
Selected Titles in ABC-CLIO’s
CONTEMPORARY
WORLD ISSUES
Series
American Families in Crisis, Jeffrey S. Turner
Animal Rights, Clifford J. Sherry
Climate Change, David L. Downie, Kate Brash, and Catherine
Vaughan
Corporate Crime, Richard D. Hartley
DNA Technology, David E. Newton
Domestic Violence, Margi Laird McCue
Education in Crisis, Judith A. Gouwens
Energy Use Worldwide, Jaina L. Moan and Zachary A. Smith
Environmental Justice, David E. Newton
Gangs, Karen L. Kinnear
Gay and Lesbian Rights, David E. Newton
Global Organized Crime, Mitchel P. Roth
Globalization, Justin Ervin and Zachary A. Smith
Identity Theft, Sandra K. Hoffman and Tracy G. McGinley
Lobbying in America, Ronald J. Hrebenar and Bryson B. Morgan
Mainline Christians and U.S. Public Policy, Glenn H. Utter
Modern Sports Ethics, Angela Lumpkin
Nuclear Weapons and Nonproliferation, Sarah J. Diehl and James
Clay Moltz
Obesity, Judith Stern and Alexandra Kazaks
Policing in America, Leonard A. Steverson
Renewable and Alternative Energy Resources, Zachary A. Smith and
Katrina D. Taylor
Sentencing, Dean John Champion
Sexual Crime, Caryn E. Neumann
Sexual Health, David E. Newton
U.S. National Security, Cynthia A. Watson
U.S. Trade Issues, Alfred E. Eckes, Jr.
Waste Management, Jacqueline Vaughn
For a complete list of titles in this series, please visit
www.abc-clio.com.

Books in the Contemporary World Issues series address vital
issues in today’s society, such as genetic engineering, pollution,
and biodiversity. Written by professional writers, scholars, and
nonacademic experts, these books are authoritative, clearly
written, up-to-date, and objective. They provide a good starting
point for research by high school and college students, scholars,
and general readers as well as by legislators, businesspeople,
activists, and others.
Each book, carefully organized and easy to use, contains an
overview of the subject, a detailed chronology, biographical
sketches, facts and data and/or documents and other
primary-source material, a directory of organizations and
agencies, annotated lists of print and nonprint resources,
and an index.
Readers of books in the Contemporary World Issues series will
find the information they need to have a better understanding
of the social, political, environmental, and economic issues
facing the world today.

This page intentionally left blank 

U.S. BORDER
SECURITY
A Reference Handbook
Judith A. Warner
CONTEMPORARY
WORLD ISSUES

Copyright 2010 by ABC-CLIO, LLC
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced,
stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any
means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise,
except for the inclusion of brief quotations in a review, without prior
permission in writing from the publisher.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Warner, Judith.
U.S. border security : a reference handbook / Judith A. Warner.
p. cm.—(Contemporary world issues)
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 978-1-59884-407-8 (hard copy : alk. paper)—ISBN 978-1-
59884-408-5 (ebook : alk. paper) 1. Border security—United States—
Handbooks, manuals, etc. I. Title.
HV8139.W37
2010
363.28050973—dc22
2010009662
ISBN: 978-1-59884-407-8
EISBN: 978-1-59884-408-5
14
13
12
11
10
1
2
3
4
5
This book is also available on the World Wide Web as an eBook.
Visit www.abc-clio.com for details.
ABC_CLIO
An Imprint of ABC-CLIO, LLC
ABC-CLIO, LLC
130 Cremona Drive, P.O. Box 1911
Santa Barbara, California 93116-1911
This book is printed on acid-free paper
Manufactured in the United States of America

Contents
Preface and Acknowledgments, xiii
1
Background and History, 1
Introduction, 1
Geography of the Borders, 2
Challenges of Border Security, 3
U.S.-Canada Border, 4
Early History of European Expansion, 4
Origins: Territorial Conflict, 5
Cross-Border Interactions, 6
U.S.-Mexico Border, 7
Origins: Territorial Acquisition, 7
Cross-Border Incursions and Illicit Activities in
Mexico and Canada, 9
Ongoing Issues, 10
Border Security, 11
Border Trade, 11
Customs Fees and Border Smuggling, 12
Immigration, 13
Attempted Solutions, 19
U.S. Border Patrol, 19
Criminalization of Immigration, 20
Terrorism, 23
Counterterrorism before and after 9/11, 24
Monitoring Ports of Entry, 25
Department of Homeland Security, 28
Layered Traveler Screening, 29
Border Inspections, 30
Conclusion, 33
References, 33
vii

2
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions, 41
Introduction, 41
Free Trade and Security, 44
Terrorism, 45
Weapons of Mass Destruction and Security, 46
Border Documents and Visas, 49
U.S.-Canada Border Issues, 53
Bolstering Canadian Security, 54
Immigration, 56
Key Players, 56
Opposing Viewpoints on Immigration Reform, 58
Federal Government, 63
Law Enforcement, 64
Militarization of the U.S.-Mexico Border, 69
Physical and Technological Barriers, 72
Impact on Migrant Smuggling, 75
Deportation versus Detainment, 77
Border Conditions, 82
Crime and Human Rights Violations, 83
U.S.-Mexico Border Migrant Deaths, 90
Rights of Immigrants and Suspected Terrorists, 92
The Future of Border Control, 95
References, 102
3
Border Security in an International Context, 117
Introduction, 117
Global Inequalities: Economic and Security, 117
Human Trafficking: Causes and Consequences, 120
Pursuing and Prosecuting Human Trafficking, 125
Drug Trafficking, 127
The U.S.-Canada Border (1960–present), 127
Mexican Drug Trafficking (1960–present), 128
Narcoterrorism, 129
Drug Addiction in Mexico, 134
The Merida Initiative and Mexican Law Enforcement, 135
Weapons Smuggling, 137
Comparing and Contrasting: European Union v.
North America, 141
North American Continental Security Perimeter, 143
Defining Borders: Counterterrorism, 144
European Union, 144
North America, 147
viii
Contents

Conclusion, 148
References, 149
4
Chronology, 157
Establishing the Geographical Boundaries of the
United States through Frontier Expansion, 157
The Closing of the Nation’s Borders to Immigration, 162
Opening of the Nation’s Borders to Immigration, 164
Expansion of Trade and Border Enforcement, 166
Terrorism and the Securitization of Immigration, 169
5
Biographical Sketches, 177
Osama bin Laden, 177
David V. Aguilar, 178
John Ashcroft, 179
Kevin Bales, 180
Sandra ‘‘La Reina del Pacifico (Queen of the Pacific)’’ Avila
Beltran, 181
George Walker Bush, 181
Felipe de Jesus Calderon, 183
Michael Chertoff, 184
Hillary Clinton, 184
David Cole, 185
Stockwell Day, 186
Arellano Felix Brothers, 186
Michael J. Fisher, 187
Miguel Angel Felix Gallardo, 188
Vincente Carillo Fuentes, 188
Vincente Fox, 190
Alberto Gonzales, 190
Osiel Cardenas Guillen, 191
Joaquin Guzman Loera, 192
Stephen Harper, 193
Eric H. Holder, 194
Edward Kennedy, 195
Michele Marie Leonhart, 196
John McCain, 196
Khalid Shaikh Mohammed, 197
Janet Ann Napolitano, 198
Barack Hussein Obama, 199
Nancy Pelosi, 200
Ahmed Ressam, 201
Contents
ix

x
Contents
Silvestre Reyes, 202
Tom Ridge, 203
James Sensenbrenner, 204
September 11 Commission/ 9/11 Commission, 205
Arlen Specter, 206
Tom Tancredo, 206
Ramzi Yousef, 207
6
Data and Documents, 209
Border Security, 209
Documents, 211
Ports of Entry, 211
The Department of Homeland Security (DHS), 211
U.S. Border Patrol, 213
Low-Intensity Conflict Doctrine and the Militarization
of the Border, 215
Traveler and Cargo Inspection Programs at the Borders, 216
U.S. Customs and Border Protection Secure Border
Initiative (SBI), 220
Marine Domain Awareness, 221
Office of National Drug Policy Drug
Interdiction Program, 221
Facts and Figures, 221
Trade, 221
Drug Trafficking, 223
Terrorism, 225
The 9/11 Hijackers: Why They Were Not Caught, 225
Selected 9/11 Commission Recommendations, 226
Bioterrorism, 227
Incidents of Terrorism Worldwide, 232
Tables and Figures on Legal and Unauthorized
Immigration, 236
Interior Enforcement, 237
Documents, 244
Initial Immigration Reform (1986), 244
Immigration Reform and Control Act of 1986, 244
Era of Criminalization of Immigration, 246
Omnibus Anti-Drug Abuse Act of 1988, 246
North American Free Trade Agreement of 1994, 247
Antiterrorism and Effective Death Penalty
Act of 1996, 248
Victims of Trafficking and Violence Protection
Act of 2000, 252

Contents
xi
Securitization of Immigration, 256
USA PATRIOT Act of 2001, 257
Enhanced Border Security and Visa Entry
Reform Act of 2002, 268
U.S. VISIT and Intelligence Reform and Terrorism
Act 2004, 271
Emergency Supplemental Appropriations Act for
Defense, the Global War on Terror, and Tsunami
Relief, 278
Secure Fence Act, 283
War on Terrorism Documents, 285
International Human Rights and Terrorism Related
Documents, 288
United Nations International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights, 288
United Nations Security Council Resolution 1373, 288
Convention to Prevent and Punish Acts of Terrorism
Taking the Form of Crimes Against Persons and
Related Extortion That Are of International
Significance, 288
7
Directory of Organizations and Government Agencies, 289
National Government Agencies and Organizations, 289
Political Groups, 298
Domestic Security Organizations, 298
International Security and Policing Organizations, 299
International Organizations, 302
International Human Rights Advocacy Organizations, 303
Domestic Advocacy Organizations, 305
Civil Rights Legal Advocacy Organizations, 313
Research Centers, 314
8
Print and Nonprint Resources, 321
Books and Articles, 321
Border Control Policy, 321
Border Conditions, Crime, and Human Rights, 325
Immigration and Interior Enforcement, 329
The U.S.-Canada Border, 331
Trafficking, 332
Terrorism, 334
Periodicals and Publications, 335
Immigration, 335
Immigration Law, 338

Human Rights, 339
Transnational Crime and Trafficking, 340
Terrorism, 341
Government Reports, 343
Bibliographies, 344
Border Security, 345
Unauthorized Immigration, 345
Human Trafficking, 345
Drug Trafficking, 345
Terrorism, 346
Borders, 346
DVDs, 346
U.S.-Mexico Border Law Enforcement, 346
Unauthorized Immigration and Crime, 347
Terrorism, 351
Trafficking, 352
Transnational Gangs, 354
Femicide, 354
Electronic Resources, 355
Border, 355
Terrorism, 355
Immigration, 356
Glossary, 357
Index, 367
xii
Contents

Preface and Acknowledgments
T
he 21st century has brought an unprecedented range of
possibilities and threats to the American way of life. In the
20th century, America was by and large secure from exter-
nal conflict within its borders except for the bombing of Pearl
Harbor at the start of World War II and the first World Trade
Center attack in 1993. The United States has a history of inter-
nal threats marked by such incidents as the 1995 Oklahoma
City bombing. It was not until September 11, 2001, and the sec-
ond terrorist attack on the World Trade Center, that the public
learned that a new era of transnational threats had begun.
In 2003, many separate federal law enforcement agencies
were reorganized as the Department of Homeland Security (DHS).
The failure to prevent the 9/11 tragedy was perceived to be due to
the inability of separate federal agencies to coordinate intelligence
on terrorist activity; in other words, they failed to ‘‘connect the
dots’’ by integrating discrete pieces of evidence. The failed attempt
by Umar Farouk Abdulmutallab to explode an incendiary device
hidden in underwear during an air flight on December 25, 2009,
demonstrated that merging agencies had not solved the problem
concerning sharing and interpretation of intelligence.
Historically, security has been viewed in terms of military
capabilities for meeting external threats. Since the end of the
Cold War, national security has focused on prevention of terror-
ism, drug trafficking, arms smuggling, and human smuggling
or trafficking. Each security threat involves crossing borders,
and an efficient border-management system is necessary to pro-
tect citizens. Nations police borders and use border guards.
Because border control is no longer viewed as a national defense
issue, it involves law enforcement, and most states classify bor-
der guards as police (€O€ovel and Varga 2003). U.S. Customs and
xiii

Border Patrol is the national policing bureaucracy at the Mexi-
can and Canadian borders.
In the 21st century, globalization of the international econ-
omy has made border security a matter of international cooper-
ation and alliances. It has extended the border to sites that
perform pre-inspection in other countries connected by air and
sea. This complex situation has introduced transnational threats
in which organized crime and terrorist groups act globally. The
complications produced by new technologies of communication
and travel have fostered new types of criminal organizations
and necessitate new border-control strategies.
Border security involves the use of border police to protect
borders and provide safety for citizens. Security concerns at
land, air, and sea borders include:

unauthorized entry and smuggling of foreign
nationals

human trafficking for purpose of prostitution or
work enslavement

drug trafficking and narcoterrorism

property offenses (e.g., auto theft)

terrorism

smuggling of weapons of mass destruction
Within the United States, policing agencies such as Cus-
toms, Border Patrol, ICE, and local or federal law enforcement
must work together to address these issues. For example, when
cargo is shipped from overseas, it travels in a variety of ways,
enters and leaves the custody of various people and organiza-
tions, and may necessitate processing up to 40 different docu-
ments connected to transit across borders (Lake 2007). The task
of law enforcement in preventing smuggling and terrorism is
further complicated by the need for cooperation between the
DHS and other agencies such as the Drug Enforcement Admin-
istration (DEA). The massive consolidation of the DHS did not
totally unify the federal law-enforcement bureaucracies.
In the second decade of the 21st century, transnational threats
such as drug and arms trafficking will be major border-security
issues. Mexico has become the leading transshipment point for
cocaine, marijuana, and other illegal drugs. Mexican drug-trafficking
organizations have fought over control of the key routes into the
interior of the United States, and thousands of Mexicans have
been killed in the violence. The freedom to own guns and
xiv
Preface and Acknowledgments

limitations on gun control in the United States are associated
with arms smuggling into Mexico, which increases lethality.
The corruption of the Mexican police and government has con-
tributed to a national security crisis for Mexico and brought
increased U.S. assistance. While Mexico is considered unlikely
to become a failed state, the terroristic use of violence by Mexi-
can narcotics traffickers, known as narcoterrorism, has gener-
ated a crisis that can only be solved by binational cooperation.
Indeed, border security is a transnational concern.
To this end, understanding the many issues involved in border
security and proposed solutions, the book is organized as follows:
Chapter 1 presents a historical outline of U.S. border rela-
tions with former North American colonial powers, Canada,
and Mexico. The circumstances and settings that give rise to
unauthorized immigration, smuggling, and transnational terror-
ism are investigated.
Chapter 2 looks at border security as a contemporary issue
and examines why the borders are critical but porous sites for
legitimate and illicit movement of goods and people. It looks at
the impact of border control on border and interior commun-
ities. Recent attempts to increase security at the land, air, and
sea borders are examined. The methods used to try to contain
problems are evaluated from different points of view. In partic-
ular, the control of transnational threats involves multiple
national, binational, and international agencies and processes,
necessitating the development of coordination and cooperation.
Chapter 3 examines the international impact of U.S. border
security, particularly on the neighboring countries of Mexico
and Canada. Security is represented as a bidirectional process
in which the policies of one nation have a feedback relationship,
often producing unintended consequences for another nation.
Border control is a difficult issue because criminal violations
cross borders, which precludes a unilateral solution and neces-
sitates bilateral and multilateral effort.
Chapter 4 presents a chronology of key events in the colo-
nial and postcolonial history of demarcation of the borders. It
lists successive laws passed to regulate immigration, drugs,
and, since 1993, terrorism. The issues examined concern how
the regulatory apparatus and border-control methods deployed
have intensified and impacted society in the 21st century.
Chapter 5 presents the biographies of key government offi-
cials and social analysts who offer viewpoints and structure
border-security policies. In addition it examines major criminals
Preface and Acknowledgments
xv

who have engaged in narcoterrorism, which has challenged the
security of Mexico and its people and poses the possibility of
spillover violence in the United States.
Chapter 6 presents statistics, research information, and key
legislative documents relating to border control of unauthor-
ized immigration, terrorism, and drug trafficking. Through the
use of URL addresses provided, the reader can access the vast
resources on this issue for download on the internet.
Chapter 7 provides information on governmental agencies,
intergovernmental organizations (IGOs), and nongovernmental
organizations (NGOs) that shape policy and advocate for various
border-control strategies and or humanitarian concerns. These agen-
cies and organizations provide the data for analysis of the effective-
ness of border security. Governmental organizations are impacted
by the reports of NGOs such as human rights organizations and
IGOs connected to the United Nations and supra-regional govern-
ment structures such as the Organization of American States.
Chapter 8 provides information on books, articles, and films
concerning border security. It lists key reports from government,
intergovernmental, and nongovernmental organizations. The
bibliographic review and Internet sites allow the reader access to
mechanisms that will generate very easy-to-use statistical data.
My special thanks go to Mildred Vasan for bringing atten-
tion to this topic and to Robin Tutt and Jane Messah of ABC-
CLIO for the determination and enthusiasm they brought to
this project. I would like to thank the administration of Texas
A&M International for supporting the research that led to this
book with faculty leave. Finally, I would like to thank Brother
Bob Warren; you are no longer residing on the border, but your
interest in the issues is not forgotten.
References
Lake, Jennifer E. 2007. ‘‘CRS Report for Congress: Border Security: The
Complexity of the Challenge.’’ Washington, DC: Congressional
Research Service. http://fpc.state.gov/documents/organization/
80215.pdf.
€O€ovel, Andrus, and Beata Varga. 2003. ‘‘Recommendations on the
Topic of Border Security Reform.’’ Paper presented at the SSR-Track
Panel at the 6th Annual Conference of the PfP Consortium for Defense
Academies and Security Studies Institutes, Berlin. http://www.dcaf.
ch/pfpc/ev_berlin_papers_oovel.pdf.
xvi
Preface and Acknowledgments

1
Background and History
Introduction
T
he United States’ borders coincide with land, water, and
the air. A border is a geographic boundary of a nation and
defines its legal jurisdiction. Its borders define national sov-
ereignty and the right to citizenship. National sovereignty is
defined as ‘‘the possession of the sole decisionmaking authority
in defining one’s policies’’ (Bagwell and Staiger 2003, 6). Every
country exercises sovereignty, the right to make policy deci-
sions, over the people, goods, animals, and plants allowed to
enter and exit its borders. Nation-states like the United States
protect their citizens by providing for security within their bor-
ders (Biersteker 2003). Yet the goal of security is not always
compatible with the free movement of people and goods across
borders—a source of economic security and improved living
standards.
U.S. national security increasingly is based on good border
relations throughout the more than 7,500 miles covering the U.S.
borders with Canada and Mexico. Because these nations are the
two largest trading partners of the United States, there are ben-
efits from allowing the free flow of goods and services between
the borders. However, there are concerns about allowing an
unregulated flow of what are increasingly considered ‘‘danger-
ous goods and people’’; therefore, border security is essential.
All citizens desire an optimal sense of security from foreign
threats. National security involves legislating to secure borders
against military attack and controlling the traffic in goods and
people. Since 9/11 the prevention of international terrorism has
1

become the major border-security issue. The United States has
ongoing concerns regarding unauthorized immigration, drugs,
weapons, and contraband trafficking. Attempts to control na-
tional borders in an age of increased international connections
create issues such as how to maintain important diplomatic
and economic ties with other nations while countering threats
to security. After 9/11 trade and immigration across borders
became critical counterterrorism issues and triggered policy
and legislative changes.
Geography of the Borders
The United States shares a land and river border with Mexico
and a land and lake border with Canada. The land and water
borders of the United States, including Alaska and Hawaii,
cover 19,841 miles (Beaver 2006, 1–5). There are 95,000 miles of
shoreline and defined air space. The United States maintains
327 official ports of entry at its land, sea, and air borders. The
ports enforce immigration and import/export law. Customs
inspectors also examine any agricultural and wildlife products
brought into the country.
The U.S.-Mexican border is 1,933 miles long and partly
defined by the Rio Grande River (Beaver 2006, 1–5). Tradition-
ally, the southern border has been the site of extensive drug
smuggling and unauthorized entry but no known terrorist
efforts. There are 24 official ports of entry in California, Ari-
zona, New Mexico, and Texas. Laredo, Texas, is the busiest port
on the Mexican border and has the fastest growth rate because
it handles trucks carrying manufactured goods and agricultural
products from Mexico. Mexico’s border is very controversial
because of unauthorized immigration, drug trafficking, arms
trafficking from the United States, drug-related violence, and
the possibility of terrorist entry.
The United States’ geographically complex northern border
with Canada stretches for approximately 5,000 miles of both land
and water (Beaver 2006, 1–5). This area is sparsely inhabited and
includes a border with Alaska that extends into the Arctic. It has
been a security zone considered the longest unguarded border in
the world and often referred to as ‘‘undefended.’’ There are 133
ports of entry, most of which are in unpopulated or wilder-
ness areas. U.S.-Canadian border security is problematic because
2
Background and History

of size, wilderness, and water boundaries. Unlike Mexico, Canada
has a history of terrorist activity, has been used as an entrance cor-
ridor, and is thought to harbor some terror cells. While unauthor-
ized immigration is a lesser issue, the smuggling of high-potency
marijuana to the United States and untaxed cigarettes to Canada
are recurrent issues.
Canada is uniquely a border nation because 75 percent of
its population resides within 100 miles of the boundary and 90
percent within 200 miles (Thompson 2001, 14). In certain sectors
the border is unmarked; in others it is only a ditch. Yet Canadians
stand in an asymmetric relationship to the more powerful United
States, referred to as ‘‘subservience’’ despite a prosperity partly
based on trade (Winterdyk and Sundberg 2010b, 29). For them,
the border may protect their political, economic, and cultural
rights against the power of the United States.
Like Canada, the developing nation of Mexico stands in an
asymmetric relationship with the United States, only it is even
more lopsided. Mexico’s seat of government is Mexico City.
Since the 1960s and the development of export processing
zones with factories called maquiladoras, border development
and urbanization have proceeded at a rapid pace but at a dis-
tance from its national government (Martinez 2006). The Mexican
border is an area of cultural contact and hybridization that
has led to concerns about de-Mexicanization, a concept that
refers to the Americanization of Mexicans living in the border
zone (Martinez 2006, 113, 114, 115).
Challenges of Border Security
Despite asymmetries of power, both Canada and Mexico have
extensively cooperated with the United States in strengthening
border security. The evolving border relationship is one in
which the three countries have worked together on mutual pro-
tection from external threats. Yet border security is controver-
sial because of the size of the task. The need to have porous
borders for the passage of people and trade is counterbalanced
by the need to stop the smuggling of people and drugs and to
prevent terrorism. Some consider it possible to successfully
manage this tradeoff and attain border security. Others believe
that the extent of resources needed is self-defeating and that bor-
der control is primarily image management (Andreas 2000, 7–9).
Challenges of Border Security
3

Public attention has concentrated on the land borders, par-
ticularly Mexico, but the terrorist threat is more widely
dispersed.
On September 11, 2001, 19 jihadist air hijackers flew three
commercial jets into the World Trade Center skyscrapers in
New York City and the Pentagon in Washington, DC. One
additional jet crashed due to passenger resistance and was
unable to reach a second Washington, DC, target. The action
horrified the world and pointed to weak aviation security.
Afterward, the 9/11 Commission (Eldridge et al. 2004) found
that prior to the attacks border security had not been consid-
ered a national security issue. In the face of the unknown after
the tragedy, it was impossible to overreact, yet many of the im-
mediate steps taken lacked planning.
When the terrorists’ actions to overcome the system were
identified, plans for greater security for Americans were put
into action. The 9/11 Commission and the newly created
Department of Homeland Security completely reorganized bor-
der security while employing and reinforcing much past prac-
tice and adding some policy innovations. The depth of the
response was due to the Bush administration’s zero tolerance
for risk. The 9/11 hijackings and subsequent mass fatalities
marked a new era in border-security management.
Historically, borders have been sites of conflict over territory.
The emergence of contemporary nations led to the association of
sovereignty with the right to regulate cross-border movement.
Many major boundary disputes between Mexico or British America
(now Canada) and the United States have occurred, including
Britain’s (Canada’s) objections over the boundaries of Oregon
and Alaska, and Mexico’s over Texas. Often these conflicts did
not occur until politics or economic or strategic change made a
border region desirable to both governments. Boundary disputes
still occur, but the massive extent of the border and the low inten-
sity of these disputes compare favorably to the rest of the world.
U.S.-Canada Border
Early History of European Expansion
Canada is the world’s second largest country, stretching from
the Pacific to the Atlantic and into the Arctic (Bothwell 2006, 4).
4
Background and History

In 1534 Jacques Cartier staked a claim for New France in the
area of the Saint Lawrence Valley. In the 1570s and 1580s, Eng-
lish exploration led to colonies in Newfoundland and Virginia.
In the 16th century, Samuel de Champlain established a colony
in Quebec. Sixty years of Iroquois wars repressed the growth of
French colonial enterprise as the English and Dutch developed
colonies along the North Atlantic seaboard. This set the stage
for conflict among the European nations over control of terri-
tory (Bothwell 2006, 17, 21, 31–35).
In the 17th century, the English forced the Dutch to sign
over their New Amsterdam colony and entered into competi-
tion with France over Hudson Bay and New York. In 1686,
France entered into a war with England that lasted until 1697.
Queen Anne’s War involved the Iroquois, traditional enemies
of the French and allied Algonquin tribes. This conflict resulted
in French colonial seizure of Hudson Bay forts but took place
mostly in Europe. France was bankrupt, and the Treaty of
Utrecht ceded all of Acadia (now Nova Scotia) and Newfound-
land to the British, who emerged as the major colonial power
(Bothwell 2006, 57, 64–65).
From 1689 to 1815 North America was the seat of warfare
between the European nations and the Indian nations. The
Seven Years’ War (1755–1761) resulted in Great Britain’s take-
over of the French territories and land east of the Mississippi
that became British America (Bothwell 2006, 63, 87–88). Subse-
quently, the American Revolution resulted in the recognition of
the United States.
Origins: Territorial Conflict
The U.S.-Canadian border was first established by the 1783
Treaty of Paris that ended the war between the thirteen U.S.
colonies and Great Britain. Afterwards, a series of border dis-
putes between the United States and Great Britain, involving
British America, occurred because of desire for territorial expan-
sion. The western boundary was especially a source of territo-
rial conflict. An 1818 U.S.-British agreement placed the British
America border at the 49th parallel from the Lake of the Woods
to the Rockies (Bothwell 2006, 158). Lake of the Woods is a
body of water in the Canadian provinces of Ontario and Mani-
toba that borders on the U.S. state of Minnesota. Britain and the
United States agreed to jointly occupy Oregon territory, west of
U.S.-Canada Border
5

the Lake of the Woods, for 10 years. This was extended to a fur-
ther 10 years in 1827 (Bothwell 2006, 109–110, 158).
After 1838 disputes arose over which nation had the right
to Oregon. In the 1840s, the American settlers drove their
wagon trains across the Oregon Trail, so the United States
sought to claim territory up to the 54th parallel. To avoid war,
a compromise between the U.S. and Great Britain placed the
border at the 49th parallel. The dispute was settled by the 1846
Oregon Treaty (Bothwell 2006, 159). It established the boundary
from the 49th parallel at the Lake of the Woods to the Strait of
Georgia. This treaty granted the United States control of the ter-
ritories that became the states of Oregon, Washington, Idaho,
and Montana. The British retained Vancouver Island and the
right to navigation on a portion of the Columbia River.
In 1837 a rebellion of Canadian settlers in Eastern British
America led Americans to consider annexation. U.S. citizens living
proximate to the border assisted the rebels. At one point, several
hundred western? New Yorkers crossed into Canada and entered
into armed conflict with British soldiers. This provoked British
Canadians into crossing into the United States. They killed a
Canadian rebel and burned the rebel’s supply ship, the American-
owned Caroline. The United States asked for an apology and repar-
ations, but was refused. Later, the boundary with Maine became a
source of dispute as lumberjacks sought control of northern Maine
and eastern Brunswick. In 1842 the Webster-Ashburton Treaty
allocated 7/12ths of the disputed territory in Maine and New
Brunswick to the United States (Bothwell 2006, 159, 175–183).
Cross-Border Interactions
In the 19th century, the Canadian border was relatively unmo-
nitored, and no barriers or fees faced Canadians or Americans
who chose to visit or immigrate (Ramirez 2001). The unguarded
northern border had few checkpoints to monitor crossing, and
both Canadians and Americans crossed and even changed citi-
zenship.
Canadian
immigrants
were
viewed
positively
as
‘‘thrifty, industrious and belonging to all trades and occupa-
tions, both skilled and unskilled’’ (U.S. Bureau of Immigration
1897, 6 Cited in Ramirez, 2001). As Western Hemisphere immi-
grants, like Mexicans, Canadians were not subject to a head tax.
At the end of the 19th century, concern about the U.S.-Canada
boundary developed because overseas immigrants were using it
6
Background and History

to avoid inspection and paying the head tax. In 1890, for example,
about 20% of all European immigrants had come through the
Canadian border to enter (Ramirez 2001). In the 1890s, U.S. check-
points with immigration inspectors were established and Canadians
underwent scrutiny regarding their criminal, health, and labor con-
tract backgrounds.
Borders involve different rules of law and invite smug-
gling. Border dwellers who smuggle do not consider it a crime.
The 20th century brought a clash of governmental policies over
issues such as U.S. Prohibition and smuggling across both
Canadian and Mexican borders. From 1920 to 1933, the Eight-
eenth Amendment, from its passing in 1920 to its repeal in
1933, prohibited the making, importing, sale, or transport of liq-
uor in the United States. Canada was a source for bootleg alco-
hol as well as a tourist destination for those seeking to drink.
Through both world wars, Canada and Mexico supported
the United States despite the legacy of conflict over expansion.
Nevertheless, the power differential in income and resources
between these nations has often meant that the United States
has been seen as trying to impose its will on these nations and
even engaging in territorial conquest. Mexico has experienced
asymmetry of power to a greater degree than more prosperous
Canada and lost considerable territory to 19th century U.S.
expansionism.
U.S.-Mexico Border
Origins: Territorial Acquisition
In the 19th century, borders and boundaries were mostly
clearly interpreted lines on maps which often coincided with
physical barriers such as mountains or freshwater rivers and
oceans. North America was subdivided among the United
States and colonies ruled by fading colonial powers such as
Spain and Great Britain. Originally a Spanish territory, Mexico
became an independent nation in 1821. Mexico faced many
issues in trying to integrate its northern ‘‘borderlands’’ territo-
ries (Martinez 2006, 11–12), whose administration collapsed
after independence. Approximately 15,000 people lived in
the
frontier
territories,
and
they
did
not
identify
with
Mexico’s central region, where the process of nation-building
U.S.-Mexico Border
7

had concentrated. While the 1924 Mexican Constitution gave the
states extensive autonomy in decision-making, the frontier territo-
ries were under the control of the Mexican Congress. In addition,
the territory of Texas was merged with Coahuila. The frontier
periphery began to have strained relations with the center.
The possession of physical territory became a major source
of dispute. Conquest was perceived as a source of economic
expansion. The United States was involved in a rush to acquire
territory and promoted the ideology of manifest destiny to
control land on the continent, including all of Mexico. Mexico
encouraged U.S. citizens to immigrate to its territories, but the
colonization policy proved a mistake. Americans came to out-
number Mexicans in Texas and California. Asserting control, the
Mexican government outlawed slavery, which was practiced in
Texas, and levied high taxes. Texans rebelled and became inde-
pendent in 1836. The Texas Rebellion resulted in Mexico’s first
loss of territory (ibid., 12, 13).
The United States annexed Texas in 1845 and war broke
out in 1846. The U.S.-Mexico War ended with the signing of the
Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo in 1848. This treaty included
the forced sale of one-third of Mexico to the United States. After
the Gadsden Purchase, Mexico lost one-half of its territory alto-
gether. The consolidation of the United States was based on a
partial conquest of Mexican territory and set the stage for the
power asymmetry in relations that exists today (ibid., 16–18).
After the U.S.-Mexico War, U.S. citizens continued to try to
expand into Mexico, and border conflict was intense. ‘‘Filibusters’’
were incidents of armed aggression directed against Mexican citi-
zens on Mexican territory. Through the first quarter of the 20th
century U.S. citizens who were independent adventurers ignored
national sovereignty and acted as revolutionary agents and colo-
nizers seeking to ‘‘liberate’’ northern Mexican territory both for
personal enrichment and so that the territory could become part of
the United States. These unlawful invasions occurred because
of the Mexican government’s weakness and instability. Mexico
held on to its northern territory for a variety of reasons. Filibuster-
ing failed because of ‘‘inadequate planning by the aggressors,
insufficient resources, poor judgment, lack of official support and
Mexican resistance’’ (ibid., 31–32, 46–47).
As colonial expansion ended in the 20th century, the ideal
of sovereign nonintervention was proclaimed and geographic
borders gained in importance (Biersteker 2003, 157–158). After
8
Background and History

World War I, the 1919 Covenant of the League of Nations speci-
fied that its members should not intervene in independent
nations. After World War II ended in Europe in 1945, the Char-
ter of the United Nations reaffirmed this idea. National boun-
daries began to be used as means of regulating the movement
of people and goods. Nation-states began to authorizel the entry
of immigrants across boundaries and to exercise control of capi-
tal through international monetary agreements meant to stabi-
lize their economies. Treaties were created to form alliances to
protect national security and territories.
Early in the 20th century, border concerns centered on the
U.S.-Mexico border and military or migration issues caused by
the Mexican Revolution, which had caused Mexican citizens to
flee over the border line (Martinez 2006, 82). From 1910 to 1920,
the United States protected its territorial sovereignty and the
security of citizens while enforcing neutrality law regarding the
outcome of the Mexican conflict. The United States engaged in
surveillance of Mexican revolutionary activities, stopping raids
into its territory, preventing gun smuggling to Mexico, and pro-
tecting U.S. border citizens by using local, state and federal
law enforcement (83). For example, federal troops, the Texas
Rangers, and state National Guards were mobilized along with
border sheriff–led civilian posses and police. A military inci-
dent occurred in March, 1916 when Pancho Villa crossed the
border at Columbus, New Mexico, and killed 17 U.S. citizens
while burning and looting. The United States responded with a
military invasion led by General John ‘‘Black Jack’’ Pershing.
Cross-Border Incursions and Illicit Activities
in Mexico and Canada
After the end of the U.S.-Mexico War of 1848, banditry was a con-
cern for both the United States and Mexico at the borders. The U.S.
military was often involved in tracking down the bandits, which
included American Indians on raids (Martinez 2006, 54–55). In
1878 the Posse Comitatus Act restricted but did not preclude mili-
tary involvement in domestic law enforcement. U.S.-Mexico bor-
der law enforcement raids involved vigilantes and unofficial
posses as well as military crossing the border to pursue bandits.
This activity continued into the early 20th century.
During Prohibition, when production and consumption of
alcohol were outlawed in the United States, smuggling of alcohol
U.S.-Mexico Border
9

from Mexico and Canada was a major concern (Moore 2004, 3–4).
Americans flocked to both Mexican and Canadian border towns to
drink. In the case of Mexico, American investors provided capital to
start entertainment establishments featuring drinking and prostitu-
tion because both were legal in Mexico (Martinez 2006, 108–109).
During this period, the Mexican border towns became stereotyped
as ‘‘sin cities’’ and centers for vice. The Great Depression brought a
decline in border tourism, and the repeal of Prohibition ended a pe-
riod in which many American citizens left the country to drink.
Today legal prostitution in Mexico brings sex tourists to
border towns, and women and some men work this trade
while subject to mandatory medical exams (Martinez 2006).
Teenagers may cross to Mexico to drink legally if the age limit
is lower than the corresponding American state; they also may
go if they perceive the trip as an ‘‘exotic’’ experience. To their
parents, of course, it is a source of consternation, especially
regarding the potential for binge drinking. In the late 20th cen-
tury, the availability of liquor, drugs, and sex work businesses
in the United States decreased the demand for such experiences
in the Mexican border cities.
Ongoing Issues
While major U.S.-Canada and U.S.-Mexico boundary disputes
have been settled for years, governmental policies still clash.
An important difference between the two borders is the status
of the two countries: Canada is a developed nation while
Mexico is a developing nation. As a result, the degree of law
enforcement at the two borders is very disparate. The United
States has created an increasingly fortified border with Mexico
to prevent economic migration and, more recently, drug traf-
ficking. The Canadian border has a history of being relatively
unguarded and of less concern (Ackleson and Heyman 2010,
39). For all three nations, too careful regulation of people and
commodities crossing the borders is viewed as causing costly
delay
in
the
flow
of
legitimate
goods
under
the
North
American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA). It is a contradiction
in terms that billions in investment in security gravitates to the
U.S.-Mexico border, posing constraints to this increasingly eco-
nomically important trade. Security policies and related post- 9/11
laws have often negatively influenced the goodwill of trans border
10
Background and History

relationships and are shadowed by the legacy of conflicted border
relations.
Border Security
Three concerns have dominated U.S. border enforcement:
immigration, drugs, and international terrorism (Payan 2006,
1–21). Mass unauthorized migration has resulted in the growth
of a U.S. Border Patrol–led interdiction regime (Heyman 1999,
619–622). Persons and vehicles crossing at a port of entry are
inspected. This is usually done without prior intelligence gath-
ering and is an example of mass enforcement. During the 20th
century, the United States’ efforts to control contraband have
focused on drugs, for example, marijuana, opiates such as her-
oin and cocaine, and methamphetamines. International terror-
ism developed as a concern in the 1990s, after the 1993 World
Trade Center bombing, and emerged as the primary border
concern after the 9/11 attacks.
The focus of counterterrorism is the apprehension of terro-
rists crossing borders, developing intelligence about transnational
networks, and stopping supplies for violent activities. Interdic-
tion relies on mass screening, including radiation monitors used
on cargos to detect weapons of mass destruction. Pinpoint
actions are used against a limited number of people and convey-
ances identified by intelligence (Ackleson and Heyman 2010,
38–39).
Border Trade
The 1980s United States–Canada Free Trade Agreement and the
1990s North American Free Trade Agreement (United States,
Canada, and Mexico) were signed to reduce or eliminate export
tariffs in several industries including agriculture, automobiles,
and textiles. These agreements resulted in a need for infrastruc-
ture growth to manage trade. The 1995 United States–Canada
Accord on Our Shared Border and the 1999 United States–
Canada Partnership Forum addressed these issues but were found
inadequate after the 9/11 attacks.
After 9/11, many considered that further transnational
integration of the NAFTA economies was precluded by na-
tional security needs and demonstrated a negative consequence
of globalization. Although the Mexican border has been long
Ongoing Issues
11

considered problematic, for the first time, the porosity of the
Canadian border came into question. In 2002, the United States
and Canada signed the Smart Border Declaration. In 2005, the
Trilateral Security and Prosperity Partnership (SSP) a North
American initiative involving the United States, Canada, and
Mexico, took another step towards addressing border security
needs (Villareal and Lake 2005). At the 2005 North American
Leaders Summit, ‘‘smart and secure borders’’ was established
as a priority for SSP. Leaders seek to coordinate security proce-
dures in order to avoid duplication such as repeat inspection of
baggage and cargo, but this initiative may not be enough to
address new security challenges.
Representative Silvestre Reyes (Democrat–Texas) has stressed,
Inadequate staffing and outdated infrastructure at our
land ports of entry are making America less safe. We
need to provide our federal law enforcement agencies
with the tools and resources they need to effectively
combat the flow of drugs, money, and weapons that
are illegally transported between the United States and
Mexico. (Reyes 2009)
Customs Fees and Border Smuggling
Borders, by their nature, create opportunities for smugglers
because of the desire to evade taxes on imports called customs
duties. The U.S. Customs Service has the job of collecting duties
on legal imports and keeping out illegal or untaxed goods,
known as contraband. After passage of the Tariff Act of 1789
on July 4, 1789, U.S. Customs began operation on July 31, 1789
(CBP.gov 2009). The fledgling United States was close to bank-
ruptcy and a tax on imported goods, known as a tariff, was
imposed to raise money. In the first year of operation $2 million
in duties was collected. In 1886, Customs inspectors on horse-
back patrolled the Mexico border. Revenue cutters sought to
prevent coastal smuggling. Customs was the chief source of
federal revenue until 1913, when an amendment authorizing an
income tax was passed.
Canada Customs was established by the Customs Consoli-
dation Act of 1841 (McIntosh, 1984). In 1906, the Canadian
Immigration Department was created by the Immigration Act of
12
Background and History

1906 (Kelly and Treblecock 1998). The Royal Canadian Mounted
Police (RCMP) was established February 1, 1920. At this point,
Canada initiated a tripartite border strategy in which customs
inspectors, immigration officers, and police work to maintain
border security (Winterdyck and Sundberg 2010b, 23). Customs
is based at all prominent land crossings, airports, and harbors.
Immigration officers work alongside Customs inspectors at
major ports of entry. The Royal Canadian Mounted Police
patrol remote areas and between ports of entry.
U.S. Customs is expected to ensure that all imported and
exported goods comply with federal law. It collects and pro-
tects tariff duty revenue, excise taxes, and any fees or penalties
due on imports (CBP.gov 2009). It seeks to interdict and seize
contraband, particularly narcotics, and it apprehends individu-
als suspected of trying to circumvent U.S. Customs and related
law. Even intellectual property rights law is enforced. A new
mission of U.S. Customs has been to protect national security
by enforcing prohibition on the export or import of critical tech-
nology used to develop weapons of mass destruction and to
provide defense against money laundering.
Unfortunately, U.S. Customs inspectors are subject to the
temptation of corruption. The profit from contraband has meant
that U.S. Customs has to wage a perpetual battle against brib-
ery of inspectors. In 1998 Congress asked the Treasury Office’s
Department of Professional Responsibility to study corruption
and U.S. Customs programs to detect it (CBP.gov 2009). The
study did not detect organized corruption networks but found
that individual Customs inspectors were at great risk of bribery
and that there were problems in detecting it. The international
drug trade and related arms smuggling present a serious chal-
lenge to the ethics of U.S. Customs inspectors, and some give in
and accept bribes to wave drugs through.
Immigration
Immigrants cross by land, sea, and, since the mid-20th century,
air to enter the United States. After U.S. independence from Great
Britain, a period of open entry to the United States occurred and
Europeans were recruited to come. As immigrant origins became
diversified, racial and ethnic disputes led to passage of a series of
laws restricting entry. In 1882 the Chinese Exclusion Act began
what was often a racist process of immigrant exclusion. In 1882
Ongoing Issues
13

U.S. Customs inspectors were asked to prevent smuggling of
Chinese. In 1904 the Immigration Service undertook this activity.
Beginning in 1917, it became necessary for individuals crossing
from Mexico into the United States to demonstrate literacy and
pay a crossing fee. Because of the porous nature of the land
boundary, the era of unauthorized Mexican migration began. Fol-
lowing the passage of restrictive immigration laws in 1920 and
1924, the U.S. Border Patrol was established. Initially it had a
budget of $1 million and 450 officers (Lee 2006, 10, 12–13).
Immigration control is a domain of international law en-
forcement. The United States’ borders are the primary focus of
its enforcement efforts. International policing is often synonymous
with local policing at the border. The border is a zone of liaisons
with foreign officials, boundary crossing, and a concentration of
federal law enforcement agencies. Because of the United States
focus on immigration control, the United States has focused on
interdiction of those who would enter without authorization. Peri-
odic intensification and escalation of immigration enforcement,
however, has never ended unauthorized immigration, and associ-
ated policies have become increasingly like crime control.
Crossing a border without document inspection or using
fraudulent documentation violates the national sovereignty of the
United States. The presence of an estimated 11.3 million unau-
thorized immigrants in the United States indicates that legislation
regulating immigration and border enforcement has not suc-
ceeded. A majority of unauthorized immigrants originate in
North America. Mexicans are most represented, followed by
other Latin Americans (Passel and Cohn 2008, iii). Europeans,
Asians, and Africans are relatively few in comparison. Mexicans
comprise 61% of all unauthorized immigrants, and they have been
in the majority since 1990 (Hoefer Rytina and Campbell 2006, 4).
The Central American countries of El Salvador, Guatemala, and
Honduras are the origin of about 12% of unauthorized immi-
grants. Other countries represented among the unauthorized
include India, Korea, China, and Vietnam.
Legal and unauthorized immigration is a response to the
‘‘pull’’ factor of economic motivation, employer demand, and the
‘‘push’’ factor of lack of economic opportunity in ‘‘sending coun-
tries,’’ the countries of origin of immmigrants. The United States
has one of the world’s most active economies, while Mexico and
Central America are developing economies in which many must
struggle to survive. Mexican workers are pulled by the wage
14
Background and History

differential with the United States. In Mexico the minimum wage
is set at $4.86 an hour (Freebairn 2007). The U.S. federal minimum
wage is $6.55 an hour and 24 states have set their minimum wage
rate higher than federal law requires (CNN 2008). State minimum
wages range from a high of $8.07 in Washington to $6.65 in
Missouri.
Opponents of immigration argue that unauthorized immi-
grants drive down the wages of native-born workers. Economists
George J. Borjas and Lawrence F. Katz (2005) indicate that Mexican
immigrants have less education than native-born workers. Their
1980–2000 econometric statistics indicate that lack of education is
associated with low wages for Mexican immigrants. Borjas and
Katz state: ‘‘The large Mexican influx in recent decades widened
the U.S. wage structure by adversely impacting the earnings of
less-educated native workers and improving the earnings of col-
lege graduates’’ (42–43). Their calculations indicate that native-born
high school dropouts experience a wage reduction of ‘‘about 4.8
percent’’ (39). In contrast, the wages of native-born college gradu-
ates were improved because they benefit from the greater availabil-
ity and reduced prices of goods and services provided by unskilled
immigrants.
Immigration critics consider that unskilled unauthorized
workers do not receive the minimum wage and that employers
refuse to pay overtime. In semi- and low-skilled day labor and
the manufacturing and food processing industries, the wages are
relatively low. In 2008, as a severe economic recession devel-
oped, wage theft became a major complaint at workers’ rights
centers (Associated Press 2009). The National Day Laborer
Organizing Network reported that an estimated 50% of day
laborers, of whom 120,000 work on any given day in the United
States, fail to receive some portion of their wages.
Wage theft is pervasive in low-skill jobs. A study of 4,378
workers in low-waged industries in Chicago, Los Angeles, and
New York City indicated numerous violations of payment of
the minimum wage or overtime, the right to take meal breaks,
and access to worker’s compensation when injured (Bernhart
et al. 2009, 43). Wage theft rates were lowest among U.S.-born
workers: 14.9% of men and 16.1% of women. Among foreign-
born authorized workers, 13.5% of men and 24.2% of women
experienced wage violations. Unauthorized foreign-born work-
ers experienced the highest rate of violations: 29.5% of men and
47.4% of women. The research indicates that minimum-wage
Ongoing Issues
15

violations range from 3% to 43% across industries and that cer-
tain industries so commonly violate the law that it appears to
be standard business practice (Bernhart et al. 2009, 39). Among
sewing and garment workers, 40% experienced a minimum-
wage violation and 70% experienced an overtime violation. Pri-
vate household employment also had a high rate of violations.
Among child-care workers, 66.3% experienced a wage violation
while 49.6 % of beauty, dry cleaning, and general repair work-
ers received illegally reduced pay.
Those in favor of restricting immigration believe that unau-
thorized workers are subject to poor working conditions. For
example, the U.S. General Accountability Office (GAO 2005)
and the Bureau of Labor Statistics (2007) indicate that food
processing has one of the highest rates of injury and illness.
Musculoskeletal injuries and respiratory and dermatological
problems occur at significant rates. Poultry processing has a
very high industry rate of injury (Bureau of Labor Statistics
2007). Poultry part cutting mechanization and assembly line
production require lengthy periods of standing and repetitive
motion. Speed on the assembly line, close proximity, and use of
hand tools generate stress, contributing to injury. The use of
immigrant labor complicates the likelihood of reporting injury
because unauthorized individuals fear deportation.
In an America’s Voice 2009 poll, 87% of Americans supported
a path to legalization for unauthorized immigrants and 89%
favored ‘‘cracking down’’ on employers of unauthorized labor
(Brodnitz 2010). Of voters, 67% favored making immigrants with-
out legal documentation into registered taxpayers. One question is
whether unauthorized workers make it possible for employers to
cut corners. Employers are economically motivated to increase
profits by failing to pay living wages and violating workplace
safety laws. Many of these jobs are cash only and the lack of paper-
work disguises wage violations. Non-hourly payment and lack of
paper wage-reporting statements facilitate this crime and make it
difficult for workers to report it (Bernhart et al. 2009, 39). Workers
may want jobs that are off the books because taxes are not
deducted from the wage. Regardless, cash-payment work deprives
states and the federal government of taxes on income. Critics also
believe that the lack of legal status of unauthorized immigrants
leaves them unable to challenge hazardous working conditions.
Will citizens avoid taking unskilled and semiskilled jobs
because of the low pay and poor working conditions? A PEW
16
Background and History

Hispanic Center national survey (2006) found that 65% of respond-
ents believe that immigrants take jobs that Americans ‘‘mostly
don’t want’’ while 24% believe they deprive the native-born of
employment opportunity. The most impacted native-born group is
minority high school dropouts. There is mixed evidence concern-
ing whether unauthorized workers substitute for less-educated
native-born workers. Borjas (2003) estimated that unauthorized
immigrants displaced about 10% of native-born workers with low
education. Meanwhile, the number of native-born high school
dropouts has decreased by 1.2 million, creating the possibility that
more unskilled labor was needed than could be provided by
native-born workers. Kochar’s (2006) examination of the impact of
foreign workers on the native-born did not show a consistent
pattern of favorable or unfavorable job outcomes. Instead, from
1990–2005, eight states (North Carolina, Arizona, Arkansas, South
Carolina, Tennessee, Oklahoma, Kentucky, and Alabama) had
above-average growth for the foreign-born population and below-
average employment rates for native-born workers. In contrast,
14 states (Minnesota, Nebraska, Colorado, Iowa, Utah, Kansas,
Georgia, Delaware, Nevada, Idaho, Indiana, Oregon, Texas, and
Washington) with above-average growth in the foreign-born popu-
lation had above-average employment rates for the native-born.
The post-2007 economic downturn in the United States has
led to increased scrutiny of the impact of immigrants on employ-
ment. Initially, the recession resulted in a 17% unemployment
rate among immigrants working in construction who were
impacted by the decline in housing prices and reduced new con-
struction (Orrenous and Zavodny 2009). In particular, unauthor-
ized Latin American immigrants are often less educated and
work at unskilled jobs, making them especially vulnerable to
fluctuations in the business cycle. Overall, recessions impact on
native-born workers to a greater degree than immigrants with
the exception of the severely impacted housing sector.
Lamar Smith (Austin American Statesmen PolitiFact Texas
2009) cited March 2008 data when stating, ‘‘allowing millions of
illegal immigrants to stay and take jobs away from citizens and
legal immigrants is like giving a burglar a key to the house. Illegal
immigrants currently occupy 8 million jobs. Those stolen jobs
rightfully belong to citizens and legal immigrants.’’ The Center
for Immigration Studies (CIS 2009) argues that the recession, com-
bined with unauthorized immigration, has hurt U.S.-born blacks
and Hispanics without a high school diploma. In December 2008,
Ongoing Issues
17

the unemployment rate for native-born blacks without a high
school education was 24.7%. Unemployment among Hispanics
with less than a high school education was 16.2%. At this
time, rising unemployment dropped jobs estimated to be held by
unauthorized immigrants to 6 to 7 million. CIS considers that
unemployed native-born high school dropouts could potentially
fill some of these jobs. About 12.8 million native-born who held
a high school diploma or less were unemployed. Among less-
educated immigrants without a high school education, unemploy-
ment was 10.6% and those with a high school education faced
11% unemployment.
Gordon H. Hanson, an economist, thinks that ‘‘Policy inaction
[on immigration] is a result not only of a partisan divide in
Washington, but also of the underlying economic reality that de-
spite its faults, illegal immigration has been hugely beneficial
to many U.S. employers, often providing benefits that the cur-
rent legal immigration system does not.’’ The availability of less-
educated unauthorized workers does put a downward pressure on
wages for unskilled employment. Hanson points out that unau-
thorized immigrants take unskilled employment because they most
often lack a high school education. Their job opportunities are fur-
ther limited by their lack of legal status. In 2008 unauthorized
immigrants worked at labor-intensive agriculture (25%), building
and maintenance staff (19%), construction (17%), food preparation
and serving (12%), and production labor (10%). They are 5% of the
civilian labor force. Losing these workers would cause economic
disruption. According to Hanson, the demand from labor-intensive
employers is such that only an increase in visas for unskilled work-
ers, making legal immigration policy responsive to market condi-
tions, would legalize this immigration flow (Hanson 2009).
Conservative Patrick Buchanan believes that ‘‘As immigrants
work for less than Americans, they drive down the wages of our
working people. And they represent a wealth transfer from the
poorest Americans to the richest’’ (2006, 264). As a result, he advo-
cates for enforcement of employer sanctions but would not legal-
ize the unauthorized population. An opposing view is given by
Robert Scheer, who has worked as a journalist for the Los Angeles
Times and is a contributing editor for The Nation:
Some 2 million immigrant workers now earn less than
the minimum wage and millions more work without
18
Background and History

the occupational safety, workers’ compensation, over-
time pay and other protections legal status offers. Con-
sequently, when the president says that immigrants
perform work that legal residents are unwilling to do,
he may be right—but we don’t know. The only way to
test that hypothesis is to bring this black market labor
pool above ground. (Scheer 2006)
The incompleteness of border control has created a dilemma of
an unauthorized population whose economic impact is incom-
pletely understood and whose solution it is difficult to agree
upon. The political sensitivity of the issue has led to repeated
delays in addressing it.
The proximity of Mexico and Central American countries
to the southern land border facilitates migration. This border is
the only one in the world between a developed and a develop-
ing country. Nevertheless, 2,410,000 immigrants are estimated
to have come from non–North American countries using other
means (Hoefer, Rytina, and Campbell 2006). Problems with the
U.S. visa entrance and exit system and the openness of coasts
permit people of many ethnicities to enter legally and fail to
depart or to come without inspection along the coasts and over
the Canadian border. Globalization has also broadened patterns
of unauthorized entry to encompass all types of borders, land,
sea, or air, although Americans are not as aware of this issue.
Attempted Solutions
U.S. Border Patrol
Since the 1970s, the expansion of U.S. Border Patrol personnel
has been a consistent policy response to concern about unauthor-
ized immigration and, later, drug trafficking across the U.S.-
Mexico border (see Andreas 2000, 34, 55–56, 87–93, 98; Ackleson
and Heyman 2010, 43). Before 9/11, border entry was more moni-
tored than border exit, when inspection was often not carried out
or any data entered. Border inspectors either allowed or turned
back entrants. They charged unauthorized entrants trying to cross
without inspection and documents with fraudulent entry. The
first attempt is a civil offense and the second is a felony.
Attempted Solutions
19

The U.S. Border Patrol, originally part of the Immigration
and Naturalization Service (INS), now in the Department of
Homeland Security, manages land interdiction and has the larg-
est budget and political constituency. In 1980, there were 2,268
agents of which 87.2% were at the southern border and 9.3% at
the northern border (TRAC 2006a). In 2001 there were 9,651
Border Patrol officers, of whom 93.9% were stationed at the
U.S.-Mexico border and 3.4% at the Canadian border (TRAC
2006b).
Public concern about unauthorized immigration has led to
a political response that continually increases the size of the
Border Patrol and adds new surveillance equipment (Ackleson
and Heyman 2010, 42–44). For example, helicopters, fixed-wing
aircraft, and motion sensors are increasingly used. By 2000,
there were 13,000 sensors, although some were not functionally
operational (Kosolowski 2006).
In the 1990s the Border Patrol implemented a new tactic:
line watching (Ackleson and Heyman 2010, 43–44) in opera-
tions like San Diego’s Operation Gatekeeper (Nevin 2002), El
Paso’s Hold the Line (Dunn 2009, 51–96), Operation Rio Grande
in McAllen, Texas (Maril 2004), and Operation Safeguard in
Tucson, Arizona. Vehicles were placed close together, a few
hundred feet apart and almost on the border line. This was
done in urban zones to deter individuals from crossing before
they even tried.
Criminalization of Immigration
Criminalization refers to the process of designating particular
human behavior, such as crossing a country’s border without
its authority, as criminally illegal. In the United States, an indi-
vidual’s first crossing is a civil offense. Repeated attempts are a
criminal felony. The language of immigration is complicated by
the media’s use of the term ‘‘illegal aliens’’ and, more recently,
the unqualified ‘‘criminal aliens’’ for all apprehended migrants,
because the first entry is a a misdemeanor (Warner 2006).
A more neutral term used by the federal government is ‘‘unau-
thorized immigrants,’’ while a term preferred by immigrant
advocates is ‘‘undocumented immigrants.’’
The first attempt at expanding criminalization, of mixed
success so far, was directed at citizen and permanent resident
employers of unauthorized workers. In 1986 the Immigration
20
Background and History

Reform and Control Act (IRCA) passed. Its ‘‘amnesty’’ legalized
unauthorized immigrants who could prove they were in the
country prior to January 1, 1982, and made employers who hired
unauthorized workers subject to civil and criminal penalties
referred to as ‘‘employer sanctions’’ (Green and Ciobanu 2006).
Regardless of the law’s intent, spending on interior enforcement
never matched the amount expended on expanding U.S.-Mexico
border enforcement to control unauthorized immigration. The
target has always been apprehending unauthorized migrants, a
task to which securing the nation from possible terrorists was
later added in what is now referred to as the securitization of
immigration.
Further criminalization of immigration began in the late
1980s after the passage of IRCA, when the United States began
to develop a two-tier system of rights for citizens and nonciti-
zens. It has gradually deprived noncitizens, including perma-
nent resident aliens who had committed certain crimes, of their
due process rights under the Constitution. Traditionally foreign-
born individuals entering without inspection (EWI) have been
deported from the country unless they successfully asked for
asylum, which the government does not award to economi-
cally motivated migrants. In 1988 deportation was relabeled as
‘‘removal’’ and the Immigration and Naturalization Service
(INS, now ICE) began the Institutional Removal Program (IRP)
to review the immigration status of federal prisoners (Office of
the Inspector General 2002, 1). This program was created to
identify and then remove noncitizen prisoners immediately after
their prison time was concluded (1999). The IRP later evolved
into the Criminal Alien Program (CAP) (ICE 2008). Criminal
aliens are defined by the Government Accountability Office
as: ‘‘noncitizens who are residing in the United States legally or
illegally and convicted of a crime’’ (GAO 2005, 3). The first per-
manent residents to be designated criminal aliens committed
aggravated felonies, a legal concept that has evolved to encom-
pass an expanded set of offenses.
In the late 1980s both immigration and crime control were
major public issues. Permanent resident aliens who had commit-
ted crimes were subject to additional penalties. Congress began
to pass laws that expanded the basis for removal (deportation)
of permanent resident aliens who had committed crimes. The
War on Drugs began with the 1988 Omnibus Anti-Drug Abuse
Act, which specified that if a permanent resident alien was
Attempted Solutions
21

convicted of homicide, rape, drug trafficking, and/or arms traf-
ficking, that person would be given expedited removal upon fin-
ishing his or her sentence without further access to a lawyer and
with expanded exclusion from reentry (Podgorny 2009). These
were among the first ‘‘criminal aliens’’ to be expelled. Because
the law was retroactive, the numbers deported exceeded those
actually finishing criminal sentences in any given year.
In 1993, the first attack on the World Trade Center was car-
ried out; it had been planned by Ramzi Yousef, who had claimed
political asylum, and other conspirators (Reeve 2002), creating a
linkage between who is allowed to enter and the possibility of ter-
rorism. In 1996 the Anti-Terrorism and Effective Death Penalty
Act (AEDPA) and the Illegal Immigration Reform and Immigrant
Responsibility Act (IIRIRA) linked immigration to the terrorism
concern, which is the hallmark of later securitization (Chacon 2008;
Podgorny 2009). These laws added 50 offenses to those desig-
nated as ‘‘aggravated felonies’’ (Garcia 2006). Further, any crime
resulting in a sentence of more than a year, including misdemeanor
crime like drug possession and shoplifting, was to be a basis for
expulsion. Even a suspended sentence was to be a criterion for
mandatory detention and removal. As a result, another wave of de-
portation of criminal aliens occurred. After removal, many con-
victed of aggravated felonies were banned for a lifetime while
others might have to wait 5, 10, or 20 years before returning.
Denying noncitizens the constitutional right to due process
of law is another aspect of criminalization. The attempt to con-
trol the high volume of unauthorized immigration led to taking
away the right to obtain a lawyer and appear at a hearing
before an immigration judge, denying the possibility of being
pardoned for meritorious behavior and the need to support a
family (Siskin and Wasem 2006). Often immigration officials at
the nation’s borders make a life-changing decision for an indi-
vidual seeking asylum with only limited information. Similarly,
in the interior, permanent-resident aliens subject to removal for
aggravated felonies have no access to a legal appeal before they
are summarily removed.
Expedited removal is applied to unauthorized entrants arriv-
ing at the land, sea, or air borders and permanent-resident or
unauthorized-resident aliens serving time in detention or prison.
For convicted noncitizens, any time in the United States after a
prison sentence is completed is to be spent in mandatory deten-
tion without release on bond, which further isolates individuals
22
Background and History

from legal help. The denial of access to legal representation and
immigration court means that there is little transparency in treat-
ment of noncitizens.
The reason for expedited removal is to avoid the costly, time-
consuming legal procedures. The combination of detention and
expedited removal is supposed to deter individuals from attempt-
ing to enter without authorization. Opposition to expedited re-
moval has come from immigration advocates who argue that the
process denies asylum applicants of the legal opportunity to state
their case (Human Rights First 2000). At present, asylum seekers
who attempt to enter and have their initial claim denied are
placed in mandatory detention, often in jails with criminals due
to lack of space.
A penultimate step in the criminalization of immigration,
irrespective of the legal entrance status of noncitizens, was the
2001 USA PATRIOT Act. It specified that immigration enforce-
ment could detain or deport any noncitizen considered a possi-
ble threat to national security without due process of law. This
legislation has been criticized for promoting racial profiling of
Arabs and Muslims who were then expelled, often based on immi-
gration violations such as overstaying a legal entrance visa, regard-
less of criminal or terrorist involvement (Cole 2003).
Terrorism
Terrorists have sought to enter the United States in the guise of
visitors coming for tourism or business and as asylum appli-
cants or legal immigrants. Although terrorists are thought, at
present, to constitute only a handful of the millions of people
entering and exiting the United States, their potential for harm
has led the country to take extraordinary steps to exercise con-
trol over the flow of people.
Before 9/11 the pattern of disallowing constitutional rights
to noncitizens was established. Subsequent securitization initia-
tives have taken this path by applying immigration law rather
than developing new criminal laws to control terrorist suspects
(Stumpf 2006, 12–24). After government officials understood
the threat of international terrorism, immigration and interdic-
tion of unauthorized immigrants became more important as a
national security issue.
Although airlines screened passengers to avert hijackings,
nothing stood in the way of the largest terrorist action in U.S.
Attempted Solutions
23

history on 9/11. This failure of preparation occurred despite
prior known terrorist crossings of the Canadian border. The
9/11 hijackers entered legally by air on various types of legitimate
and fraudulent visas and passports (Eldridge et al. 2004). As a
consequence, the United States undertook the drastic actions of
the War on Terror. Ports of entry acquired new significance as
increased scrutiny of visitors for business or pleasure, asylum
applicants, and new immigrants occurred.
Counterterrorism before and after 9/11
Prior to 9/11, the United States had warning that it could be an
international terrorist target and that the direction of the threat
came from the northern border. In 1988 U.S. Customs arrested
three Syrian terrorist group members linked to al-Qaeda for
attempting to bring explosives across the Canadian border
(Winterdyk and Sundberg 2010b, 19–20). The 1993 World Trade
Center bombing was connected to Islamic terrorism, and certain
plotters entered the United States from Canada (Hataley 2007;
Winterdyk and Sundberg 2010b, 22).
In 1999 Ahmed Ressam, a member of al-Qaeda, was
stopped at the U.S.-Canadian border after being tracked by
Canadian intelligence for linkage to a bomb plot (Winterdyk and
Sundberg 2010b, 22–23). The ‘‘millennium bomber’’ had planned
to bomb Los Angeles International Airport during the 2000
Millennium celebration and was later convicted of terrorism and
given a sentence of 22 years. The Royal Canadian Mounted
Police (RCMP) first collected intelligence on Ressam, and then
he was arrested when he attempted to cross the border to
the United States in a joint operation with the United States
(Ackleson and Heyman 2010, 48).
Before 9/11, security priorities were the interdiction of
unauthorized migrants and contraband, especially drugs, on
land at the U.S.-Mexico border, by air travel, or at sea, off Florida
(Ackleson and Heyman 2010, 42–43). Less attention was given to
port of entry security, the visa and admission process, and the
U.S.-Canadian land and maritime borders, which include the
Great Lakes. The 9/11 attack initially resulted in inspecting all
entrants and vehicles at the borders, including the trucks that
are a major element of international trade (Ackleson and
Heyman 2010, 50). This created massive backups (Andreas 2003,
10), including a 36-mile traffic line at the Windsor, Ontario, and
24
Background and History

Detroit port of entry bridges. Counterterrorism surveillance pro-
cedures increased border-crossing time, and migrant apprehen-
sions for unauthorized entry dropped. The intensive enforcement
created transaction costs for international business and slowed or
diverted trade to other countries.
After 9/11, the Bush administration sought to maintain bor-
ders that were open to entry but the major emphasis was on
lengthy background checks, aggressive immigration enforcement,
and new border controls. Border security has been enhanced in
many ways but many of the policies undertaken are a continua-
tion of past trends. Initial response to the attack was marked by
confusion and the need to reassess all aspects of border-security
policy. The attack provoked both innovation and greater invest-
ment in prior programs (Ackleson and Heyman 2010, 49–50). In
the post–World Trade Center attack world, planners began to con-
sider a wide variety of terrorist attacks that could be carried out
on U.S. soil. Border-control strategies that were emphasized after
9/11 included nonintrusive scanning equipment for cargo and
differentiating trusted (low risk) shippers from those unknown or
suspected of smuggling contraband.
The 9/11 Commission (see Eldridge et al. 2004) found that
the United States was slow to react to the development of interna-
tional terrorism. Al-Qaeda terrorism against U.S. embassies and
military abroad did not result in improved U.S. border security.
Terrorism, rather than immigration or drug smuggling, became
the major border-security issue after 9/11, although terrorists have
been few and seldom encountered in the United States (Ackleson
and Heyman 2010, 58–59). As a result, most border-security
efforts concentrate on unauthorized entry and drug control. The
initiatives undertaken are mostly a reprioritization of established
programs for improving surveillance technology, fencing, and
certain enforcement procedures. Federal terrorism prosecutions,
never more than marginal in number, rose in the 12 months after
9/11 and then declined (TRAC 2006c). To illustrate, there were
355 international terrorist prosecutions in 2002 and 19 in 2006.
Monitoring Ports of Entry
Originally, ports of entry had dual governance (Ackleson and
Heyman 2010, 40–41). The Immigration and Naturalization Serv-
ice (INS) in the Department of Justice inspected noncitizen visi-
tors, immigrants, and citizens in transit. Customs, in the Treasury
Attempted Solutions
25

Department, regulated legitimate goods and sought to prevent
smuggling through inspection of land vehicles and airplane inspec-
tions, a task shared with the Federal Aviation Agency (FAA). Cus-
toms shared oceanic vessel inspection with the Coast Guard, in the
Department of Transportation. Further inspection was carried
out by the Animal and Health Inspection Service in the Depart-
ment of Agriculture and the Nuclear Regulatory Commission in
the Department of Energy.
Every nation exercises border control and seeks to confine
transit to special zones known as ports of entry. Ports of entry,
places where movement occurs across borders, are deterritorial-
ized from physical borders when individuals enter at interna-
tional airports or seaports. Since 1976, the legal case of U.S. v.
Martinez-Fuente has allowed the establishment of permanent or
fixed checkpoints on highways within 100 miles of the border.
These have been situated above the Mexican border. Vehicles
traveling through these checkpoints are checked for individual
documentation and contraband such as drugs. The inspections
must be brief and a warrant is not required.
Ports of entry regulation is central to border security, and
Customs inspectors make many arrests. The port traffic of legal
entrants is 1,000 times that of unauthorized entries; 500,000
enter via the ports, and it is loosely estimated that at least 500
million attempt clandestine entrance each year. Major publicity
is given to land borders outside of the ports, especially abutting
Mexico. Entrance between ports, by air, land, or sea, is unau-
thorized. The Border Patrol is in charge of preventing unau-
thorized entry over the land borders. The Department of
Defense is responsible for air interdiction, and the Coast Guard
patrols the coast (Ackleson and Heyman 2010, 41, 42).
Before 9/11 residents of the two countries bordering the
United States had two different procedures which reflected the
relative social inequality between the nations. Canadian citi-
zens, from a prosperous country, did not need a visa (Ackleson
and Heyman 2010, 48). Mexican citizens, from a developing
nation, were required to have a border-crossing card or visa.
The card for Mexico was biometric and allowed 72-hour visits
within 25 miles of the border. These visits could be extended
if approved at a port of entry or consulate. An additional 27
prosperous countries had visa waivers and could enter with a
passport. This was a key vulnerability, as these countries, with
low rates of unauthorized immigration to the United States,
26
Background and History

were known to harbor terrorists or were a part of terrorist tra-
vel patterns.
Both pre- and post-9/11, the Department of State has regu-
lated visas for nonimmigrant travel. Pre-9/11 immigrant visas
involved the Immigration and Naturalization Service (INS) and
the Department of State. The 9/11 terrorists used visas, some
fraudulent, and their entry was linked to lack of consular and port
inspector training in examining terrorist travel patterns or identi-
fying fraudulent documents. The 9/11 Commission found that
U.S. Consulates prioritized prevention of unauthorized immigra-
tion over screening for potentially dangerous terrorists (Eldridge
et al. 2004, 7, 73–74, 82; Ackleson and Heyman 2010, 42, 47).
Land port inspectors were and are under pressure to clear
traffic (Andreas 2000, 46, 47; Heyman 1999, 626–627) but are
also mandated to interdict drugs, and checking people was
deemphasized (Ackleson and Heyman 2010, 46). Staffing and
port-of-entry expansion had not kept up with demand. Individ-
uals crossing at land borders were waved through after very
brief questioning. Trucking connected the manufacturing of
commodities in the U.S.-Mexico economic partnership. The vol-
ume of such traffic meant that port inspectors had heavy work
schedules and substantial overtime. Previously, land-port work-
ers were pressured to clear goods quickly while searching for
contraband and inspection of visitors was not emphasized. Sea-
ports prioritized clearance of cargo over security while the
Coast Guard concentrated on interdiction of Haitian and Cuban
migrants and drugs (Ackleson and Heyman 2010, 46). Terror-
ism had not been a priority and the United States was caught
by surprise.
Screening at airports was cursory because of pressure to
clear passenger entries. Air travelers and luggage/goods were
screened by the INS and Customs. International airports gave
priority to clearing passengers instead of inspection of travelers
for immigration violations. Before 9/11 the United States was
one of the most open countries in the world to visit. After 9/11,
it was found that the United States had been underprepared in
addressing international terrorism with border-security mea-
sures (Eldridge et al. 2004, 3).
Before 9/11 biometric electronic databases containing bio-
graphical, criminal, and security information were being devel-
oped (Eldridge et al. 2004, 87–96; Ackleson and Heyman 2010,
46). These included IDENT, IBIS, NAILS, TECS, and TIPOFF.
Attempted Solutions
27

Despite their availability, use of these databases was discretion-
ary. Identity documents were not machine readable for compar-
ison. Oral declarations of citizenship were accepted at the
discretion of the land-port officers. The biometric database was
to be used for immigration enforcement and port security offi-
cials were distracted from searching for terrorists. After 9/11,
new systems and procedures heavily regulated visa applicants
and increased the difficulty for visitors, foreign students, and
temporary workers trying to enter the United States.
Department of Homeland Security
Prior to their reorganization into the U.S. Department of Home-
land Security, border-control and law-enforcement agencies
were fragmented and did not share intelligence (Eldridge et al.
2004). The Bush administration adopted a zero-tolerance risk-
management approach to improving border security. They
sought to balance concerns about identifying and preventing
terrorist entry, stopping unauthorized immigration, and pre-
venting criminals’ entry with economic concerns.
The most significant development after 9/11 was the reor-
ganization of federal agencies under the umbrella of the U.S.
Department of Homeland Security (Ackleson and Heyman
2010, 51–52). The 9/11 Commission had substantially faulted
the lack of cooperation among government intelligence agencies
(Eldridge et al. 2004). They indicated that the United States had
not been prepared to counter a major terrorist attack because of
lack of coordination of intelligence agencies and law enforce-
ment. The Homeland Security Act of 2002 joined 22 federal
agencies and 180,000 employees. The U.S. Immigration and
Naturalization Service (INS) ceased to exist on March 1, 2003.
Its functions were reallocated to the Bureau of Citizenship and
Immigration services (CIS), U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforce-
ment (ICE), and U.S. Customs and Border Protection. The DHS
director became a Cabinet-level member of the government.
Whether the huge bureaucratic organization, which was again
reorganized in 2004, has been successfully integrated has been
questioned (Carafano and Heyman 2004). The DHS budget has
consistently had massive and constant increases.
The U.S.-Canadian border was proudly referred to as the
‘‘longest undefended border’’ in the world, but that changed
dramatically after 9/11 (Winterdyk and Sundberg 2010a, 27).
28
Background and History

Armed police and paramilitary organizations patrol this bilat-
eral border. In a move parallel to the United States’ creation of
the Department of Homeland Security, Canada created the um-
brella Canadian Border Services Agency (CBSA) to house the
former customs, immigration, and food inspections services, and
it became the first armed service to patrol. In 2006, the Canadian
government allocated $101 million to arm 4,800 Border Services
officers. They wear ballistic vests and carry handguns to oper-
ate as a paramilitary organization.
Layered Traveler Screening
The 1996 Illegal Immigration Reform and Immigrant Responsi-
bility Act (IIRIRA) had mandated the development of a data
system to track foreign visitor arrival and departure as did the
Immigration and Naturalization Service Data Management
Improvement Act of 2000 (Ackleson and Heyman 2010, 57). The
system was to integrate the Department of Justice and Depart-
ment of State databases. The goal was to identify unauthorized
entrants, not terrorists. The original databases were faulty as
immigration and consular watch lists lacked comprehensive in-
formation. This was partly due to lack of cooperation among
intelligence agencies, the State Department, and the FBI, which
the 9/11 Commission later noted. Although consular terrorist
watch lists were electronic, they were incomplete.
The 9/11 Commission determined that better informa-
tion from a layered approach would identify high-risk travelers
to maintain security and be less disruptive to regular travel
(Eldridge et al. 2004). They determined that the border of the
United States should be electronically ‘‘moved abroad’’ to begin
the process of security checks for a layered defense (Ackleson and
Heyman 2010, 56). This necessitated working with foreign gov-
ernments to begin checks. The physical border and its inspectors
would be the last—not the first—step in security screening.
The Uniting and Strengthening America by Providing
Appropriate Tools Required to Intercept and Obstruct Terror-
ism Act (USA PATRIOT Act) of 2001 sought to strengthen sur-
veillance and intelligence sharing (Ackleson and Heyman 2010,
53). It focused on review of immigrants and noncitizen visitors.
A new deadline was set for requiring machine-readable pass-
ports for nations that were not required to request a visa to
travel. The Enhanced Border Security and Visa Entry Reform
Attempted Solutions
29

Act of 2002 changed security reviews for visa applicants, estab-
lished data sharing, and sought to integrate the entry and exit
systems at U.S. ports of entry (Ackleson and Heyman 2010, 54).
Changes in the visa-application process were a needed coun-
terterrorist response. The United States is seeking to unify consular
and international travel system watch lists for visa screening.
Before 9/11, the CIA, FBI, and Defense Department watch lists
were integrated but they did not share data, permitting duplica-
tion and waste of intelligence (Ackleson and Heyman 2010,
55–56). A new Terrorist Screening Center is unifying watch lists
and has information on individuals and their records. The security
of the original sources is protected while the information is shared.
Layered inspection is occurring (Ackleson and Heyman
2010, 56). The first step is to apply for a visa at consulates
(although many European countries and Canada have this proc-
ess waived). At step two, pre-inspection of documents against
watch lists is done and individuals may be questioned prior to
boarding airplanes or ships. Certain individuals may be denied
transit if they are on a ‘‘no-fly list.’’ The Secure Flight program
uses a computerized risk assessment algorithm (Automated Tar-
geting System) which searches by computer to indicate ‘‘no fly’’
or further inquiry of ‘‘selectees.’’ Step three involves three proce-
dures: document inspection, a watch-list check, and questioning
at entry. A preflight manifest is sent to international airports
under Secure Flight and inspectors have backgrounds and risk
scores. This approach is also used at sea and air freight entry
points. All individuals entering and cargo paperwork are
inspected. Most actual air or marine cargo is not inspected.
A necessity for control of terrorism is screening of aircraft
flight lists. In the 1995 Bojinka plot, Ramzi Yousef and Khalid
Shaikh Mohammed planned to bring down 11 Trans-Pacific
commercial jets (Hamm 2007). Although the United States rec-
ognized its vulnerability, before 9/11 foreign air carriers only
cooperated voluntarily, and countries like Saudi Arabia refused
to do so. The United States now operates the Advanced Passen-
ger Information System (APIS) and receives information on for-
eign passengers from all international airlines.
Border Inspections
The Intelligence Reform and Terrorism Prevention Act (IRTP)
of 2004 ended the passport exemption for travel among the
30
Background and History

United States, Canada, and Mexico (Ackleson and Heyman
2010, 58). Under the Western Hemisphere Travel Initiative
(WHTI) everyone must have a passport or another approved
identity document to cross over the borders. Communities
located on the borders were concerned about impact on cross-
border traffic and increased crossing times. Previously, U.S. citizens
could verbally declare their status and cross without verifica-
tion. WHTI has caused consternation in border communities
concerned about crossing times (Abelson and Wood 2007).
A trusted traveler program was created to pre-clear certain
noncitizens. Preferred flows of travelers have been established to
structure inspection programs. Identity card standards were raised
and standards for ‘‘breeder documents,’’ birth certificates, and
other documents used to establish personage were set. SENTRI is
the Secure Electronic Network for Traveler’s Rapid Inspection and
is meant to expedite entry of cleared individuals (Ackleson and
Heyman 2010, 55). This program is called NEXUS in Canada.
In 2002 the Container Security Initiative (CSI) was begun, as
was the Customs-Trade Partnership Against Terrorism (C-TPAT)
(Ackleson and Heyman 2010, 55; DHS 2007a). These public and
private initiatives created a risk-based automated targeting sys-
tem and signed up businesses for a trusted shipper program in
which they would agree to guarantee security of goods from their
supply chain. It is a layered form of security because goods are
inspected prior to coming to the border and may be inspected at
the port of entry. Radiation screening and advanced inspection
technology are used to detect weapons of mass destruction such
as nuclear materials for a dirty bomb.
Pressure exists for speedy border transit because inspection
can create bottlenecks in the international transport grid. Both
business owners and politicians push for fast transit of people
and goods. Yet the completeness of the inspection process is
inversely related to speed. Despite the emphasis on paying fees
for passage of legal goods and apprehending smugglers and
taking contraband, most shipping is not inspected. The 9/11
Commission Act of 2007 requires that 100% of air cargos be
physically inspected by August, 2010 (GAO 2009). Similarly,
100% of maritime shipping containers are to be inspected by
July, 2010. The Government Accountability Office (2009) reports
that 100% scanning of inbound foreign maritime cargo is not
feasible and the deadline has been extended to 2014. In 2009,
about 50% of nonexempt air cargo was being screened due to
Attempted Solutions
31

labor and resource issues. A formal declaration is made for all
shipped goods, and tariff fees and regulations are applied.
The 2004 Border Strategic Plan made terrorism the most im-
portant issue but has focused on the U.S.-Mexico border corridor.
Border Patrol officers have been given access to terrorist and crimi-
nal watch databases and are apprehending criminal non-citizens
attempting reentry. Border communities are receiving increased
street patrolling.
Overall, the massive efforts to arrest terrorists after 9/11
have produced few solid leads resulting in prosecution. Immi-
gration law was used to detain noncitizens on the basis of
nationality and religion without charge and for lengthy periods
of time without bond. A major problem is that immigrant com-
munities were alienated from cooperating to find potential ter-
rorists. Counter-terrorism and immigration enforcement have
begin to overlap.
Although the basic thrust of legislation has been counter-
ing terrorism, most funded initiatives impact visitors, cargo,
and citizens crossing the borders. These changes primarily
address the past issues of immigration and smuggling while
incorporating concerns about terrorism. The DHS has continued
its integration of formerly separate agencies and the ID system
at U.S. consulates and airports has been strengthened.
Canada has resisted fortification of its border, and Smart
Border screening and entry will be the major strategy. In North
America, policy was based on Smart Border Accords and the
Security and Prosperity Agreement of the United States, Mexico,
and Canada. Trilateral cooperation in intelligence, inspection, and
prescreening was arranged. After establishing that the al-Qaeda
hijackers did not cross as unauthorized entrants, screening was
the priority. Although no system is infallible, new strategies seek
to assess and manage indirect and unintended risks (Naim 2005).
Screening involves filtering for threats using a layered approach
(Ackleson and Heyman 2010). Developed countries have a Smart
Border preference and the resources to implement it.
The original Canada-U.S. Smart Border Declaration initi-
ated a biometric identification system in Canada and sharing
of intelligence data. The Security and Prosperity Agreement of
the United States, Canada, and Mexico extended intelligence
sharing to Mexico and established a trusted traveler program
for all three countries. The three security priorities are (1) trav-
eler and cargo inspection and bioprotection; (2) shared critical
32
Background and History

infrastructure protection, port security, and intelligence against
transnational threats; and (3) trusted travel (Ackleson and Justin
2006; Villareal and Lake, 2009).
Conclusion
The 9/11 incident demonstrated that border security involves
more than the land borders. The air and sea ports of entry need
careful monitoring and application of intelligence data to prevent
terrorism. Consulates issuing visas and passports are carrying out
layered screening. The DHS and the Terrorist Screening Center
have integrated electronic watch lists. Homeland Security now
has officers at some consulates. Implementation of intelligence-
led law enforcement is under way. Despite or because of this
upgrading, the land and sea ports have operational problems.
Inspectors turned away 200,000 inadmissible entrants in 2006, but
it is estimated that they missed 20,000 (GAO 2007). It is thought
that the inspection process is inconsistent. This may be due to
ports being understaffed by 7–25%. There is an extreme workload
with poor training, outdated facilities, and a lack of full documen-
tation standardization. It is not surprising that there are delays,
inadequacies in security, low morale, and high turnover among
inspectors. In 2007 the exit check at land ports was abandoned,
making calculation of visa overstayers problematic. The DHS
lacks the capacity to arrest all visa violators.
The United States is attempting to safeguard its physical
length and numerous borders against ‘‘terrorism.’’ Terrorism is
hard to combat because, relative to an issue like unauthorized
immigration, looking for terrorists is like searching for a needle
in a haystack (Winterdyck and Sundberg 2009). It is suggested
that border-security personnel should search for criminals rather
than terrorists (Hamm 2007). Meanwhile, the U.S. Government
Accountability Office (GAO 2008) has determined that the huge
and complex Department of Homeland Security is expending
billions of dollars without appropriate oversight, including 15
major investments deemed to be underperforming.
References
Abelson, D., and D. Wood. 2007. ‘‘People, Security, and Borders: The
Impact of the Western Hemisphere Travel Initiative in North
References
33

America.’’ White paper. Foundation for Educational Exchange
between Canada and the United States of America. http://www.
wilsoncenter.org/index.cfm?fuseaction=events.print&event_
id=237749&stoplayout=true.
Ackleson, J., and Josiah McHeyman. 2010. ‘‘United States Border
Security after 9/11.’’ In Border Security in the Al-Qaeda Era, ed. John A.
Winterdyk and Kelly W. Sundberg, 37–76. New York: CRC Press.
Ackleson, J., and K. Justin. 2006. ‘‘The Security and Prosperity
Partnership of North America.’’ American Review of Canadian Studies 36:
207–232.
Andreas, Peter. 2000. Border Games: Policing the U.S.-Mexico Divide.
Ithaca: Cornell University Press.
Andreas, Peter. 2003. ‘‘A Tale of Two Borders: The U.S.-Canada and
U.S.-Mexico Lines after 9–11.’’ In The Rebordering of North America,
ed. Peter Andreas and Thomas J. Biersteker New York: Routledge.
Associated Press. 2009. ‘‘As Wage Theft Rises, States and Cities Crack
Down.’’ December 16. http://abcnews.go.com/Business/wireStory?
id=9359168.
Austin American Statesmen PolitiFact Texas. 2009. ‘‘Rep. Lamar Smith
Says Immigrants Hold 8 Million Jobs.’’ http://www.politifact.com/
texas/statements/2010/jan/12/lamar-smith/rep-lamar-smith-says-
immigrants-hold-8-million-job/.
Bagwell, K., and R. W. Staiger. 2003. ‘‘National Sovereignty in an
Interdependent World.’’ http://www.intertic.org/Unions%20Papers/
bagwell-staiger.pdf.
Beaver, Janice Cheryl. 2006. ‘‘CRS Report for Congress: U.S.
International Borders: Brief Facts.’’ http://fpc.state.gov/documents/
organization/76897.pdf.
Bernhart, Annette, Ruth Milkman, Nik Theodore, Douglas Heckathorn,
Miribai Auer, James DeFillipis, Ana Luz Gonzalez, Victor Narro, Jason
Perelshteyn, Diana Polson, and Michael Spiller. 2009. Broken Laws,
Unprotected Workers: Violations of Employment and Labor Laws in
American Cities. Joint Report of the Center for Urban Economic
Development, University of Illinois–Chicago, National Employment
Law Project of New York, NY, and the UCLA Institute for Research on
Labor and Employment, Los Angeles, California. http://www.nelp.
org/page/-/brokenlaws/BrokenLawsReport2009.pdf?nocdn=1.
Biersteker, Thomas J. 2003. ‘‘The Rebordering of North America?
Implications for Conceptualizing Borders after September 11th.’’ In The
Rebordering of North America: Integration and Exclusion in a New Security
Context, ed. Peter Andreas and Thomas J. Biersteker, 153–166. New
York: Routledge.
34
Background and History

Borjas, George J. 2003. ‘‘The Labor Demand Curve Is Downward
Sloping: Reexamining the Impact of Immigration on the Labor
Market.’’ Quarterly Journal of Economics 118: 1335–1374.
Borjas, George J., and Lawrence F. Katz. 2005. ‘‘The Evolution of the
Mexican-Born Workforce in the United States.’’ National Bureau of
Economic Research Working Paper 11281. Cambridge, MA: National
Bureau of Economic Research. http://www.hks.harvard.edu/fs/
gborjas/Papers/w11281.pdf.
Bothwell, Robert. 2006. The Penguin History of Canada. Toronto:
Penguin Group (Canada).
Brodnitz, Pete. 2010. ‘‘Immigration Reform: National Polling.’’
Benensen Strategy Group for America’s Voice. December. http://
amvoice.3cdn.net/e8038e6eb31fa1bd2e_gfm6vati2.pdf.
Buchanan, Patrick. 2006. State of Emergency: The Third World Invasion
and Conquest of North America. New York: Thomas Dunne Books.
Bureau of Labor Statistics, U.S. Department of Labor. 2007. ‘‘Survey of
Occupational Injuries and Illnesses in Cooperation with Participating
State Agencies.’’ Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Labor. http://
www.bls.gov/iif/oshwc/osh/case/ostb1951.txt.
Carafano, James J., and David Heyman. 2004. ‘‘DHS 2.0: Rethinking
the Department of Homeland Security.’’ Washington, DC: The
Heritage Foundation. http://www.heritage.org/Research/
HomelandDefense/upload/72759_1.pdf.
Center for Immigration Studies (CIS). 2009. Unemployment for
Immigrants and the U.S.-Born: Picture Bleak for Less-Educated Black and
Hispanic Americans. Washington, DC: Center for Immigration Studies.
http://www.cis.org/December2008Unemployment.
Chacon, Jennifer. 2008. ‘‘The Security Myth: Punishing Immigrants in the
Name of National Security.’’ In Immigration, Integration and Security:
America and Europe in Comparative Perspective, ed. Ariane Chebel
d’Appollonia and Simon Reich. Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press.
Cole, David. 2003. Enemy Aliens: Double Standards and Constitutional
Freedoms in the War on Terrorism. New York: Free Press.
CNN. 2008. ‘‘Minimum Wage Laws, State by State.’’ July 24. http://
money.cnn.com/2008/07/24/smallbusiness/state_minimum_wages.
fsb/index.htm?postversion=2008072411.
Department of Homeland Security (DHS). 2007a. ‘‘Container Security
Initiative Strategic Plan.’’ http://www.dhs.gov/files/programs/gc_
1165872287564.shtm.
Department of Homeland Security (DHS). 2007b. ‘‘DHS Announces
Predeparture Screening of International Passengers and First Step
References
35

Towards Secure Flight.’’ http://www.dhs.gov/xnews/releases/pr_
1186668114504.shtm.
Dunn, Timothy J. 2009. Blockading the Border and Human Rights: The El
Paso Operation That Remade Immigration Enforcement. Austin: University
of Texas Press.
Eldridge, Thomas R., Susan Ginsberg, Walter T. Hempel II, Janice L.
Kephart, and Kelly Moore. 2004. ‘‘9/11 and Terrorist Travel. Staff
Report of the National Commission on Terrorist Attacks Upon the
United States.’’ http://govinfo.library.unt.edu/911/staff_statements/
911_TerrTrav_Monograph.pdf.
Freebairn, William. 2007. ‘‘Mexico Raises Daily Minimum Wage to
$4.86 in 2008.’’ Bloomberg News, December 21. http://www.bloomberg.
com/apps/news?pid=20601086&sid=a0nqGGuVgzzo&refer=latin_
america.
GAO. 2005. ‘‘Information on Criminal Aliens Incarcerated in Federal
and State Prisons and Local Jails.’’ http://www.gao.gov/new.items/
d05337r.pdf.
GAO. 2007. ‘‘Border Security: Despite Progress, Weaknesses in
Travelor Inspections Exist at Our Nation’s Ports of Entry.’’ http://
www.gao.gov/highlights/d08219high.pdf.
GAO. 2008. ‘‘Department of Homeland Security: Billions Invested in
Major Programs Lack Appropriate Oversight.’’ http://www.gao.gov/
new.items/d0929.pdf.
GAO. 2009. DHS’s ‘‘Progress and Challenges in Key Areas of
Maritime, Aviation and Cybersecurity.’’ http://www.gao.gov/new.
items/d10106.pdf.
Garcia, Michael John. 2006. ‘‘CRS Report for Congress: Immigration
Consequences of Criminal Activity.’’ http://fpc.state.gov/documents/
organization/78335.pdf.
Green, Thomas C., and Illiana M. Ciobanu. 2006. ‘‘Deputizing—and
Then Prosecuting—America’s Businesses in the Fight Against Illegal
Immigration.’’ American Criminal Law Review 43 (3): 1203–1224.
Hamm, Mark S. 2007. Terrorism as Crime: From Oklahoma City to
Al-Qaeda and Beyond. New York: New York University Press.
Hanson, Gordon H. 2009. ‘‘The Economics and Policy of Illegal
Immigration to the United States. Migration Information Source.’’
Washington, DC: Migration Policy Institute. http://www.
migrationpolicy.org/pubs/Hanson-Dec09.pdf.
Hataley, T. S. 2007. ‘‘Catastrophic Terrorism at the Border: The Case of
the Canada–United States Border. Homeland Security Affairs.’’
Supplement no. 1. http://www.jsaj.org/?special:article=supplement.1.2.
36
Background and History

Heyman, Josiah Mc. 1999. ‘‘Why Interdiction? Immigration and Law
Enforcement at the United States–Mexico Border.’’ Regional Studies 33:
619–630.
Hoefer, Michael, Nancy Rytina, and Christopher Campbell. 2006.
‘‘Estimates of the Unauthorized Immigrant Population Residing in the
United States: January, 2006.’’ http://www.dhs.gov/xlibrary/assets/
statistics/publications/ill_pe_2006.pdf.
Human Rights First. 2000. ‘‘Is This America? The Denial of Due Process
to Asylum Seekers in the United States.’’ http://www.humanrightsfirst.
org/refugees/reports/due_process/due_process.aspx.
Kelly, N., and M. Treblecock. 1998. The Making of the Mosaic: A History
of Canadian Immigration Policy. Toronto: University of Toronto Press.
Kochhar, Rakesh. 2006. ‘‘Growth in the Foreign-Born Workforce and
Employment of the Native-Born.’’ Washington, DC: PEW Hispanic
Center. http://pewhispanic.org/files/reports/69.pdf.
Kosolowski, R. 2006. ‘‘Immigration Reforms and Border Security
Technologies. Border Battles: The U.S. Immigration Debates.’’ Social
Science Research Council. http://borderbattles.ssrc.org/Koslowski.
Lee, Erika. 2006. ‘‘A Nation of Immigrants and a Gatekeeping Nation:
American Immigration Law and Policy.’’ In A Companion to American
Immigration, ed. Reed Ueda. New York: Routledge.
Maril, Robert. 2004. Patrolling Chaos: The U.S. Border Patrol in Deep
South Texas. Lubbock: Texas Tech University Press.
Martinez, Oscar. 2006. Troublesome Border. Rev. ed. Tucson: University
of Arizona Press.
McIntosh, D. 1984. The Collectors: A History of Canada Customs and
Excise. Toronto: NC Press (in association with Revenue Canada,
Customs and Excise and Supplies and Services Canada).
Moore, Stephen T. 2004. ‘‘Defining the ‘Undefended’: Canadians,
Americans, and the Multiple Meanings of Border during Prohibition.’’
American Review of Canadian Studies 34(1): 3–32.
Naim, Moises. 2005. Illicit: How Smugglers, Traffickers, and Copycats Are
Hijacking the Global Economy. New York: Doubleday.
Nevins, Joseph. 2002. Operation Gatekeeper: The Rise of the ‘‘Illegal Alien’’
and the Making of the U.S.-Mexico Boundary. New York: Routledge.
Office of the Inspector General. 2002. ‘‘Audit Report: Immigration and
Naturalization Service Institutional Removal Program.’’ http://www.
usdoj.gov/oig/reports/INS/a0241/final.pdf.
Orrenius, Pia M., and Madeline Zavodny. 2009. Tied to the Business Cycle:
How Immigrants Fare in Good and Bad Times. Washington, DC: Migration
References
37

Policy Institute. http://www.migrationpolicy.org/pubs/orrenius-
Nov09.pdf.
Passel, Jeffrey and D’Vera Cohn. 2008. ‘‘Trends in Unauthorized
Immigration: Undocumented Inflow Now Trails Legal Inflow.’’
Washington, DC: PEW Hispanic Center. http://pewhispanic.org/
files/reports/94.pdf.
Payan, Tony. 2006. The Three U.S.-Mexico Border Wars: Drugs,
Immigration, and Homeland Security. Westport, CT: Praeger Security
International.
PEW Research Center for the People and the Press and PEW Hispanic
Center. 2006. America’s Immigration Quandary. Washington, DC: PEW
Research Center for the People and the Press and PEW Hispanic
Center. http://pewhispanic.org/files/reports/63.pdf.
Podgorny, Diana R. 2009. ‘‘Rethinking the Increased Focus on Penal
Measures in Immigration Law as Reflected in the Expansion of the
‘Aggravated Felony Concept.’’’ Journal of Criminal Law and Criminology
99 (1): 287–315.
Ramirez, Bruno. 2001. ‘‘Canada in the United States: Perspectives on
Migration and Continental History.’’ Journal of American Ethnic History
20(3): 50–71.
Reeve, Simon. 2002. The New Jackals: Ramzi Yousef, Osama Bin Laden,
and the Future of Terrorism. Boston: Northeastern University.
Reyes, Silvestre. 2009. ‘‘Border Security.’’ http://reyes.house.gov/
Issues/Issue/?IssueID=4437.
Scheer, Robert. 2006. ‘‘There Is No Immigration Crisis.’’ Huffington
Post. March 29. http://www.huffingtonpost.com/robert-scheer/there-
is-no-immigration-c_b_18080.html.
Schuck, P.H. and J. Williams 1999. ‘‘Removing Criminal Aliens: The
Pitfalls and Promises of Federalism.’’ Harvard Journal of Law and Public
Policy 22(2): 367–464.
Siskin, Alison, and Ruth Ellen Wasem. 2006. ‘‘Congressional Research
Service Report for Congress: Immigration Policy on Expedited
Removal of Aliens.’’ Washington, DC: Government Printing Office.
http://fpc.state.gov/documents/organization/54512.pdf.
Stumpf, Juliet. 2006. ‘‘The Crimmigration Crisis: Immigrants, Crime,
and Sovereign Power.’’ American University Law Review 56: 368–419.
Thompson, Wayne C. 2001. Canada 2001. Harper’s Ferry, WV: Stryker-
Post Publications.
Transactional Action Clearinghouse (TRAC). 2006a. ‘‘Border Patrol
Agents: Southern Versus Northern Border.’’ http://trac.syr.edu/
immigration/reports/143/include/rep143table2.html.
38
Background and History

Transactional Action Clearinghouse (TRAC). 2006b. ‘‘Border Patrol
Expands: But Growth Rate After 9/11 Much Less Than Before;
Division Between North/South Border Little Changed. http://trac.syr.
edu/immigration/reports/143/Transactional Action Clearinghouse.
Transactional Records Clearinghouse (TRAC) 2006c. ‘‘Criminal
Terrorism Enforcement in the United States During the Five Years
Since the 9/11/01 Attacks.’’ http://trac.syr.edu/tracreports/
terrorism/169/.
U.S. Customs and Border Patrol (CBP.gov). 2009. ‘‘U.S. Customs
Service—Over 200 Years of History.’’ http://www.cbp.gov/xp/cgov/
about/history/legacy/history2.xml.
U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement. 2008. ‘‘Fact Sheet:
Criminal Alien Program.’’ http://www.ice.gov/doclib/pi/news/
factsheets/criminal_alien_program.pdf.
Villareal, M. Angeles, and Jennifer E. Lake. 2009. CRS Report for
Congress: Security and Prosperity Partnership of North America: An
Overview and Selected Issues. Washington, DC: Congressional Research
Service. http://www.fas.org/sgp/crs/row/RS22701.pdf.
Warner, Judith A. 2006. ‘‘The Social Construction of the Criminal Alien
in Immigration Law, Enforcement Practice and Statistical
Enumeration: Consequences for Immigrant Streotyping.’’ Journal of
Social and Ecological Boundaries 1(2): 56–80.
Winterdyk, John A. and Kelly W. Sundberg, 2010a. ‘‘Introduction.’’ In
Border Security in the Al-Qaeda Era, ed. John A. Winterdyk and Kelly W.
Sundberg, xvii–xliv. New York: CRC Press.
Winterdyck, John A., and Kelly W. Sundberg. 2010b. ‘‘Shifts in
Canadian Border Security.’’ In Border Security in the Al-Qaeda Era, ed.
John A. Winterdyk and Kelly W. Sundberg, 3–36. New York: CRC
Press.
References
39

This page intentionally left blank 

2
Problems, Controversies, and
Solutions
Introduction
O
ur world is being transformed by a high rate of interna-
tionally interconnected social changes that are beyond
individual nations’ capacity to control. Economic global-
ization involves a process of integration of the world economy
and travel circuits. Globalization was widely viewed as a social
force leading to a new era of economic integration and peace.
Instead nonstate criminal actors such as terrorists and organ-
ized criminals are using new technology to exploit opportuni-
ties within the growing web of global linkages. Transnational
threats are not confined to one nation; they cross borders and
are not subject to sovereign control (Thachuk 2007, 3, 8). They
include terrorism, drug, arms, and human trafficking, money
laundering, and corruption. Three major trends are increasing
transnational threats: (1) the globalization of trade and commu-
nications has generated unequal opportunities while increasing
awareness of new technology; (2) the number of politically unsta-
ble states is increasing; and (3) the ethnic and religious hatred that
produces terrorism, civil conflict, and war has increased. Nonstate
actors are as important to maintaining national and border secu-
rity as nation-states.
Increasingly nation-states are presented with the serious
issue of how to deal with transnational threats and maintain
economic ties while cooperating to stop transnational terrorism
and crime. Nonstate actors smuggle and traffic goods, services,
41

and people. Kimberly Thachuk of the Center for Technology and
National Security Policy at the National Defense University notes;
‘‘While much of this illicit trade brings great misery and sorrow
to many, so too does it provide jobs and buoys up sagging econo-
mies, often blending seamlessly into busy commerce.’’ Newly
democratic nations that are struggling to develop economically
during globalization face survival issues (Thachuk 2007, 3–5).
These countries may choose to look the other way or participate
in corruption as they seek income. Criminal enterprise may be
deeply embedded within legitimate activities, which complicates
the task of keeping the social order. For example, illicit goods like
drugs are often smuggled in regular cargos. Criminals may commit
terroristic acts like the multiple murders committed by Mexican
drug-trafficking organizations in conflict over territory and the
police. Nations must learn to integrate law enforcement with mili-
tary defense activities. Further, the types of threats that are faced
are not discrete but interconnected, as when terrorists commit
crimes to raise money such as al-Qaeda trafficking heroin.
Thachuk suggests that power is no longer solely located in
societal institutions. Individuals and loosely organized collec-
tives have taken advantage of the fluidity of global networks.
According to Thachuk,
Errant individuals of indeterminate origins, loosely
knit gangs of determined killers, small bands of crimi-
nal clans with excessive international connections and
numerous other combinations of nonstate actors, many
of whom possess statelike capabilities, are proving to
be elusive, sophisticated, and deadly enemies, not only
in the war on terror but also for the stability of many
sovereign states in a number of regions. (2007, 5)
Governments are subject to corruption and extortion, and citi-
zens are threatened by violence and experience economic distortion
caused by criminal investment. As a result, domestic security is no
longer distinct from national security and international military
conflict. The key event precipitating this change is 9/11. The ‘‘War
on Terror’’ is a domestic and international policy involving border
security and international armed conflict in Afghanistan and Iraq.
Al-Qaeda is a loosely networked terrorist organization. It
cannot be addressed without international cooperation, although
42
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

nations are often unwilling to cooperate if their sovereignty is
threatened. Terrorism
is
merged with criminal activity as
al-Qaeda has smuggled both drugs and diamonds. The U.S.
Department of State indicates that many major international
terrorist groups have ties to drug traffickers (Thachuk 2007, 16).
The money raised is used for the cause. In 2002, the FBI caught
an American and two Pakistanis trading 5 metric tons of hashish
and 600 kilograms of heroin for four Stinger antiaircraft missiles
(‘‘Feds Break Up’’ 2002). Other criminal activity linked to terro-
rists includes extortion, kidnapping, document forgery, identity
theft, and credit card fraud. The international scope of this activ-
ity makes them a threat to global security and stability rather
than just a law enforcement problem (Thachuk 2007, 17–18). Vio-
lence and corruption can destabilize governments, making indi-
viduals and their organizations as powerful as some nation-states.
The development of transnational terrorism occurred before
a comprehensive security strategy could be developed. Control-
ling jihadist terrorists is difficult for four reasons: (1) jihadists
are deliberately distributed in multiple countries to make detec-
tion more difficult; (2) the United States has a large flow of visi-
tors and asylum applicants arriving each year; (3) intolerance is
a problem if jihadist terrorist profiling is solely based on race/
ethnicity and religion; and (4) the problem of jihadist terrorism
can be ‘‘homegrown’’ by social alienation if the second and
third generations after immigration are not socially integrated
into American society.
After 9/11, the prevention of terrorism became a major ele-
ment of border policy. In the struggle to monitor access to the
United States for business and travel while preventing entry of
terrorists, two positions came to predominate among the
nation’s leaders (Alden 2008). In Washington, DC, technocrats
proposed a risk-management strategy for border security that
adhered to the Constitutional Bill of Rights and utilized infor-
mation and surveillance technology to better monitor border
access. Advocates of this strategy included former Secretary of
Homeland Security Tom Ridge and, to a moderate extent, Robert
Bonner, former Commissioner of Customs and Border Security.
A competing perspective on border control is that taken by
law-enforcement advocates who used existing immigration law
to screen immigrants and prevent terrorist entry. The key advo-
cate of this position was former Attorney General John Ashcroft,
Introduction
43

who stated, ‘‘If a terrorism suspect committed any legal infrac-
tion at all, regardless how minor, we would apprehend and
charge him’’ (Alden 2008, 81).
An intelligence-based approach to terrorism is developing
but, once again, the priority is immigration and law enforce-
ment at the U.S.-Mexico border. Politicians have focused on
immigration and promote special operations and building a
wall at the U.S.-Mexico border. The U.S. Border Patrol is the
primary agency targeted for increased funding. In September
2006, it was comprised of 12,300 agents, and it grew to 18,875
in April, 2009: a 53% increase in under three years (Kouri 2009).
Adding a large number of new hires has a potential for prob-
lems. The standards for hiring may be lowered, training attenu-
ated, and less experienced agents are likely to be less worthy in
the field. In contrast, the Canadian border had 980 officers in
September 2005 and 1,128 in May 2008 (Heyman and Ackleson
2010: 59). The Canadian- border agents are 8.8% of U.S. Border
Patrol staffing as compared to 7.1% in prior years.
Free Trade and Security
The North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) was fol-
lowed by an expansion of trade among the United States, Canada,
and Mexico. Experts disagree about the extent to which NAFTA
itself widened economic ties (Teslik 2009). According to the Office
of the U.S. Trade Representative (2008), ‘‘From 1993 to 2007, trade
among the NAFTA nations more than tripled, from $297 billion to
$930 billion.’’ Tellingly, trade between the NAFTA nations consti-
tutes 80% of Canadian and Mexican trade and is over one-third of
U.S. trade (Teslik 2009).
In Canada, the extent of trade makes the degree to which
cross-border traffic is scrutinized a major business-cost issue. Of
Canadian exports, 82% are to the United States, its major interna-
tional trade partner; in contrast, 22% of U.S. exports are sent to
Canada. Canada inspects an estimated 4.5% of shipments. At the
Canadian border, Free and Secure Trade (FAST), NEXUS, and
C-TPAT are risk-management programs that seek to preclear
low-risk shipments based on shipper compliance. The degree of
importance that should be attached to protecting key U.S.-
Canada ports of entry relative to less trafficked locations is open
to debate. One-third of all truck traffic goes through Windsor,
44
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

Canada, and Detroit. Two-thirds of traffic utilizes four crossings
in Southern Ontario. Eight of the top 10 crossings in use are
bridges or tunnels. The key ports of entry are more vulnerable to
terrorist disruption because of the volume of traffic.
Mexico’s border-security apparatus has developed parallel
to the United States’ War on Terror (Heyman and Ackleson
2010). The Mexican International Migration Institute (El Insti-
tuto Nacional de Migracion, INM) is developing a biometric im-
migration document system. The Secure Electronic Network for
Traveler’s Rapid Inspection (SENTRI) promotes the free and
rapid flow of people. In Mexico, the Container Security Initiative
and the Customs-Trade Partnership Against Terrorism (C-TPAT)
for shipment certification are being deployed.
Terrorism
The terrorist threat faced by the United States and other West-
ern nations has changed dramatically since 9/11. Historically,
terrorism involved state-sponsored military activity directed
toward changing the foreign policy of other nations. Today’s
terrorism is a privatized non–nation state activity using crimi-
nal financing. Three trends distinguish transnational terrorism
(Armitage 2008). First, international agreements promoting eco-
nomic liberalization such as NAFTA and the European Com-
mon Market promoted the free movement of people, goods,
and capital across borders. As a result, regional borders were
opened. Second, advances in global communication and trans-
portation made it easier for international organization and
travel. Al-Qaeda is a global network using commercial travel
routes and the Internet. Third, major political events such as
the collapse of the Soviet Union, wars in the Balkans, and the
Gulf War destabilized societies and increased the opportunity
for organized crime.
Pre-globalization terrorist organizations were involved in
perpetrating fraud, extortion, theft, bank robbery, and counter-
feiting. The contemporary organized criminal activities of ter-
rorist organizations include drug trafficking, smuggling of arms
and weapons of mass destruction (WMD), kidnapping, money
laundering and other financial crimes, and human trafficking.
Terrorist financial crimes include theft of identity, cell phones,
and credit cards. Transnational organized crime and terrorist
Terrorism
45

organizations have much in common. For al-Qaeda, the need to
commit crime to raise money is an ‘‘Achilles heel’’ because it
attracts law enforcement. Islamic jihadist groups have banked
in the Middle East and Africa, making it difficult to control
money laundering. As might be expected, Middle Eastern coun-
tries are not receptive to Western oversight of banking.
The collapse of the Soviet Union has exposed its substantial
nuclear armament to diversion for sale to terrorists. Soviet
activity in Afghanistan, Azerbaijan, and Tajikistan left behind
potentially
catastrophic
weaponry.
For
example,
in
2002,
al-Qaeda used a Russian antiaircraft missile in an attempt to
shoot down an Israeli jet in Kenya. National security investiga-
tors know that terrorist organizations have repeatedly tried to
purchase WMDs on the black market.
Weapons of Mass Destruction and Security
After hijackers used airplanes to destroy skyscrapers, the world
entered a new era of global threats from weapons of mass
destruction (WMD). Dick Cheney (Vanderbilt, Harris, and Allen
2009) considers that: ‘‘the ultimate threat to the country’’ is ‘‘a
9/11-type event where the terrorists are armed with something
much more dangerous than an airline ticket and a box cutter—a
nuclear weapon or a biological agent of some kind.’’ Texas Gov-
ernor Rick Perry (Texas Border Sherrif’s Coalition 2007) points
out: ‘‘A vulnerable border also gives terrorists opportunities to
smuggle weapons of mass destruction into the U.S. undetected.’’
During the Cold War, the United States was very con-
cerned about the possibility of a Soviet nuclear strike. After the
breakup of the Soviet Union, concern turned to the lack of secu-
rity for nuclear materials in its stockpiles (Smigielski 2007, 53).
The Russian military dispersed, and tens of thousands of
atomic scientists went without pay for months. Policy planners
became concerned that rogue regimes and terrorists would gain
access to nuclear materials and the means to construct a device.
In the United States, the Cooperative Threat Reduction (CTR)
Program is active in preventing nuclear smuggling, particularly
from the Russian stockpile.
The transnational threat of nuclear smuggling is constrained
by the availability of materials and the intention of the end user.
46
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

Thachuk (2007, 14) has stated: ‘‘While great fear is generated by
the chance that a nuclear weapon will be smuggled into the
wrong hands, the probability is low.’’ More probable scenarios
are the smuggling of nuclear materials or components used to
make weapons. Four types of nuclear search by terrorists
occur in illicit markets. They seek weapons, raw materials, tech-
nological components, and expertise. Rogue regimes and terro-
rists are known to have tried to acquire a nuclear bomb
(Smigielski 2007, 54–55). Muammar Qadhafi of Libya is believed
to have offered the Chinese government almost $1 billion for
nuclear weapons and was declined (Federation of Nuclear Scien-
tists, n.d.). Another terrorist option is acquiring fissionable mate-
rials, the industrial means to enrich them to bomb quality, and
the help of experts. Because terrorists lack the national territory
(a state-based homeland) for bomb development, if they wanted
to build a bomb they would try to produce a ‘‘dirty bomb,’’ which
is a low-tech radiological weapon. Al-Qaeda is known to have tried
to acquire a nuclear weapon or materials. It is considered unlikely
that nuclear bombs will be smuggled because they are guarded.
Nevertheless, a rogue technician could attempt insider theft.
Weapons-grade fissile uranium and plutonium require refine-
ment and separation technology. Nuclear-weapon construction
requires detonators and timers (Smigielski 2007, 57). Computer
design programs and specialized machinery are necessary. Techni-
cians with knowledge of nuclear physics, fissionable material, and
weapons manufacture are needed. Furthermore, nuclear materials
that have been intercepted have never amounted to enough for
bomb construction (Smigielski 2007, 56). Plutonium is toxic when
handled outside special facilities. A smuggler attempting to transit
sufficient nuclear materials for a bomb would likely be killed by
radiation. Nevertheless, highly enriched uranium is easier to use
and handle and can be shielded to a degree that would make it
difficult to detect with conventional U.S. Customs technology.
Dogs are unable to detect uranium and plutonium because they
have no odor. The availability of uranium on the black market is
the major factor impacting terrorists’ ability to construct a dirty
bomb.
The manufacture of a dirty bomb requires only low-grade
radioactive material and a casing. Most people are unaware that
dirty bombs are not considered a WMD because they do not
cause casualties outside of the area of the explosion. Dr. Henry
Weapons of Mass Destruction and Security
47

Kelly, in March 2002 testimony before the Senate Committee on
Foreign Relations, stated:
While
radiological
attacks
would
result
in
some
deaths, they would not result in the hundreds of thou-
sands of fatalities that could be caused by a crude
nuclear device. Attacks could contaminate large urban
areas with radiation levels that exceed . . . health and
toxic materials guidelines [and] would require prompt
evacuation and create terror in large communities
even if radiation casualties were low. (Federation of
American Scientists 2002)
Dirty bombs have been labeled ‘‘weapons of mass disrup-
tion’’ because they cause panic among the public (Smigielski 2007,
56). In November 1995, Chechen rebels placed a cesium-137 radio-
active bomb in a Moscow park to cause terror, but it was disabled.
In 1991, concerns about the security of Russia’s nuclear
stockpile
resulted
in
the
Nunn-Lugar
Cooperative
Threat
Reduction Program. The U.S. Department of Defense cooper-
ated in an international program to prevent nuclear smuggling
at the source (Smigielski 2007, 58–59). Dismantled Russian war-
heads were secured and fencing and surveillance for deterrence
were provided. Russian weapons-grade reactors were con-
verted to nuclear power plants and enriched uranium was
blended with lower-grade uranium to stabilize it.
David Smigielski (2007, 60–61), an analyst at the Central
Intelligence Agency (CIA), suggests that the U.S. effort to pre-
vent smuggling by helping Russia must be broadened to other
countries. In 2001, al-Qaeda was reported to have contacted
Pakistani nuclear scientists (Kelly 2001). The Pakistani scientists
indicated they would only go to Afghanistan if their govern-
ment approved and, fortunately, it did not. Later, al-Qaeda con-
tacted A. Q. Khan, a nuclear scientist in Pakistan who was
found to have sold nuclear components to Libya.
Although attention is focused on fissile nuclear material,
nonfissile material including medical and scientific radioactive
waste can be used to make a dirty bomb with devastating conse-
quences (Smigielski 2007, 61). A cesium-137 or strontium-90
bomb exploded in New York City would contaminate tens of
square miles and necessitate building demolition costing trillions
48
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

of dollars. Smigielski considers that preventing nonfissile dirty
bomb attacks requires greater attention than nuclear materials.
Border Documents and Visas
Acts of terrorism by noncitizens have been very limited in the
United States. Most individuals entering on visas are travelers
on business or pleasure. The United States needs to maintain
security at the ports of entry and overcome vulnerabilities in
the legal visitation and immigration system. Major violations
include extending a stay without authorization after entering
on a visa, known as visa overstay, and using fraudulent docu-
ments to enter. Nevertheless, Americans associate unauthorized
immigration with U.S.-Mexico border migrants who enter with-
out inspection. The reality is that about 45–50% of the un-
authorized population is estimated to be comprised of visa
overstayers who enter legally using nonimmigrant visas or bor-
der crossing cards (PEW Hispanic Center 2006). The tracking of
international visitors is an important aspect of the securitization
of immigration.
Keeping track of immigration is a major task at the air bor-
ders because of business and tourist visitation. It is estimated
that 250,000–350,000 of the unauthorized population entered
with permission and overstayed (PEW Hispanic Center 2006).
This is about 1–1.5% of visitors and they comprise 35–45% of
the annual increase in unauthorized residents. This number is
augmented by individuals who cross at the Canadian or
Mexican borders with border-crossing cards and overstay.
Immigration monitoring is far more complex than just policing
the Mexican border as it involves any land, sea, or air port of
entry and searching within the interior of the United States for
unauthorized entrants.
Air borders have been a site for U.S. vulnerability to terror-
ism. Two of the 9/11 hijackers were on a terrorist watch list on
the day they passed through air security (Eldridge et al. 2004).
The training camps developed by terrorist groups like al-Qaeda
teach military and criminal skills for unauthorized entry. Alter-
ing visas, passports, and other documentation is a part of
the lesson. The 9/11 terrorists entered on temporary visas, and
some used fraudulent documents while coming by air. The 9/11
Border Documents and Visas
49

Commission recommendations (Eldridge et al. 2004) resulted in
many changes to immigration policy for both business and visi-
tation to the United States.
The knowledge that the 9/11 terrorists had traveled from
foreign nations using visas obtained by legal or fraudulent
means has generated new security and detention regimes. New
biometric identification requirements for visitors, security checks
prior to issuing visas, and mandatory detention of asylum appli-
cants and unauthorized entrants are major initiatives to contain
the threat of terrorism. Stringent visa screening policies have
resulted in processing delays. Applicants often have a long wait-
ing period before they can be interviewed by a consular official.
Visitors applying for a visa need to prove that they are coming
for a limited period of time and a specified objective, such as
business or tourism. The portion of visitors for whom the inter-
view is not waived increased as a result of 9/11 Commission
identification of laxness in carrying out visa policy.
On December 25, 2009, the continued vulnerability of the
air borders became evident as Umar Farouk Abdulmutallab, a
Nigerian citizen, was observed attempting to light a powder
and liquid explosive on a Northwest Airlines flight from
Holland (O’Conner and Schmidt 2009). The passengers and crew
subdued the terrorism suspect while the plane was landing at
Detroit’s airport. Although he was allowed to fly, Abdulmutal-
lab was in a law-enforcement intelligence database because his
father had reported his radicalization. He later stated that
al-Qaeda in Yemen had sponsored him (Baker 2010). The intelli-
gence community has been criticized for not integrating intelli-
gence information that Abdulmutallab could be connected to
terrorism with reports that al-Qaeda was training a Nigerian
suicide bomber.
President Obama ordered immediate changes in the use of
the terrorism database to increase the number of individuals
from Nigeria and Yemen who are on a terrorism watch list.
Millimeter full body scanning technology, not available in most
airports, might have detected the explosive device. Intelligence
can identify potential terrorists and targets for additional secu-
rity precautions and multilayered, unpredictable screening to
deter attempts. Anytime security is heightened at airports, it
increases delays.
After the 9/11 World Trade Center attacks one might
expect that a viable entry and exit tracking system would be in
50
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

operation but, as the December 25, 2009, Northwest Airlines
incident has demonstrated, that is not the reality. The visa proc-
ess entails checking both terrorist watch lists and no-fly lists.
Abdulmutallab is another case in which the United States had
access to information indicating he was a terrorism suspect, but
he was not subjected to a pat-down search or placed on a no-
fly list.
The U.S. VISIT (U.S. Visitor and Immigrant Status Indicator)
Program uses biometric identification (digital photographs and
fingerprints) to scan travelers before flying and at arrival but it is
not used at exit. This new identification system supplements the
arrival and departure forms referred to as ‘‘I-95s’’ that air travel-
ers are supposed to fill out by hand when they enter through U.S.
Customs at ports of entry. This pre-computer age form is typed
into a computer network at entrance, when identification docu-
ments are also inspected to verify personal identity and checked
against watch lists. A problem is that the departure form is not
always received. At departure, forms are collected and not always
entered into a national or global database to verify that a visa
holder exited. Further complications occur when the two I-95 de-
parture and exit forms do not match (GAO 2004). In 2001 20% of
I-95 departure forms were estimated to be uncollected. In the
process, some people leave without being registered and some
unauthorized entrants stay and become unauthorized immigrants.
Despite the connection between visa overstay and unau-
thorized immigration, the United States is still unable to track
departures (McKinley and Preston 2009). Although Congress
passed legislation mandating the creation of such a universal
exit electronic monitoring system, inspection only occurs at ar-
rival, not at departure. In 2009, Hosam Maher Husein Smadi, a
19-year-old Jordanian national who overstayed a tourist visa,
was arraigned on charges of plotting to bomb a Dallas sky-
scraper. This directed attention to the gap in the visa-monitoring
system. In 2008, 2.9 million people came to the United States on
temporary visas and some were never officially recorded as
checking out. The current exit system relies on turning in a pa-
per stub with personal information. Approximately 93% turn in
this paperwork. Some of the remainder exit without knowing
how to process their departure forms. About 200,000 may have
overstayed their visas and joined the unauthorized population. It
is estimated that 40% of the population of unauthorized immi-
grants overstayed their visas.
Border Documents and Visas
51

DHS has indicated that, with over one million visitors a day,
monitoring exits is a formidable task (McKinley and Preston 2009).
Pilot exit programs have not functioned in a speedy manner to
facilitate visits and commerce through borders. Airlines have
refused to take photographs and fingerprints of departing passen-
gers. This inability to track departure has led DHS to emphasize
the role of law enforcement in apprehending terrorists. In addition,
the penalty for visa overstay has been greatly increased. Failure to
renew a visa for additional time of stay could result in deportation
and being banned from returning to the U.S. for 10 years.
Border-crossing cards are issued to Canadian and Mexican
citizens for facilitating border transit. In 1998 the federal gov-
ernment began a process of issuing biometric border-crossing
cards to Mexican citizens. A U.S.-Mexico border-crossing card
authorizes a visit of no longer than 30 days within a 25-mile
radius of the border in California, Texas, and New Mexico, and
75 miles in Arizona. In order to obtain a visa for a longer stay, an
individual must fill out an additional application. Many requests
are denied when individuals cannot show financial means in an
effort to prevent undocumented economic migration.
Border-crossing cardholders are not checked when they exit
the border, which creates vulnerability in the tracking system. In
addition, crossing at U.S.-Mexico ports of entry does not mean that
biometric data is verified. It is estimated that 1.7% of legal border
crossers overstay (PEW Hispanic Center 2006). At the inland bor-
der mileage limit checkpoints, all vehicles stop and the occupants
are asked about citizenship, but many vehicles are waved on after
a verbal validation without the documents being checked for
everyone in the car. Interior checkpoints do not have the necessary
computers or staffing to validate all vehicle occupants.
At borders, an economic premium is placed on getting peo-
ple across in a speedy manner. The U.S. Government Account-
ability Office (GAO 2008) found that individuals in a test program
sent across the Canadian border without documentation or with
counterfeit driver’s licenses or passports were almost uniformly
allowed to enter without detection of their unauthorized status.
The U.S. Customs and Border Patrol (CBP) responded that they
lacked the resources to inspect all documents at land crossings
and the situation was acute at the northern border. The imple-
mentation of the Western Hemisphere Travel Initiative (WHTI)
ended the ability to enter the U.S. with only a verbal declaration
and no document inspection.
52
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

U.S.-Canada Border Issues
The American media constantly focus on the Mexican border
although no terrorists have ever been apprehended at that bor-
der (Chavez 2009). In contrast, the Canadian border has been
the site of major arrests of terrorist plotters. Hataley (2007, 1)
states: ‘‘A catastrophic event at the U.S.-Canadian border
would be an event having the potential to seriously disrupt . . .
economic linkages vital to the well-being of Canadians and the
Canadian state.’’ Besides the vulnerability of border economic
infrastructure, tunnels and bridges are major targets. These
transit points across the border function as ‘‘chokepoints’’
(Ackleson 2009, 345) for disrupting trade. According to Hataley
(2007, 2), 80% of Canadian trade uses a very limited number of
checkpoints which would make terrorist attacks more damag-
ing at these crossings.
In congressional testimony prior to 9/11, Congressman
Lamar Smith of Texas said that police investigator Claude
Pacquette criticized Canada as a ‘‘Club Med for terrorists’’
(Committee of the Judiciary 2000, 12). The Canadian immigra-
tion and refugee system is viewed as creating a U.S. security
risk. Approximately 30,000 refugees are allowed to enter Canada
each year, and claims are made that efforts to determine ter-
rorist connections are not sufficient. It is easier to enter Canada
than the United States, and there is facility of movement within
Canada and potentially to the United States. The Canadian
Security and Intelligence Service (CSIS) found that Canada’s en-
trance rules had attracted terrorists. Ward Elock, director of the
CSIS, states,
the following terrorist groups or front groups acting
on their behalf have been and are active in Canada:
Hezbollah and other Shiite Islamic terrorist organiza-
tions, several Sunni extremist terrorist groups, including
Hamas, with ties to Egypt, Libya, Algeria, Lebanon and
Iran; . . . the Tamil Tigers [Sri Lankan]; the Kurdistan
Worker’s Party (PKK); and all of the world’s major Sikh
terrorist groups. (Emerson 2000, 7, citing Elock)
Prior terrorist attempts to cross the Canadian border into
the United States have resulted in arrests on two occasions and
U.S.-Canada Border Issues
53

successful entry by certain 1993 World Trade Center bombers
(Hataley 2007). U.S. intelligence believes there are terrorist
sleeper cells in Canada and that its border represents a security
risk. Prior to 9/11, Canada began tightening its policies by
passing the Immigration and Refugee Act of 2000 (Adelman
2002, 22–23). In response to the terrorist security risk, the Post
9/11 Public Safety Act has provisions for denying asylum to
individuals connected to terrorism and detaining such individ-
uals at the border or in the interior of Canada.
Canada’s passing of securitization legislation is not consid-
ered sufficient. Stewart Bell (2004) and Clark Kent Erwin (2006)
have suggested that the United States faces a major risk of ter-
rorists crossing from Canada. Former U.S. ambassador to
Canada Paul Cellucci stated: ‘‘It is inevitable that terrorists
would look to Canada as a potential launching pad to get into
the U.S.’’ (Dawson and Fife 2005).
Ackleson (2009, 341) believes the unease created in the United
States by 9/11 has caused the United States to think of Canada and
its border as a major security threat. Canada is criticized by DHS
Secretary Janet Napolitano as lax in immigration and refugee pol-
icy. The United States wants the same level of scrutiny given to
Canadian applicants for asylum and immigration that foriegn
applicants receive when they come to the United States.
The U.S. Northern Command considers Canada a ‘‘favor-
able’’ environment for terrorism because of its immigration
policies toward Pakistani, Afghan, and Egyptian applicants.
The Great Lakes region and areas of upstate New York, Ver-
mont, and New Hampshire were cited for concern about terro-
rist network formation. Suggestions for increasing security
include intelligence sharing through both cross-border criminal
and terrorist databases and law-enforcement programs, such as
the extant Integrated Border Enforcement Team, which targets
dangerous people. More complicated would be coordinating
Canadian and United States visa policies for foreign entrants to
have matching entrance criteria (McNeill and Nguyen 2009).
Bolstering Canadian Security
Global terrorists have developed the communications and logis-
tical capacity to form international networks and to cross bor-
ders. Both ‘‘homegrown’’ and foreign-born terrorists figure in
54
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

these networks. The bombing of London mass transit in 2005
was the first example of a self-organized terrorist group not
composed of foreign nationals. A 2006 Canadian plot to bomb
buildings was disrupted by the Royal Canadian Police (CBC
News 2010). Seventeen young Muslim males were arrested on
charges of participating in a terrorist group. Three were charged
with
importing
weapons
and
ammunition
while
12
were
charged with planning a bombing. As with earlier plots, a Mus-
lim imam had preached violence. Their arrest led to an investiga-
tion of their possible ties to jihadist groups in the United States,
Great Britain, and other countries.
Serious concerns exist about Canadian border-security infra-
structure. The U.S. Government Accountability Office (GAO
2007) found areas of the border designated as ‘‘unmanned and
unmonitored’’ and simulated movement of radioactive materials
that went undetected in tests. They concluded: ‘‘Our work shows
that a determined cross border violator would likely be able to
bring radioactive materials or other contraband undetected into
the United States by crossing the U.S.-Canada border at any of the
locations we investigated’’ (GAO 2007, 1). CBP responded that a
lack of visible Border Patrol agents did not mean that the border
was not monitored. The ground surveillance camera, radar, and
mobile infrared detection sensor systems are being upgraded and
increased.
On June 1, 2009, the Western Hemisphere Travel Initiative
(WHTI) was implemented. Individuals from countries other
than Canada, Western Europe, Japan, and select other coun-
tries need to attend an interview with a U.S. embassy official
regardless of the reason for entry: visits, business, study, or
work. Prior to 9/11, it was thought that international visitors
posed little risk. Concerns have been raised that long delays
required for interviews will block the flow of people and trade
over the borders. Since 2004, most visa applicants must come
for an interview, photograph, and fingerprinting, which results
in delays of up to months. Young men from Muslim nations,
regardless of religious orientation, must undergo an additional
questionnaire interview including information on U.S. family, con-
tacts, and income. Upon departure, they need to notify U.S. border
inspectors that they are leaving or face a ban of five years or more.
Individuals previously cleared for U.S. entry who travel back
to the country of origin undergo ‘‘secondary screening’’ for return.
One result of tightened security is that the number of visitors,
Bolstering Canadian Security
55

workers, and foreign students applying for visas has dropped. For-
eign investors have also been discouraged. The United States has
to pay a price in loss of talent as well as money to maintain excep-
tional security standards (Alden 2008).
A process of militarization largely began after 9/11 at the
previously ‘‘unguarded’’ Canadian border. The northern strat-
egy has relied on high-tech detection equipment including sen-
sors and radar because only a little over a thousand U.S. Border
Patrol agents are stationed there. Ongoing efforts include iden-
tifying high-threat areas and intelligence sharing across data-
bases. Canada and the United States are high-income countries
and the funding and development of cross-border initiatives
involves more bilateral decision-making than at the Mexican
border but is still unequal. Due to U.S. pressure, Canada has
undertaken a series of securitization measures that parallel
those of the United States. Patrick Lennox (2007, 1021) states:
‘‘Given the vast asymmetry in power capabilities between the
two countries, the United States has and continues to have the
prerogative to define and determine the means to deal with
threats to the continent.’’ The size and relatively lower degree
of enforcement of the Canadian border are ongoing issues.
Immigration
Although the passage of tough immigration laws in the 1990s
was meant to resolve public concern, throughout the first dec-
ade of the 21st century, immigration has been a divisive issue.
Notably, a series of Presidents, Democrat Bill Clinton, Republi-
can George W. Bush, and Democrat Barack Obama, have all suc-
cessfully backed legislation to support policing of the borders
and failed to gain Congressional authorization for legalization
of unauthorized entrants residing sub rosa in the country. The
only remaining form of leniency has been for the first attempt
at unauthorized entry to remain a misdemeanor civil offense
instead of passing legislation making it a felony crime.
Key Players
The Clinton administration and Congress passed tougher laws
to deter unauthorized immigration and remove ‘‘criminal ali-
ens.’’ This legislation included the 1996 Anti-Terrorism and
56
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

Effective Death Penalty Act (AEDPA) and Illegal Immigration
Reform and Immigrant Responsibility Act (IARIRA. President
Clinton (1993) stated:
The simple fact is that we must not—and we will
not—surrender our borders to those who wish to
exploit our history of compassion and justice. . . . But
the solution to the problem of illegal immigration is
not simply to close our borders. The solution is to wel-
come legal immigrants and legal, legitimate refugees
and to turn away those who do not obey the laws. We
must say no to illegal immigration so we can continue
to say yes to legal immigration.
In 2001, President George W. Bush indicated that immigra-
tion would be a signature issue but attempts to achieve a biparti-
san compromise on immigration reform were unsuccessful.
President Bush (2006) supported the legalization of undocu-
mented immigrants and a new guest-worker program. Bush
introduced an approach to legalization with penalties that was
promoted by Senators Ted Kennedy and John McCain and
shapes current proposals on legalization. Bush (2006) stated:
Illegal immigration puts pressure on public schools
and hospitals, it strains state and local budgets, and
brings crime to our communities. These are real prob-
lems. Yet we must remember that the vast majority of
illegal immigrants are decent people who work hard,
support their families, practice their faith, and lead re-
sponsible lives. They are a part of American life, but
they are beyond the reach and protection of American
law.
The election of Barack Obama as president was accompanied
by the creation of a two year Democratic majority in the Senate
and House of Representatives. In 2009, the issue of immigration
was placed on the back burner, but slated for future action.
President Obama (2009) has stated:
Here’s what I believe: We are a nation of immigrants,
number one. Number two, we do have to have control
of our borders. Number three, that people who have
Immigration
57

been here a long time and have put down roots here
have to come out of the shadows, because if they stay
in the shadows, in the underground economy, then
they are oftentimes pitted against American workers.
Since they can’t join a union, they can’t complain
about minimum wages, et cetera, they end up being
abused, and that depresses the wages of everybody,
all Americans.
So I don’t think we can do this [immigration
reform] piecemeal. I think what we have to do is come
together and say, we’re going to strengthen our bor-
ders. We have to combine that with cracking down on
employers who are exploiting undocumented workers.
(Obama 2009)
Obama’s views on immigration reform involve supporting legal-
ization of unauthorized residents who pay a fine, return to
Mexico, and then enter the legal immigration system. As a part
of legalization, they would be expected to learn English. To con-
trol unauthorized economic migrants, an effective employment-
verification system would be set up. In this regard, many aspects
of the renewed immigration reform initiative are not new.
Opposing Viewpoints on Immigration Reform
It has been hard to achieve immigration reform because some
favor all out-border control and immigration restriction while
others suggest that a combination of border and interior
enforcement, legal immigration reform, and legalization is
needed. The two positions have stalled congressional debate as
border enforcement advocates have refused to consider changes
to the legal immigration system until the problem of unauthor-
ized immigration is solved. Five key issues of this debate are as
follows: (1) Can a level of border enforcement be reached that
prevents unauthorized immigration? (2) What is the role of
employer sanctions and/or interior enforcement to locate un-
authorized immigrants in the solution? (3) Should the unau-
thorized population be legalized and under what specific
conditions—or should they be deported? (4) Should legal immi-
gration be primarily based on admitting skilled workers or family
reunification? and (5) How many unskilled permanent or guest
workers should be allowed into the United States?
58
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

Republican and Democratic conservatives had a major role
in preventing passage of the Senate Comprehensive Immigra-
tion Reform (CIR) bills of 2006 and 2007 (Orchowski 2008, 169).
Conservatives in the House emphasized securing the border
and visa restriction rather than legalization, which they nega-
tively call ‘‘amnesty,’’ which was an aspect of the Senate bill.
Conservative Republican grassroots organizations sent over a
million faxes or phone calls to defeat CIR. These bills failed
because there was a deadlock over whether the ‘‘broken immi-
gration system’’ can be fixed through just border control and
immigration restriction or if a redesign of the criteria for legal
residence is needed. Neoconservative Charles Krauthammer
(2007) summed up the prior failure to pass a bill as follows:
Comprehensive immigration reform is in jeopardy be-
cause it is a complex compromise with too many moving
parts and too many competing interests. Employers want
a guest-worker program; unions want to kill it. Reformers
want to introduce a point system that preferentially ad-
mits skilled and educated immigrants; immigrant groups
naturally want to keep the existing family-preference sys-
tem. Liberals want legalization now; conservatives insist
on enforcement ‘‘triggers’’ first.
Current attempts to pass immigration legislation will
involve a degree of compromise that only wholehearted intra-
party and bipartisan support can provide. Neither the Republi-
can nor the Democratic Party speak with one unified voice.
There are three Republican groups: corporate libertarians, neo-
conservatives, and traditional conservatives (Orchowski 2008,
169). The Democratic Party is divided into centrist progressives,
populist progressives, moderates, and conservatives. Conserva-
tive and moderate Democrats meet in the ‘‘Blue Dog Caucus’’
which has a maximum membership of 47 (Orchowski 2008, 175).
The late Senator Ted Kennedy, former chair of the Senate im-
migration subcommittee, was the most vocal supporter of immi-
grants in Washington, DC. Kennedy was a supporter of the 1965
Immigration and Nationality Act and an architect of the Immigra-
tion Reform and Control Act of 1986, which had a one-time am-
nesty for individuals resident in the United States prior to 1986.
Orchowski (2008, 171) considers that both Kennedy and former
President George W. Bush represent libertarians in favor of more
Immigration
59

permissive immigration. Nevertheless, Bush wanted immigration
for economic reasons while Kennedy promoted humanitarianism
and social justice.
‘‘Corporate libertarians’’ include corporate lobbyists, many
of whom are representatives of industries involved in mass hiring
of unauthorized workers and legal immigrants (Orchowski 2008).
Daniel Griswold (2009), the director of the Center for Trade Policy
Studies at the Cato Institute, has urged the adoption of a guest-
worker program which corporate libertarians connect to positive
economic expansion. This reform of the legal immigration system
would occur in addition to legalization. Centrist Democrats favor
expanding work visas and legalization. To illustrate how complex
the issue is, some centrist Democrats want to simultaneously
increase border control and interior enforcement of immigration
laws to contain the immigrant population. This implies that they
do not believe opening more legal ways to enter, such as a guest-
worker program, will stop the problem of unauthorized border
crossing for immigration.
Democratic Senator Charles Schumer (2007) of New York
presents a pro-legalization view in his book, Positively American:
Winning Back the Middle Class Majority One Family at a Time.
Schumer advocates a balanced approach through his ‘‘50% so-
lution’’: reducing unauthorized immigration by 50% and increas-
ing legal immigration by 50%. Interior enforcement of labor law
through employer sanctions and legalization is emphasized in
this strategy. Both centrist and populist progressive Democrats
favor social justice for the poor and minorities. As a result, they
are concerned about public opinion on interior immigration
enforcement such as raids impacting immigrant communities.
Progressive think tanks representing this position include the
Center for American Progress and People for the American Way.
Media proponents include Jon Stewart at Comedy Central and
Keith Olbermann of MSNBC. Other advocates of liberal immi-
gration policy include The Progressive, The Nation, In These Times,
and the American Catholic Church.
Many centrist progressive Democrats are allied with conserv-
ative Republicans in wanting increased border enforcement. The
conservative position on immigration is tied to individual politi-
cians rather than political parties. Patrick Buchanan (2006, 250),
editor of the American Conservative, is a strong advocate of immi-
gration restriction and believes in an ‘‘immediate moratorium on
all immigration’’ and removal of the unauthorized population.
60
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

He emphasizes border control as the major strategy by supporting
a ‘‘permanent fence along the entire 2,000 mile border with
Mexico, defining, sealing and securing it forever’’ (P. Buchanan
2006, 254). Many Democrats who are Blue Dog Caucus members
favor enforcement without legalization, known as the SAVE pro-
posal, which was cosponsored by congressmen Heath Shuler
(D-NC) and Brian Bilbray (R-CA). Opinion is further divided as
some would increase enforcement and expand immigration per-
mits as well.
Conservatives are said to have a media pipeline through
supportitive news anchors: Bill O’Reilly of FOX News and Lou
Dobbs, a former CNN anchor who works in talk radio. Bill
O’Reilly supported the border fence and legalization of the
unauthorized population via an initial U.S. Post Office adminis-
tered Department of Homeland Security registration program
tied to later passing a criminal background check. With this ini-
tiative, employers hiring workers without legitimate documents
would be penalized. Since leaving CNN, Dobbs has continued
to promote border control. He considers: ‘‘We need to be able
to influence the direction of the conversation toward securing
the border because until we can control immigration, we cannot
meaningfully, substantively alter immigration law because it
would have no point if we cannot establish the basis for the
control of the flow of people across that border’’ (Rhee 2009).
Dobbs’s views changed after he left CNN as he had not previ-
ously emphasized ‘‘humane immigration policy’’ or the ‘‘ability
to legalize illegal immigrants under certain conditions.’’
Given the public’s acceptance of border control as the main
strategy for ending unauthorized immigration, support for legal-
ization, often referred to as a new ‘‘amnesty,’’ is a divided issue.
Kris Koback (2009), a law professor and advisor to the Attorney
General on immigration law and national security (2001–2003),
indicated that the size of the undocumented population makes
legalization ill-advised because of ‘‘(1) the inability of U.S. Citi-
zenship and Immigration Services (USCIS) to implement the
amnesty and (2) the national security risks that would result. He
considers that undertaking legalization in one year would present
a monumental task and that there would be insufficient time for
background checks.
The negative public attitude towards ‘‘illegal immigration’’
has been viewed as a moral panic. ‘‘Moral panics’’ refer to a sit-
uation in which the public is falsely manipulated to believe in
Immigration
61

the existence of a threatening social problem. According to this
view, since the 1970s, undocumented immigrants have been
repeatedly made scapegoats for employment problems related
to fundamental changes in the global economy. Due to the 21st-
century emphasis on counterterrorism, U.S.-Mexico border
enforcement has been strengthened, but critics say it does more
to give the appearance of protection than actually achieving a
concrete goal of stopping undocumented immigration or terror-
ism (Andreas, 2000; Rothe and Muzzatti 2004; Sharma 2006).
Progressive U.S.-Mexico border scholars view negative
media and political attention toward unauthorized entrants as a
form of cultural violence. ‘‘Cultural violence’’ refers to symbols
and ideas that rationalize, appear to make legitimate, or mystify
the impact of structural violence. According to proponents of
this idea (Spener 2009), cultural violence occurs when ‘‘illegal
immigrants’’ are stigmatized while their human dilemma as
citizens of developing nations who have a difficult time eco-
nomically supporting their families is overlooked.
In light of the representation of ‘‘illegals’’ as scapegoats, it
is surprising that the American public favors remedial action. An
America’s Voice opinion poll conducted by the Berenson Strategy
Group of 1,000 likely voters in May 2009 (Immigration Forum
2009) indicated that 75% wanted congressional action on immigra-
tion reform; and 68% supported a path to legalization, including
62% of Republicans. Respondents reported that 71% wanted
unauthorized workers to become legal taxpayers and also con-
sidered that they do not deprive American citizens of jobs.
These results were somewhat higher than a PEW Research Cen-
ter poll of a sample of 1,000 taken in May 2009 indicating 63%
of voters and 50% of Republicans supported a path to citizen-
ship (Immigration Forum 2009).
Immigration reform has always been difficult to pass, but
public opinion is definitely in favor of ending ‘‘illegal immigra-
tion.’’ A November 2008 America’s Voice national poll of 1,000
respondents found that 78% of voters considered it a ‘‘serious
problem’’ (Immigration Forum 2009). In a November, 2009
speech at the Center for American Progress, DHS Secretary
Janet Napolitano (DHS 2009) stated:
a larger segment of the American public has embraced
the need to engage this debate and arrive at a sensible
62
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

solution to this problem. . . . There are leaders of the
law enforcement community speaking out, saying that
immigration reform is vital to their ability to do their
jobs keeping Americans safe. Faith leaders, including
the
National
Association
of
Evangelicals,
have
announced their support for immigration reform as a
moral and practical issue. We are seeing more business
leaders and more labor leaders engaged in this debate
in a constructive way than we have ever seen before.
In 2009 Rep. Luis Gutierrez (D-IL) introduced an immigra-
tion bill: The Comprehensive Immigration Reform for America’s
Security and Prosperity Act (CIR ASAP). It is supported by 90
House members, including the Congressional Hispanic Caucus,
the Congressional Black Caucus, the Congressional Asian Pacific
Caucus, and the Progressive Caucus. CIR ASAP provides a
path to legalization, updates the family and employment-
based legal immigration system, provides more resources for
border ports of entry to deter unauthorized immigration and
drug and arms smuggling, sets standards for detention and
provides for community alternatives, repeals the Section 287
program linking federal immigration enforcement with local
and state police, restores due process through judicial review
of immigration proceedings, and provides for an electronic
employment
verification
system.
The
progressive
group
Reform Immigration FOR America has organized more than
600 business, community, faith, labor, and civil rights organi-
zations to support immigration reform and is organizing
media events to support it.
Federal Government
The securitization of immigration is connected to the move of
immigration visa and citizenship processing and enforcement
from the Department of Justice (DOJ) to the Department of
Homeland Security (DHS). The July 2002 ‘‘National Strategy for
Homeland Security’’ of the Bush administration focused on mo-
bilization to protect the homeland from terrorism. The 2002
‘‘National Security Strategy of the United States of America’’
included immigration policy. The DHS is a counterterrorism
bureaucracy and more militarized than the policing-oriented
Immigration
63

DOJ. Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE) is now
located in the DHS national security bureaucracy. This led
to increased militarization of ICE and the U.S. Border Patrol
(Lovato 2008).
Begun in the late 1980s, policies to criminalize immigration
are increasingly deployed in an effort to arrest, detain, and
deport unauthorized entrants. As a result, an unprecedented
policing bureaucracy has been developed. The fear that terro-
rists might use the same forms of unauthorized entry as other
migrants over the land borders has created a domestic security
industry (Lovato 2008). Billions of dollars have been awarded
in military contracts for Boeing, General Electric, and Halibur-
ton to build virtual walls, ground sensor systems, radar sys-
tems, drones, and surveillance technology for a geographically
complex border.
Law Enforcement
The apprehension of undocumented residents in the interior is
an important aspect of border security because it is thought to
deter further attempts at unauthorized entrance. Historically,
the United States has primarily relied on interdiction at the
U.S.-Mexico border instead of in the interior. Conservatives
such as Carafano and colleagues (2006) have suggested that
worksite enforcement and not legislating legalization of undo-
cumented residents would send a stronger message to individ-
uals considering migration. Janet Napolitano, DHS Secretary,
notes: ‘‘border security by itself will not stop illegal entrants
into our country. Our border strategy must be combined with
better enforcement of the immigration laws within the United
States’’ (McKinley 2009).
The Immigration Reform and Control Act of 1986 is ineffec-
tive because it instituted worker document checks but did not
require employers to verify if they were valid. INA Section
274A authorized employer sanctions for hiring unauthorized
workers (Smith 2005). It prohibits knowing hiring of undocu-
mented immigrants and provides for civil fines of $250 to
$10,000 per worker and a criminal sanction of up to six months
imprisonment. To comply, employers submit I-9 forms showing
that a Social Security card, driver’s license, voter registration
card, passport, or other identification indicates an individual is
a citizen or a U.S. resident alien.
64
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

In the mid-1980s, the failure to make an employer responsi-
ble for document verification resulted in the development of a
cottage fraudulent-document industry followed by organized
criminal document rings (Simcox 2000). Traditionally, interior
enforcement has been understaffed and unable to track the
level of fraudulent document use. This is shown by the unde-
tected cases of Zoe Baird, Kimba Wood, Linda Chavez, and
others unable to gain high-ranking federal positions because
they had hired unauthorized labor. After 9/11, diversion of
resources to counterterrorism reduced enforcement through
employer audits. They declined from 1,300 in 1990 to less than
500 in FY2003 (Brownell 2005). As a result, many unauthorized
workers submit work-related documents that are false (such as a
made-up Social Security number unconnected to an individual)
or fraudulent (a Social Security number connected to an individ-
ual, i.e., illegal use of an authenticated identity).
ICE workplace raids were stepped up during the second
half of the Bush administration. Yet only 863 out of 4,077
‘‘administrative arrests’’ in FY2007 involved owners, managers,
or human resource supervisors (ICE 2007). Those who suffer
the penalty for this white-collar crime are the unauthorized
workers. In 2008, out of 7.4 million employers, 42 companies
were raided and 16 had administrative employees who were
arrested and convicted (some cases pending appeal) (ICE 2009).
At the end of the decade, ICE shifted its priorities and sought
to target employers rather than conduct numerous workplace
raids. Nevertheless, ICE audits are still connected to mass fir-
ings of unauthorized workers.
Immigration enforcement has especially targeted criminal
aliens. The 287(g) program authorized by the 1996 Illegal Immi-
gration Reform and Immigrant Responsibility Act (IIRIRA) pro-
vides for cooperation in immigration enforcement between the
fed and state and local law enforcement (ICE 2010). Participat-
ing municipalities enter the program by signing a Memoran-
dum of Agreement (MOA). At the prompting of the Obama
administration, the DHS has expanded the 287(g) immigration
enforcement program and has issued a revised MOA. Partici-
pating 287(g) police are supervised by Immigration and Cus-
toms Enforcement.
Criticism of 287(g) has come from both immigrant advocates
concerned about racial profiling and those who support tougher
enforcement, who claim that prioritizing criminal aliens would
Immigration
65

lead to neglect of unauthorized immigrants. The U.S. Government
Accountability Office (GAO 2009a, 4) audit of police departments
participating in 287(g) found that:
while ICE officials have stated that the main objective
of the 287(g) program is to enhance the safety and
security of communities by addressing serious crimi-
nal activity committed by removable aliens, they have
not documented this objective in program-related
materials consistent with internal control standards.
As a result, some participating agencies are using their
287(g) authority to process for removal aliens who
have committed minor crimes, such as carrying an
open container of alcohol. While participating agencies
are not prohibited from seeking the assistance of ICE
for aliens arrested for minor offenses, if all the partici-
pating agencies sought assistance to remove aliens for
such minor offenses, ICE would not have detention
space to detain all of the aliens referred to them. ICE’s
Office of Detention and Removal strategic plan calls
for using the limited detention bed space available for
those aliens who pose the greatest threat to the public,
until more alternative detention methods are available.
Evidence exists indicating that 287(g) had not met its targets
but resulted in arrest of nonviolent unauthorized migrants. In El
Paso, Texas, the Sheriff’s Office’s Operation Linebacker, con-
nected to 287(g), resulted in the arrest of 1,076 unauthorized
entrants and four noncitizens on drug-related charges (Staudt
2008a, 303). Kathleen Staudt, a political scientist, considers that
did not reflect the emphasis placed on stopping drug- and vio-
lence-related crime. Due to concerns expressed by the GAO
(2009a) and immigration advocates, ICE has changed its 287(g)
agreements to stress that its priority is to remove dangerous crim-
inal aliens. 287(g) is designed to increase apprehension of non-
citizens that commit violent crimes, human smuggling, gang/
organized crime activity, sexual-related offenses, narcotics smug-
gling, and money laundering.
Reliance on ICE and the U.S. Border Patrol occurs because
immigration enforcement is a federal responsibility. When local
and state police are allowed to use immigration status as a factor
66
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

in questioning and arrest, they are considered a ‘‘multiple force
amplifier’’ One argument for this involvement is that four of the
9/11 hijackers were subject to routine traffic stops and could
have been detained for visa violations (Eldridge et al. 2004). An
argument against giving local and state police this power is it
could foster alienation of immigrant communities, which often
contain many unauthorized residents. Immigrants may hesitate
to report crime and victimization or otherwise cooperate with the
police if they fear family or community members will be deported
(Romero 2006; Martinez 2007).
Community policing strategies rely on steady contact
between police and neighborhood residents, which is difficult if
there is a fear of the police (Martinez 2007). Many immigrants
originate from nations where the police are corrupt and not
trusted. They bring this attitude to the United States and are
aware of negative public attitudes toward immigrants. Another
problem associated with nonfederal police involvement is the
possibility of screening based on racial and ethnic profiling
rather than suspicious behavior (Kretsedemas 2008, 346–351).
The federal government has taken many steps to offer im-
migration enforcement authority to state and local police but
municipalities have not uniformly responded (Kretsedemas
2008, 341–342). Regardless, information on noncitizens with im-
migration violations and, after 9/11, noncitizens under suspi-
cion of terrorist activity, has been incorporated into a National
Crime Information Center (NCIC) database. The database
includes noncitizens with both criminal and civil violations.
Arizona bypassed the 287(g) federal and state law enforce-
ment linkage program when Governor Jan Brewer signed Sen-
ate Bill 1070 into law on March 23, 2010 (Archibold 2010b). The
bill makes unauthorized entrance and presence of a migrant in
the United States a state misdemeanor crime. It stipulates that
state and local police should check an individual’s immigration
status if there is reasonable suspicion that a person is an unau-
thorized alien. If an individual cannot prove legal residency,
law enforcement officers can make a warrantless arrest if there
is probable cause that an individual is an unauthorized alien.
Upon arrest, individuals cannot be released unless they estab-
lish legal immigration status under § 1373(c) of Title 8 of the
United States Code. The first offense carries a $500 fine and up
to a six-month jail term. In order to avoid arrest, permanent
Immigration
67

resident aliens and visitors holding visas must carry identifica-
tion. The documentation necessary to prove legal status includes
Arizona driver’s licenses, Arizona nonoperating identification
licenses, or any form of valid federal, state, or local identifica-
tion which can certify immigration status. Arizona’s law is the
first to require state and local police to check immigration status.
It is considered that the law makes a failure to carry immigration
documents a crime.
Because immigration is a matter of federal law, Arizona’s bill
may be unconstitutional. Multiple law suits at the federal and
state level have been filed by the American Civil Liberties Union,
the Mexican American Legal Defense and Educational Fund, and
Phoenix, AZ mayor Phil Gordon. The ACLU lawsuit makes the
argument that the bill violates the Supremacy Clause of the U.S.
Constitution, which provides for federal authority over the states,
including on immigration matters. Erwin Chemerinsky, Dean of
the School of Law at the University of California Irvine, is quoted:
as follows: ‘‘The law is clearly pre-empted by federal law under
Supreme Court precedents.’’ Defenders of the bill, including Kris
W. Kobach, a co-drafter of the AZ bill and law professor at the
University of Missouri-Kansas City School of Law, present the
principle of ‘‘concurrent enforcement’’: that the state law parallels
the federal law which makes first entry without authorization a
misdemeanor (Schwartz and Archibold 2010).
President Barack Obama criticized passage of the law, stating
that it would ‘‘undermine basic notions of fairness that we cherish
as Americans, as well as the trust between police and our com-
munities that is so crucial to keeping us safe’’ (Archibold 2010b).
Arizona governor Brewer defended the law as: ‘‘another tool for
our state to use as we work to solve a crisis we did not create and
the federal government has refused to fix’’ (Archibold 2010b).
The mandated use of state and local police in immigration
enforcement and the requirement for possession of immigration
documents generated national protests. Major social criticism
includes that the bill justifies racial profiling and will lead to dis-
crimination against both legal immigrants and minority citizens.
Former Arizona Attorney General Grant Woods said that: ‘‘Peo-
ple will be profiled because of the color of their skin’’ (Schwartz
and Archibold 2010).
Public reaction to the Arizona immigration law included a
protest gathering of over one thousand during the signing of
the law in Phoenix, Arizona. U.S. Congressman Raul Grijalva,
68
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

representative for Arizona’s 7th Congressional District, called
for an economic boycott of Arizona state products and tourism
(Archibold 2010a). The nation’s major Spanish language news-
paper, La Opinion, and the Reverand Al Sharpton were among
those supporting a boycott. It is likely that the new Arizona im-
migration law will galvanize both continued legal reaction and
public protest until constitutional issues and probable individ-
ual anti-discrimination lawsuits are resolved.
Militarization of the U.S.-Mexico Border
The U.S.-Mexico border has been subject to repeat military
buildups. From 1978 to 1992, when the War on Drugs was initi-
ated, the military was directly deployed to stop drug trafficking
(Dunn 1996). In theory, if the supply of drugs was reduced or
eliminated, it was thought that drug usage would decline and
this social problem would be controlled. Initially, the antidrug
campaign was conducted in foreign nations such as Colombia
(Payan 2006, 28; Andreas and Nadelman 2006, 130–131). Troops
fought growers and associated smuggling operations in the
Caribbean with military technology and succeeded in disrupt-
ing the Colombian-Caribbean connection. This diverted cocaine
trafficking to the Mexico border in the late 1980s. At the same
time an increase in Mexican economic migration and Central
American war refugees became a military concern.
Attempts to control undocumented entry and drug smug-
gling resulted in the militarization of the U.S.-Mexico border
with armed services troops, the National Guard, and military
technologies used to secure the border (Dunn 1996, 147–156).
Since the 1980s, given substantial reliance on military surveil-
lance technology, the military has backed up the Border Patrol
and Customs at all types of borders: land, sea, and air. The
1878 Posse Comitatus Act proscribes the military from enforc-
ing civilian law, but the National Guard, which is controlled by
the states, can and has been repeatedly ordered to the U.S.-
Mexico border (Banks 2002; Dunn 1996, 106–108). The National
Guard was involved in the first border wall construction at
the San Diego, California, urbanized border (Nevins 2002).
The Armed Forces and the National Guard have worked on
construction, given logistical support, engaged in intelligence
Militarization of the U.S.-Mexico Border
69

gathering and interpretation, and conducted ground reconnais-
sance and surveillance.
For example, Joint Task Force-Six (JTF-6, later renamed JTF
North) has been stationed at Fort Bliss in El Paso, Texas. It pro-
vides military personnel for assistance to the Border Patrol via
observations, reconnaissance, analysis of data, and training
(Heyman and Ackleson 2010, 61). During the first eight years of
JTF-6, it conducted numerous covert troop operations, mostly
at the request of the Border Patrol. Military units patrolled until
1997 when a reconnaissance unit killed a U.S. citizen near
Redford, Texas (Dunn 2001, 9). In May 1997, Esequiel Hernandez,
a U.S. citizen of Mexican American descent, was shot and killed
by four marines during a covert operation. This stopped mili-
tary patrols but not support and technological assistance by mili-
tary personnel. In addition, the family of Esequiel Hernandez
was awarded $1.9 million in a settlement for wrongful death
(Lubbockonline 1998).
The Immigration Reform and Control Act of 1986 initiated
a two-decade expansion of policing of the U.S.-Mexico border.
In 1993, border deterrence began to involve walls and line-
watch duties for U.S. Border Patrol officers. It was augmented
by militarization through the use of troops or military technol-
ogy. The classic line-watch operations, Operation Gatekeeper in
San Diego, Operation Hold the Line in El Paso, and Operation
Rio Grande in the McAllen/Laredo, Texas sector, have greatly
reduced the possibility of a successful unauthorized migrant
urban border crossing (Nevins 2002; Dunn 2009; Maril 2004).
Due to line-watching, from 1980 to 2000, U.S. Border Patrol
agent staffing increased 3.7 times; line-watch hours were upped
by 6.5 times and the cost increased by a factor of 12 (Massey
2009).
Although unauthorized immigration apprehensions began
to decrease, the War on Terror brought renewed focus to fortify-
ing the U.S.-Mexico border. Jeb Bush, Thomas F. McLarty, and
Edward Alden (2009) state, ‘‘In a post 9/11 world in which the
U.S. must be able to thwart terrorist plots by extremists coming
from abroad, illegal immigration . . . creates an unacceptable
security risk.’’ The addition of preventing terrorist entry to the
mix of duties that the U.S. Border Patrol handles must be eval-
uated. Alden (2008, 291) believes that ‘‘immigration enforcement
and counter-terrorism are two different things, and for either to
70
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

be effective, they must be separated.’’ Since 9/11, massive fed-
eral expenditure has occurred to support border enforcement.
Douglas Massey, a sociologist (2009), states,
Border enforcement nonetheless rose exponentially
after September 11, with the Border Patrol Budget
increasing 95 times its 1980 level and the number of
line-watch hours rising 111 times. After 9/11 deporta-
tions also began a marked increase, rising from just
11,000 in 1980 to some 350,000 in 2008.
In 2006, the governors of New Mexico and Arizona requested
that the National Guard support border law enforcement. By June
2006, 6,000 National Guardsmen ordered by President George W.
Bush were at the California, Arizona, New Mexico, and Texas
borders (CNN 2006). They have not been assigned to direct law
enforcement. They assist with road and wall or fence construction
and operate ground-level radar, visual and other surveillance
devices that communicate immediate intelligence about crossing
attempts. National Guardsmen are deployed to perform surveil-
lance using high-tech devices that allow USBP officers to be in the
field. Currently, many Border Patrol officers are assigned to line-
watch duty at the geographical boundary to deter migrants from
attempting to cross, but many areas of the border are not watched
or do not have ready response units.
In 2009, Governor Rick Perry of Texas requested 1,000
National Guard troops, but a conflict occurred over whether the
federal or state government would pay it. This forestalled deploy-
ment (Office of the Governor, Rick Perry 2009a). Instead, the
Texas Rangers were called in (Office of the Governor, Rick
Perry 2009b). Perry has sent Ranger Recon teams combining
Texas Rangers and Texas National Guard Counter Drug Forces
to
conduct
surveillance,
identify
high-intensity
smuggling
routes, and assist in operations to reduce border-related crime
connected to drug trafficking and migrant smuggling. In Texas
there has been an increase in burglaries of rural ranches,
homes, and hunting camps. Land owners along the Texas
boundary also face extortion demands or threats from organ-
ized criminal groups connected to drug smuggling.
Although Congress has sought to give the military search,
arrest, and seizure assignments along the border, which would
Militarization of the U.S.-Mexico Border
71

be a major escalation, such bills have never passed. Critics
argue that immigration enforcement is a civil—not military—
matter and that troops should not be assigned to the border.
Physical and Technological Barriers
Whether or not walls work to deter unauthorized immigration
has been a major concern. Migrants have responded by crossing
in different locations, which is a displacement effect (Dunn
2009; Haddal, Kim, and Garcia 2009). There have been tempo-
rarily successful efforts to tunnel under walls as well. Although
walls have been represented to the public as a deterrent to
unauthorized entry, the reality is that they displace migrants to
more rural and remote, even hazardous, areas to cross (Garcia-
Goldsmith 2007).
The Secure Fence Act of 2006 directed the DHS to build
two layers of secured fencing and to place additional physical
barriers, roads, and surveillance technology in five areas of
Arizona, California, New Mexico, and Texas (Haddal, Kim, and
Garcia 2009). Walls and fencing were to be placed along 850
miles. Border communities selected for the wall and fencing
project have objected to the impact on the local environment
and their properties. Former Department of Homeland Security
Secretary Michael Chertoff won the right to waive seven envi-
ronmental and historic preservation laws including the Endan-
gered Species Act, the Federal Water Pollution Control Act
(Clean Water Act), and the Safe Drinking Water Act. DHS has
used the waivers on four locations.
Alternately represented as both successful and controver-
sial in cost and consequences, border walls are extremely ex-
pensive to build and maintain (GAO 2009b). By 2009, 613 miles
of border wall and fence authorized by the Secure Fence Act of
2006 had been built. J. D. Hayworth (2009, 3), former congres-
sional representative from Arizona, indicates that the bills call
for double-layer fencing; however, only 200 miles are double.
The single-layer fence and vehicle barriers are being overcome
by smugglers who use portable ramps.
Early in his term, President Obama deemphasized the need
for fencing and advocated stepping up border patrols and
deploying surveillance technology. Yet the likelihood that fenc-
ing and walls will be scaled back was reduced by Mexican drug-
cartel violence. The problem of border violence is exacerbated by
72
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

arms smuggling from the United States to Mexico. Although
DHS Secretary Janet Napolitano was initially opposed to border
fencing as governor of Arizona, she came to believe that walls
and fences improve operational control. She has authorized
completion of the final 60 miles of fencing projected to cost $4
million a mile (Reese 2009). Napolitano also initiated southbound
inspection of entry into Mexico to curtail traffic in weapons.
Passed in 2008, the Department of Homeland Security
(DHS) appropriations bill requires consultation with federal
agencies, state and local officials, and local property owners
before building fencing. DHS allocated $50 million in 2009 to
compensate for damage to animal and plant habitat or issues
with Native American religious sites. The fence could be modi-
fied to curb flooding or restore habitats of endangered or
threatened species. Previously about $40 million had been spent
on restorative activities. Jaguars, ocelots, deer, javelinas (wild
pig species), and owls are among the species affected by the wall,
which blocks their migratory routes and reduces habitat.
Those favoring border-fence construction use data from the
San Diego Sector, where border fencing originated during
Operation Gatekeeper. This sector is almost completely fenced
pending a small section (Haddal, Kim, and Garcia 2009). Signif-
icantly fewer migrants are being apprehended because of the
barrior. The U.S. Border Patrol believes that border fencing is a
force multiplier because it allows the patrol to concentrate
enforcement resources on other activities. The Border Patrol
views the diversion of unauthorized migration to more remote
rural regions as giving its agents a tactical advantage in appre-
hending unauthorized entrants (Dunn 2009). Those in opposi-
tion to extensive border-fencing expenditures view the existing
fencing as funneling migrants away and not stopping undocu-
mented entry (Garcia-Goldsmith et al. 2007). They view greatly
increased U.S. Border Patrol staffing and resources as the cause
of increased apprehensions, not the fencing.
The overall number of undocumented border-crossing
arrests in 2004 was very close to the figure for 1992 (Haddal,
Kim, and Garcia 2009). The major difference is that most arrests
in 1992 occurred in San Diego while in 2004 arrests were high-
est in the Tucson and Yuma, Arizona, sectors. Fencing appears
to funnel migrants to less densely populated and hazardous
areas. In fenced areas, individuals have cut holes, used ladders,
dug tunnels, and employed various other means to get across.
Militarization of the U.S.-Mexico Border
73

This suggests that fencing only modifies the efforts of migrants
who want to enter without papers. Options for dealing with
these problems include more tamper-resistant and expensive
fencing and investing in tunnel-detection technology.
There are a number of arguments against border walls and
fences. Both Mexican and Canadian diplomats have protested
any extension of border fencing. The Canadian government is
concerned that it has not been consulted enough by the United
States. Overall, opponents of border barriers consider them to
be akin to the ‘‘Great Wall of China’’ or the ‘‘Berlin Wall.’’ The
U.S. government needs to consider if the need for national secu-
rity is more important than alienating its border neighbors and
if border nationa should be bilaterally consulted about fencing
(Haddal, Kim, and Garcia 2009). The securitization of the bor-
der necessitates international cooperation in intelligence sharing
and policing, and border fences create problems for working
together.
Cross-border tunnels and subterranean passages have been
used for smuggling drugs, people, and contraband. From
May 1990 through 2008, 101 tunnels were discovered (Haddal,
Kim, and Garcia 2009). The largest had lighting, ventilation, and
drainage systems and contained two tons of marijuana when
discovered. Intensive Border Patrol enforcement has thought to
have increased the number and sophistication of tunnels and
encouraged drug traffickers to expend the time and investment.
Intelligence gathering for suspicious patterns of behavior and
sophisticated tunnel-detection technology are being improved.
For deterrence, the 2006 Border Tunnel Prevention Act increased
criminal penalties for cross-border tunneling. There is a 20-year
maximum sentence for constructing or financing tunnels.
One alternative to walls is a $6.7 billion ‘‘virtual fence’’ of
cameras, sensors, and other communications equipment (Heyman
2008). The Border Patrol has used airplanes and helicopters for
decades, and electronic motion detectors were installed in some
areas in the 1970s. In the 1980s airplanes and balloons with instru-
mentation were deployed to monitor unauthorized border-
crossing traffic. A virtual wall increases the density of high-tech
devices and upgrades them. Drones, which are unmanned flying
vehicles, carry surveillance cameras. Upgraded detection equip-
ment will use wider electromagnetic bands, near ground radar,
and high-resolution cameras on towers. Even National Security
Administration satellites may be used for monitoring.
74
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

Surveillance technology such as the Integrated Surveillance
Intelligence System (ISIS) and the America’s Shield Initiative
(ASI) had operational issues in deployment, readiness, and sys-
tem integration (GAO 2006, 29–44) and was later replaced by the
high-tech SBInet, part of the Secure Border Initiative (SBI). The
SBI was a multibillion-dollar program initiated in 2005 to sustain
border security and reduce unauthorized immigration. It focused
on the Mexican border at locations deemed vulnerable and had
programs at the Canadian border to increase Border Patrol per-
sonnel and install radiation portal monitors to scan for radioac-
tive material. SBI surveillance technology involved cameras,
unattended ground sensors, radar systems, communication sys-
tems, mounted laptops for U.S. Border Patrol vehicles, helicop-
ters, and drones as well as walls and fencing (GAO 2009b, 10).
Command, control, and communications technologies (C3l) were
to include hardware and software to produce a ‘‘common oper-
ating picture (COP),’’ uniform activity data presentation for com-
mand centers and agent vehicles (GAO 2009b, 13). In March,
2010, $50 million in SBI funding was taken for use with more
‘‘tested’’ surveillance technologies (DHS 2010). DHS Secretary
Napolitano was responding to SBI technology problems.
Theoretically, tracking of people and vehicles can be con-
fused by irrelevant information such as animal migration, rancher
activity, and even dust in the air. SBI has faced problems in sys-
tem integration and a $400 million cost overrun by the contractor,
Boeing. The U.S. Government Accountability Office (GAO 2008, 2)
conducted a study that concluded, ‘‘It is imperative that [DHS]
immediately re-evaluate its plans and approach in relation to the
status of the system and related development acquisition and
testing activities.’’ In 2007 and 2008 tests showed that the sur-
veillance technology often failed in application due to software,
communication, and user failures. The GAO (2009b, 15) deter-
mined that SBI had problems including the failure to involve
U.S. Border Patrol agents in developing its requirements, limited
oversight of program contractors, and underestimation of the
scope and complexity of what was needed.
Impact on Migrant Smuggling
The repeated intensification of border control has led migrants
to increasingly hire coyotes (Spener 2009, 231; Andreas 2000,
21–26; Spagot 2006). Like other forms of smuggling, adaptation
Militarization of the U.S.-Mexico Border
75

occurs when old routes are blocked. Intensive enforcement in
the San Diego sector, the site of Operation Gatekeeper (Nevins
2002), is associated with attempts to smuggle people in motor
boats. More unauthorized crossings are occurring through ports
of entry as individuals are concealed in vehicles or purchase
fraudulent documents. U.S. Customs and Border Patrol is unable
to thoroughly inspect all individuals and vehicles because of
the time demand on personnel and the need to quickly move peo-
ple and trade over the border. Human smugglers have responded
to the continual process of tightening enforcement with innova-
tive strategies. The rising cost of assisted unauthorized entry and
the reduced penalties for human smuggling, as opposed to drug
smuggling, were thought attractive for organized crime. David
Spener’s (2009) field research on the use of coyotes (human smug-
glers) in South Texas demonstrates that the hierarchical, top-
down structure of organized crime has not developed. Instead,
horizontal organization and loose connections permits coyotes to
flexibly adapt to heightened enforcement. In this respect, their
degree of organization is characteristic of lower level transna-
tional crime groups across the globe (Thachuk 2007).
In the negotiation between migrants and coyotes, a fee is
agreed upon which is paid on delivery by their relatives in
communities in the interior. Indeed, these operations are de-
pendent on linkages between families and friends in the send-
ing communities in Mexico and the receiving communities in
the United States. According to Spener (2009, 166), migrants uti-
lize the social capital of these network ties to try to accomplish
at least a portion of the following:

give them information they needed to cross the
border successfully, including recommending them
to affordable and reliable coyotes;

being guided/advised while making the journey
across the border;

send them money at no interest to finance the
crossing, including money to pay the coyotes’ fee;

drive them to their final destination in the United
States after the migrants get past the last
immigration checkpoint; and

provide them with food, housing, and assistance
with finding a job after arrival in the U.S.
destination.
76
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

Spener (2009, 152–153) identifies the basic operational structure of
human smuggling in the South Texas border region as follows:

someone to recruit migrants in Mexico;

someone at the border who could receive migrants,
form a crossing party, and verify via telephone that
migrants had respondents in the destination city
who would pay for their passage;

someone who could guide migrants through brush
around the segunda garita [the ring of traffic
checkpoints away from the border];

someone with a car, van or truck who could pick
migrants up as they emerged from the brush and
drive them on to San Antonio, Austin, Dallas or
Houston or other destinations; and

someone living in the destination city who could
house migrants in an apartment, mobile home or
private residence and collect the remaining fees
from their respondents.
Migrant deaths have been publicized in Mexico, but individ-
uals feel financial pressure to migrate, hire smugglers and take
the risk. After the expansion of border enforcement, migrants are
increasingly choosing to remain in the United States and become
immigrants (Massey 2009). After a successful unauthorized entry,
migrants are bottled up and do not return. An unexpected con-
sequence of the deterrent strategy is shaping circular migrants
into long-term immigrants, and they are bringing family mem-
bers and forming households in the United States (Casteneda
2007). This is changing a pattern of circular migration back and
forth from Mexico to permanent immigration as the cost of
smuggling has risen and risk has increased. This means that
there are fewer times that individuals are exposed to apprehen-
sion after a successful crossing and that reduced apprehensions
do not necessarily represent deterrence.
Deportation versus Detainment
Unauthorized entrance has been handled through deportation
or, as an additional sanction, mandatory detention followed by
Deportation versus Detainment
77

deportation. The Illegal Immigration Reform and Immigrant
Responsibility Act of 1996 (IIRIRA) mandated that the Immigra-
tion and Naturalization Service (now ICE) detain increasing
numbers of unauthorized entrants and asylum applicants who
petitioned to stay. In 1996, 20,000 were detained. Annually, the
figure is now over 300,000. The federal government was never
prepared for this extent of detention. In 2004, Congress author-
ized building detention centers with 40,000 beds by 2010. This
is a major expansion of what has been described as a ‘‘prison-
industrial complex’’ (Dow 2004).
Annually, ICE detains hundreds of thousands of immi-
grants at its facilities or in jails and prisons where the govern-
ment can purchase bed space. In 2008, 378,582 were placed in
detention facilities. There were 32,000 detention beds available
in FY2008 at a cost of $90–118 per day (ICE 2008b). There are
over 350 detention centers with at least one in almost every
state, but most detention sites are actual jails and prisons rather
than centers operated by ICE. Local governments and states
subcontract their facilities through intergovernmental service
agreements (IGSA). Sixty-seven percent of detainees are held in
ICE IGSA facilities (Human Rights Watch 2009, 1).
ICE is estimated to detain 31,000 prisoners daily (ICE
2008b). Because many detainees are sent to jails or prisons, they
are placed with prisoners and exposed to the same conditions.
Regardless of whether a detainee has committed a civil or a
criminal offense, he or she has experienced a combination of
handcuffs, belly chains, and leg shackles. Journalist Mark Dow
(2004) went to various ICE and IGSA detention facilities and
discovered problems whether a detainee was in ICE custody or
under contract to a jail or prison. Detention conditions included
verbal and physical abuse, poor diet and health facilities, and use
of solitary confinement—for individuals who had attempted
unauthorized entry or asylum applicants who had committed
no crime. It has been difficult for detainees to challenge these
conditions due to lack of legal consultation, which led some to
hunger strikes or attempted suicide.
The Office of the Inspector General (OIG 2006) audited six
ICE
and
subcontracted
IGSA
facilities.
Health
violations
included not giving required physical examinations, failure to
respond to nonemergency health issues in a reasonable amount
of time, and problems monitoring detainees on hunger strikes
or suicide watch lists. In terms of environment, issues occurred
78
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

with rodents, insects, vermin and adequate temperatures when
cooking meat. From 2003 to 2008, under these conditions, 74
people died in ICE detention (ICE 2008c).
The rate at which detainees are transferred, which compli-
cates contact with relatives and receiving legal advice, has
greatly increased. Because IGSA facilities are for local, state,
and federal prisoners and ICE detention space is limited,
detainees are being transported long distances to be placed in a
facility. Detainees are first held in a location near their resi-
dence but often transferred to remote regions such as Arizona,
Texas, and Louisiana (Human Rights Watch 2009, 1–2). Transfers
are made between immigration gateway cities like Los Angeles
to distant states like Texas. ICE data released to Human Rights
First indicates that from 1999 to 2008, 1.4 million detainee trans-
fers occurred. There were 122,783 transfers in 2003 and 261,941
in 2007. These transfers make it difficult for detainees to have
access to their families and retain legal counsel.
Human Rights Watch (2009, 2–4) has compared the rights
of citizens, as prisoners, to those given to noncitizen detainees.
The Sixth Amendment of the Constitution provides the right to
be tried in the jurisdiction in which a crime occurred. Detainees
are often moved from the district in which they violated im-
migration law and are distant from witnesses and evidence
relevant to their case. Commonly citizen prisoners are not
transferred until they have received access to counsel and been
convicted. Noncitizen detainees can be transferred away from
their attorneys. Citizen prisoners can also be located in a state
or federal locator system, often updated every 24 hours, while
detainees are ‘‘lost’’ with no access. Noncitizen detainees, none-
theless, have a right to access an attorney under international
human rights law.
The detainee-transfer system disrupts attorney-client rela-
tions because lawyers are not informed. ICE expects detainees
to contact attorneys but does not typically provide the means.
Attorneys are then forced to spend days or weeks determining
where their clients are. A distant location can terminate attor-
ney representation. If an attorney agrees to represent a client
over the phone or by video, a particular immigration judge can
deny it. Unfortunately, some detainees are transferred, often to
remote locations, before they have legal representation and are
unable to obtain it. In 2008 60% of noncitizens appeared in im-
migration court without representation (Human Rights Watch
Deportation versus Detainment
79

2009, 4). The legal process is further complicated because detain-
ees are often denied a bond hearing because the transfer pre-
vents family and character witnesses to speak in their defense.
Human Rights Watch (2009) criticizes the transfer system
for preventing detainees from gaining access to an attorney and
receiving their legal rights. ICE cares for hundreds of thousands
of people and argues that it needs to make transfers. It claims
that limitations on its ability to transfer detainees would pre-
vent it from making cost-effective use of access to detention
beds. Requests for change of venue to return to attorneys and
witnesses are most often denied (Human Rights Watch 2009, 5).
Although detainees have the right to a hearing to contest re-
moval, the transfer process often works against it.
An alternative to detention, the former ‘‘catch-and-release’’
policy, involved releasing unauthorized Mexican entrants at a bor-
der crossing into their home country, which led to multiple cross-
ing attempts. Andreas (2000) referred to this as ‘‘border games.’’
Since 2005, Operation Streamline has required first-time undocu-
mented entrants to be detained. This effort began in the high-traffic
border zone of Del Rio, Texas (U.S. Customs and Border Protection
2005), and was extended to Tucson, Arizona, and other sectors
(U.S. Customs and Border Protection 2007). Previously, the first
entry without inspection (EWI) was a misdemeanor that did not
require detention. Currently, a zero-tolerance policy, when avail-
able detention space allows for it, has led to detention of these
migrants for up to 180 days rather than deportation over the bor-
der into Mexico or otherwise returning the migrants.
Critics of this mass-detention policy point out that it gener-
ates massive need for U.S. attorneys, public or pro bono defense
lawyers, federal courthouse space, U.S. marshalls (for prisoner
transport), prison beds, and other resources (Ackleson and
Heyman 2010, 60). Operation Streamline has strained judicial
and detention capacity. A chief judge for the U.S. District Court
for New Mexico reacted to the new operation’s volume of
detainees: ‘‘We were obviously alarmed because where would
we put our bank robbers? Our rapists? Those who violate pro-
bation?’’ (Associated Press 2007). Congressional testimony by
Heather E. Williams, First Assistant Federal Public Defender,
District of Arizona, concluded that ‘‘Operation Streamline may
well be one of the least successful, but most costly and time
consuming ways of discouraging [unauthorized] entries and
re-entries’’ (Hsu 2008).
80
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

It is difficult for Operation Streamline courtrooms to pro-
vide procedural due process and access to legal counsel.
Defendants are arraigned in groups: up to 80 in Del Rio, Texas,
70 in Tucson, and 20 in El Paso (Lydgate 2010, 12). In 2009, the
Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals ruled that mass proceedings in
Tucson violate Federal Court Rule 11 procedures of due process
before a guilty plea can be accepted. These rules include a per-
sonal address for the defendant and making sure that he or she
understands constitutional rights are being waived and the plea
is voluntary. Alternate procedures are being implemented in
Tucson, and other districts are not yet impacted.
The end of the catch-and-release policy in 2006 raised
detention costs. The states are supposed to be paid by the fed-
eral State Criminal Assistance (SCAP) program for detention
costs, but they are not fully reimbursed. Unauthorized immi-
gration has serious financial impacts on 24 counties located on
the U.S.-Mexico border. From 1999 through 2006, the 24 U.S.-
Mexico border counties reported $1.23 billion in law enforce-
ment expenditures for processing unauthorized migrants with
criminal charges (U.S.-Mexico Border Counties Coalition 2008).
In FY 2006, $192 million was expended. In 2006, the SCAP pro-
gram federal appropriation was $400 million and the 24 border
counties received $4.7 million. This raises serious cost implica-
tions for U.S.-Mexico border counties receiving an increased
detention population.
One reason that the United States often released Mexican
migrants to Mexico after apprehension was the monumental
size of the task of detention. Because the border-deterrence
strategy funnels migrants rather than discouraging them for
attempting entry, the end of the catch-and-release policy has
meant that the federal government does not have enough
detention space and is having a hard time paying for the
expense. The old policy of voluntary departure was cheaper,
although more individuals made multiple attempts until they
succeeded without forfeiting time and earnings to detention.
Human rights organizations have argued that there are
cost-effective alternatives to detention. These include a system
of conditional release and bond or a financial deposit (Amnesty
International 2009). Reporting and electronic monitoring can
cost $12 a day (Detention Watch Network 2009). When alterna-
tives are used, 93% of those apprehended still appear for a
hearing at an immigration court. Congress approved a funding
Deportation versus Detainment
81

increase to explore alternatives but ICE used it to monitor
those eligible for release rather than persons to be detained. At
present, ICE operates two supervised release programs using
electronic bracelets, telephone check-in, home visits, and restricted-
movement guidelines. Electronic monitoring is available through-
out the nation, but it is in limited use. Amnesty International
(2009) believes that individuals should only be detained if it is
established that it is necessary and proportional after consider-
ing alternative measures. Further, it argues that electronic mon-
itors should not be placed on people who are not security or
flight risks.
At the end of the Bush presidency, ICE released new deten-
tion standards for staff-detainee communication. The Obama
administration has responded to criticism of immigrant detention
by creating an Office of Detention Policy and Planning in ICE and
increasing federal oversight. DHS will move away from a decen-
tralized, jail-oriented approach. This would reestablish a right
eroded by the process of criminalization and securitization of im-
migration and require further change in law. DHS detention
reforms include new oversight of contracted detention facilities,
using detention in relation to risk, expanding alternatives to
detention, and improving medical care in detention.
The prosecution and detention of individuals in the United
States without authorization are projected to deter new migrants.
Conservatives such as Rep. James Sensenbrenner (R-WI) have
argued for stronger sanctions against unauthorized migrants,
but human rights activists are concerned that the detention sys-
tem denies detainee rights and is not operated humanely. While
the most recent increase in detention involves migrants appre-
hended in the U.S.-Mexico border region, asylum applicants
and unauthorized immigrants apprehended in the interior are
also being held. The pressure to prevent terrorism and prob-
lems in having border arrivals who are not authorized to stay
present themselves before an immigration court with ‘‘abscond-
ing’’ have generated mass detention.
Border Conditions
The U.S.-Mexico border region is marked by poverty and lower
levels of education than in the interior (Anderson and Gerber
2007). Overall, the region has higher levels of unemployment
82
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

than in the rest of the United States. The degree of poverty
increases from west to east as one travels from the affluent city
of San Diego, California, east across to Texas, ending at the
city of Brownsville, Texas. Economic differences between the
American and Mexican sister cities are less than between com-
parable American and Mexican cities of the interior of these
two nations. The Mexican border cities tend to be relatively bet-
ter off than the Mexican interior.
There are five major U.S.-Mexico sister cities: (1) San Diego
and Tijuana, Baja California; (2) El Paso and Ciudad Juarez,
Chihuahua;
(3)
Brownsville
and
Matamoros,
Tamaulipas;
(4) Laredo, Texas, and Nuevo Laredo, Tamaulipas; and (5)
McAllen, Texas, and Reynosa, Tamaulipas. U.S.-Mexico border
cities function as trade routes and ports of entry with trade
bridges. The railways were important in the development of
trade to the interior, and NAFTA greatly increased the eco-
nomic significance of these cities for both countries (Anderson
and Gerber 2007). The desire to avoid customs levies means
that smuggling for the black market is important. For example,
Mexico has a tariff on used clothing, but much ‘‘ropa’’ is taken
into Mexico with the cooperation of corrupt Mexican border
guards. Regarding economic fluctuations, the border cities
are typically more impacted than the interior. U.S. Border cities
experience declines in Mexican consumer purchases when
there are peso devaluations or Mexican layoffs in American-
owned factories when the United States is experiencing a
recession.
Crime and Human Rights Violations
On the U.S.-Mexico border and in the interior, ‘‘criminal aliens’’
have been represented in the media as a security threat
involved in the drug trade and violent crime (Dell’Agnese 2005;
Mains 2004). In contrast, national crime trends indicate that
immigrant destination cities have lower violent crime rates
(Martinez 2006, 12). Sociologist Ruben Rumbaut and his col-
leagues (2006b, 70) analyzed 2000 U.S. Census data to deter-
mine that foreign-born immigrant men between age 18 and 39
were half as likely as similarly situated non-Hispanic native-
born men and thirteen times less likely than African American
native-born men to be incarcerated in federal or state prisons
Crime and Human Rights Violations
83

and local jails. Nevertheless, incarceration rates for the native-
born second generation were four times that of the foreign men
regardless of level of education.
Rumbaut and colleagues (2006, 73) state:
The finding that incarceration rates are much lower
among immigrant men than the national norm, despite
their lower levels of education and minority status, but
increase significantly among their co-ethnics by the sec-
ond generation, suggest that the process of ‘‘American-
ization’’ leads to downward mobility and increased
rates of involvement with the criminal justice system
among a significant segment of this population.
The policy implication is that the nation needs to oversee and
invest in the development of the second-generation offspring of
immigrants. Progressives view investment in immigrant educa-
tion and services, rather than the criminal justice system, as
more cost-effective.
Research results on immigrant crime trends in U.S. border
cities are contrary to public belief about the connection between
unauthorized immigration and crime. Matthew Lee (2003)
found that Latino immigrant neighborhoods in El Paso and San
Diego had lower homicide rates. Factors associated with homi-
cide included poverty, joblessness, and residential instability—
all factors associated with social disorganization. Jacob Stow-
ell’s (2007) statistical research found that immigrants of varied
national origin were less likely to commit violent crime but that
immigrant groups living in high-crime impoverished neighbor-
hoods had an increased violent crime rate.
The U.S. border cities have been ranked among the 50
safest in the United States (Albuquerque 2007, 77). Looking at
crime rates from 1996 to 2001, Pedro H. Albuquerque states,
Cities on the American side of the border have experi-
enced impressive reductions of homicide rates from
peak levels, which were significantly larger than the
reductions observed in most American cities outside
the border region; for example, four border cities saw
reductions of homicide rates varying from 72.3 to
73.1%, comparable therefore with the famed New York
City reduction of 73.6%.
84
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

Overall, both violent crime and property crime rates in the five
American border cities have fallen since the 1990s and were
lower than median city rates, although larceny theft increased
in Brownsville, Laredo, and McAllen (Albuquerque 2007). In the
border region itself, the rate of property crime among minors
is impacted by special conditions (Richardson and Resendez
2006). The demand for vehicles in Mexico promotes auto theft
and shoplifting is an attractive source of criminal income.
Mexican twin-city homicide rates are higher than on the U.S.
side. From 1985 to 2001, prior to development of drug-cartel vio-
lence, Mexican twin cities’ homicide rate declined relative to the
countrywide Mexican rate. Albuquerque’s (2007) analysis of crime
data indicates that U.S. Border Patrol line-watch hours reduce
homicide rates in Mexican border cities. From 1985 to 2004, line-
watch hours increased 370%. Rodriguez makes a conservative sta-
tistical estimate that 991 lives may have been saved in Mexican
border cities and an optimistic estimate that 2, 371 lives were saved
(Albuquerque 2007, 76, 86). Nevertheless, escalating drug related
violence has greatly increased homicide in Mexican border cities.
The higher population density in Mexican cities is a structural
factor contributing to the homicide rate. Mexican cities may have
higher homicide rates, due to severe problems with organized crime
and institutional inefficiencies such as lack of training and law
enforcement corruption. The Comision para Asuntos de la Frontera
Norte (2002, as cited in Albuquerque 2007) indicates that drug traf-
ficking, arms smuggling, chaotic urban growth, low civic participa-
tion, and a ‘‘culture of impunity’’ increase crime. Mexican twin-city
homicide rates have a moderate spillover effect on American border
cities. Albuquerque found that a 10% increase in Mexican homicide
rate correlated with a 2% increase in twin-city homicide rate
(Albuquerque 2007, 83). Through the first decade of the 21st century,
relatively little spillover violence has occurred (Lake et. al., 2010).
The concept of impunity is important in understanding vio-
lent Mexican crime. To act with impunity means to have no con-
cern for the consequences. The weakness of the Mexican police
fosters lawless, violent behavior. In the border city of Ciudad
Juarez, Mexico, the repeat rape, mutilation, and killing of young
Mexican women, many of whom work in factories (maquiladoras),
is of great concern. Since 1993 over 400 women have been mur-
dered in what has been described as femicide. The institutional
ineffectiveness of Mexican law enforcement is illustrated by the
loss of murder reports and evidence, mysterious case closings or
Crime and Human Rights Violations
85

‘‘solutions,’’ and the fact that the number killed changes with the
Mexican political party in power (Staudt 2008b, 33).
Various theories attempt to explain the murder and abandon-
ment of young women’s bodies in the desert. These include multi-
ple serial killers or gangs, drug traffickers having sport, ‘‘sons of
the rich,’’ sex trafficking, snuff films produced for U.S. citizens,
and even the black market in organs. International and Mexican
human rights organizations have tracked a situation in which jus-
tice is elusive. Kathleen Staudt points to activism against violence
against women as a partial answer for reducing femicide (2008b,
1–2, 13). She views the homicides as related to a gendered culture
of violence against women on both sides of the border.
Sensational media stories represent U.S. and Mexican bor-
der communities as war zones heavily impacted by unauthor-
ized migrant crossings. Realistically, migrants attempting to
enter must use stealth and do not visibly enter into the daily life
of most border citizens. Border violence is associated with the
peril of crossing without documents from Mexico. Migrants
who cross the Rio Grande in Texas face robbery and rape by
bandits (Richardson and Resendez 2006). For example, Richard-
son interviewed Rodolfo about his experiences in crossing the
Rio Grande with his pregnant wife, Rosario:
‘‘It was around seven in the evening,’’ he says, ‘‘and
we had just crossed the river. We had not even fin-
ished getting dressed, when out of nowhere came
three guys. Two of them had knives and the other said
he had a gun. They threatened us and demanded
money. When we explained to them that we had
almost no money, they got mad and began verbally
harassing my wife. Since she was five months preg-
nant, I started defending her. This made matters worse
because they started to beat me up. My wife was
screaming hysterically and I was afraid to fight back
because they were armed. The only thing that mat-
tered to me was the baby’s well-being. When they
were finally satisfied that we had given them all we
had, they left, taking all of our belongings, including
some of the clothing we were wearing. I was badly
beaten and Rosario was shaking and crying. To top it
all, we were half naked. We finally had the strength to
86
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

make it up the nearest street, where, because of our
appearance, we were picked up by immigration. Since
we did not have any documents, they returned us to
Reynosa [Mexico]. Fortunately, they provided us with
food, clothing and medical attention. I was grateful for
that.’’
The Mexican bandits know that unauthorized crossers are
unlikely to risk contacting law enforcement to report their vic-
timization. These crimes may only be detected if migrants are
apprehended by the Border Patrol. The smugglers are not trust-
worthy and may set up the migrants, robbing them and taking
their possessions.
Petty property crime such as stealing food for survival from
homes and trespassing is common in remote rural areas where
unauthorized migrants are trekking overland (Hagan and
Pallioni 1999). These crimes are acts of desperation as the
migrants may be thirsty and starving. Arizona ranchers and rural
residents have repeatedly experienced this as a result of the
diversion of migrants from urban crossing areas by fences and
line watching. Unfortunately, refuse such as plastic water jugs
and bags litters the desert, and grazing land is damaged by the
foot traffic and refuse. Residences have been burglarized for basic
staples, and trespassing on private land is frequent. Some ranch-
ers become vigilantes and migrant shootings have occurred.
As border enforcement has intensified, the number of inci-
dents of violence against U.S. Border Patrol officers has esca-
lated. In FY2005, there were 773 attacks on USBP agents and in
FY2008 1,097 occured (Nunez-Nieto 2008, 28–29). These incidents
included being fired at, rocking, and being doused with a flam-
mable liquid and set ablaze. ‘‘Rocking’’ refers to when individu-
als on the Mexican side of the border throw rocks and other
items at U.S. Border Patrol agents and their vehicles (Haddal,
Kim, and Garcia 2009). As a result, the fenced area of the Yuma
sector uses armored vehicles for patrol. U.S. Border Patrol agents
prefer open view fencing, such as more easily compromised
chain link to less costly concrete, because they can limit rockings
and have a tactical advantage for apprehensions.
Migrant apprehensions often number over 1 million per
year; and, historically, immigration enforcement is primarily non-
violent. The concentration of drug trafficking at the U.S.-Mexico
Crime and Human Rights Violations
87

border in zones where migrants may be attempting to cross
exposes the USBP to violent incidents, although migrants and
especially smugglers have been occasionally reported to engage
in violent acts.
Policing organizations are often accused of using undue
force on suspects or violating their rights, and the U.S. Border
Patrol is no exception. Immigrant advocacy and social justice
groups have documented what would be termed human rights
abuses under international law and violations of the U.S. Con-
stitution. There are documented incidents of illegal search of
people and property (Seltzer and Korous 1998). Abuse includes
verbal, psychological, and physical violence. Migrants have
been deliberately deprived of food and water, refused medical
attention, and tortured. There have been incidents of assault,
battery, and murder. Human rights and immigrant advocates
state that migrant interrogation routinely involves verbal abuse
and threats. Mexicans and Central Americans are humiliated
and intimidated. Much of this abuse is never reported by the
vulnerable migrant population.
An immigrant advocate research (Huspeck, Martinez, and
Jiminez 1998) found that 24% of encounters with USBP agents
involved psychological abuse. Of migrants, 13% were physi-
cally abused and 13% were sexually assaulted. As migrants
may be carrying personal property, at the minimum—food,
water, and clothing—theft or destruction of their goods has
occurred. This was documented for 9% of cases. Racial and eth-
nic profiling is discriminatory but this immigrant advocacy
research found that 24% of the migrant arrests investigated
were based on ethnic physical appearance, and the number
may be underestimated.
The USBP, like other policing organizations, enters into life-
threatening situations due to the intrusion of drug traffickers
into the migrant routes. U.S. Border Patrol officers’ lives may be
on the line, and they can make poorly thought out decisions in
the heat of the moment. U.S.-Mexico border-crossing zones are
becoming dangerous and violent places. Sometimes officers
quickly decide to use force when suspects are not trying to flee.
Harm can be prevented through training and safety programs.
The militarization of the U.S. border and media representa-
tions have hardened public views of ‘‘illegal immigrants.’’ American
citizens and many border residents stereotype unauthorized
crossers as invaders and criminals (Chavez 2009, 89–94). Since
88
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

2000, civilian watch groups have formed because of a concern
that border-control efforts are insufficient. Using weapons and
surveillance technology, the Minutemen, Ranch Rescue, and the
American
Border
Patrol
have
monitored
undocumented
migrants trying to cross in rural areas. Watch-group members
view these migrants as criminals, enemies, and a national secu-
rity threat (Kil and Menjivar 2006). In reaction, immigrants have
called them ‘‘migrant hunters.’’ Jim Gilchrist (2006) of the Min-
uteman Project stresses that the ‘‘Minuteman volunteers only
observe and report; they do not chase or confront. . . . There has
never been a violent incident initiated by volunteers.’’
President George W. Bush (2005) labeled the citizen volun-
teers as vigilantes, stating, ‘‘I am against vigilantes in the
United States. I am for enforcing the law in a rational way.
That’s why you got a Border Patrol, and they ought to be in
charge of enforcing the border.’’ Many civilian watch-group
members have active or past memberships in nationally organ-
ized racist groups. The Department of Justice has categorized
the American Patrol as a ‘‘hate group,’’ and their alleged hate
crimes are being documented by the Southern Poverty Law
Center (Buchanan and Kim 2006). The Minutemen have been
viewed firing shots, loosing biting dogs, assaulting with a flash-
light, and kicking and verbally harassing migrants while taking
them prisoner, which is illegal but tolerated. As a result of the
presence of racists in citizen watch groups, many progressives
have labeled them as vigilantes.
Ranchers in the U.S.-Mexico border region have endorsed
the activities of civilian watch groups and engage in their own
offensive and defensive actions against migrants who may tres-
pass and even damage their property. Arizonan Roger Barnett
has a 22,000-acre cattle ranch located one mile from the
Mexican border. Undocumented migrants frequently come onto
the land with smugglers in large groups or in small parties on
their own. He alleges that men patrolling his ranch have
reported over 14,000 undocumented migrants to the U.S. Border
Patrol and intercepted drug shipments. Barnett has stated, ‘‘It’s
time we take our country back’’ (Barnetts Arizona.com 2009).
Barnett and his brother Donald are alleged to have held
migrants at gunpoint, chased after them in all-terrain vehicles,
and used dogs to attack them (Buchanan and Kim 2006). In the
Morales incident, a Mexican American father and three girls
were fired upon. Frustrated at Cochise County’s lack of action,
Crime and Human Rights Violations
89

the Southern Poverty Law Center, a human rights group, took
Barnett to civil court on charges of assault, intentionally inflict-
ing emotional distress, and false imprisonment (Buchanan
2007). Attorneys for the Morales family alleged that the incident
caused the Morales’ three girls to suffer post-traumatic stress
disorder. After deliberation, the jury found for the plaintiff and
awarded $99,000 in damages.
Concern exists about whether citizen watch-group mem-
bers will harm unauthorized entrants. Shawna Forde, the leader
of American Minuteman Defense, a Washington State citizen
group that patrols the border, and two other individuals are
suspected of attempting a home invasion in Aravaca, Arizona
(McKinley and Wollan 2009). A man and a child were killed in
what has been called an attempt to gain money and drugs to
finance vigilantism. Suspects were charged with first-degree
murder, assault, and burglary. There has been disagreement
among citizen watch-groups, and while some merely monitor
the border, others advocate more confrontational tactics. Forde
has been linked to both the Minuteman Project and the Federa-
tion for American Immigration Reform because of appearances
in Washington State at which she appeared listed as a speaker
for these groups.
The Minuteman Project and other border watch groups have
been successful in gaining media attention for issues of bor-
der security. Whether they have any major impact on unauthor-
ized border crossing is disputed. California governor Arnold
Schwarzenegger (Associated Press 2005) considered that the
groups ‘‘cut down the crossing of illegal immigrants by a huge
percentage.’’ Nevertheless, it is difficult to locate accurate statis-
tics that can untangle their impact from that of the U.S. Border
Patrol. Like the U.S. Border Patrol, citizen watch-groups may
deter migrants from crossing where they are located but divert
them to other, less patrolled areas.
U.S.-Mexico Border Migrant Deaths
A disturbing consequence of the southern border deterrent strat-
egy has been unprecedented increases in border migrant cross-
ing deaths. Wayne Cornelius found that, from 1994 to 2004,
2,978 border migrants died. Cornelius (2006, 784) indicates: ‘‘To
put this death toll in perspective, the fortified U.S. border with
90
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

Mexico has been more than ten times deadlier to migrants from
Mexico during the last nine years than the Berlin Wall was to
East Germans throughout its twenty-eight year existence.’’
A funnel effect (Garcia-Goldsmith et al. 2007) due to inten-
sified border enforcement in California and Texas essentially
diverted migrant crossing attempts to Arizona. One thousand
deaths are estimated to have occurred in Arizona, and this is
only a count of bodies that were found. Deaths cannot be fully
counted because of the remoteness of this desert and mountain-
ous region. The GAO (2006) indicated that Arizona was the site
of 78% of increased migrant deaths. Sadly, over 80% of those
killed were under the age of 40 and there has been an increase
in deaths of individuals under 18.
Three primary causes of migrant death are exposure-heat
(35%), drowning (21%), and motor-vehicle accidents (11%)
(Guerette 2007a). Deterring migrants from crossing in urban
areas sent them toward the hot southwestern deserts where
water sources are scarce and it is easy to get lost. Drowning
occurs in Texas along the Rio Grande River or in California’s
Colorado River. Both riverine systems are connected to irriga-
tion works, and migrants may drown when an area is suddenly
flooded.
Migrant deaths were first recognized as a major issue in
1998 (Eschbach, Hagan, and Rodriguez 1999) when the United
States and Mexico agreed on the Border Safety Initiative (BSI).
This is a joint effort to alert migrants about crossing risks, to
organize rescue in remote, high-risk regions, and to seek to ar-
rest smugglers and human traffickers. BSI is a harm-reduction
method for border policing (Guerette 2007b). The plan has
four elements: (1) public media campaigns in Mexico about
the risks of border crossing and the posting of signage about
risks in remote border-crossing areas; (2) Border Search,
Trauma, and Rescue (BORSTAR) teams; (3) U.S. Border Patrol
training in search-and-rescue methods; and (4) data analysis
to determine areas of highest risk to migrants. One example of
a BSI initiative is the placing of high towers with strobes that
have a button for stranded migrants to call for rescue (Sapotka
et al. 2006). Unmanned drones also search for migrants in
need of rescue.
Immigration reform has not resulted in any alleviation of
pressures to migrate in Mexico. As a result, situational crime
prevention has been proposed as a way to reduce mortality
U.S.-Mexico Border Migrant Deaths
91

(Clarke 1997; Guerette 2007a). Warning migrants with a hazard-
ous condition alert system and placing Spanish and English
warning signs are two measures to deter crossing at specific sites.
For example, a weather warning system could prevent death
events.
U.S. citizens have been dismayed at the increasing migrant
death rate. Volunteer groups have maintained water stations and
watched from airplanes for distressed migrants. The U.S. govern-
ment has allowed these groups to operate and taken notice of
the increased deaths. Humane Borders founder Reverend Robin
Hoover believes that the Border Patrol ‘‘cannot encourage death.
[The Border Patrol is] losing the P.R. war. . . . Their only other
option is to say: ‘We like death, let’s have some more’ ’’ (quoted
in Scharf 2006, 167).
Rights of Immigrants and
Suspected Terrorists
After the World Trade Center was destroyed, many nations
faced difficult decisions about how to balance the rights of indi-
viduals with the need for security. Both U.S. citizens and per-
manent resident aliens were subject to a loss of constitutional
rights in the name of security. The events of 9/11 introduced
issues of electronic eavesdropping and warrantless surveillance
that gave the law enforcement system and government unprec-
edented power.
Ultimately, a borderless world is turned on itself when secu-
rity does not stop at the border but encompasses everyone. The
U.S. Constitution gives citizens the right to privacy. After 9/11
the USA PATRIOT Act and the Presidential Directives of George
W. Bush (2001–2009) cut back on these rights to fight the War on
Terror. This program was later extended by the Protect America
Act of 2007. The Bill of Rights affords individuals the right to
privacy and necessitates warrants for search and seizure. The
crime control orientation of counterterrorist initiatives resulted
in the suspension of privacy rights to ostensibly track terrorist
organizations’ financing and money laundering and produced
warrantless searches for information that would ordinarily violate
the Fourth Amendment to the Constitution. Warrantless surveil-
lance included electronic eavesdropping.
92
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

The United States spends billions per year on surveillance.
Electronic eavesdropping and wiretapping allow the govern-
ment potential access to terrorist conversations when attacks
are being plotted. Nevertheless, the government has been able
to listen to any phone call made in the United States, which
means that citizens are under surveillance without their con-
sent. In 2005 the New York Times released a story to the effect
that the National Security Administration was listening to bil-
lions of phone calls, emails, cellular and other communication
(Risen and Licthblau 2005). This news led to the warrantless
surveillance controversy, congressional investigation, and major
lawsuits. The Protect America Act of 2007 extended the provi-
sions for unrestricted communications access for the govern-
ment. President Barack Obama has supported the continued
operation of these information sweeps.
Because of the volume of communication, the government
indicates that it is focused on monitoring terrorism suspects,
which may protect citizens to a degree. Regardless, the Office
of the Inspector General (OIG 2009) issued an unclassified
report indicating that the monumental wiretapping project,
while expensive, has uncovered little of value. Presumably
much of this information is classified and difficult to evaluate
for efficacy. One of the known cases of its use is that of former
governor of New York Elliot Spitzer, who was found to have
patronized prostitutes in a wiretapping operation, and that cer-
tainly was not terrorist activity. The program continues, as in
August 2008, the U.S. Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Court of
Review found the 2007 Protect America Act to be constitutional.
The constitutionality of this program is likely to be further
debated and decided in the courts.
After 9/11 the NSEERS program was used to round up
Arab Muslim men. Those who had overstayed their visas or
where otherwise unauthorized were summarily deported. This
was done in the name of fighting terrorism, but only one con-
viction occurred: Felix Padilla, a U.S. citizen. Despite this lack
of productive findings, the suspension of rights resulted in a
practice that had previously been declared unconstitutional
by the Supreme Court: indefinite detention. Arabic and/or
Muslim foreign-born men were held indefinitely—often prior to
deportation—after a series of sweeps. At present, all immigrants
entering the United States who request political asylum are
detained. For those whose application is turned down, but refuse
Rights of Immigrants and Suspected Terrorists
93

a return to their homeland, the possibility of indefinite detention
looms. Foreign nationals from 25 countries designated as terrorist-
harboring nations now face additional scrutiny if trying to enter.
Foreign students are monitored and U.S. consulates are free to
turn down visitation or immigration applications if they find an
individual’s background suspicious.
The War on Terror was a response to immense deficits in
intelligence that left the federal government unaware of exactly
who had exited the country (Eldridge et al. 2004). The unau-
thorized population, estimated to have peaked at 12 million,
represented an unknown in terms of terrorist threat. The initial
response in registering noncitizens from nations labeled as
sponsoring terrorists was a reaction to a massive failure in intel-
ligence and recordkeeping. The stringent measures undertaken
have potentially harmful consequences for the U.S. economy.
Politicians
and
academicians
have
predicted
that
the
‘‘Global War on Terror’’ may last indefinitely. This war is based
on intelligence, law enforcement, and improvement in home-
land security defenses. As an enemy, terrorists are difficult to
strategize, and progress cannot be easily measured. The task of
preventing terrorism involves air, sea, and the Mexican and
Canadian land borders. The focus on the southern border and
arrest and detention of Mexican and Central American unau-
thorized migrants moves the focus from terrorists to mass
enforcement of immigration law (Heyman and Ackleson 2010).
U.S. border security has been enhanced, but there have been
tradeoffs from the War on Terror impacting the vitality of the
economy and foreign relations. International immigration of the
most educated and talented suffered setbacks (Alden 2008) and
only slowly recovered over time. Critics of how homeland secu-
rity has been managed maintain that it is wrong to conflate
counterterrorism with immigration enforcement. Zero tolerance
of risk can have harsh consequences for the functioning of inter-
national trade and managing the process of legal immigration.
The United States was unprepared for the 9/11 terrorist
attacks, but it implemented a securitization regime that many
view as draconian. The overall policy of deterrence of unau-
thorized immigration, now characterized by mass arrests and
detention at the southern border, has never been evaluated as a
failure. The public views the Mexican border, rather than the
interior, as the place to deal with both unauthorized entry and
drug trafficking (Heyman and Ackleson 2010). Internal steps to
94
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

reduce the employment of the undocumented and reduce
demand for drugs are minor compared to the outlay to the
south. Josiah Heyman (2008) thinks that a combination of vir-
tual or physical walls and the current mass enforcement policy
is likely to be ineffective.
The Future of Border Control
The achievement of border security by air, land, and sea is a com-
plicated task (Lake, 2007, 3–4). It involves five different missions
which are difficult to coordinate. First, it involves discovery and
interdiction of terrorists attempting entry or smuggling weapons
of mass destruction from abroad. Second, border law enforcement
seeks to interdict unauthorized migrants, smuggled goods, and
terrorists. Third, interior law enforcement is used to control unau-
thorized immigration, confiscate contraband, and interdict terro-
rists. Fourth, the protection of people and critical infrastructure all
over the United States is monitored. Fifth, it includes an element
of emergency preparation and response to terrorist attack or natu-
ral disaster.
It is difficult to balance the need for rapid flow of legitimate
people and goods with guarding against transnational threats.
Smugglers and terrorists seek to embed themselves in this traffic
or to cross themselves or illicit goods in remote, less secure ways
away from ports of entry. Examining all of the different processes
for authorized border entry by air, land, and sea is a major step
towards understanding current efforts to securitize the borders
and what is needed in the future. Providing security at the borders
involves governmental agencies, foreign governments, and private
individuals. Each situation at a land, air, or sea border necessitates
a fine-tuned strategy. One emergent effort has been to ‘‘move the
border’’ to the countries in which individual travel and shipment
of goods originate (Lake 2007). This is done by initiating clearance
procedures at United States consulates and international ports of
departure. Another strategy has been to harden the border
through hiring more agents, using high technology, and getting as-
sistance from the military. This is referred to as the militarization
of the border and has been critiqued. One unanticipated conse-
quence is increased attacks on U.S. Border Patrol officers.
Globalization changes the tactics and organization of groups
which are transnational threats. The response to transnational
The Future of Border Control
95

threats is increasingly complicated by the interchangeability of
criminal networks. Trafficking networks may form ties with terro-
rists and can switch from smuggling drugs to weapons. Those
who provide fraudulent documents to migrants who seek to enter
to work could potentially sell them to terrorists. Transnational
criminal organizations are becoming sophisticated and flexible.
The loose horizontal linkage between specialist groups in criminal
organizations facilitates shifting activities and makes it more diffi-
cult for international and border law enforcement to apprehend
criminals. One of the crucial needs will be to develop bilateral
and multilateral policing cooperation because deterring transna-
tional threats will involve actions in more than one country. If the
joint involvement of federal agents and state or local police can be
viewed as a ‘‘force multiplier,’’ then efforts to engage foreign gov-
ernments, their internal police forces, and international policing
agencies are key to dealing with transnational threats. Interpol,
Europol, and intelligence sharing with many countries will facili-
tate prevention of terrorist plots.
After the 9/11 attacks, the cancellation of air flights and
the closure of the Canadian and Mexican borders placed legiti-
mate travel and commerce on hold. U.S. Customs was placed
on high alert and every vehicle or truck was searched, causing
delays of up to twelve hours in crossing the border at crossings
in New York and Michigan (Andreas 2003). This situation gen-
erated major economic losses and negatively impacted the auto
industry and other cross-border industries using just-in-time
shipping for production. On September 13, Daimler-Chrysler
closed a plant, and Ford followed by closing five plants the fol-
lowing week. As a result, border-security policies which rein-
force national security while permitting legitimate traffic across
borders are a goal. These policies are simultaneously evaluated
in terms of how they facilitate legal activities and impede illicit
ones.
Since the 9/11 terrorist attack, many border-security policy
decisions have been made in a climate of uncertainty. These
decisions will have consequences, intended and unintended,
that will take the measure of the United States as a world
power. In an era of globalization, American discussions of bor-
der control externalize the problem as originating from outside.
In short, other nations and groups are represented as caus-
ing the problems. Examination of the many issues of border
security reveals that the issues are inevitably linked: crossing
96
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

borders. The policy decisions which have been made or avoided
by the United States have contributed to current border-
security
problems.
Similarly,
the
policies
of
neighboring
Canada and Mexico impact on border control, and through the
sea and air borders, world policy comes to impact the United
States.
The media and public focus extensively on the U.S.-Mexico
border and undocumented immigration. Fears about terrorists
have led to concerns that terrorists might use the Mexican bor-
der for covert entry. Realistically, known terrorists have primar-
ily used the air borders to transit to the United States (9/11
attacks) or the Canadian border (first World Trade Center
attack, 1993). After the 12-25-2009 failed attempt to explode an
incendiary device on a Northwest Airlines flight into Detroit,
the National Counterterrorism Center has been given authority
to respond to the threat of al-Qaeda attacks by hiring hundreds
of intelligence specialists to join teams to monitor emergent
terrorist plots (Schmidt 2010). White House review found
that no one in the new intelligence bureaucracy had sole author-
ity to interpret disparate intelligence information. This action
occurred in conjunction with tightened airport screening, new
watch-list rules, and increased revocation of permission to fly.
The human right of freedom of movement is increasing chal-
lenged by procedures which make crossing borders a heavily
regulated privilege.
World history is marked by conflict and border disputes as
groups have sought to become more powerful. Although cur-
rent boundaries have been politically designated and geospa-
tially
mapped,
the
desire
of
individuals
for
freedom
of
movement is in conflict with ideals of sovereign control of terri-
tory. The Department of Homeland Security, and particularly
the U.S. Border Patrol, have been viewed as the key to border
security despite the range of land, sea, and air borders. Control
of unauthorized immigration, particularly at the southern bor-
der, is a major federal expense, and current border-control
strategies are subject to criticism. David Carafano and Heyman
(2004) consider, ‘‘U.S. border operations are likely to fail
regardless of what security (e.g., manpower and fences) is
added because in the months and years required to implement
new means of security, the hundreds of thousands seeking to
enter the United States will find ways to circumvent these
measures.’’
The Future of Border Control
97

The classic criminological theory of deterrence makes the
case that increased level of punishment and risk of being
caught will reduce traditional criminal behavior. The southern
border strategy has emphasized ‘‘prevention through deter-
rence.’’ Deterrence has involved continual expansion of the U.S.
Border Patrol, increasing walls and fencing in traditional urban
crossing zones, building new fortified checkpoints above the
border, placing expensive high-technology sensing devices, and
mounting special operations. The U.S. Congress is committed
to both the building of an expensive border fence and the fur-
ther development of electronic surveillance systems.
Lou Dobbs (2007), former CNN journalist and news anchor,
has stated: ‘‘We cannot reform immigration law until we control
immigration, and we cannot control immigration until we con-
trol our borders and our ports.’’ In this regard, his views are in
line with those in the House of Representatives who supported
2007 border-security bills and resisted legalization. Proposed
comprehensive immigration reform legislation contains provi-
sions for increased border enforcement and a legalization pro-
gram to deal with unauthorized immigrants in the interior.
Another issue is increasing visas for unskilled workers as a way
of reducing demand for unauthorized workers.
One way of measuring the success of border interdiction
is to look at control of unauthorized entry. Mexico is the
primary source of undocumented immigrants in the United
States. Douglas Massey (2009) has testified to the Senate Sub-
committee on Border Security, Immigration, and Citizenship
that Mexican Migration Institute data indicates that the proba-
bility of making initial unauthorized entry into the United
States has decreased since 1990 and the probability of making
subsequent trips after return to Mexico has declined since
2000. These decreases occurred regardless of the current bor-
der buildup.
Intensified enforcement did increase the costs of unauthor-
ized crossing involving smugglers from $600 to $2,200 in con-
stant dollars. Mexicans responded to the increased cost and risk
of death of border crossing by staying in the United States.
Massey (2009) indicates that between 1980 and 2005, the proba-
bility of returning to Mexico within 12 months of unauthorized
entry decreased by more than half. The odds of apprehension
did not rise and successful border migrants stayed longer and
chose settlement. Massey states, ‘‘It was because of a decline in
98
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

return migration and not an increase in entry from Mexico that
the undocumented population ballooned during the 1990s’’
(Massey 2009).
Intensified
border
enforcement
and
increased
interior
deportations have coincided with a small decline in the size of
the undocumented population (Passel and Cohn 2008). Never-
theless, Massey believes that it also reflects a decline in labor
demand. The 2007–2009 recession in the United States increased
unemployment, but settled Mexican migrants have not re-
turned. Simultaneously, the federal government quietly pro-
vided a legal means for unskilled Mexican workers to come.
Massey indicates, ‘‘According to official data, the number of
temporary legal workers entering from Mexico rose from 3,300
in 1980 to 361,000 in 2008, rivaling numbers last seen during
the Bracero Program [a Mexican guest-worker program] of the
late 1960s’’ (Massey 2009).
He continues, ‘‘Mexican migration is not and has never been
out of control. It rises and falls with labor demand and if legiti-
mate avenues for entry are available, migrants enter legally.’’
This sentiment was shared by former Secretary of Homeland
Security Michael Chertoff (2008), who commented, ‘‘If the econ-
omy suddenly changes in the next year or two and particularly
if a differential between the economy in other countries and the
U.S. becomes more marked, yes, that is going to probably en-
courage some more people to try to come across.’’
The process of criminalization of immigration has added
the threat of detention and deportation to the risk faced by
unauthorized entrants. The securitization of immigration policy
involves adding new controls to the legal process of entry into the
United States. Media have fostered fear of terrorism and xenopho-
bic fear of new immigrants. Because of political and public em-
phasis on border control as a means to prevent unauthorized
immigration and terrorist entry, it is unlikely that research on
the unintended consequences of the southern border strategy,
such as increased migrant deaths, will end the staffing and
high-technology buildup of enforcement. There is humanitarian
concern about the increase in deaths of unauthorized migrants
who attempt to cross in harsh and remote regions of the U.S.-
Mexico border connected to urban line-watch U.S. Border Patrol
Operations such as Operation Gatekeeper.
Jeb Bush, Thomas S. McLarty III, and Edward Alden (2009)
consider ‘‘Getting immigration policy right is fundamental to
The Future of Border Control
99

[U.S.] national interests—our economic vitality, our diplomacy
and our national security.’’ The deep divisions within both the
Republican and Democratic parties indicate that immigration
reform will not be easily achieved. Proponents of legalization
are criticized as attempting ‘‘amnesty,’’ giving something for
nothing to ‘‘lawbreakers.’’ Although this solution would bring
the cooperation of undocumented immigrants, the scale of the
effort is considered more than U.S. Citizenship and Immigra-
tion Services (USCIS) could handle without a massive increase
in staffing and reorganization.
Few stop to think about the consequences of attempting to
remove the unauthorized population, estimated at almost 11.3
million. ICE deports approximately 300,000 per year. Human
and civil rights issues could back up the courts as many ‘‘mixed
status’’ (legal and unauthorized) families have U.S.-born chil-
dren whose lives would be disrupted. Beyond these concerns
are the citizens who ‘‘aided’’ these undocumented immigrants:
their employers, service providers such as landlords, and their
friends. The U.S. citizens involved in this situation have never
been implicated in any solution except for businesses, if they
are asked to undertake more fool-proof employment verifica-
tion such as e-verify.
The question of whether it is possible to fully control the
borders is seldom raised. Particular problems, such as unau-
thorized immigration, first led to attempts to control land and
sea borders followed by the challenge of protecting the passen-
gers of the air. Terrorism connected the immigration issue to
one encompassing security at all land, sea, and air routes of
entrance. Perhaps the size of the problem automatically leads to
focusing on one issue at a time such as Mexican migration. Yet
a broader view of how nation-states interconnect is developing
in the 21st century. Regarding the massive investment in multi-
ple methods of border control, Edward Alden (2008, 291)
believes: ‘‘managing the risk of terrorism means exactly what it
says, which is accepting that there are risks and that the conse-
quences of trying to eliminate all those risks are worse than
learning how to live with them.’’
The way forward in dealing with a climate of risk involves a
new style of international negotiation and ties. Ackleson (2009,
344) states that: ‘‘most scholars agree that security in both Canada
and the United States can be increased, not only through
new domestic policies but also through increased multilateral
100
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

cooperation.’’ He emphasizes rediscovering common ground and
rebuilding trust and mutual confidence. The infrastructure of the
northern border is outdated, and there is a need to invest in more
bridges, lanes, and crossings to foster trade. Regarding the
Department of Homeland Security, firm leadership is needed.
Although Ackleson believes that development of a North Ameri-
can security perimeter is too controversial, he does advocate for
shared border management. It would include intelligence cooper-
ation, joint law enforcement, and expansion of pre-clearance pro-
grams for the movement of people and goods.
Border control involves preventing unauthorized immigra-
tion, drug smuggling, and terrorist entry. Public focus is on im-
migration and terrorism. Yet former representative Jim Kolbe
(R-AZ) has commented: ‘‘Our intelligence agents will tell you
that there has been no evidence of any serious attempt of terro-
rists to come into the United States through the southern bor-
der’’ (LoMonaco 2005). Regarding the Canadian border, Sen.
Charles Schumer (D-NY) indicates: ‘‘Northern New York has
hundreds of miles of remote land and lakes that straddle the
border with Canada that could easily be crossed by terrorists.
Those wishing to do our nation harm tend to follow the path of
least resistance’’ (LoTemplio 2007). Schumer emphasized the
disparity in staffing and resources between the northern and
the southern borders and blamed the Bush administration for
neglect.
If unauthorized entrance could be controlled by previously
unheard of massification of border enforcement, an employer
verification system immune from fraudulent document use,
and the legalization of the current unauthorized population,
would drug trafficking, arms smuggling, and terrorism become
the focus of U.S.-Mexico border control? The Arizona Republic,
Arizona’s largest newspaper, wrote a front page editorial after
the controversial Arizona immigration law requiring state and
local police to check immigration was passed. It stated: ‘‘Com-
prehensive [immigration] reform will make the border safer.
When migrant labor is channeled through the legal ports of
entry, the Border Patrol can focus on catching drug smugglers
and other criminals instead of chasing busboys across the de-
sert’’ (Arizona Republi 2009). Many voices speak in favor of
fixing a broken immigration system, and resolving transnational
threats such as drug and arms smuggling and terrorism is con-
nected to political cooperation and reform in Washington, DC.
The Future of Border Control
101

References
Ackleson, Jason. 2009. ‘‘From ‘Thin’ to ‘Thick’ (and Back Again?): The
Politics and Policies of the Contemporary U.S.-Canada Border.’’
American Review of Canadian Studies 39(4): 336–351.
Adelman, Howard. 2002. ‘‘Canadian Borders and Immigration Post 9/
11.’’ International Migration Review 36: 15–28.
Albuquerque, Pedro S. 2007. ‘‘Shared Legacies, Disparate Outcomes:
Why American South Border Cities Turned the Tables on Crime and
Their Mexican Sisters Did Not.’’ Crime, Law and Social Change 47: 69–88.
Alden, Edward. 2008. The Closing of the American Border: Terrorism,
Immigration, and Security since 9/11. New York: HarperCollins and the
Counsel on Foreign Relations.
Amnesty International. 2009. ‘‘Jailed Without Justice: Immigrant
Detention in the USA.’’ http://www.amnestyusa.org/uploads/
JailedWithoutJustice.pdf.
Anderson, Joan, and James Gerber. 2007. ‘‘Introduction.’’ In Fifty Years
of Change on the U.S.-Mexico Border, ed. Joan Anderson and James
Gerber, 1–12. Austin: University of Texas Press.
Andreas, Peter. 2000. Border Games: Policing the U.S.-Mexico Divide.
Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
Andreas, Peter. 2003. ‘‘A Tale of Two Borders: The U.S.-Canada and
U.S.-Mexico Lines After 9–11.’’ In The Rebordering of North America,
ed. Peter Andreas and thomas J. Biersteker. New York: Routledge.
Andreas, Peter and Ethan Nadelman. 2008. Policing the Globe:
Criminalization and Crime Control in International Relations. New York:
Oxford University Press.
Archibold, Randal C. 2009. ‘‘Border Plan Will Address Harm Done at Fence
Site.’’ New York Times, January 16. http://www.nytimes.com/2009/01/17/us/.
Archibold, Randal C. 2010a. ‘‘In Wake of Immigration Law: Calls for
an Economic Boycott of Arizona.’’ New York Times, April 26. http://
www.nytimes.com/2010/04/27/us/27arizona.html.
Archibold, Randal C. 2010b. ‘‘U.S.’s Toughest Immigration Law Is
Signed in Arizona.’’ New York Times, April 23. http://www.nytimes.
com/2010/04/24/us/politics/24immig.html.
Arizona Republic. 2010. ‘‘Editorial: Stop Failing Arizona; Start Fixing
Immigration.’’ Arizona Republic. May 1. http://www.azcentral.com/
news/articles/2010/05/01/20100501arizona-immigration-problem.html.
Armitage Jr., David T. 2007. ‘‘U.S. and EU Efforts to Fight Terrorism:
Same Ends, Different Means, or Same Means, Different Ends.’’
102
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

Presented at European Union Studies Association Bienniel Conference,
May 17–19, Montreal, Canada.
Associated Press ‘‘Canadian Terror Probe Expands to Seven Nations.’’
2006. USA Today, June 6. http://www.usatoday.com/news/world/
2006-06-05-canada_x.htm.
Associated Press. 2005. ‘‘Schwarzenegger Praises Minuteman
Volunteers for Watching Arizona Border.’’ USA Today, May 1. http://
www.usatoday.com/news/nation/2005-05-01-minutemen_x.htm.
Associated Press. 2007. ‘‘Southwest Border Courts Swamped with
Immigration-Related Felony Cases.’’ April 27. http://www.foxnews.
com/story/0,2933,268961,00.html.
Baker, Peter. 2010. ‘‘Obama Says Al Qaeda in Yemen Planned
Bombing Plot, and He Vows Retribution.’’ New York Times, January 2.
http://www.nytimes.com/2010/01/03/us/politics/.
Banks, William C. 2002. ‘‘Troops Defending the Homeland: The Posse
Comitatus Act and the Legal Environment for a Military Role
in Domestic Counterterrorism.’’ Terrorism and Political Violence 14: 41.
Barnett’s Arizona.com. 2009. http://barnettsaz.com/
towingABOUTowners.htm.
Beleda, Alex. 2002. ‘‘Nuclear Fuel Rod Reported Missing from DRC.’’
Voice of America, June 24.
Bell, Stewart. 2004. Cold Terror: How Canada Nurtures and Exports
Terrorism to the World. Ottawa: John Wiley.
Bernstein, Nina. 2009. ‘‘Immigration Detention System Lapses
Detailed.’’ New York Times, December 2. http://www.nytimes.com/
2009/12/03/us/03immig.html?partner=rss&emc=rss.
Brownell, Peter. 2005. ‘‘The Declining Enforcement of Employer
Sanctions.’’ Washington, DC: Migration Policy Institute. http://www.
migrationinformation.org/Feature/display.cfm?ID=332.
Buchanan, Patrick. 2006. State of Emergency: The Third World Invasion
and Conquest of America. New York: Saint Martin’s Griffin.
Buchanan, Suzy. 2007. ‘‘Vigilante Justice: Rancher Roger Barnett Faces
a Comeuppance.’’ Southern Poverty Law Center. Spring. http://www.
splcenter.org/intel/intelreport/article.jsp?aid=758.
Buchanan, Suzy, and Tom Kim. 2006. ‘‘The Nativists.’’ Southern
Poverty Law Center Intelligence Report. http://www.splcenter.org/
intel/intelreport/article.jsp?pid=1251.
Bush, George W. 2005. ‘‘President Meets with President Fox and Prime
Minister Martin.’’ March 23. http://georgewbush-whitehouse.archives.
gov/news/releases/2005/03/20050323-5.html.
References
103

Bush, George W. 2006. ‘‘President Bush Addresses the Nation on
Immigration Reform.’’ May. http://georgewbush-whitehouse.archives.
gov/news/releases/2006/05/20060515-8.html.
Bush, Jeb, Thomas F. McLarty III, and Edward Alden. 2009. ‘‘Op-Ed: A
Bipartisan Blueprint for Immigration Reform.’’ Los Angeles Times, July
13. http://www.cfr.org/publication/19860/bipartisan_blueprint_for_
immigration_reform.html.
Carafano, James J., and David Heyman. 2004. ‘‘DHS 2.0: Rethinking
the Department of Homeland Security.’’ Heritage Foundation Special
Report #2, December 13. http://www.heritage.org/Research/
HomelandSecurity/sr02.cfm.
Carafano, James J., Brian W. Walsh, David B. Mulhausen, Laura P.
Keith, and David D. Gentili. 2006. ‘‘Better, Faster and Cheaper Border
Security.’’ Heritage Foundation Backgrounder #1967. http://www.
heritage.org/Research/HomelandSecurity/bg1967.cfm.
Casteneda, Jorge. 2007. Ex-Mex: From Migrants to Immigrants. New
York: The Free Press.
CBC News. 2009. ‘‘Van Loan Signs Border Security Pact with
Homeland Security Head.’’ http://www.cbc.ca/canada/story/2009/
05/26/border-security-van-loan-napolitano.html?ref=rss.
CBC News. 2010. ‘‘‘Toronto 18’ Case: Key Events in the Case.’’ http://
www.cbc.ca/canada/story/2008/06/02/f-toronto-timeline.html.
Chavez, Leo R. 2009. ‘‘Mexicans of Mass Destruction: National
Security and Mexican Immigration in a Pre- and Post- 9/11 World.’’ In
International Migration and Human Rights: The Global Repercussions of
U.S. Policy, ed. Samuel Martinez, 82–97. Berkeley: University of
California Press.
Chertoff, Michael. 2008. ‘‘Remarks by Homeland Security Secretary
Michael Chertoff on the State of Immigration and the No Match Rule.’’
October 23. http://www.dhs.gov/xnews/speeches/sp_1224803933474.
shtm.
Chisti, Muzzafer, and Claire Bergeron. 2009. ‘‘New and Revised ICE
Agreements with State and Local Law Enforcement Met with
Criticism.’’ Washington, DC: Migration Policy Institute. http://www.
migrationinformation.org/USfocus/display.cfm?ID=738.
Clarke, Ronald V., ed. 1997. Situational Crime Prevention: Successful Case
Studies. 2nd ed. New York: Harrow and Heston.
Clinton, William Jefferson. 1993. ‘‘Protecting Borders Against Illegal
Immigration: Remarks Made at Announcement of Immigration
Policy.’’ U.S. Department of State dispatch. August 9. http://
findarticles.com/p/articles/mi_m1584/is_n32_v4/ai_13263265/.
104
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

CNN. 2006. ‘‘Gen. Blum: ‘‘Not Every Guardsmen on Border Will Be
Armed.’’ May 17. http://www.cnn.com/2006/POLITICS/05/17/cnna.
blum/index.html.
Committee of the Judiciary, House of Representatives Subcommittee
on Immigration and Claims. 2000. Hearing on Terrorism and Threats.
http://commdocs.house.gov/committees/judiciary/hju64355.000/
hju64355_0.HTM.
Comision para Asuntos de la Frontera Norte. 2002. Seguridad Publica
y Procuracion de Justicia. In Programa de Desarrollo Regional Frontera
Norte 2001–2006, 563–597. Tijuana: CAFN.
Cornelius, Wayne A. 2006. ‘‘Controlling ‘Unwanted Immigration’:
Lessons from the United States, 1993–2004.’’ Journal of Ethnic and
Migration Studies 31 (4): 775–794.
Dawson, Anne, and Robert Fife. 2005. ‘‘Don’t Lose Fear of Terrorists,
U.S. Envoy Cellucci Warns.’’ Ottawa Citizen, February 7, A5.
Dell’Agnese, E. 2005. ‘‘The US–Mexico Border in American Movies:
A Political Geography Perspective.’’ Geopolitics 10: 204–221.
Detention Watch Network. 2009. ‘‘About the U.S. Detention and
Deportation System.’’ http://www.detentionwatchnetwork.org/
aboutdetention.
DHS (Department of Homeland Security). 2009. ‘‘Prepared Remarks
by Secretary Napolitano on Immigration Reform at the Center for
American Progress.’’ http://www.dhs.gov/ynews/speeches/sp_
1258123461050.shtm.
Discover America Partnership. 2006. ‘‘Discover America Partnership/
RT Strategies Survey of International Travelers.’’ November 20. http://
www.tia-dap.org/pdf/International_Travek_Survey_Summary.pdf.
Dobbs, Lou. 2007. ‘‘New Immigration Plan Ignores History’s Lessons.’’
CNN.com, May 23. http://www.cnn.com/2007/US/05/22/Dobbs.
May23/index.html.
Dow, Mark. 2004. American Gulag: Inside U.S. Immigration Prisons.
Berkeley: University of California Press.
Dunn, Timothy. 1996. The Militarization of the Border, 1978–1992: Low-
Intensity Conflict Doctrine Comes Home. Austin: Center for Mexican
American Studies, University of Texas.
Dunn, Timothy. 2001. ‘‘Border Militarization Through Drug and
Immigration Enforcement: Human Rights Implications.’’ Social Justice
28 (2): 7–30.
Dunn, Timothy. 2009. Blockading the Border and Human Rights: The El
Paso Operation That Remade Immigration Enforcement. Austin, TX:
University of Texas Press.
References
105

Eschbach, Karl, Jacqueline Hagan, and Nestor Rodriguez. 1999. ‘‘Death
at the Border.’’ International Migration Review 33 (2): 430–454.
Eldridge, Thomas R., Susan Ginsberg, Walter T. Hempel II, Janice L.
Kephart, and Kelly Moore. 2004. 9/11 and Terrorist Travel. Staff Report of
the National Commission on Terrorist Attacks upon the United States.
http://govinfo.library.unt.edu/911/staff_statements/911_TerrTrav_
Monograph.pdf.
Erwin, Clark Kent. 2006. Open Target: Where America Is Vulnerable to
Attack. New York: Palgrave Macmillan.
Federation of Nuclear Scientists. 2002. ‘‘Testimony of Dr. Henry Kelly
before the Senate Committee on Foreign Relations.’’ www.fas.org/
ssp/docs/030602-kellytestimony.htm.
Federation of Nuclear Scientists. N.d. ‘‘Libya Special Weapons.’’ www.
fas.org/nuke/guide/lbya/index.html.
‘‘Feds Break Up Drug Smuggling Linked to Terrorist Groups.’’ 2002.
New York Times, November 6.
GAO. 2004. Over-Stay Tracking: A Key Component of Homeland Security
and a Layered Defense: A Report to the Chairman, Committee on the
Judiciary, House of Representatives. Washington, DC: U.S. Government
Printing Office. http://www.gao.gov/new.items/d04170t.pdf.
GAO. 2006. Border Crossing Deaths Have Doubled since 1995; Border
Patrol’s Efforts to Prevent Deaths Have Not Been Fully Evaluated.
Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office. http://www.gao.
gov/new.items/d06770.pdf.
GAO. 2007. Border Security: Security Vulnerabilities at Unmanned and
Unmonitored U.S. Border Locations. Washington, DC: U.S. Government
Printing Office. http://www.gao.gov/new.items/d07884t.pdf.
GAO. 2008a. ‘‘Border Security: Summary of Covert Tests and Security
Assessments for the Senate Committee on Finance, 2003–2007.’’
http://www.gao.gov/new.items/d08757.pdf.
GAO. 2008b. ‘‘Secure Border Initiative: DHS Needs to Address
Significant Risks in Delivering Key Technology Investment.’’ http://
www.gao.gov/new.items/d081148t.pdf.
GAO. 2009a. ‘‘Immigration Enforcement: Better Controls Needed over
Program Authorizing State and Local Enforcement of Federal
Immigration Laws.’’ http://www.gao.gov/new.items/d09109.pdf.
GAO. 2009b. ‘‘Secure Border Initiative Fence Construction Costs.’’
http://www.gao.gov/new.items/d09244r.pdf.
Garcia-Goldsmith, Raquel, M. Melissa MucCormick, Daniel Martinez,
and Inez Magadalena Duarte. 2007. The ‘‘Funnel Effect’’ & Recovered
Bodies of Unauthorized Immigrants Processed by the Pima County Office of
106
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

the Medical Examiner, 1990–2005. Binational Immigration Institute.
http://www.borderhealth.org/files/res_763.pdf.
Gilchrist, Jim. 2006. ‘‘Don’t Fall for Media’s Spin about the
Minutemen.’’ CNN.com. October 26. http://www.cnn.com/2006/US/
10/25/gilchrist.commentary/index.html.
Griswold, David. 2009. ‘‘As Immigrants Move In, Americans Move
Up.’’ Free Trade Bulletin #38: 1–4. http://www.cato.org/pubs/ftb/
FTB-038.pdf.
Guerette, Rob T. 2007a. ‘‘Immigration Policy, Border Security, and
Migrant Deaths: An Impact Evaluation of Life-Saving Efforts under the
Border Safety Initiative.’’ Criminology and Public Policy 6 (2): 245–266.
Guerette, Rob T. 2007b. Migrant Death: Border Safety and Situational
Crime Prevention on the U.S.-Mexico Divide. New York: LFB Scholarly
Publishing.
Haddal, Chad C., Yule Kim, and Michael John Garcia. 2009.
‘‘Congressional Research Service: Border Security: Barriers Along the
U.S. International Border.’’ March 16. http://www.fas.org/sgp/crs/
homesec/RL33659.pdf.
Hagan, John, and Alberto Pallioni. 1999. ‘‘Sociological Criminology
and the Mythology of Hispanic Immigration and Crime.’’ Social
Problems 46(4): 617–632.
Harris, John F., Mile Allen, and Jim Vandehei. 2009. ‘‘Cheney Warns of
New Attacks.’’ Politico, February 4. http://www.politico.com/news/
stories/0209/18390.html.
Hataley, Todd S. 2007. Catastrophic Terrorism at the Border: The Case of
the Canada–United States Border. Homeland Security Affairs,
Supplement No. 1. http://www.hsaj.org/pages/supplement/issue1/
pdfs/supplement.1.2.pdf.
Hayworth, J. D. 2009. Testimony before the United States Senate
Committee on the Judiciary, Subcommittee on Immigration, Border
Security and Citizenship, Hearing on Securing the Borders and
America’s Ports of Entry, What Remains to Be Done. May 20. http://
judiciary.senate.gov/pdf/5-20-09HayworthTestimony.pdf.
Heyman, Josiah Mc. 2008. ‘‘Constructing a Virtual Wall: Race and
Citizenship in U.S.-Mexico Border Policing.’’ Journal of the Southwest 50
(3): 305–334.
Heyman, Josiah Mc. 2009. ‘‘Ports of Entry in the ‘Homeland Security’
Era: Inequality of Mobility and the Securitization of Transnational
Flows.’’ In International Migration and Human Rights: The Global
Repercussions of U.S. Policy, ed. Samuel Martinez, 44–62. Berkeley:
University of California Press.
References
107

Heyman, Josiah Mc, and Jason Ackleson. 2010. ‘‘United States
Border Security after 9/11.’’ In Border Security in the Al-Qaeda Era,
ed. John A. Winterdyk and Kelly W. Sundberg, 37–76. New York:
CRC Press.
Human Rights Watch. 2009. ‘‘Locked Up Far Away: The Transfer of
Immigrants to Remote Detention Centers in the United States.’’
December. http://www.courthousenews.com/2009/12/03/
HumanRtsRep.pdf.
Huspek, Michael, Roberto Martinez, and Leticia Jimenez. 1998.
‘‘Violations of Human and Civil Rights on the U.S.-Mexico Border,
1995–1997: A Report.’’ Social Justice 25 (2): 110–130.
Hsu, Spencer S. 2008. ‘‘Immigration Prosecutions Hit New High.’’
Washington Post, June 2. http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/
content/article/2008/06/01/AR2008060102192_pf.html.
ICE. 2007. Workplace Enforcement Fact Sheet. http://www.ice.gov/
pi/news/factsheets/worksite.htm.
ICE. 2008a. ICE/DRO Detention Standard: Staff-Detainee
Communication. http://www.ice.gov/doclib/PBNDS/pdf/staff_
detainee_communication.pdf.
ICE. 2008b. Immigration and Customs Enforcement, Detention
Management Program. http://www.ice.gov/partners/dro/dmp.htm.
ICE. 2008c. ‘‘Mortality Rates at ICE Facilities.’’ http://www.ice.gov/
pi/news/factsheets/detention_facilities_mortality_rates.htm.
ICE. 2010. Immigration and Customs Enforcement, Delegation of
Immigration Authority Section 287(g) Immigration and Nationality
Act. http://www.ice.gov/pi/news/factsheets/section287_g.htm.
Immigration Forum. 2009. ‘‘Polls Show Most Americans Support
Comprehensive Immigration Reform.’’ http://amvoice.3cdn.net/
ad908a806f9a2997e8_6om6b9tju.pdf.
Johnson, David, and Scott Shane. 2009. ‘‘Terror Case Is Called One of
the Most Serious in Years.’’ New York Times, September 24. http://
www.nytimes.com/2009/09/25/us/25zazi.html.
Kelly, Jack. 2001. ‘‘Terrorists Courted Nuclear Scientists.’’ USA Today,
November 12.
Kil, Sang Hea, and Cecilia Menjivar. 2006. ‘‘The ‘War on the Border’:
Criminalizing Immigrants and Militarizing the U.S.-Mexico Border.’’ In
Immigration and Crime: Race, Ethnicity and Violence, ed. Ramiro Martinez Jr.
and Abel Valenzuela Jr., 164–188. New York: New York University Press.
Koback, Kris. 2009. Testimony before the United States Senate
Committee on the Judiciary, Subcommittee on Immigration, Border
Security, and Citizenship, Hearing on Comprehensive Immigration
Reform in 2009, Can We Do It Now and How? April 30. http://
judiciary.senate.gov/pdf/09-04-30KobachTestimony.pdf.
108
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

Kouri, Jim. 2009. ‘‘GAO: Funding Needed for New Border Patrol
Agents.’’ Law Enforcement Examiner, June 19.
Krauthammer, Charles. 2007. ‘‘The Jeopardy of Reform.’’ Washington
Post, June 15. http://townhall.com/columnists/CharlesKrauthammer/
2007/06/15/the_jeopardy_of_reform?page=full&comments=true.
Kretsedemas, Philip. 2008. ‘‘What Does an Undocumented Immigrant
Look Like? Local Enforcement and New Immigrant Profiling.’’ In
Keeping Out the Other: A Critical Introduction to Immigration Enforcement
Today, ed. David Brotherton and Philip Kretsedemas, 334–364.
New York: Columbia University Press.
Lake, Jennifer E. 2007. ‘‘CRS Report for Congress: Border Security: The
Complexity of the Challenge.’’ Washington, DC: Congressional Research
Service. http://fpc.state.gov/documents/organization/80215.pdf.
Lake, Jennifer E., Kristin M. Finklea, Mark Eddy, Celinda Franco,
Chad C. Haddal, William J. Krouse and Mark A. Randol. 2010. CRS
Report for Congress: Spillover Border Violence: Issues in Identifying
and Measuring Spillover Violence. Washington DC: CRS Research
Service. http://www.opencrs.com/document/R40135/2009-06-01/
Lee, Matthew T. 2003. Crime on the Border: Immigration and Homicide in
Urban Communities. New York: LFB Scholarly Publishing.
Lennox, Patrick. 2007. ‘‘From Golden Straitjacket to Kevlar Vest:
Canada’s Transformation to a Security State.’’ Canadian Journal of
Political Science 40 (4): 1017–1038.
LoMonaco, Claudine. 2005. ‘‘Border Security: Line Blurs on
Terrorism.’’ Tucson Citizen, September 11. http://www.tucsoncitizen.
com/daily/local/25753.php.
LoTemplio, Joe. 2007. ‘‘Schumer Blasts Administration over Northern
Border.’’ PressRepublican.com. September 28. http://www.press
republican.com/.
Lovato, Roberto. 2008. ‘‘Building the Homeland Security State.’’
NACLA Report on the Americas 41 (6): 15–22.
Lubbockonline. 1998. ‘‘Family of Teen Shot by Marine Patrol gets
Settlement.’’ August 12. http://www.lubbockonline.com/stories/
081298/LD0703.shtml.
Lydgate, Joana. 2010. ‘‘Assembly-Line Justice: A Review of Operation
Streamline.’’ Berkeley: The Chief Justice Earl Warren Institute on Race,
Ethnicity and Diversity, University of California, Berkeley Law School.
http://www.law.berkeley.edu/files/Operation_Streamline_Policy_
Brief.pdf.
Mains, S. P. 2004. ‘‘Imagining the Border and Southern Spaces:
Cinematic Explorations of Race and Gender.’’ GeoJournal 59: 253–264.
Maril, Robert. 2004. Patrolling Chaos: The U.S. Border Patrol in Deep
South Texas. Lubbock: Texas Tech University Press.
References
109

Mann, Jack. 2010. ‘‘DHS Pulls SBInet Funding.’’ GovCon Executive.
March 17. http://www.govconexecutive.com/2010/03/dhs-pulls-
sbinet-funding/.
Martinez, Ramiro. 2006. ‘‘Coming to America: The Impact of the New
Immigration on Crime.’’ In Immigration and Crime: Race, Ethnicity
and Violence, ed. Ramiro Martinez and Abel Valenzuela, 1–35.
Berkeley: University of California Press.
Martinez, Ramiro. 2007. ‘‘Incorporating Latinos and Immigrants
into Policing Research.’’ Criminology and Public Policy 6 (1):
57–64.
Massey, Douglas. 2009. Testimony before the U.S. Senate Committee
on the Judiciary, Subcommittee on Immigration, Border Security, and
Citizenship, Hearing on Securing the Borders and America’s Ports of
Entry, What Remains to Be Done. May 20. http://judiciary.senate.
gov/hearings/testimony.cfm?id=3859&wit_id=7939.
Martinez, Ramiro, Jr. 2006. ‘‘Coming to America: The Impact of the
New Immigration on Crime.’’ In Immigration and Crime: Race, Ethnicity,
and Violence, ed. Ramiro Martinez Jr. and Abel Valenzuela Jr., 20–35.
New York: New York University Press.
McKinley, James C., Jr. 2009. ‘‘Napolitano Focuses on Immigration
Enforcement.’’ New York Times, August 11. http://www.nytimes.com/
2009/08/12/us/12border.html?_r=1.
McKinley, James C., Jr., and Julia Preston. 2009. ‘‘U.S. Can’t Trace
Foreign Visitors on Expired Visas.’’ New York Times, October 11. http://
www.nytimes.com/2009/10/12/us/12visa.html?pagewanted=1&_r=1&
partner=rss&emc=rss.
McKinley, Jesse, and Malia Wollan. 2009. ‘‘New Border Fear: Violence
by a Rogue Militia.’’ New York Times, June 26. http://www.nytimes.
com/2009/06/27/us/27arizona.html?_r=2.
McNeill, Jena Baker, and Diem Nguyen. 2009. ‘‘U.S., Canada Working
Together on Border Security.’’ Heritage Organization. http://www.
heritage.org/Research/HomelandSecurity/wm2329.cfm.
Nevins, Joseph. 2002. Operation Gatekeeper: The Rise of the ‘‘Illegal Alien’’
and the Making of the U.S.-Mexico Boundary. New York: Routledge.
Nunez-Nieto, Blas. 2008. Border Security: The Role of the U.S. Border
Patrol. Congressional Research Service. http://www.fas.org/sgp/crs/
homesec/RL32562.pdf.
Moreno, S. 2006. ‘‘Along Part of the Border; A Zero Tolerance Zone:
Tough Program Is Discouraging Illegal Crossings.’’ Washington Post,
June 18, A03.
110
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

O’Conner, Anahad, and Eric Schmidt. 2009. ‘‘Terror Attempt Seen as
Man Tries to Ignite Device on Jet.’’ New York Times, December 25.
http://www.nytimes.com/2009/12/26/us/26plane.html?scp=1&
sq=December%2025%20terror%20attack&st=cse.
Obama, Barack. 2009. ‘‘The President of the United States Supports
Comprehensive Immigration Reform.’’ Costa Mesa Town Hall
Meeting, March 18. http://latimesblogs.latimes.com/washington/
2009/03/obama-text.html.
Office of Border Patrol. 2004. National Border Patrol Strategy.
Washington, DC. http://www.au.af.mil/au/awc/awcgate/dhs/
national_bp_strategy.pdf.
Office of the Governor, Rick Perry. 2009a. ‘‘Statement by Governor
Rick Perry on the Obama Administration’s Plan to Combat Mexican
Drug Cartels.’’ March 24. http://governor.state.tx.us/news/press-
release/12119/.
Office of the Governor, Rick Perry. 2009b. ‘‘Gov. Perry Announces
Highly Skilled Ranger Recon Teams as Texas’ Latest Efforts to
Enhance Border Security.’’ September 10. http://www.governor.state.
tx.us/news/press-release/13577/.
Office of the U.S. Trade Representative. 2008. ‘‘NAFTA—Myth vs.
Facts.’’ http://www.ustr.gov/sites/default/files/uploads/factsheets/
2008/asset_upload_file71_14540.pdf.
OIG (Office of the Inspector General), Department of Homeland
Security. 2006. ‘‘Treatment of Immigration Detainees Housed at
Immigration and Customs Enforcement Facilities.’’ http://www.dhs.
gov/xoig/assets/mgmtrpts/OIG_07-01_Dec06.pdf.
‘‘On the Trail of the Traffickers.’’ 2009. The Economist, March 7.
Orchowski, Margaret Sands. 2008. Immigration and the American Dream:
Battling the Political Hype and Hysteria. New York: Rowan and Littlefield.
Papademetriou, Demetri, and Aaron Terrazas. 2009. Immigrants and the
Current Economic Crisis: Research Evidence, Policy Challenges, and
Implications. Washington, DC: Migration Policy Institute. http://www.
migrationpolicy.org/pubs/lmi_recessionJan09.pdf.
Passel, Jeffrey S., and D’Vera Cohn. 2008. Trends in Unauthorized
Immigration: Undocumented Inflow Now Trails Legal Inflow.
Washington, DC: PEW Hispanic Center. http://pewhispanic.org/files/
reports/94.pdf.
Payan, Tony. 2006. The Three U.S.-Mexico Border Wars: Drugs,
Immigration, and Homeland Security. Westport, CT: Praeger Security
International.
References
111

PEW Hispanic Center. 2006. Modes of Entry for the Unauthorized Migrant
Population Fact Sheet. Washington, DC: PEW Hispanic Center.
Preston, Julia. 2009. ‘‘Obama to Push Immigration Bill as One
Priority.’’ New York Times, April 8. http://www.nytimes.com/2009/
04/09/us/politics/09immig.html?hp.
Ramos, Jorge. 2005. Dying to Cross: The Worst Immigrant Tragedy in
History. New York: HarperCollins.
Reese, April. 2009. ‘‘U.S.-Mexico Fence Building Continues Despite
Obama’s Promise to Review Its Effects.’’ New York Times, April 16.
http://www.nytimes.com/gwire/2009/04/16/.
Rhee, Foon. 2009. ‘‘Hard Line Immigration Group Pulls Backing from
Dobbs.’’ Political Intelligence, December 3. http://www.boston.com/
news/politics/politicalintelligence/2009/12/hardline_immigr.html.
Richardson, Chad, and Rosalva Resendez. 2006. On the Edge: Culture,
Labor and Deviance on the South Texas Border. Austin: University of
Texas Press.
Risen, James, and Eri Licthblau. 2005. ‘‘Spying Program Snared U.S.
Calls.’’ New York Times, December 21. http://www.nytimes.com/
2005/12/21/politics/21nsa.html.
Roebuck, J. 2008. ‘‘Some Fear ‘Streamline’ Could Overburden Federal
Courts.’’ The Monitor (McAllen, TX), June 10. http://www.themonitor.
com/articles/illegal_13020_article.html/border_immigration.htm.
Romero, Mary. 2006. ‘‘Racial Profiling and Immigration Law
Enforcement: Rounding Up of Usual Suspects in the Latino
Community.’’ Critical Sociology 32 (2–3): 447–473.
Rothe, Dawn, and Stephen L. Muzzatti. 2004. ‘‘Enemies Everywhere:
Terrorism, Moral Panic, and U.S. Civil Society.’’ Critical Criminology 12:
327–350.
Rubio-Goldsmith, Raquel, M. Melissa McCormick, Daniel Martinez,
and Inez Magdelena Duarte. 2006. The ‘‘Funnel Effect’’ and Recovered
Bodies of Unauthorized Immigrants Processed by the Pima County Office of
the Medical Examiner, 1990–2005. Report Submitted to the Pima County
Board of Supervisors. Tucson: Binational Immigration Institute,
Mexican American Research and Studies Center, University of
Arizona.
Rumbaut, Ruben, Roberto G. Gonzales, Golnaz Komaie, and Charlie V.
Morgan. 2006a. ‘‘Debunking the Myth of Migrant Criminality:
Imprisonment among First and Second Generation Young Men.’’
Washington, DC: Migration Policy Institute. http://www.
migrationinformation.org/Feature/display.cfm?ID=403.
112
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

Rumbaut, Ruben, Roberto G. Gonzales, Golnaz Komaie, and Charlie V.
Morgan. 2006b. ‘‘Immigration and Incarceration: Patterns and
Predictors of Imprisonment among First- and Second-Generation
Young Adults.’’ In Immigration and Crime: Race, Ethnicity, and Violence,
ed. Ramiro Martinez Jr. and Abel Valenzuela Jr., 64–89. New York:
New York University Press.
Scharf, David A. 2006. ‘‘For Humane Borders: Two Decades of Death
and Illegal Activity in the Sonoran Desert.’’ Case Western Reserve
Journal of International Law 141: 141–172.
Schmidt, Eric. 2010. ‘‘New Teams Created to Connect Dots of Terror
Plots.’’ New York Times, January 29. http://www.nytimes.com/2010/
01/30/us/30intel.html.
Schwartz, John, and Randall C. Archibold. 2010. ‘‘A Law Facing A
Tough Road Through the Courts.’’ New York Times, April 27. http://
www.nytimes.com/2010/04/28/us/28legal.html.
Schumer, Charles. 2007. Positively American: Winning Back the Middle
Class Majority One Family at a Time. Emmaus, Penn: Rodale Books.
Schumer, Charles. 2009. Remarks at the 6th Annual Immigration and
Law and Policy Conference, Migration Policy Institute, June 24.
http://www.migrationpolicy.org/pubs/Schumer-remarks-Law-
Policy-Conference-06-24-09.pdf.
Sele, Andrew. 2009. ‘‘‘Money, Guns, and Drugs’: Are U.S. Inputs
Fueling Violence on the U.S.-Mexico Border?’’ Testimony by Andrew
Sele to the House Subcommittee on National Security and Foreign
Affairs, March 9. http://nationalsecurity.oversight.house.gov/
documents/20090313115456.pdf.
Seltzer, Nate, and George Kourous. 1998. ‘‘Persistent Impunity,
Growing Problems: Immigration Law Enforcement and Human Rights
Abuses.’’ Borderlines 6 (9): 1–4.
Sharma, Nandita. 2006. ‘‘White Nationalism, Illegality, and
Imperialism: Border Control as Ideology.’’ In (En)gendering the War on
Terror: War Stories and Camoflauged Politics, ed. Krista Hunt and Kim
Rygiel, 121–144. Aldershot, UK.
Simcox, David. 2000. Inalienable Identification: Key to Halting Illegal
Employment. Washington, DC: Center for Immigration Studies. http://
www.cis.org/articles/2000/back100.html.
Smigielski, David. 2007. ‘‘Addressing the Nuclear Smuggling Threat.’’
In Transnational Threats: Smuggling and Trafficking in Arms, Drugs, and
Human Life, ed. Kimberly L. Thachuk, 53–63. Westport, CT: Praeger
Security International.
References
113

Smith, Alison. 2005. ‘‘CRS Report for Congress: Unauthorized
Employment of Aliens: Basics of Employer Sanctions.’’ Washington,
DC: Congressional Research Service. http://fpc.state.gov/documents/
organization/49088.pdf.
Spagot, Elliot. 2006. ‘‘Border Crackdown Fuels Smuggler’s Boom.’’
Washington Post, December 30. http://www.washingtonpost.com/
wp-dyn/content/article/2006/12/30/AR2006123000471.html.
Spakota, Sanjeeb, Harold W. Kohl III, Julie Gilchrist, Jay McAuliffe,
Bruce Parks, Bob England, Tim Flood, Mark Sewell, Dennis Perrota,
Miguel Escobedo, Corrine E. Stern, David Zane, and Kurt B. Nolte.
2006. ‘‘Unauthorized Border Crossings and Migrant Deaths: Arizona,
New Mexico, and El Paso, Texas, 2002–2003.’’ American Journal of
Public Health 96 (7): 1282–1287.
Spener, David. 2009. Clandestine Crossings: Migrants and Coyotes on the
Texas-Mexico Border. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
Staudt, Kathleen. 2008a. ‘‘Bordering the Other in the Texas Southwest:
El Pasoans Confront the Local Sheriff.’’ In Keeping Out the Other:
A Critical Introduction to Immigration Enforcement Today, ed. David
Brotherton and Philip Kretsedemas, 291–313. New York: Columbia
University Press.
Staudt, Kathleen, 2008b. Violence and Activism at the Border: Gender,
Fear, and Everyday Life in Ciudad Juarez. Austin: University of Texas
Press.
Stowell, Jacob. 2007. Immigration and Crime: The Effects of Immigration
on Criminal Behavior. New York: LFB Scholarly Publishing.
‘‘Surge in Immigration Prosecutions Continues.’’ 2008. Transactional
Record Clearinghouse. http://trac.syr.edu/immigration/reports/188/.
Teslik, Lee Hudson. 2009. Council on Foreign Relations Backgrounder:
NAFTA’s Economic Impact. New York: Council on Foreign Relations.
http://www.cfr.org/publication/15790/naftas_economic_impact.html.
Texas Border Sheriff’s Coalition. 2007. ‘‘The Governor’s View on
Border Security.’’ http://www.tlc2.uh.edu/TBSC/News/news_item.
2007-05-30.6007901817/newsitem_view?month:int=1&year:int=2010.
Thachuk, Kimberly L. 2007. ‘‘An Introduction to Transnational
Threats.’’ In Transnational Threats: Smuggling and Trafficking in Arms,
Drugs, and Human Life, ed. Thachuk, 3–20. Westport, CT: Praeger
Security International.
Thompson, Ginger. 2009a. ‘‘A Shift to Make the Border Safe, from
Inside Out.’’ New York Times, April 5. http://www.nytimes.com/
2009/04/06.
114
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

Thompson, Ginger. 2009b. ‘‘Work Under Way on Virtual Fence.’’
New York Times, May 8. http://www.nytimes.com/2009/05/09.
Waugh, W. L. 2003. ‘‘Terrorism, Homeland Security, and the National
Emergency Management Network.’’ Public Organization Review:
A Global Journal 3: 373–385.
Wassem, Ruth Ellen. 2008. ‘‘Visa Issuances: Policy, Issues, and
Legislation.’’ Congressional Research Service. http://italy.usembassy.
gov/pdf/other/RL31512.pdf/.
U.S. Customs and Border Protection. 2005. ‘‘DHS Launches Operation
Streamline II.’’ http://www.cbp.gov/xp/cgov/newsroom/news_
releases/archives/2005_press_releases/122005/12162005.xml.
U.S. Customs and Border Protection. 2007. ‘‘Operation Streamline Nets
1200-Plus Prosecutions in Arizona.’’ http://www.cbp.gov/xp/cgov/
newsroom/news_releases/archives/2007_news_releases/072007/
07242007_3.xml.
U.S.-Mexico Border Counties Coalition. 2008. ‘‘Undocumented
Immigrants in U.S.-Mexico Border Counties: The Costs of Law
Enforcement and Criminal Justice Services.’’ The University of Arizona
Eller College of Management. http://www.bordercounties.org/
vertical/Sites/%7BB4A0F1FF-7823-4C95-8D7A-F5E400063C73%7D/
uploads/%7B690801CA-CEE6-413C-AC8B-A00DA765D96E%7D.pdf.
U.S.-Mexico Border and Immigration Task Force. 2009.
‘‘Accountability, Community Security, and Infrastructure on the
U.S.-Mexico Border: Policy Priorities for 2009–2010.’’ http://
borderaction.org/bordertaskforce/2009.Border.Policy.Report.Final.pdf.
Vanderbilt, Jim, John F. Harris, and Mile Allen. 2009. ‘‘Cheney Warns
of New Attacks.’’ Politico, February 4. http://www.nbcdfw.com/
news/archive/Cheney_warns_of_new_attacks.html?f=y&orderpar=
regular&com=4.
Villareal, M. Angeles, and Jennifer E. Lake. 2009. ‘‘CRS Report for
Congress: Security and Prosperity Partnership of North America:
An Overview and Selected Issues.’’ Washington, DC: Congressional
Research Service. http://www.fas.org/sgp/crs/row/RS22701.pdf.
References
115

This page intentionally left blank 

3
Border Security in an
International Context
Introduction
S
ecuring the U.S. borders has become a major expense for
the nation. Enforcement for interdiction of unauthorized
migrants has been continually stepped up at the U.S.-Mex-
ico border without ever more than partially succeeding by tem-
porary declines or diversion to more remote regions. It has had
the unanticipated consequence of increasing the size of the
undocumented population in the United States and decreasing
the more temporary pattern of circular migration (Massey
2009). In the meantime, new transnational threats in the form of
terrorist acts, various forms of trafficking, and money launder-
ing are developing from international criminal and terrorist net-
works. This threat is driven by the desire for prosperity in an
imbalanced world of ‘‘haves’’ and ‘‘have-nots.’’
Global Inequalities: Economic and Security
Global inequality has a major negative impact on human lives
and health within and between nations. Unfortunately, income
inequalities are increasing in almost all world countries (Interna-
tional Labor Organization 2008). International agreements like the
North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA), which includes
the United States, Mexico, and Canada, are meant to increase
incomes and decrease inequality through economic integration
117

after a difficult transition phase. NAFTA represents a form of fi-
nancial liberalization that has not yet improved global productiv-
ity or employment growth. Financial globalization has not equally
benefited everyone as inequalities between social classes have
deepened inside impacted nations. From 1990 to 2000 income
inequality between and within world nations has increased, and,
through 2008, executive pay was a major cause of increasing
income inequality within the economies of high-income nations.
Since 2000 U.S. income inequality has rapidly increased, fol-
lowing a trend that began in the 1970s (OECD 2008). The average
income of the richest 10% is $93,000 in purchasing power. The
poorest try to make do on $5,800. The top 1% of earners control
25–33% of the wealth and the top 10% control 71%. The United
States has become a nation of earners living on wages and salaries
that are decreasing relative to elite earners. In the mid-1980s,
income inequality began to increase in Canada (OECD 2008). The
elite earners receive $71,000 in purchasing power per year. Pov-
erty has increased among all age groups. Of children, 15% live in
poverty. Fearful American workers advocate for keeping the rest
of the world out without realizing how U.S. prosperity is increas-
ingly dependent on international economic ties.
Mexico has a higher degree of inequality than the United
States or Canada, but the United States has the third-highest level
of inequality of the 30 OECD nations, challenging ideas about the
affluence of the American population (OECD 2008). Inequality has
been increasing among the world’s high-income countries due to a
widening gap between high earners and the poor. In both the
United States and Canada, middle-income earners are falling
behind. The situation of widening inequality in these high-income
nations raises important questions about the benefits of financial
globalization (International Labor Organization 2008; OECD 2008).
Nevertheless, once the process has been initiated, it is unlikely that
nations can withdraw from this new world economic system.
Mexico is classified as an upper-middle-income country by
the World Bank (World Bank 2001). Its economy, although devel-
oping, is the twelfth largest in the world (High 2009). NAFTA was
meant to end the exclusion of Mexico from the United States and
Canadian economies, but disproportionate resources have meant
that Mexico has not benefited to the degree one might expect.
Mexico’s economy is driven by NAFTA-related international
trade, oil, tourism, and remittances, money sent from abroad
by migrants and immigrants working in the United States. Since
118
Border Security in an International Context

NAFTA was implemented in 1994, trade has tripled from $297 to
$930 billion (High 2009). About 80% of Mexico’s exports are sent
to the United States (High 2009). Yet NAFTA is not sufficient to
drive the economy of Mexico. Remittances peaked at $27 billion in
2007 and dropped after the world economic crisis of 2008–2009
(Banco de Mexico 2009).
Since NAFTA was enacted, social inequality has been slightly
reduced in Mexico as income poverty (people who live on less
than half of the median income) decreased from 21% to 18%
(OECD 2008). (OECD 2008). Despite this positive change, 42.6% of
the Mexican population is estimated to live in poverty and 13.8%
in extreme poverty (CONEVAL 2009). The young and the elderly
are particularly affected; 22% of children and about 30% of those
over 65 live in households with a below–poverty-level income.
The United States has asymmetric power relations with both
Canada and Mexico. The gap in resources between the high-
income countries of the United States and Canada and the high-
middle-income of Mexico limits Mexican multilateral political
influence. Similarly, Canada faces limitations on its ability to influ-
ence American policy. Powerful countries like the United States
have less initiative to cooperate with the less powerful on bina-
tional issues. Many security issues devolve from the inequality of
access to global resources in Mexico and the desire of Canadians to
maintain independent policies rather than follow the lead of the
United States, a country with world objectives that do not always
overlap with Canadian views.
Globalization is connected to processes of economic liberaliza-
tion that have implied that the significance of borders will decline.
Security concerns have meant that the U.S.-Mexico border is more
tightly controlled while other borders, such as the internal borders
in the multination European Union, are more relaxed (Andreas and
Snyder 2000). Economic and political inequality results in dispro-
portionate control over which people and goods will cross the bor-
der. Ports of entry and associated borders are subject to diverging
levels of control. The sizable security investment in the Mexican bor-
der as opposed to the Canadian border demonstrates this. The politi-
cal economy of the world system of nations results in the unequal
movement of capital and social value and persons across borders.
U.S. citizens, who are at a higher income level, are allowed to
cross the Mexico border with greater ease than Mexican citizens,
although some members of the middle and working classes or peas-
ants from Mexico are allowed (Heyman 2004). U.S. tourists seek
Global Inequalities: Economic and Security
119

better prices when crossing the border. The mobility of financial
capital has increased as a result of NAFTA, allowing a certain
potential for Mexican development. Similarly, raw materials are
assembled in Mexico, where value is added by low-priced labor, an
unequal value transfer perceived as vital to American prosperity.
Manufacturers gained access to labor and investors to markets at
favorable rates. The mobility of goods and people over the border
does not contribute to extensive change in the relation of inequality
in resources between the three countries. Canada is a ‘‘medium-
power’’ country in relation to the United States (Ackleson and
Krasner 2006, 219) and NAFTA basically extended the United
States’ economic norms to both Canada and Mexico, impacting the
two border states to a greater extent. The Security and Prosperity
Partnership extends the same pattern of interstate power relations.
The World Bank (2001) has taken the position that ‘‘economic
and social stability and human security are preconditions for sus-
tainable development’’ (emphasis added). Because of power
asymmetries, the United States is viewed as imposing its own
rules on Canada (Weinburg 2009) and Mexico. This tendency for
one country to dominate another is referred to as unilateralism.
A more coordinated approach is multilateralism. The economic
situation of its bordering countries and all world nations is
increasingly tied into the major problems the United States faces:
unauthorized immigration, drug trafficking, and transnational
terrorism. Borders lend themselves to reciprocal influence for bet-
ter or worse. The U.S. consumer demand for drugs and relative
freedom of access to guns means that internal measures are
needed to combat drug and arms trafficking and reduce violence
on the border and in Mexico. Similarly, many Mexicans and Cen-
tral Americans want to cross the border for better opportunities.
The economic development of Mexico and Central America is a
strategy for dealing with unauthorized immigration. To a greater
degree, attempts to coordinate and stabilize world development
may ease transnational threats.
Human Trafficking: Causes and
Consequences
Mexicans migrate to the United States for better wages, the avail-
ability of jobs, and family reunification. Mexico is very dependent
120
Border Security in an International Context

on remittances from migrants and immigrants in the United
States. The need for remittances is heightened by the dependency
of many families on unmechanized subsistence-level agriculture.
Because there is little irrigation, unpredictable rainfall is needed
for crops to thrive. The impoverishment in the countryside
pushes Mexicans, along with Central Americans and an array of
potential immigrants from all over the globe, to look for work in
the United States.
Intensified border enforcement has led to an increase in the
hiring of smugglers by U.S.-Mexico border migrants. For individ-
uals attempting to gain entry from other continents, smugglers
may be their only choice. Smugglers range from one person to
group operations and charge a fee, now substantial, to get a per-
son across the border without inspection. In recent years, the fee
for assistance in unauthorized crossing of the southern border has
risen to $2,000 or more. Certain individuals working the cross-bor-
der passage of immigrants mean to make more than just money
from helping them to cross. Traffickers take advantage of restric-
tions on global movement to practice debt bondage and slavery.
Human smuggling involves abetting unauthorized entry,
which is a violation of immigration law. It occurs by mutual
consent of the smuggler and the undocumented migrant
(Kleeman 2009, 409). In contrast, human trafficking is defined by
the use of force, fraud, coercion, or deceit to exploit the unau-
thorized entrant. Human traffickers who bring unauthorized
entrants are distinct from smugglers because of their trans-
national and organized criminal connections and motivation.
Recent attempts to illuminate the dark figures of human traf-
ficking have resulted in the estimate that from 600,000 to more
than 4 million persons are annually trafficked worldwide (Lehti
and Aromaa 2006, 183–215).
The U.S. Congress enacted the Victims of Trafficking and
Violence Protection Act (VTVPA) to bolster the Thirteenth
Amendment to the Constitution, which outlawed slavery. The
VTVPA defines the two ‘‘severe forms of trafficking’’ as ‘‘sex
trafficking in which a commercial sex act is induced by force,
fraud, or coercion, or in which the person induced to perform
such an act has not attained 18 years of age’’; and ‘‘the recruitment,
harboring, transportation, provision or obtaining of a person
for labor or services, through the use of force, fraud or coercion
for the purpose of subjection to involuntary servitude, peonage,
debt bondage or slavery’’ (U.S. Department of State 2008, 6).
Human Trafficking: Causes and Consequences
121

Forms of exploitation of trafficking victims include forced pros-
titution or labor, slavery, and/or removal of body organs. In
2001 the Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking
in Persons, Especially Women and Children, an international
law, was passed, making antitrafficking a principle of interna-
tional law (United Nations 2001). Both immigration and organ-
ized crime laws are broken when human traffickers bring a
victim to the United States illegally.
The United States is thought to be the destination for thou-
sands of men, women, and children primarily from Mexico and
East Asia (U.S. Department of State 2009, 57). Other source re-
gions include South Asia, Central America, Africa, and Europe.
It is estimated that 600,000 to 800,000 people per year are
trafficked worldwide. Profit drives this illegal practice and only
drugs and arms trafficking are more profitable. Seven to ten
billion dollars a year may be realized by human trafficking.
Traffickers believe that they have a lower probability of being
arrested and convicted of this crime as compared to arms and
drugs trafficking because they believe they are not likely to be
caught and that the law will not be enforced.
Human trafficking is a crime that occurs in stages. The first
stage does not necessarily involve criminal activity but it con-
cerns the social characteristics of the victims, which create vul-
nerability. Poverty and hopelessness combined with the desire
for a better life make individuals in developing countries turn to
traffickers in a search for economic opportunity (Kleeman 2009,
416; Lehti and Aromaa 2006). They believe that traffickers can
find them employment in an overseas host country and are not
aware of any danger or that they may lose their freedom and be
forced to engage in criminal activities or enslaved. Often these
individuals want to go overseas to earn money to support their
relatives and/or families in the homeland and are not aware that
they may disappear into a criminal underground. The ultimate
cause of this situation is economic instability and lack of eco-
nomic opportunity in their home countries, which are develop-
ing nations and lack the perceived opportunities of developed
economies
Recruitment is the second stage of trafficking. A local per-
son often recruits an acquaintance or friend of the victim who
knows the culture and understands vulnerability (Kleeman
2009, 417). Often these recruiters are women. Recruiters speak of
ways to earn undreamed of amounts of money and may even
122
Border Security in an International Context

use help-wanted ads to attract victims. The trust of the victims
and their false sense of security lead to willing consent to travel
and to accept illegal aspects of the situation, such as obtaining a
fraudulent passport, and they will even provide a down pay-
ment for travel. The countries of origin lack resources to stop
trafficking and corrupt officials may abet it. The United States, a
frequent destination, is known to receive victims from Thailand,
China, Russia, Ukraine, and the Czech Republic (U.S. Depart-
ment of State 2008). A major origin region for trafficking victims
is the former Soviet Union, where Belarus, Moldavia, the Rus-
sian Federation, and Ukraine are the source of many sex traffick-
ing victims (United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime 2006).
Recruitment can occur by force but this practice is not com-
mon (Kleeman 2009, 417). Trafficker organizations kidnap or
use drugs to pacify victims. Refugee relocation camps holding
those who flee war or disasters are a target for abduction.
Another type of abduction occurs when individuals are taken
from streets, schoolyards, or everyday locations in which police
or capable guardians are not available to intercede. After
recruitment, individuals are transported abroad. At this stage,
many are consenting victims who expect normal employ-
ment, but some are coerced into traveling along routes traffickers
typically use.
The uncovering of the deception and exploitation of traffick-
ing victims often occurs upon arrival at the destination. Traffick-
ers withhold passports and other identification documents, and
victims are told that they have a huge debt to pay through their
labor. In sex trafficking, this coerced labor is facilitated by the
development of perverted social relationships, intimidation,
extremely close monitoring, and violence (Kleeman 2009, 417).
Victims are enslaved to a purchaser or the trafficker. Sex traffick-
ers coerce women and children to work in prostitution, exotic
dancing, or other ‘‘entertainment.’’ Less commonly, victims may
work in factories, on farms, in mines, or as domestic servants.
Although forced labor is given, with the hope of eventual free-
dom, ‘‘interest’’ on the smuggling debt makes release unlikely
unless severe illness occurs such as a prostitute contracting
HIV/AIDS and being no longer able to work.
Exploitation of trafficking victims occurs simultaneously
with psychological and verbal abuse that extends to torture.
Physical abuse, such as beatings and rape, is not uncommon.
This abuse ensures that the trafficking victim will be compliant
Human Trafficking: Causes and Consequences
123

with customers and will be worn down and therefore not try to
escape. Another form of abuse is confined living quarters that
may be shared by up to 20 people in the presence of guards.
Victims are always under supervision to prevent attempts to
get help or escape.
For some victims, the only resolution to trafficking is death.
They could be tortured to death or die trying to pay off the
smuggling debt. For those who escape, it is often not possible
to return to the home country because they would be socially
ostracized. In many cultures, prostitution is not acceptable and
trafficking victims forced to do such work are considered
unclean. Trafficking victims who do return often find them-
selves without economic opportunity again and may even let
themselves be recruited by a new smuggler or trafficker.
The Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in
Persons, Especially Women and Children is an international legal
agreement that requires its signatory countries to take action to pre-
vent trafficking, prosecute traffickers, and provide victim protection.
In the United States, the Victims of Trafficking and Violence Protec-
tion Act (VTVPA) requires international cooperation with send-
ing countries to identify human traffickers. Law-enforcement task
forces include the FBI (Federal Bureau of Investigation) and Immi-
gration and Customs Enforcement (ICE) agents, which work with
international police to acquire intelligence on human-trafficking
rings. The U.S. government seeks to educate women abroad about
trafficking and provides funding to create economic opportunities in
developing countries. The VTVPA of 2000 began a sanctions-based
system in which countries are ranked into three tiers based on the
degree to which they have introduced antitrafficking initiatives and
are attempting prevention and prosecution. The U.S. Department of
State has recognized 26 countries as Tier 1, considered acceptable.
Tier 2 countries are considered to need more preventative efforts but
are not subject to sanctions. Tier 3 countries are subject to sanctions.
Sending countries in the developing world which are suc-
cessful in assisting prosecution of human trafficking receive eco-
nomic aid. Countries involved in human trafficking which have
not made steps toward dealing with the problem are ineligible
for funding. Since it is economic problems which encourage
human trafficking, this economic sanction is likely to have the
reverse impact of increasing human trafficking if a country does
not have the resources to combat it and the VTVPA sanctions
are enforced because more individuals will seek to migrate.
124
Border Security in an International Context

In the United States, VTVPA, in conjunction with the Peon-
age Abolition Act of 1867, which made it a crime to force labor
of any man, woman, or child as a slave, provides for prosecu-
tion and sentencing of human traffickers. The new law makes it
a crime to deceive or threaten harm to coerce work irregardless
of whether it is sex work or any other kind of labor. Traffickers
and knowing customers can receive up to 20 years’ imprison-
ment for forcing adult labor. In the case of child labor, or if an
adult victim dies, is kidnapped, or endures severe sexual abuse,
the sentence expands to life imprisonment. This act also speci-
fies that any U.S. citizen traveling to another country for sex
tourism can be imprisoned for up to 30 years.
Pursuing and Prosecuting Human
Trafficking
The VTVPA authorizes two types of immigration relief for traf-
ficking victims: Continued Presence (CP) and T visas. ‘‘Contin-
ued presence’’ is a temporary status issued by law enforcement
which allows a victim of severe trafficking to stay in the United
States during an investigation. A ‘‘T visa’’ gives nonimmigrant
status to victims of severe forms of trafficking who are at or
near a port of entry because of trafficking, have helped with
investigation or prosecution of trafficking, or are under 18 years
of age and who would suffer extreme hardship if deported.
They may stay in the United States up to four years and the
stay may be extended of it is needed for an antitrafficking
investigation. After three years, holders of T visas can apply for
an adjustment to permanent resident status.
In FY2007, 122 people received CP status. Their origins were
Mexico, El Salvador, and China. Immigration gateway cities
such as Los Angeles, New York, Newark, and Houston were
sites of the most requests. In FY2007, 279 people received T visas.
Since 2001, 1,974 victims and immediate family members have
received T visas (Office of the Attorney General 2008, 19–20).
Police corruption in sending countries extends to accepting
bribes or even participating in human-trafficking organizations.
Police who are involved are called ‘‘corrupt guardians’’ (Farr 2005).
Bribery can ensure that false identification and travel documents
are accepted, and even some American inspectors are not above
Pursuing and Prosecuting Human Trafficking
125

taking money to allow fraudulent entry. Alarmingly, corrupt
guardians may help to enforce enslavement if they recapture
and turn over victims or take bribes to protect businesses using
forced labor. They may also warn traffickers of investigations and
raids (Farr 2005).
Border-security efforts are considered a method to fight
human trafficking. The difficulty with this approach concerns
the recruitment of individuals who travel voluntarily and make
unauthorized entrance before the situation turns against them
(Kleeman 2009, 419). Because most individuals who are forced
into labor have entered the United States and other countries
without authorization and giving consent, police become com-
placent about offering assistance and may view these individu-
als as immigration law violators. Police treat trafficking victims
as criminal aliens and put them into deportation proceedings,
which occur without due process rights accorded to citizens
such as access to a lawyer. The use of fraudulent documents
and payment to traffickers makes these victims appear to be
willing accomplices. Because the victims consented to illegal
entry, police are reluctant to assign a victim status. Victims
engaging in prostitution and other sex trade labor also are less
likely to be helped by police because they have committed yet
another type of crime even though it was against their will.
Police complacency and resultant inaction produces a forgotten
population of forced labor and further victimizes this group.
Lack of police action then encourages human traffickers to op-
erate with impunity. Another factor in police complacency that
encourages traffickers is lack of knowledge of how to conduct
trafficking investigations.
The U.S. VTVPA provides for protection of victims of
human trafficking found in the United States. Victims are to be
placed in shelters with security and given psychological, medi-
cal, legal, and job assistance. They are to be provided with tem-
porary visas for their testimony against traffickers and will
ultimately qualify for permanent resident visas. The United
States has faced issues in carrying out this law because of prob-
lems in prosecuting cases where the individual gave consent.
They may have consented to use of fraudulent documents and
unauthorized entry. The VTVPA requires proof of harm and
that work was forced or coerced. It is hard to prosecute cases of
travel across international borders or instances where individu-
als agreed to work in the sex industry. The victim has to prove
126
Border Security in an International Context

their victimization. Individuals are evaluated in a process called
certification by the Department of Health and Human Services
to determine if severe treatment due to trafficking occurred
before receiving a temporary visa. This means that individuals
who have difficulty proving their case may be deported and
subject to retaliation in the home country.
Drug Trafficking
In the 1960s, the United States began a law-enforcement campaign
against domestic and international drug trafficking (Andreas and
Nadelman 2006, 128–131). The U.S. official policy narratives have
emphasized the importance of prohibition of drug use rather than
alternative harm-reduction approaches including drug treatment.
This approach has resulted in organized crime involvement in
both Canada and Mexico as there is consumer demand for nar-
cotics and smuggled cigarettes at lower cost.
The U.S.-Canada Border (1960–present)
The Canadian border is a two-way drug-trafficking transship-
ment point. All methods of border crossing are used. Commer-
cial and private vehicles take drugs overland, and some are
brought on foot. Marine borders used for smuggling include
the Great Lakes, the Saint Lawrence River, the Washington–
British Columbia Strait, and open ocean. Aircraft are used as
well in this very profitable illicit venture. Canada has become a
source of high-grade marijuana brought to the United States.
Heroin and precursor chemicals are trafficked to a lesser extent.
The Canadian border is a world source of methamphetamines
and ecstasy (National Drug Intelligence Center 2001, 2–18).
The U.S. border is used to smuggle cheaper, tax-exempt
cigarettes into Canada. By 1994 it was estimated that one-third
of all Canadian cigarettes were smuggled to avoid tariff taxa-
tion (Beare 2003). Of greater concern for the Canadians is that
the United States has been the major transshipment point for
cocaine to be smuggled into Canada and is the main source of
smuggled weapons because of its gun-control policy.
In contrast to the increasingly fortified Mexican border, the
Canadian border received far fewer resources over time, and was
viewed as much less of a priority (Ackleson and Heyman 2010, 66).
Drug Trafficking
127

In the 1980s the United States passed major antidrug-trafficking
legislation, and Canada follows international conventions and its
own Controlled Drugs and Substances Act (National Drug Intelli-
gence Center 2001, 21). The United States and Canada have mutual
drug demand reduction goals and, with greater resources available
than Mexico, have bilateral law-enforcement cooperation. Cross-
border cooperative efforts prior to 9/11 include Integrated Border
Enforcement Teams, Intelligence Collection Analysis Teams, and
the Canada-U.S. Cross-Border Crime Forum.
In Canada, organized Asian criminal groups and outlaw
motorcycle gangs such as the Hells Angels control marijuana pro-
duction and distribution (National Drug Intelligence Center 2001,
4–5). British Columbia is the primary growing area for marijuana,
producing ‘‘BC Bud,’’ although Quebec also produced ‘‘Quebec
Gold.’’ BC Bud is used in exchange for cocaine from the United
States, and drug smugglers are caught along the border on a regu-
lar basis. As the drug trade becomes entrenched, Vancouver,
British Columbia, is experiencing drug-related violence.
Mexican Drug Trafficking (1960–present)
The militarization of the U.S.-Mexico border is a social project
that began with drug control and has been expanded to immi-
gration (Dunn 1996). Both the United States and Mexico have
increasingly involved the armed forces, including the U.S.
National Guard, to perform surveillance on the Mexican border.
Since the 1980s the U.S.-Mexico border has emerged as the
major site of drug trafficking into the United States, a national
security threat (Payan 2006, 28). It threatens the Mexican gov-
ernment due to high levels of violence and associated corrup-
tion.
Mexican
drug-trafficking
organizations
grow
and
transport marijuana and heroin and manufacture methamphet-
amines. Of the cocaine entering the United States from South
America, 90% is trafficked by the Mexican cartels over the
southwest border (U.S. Department of Justice National Drug
Intelligence Center 2006). The smuggling of drug money and
arms south is equally significant.
The successful enforcement effort against the Colombian
Cali and Medellin cartels led to the emergence of Mexican drug-
trafficking organizations (DTOs) which took over the trade (Payan
2006, 28). Previously, Colombians trafficked cocaine through
Florida. Mexican smugglers made ties with Colombian traffickers
128
Border Security in an International Context

and relocated the problem to the southern border. The Mexican
government has a history of tolerating drug-trafficking organiza-
tions (Beittel 2009, 7–8). In the 1980s and 1990s, it pursued a policy
of accommodation in which government officials and police
accepted bribes while appeasing the United States by making some
arrests and running a crop-eradication program. Cooperative
efforts between the United States and Mexico were viewed with
mistrust by U.S. officials because of known corruption in Mexico.
From 1986 through 1992, the U.S. president was required to
certify the degree of foreign government cooperation in combating
DTOs and Mexico was criticized, which led to a negative Mexican
government reaction (Beittel 2009, 2–3). In 2002 the United States
changed to a policy of designating countries considered to be
deficient in combating narcotics trafficking and withholding assis-
tance. After the election of Mexican President Vincente Fox (2000–
2006) of the National Action Party (PAN) ended 71 years of PRI
(Institutional Revolutionary Party) rule, binational cooperation
against DTOs increased as Mexico strengthened its commitment
to democracy rather than one-party rule.
Narcoterrorism
Narcoterrorism is defined as the use of terrorism to increase
profits from drug trafficking or taking the profits from drug traf-
ficking to fund terrorism (Casteel 2003). In the case of Mexico,
drug organizations have used executioners, gangs, and paramili-
tary groups to terrorize and intimidate the public and govern-
ment officials (Cook 2007, 6–9; Beittel 2009, 5–6). Police chiefs,
prosecutors, elected government representatives, journalists, and
civilians of all ages have been killed (Beittel 2009, 10–12). The vio-
lence is considered terroristic because of the torture which marks
some of the threats used to intimidate, killings, and their extent.
DTOs are torturing and maiming victims and decapitating the
corpses (Bunker, Campbell, and Bunker 2010, 146–148). Torture is
practiced for intimidation and extortion and can include beatings,
breaking bones, knife lacerations, starvation, and sexual abuse.
More extreme torture methods include acid, fire, water, electricity,
and suffocation. Maiming in connection with murders can involve
decapitation, placing bodies in car trunks, drums, or acid baths,
taping the eyes and mouth shut, and quartering of the body.
Since 2007, the Mexican government estimates that 22,700
people have been killed in drug-related violence (Castillo 2010).
In 2009, 9,635 people were murdered, more than triple the total
Drug Trafficking
129

of 2,837 in 2007. Since, 2006, 4,324 of these deaths occurred in
Ciudad Juarez, a Mexican border city. In the first four months
of 2010, 3,365 died. This 2010 total includes the deaths of a
pregnant U.S. Consulate employee and her husband and another
husband of a U.S. Consulate employee (Lacey and Thompson
2010). DTOs made threats against U.S. diplomats stationed on
the U.S.-Mexico border prior to the incidents. A short time previ-
ously, the State Department decided that consulate workers
could evacuate their families across the border for protection in
the United States. Mexican president Felipe Calderon considers
Mexico’s drug-related violence a threat to the nation (Beittel
2009, 3). As of yet, Mexican drug traffickers have not been linked
to international terrorism, but the groups that launder money of-
ten work with both drug and terrorist organizations.
Despite many attempts and reputed success in corrupting
some government officials, Mexico has taken the initiative and
cooperated with the Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA) to
combat the cartels. From 2000 through 2006, 79,000 people were
arrested on drug trafficking–related charges (Cook 2007, 3–4).
Although 78,831 were low-level drug dealers, 428 hitmen, 74 lieu-
tenants, 53 financial officers, and 15 cartel leaders were arrested,
including Tijuana leader Francisco Javier Arellano Felix and Osiel
Cardenas Guillen, the head of the Gulf organization. Mexico has
experienced conflict between major drug organizations, and the
arrest of DTO leaders has led to a turf war between the Gulf/
Tijuana and Sinaloa organizations (Cook 2007, 11–12).
Mexico drug organizations transit narcotics to 230 U.S. cities
and directly operate in 195 cities. In Mexico narcoterrorism is
increasing in response to intensified enforcement. Since Calderon
became president of Mexico, 70 tons of cocaine, 4,000 tons of mari-
juana, and 43,000 tons of methamphetamine drug processing pre-
cursors have been confiscated (Berrong 2009). This is due to the
militarization of Mexico’s antidrug effort, which involves federal
law enforcement and 45,000 members of the Mexican military
(Beittel 2009, 3, 13–14). Mexican law enforcement has arrested
90,000 traffickers, 400 hitmen, and several cartel leaders (Moore
2009). The United States extradited 95 Mexican nationals in 2008
and increased drug-seizure rates. Ironically, top-level arrests
increase inter-drug organization violence and narcoterrorism as
they fight over control of the most profitable drug routes. Six
thousand Mexicans, including 530 police officers, were killed in
drug-related violence during 2008.
130
Border Security in an International Context

Mexican traffickers’ most profitable crop is marijuana—as
cocaine and heroin smuggling has somewhat declined with
increased enforcement (Moore 2009). They use tunnels and
ramps over border barriers to move it. As drug-trafficking
efforts have become concentrated at the Mexico border, vio-
lence against Border Patrol officers has increased, including use
of automatic weapons like machine guns. Increasingly, Mexican
drug organizations are growing indoor marijuana in the United
States and competing with Asian networks and individual
growers while making contacts with street and prison gangs.
Major drug-trafficking organizations are the Tijuana Cartel
Federation, the Sinaloa Cartel Federation, the Gulf Cartel Federa-
tion, and the Federation (Sinaloa, Juarez, and Valencia) (Cook
2007, 1–2). The arrests of Tijuana cartel leaders Francisco Javier
Arellano Felix and Guild cartel leader Osiel Cardenas Guillen led
to an inter-cartel alliance. Project Reckoning, a DEA initiative, fur-
ther disrupted the Gulf Cartel’s U.S. and European distribution
networks (U.S. Attorney, Southern District of New York 2008). Six
hundred were arrested and 12,000 pounds of cocaine and $72
million in U.S. currency were confiscated. In the U.S. interior, the
DEA moved against the Gulf organization and arrested 750 while
targeting 70 distribution networks. Twelve thousand kilograms of
cocaine and $60 million in U.S. currency were confiscated.
Narcoterrorism in Mexico has become a leading threat to
Mexican national security (Casteel 2003; Grayson 2010). The
DTOs attempt to bribe or intimidate Mexican law enforcement,
the military, and the government. Police in Nuevo Laredo,
Mexico, have reportedly kidnapped members of rival cartels to
turn over to the Gulf organization. The Mexican government
has conducted numerous operations to purge police of drug or-
ganization enforcers. Nuevo Laredo was originally the site of
highly publicized drug-organization conflict because of its
proximity to Laredo, Texas, its sister border city and the profit-
able I-35 trafficking route. Hundreds of Mexicans and 60 Amer-
ican citizens have been kidnapped (Blumenthal 2005). Violence
has included the murder of government officials, and threats
against American journalists have led their newspapers to
take protective action. Drug organizations seek to intimidate
both the media and police as a way of reducing coverage
and reaction to their activities. The U.S. State Department
has urged American citizens to take precautions when travel-
ing in Mexico. In April, 2010, a grenade was hurled at the U.S.
Drug Trafficking
131

Consulate in Nuevo Laredo, which was closed indefinitely
(Lacey 2010). It is considered that threats against U.S. interests
in Mexico are due to U.S. backing of President Calderon’s anti-
drug offensive.
The U.S. Joint Forces Command (2008, 36) characterized
Mexico as a possible ‘‘failing state.’’ Mexican officials have
contested this position, and Secretary of State Hillary Clinton
(Clinton 2009) has stated that she does not believe that Mexico
has any ‘‘ungovernable territories.’’ Alternately, Mexican Presi-
dent Calderon claims that the DTOs have been weakened and
are turning against each other due to shrinking market share
(Malkin 2009). A third view is that drug traffickers need to sub-
vert the state by corrupting government and law enforcement
rather than defeat it (Jane’s Information Group 2009).
Controversy exists over the cause of rapidly accelerating
drug-related violence during the Calderon presidency (Lacey
and
Thompson
2010).
Michele
Leonhart,
acting
Enforce-
ment Administration administrator, considers that: ‘‘. . . the vio-
lence we have been seeing is a signpost of the success our very
courageous Mexican counterparts are having’’ (Peters 2009).
The Mexican government has maintained that the deaths are
primarily of individuals involved in drug trafficking and
involve conflict between the military or law enforcement and
gangs and DTOs or inter-cartel turf wars generated by arrests
of high-ranking DTO leaders. Former Foreign Minister Jorge
Casta~neda has stated that: ‘‘The argument is absurd that the
killings are a sign of his [Calderon’s} success.’’ The January,
2010 deaths of 16 Mexican teenage students at a birthday party
were characterized by Felipe Calderon as ‘‘a settling of ac-
counts’’ between drug gang members. In fact, the youth were
from a rough neighborhood and had avoided involvement with
the drug trade. This incident and the killing of a U.S. Consulate
worker has led to increased criticism of President Calderon’s
military offensive. A new effort will be made to involve
Mexican citizens and deal with the rupture in the social fabric
of Mexican society.
Janet Napolitano (2009), director of Homeland Security,
indicates that cartel violence in Mexican border cities has a spill-
over effect in the United States. Spillover violence is defined as
planned attacks on U.S. citizens, officials, or physical infrastruc-
ture in the United States (Peters 2009). There have been inter-
cartel murders in the United States, kidnappings, and attacks on
132
Border Security in an International Context

U.S. Border Patrol officers attempting interdiction of drug smug-
glers. Law-enforcement monitoring indicates Mexican DTOs
maintain drug distribution networks or supply drugs to distrib-
uters in 230 U.S. cities (GAO 2009). The National Drug Assess-
ment, 2010 states that: ‘‘Direct violence similar to the conflicts
occurring among major DTOs in Mexico is rare.’’ (Department of
Justice National Drug Intelligence Center 2009, 16). Neverthe-
less, ‘‘indirect violence’’ including kidnapping and other forms
of DTO ‘‘discipline,’’ are occurring. Kidnappings of drug cus-
tomers occur when payment has not been made. Inside DTOs,
the discipline of members can include beatings, kidnappings,
torture, and/or death of members who do not deliver drugs or
money. Drug-related violence includes assaults against members
or the families of DTOs that are establishing homes in the United
States for safety. Phoenix, Arizona has experienced an increase
in drug and human smuggling related kidnappings in 2007
(260), 2008 (299), and 2009 (267) (Department of Justice National
Drug Intelligence Center 2009, 16).
The expansion of Mexican DTOs into the United States
led to raids in 19 states by Project Coronado against La Familia
Michoacana
(LFM),
a
methamphetamine
distributing
cartel
(McKinley 2009). Three hundred and three people were arrested.
Simultaneously, Mexican law enforcement arrested two midlevel
commanders and four other LFM members. In Mexico, LFM tor-
tures and beheads its victims, including police officers. Attorney
General Eric H. Holder Jr. indicates: ‘‘The sheer depravity and
level of violence that this cartel has exhibited far exceeds what
we, unfortunately, have become accustomed to from other car-
tels. While this cartel may operate from Mexico, the toxic reach
of its operations extends to nearly every state within our coun-
try.’’ Arrests occurred in 38 cities including the major distribu-
tion centers of Dallas, Atlanta, and Seattle. Since 2006, over 900
members of La Familia Michoacana have been arrested in the
United States.
The degree of violence impacting the United States, partic-
ularly border communities, is not as severe as in Mexico. For
example, El Paso, Texas, reported 17 murders in 2008 and
13 murders through 12-25-2009 in comparison to over 1,600
drug-related murders in Ciudad Juarez, Mexico (Johnson 2009).
In 2009, murder rates actually declined during the first six
months of 2009. According to Texas governor Rick Perry, this
is due to increased patrols. Nevertheless, DHS has added ICE
Drug Trafficking
133

officers to deal with criminal aliens in the border region and is
funding increased assistance to state and local law enforcement
and Mexico (Department of Homeland Security Office of the
Press Secretary 2009). In addition, the United States is enacting
plans to increase security by installing x-ray devices to check
certain southbound cars for drugs, arms, and cash. Both the
DHS and the state of Texas have developed border-security ini-
tiatives for any surge of border spillover violence. The most
drastic scenario concerns the possibility that drug violence may
cause Mexico to become a failed state. When the Pentagon
raised this possibility, Mexican President Calderon denied it.
Drug Addiction in Mexico
Mexico has been developing an internal drug-addiction problem
as drugs become cheaper and more available. In 2009, Mexico
passed a statute said to decriminalize drug possession (Lacey
2009a). Individuals found in possession of small amounts of
drugs will not be prosecuted. Instead, they will receive referrals
to treatment programs. Individuals found with drugs a third
time would be forced to enter a treatment center. The measure is
intended to free prison space for more dangerous criminals.
Critics of the new law argue that it will promote border drug
tourism and increase addiction. It can be viewed, however, as a
step toward mandatory sentencing because previously only sale
or purchase was criminalized. The amount in possession is very
small, making possession of larger amounts a criminal offense.
Border drug tourism is less likely because of the higher risk of
arrest and imprisonment in Mexico. While drug-related violence
in Mexico remains a serious problem, individuals may forego
exposing themselves to danger while obtaining drugs in Mexico.
The United States has been the world leader in enacting a
drug-prohibition agenda (Andreas and Nadelman 2006). Critics
of the War on Drugs consider it a disastrous policy damaging
U.S. security interests in Mexico and other drug-exporting
nations (Lacey 2009a). They advocate harm reduction through
legalization of drugs and associated taxation to pay for the
costs. The United States and Mexico have a policy of interdic-
tion and eradication of drug crops. Advocates of this policy
believe that the drug supply has been reduced while critics con-
sider that the government has held back data which shows that
cocaine prices have dropped due to an increase in supply. The
Mexican government and drug-policy critics believe that the
134
Border Security in an International Context

United States needs to reduce citizens’ demand for drugs,
which allows cartels to earn billions. Strategies for demand
reduction include drug-prevention programs and treatment.
Five billion dollars has been committed to the integration of
substance-abuse services into the U.S. health care system for
early screening and care with an emphasis on prevention.
Advocates of this approach argue that drug treatment is more
cost effective than interdiction.
The United States’ power asymmetry with Mexico, a develop-
ing country, can be viewed as contributing to the problem. Mexico
regards U.S. assistance as sensitive because it sees U.S. inter-
vention as a violation of its sovereignty. Many Latin American
countries dislike the United States’ unilateral drug-enforcement
strategy and would prefer multilateral cooperation. The relative
inequality between developed and developing nations, weak insti-
tutions, and poverty create a social environment in which organ-
ized drug crime can flourish. Confronting the systemic problems
of Mexico could benefit counternarcotics efforts.
The Merida Initiative and Mexican Law Enforcement
Drug trafficking and organized crime are problems in Mexico,
Central America, and the Caribbean. It has been difficult for the
developing nations of the North American region to address drug
transit and crime. Organized crime develops in weak nations, and
strong and credible national governments are needed to address
it (Olson and Donnelly 2009). Although democratic institutions
are not absolutely essential, it is thought that they further crime
control. Corruption of government officials and law enforcement
has allowed drug organizations to exercise control in trafficking
nations. Corruption becomes endemic due to a lower standard of
living and salaries. As a result, law enforcement and the judiciary
are weak in these neighbor nations.
The Merida Initiative involves the United States, Mexico,
Central America, the Dominican Republic, and Haiti. It addresses
drug trafficking, arms smuggling, money laundering, and organ-
ized criminal activity. The United States will input $1.5 billion
over three years. Technological assistance and training will be
provided, with much investment in helicopters, speedboats, and
computerized intelligence systems to share databases.
Organized crime thrives in ungoverned spaces: nations where
the government is weak and undemocratic. The drug-trafficking
Drug Trafficking
135

crisis of violence in Mexico has led to citizen protests and major
reform of law enforcement. The federal police have been restruc-
tured into a national police force. Major problems exist at all levels
of law enforcement because low salaries and poor working con-
ditions attract less-educated personnel to what is a low social
prestige occupation. Police are very vulnerable to corruption to
augment their pay, and there is a history of corruption in both law
enforcement and government, especially at the state and munici-
pal levels (Grayson 2010).
The Mexican criminal justice system needs greater equity
and transparency to reduce corruption and increase its credi-
bility (Grayson 2010). It lacks resources for the investigation
and prosecution of organized crime. Criminal justice personnel
lack scientific, technical, and legal training. Organized criminals
have infiltrated law enforcement, the courts, and prisons. Com-
pounding this problem is a lack of institutional oversight.
Mexico is moving from an inquisitorial to an adversarial
system of justice such as is practiced in the United States (Olson
2008). In inquisitorial systems prosecutors compile evidence
and issue recommendations resulting in verdicts given behind
closed doors. Individuals are not presumed innocent until evi-
dence is provided and there is an absence of oral prosecution
and defense, witness cross-examination, or defendant examina-
tion of evidence. This has led to inefficiency and human rights
violations. Defendants are held until proven innocent. It is pre-
dicted that it will take into 2015 to switch completely over to an
adversarial system.
Mexico has endemic corruption due to drug-organization
payouts to officials and law-enforcement officers. Mexican federal,
state, and local police, as well as the military, have been penetrated
by organized crime and subject to bribery (Grayson 2010). For
many Mexican government officials, corruption has been consid-
ered the norm rather than deviant. As a result, the profession-
alization of law enforcement has been a priority. Mexico has
involved 24,000 of the military in counter-trafficking and prelimi-
nary evidence indicated that although violence is reduced where
they are deployed, it is displaced, or a stalemate occurs. Nevethe-
less, the increase in drug-related violence since involvement of
the Mexican military has led to a refocusing of the Merida Initia-
tive on strengthening civilian law enforcement and providing sup-
port, screening of goods and people prior to border crossing,
and strengthening Mexican communities with high poverty and
136
Border Security in an International Context

crime rates, particularly Ciudad Juarez and Tijuana (Thompson
and Lacey 2010).
The Calderon administration has sought to strengthen con-
trol over the military whose officers are involved in civilian law
enforcement against drug trafficking. Amnesty International
(2009) has issued a report documenting five cases in which the
Mexican army is alleged to have committed extrajudicial kill-
ings, torture, arbitrary detention, and enforced disappearance—
all human rights violations. This NGO believes that these cases
establish a pattern of violation of international human rights
law. In Mexico crimes committed by the military have been
tried in a separate judicial system, which may not be constitu-
tional. Amnesty International (2009, 20) believes that: ‘‘military
courts lack the independence and impartiality to be able to try
the cases of human rights violations implicating members of
the military in line with international law.’’ Both the United
Nations and the Inter-American Court on Human Rights have
issued policies or rulings that such cases should be tried in ci-
vilian courts. If Mexico’s army is found to be in violation of
human rights law, it would cause a withholding of 15% of Mer-
ida Initiative funding.
Recommendations for changing policy to deal with the
Mexican drug crisis include reducing the demand for drugs
among developed nations while increasing the costs of doing
business for organized crime. Mexico has a crisis of public secu-
rity. This is due to homicide, kidnappings, robbery, and piracy.
The United States recognizes that public demand for drugs cre-
ates this social problem. Another issue is gun control as fire-
arms trafficking is linked to drug-related violence.
Weapons Smuggling
Drug-related violence is connected to traffic in weapons smuggled
from the U.S. border states to Mexico. During the first two years of
Calderon’s presidency, 31,000 weapons and 4 million rounds of
ammunition have been seized. Over 3,000 grenades have been
confiscated and 56,000 criminals arrested (Berrong 2009). The U.S.
civilian gun market in Texas, Arizona, and California provides
access to military weaponry for drug traffickers (GAO 2009). The
absence of gun control in what is a lightly regulated form of com-
merce has resulted in constant piecemeal smuggling of arms to
Weapons Smuggling
137

Mexico. Gun shows, where individuals sell weapons without a
background check, and other private sales are major sources. Deal-
ers have seldom been investigated. Addressing this issue will be
difficult because of powerful civilian pro-gun organizations in the
United States. Among measures suggested are stopping import of
assault weapons, extending gun checks to the secondary market of
individual sales, and targeting border region gun dealers for
yearly inspections and revoking the licenses of those found to be a
prime source of trafficked weapons.
The smuggling of guns has negatively impacted U.S.-
Mexico border security and caused increased weapons-related
violence in both Mexico and Canada (Cook, Cukier, and Krause
2009). Although American citizens are not used to being con-
nected to a trinational problem, both Mexico and Canada must
deal with a side effect of relatively less-strict U.S. gun-control
laws that allow purchase of weapons that are then smuggled
across the border (Cook, Cukier, and Krause 2009, 275). Drug-
related violence on the Mexico border and in the Mexican inte-
rior has intensified due to the illicit trade in U.S. weapons.
Canadian gangs have an increased rate of homicide due to use
of smuggled weapons in intergang conflict and against police
or bystanders (Li 2008). Canadian police documented 117 gang-
related homicides in 2007 and 69% were committed with a gun
(Li 2008). British Columbia has experienced increased gun vio-
lence due to Mexican drug traffickers’ conflicts with Canadian
drug dealers. From January to March 2009 there were 40 shoot-
ings and 17 deaths. As a result, British Columbia’s attorney
general signed a joint agreement to combat weapons trafficking
with Baja California, Mexico, state officials (CTV News 2009).
The United States has readily accessible guns. They can be
purchased in small lots and smuggled at low cost using routes
already established for other contraband trade. Guns can be
legally bought from federal firearms licensees (FFLs) as long
as the purchaser does not have a felony record and is a perma-
nent resident alien or citizen (Cook, Cukier, and Krause 2009,
268, 272). Handguns may be purchased in multiples in the state
of residence, but this type of sale needs to be reported by FFLs
to the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms, and Explosives
(ATF). A criminal background check is meant to curb illegal
purchases although false documentation can be used. In addi-
tion, firearms dealers may have knowledge that guns will be
smuggled. Another way of purchasing illicit weapons in most
138
Border Security in an International Context

states is at gun shows where private parties can sell without a
background check (Wintermute 2007, 151). It is possible to buy
a substantial number of guns this way although mass purchases
of hundreds would likely come to the attention of authorities.
Theft from FFLs and diversion from manufacturers and distrib-
utors are another source of guns (Cook, Cukier, and Krause
2009, 272).
False documentation, concealing guns, and false declara-
tion are used to cross weapons over the Mexican and Canadian
borders (Cook, Cukier, and Krause 2009, 275). Border inspectors
are under time pressure and may inadvertently pass smuggled
arms. Some inspectors may be bribed to let guns pass. The
Mexican pattern is to purchase guns in the United States and
send a few across the border at a time (Lumpe 1998, 2000).
Although few guns are risked at once, a source such as a dealer
can provide major quantities (Cook, Cukier, and Krause 2009,
276). ATF data analysis indicates that from 1996 to 2003, more
than 30,000 firearms were involved in 127 cases with a 124-gun
average (Cook, Cukier, and Krause 2009, 276).
Limited data from firearms tracing indicates that the
United States is the main source of handguns used in Canadian
crime and of crime weapons used in Mexico (GAO 2009). The
illicit arms trade in Mexico is organized around point sources,
dealers, and trafficking organizations rather than multiple dif-
fused sources as the same dealers are used repeatedly (Cook,
Cukier, and Krause 2009, 277). In recent years, high-caliber and
power weapons such as the AK and AR-15 semiautomatic rifles
are being trafficked into Mexico, especially from southwestern
border states (GAO 2009, 4).
The United States is mobilizing border intelligence and se-
curity to apprehend arms traffickers (Cook, Cukier, and Krause
2009, 280). AFT processes online gun trace requests from
Mexican officials through Project Gun Runner. One hundred spe-
cial agents and 25 industry operations investigators are combating
smuggling and weapons-related violence in border communities
on both sides. Armas Cruzadas, a joint law-enforcement project
with Mexico, facilitates intelligence sharing and coordination
of operations (Seelke 2008, 18). Drug-related violence in Mexico is
peaking and to curb arms smuggling, Mexico will inspect 1 in
every 10 cars going south (Asbury 2008).
ATF trace data indicates that the major source states pro-
viding arms to Mexico are Texas (39%), California (20%), and
Weapons Smuggling
139

Arizona (10%) (GAO 2009, 4). Most firearms traced come from
gun shops and pawn shops. About 6,700 gun and pawn shops
are located in southwestern border states. Gun dealers can
operate at gun shows or out of their own homes. ‘‘Straw pur-
chasers,’’ individuals without a criminal record, are paid by
middlemen or drug-trafficking organizations to buy from shops
and at gun shows (Cook, Cukier, and Krause 2009, 272). The
bulk of guns smuggled to Mexico are used by drug-trafficking
organizations who maintain support staff to procure weapons
(Cook, Cukier, and Krause 2009, 281). Bringing weapons across
the border in personal or commercial vehicles has been very
successful.
Attempts to prevent arms trafficking are held back by loose
inspection regulations and problems in organizing ICE and ATF
to coordinate their efforts (Cook, Cukier, and Krause 2009, 280).
Problem areas include no requirement for background checks on
private firearm sales and limits to reporting of multiple sales. ATF
has no history of cooperation with ICE and the two agencies lack a
clear agreement on how to coordinate activities and what their
cooperative roles should be. Gun-ownership tracking is problem-
atic because data is not systematically collected on arms-trafficking
confiscation and the investigation and prosecution of cases.
Cook, Cukier, and Krause (2009, 280), academicians, consider
that the best policy option for reducing international gun traffick-
ing out of the United States is legislating gun-control laws. This
would be opposed by the gun lobby, including the National Rifle
Association. Expansion of state regulations would better control
buyers, such as legislating gun show laws for Arizona, New
Mexico, and Texas, like those in place in California. Improved
enforcement of existing laws that prohibit illicit sales at gun
shows and more investigations of gun running would make it
more difficult to traffic in arms.
If the United States is successful in reducing gun smuggling
to Mexico, the price of arms will increase and other international
sources will be sought (Cook, Cukier, and Krause 2009, 280). The
military and Central America are alternate weapons sources. In
Central America, millions of weapons used in various armed
conflicts are still in use. Corruption in Mexico could lead to sale
of police and military arms to organized crime groups.
If weapons became very costly and access to other sources
could be checked, then weapons-related violence could be con-
trolled but it is unlikely to eliminate gun smuggling. Canada has
140
Border Security in an International Context

strong gun-control laws, a lower likelihood that guns would be
diverted from the military or police, and vigorous enforcement,
yet gun smuggling persists (Cook, Cukier, and Krause 2009).
Curtailing gun smuggling would be likely to reduce gun avail-
ability, particularly for handguns, but the impact on the rate
of violence is less predictable. The billions in profit from drug traf-
ficking would permit cartels to seek alternate international sources.
Comparing and Contrasting: European
Union v. North America
The United States maintains conventionally guarded land bor-
ders with Canada and Mexico. In contrast, the European Union
(EU) has eliminated many of the internal land borders demar-
cating its members for its citizens, although noncitizen travel is
documented. The Schengen agreement created a ‘‘borderless
Europe’’ through which its citizens can freely travel without
being stopped for inspection (Europa 2009). The EU countries
include Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria, Cyprus, the Czech Republic,
Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Hungary,
Iceland, Italy, Latvia, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, the Nether-
lands, Poland, Portugal, Romania, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain,
Sweden, Switzerland, and the United Kingdom. In 2009, Turkey
was negotiating to join.
The Schengen agreement is named after a town in Luxem-
bourg near where it was signed. In 1985, signing occurred in a
boat on the Moselle River that demarcates the border between
Luxembourg and Germany. The Convention applying the Schengen
agreement took five more years for negotiation. The central idea
of Schengen was to allow ‘‘free movement of persons.’’
Border-security arrangements for the European Union are
substantially different than those of the United States. The exter-
nal borders of the Schengen countries are the focus of entry and
exit management. The Schengen agreement eliminated internal
borders between the member states. Official ports of entry allow
noncitizens in. Noncitizens are separated from EU citizens at
these ports. If a U.S. citizen enters a Schengen country, he or she
may continuously travel within the European Union. American
citizens coming as visitors do not have to apply for a visa to
travel if staying less than 90 days but must carry a passport valid
Comparing and Contrasting: European Union v. North America
141

for three months beyond expected departure (U.S. Department
of State, n.d.). A visa is needed if the purpose is for employment,
study, or like activities. Borderless travel has resulted in many
unstaffed internal borders. Noncitizens entering the European
Union need to have their passport stamped at an official port of
entry for each country entered. Failure to document the visit can
result in questioning, fines, and other consequences.
The Schengen agreement created a shared external border
and EU member state rules for policing and surveillance of the
common border. Shared policy includes hot pursuit: police
can cross borders to chase criminals. The Schengen Information
System (SIS) allows consulates and police agencies to pool
and share information on criminals and stolen property (The
Schengen acquis No date). Joint efforts are made to stop drug-
related criminal activity. The policy for entry and visa issuance
is coordinated between Schengen countries. A common policy
on asylum is held in the region.
Article 2.2 of the Schengen treaty allows member countries to
reinstate border control for security reasons over a short period of
time. France reinstated border control for the 60th anniversary of
D-Day in June 2004 and after the London bombings of 2005.
Portugal, Finland, and Germany temporarily maintain border con-
trol for major sporting events such as the 2006 FIFA World Cup.
The European Union has a common external border and
coordinates border surveillance. In light of the international ter-
rorist threat, the open borders within the European Union have
decreased control over travel within at a time when increased
scrutiny of noncitizen entrants has increased importance. The
contradiction between the free movement of people and goods
and the need to regulate passage of people is difficult to resolve.
The European Union’s cooperation in the visa issuance
process has made it easier to attract educated and talented
international migrants while allowing a unified process of shar-
ing intelligence on terrorism. In the European Union, one visa
is accepted by 24 member nations. The visa process often does
not require an interview, and the wait time for processing is
about three weeks. Externally, the European Union admits citi-
zens of more countries without a visa than the United States.
Although the United States has been the world’s leading nation
for immigration, the European Union is now friendlier.
In this context, it is helpful to examine the response of the
European Union to boundary maintenance pre- and post-9/11.
142
Border Security in an International Context

Prior to the World Trade Center attacks, the European Union
signed the Schengen agreement, dissolving its borders and per-
mitting travel without passports for citizens of the European
Union. After 9/11, the European Union departed from the
United States’ practice of limiting citizens’ rights by emphasiz-
ing intelligence-led policing.
If terrorists are viewed as criminals who engage in routine
activities, then police surveillance and citizen engagement can
help to interdict them. The United States has invested billions
in border security in the hope of intercepting terrorism sus-
pects. The European Union has relied on policing and intelli-
gence to prevent terrorism. Its tradition of dealing with
nationalistic terrorism has led it to police terrorism as a crime
rather than to become involved in major overseas wars like the
United States. The European Union tries to rely on diplomacy,
and the difference in international strategy has led to reduced
support for the United States. Although the European Union is
emphasizing external borders to allow freedom of movement
internally, this concept does not seem likely to be adopted for
North America. Canadians have rejected the idea of a ‘‘security
perimeter’’ because of their need to retain a sense of Canada as
a separate nation. Canada will cooperate in creating a Smart
Border but will not relinquish national sovereignty. The asym-
metry in power relations between the United States and Canada
causes them to favor national border regulation rather than
international policing cooperation, perhaps permanently post-
poning a ‘‘Fortress North America.’’
North American Continental
Security Perimeter
Good border relations with Canada and Mexico are important
to U.S. prosperity. Because these nations are the two largest
trading partners of the United States, there are benefits from
allowing the free flow of goods and services, as well as migrant
labor, between the borders. However, there are concerns about
having an unregulated free flow; therefore, security is essential.
Thus far, high technology for open surveillance and direct
inspection has been used to deal with gridlock in the movement
of goods. After 9/11, the idea of a common external border for
North American Continental Security Perimeter
143

North America was explored. Canadians rejected development
of a continental security perimeter (see Diez 2007) because it
was thought to compromise Canadian sovereignty. The greater
economic and military strength of the United States creates an
asymmetry in power relations between both the United States
and Canada. The desire of Canada and Mexico to remain au-
tonomous may preclude the formation of a continental security
perimeter or an even more integrative regional economy such
as that of the European Union. Terrorism increased the per-
ceived importance of borders as sites of risk.
Defining Borders: Counterterrorism
European Union
The European Union must deal with terrorist threats from
Islamist, ethnonationalist, and separatist terrorist groups. In
comparison to the United States and Canada, the level of terro-
rist activity is much higher in Europe. The most notable Euro-
pean terrorist events have included March 2004 train bombings,
July 2005 London mass-transit bombings, August 2006 plots in
the United Kingdom and Germany, and the July 2007 London
and Glasgow attacks that were prevented.
In 2008, terrorist activity in EU member states except for
the United Kingdom decreased by 24 percent as compared to
2007 (Europol 2009). In 2008, 515 terrorist attacks were pre-
vented before mission accomplishment. Over 1,000 terrorist sus-
pects were arrested in 13 EU states. Most arrests were on
suspicion of membership in a terrorist organization. Other
arrests occurred for attack-related offenses, media propaganda,
and the financing of terrorism. Most arrests are to prevent or
disrupt terrorist actions.
After 9/11, Islamicist terrorism is perceived as the world’s
greatest threat. Nevertheless, the European Union experienced
only one Islamicist attack in 2008 which occurred in the United
Kingdom (Europol 2009). Separatist terrorism is highly prevalent,
including Basque terrorist acts in Spain and France and Corsican
terrorism in France. Four persons died in separatist attacks in
2008. As in Canada and the United States, the number of ‘‘home-
grown’’ (i.e., within country) terrorist groups is increasing. The
Islamicist terrorist threat is linked to the situation in warring
144
Border Security in an International Context

and/or politically unstable countries: Iraq, Afghanistan, Pakistan,
Somalia, Yemen, and India. Terrorist volunteers increasingly
travel to Afghanistan, Pakistan, or Yemen rather than Iraq to
fight.
Despite the relatively lower rate of Islamicist terrorist activ-
ity in the European Union, such attack plans aim at perpetrating
indiscriminate mass casualties (Europol 2009). The wars in
Afghanistan and Iraq and ethnic antagonism associated with
anti-Muslim attitudes in Europe are thought to increase the
threat of terrorism. Prisons and the Internet (Stenersen 2008),
rather than mosques and public locations, are thought to be the
focus for radicalization and recruitment because of anonymity.
It is thought that second- and third-generation recruits are
attracted to global jihad because they do not identify with the
culture of their immigrant forebears but do not feel accepted in
the West, which continues to view them as foreigners. Muslims
in certain European nations continue to feel excluded after liv-
ing there for years. Research on 242 European jihadist terrorists
found that 40% were born in Europe and 55% were raised in
Europe or were long-term residents (Baker 2007). As in the
United States, adopting a strategy for fostering assimilation and
identification of Muslim immigrants within European host soci-
eties would be proactive. Assimilated immigrants make a long-
term commitment and can be socially included, not excluded.
Unfortunately, al-Qaeda encourages Muslims who feel excluded
in Europe to associate their social condition with regional conflicts
such as those between Palestine and Israel and in Afghanistan,
Iraq, and Pakistan. A failure to act to integrate new Muslim immi-
grants may create youth alienation and interest in Islamic jihad.
Law-enforcement activities for prevention of terrorism
involve substantial investigations of funding, including criminal
activities, and Internet recruitment (Europol 2009). Criminal
investigation has established that Islamic terrorist organizations
have perpetrated fraud while separatist organizations have been
accused of extortion. These organizations actively use high-speed
Internet and low-cost communication devices because of anony-
mity and lack of regulation (Stenersen 2008). They are used to
spread propaganda and recruit.
European experts believe that terrorism will be a constant
threat to national security (Europol 2009). Western nations’ pol-
icies such as the wars in Afghanistan and Iraq and support
of Israel are used to justify global jihad. Along with the United
Defining Borders: Counterterrorism
145

States, European countries having a military presence in Mus-
lim countries has precipitated jihadist video threats. ‘‘Home-
grown’’ terrorism is likely to increase as radical imans are
augmented by Internet recruitment. Homemade explosives are
most likely to be used in attacks and present a constant risk in
a chemical-using society.
The European Union has had a great deal more experience
in combating terrorism than the United States and Canada.
Prior to 2001, the European Union did not have a common defi-
nition of terrorism or penalties. A common policy was rapidly
developed,
but
EU
counterterrorism
efforts
substantially
diverge from the U.S. War on Terror, which has external (wars
in Afghanistan and Iraq) and internal dimensions. The interior
and justice ministries, rather than defense, and intelligence
services seek to disrupt terrorist networks. The European Secu-
rity and Defense Policy (ESDP) has little input into counter-
terrorism within EU nations. It is not acceptable for the European
military to be involved in homeland defense in the way that
the U.S. armed forces and National Guard have been active at
the U.S.-Mexico border. For example, instead of using a composite
agency like the Department of Homeland Security (DHS), in the
European Union, the transport ministries have increased airport
security. The Agency for the Management of External Borders
(FRONTEX) manages overseas external border management
and risk analysis. Handling of counterterrorism is divided
between many EU ministries.
The Europeans have utilized criminal law to deal with the
terrorist threat. This is unlike the United States, where the crim-
inalization of immigration law has greatly reduced rights of
noncitizens. The internal problems of separatist and other nonji-
hadist terrorists and 1970s and 1980s experience with jihadist
terrorism have led to intelligence-based counterterrorism pro-
grams. Great Britain is an example of a country with prior ex-
perience in terrorist prevention. Terrorist incidents initiated by
the Irish Republican Army (IRA) led to the development of so-
phisticated intelligence-gathering operations in Great Britain.
Although the European Union took security precautions after
9/11, its approach has emphasized international policing coop-
eration rather than the development of a surveillance net
depriving citizens of constitutional protection of privacy as in
the United States. To the degree that the European Union has
been involved in the war in Afghanistan through the North
146
Border Security in an International Context

Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO), and that Great Britain
and Spain were involved in Iraq, they have increased their
jihadist terrorist threat.
North America
Unlike the United States, Canada has used criminal law, not im-
migration law, as a method of controlling terrorists (Winderdyck
and Sundberg 2010). Canada has allocated resources to inter-
diction of ‘‘irregular migrants’’ to prevent or intercept the
entrance of terrorism suspects (Aiken 2006). On November 20, 2001,
Canada passed its Anti-Terrorism Act. Although surveillance
was increased, it included measures to safeguard the rights of
Canadians under the Canadian Constitution (Royal Assent 2001).
This act was criticized on the grounds that it would lead to racial
profiling and a discriminatory arrest pattern.
Mexico’s foreign policy is one of nonintervention, and
cooperation with the United States only occurs if it is reciprocal.
Mexico has a historic concern with how its undocumented citi-
zens fare in the United States, and the lack of softening of U.S.
response has created constraints on such cooperation (Hussain
2008). Mexico has a National Security Council, the Consejo
Nacional de Seguridad Privada de Mexico (CNSP). The CNSP
is over Centro de Informacion de Seguridad Nacional (CISEN),
the directorate that gathers and interprets civil intelligence, and
it develops and implements national security policy based on a
prioritized Institutional Risks Agenda. Due to a history of asym-
metry in relations between the United States and Mexico, there
is no direct binational cooperative linkage between national secu-
rity organizations.
Mexico has established the Sistema Nacional de Seguridad
Publica (SNSP) (Presidency of the Republic 2009). It controls,
among other public security tasks, the Policia Federal de Pre-
ventiva (PFP). The Mexican Federal Police have jurisdiction
over many activities connected to border security, including
customs, immigration, and efforts to counter drug trafficking.
The PFP controls the Inter-Institutional Coordination Unit
Gruppa Antiterrorista (UCIDGAT). UCIDGAT deals with insur-
gencies in Mexico and, with the PFP and the Mexican military,
has been active at the border.
A major issue in Mexico has been low pay for police and cor-
ruption. The PFP and UCIDGAT pay better than other Mexican
Defining Borders: Counterterrorism
147

police agencies and are seeking to end or control corruption over
the long term, although drug traffickers appear to have succeeded
in corrupting some special police as investigations are under way.
Islamic terrorist groups that may have established a pres-
ence include the Lebanese Shi’ite group Hezbollah, which is
thought to be in Monterrey, Mexico, where there are Palestinian
and Lebanese communities. The Mexican government does not
believe that al-Qaeda operatives are established there.
Conclusion
The land, air, and maritime borders of the United States involve
a degree of international linkage unprecedented in human his-
tory. As a result, transnational threats have developed which
require bilateral and international cooperation in law enforce-
ment. It is likely that Interpol and other international policing
organizations will become more prominent in efforts to control
transnational crimes such as sex, drug, and arms trafficking.
A major question is whether U.S. politicians will come to recog-
nize the degree to which unilateral solutions can impede trans-
national crime control efforts.
The War on Terror provides an example of how international
cooperation can dissolve in the face of unilateral actions. The
United States faces unprecedented challenges to its economy due
to globalization and had the sympathy of the world after the 9/11
attacks. This developed in cooperation in the war in Afghanistan,
which was primarily begun in an effort to dismantle al-Qaeda
and capture Osama bin Laden. Almost a decade later, bin Laden
was still at large and the Taliban was attempting to retake the
country. The war in Iraq, with its failure to locate weapons of
mass destruction, the use of torture and extraterritorial detention,
and other unilateral actions, alienated many countries. To combat
transnational crime, there must be international policing coopera-
tion on a global scale rather than just with Canada and Mexico
and political ties must be renewed.
The United States has dimmed its democratic luster in the
eyes of the international community despite its record in the pro-
motion of international crime initiatives in the area of trafficking.
Tremendous amounts of taxpayer income are spent on border
control, particularly at the U.S.-Mexico border, with less attention
148
Border Security in an International Context

paid to the international linkages involved. For example, the
Merida
Initiative
involves
the
United
States,
Mexico,
and
Central America but the cocaine trafficked through Mexico origi-
nates in Colombia. In the manner in which armed conflict united
countries through such venues as NATO, the fight against trans-
national threats will involve giving up antiquated unilateral initia-
tives for binational and especially, multilateral ventures.
References
Ackleson, Jason, and Justin Krasner. 2006. ‘‘The Security and
Prosperity Partnership of North America.’’ American Review of Canadian
Studies 36(2): 207–232.
Aiken, Sharryn. 2006. ‘‘Interdiction and the Post 9/11 Security
Agenda: A Canadian Perspective.’’ Le Centres d’etudes et de
recherches internationales. http://www.cerium.ca/article1932.html.
Amnesty International. 2009. ‘‘Mexico: New Reports on Human Rights
Violations by the Military.’’ http://www.amnesty.org/en/library/
asset/AMR41/058/2009/en/e1a94ad6-3df1-4724-a545-f0b93f39af69/
amr410582009en.pdf.
Andreas, Peter, and Nadelman. 2008. Policing the Globe: Criminalization
and Crime Control in International Relations. New York: Oxford
University Press.
Andreas, Peter, and Timothy Synder, eds. 2000. The Wall Around the
World: State Borders and Immigration Controls in North America and
Europe. Lanham, MD: Rowan and Littlefield.
Armitrage, David T. 2007. ‘‘The European Union: Measuring Counter-
Terrorism Cooperation. Strategic Forum.’’ http://www.ndu.edu/inss/
Strforum/SF229/SF229.pdf.
Asbury, John. 2008 ‘‘Guns Move South via Inland Gangs.’’ Press-
Enterprise, September 28. http://www.pe.com/localnews/inland/
stories/PE_News_Local_S_guns29.214203b.html.
Bach, Robert L. 2003. ‘‘Global Mobility, Inequality, and Security.’’
Journal of Human Development 4 (2): 227–245.
Baker, Edwin. 2007. ‘‘Jihadi Terrorists in Europe, Their Characteristics
and Circumstances in Which They Joined the Jihad: An Exploratory
Study.’’ Clingendael Institute. http://www.clingendael.nl/
publications/2006/20061200_cscp_csp_bakker.pdf.
Banco de Mexico. 2009. ‘‘SE27803: Remesas Familiares, Total.’’ www.
banxico.org.mx.
References
149

Beare, Margaret E. 2003. ‘‘Organized Corporate Criminality: Corporate
Complicity in Tobacco Smuggling.’’ In Critical Reflections on
Transnational Organized Crime, Money Laundering and Corruption, ed.
Beare, 183–206. Toronto: University of Toronto Press.
Beittel, June S. 2009. ‘‘Congressional Research Report for Congress:
Mexico’s Drug Related Violence.’’ Washington DC: Congressional
Research Service. http://www.fas.org/sgp/crs/row/R40582.pdf.
Berrong, Stephanie. 2009. ‘‘Cooperation on the Border: Security
Management.’’ The Magazine. http://www.securitymanagement.com/
article/cooperation-border-005427.
Blumenthal, Ralph. 2005. ‘‘Texas Town Is Unnerved by Violence in
Mexico.’’ New York Times, August 11. http://www.nytimes.com/2005/
08/11/national/.
Bunker, Pamela L., Lisa J. Campbell, and Robert J. Bunker. 2010.
‘‘Torture, Beheadings and Narcocultos.’’ Small Wars and Insurgencies
21(1): 145–178.
Casteel, Steven W. 2003. ‘‘Narco-Terrorism, International Drug
Trafficking and Terrorism—A Dangerous Mix.’’ Statement before the
U.S. Senate Judiciary Committee, May 20. http://www.usdoj.gov/
dea/pubs/cngrtest/ct052003.html.
Castillo, Eduardo. 2010. ‘‘22,700 killed in Drug Related Violence in
Mexico Since ’06.’’ Houston Chronicle, April 13. http://www.chron.
com/disp/story.mpl/ap/latinamerica/6957687.html.
CONEVAL. 2009. ‘‘Reporta CONEVAL cifras de pobreza por ingresos
2008.’’ El Consejo Nacional de Evaluacion de la Politica de Desarrollo
(CONEVAL), July 18.
Cook, Colleen W. 2007. Congressional Research Service Report: Mexico’s
Drug Cartels. http://ftp.fas.org/sgp/crs/row/RL34215.pdf.
Cook, Philip J., and Anthony A. Braga. 2001. ‘‘Comprehensive
Firearms Tracing: Strategic and Investigative Uses of New Data on
Firearms Markets.’’ Arizona Law Review 43 (2): 277–309.
Cook, Philip J., Wendy Cukier, and Keith Krause. 2009. ‘‘The Illicit
Firearms Trade in North America.’’ Criminology and Criminal Justice
9 (3): 265–286.
CTV News. 2009. ‘‘Cops in Metro Vancouver Struggle to End Gun
Violence.’’ http://www.ctvbc.ctv.ca/servlet/an/local/CTVNews/.
Diez, Jordi. 2007. ‘‘North America’s Security Perimeter.’’ Security and
Defense Studies Review 7(1). http://www.ndu.edu/chds/Journal/PDF/
2007/Diez_Article-formatted.pdf.
Dunn, Timothy. 1996. The Militarization of the Border, 1978–1992: Low
Intensity Conflict Doctrine Comes Home. Austin, TX: CMAS Books,
Center for Mexican American Studies, University of Texas.
150
Border Security in an International Context

Europa. 2009. ‘‘Summaries of EU Legislation: The Schengen Area and
Cooperation.’’ http://europa.eu/legislation_summaries/justice_freedom_
security/free_movement_of_persons_asylum_immigration/l33020_en.htm.
Europol. 2009. ‘‘TE-SAT 2009: EU Terrorism Situation and Trend
Report.’’ http://www.scribd.com/doc/14818199/EuroPol-2009-report.
Farr, Kathryn. 2005. Sex Trafficking: The Global Market in Women and
Children. New York: Worth Publishers.
Fernandez-Kelly, Patricia. ‘‘Borders for Whom? The Role of NAFTA in
Mexico- U.S. Migration.’’ Annals of the American Academy of Political and
Social Science 610: 98–118.
GAO (Government Accountability Office). 2007. ‘‘Drug Control: U.S.
Assistance Has Helped Mexican Counter-narcotics Efforts, but the
Flow of Illicit Drugs into the United States Remains High.’’
GAO (Government Accountability Office). 2009. ‘‘Firearms Trafficking:
U.S. Efforts to Combat Arms Trafficking to Mexico Face Planning and
Coordination Challenges.’’ http://www.gao.gov/htext/d09709.html.
Grayson, George W. 2009. Mexico’s Struggle with ‘‘Drugs’’ and ‘‘Thugs.’’
Foreign Policy Association, Headline Series No. 331, New York, NY, Winter.
Heyman, Josiah. 2004. ‘‘Ports of Entry as Nodes in the World System.’’
Identities: Global Studies in Culture and Power 11: 303–327.
High, Travis Scott. 2009. ‘‘The Mexican Economy in 2009.’’ Woodrow
Wilson Mexico Institute. http://wilsoncenter.org/topics/docs/
Mexican%20Economy%20in%202009.pdf.
Hussain, Imtiaz. 2008. ‘‘Mexico.’’ In PSI Handbook of Global Security and
Intelligence, vol. 1, ed. Stuart Farr, 64–97. Westport, CT: Praeger
Security International.
ILO. 2008. ‘‘World of Work Report 2008: Income Inequalities in the Age
of Financial Globalization.’’ International Labor Organization. http://
www.ilo.org/public/english/bureau/inst/download/world08.pdf.
Jane’s Information Group. 2009. ‘‘Security-Mexico.’’ February 20.
Johnson, Kevin. 2009. ‘‘Violence Drops in U.S. Cities Neighboring
Mexico.’’ USA Today, December 28. http://www.usatoday.com/news/
nation/2009-12-27-Mexico-border-violence_N.htm?csp=34&utm_sour-
ce=feedburner&utm_medium=feed&utm_campaign=Feed%
3A+usatoday-NewsTopStories+%28News+-+Top+Stories%29.
Kleeman, Edward R. 2009. ‘‘Human Smuggling and Human
Trafficking.’’ In Oxford Handbook of Crime and Public Policy, ed. Michael
Tonry, 209–327. New York: Oxford University Press.
Lacey, Marc. 2009a. ‘‘In Mexico, Ambivalence on a Drug Law.’’ New
York Times, August 23. http://www.nytimes.com/2009/08/24/
world/americas/.
References
151

Lacey, Marc. 2009b. ‘‘In Mexican Drug War, Investigators Are
Fearful.’’ New York Times, October 16. http://www.nytimes.com/
2009/10/17/world/americas/.
Lacey, Marc, and Ginger Thompson. 2010. ‘‘Two Drug Slayings in
Mexico Rock U.S. Consulate.’’ New York Times, March 14. http://
www.nytimes.com/2010/03/15/world/americas/15juarez.html.
Lehti, M., and K. Aromaa. 2006. ‘‘Trafficking for Sexual Exploitation.’’
In Crime and Justice: A Review of Research 34(1): 133–227
Li, Geoffrey. 2008. ‘‘Homicide in Canada 2007.’’ Juristat 28 (9): 1–26.
http://www.statcan.gc.ca/pub/85-002-x/2008009/article/10671-eng.
pdf.
Lumpe, Lora. 1998. ‘‘The US Arms Both Sides of Mexico’s Drug War.’’
Covert Action Quarterly 61: 39–46.
Lumpe, Lora, ed. 2000. Running Guns: The Global Black Market in Small
Arms. London: Zed Books.
Malkin, Elisabeth. 2009. ‘‘Leader Urges Cooperation Against Ills
Mexico Faces.’’ New York Times, September 2. http://topics.nytimes.
com/top/news/international/countriesandterritories/mexico/drug_
trafficking/index.html?offset=30&s=newest.
McKinley Jr., James C. 2009. ‘‘U.S. Arrests Hundreds in Raids on Drug
Cartel.’’ New York Times, October 22. http://www.nytimes.com/2009/
10/23/us/23bust.html?_r=1&pagewanted=1.
Moore, Solomon. 2009. ‘‘Tougher Border Can’t Stop Mexican
Marijuana Cartels.’’ New York Times, February 2. http://www.nytimes.
com/2009/02/02/.
Moran, Terry. 2009. ‘‘Mexico President Vows to Win Drug War.’’ ABC
News, April 15. http://abcnews.go.com/Politics/story?id=7342256&
page=1.
Napolitano, Janet. 2009. ‘‘Napolitano’s Testimony before Senate
Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs Committee, Southern
Border Violence: Homeland Security Threats, Vulnerabilities, and
Responsibilities.’’ Council on Foreign Relations. http://www.cfr.org/
publication/18945.
OECD (Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development). 2008.
Growing Unequal: Income Distribution and Poverty in OECD Countries.
Paris: Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development.
Office of the Attorney General. 2008. ‘‘Attorney General’s Annual
Report to Congress and Assessment of the U.S. Government’s
Activities to Combat Trafficking in Persons Fiscal Year 2007.’’ http://
www.justice.gov/ag/annualreports/tr2007/agreporthumantraffic-
ing2007.pdf.
152
Border Security in an International Context

Office of the Inspector General of the Department of Defense,
Department of Justice, Central Intelligence Agency, National Security
Agency, Office of the Director of National Intelligence. 2009. (U)
Unclassified Report on the President’s Surveillance Program. July 10.
http://documents.nytimes.com/federal-report-on-the-president-s-
surveillance-program#p=1.
Olson, Eric. 2008. ‘‘Six Key Issues in U.S.-Mexico Security
Cooperation.’’ Woodrow Wilson Center Mexico Institute. http://
www.wilsoncenter.org/news/docs/Olson%20Brief.pdf.
Olson, Eric L., and Robert Donnelly. 2009. ‘‘Report from the U.S.-Mexico-
Security Cooperation Working Group and a Conference on International
Experiences in Combating Organized Crime: Confronting the Challenges
of Organized Crime in Mexico and Latin America.’’ http://www.
wilsoncenter.org/news/docs/Confronting%20Challenges%20of%20
Organized%20Crime-%20Eric%20Olson%20Robert%20Donnelly.pdf.
Payan, Tony. 2006. The Three U.S.-Mexico Border Wars: Drugs,
Immigration, and Homeland Security. Westport, CT: Praeger Security
International.
Peters, Katherine McIntire. 2009. ‘‘DEA: Mexican Drug Violence Is a
Sign of Progress, Not Failure.’’ Government Executive, April 15. http://
www.govexec.com/dailyfed/0409/041509kp1.htm.
Pierce, Glenn, and Anthony Braga. 2008. ‘‘US Illegal Firearms Markets:
Potential Methods of Control.’’ Unpublished paper presented at the
New Directions in Drug and Crime Control conference, El Colegio de
Mexico, 28–9 April.
Presidency of the Republic. 2009. ‘‘Mexico’s National Public Security
System and Council.’’ November 30. http://www.mexidata.info/
id2480.html.
Rauschbaum, William K. ‘‘Revelations Begin in Routine Tax Inquiry.’’
New York Times, March 11, 2008. http://www.nytimes.com/2008/03/
11/nyregion/11inquire.html.
Richard, Stephanie. 2005. ‘‘State Legislation and Human Trafficking:
Helpful or Hurtful?’’ University of Michigan Journal of Law Reform 38:
447–477.
Risen, James, and Eric Lichtblau. 2005. ‘‘Bush Lets U.S. Spy on Callers
without Courts.’’ New York Times, December 16, A1.
Risen, James, and Eric Lichtblau. 2009. ‘‘Court Affirms Wiretapping
Without Warrants.’’ New York Times, January 15. http://www.nytimes.
com/2009/01/16/washington/16fisa.html?_r=1.
Royal Assent of Bill C-36. 2001. The Anti-Terrorism Act. http:/www.
justice.gc.ca/en/news/nr/2001/doc_28217.html.
References
153

Schengen Acquis. n.d. eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?.
Seelke, Claire Ribando. 2009. ‘‘Congressional Research Service Report
for Congress: Merida Initiative for Mexico and Central America:
Funding and Policy Issues.’’ http://www.wilsoncenter.org/news/
docs/CRS%20Merida%20Initiative%20for%20Mexico%20and%20
Central%20America%20Funding%20Policy%20Issues.pdf.
Sele, Andrew. 2009. ‘‘Money, Guns and Drugs: Are U.S. Inputs
Fueling Violence on the U.S.-Mexico Border?’’ Testimony by Andrew
Sele to the House Subcommittee on National Security and Foreign
Affairs. March 9. http://nationalsecurity.oversight.house.gov/
documents/20090313115456.pdf.
Shifter, Michael. 2007. ‘‘Latin America’s Drug Problem.’’ Current
History. February.
Stenersen, Anne. 2008. ‘‘The Internet: A Virtual Training Camp?’’
Terrorism and Political Violence 20 (2): 215–233.
Thompson, Ginger, and Marc Lacey. 2010. ‘‘U.S. and Mexico Revise
Joint Anti-Drug Strategy.’’ New York Times, March 23. http://www.
nytimes.com/2010/03/24/world/americas/24mexico.html.
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime. 2001. United Nations
Convention Against Transnational Organized Crime and the Protocols
Thereto. http://www.unodc.org/documents/treaties/UNTOC/
Publications/TOC%20Convention/TOCebook-e.pdf.
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime. 2006. Trafficking in Persons:
Global Patterns. April. www.unodc.org/pdf/traffickinginpersons_
report_2006ver2.pdf.
U.S. Attorney, Southern District of New York. 2008. ‘‘175 Alleged Gulf
Cartel Members and Associates Arrested in Massive International Law
Enforcement Operation.’’ http://www.usdoj.gov/usao/nys/
pressreleases/September08/projectreckoningpr.pdf.
U.S. Department of Justice National Drug Intelligence Center. 2006.
‘‘National Drug Threat Assessment, 2006.’’ http://www.justice.gov/
ndic/pubs11/18862/index.htm.
U.S. Department of Justice National Drug Intelligence Center.
‘‘National Drug Threat Assessment, 2009.’’ http://www.usdoj.gov/
ndic/pubs31/31379/index.htm.
U.S. Department of Justice National Drug Intelligence Center. 2009.
National Drug Threat Assessment, 2010. http://www.justice.gov/
ndic/pubs38/38661/38661p.pdf.
U.S. Department of Homeland Security. 2009. ‘‘Secretary Napolitano
Announces Major SW Border Initiative.’’ http://www.dhs.gov/
ynews/releases/pr_1237909530921.shtm.
154
Border Security in an International Context

U.S. Department of State. 2008. Trafficking in Persons Report 2008.
http://www.state.gov/g/tip/rls/tiprpt/2008.
U.S. Department of State. N.d. Schengen Fact Sheet. Accessed
September 3, 2009. http://travel.state.gov/travel/cis_pa_tw/cis/cis_4361.
html.
Clinton, Hillary Rodham, U.S. Department of State. 2009. ‘‘Remarks
with Mexican Foreign Secretary Patricia Espinosa after Their
Meeting.’’ Mexico City, Mexico, March 25.
U.S. Joint Forces Command. 2008. ‘‘The Joint Operating Environment
2008: Challenges and Implications for the Future Joint Force.’’
December. http://www.jfcom.mil/newslink/storyarchive/2008/
JOE2008.pdf.
Victims of Trafficking and Violence Protection Act of 2000. Public Law
106-386-OCT 28, 2000. http://www.state.gov/documents/
organization/10492.pdf.
Weinburg, Paul. 2009. ‘‘US-Canada: Shared Border, Unilateral Policy?’’
May 29. http://www.globalissues.org/news/2009/05/29/1664.
Winterdyck, John A., and Kelly W. Sundberg. 2010b. ‘‘Shifts in
Canadian Border Security.’’ In Border Security in the Al-Qaeda Era, ed.
John A. Winterdyk and Kelly W. Sundberg, 3–36. New York: CRC
Press.
Wintemute, Garen J. 2007. ‘‘Gun Shows across a Multistate American
Gun Market: Observational Evidence of the Effects of Regulatory
Policies.’’ Injury Prevention 13: 150–155.
World Bank. 2001. Development Cooperation and Conflict, Operational
Policy 230. Washington, DC: World Bank.
References
155

This page intentionally left blank 

4
Chronology
Establishing the Geographical
Boundaries of the United States
through Frontier Expansion
1783
The Treaty of Paris ends the War of Independence
between Great Britain and the 13 U.S. colonies and
establishes the boundary with British Canada. The
13 colonies become the United States. The exact
geographic
coordinates
are
left
unclear.
The
boundary becomes a source of conflict as both
nations want territorial expansion.
1794
The Jay Treaty establishes an International Bound-
ary Commission for the United States and British
Canada.
1789
The Tariff Act creates U.S. Customs, whose job is to
collect taxes on imports, known as customs duties.
U.S. Customs is the primary source of federal reve-
nue until an income tax law is passed in 1913.
1795
The Naturalization Act restricts citizenship eligibility
to ‘‘free white persons’’ who have lived in the United
States for longer than two years and are willing to
renounce allegiance to the sending country.
1798
The Alien and Sedition Act allows for deportation
of any foreigner considered dangerous. The Natu-
ralization Act is revised to establish eligibility for
citizenship after 14 years of residence.
157

1802
An act of Congress allows for citizenship eligibility
after five years of residence.
1808
Congress prohibits the importation of slaves.
1812
War of 1812 involves armed conflict between the
United States and Great Britain. The British occupy
a majority of eastern Maine.
1818
A boundary agreement between Great Britain and
the United States places the British America border
at the 49th parallel from the Lake of the Woods to
the Rockies. The Lake of the Woods is a body of
water in the Canadian provinces of Ontario and
Manitoba that border on the U.S. state of Minne-
sota. Great Britain and the United States agree to
jointly occupy Oregon.
1819
Congress enacts a count of aliens entering the
United States and requires shipmasters to provide
a manifest of all aliens transported for immigration.
The secretary of state is required to inform the Con-
gress of the number admitted.
1821
Mexico wins its independence from Spain.
1824
The Mexican Constitution grants states considerable
autonomy but places its territories under the author-
ity of the Mexican Congress. The territory of Texas
is placed with Coahuila. Tensions develop between
the Mexican government and the frontier territories.
1836
The Texas Rebellion establishes Texas as independ-
ent from Mexico. Mexican outlawing of slavery
and high taxation precipitate this conflict.
1837
A rebellion in Eastern British America results in
U.S. discussions about its annexation. U.S. citizens
assist rebels in Canada and some cross into Canada
and enter into military conflict. Great Britain retali-
ates by crossing into the United States. An incident
occurs involving the British destruction of an
American-owned ship, the Caroline, used to supply
the rebels, results in a U.S. request for an apology.
Great Britain does not apologize.
1838
The United States and Great Britain enter into a
dispute over the right to occupy the territory of
Oregon. The area west of the Rockies in what is
now Oregon is held jointly by the United States
and Great Britain. In the United States, it is referred
to as Oregon County, while it is known as the
158
Chronology

Columbia Department of the Hudson’s Bay Com-
pany in British America.
1841
Canada passes the Customs Consolidation Act and
places a tariff on imports.
1842
The Weber-Ashburton Treaty with Great Britain
settles a dispute over territory in New Brunswick
and the United States by allocating seven-twelfths
to the United States. Lumberjacks enter into conflict
over use of the tree resources.
1845
The United States annexes Texas.
1846–1848
The U.S.-Mexico War ends with the Treaty of
Guadalupe Hidalgo in 1848. Mexico is forced to sell
one-third of its territory to the United States. A pat-
tern of asymmetrical relations in which the United
States dominates its relationship with Mexico is
established.
The Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo grants citi-
zenship to Mexicans in the ceded territories.
1846
The Oregon Treaty between the United States and
Great Britain gives control of the Oregon territory to
the United States. It establishes the boundary
between the United States and British America as at
the 49th parallel with the exception of Vancouver
Island. The British receive the right to navigate the
Columbia River. The Strait of San Juan de Fuca is
described as having a boundary through the middle
of the channel. This treaty gives the United States
control of the territories that become the states of
Oregon, Washington, Idaho, and Montana.
1850–1859
Mass immigration of Chinese to the West Coast
causes a nativist reaction. The Know Nothing polit-
ical party advocates restriction on immigration and
naturalization.
1853
The Gadsden Purchase of territory from Mexico is
negotiated. Approximately 29,000 square miles of
territory in what is present-day Arizona and parts
of New Mexico are acquired. The land lost as a
result of the U.S.-Mexico war expands to fully one-
half of Mexico’s prior territory.
1859
The ‘‘Pig War’’ results from conflict between the
United States and Great Britain over the ownership
of the San Juan Islands in the Strait of San Juan de
Fuca. The Oregon treaty’s maritime boundary, set
Establishing the Geographical Boundaries
159

1859
(cont.)
as the middle of the channel, is vague. The blood-
less dispute is named after an incident in which a
pig was shot, becoming the only casualty.
1867
Canadian independence brings unification of the
remaining British North American colonies. In the re-
mainder of the 19th century, this border is unguarded
and relatively unmonitored with few checkpoints.
The Peonage Abolition Act makes it a crime
to force the labor of any man, woman, or child
whether through debt or slavery.
1868
Ratification of the Fourteenth Amendment stipu-
lates that all individuals born or naturalized in the
United States are under U.S. jurisdiction. No state is
allowed to abridge citizens’ right to due process of
law or equal protection under the law. Citizenship
rights are granted to former slaves and the phrase
‘‘free white persons’’ is removed from the Constitu-
tion to include blacks. The Fourteenth Amendment
affirms the right of the federal government to regu-
late immigration and naturalized citizenship.
1870
The Naturalization Act is amended to restrict citi-
zenship to ‘‘white persons and persons of African
descent,’’ thereby excluding Asians.
1875
The Page Law excludes certain social categories of
persons from entrance including convicts and pros-
titutes. Immigration is made a matter of federal
policy and all state immigration laws are declared
unconstitutional.
1878
The Posse Comitas Act restricts but does not totally
disallow military participation in domestic law
enforcement. This act later permits the military to
assist the U.S. Border Patrol at the U.S.-Mexico bor-
der in the prevention of drug trafficking and undo-
cumented immigration.
1882
The
Chinese
Exclusion
Act
prohibits
further
Chinese immigration. This act is renewed in 1888,
1892, and 1904.
The Immigration Act of 1882 levies a ‘‘head
tax’’ of 50 cents per immigrant and designates
social categories of individuals who are restricted
from coming, including ‘‘lunatics’’ and individuals
‘‘likely to become a public charge.’’
160
Chronology

1890–1899
A degree of monitoring is established by placing
U.S. checkpoints with immigration inspectors at
the Canadian border because European immi-
grants are crossing to avoid inspection and paying
a head tax. Canadians are exempt from the head
tax but subject to health, criminal history, and con-
tract labor scrutiny.
1885
The Alien Contract Labor Law prohibits employ-
ers,
companies,
or
individuals
from
bringing
immigrants under contract to work in the United
States while prepaying passage. Domestics and
skilled workers needed for new trades or industries
are an exception.
1886
U.S. Customs inspectors begin to patrol the Mexico
border on horseback to prevent smuggling. Reve-
nue cutters patrol at the maritime boundaries.
1888
The Scott Act rescinds reentry permits for Chinese
laborers, preventing them from returning.
1891
Congress designates further social categories of
individuals to be excluded from admission, includ-
ing persons ‘‘suffering from a loathsome or conta-
gious disease’’ or convicted of a ‘‘misdemeanor
involving moral turpitude.’’ The Immigration Act
is revised to create a Bureau of Immigration within
the Treasury Department. The position of ‘‘Super-
intendent of Immigration’’ is created.
1892
The Geary Act deprives Chinese immigrants of
most legal rights and requires them to have a certif-
icate of residence.
1894
Immigration inspectors are permitted to bar speci-
fied social categories of individuals from entrance,
including Chinese persons.
1901
The assassination of President William McKinley
by a Polish anarchist precipitates the Anarchist
Exclusion Act. It restricts entrance of individuals
based on their political beliefs.
1903
A joint tribunal involving
the United States,
Canada, and Great Britain clarifies northern water
boundaries, including the Great Lakes.
Congress designates immigration as a respon-
sibility of the Department of Commerce and Labor.
1906
A Naturalization Act codifies naturalization practice.
Establishing the Geographical Boundaries
161

1907
Congress passes the White Slave Traffic Act. It
makes bringing girls and women for the purpose of
prostitution or immorality a crime.
1911
The Dillingham Commission Report makes recom-
mendations to restrict immigration.
A Canadian Immigration Act creates an Immi-
gration Department.
1908
The Gentleman’s Agreement between the United
States and Japan establishes that Japanese will no
longer immigrate and that discrimination against
Japanese present in the United States will end.
1910–1920
The Mexican Revolution begins in 1910 and causes
refugee flows. The United States maintains its neu-
trality but seeks to protect its sovereignty and the
security of citizens. The military and state and local
law enforcement are used to protect U.S. interests.
1916
Pancho Villa crosses the border into Columbus, New
Mexico, killing 17 U.S. citizens and burning and loot-
ing. The United States retaliates by invading with a
force led by General John ‘‘Black Jack’’ Pershing.
1917
The United States enters World War I.
Congress
enacts
an
Immigration
Act
to
exclude illiterates. Individuals are required to be
able to read at least 40 words in any language.
The Department of State and the Department
of Labor enact a regulation requiring individuals to
obtain a visa in their home country before appear-
ing at a port of entry.
The Closing of the Nation’s
Borders to Immigration
1918
The president is given broad powers to restrict entry
or departure at the borders during times of war. This
policy is repeated in subsequent conflicts.
1919
The Covenant of the League of Nations stipulates
that members should not intervene in the affairs of
independent nations. National boundaries begin to
be used to regulate the flow of people and goods.
162
Chronology

The ‘‘Red Scare’’ due to the Bolshevik Revolu-
tion in Russia results in the deportation of ‘‘radi-
cal’’ aliens considered a threat to security.
1920–1933
Prohibition outlaws the sale and consumption of
alcohol in the United States. Smuggling of alcohol
from Canada and Mexico becomes a problem. Many
citizens cross to Canada or Mexico to drink.
1920
The Royal Canadian Mounted Police are organized.
Together with customs, immigration inspectors, and
police, they work to maintain border security.
1921
Negative public reaction to mass immigration from
south and southeastern Europe, whose entrants are
deemed ‘‘racially inferior,’’ results in the Immigration
Act of 1921 which restricted entrance to no more than
3% of the population from a particular country in the
United States at the time of the 1910 Census.
1924
The Immigration Act (Johnson-Reed Act) resets the
national origin quota to a maximum of 2% of the for-
eign-born population from that country as counted
by the 1890 Census. This results in a shift in immigra-
tion from south and southeastern Europe to north-
western Europe. Most Asians are barred as ineligible
for citizenship.
1924
The U.S. Border Patrol is established by Congress
for the purpose of preventing unauthorized entry
and smuggling. It is given the additional responsi-
bility of interior enforcement through identifica-
tion and deportation of undocumented immigrants
and migrants. Its deployment establishes a trend
in which the U.S.-Mexico border rather than the
Canadian border or interior enforcement is the pri-
mary objective in control of immigration.
1940
A Registration Law is passed by Congress. Aliens
are required to register their addresses every year.
(This requirement ended in 1980.) The Immigration
and Naturalization Service is unable to efficiently
file the forms, which become backlogged or lost.
1941
The attack on Pearl Harbor brings the United States
into World War II.
1942
The United States and Mexico begin the Bracero pro-
gram, which allows Mexican nationals to enter as
temporary workers to fill agricultural labor shortages.
The Closing of the Nation’s Borders to Immigration
163

1942
(cont.)
The program leads to the development of migra-
tory networks which link sending and receiving
communities. Gradually Mexicans begin to migrate
without authorization for work.
1945
The United Nations Charter reaffirms the policy
that independent nations should not intervene in
each other’s affairs. The sovereignty of states is
considered to allow for regulation of people and
goods crossing borders.
1949
The Agricultural Act is passed by Congress with a
provision to recruit Mexican temporary workers
for agriculture.
The United Nations issues the Convention for
the Suppression of the Traffic in Persons and the
Exploitation of the Prostitution of Others.
1952
An immigration act (McCaron Walter Act) is passed
by Congress. It ends racial restrictions on immigra-
tion but keeps a quota system and restricted entrance
from specific countries. For the first time, familial
relationships and skills are recognized as immigra-
tion selection criteria.
1954
Operation Wetback of the U.S. Border Patrol seeks
to apprehend Mexican migrants in the Southwest
who entered without authorization, primarily for
agricultural work.
1956
The United Nations incorporates the International
Criminal Police Organization (INTERPOL). It deals
with migrant smuggling, human trafficking, and
drugs and arms smuggling, among other transna-
tional crimes.
1960–
present
The United States begins a domestic and interna-
tional campaign to prohibit illegal drugs and their
trafficking.
Opening of the Nation’s
Borders to Immigration
1965
The Immigration and Nationality Act is passed by
Congress. It ends the use of a quota system and
164
Chronology

establishes a new system based on family relation-
ships and skills preferences, standardizing the proc-
ess of admission and establishing a country-specific
limit of 20,000 for Eastern Hemisphere nations,
allowed a total of 170,000. For the first time, Western
Hemisphere nations are placed under a quota, set at
120,000. This places social constraints on the ability
to legally migrate from Mexico and Central America,
expanding unauthorized migration.
1973
President Nixon establishes the Drug Enforcement
Administration (DEA).
1976
In United States v. Martinez-Fuente the Supreme
Court rules that it is legal to place checkpoints
within 100 miles of the border and to search
vehicles for unauthorized entrants.
Congress amends the visa system by extend-
ing the quota limits applied to Western Hemi-
sphere countries.
1978–
present
A process of militarization of the U.S.-Mexico border
begins with the use of troops to stop drug trafficking.
Each step toward militarization parallels an increase
in relatively permanent unauthorized immigration.
1978
President Carter establishes a Select Committee on
Immigration to issue recommendations about the
growing unauthorized immigrant population.
1980–
present
After the United States succeeds in limiting cocaine
trafficking off the coast of Florida and takes action
against Colombian cartel leaders, cocaine is increas-
ingly trafficked across the Mexican border and
Mexico develops major drug-trafficking organizations.
1981
During a recession, the Select Committee on Immi-
gration issues its report. It recommends changes to
the immigration system and border enforcement
that are enacted in the Immigration Control and
Reform Act of 1986 and continue to influence pol-
icy to the present.
1982
Congress begins a divisive debate about immigra-
tion reform.
1986
The Immigration Reform and Control Act (IRCA) is
designed to control undocumented immigration
through legalization and criminal and civil sanctions
for employers hiring undocumented immigrants.
Opening of the Nation’s Borders to Immigration
165

1986
(cont.)
IRCA allows amnesty for persons entering
without authorization before January 1, 1981, who
can provide documentation to prove their presence.
IRCA fails to stop unauthorized migration
because of a major loophole. Employers are not
asked to verify employee documents, and an under-
ground industry in false documentation develops.
The Immigration and Naturalization Service,
with the Department of Justice, does not initially
apply criminal sanctions or devote sufficient per-
sonnel to interior enforcement of this IRCA. Instead
the U.S. Border Patrol is repeatedly given increased
funding for staff and equipment, and this effort is
insufficient to prevent a large buildup in the unau-
thorized
immigrant
population.
This
buildup
partly occurs because the difficulty in border cross-
ing encourages migrants to stay permanently as
immigrants.
1986
The United States and Canada reach a bilateral
agreement to strengthen cross-border trade.
Expansion of Trade and
Border Enforcement
1988
The 1988 Omnibus Anti-Drug Act stipulates that per-
manent resident aliens convicted of homicide, rape,
drug trafficking, and/or arms trafficking, which are
classified as aggravated felonies, must be immediately
deported, referred to as expedited removal, after serv-
ing their sentence. This is to be done without access to
a lawyer and with expanded exclusion from reentry.
This law is applied retroactively and begins a
process of increasing denial of due process rights
under the law to noncitizens. The Institutional Re-
moval Program (IRP) is begun to remove aliens who
have committed an aggravated felony crime from
the United States on completion of their sentence.
The United States–Canada Free Trade Agree-
ment reduces barriers to trade.
166
Chronology

Three Syrians are arrested by U.S. Customs for
attempting to cross the border in possession of
explosives.
1990
The Immigration Act is passed by Congress. It
establishes new hemispheric and worldwide quo-
tas, redefines the familial and skills preferences,
and adds a diversity criterion.
1993
The World Trade Center bombing involves a large
explosive device placed in a vehicle which is
placed below the North Tower. Six people are
killed and 1,042 injured. This terrorist action is car-
ried out by individuals with ties to al-Qaeda. The
chief conspirator, Ramzi Yousef, had received
explosives training in an al-Qaeda camp.
Operation Blockade, later renamed Operation
Hold the Line, is begun in El Paso. U.S. Border Patrol
agents are positioned in high-visibility positions along
the borderline, a strategy called ‘‘line watching.’’
The North American Free Trade Agreement
(NAFTA) between the United States, Canada, and
Mexico opens the borders to economic trade but
not immigration.
1994–2004
Estimates are that 2,978 migrants trying to enter
without inspection have died trying to cross in
more remote and dangerous regions due to U.S.
Border Patrol line watching in urban zones. Deaths
continue to occur.
1994
Operation Gatekeeper begins at the Imperial Beach
Station in San Diego. The success of Operations
Gatekeeper and Hold the Line in reducing unau-
thorized border crossing leads to its application in
other
locations,
including
McAllen,
Texas.
A
debate about whether line watching deters or dis-
places potential undocumented crossers to riskier
border zones begins.
The Violent Crime Control and Law Enforce-
ment Act provides for enhanced penalties for alien
smuggling, illegal reentry after deportation, and
other immigration-related crimes.
1995
A Canada-U.S. Accord on Our Shared Border
establishes that improvement of border infrastruc-
ture is a priority.
Expansion of Trade and Border Enforcement
167

1995
(cont.)
President
Clinton’s
Decision
Directive
42
declares that international crime is a threat to the
United States.
1996
The Anti-Terrorism and Effective Death Penalty
Act contains provisions regarding the removal of
terrorists and criminal aliens which limit judicial
review.
The Illegal Immigration Reform and Immi-
grant Responsibility Act (IIRIRA) mandates the de-
velopment of a data tracking system for foreign
citizen arrivals and departure. (This would not be
acted upon until after 9/11.)
IIRIRA classifies fifty categories of crime as
aggravated felonies subject to removal upon sen-
tence completion or retroactively. It further stipu-
lates that
any crime committed
by
an alien
resulting in a sentence of more than one year, even
if a misdemeanor, like drug possession, is to result in
removal.
The International Crime Control Act is passed
by Congress. It authorizes initiatives to stem drug
trafficking, terrorism, and money laundering. Its
provisions enable investigation, extradition, and
prosecution of international criminals and provides
for freezing of their assets and denial of entry over
the U.S. borders.
1997
The shooting death of Ezequiel Hernandez, an
American citizen of Mexican descent, by four
Marines in a covert operation ends the direct use of
the military in border enforcement.
1998
The United States and Mexico begin the Border
Safety Initiative, a program to inform Mexican
migrants about risks associated with crossing the
border in remote regions and to establish rescue
teams.
1999
A Canada-U.S. Partnership (CUSP), US INS-CIC
Border Vision, and the Cross-Border Crime Forum
are established to further trade and deal with secu-
rity concerns.
Nongovernmental organizations dealing with im-
migration call for a reorganization of the Immigration
168
Chronology

and Naturalization Service to separate immigration
enforcement from visa and citizenship functions.
Ahmed Ressam is arrested while attempting to
cross the Canadian border and later charged with
conspiring to bomb Los Angeles Airport at the
millennium.
2000
Vincente Fox is elected president of Mexico and advo-
cates a guest-worker program with the United States.
The
United
Nations
Convention
Against
Transnational Organized Crime is signed.
2000
The Victims of Trafficking and Violence Protection
Act (VTVPA) requires international cooperation
with sending countries to identify human traffick-
ers. Countries are ranked into three tiers based on
the degree to which they have introduced antitraf-
ficking initiatives and are attempting prevention
and prosecution. Tier 3 countries are subject to
sanctions. In the United States, the VTVPA makes it
a crime to deceive or threaten harm to coerce work
regardless of whether it is sex work or any other
kind of labor. In addition, the act offers relief in the
form of visas and support for victims willing to tes-
tify against traffickers. It is reauthorized in 2003,
2005, and 2008.
2000
The Immigration and Naturalization Service Data
Management Act stipulates that an entrance-and-
exit system should be established at the borders.
This was not acted upon until after 9/11 and is still
incomplete as it lacks a computerized exit system.
This is significant because many undocumented
immigrants are visa overstayers.
Terrorism and the Securitization
of Immigration
2001
On September 11, the World Trade Center is
destroyed and the Pentagon damaged by 19 al-
Qaeda jet hijackers deploying four planes, one of
Terrorism and the Securitization of Immigration
169

2001
(cont.)
which was brought down by passengers without
reaching its target. The 19 suicidal jihadists and
2,976 victims, the vast majority of whom were civil-
ians, died. The terrorist event caused massive
shock and grief and precipitated the War on Terror
and the war in Afghanistan.
The United States first responds by closing its
borders, and when they are reopened, intensified
inspection causes major business and travel delays
at the land border ports of entry.
2001
The Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish
Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and
Children (Palermo Protocol) is an international
agreement to take action to prevent traffick-
ing, prosecute traffickers, and provide victim
protection.
2001
The Canada-U.S. Smart Border Accord harmonizes
border screening, establishes sharing of intelli-
gence databases, and initiates development of bio-
metric identification technology in Canada.
2001
The Uniting and Strengthening America by provid-
ing Appropriate Tools Required to Intercept and
Obstruct Terrorism Act (USA PATRIOT Act) greatly
enhances the surveillance capacity of federal law
enforcement in the area of communications by
exempting the need for a warrant in terrorism-
related investigations. This causes a civil liberties
controversy. It also stipulates that noncitizens can be
detained or removed without due process of law.
This creates controversies over the duration of deten-
tion, removal, and access to lawyers or relations.
The USA PATRIOT Act stipulates that more
funding should be provided to create a U.S. Visit
and
Immigration
Status
Indicator
Technology
(U.S.-VISIT) system.
2002
Al-Qaeda
names
Australia,
Canada,
France,
Germany, Great Britain, Italy, and the United States
as targets for terrorist attacks due to their assistance
of the United States.
The Immigration and Naturalization Service
informs certain deceased 9/11 hijackers that they
170
Chronology

can enroll in U.S. flight-training schools. There is a call
for removing immigration enforcement from the INS.
Attorney General John Ashcroft is allowed
new authority for expedited removal.
Congress establishes a Department of Home-
land Security and begins reorganization of the Im-
migration and Naturalization Service.
The Smart Border Declaration and 30 Point
Action Plan to Enhance the Security of Our Shared
Border While Facilitating the Legitimate Flow of
People and Goods is entered into by the United
States
and
Canada.
This
bilateral
agreement
addresses concerns about counterterrorism and
border security while facilitating trade.
The Homeland Security Act joins 22 federal
agencies and 180,000 employees into the same orga-
nization: the Department of Homeland Security
(DHS). The DHS director becomes a member of the
Cabinet. The Immigration and Naturalization Service
is reorganized into U.S. Citizenship and Immigration
Services, U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforce-
ment, and U.S. Customs and Border Protection.
John Ashcroft initiates Operation Condor. All
visa applications from men 16–45 from nations des-
ignated as terrorist sponsoring are to be screened.
In the United States, the National Security En-
trance-Exit Registration System (NSEERS) program
requires Muslim men 16–45 to register. Approxi-
mately 140,000 people are registered and 13,000
deported for being ‘‘out-of status’’—not having a
valid visa. This program is criticized as an example
of racial profiling.
The Enhanced Border Security and Visa Entry
Reform Act again stipulates that more funding should
be provided to create a U.S. Visit and Immigration
Status Indicator Technology (U.S.-VISIT) system.
The Container Security Initiative introduces
risk assessment to target containers to inspect and
begins a trusted shippers program to expedite ship-
ments that meet requirements. This is a part of the
Customs-Trade Partnership Against Terrorism.
Terrorism and the Securitization of Immigration
171

2003
Canada reorganizes its federal enforcement agencies
into the Canadian Border Agency in a move parallel
to the reorganization of like agencies into the Depart-
ment of Homeland Security in the United States.
The Terrorist Threat Integration Center is
authorized.
The Lateral Repatriation Program releases
Mexican migrants apprehended while crossing the
Arizona desert border in the heat of summer to
Texas. It runs for 23 days.
Osiel Cardenas Guillen, thought to be the
leader of the Gulf cartel, is arrested in Mexico.
2004
The 9/11 Commission releases its report. It identi-
fies failure to share intelligence between the FBI
and the CIA as a major problem. The United States
is viewed as slow to react to the destructive poten-
tial of international terrorism. Specifically, U.S.
consulates and border inspectors are found to be
limited in knowledge of how to screen for terrorist
travel. Again the United States is found to lack an
efficient entrance-and-exit tracking system.
The U.S. Visit and Intelligence Reform and
Terrorism Act ends exemption from a passport
requirement for Canadian citizens as a part of the
Western Hemisphere Travel Initiative. It provides
for expansion and increased funding of the U.S.-
VISIT data system including biometric capability.
It requires in-person interviews of visa applicants
at U.S. consulates. Funding is provided for U.S.
Border Patrol expansion and purchase and installa-
tion of electronic surveillance technology. The 9/11
Commission recommendations are funded for
implementation.
A National Counterterrorism Center is created.
The Border Strategic Plan makes counter-
terrorism its most important initiative but focuses
on the U.S.-Mexico border. The U.S. Border Patrol
is given access to terrorist and criminal databases.
The U.S. Border Patrol releases data indicating
that 460 migrants died while attempting unauthor-
ized entry across the border in FY2004.
172
Chronology

Congress authorizes building 40,000 detention
beds for unauthorized entrants by 2010.
It is estimated that the unauthorized popula-
tion has reached 11 million.
2005
The Security and Prosperity Agreement of the
United States, Canada, and Mexico extends the
original Canada-U.S. border declaration to Mexico.
Intelligence will be shared between the three coun-
tries and Mexico will establish a trusted traveler
program for expedited border crossing.
The Secure Border Initiative involves a billion-
dollar investment in electronic surveillance tech-
nology for border security.
Operation Streamline of the U.S. Border Patrol
changes the policy of releasing migrants apprehended
for the first time without detention. To the extent that
detention infrastructure allows, migrants are detained
for two weeks to six months. This zero tolerance pol-
icy has been continued, although a shortage of deten-
tion facilities impedes its full implementation.
The Real ID Act, also called the Border Protec-
tion, Anti-Terrorism, and Illegal Immigration Con-
trol Act, mandates the states to develop improved
driver’s license identification but provides no
funding for it. The states object and the law will
face obstacles in implementation.
The governors of Arizona and New Mexico
declare a ‘‘state of emergency’’ due to unauthor-
ized migration.
The U.S. Border Patrol releases data indicating
that over 500 migrants died while attempting
unauthorized entry across the border in FY2005.
2006
Felipe Calderon is inaugurated as president of
Mexico and declares he will take further action
against drug traffickers and corrupt officials.
The U.S. Coast Guard arrests Francisco Javier
Arellano Felix and other Tijuana cartel leaders and
disrupts cartel operations. It is thought that he
reaches an agreement with Osiel Cardenas Guillen,
the Gulf Cartel leader, while in Mexican prison and
that they unify the two organizations.
Terrorism and the Securitization of Immigration
173

2006
(cont.)
The Secure Fence Act directs that two layers of
secured fencing be built and additional physical
barriers, roads, and surveillance technology be
placed in five areas of Arizona, California, New
Mexico, and Texas. The walls and fencing are for
850 miles. In response to protests by private land-
owners
and environmentalists,
Department
of
Homeland Security Secretary Michael Chertoff
receives a waiver to begin building regardless of
environmental and historic preservation laws. By
2009, 613 miles are constructed.
New Mexico governor Bill Richardson and
Arizona governor Janet Napolitano request National
Guard troops to deal with undocumented entry and
drug trafficking at the border. President Bush sends
6,000 National Guardsmen to the California, Arizona,
New Mexico, and Texas borders. They are directed to
assist the U.S. Border Patrol and are not directly
involved in enforcement.
The Border Tunnel Prevention Act increases
criminal penalties for cross-border tunneling.
2007
The Protect America Act extends the provisions for
federal access to communication established by the
USA PATRIOT Act.
The 9/11 Commission Act stipulates that 100%
of air cargo must be physically inspected by 2010
and 100% of maritime containers must be physi-
cally inspected by 2012. Lack of infrastructure
raises questions about feasibility of the timeline for
implementation.
Osiel Cardenas Guillen is extradited to the
United States and placed in maximum security. It
is thought that he can no longer direct the Gulf
drug organization.
A turf war between rival Mexican drug-traf-
ficking organizations leads to violence in Nuevo
Laredo, Mexico, over control of trafficking routes
between the Gulf and Sinaloa cartels.
Calderon sends federal troops to Nuevo Laredo.
Mexican newspaper Reforma reports 2,280
deaths from drug-related violence in 2007.
174
Chronology

2007–2008
It is estimated that 183 migrants die attempting to
enter the United States without authorization by
crossing the border in remote regions in Arizona
from October 2007 to October 2008.
2008
The Merida Initiative is signed and authorized by
Congress. It is a security agreement involving the
United States, Mexico, and Central American coun-
tries to provide intelligence, equipment, and train-
ing to combat drug trafficking.
Turf disputes between rival drug-trafficking
organizations lead to increased violence in many
regions of Mexico and in border cities such as Juarez,
Mexico. Calderon sends federal troops to Juarez.
Mexican citizens march to protest the violence.
Mexican newspaper Reforma reports 5,153
deaths from drug-related violence in 2008.
2008–2009
It is estimated that 238 migrants died attempting to
enter the United States without authorization by
crossing the border in remote regions of Arizona
from October 2008 to October 2009.
2009
Governor Perry of Texas requests deployment of
the National Guard to the Texas border but a fund-
ing dispute results in Texas Rangers being sent to
assist the U.S. Border Patrol instead.
President Obama responds to criticism of
immigrant detention by creating an Office of Immi-
grant Detention and Planning within Immigration
and Customs Enforcement.
Secretary of Homeland Security Janet Napoli-
tano expresses concern that Mexican drug-organi-
zation violence could have a spillover effect to U.S.
border cities. In an effort to curb the violence, there
is an increase in inspection of vehicles crossing to
Mexico due to arms smuggling as the United
States is the primary source of weapons.
Mexico passes a statute to decriminalize drug
possession of small amounts to free prison space
for more dangerous criminals.
A Mexican government report indicates 9,635
deaths due to drug-related violence in 2009.
Terrorism and the Securitization of Immigration
175

2010
On March 14, 2010, a pregnant American consulate
worker and her husband and the husband of
another U.S. Consulate worker are killed due
to what is believed to be drug-related violence in
Ciudad Juarez, Mexico.
Secretary of Homeland Security Janet Napoli-
tano announces that funding is being diverted from
the electronic surveillance SBInet in favor of pro-
ven technology.
The United States and Mexico revise the Mer-
ida Initiative to emphasize civilian police rather
than military assistance and strengthen efforts to
rebuild Mexican communities with high poverty
and crime rates.
On May 1, 2010, Faisal Shazad places a home-
made explosive device left inside a car in Times
Square, New York. It fails to detonate. Shazad is
identified and placed on a no-fly list. He attempts
to leave on an Emirates Airlines jet and is not
detected because Emirates did not update its list. A
second check of the passsenger list in the Depart-
ment of Homeland Security database results in
stopping the plane and Shazad’s apprehension.
176
Chronology

5
Biographical Sketches
Osama bin Laden (1957– )
T
he leader of the Muslim terrorist group al-Qaeda, Osama
bin Laden was born to a wealthy family in Riyadh, Saudi
Arabia. He grew up as a Wahhabi Muslim and attended
the elite Al-Thager Model School. At King Abdulaziz Univer-
sity he studied economics and business administration. It is
not known if he received a degree. In 1979, bin Laden went to
Afghanistan to fight against the Soviet invasion and facilitated
Muslim fighters, later establishing a camp. In 1990, Osama bin
Laden returned to Saudi Arabia as a hero of jihad. Iraq invaded
Kuwait, and when the Western powers engaged in the Persian
Gulf War, he spoke out at his outrage at Saudi Arabia’s cooper-
ation, particularly its hosting of U.S. military forces. This antag-
onized the Saudis, who sought to silence him and revoked his
citizenship.
In 1992, bin Laden moved to the Sudan and established a
new Mujahideen base in Khartoum. In 1996, the Sudan came
under pressure from Saudi Arabia, Egypt, and the United States
to expel bin Laden and he returned to Jalalabad, Afghanistan.
He befriended Mohammed Omar, who became head of the
Taliban and raised money for his organization. At this point,
al-Qaeda became involved in numerous worldwide terrorist
actions, including some against civilians.
The United States responded to 9/11 with the War on Terror
and sought to depose the Taliban in Afghanistan and capture or
kill bin Laden and al-Qaeda members. In 2004, Osama bin Laden
177

claimed responsibility for the 9/11 attacks which caused the
deaths of 2,974 people.
Al-Qaeda is a loosely connected network of terrorist cells
connected to participants in the 1993 World Trade Center bomb-
ing, the Los Angeles Airport Millennium bomb plot, and the 9/
11 attacks on the World Trade Center and Pentagon. These are
three major internationally planned terrorist activities meant to
harm the United States.
David V. Aguilar
David Aguilar was chief of the Border Patrol from 7-1-2004
through 1-20-2010, when he was appointed the acting commis-
sioner of U.S. Customs and Border Protection, a position he held
until 3-27-2010. He earned an associate degree in accounting
from Laredo Community College and attended Laredo State
University (now Texas A&M International University) and the
University of Texas at Arlington. In 1999, he graduated from the
John F. Kennedy School of Government. In 1978, Aguilar began
work with the U.S. Border Patrol in Laredo, Texas, serving as a
U.S. Border Patrol agent, first-line supervisory agent, and assist-
ant USBP agent-in-charge. During 1988–1996, he was USBP agent-
in-charge of three Texas USBP stations in Dallas, Rio Grande
City, and Brownsville, at varying points in time. The USBP sta-
tions in Dallas and Brownsville were both given the Com-
missioner’s Award for Group Achievement while Aguilar was
in charge.
From August 1996 through November 1999, Aguilar served
as assistant regional director for the Border Patrol in the Central
Region. He acted as the advisor to the regional director of the
former
Immigration
and
Naturalization
Service
and
was
involved in strategic planning. In late 1999, Aguilar became
chief patrol agent of the Tucson-sector USBP with responsibility
for administration and all operations. Two thousand–plus agents
and 200 support personnel worked in the Tucson sector, which
covers 261 miles of the Arizona-Mexico border. In 2004, Chief
Aguilar was appointed the Border and Transportation Security
Integrator for the Arizona Border Control Initiative. In 2003,
Operation Safeguard was begun in areas at risk for migrant
fatalities. The Tucson sector received the Customs and Border
Protection Office of Anti-Terrorism Commissoner’s Award for
178
Biographical Sketches

this operation. In 2005 David Aguilar received one of nine
Department of Homeland Security Presidential Rank Awards
for Meritorious Senior Professionals.
While in charge of the Border Patrol, Aguilar was subject to
criticism by the National Border Patrol Council (NBPC). The
NBPC is an affiliate of the AFL-CIO as a part of the American
Federation of Government Employees. In February 2007 and on
February 25, 2009, the NBPC unanimously issued a vote of ‘‘no
confidence’’ in David Aguilar as chief of the Border Patrol. The
reason for disapproval was that rank and file Border Patrol
agents did not believe that senior management supported them.
John Ashcroft (1942– )
Ashcroft was president of his class at Hillcrest High in Spring-
field, Missouri. He was a captain and quarterback on the foot-
ball team and received a football scholarship to Yale University.
A knee injury kept him from football, but he engaged in intra-
mural sports. After graduating with honors from Yale, Ashcroft
went to the University of Chicago Law School on a scholarship.
Upon receipt of his degree, Ashcroft returned to Springfield
and opened a law practice. He started teaching at Southwest
Missouri State University.
John Ashcroft’s paternal grandfather was a Northern Irish
immigrant who became a minister with the Christian evangelist
Assembly of God church. He had a son, John, born to his wife
Grace. Robert entered the footsteps of his father, becoming a
minister and served as president of three colleges connected to
the Assembly of God.
As an undergraduate at Yale, John Ashcroft interned one
summer for his congressman. When the congressman did not
seek reelection in 1972, Ashcroft ran as a replacement in the
Republican primary, receiving almost 45% of the vote, but he lost.
Instead, he was accepted as a replacement to fill an unexpired
term as state auditor. Two years later, he again was not elected
to Congress. Ashcroft was next hired as a legal assistant to state
attorney general John Danforth. When Danforth was elected to
the Senate in 1976, Ashcroft was elected to replace him as
Missouri attorney general and won reelection in 1980. At that
time he became chairman of the nonpartisan National Associa-
tion of Attorneys General.
Biographical Sketches
179

In 1984, Ashcroft was elected governor of Missouri and was
chairman of the Education Commission for the states. In 1991,
he was elected chairman of the nonpartisan National Gover-
nor’s Association. In 1992, term limits prevented him from seek-
ing reelection. In 1994, he successfully ran for Danforth’s open
seat. He served for six years on the by Senate Judiciary Com-
mittee and as chairman of the Constitution committee, where
he became known for his conservative position on abortion and
other issues. John Ashcroft ran for reelection, but his opponent,
Mel Carnhan, died in an accident three weeks before the elec-
tion, which was too late to change the ballot. McCarnhan won
and his widow accepted a Senate appointment which Ashcroft
left unchallenged.
In 2000 Ashcroft was nominated by President-elect George
W. Bush to be U.S. Attorney General. His conservative views led
to Senate opposition. He was confirmed by a vote of 68–42. After
9/11 Attorney General Ashcroft became very involved with the
War on Terror. He used provisions of immigration law to hold
noncitizens suspected of terrorism, including indefinite deten-
tion. Over 1,000 were detained on charges not publicly released
and with little outside contact with relations or lawyers.
Kevin Bales
A leading antislavery expert, Kevin Bales received a Ph.D.
from the London School of Economics. He is emeritus professor
of sociology at Roehampton University in London, a visiting
professor at the Wilberforce Institute for the Study of Slavery
and Emancipation, University of Hull, and serves on the board
of directors of the National Cocoa Institute. Bales’s 1999 book
Disposable People: New Slavery in the Global Economy was a
Pulitzer Prize nominee and has been translated into 10 lan-
guages. Revised in 2005, this work received the designation as
a top ‘‘World Changing Discovery’’ on a list of 100 created by
an association of British universities. The Italian edition of this
book was given a Premio Viareggio for humanitarian service in
2000. A documentary that Bales cowrote, Slavery: A Global Inves-
tigation, won a Peabody Award in 2000 and two Emmy awards
in 2002. In 2004 Bales received the Judith Sargeant Murray
Award for Human Rights, followed by the University of
Alberta Human Rights Award in 2005.
180
Biographical Sketches

Bales is president of Free the Slaves, an affiliate of Anti-
Slavery International, at which he is a trustee. He is director of
the Alliance to Stop Slavery and Stop Trafficking and a United
Nations Global Program on Trafficking in Human Beings con-
sultant. He has advised the U.S. government on slavery and
human trafficking policy. Bales edited a United Nations antitraf-
ficking toolkit and has authored a report on forced labor for the
Human Rights Center at the University of California at Berkeley.
For the National Institute of Justice, he researched human traf-
ficking to the United States for two years. He is active in the
international chocolate industry and seeks to end child labor.
Additional books he has written include New Slavery: A Reference
Handbook (revised 2nd edition, 2005) and Ending Slavery: How
We Free Today’s Slaves (2007). In 2008 To Plead Our Cause: Personal
Stories by Today’s Slaves, with Zoe Trod, and Documenting Dispos-
able People: Contemporary Global Slavery with Magnum photogra-
phers, were published. In 2009 he coauthored The Slave Next
Door: Modern Slavery in the United States with Ron Soodalter.
Sandra ‘‘La Reina del Pacifico (Queen of
the Pacific)’’ Avila Beltran (1960– )
Sandra Avila Beltran was born in the state of Sinaloa, Mexico.
Her uncle was Miguel Angel Felix Gallardo, a key Mexican drug
trafficker. Her relationship with Juan Diego Espinoza Ramirez, a
Colombian cocaine trafficker, is thought to have led to her drug-
trafficking involvement. In 2001, nine tons of cocaine was found
in the Manzanillo, Colima Pacific port. It was traced to Beltran
and Juan Diego Espinoza. They were arrested on September 28,
2007. She is accused of organized criminal activity, trafficking in
drugs, and money laundering in both Mexico and the United
States, which has requested extradition. Beltran is considered
the most successful female drug trafficker worldwide.
George Walker Bush (1946– )
The 43rd president of the United States, George Walker Bush, is
the son of former president George H. W. Bush. He was born in
Biographical Sketches
181

Connecticut, but raised in Texas, and later attended Phillips
Academy in Andover, Massachusetts, and Yale University.
Bush was a lieutenant in the Texas Air National Guard and
then took several positions in Houston, including working with
an underprivileged youth program called Pull for Kids. After
attending Harvard Business School and receiving an MBA,
George W. Bush became an oilman and ran for Congress at age
32, losing by six votes. After achieving financial success in the
oil business, he started Bush Exploration, which did not do well
in the soft energy market of the early 1980s. Bush Exploration
was salvaged through a merger with Spectrum 7, a company
that was later purchased by Harken Energy. Speculation exists
that this deal only occurred because of Bush’s father’s influ-
ence. The deal was controversial because George W. Bush made
money while Harken Energy lost millions. Bush worked for his
father’s 1988 presidential campaign and then returned to Texas,
organizing a group of investors who bought the Rangers, an
American League baseball team. He become a managing part-
ner and increased the now–Texas Rangers’ popularity.
In 1994 and 1998, Bush successfully ran for governor of
Texas, which he used as a stepping stone to successfully run
for president in 2000. The 2000 presidential election against
Vice President Albert Gore was controversial because of a close
vote and allegations of election fraud regarding the Florida vote
count.
President George W. Bush has been associated with both
the War on Terror and the criminalization of immigration. Bush
initially
favored
an expansion
of migration
from Mexico
through the establishment of a guest-worker program but the
public and Congress failed to positively respond. As the sitting
president at the time of the 9/11 attacks, Bush and his team
crafted a series of external and internal responses to strengthen
the United States and reduce the possibility of terrorist attack.
Both the war in Afghanistan and the war in Iraq were pre-
sented as a means to strengthen national security. In Afghani-
stan, the Taliban regime was removed while in Iraq Saddam
Hussein and his Sunni Muslim counterparts were taken from
power. Both wars have persisted at great expense and lost a
degree of support among the American public.
The War on Terror strategy involved a major reorganiza-
tion of federal intelligence and law-enforcement agencies into
the Department of Homeland Security. Policies of the War on
Terror are very controversial because of their implication for
182
Biographical Sketches

loss of citizen’s rights, such as protection from wiretapping
without a judicial order.
Felipe de Jesus Calderon (1962– )
Felipe Calderon (in full Felipe de Jesus Calderon Hinojosa) was
elected president of Mexico in 2006 for a six-year term. Born in
Morelia, Michoacan, he received a degree from the Escuela Libre
de Derecho in Mexico City and a master’s degree in economics
from the Instituto Technologico de Mexico (ITAM). Calderon
attended the John F. Kennedy School of Government at Harvard
University and received a master’s in public administration.
Felipe Calderon’s father cofounded the National Action
Party (PAN), and he has been active in its politics during his
career. He began his activities in the PAN youth movement and
later served as national president of the party from 1996 to
1999. He won election to the legislative assembly as a local rep-
resentative and twice was a member of the federal Chamber
of Deputies. During Vincente Fox’s presidency (2000–2006),
Calderon was a federal deputy and secretary of energy.
Calderon is a strong supporter of free trade and immigra-
tion reform. He supports a road to legalization for unauthorized
U.S. residents and is against the U.S.-Mexico border fence, which
he believes harms bilateral relations. In turn, he authorized inten-
sified law-enforcement efforts against Mexican drug-trafficking
organizations (DTOs), which has led to the arrest of several
high-ranking DTO members. These arrests have resulted in a
continuation of turf wars between rival DTOs, and Calderon
positioned federal police and troops in Mexican border cities.
Escalation of drug-related violence has led to assignment of
the Mexican Army to combat drug trafficking. Felipe Calderon
has participated in the Merida Initiative, a regional agreement
for cooperation among the United States, Mexico, and Central
American countries to deal with drug trafficking and transna-
tional crime. Unfortunately, as trafficking to the United States
became more difficult, DTOs began selling their product in Mex-
ico and addiction rates increased. Calderon is Catholic and
believes that faith in God helps to prevent youth from trying
drugs. He has advocated the harm reduction strategy of Mexican
legalization of possession of small amounts of cocaine and drugs
for addicts in treatment and stresses that the United States
should take responsibility for easing its consumer drug demand.
Biographical Sketches
183

Michael Chertoff (1953– )
Michael Chertoff, the second person appointed as secretary of
Homeland Security, was born in Elizabeth, New Jersey. He
received a bachelor’s degree in history from Harvard Univer-
sity. In 1975, he went on to Harvard Law School, where he
served as the editor of the Harvard Law Review, earned a J.D.,
and graduated magna cum laude in 1978. From 1978 to 1979,
he served as a law clerk in Judge Murray Griffin’s Second U.S.
Circuit Court of Appeals and in 1979–1980, he worked for U.S.
Supreme Court Justice William J. Brennan Jr. In 1980, Chertoff
joined the firm of Latham and Watkins as an associate attor-
ney. From 1990 to 1994, he was U.S. attorney for New Jersey
and in 2001 went on to head the criminal division of the
Department of Justice, where he was involved in developing
the legal response to the 9/11 attacks. Chertoff advocated the
detention of foreign nationals of Arab and Muslim ancestry, a
position for which he was criticized. In 2003, he received a
lifetime appointment as a judge to the Third U.S. Circuit Court
of Appeals.
In 2005 Chertoff succeeded Tom Ridge to become the sec-
ond secretary of the newly reorganized Department of Home-
land Security. In this position, Chertoff sought to balance a
need for homeland security with civil liberty concerns. During
Chertoff’s service as secretary, three major changes in policy
were: (1) the Western Hemispheric Travel Initiative, which
stopped the acceptance of oral declarations by U.S. and Canadian
citizens in lieu of a passport; (2) the end of the ‘‘catch and release’’
of Mexican nationals back over the Mexican border without
detention; and (3) active building of a border fence extension
on the U.S.-Mexico border despite Environmental Protection
Agency and civilian concerns.
Hillary Clinton (1947– )
Hillary Clinton received an undergraduate degree in political
science from Wellesly College and attended Yale Law School,
receiving a Juris Doctor degree in 1973. While at Yale, she
served on the Board of Editors of the Journal of Law and Social
Action and met Bill Clinton, whom she later married. Bill
Clinton became governor of Arkansas and the 42nd president
184
Biographical Sketches

of the United States. Hillary Clinton was first lady of the United
States from 1993 to 2001. As first lady, she took a more active
political role than prior presidential spouses and was very
involved with a failed national health care initiative but, in
1997, was successful in establishing a Children’s Health Insur-
ance Program.
Hillary Clinton’s career path changed when Bill Clinton
left office. She was elected the junior United States Senator from
New York in 2000, the first time a first lady was elected to pub-
lic office. In 2006 she was reelected, and Hillary Clinton became
a Democratic candidate for president in the 2008 primaries, los-
ing to Barack Obama. In 2009, Obama appointed her secretary
of state.
David Cole (1958– )
David Cole is a legal advocate for the rights of immigrants and
civil liberties. He received degrees from Yale University and
Law School. His first position was as a law clerk for Judge
Arlin M. Adams of the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Third
Circuit. Next, he worked as a staff attorney for the Center for
Constitutional Rights, where he remains as a volunteer and is
on the board of directors. David Cole is a law faculty member
at Georgetown University. He is a co-chairman of the Liberty
and Security Committee of the Constitution Project.
Cole is The Nation’s legal affairs correspondent and a com-
mentator on National Public Radio’s All Things Considered. He
publishes widely in the areas of civil liberties, civil rights, crimi-
nal justice, and constitutional law. His books include Enemy
Aliens: Double Standards and Constitutional Freedoms in the War on
Terrorism (2nd ed., 2005), and Terrorism and the Constitution: Sac-
rificing Civil Liberties for National Security (3rd ed., 2005). In 2004
he received an American Book award and the Hefner First
Amendment prize for Enemy Aliens. Cole has received civil
liberties and civil rights awards from the American Bar
Association’s Individual Rights and Responsibilities Section, the
National Lawyers Guild, the Thomas Jefferson Center for the
Protection of the Freedom of Expression, the American Arab
Anti-Discrimination Committee, Trial Lawyers for Public Justice
and the Political Asylum and Immigrant Rights Project, and the
American Muslim Council.
Biographical Sketches
185

Stockwell Day (1950– )
Canadian Public Safety Minister Stockwell Day is a member of
the Conservative Party of Canada. He was born in Barrie,
Ontario, but has lived in numerous Canadian locations includ-
ing Ottawa. Day graduated from Westmount High School in
Montreal and attended Ashbury College in Ottawa. From 1978
to 1975, Day was assistant pastor and school administrator at the
Bentley Christian Center in Bentley, Alberta. From 1986 to 2000,
he represented Red Deer North in the Legislative Assembly of
Alberta as a Progressive Conservative. Concurrently, in 1992
Day was minister of labour in the Alberta Cabinet and in 1994 he
became Government House Leader. In 1996, he was appointed
Minister of Social Services and in 1997, Treasurer.
In 2000, Day joined the Canadian Alliance Party and was
elected to the House of Commons in Parliament for the riding of
Okanagan-Coquihalla in British Columbia. He sought party
leadership but lost to Stephen Harper. When the Canadian
Alliance and the Progressive Conservative Party merged as the
Conservative Party of Canada, Day became the Conservative
Foreign Affairs critic for the Conservative Party Caucus and was
reelected to Parliament in 2004 and 2006.
After Stephen Harper was elected prime minister in 2006, Day
became minister of public safety and joined the Privy Council. As
the Minister of Public Safety, Day was responsible for national se-
curity advice and support, and he is a part of the Cross-Cultural
Round Table on Security. Canada’s national security policy reflects
concerns about protecting Canadians and Canada, preventing
Canada from being a base for international terrorism, and ensuring
international security. In 2008, Day became the Minister of Interna-
tional Trade. One development Day is associated with is the crea-
tion of an electronic manifest cargo program to allow identification
of high-risk shipments prior to arrival at the Canadian border.
Arellano Felix Brothers
The Arellano Felix brothers led the Tijuana cartel. On August 6,
2006, the U.S. Coast Guard arrested Francisco Javier Arellano
Felix and other Tijuana cartel leaders on a boat off the coast of
Mexico. His brother, Francisco Javier Arellano Felix, was extra-
dited to the United States. He pled guilty to charges of running a
186
Biographical Sketches

criminal enterprise and money laundering and was sentenced to
life imprisonment without the possibility of parole. In Mexico,
Benjamin Arellano Felix was sentenced to 22 years for organized
crime and drug-trafficking violations. The United States has
requested his extradition on drug-trafficking, racketeering, and
money-laundering charges. In September 2006, Francisco Rafael
Arellano Felix was extradited to the U.S. and pled guilty to intent
to distribute cocaine. He received a six-year sentence.
The Tijuana cartel operates in at least 15 states with an impor-
tant base in Tijuana, Baja California. Additional bases are in Mexi-
cali, Tecate, and Ensenada in Baja California and Sinaloa state. At
its peak, the Tijuana cartel is considered to have supplied 40% of
cocaine trafficked into the United States. The Tijuana cartel
formed an alliance with the Gulf cartel after Francisco Javier Are-
llano Felix was imprisoned along with Osiel Cardenas Guillen as
a result of negotiations. Its major area of influence is the Mexican
state of Baja California.
Ismael Higuera Guerrero and Gilberto Higuera Guerrero,
high-ranking members of the Tijuana cartel, were extradited to
the United States in January 2007. As of January 2006, 107
Tijuana cartel enforcers had been arrested. The weakening of this
cartel through the loss of its leaders has led to attempts to defend
control of its trafficking routes, corrupt Mexican law enforce-
ment, and heightened violence. Despite arrests, the Tijuana car-
tel still controls the corridor between Tijuana and San Diego.
Michael J. Fisher
In January, 2010, Michael Fisher became the Acting Chief of the
U.S. Border Patrol. On March 28, he became the Acting Comis-
sioner of U.S. Customs and Border Protection. He holds under-
graduate degrees in criminal justice and business administration
and is a graduate of the Kennedy School of Government at
Harvard University Senior Executive Fellows Program. He
graduated first for physical efficiency in his Border Patrol class
and began as a southwestern Border Patrol agent in 1987. His
career progression included being selected for the Border Patrol
Tactical Unit and becoming a field operations supervisor for El
Paso, Texas, a position in which he directed U.S. and interna-
tional operations. Next, he was appointed the deputy chief pa-
trol agent of the Detroit Sector, serving as an administrative and
Biographical Sketches
187

operations officer. This was followed by assignment as assistant
chief patrol agent of the Tucson Sector. In 2001, Michael Fisher
received the ‘‘Manager of the Year’’ award for establishing a
budgetary operational planning model in the Tucson Sector.
Next he became deputy director for the U.S. Customs and Bor-
der Protection (CBP) Office of Anti-Terrorism in Washington,
DC and was a liason to an inter-agency intelligence community
for counterterrorism planning and operations. He became an as-
sociate chief patrol agent in Headquarters Border Patrol and
was promoted as senior associate chief in 2004. Mr. Fisher estab-
lished a Border Patrol Intelligence Division in its Washington,
DC Operations Branch. In 2006, he became the deputy chief
patrol agent in the San Diego Sector.
Miguel Angel Felix Gallardo (1946– )
In 1989, Felix Gallardo, a drug trafficking organization leader,
was arrested. He was able to operate his organization by using a
mobile phone in prison until the 1990s, when he was transferred
to a maximum-security unit. After losing his leadership, his or-
ganization was divided by two factions which became the
Tijuana cartel, led by the Arellano Felix brothers, and the Sinaloa
cartel, run by Hector Palma Salazar, Adrian Comez Gonzalez, and
Joaquin Guzman Loera.
Felix Gallardo began by working as a family bodyguard
for Mexican governor Leopoldo Sanchez Celis. Celis was pre-
sented with the opportunity for corruption and it is believed
that Felix Gallardo used Sanchez Celis’s political connections to
create his drug organization. He later partnered with the key
Colombian cocaine trafficker, Pablo Escobar.
Miguel Angel Felix Gallardo was a godfather of Governor
Sanchez Celis’s son Rodolofo. Rodolfo Sanchez Celis was kidnapped,
tortured, and assassinated. It is alleged that Hector Luis Palma
Salazar and Joaquin Guzman Loera were responsible. In retaliation,
Felix Gallardo kidnapped and decapitated Palma Salazar’s wife.
As a result, the Tijuana and Sinaloa cartels entered into conflict.
Vincente Carillo Fuentes (1962– )
Born in La Armitas, Zacatecas, Mexico, Vincente Carlos Fuentes
is the leader of the Juarez cartel, a drug organization in control
188
Biographical Sketches

of a major U.S. interstate drug route. He is charged in the West-
ern District of Texas with 46 counts of organized criminal activ-
ity, cocaine and marijuana importation and possession with
intent to distribute, money laundering, witness tampering, and
ordering assassinations to prevent communication with U.S.
law. There is a $5 million reward offered by the Department of
State for his arrest and/or conviction.
The founder of the Juarez cartel, Amado Carillo Fuentes, is
Vincente Carlos Fuentes’ brother. Amado brought in his six
brothers and his son, Vincente Carillo Leyva, who was arrested
on April 1, 2009. In 1999, Amado’s death from a botched plastic
surgery operation was a media sensation, and his passing set
off a turf war over cartel leadership won by Vincente. After
Amado Carillo Fuentes’ death, this cartel has been less power-
ful. In the 1990s the ‘‘Maxiproceso’’ interdiction effort resulted
in 110 arrest warrants for alleged cartel members and accompli-
ces, 65 of which were executed.
After Amado’s death, the Arellano Felix brothers became
very powerful, but Vincente Carillo Fuentes avoided this conflict
and strengthened his organization. In the late 1990s, tensions grew
with the other cartels and some members defected to the Sinaloa
cartel. In 2004, Rodolfo Carillo was murdered and the Sinaloa car-
tel was implicated. In retaliation, Guzman Loera’s brother was
killed in prison, setting off an intercartel turf war. The turf war
between the Sinaloa cartel and the Gulf cartel in 2005–2006 led to
a truce. The Juarez cartel contains factions loyal to the Carillos or
to the Sinaloa cartel. In the first three months of 2008, intercartel
conflict was connected to 200 murders. President Felipe Calderon
of Mexico initially sent Mexican federal troops to Ciudad Juarez
to curb the violence. Although the Juarez cartel is considerably
less powerful, Vincente Carillo Fuentes is still very powerful.
The Juarez drug-trafficking cartel is active in 21 Mexican
states, including Culiacan, Sinaloa, Monterrey, and Nuevo Leon.
It has bases in Ciudad Juarez, Chihuahua; Ojinaga, Chihuahua;
Mexico City; Guadalajara, Jalisco; Cuaernavaca, Morelos; and Can-
cun, Quintana Roo. It is the most geographically dispersed drug
cartel operating in Mexico but is named after Ciudad Juarez, the
Mexican sister city of El Paso, Texas. The Juarez cartel is predomi-
nant in the Mexican state of Chihuahua. This cartel is considered a
member of the Federation Alliance, but this tie may have been
weakened by murders committed by another federation member.
As of January 2006, 66 Juarez cartel enforcers had been arrested.
Biographical Sketches
189

Vincente Fox (1942– )
Vincente Fox was born in Mexico City and grew up on the San
Cristobal ranch in the municipality of San Francisco del Rincon
in the state of Guanajato, Mexico. He studied business adminis-
tration at the Universidad Iberoamericana and received a top
management diploma from the Harvard Business School. In
1964, he began work as a route supervisor for Coca-Cola and
traveled throughout Mexico. In the 1980s he joined PAN, the
Partido Accion Nacional. He became a federal congressman for
the third district of Leon. In 1991, he ran for governor of Gua-
najuato, but Carlos Medina Plascencia was named interim gov-
ernor. In 1995, he was elected Guanajuato’s governor. Vincente
Fox became the first member of the PAN party to be elected
president of Mexico in 2000 and served a six-year term. In 2007,
he became co-president of the Centrist Democrat International,
an organization of Christian Democratic parties.
President Fox sought to improve trade relations with the
United States and initiated bilateral efforts to curb drug traffick-
ing and the government corruption associated with it. This
effort resulted in arrest of certain drug-trafficking organization
(DTO) leaders, and inter-DTO rivalry to take over lucrative
drug-trafficking routes resulted in violence in Nuevo Laredo,
Tamaulipas. Regarding immigration, Fox called for opening the
borders and protecting the rights of Mexican undocumented
workers. He discussed the prospect of a guest-worker program
with President George W. Bush in 2000 but immigration reform
was stalled by concerns about terrorism and negative U.S. pub-
lic opinion. U.S. public sentiment was against admitting more
Mexican workers and this initiative languished.
Alberto Gonzales (1955– )
Alberto Gonzalez is a corporate lawyer who became general
counsel for George W. Bush in 1995 when Bush was governor
of Texas. He was secretary of state of Texas from December
1997 to January 10, 1999. As secretary of state, Gonzales special-
ized in U.S.-Mexico border issues and developed immigration
policy. In 2001, newly elected President Bush asked Gonzales to
serve as general counsel to the White House. In 2005, Gonzalez
became the first Hispanic American and Mexican American to
190
Biographical Sketches

be appointed attorney general when he succeeded John Ashcroft.
In confirmation hearings before the Senate, all eight Democrats
on the Judiciary Committee did not vote for him, but he was
confirmed by a vote of 60 to 36.
Alberto Gonzales is the son of a migrant farm worker who
was born in San Antonio, Texas. His parents did not finish ele-
mentary school and his father died in a work accident in 1982.
Upon high school graduation, Gonzales joined the U.S. Air
Force and served from 1973 to 1975. He was encouraged to
enter the U.S. Air Force Academy but instead sought a career
in law and enrolled at Rice University, graduating in 1979. He
is the first to graduate from college in his family and went on
to Harvard Law School before becoming a member of the Vin-
son and Elkins corporate law firm in 1982. He practiced law for
13 years. Alberto Gonzales has taught law as an adjunct profes-
sor at the University of Houston Law Center.
Gonzales was a distinguished alumnus of Rice Univer-
sity and later received the Harvard Law School Association
Award. In his career, Gonzales has received the President’s
Awards from the U.S. Hispanic Chamber of Commerce and
the League of United Latin American Citizens. In 1999, he was
named Latino Lawyer of the Year by the Hispanic National
Bar Association.
Alberto Gonzales pursued the policy of expedited removal
and implementation of the USA PATRIOT Act, reorganization
of federal agencies into the Department of Homeland Security,
and the development of a law establishing a director of national
intelligence. Gonzalez inherited many of the controversial poli-
cies of his predecessor, John Ashcroft, and while he was attor-
ney general was embroiled in controversy. On April 9, 2007, he
testified before Congress regarding the accusations that the
Department of Justice and the Federal Bureau of Investigation
used the USA PATRIOT Act electronic surveillance provisions
in a manner not intended by the law. Subsequent intensification
of controversy and calls from members of Congress for his res-
ignation led him to step down on September 17, 2007.
Osiel Cardenas Guillen (1967– )
The Gulf cartel operates in 13 states, including Monterrey,
Nuevo Leon, and Morelia, Michoachan. Its center of activity is
Biographical Sketches
191

the Mexican state of Tamaulipus. Important bases are located in
Nuevo Laredo, across from Laredo, Texas; Reynosa, across from
McAllen, Texas; Matamoros, across from Brownsville, Texas;
and Miguel Aleman. It is known as the Gulf cartel because of
its bases along the Rio Grande River in southeastern Texas,
which opens into the Gulf of Mexico at Matamoros and Browns-
ville. The Gulf cartel is known to be particularly violent, and it
employed a paramilitary group known as the Zetas, which is
now contesting leadership of their drug-trafficking territory
(plaza). Through January 2006, 134 Gulf cartel enforcers have
been arrested.
Osiel Cardenas Guillen is thought to be the leader of the
Gulf cartel, although he has been imprisoned since 2003. He
was extradited to the United States in January 2007. Charges
brought against him include drug trafficking and threatening to
murder U.S. federal agents in Matamoros, Mexico. After enter-
ing prison, it is thought that he negotiated an alliance with the
Tijuana cartel. Because of the impact of counter-trafficking
enforcement on its leadership and drug profits, the Gulf cartel
is thought to be expanding into human smuggling for profit.
The attempts to cross people are thought to be attempts to
divert attention from drug loads.
Joaquin Guzman Loera (1957– )
Joaquin Guzman Loera was born in the Mexican state of Sina-
loa. In the 1980s, Guzman Loera was associated with Miguel
Angel Felix Gallardo, a.k.a ‘‘El Padrino (the Godfather),’’ who
headed Mexico’s most active drug-trafficking organization. He
left this organization to found his own international criminal
enterprise. An early 1990s effort involved an under-border tun-
nel in Douglas, Arizona, used to smuggle cocaine. In May 1993,
members of the Arellano-Felix organization attempted to assas-
sinate Guzman Loera in Guadalajara, Jalisco, Mexico. The result
was the heavily publicized murder of Catholic Cardinal Jan
Jesus Posadas-Ocampo, who was traveling in the vehicle
thought to hold Guzman Loera.
In 1993, Guzman Loera was connected to 7.3 tons of cocaine
that was concealed in cans of chili peppers seized in Tecate, Baja
California, Mexico. In the same time period, a very sophisticated
192
Biographical Sketches

tunnel was also discovered in Tijuana, Baja California, that ended
in the Otay Mesa, California, area. Joaquin Guzman Loera was
arrested in Mexico and convicted of criminal association and
bribery. Joaquin Guzman Loera escaped from the maximum se-
curity Puente Grande prison in the Mexican state of Jalisco on
January 19, 2001. He was serving a 20-year sentence for crimi-
nal association and bribery.
Guzman Loera is wanted for conspiracy to distribute co-
caine, possession with intent to distribute, and money launder-
ing by the U.S. and Mexican governments and INTERPOL.
Drug trafficking has brought him great wealth, and Guzman
Loera was listed as number 701 on Forbes’ list of the world’s
wealthiest people in 2008 and number 47 of the world’s most
powerful people in 2009. The DEA has offered a $5 million
reward for his capture.
The Sinaloa cartel smuggles multi-ton shipments of cocaine
and operates in 17 Mexican states and Mexico City, Tepic,
Nayarit, Toluca, and Cuautitlan, Mexico state; and most of Sin-
aloa state. As of January 2006, 98 Sinaloa enforcers have been
arrested. The Negros and the Pelones are enforcer units. The
Negros are thought to be responsible for many violent attacks
against the Zetas in Nuevo Laredo in a fight to control drug
routes and the local police. Certain agents of Mexico’s Federal
Investigative Agency (AFI) are thought to have been corrupted
by the Sinaloa cartel. In 2005, nearly 1,500 of 7,000 agents were
under investigation and 457 faced criminal charges.
Stephen Harper (1959– )
Born in Toronto, Stephen Harper is the 22nd prime minister of
Canada and leader of the Conservative Party. He was elected in
January 2006 after his party won the largest number of seats in
the Canadian House of Commons. Previously, Harper attended
Richview Collegiate Institute and went on to the University of
Toronto, then dropped out. After working at Imperial Oil, he
went to the University of Calgary and received a B.A. in eco-
nomics. He later earned a master’s degree in economics from
the University of Calgary. In 1985, Harper began in politics as
chief aide to Progressive Conservative MP Jim Hawkes but
became disillusioned with that party and Brian Mulrony, the
PC prime minister. Next, he became the Reform Party’s chief
Biographical Sketches
193

policy officer. In 1992, he ran for MP and won, stepping down
in 1997. Harper then became president of the National Citizen’s
Coalition, a conservative think tank.
In 2002, Harper became leader of the Canadian Alliance
Party and was elected to the House of Commons and became
leader of the opposition. He led efforts to merge the Canadian
Alliance with the Progressive Conservative Party. They became
the Conservative Party of Canada. In 2004, Harper resigned as
leader of the opposition to run for leadership of the Conserva-
tive Party of Canada, winning the election. The Liberals were
reelected as a minority government with the conservatives coming
in second. In 2006, after a vote of no confidence in the scandal
plagued liberal government, the Conservatives won the federal
election and established a minority government with Harper as
prime minister. In 2008, Harper and the Conservative Party were
reelected. Harper received the Woodrow Wilson Award in 2006 for
his Calgary public service. In 2008 he was awarded the Presidential
Gold Medal for Humanitarianism by B’nai B’rith International.
Harper has stated, ‘‘Threats to the U.S. are threats to
Canada’’ (Brennan 2009). He is fulfilling a campaign promise
that Canada Border Service agents will be armed and that situa-
tions where they would need to work alone will be avoided. They
are being provided with side arms to deal with transnational threats
such as high-risk individuals, firearms, explosives, and drugs.
Eric H. Holder (1951– )
Eric Holder is a Columbia University and Columbia Law School
graduate who began employment at the Department of Justice
(DOJ). At the DOJ, he moved upward through the ranks and, in
1988, became an Associate Judge in the Superior Court of the
District of Columbia. From 1993 to 1997, Eric Holder served as
U.S. District Attorney for the District of Columbia by appoint-
ment of President Bill Clinton. He became Deputy Attorney
General under Janet Reno from 1997 to 2001. Holder’s actions in
support of President Clinton’s controversial pardon of Marc Rich,
a financier who had fled the country due to criminal charges,
were controversial. Eric Holder indicated that his opinion of the
pardon was ‘‘neutral, leaning toward favorable’’ and Holder
was accused of being too friendly with Rich’s lawyer, Jack Quinn.
After his appointment, he joined the corporate legal firm of
194
Biographical Sketches

Covington & Burling from 2001 to 2008. After Barack Obama
won the presidency, he nominated Holder to be Attorney Gen-
eral. Eric Holder was confirmed on 2-2-2009 and became the first
African American to serve as Attorney General. In 2010, Holder
began working with Congress on a law to permit law enforce-
ment to delay giving Miranda warnings to terrorist suspects.
Edward Kennedy (1932–2009)
Edward Moore ‘‘Ted’’ Kennedy was born in Brookline, Massa-
chusetts. He entered Harvard University in 1950, served in the
U.S. Army beginning in 1951, and returned to Harvard in 1953,
graduating in 1956. Kennedy attended the University of Vir-
ginia Law School and graduated in 1958. In 1960, he became an
assistant district attorney in Suffolk County, Massachusetts.
When his brother John F. Kennedy was elected president in
1960, Ted Kennedy stepped forward to run to fill his Massachu-
setts Senate seat in 1962. Despite lack of experience and criti-
cism that he was using his brother’s success, he won and then
was reelected to a full term in 1964, serving through reelection
until his death from brain cancer in 2009.
Kennedy was poised to run for president in 1972 when his
actions became a national scandal. After a party on Chappa-
quiddick Island, Massachusetts, he drove away with Mary Jo
Kopechne as a passenger. He had an accident in which his car
fell off a narrow bridge and Kopechne was killed. Kennedy did
not immediately report the accident and later pled guilty to a
misdemeanor charge of leaving the scene. His presence, as a
married man, in the company of a young, unmarried woman
and his lack of responsible actions after the accident perma-
nently impacted his political standing, and he did not run for
president in 1972. He later ran for president in the Democratic
primaries in 1980, but lost.
Kennedy was a strong advocate of social welfare legislation
and a consistent supporter of legal immigration opportunities.
He became the senior Democrat on the Immigration Subcom-
mittee of the Judiciary Committee. He was the sponsor of the
Enhanced Border Security Act of 2001 and was the coauthor of
the 2007 Senate Immigration Reform Bill with John McCain,
which was not passed. The bill was controversial because of its
proposed path to legalization for undocumented residents and
Biographical Sketches
195

guest-worker program. For border security, it would have
provided for an increase in U.S. Border Patrol agents, increased
interior enforcement, strengthened electronic surveillance mea-
sures, and provided more border fencing.
Michele Marie Leonhart
Michele Leonhart is a 1978 graduate of Bemidji State University in
Minnesota with a B.S. in criminal justice. She began her career as
a police officer with the Baltimore Police Department, graduating
from the Baltimore Police Academy and patrolling the Northwest
District of Baltimore. In 1980, Leonhart became a Drug Enforce-
ment Administration (DEA) special agent and began work in
Minneapolis. In 1986, she was transferred to the Saint Louis field
division and worked as a recruiter. Next, Leonhart was promoted
as a GS-14 Group Supervisor in San Diego, working in the border
region on intelligence and then enforcement. Her enforcement
group dealt with a Bolivia cocaine cartel whose leader, Jorge
Roca-Suarez, and co-defendants were arrested and convicted with
$14 million in assets seized. She was acknowledged as group
supervisor with a 1993 DEA Administrator’s Award.
In 1993, Leonhart moved to DEA headquarters in Arlington,
Virginia, working as an internal affairs inspector with the
DEA Office of Professional Responsibility. Promoted to GS-15,
she served on the DEA’s Career Board until 1995, when she
became assistant special agent in charge of the Los Angeles
Field Division. In 1996, she was promoted to the Senior Execu-
tive Service and supervised the Special Agent Recruitment Pro-
gram at headquarters. In 1997, she took charge of the San
Francisco Field Division, commanding the heavily trafficked
Los Angeles area, Nevada, Hawaii, Guam, and Saipan. In 2003,
President Bush named her acting DEA deputy administrator.
She was confirmed by the Senate in 2004. In 2008, she was nom-
inated to become the next administrator of DEA. Leonhart is
acting administrator of the DEA.
John McCain (1936– )
John McCain was born in the Panama Canal Zone and grew up
on naval bases in the United States and internationally. His
196
Biographical Sketches

father, John McCain Jr., was an admiral who commanded the
American navy in the Pacific during the Vietnam War. A grad-
uate of Episcopal High School in 1954, McCain attended the
U.S. Naval Academy in Annapolis, completing in 1958 and
going on to become a naval aviator. On October 26, 1967,
McCain was hit by an antiaircraft missile during a mission and
ejected, receiving multiple broken bones. Held by the enemy,
he received delayed medical care. Spending five and a half
years as a prisoner of war, he was released on March 17, 1973.
John McCain received the Silver Star, Bronze Star, Legion of
Merit, Purple Heart, and Distinguished Flying Cross. Next, he
attended the National War College in Washington, DC, in
1973–1974, but wished to fly. He became a training squadron
commander in 1975 and was promoted to captain in 1977. In
that year, the Navy made McCain its liaison to the U.S. Senate.
John McCain retired from the Navy in 1981 and was
employed by his wife’s father, a beer distributor. In 1982, he ran
for the U.S. Congress as a Republican and won, keeping the
seat with reelection. In 1986 McCain was elected to the Senate,
a position he has consistently held through reelection. Through-
out, McCain has been a Republican but is also known for taking
stands with the Democrats. In 2008, McCain ran for president
but lost to Barack Obama. John McCain was the cosponsor of
the 2007 Secure America and Orderly Immigration Act. He pri-
oritized border security but also favored a path to legalization
for unauthorized immigrants and a guest-worker program.
Khalid Shaikh Mohammed (1964– or 1965– )
Khalid Shaikh Mohammed was born in Kuwait to parents from
Baluchistan in Pakistan and spent some of his childhood in
Kuwait, as did his nephew, Ramzi Yousef, a planner in the
1993
World
Trade
Center
bombing.
At
age
16,
Shaikh
Mohammed joined the Muslim Brotherhood and subsequently
went to Pakistan. Later, he went to the United States and
attended the Baptist Chowan College in Murfreesboro, North
Carolina, for one semester before transferring to North Carolina
Agricultural and Technical State University. He received a
degree in mechanical engineering in 1986.
In the late 1980s, Khalid Shaikh Mohammed went to
Afghanistan and fought against the Soviet invasion. Afterward,
Biographical Sketches
197

he went to work for an electronics company, servicing commu-
nications equipment. Next, he worked with an organization
helping Afghan fighters against the Soviets. In 1992, he went to
fight with Muslims in Bosnia and Herzegovina. Afterward, he
was a project engineer for the Qatari Ministry of Electricity
through 1996, when he fled to Pakistan because he had become
a U.S. terrorism suspect in the 1993 WTC bombing.
Beginning in 1999, he acted as a member of al-Qaeda, man-
aging propaganda. The 9/11 Commission believes that he
planned the 9/11 attacks. Khalid was captured in Pakistan on
March 2003 and has been in U.S. custody since, including at
Guantanamo Bay. There are allegations that the United States
tortured him. CIA Director Michael Hayden stated before a
Senate Committee on February 5, 2008, that waterboarding had
been used. His subsequent confessions include a statement that
he masterminded the 9/11 attacks, among other actions.
Khalid Shaikh Mohammed is a U.S. prisoner alleged to have
committed acts of terrorism, including mass murder of civilians.
On February 11, 2008, a military tribunal charged him with war
crimes and murder and he faces the death penalty. In November
2009, it was announced that he will stand trial in a civilian fed-
eral court in New York City. The decision to hold the trial in a ci-
vilian court and locate it in New York City resulted in
controversy and subsequent postponements of the trial.
Janet Ann Napolitano (1957– )
Born in New York City, Janet Napolitano was raised in
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, and Albuquerque, New Mexico. She
graduated from Sandia High School in Albuquerque and was
voted ‘‘mostly likely to succeed.’’ Napolitano was valedictorian
of her class at Santa Clara University in Santa Clara, California,
where she received a Truman Scholarship. She went on to the
University of Virginia School of Law, and her first position was
as a law clerk for Judge Mary M. Schroeder, who served on the
U.S. Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit. Next, Napolitano
joined the firm of Lewis and Roca in Phoenix, Arizona. In 1991
she was an attorney for Anita Hill, who testified before the Sen-
ate that she had been sexually harassed by Clarence Thomas
when she was working for him at the Equal Employment Op-
portunity Commission.
198
Biographical Sketches

In 1993, Janet Napolitano was appointed as U.S. attorney
for the District of Arizona by President Bill Clinton. She was
elected Arizona attorney general in 1998. In 2002, she was
elected governor of Arizona and she won reelection in 2006. In
2006, Napolitano received the Woodrow Wilson Award for
Public Service. She is a past member of the Democratic Gover-
nors Association and served as chair of the Western Governors
Association and National Governors Association from from
2006 to 2007.
In 2009, Janet Napolitano began as the new Director of
Homeland Security. Her initial duties have included dealing
with the possibility that drug-related violence in Mexico will
spill over to the United States and taking steps to prevent arms
smuggling to Mexico.
Barack Hussein Obama (1961– )
The first African American or member of any minority to be
elected president of the United States, Barack Obama was born
in Honolulu, Hawaii, but grew up in both the United States
and Indonesia. In 1979, he attended Occidental College in Los
Angeles but transferred to Columbia University in New York
City, majoring in political science with a specialization in inter-
national relations and receiving a B.A. Obama worked for the
Business International Corporation and the New York Public
Interest Research Group. Next, he moved to Chicago and was a
director of the Developing Communities Project, a church-
based community organization, from 1985 to 1988. In 1988,
Obama went to Harvard Law School, where he was editor and
then president of the Harvard Law Review before graduating
with a Juris Doctorate magna cum laude.
In 1992, Obama structured the Project Vote registration
drive in Illinois. Next he joined the Davis, Miner, Barnhill and
Galland law firm, which specialized in civil rights and neigh-
borhood economic development litigation. He was an associate
from 1993 to 1996 and worked as counsel until 2004. Concur-
rently, he was a lecturer at the University of Chicago Law
School from 1992 to 1996 and a senior lecturer from 1996 to
2004. From 1997 to 2004, Obama served in the Illinois Senate for
the 13th District for three terms. He was defeated when
running for the House of Representatives in 2000 and ran
Biographical Sketches
199

successfully for the U.S. Senate in 2004. In the Senate, Barack
Obama supported the Secure America and Orderly Immigra-
tion Bill, which was not passed by Congress, and voted for the
Secure Fence Act of 2006. In 2005–2006, Obama served on the
Foreign Relations Committee and in 2007 he joined the Home-
land Security and Governmental Affairs Committee.
In 2006 and 2008, Obama won Best Spoken Word Album
Grammy Awards for the abridged audiobook version of Dreams
from My Father (1995) and The Audacity of Hope (2008). Barack
Obama’s ‘‘Yes We Can’’ speech was set to music by independ-
ent artists and received a Daytime Emmy Award. In 2008,
Obama was elected president of the United States and named
Time magazine’s Person of the Year, and in 2009, he received
the Nobel Peace Prize.
Action taken by President Obama against Mexican drug-
trafficking organizations (DTOs) include presidential authorization
of seizure of any DTO assets in the United States and intensified
enforcement efforts to apprehend U.S. citizens involved in drug
or arms smuggling and money laundering. Regarding immigra-
tion, Obama believes that the U.S. system is broken and that it
needs to be reformed. He backs a path to legalization for unau-
thorized immigrants. Obama’s border-security policy follows
that of his predecessor George W. Bush in authorizing increased
funding for border-security inspections, trade facilitation at ports
of entry (POEs), an increase in operational control in between
POEs, and increases in air and marine operations, border fencing,
infrastructure, and technology.
Nancy Pelosi (1940– )
Nancy Pelosi was born in Baltimore, Maryland, the daughter of
a five-term congressman, Thomas D’Alesandro Jr. She attended
Trinity College in Washington, DC, where she met her future
husband, Paul Pelosi. Paul Pelosi was from San Francisco and
they moved there and raised a family. Her first political posi-
tion was as the Northern California Party chairwoman. She ran
for Congress in 1987 and has been reelected every two years
from California’s Eighth District, a left-oriented constituency
located in San Francisco. She served on the Appropriations and
Intelligence Committee for 10 years as the ranking Democrat.
Following the 9/11 terrorist attacks, she authored the bill
200
Biographical Sketches

creating the independent 9/11 Commission to investigate U.S.
strategic intelligence failures.
In 2001, Pelosi became House minority whip, the first
woman so selected. She replaced Richard Gephart as the House
minority leader in 2004. She led Democratic criticism of the
George W. Bush administration and was key to the reunifica-
tion of Democrats prior to their taking control of both the
House and Senate in the 2008 elections. Pelosi became Speaker
of the House in 2009. She has been a co-sponsor of the Secure
America and Orderly Immigration Act that would provide a
path to legalization and start a guest-worker program. She
voted against the Secure Fence Act of 2006 and in favor of the
Border Tunnel Protection Act of 2006, which increased criminal
penalties for tunneling. She later reversed her position and in
2007 voted for an amendment to increase border-fence funding.
Ahmed Ressam (1967– )
Labeled the ‘‘Millennium Bomber’’ by the media, Ahmed
Ressam was born in Algeria. In 1994, he used a forged French
passport to gain entrance to Canada by claiming political asy-
lum from persecution in Algeria. Surviving through criminal
activity, he was recruited to al-Qaeda. When he failed to appear
for an asylum hearing, his asylum application was turned
down and a warrant issued for his arrest. At that time he
obtained a passport under the name ‘‘Benni Noris’’ and used it
to travel to Afghanistan for military training for jihadists. In
1999, Ressam returned to Canada with plans for making an ex-
plosive weapon to attack a U.S. target. He decided to attack the
Los Angeles Airport on the eve of the millennium, known as
the ‘‘millennium attack plot.’’
On December 14, 1999, Ressam boarded the M/V Coho at
Victoria on Vancouver Island, Canada, and attempted to pass
border security at Port Angeles, Washington. Under suspicion,
he had been monitored by Canadian intelligence for two years
in Montreal. He disappeared and was traced to a motel room in
British Columbia where bomb-making materials were left
behind. The Royal Canadian Mounties notified U.S. Customs of
a possible bomb threat. Ressam was cleared by U.S. immigration
in Victoria. Ressam was uneasy and attempted to flee border
inspection in Port Angeles, Washington. Diana Dean, a border
Biographical Sketches
201

agent, decided to search Ressam’s car and found explosives
meant for a bombing of LAX.
After conviction, Ressam eventually received 22 years plus
5 years supervision after release. The sentencing was delayed to
win his cooperation in providing intelligence about terrorism.
In 2001, Ressam cooperated with U.S. investigators and told
them that al-Qaeda had sleeper cells in the United States. The
President’s Daily Briefing given to George Bush on August 6,
2001, contained information from Ressam and was titled ‘‘Bin
Laden Determined to Strike in U.S.’’ In 2007, the U.S. Court of
Appeals for the Ninth Circuit in Seattle reversed one of the
charges on which he was convicted and assigned him for resen-
tencing. The Supreme Court overturned this decision in 2008
and restored the original conviction and sentence. The FBI proj-
ects that he will be released on July 6, 2019, when Ressam will
be subject to removal for commission of an aggravated felony.
Silvestre Reyes (1944– )
Silvestre Reyes, a Mexican American, was born in Canutillo,
Texas, a rural community located five miles from El Paso, Texas.
Raised on a farm, Reyes first spoke Spanish and learned Eng-
lish in grade school. As a youngster, he watched for agents from
the Border Patrol in order to warn unauthorized workers on
the farm to hide. During summers, Reyes was a migrant farm
worker in the Lower Rio Grande Valley of Texas and California.
In 1966 he joined the military and fought in Vietnam for two
years. Afterwards, GI benefits enabled him to attend El Paso
Community College, from which he graduated in 1977, and then
the University of Texas at El Paso and Austin, while working to
support a family. He received the Outstanding Alumnus Award
of the American Association of Community Colleges, 2001.
In 1969 Silvestre Reyes joined the Immigration and Natural-
ization Service (INS). He was promoted to be assistant regional
commissioner in Dallas, Texas, where he had responsibility for
13 states and a $100 million budget. From 1984 to 1995, he was
the Border Patrol chief for El Paso, Texas, supervising 900
employees and McAllen, Texas, with 500 employees. Prior to
Reyes’ supervision, the Border Patrol was viewed as largely inef-
fective, but Reyes introduced changes including the Canine
Program. He has received national recognition for starting
202
Biographical Sketches

Operation Hold the Line in 1993. Instead of using Border Patrol
agents to catch undocumented migrants in the United States,
which often involved harassment of Hispanic U.S. citizens, he
strengthened enforcement to deter them from trying by visibly
stationing agents at the border. This operation caused a major
decline in migrants’ attempts to cross at El Paso. Operation Hold
the Line has been criticized for displacing attempts to enter with-
out authorization to more dangerous rural regions, which has
led to deaths. El Paso itself is considered to have suffered
because of loss of unauthorized laborers and their consumer
purchases. Finally, Reyes was criticized as a Mexican American
who policed Mexicans, an accusation that offended him.
Upon retirement from the Border Patrol, he was elected as
a Democrat to the U.S. Congress 16th District, representing El
Paso County in Texas, a position he has served in through
2010. After the 9/11 attacks, Reyes focused on border security
and was appointed to the Democratic Caucus Homeland Secu-
rity Task Force. As a member of Congress, Reyes received the
National Legislative Award, League of United Latin American
Citizens in 2002. He is the chair of the House Permanent Select
Committee on Intelligence and a member of the House Armed
Services Committee, the Veterans Affairs Committee, and the
Special Oversight Panel on Terrorism. Reyes opposed the
Secure Border Act of 2006 and has promoted electronic surveil-
lance to achieve a ‘‘virtual fence.’’
He is a past chair of the Congressional Hispanic Caucus
and active in many congressional caucuses, including the Law
Enforcement Caucus, the National Security Caucus, the Con-
gressional Human Rights Caucus, the Older Americans Caucus,
the Urban Caucus, and the Democratic Caucus Task Force on
Education. In addition, he is a member of the Air Force Acad-
emy Visitors Board, American Legion, Association of the U.S.
Army, AMVETS, Disabled American Veterans, Transatlantic
Learning Community, US/Mexico Interparliamentary Group,
Veterans of Foreign Wars, and Vietnam Veterans of America.
Tom Ridge
Tom Ridge was born August 26, 1945, in Munhill, Pennsylvania,
and grew up in a housing project in Erie, Pennsylvania. He grad-
uated from Harvard University in 1967 and began at the Dickinson
Biographical Sketches
203

School of Law before being drafted and serving for two years
as an infantryman in Vietnam. Ridge received the Bronze Star
for Valor. He returned to law school and received a J.D. in
1972. He began in private practice and then served as a pub-
lic defender. From 1979 to 1982, he was Erie County assistant
district attorney. Ridge was elected as a Republican to the
U.S. House of Representatives in 1982 and served until 1994,
when he was elected governor for two terms.
Following the September 11, 2001, attacks, Tom Ridge
became the first director of the Office of Homeland Security and
transitioned to be the secretary of the Homeland Security Depart-
ment in charge of 22 agencies and 180,000 employees. In 2003, the
DHS sustained criticism from Congress and the public over its ex-
pensive planning, which it lacked the funding to carry through.
In 2004, the United States began the war in Iraq and concern about
terrorist attacks again increased. In December 2004, Tom Ridge
resigned, citing job stress and personal financial issues. He is the
author with Larry Bloom of The Test of Our Times: America Under
Siege . . . And How We Can Be Safe Again (2009).
James Sensenbrenner (1943– )
James Sensenbrenner was born in Chicago and raised in Shore-
wood, Wisconsin, where he attended the private Milwaukee
County Day School, graduating in 1961. He attended Stanford
University, graduating with a B.A. in political science in 1965.
In 1968, he received a J.D. from the University of Wisconsin
Law School.
In 1968, Sensenbrenner, a Republican, was elected to the
Wisconsin State Assembly and served until 1975, when he was
elected to the Wisconsin State Senate, a position he served in
until early 1979. In 1979, he was elected in Wisconsin’s 9th Dis-
trict (now reapportioned as the 5th) to Congress and has been
reelected 14 times. His congressional activities include service
on the Committee of the Judiciary, including its subcommittee
on the Constitution, Civil Rights, and Civil Liberties, where he
is the ranking member. After Democrats became the majority in
Congress in 2009, he finished his term as chairman of the House
Judiciary committee.
On October 23, 2001, James Sensenbrenner introduced the
USA PATRIOT Act, which he did not author. He is a strong
204
Biographical Sketches

advocate of the Bush administration’s War on Terror policies.
He has authored the Real ID Act of 2005, which would require
proof of citizenship when issuing licenses and authorizes a fed-
eral driver’s license database. Beginning in 2004, Sensenbrenner
has repeatedly supported bills that would eliminate the immi-
gration visa lottery. In 2005, Sensenbrenner sponsored H.R.
4437, a bill that would increase criminal penalties for aiding
and abetting unauthorized entry to the United States.
September 11 Commission/ 9/11
Commission
The National Commission on Terrorist Attacks upon the
United States (9/11 Commission) was established by legislative
act of Congress on November 27, 2002 to investigate the details
of the September 11, 2001, attacks, including the degree to
which the United States was prepared and how it responded. It
had a mandate to develop recommendations to prevent future
terrorist attacks.
The cochairs were Thomas Kean and Lee H. Hamilton.
Other members were Richard Ben-Veniste, Max Cleland, Fred
F. Fielding, Jamie Gorlick, Slade Gorton, Bob Kerrey, John F.
Lehman, Timothy J. Roemer, and James R. Thompson. The
massive final report was based on numerous interviews and
testimony. The 9/11 Commission concluded that the lack of
intelligence sharing between the Central Intelligence Agency
and the Federal Bureau of Investigation permitted the attack to
be carried out and that it could possibly have been prevented.
Major points of the report that have shaped border security pol-
icy include the development of a system to monitor terrorists’
travel and prevent their entrance, integration of the U.S. border-
security system into a larger network of screening points
including international airports, development of a biometric
entry-exit system, development of a secure identification sys-
tem, and creation of a Department of Homeland Security with
information-sharing capacity. Afterwards, co-chairs Kean and
Hamilton wrote Without Precedent: The Inside Story of the 9/11
Commission about problematic issues faced in the investigation,
including their skepticism about whether they were told the full
story by U.S. government officials.
Biographical Sketches
205

Arlen Specter (1930– )
Born in Wichita, Kansas, Arlen Specter graduated Phi Beta
Kappa with a major in international relations from the Univer-
sity of Pennsylvania in 1951. He served in the U.S. Air Force in
the Office of Special Investigations from 1951 to 1953 and then
attended Yale Law School, graduating in 1956. He opened a
Pennsylvania law practice with Marvin Katz and became an as-
sistant district attorney under District Attorney James Crumlish
as a Democrat. Arlen Specter was a member of the Warren
Commission, investigating the assassination of President John
F. Kennedy.
In 1965, Specter ran for district attorney as a Republican
and won, ultimately serving two terms. In 1976, he was defeated
in the Republican primary for a Senate seat and in 1978 he was
defeated running for governor. After working in the firm of
Dechert, Price and Rhoads, he ran for the Senate successfully in
1980. He became chairman of the House Judiciary Committee
from 2005 to 2007. Arlen Specter is a member of the Committee
on Appropriations, including the Subcommittee on Homeland
Security; and the Committee on the Judiciary, including the
Subcommittee on the Constitution, the Subcommittee on Crime
and Drugs (past chair), and the Subcommittee on Human
Rights and the Law.
Specter was critical of warrantless wiretapping. Neverthe-
less, he voted for the 2008 amendments to the Foreign Intelli-
gence Surveillance Act, which places authority for electronic
searches with the federal executive branch. He is considered
conservative on national and border-security issues. Specter
introduced Senate Bill 2611, the Comprehensive Immigration
Reform Act of 2006, and supports both a pathway to citizenship
for unauthorized immigrants and a guest-worker program. S.
2611 was passed by the Senate and stalled in the House. His
view on immigration is liberal. Specter switched parties and
ran for the Senate in the Democratic in 2010, but was defeated.
Tom Tancredo (1945– )
Born in Denver, Colorado, Tom Tancredo attended Holy Family
High School. He has a B.A. in political science from the Univer-
sity of Northern Colorado. His professional career began as a
206
Biographical Sketches

history teacher at Drake Junior High School in Denver. In 1976
he ran for the Colorado House of Representatives and won,
serving until 1981. In 1981, he was appointed by Ronald Reagan
to be regional representative for the Department of Education.
In 1993, he became president of the Independence Institute, a
conservative think-tank in Golden, Colorado.
In 1998, he ran for Congress in the 6th District and won,
serving for four terms. In Congress he served on the Foreign
Affairs Committee and Subcommittee on Terrorism, Nonprolif-
eration, and Trade. Tancredo is noted for his position on immi-
gration and was critical of the Bush administration’s border-
security policy. He introduced the Mass Immigration Reduction
Act in 1999 (H.R. 41), 2001 (H.R. 2712), and 2003 (H.R. 946).
This bill would have placed an indefinite moratorium on U.S.
immigration except for spouses and children of American citi-
zens. The five-year moratorium would be extended until it was
estimated that fewer than 10,000 unauthorized migrants were
entering the U.S. each year and at a level that would not nega-
tively impact the legal population. In 2006, Tancredo authored
In Mortal Danger: The Battle for America’s Border and Security. A
controversial strategy for reducing U.S.-Mexico border and inte-
rior violence that he has promoted is the legalization of mari-
juana. In 2008, Tom Tancredo introduced H.R. 6975, the Jihad
Prevention Act. The legislation would require aliens seeking
admission to state that they would not advocate establishing a
Sharia (Muslim) legal system in the United States. Potential
entrants refusing to attest would be denied while visitors
would have their visas revoked.
Tancredo was an early Republican candidate for president
in 2007–2008, announcing that his participation was contingent
on failure to address illegal immigration, which he viewed as a
major threat to national security. He stood for strict enforce-
ment of immigration law, a border fence, deportation of unau-
thorized immigrants, and ending sanctuary policies protecting
the unauthorized entrants.
Ramzi Yousef
Born in Kuwait of Pakistani descent, Ramzi Yousef was partly
educated in England, where he graduated from the Swansea
Institute in Wales, majoring in electrical engineering. Later
Biographical Sketches
207

Yousef attended an al-Qaeda training camp and learned bomb-
making. He has a history of terrorist planning other than the
first World Trade Center bombing: (1) the 1993 Benazir Bhutto
assassination attempt; (2) carrying out the 1994 Imam Reza
Shrine bombing; (3) preplanning for the failed Bojinka multiple
airline hijacking plot; and (4) creation and placing of a bomb
which exploded on 1994 Philippine Airlines Flight 434.
Ramzi Yousef was able to enter the United States with a
passport and was taken into custody by the Immigration and
Naturalization Service. A traveling companion was arrested
with false immigration documents and terrorist materials in his
luggage. It is considered that this served as a smokescreen.
Yousef claimed political asylum and was interrogated while
held, but he was released because of overcrowding in detention.
Because he stated that he was a Pakistani national who had lost
his passport, the New York Pakistani Consulate issued him a
temporary document.
With
the
assistance
of
terrorist
conspirators,
Yousef
assembled a 1,500-pound urea, nitrate, and hydrogen gas bomb
to be delivered to the World Trade Center on February 26,
1993. The bombing was carried out by detonating a bomb
inside a car under Tower One. It was intended to undermine
Tower One and have it fall on Tower Two, destroying both
towers and killing thousands of civilians. Instead, six people
were killed and 1,042 injured. The New York Times printed a let-
ter sent by Yousef which stated, ‘‘We declare our responsibility
for the explosion on the mentioned building. This action was
done in response for the American political, economic, and
military support for Israel, the state of terrorism and to the rest
of the dictator countries in the region.’’
Yousef was captured in Islamabad, Pakistan, in 1995 and
extradited to the United States. On trial, Yousef said, ‘‘Yes, I am
a terrorist, and proud of it as long as it is against the U.S. gov-
ernment and against Israel, because you are more than terro-
rists; you are the one who invented terrorism and using it every
day. You are butchers, liars and hypocrites.’’ In 1996, Yousef
was one of three conspirators convicted for the Bojinka plot
and sentenced to life in prison with no parole. In 1997, Yousef
was convicted of planning the 1993 WTC bombing and in 1998
was also convicted of seditious conspiracy in the WTC case.
Ramzi Yousef is in detention at the Supermax prison ADX Flor-
ence in Florence, Colorado.
208
Biographical Sketches

6
Data and Documents
Border Security
A
limited, solely terrorism-focused definition of border secu-
rity focuses on ‘‘all efforts by the United States and other
actors to interdict terrorists and their weapons of destruc-
tion at the U.S. border’’ (Lake 2007, 2). Yet, in the process of
looking at all aspects of the maintenance of border security, one
finds that:
Initially it [border security] starts with direct interven-
tion to prevent threats and interdict dangerous people
and goods at the U.S. border itself (in terms of ports of
entry at land, sea or air terminals). Protection efforts at
the border are extended to encompass both such extra-
border activities as targeting and pre-inspection of peo-
ple and cargo in originating ports around the world,
cross-border efforts between ports of entry by the Border
Patrol, as well as intra-U.S. efforts to intercept people
and goods as they are shipped inland from their initial
port of arrival (or from internal U.S. sites). The latter
involves using the internal enforcement tools of the
Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI), Immigration and
Customs Enforcement (ICE), and other law enforcement
agents. (Lake 2007, 2)
A more comprehensive definition of border security refers to more
than the process of maintaining orderly entrance and exit of peo-
ple and goods at a nation’s borders (land, sea, or air). It involves
209

the externalization of the border through pre-inspection of trav-
elers and cargo at ports outside the United States and the inter-
nalization of monitoring goods and people to detect proscribed
goods and unauthorized entrants after they have passed through
a border and into the interior. This process of monitoring,
‘‘inside and out,’’ is based on the external checks abroad of visas
and passports of travelers or cargo documentation at exiting
countries, inspection of people and cargo at the U.S. borders and
payment of any tariff fees, and a process of search for contra-
band such as drugs or unauthorized entrants in the interior.
In order to prevent terrorist acts, the process of effecting
border security involves five missions:
1. Discovery and Interdiction of Terrorist Action
Emanating from Abroad
2. Interdiction at the Border
3. Defending Against Catastrophic Terrorism Inside
the United States
4. Protection of Critical Infrastructure and Populations
5. Emergency Preparedness and Response (Lake 2007,
3–4)
Other missions that have traditionally involved border enforce-
ment and that became intertwined with prevention of terror-
ism, which became the primary mission, are:
1. Prevention of unauthorized entry by migrants into
the United States.
2. Prevention of the smuggling of contraband, such as
drugs, into the United States and interdicting the
smuggling of arms or other external contraband to
countries outside of the United States such as
Mexico.
3. Tracking of unauthorized migrants and immigrants
and contraband inside the United States and arrest
or seizure of people and goods.
The complexity of merging the new priority to stop terror-
ism with the traditional activity of interdicting unauthorized
entrants and contraband will result in the development of new
strategies and means of border control and interior enforce-
ment. These transboundary efforts are in their infancy and such
210
Data and Documents

elements as the internal and external security nexus are incom-
pletely understood (Eriksson and Rhinard 2009, 243).
Documents
Eriksson, Johan, and Mark Rhinard. 2009. ‘‘The Internal-External
Security Nexus: Notes on an Emerging Research Agenda.’’ Coop-
eration and Conflict 44 (3): 243–267.
Lake, Jennifer E. 2007. ‘‘Border Security: The Complexity of
the Challenge.’’ Washington, DC: Congressional Research Service.
http://fpc.state.gov/documents/organization/80215.pdf.
Ports of Entry
Ports of entry are locations where people and goods can be author-
ized for entrance into a country. Individual passports and visas or
cargos are inspected to prevent passage of fraudulent entrants and
smuggled goods. There are 327 designated ports of entry, including
15 preclearance stations, for international travelers and cargo to
enter the United States. Roads, railroads, and international airports
which cross boundaries are typically designated ports of entry.
Certain land ports of entry are designated as bridges because they
cross rivers or other bodies of water to connect two bordering
countries. In 2008, 29 million trade entries were processed and
$34.5 billion in revenue was collected (USCBP 2009).
Typically, immigration inspectors and U.S. Customs officers
are present at ports of entry. In 2008, 409 million pedestrians and
passengers were processed. Whether or not an air or sea port is
classified as a port of entry for persons is a decision left to the
civil authority controlling it. Many non-land border ports choose
not to grant international entry.
Source: http://www.cbp.gov/.
The Department of Homeland
Security (DHS)
The prioritization of prevention of terrorism resulted in the reor-
ganization of federal law enforcement in order to consolidate
intelligence from external, border, and interior sources. One major
change was the dissolving of the Immigration and Naturalization
Service (INS). In the DHS, U.S. Customs and the U.S. Border
The Department of Homeland Security (DHS)
211

FIGURE 6.1
Department of Homeland Security organization chart

Patrol were subsumed as U.S. Customs and Border Patrol, which
included the U.S. Border Patrol (USBP) and Immigration and
Customs Enforcement (ICE). The Bureau of Citizenship and Im-
migration Services (CIS) took over the remainder of INS activity.
Whether or not this effort has improved national and border secu-
rity will not been known in such a short period of time.
As can be seen in the Department of Homeland Security
chart, the United States has created one of the largest law
enforcement and regulatory bureaucracies in the world. The
complexity of law-enforcement cooperation is increased when
one considers that inter-federal agency law enforcement and
intelligence cooperation is expected despite a history of compet-
itiveness between these agencies.
U.S. Border Patrol
Expansion of budget and personnel for the U.S. Border Patrol
has been recurrent despite controversy over its effectiveness at
controlling unauthorized immigration and human rights issues.
In FY1992, their budget was $326 million and a steady rate of
TABLE 6.1
U.S. Border Patrol budget, FY1992–2009
Fiscal Year
Millions ($)
1992
326
1993
363
1994
400
1995
452
1996
568
1997
717
1998
877
1999
917
2000
1,055
2001
1,146
2002
1,416
2003
1,515
2004
1,409
2005
1,525
2006
2,115
2007
2,278
2008
2,245
2009
2,656
Source: U. S. Border Patrol Headquarters, Office of Public Affairs, September 25, 2009.
U.S. Border Patrol
213

increase brought operating costs to $2,656 billion in FY2009
with further increases likely.
Increases in U.S. Border Patrol funding have largely gone to
hire an increasing number of agents at the U.S.-Mexico border. In
1992 there were 3,555 agents. By 2009, 17,415 agents and staff were
employed by the USBP and it was being repeatedly augmented by
National Guardsmen or, in Texas, Texas Rangers. This degree of
TABLE 6.2
U.S. Border Patrol agents stationed along the southwest border, FY1992–2009
Fiscal Year
Number of Agents
1992
3,555
1993
3,444
1994
3,747
1995
4,388
1996
5,333
1997
6,315
1998
7,357
1999
7,706
2000
8,580
2001
9,147
2002
9,239
2003
9,840
2004
9,506
2005
9,891
2006
11,032
2007
13,297
2008
15,442
2009
17,415
Source: U.S. Border Patrol Headquarters, Department of Public Affairs, September 25, 2009.
TABLE 6.3
U.S. Customs and Border Patrol and Immigration
and Customs Enforcement budgets, 2003–2009
Fiscal Year
CBP Budget
(in billion $)
ICE Budget
(in billion $)
2003
6.00
3.67
2004
6.34
3.13
2005
7.11
3.87
2006
7.75
4.70
2007
9.31
5.05
2008
10.94
5.68
2009
11.27
5.93
Source: U. S. Department of Homeland Security, budget in brief for FY2003–2009.
214
Data and Documents

growth in personnel involves a major expansion of law enforcement
on the southern border.
The increase in U.S. Border Patrol funding is not matched
by increases in Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE)
staffing. The focus has been on stationing USBP agents on line
watch at the border to deter entry in urban areas and increasing
agents on duty in rural regions, which have also been aug-
mented by walls, fencing, and remote surveillance technology.
Low-Intensity Conflict Doctrine and the
Militarization of the Border
Historically, the Canadian and Mexican borders have been
among the most peaceful worldwide because of the absence of
any military threat. In the 1970s, the United States and, to a
lesser degree, Mexico began the use of military tactics and tech-
nology to control civilian cross-border activities such as unauthor-
ized immigration and drug trafficking. Timothy J. Dunn (1996), a
social scientist, introduced the concept of the militarization of the
TABLE 6.4
Spectrum of militarization of the U.S.-Mexico border, less militaristic
(1) to most militaristic (11)
1. Military gives or loans equipment to the Border Patrol (BP) and Law Enforcement Agencies (LEA)
2. Military troops operate and/or maintain loaned equipment
3. Military provides ‘‘expert advice’’ to BP and LEAs
4. Military construction for BP/LEAs
5. Military provides advisors and training for BP/LEAs
6. Military transports supplies, personnel, and equipment for BP and LEAs
7. Military aerial reconnaissance and surveillance for BP and LEAs
8. Military ground troops deployed on a small scale at or near border, mainly recon for BP/LEAs
9. ‘‘Improved integration’’—‘‘Total Integration’’ of military and BP/LEA efforts. Blurring of institutional lines
between military and BP/LEAs
10. Massive deployment of military troops at or near border to perform variety of border enforcement roles
11. Military granted authority to arrest, search, seize civilians and property
Note: Sections 1 through 3: Allowed by the 1982 DOD Defense Authorization law; added new chapter to U.S. law,
Military Cooperation with Civilian Law Enforcement Officials. This support is allowed for police bodies with jurisdiction
to enforce drug, contraband, and immigration laws.
Sections 4 through 9: Allowed by 1989–1981 Defense Authorization Laws, amending 1982 provisions, specific to
drug enforcement (broader in practice, however).
Sections 10 and 11: Bills filed and debated in Congress; no laws passed.
Source: Dunn, Timothy J. 2001. ‘‘Border Militarization Via Drug and Immigration Enforcement: Human Rights Impli-
cations.’’ Social Justice 28 (2): 24.
Low-Intensity Conflict Doctrine and the Militarization of the Border
215

U.S.-Mexico border. It refers to the use of low-intensity conflict doc-
trine, military tactics for guerrilla warfare, and military occupation
to deal with armed insurgency and drug trafficking in Central and
South America. Dunn (1996, 2001) classified the degree of military
involvement on a scale from 1 (less) to 11 (most) as the type of mili-
tary assistance and the degree of military involvement in direct
interaction with civilian populations increased.
The militarization of the border peaked on May 20, 1997,
when a Marine shot and killed Esequiel Hernandez, a U.S. citi-
zen who was herding goats near Redford, Texas (Dunn 2001).
Recently, military troops or the National Guard have been sent
to assist the U.S. Border Patrol, but they have not been
deployed as armed troops with the purpose of civilian law
enforcement.
Traveler and Cargo Inspection
Programs at the Borders
On average, U.S. Customs and Border Patrol handles processing
of millions of travelers and tens of thousands of truck, rail, and
sea containers. A variety of risk assessment and documentation
procedures, listed alphabetically below according to whether
travelers or cargo are inspected, have been set up for this:
Travelor Processing and Inspection
Cross-Border Advanced Traveler Information System (ATIS):
Flashing variable message road signs, Web sites, and other means
are used to provide travelers with real-time transportation updates.
Electronic Advanced Passenger Information System (eAPIS):
This computerized system allows entry of passenger and crew
manifests for prescreening and tracking purposes. After the
9/11 attacks, international airlines and other carriers were
asked to provide such information.
Electronic System for Travel Authorization (ESTA): This auto-
mated system confirms traveler eligibility for visa waiver in the case
of approved countries. Processing is done before boarding a carrier.
International Global Entry: A trusted-traveler program in which
risk assessment is used to allow quicker processing of preap-
proved U.S. citizens, U.S. nationals, lawful permanent residents of
the United States, and citizens of cooperating countries. Frequent
international travelers who undergo a background check can use
216
Data and Documents

an automated kiosk for examination of a machine-readable pass-
port and pass through an expedited CBP processing lane.
Student Exchange Visitor Information System (SEVIS): A
Web-based program to track and monitor students, schools,
exchange visitors, and their dependents through the duration
of their U.S. education. SEVIS by the Numbers provides a
breakdown of trends in participation by foreign students.
United States Visitor and Immigrant Status Indicator Technol-
ogy (U.S.-VISIT): A biometric inspection system operating to
process entrance of international visitors and immigrants at the
air, land, and sea borders. Its purpose is to track people and pro-
tect against terrorist entry and attacks by increasing border
security. The system is not yet able to track exit.
U.S.-Canada NEXUS. The NEXUS card allows American and
Canadian citizens to receive preapproval before crossing the shared
border. It satisfies the Western Hemisphere Travel Initiative re-
quirement for verification of identity and citizenship and substi-
tutes for a passport. The NEXUS card is used at a land border
crossing for scanning and at airport kiosks for retinal scanning. The
scan takes 10 seconds. At land borders, special NEXUS lanes allow
faster processing meaning of ‘‘as to’’ unclear kiosks at airports. All
citizens of Canada and the United States with no criminal history
are eligible for the card. Currently NEXUS has 255,000 members.
U.S.-Mexico Border Crossing Card (BCC): The Illegal Immigra-
tion Reform and Immigrant Responsibility Act of 1996 author-
ized Border Crossing Cards for the United States and Mexico.
The ‘‘laser visa’’ is equivalent to a B1/B2 visa. Cards issued af-
ter 2008 have more advanced graphics and technology. Mexican
citizens must prove that they have the economic and family ties
to Mexico indicating a strong potential to return before a card
is issued. All applicants must previously have been issued a
Mexican passport.
U.S.-Mexico SENTRI: The SENTRI card allows preapproved
low-risk American and Mexican travelers a secure and verifiable
citizenship document for expedited entry. It meets the standards
of the Western Hemispheric Travel initiative requirement for a
passport or other approved document. SENTRI has been estab-
lished at 16 lanes of the 9 most used ports of entry. At non-
SENTRI U.S.-Mexico ports, a border crossing card is needed.
Z-Portal Passenger Imaging System: This system allows drive-
through passenger vehicles to be safely scanned for human
stowaways, drugs, and security threats. It produces left, right,
Traveler and Cargo Inspection Programs at the Borders
217

and top-down security scanning images of suspicious items while
allowing quick vehicle inspection to facilitate travel. Vehicles
waived from a primary to a secondary inspection line are exam-
ined with Z-Portal. Passengers can safely remain in their vehicle.
Cargo Crossing and Inspection
Automated Commercial Equipment (ACE): A computerized
commercial trade processing system. It is a part of the auto-
mated commercial environment.
Canada’s Partners in Protection (PIP): A Canadian Border
Services Agency program involving cooperation with private
industry to combat terrorism, organized crime, and smuggling.
It concentrates on trade chain security, including assessment of
infrastructure and procedures. It is a prerequisite to participa-
tion in the FAST program.
Canada and Mexico Customs Trade Partnership Against Ter-
rorism (C-TPAT): A bilateral agreement between the United
States and Canada for mutual security standards for trade
goods being exported or imported.
Canada and Mexico Free and Secure Trade (FAST) program:
The FAST program seeks to identify low-risk shippers and ship-
ments using integrated technology to link trade at 55 of 105
ports handling truck traffic. Carriers and importers have a past
history of customs compliance and agree to use procedures that
minimize exposure to criminal opportunity. Importers, drivers,
and carriers have reduced information requirements if they use
sound and secure business procedure. Currently, 87,000 drivers
are enrolled in FAST.
This program uses electronic data sent by preauthorized
participants in advance of arrival at the border. In return, quali-
fied participants receive expedited clearance of low-risk trans-
border shipments with limited physical inspection and the use
of dedicated border-crossing lanes. Barcodes and transponder
technology identify the driver, carrier, importer, and shipment,
permitting fast processing. Typically, precleared shipments will
not be examined and, if they are, it will be at a reduced rate
compared to non-FAST shipments.
Canada and Mexico Automated Commercial System (ACS):
The ACS for Canada and Mexico imports and exports is com-
prised of the following components.
Automated Broker Interface (ABI) and Contact Informa-
tion: A system operated by U.S. Customs to track, control,
and process commercial goods being imported into the
218
Data and Documents

United States. Data on goods to be imported is filed elec-
tronically with CBP. This voluntary program is open to
brokers, importers, carriers, port authorities, and independ-
ent border service centers. ABI is used by 96% of all com-
mercial goods being processed through the borders.
Automated Line Release (ALR) or Border Release Advanced
Screening and Selectivity (BRASS) program: A CBP-
expedited release program that uses a periodic ‘‘blanket’’ dec-
laration and file any needed subsequent reconciliation reports.
Automated Manifest System (AMS): A cargo inventory con-
trol and release notification system connected to Customs
Cargo Selectivity and In-Bond Systems and indirectly with
ABI to allow faster identification and release of low-risk ship-
ments by CBP. It is open to carriers, port authorities, service
bureaus, freight forwarders, and container freight systems. Cargo
is moved and tracked faster and Customs service is improved.
Border Cargo Selectivity System: A computerized means
of risk assessment to determine the need for examination
of cargo at high-volume borders. The system uses the same
editing process as the Cargo Selectivity System. The Border
Cargo Selectivity System will soon be enhanced to allow
ABI filers to transmit manifest information.
Customs Cargo Selectivity: This system differentiates low-
risk cargo from high-risk cargo and assigns it to an inten-
sive or less rigorous examination. It accepts data from the
Automated Broker Interface (ABI) and uses established risk
criteria to make an inspection determination and to post a
bill of lading. It allows cargo processing to be faster. The
Border Cargo Selectivity System is a system using the same
risk criteria to indicate need for examination at high-volume
ports of entry.
Entry Summary Selectivity: This advanced risk analysis
system matches local and national selectivity criteria with
the entry summary data to access risk using information on
importer, manufacturer, country of origin, value, and tariff
number. It uses paperless summary activity and produces
summary findings of discrepancies for possible inspection.
National In-Bond System: An automated system for track-
ing of cargo being sent to the United States with departure,
arrival, and closure data. This is done with conventional
paperwork or the Paperless Master In-Bond program. Paper-
less Entry allows ABI importers and exporters to do without
a Customs Form 3461 Entry/Immediate Delivery if the cargo
Traveler and Cargo Inspection Programs at the Borders
219

meets CBP criteria and the merchandise is classified as low
risk and not needing examination. Electronic notification is
sent when the goods are released.
Quota: A system that tracks the quantity of imported goods in
relation to visas from sending countries. This is because visas
determine export limits. Quantity is matched to the number of
visas, and the information is sent to the country of origin to
reconcile the amount of exports and imports.
U.S. Customs and Border Protection Secure
Border Initiative (SBI)
The Secure Border Initiative involved development of the SBI Tacti-
cal Infrastructure Program. This was to establish electronic surveil-
lance for a virtual border with Canada and Mexico until funding
was canceled in March, 2010 due to problems in equipment func-
tioning. The southwestern border is also being fenced. The trial
video and mobile systems relied on day and night cameras, radar,
and unattended ground sensors. SBI programs included:
SBInet Technology Program: This program was to develop,
test, and deploy high-tech border surveillance gear to detect
and track unauthorized migrants, drug smuggling, and other
activities outside of the law. The objective was to develop situa-
tional awareness to detect and enable front-line personnel to
respond to illegal cross-border activity.
Command, Control, Communications, and Intelligence (C3I)
Common Operating Picture (COP) Program: This program was
expected to provide real-time monitoring of the border to facili-
tate the use of agents to cover widespread areas by controlling
and integrating sensors and providing the means to identify and
classify border entries. It attempted to provide a display of bor-
der activity to initiate a tactical response in a situation in which
multiple missions are carried out. The system was being built by
the Boeing Corporation and its partners and had major cost over-
runs subject to U.S. Government Accountability Office criticism.
Tactical Infrastructure (TI) Program: A variety of pedestrian
and vehicle fencing materials have or are being installed to
slow, and present an obstacle to, illegal activity. Roads and
lights are also being deployed. This is not discontinued.
Northern Border Project: Common Operating Picture electronic
surveillance technology was being placed along the Canadian
border to integrate air, land, and also marine capability on the
220
Data and Documents

Great Lakes and the Strait of San Juan de Fuca. The hardware
included remote video and mobile surveillance systems. The
primary locations are Detroit, Buffalo, New York, Swanton,
Vermont, and Champlain, New York.
Marine Domain Awareness
The ‘‘National Plan to Achieve Maritime Domain Awareness’’ is
meant to develop regular global monitoring of vessels, craft, cargo,
vessel crews and passengers, and other activities of interest in the
marine domain. This intelligence will be collected, analyzed, and
given to public officials to take any needed action regarding the se-
curity and safety of the United States. It will integrate Global
Maritime Intelligence and Global Situational Awareness.
Port Modernization Project: The American Recovery and Reinvest-
ment Act of 2009 provides funding to upgrade port infrastructure.
Office of National Drug Policy Drug
Interdiction Program
High Intensity Drug Trafficking Area Program (HIDTA):
The High Intensity Drug Trafficking Areas program integrates
federal,
state,
and
local
law-enforcement
drug-interdiction
efforts. It provides training and equipment while integrating
law-enforcement efforts in areas where drug-trafficking prob-
lems are intense. The Director of National Drug Control Policy
is responsible for designating HIDTA areas, many of which are
located along the Mexico-U.S. border and the coasts.
Facts and Figures
Trade
In 2008, 29 million trade entries were processed and subject to
inspection by U.S. Customs and Border Patrol as a security
precaution. North American Free Trade Agreement partners,
Canada and Mexico, are the nation’s largest import and export
partners. In both cases, the United States imports more goods
from Canada and Mexico than it exports. The United States has
a trade deficit with both Canada and Mexico. The deficit was
Facts and Figures
221

TABLE 6.5
Top U.S. trade partners ranked by 2008 U.S. total export value for goods (in millions of U.S. dollars)
Exports
Imports
Through
Through
Through
Through
Rank
Country
2007
2008
% Change
Oct. 2008
Oct. 2009
% Change
2007
2008
% Change
Oct. 2008
Oct. 2009
% Change
1
Canada
248,888
261,150
4.9%
225,065
167,933
25.4%
317,057
339,491
7.1%
297,178
183,534
38.2%
2
Mexico
135,918
151,220
11.3%
129,135
105,186
18.5%
210,714
215,942
2.5%
186,201
142,358
23.5%
3
China
62,937
69,733
10.8%
59,441
53,887
9.3%
321,443
337,773
5.1%
284,428
242,351
14.8%
4
Japan
61,160
65,142
6.5%
55,591
42,016
24.4%
145,463
139,262
4.3%
119,350
76,743
35.7%
5
Germany
49,420
54,505
10.3%
46,319
35,670
23.0%
94,164
97,497
3.5%
83,209
57,485
30.9%
6
United Kingdom
49,981
53,599
7.2%
46,470
38,180
17.8%
56,858
58,587
3.0%
50,565
39,090
22.7%
7
Netherlands
32,837
39,719
21.0%
33,186
26,788
19.3%
18,403
21,123
14.8%
18,288
13,165
28.0%
8
Korea
34,402
34,669
0.8%
30,434
23,200
23.8%
47,562
48,069
1.1%
41,167
32,538
21.0%
9
Brazil
24,172
32,299
33.6%
27,365
21,385
21.9%
25,644
30,453
18.8%
26,385
16,412
37.8%
10
Belgium
25,259
28,903
14.4%
24,837
17,891
28.0%
15,281
17,308
13.3%
15,114
10,578
30.0%
Source: Top Trade Partners (December 2009), Industry Trade Data and Analysis, Office of Trade and Industry Information, International Trade Administration, http://ita.doc.gov/td/industry/otea/ttp/
Top_Trade_Partners.pdf.

$143.1 billion in 2008. The U.S. goods trade deficit with NAFTA
countries accounted for 17.5% of the overall U.S. goods trade
deficit in 2008, up from 8.7% in 1994, the year that NAFTA
began. The United States has a service trade surplus of $26.5
billion with Canada and Mexico. Imported goods are a source
of tariff revenue. In 2008 U.S. Customs collected approximately
$34.5 billion in Customs revenue.
Drug Trafficking
The drug trade is considered a dual national security threat.
Besides the impact of drug use and addiction on the public,
drug-trafficking organizations (DTOs) can reach the capacity of
destabilizing foreign governments through corruption and a
major decline in public safety. In addition, one form of narco-
terrorism occurs when terrorist organizations become involved
in drug trafficking as a money-raising activity.
Land-border drug interdiction is undertaken by the Drug
Enforcement Administration and U.S. Customs and Border
Patrol (USCBP). The U.S. Coast Guard intercepts maritime drug
shipments, and Immigration and Customs Enforcement has air
and maritime drug operations. In 2009, USCBP confiscated 4.75
million pounds of drugs, an increase from 3.1 million in 2008.
Marijuana shipments are the most frequently taken, followed
by cocaine and heroin. The United States has substantial
domestic marijuana production, and most externally produced
marijuana comes from Mexico with some high-quality marijuana
grown in Canada. In recent years, Mexico has had greater involve-
ment in methamphetamine production.
Drugs are routed to the United States over the Mexican
and Canadian borders and by boat from the Caribbean and
international destinations. Cocaine is transshipped from Colom-
bia, Venezuela, and Andean nations while heroin originates
from Mexico and internationally. The amount of drugs seized
in any year depends on changes in drug-trafficking routes and
the innovative approaches taken by both U.S. law enforcement
and the traffickers. Although drug seizures are a performance
evaluation measure, the principal objective of law enforcement
is the disruption and dismantlement of DTOs. DTOs are
the principal sources of the drug supply, and hampering their
efforts is associated with market disruption, a decline in
Facts and Figures
223

shipments that reach the U.S. interior for sales. The United
States is cooperating with Mexico in an effort to target the Gulf,
Juarez, and Sinaloa DTOs, and the Arellano Felix organization.
In 2008 Eduardo Arellano-Felix, Jaime Gonzalez (Gulf DTO),
and Alfredo Beltran Leyva (Sinaloa DTO) were arrested.
In Mexico, narcoterrorism involves violence due to con-
flicts between drug-trafficking organizations for control of terri-
tory and routes. The Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, and Firearms
is enacting Project Gunrunner to stop smuggling of arms into
Mexico. As part of the effort, it is providing e-trace technology
for Mexican officials to trace confiscated weapons.
TABLE 6.6
Drug seizures by the U.S. Customs and Border Patrol
Substance (pounds)
Fiscal Year
Marijuana
Cocaine
Heroin
Methamphetamine
2008
2,471,931
178,770
2,178
2,270
2007
N/A
2006
489,300
53,700
2,500
2005
531,700
42,800
2,300
2004
653,000
44,600
2,800
Source: Performance and Accountability Reports, 2008, 2006, U.S. Customs and Border Patrol, http://www.cbp.
gov/xp/cgov/newsroom/publications/admin/.
TABLE 6.7
DEA drug seizures, 2001–2008
Calendar
Year
Cocaine
(kgs)
Heroin
(kgs)
Marijuana
(kgs)
Methamphetamine
(kgs)
Hallucinogens
(dosage units)
2008
49,823.3
598.6
660,969.2
1,540.4
9,199,693
2007
96,713
625
356,472
1,086
5,636,305
2006
69,826
805
322,438
1,711
4,606,277
2005
118,311
640
283,344
2,161
8,881,321
2004
117,854
672
265,813
1,659
2,261,706
2003
73,725
795
254,196
1,678
2,878,594
2002
63,640
710
238,024
1,353
11,661,157
2001
59,430
753
271,849
1,634
13,755,390
Source: DEA (STRIDE), U.S. Department of Justice, http://www.justice.gov/dea/statistics.html#seizures.
224
Data and Documents

Terrorism
The Federal Bureau of Investigation uses a definition of terror-
ism from the Code of Federal Regulations. Terrorism is
the unlawful use of force and violence against persons
or property to intimidate or coerce a government, the
civilian population, or any segment thereof, in furtherance
of political or social objectives. (28 C.F.R. Section 0.85)
To define international acts of terrorism, the FBI states that it:
involves violent acts or acts dangerous to human life that
are a violation of the criminal laws of the United States
or any state. These acts appear to be intended to intimi-
date or coerce a civilian population; influence the policy
of a government by intimidation or coercion; or affect
the conduct of a government by mass destruction, assas-
sination or kidnapping and occur primarily outside the
territorial jurisdiction of the United States or transcend
national boundaries in terms of the means by which they
are accomplished, the persons they appear intended to
intimidate or coerce, or the locale in which their perpe-
trators operate or seek asylum. [18 U.S.C. § 2331(1)]
The 9/11 Hijackers: Why They Were Not Caught
The 9/11 Commission identified a host of reasons about why the
9/11 hijackers were not stopped (Eldridge et al. 2004). One rea-
son was connected to terrorist travel. Consular officials were not
sufficiently trained in how to detect fraudulent documents or to
identify terrorist travel patterns. Al-Qaeda trained terrorists in
methods of fraudulent travel-document preparation. This was
partly to give the organization the means to alter passports and
visas but also to give the operatives the ability to modify their
own documents while in the field. Tampering often occurred to
delete or avoid evidence of travel to countries with terrorist
involvement such as Afghanistan and Pakistan. In addition,
passport and visa alteration was easier before the post 9/11
advent of biometric identification systems. A second reason that
the hijackers were able to proceed is constraints upon U.S. law
enforcement. In several instances, a hijacker was stopped for
speeding and immigration status was not examined.
Facts and Figures
225

Selected 9/11 Commission Recommendations
12.4 Protect Against and Prepare for Terrorist Attacks
Terrorist Travel. Targeting travel is at least as powerful a
weapon against terrorists as targeting their money. The United
States should combine terrorist travel intelligence, operations,
and law enforcement in a strategy to intercept terrorists, find
terrorist travel facilitators, and constrain terrorist mobility.
A Biometric Screening System. The U.S. border-security system
should be integrated into a larger network of screening points
that includes our transportation system and access to vital facili-
ties, such as nuclear reactors. The president should direct the
Department of Homeland Security to lead the effort to design a
comprehensive screening system, addressing common problems
and setting common standards with system-wide goals in mind.
Extending these standards among other governments could dra-
matically strengthen America and the world’s collective ability
to intercept individuals who pose catastrophic threats.
The U.S. Border Screening System. The Department of Home-
land Security, properly supported by Congress, should com-
plete, as quickly as possible, a biometric entry-exit screening
system, including a single system for speeding qualified travel-
ers. It should be integrated with the system that provides bene-
fits to foreigners seeking to stay in the United States. Linking
biometric passports to good data systems and decisionmaking is
a fundamental goal. No one can hide his or her debt by acquir-
ing a credit card with a slightly different name, yet today, a ter-
rorist can defeat the link to electronic records by tossing away
an old passport and slightly altering the name in a new one.
International Intelligence Exchange on Terrorism. The U.S.
Government cannot meet its own obligations to the American
people to prevent the entry of terrorists without a major effort
to collaborate with other governments. We should do more
to exchange terrorist information with trusted allies and raise U.S.
and global border-security standards for travel and border cross-
ing over the medium and long term through extensive interna-
tional cooperation.
Immigration
Law
and
Enforcement.
Secure
Identification
should begin in the United States. The federal government
should set standards for the issuance of birth certificates and
sources of identification, such as driver’s licenses. Fraud in
identification documents is no longer just a problem of theft. At
226
Data and Documents

many entry points in vulnerable facilities, including gates for
boarding aircraft, sources of identification are the last opportu-
nity to ensure that people are who they say they are and to
check whether they are terrorists.
Strategies for Aviation and Transportation Security. Hard
choices must be made in allocating limited resources. The U.S.
government should identify and evaluate the transportation assets
that need to be protected, set risk-based priorities for defending
them, select the most practical and cost-effective ways of doing so,
and then develop a plan, budget, and funding to implement the
effort. The plan should assign roles and missions to the relevant
authorities (federal, state, regional, and local) and to private stake-
holders. In measuring effectiveness, perfection is unattainable. But
terrorists should perceive that potential targets are defended. They
may be deterred by a significant chance of failure.
A Layered Security System. Improved use of ‘‘no-fly’’ and
‘‘automatic selectee’’ lists should not be delayed while the argu-
ment about a successor to CAPPS continues. This screening
function should be performed by TSA, and it should utilize the
larger set of watchlists maintained by the federal government.
Air carriers should be required to supply the information
needed to test and implement this new system.
Explosive Screening of Passengers. The TSA and Congress must
give priority attention to improving the ability of screening check-
points to detect explosives on passengers. As a start, each individ-
ual selected for special screening should be screened for explosives.
Further, the TSA should conduct a human factors study, a method
often used in the private sector to understand problems in screener
performance and set attainable objectives for individual screeners
and for the checkpoints where screening takes place.
Source: Eldridge, Thomas R., Susan Ginsberg, Walter T. Hempel
II, Janice L. Kephart, and Kelly Moore. 2004. 9/11 and Terrorist
Travel. Staff Report of the National Commission on Terrorist
Attacks upon the United States. http://govinfo.library.unt.edu/
911/staff_statements/911_TerrTrav_Monograph.pdf.
Bioterrorism
Biological Weapons of Mass Destruction
The Center for Disease
Control (2008) defines a bioterrorism attack as the: ‘‘deliberate
release of viruses, bacteria or other germs (agents) used to cause ill-
ness or death in people, animals or plants.’’ Previously referred to
Facts and Figures
227

as biological warfare or germ warfare, it has the capacity for pro-
ducing mass casualties while being unpredictable and potentially
uncontrollable. Unlike nuclear weapons, bioterrorism is a tactical
weapon, not strategic, because a large quantity is not required to
cause great harm. In 1972, the United Nations issued the Conven-
tion on the Prohibition of the Development, Production and Stock-
piling of Bacteriological and Toxin Weapons. The major signatories
were the United States, Soviet Union, and Great Britain, who are
cooperating in countering terrorism.
To combat a limited and dispersed force of terrorists, a pre-
ventative search occurs that is like looking for a needle in a hay-
stack because of the massive extent and geographical complexity of
the U.S. borders. Biological weapons are thought to be most avail-
able and more likely to be used by terrorists. Individuals planning
terrorist attacks may carry plans or ingredients for making such
weapons when crossing borders.
In real-time bio-terrorism events, certain warning signs occur:

Gas, mist, or liquid which is being dispensed in an
explosion

Spraying activity that is not expected

A parcel or package that explodes

Unattended spraying equipment

Scattered dead birds, fish, or other animals

Mass casualties without a known cause of injury or
death

A pattern of symptoms, injury, or death

Mass casualties at a location considered a terrorist
target such as mass transport, hotels, sports arenas,
or government buildings
Chemical agents that can injure and/or cause mass death
include:
Nerve agents: A chemical that attacks the human central nervous
system and can cause convulsions and death. These agents are liq-
uid at normal temperatures and pose great risk. They include GA
(Tabun), GB (Sarin), GD (Soman), and VX (V agents). The nerve
agent Sarin was used in the Aum attack on the Tokyo subway
system.
Humans who have been exposed to a nerve gas attack dis-
play the following symptoms:

Pinpoint pupils

Vision blurring
228
Data and Documents


Eyes irritated by light

Unusual sweating

Nasal mucous and congestion

Coughing

Breathing difficulty

Nausea

Vomiting

Anxiety
Vesicants or blistering agents: Heavy, oily liquids without
color or odor that easily penetrate clothing and enter the blood
stream through the skin. In World War I mustard gas, when
inhaled, caused severe skin burns and eye and respiratory
damage. Blistering agents include H (mustard), HD (distilled
mustard), HN (nitrogen mustard), CX (phosgene oxime), and
L (lewsite). Although less lethal than nerve agents, a few drops
on the skin will result in serious injury and three grams will kill.
The symptoms of vesicant poisoning are:

Red eyes

Tearing and eye soreness

Eyelid pain and spasm

Itching and redness of the skin followed by pain
and tenderness

Fluid-filled blisters in normally moist skin areas
such as armpit and groin

Burning feeling in nose and throat

Coughing

Shortness of breath
Blood agents: Derivatives of cyanide compounds that cause death
by stopping the blood’s delivery of oxygen to cells, which leads to
asphyxiation. Blood agents include AC (hydrogen cyanide) and
CK (cyanogen chloride). These agents are common industrial
chemicals, and information on them is readily available.
The indicators of blood agent poisoning are:

Mass casualties with no trauma indicator

Peach or almond odor
Choking agents: Chemicals that destroys respiratory track cells
and cause internal fluid to build up, producing asphyxiation.
Facts and Figures
229

They include chlorine, phosgene, and chloropicrin. The signs
are the smell of chorine or hay, which is an odor associated
with phosgene. Chlorine is readily used and available for home
and swimming pools.
The symptoms of choking agent poisoning are:

Choking

Coughing
Irritating agents: The most commonly used irritant is tear gas
for riot control. The varieties used include CN (standard tear
gas),
CS
(stronger
tear
gas,
induces
vomiting),
and
DM
(adamsite vomiting agent). It is not lethal and smells of pepper.
It causes tearing and respiratory distress.
Biological Weapons
The threat of bioterrorism is a major inter-
national concern. The Center for Disease Control classifies
agents with bioterrorism capacity at three levels of severity.
Category A agents include ones that:

pose the greatest possible threat for a bad effect on
public health

may spread across a large area or need public
awareness

need a great deal of planning to protect the
public’s health
Anthrax: The Bacillus anthracis, anthracis, a one-celled organism,
forms spores, dormant cells which can later activate. Humans can
contract anthrax by breathing in spores from infected animal
products, such as wool. It can also be spread as a weapon, as
when letters with powder were mailed through the postal system
to prominent people in 2001. This caused 22 cases of anthrax.
There are three types of anthrax: (1) skin (cutaneous); (2)
lung (inhalation); and (3) digestive (gastrointestinal). The CDC
identifies the symptoms of each as follows:

Cutaneous: The first symptom is a small sore that
develops into a blister. The blister then develops
230
Data and Documents

into a skin ulcer with a black area in the center.
The sore, blister, and ulcer do not hurt.

Gastrointestinal: The first symptoms are nausea,
loss of appetite, bloody diarrhea, and fever,
followed by bad stomach pain.

Inhalation: The first symptoms of inhalation
anthrax are like cold or flu symptoms and can
include a sore throat, mild fever, and muscle aches.
Later symptoms include cough, chest discomfort,
shortness of breath, tiredness, and muscle aches.
(Caution: Do not assume that just because a person
has cold or flu symptoms that he or she has
inhalation anthrax.)
Symptoms could appear within seven days of exposure. Inhala-
tion anthrax symptoms may develop over a week to 42 days. The
Center for Disease Control classifies anthrax as a Category A
agent. Early antibiotic treatment can cure cutaneous anthrax,
which 80% of those infected survive. Between 25% to 50% of gas-
trointestinal cases of anthrax cause death, while half of inhala-
tional anthrax cases result in death. Fortunately, a vaccine is being
developed for anthrax, but it is not yet available for the public.
Smallpox: Smallpox was eradicated worldwide as the result
of an international vaccination campaign. Two approved labs
in the United States and Russia keep the only extant smallpox
virus samples. Nevertheless, there is credible concern that the
virus may have been made into a weapon and that terrorists
could obtain it. Smallpox is a Category A health threat that can
cause death. Methods of smallpox infection include prolonged
face-to-face contact with a person who has smallpox, contact
with infected body fluids or objects such as bed sheets, or expo-
sure to a smallpox aerosol. There is no proven treatment for
smallpox, and the best way to control it has been vaccination. The
CDC has developed a public health program for response to any
terrorist smallpox threat and has enough vaccine for everyone.
Botulism: This muscle-paralyzing disease is caused by a toxin
secreted by the Clostridum botulin toxin. This toxin may form
in contaminated food or be transmitted in an infected wound.
The CDC indicates that: With foodborne botulism, symptoms
begin within 6 hours to 10 days (most commonly between
Facts and Figures
231

12 and 36 hours) after eating food that contains the toxin.
Symptoms of botulism include double vision, blurred vision,
drooping eyelids, slurred speech, difficulty swallowing, dry
mouth, and muscle weakness that moves down the body, usu-
ally affecting the shoulders first, then the upper arms, lower
arms, thighs, calves, etc. Paralysis of breathing muscles can
cause a person to stop breathing and die, unless assistance with
breathing (mechanical ventilation) is provided.
Tularemia: The bacterium Francisella tularensis is carried by
such animals as rodents, rabbits, and hares. It can cause serious
illness and presents some of the following symptoms: sudden
fever, chills, headaches, diarrhea, muscle aches, joint pain, dry
cough, and progressive weakness. People can contract tulare-
mia by:

being bitten by an infected tick, deerfly, or other
insect

handling infected animal carcasses

eating or drinking contaminated food or water

breathing in the bacteria, F. tularensis
Symptoms typically appear in 3 to 5 days, but can take as long
as 14 days. Because the bacterium is very infectious, as few as
10–50 organisms can make a person sick. As a weapon, it
would likely be delivered in an infectious aerosol. People with
tularemia infection develop severe respiratory illness, including
pneumonia and infection. The CDC is responding by stockpil-
ing antibiotics.
Source: http://www.bt.cdc.gov/agent/agentlist.asp#b
Incidents of Terrorism Worldwide
The United States is fortunate that it has not experienced a terro-
rist attack since September 11, 2001 although terrorist plots have
been detected and stopped. In 2008, 11,800 terrorist attacks, which
caused 54,000 deaths, injuries, and/or kidnappings, occurred.
Methods of attack included coordinated arms strikes and im-
provised explosive devises. About 50,000 individuals were killed
or injured worldwide. Sixty-five percent of these victims were
civilians.
It is often difficult to get accurate information on attackers.
Iraq, Afghanistan, and Pakistan were the locales of approximately
232
Data and Documents

55% of attacks. In Afghanistan, the Taliban claimed credit for the
most attacks and highest death tolls. The al-Qaeda organization is
thought to be planning attacks from northwest Pakistan and
claimed attacks made in Algeria and Yemen.
The Secretary of State, under section 219 of the amended
Immigration and Nationality act (INA), designates foreign ter-
rorist organizations (FTOs). This is an international list which
includes many organizations not known to be active in the
United States.
Current List of Designated Foreign Terrorist Organizations
Abu Nidal Organization (ANO)
Abu Sayyaf Group
Al-Aqsa Martyrs Brigade
Al-Shabaab
Ansar al-Islam
Armed Islamic Group (GIA)
Asbat al-Ansar
Aum Shinrikyo
Basque Fatherland and Liberty (ETA)
TABLE 6.8
Incidents of terrorism worldwide
2005
2006
2007
2008
Attacks
Worldwide
11,157
14,545
14,506
11,770
Resulting in death, injury, or
kidnapping of at least 1 person
8,025
11,311
11,123
8.438
Resulting in the death of at least 1 individual
5,127
7,428
7,255
5,067
Resulting in the death of zero individuals
6,030
7,117
7,251
6,703
Resulting in the death of only 1 individual
2,880
4,139
3,994
2,889
Resulting in the death of at least 10 individuals
226
293
353
235
Resulting in the injury of at least 1 individual
3,842
5,796
6,256
4,888
Resulting in the kidnapping of at least one individual
1,475
1,733
1,459
1,125
People
Worldwide
Killed, injured, or kidnapped as a result of terrorism
74,280
74,709
71,608
54,747
Killed as a result of terrorism
14,560
20,468
22,508
15,765
Injured as a result of terrorism
24,875
38,386
44,118
34,124
Kidnapped as a result of terrorism
34,845
15,855
4,982
4,858
Source: U.S. Department of State, National Counter-Terrorism Center: Annex of Statistical Information. 2009. Coun-
try Reports on Terrorism, 2008. http://www.state.gov/s/ct/rls/crt/2008/122452.htm#*
Facts and Figures
233

Communist Party of the Philippines/New People’s Army
(CPP/NPA)
Continuity Irish Republican Army
Gama’a al-Islamiyya (Islamic Group)
HAMAS (Islamic Resistance Movement)
Harakat ul-Jihad-i-Islami/Bangladesh (HUJI-B)
Harakat ul-Mujahidin (HUM)
Hizballah (Party of God)
Islamic Jihad Group
Islamic Movement of Uzbekistan (IMU)
Jaish-e-Mohammed (JEM) (Army of Mohammed)
Jemaah Islamiya organization (JI)
al-Jihad (Egyptian Islamic Jihad)
Kahane Chai (Kach)
Kata’ib Hizballah
Kongra-Gel (KGK, formerly Kurdistan Workers’ Party,
PKK, KADEK)
Lashkar-e Tayyiba (LT) (Army of the Righteous)
Lashkar i Jhangvi
Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE)
Libyan Islamic Fighting Group (LIFG)
Moroccan Islamic Combatant Group (GICM)
Mujahedin-e Khalq Organization (MEK)
National Liberation Army (ELN)
Palestine Liberation Front (PLF)
Palestinian Islamic Jihad (PIJ)
Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine (PFLF)
PFLP-General Command (PFLP-GC)
Tanzim Qa’idat al-Jihad fi Bilad al-Rafidayn (QJBR)
(al-Qaida in Iraq) (formerly Jama’at al-Tawhid
wa’al-Jihad, JTJ, al-Zarqawi Network)
al-Qa’ida
al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb (formerly GSPC)
Real IRA
Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC)
Revolutionary Nuclei (formerly ELA)
Revolutionary Organization 17 November
Revolutionary People’s Liberation Party/Front (DHKP/C)
Shining Path (Sendero Luminoso, SL)
United Self-Defense Forces of Colombia (AUC)
234
Data and Documents

Terrorist Exclusion List
Section 411 of the USA PATRIOT Act of
2001 (8 U.S.C. § 1182) authorized the Secretary of State, in con-
sultation with or upon the request of the Attorney General, to
designate terrorist organizations for immigration purposes.
This authority is known as the ‘‘Terrorist Exclusion List
(TEL)’’ authority. A TEL designation bolsters homeland secu-
rity efforts by facilitating the USG’s ability to exclude aliens
associated with entities on the TEL from entering the United
States.
Designation Criteria
An organization can be placed on the TEL
if the Secretary of State finds that the organization:

commits or incites to commit, under circumstances
indicating an intention to cause death or serious
bodily injury, a terrorist activity;

prepares or plans a terrorist activity;

gathers information on potential targets for
terrorist activity; or

provides material support to further terrorist activity.
Under the statute, ‘‘terrorist activity’’ means any activity that is
unlawful under U.S. law or the laws of the place where it was
committed and involves: hijacking or sabotage of an aircraft,
vessel, vehicle, or other conveyance; hostage taking; a violent
attack on an internationally protected person; assassination; or
the use of any biological agent, chemical agent, nuclear weapon
or device, or explosive, firearm, or other weapon or dangerous
device (other than for mere personal monetary gain), with
intent to endanger, directly or indirectly, the safety of one or
more individuals or to cause substantial damage to property.
The definition also captures any threat, attempt, or conspiracy
to do any of these activities.
Legal Ramifications
Individual aliens providing support to or
associated with TEL-designated organizations may be found
‘‘inadmissable’’ to the United States; that is, such aliens may be
prevented from entering the United States or, if already in U.S.
territory, may in certain circumstances be deported. Examples
Facts and Figures
235

of activity that may render an alien inadmissible as a result of
an organization’s TEL designation include:

membership in a TEL-designated organization;

use of the alien’s position of prominence within
any country to persuade others to support an
organization on the TEL list;

solicitation of funds or other things of value for an
organization on the TEL list;

solicitation of any individual for membership in an
organization on the TEL list; and

commission of an act that the alien knows, or
reasonably should have known, affords material
support, including a safe house, transportation,
communications, funds, transfer of funds or other
material for financial benefit, false documentation
or identification, weapons (including chemical,
biological, or radiological weapons), explosives, or
training to an organization on the TEL list.
(It should be noted that individual aliens may also found inadmis-
sible on the basis of other types of terrorist activity unrelated to
TEL-designated organizations; see 8 U.S.C. §1182(a)(3)(B).)
Other Effects of a Terrorist Exclusion List
1. Deters donation or contributions to named
organizations.
2. Heightens public awareness and knowledge of
terrorist organizations.
3. Alerts other governments to U.S. concerns about
organizations engaged in terrorist activities.
4. Stigmatizes and isolates designated terrorist
organizations.
Tables and Figures on Legal and
Unauthorized Immigration
Conservatives and liberals express concern that our immigra-
tion system is broken. If that is the case, it is broken in many
ways. Liberals express concern that the United States is the
236
Data and Documents

world’s major immigrant-receiving nation, but its immigrants
must be respected. Conservatives espouse cutting back on legal
immigration, which is over a million per year, the largest rate
of entrance since the early 20th century. Then as now, the cul-
tural and perceived racial-ethnic differences of immigrants raise
questions about their acceptance and cultural and economic
incorporation into this society.
Although 19th- and early 20th-century immigration was pre-
dominately from southern and southeastern Europe, late 20th-
century immigration was globalized. The greatest demand occurs
from Mexico, which, along with Canada and the Caribbean, is
placed in the North American region. After the racial-ethnic quo-
tas of the 1924 Johnson Reed Act were abolished by the Immigra-
tion and Nationality Act of 1965, Asian immigration became very
prominent. In the late 20th century, the Diversity Lottery and
globalization are fostering the beginning of mass migration from
South America and Africa.
Asia is catching up with Mexico and the Caribbean nations
and may soon be the major sending region for legal U.S. immi-
grants. Mexico has been and by and far will be the major send-
ing nation for U.S. legal permanent residents. If the rate of
acceptance of Mexican nationals as permanent resident aliens
follows the pattern of a high rate of admission, over 2 million
will be legally admitted to the United States in the first decade
of the 21st century.
The large numbers of individuals being legally admitted to
the United States are augmented by unauthorized entrants. Dur-
ing the 2008–2010 Recession, which was only beginning to mod-
erate in mid-2010, U.S. Border Patrol apprehensions declined.
How much of this decline was due to staffing and technology
and to what extent it was caused by lack of economic opportu-
nity in the United States drawing people from Mexico and Cen-
tral America is not known.
Interior Enforcement
Even prior to the War on Terror, the criminalization of perma-
nent resident aliens who committed crimes designated as ‘‘aggra-
vated felonies’’ increased deportation. Many individuals ordered
removed, however, did not commit a conventional crime,
but were in violation of immigration law through first-time un-
authorized entry—a civil offense. This artificially increases the
number of ‘‘criminal aliens’’ removed.
Tables and Figures on Legal and Unauthorized Immigration
237

TABLE 6.9
Persons obtaining legal permanent resident status by region, FY1910–1999
1910–1919
1920–1929
1930–1939
1940–1949
1950–1959
1960–1969
1970–1979
1980–1989
1990–1999
North America
1,070,539
1,591,278
230,319
328,435
921,610
1,674,172
1,904,355
2,695,329
5,137,743
Asia
269,736
126,740
19,231
34,532
135,844
358,605
1,406,544
2,391,356
2,859,899
Europe
4,985,411
2,560,340
444,399
472,524
1,404,973
1,133,443
825,590
668,886
1,348,612
South America
39,938
43,025
9,990
19,662
78,418
250,754
273,608
399,862
570,634
Africa
8,867
6,362
2,120
6,720
13,016
23,780
71,408
141,990
346,416
Oceania
12,339
9,860
3,306
14,262
11,353
23,630
39,980
41,432
56,800
Source: Yearbook of Immigration Statistics, 2008.

Since the late 19th century, the United States has deported
noncitizens considered to present a problem, such as commis-
sion of a crime of moral turpitude. After 1970, the number of
unauthorized entrants returned (given voluntary departure)
TABLE 6.10
Persons obtaining legal permanent resident status by region, FY2001–2008
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
North America
405,638
402,949
249,968
342,468
345,561
414,075
339,375
393,253
Asia
348,256
340,494
243,918
334,540
400,098
422,284
383,508
383,608
Europe
174,411
173,524
100,434
133,181
176,516
166,244
120,821
119,138
South America
67,880
73,082
53,946
69,425
100,803
136,134
102,616
96,178
Africa
50,009
56,002
45,559
62,623
79,697
112,100
89,277
100,881
Oceania
7,201
6,495
5,076
6,954
7,432
8,000
6,639
5,926
Source: Yearbook of Immigration Statistics, 2008.
TABLE 6.11
Persons obtaining legal resident status from Mexico
Fiscal Year
Number of
Persons
1910–1919
185,334
1920–1929
498,945
1930–1939
32,709
1940–1949
56,158
1950–1959
273,847
1960–1969
441,824
1970–1979
621,218
1980–1989
1,009,586
1990–1999
2,757,418
2000
171,445
2001
204,032
2002
216,924
2003
114,758
2004
173,711
2005
157,992
2006
170,042
2007
143,180
2008
188,015
Source: Yearbook of Immigration Statistics, 2008.
Tables and Figures on Legal and Unauthorized Immigration
239

began to greatly increase, reaching over 1 million in the year
before passage of the Immigration Reform and Control Act of
1986. Despite passage of a series of immigration laws, the rate
of removals and returns has remained consistently high and an
expense for taxpayers. These statistics indicate that the USBP
and ICE have a certain degree of success, but the fact of en-
trance in such high numbers must be interpreted as meaning
that many individuals were not deterred from coming by the
threat of apprehension.
Table 6.14 indicates the breakdown of criminal versus non-
criminal deportations in 2008. The criminal deportation statis-
tics refer to both individuals deported after serving time for an
aggravated felony and those retroactively deported after previ-
ously serving time and being released into the population. The
North American region, which contains Mexico and Central
America, accounts for the largest number of undocumented
and legal immigrants, a fact which correlates with their rate of
criminal and noncriminal removal.
The ultimate measure of the success of border interdiction
efforts is the size of the undocumented population. At an esti-
mated 11 million, it is far greater than at any prior historical
period.
TABLE 6.12
Leading crime categories of criminal aliens removed, FY2008
Crime Category
Number
Removed
Percent of
Total
Total. . . . . . . . . . . .
97,133
100.0
Dangerous drugs. . . . . . . . . . . .
34,882
35.9
Immigration. . . . . . . . . . . .
17,542
18.1
Assault. . . . . . . . . . . .
7,485
7.7
Burglary. . . . . . . . . . . .
3,292
3.4
Larceny. . . . . . . . . . . .
3,282
3.4
Robbery. . . . . . . . . . . .
3,101
3.2
Sexual assault. . . . . . . . . . . .
2,929
3.0
Family offenses. . . . . . . . . . . .
2,343
2.4
Fraudulent activities. . . . . . . . . . . .
2,059
2.1
Weapon offenses. . . . . . . . . . . .
2,048
2.1
Other. . . . . . . . . . . .
18,170
18.7
Source: Department of Homeland Security, Office of Immigration Statistics Policy Directorate, 2009. Immigration
Enforcement Actions, 2008, p. 4.
240
Data and Documents

TABLE 6.13
Aliens removed or returned, FY1892–1930
Year
Removalsa Returnsb
Year
Removalsa Returnsb
Year
Removalsa Returnsb
1892
2,801
NAc
1931
27,886
11,719
1970
17,469
303,348
1893
1,630
NA
1932
26,490
10,775
1971
18,294
370,074
1894
1,806
NA
1933
25,392
10,347
1972
16,883
450,927
1895
2,596
NA
1934
14,263
8,010
1973
17,346
568,005
1896
3,037
NA
1935
13,877
7,978
1974
19,413
718,740
1897
1,880
NA
1936
16,195
8,251
1975
24,432
655,814
1898
3,229
NA
1937
16,905
8,788
1976
38,471
955,374
1899
4,052
NA
1938
17,341
9,278
1977
31,263
867,015
1900
4,602
NA
1939
14,700
9,590
1978
29,277
975,515
1901
3,879
NA
1940
12,254
8,594
1979
26,825
966,137
1902
5,439
NA
1941
7,336
6,531
1980
18,013
719,211
1903
9,316
NA
1942
5,542
6,904
1981
17,379
823,875
1904
8,773
NA
1943
5,702
11,947
1982
15,216
812,572
1905
12,724
NA
1944
8,821
32,270
1983
19,211
931,600
1906
13,108
NA
1945
13,611
69,490
1984
18,696
909,833
1907
14,059
NA
1946
17,317
101,945
1985
23,105
1,041,296
1908
12,971
NA
1947
23,434
195,880
1986
24,592
1,586,320
1909
12,535
NA
1948
25,276
197,184
1987
24,336
1,091,023
1910
26,965
NA
1949
23,874
276,297
1988
25,829
911,790
1911
25,137
NA
1950
10,199
572,477
1989
34,427
830,890
1912
18,513
NA
1951
17,328
673,169
1990
30,039
1,022,533
1913
23,399
NA
1952
23,125
703,778
1991
33,189
1,061,105
1914
37,651
NA
1953
23,482
885,391
1992
43,671
1,105,829
1915
26,675
NA
1954
30,264
1,074,277
1993
42,542
1,243,410
1916
21,648
NA
1955
17,695
232,769
1994
45,674
1,029,107
1917
17,881
NA
1956
9,006
80,891
1995
50,924
1,313,764
1918
8,866
NA
1957
5,989
63,379
1996
69,680
1,573,428
1919
11,694
NA
1958
7,875
60,600
1997
114,432
1,440,684
1920
14,557
NA
1959
8,468
56,610
1998
174,813
1,570,827
1921
18,296
NA
1960
7,240
52,796
1999
183,114
1,574,863
1922
18,076
NA
1961
8,181
52,383
2000
188,467
1,675,876
1923
24,280
NA
1962
8,025
54,164
2001
189,026
1,349,371
1924
36,693
NA
1963
7,763
69,392
2002
165,168
1,012,116
1925
34,885
NA
1964
9,167
73,042
2003
211,098
945,294
1926
31,454
NA
1965
10,572
95,263
2004
240,665
1,166,576
1927
31,417
15,012
1966
9,680
123,683
2005
246,431
1,096,920
1928
30,464
19,946
1967
9,728
142,342
2006
280,974
1,043,381
1929
31,035
25,888
1968
9,590
179,952
2007
319,382
891,390
1930
24,864
11,387
1969
11,030
240,958
2008
358,886
811,263
Source: Yearbook of Immigration Statistics, 2008, 95.
aRemovals are the compulsory and confirmed movement of an inadmissible or deportable alien out of the United
States based on an order of removal. An alien who is removed has administrative or criminal consequences placed
on subsequent reentry owing to the fact of the removal.
bReturns are the confirmed movement of an inadmissible or deportable alien out of the United States not based on
an order or removal. Most of the voluntary returns are of Mexican nationals who have been apprehended by the
U.S. Border Patrol and are returned to Mexico.
c NA ¼ Not available.

TABLE 6.14
Aliens removed by criminal status and region, FY2008
Region and Country
and Nationality
Total
Criminal
Noncriminal
Total
358,886
97,133
261,753
Africa
1,999
626
1,373
Asia
5,338
1,288
4,050
Caribbean
7,361
4,343
3,018
Central America
79,823
14,634
65,189
Europe
4,095
1,168
2,927
North America
248,176
72,126
176,050
Oceania
301
177
124
South America
11,704
2,745
8,959
Unknown
89
26
63
Source: Yearbook of Immigration Statistics, 2008.
TABLE 6.15
Unauthorized immigrant population, 2000–2008
Year
Millions
2000
8.5
2001
–
2002
–
2003
–
2004
–
2005
10.5
2006
11.3
2007
11.8
2008
11.6
Source: Michael Hoeffer, Nancy Rytina, and Bryan C. Baker. 2009. Estimates of the Immigrant Population Residing
in the United States: January, 2008. Department of Homeland Security, Office of Immigration Statistics Policy Direc-
torate, 2. http://www.dhs.gov/xlibrary/assets/statistics/publications/ois_ill_pe_2008.pdf.
Note: DHS estimates not produced for 2001–2004.
TABLE 6.16
Region of birth of the unauthorized immigrant population,
January 2008 and 2000 (in millions)
2000
2008
North America
6.1
8.8
Asia
1.2
1.2
South America
0.6
0.8
Europe
0.3
0.4
Other
0.2
0.4
Source: Michael Hoeffer, Nancy Rytina, and Bryan C. Baker. 2009. Estimates of the Immigrant Population Residing
in the United States: January, 2008. Department of Homeland Security, Office of Immigration Statistics Policy Direc-
torate, 4. http://www.dhs.gov/xlibrary/assets/statistics/publications/ois_ill_pe_2008.pdf.

TABLE 6.17
Country of birth of the unauthorized immigrant population, January 2008 and 2000
Country of Birth
Estimated Population in January
Percent of Total
Percent Change
Average Annual
Change
2008
2000
2008
2000
2000 to 2008
2000 to 2008
All countries
11,600,000
8,460,000
100
100
37
390,000
Mexico
7,030,000
4,680,000
61
55
50
290,000
EI Salvador
570,000
430,000
5
5
35
20,000
Guatemala
430,000
290,000
4
3
48
20,000
Phillippines
300,000
200,000
3
2
51
10,000
Honduras
300,000
160,000
3
2
81
20,000
Korea
240,000
180,000
2
2
37
10,000
China
220,000
190,000
2
2
14
—
Brazil
180,000
100,000
2
1
72
10,000
Ecuador
170,000
110,000
1
1
50
10,000
India
160,000
120,000
1
1
29
—
Other countires
2,000,000
2,000,000
17
24
0
—
Source: Michael Hoeffer, Nancy Rytina, and Bryan C. Baker. 2009. Estimates of the Immigrant Population Residing in the United States: January, 2008. Department of Homeland Security, Office of Immi-
gration Statistics Policy Directorate, 4. http://www.dhs.gov/xlibrary/assets/statistics/publications/ois_ill_pe_2008.pdf.

Documents
Initial Immigration Reform (1986)
After the passage of the Immigration and Nationality Act of 1965,
legal immigration to the United States from Asia and other non-
European world regions greatly increased. The act also placed a
quota on Western Hemisphere immigrants (Mexican, Central
America, Canada, etc.) which limited legal access, and, in the
1970s, the size of the unauthorized population began to grow.
Many of the concerns about unauthorized immigration and its
consequences that are aired in public today were first voiced in
the 1970s and became a source of congressional debate in the
1980s. After repeated attempts at immigration reform, the Immi-
gration Reform and Control Act (IRCA) set a basis for many poli-
cies followed today. It provided increased funding for the U.S.
Border Patrol, established civil and criminal sanctions for employ-
ers who knowingly hire unauthorized workers, and established
an amnesty: a process of legalization with no fines or necessity to
return to the sending country before being readmitted.
Immigration Reform and Control Act of November 6, 1986
(100 Stat. 3360)
TITLE I—Control of Illegal Immigration
PART A—Employment
Sec. 101. Control of Unlawful Employment of Aliens.—
Made it unlawful for employers to hire (including through sub-
contractors), recruit, or refer for a fee any alien knowing that
the person is unauthorized to work or any person without veri-
fying his or her employment status. It also made continued
employment of unauthorized or unverified illegal.
Establishes an employment verification system requiring
that the employee’s birth certificate, Social Security card,
employment verification papers, and passport be examined.
Compliance with verification without checking for fraudulent
documentation was considered sufficient.
Directs the Attorney General to establish both hiring viola-
tion complaint and investigation procedures.
Provides for employer sanctions including first and grad-
uated subsequent civil penalties, criminal penalties, and injunc-
tive remedies.
Sec. 102—Makes it an unfair immigration-related employ-
ment practice for any employer to discriminate against any
244
Data and Documents

individual other than an unauthorized alien with respect to hir-
ing, recruitment, firing, or referral for fee because of individual
origin or citizenship (or intended citizenship) status and states
that it is not a violation to hire an equally qualified U.S. citizen
or national over an equally qualified alien.
Sec. 103—Makes fraud and misuse of certain immigration-
related documents illegal.
PART B—Improvement of Enforcement and Services
Sec. 111—Authorized increased appropriations for enforce-
ment and service activities of the Immigration and Naturaliza-
tion Service, the Executive Office of Immigration Review, the
Border Patrol and other appropriate federal agencies. Author-
izes additional appropriations for wage and hour enforcement.
Sec. 112—Revised penalties for unlawful transportation of
aliens to the United States.
Sec. 113—Authorized a $35-million immigration emergency
fund for enforcement costs and state and local reimbursement.
Sec. 114—Permits owners and operators of international
bridges and toll roads to request the assistance of the Attorney
General to inspect and approve measures to prevent the unau-
thorized crossing of aliens into the United States.
Sec. 115—Expressed the sense of Congress that the immi-
gration laws of the United States should be vigorously enforced
while protecting the rights and safety of U.S. citizens.
Sec. 116—Requires the INS to have the owner’s consent or
a warrant, restricting warrantless entry in the case of outdoor agri-
cultural operations to interrogate persons to see if unauthorized ali-
ens are present.
Sec. 117—Prohibits the adjustment of status to permanent
resident for visa violators.
TITLE V—State Assistance for Incarceration Costs of Illegal
Aliens and Certain Cuban Nationals
Sec. 501—Directs the Attorney General to reimburse states
for the costs of incarcerating illegal aliens and certain Cuban
nationals convicted of felonies.
TITLE
VII—Federal
Responsibility
for
Deportable
and
Excludable Aliens Convicted of Crimes
Sec. 701—Provides for the expeditious deportation of aliens
convicted of crimes.
Documents
245

Sec. 702—Provides for the identification of Department of
Defense facilities to incarcerate deportable or excludable aliens.
Era of Criminalization of Immigration
Negative public reaction to unauthorized immigration became
interconnected with the ‘‘War on Crime’’ and the ‘‘War on
Drugs.’’ One result was that the Omnibus Anti-Drug Abuse Act
of 1988 created the ‘‘aggravated felony’’: a crime for which a
permanent resident alien (or an unauthorized immigrant)
would be deported and denied reentry on a permanent basis.
Omnibus Anti-Drug Abuse Act of 1988
H.R. 5210, November 18, 1988
Subtitle J—Provisions Relating to the Deportation of Aliens
Who Commit Aggravated Felonies
Directs the Attorney General to: (1) take into custody any
alien convicted of an aggravated felony (murder, drug-trafficking
crimes, or illicit trafficking in firearms or destructive devices)
upon completion of the relevant sentence; (2) establish a system to
maintain records of such aliens and train Immigration and Natu-
ralization Service (INS) personnel to act as a liaison to other law
enforcement entities with respect to such aliens; and (3) report to
the congressional Judiciary Committees on reports in these areas.
Prohibits the voluntary departure of aliens convicted of an
aggravated felony. Includes within a class of deportable aliens
any alien convicted: (1) of an aggravated felony at any time after
entry into the United States; or (2) of possessing or carrying
unlawfully any firearm, destructive device, or revolver.
Establishes criminal penalties to apply to persons deported
subsequent to a felony or aggravated felony conviction who
reenter the United States, as well as for persons who assist cer-
tain deportees in their reentry.
During a period in which unauthorized immigration was re-
emerging as a social issue, the North American Free Trade Agree-
ment was passed, easing tariff fees on goods crossing the borders.
Public reaction against admission of unskilled labor meant that
immigration was restricted while trade was opened. The failure
to increase legal immigration opportunities, in relation to labor
246
Data and Documents

market demand in the United States, led to increased unauthor-
ized immigration and a new population buildup as employers in
less skilled labor industries sought to hire these willing workers.
North American Free Trade Agreement of 1994
Signatories: United States, Canada, and Mexico
NAFTA PART TWO—Trade in Goods
Article 302: Tariff Elimination
1. Except as otherwise provided in this Agreement, no
Party may increase any existing customs duty, or
adopt any customs duty, on an originating good.
2. Except as otherwise provided in this Agreement,
each Party shall progressively eliminate its customs
duties on originating goods in accordance with its
Schedule set out in Annex 302.2 or as otherwise
indicated in Annex 300-B.
3. At the request of any Party, the Parties shall consult
to consider accelerating the elimination of customs
duties set out in their Schedules. An agreement
between any two or more Parties to accelerate the
elimination of a customs duty on a good shall
supersede any prior inconsistent duty rate or
staging category in their Schedules for such good
when approved by each such Party in accordance
with Article 2202(2) (Amendments).
Subchapter C—Non-Tariff Measures
Article 309: Import and Export Restrictions
1. Except as otherwise provided in this Agreement, no
Party shall adopt or maintain any prohibition or restriction on
the importation of any good of another Party or on the exporta-
tion or sale for export of any good destined for the territory of
another Party, except in accordance with Article XI of the
GATT, including its interpretative notes, and to this end Article
XI of the GATT and its interpretative notes, or any equivalent
provision of a successor agreement to which all Parties are
party, are incorporated into and made part of this Agreement.
Article 315: Export Taxes
Except as set out in Annex 315 or Article 604 (Energy-
Export Taxes), no Party may adopt or maintain any duty, tax,
Documents
247

or other charge on the export of any good to the territory of
another Party, unless such duty, tax, or charge is adopted or
maintained on: (a) exports of any such good to the territory of
all other Parties; and (b) any such good when destined for
domestic consumption.
The Antiterrorism and Effective Death Penalty Act of 1996 rein-
forced the criminalization of unauthorized immigration by in-
creasing the number of offenses classified as ‘‘aggravated felonies’’
and specified that deportation would be retroactive. In other
words, an individual who has served time for an aggravated felony
could be deported years or decades afterwards. This step was
taken due to concerns raised by the bombing of the World Trade
Center by terrorists in 1993 and the Oklahoma City bombing in
1995, at first attributed to external terrorists, but later found to have
been carried out by Timothy McVeigh, a U.S. citizen.
Antiterrorism and Effective Death Penalty Act of 1996
Senate 735, April 24, 1996
Title IV—Terrorist and Criminal Alien Removal and Exclusion
Subtitle A—Removal of Alien Terrorists
Section 401—Alien Terrorist Removal
Subtitle B—Exclusion of Members and Representatives of
Terrorist Organizations
Sec. 411—Exclusion of alien enemy terrorists. Establishes
membership in or representation of a terrorist organization as a
ground for denying an alien entry into the United States. . . .
Sec. 412—Waiver of authority concerning notice of denial
of application for visas. Allows the Attorney General to waive
notice of visa application denials . . . to any individual or class
of excludable individuals, except in cases of visas sought with
the intent to immigrate.
Sec. 413—Denial of other relief for alien terrorists. Limits the
discretion of the Attorney General with respect to those who have
engaged in terrorist activities to: withhold deportation . . ., sus-
pend deportation . . ., permit voluntary departure . . ., adjust sta-
tus of nonimmigrant to that of resident alien . . ., or enter a record
of lawful admission for alien who entered the U.S. prior to
January 1, 1972. . . . The Attorney General may stay deportation
upon a determination that otherwise the alien may be persecuted
and would be contrary to the U.N. protocol on refugees. . . .
248
Data and Documents

Sec. 414—Exclusion of aliens who have not been inspected
and admitted. ‘‘. . .by operation of law, returns ‘to the border’ any
alien who has entered the United States unlawfully, regardless of
the duration of his or her presence In the United States,’’. . . The
Attorney General, however, is required to establish a procedure
whereby aliens citied under this section have the opportunity to
demonstrate that they were in fact lawfully admitted. . . .’’
Subtitle D—Criminal Alien Procedural Improvements
Sec. 432—Criminal alien identification system—. . . adjusts
the provisions calling for a criminal alien tracking station to
authorize the creation of a criminal alien identification system
to assist in identifying and locating aliens deportable by virtue
of their conviction for aggravated felonies. . . .
Sec. 434—. . . adds a number of immigration offenses to the
list of RICO predicate Offenses. . . . The Racketeer Influenced
and Corrupt Organization (RICO) provisions . . . prohibit
(1) the acquisition or conduct of the affairs of (2) an enterprise
whose activities affect interstate or foreign commerce (3) through
the patterned commission of predicate crimes. RICO violations
are punishable by imprisonment for not more than 20 years, by
criminal forfeiture of any proceeds of the offense, and may result
in civil liability to injured parties. The new predicate offenses
include: 18 U.S.C. 1028 (relating to fraud concerning identifica-
tion documents) when committed for financial gain; 18 U.S.C.
1542 (relating to false statement to secure a passport) when com-
mitted for financial gain; 18 U.S.C. 1543 (relating to forgery or
false use of a passport) when committed for financial gain; 18
U.S.C. 1544 (relating to misuse of a passport) when committed
for financial gain; 18 U.S.C. 1546 (relating to fraud and misuse of
immigration entry documents) when committed for financial
gain; 18 U.S.C. 1581–1588 (relating to peonage and slavery); 8
U.S.C. 1324 (relating to bringing in, transporting, or harboring
illegal aliens); 8 U.S.C. 1327 (relating to aiding illegal reentry by
aliens excludable as terrorists or for conviction of aggravated fel-
onies); and 8 U.S.C. 1328 (relating to importing aliens for
immoral purposes) when committed for financial gain.
Sec. 435 . . . enables law enforcement officials to use court
ordered wiretapping to investigate various immigration offenses,
18 U.S.C. 2516, i.e.: 18 U.S.C. 1028 (relating to fraud concerning
drivers’ licenses, social security cards and other forms of identifi-
cation); 18 U.S.C. 1542 (relating to false statements made to secure
Documents
249

a passport); 18 U.S.C. 1546 (relating to forgery or false statements
concerning immigration cards or other documents); 8 U.S.C. 1324
(relating to bringing in, transporting, or harboring illegal aliens);
8 U.S.C. 1327 (relating to aiding illegal reentry by aliens excluda-
ble as terrorists or for conviction of aggravated felonies); and
8 U.S.C. 1328 (relating to importing aliens for immoral purposes).
Sec. 436—Expansion of criteria of deportation for crimes of
moral turpitude. . . . Amends the description of the crimes of
moral turpitude which render an alien deportable, 8 U.S.C.
1251(a)(2)(A)(i)(II), to make it clear that ‘‘crimes of moral turpi-
tude’’ refers to those punishable by imprisonment for one year or
more rather than those for which the alien is actually sentenced to
imprisonment for one year or more.
Sec. 437—. . . permits, with the agreement of the parties,
deportation proceedings to be conducted by telephone confer-
ence call or in the absence of the alien. . . .
Sec. 438—Deportation of nonviolent offenders prior to
completion of sentence of imprisonment. . . . directs the develop-
ment and implementation within 180 days of a plan to relocate
at least 500 kilometers from the U.S. border any alien who has
entered the U.S. illegally and been returned to a contiguous
country at least 3 times.
. . . permits the deportation before complete service of sen-
tence of aliens convicted of nonviolent crimes (but excluding
alien smuggling) under federal or state law; aliens who subse-
quently reenter the U.S. unlawfully would be required to serve
the remainder of their sentences in addition to any other penal-
ties that might be imposed.
Sec. 439—Authorizing State and local law enforcement offi-
cials to arrest and detain certain illegal aliens. . . . authorizes
state and local law enforcement officers, unless contrary to state
law, to arrest and detain aliens unlawfully reentering the U.S.,
8 U.S.C. 1252c.
Sec. 440—Criminal alien removal. . . . provides for more ex-
peditious deportation of certain criminal aliens. It adds to the list
of ‘‘aggravated felon[ies],’’ 8 U.S.C. 1101(a)(43), conviction for
which constitutes grounds for deportation: violations of 18
U.S.C. 1084 (other than a first offense relating to transportation
of wagering information) or 18 U.S.C. 1955 (running a gambling
business), 18 U.S.C. 2421, 2422, 2423 (relating to transportation
in interstate or foreign commerce for purposes of criminal sexual
activity) for commercial purposes; 8 U.S.C.1324(a)(2) bringing
250
Data and Documents

aliens into the U.S. in reckless disregard of their authority to
enter if the offender has been previously convicted, the arrange-
ment is commercial, or the alien is not presented to immigration
officials upon entry (existing law includes knowingly smug-
gling, transporting, or harboring illegal aliens); 18 U.S.C. 1543
(relating to forgery of a passport) or 18 U.S.C. 1546(a) (relating to
fraud, false impersonation, or false statements in connection
with documents for entry into the U.S.), when a sentence of at
least
18
months
imprisonment
is
imposed;
previous
law
included violations of 1546 (relating to trafficking in forged entry
documents) punishable by imprisonment for at least 5 years; fail-
ure to appear to serve a sentence for an offense punishable by
imprisonment for a term of 5 years or more; prior law included
failure to appear to serve a sentence for an offense punishable by
imprisonment for a term of 15 years or more; when committed
by an alien previously deported on the bases of a conviction for
an aggravated felony, 8 U.S.C. 1325(a) (relating to improper
entry by an alien) or 1326 (relating to reentry by a deported
alien); when punishable by imprisonment for 5 years or more,
commercial bribery, counterfeiting, forgery, or trafficking in
vehicles with altered identification numbers; when punishable
by imprisonment for 5 years or more, obstruction of justice, per-
jury, subornation of perjury, or bribery of a witness; and failure
to comply with a court order to appear to answer or dispose of a
felony charge punishable by imprisonment for 2 years or more.
The section provides expedited procedures for aliens who
commit aggravated felonies or violate the drug laws, the fire-
arms laws, the espionage, sabotage, selective service, trading
with the enemy, or sedition laws, or threaten the President, or
launch an invasion from the United States or commit a second
crime of moral turpitude. Expedited procedures in such cases
include: no judicial review after the Board of Immigration
Appeals (prior law permitted subsequent review under habeas
provisions or appeal to the U.S. court of appeals), 8 U.S.C.
1105a(a)(10), 1101(a)(47); arrest for expeditious deportation fol-
lowing release from incarceration (prior law applied only to
those convicted of aggravated felonies), 8 U.S.C. 1252(a)(2);
exclusion of permanent resident aliens who commit such
offenses, then leave the country temporarily and seek to reenter
(prior law applied only to those convicted of aggravated fel-
onies), 8 U.S.C. 1182(c); conducting deportation proceedings
at correctional institutions prior to the alien’s release from
Documents
251

incarceration (prior law applied only to those convicted of
aggravated felonies), 8 U.S.C. 1252a; requires the Attorney Gen-
eral to effect deportation within 30 days of the final order rather
than 6 months afforded in other cases, 8 U.S.C. 1252(c).
Sec. 441—Limitation on Collateral Attacks on Underlying
Deportation Order modifies the section outlawing illegal reen-
try by deported aliens to bar challenges to the underlying de-
portation order unless—the alien has exhausted administrative
review; was previously denied the opportunity for judicial
review; and can show that the deportation order was funda-
mentally unfair, 8 U.S.C. 1326(d).
Sec. 442—Deportation procedures for certain criminal aliens
who are not permanent residents. Modifies the expedited proce-
dures for deportation of aliens (other than permanent resident
aliens) convicted of aggravated felonies, 8 U.S.C. 1252a to:
exclude from application of the procedure those under condi-
tional permanent resident alien status rather than, as is now the
case, those who are entitled to deportation relief under immigra-
tion law; shorten the notice period from 30 to 14 days; provide
for the translation of the proceedings into a language the alien
understands; require an explicit determination as to whether the
alien appearing at the proceedings is the alien against whom the
proceedings were brought and whether he or she is appropri-
ately subject to the procedure; bar the exercise of discretionary
relief from deportation by the Attorney General; limit habeas
corpus or other review of a final deportation order for criminal
aliens to identification of the alien, 8 U.S.C. 1105a(c); and estab-
lishes a ‘‘conclusive’’ presumption that an alien convicted of an
aggravated felony is deportable, 8 U.S.C. 1252a(c).
Research indicating that human trafficking for purpose of pros-
titution or enslavement had become a global problem led to the
passage of harsher criminal penalties for traffickers. Neverthe-
less, the Victims of Trafficking and Violence Protection Act of
2000 provided visas for victims willing to testify against traf-
fickers and enacted a system of sanctions for sending countries
which did not take steps to protect their citizens.
Victims of Trafficking and Violence Protection Act of 2000
H.R. 3244
Amends the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961 (FAA) to
require the Secretary of State (the Secretary) to include as part
252
Data and Documents

of required reports on human rights and development assis-
tance and human rights and security assistance: (1) a descrip-
tion of the nature and extent of severe forms of trafficking in
persons in each foreign country; and (2) with respect to each
country that is a country of origin, transit, or destination for
victims of severe forms of trafficking in persons, an assessment
of the efforts by such countries’ governments to combat such
trafficking.
Section 105—Requires the President to establish an Inter-
agency Task Force to Monitor and Combat Trafficking, chaired
by the Secretary. Authorizes the Secretary to establish within
the Department of State an Office to Monitor and Combat Traf-
ficking, which shall assist the Task Force and be administered
by a Director. Requires the Director to consult with domestic
organizations,
international
nongovernmental
organizations,
and multilateral organizations, including the Organization of
American States, the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe (OSCE), and the United Nations, and with trafficking
victims or other affected persons.
Directs the Task Force to: (1) coordinate the implementa-
tion of this division; (2) measure and evaluate progress of the
United States and other countries in trafficking prevention, pro-
vision of assistance to and protection of trafficking victims, and
prosecution of and enforcement against traffickers; (3) assist the
Secretary in the preparation of the reports under section 110,
below; (4) expand interagency procedures to collect and organ-
ize data and to respect the confidentiality of trafficking victims;
(5) engage in efforts to facilitate cooperation among countries of
origin, transit, and destination; (6) examine the role of the inter-
national ‘‘sex tourism’’ industry in the trafficking of persons
and in the sexual exploitation of women and children around
the world; and (7) engage in consultation and advocacy with
governmental
and
nongovernmental
organizations,
among
other entities, to advance the purposes of this division.
Sec. 106—Directs the President: (1) to establish and carry
out initiatives to enhance economic opportunity for potential
victims of trafficking as a method to deter trafficking; (2) acting
through the Secretaries of Labor, Health and Human Services
(HHS), and State and the Attorney General, to establish and
carry out programs to increase public awareness, particularly
among potential victims, of the dangers of trafficking and the
protections that are available for victims; and (3) to consult with
Documents
253

appropriate nongovernmental organizations with respect to the
establishment and conduct of initiatives under this section.
Sec. 107—Requires the Secretary and the Administrator of
the Agency for International Development (AID) to establish
and carry out programs and initiatives in foreign countries to
assist in the safe integration, reintegration, or resettlement of
victims of trafficking and their children and to take appropriate
steps to enhance cooperative efforts among foreign countries,
including countries of origin of victims, to assist in such inte-
gration, reintegration, or resettlement.
Directs the Secretaries of HHS and Labor, the Board of
Directors of the Legal Services Corporation (LSC), and the
heads of other Federal agencies to expand benefits and services
to victims of severe forms of trafficking in persons within the
United States, without regard to the immigration status of such
victims. Makes an alien who is such a victim eligible for bene-
fits and services to the same extent as an alien who is admitted
to the United States as a refugee under the Immigration and
Nationality Act (INA). Sets forth reporting and certification
requirements. Directs the Attorney General and the Secretary to
promulgate regulations for law enforcement personnel, immi-
gration officials, and State Department officials to provide that:
(1) such victims, while in Federal custody, shall not be detained
in facilities inappropriate to their status as crime victims, shall
receive necessary medical care and other assistance, and shall
be provided protection if a victim’s safety is at risk or if there is
danger of additional harm by recapture by a trafficker; (2) such
victims shall have access to information about their rights and
translation services; (3) Federal law enforcement officials may act
to ensure an alien’s continued presence in the United States if it is
determined that such individual is a victim of trafficking and a
potential witness to the prosecution of those responsible; (4) such
officials, in investigating and prosecuting traffickers, shall protect
the safety of trafficking victims; and (5) appropriate personnel of
the Departments of State and Justice shall be trained in identifying
such victims and providing for their protection.
Amends the INA to create a new non-immigrant ‘‘T’’ visa
for: (1) an alien who the Attorney General determines is a vic-
tim of a severe form of trafficking in persons, who is in the
United States, American Samoa, the Commonwealth of the
Northern Mariana Islands, or a U.S. port of entry on account of
such trafficking, who has complied with any reasonable request
254
Data and Documents

for assistance in the investigation or prosecution of acts of traf-
ficking or has not attained age 15, and who would suffer
extreme hardship involving unusual and severe harm upon re-
moval from the United States; (2) the spouse, children, and
parents of such an alien who is under 21 if the Attorney Gen-
eral considers it necessary to avoid extreme hardship; or (3) the
minor children of such an alien who is 21 years of age or older
if they are accompanying or following to join such alien. Limits
the total number of aliens who may be issued visas or otherwise
provided non-immigrant status during a fiscal year to 5,000.
Makes this numerical limitation applicable only to principal aliens
and not to the spouses, sons, daughters, or parents of such aliens.
Directs the Attorney General and other government officials
to refer such non-immigrant aliens to nongovernmental organi-
zations that would advise the aliens regarding their options and
the resources available to them. Requires the Attorney General,
during the period those aliens are in lawful temporary resident
status, to grant them authorization to engage in employment in
the United States and to provide them with an ‘‘employment
authorized’’ endorsement or other appropriate work permit.
Permits the Attorney General to adjust the status of a ‘‘T’’
visa holder to that of a permanent resident if the alien: (1) has
been physically present in the United States for a continuous
period of at least three years since the date of admission; (2) has
been a person of good moral character throughout such period;
and (3) has complied with any reasonable request for assistance
in the investigation or prosecution of trafficking acts throughout
such period, or would suffer extreme hardship upon removal
from the United States. Permits the Attorney General to adjust
the status of any other alien admitted under that section, with an
exception.
Sec. 108—Establishes minimum standards for the elimina-
tion of trafficking applicable to the government of a country of
origin, transit, or destination for a significant number of victims
of severe forms of trafficking. Urges such countries to prohibit
such trafficking, to punish such acts, and to eliminate such
trafficking.
Sec. 109—Amends the FAA to authorize the President to pro-
vide assistance to foreign countries directly or through nongo-
vernmental, intergovernmental, and multilateral organizations for
programs and activities designed to meet the minimum standards
for the elimination of trafficking, including the drafting of laws to
Documents
255

prohibit and punish acts of trafficking, the investigation and pros-
ecution of traffickers, the creation and maintenance of facilities,
programs, and activities for the protection of victims, and the
expansion
of
exchange
programs
and
international
visitor
programs for governmental and nongovernmental personnel to
combat trafficking.
Sec. 110—Declares that it is U.S. policy not to provide non-
humanitarian, non-trade-related foreign assistance to any gov-
ernment that does not comply with minimum standards for the
elimination of trafficking and that is not making significant
efforts to comply with such standards.
Requires the Secretary to submit to the appropriate congres-
sional committees reports with respect to the status of severe
forms of trafficking and those countries to which the minimum
standards for the elimination of trafficking are applicable whose
governments: (1) fully comply with such standards; (2) do not
yet fully comply but are making significant efforts to comply;
and (3) do not fully comply and are not making significant efforts
to do so. Specifies possible presidential determinations with
respect to: (1) the withholding of non-humanitarian, non-trade-
related assistance; (2) ongoing, multiple, broad-based restrictions
on assistance in response to human rights violations; (3) sub-
sequent compliance; and (4) continuation of assistance in the
national interest and waiver authority.
Securitization of Immigration
The 9/11 attacks led to the rapid passage of the USA PATRIOT
Act of 2001 as a part of the initiative known as the ‘‘War on
Terror.’’ The 21st-century legislative emphasis on dealing with
visitors from abroad, legal immigrants, and unauthorized
entrants has emphasized protecting the American population
from terrorists. This act is controversial for the degree of sur-
veillance of both citizens and noncitizens which was author-
ized. Certain portions of the act are due to ‘‘sunset,’’ but
in 2010 most of the surveillance provisions were still in effect
and sustaining legal challenge. Regarding security at the bor-
ders, this act sought to enhance Canadian border personnel and
surveillance technology. It is also noted for its antimoney-
laundering provisions, authorization of mandatory detention
without judicial review for terrorism suspects, and enhanced
penalties for terrorists. It has provided that all individuals,
256
Data and Documents

citizen or noncitizen, seeking to enter or exit the United States
must provide enhanced documentation, including biometric
technology.
USA PATRIOT Act of 2001
HR 3162, October 24, 2001
Title I—Enhancing Domestic Security Against Terrorism
Sec. 102—Sense of Congress condemning discrimination
against Arab and Muslim Americans and Americans from
South Asia.
(a) FINDINGS—Congress makes the following
findings:
(1) Arab Americans, Muslim Americans, and
Americans from South Asia play a vital role in our
Nation and are entitled to nothing less than the
full rights of every American.
(2) The acts of violence that have been taken against
Arab and Muslim Americans since the September
11, 2001, attacks against the United States should
be and are condemned by all Americans who
value freedom.
(3) The concept of individual responsibility for
wrongdoing is sacrosanct in American society, and
applies equally to all religious, racial, and ethnic
groups.
(4) When American citizens commit acts of violence
against those who are, or are perceived to be, of
Arab or Muslim descent, they should be punished
to the full extent of the law.
(5) Muslim Americans have become so fearful of
harassment that many Muslim women are
changing the way they dress to avoid becoming
targets.
(6) Many Arab Americans and Muslim Americans
have acted heroically during the attacks on the
United States, including Mohammed Salman
Hamdani, a 23-year-old New Yorker of Pakistani
descent, who is believed to have gone to the World
Trade Center to offer rescue assistance and is now
missing.
Documents
257

(b) SENSE OF CONGRESS—It is the sense of Congress
that—
(1) the civil rights and civil liberties of all Americans,
including Arab Americans, Muslim Americans,
and Americans from South Asia, must be
protected, and that every effort must be taken to
preserve their safety;
(2) any acts of violence or discrimination against any
Americans be condemned; and
(3) the Nation is called upon to recognize the
patriotism of fellow citizens from all ethnic, racial,
and religious backgrounds.
Title II—Enhanced Surveillance Procedures
Sec. 201—Authorizes interception of wire, oral, and elec-
tronic communications relating to terrorism or production and
dissemination of chemical weapons from both citizens and
noncitizens.
Sec. 202—Establishes authority to intercept wire, oral, and
electronic communications relating to felony fraud and abuse
offenses against computers.
Sec. 203—Allows warrantless interception and sharing of
criminal investigative information disclosed to a grand jury
among federal agencies if it involves foreign intelligence or
counterintelligence.
Sec. 204—Extends intelligence exceptions for interception
and disclosure of wire, oral, and electronic communications.
Sec. 206—Establishes roving wiretap authority allowing
surveillance of any communications made to an intelligence tar-
get under the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act (FISA) of
1978.
Sec. 207—Extends duration of FISA surveillance of non–
United States persons who are agents of a foreign power.
Sec. 209—Authorizes seizure of voice mail messages after
obtaining warrants.
Sec. 210—Extends use of subpoenas, rather than court
orders for an expanded variety of records of electronic com-
munications and does not limit use to suspected terrorism
investigations.
Sec. 212—Authorizes emergency disclosure of electronic
communications to protect life and limb.
258
Data and Documents

Sec. 213—Delineates authority for notice of the execution of
a warrant which permits delay until after surveillance occurs.
[Referred to as ‘‘sneak and peak’’]
Sec. 214—Removes statutory requirement that the govern-
ment must prove an individual is ‘‘an agent of a foreign
power’’ and extends pen register and trap and trace authority
to the Internet under FISA.
Sec. 215—Authorizes FBI ability to request an order ‘‘requir-
ing the production of any tangible things’’ (records, books, docu-
ments, etc.) under the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act to
investigate terrorism.
Sec. 216—Expands court jurisdiction to place wiretaps and
pen register/trap and trace outside of geographic jurisdiction.
Sec. 217—Authorizes interception of computer trespasser
communications.
Sec. 218—Allows collection of foreign intelligence informa-
tion as a significant and not necessarily the sole purpose of an
investigation.
Sec. 219—Expands court jurisdiction to place wiretaps and
pen trap and trace outside of geographic jurisdiction in investi-
gations of international or domestic terrorism.
Sec. 220—Authorizes nationwide service of search warrants
for electronic evidence.
Sec. 223—Establishes civil liability for unauthorized and
improper disclosures violating communications privacy made
by government officials or the courts.
Sec. 224—Provides for sunset of many enhanced surveil-
lance and foreign intelligence Amendments (201, 202, 203b, 204,
206, 207, 209, 212, 214, 215, 217, 218, 220, 223, 225) on December
31, 2005.
Sec. 225—Authorizes immunity to providers for compli-
ance with FISA wiretaps.
Title IV—Protecting the Border
Subtitle A—Protecting the Northern Border
Sec. 401—Ensures adequate personnel on the northern border.
There are authorized to be appropriated—
(1) such sums as may be necessary to triple the number of
Border Patrol personnel (from the number authorized
under current law), and the necessary personnel and
Documents
259

facilities to support such personnel, in each State along
the Northern Border;
(2) such sums as may be necessary to triple the number of
Customs Service personnel (from the number
authorized under current law), and the necessary
personnel and facilities to support such personnel, at
ports of entry in each State along the Northern Border;
(3) such sums as may be necessary to triple the number of
INS inspectors (from the number authorized on the
date of the enactment of this Act), and the necessary
personnel and facilities to support such personnel, at
ports of entry in each State along the Northern Border;
and
(4) an additional $50,000,000 each to the Immigration and
Naturalization Service and the United States Customs
Service for purposes of making improvements in
technology for monitoring the Northern Border and
acquiring additional equipment at the Northern Border.
Sec. 403—Grants access by the Department of State and the
INS to certain identifying records in the criminal history
records of visa applicants and applicants seeking admission to
the United States.
(b)(1)
The Attorney General and the Director of the
Federal Bureau of Investigation shall provide the
Department of State and the Service access to the
criminal history record information contained in
the National Crime Information Center’s Interstate
Identification Index (NCIC-III), Wanted Persons
File, and to any other files maintained by the
National Crime Information Center that may be
mutually agreed upon by the Attorney General and
the agency receiving the access, for the purpose of
determining whether or not a visa applicant or
applicant for admission has a criminal history
record indexed in any such file.
(2) Such access shall be provided by means of extracts
of the records for placement in the automated visa
lookout or other appropriate database, and shall be
provided without any fee or charge.
(3) The Federal Bureau of Investigation shall provide
periodic updates of the extracts at intervals
260
Data and Documents

mutually agreed upon with the agency receiving
the access. Upon receipt of such updated extracts,
the receiving agency shall make corresponding
updates to its database and destroy previously
provided extracts.
(4) Access to an extract does not entitle the
Department of State to obtain the full content of the
corresponding automated criminal history record.
To obtain the full content of a criminal history
record, the Department of State shall submit the
applicant’s fingerprints and any appropriate
fingerprint processing fee authorized by law to the
Criminal Justice Information Services Division of
the Federal Bureau of Investigation.
(c) The provision of the extracts described in subsection
(b) may be reconsidered by the Attorney General and
the receiving agency upon the development and
deployment of a more cost-effective and efficient means
of sharing the information.
(d) For purposes of administering this section, the
Department of State shall, prior to receiving access to
NCIC data but not later than 4 months after the date of
enactment of this subsection, promulgate final
regulations—
(1) to implement procedures for the taking of
fingerprints; and
(2) to establish the conditions for the use of the
information received from the Federal Bureau of
Investigation, in order—
(A) to limit the redissemination of such
information;
(B) to ensure that such information is used solely
to determine whether or not to issue a visa to
an alien or to admit an alien to the United
States;
(C) to ensure the security, confidentiality, and
destruction of such information; and
(D) to protect any privacy rights of individuals
who are subjects of such information.
(b) REPORTING REQUIREMENT—Not later than 2 years
after the date of enactment of this Act, the Attorney
General and the Secretary of State jointly shall report to
Documents
261

Congress on the implementation of the amendments
made by this section.
(c) TECHNOLOGY STANDARD TO CONFIRM IDENTITY—
(1) IN GENERAL—The Attorney General and the
Secretary of State jointly, through the National
Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST), and
in consultation with the Secretary of the Treasury
and other Federal law enforcement and intelligence
agencies the Attorney General or Secretary of State
deems appropriate and in consultation with
Congress, shall within 2 years after the date of the
enactment of this section, develop and certify a
technology standard that can be used to verify the
identity of persons applying for a United States
visa or such persons seeking to enter the United
States pursuant to a visa for the purposes of
conducting background checks, confirming
identity, and ensuring that a person has not
received a visa under a different name or such
person seeking to enter the United States pursuant
to a visa.
(2) INTEGRATED—The technology standard
developed pursuant to paragraph (1), shall be the
technological basis for a cross-agency, cross-
platform electronic system that is a cost-effective,
efficient, fully integrated means to share law
enforcement and intelligence information necessary
to confirm the identity of such persons applying
for a United States visa or such person seeking to
enter the United States pursuant to a visa.
(3) ACCESSIBLE—The electronic system described in
paragraph (2), once implemented, shall be readily
and easily accessible to—
(A) all consular officers responsible for the
issuance of visas;
(B) all Federal inspection agents at all United
States border inspection points; and
(C) all law enforcement and intelligence officers as
determined by regulation to be responsible for
investigation or identification of aliens
admitted to the United States pursuant to a visa.
262
Data and Documents

(4) REPORT—Not later than 18 months after the date
of the enactment of this Act, and every 2 years
thereafter, the Attorney General and the Secretary
of State shall jointly, in consultation with the
Secretary of Treasury, report to Congress
describing the development, implementation,
efficacy, and privacy implications of the technology
standard and electronic database system described
in this subsection.
(5) FUNDING—There is authorized to be appropriated
to the Secretary of State, the Attorney General, and
the Director of the National Institute of Standards
and Technology such sums as may be necessary to
carry out the provisions of this subsection.
(d) STATUTORY CONSTRUCTION—Nothing in this
section, or in any other law, shall be construed to limit
the authority of the Attorney General or the Director
of the Federal Bureau of Investigation to provide access
to the criminal history record information contained in
the National Crime Information Center’s (NCIC)
Interstate Identification Index (NCIC-III), or to any
other information maintained by the NCIC, to any
Federal agency or officer authorized to enforce or
administer the immigration laws of the United States,
for the purpose of such enforcement or administration,
upon terms that are consistent with the National Crime
Prevention and Privacy Compact Act of 1998 (subtitle
A of title II of Public Law 105-251; 42 U.S.C. 14611-16)
and section 552a of title 5, United States Code.
SEC. 405. REPORT ON THE INTEGRATED AUTO-
MATED FINGERPRINT IDENTIFICATION SYSTEM FOR
PORTS OF ENTRY AND OVERSEAS CONSULAR POSTS.
Sec. 405—Establishes the integrated automated fingerprint
identification system for ports of entry and overseas consular posts.
(a) IN GENERAL—The Attorney General, in consultation
with the appropriate heads of other Federal agencies,
including the Secretary of State, Secretary of the Treas-
ury, and the Secretary of Transportation, shall report to
Congress on the feasibility of enhancing the Integrated
Automated Fingerprint Identification System (IAFIS) of
Documents
263

the Federal Bureau of Investigation and other identifi-
cation systems in order to better identify a person who
holds a foreign passport or a visa and may be wanted
in connection with a criminal investigation in the
United States or abroad, before the issuance of a visa to
that person or the entry or exit from the United States
by that person.
Subtitle B—Enhanced Immigration Provisions
Sec. 411—Defines new legal terms relating to terrorism.
Sec. 412—Mandatory
detention
of
suspected
terrorists,
denial of habeas corpus under specified conditions and limits
on judicial review.
Sec. 236A. (a) DETENTION OF TERRORIST ALIENS—
(1) CUSTODY—The Attorney General shall take into
custody any alien who is certified under paragraph (3).
(2) RELEASE—Except as provided in paragraphs (5) and
(6), the Attorney General shall maintain custody of
such an alien until the alien is removed from the
United States. Except as provided in paragraph (6),
such custody shall be maintained irrespective of any
relief from removal for which the alien may be eligible,
or any relief from removal granted the alien, until the
Attorney General determines that the alien is no longer
an alien who may be certified under paragraph (3). If
the alien is finally determined not to be removable,
detention pursuant to this subsection shall terminate.
(3) CERTIFICATION—The Attorney General may certify
an alien under this paragraph if the Attorney General
has reasonable grounds to believe that the alien—
(A) is described in section 212(a)(3)(A)(i),
212(a)(3)(A)(iii), 212(a)(3)(B), 237(a)(4)(A)(i),
237(a)(4)(A)(iii), or 237(a)(4)(B); or
(B) is engaged in any other activity that endangers the
national security of the United States.
(4) NONDELEGATION—The Attorney General may
delegate the authority provided under paragraph (3)
only to the Deputy Attorney General. The Deputy
Attorney General may not delegate such authority.
(5) COMMENCEMENT OF PROCEEDINGS—The
Attorney General shall place an alien detained under
264
Data and Documents

paragraph (1) in removal proceedings, or shall charge
the alien with a criminal offense, not later than 7 days
after the commencement of such detention. If the
requirement of the preceding sentence is not satisfied,
the Attorney General shall release the alien.
(6) LIMITATION ON INDEFINITE DETENTION—An
alien detained solely under paragraph (1) who has not
been removed under section 241(a)(1)(A), and whose
removal is unlikely in the reasonably foreseeable
future, may be detained for additional periods of up to
six months only if the release of the alien will threaten
the national security of the United States or the safety
of the community or any person.
(7) REVIEW OF CERTIFICATION—The Attorney General
shall review the certification made under paragraph
(3) every 6 months. If the Attorney General determines,
in the Attorney General’s discretion, that the certification
should be revoked, the alien may be released on such
conditions as the Attorney General deems appropriate,
unless such release is otherwise prohibited by law. The
alien may request each 6 months in writing that the
Attorney General reconsider the certification and may
submit documents or other evidence in support of that
request.
(b) HABEAS CORPUS AND JUDICIAL REVIEW—
(1) IN GENERAL—Judicial review of any action or
decision relating to this section (including judicial
review of the merits of a determination made
under subsection (a)(3) or (a)(6)) is available
exclusively in habeas corpus proceedings
consistent with this subsection. Except as provided
in the preceding sentence, no court shall have
jurisdiction to review, by habeas corpus petition or
otherwise, any such action or decision.
(2) APPLICATION—
(A) IN GENERAL—Notwithstanding any other
provision of law, including section 2241(a) of
title 28, United States Code, habeas corpus
proceedings described in paragraph (1) may
be initiated only by an application filed with—
(i)
the Supreme Court;
(ii) any justice of the Supreme Court;
Documents
265

(iii)
any circuit judge of the United States
Court of Appeals for the District of
Columbia Circuit; or
(iv) any district court otherwise having juris-
diction to entertain it.
(B) APPLICATION TRANSFER—Section 2241(b)
of title 28, United States Code, shall apply to
an application for a writ of habeas corpus
described in subparagraph (A).
(3) APPEALS—Notwithstanding any other provision
of law, including section 2253 of title 28, in habeas
corpus proceedings described in paragraph (1)
before a circuit or district judge, the final order shall
be subject to review, on appeal, by the United States
Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia
Circuit. There shall be no right of appeal in such
proceedings to any other circuit court of appeals.
(4) RULE OF DECISION—The law applied by the
Supreme Court and the United States Court of
Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit shall
be regarded as the rule of decision in habeas
corpus proceedings described in paragraph (1).
(c) STATUTORY CONSTRUCTION—The provisions of this
section shall not be applicable to any other provision of
this Act.
(b) CLERICAL AMENDMENT—The table of contents of
the Immigration and Nationality Act is amended by
inserting after the item relating to section 236 the
following:
Sec. 236A. Mandatory detention of suspected terrorist;
habeas corpus; judicial review.
(c) REPORTS—Not later than 6 months after the date of
the enactment of this Act, and every 6 months
thereafter, the Attorney General shall submit a report to
the Committee on the Judiciary of the House of
Representatives and the Committee on the Judiciary of
the Senate, with respect to the reporting period, on—
(1) the number of aliens certified under section
236A(a)(3) of the Immigration and Nationality Act,
as added by subsection (a);
266
Data and Documents

(2) the grounds for such certifications;
(3) the nationalities of the aliens so certified;
(4) the length of the detention for each alien so
certified; and
(5) the number of aliens so certified who—
(A) were granted any form of relief from removal;
(B) were removed;
(C) the Attorney General has determined are no
longer aliens who may be so certified; or
(D) were released from detention.
Sec. 413—Increases multilateral cooperation against terrorists.
Sec. 414—Expands visa integrity and security.
Sec. 415—Mandate for Office of Homeland Security to par-
ticipate in Entry-Exit Task Force.
Sec. 416—Establishes a program for monitoring foreign
students.
Sec. 417—Initiates machine readable passports.
Title
VIII—Strengthening
the
Criminal
Laws
Against
Terrorism
Sec. 801—Terrorist attacks and other acts of violence
against mass transportation systems.
Sec. 803—Prohibits harboring terrorists.
Sec. 805—Material support of terrorism.
Sec. 807—Technical clarification relating to provision of
material support to terrorism.
Sec. 808—Defines federal crime of terrorism.
Sec. 809—Removes statute of limitation for certain terrorism
offenses.
Title X—Miscellaneous
Sec. 1003—Defines electronic surveillance.
Sec. 1008—Feasibility study of use of biometric identifier
system with access to the FBI integrated automated fingerprint
identification system at overseas consular posts and points of
entry to the United States.
The trends established in the USA PATRIOT Act of 2001 were
reinforced by the Enhanced Border Security and Visa Entry
Reform Act of 2002 and the U.S. Visit and Intelligence Reform
and Terrorism Act of 2004.
Documents
267

Enhanced Border Security and Visa Entry Reform Act of 2002
Title 1—Funding
Sec. 101—Authorization of Appropriations for Hiring and
Training Governmental Personnel.
Sec. 102—Authorization of Appropriations for Improve-
ments in Technology and Infrastructure.
Sec. 103—Machine Readable Visa Fees.
Title 2—Intragency Information Sharing
Sec. 202—Interoperable Law Enforcement and Intelligence
Data System With Name Matching Capacity and Training
(a) Interoperable Law Enforcement and Intelligence
Electronic Data System.—
(1) Requirement for integrated immigration and
naturalization data system.—The Immigration and
Naturalization Service shall fully integrate all
databases and data systems maintained by the
Service that process or contain information on
aliens. The fully integrated data system shall be an
interoperable component of the electronic data
system described in paragraph (2).
(2) Requirement for interoperable data system.—Upon
the date of commencement of implementation of
the plan required by section 201(c), the President
shall develop and implement an interoperable
electronic data system to provide current and
immediate access to information in databases of
Federal law enforcement agencies and the
intelligence community that is relevant to
determine whether to issue a visa or to determine
the admissibility or deportability of an alien.
(3) Consultation requirement.—In the development
and implementation of the data system under this
subsection, the President shall consult with the
Director of the National Institute of Standards and
Technology (NIST) and any such other agency as
may be deemed appropriate.
(4) Technology standard.—
(A) In general.—The data system developed and
implemented under this subsection, and the
databases referred to in paragraph (2), shall
268
Data and Documents

utilize the technology standard established
pursuant to section 403(c) of the USA
PATRIOT Act, as amended by section 201(c)(5)
and subparagraph (B).
(5) Access to information in data system.—Subject to
paragraph (6), information in the data system
under this subsection shall be readily and easily
accessible—
(A) to any consular officer responsible for the
issuance of visas;
(B) to any Federal official responsible for
determining an alien’s admissibility to or
deportability from the United States; and
(C) to any Federal law enforcement or intelligence
officer determined by regulation to be
responsible for the investigation or
identification of aliens.
Title 3—Visa Issuance
Sec. 302—Implementation of an Integrated Entry and Exit
Data System
(a) Development of System.—In developing the integrated
entry and exit data system for the ports of entry, as
required by the Immigration and Naturalization Service
Data Management Improvement Act of 2000 (Public
Law 106-215), the Attorney General and the Secretary of
State shall—
(1) implement, fund, and use a technology standard
under section 403(c) of the USA PATRIOT Act (as
amended by sections 201(c)(5) and 202(a)(3)(B)) at
United States ports of entry and at consular posts
abroad;
(2) establish a database containing the arrival and
departure data from machine-readable visas,
passports, and other travel and entry documents
possessed by aliens; and (3) make interoperable all
security databases relevant to making
determinations of admissibility under section 212
of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 U.S.C.
1182).
Documents
269

Sec. 303—Machine-readable Tamper-Resistant Entry and Exit
Documents
(b) Requirements.—
(1) In general.—Not later than October 26, 2003, the
Attorney General and the Secretary of State shall
issue to aliens only machine-readable, tamper-
resistant visas and travel and entry documents that
use biometric identifiers. The Attorney General and
the Secretary of State shall jointly establish biometric
identifiers standards to be employed on such visas
and travel and entry documents from among those
biometric identifiers recognized by domestic and
international standards organizations.
(2) Readers and scanners at ports of entry.—
(A) In general.—Not later than October 26, 2003,
the Attorney General, in consultation with the
Secretary of State, shall install at all ports of
entry of the United States equipment and soft-
ware to allow biometric comparison of all
United States visas and travel and entry docu-
ments issued to aliens, and passports issued
pursuant to subsection (c)(1).
Sec. 303—Improved Training for Consular Officers
(a) Training.—The Secretary of State shall require that
all consular officers responsible for adjudicating visa
applications, before undertaking to perform consular
responsibilities, receive specialized training in the effec-
tive screening of visa applicants who pose a potential
threat to the safety or security of the United States.
Sec. 306—Restrictions on Issuance of Visas to Nonimmigrants
From Countries That Are State Sponsors of International Terrorism
(a) In General.—No nonimmigrant visa under section
101(a)(15) of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8
U.S.C. 1101(a)(15)) shall be issued to any alien from a
country that is a state sponsor of international terror-
ism unless the Secretary of State determines, in consul-
tation with the Attorney General and the heads of
other appropriate United States agencies, that such
alien does not pose a threat to the safety or national se-
curity of the United States. In making a determination
under this subsection, the Secretary of State shall apply
270
Data and Documents

standards developed by the Secretary of State, in con-
sultation with the Attorney General and the heads of
other appropriate United States agencies, that are ap-
plicable to the nationals of such states.
(b) State Sponsor of International Terrorism Defined.—
(1) In general.—In this section, the term ‘‘state sponsor
of international terrorism’’ means any country the
government of which has been determined by the
Secretary of State under any of the laws specified in
paragraph (2) to have repeatedly provided support
for acts of international terrorism.
U.S. VISIT and Intelligence Reform and Terrorism Act 2004
Subtitle B—Terrorist Travel and Effective Screening
SEC. 7201—COUNTERTERRORIST TRAVEL INTELLIGENCE.
(a) Findings.—Consistent with the report of the National
Commission on Terrorist Attacks Upon the United
States, Congress makes the following findings:
(1) Travel documents are as important to terrorists as
weapons since terrorists must travel clandestinely
to meet, train, plan, case targets, and gain access to
attack sites.
(2) International travel is dangerous for terrorists
because they must surface to pass through regulated
channels, present themselves to border security
officials, or attempt to circumvent inspection points.
(3) Terrorists use evasive, but detectable, methods to
travel, such as altered and counterfeit passports
and visas, specific travel methods and routes,
liaisons with corrupt government officials, human
smuggling networks, supportive travel agencies,
and immigration and identity fraud.
(4) Before September 11, 2001, no Federal agency
systematically analyzed terrorist travel strategies.
If an agency had done so, the agency could have
discovered the ways in which the terrorist
predecessors to al Qaeda had been systematically,
but detectably, exploiting weaknesses in our
border security since the early 1990s.
(5) Many of the hijackers were potentially vulnerable
to interception by border authorities. Analyzing
their characteristic travel documents and travel
Documents
271

patterns could have allowed authorities to
intercept some of the hijackers and a more
effective use of information available in
government databases could have identified some
of the hijackers.
(6) The routine operations of our immigration laws
and the aspects of those laws not specifically
aimed at protecting against terrorism inevitably
shaped al Qaeda’s planning and opportunities.
(7) New insights into terrorist travel gained since
September 11, 2001, have not been adequately
integrated into the front lines of border security.
(8) The small classified terrorist travel intelligence
collection and analysis program currently in place
has produced useful results and should be
expanded.
(b) Strategy.—
(1) In general.—Not later than 1 year after the date of
enactment of this Act, the Director of the National
Counterterrorism Center shall submit to Congress
unclassified and classified versions of a strategy
for combining terrorist travel intelligence,
operations, and law enforcement into a cohesive
effort to intercept terrorists, find terrorist travel
facilitators, and constrain terrorist mobility
domestically and internationally. The report to
Congress should include a description of the
actions taken to implement the strategy and an
assessment regarding vulnerabilities within the
United States and foreign travel systems that may
be exploited by international terrorists, human
smugglers and traffickers, and their facilitators.
(2) Coordination.—The strategy shall be developed in
coordination with all relevant Federal agencies.
Sec. 7202—Establishment of Human Smuggling and Traf-
ficking Center
(1) serve as the focal point for interagency efforts to
address terrorist travel;
(2) serve as a clearinghouse with respect to all
relevant information from all Federal Government
272
Data and Documents

agencies in support of the United States strategy to
prevent separate, but related, issues of clandestine
terrorist travel and facilitation of migrant
smuggling and trafficking of persons;
Sec. 7204—International Agreements to Track and Curtail
Terrorist Travel Through the Use of Fraudulently Obtained
Documents.
(1) International agreement on lost, stolen, or falsified
documents.—The President should lead efforts to
track and curtail the travel of terrorists by
supporting the drafting, adoption, and
implementation of international agreements, and
relevant United Nations Security Council
resolutions to track and stop international travel
by terrorists and other criminals through the use
of lost, stolen, or falsified documents to augment
United Nations and other international anti-
terrorism efforts.
(2) Contents of international agreement.—The
President should seek, as appropriate, the
adoption or full implementation of effective
international measures to—
(A) share information on lost, stolen, and
fraudulent passports and other travel
documents for the purposes of preventing the
undetected travel of persons using such
passports and other travel documents that
were obtained improperly;
(B) establish and implement a real-time
verification system of passports and other
travel documents with issuing authorities;
(C) share with officials at ports of entry in any
such country information relating to lost,
stolen, and fraudulent passports and other
travel documents;
(D) encourage countries—
(i)
to criminalize—
(I)
the falsification or counterfeiting of
travel documents or breeder docu-
ments for any purpose;
Documents
273

(II)
the use or attempted use of false
documents to obtain a visa or cross a
border for any purpose;
(III)
the possession of tools or imple-
ments used to falsify or counterfeit
such documents;
(IV)
the trafficking in false or stolen
travel documents and breeder docu-
ments for any purpose;
(V)
the facilitation of travel by a terro-
rist; and
(VI)
attempts to commit, including con-
spiracies to commit, the crimes speci-
fied in subclauses (I) through (V);
(ii)
to impose significant penalties to appro-
priately punish violations and effec-
tively deter the crimes specified in
clause (i); and
(iii)
to limit the issuance of citizenship papers,
passports, identification documents,
and similar documents to persons—
(I)
whose identity is proven to the issu-
ing authority;
(II)
who have a bona fide entitlement to
or need for such documents; and
(III)
who are not issued such documents
principally on account of a dispro-
portional payment made by them or
on their behalf to the issuing
authority;
(A) provide technical assistance to countries to
help them fully implement such measures; and
(B) permit immigration and border officials—
(i) to confiscate a lost, stolen, or falsified
passport at ports of entry;
(ii)
to permit the traveler to return to the
sending country without being in
possession of the lost, stolen, or falsi-
fied passport; and
(iii)
to detain and investigate such traveler
upon the return of the traveler to the
sending country.
274
Data and Documents

Sec. 7208—Biometric Entry and Exit Data System
(a) Finding.—Consistent with the report of the National
Commission on Terrorist Attacks Upon the United
States, Congress finds that completing a biometric entry
and exit data system as expeditiously as possible is an
essential investment in efforts to protect the United
States by preventing the entry of terrorists. . . .
(d) Collection of Biometric Exit Data.—The entry and exit
data system shall include a requirement for the
collection of biometric exit data for all categories of
individuals who are required to provide biometric
entry data, regardless of the port of entry where such
categories of individuals entered the United States.
(h) Entry-Exit System Goals.—The Department of
Homeland Security shall operate the biometric entry
and exit system so that it—
(1) serves as a vital counterterrorism tool;
(2) screens travelers efficiently and in a welcoming
manner;
(3) provides inspectors and related personnel with
adequate real-time information;
(4) ensures flexibility of training and security protocols
to most effectively comply with security mandates;
(5) integrates relevant databases and plans for
database modifications to address volume increase
and database usage; and
(6) improves database search capacities by utilizing
language algorithms to detect alternate names.
(k) Expediting Registered Travelers Across International
Borders.—
(1) Findings.—Consistent with the report of the
National Commission on Terrorist Attacks Upon
the United States, Congress makes the following
findings:
(A) Expediting the travel of previously screened
and known travelers across the borders of the
United States should be a high priority.
(B)
The process of expediting known travelers
across the borders of the United States can
permit inspectors to better focus on identifying
terrorists attempting to enter the United States.
Documents
275

Sec. 7209—Travel Documents
(a) Findings.—Consistent with the report of the National
Commission on Terrorist Attacks Upon the United
States, Congress makes the following findings:
(1) Existing procedures allow many individuals to
enter the United States by showing minimal
identification or without showing any
identification.
(2) The planning for the terrorist attacks of September
11, 2001, demonstrates that terrorists study and
exploit United States vulnerabilities.
(3) Additional safeguards are needed to ensure that
terrorists cannot enter the United States.
(b) Passports.—
(1) Development of plan.—The Secretary of Homeland
Security, in consultation with the Secretary of
State, shall develop and implement a plan as
expeditiously as possible to require a passport or
other document, or combination of documents,
deemed by the Secretary of Homeland Security to
be sufficient to denote identity and citizenship, for
all travel into the United States by United States
citizens and by categories of individuals for whom
documentation requirements have previously been
waived under section 212(d)(4)(B) of the
Immigration and Nationality Act (8 U.S.C.
1182(d)(4)(B)). This plan shall be implemented
not later than January 1, 2008, and shall seek
to expedite the travel of frequent travelers,
including those who reside in border communities,
and in doing so, shall make readily available a
registered traveler program (as described in
section 7208(k)).
(2) Requirement to produce documentation.—The plan
developed under paragraph (1) shall require all
United States citizens, and categories of individuals
for whom documentation requirements have
previously been waived under section 212(d)(4)(B) of
such Act, to carry and produce the documentation
described in paragraph (1) when traveling from
foreign countries into the United States.
276
Data and Documents

Sec. 7210. Exchange of Terrorist Information and Increased
Preinspection at Foreign Airports.
(a) Findings.—Consistent with the report of the National
Commission on Terrorist Attacks Upon the United
States, Congress makes the following findings:
(1) The exchange of terrorist information with other
countries, consistent with privacy requirements,
along with listings of lost and stolen passports,
will have immediate security benefits.
(2) The further away from the borders of the United
States that screening occurs, the more security
benefits the United States will gain.
(b) Sense of Congress.—It is the sense of Congress that—
(1) the Federal Government should exchange
terrorist information with trusted allies;
(2) the Federal Government should move toward real-
time verification of passports with issuing
authorities;
(3) where practicable, the Federal Government
should conduct screening before a passenger departs
on a flight destined for the United States;
(4) the Federal Government should work with
other countries to ensure effective inspection
regimes at all airports;
(5) the Federal Government should work with other
countries to improve passport standards and
provide foreign assistance to countries that need
help making the transition to the global standard
for identification; and
(6) the Department of Homeland Security, in
coordination with the Department of State and other
Federal agencies, should implement the initiatives
called for in this subsection.
The REAL ID Act of 2005 was a House of Representatives rider
to the Emergency Supplemental Appropriations Act for Defense,
the Global War on Terror, and Tsunami Relief. Its purpose was
to regulate people crossing borders and remove individuals over the
border. It is not all about native-born citizens although they would
need new identification; it concerns the monitoring of individuals
Documents
277

who have crossed the borders in order to detect those who have
undocumented status.
Emergency Supplemental Appropriations Act for Defense, the Global
War on Terror, and Tsunami Relief
H.R. 1268, May 11, 2005
Division B: REAL ID Act of 2005 –
Title I: Amendments to Federal Laws to Protect Against Terrorist
Entry—
Section 101—Preventing terrorists from obtaining relief
from removal
Applications for relief or protection from removal—the
alien applying has the burden of establishing that they (1) sat-
isfy the applicable eligibility requirements; and with respect to
any form of relief that is granted in the exercise of discretion,
that the alien merits a favorable exercise of discretion.
Sustaining burden—The applicant must comply with the
applicable requirements to submit information or documenta-
tion in support of the applicant’s application for relief or pro-
tection
as
provided
by
law
or
by
regulation
or
in
the
instructions for the application form. In evaluating the testi-
mony of the applicant or other witness in support of the appli-
cation, the immigration judge will determine whether or not
the testimony is credible, is persuasive, and refers to specific
facts sufficient to demonstrate that the applicant has satisfied
the applicant’s burden of proof. In determining whether the
applicant has met such burden, the immigration judge shall
weigh the credible testimony along with other evidence of re-
cord. Where the immigration judge determines that the appli-
cant should provide evidence which corroborates otherwise
credible testimony, such evidence must be provided unless the
applicant demonstrates that the applicant does not have the evi-
dence and cannot reasonably obtain the evidence.
Credibility determination—Considering the totality of the
circumstances, and all relevant factors, the immigration judge
may base a credibility determination on the demeanor, candor, or
responsiveness of the applicant or witness, the inherent plausibil-
ity of the applicant’s or witness’s account, the consistency
between the applicant’s or witness’s written and oral statements
(whenever made and whether or not under oath, and considering
the circumstances under which the statements were made), the in-
ternal consistency of each such statement, the consistency of such
278
Data and Documents

statements with other evidence of record (including the reports of
the Department of State on country conditions), and any inaccura-
cies or falsehoods in such statements, without regard to whether
an inconsistency, inaccuracy, or falsehood goes to the heart of the
applicant’s claim, or any other relevant factor. There is no pre-
sumption of credibility; however, if no adverse credibility deter-
mination is explicitly made, the applicant or witness shall have a
rebuttable presumption of credibility on appeal.
Standard of Review for Orders of Removal—Limits judicial
review of determinations regarding the availability of corrobo-
rating evidence.
Section 102—Waiver of legal requirements necessary for
improvement of barriers at borders; federal court review.
Authorizes the Secretary of Homeland Security at sole discretion,
to waive all legal requirements as necessary to ensure expedi-
tious construction of certain barriers and roads at the U.S. bor-
der. Makes the Secretary’s decision effective upon publication
in the Federal Register. Gives U.S. district courts exclusive juris-
diction to hear causes or claims arising from actions or deci-
sions by the Secretary pursuant to this section. Limits such
causes or claims to those alleging a violation of the Constitu-
tion. Authorizes appellate review only upon petition for a writ
of certiorari to the Supreme Court.
Section 103—Inadmissibility due to terrorist and terrorist-
related activities. Expands the grounds of inadmissibility and
deportability due to terrorist or terrorist-related activity to include
aliens who: (1) are representatives of terrorist organizations or polit-
ical, social, or other groups that endorse or espouse terrorist activity;
(2) are members of designated terrorist organizations; (3) are mem-
bers of organizations that engage in specified acts of terrorism;
(4) endorse or espouse any terrorist activity or persuade others to
do so; or (5) have received military type training from or on behalf
of any organization that at the time was a terrorist organization.
Expands the definition of terrorist organization to incorpo-
rate a broader range of underlying activities.
Makes this section applicable to removal proceedings insti-
tuted, and grounds of inadmissibility occurring before, on, or
after this Act.
Section 104—Waiver for certain grounds of inadmissibility.
Authorizes the Secretary of State or the Secretary to conclude at
sole unreviewable discretion that specified terrorism-related
grounds of inadmissibility shall not apply to an alien, including
those grounds applicable to: (1) representatives of groups whose
Documents
279

public endorsement of terrorist activities the Secretary of State
has determined undermines U.S. efforts to reduce or eliminate
terrorist activities; (2) spouses or children of aliens inadmissible
on terrorist grounds for activities occurring in the last five years;
(3) alilens providing material support to organizations or indi-
viduals that have engaged in terrorist activity; or (4) groups
that fall within the definition of ‘‘terrorist organization’’ simply
by virtue of having a subgroup consisting of two or more indi-
viduals that engages in a specified terrorist activity or related
planning. Prohibits the Secretary of State from exercising such
discretion after removal proceedings have been instituted.
Requires the Secretary of Homeland Security and the Secre-
tary of State to report to Congress on the application of this sec-
tion of legislation.
Section 105—Removal of terrorists. Expands the grounds of
deportability due to terrorist activity to include aliens who
would be inadmissible on terrorism-related grounds.
Makes this applicable to removal proceedings initiated
before, on, or after the date of enactment of this Act; and
(2) grounds of inadmissibility, excludability, deportation, or
removal occurring or existing before, on, or after such date.
Section 106—Judicial review of orders of removal.
Bars inadmissible arriving aliens from seeking judicial
review of removal orders through habeas corpus, mandamus,
or other extraordinary petitions.
Imposes a similar bar on denials of discretionary relief and
orders against criminal aliens, with an exception for petitions
for review concerning constitutional claims or questions of law.
Establishes the INA’s judicial review provisions as the sole
avenue for reviewing claims arising under the United Nation’s
Convention Against Torture and Other Forms of Cruel, Inhu-
man, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment and for challeng-
ing removal orders.
Requires petitions for review filed under pre-IIRIRA law to
be treated as if filed under the INA as amended by this section.
States that such petitions shall be the sole and exclusive means
for judicial review of orders of deportation and exclusion.
Title II: Improved Security for Driver’s Licenses and Personal
Identification Cards—
Section 202—Minimum document requirements and issu-
ance standards for federal recognition. Prohibits Federal agencies
280
Data and Documents

from accepting State issued driver’s license or identification cards
unless such documents are determined by the Secretary of Home-
land Security to meet minimum security requirements, including
the incorporation of specified data, a common machine-readable
technology, and certain anti-fraud security features.
Minimum issuance standards—
To meet the requirements of this section, a State shall
require, at a minimum, presentation and verification of the fol-
lowing information before issuing a driver’s license or identifi-
cation card to a person:
(A) A photo identity document, except that a nonphoto
identity document is acceptable if it includes both the
person’s full legal name and date of birth.
(B)
Documentation showing the person’s date of birth.
(C) Proof of the person’s social security account number
or verification that the person is not eligible for a
social security account number.
(D) Documentation showing the person’s name and
address of principal residence.
(2) SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS.—
(A) IN GENERAL.—To meet the requirements of this
section, a State shall comply with the minimum
standards of this paragraph.
(B)
EVIDENCE OF LAWFUL STATUS.—A State shall
require, before issuing a driver’s license or
identification card to a person, valid documentary
evidence that the person—
(i)
is a citizen or national of the United States;
(ii)
is an alien lawfully admitted for permanent or
temporary residence in the United States;
(iii)
has conditional permanent resident status in the
United States;
(iv)
has an approved application for asylum in the
United States or has entered into the United
States in refugee status;
(v)
has a valid, unexpired nonimmigrant visa or
nonimmigrant visa status for entry into the
United States;
(vi)
has a pending application for asylum in the
United States;
Documents
281

(vii)
has a pending or approved application for tem-
porary protected status in the United States;
(viii)
has approved deferred action status; or
(ix)
has a pending application for adjustment of sta-
tus to that of an alien lawfully admitted for
permanent residence in the United States or
conditional permanent resident status in the
United States.
Sets forth minimum issuance standards for such documents
that require:
(1) verification of presented information;
(2) evidence that the applicant is lawfully present in the
United States;
(3) issuance of temporary driver’s licenses or identification
cards to persons temporarily present that are valid
only for their period of authorized stay (or for one year
where the period of stay is indefinite);
(4) a clear indication that such documents may not be
accepted for Federal purposes where minimum
standards are not met; and
(5) electronic access by all other States to the issuing
state’s motor vehicle database.
Section 2003—Trafficking in authentication features for use
in false identification documents. Amends the Federal criminal
code to prohibit trafficking in actual as well as false authentica-
tion features for use in fake identification documents, docu-
ment-making implements or means of identification.
Requires the Secretary of Homeland Security to enter into
the appropriate aviation security screening database informa-
tion regarding persons convicted of using false driver’s licenses
at airports.
Title III: Border Infrastructure and Technology Integration—
Section 301—Vulnerability and Threat Assessment
Directs the Under Secretary of Homeland Security for Border
and Transportation Security to study the technology, equipment,
and personnel needed to address security vulnerabilities within the
United States for each Customs and Border Protection field office
that has responsibility for U.S. borders with Canada and Mexico.
282
Data and Documents

Section 302—Use of Ground Surveillance Technologies for
Border Security
Directs the Under Secretary of Homeland Security for Sci-
ence and Technology to develop and report to specified congres-
sional committees on a pilot program to utilize or increase the
utilization of ground surveillance technologies to enhance U.S.
border security. Requires pilot program technologies to include
video camera, sensor and motion detection technologies.
Technologies—the ground surveillance technologies . . .
shall include:
(A) video camera technology
(B)
sensor technology
(C) motion detection technology
Section 303—Enhancement of Communications Integration
and Information Sharing on Border Security
Requires
the
Secretary
of
Homeland
Security,
acting
through the Under Secretary for Border and Transportation
Security, to develop and Implement a plan to: (1) improve com-
munication systems of Federal agencies to facilitate integrated
communications among such agencies, State and local govern-
ment agencies, and Indian tribes on border security matters; and
(2) enhance related information sharing among such entities.
In the absence of successful terrorist incidents attempted in the
United States, concerns grew about the expanding unauthor-
ized population. It was feared that terrorists might also use the
Mexican border for entry and the public supported building a
wall to enclose the United States which was authorized by the
Secure Fence Act of 2006.
Secure Fence Act
H.R. 6061, January 3, 2006
Section 2—Securing operational control of the border
Authorizes the Secretary of Homeland Security to take necessary and
appropriate actions to achieve and maintain operational control over
the entire U.S. international land and maritime borders, including:
(1) systematic border surveillance through more effective
use of personnel and technology, such as unmanned
Documents
283

aerial vehicles, ground-based sensors, satellites, radar
coverage, and cameras; and
(2) physical infrastructure enhancements to prevent
unlawful border entry and facilitate border by United
States Customs and Border Protection, such as
additional checkpoints, all weather access roads, and
vehicle barriers.
Defines operational control as the prevention of all unlaw-
ful U.S. entries into the United States, including entries by ter-
rorists,
other
unlawful
aliens,
instruments
of
terrorism,
narcotics, and other contraband.
Requires the Secretary of Homeland Security to report
annually to Congress on progress towards border control.
Section 3—Construction of fencing and security improve-
ments in border area from Pacific Ocean to Gulf of Mexico.
Amends Section 102(b) of the Illegal Immigration Reform and
Immigrant Responsibility Act of 1996 to direct the Secretary of
Homeland Security to increase border security through:
Reinforced Fencing—. . . at least 2 layers of reinforced fencing, the
installation of additional physical barriers, roads, lighting, cam-
eras and sensors extending from: (1) 10 miles west of the Tecate,
California port of to 10 miles east of the Tecate, California port of
entry; (2) 10 miles west of the Calexio, California port of entry to
5 miles east of the Douglas, Arizona port of entry; (3) 5 miles west
of the Columbus, New Mexico port of entry to 5 miles southeast
of the Eagle Pass, Texas port of entry; and (4) 15 miles northwest of
the Laredo, Texas port of entry to the Brownsville, Texas port of
entry. States that if an area has an elevation grade exceeding
10% the Secretary may use other means to secure such area,
including surveillance and barrier tools
Section 4—Northern border study
Directs the Secretary of Homeland Security to conduct a study on
the necessity and feasibility of implementing a state-of-the-art
infrastructure security system along the northern international
land and maritime border of the United States and to include
assessment of the economic impact that implementation of such a
system would have on the northern border. A study report for the
Committee on Homeland Security of the House of Representatives
284
Data and Documents

and the Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental
Affairs of the Senate was required within one year.
Section 5—Evaluation and report relating to customs author-
ity to stop certain fleeing vehicles
Directs the Secretary of Homeland Security to: review the
equipment and technology available and evaluate the authority
(and consider its expansion) and the training of personnel of
United States Custom and Border Protection to stop vehicles
that enter the United States illegally and refuse to stop when or-
dered to do so and report back to the Congress.
War on Terrorism Documents
President George W. Bush set the tone for the War on Terror-
ism with Executive Order 13224:
Executive Order 13224 By the authority vested in me as President
by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America,
including the International Emergency Economic Powers Act (50
U.S.C. 1701 et seq.)(IEEPA), the National Emergencies Act (50
U.S.C. 1601 et seq.), section 5 of the United Nations Participation
Act of 1945, as amended (22 U.S.C. 287c) (UNPA), and section
301 of title 3, United States Code, and in view of United Nations
Security Council Resolution (UNSCR) 1214 of December 8, 1998,
UNSCR 1267 of October 15, 1999, UNSCR 1333 of December 19,
2000, and the multilateral sanctions contained therein, and
UNSCR 1363 of July 30, 2001, establishing a mechanism to moni-
tor the implementation of UNSCR 1333, I, GEORGE W. BUSH,
President of the United States of America, find that grave acts of
terrorism and threats of terrorism committed by foreign terro-
rists, including the terrorist attacks in New York, Pennsylvania,
and the Pentagon committed on September 11, 2001, acts recog-
nized and condemned in UNSCR 1368 of September 12, 2001,
and UNSCR 1269 of October 19, 1999, and the continuing and im-
mediate threat of further attacks on United States nationals or the
United States constitute an unusual and extraordinary threat to
the national security, foreign policy, and economy of the United
States, and in furtherance of my proclamation of September 14,
2001, Declaration of National Emergency by Reason of Certain
Terrorist Attacks, hereby declare a national emergency to deal
Documents
285

with that threat. I also find that because of the pervasiveness and
expansiveness of the financial foundation of foreign terrorists,
financial sanctions may be appropriate for those foreign per-
sons that support or otherwise associate with these foreign terro-
rists. I also find that a need exists for further consultation and
cooperation with, and sharing of information by, United States
and foreign financial institutions as an additional tool to enable
the United States to combat the financing of terrorism.
I hereby order:
Sec. 1. Except to the extent required by section 203(b) of
IEEPA (50 U.S.C. 1702(b)), or provided in regulations, orders,
directives, or licenses that may be issued pursuant to this order,
and notwithstanding any contract entered into or any license or
permit granted prior to the effective date of this order, all prop-
erty and interests in property of the following persons that are
in the United States or that hereafter come within the United
States, or that hereafter come within the possession or control
of United States persons are blocked:
(a) foreign persons listed in the Annex to this order;
(b) foreign persons determined by the Secretary of State, in
consultation with the Secretary of the Treasury and the
Attorney General, to have committed, or to pose a sig-
nificant risk of committing, acts of terrorism that
threaten the security of U.S. nationals or the national se-
curity, foreign policy, or economy of the United States;
(c) persons determined by the Secretary of the Treasury,
in consultation with the Secretary of State and the
Attorney General, to be owned or controlled by, or to
act for or on behalf of those persons listed in the Annex
to this order or those persons determined to be subject
to subsection 1(b), 1(c), or 1(d)(i) of this order;
(d) except as provided in section 5 of this order and after
such consultation, if any, with foreign authorities as
the Secretary of State, in consultation with the Secre-
tary of the Treasury and the Attorney General, deems
appropriate in the exercise of his discretion, persons
determined by the Secretary of the Treasury, in consul-
tation with the Secretary of State and the Attorney
General;
(i)
to assist in, sponsor, or provide financial, mate-
rial, or technological support for, or financial or
286
Data and Documents

other services to or in support of, such acts of
terrorism or those persons listed in the Annex
to this order or determined to be subject to this
order; or
(ii) to be otherwise associated with those persons
listed in the Annex to this order or those per-
sons determined to be subject to subsection
1(b), 1(c), or 1(d)(i) of this order.
Sec. 2. Except to the extent required by section 203(b) of
IEEPA (50 U.S.C. 1702(b)), or provided in regulations, orders,
directives, or licenses that may be issued pursuant to this order,
and notwithstanding any contract entered into or any license or
permit granted prior to the effective date:
(a) any transaction or dealing by United States persons or
within the United States in property or interests in
property blocked pursuant to this order is prohibited,
including but not limited to the making or receiving of
any contribution of funds, goods, or services to or for
the benefit of those persons listed in the Annex to this
order or determined to be subject to this order;
(b) any transaction by any United States person or within
the United States that evades or avoids, or has the pur-
pose of evading or avoiding, or attempts to violate, any
of the prohibitions set forth in this order is prohibited;
and
(c) any conspiracy formed to violate any of the prohibi-
tions set forth in this order is prohibited. . . .
Sec. 6. The Secretary of State, the Secretary of the Treasury,
and other appropriate agencies shall make all relevant efforts to
cooperate
and
coordinate
with
other
countries,
including
through technical assistance, as well as bilateral and multilat-
eral agreements and arrangements, to achieve the objectives of
this order, including the prevention and suppression of acts of
terrorism, the denial of financing and financial services to terro-
rists and terrorist organizations, and the sharing of intelligence
about funding activities in support of terrorism.
Sec. 7. The Secretary of the Treasury, in consultation with
the Secretary of State and the Attorney General, is hereby
authorized to take such actions, including the promulgation of
Documents
287

rules and regulations, and to employ all powers granted to the
President by IEEPA and UNPA as may be necessary to carry
out the purposes of this order. The Secretary of the Treasury
may redelegate any of these functions to other officers and
agencies of the United States Government. All agencies of the
United States Government are hereby directed to take all
appropriate measures within their authority to carry out the
provisions of this order.
. . . . . . .
GEORGE W. BUSH
THE WHITE HOUSE,
September 23, 2001.
International Human Rights and Terrorism Related
Documents
United Nations International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights
Article 9. Everyone has the right to liberty and security of per-
son. No one shall be subject to arbitrary arrest and detention.
United Nations Security Council Resolution 1373
A resolution that called for international cooperation to prevent
and
eradicate
acts
of
terrorism
worldwide;
unanimously
adopted on September 28, 2001, under Chapter 7 of the U.N.
General Assembly by consensus of the 189 member states.
Convention to Prevent and Punish Acts of Terrorism Taking the Form
of Crimes Against Persons and Related Extortion That Are of
International Significance
An Organization of American States treaty that defines attacks
against internationally protected persons as a common crime.
Its purpose was to protect the absolute inviolability of diplo-
matic missions.
288
Data and Documents

7
Directory of Organizations and
Government Agencies
National Government Agencies
and Organizations
U.S. Department of Homeland Security
http://www.dhs.gov/index.shtm
This newly created organization leverages resources of the fed-
eral government to integrate the agencies protecting the United
States. Among its components, the DHS contains the Office of
Intelligence and Analysis (OIA), the Office of Operations Coor-
dination (OOC), the Domestic Nuclear Detection Office (DND),
the Transportation Security Administration (TSA), U.S. Cus-
toms and Border Protection (CBP), U.S. Citizenship and Immi-
gration
Services
(CIS),
U.S.
Immigration
and
Customs
Enforcement (ICE), the U.S. Coast Guard (USCG), the Federal
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), and the U.S. Secret
Service. The Office of the Secretary within the DHS is con-
cerned with border security, intelligence analysis, and protec-
tion
of
infrastructure,
using
science
and
technology
to
prevent use of weapons of mass destruction and establishing a
response and recovery system. The operation of the immigrant
admittance system and interdiction of unauthorized entrants
are both contained in the same umbrella organization but sepa-
rated in different agencies: CBP, ICE, and CIS. The Secretary
of Homeland Security carries the chief responsibility for the
289

control of unauthorized immigration, prevention of terrorism,
and developing border-security measures.
U.S. Customs and Border Protection (USCBP)
http://www.cbp.gov/xp/cgov/home.xml
U.S. Customs and Border Protection is one of the Department
of Homeland Security’s largest and most complex components,
with a priority mission of keeping terrorists and their weapons
out of the United States (CBP.gov, 2010). It also has a responsibility
for securing and facilitating trade and travel while enforcing hun-
dreds of U.S. regulations, including immigration and drug laws.
CBP contains the first-line responders for border security
and provides border law enforcement for DHS. It is the sec-
tion of the former Immigration and Naturalization Service
(INS) which combines the inspection and border authority of
U.S. Customs, U.S. Immigration, the Animal and Plant Health
Inspection Service, and the U.S. Border Patrol. It oversees cross-
border travel and commerce. This involves the processing of
visitors and immigrants for entry and inspection of goods,
including agricultural produce. It is the security agency in place
at the Canada and Mexico borders. A focus is the ‘‘one face at
the border initiative.’’ CBP officers are cross-trained to perform
immigration, customs, and agricultural inspections. Its officers
enforce immigration law by verifying travel documents and the
right to enter the country.
Within the Department of Homeland Security, CBP protects
our nation’s borders from terrorism, human and drug smug-
gling, illegal migration, and agricultural pests while simultane-
ously facilitating the flow of legitimate travel and trade. As the
nation’s single unified border agency, CBP’s mission is vitally
important for the protection of the American people and the
national economy. Nearly 52,000 CBP employees work in a vari-
ety of ways to secure the nation’s borders both at and between
the official ports of entry and also to extend our zone of security
abroad through pre-clearence of travelors and inspection of
cargo. Employees continually incorporate the core values of vigi-
lance, service to country, and integrity into their actions.
CBP is responsible for guarding nearly 7,000 miles of land
border the United States shares with Canada and Mexico and
2,000 miles of coastal waters surrounding the Florida peninsula
and off the coast of Southern California. The agency also protects
290
Directory of Organizations and Government Agencies

95,000 miles of maritime border in partnership with the U.S.
Coast Guard. To secure this vast terrain, more than 17,000 CBP
Border Patrol agents, 1,000 CBP Air and Marine agents, and
almost 22,000 CBP officers and agriculture specialists, together
with the nation’s largest law-enforcement canine program, stand
guard along America’s front line. Its activities are as follows:

CBP Customs officers protect America’s borders at
official ports of entry, while CBP’s Border Patrol
agents prevent unauthorized entry into the United
States of people and smuggling of contraband
between the ports of entry.

CBP Air and Marine, which manages the largest
law-enforcement air force in the world, patrols the
nation’s land and sea borders to stop terrorists and
drug smugglers before they enter the United States.

CBP agriculture specialists prevent the entry of
exotic plant and animal pests, and confront
emerging threats from agro- and bioterrorism.
Counterterrorism is presented as CBP’s top priority. It
seeks to carry out two potentially conflicting goals: facilitating
legitimate trade and travel while preventing terrorism and use
of weapons of mass destruction. Both people and goods are
subject to a multilevel inspection process when crossing the
border at a port of entry. It operates the Advance Passenger
Information System (APIS), U.S. Visitor and Immigrant Status
Indication Technology (US-VISIT), the Student and Exchange
Visitor System (SEVIS), and the Container Security Initiative
(CSI). Within CBP, the U.S. Border Patrol seeks to secure the
open border between ports of entry by deterring or stopping
entrants attempting crossing the border without inspection and
smugglers of contraband.
U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services (USCIS)
http://www.uscis.gov/portal/site/uscis/
Formerly a part of the Immigration and Naturalization Service,
CIS is now located in the Department of Homeland Security.
CIS is a federal agency that admits and tracks legal immi-
grants. It is responsible for granting entrance, maintaining
records of permanent residency, and conducting the process of
National Government Agencies and Organizations
291

naturalization to citizenship. It maintains the security of the im-
migration process and provides immigration information and
services.
U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE)
http://www.ice.gov/
U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE) is the largest
DHS investigative agency. Its primary mission is detection and
interdiction of terrorists and criminals through targeting the
persons, materials, and money used to support terrorist and
criminal organizations. ICE handles investigations for interior
enforcement of immigration and customs law to counter
national security threats and contributes to border enforcement.
It handles detention and removal of unauthorized entrants and
noncitizen criminals, probes of immigration document fraud,
air and marine drug interdiction operations, and federal protec-
tive services.
The ICE Office of Intelligence (INTEL) collects information
from both the public and law enforcement inside and outside
of the Department of Homeland Security on individuals who
have entered without documentation and suspected threats or
criminal activities. This intelligence is provided to the Office of
Investigations (OI), which examines and enforces laws relating
to terrorism, immigration fraud and crime, human smuggling,
child pornography/exploitation, human rights violations, export
and import enforcement issues, narcotics, weapons and other
types of smuggling, cyber crimes, and financial crimes such as
money laundering. In addition it seeks to protect infrastructure
vulnerable to attack or sabotage. If undocumented entrants are
taken into custody, they are referred to the Office of Detention
and Removal (DRO), which apprehends, identifies, and removes
noncitizens without legal documentation, fugitive aliens who did
not present themselves at an immigration hearing or register,
and criminal aliens. ICE also houses the Federal Air Marshalls
program for passenger safety during flights.
U.S. Transportation Security Administration (TSA)
http://www.tsa.gov/index.shtm
TSA was created after 9/11 by the Aviation and Transportation
Security Act (Public Law 107-71). It organized previously
poorly paid airport baggage screeners and provided training
292
Directory of Organizations and Government Agencies

and equipment for upgrading security. It has the task of secur-
ing the national land, air, and rail transport system against
attack for the purpose of facilitating movement of people and
goods. TSA checks passengers and baggage for explosive devi-
ces and is responsible for airport security.
U.S. Coast Guard (USCG)
http://www.uscg.mil/
The USCG provides border security by patrolling territorial and
near international waters for the purpose of deterring and inter-
dicting drugs, contraband, and unauthorized entry, including
terrorist penetration. It is a stand-alone division within the
Department of Homeland Security. The USCG evaluates, boards,
and inspects commercial shipping. A participant in Operation
Noble Eagle, it is on heightened alert to protect 361 ports and
95,000 miles of coastline.
U.S. Department of Justice Executive Office for Immigration
Review (EOIR)
http://www.justice.gov/eoir/
EOIR has authority delegated from the Attorney General to
interpret federal immigration laws and adjudicate immigration
cases. It conducts immigration court proceedings and adminis-
trative hearings. Within EOIR, the Office of the Chief Immigra-
tion Judge
manages geographically dispersed
immigration
courts with sitting immigration judges. The Board of Immigra-
tion Appeals conducts appellate review of immigration judges’
decisions. The Office of the Chief Administrative Hearing Offi-
cers adjudicates immigration employment cases.
U.S. Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA)
http://www.justice.gov/dea/index.htm
The DEA enforces the Controlled Substances Act and drug regu-
lations, particularly targeting drug-trafficking organizations
(DTOs) and their members, including violent drug gangs, for
criminal arrest and prosecution. They are involved with preven-
tion of the growth, manufacture, or distribution of controlled
substances in the illicit economy. DEA manages a national drug-
intelligence program in cooperation with local, state, national,
and international law enforcement and coordinates interdiction
National Government Agencies and Organizations
293

efforts with these officials. They have the authority to seize
assets used in illegal drug trafficking. DEA provides training for
Mexican law-enforcement officers and crop eradication or crop
substitution. DEA is responsible for drug law-enforcement oper-
ations overseas. It cooperates with the United Nations, Interpol,
and Europol on international drug-control efforts.
U.S. Office of National Drug Control Policy (ONDCP)
http://www.whitehousedrugpolicy.gov/
The White House ONDCP was established by the Anti-Drug
Abuse Act of 1988. It sets national drug-control priorities and
policy. It deals with drug trafficking–related concerns such as
manufacturing and sales and related crime and violence. Unlike
the Drug Enforcement Administration, it is concerned with the
demand side of drug control and with reducing drug use and
its health consequences. To meet the objective of dealing with
both interdiction and demand, ONDCP produces the National
Drug Control Strategy and establishes a program, budget, and
guidelines for federal, state, and local organizations. The director
also coordinates international and national antidrug efforts
among federal agencies and ensures that these are complemen-
tary with state efforts. The ONDCP also distributes drug-related
prevention information to the public.
U.S. Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI)
http://www.fbi.gov/
The FBI has jurisdiction over more than 200 categories of fed-
eral law. Counterterrorism-related investigation includes both
international and domestic terrorism as well as preventing the
use of weapons of mass destruction. It conducts intelligence
operations and is a primary enforcer against organized crime.
Other investigative areas include money laundering and human
trafficking.
U.S. Central Intelligence Agency (CIA)
www.cia.gov
The Director of National Intelligence is the head of the Central
Intelligence Agency, heads the U.S. intelligence community,
and acts as the principal intelligence advisor to the president
on matters of national security. The CIA Director reports to the
294
Directory of Organizations and Government Agencies

Director of National Intelligence. The CIA has authorization to
conduct intelligence but has no law-enforcement powers and
does not conduct internal security operations. It collects intelli-
gence outside the United States on matters of national security.
Its high-priority concerns include nonproliferation of nuclear
weapons, counterterrorism, transnational organized crime, drug
trafficking, and arms-control intelligence.
U.S. Department of State
www.state.gov
The Department of State develops a national security strategy
for dealing with transnational issues. Policy concerns include
counterterrorism, democracy and human rights, energy secu-
rity, food security, health, narcotics and trafficking in persons.
Regarding counterterrorism, it publishes online Country Reports
on Terrorism, State Sponsors of Terrorism Reports and Terrorist
Designation lists. A chief border security concern is human traf-
ficking. It publishes an annual Trafficking in Persons Report
which is available online. The Department of State has become
involved in diplomacy to develop a bilateral response to Mexican
drug trafficking and related violence.
U.S. Government Accountability Office (GAO)
http://www.gao.gov/
The GAO is an independent, nonpartisan agency that works for
Congress. Among its general activities, it has primary responsi-
bility for evaluating the various federal administrative and law-
enforcement efforts to provide border security. Congressional
committees and subcommittees can request a report on how tax
dollars are spent. GAO has carried out many studies of Mexican
and Canadian border-security policy and operations to monitor
effectiveness in deterring terrorists, technology being used for
intelligence surveillance, and other security issues. GAO pro-
vides information for Congress and the federal government on how
to be more efficient, ethical, and responsive to the public.
U.S. Census Bureau
http://www.census.gov/
The U.S. Census Bureau collects statistical data on the nation’s pop-
ulation, including immigrants. The surveys include a Decennial
National Government Agencies and Organizations
295

Population and Housing Census, an Economic Census every five
years, and an annual American Community Survey. Data provided
supplies the best estimate of the permanent resident immigrant
and undocumented immigrant populations. This information
allows for projection of changes in the immigrant population over
time and allows measurement of how immigrants are becoming
incorporated into mainstream institutions.
U.S. Census data on immigration is important for appor-
tioning seats in the U.S. House of Representatives because the
process is based on population counts in districts. Immigrant
counts also impact the definition of state legislature districts,
school districts, and decisions about federal fund allocation and
community planning. Online information describing the popu-
lation of any zip code is available at http://factfinder.census.
gov/home/saff/main.html?_lang=en.
U.S. Commission on Civil Rights
http://www.usccr.gov/contact/contndx.htm
The USCCR is an independent agency within the federal branch
established by the Civil Rights Act of 1957. It collects informa-
tion on discrimination and denial of equal protection under the
laws under the Constitution based on race, color, religion, sex,
age, disability, or national origin, or in the administration of
justice. It analyzes federal laws and policy for discriminatory
impact and investigates complaints that citizens, including
naturalized immigrants, are being deprived of the right to vote
or subject to election fraud. It submits reports to the president
and Congress on the civil rights of immigrants, including the
human rights of unauthorized immigrants, and issues con-
nected to immigration trends and civil rights.
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services
http://www.hhs.gov/
This department is the principal federal agency for protecting
health and providing related services, particularly for those
who are unable to afford care, including noncitizen immigrants
who meet congressionally established program guidelines. It
expends more than 25% of all federal outlays and provides
national health care, such as Medicare and Medicaid. Its 11
operating divisions include the National Institutes of Health
(NIH), the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC),
296
Directory of Organizations and Government Agencies

the Health Resources and Services Administration (HRSA),
the Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administra-
tion (SAMHSA), the Agency for Health Care Research and
Quality (HCRQ), and Administration for Children and Families
(ACF). After 9/11, a new initiative of the umbrella agency
became
medical
preparedness
for
emergencies,
including
potential terrorist incidents. The CDC works with states and
partners to monitor health and prevent disease outbreaks, in-
cluding bioterrorism.
U.S. House Committee on the Judiciary
http://judiciary.house.gov/index.html
This House committee has two subcommittees of primary im-
portance in legislating for border security. The Subcommittee
on Immigration, Citizenship, Refugees, Border Security, and
International Law has jurisdiction over immigration and natu-
ralization, border security, treaties, international agreements
and conventions, and nonborder enforcement. The Subcom-
mittee on Crime, Terrorism, and Homeland Security has ju-
risdiction over the Federal Criminal Code and Federal Rules
of Criminal Procedure, drug enforcement, terrorism, and
prisons.
U.S. Senate Committee on the Judiciary
http://judiciary.senate.gov/
The subcommittees of the Senate Committee on the Judiciary
include Immigration, Border Security and Citizenship; Terror-
ism, Technology and Homeland Security; and Human Rights
and the Law.
U.S. Department of State Bureau of Population, Refugees,
and Migration
http://www.state.gov/g/prm/
The Bureau of Population, Refugees, and Migration (PRM) pro-
motes the United States’ population and migration policies. It
aids refugees, victims of conflict, and stateless persons (individ-
uals who cannot establish homeland citizenship through docu-
mentation). It fosters repatriation to original homelands, local
re-integration of displaced persons, and resettlement in the
United States.
National Government Agencies and Organizations
297

U.S. National Institute of Justice (NIJ)
The NIJ is the research, development, and evaluation agency of
the Department of Justice. It provides objective evidence-based
information on crime and justice issues, particularly at the state
and local level. Its research priorities include drugs and crime
and counterterrorism/critical incidents. It seeks to synthesize
knowledge about terror-group networks and finances, develop
tools to prevent, deter, and apprehend terrorists, improve tools
and techniques for first responders, and refine and evaluate
technologies, practices, and procedures to minimize harm to
persons, properties, and communities from terrorism. It pro-
vides current crime statistics and publications on human traf-
ficking,
drug
trafficking,
and
the
relationship
between
immigration and crime.
Political Groups
Immigration Reform Caucus (IRC)
http://www.house.gov/bilbray/immreformmsg.shtml
The House of Representatives has a political suborganization
with voluntary membership, which meets to discuss policy on
unauthorized immigration. They seek to identify policy that
can be the basis of a legislative solution.
Domestic Security Organizations
National Security Agency (NSA)/Central Security Service
(CSS)
http://www.nsa.gov/index.shtml
The NSA/CSS has the mission of protecting U.S. national secu-
rity systems and collecting foreign signals intelligence. It makes
and breaks code. Information Assurance initiatives involve pre-
venting foreign adversaries from gaining access to classified
U.S. information. Intelligence is also collected from foreign sig-
nals and/or clandestinely and analyzed to prevent security
threats. It authorizes Network Warfare operations for purposes
of counterterrorism.
298
Directory of Organizations and Government Agencies

National Cyber-Security Division (NCSD)
http://www.dhs.gov/xabout/structure/editorial_0839.shtm
Located in the Department of Homeland Security, NCSD iden-
tifies, analyzes, and contains or removes cyber threats and
vulnerabilities. It issues cyber-threat warnings, provides coordi-
nation of incident response, and technically assists continuity of
computerized operations and recovery.
U.S. Office of the National Counterintelligence Executive (ONCIX)
http://www.ncix.gov/about/index.html
Led by the Director of National Intelligence, ONCIX provides
counterintelligence, which involves identifying and dealing
with foreign intelligence threats within the United States,
including terrorist groups. It conducts foreign intelligence
threat assessment and other intelligence activities.
U.S. National Counterterrorism Center (NCTC)
http://www.nctc.gov/
This office reports to the Director of National Intelligence at
ONCIX. It is a center to facilitate joint operational intelligence
between federal agencies, a recommendation of the 9/11 Commission.
It is the primary agency to integrate counterterrorism intelligence.
International Security and Policing
Organizations
Canadian Security Intelligence Service (CSIS)
http://www.csis-scrs.gc.ca/index-eng.asp
The premier national intelligence-gathering agency, CSIS gath-
ers information on national security threats to take pre-emptive
action. It reports to the Canadian government and advises it on
security issues. Key threats are terrorism, weapons of mass
destruction, espionage, foreign interference, and cyber tamper-
ing. Its Security Screening Program is meant to keep individu-
als connected to terrorism from entering Canada or receiving
permanent resident status and citizenship. CSIS’s top priority is
countering terrorism, and it seeks to stop terrorist planning and
actions in its own territory and abroad. It has a proactive role
International Security and Policing Organizations
299

of preventing threats rather than a reactive role in investigating
and prosecuting crime such as in law enforcement.
Centro de Informacion de Seguridad Nacional (CISEN)
Mexico’s major national security agency, CISEN, is a civilian or-
ganization controlled by the Office of the Minister of the Inte-
rior. Its function is to collect intelligence for safeguarding
Mexican national security. CISEN has its own budget and tech-
nical and operative autonomy although it is subject to the legis-
lative and judicial branches of the Mexican government. It
collects intelligence for national security decisions and seeks to
maintain the stability of the Mexican state. It does not have ju-
risdiction over Mexican law-enforcement activities. It is not
directly linked to U.S. counterpart agencies.
Consejo Nacional de Seguridad Privada de Mexico (CNSP)
http://www.cnsp.org.mx/
Mexico’s CNSP, labeled in English as the National Security Coun-
cil, coordinates federal government agencies and local and state
and federal law enforcement. This organization is placed above
the Centro de Informacion de Seguridad Nacional (CISEN).
Europol
http://www.europol.europa.eu/
This abbreviated term is used to refer to the European Police
Office, a consortium of members of the European Union who
engage in international police cooperation. Founded in 1992
and fully operational in 1999, Europol is the European Union’s
policing organization in charge of criminal intelligence. Its mis-
sion is to assist member states in combating organized crime
and terrorism. Over 670 staff members work with police in the
27 member states of the European Union and partner with such
countries as the United States and Canada. Europol does not
have direct power of arrest but provides information and analy-
sis for law enforcement and takes part in joint investigative
teams. It produces regular assessments, including the European
Organized Crime Threat Assessment (OCTA) about the struc-
ture and operations of European organized crime groups, and
the European Terrorism Situation and Trend Report (TE-SAT).
Europol has acquired extensive criminal intelligence on drug
300
Directory of Organizations and Government Agencies

trafficking, illicit immigration networks, human trafficking, and
international terrorist groups.
International Association for Counterterrorism and Security
Professionals (IACSP)
Institute of Terrorism Research and Response (ITRR)
http://www.iacsp.com/
The Institute of Terrorism Research and Response (ITRR),
within IACSP, is an American and Israeli nonprofit corporation.
It provides training seminars and expertise in dealing with such
issues as weapons of mass destruction. It has a Targeted Action-
able Monitoring Center (TAM-C), which provides information
and terrorist plans and actions, historical ‘‘red flag dates,’’ and
real-time alerts. Within TAM-C, the Ground Security Network
receives information from the field for real-time intelligence.
Interpol
http://www.interpol.int/
The abbreviation ‘‘Interpol’’ is in reference to the International
Criminal Police Organization. It originated in 1923 to assist in
international police cooperation. The world’s largest interna-
tional policing organization, Interpol has 188 member countries.
It provides four core services: (1) securing police communica-
tion services; (2) police operational databases and data services;
(3) operational police support services; and (4) police training
and development. A main activity is facilitating cross-border
police cooperation and sharing of intelligence. I-24/7, Interpol’s
global police communications system, allows police in all mem-
ber countries to request, submit, and access crime-related data
in a secure environment. This database system contains infor-
mation on known criminals, fingerprints, DNA profiles, and lost
or stolen travel documents. Its Command and Coordination Cen-
ter can deploy an incident-response team to crime or disaster
scenes on a 24/7 basis. Interpol’s priority crime investigation
areas include drugs and criminal organizations, trafficking in
human beings, and public safety and terrorism.
Policia Federal de Preventa (PFP)
The Federal Preventative Police of Mexico has jurisdiction
over federal crimes and legal offenses. It has a special mandate
International Security and Policing Organizations
301

to provide public security in border areas, coastlines, bridges,
customs, immigration control points, the federal highways, rail-
ways, airports, and seaports authorized for international traffic.
The PFP controls the Inter-Institutional Coordination Unit
Gruppa Antiterrorista (UCIDGAT), the antiterrorism policing
organization. Originally organized to deal with armed insur-
gent groups within Mexico, UCIDGAT is in charge of both bor-
der security and efforts to stop drug and arms trafficking and
other organized crime.
Sistema Nacional de Seguridad Publica (SNSP)
Under direction of the Mexican president, the SNSP, known in
English as the National Public Security System, coordinates and
distributes public security functions between the Mexico City
Federal District and other municipalities and the Federation
states of Mexico. SNSP is in charge of public security and coor-
dinated police departments, state prosecutors’ offices, and
penal institutions. Among its duties, it oversees public security
policy and programs, establishes criteria for the technological
modernization of public security, and establishes and controls
intelligence databases on criminal activities. It was established
in November, 2009.
International Organizations
Inter-American Development Bank
http://www.iadb.org/
In 1959, the Inter-American Development Bank was established
to make loans for the purpose of development to qualifying Latin
American countries. It has issued funds to the extent of $168
billion for novel technical cooperation programs, or economic
and social development projects, and is a major source for mul-
tilateral financing. It promotes trade and regional integration in
the Latin American and Caribbean region. Its projects, which
are aimed at low-income populations, have become a model for
other regional and subregional development institutions. Its
current projects focus on poverty reduction, global competitive-
ness, state modernization, and regional integration. Success of
its economic development projects can stabilize population and
reduce international migration.
302
Directory of Organizations and Government Agencies

United Nations
http://www.un.org/
The United Nations Universal Declaration of Human Rights was
issued by the General Assembly on December 10, 1948. It is one
basis for the orientation referred to as the open border policy.
The United Nations contains the Office of the High Commis-
sioner for Human Rights and an Office on Drugs and Crime. It
publishes online documents on counterterrorism, human trafficking,
and a host of other international issues involving border security.
The World Bank
http://www.worldbank.org/
Established in 1944, the World Bank contains two development
institutions: the International Bank for Reconstruction and
Development
(IBRD)
and
the
International
Development
Association (IDA). The IBRD promotes inclusive and sustain-
able globalization through reduction of poverty in middle
income and ‘‘credit-worthy’’ poorer countries. The IDA targets
the poorest nations. These institutions are connected to the
International Finance Corporation (IFC), the Multilateral Invest-
ment Guarantee Agency (MIGA), and the International Center
for the Settlement of Investment Disputes (ICSID). Together,
these institutions work to provide low-interest loans, interest-
free credits, and grants to developing countries for agriculture,
natural resources, environmental, education, infrastructure, fi-
nancial, and private-sector development. Headquartered in
Washington, DC, the World Bank has more than 10,000 employ-
ees and offices in over 100 countries. Its mission is to fight pov-
erty through encouraging self-help and building capacity.
International Human Rights Advocacy
Organizations
American Friends Service Committee (AFSC)
http://www.afsc.org/immigrant-rights
The American Friends Service Committee believes in the
‘‘worth and inherent dignity of every human being.’’ Its cur-
rent concerns include immigrant detention standards, secure
International Human Rights Advocacy Organizations
303

community-based alternatives to detention, access to counsel,
conducting a review of federal enforcement of immigration
law, border policy, and advocacy for legalization. It conducts
projects in various areas of the country, including a U.S.-Mexico
border program that monitors the actions of law enforcement
toward migrants.
Amnesty International USA (AIUSA)
http://www.amnestyusa.org/
Amnesty International is a Nobel Prize–winning grassroots ac-
tivist organization with branches in over 150 nations and a
worldwide membership of over 2 million supporters, activists,
and volunteers. Amnesty International USA is one if its branches.
It advocates that all peoples should receive the rights in the
United Nation’s Universal Declaration of Human Rights and
that countries should meet other international standards for
humane treatment. It seeks to have governments stop violations
and to change law and practice. It supports research and action
on all human rights.
Anti-Slavery International
http://www.antislavery.org/english/default.aspx
Founded in 1787, Anti-Slavery International is the world’s old-
est international human rights organization. This nonprofit
works locally, nationally, and internationally to end all forms of
slavery. Through research, lobbying, and the raising of aware-
ness, it seeks to end trafficking, forced labor, child labor, and
child domestic work. It stresses the connection between what
people buy and the use of forced labor in its production. The
organization has conducted many successful campaigns and
works with the new Special Rapporteur on Slavery in the
United Nations, the first new U.N. special mechanism on slav-
ery in 30 years.
Human Rights Watch
http://www.hrw.org
Human Rights Watch is an independent nongovernmental or-
ganization (NGO) that seeks to defend and protect human
rights. It investigates ongoing situations in which human
rights may be violated and publicizes its findings. Its work
304
Directory of Organizations and Government Agencies

is international in scope and includes investigations and tar-
geted advocacy for a wide range of human rights, including
those of immigrants. Its international work in protecting the
rights of migrants and immigrants includes research on the ex-
ploitation of unauthorized immigrants in the workplace. Recent
research has covered expedited removal, the rights of asylees,
and detention conditions. Human Rights Watch has been criti-
cal of U.S. detention policy and is actively lobbying for reform.
It publishes numerous reports on human rights in many
nations, including the United States.
Witness
http://www.witness.org/
Witness records human rights violations on video to change
stories of abuse into tools for justice. It envisions a just and
equitable
world
in
which
all
individual
and
community
human rights are upheld. Its core partner program works with
12–15 human rights organizations for a period of 1–3 years to
train and support them to use video as a tool for human rights
campaigns with high visibility and impact. These videos have
been used as evidence in domestic and international courts, in
reports on human rights abuses and the media.
Domestic Advocacy Organizations
American Anthropological Association Committee on Human
Rights
http://www.aaanet.org/cmtes/cfhr/index.cfm
This subcommittee of the American Anthropological Association
seeks to protect the human rights of indigenous peoples and
cross-border migrants. It consults on human rights issues and
works with human rights organizations, foreign colleagues, and
international policymakers. This group issues a series of state-
ments on human rights issues.
American Conservative Union (ACU)
http://www.conservative.org/
Established in 1964, the ACU is the oldest grassroots conserva-
tive lobbying organization. It advocates a free market economy,
Domestic Advocacy Organizations
305

the doctrine of original intent of the Constitution’s architects,
and traditional moral values. It is committed to a strong
national defense. It sponsors town meetings on such issues as
defending the homeland and opposition to immigration policy.
Since 1971, it has published an annual rating of Congress that
tallies how members voted on issues to evaluate the degree to
which members support conservative principles. Since 1973,
ACU has hosted CPAC, the annual Conservative Political
Action Conference, which brings conservatives from across the
country together to discuss issues and policy to set a conserva-
tive agenda. It has supported strengthening border security and
suggested it should be a higher priority than other changes in
immigration law.
American Immigration Control Foundation
http://www.aicfoundation.com/
Founded in 1983, the American Immigration Control Founda-
tion is a nonprofit organization for education and research on
regulating immigration to restrict it to meet the national interest
and capacity for assimilation of newcomers. It considers that
there is an immigration crisis and advocates immigration
reform, particularly restriction of unauthorized Mexican migra-
tion, which it views as weakening the rule of law. Deeply com-
mitted to preserving the national heritage, it provides many
books, pamphlets, monographs, and videos.
American Immigration Council (AIC)
http://www.americanimmigrationcouncil.org
Established in 1987, this tax-exempt, not-for profit organization
(formerly the American Immigration Law Foundation) was
started by the American Immigration Lawyer’s Association
(AILA). Its mission is to showcase American immigration his-
tory and to support immigration policies that honor constitu-
tional and human rights. It works to promote the United States’
prosperity and cultural richness through: (1) citizen education
about immigrant contributions; (2) support of humane immigra-
tion policy reflective of American values; (3) enacting immigra-
tion law which reflects constitutional and human rights; and (4)
work to achieve justice and fairness for immigrants. Its motto is
‘‘Honoring our immigrant past, shaping our immigrant future.’’
306
Directory of Organizations and Government Agencies

American Immigration Lawyers Association (AILA)
http://www.aila.org/
AILA is a national nonprofit association of more than 11,000
attorneys and law professors who teach about and practice im-
migration law. The association promotes justice, advocates for
fairness in immigration law, and enhances professional develop-
ment of members. Members represent both immigrants and
businesses and offer services at a pro bono (no cost) basis for
asylum seekers, foreign students, and others in need who are
seeking to enter. The AILA also has a Legal Action Center. The
Legal Action Center
provides legal education, information,
professional services, and expertise and has 36 chapters and
over 50 national committees. AILA engages in public education
and advocates before the Congress, Judiciary, federal agencies,
and the media. It supports legalization, increasing legal oppor-
tunities to immigrate, and promoting border enforcement
which allows the efficient flow of people and goods.
Business Roundtable
http://www.businessroundtable.org/
The Business Roundtable is a conservative group comprised of
chief executives of major U.S. corporations with more than $5
trillion in annual revenues. The group promotes sustainable
long-term economic growth that is not inflationary and main-
tains American competitiveness in a global economy. To this
effect, it supports workplace policies for a flexible and available
workforce, including high skilled (professionals and college
educated) immigration. It has supported a guest-worker pro-
gram for unskilled, less educated workers and ‘‘earned legaliza-
tion.’’ It is a part of the pro-immigration lobby.
Center for American Progress (CAP)
http://www.americanprogress.org/
CAP is headed by John Podesta, professor of law at George-
town University and former chief of staff to President Bill Clin-
ton. This progressive think-tank challenges conservative policy.
Issues it focuses on include achieving immigration reform and
sustainable national security. CAP stresses the linkage of eco-
nomic globalization and immigration and stresses development
in the sending countries as a part of the solution. Domestic
Domestic Advocacy Organizations
307

policies supported include legalization of the unauthorized
population, increasing family reunification visas, strengthening
worker protections, making the visa allocation system more
flexible to deal with the application backlog and responsive to
labor market needs, working to socially and culturally integrate
the immigrant population, and strengthening border and inte-
rior enforcement including through expansion of the Depart-
ment of Homeland Security.
Center for Democracy and Technology
http://www.cdt.org/contact
The Center for Democracy and Technology is a nonprofit orga-
nization that seeks to keep the Internet ‘‘open, innovative, and
free.’’ It addresses civil liberties issues in law, technology, and
policy and seeks to enhance free expression and privacy in
communications technologies by finding practical and innova-
tive solutions to public policy challenges while protecting civil
liberties. The Center for Democracy and Technology has advo-
cated restoring checks and balances on access to confidential in-
formation removed by the USA PATRIOT Act.
Coalition Against Trafficking in Women (CATW)
http://www.catwinternational.org/
Founded in 1988, CATW is a nongovernmental organization
that promotes human rights by working internationally to pre-
vent sexual exploitation of women and girls. It was the first interna-
tional organization to focus on human trafficking, particularly sex
trafficking. In 1989 it received Category II Consultative status with the
United Nations Economic and Social Council. CATW considers that
women and girls have a ‘‘right to sexual integrity and autonomy.’’
Deletetheborder.org
http://deletetheborder.org/
Deletetheborder.org is an online community seeking participation
in a global movement to abolish borders. It provides open post-
ings, news feed collection, media galleries, blogs, and forums.
Federal
Immigration
Reform
and
Enforcement
Coalition
(FIRE Coalition)
http://www.firecoalition.com/index.asp
308
Directory of Organizations and Government Agencies

The FIRE Coalition is a website devoted to grassroots organiz-
ing for immigration restriction. It has an extensive list of coali-
tion partners including the American Border Patrol, Citizens for
Immigration Law Enforcement, the Colorado Alliance for Immi-
gration Reform, Limits to Growth, and Save Our State, among
others. Its vision is to ‘‘end the invasion of illegal aliens to the
United States.’’ It operates ‘‘WeHireAliens.com’’ to expose
employers of unauthorized immigrants and ‘‘Operation Fire
and Ice,’’ to educate the public about the 287(g) federal law-
enforcement cooperation program with state and local police,
among its many reporting programs. It is pro-enforcement of im-
migration law, seeks repatriation of the unauthorized immigrant
population, advocates more effective implementation of employer
sanctions, and provides immigration information and resources.
It is self-described as a nonprofit grassroots coalition organization
seeking to educate the public and politically campaign for its
agenda.
Federation for American Immigration Reform (FAIR)
http://www.fairus.org
Founded in 1979, FAIR is a national nonprofit organization
with 250,000 members. It advocates ending unauthorized immi-
gration, securing the border, and reducing legal immigration.
In particular, it seeks a moratorium on all legal immigration
except spouses and children of U.S. citizens and a small quota
of refugees. It expouses border control to reduce unauthorized
immigration and is opposed to legalization. Internationally, it
supports efforts at population stabilization, economic develop-
ment, and alleviating poverty, particularly in high-migration
countries.
The Heritage Foundation
http://www.heritage.org/research/immigration
Founded in 1973, the Heritage Foundation is a self-designated
‘‘conservative’’ public policy research institute. It supports prin-
ciples of free enterprise, limitations on government, and tradi-
tional values. Regarding immigration, it seeks a reduction in
the number admitted and expanded enforcement of immigra-
tion law. It is opposed to a path to legalization. The Heritage Foun-
dation supports cross-border trade while maintaining border
security, especially against international terrorism.
Domestic Advocacy Organizations
309

Humane Borders
http://www.humaneborders.org/
Established in June 2000, Humane Borders is a faith-based citi-
zen-action group that seeks to promote a humane and just bor-
der environment. It works to provide humanitarian assistance
to individuals seeking to cross the border without authorization
in the remote Arizona desert. Its priorities include reducing mi-
grant deaths, changing U.S. policy to permit increased legal
migration through ports of entry, legalization of the unauthorized
population, providing legal work for migrants, and giving eco-
nomic relief of U.S. agencies involved in helping migrants. It
maintains a network of water stations in the Arizona desert to
prevent death by dehydration and provides maps and warning
posters about dangers in Mexico to deter migrants from risking
their lives through desert crossing. It has testified before Congress
to promote a humane, non-militarized border.
International Immigrants Foundation
http://www.10.org/
In 1973 the International Immigrants Foundation was estab-
lished to help immigrant families and children realize a ‘‘better
life.’’ It provides direct support to improve intercultural rela-
tions. It offers counseling and English, homebuyers, and citi-
zenship classes. It sponsors the annual International Cultures
celebration Expo-Fest and Parade in New York City.
Minuteman Civil Defense Corps
http://www.minutemanhq.com/hq/
The Minuteman Civil Defense Corps (MCDC), headed by Chris
Simcox, split off from the Minuteman Project. It prioritized bor-
der enforcement and was opposed to legalization of the unau-
thorized population. This group organized citizen volunteers to
‘‘observe, report and direct’’ to the U.S. Border Patrol to sus-
pected unauthorized entrants and illegal activities. It has con-
ducted operations at both the southern and northern border.
The organization stresses that its members ‘‘do not verbally
contact, physically gesture to or have any contact’’ with unau-
thorized entrants.
In March, 2010, the Minuteman Civil Defense Corps Inc.
corporate entity ceased operation because of increasing liability
310
Directory of Organizations and Government Agencies

issues and concern for the safety of citizen watch volunteers.
The Declaration Alliance, with Chris Simcox as Honorary Chair-
man, continues to support the MCDC Project and its Political
Action Committee.
The Minuteman Project
http://www.minutemanproject.com
In 2004, the Minuteman Project was founded by Jim Gilchrist to
enforce immigration law with a focus on volunteering to assist
in monitoring the borders. Observers report and attempt
to deter unauthorized migrants and drug smuggling. The Min-
uteman Project seeks to increase national awareness of unau-
thorized
immigration
and
advocates
for
increased
border
enforcement, which it perceives as essential for national secu-
rity, and immigration reform. It prioritizes U.S.-Mexico border
enforcement over the Canadian border.
National Immigration Forum
http://www.immigrationforum.org
This organization advocates the value of immigrants and immi-
gration for the nation. It seeks to develop an understanding of
diverse views, provide pro-immigration information, analysis,
and advocacy, and develop coalitions for change. It provides in-
formation
on
border
enforcement,
immigrants
and
crime,
detention and enforcement, immigration and national security,
and a broad range of other immigration issues.
National Network for Immigrant and Refugee Rights (NNIRR)
http://www.nnirr.org
NNIRR is a national organization that contains coalitions and
various community, religious, labor, legal, civil rights, and immi-
grant organizations. It provides information for education and
develops action plans on the immigration issue. It offers immigrant
and refugee rights training, hosts the national community dialog
for the border, and campaigns for fair and just immigration.
No More Deaths/No Mas Muertes
http://www.nomoredeaths.org
This Arizona volunteer group believes that people of conscience
must act to uphold civil rights. It advocates that it has a
Domestic Advocacy Organizations
311

‘‘right to provide humanitarian assistance’’ to men, women,
and children attempting to enter the United States without au-
thorization through the southern Arizona desert and moun-
tains. It provides a humanitarian presence in the desert to
provide food, water, and medical assistance to prevent migrant
deaths. Its activities include maintaining water stations and
camps for watching the border and providing outreach. No
More Deaths follows medical and legal protocols to save lives.
Numbers USA
http://www.numbersusa.com/content/
Executive Director Roy Beck provides information on the
impact of mass immigration on the environment, labor market,
and local communities in the United States. Numbers USA
advocates for securing the border, better enforcement of immi-
gration law, arrest of smugglers and traffickers, streamlining
and improvement of the process of workplace verification of
work status, detention and removal of the unauthorized popula-
tion, and denial of access to benefits and services for unauthorized
entrants. It is opposed to legalization but works to allow those
who return to the sending nation voluntarily the opportunity to
return without penalty. It considers that the immigration situa-
tion has come by ‘‘accident or acquiescence’’ rather than delib-
erate action and that immigration-related actions should benefit
the native-born citizens of the United States.
U.S. Border Watch
www.USborderwatch.com
The volunteer U.S. Border Watch is active at both the Mexican
and Canadian borders. This citizen action group seeks to draw
media attention to border security. The organization conducts
day-labor site observations. It advocates a constitutional amend-
ment to end unauthorized immigration and give power over
immigration control to the states. It seeks action against employ-
ers of unauthorized immigrants and opposes legalization.
U. S. Chamber of Commerce
http://www.uschamber.com/default
The world’s largest business lobby organization represents
3,000 businesses of all types, sizes, and regions, state and local
312
Directory of Organizations and Government Agencies

chambers of commerce, and industrial associations. It advocates
for free enterprise. The U.S. Chamber of Commerce supports
immigration reform including an earned pathway to legaliza-
tion, addressing backups in processing legal immigration,
expansion of visas for skilled workers, and addressing delays,
backlogs, and disruptions of the border management system
impacting the flow of people and goods. The Chamber partners
with the Americans for Better Borders Coalition to ensure the
speedy passage of legitimate traffic at the border.
Civil Rights Legal Advocacy Organizations
American Civil Liberties Union (ACLU) Immigrant Rights
Project
http://www.aclu.org/
The ACLU Immigrant Rights Project (IRP) undertakes class-
action lawsuits and law-reform litigation on behalf of immi-
grants.
It
works
with
immigration
advocates,
community
groups, the immigration bar, and legislatures to preserve the
rights of individual citizens guaranteed in the U.S. Constitution
and the civil liberties of noncitizens. It particularly focuses on
equal protection rights, the right to due process, and the right
to privacy. The ACLU IRP is involved with cases of unauthor-
ized immigrants, legal immigrants, asylum applicants, and ref-
ugees. Many cases involve discrimination, workplace rights,
due process rights, detention, and ICE or police abuse of immi-
grants.
The
Supreme
Court
cases
in
which
it
has
been
involved include Demore v. Kim and INS v. St. Cyr, which upheld
the right to habeas corpus of noncitizens and reversed the retro-
active deportation of longtime legal residents. It advocates that
the right to equal protection under the law and due process
is the right of all ‘‘persons’’ and not restricted to citizens.
Southern Poverty Law Center (SPLC) Immigrant Justice Project
http://www.splc.org
In 1971, a civil rights firm founded the nonprofit Southern
Poverty Law Center to take legal action against hate and dis-
crimination. The SPLC legal department has taken civil suits
against hate groups, including to the Supreme Court. Its SPLC
Civil Rights Legal Advocacy Organizations
313

Intelligence Project monitors the activities of hate groups and
extremists, including their actions against immigrants, and pub-
lishes information on its research available at its website.
It offers the Teaching Tolerance program for K-12 teachers to
generate respect and offers anti-bias resources. Recently, its
Immigrant Justice Project has taken civil suits against agri-
business and begun an antidiscrimination and sexual harass-
ment educational project for immigrant women to notify them
of their rights.
Research Centers
Brookings Institution
http://www.brookings.edu/
A nonprofit public policy organization, the Brookings Institu-
tion’s mission is to conduct independent research to develop
innovative,
practical
recommendations
that
(1)
strengthen
American democracy; (2) foster the economic and social wel-
fare, security, and opportunity of all Americans; and (3) secure
a more open, safe, prosperous, and cooperative international
system. In January 2009 Foreign Policy magazine’s Think Tank
Index ranked Brookings as the number 1 think-tank and number
1 in the following categories: impact on public policy debates,
international and security affairs, international development,
international economic policy, health policy, domestic economic
policy, and social policy. Topics researched include counternar-
cotics policy, globalization, homeland security, immigration,
Mexico, migration, terrorism, the U.S. Department of Homeland
Security, and weapons of mass destruction. It explores immigra-
tion in the United States, Europe, and the Middle East. Its Immi-
gration Policy Roundtable recommended linking legalization
with employment verification; restricting family reunification to
nuclear family members, and increasing visas for highly skilled
workers, while also increasing unskilled worker visas but mak-
ing them unrenewable after five years, establishing an independ-
ent standing commission on immigration, and cooperating with
Mexico on investment and law enforcement and interdiction.
314
Directory of Organizations and Government Agencies

Carnegie Endowment for International Peace
http://www.carnegieendowment.org/
Founded in 1910, this private nonprofit organization seeks to
enhance cooperation between nations and international engage-
ment of the United States. The Carnegie Endowment for Inter-
national Peace is establishing overseas centers in an effort to
become the first ‘‘multinational, truly global’’ think-tank. It
now has operations in Moscow, Beijing, Beirut, and Brussels. It
believes that single international outlooks are overly restrictive.
In Latin America, Carnegie has been examining political and
economic development, the impact of the North American Free
Trade Agreement on Mexico, and the impacts of global finan-
cial crisis on migrants. Issues examined include the relationship
of migration and globalization, fighting cross-border corrup-
tion, nuclear policy, and terrorism and cross-radicalization.
Cato Institute
www.//http://cato.org
Founded in 1977, the Cato Institute is a nonprofit public policy
research foundation. It promotes libertarian principles of free
markets, limits on the federal government, rule of law, and
individual liberty. It generates policy proposals to achieve free
and open civil society. In keeping with its orientation of market
libertarianism, it advocates for immigration but focuses on
expanding employment visas and legal immigration quotas. It
seeks repeal of the cap on Hi-B cap visas for skilled workers
and expansion of unskilled worker visas as a way to control
unauthorized immigration. Regarding enforcement, it prioritizes
keeping criminals and terrorists from entering the United States.
Center for Comparative Immigration Studies (CCIS)
http://www.ccis-ucsd.org
In 1999, sociologist Wayne Cornelius established CCIS under
the auspices of the University of California–San Diego’s Center
for U.S.-Mexican Studies. It is a research center with a global
network of research associates and 19 institutional affiliates.
The center focuses on study of Mexican migration to the United
States and Latin American/North African migration to Spain. It
hosts the Mexican Migration Field Research program.
Research Centers
315

Center for Immigration Studies (CIS)
http://www.cis.org
CIS is an independent nonprofit organization researching immi-
gration. The center has a ‘‘pro-immigrant, low immigration’’
orientation. The executive director is Mark Kirkorian. It covers
legal
and
unauthorized
immigration
issues
and
national
security.
Center for Migration Studies (CMS)
http://www.cmsny.org
Established in 1964, CMS is a nonprofit organization that con-
ducts research on international migration and publishes the
International Migration Review. It holds the annual National
Legal Conference on Immigration and Refugee Policy in Wash-
ington, DC.
Center for Strategic and International Studies (CSIS)
http://csis.org/
A provider of strategic insights and policy solutions, CSIS is a
bipartisan nonprofit organization. It assists government, busi-
ness, and citizens with foreign policy and national security
issues. In 2007 the CSIS Smart Power Commission developed
an approach to shoring up the United States’ declining world
standing. It hosts a Homeland Security and Counterterrorism
Program, the Global Strategy Institute, a Human Rights and Se-
curity Initiative, an International Security Program, and the
Transnational Threats Project. The Transnational Threats Project
assesses terror, insurgent, and criminal networks. It has exam-
ined drug, arms, and human trafficking in the Mesoamerican
corridor (http://csis.org/event/trafficking-mesoamerican-corri-
dor-threat-regional-and-human-security).
International Organization for Migration (IOM)
http://www.iom.int/jahia/Jahia/lang/en/pid/1
The IOM is an intergovernmental migration organization that
assists governmental, nongovernmental, and intergovernmental
partners. It has 127 member states, including the United States,
17 states with observer status, and over 100 offices in different
316
Directory of Organizations and Government Agencies

countries. Seventy-six global and regional international govern-
mental organizations (IGOs) and nongovernmental organiza-
tions (NGOs) are members. Over 6,000 staff members work on
over 2,000 projects with more than $1 billion in expenditures. It
promotes the ‘‘orderly and humane management of migration.’’
Services are provided by IOM in the areas including migrant
health, return assistance to migrants and governments, resettle-
ment assistance, repatriation assistance, and emergency and
postemergency operations assistance.
Jamestown Foundation
http://www.jamestown.org/
The Jamestown Foundation studies terrorism in Eurasia and its
threat to the United States. It publishes the Terrorism Monitor,
the Eurasian Monitor, Terrorism Focus, China Brief, and North
Caucasus Analysis. It provides information on contact between
Eurasian countries and Latin American governments.
Migration Policy Institute
http://www.migrationpolicy.org
A nonpartisan think-tank, the Migration Policy Institute looks
at local, national, and international migration patterns. It seeks
to develop migration policy that benefits immigrant families,
sending and receiving communities, and the countries of origin
and destination. International comparative research is pre-
sented for community leaders, immigrant advocacy groups,
and policymakers. A variety of online subsites and reports pro-
vide information on U.S. immigration, European migration,
international immigration, and development.
NYU Center on Law and Security
http://www.lawandsecurity.org/contact.cfm
In 2003, the Center on Law and Security was founded at New
York University. It is an independent center seeking to network
policymakers, academicians, journalists, and other experts to
discuss issues of law and security. The center’s programs focus
on domestic security and global law and security. It hosts con-
ferences, roundtables, and research groups and publishes the
NYU Review of Law and Security, the Bulletin on Law and Security,
and Terrorist Trial Report Cards, which provide statistics on
Research Centers
317

post-9/11 terrorism-related court cases. The Report Cards give
information on charges, plea bargains, and trial convictions and
sentencing.
People for the American Way
http://site.pfaw.org/site/PageServer?pagename=homepagenew
The mission of People for the American Way is to promote equal-
ity, freedom of speech, freedom of religion, the right to seek justice
in a court of law, and the right to vote. Although this organization
is not focused on immigration, it critiques the conservative right.
PEW Hispanic Center
http://pewhispanic.org/
The PEW Hispanic Center is a division of the PEW Research
Center, which conducts research on the Hispanic population
and its impact on the United States. It is a nonpartisan think-
tank that conducts scientific research on Hispanic population
structure, identity, education, employment, politics, immigra-
tion, and remittances sent abroad. Findings of its research are
published in reports available on the Internet.
The Protection Project
http://www.protectionproject.org/index.htm
This human rights center is contained within the Foreign Pol-
icy
Institute
at
the
Johns
Hopkins
University
School
of
Advanced International Studies. It was founded to deal with
trafficking in humans as a legal issue and human rights vio-
lation. It focuses on the promotion of human rights values
and the protection of human security, especially the rights of
women and children. It seeks to foster nongovernmental orga-
nization (NGO) development through coalition and capacity
building, bringing citizens into the political and legal process,
advancing education about human rights, as well as ending
trafficking in persons. The Protection Project contributed to the
drafting of the Victims of Trafficking and Violence Protection
Act of 2000, assists in drafting model anti-trafficking legislation,
identifies trafficking victims through field research and data
collection, provides training and services to professionals work-
ing with victims of human trafficking, and maintains an online
database on human trafficking.
318
Directory of Organizations and Government Agencies

Rand Corporation
http://www.rand.org/
The nonprofit Rand Corporation provides research and analysis
for policy decision making. Its research areas include terrorism,
homeland security, and national security. It contains the Center
for Global Risk and Security, a Homeland Security Program, and
a Center for Terrorism Risk Management. The Homeland Security
Program assists local, state, and federal government to prevent
and mitigate terrorist activity within U.S. borders. Projects in this
program include national preparedness, critical infrastructure
protection, cybersecurity, emergency management, terrorism risk
management, security cost-benefit analyses, border security,
enhanced capabilities for responders, domestic threat assess-
ments, domestic intelligence, and manpower and training.
Terrorism Research Center (TRC)
http://www.terrorism.com/
TRC is an independent collaborative research and training insti-
tute. It studies terrorism, homeland security, and other low-
intensity conflict issues.
Urban Institute.
http://www.urban.org
The Urban Institute gathers and analyzes research data on eco-
nomic and social policy issues, including immigration. Its Cen-
ter on Labor, Human Services, and Population has particularly
focused on immigrant families and children.
Woodrow Wilson International Center for Scholars
http://www.wilsoncenter.org/index.cfm
The Woodrow Wilson Center was established by an act of Con-
gress in 1968. It supports linkage of knowledge to the policy
process. Scholars are brought to Washington, DC, to conduct
research and interact with policymakers. The center has both
Canada and Mexico Institutes and a Division of International
Security Studies.
Research Centers
319

This page intentionally left blank 

8
Print and Nonprint Resources
Books and Articles
Border Control Policy
A
lden, Edward. 2008. The Closing of the American Border:
Terrorism, Immigration, and Security since 9/11. New York:
HarperCollins.
After 9/11 the George W. Bush administration sought to bal-
ance public security with maintaining openness at its borders.
Edward Alden covers the impact of counterterrorism policy on
visitors, business travelers, and the flow of professional or
skilled workers and their ideas across the borders. As a case
study in policy development and bureaucracy, it is based on
interviews with federal officials, foreign government officials,
university professionals, business executives, and individuals.
The relationship of homeland security with economic openness,
and its social and diplomatic impact on keeping a welcoming
orientation are appraised.
Andreas, Peter. 2000. Border Games: Policing the U.S.-Mexico
Divide. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
Andreas examines inconsistency in the rhetoric and application
of border control policy. Border policing has been transformed
from a relatively marginal activity to a costly, high-tech infra-
structure seeking to curb migration and drug trafficking. This
has occurred while the economies of Mexico and the United
States—with the exception of labor forces—have become more
321

integrated under the North American Free Trade Agreement.
Andreas emphasizes that past immigration and drug-war poli-
cies have led to the escalation in border enforcement. Of impor-
tance, he stresses that the attempt to control the border is less
about deterring migrants from coming and more to do with
symbolically affirming U.S. sovereignty and appeasing the pub-
lic. Andreas believes that globalization has not made borders
superfluous but instead has increased their importance.
Campbell, Howard. 2009. Drug War Zone: Frontline Dispatches
from the Streets of El Paso and Juarez. Austin: University of
Texas Press.
In the first decade of the new century, drug trafficking–related
violence reached unprecedented levels in Mexico and the Mexican
border cities. This ethnographic study of community drug use
in El Paso, Texas, and drug sales and smuggling in its sister city
Ciudad Juarez, Mexico, provides an overview of the situation
accompanied by oral history interviews with law enforcement
from both sides of the border and drug traffickers. The narra-
tive examines drug-trafficking organizations, their connection
to government, and law-enforcement corruption, and strategy
in the ‘‘drug war zone.’’ Campbell maintains total commitment
to control of drug trafficking produced a ‘‘security vacuum’’ con-
nected to an overall increase in Mexican border crime. Overall,
Campbell’s research critiques the War on Drugs and suggests that
policy alternatives must be considered.
Dunn, Timothy J. 1996. The Militarization of the U.S.-Mexican
Border, 1978–1992: Low-Intensity Conflict Doctrine Comes
Home. Austin: CMAS Books, Center for Mexican American
Studies, University of Texas.
This social history is the classic study of the application of low-
intensity conflict doctrine to the U.S.-Mexico border. Initially,
border enforcement is situated within the years of pacification
(1848–1919) and examined as a method of labor control (1918–
1977). During the Carter and Reagan administrations (1978–
1988) the Immigration and Naturalization Service (INS) began
the use of military technology, integrated law enforcement
and military personnel, and expanded the authority of the U.S.
Border Patrol. From 1988 to 1992, a continued paramilitary
322
Print and Nonprint Resources

buildup was associated with the War on Drugs. The militariza-
tion of the border is represented as a means of securing a region
of strategic economic importance subject to political instability.
Dunn views the outcome as serving to preserve asymmetry of
power between the United States and Mexico and creating a
precedent for further loss of civil and human rights.
Dunn, Timothy. 2009. Blockading the Border and Human
Rights: The El Paso Operation That Remade Immigration
Enforcement. Austin: University of Texas Press.
In 1993, in El Paso, Texas, Operation Blockade began a strategy
of stationing U.S. Border Patrol officers at the border line in
highly visible areas to deter unauthorized migrants from cross-
ing in urban areas. Dunn examines how the prior policy of
apprehending unauthorized entrants in urban El Paso led to
violations of Mexican American citizens’ civil rights, particu-
larly students attending Bowie High School, right on the border
line. In response, the line watch strategy of Operation Blockade
led to the ‘‘prevention through deterrence’’ approach empha-
sized in the 1994 and 2004 National Border Patrol Strategies for
the Southern Border. The consequences of this strategy for
increased migrant deaths and human rights violations are con-
sidered and suggestions made for balancing issues of sover-
eignty with humanitarian concerns.
Guerette, Rob T. 2007. Migrant Death: Border Safety and Sit-
uational Crime Prevention on the U.S.-Mexico Divide. New
York: LFB Scholarly Publishing.
Since the 1990s and the change in U.S. Border Patrol tactics,
there has been an unprecedented increase in migrant deaths while
attempting unauthorized entrance into the United States. Guerette
presents research on the specific social and environmental cau-
sation of migrant death and evaluates the U.S. Border Patrol
Border Safety Initiative. He found increasing spatial dispersion
of migrants to remote and harsh terrain, disproportionate death
rates for women migrants, and improved recordkeeping of mi-
grant deaths. Using a situational crime-prevention framework,
Guerette suggests methods for deterring migrants from hazard-
ous crossing and considers safety practices before, during, and
after life-threatening events to prevent deaths.
Books and Articles
323

Maril, Robert. 2004. Patrolling Chaos: The U.S. Border Patrol
in Deep South Texas. Lubbock: Texas Tech University Press.
Robert Lee Maril’s ethnography focuses on a McAllen, Texas,
U.S. Border Patrol station of 200 men and women over a two-
year period. It closely follows 10 men and women on 10-hour
patrols of the border as they perform surveillance and appre-
hensions of unauthorized migrants and drug smugglers. The
book details the border police’s insights into the effectiveness
of placing vehicles on stationary ‘‘line watch’’ to deter people from
crossing in dense brush country with low visibility. Maril criticizes
the centralized USBP management hierarchy, its decision-making,
and its androcentrism, which marginalizes women employees. He
suggests that the issue of U.S. corruption should be confronted.
Massey, Douglas S., Jorge Durand, and Nolan J. Malone. 2002.
Beyond Smoke and Mirrors: Mexican Immigration in an Era of
Economic Integration. New York: Russell Sage Foundation.
Unauthorized Mexican immigration is presented as a part of
the historical process of North American integration. Douglas
Massey
and
coauthors
indicate
that
the North
American
Free Trade Agreement of 1994 allowed for the passage of goods,
services, information, and capital but not labor. The United
States’ policy of trying to deter the entrance of less-skilled Mexi-
can workers has resulted in restriction of rights for immigrants
and militarization of the border. This book views U.S. immigra-
tion policies enacted between 1986 and 1996 and its authoriza-
tion of increased border enforcement as a waste of government
investment. Unintended consequences include a change from
circular, temporary migration to permanent migration, rein-
forcement of an underground economy for Mexican labor, and
lowered wages for U.S. citizens. The authors suggest that the
United States should recognize the demand for Mexican unskilled
labor and regularize it while promoting economic development in
Mexico as an employment alternative that will stabilize the situation.
Nevins, Joseph. 2002. Operation Gatekeeper: The Rise of the
‘‘Illegal Alien’’ and the Making of the U.S.-Mexico Boundary.
New York: Routledge.
Operation Gatekeeper has utilized line watch and border walls
to deter unauthorized immigration. Joseph Nevins historically
324
Print and Nonprint Resources

situates this border-security practice in the context of a reces-
sion in California, ineffective government, and the social con-
struction of unauthorized immigrants as ‘‘lawbreakers’’ and a
threat to national security. Operation Gatekeeper is viewed as a
result of the maintenance of boundaries despite the process of
economic integration associated with the North American Free
Trade Agreement and globalization. Instead globalization is
viewed as a cause of a decreased sense of public security,
which promotes border enforcement buildup with undesirable
consequences for the integration of world regions and human
rights, and increased migrant deaths.
Payson, Tony. 2006. The Three U.S.-Mexico Border Wars: Drugs,
Immigration, and Homeland Security. Westport, CT: Praeger
Security International.
Payson traces the history of the militarization of the border all
the way through to the creation of the Department of Home-
land Security and securitization. He views the ‘‘war over the
enforcement of immigration laws,’’ the War on Drugs, and the
War on Terror as potentially reducing the autonomy of border
regions and making a divide between border populations and
Washington. The attempt to secure all points of entry and exit
to the United States has become a barrier to economic, social,
and cultural integration: a closing of the border. Border militari-
zation is criticized and instead a multilateral ‘‘North American
Solution’’ is proposed. Payson proposes a new vision of secu-
rity based on multilateral cooperation.
Border Conditions, Crime, and Human Rights
Lee, Matthew T. 2003. Crime on the Border: Immigration and
Homicide in Urban Communities. New York: LFB Scholarly
Publishing.
Although immigrants are stereotyped as crime-prone, studies
consistently indicate that the size of the immigrant population
is associated with a decrease in violent crime. Matthew Lee’s
research uses multivariate analysis to compare the relationship
between immigration and the homicide rate in Miami and the
border cities of El Paso, Texas, and San Diego. The results show
a negative relationship between Latino immigration and Latino
Books and Articles
325

homicide rates. Instead, the degree of Latino poverty and job-
lessness and residential instability, indicators of social disorga-
nization, were positively associated with Latino homicide rates.
The author suggests that economic deprivation, absence of
labor market opportunity, and neighborhood instability, rather
than immigration, must be addressed to lower homicide. Immi-
grant populations are a stabilizing influence on neighborhoods
which can reduce levels of homicide.
Martinez, Oscar. 2006. Troublesome Border. Revised edition.
Tucson: University of Arizona Press.
This volume details the conflictive history of the United States’
relations with Mexico and the development of a transitional
cultural zone at its border. Martinez covers contemporary issues
such as the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA)
and economic integration, immigration, drugs, and violence. A
chapter on Mexico’s border population and the impact of its
foreign independence provides a Mexican perspective on the
U.S. impact. Finally, parallels to international situations at bor-
ders and suggestions about a bilateral approach are considered.
Martinez, Ramiro, Jr., and Abel Valenzuela, Jr. 2006. Immigra-
tion and Crime: Race, Ethnicity and Violence. New York: New
York University Press.
Martinez and Valenzuela have gathered research essays that
address the relationship between crime and immigration, race
and ethnicity. National origin groups covered include Asian,
Caribbean, and Latin American. Past theory and findings on
immigration’s relationship to crime are compared to the pres-
ent. Topics include immigrant trends in victimization, juvenile
delinquency, gangs, exposure to violence, drugs and homicide
as well as border violence. Contributors indicate that fear of immi-
grant crime is not justified by the evidence. Instead, immigrants are
subject to stereotyping, discrimination, and victimization.
Martinez,
Samuel, ed.
2009.
International
Migration
and
Human Rights: The Global Repercussions of U.S. Policy. Berkeley:
University of California Press.
The focus on increasing border control at the U.S.-Mexico bor-
der has overpowered consideration of the achievability and
326
Print and Nonprint Resources

impact of securitization policy on other nations. Contributors
examine how the United States and other industrialized coun-
tries’ international trade, drug prohibition, immigration control,
and national security policies have the unanticipated impact of
increasing international migration. Essays include an examina-
tion of the impact of globalization on international migration,
analysis of inspection at U.S. ports of entry, new discourse on
unauthorized
Mexican
immigration
and
national
security,
profiling of Arab and Muslim immigrants, and human rights
issues with detention. The contributors chart the many ways in
which the criminalization and securitization of immigration
have negative consequences for human rights.
Richardson, Chad, and Rosalva Resendez. 2006. On the Edge:
Culture, Labor, and Deviance on the South Texas Border. Austin:
University of Texas Press
This volume includes case studies of undocumented workers,
immigration enforcement, drug smuggling, property crime, and
the impact of Mexican criminal justice practices on U.S. citizens
and Mexicans. It presents research on the motivations of Mexican
undocumented migrants and the hardships faced in crossing
the border while trying to avoid the U.S. Border Patrol and bor-
der bandits. It is one of the only studies of the cross-border
issues of shoplifting and auto theft, especially among minors,
and presents information on the problem of police corruption
in Mexico and, to a lesser degree, in the United States.
Spener, David. 2009. Clandestine Crossings: Migrants and
Coyotes on the Texas-Mexico Border. Ithaca, NY: Cornell Uni-
versity Press.
Academic debate has focused on the degree to which migrant
smuggling is an organized effort connected to organized crime
and human trafficking. Ethnographic research on unauthorized
migration across the South Texas–Mexico border indicates that
human smuggling is not a hierarchical, top-down, organized
criminal
activity.
Extensive
interviews
with
cross-border
migrants and smugglers indicate it occurs within loosely struc-
tured horizontal networks that link migrants in sending and
receiving communities with coyotes (human smugglers). The
migrant-coyote linkage is explained as a result of the need to
Books and Articles
327

rely on costly additional help due to intensified border enforce-
ment. Internationally, these efforts are viewed by liberal schol-
ars as resistance to a closed-border policy enforcing global
apartheid, the closure of access to the assets of wealthier groups
and countries. The risks and suffering, even unto death during
crossing attempts, is viewed as the imposition of structural vio-
lence due to the exercise of national sovereignty.
Staudt, Kathleen, Tony Payan, and Z. Anthony Kruszewski,
eds. 2009. Human Rights along the U.S.-Mexico Border: Gen-
dered Violence and Insecurity. Tucson: University of Arizona
Press.
Public concern in the United States about the Mexican border
control has led to unilateral efforts such as the militarization of
border enforcement and the criminalization of immigration.
This volume explores the violent consequences of U.S. policy
for the developing country of Mexico. Part 1 contributors exam-
ine the social context in which migrant women experience sex-
ual violence at Mexico’s northern and southern borders; the
risk of robbery or violence male and female migrants face from
Mexican municipal police and railroad ‘‘security’’ workers and
their human smugglers; the manner in which intensified border
enforcement is making unauthorized crossing more difficult
and causing deaths and abandonment of migrant women; and
the impact of NAFTA’s economic integration on the expansion
of organized illicit markets from drugs to bootleg CDs. Part 2
presents research on femicide in Ciudad Juarez, Mexico, the
border city in which over 400 women were murdered from
1993 to 2006. Femicide involves the rape, torture, and mutila-
tion of one-third of the women victims, who were often maqui-
ladora (Mexican factory) workers. Two-thirds of the women
were killed as a result of domestic violence or routine oppor-
tunistic murders, issues that are overlooked on both sides of
the border. Contributors examine how nongovernmental advo-
cacy organizations and law enforcement responded and the
implications for Mexico regarding adopting international human
rights standards. In addition, problems with the United States’
approach to protecting human trafficking victims are examined.
The editor’s conclusion discusses a ‘‘Border Security Industrial
Complex’’ and its implications for violence against women, crea-
tion of human insecurity, and human rights issues. The authors
328
Print and Nonprint Resources

suggest multilateral cooperation, legal immigration opportunities,
and political, social, and economic reforms that include paying a
living wage in Mexico as an alternative to present border policy.
Stowell, Jacob I. 2007. Immigration and Crime: The Effects of
Immigration on Criminal Behavior. New York: LFB Scholarly
Publishing.
Research indicates that the size of the immigration population
in a community is negatively associated with the degree of vio-
lent crime. Overall, studies of the relationship between having
immigrant status and crime have seldom examined variation
by national origin. Previously, social disorganization theory
predicted that the degree of structure, social disruption, and
reduced educational attainment opportunities in immigrant
communities would be correlated with crime. Findings based
on multivariate analysis indicated that variation in level of
neighborhood poverty and housing vacancies, which are associ-
ated with residential stability, differentially impacted national
origin immigrant groups. Immigration was found to positively
impact community social structure through its association with
neighborhood poverty levels, and it had a negative effect on
residential instability. Stowell concludes that although immi-
grants are less likely to engage in violent criminal activity, the
national origin immigrant population has an indirect effect on
crime through its positive impact on poverty and residential
instability, key predictors of social disorganization theory.
Immigration and Interior Enforcement
Brotherton, David, and Philip Kretsedemas, eds. 2008. Keeping
Out the Other: A Critical Introduction to Immigration Enforce-
ment Today. New York: Columbia University Press.
This collection of essays examines the trend toward expansion
of immigration enforcement before and after 9/11 and the de-
velopment of a two-tier system of legal rights for citizens and
noncitizens. The spiral of enforcement spending is shown to
precede 9/11 during an era that provided initial rationales
for the restriction of due process rights. Revocation of rights
continued after securitization concerns about terrorism devel-
oped and Arab-Muslim men were subject to profiling and mass
Books and Articles
329

deportation without examination of the charges against them.
This is connected to moral panic coalescing public attitudes
favoring immigration restriction without evidence of extensive
immigrant involvement in criminal activity or terrorism. Con-
tributors address the impact of imprisoning noncitizens who
are noncriminal detainees, prison conditions and abuse, the ec-
onomics of expansion of immigration detention, and the mass
deportation of unauthorized migrants and permanent resident
aliens convicted of aggravated felony offenses. Essays conclude
with a look at social causes and policy consequences of intense
law-enforcement scrutiny merging federal, state, and local
efforts and its impact on immigrant communities.
Dow, Mark. 2004. American Gulag: Inside U.S. Immigration
Prisons. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Mark Dow covers the history of immigration law and the
expanding use of detention both before and during the War on
Terror. His field research covers the conditions faced by immi-
gration detainees in Immigration and Naturalization Service
(INS) detention centers and jails and prisons with contracts.
Detainees, guards, and federal officials describe physical and
psychological abuse, indefinite detention, racist attitudes, and
other conditions in violation of human rights. Dow argues that
many detentions are not a response to terrorism, but an aspect
of INS unmonitored authority over unauthorized immigrants
and asylum applicants within a prison system that holds many
people who are not considered to have committed a traditional
crime but are in violation of immigration law.
Orchowski, Margaret Sands. 2008. Immigration and the American
Dream: Battling the Political Hype and Hysteria. New York:
Rowan and Littlefield.
Margaret Sands Orchowski examines conservative, liberal, and
independent viewpoints on the immigration issue. She consid-
ers that misinformation and political spin have complicated
achieving an objective understanding of what is involved. This
volume re-examines the history of immigration and offers an
analysis of buzzwords and the framing of the issue. It presents
the policy alternatives that are being politically debated and
Orchowski’s views on beneficial change.
330
Print and Nonprint Resources

The U.S.-Canada Border
Ackleson, Jason. 2009. ‘‘From Thin to Thick (and Back
Again?): The Politics and Policies of the Contemporary US-
Canada Border.’’ American Review of Canadian Studies 39 (4):
336–351.
The policies and procedures of the 30-point Smart Border
Action Plan have not been fully put into action. The new
border-security procedures being implemented by the United
States
includes
the
Western
Hemisphere
Travel
Initiative
requirement that Canadians carry passports to cross the border.
The Security and Prosperity Partnership are legging. Ackleson
argues that the result is that when greater economic and secu-
rity cooperation is needed it is not forthcoming, and he offers
insight into obstacles to the process and ways to improve border-
security efforts.
Adelman, Howard. 2002. ‘‘Canadian Borders and Immigration
Post 9/11.’’ International Migration Review 36: 15–28.
After 9/11, public discussion of terrorist routes into the United
States focused on Canada as a ‘‘weak link.’’ This essay exam-
ines the human rights implications for citizens and noncitizens
of antiterrorism legislation passed in the Canadian Parliament
to strengthen security. It discusses the transition of the previ-
ously unguarded border into a security barrier and the degree
to which a common security perimeter might be developed.
Regarding immigration policy, the Immigration and Refugee
Act of 2000 and the post 9/11 Public Safety Act’s new securiti-
zation procedures are highlighted. Finally, issues in the use of
false documentation by refugees to gain entry and their disposi-
tion are discussed.
Hataley, Todd S. 2007. ‘‘Catastrophic Terrorism at the Border:
The Case of the Canada-United States Border.’’ Homeland Se-
curity Affairs, Supplement no. 1. http://www.hsaj.org/pages/
supplement/issue1/pdfs/supplement.1.2.pdf.
The land crossings at the Canadian border are strategic for the
economic viability of Canada due to its reliance on trade with
the United States. A terrorist attack on border infrastructure,
tunnels, and bridges would be catastrophic and jeopardize
Books and Articles
331

Canadians’ well-being. This essay examines the potential for
disruption at the border and the use by terrorists of the Cana-
dian border as a transit point into the United States.
Konrad, Victor, and Heather N. Nicol. 2008. Beyond Walls:
Re-Inventing the Canada–United States Borderlands. London:
Ashgate.
Since 9/11, there have been new policies for counterterrorism,
trade regulation, emergency preparedness, and control of bor-
der crossing. The impact of ‘‘re-bordering’’ for Canadian and
U.S. citizens is explored. Security-driven change is viewed as
initiated by the United States and affecting the borderlands, its
culture,
and transnational
communities.
Chapters examine
globalization and the development of borderlands theory, past
practice at the Canada-U.S. border, cross-border trade with
heightened security, passport compliance, the environment,
and the Artic/Northern borderlands region.
Lennox, Patrick. 2007. ‘‘From Golden Straitjacket to Kevlar
Vest: Canada’s Transformation to a Security State.’’ Canadian
Journal of Political Science 40 (4): 1017–1038.
Canada is rapidly becoming a security state that incorporates
constitutional, bureaucratic, defense, and border initiatives to
protect its citizens from terrorism. This change is explained as
based in both asymmetry in Canadian-U.S. relations and the
emergence of a transnational security paradigm—a common
way of dealing with terrorism. Lennox argues that the power
differential between the United States and Canada shaped the
form of the changes but international concern with securitiza-
tion led to rapid change.
Trafficking
Cook, Philip J., Wendy Cukier, and Keith Krause. 2009. ‘‘The
Illicit Firearms Trade in North America.’’ Criminology and
Criminal Justice 9 (3): 265–286.
Cook, Cukier, and Krause look at how the freedom to own
weapons in the United States is associated with smuggling of
weapons to criminal organizations in both Mexico and Canada.
The U.S. federal gun control laws and state regulations allow
332
Print and Nonprint Resources

for many situations in which ‘‘straw purchasers’’ can legally ac-
quire firearms for illegal small-scale smuggling operations. Both
Mexico and Canada have stronger legal controls on firearms
than the United States. This article discusses how criminals,
including narcotraffickers, evade the law to acquire weapons
associated with increased inter-criminal organization violence.
Grayson, George W. 2010. Mexico: Narco-Violence and a Failed
State? New Brunswick, NJ: Transaction Publishers.
There is speculation that drug trafficking and related violence
in Mexico will undermine the ability to govern. Grayson exam-
ines Mexican history from Prohibition through the drug wars.
He connects the crisis to the one-party rule of the Institutional
Revolutionary Party (PRI) and its corruption and connections to
organized crime. In 2000, the National Action Party (PAN) took
the presidency and began a transition to a two-party demo-
cratic system. The historical and contemporary analysis exam-
ines the institutional structure of PRI rule and its decline, the
Sinaloa and Gulf drug-trafficking organizations, President Felipe
Calderon’s strategy against narcoviolence, the implications for
U.S. relations, and the impact of the Merida Initiative. In conclu-
sion, Grayson considers whether Mexico might become a failed
state due to eroded institutional capacity and the cost of the drug
war and then discusses options.
Thachuk, Kimberly L., ed. 2007. Transnational Threats: Smug-
gling and Trafficking in Arms, Drugs, and Human Life. West-
port, CT: Praeger Security International.
Thachuk’s collection of essays covers nonstate criminal actors
including terrorists, organized criminals, pirates, and entrepre-
neurs who engage in the smuggling and trafficking of people,
goods, and services. Transnational threats occur across borders
and are not subject to the control of any single sovereign state.
Contributions on international criminal organization include
writing on narcoterrorism, international human trafficking, and
small arms trafficking. An essay on the threat of nuclear smug-
gling provides information on the likelihood of use of different
types of radioactive materials. Regional studies cover various
types of smuggling and trafficking in the Balkans, Central Eura-
sia, Africa, China, Japan, South Asia, the Andean region, the
Caribbean, and the United States.
Books and Articles
333

Velasco, Jose Luis. 2005. Insurgency, Authoritarianism, and
Drug Trafficking During Mexico’s ‘‘Democratization.’’ New
York: Routledge.
This statistically documented work focuses on the relationship
between the democratic transition in Mexico and the unprece-
dented increase in narcoterrorism. The transition from the
national one-party rule of the PRI to a two-party system includ-
ing the PAN is represented as a weak institutional change in
which drug-trafficking organizations have corrupted new gov-
ernment regimes and involved business in money laundering.
Velasco promotes an antidrug strategy in which Mexico devel-
ops legitimate economic opportunity for its citizens and the
United States addresses the demand for drugs among its own
population. He concludes that weak states are especially vul-
nerable to the corruption of the international drug trade.
Terrorism
Eldridge, Thomas R., Susan Ginsberg, Walter T. Hempel II,
Janice L. Kephart, and Kelly Moore. 2004. 9/11 and Terrorist
Travel. Staff Report of the National Commission on Terrorist
Attacks Upon the United States. http://govinfo.library.unt.edu/
911/staff_statements/911_TerrTrav_Monograph.pdf.
This examination of events and missteps in intelligence gather-
ing and reaction prior to the 9/11 attacks is the seminal work
on planning for counterterrorism. It explains the steps leading
to the tragedy and issues a set of recommendations that remain
relevant.
Winterdyck, John A., and Kelly W. Sundberg, eds. 2010. Bor-
der Security in the Al-Qaeda Era. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press.
After 9/11, the manner in which nations protect their borders
changed. The United States and Canada reorganized border
services into new departments and other nations have passed
laws to integrate border services to prevent terrorism. Contribu-
tors from Australia, Austria, Canada, England, Frances, Iran,
Italy, and the United States address border-security issues. Each
country’s specific essay provides an overview of the following:
(1) the history of terrorism and post-9/11 terror incidents; (2)
the definition of terrorism used and its relation to border
334
Print and Nonprint Resources

security; (3) how terrorism and suspected terror incident data is
handled by border security; (4) organization and operation of
border security and post-9/11 change; (5) how changes in bor-
der-security practices have impacted movement in people and
goods and reporting on such in the mass media; (6) ‘‘preferred’’
explanations of terrorism used by governments or border secu-
rity; (7) steps taken to strengthen national and border security
and social, political, economic, and humanitarian impact of
such change on citizens; (8) impact of border-security change
on country’s sense of sovereignty; and (9) examination of the
impact of al-Qaeda on changes in border security and the
results of such securitization for civil liberties and human
rights. Emphasis is placed on how each country has dealt with
terrorist attacks and whether political, legal, and military meas-
ures have been justified.
Periodicals and Publications
Immigration
Citizenship Studies
http://www.tandf.co.uk/journals/titles/13621025.asp
Citizenship Studies covers citizenship, human rights, and demo-
cratic processes from an interdisciplinary perspective including
the fields of politics, sociology, history, and cultural studies. It
seeks to lead an international debate on the academic analysis
of citizenship, and also aims to cross the division between inter-
nal academic discussion and external public debate. It contains
articles on debates that move beyond conventional notions of
citizenship, and treats citizenship as a strategic concept that is
central in the analysis of identity, participation, empowerment,
human rights, and the public interest. Citizenship is analyzed
in the context of contemporary processes involving globaliza-
tion, theories of international relations, changes to the state
and political communities, multiculturalism, gender, indige-
nous peoples and national reconciliation, equity, social and
public policy, welfare, and the reorganization of public man-
agement. As a theoretically basic concept, citizenship provides
new tools for formulating problems and providing practical
analysis and advice in these fields.
Periodicals and Publications
335

Immigrants and Minorities
http://www.tandf.co.uk/journals/titles/02619288.asp
Founded in 1981, Immigrants and Minorities publishes research
on the history of immigration and related studies. Its articles
examine the social construction of ‘‘race’’ and ethnic and mi-
nority relations within a historical setting. International cover-
age includes research on the United States, Australia, the
Middle East, and the United Kingdom.
International Migration
http://www.wiley.com/bw/journal.asp?ref=0020-7985
A policy-oriented journal, International Migration focuses on the
migration research of sociologists, demographers, political sci-
entists, economists, and other social scientists from all world
regions. It covers policies relevant to international migration
and publishes comparative research.
International Migration Review (IMR)
The
peer-reviewed
International
Migration
Review
contains
articles on sociodemographic, economic, historical, political,
and legislative aspects of human migration and refugee move-
ments. IMR offers original research, documentation notes,
reports on key legislative developments—both national and
international—an extensive bibliography and abstracting serv-
ice, the International Sociological Association’s International
Newsletter on Migration, plus a scholarly review of new books
in the field. It uses an interdisciplinary approach and provides
international perspective for the analysis and review of interna-
tional population movements.
Journal of Ethnic and Migration Studies
http://www.tandf.co.uk/journals/titles/1369183X.asp
The Journal of Ethnic and Migration Studies (JEMS) publishes the
results of first-class research on all forms of migration and its
consequences, together with articles on ethnic conflict, discrimi-
nation, racism, nationalism, citizenship, and policies of integra-
tion. It focuses on comparative research, for example, within
Europe or between one or more European country and the
countries
of
North
America
and
Asia-Pacific,
particularly
336
Print and Nonprint Resources

advanced industrial countries. Certain articles are pertinent to
informed policy debate and the implications of research for pol-
icy innovation or evaluate the results of previous initiatives.
(Self-description)
Journal of International Migration and Integration
http://jimi.metropolis.net/
This quarterly multidisciplinary and interdisciplinary journal is
published in English and Spanish. Its focus is current research,
theory, and policy analysis on migration. Contributors include
researchers, policy analysts, and service providers. Topics in-
clude the sending society impact of migration and diversity,
demographic planning, public health, the effect of racism, dis-
crimination and social exclusion of immigrant groups, securiti-
zation of immigration, and justice.
Migration
http://publications.iom.int/bookstore/index.php?main_page=
contact_us
The
International
Organization
for
Migration
publishes
a
description of its activities and policy essays several times a
year. It is available in English, Spanish, and French.
Migration Letters
http://www.migrationletters.com/index.html
A quarterly interdisciplinary journal on international migration,
Migration Letters publishes short accounts of research, articles
focusing on debate, and comments. Topics include transna-
tional mobility and voluntary or forced migration. Papers range
from the theoretical to empirical and applied research or policy
analysis.
Migration News
http://migration.ucdavis.edu/mn/
This quarterly online news source contains news and informa-
tion on immigration and integration and has much useful infor-
mation on current developments in U.S. immigration policy.
Contributions are listed by region: North America, Europe, and
Other. The email version is free.
Periodicals and Publications
337

Population Studies
http://www.tandf.co.uk/journals/titles/00324728.html
For over half a century, Population Studies has reported sig-
nificant advances in methods of demographic analysis, concep-
tual and mathematical theories of demographic dynamics and
behavior, and the use of these theories and methods to extend
scientific knowledge and to inform policy and practice. The
journal’s coverage of this field is comprehensive: applications
in developed and developing countries; historical and contem-
porary studies; quantitative and qualitative studies; analytical
essays and reviews. Paper subjects range from classical con-
cerns, such as the determinants and consequences of population
change, to such topics as family demography and evolutionary and
genetic influences on demographic behavior. (Self-description)
Immigration Law
Georgetown Immigration Law Journal
http://www.law.georgetown.edu/journals/gilj/
The Georgetown Immigration Law Journal is a scholarly publica-
tion dedicated to the advancement of legal knowledge in the
field of immigration law. The journal is published quarterly
and is dedicated to exploring and critically analyzing interna-
tional and domestic events as they shape the field of immigra-
tion law. Each issue features articles by scholars and legal
practitioners, as well as a significant number of student notes
and a section reviewing current developments in immigration.
Immigration law permeates a wide number of other substantive
areas including constitutional, administrative, criminal, labor,
and international law. Recent world events have increased
awareness among the legal community of the importance of im-
migration law, with issues ranging from the meaning of citizen-
ship to multinational corporate concerns about employing
foreign persons. As a result, expertise in immigration law is
required by both individuals seeking citizenship and big busi-
ness attracting skilled workers. (Self-description)
Michigan Journal of Race and Law
http://students.law.umich.edu/mjrl/
The goal of the Michigan Journal of Race and Law is to serve as a
forum for the exploration of issues relating to race and law,
338
Print and Nonprint Resources

and to civil rights in general. The journal is recognized for pub-
lishing cutting-edge scholarship on a wide range of civil rights
issues from diverse perspectives, most specifically those issues
that are marginalized in mainstream legal discourse. Those per-
spectives include anything from critical race theory to law and
economics, and everything in between. This flexibility has
allowed the journal to cover a huge number of topics in-depth
and with great effect. To that end, the journal publishes the
views of scholars, students, practitioners, and social scientists.
Since the inaugural issue, the journal has become nationally rec-
ognized as one of the leading civil rights journals in the coun-
try, and has also been consistently ranked among the top 25
specialty journals overall. (Self-description)
Human Rights
Social Justice: A Journal of Crime, Conflict, and World Order
http://www.socialjusticejournal.org/
Founded in 1974, Social Justice is a quarterly nonprofit educa-
tional journal that seeks to promote human dignity, equality,
peace, and genuine security. Its early focus on issues of crime,
police repression, social control, and the penal system has
expanded to encompass globalization, human and civil rights,
border, citizenship, and immigration issues, environmental vic-
tims and health and safety concerns, social policies affecting
welfare and education, ethnic and gender relations, and persis-
tent global inequalities. The journal has framed its vision of
social justice with an understanding of the international dimen-
sions of power, inequality, and injustice. In doing so, it has
formed part of an international community of progressive intel-
lectuals, activists, and movements. The connection to that com-
munity has helped Social Justice keep its bearings in times of
stormy weather (such as the nasty squalls of the Reagan era or
the hurricane winds at the end of the Cold War). Social Justice
continues to promote social criticism as a distinctive form of
knowledge and respects the theoretical implications of practice
and the practical aspects of theory. We present divergent view-
points in a readable fashion. (Self-description)
Recent issues include ‘‘Migrant Labor and Contested Social
Space,’’ ‘‘Beyond Transnational Crime,’’ and ‘‘Immigrant Rights
and National Insecurity.’’
Periodicals and Publications
339

Transnational Crime and Trafficking
Crime and Justice International
http://www.cjimagazine.com/
Crime and Justice International is published by the Office of Inter-
national Criminal Justice at Sam Houston State University for a
readership of academicians and law-enforcement professionals.
Article topics include organized crime, border crime, traffick-
ing, and terrorism.
Crime, Law, and Social Change
http://www.springerlink.com/content/0925-4994
Crime, Law, and Social Change is a peer-reviewed journal that
publishes essays and reviews dealing with the political econ-
omy of organized crime, whether at the transnational, national,
regional, or local level anywhere in the world. In addition,
the journal publishes work on financial crime, political corrup-
tion, environmental crime, and the expropriation of resources
from developing nations. The journal is also committed to pub-
lishing in the general area of human rights including historical
and contemporary studies of genocide, essays on compensation
and justice for survivors of mass murder and state-sponsored
terrorism, analyses of international human rights organizations
(both governmental and NGOs), and historical as well as contem-
porary essays focused on gender, racial, and ethnic equality. (Self-
description)
Global Crime
http://www.tandf.co.uk/journals/titles/17440572.asp
Global Crime, formerly titled Transnational Organized Crime, is a
social-science journal devoted to the study of crime broadly
conceived. Its focus is deliberately broad and multidisciplinary
and its first aim is to make the best scholarship on crime avail-
able to specialists and nonspecialists alike. It endorses no par-
ticular orthodoxy and draws on authors from a variety of
disciplines, including history, sociology, criminology, econom-
ics, political science, anthropology, and area studies. Major
topics include organized criminality, its history, activities, rela-
tions with the state, its penetration of the economy, and its per-
ception in popular culture. Other topics include corruption,
crime and women’s studies, illegal migration, terrorism, illicit
340
Print and Nonprint Resources

markets, violence, police studies, and the process of state build-
ing. The journal includes research articles, dispatches highlight-
ing research in progress, and field reports from law-enforcement
officials and book reviews. (Self-description)
Trends in Organized Crime
http://www.iasoc.net/trends.html#
Trends in Organized Crime is a peer-reviewed journal published
four times a year. It presents a composite of analyses and syn-
theses of research on organized crime, drawn from a variety of
sources. It publishes peer-reviewed, original research articles
and excerpts from significant governmental reports. The con-
tents also include reviews of important new books and presents
analysis and commentary on current issues in organized crime.
Trends in Organized Crime is an ideal resource for practitioners
and policymakers, as well as the academic community. It is
published in association with the International Association for
the Study of Organized Crime (IASOC). (Self-description)
Terrorism
CTC Sentinel
http://ctc.usma.edu/sentinel/
The Combating Terrorism Center at West Point is an independent
educational and research institution based in the Department of
Social Sciences at the U.S. Military Academy, West Point. The
CTC Center harnesses the Center’s global network of scholars
and practitioners to understand and confront contemporary
threats posed by terrorism and other forms of political violence.
Perspectives on Terrorism
http://www.terrorismanalysts.com
An international initiative, this electronic journal permits tradi-
tional research and perspectives on terrorism and counterterror-
ism. Each posted essay is connected to a discussion board.
Studies in Conflict and Violence
http://www.tandf.co.uk/journals/tf/1057610X.html
Terrorism and insurgency are now the dominant forms of con-
flict in the world. Fueled by moribund peace processes, ethnic
Periodicals and Publications
341

and religious strife, disputes over natural resources, and trans-
national organized crime, these longstanding security chal-
lenges have become even more violent and intractable, posing
new threats to international peace and stability. Studies in Con-
flict and Terrorism aims to cast new light on the origins and
implications of conflict in the twenty-first century and to illumi-
nate new approaches and solutions to countering the growth
and escalation of contemporary substate violence.
The journal thus seeks to publish the best theoretical and
empirical studies that contribute to a better understanding of the
causes of these conflicts and the measures required to achieve
their resolution. In a world of diverse and changing threats, enig-
matic adversaries, and continued uncertainty, the editor’s goal is
to provide fresh insight, thoughtful analysis, and authoritative
prescriptions to the most pressing concerns that affecting global
security in the twenty-first century. (Self-description)
Terrorism and Political Violence
http://www.tandf.co.uk/journals/titles/09546553.asp
Terrorism and Political Violence reflects the full range of current
scholarly work from many disciplines and theoretical perspec-
tives. It aims to give academic rigor to a field which hitherto
has lacked it, and encourages comparative studies. In addition
to focusing on the political meaning of terrorist activity, the
journal publishes studies of various related forms of violence
by rebels and by states, on the links between political violence
and organized crime, protest, rebellion, revolution, and human
rights. Symposia are a regular feature covering such subjects as
terrorism and public policy; religion and violence; political par-
ties and terrorism; technology and terrorism; and right-wing
terrorism. (Self-description)
Terrorism and Security Monitor
http://jtsm.janes.com/public/jtsm/index.shtml
Jane’s Terrorism and Security Monitor covers current issues in
terrorism and counterterrorism worldwide. Contents include
what’s behind terrorist campaigns, tracking of trends in the
strategy and operations of the world’s terrorist and insurgent
groups, and discussion of government policy responses to the
terrorist threat. Key contents include regional coverage of
342
Print and Nonprint Resources

terrorist activity, the root causes of terrorism and insurgency,
terrorist use of weapons of mass destruction, biographies of ter-
rorism leaders, and intelligence on the growing links between ter-
rorism, insurgency, and organized crime. (Partial self-description)
Transnational Threats Update
http://csis.org/programs/transnational-threats-project/
transnational-threats-update
The Transnational Threats Update is produced by the Transna-
tional Threats Project and provides monthly reports and analysis
on terrorism, drug trafficking, organized crime, money launder-
ing, and arms trafficking. The newsletter draws on several U.S.
and international media sources, including the Associated Press,
Agence France Presse, Reuters, Xinhua News Agency, World
Tribune, Afghan News, and others. (Self-description)
Government Reports
Beaver, Janice Cheryl. 2006. ‘‘CRS Report for Congress: U.S. Inter-
national Borders: Brief Facts.’’ http://fpc.state.gov/documents/
organization/76897.pdf.
Beittel, June S. 2009. ‘‘Congressional Research Report for
Congress: Mexico’s Drug Related Violence.’’ http://www.fas.
org/sgp/crs/row/R40582.pdf.
Cook, Colleen W. 2007. ‘‘Congressional Research Service
Report: Mexico’s Drug Cartels.’’ http://ftp.fas.org/sgp/crs/
row/RL34215.pdf.
Government Accountability Office (GAO). 2005. ‘‘Informa-
tion on Criminal Aliens Incarcerated in Federal and State Prisons
and Local Jails.’’ http://www.gao.gov/new.items/d05337r.pdf.
Government Accountability Office (GAO). 2006. ‘‘Border
Security: Key Unresolved Issues Justify Reevaluation of Border
Surveillance Technology Program.’’ http://www.gao.gov/new.
items/d06295.pdf.
Government Accountibility Office (GAO). 2008a. ‘‘Depart-
ment of Homeland Security: Billions Invested in Major Pro-
grams Lack Appropriate Oversight.’’ http://www.gao.gov/
new.items/d0929.pdf.
Government Accountability Office (GAO). 2008b. ‘‘Secure
Border Initiative: Observations on the Importance of Applying
Government Reports
343

Lessons Learned to Future Projects: Statement of Richard M.
Stana: Director Homeland Security and Justice Issues.’’ GAO
Report 08-361. http://www.gao.gov/new.items/d081141t.pdf.
Government Accountability Office (GAO). 2009. ‘‘Briefing
on U.S. Custom’s and Border Protection Secure Border Initiative
Fiscal
Year
2009
Plan.’’
http://www.gao.gov/new.items/
d09274r.pdf.
Garcia, Michael John. 2006. ‘‘CRS Report for Congress: Im-
migration Consequences of Criminal Activity.’’ http://fpc.state.
gov/documents/organization/78335.pdf.
Government Accountability Office (GAO). 2004. Over-Stay
Tracking: A Key Component of Homeland Security and a Layered
Defense: A Report to the Chairman, Committee on the Judiciary,
House of Representatives. Washington, DC: U.S. Government
Printing Office. http://www.gao.gov/new.items/D0482.pdf.
Government Accountability Office (GAO). 2006. Border
Crossing Deaths Have Doubled Since 1995; Border Patrol’s Efforts to
Prevent Deaths Have Not Been Fully Evaluated. Washington, DC:
U.S. Government Printing Office.
National Drug Intelligence Center. ‘‘National Drug Threat
Assessment 2009.’’ http://www.usdoj.gov/ndic/pubs31/31379/
index.htm.
Siskin, Alison, and Ruth Ellen Wasem. 2005. ‘‘Congressional
Research Service Report for Congress: Immigration Policy on
Expedited Removal of Aliens.’’ Washington, DC: Government
Printing Office. http://fpc.state.gov/documents/organization/
54512.pdf.
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime. 2006. Traf-
ficking in Persons: Global Patterns. April. www.unodc.org/pdf/
traffickinginpersons_report_2006ver2.pdf.
U.S. Department of State. 2008. Trafficking in Persons Report
2008. http://www.state.gov/g/tip/rls/tiprpt/2008/.
Bibliographies
The Internet provides many extensive bibliographies of value to
the researcher; subjects include border security, unauthorized
immigration, drug trafficking, and terrorism. Listed below are
several bibliographies that address these issues.
344
Print and Nonprint Resources

Border Security
Homeland Security: A Selected Bibliography. May 2006. Com-
piled by Jeanette C. Moyer, U.S. Army War College Library.
http://www.carlisle.army.mil/library/bibs/homesec06.pdf.
Human Security: An Extended and Annotated International
Bibliography. November 1, 2001. Compiled by Sara Edson.
Centre for History and Economics, King’s College, University
of Cambridge, United Kingdom for the Common Security Fo-
rum. http://www.humansecurity-chs.org/activities/meetings/
first/bibliography.pdf.
Illegal Immigration and U.S. Border Security. May 2006. Com-
piled by Stephen B. T. Chun, Muir S. Fairchild Research Infor-
mation Center, Maxwell Air Force Base, Alabama. http://
www.au.af.mil/au/aul/bibs/illegalim.htm.
Unauthorized Immigration
Annotated Bibliography: Worksite and Interior Enforcement
Issues. September 2007. Institute for the Study of International
Migration. Walsh School of Foreign Service, Georgetown Univer-
sity.
http://isim.georgetown.edu/Publications/SRFMaterials/
ANNOTATED%20BIBLIOGRAPHY.pdf.
Undocumented Immigrants: An Annotated Bibliography. No-
vember 2005. Compiled by Alicia Burgarin, Steven DeBry, and
Martha Jones, California Research Center. http://www.library.
ca.gov/crb/05/06/05-006.pdf.
Human Trafficking
Data and Research on Human Trafficking: Bibliography of
Research-Based Literature. October 2008. Compiled by Elsbieta
M. Gozdziak and Michah N. Bump. http://www.ncjrs.gov/
pdffiles1/nij/grants/224392.pdf.
Trafficking in Human Beings. 2009. United Nations Interre-
gional Crime and Justice Research Institute (UNICRI). http://
www.unicri.it/wwd/trafficking/bibliography/thb-bibl.php.
Drug Trafficking
Cork Bibliography: Drug Trade and Trafficking. January 2008.
http://www.projectcork.org/bibliographies/data/Bibliography_
Drug_Trade_and_Trafficking.html.
Bibliographies
345

Narco-Terrorism. 2003. Compiled by Ron Fuller. Air University
Library, Maxwell Air Force Base. http://www.au.af.mil/au/
aul/bibs/narco/narco.htm.
Terrorism
Bibliography on Terrorism. 2008. Pinklet, The Peace Palace
Library. http://andromeda.rutgers.edu/~wcjlen/WCJ/mainpages/
bibliogs_body.html.
Terrorism and Counterterrorism: An Annotated Bibliography,
Volume 2. September 11, 2006. Compiled by James J. F. Forest,
Thomas A. Bengston Jr., Hilda Rosa Martinez, Nathan Gonzalez,
and Bridget C. Nee, Combating Terrorism Center, U.S. Military Acad-
emy at West Point. http://www.teachingterror.com/bibliography/
CTC_Bibliography_2006.pdf.
Weapons of Mass Destruction. 2006. Department of Justice, Fed-
eral Bureau of Investigation, FBI Academy Library. Quantico,
VA.
http://fbilibrary.fbiacademy.edu/bibliographies/weapon
sofmassdestruction.htm.
Borders
U.S.-Mexico Border Issues: A Selected Bibliography from the
Smithsonian Institution Libraries’ Collections. Summer 2000.
Compiled by Cecilia C. Perez, Smithsonian Institution Libraries
Intern, University of South Florida, School of Library and Infor-
mation Science.
DVDs
U.S.-Mexico Border Law Enforcement
Border Wars: Season 1. 2 discs; 250 mins. National Geo-
graphic, 2010. $29.97
The efforts of U.S. Customs and Border Patrol to stop unauthor-
ized immigration and drug trafficking are filmed by day and
night in U.S.-Mexico Border locations including the Arizona de-
sert. The programs detail the technology and methods used for
apprehension at ports of entry, in urban areas and remote
regions.
346
Print and Nonprint Resources

Border War. 52 mins. National Geographic, 2008. $19.95
Unauthorized immigrants and smugglers try on foot and by
car, even risking their lives to cross the U.S.-Mexico border.
This DVD examines how migrants and drug smugglers attempt
crossing the border and sometimes make it. Live action footage
of U.S. Border Patrol officers using high-tech tracking is shown.
Now on PBS: Obama’s Border Fence. 30 mins. PBS, 2009.
$39.95 (public view) $19.95 (individual view)
The Secure Fence Act of 2006 authorized the southwest border
fence and the Secretary of Homeland Security was given waiv-
ers from lawsuits by environmentalists, property owners, and
other concerned groups. As the fence is being finalized, this
program discusses the ‘‘virtual fence’’ that the Obama adminis-
tration inherited from the previous administration and Con-
gress. Tests of the Secure Border Initiative in high technology for
electronic surveillance have not indicated that it works.
Now on PBS: The Border Fence. 30 mins. PBS, 2001. $39.95
(public view) $19.95 (individual view)
This program questions the degree to which the U.S.-Mexico
border fence will be effective. It examines the impact of the
fence on families who are concerned about their property and
fear for their safety.
Enforcers: The Border Patrol. 100 mins. History Channel, 2008.
$19.95
In part 1, this Greystone documentary presents the history of
the U.S Border Patrol and its enforcement of immigration law
against smugglers and unauthorized migrants. Part 2 profiles
the history of the Texas Rangers, who have also been active
along the border.
Unauthorized Immigration and Crime
Frontline: World VII: Crimes at the Border. 24:41 mins. PBS,
2008. $54.95 (institutional viewing) $24.99 (individual view)
Frontline and the New York Times partnered in this documentary
about the business of human smuggling on the U.S.-Mexico
DVDs
347

border. Reporter Lowell Bergman interviews a Mexican smug-
gler
who
explains
how
smugglers
are
compensating
for
increased border enforcement and reports on a case of a corrupt
border guard caught assisting human smugglers. Congressman
Duncan Hunter (San Diego) and sociology professor Wayne
Cornelius offer their perspective on the effectiveness and conse-
quences of border controls. The report presents smuggling oper-
ations as increasingly expensive and organized—a high-paying
business.
Border: The Divide Between the American Dream and the
American Nightmare. 104 mins. Little Bonanza Productions,
2006. $19.95
This documentary encourages debate about the problems and
dangers of the border and critiques both Republican and Demo-
cratic views on immigration. It looks at both sides of the issue
detailing the perspectives of the Minutemen, citizens volunteer-
ing to watch the border, ranchers, and immigrant rights groups
including Derechos Humanos (a human rights organization),
No More Deaths (human rights campaign) and the American
Civil Liberties Union. Coverage includes recovery of the de-
ceased and footage of a Mexican drug smuggling group. In
addition, it details the impact of unauthorized immigrants on
the California health care system. Director Chris Bogard’s per-
spective emphasizes the problems associated with employers’
encouragement of unauthorized migration and takes a position
that opening the border would provide a source of eventual
swing votes for the Democratic Party. Whether or not the viewer
agrees with Bogard, the coverage of the politics of unauthorized
migration and its impact will expand one’s perspective. It has
received awards as the best documentary at the California Inde-
pendent Film Festival, Bronze Ram Award at the Houston Film
Festival, and the Director’s Choice Award at the Pensacola Inter-
national Film Festival.
Rights on the Line: Vigilantes on the Border. 26 mins. American
Friends Service Committee, 2009. $19.95
The American Friends Service Committee, a human rights orga-
nization, presents a critique of the Minutemen citizen watch
groups and border militarization.
348
Print and Nonprint Resources

Dying to Get In: Undocumented Immigration at the U.S.-Mex-
ico Border. 40 mins. Brett Tolley, 2005. $19.95
Globalization is economically integrating developed and underde-
veloped countries. Yet the United States deliberately did not include
labor exchange across borders as a part of the North American Free
Trade Agreement (NAFTA) and extensive unauthorized migration
has occurred at the U.S.-Mexico border. This film examines how
NAFTA displaced Mexican corn farmers through inexpensive U.S.
corn imports and Mexicans must seek work. Trade and immigra-
tion policy has produced a situation in which Mexican migrants face
high temperatures and dehydration, risking death to cross at remote
areas of the border. This film covers the migrants’ stories of the cross-
ing and why they took this risk for economic survival. It asks the
question of how U.S. citizens can achieve greater global responsibility.
The film received the following awards: Long Format News
Digital Video Award (2007), Most Socially Relevant Student Doc-
umentary (2006), Hollywood Student Film Festival Finalist
(2006), Best Student Film, Plymouth Film Festival (2006).
Letters from the Other Side. New Day Films. $249; $4.99 (90-
day flash streaming for individual use)
In May 2003, 19 unauthorized migrants suffocated to death in a
tractor trailer in Texas while attempting to enter the interior.
This documentary interviews women and children in Mexico
about how they feel about husbands and fathers who live in
the United States. Two of the women lost their husbands in the
2003 tragedy, while others express their hopes and fears about
husbands in the United States, who are also videotaped and
share their thoughts with the families they left behind. The re-
sultant videos are screened by an official at the Department of
Homeland Security, who is unable to respond about how the
United States will resolve this situation.
This film has received the following awards: Official Closing
Night Film, SlamDance Film Festival (2006), Official Selection SXSW
Film Festival, Official Selection, HotSprings Film Festival (2006).
Golden Venture. 70 mins. New Day Films, 2006. $295.00; $4.99
(90-day flash streaming for individual use)
In 1993 the Golden Venture, a smuggling freighter, ran aground
near New York City, carrying 286 migrants who had paid
DVDs
349

$30,000 each to be smuggled from the Fugian province of China
to the United States. Ten people drowned in the surf. Previ-
ously, they endured limited food, crowding, and disease below
deck during the passage. In the United States, the Immigration
and Naturalization Service detained them in county jails for up
to four years, some gaining parole. Half were deported and 220
are living legally in the United States, vulnerable to deporta-
tion. Among the greater than 110 passengers deported, 60 have
returned without authorization. In China, they allege, they were
beaten, jailed, and forcibly sterilized but they are not eligible
for political asylum. This film presents stories of the survivors
and lawyers and paralegals who advocated for them. The im-
migration advocacy coalition included members of groups from
the left and right and this film documents their work.
This film was an Official Selection, Tribeca Film Festival (2006).
Wetback: The Undocumented Documentary (Mojado: El Docu-
metal Indocumentado). 92 mins. National Geographic, 2005.
$19.95
Despite the title, this documentary is a sympathetic presenta-
tion of the journeys of unauthorized entrants crossing borders
to the United States and, ultimately, Canada. The southern jour-
ney begins in Nicaragua, crossing five borders in all. In Mexico,
Nicaraguan migrants face gang members and, at the U.S. bor-
der, citizen watch groups. Seeking to enter Canada, which is
perceived to have more jobs and less border control after 9/11,
they must cross the United States. They come fleeing persecution
or for employment. The film seeks to humanize the migrants’
quest and win respect, not sympathy.
This film received the Best Documentary Award, Cinequest
Film Festival (2005), Best Story, Pamplona Film Festival, Punto
de Vista (2005), Spectrum Award (Full Frame) (2005, Audience
Award), Chicago Latino Film Festival (2005), and was the Offi-
cial Selection of Hot Docs (2005).
Invisible: Illegal in Europe. 88 mins. Documentary Channel,
2006. $24.99
Europe faces extensive unauthorized immigration in search of
economic
opportunity.
Without
legal
status,
immigrants
attempt to live in the shadows and participate in an under-
ground economy. This documentary follows five unauthorized
350
Print and Nonprint Resources

immigrants from different world regions who seek to realize a
‘‘European Dream.’’
Terrorism
Inside 9/11. 240 mins. National Geographic, 2005. $19.99
This documentary follows the evolution of Osama bin Laden
from a freedom fighter in Soviet-occupied Afghanistan to al-
Qaeda leader and Islamic terrorist jihadist. A timeline traces
events through the 9/11 attacks on the World Trade Center.
Focus is placed on 9/11 planner Khalil Shaikh Mohammed,
hijackers Mohammed Atta and Ziad Jarrah, and sleeper cells. It
looks at how 9/11 happened, including CIA and FBI failures in
intelligence cooperation and flaws in airport security. It pro-
vides archival photos, news footage, and eyewitness interviews.
An Inside 9/11 interview archive is located at http://channel.
nationalgeographic.com/channel/inside911/interactive.html.
Frontline: The Enemy Within. 60 mins. PBS Educational
Media, 2006. $59.95
After 9/11, federal law enforcement was reorganized under the
Department of Homeland Security. From the vantage point of
five years later, policy response to terrorism and fear of terror-
ism are explained. It assesses the threat of international versus
homegrown terrorism and presents the case of the purported
JIS Conspiracy in Lodi, California. In addition, interviews with
terrorism experts are presented.
Targeting Terror. 29 mins. Films for the Humanities and Sci-
ences, 2010. $99.95
Terrorism’s history, forms, and causation are examined in five
nations: (1) the post-9/11 United States, which attempted to
handle terrorism through civilian rather than military courts;
(2) the United Kingdom, whose experience with the Irish Re-
publican Army (IRA) is evaluated in terms of impact on han-
dling Islamic terrorism; (3) Germany and Japan, former World
War II aggressors whose counterterrorism efforts are subject
to constitutional limitations; and Colombia, which used extradi-
tion as a tool against narcoterrorism. Some content may only be
appropriate for adult audiences.
DVDs
351

Our Own Private Bin Laden. 63 mins. (plus 102 mins. of bonus
material). Films for the Humanities and Sciences, 2005. $179.95
The United States is a former sponsor of Osama bin Laden,
who was a revolutionary jihadist fighter against the Soviet
Union when they occupied Afghanistan. This documentary
examines the role of U.S. foreign policy in the genesis of 9/11.
It looks at the actions taken during the Cold War by presidents
Carter and Reagan such as the investigation and shutting down
of the Bank of Credit and Commercial International. Then it
looks at the CIA connection to bin Laden and the Afghani
mujahideen as the Cold War ended prior to the War on Terror.
Individuals interviewed include former National Security Advi-
sor Zbigniew Brzezinski, who devised a plan to draw the Soviet
Union into an expensive long-term conflict in Afghanistan,
Benazir Bhutto, former prime minister of Pakistan, former CIA
station chief in Pakistan Milton Bearden, and Noam Chomsky,
scholar and activist.
The Balancing Act: Security and Liberty Post 9/11. 58 mins.
Films for the Humanities and Sciences, 2004. $149.95
The USA PATRIOT Act suspended certain constitutional rights
for citizens and noncitizens as a part of the War on Terror. This
CNN program examines the trade-off between personal free-
dom and security. The panel of experts discussing the issue
include Viet Dinh, who wrote the act, Margaret Hamburg, a
bioterrorism expert, and Professor Julieete Kayyem of the Har-
vard Kennedy School of Government. They talk about hypo-
thetical
attack
scenarios
for
the
United
States,
indefinite
detention, Arab-American rights, the Freedom of Information
Act, and the provisions of the USA PATRIOT Act.
Trafficking
Illicit: The Dark Trade. 54 mins. National Geographic, 2008.
$24.95
Moises Niam’s Illicit: How Smugglers, Traffickers and Copycats Are
Hijacking the Global Economy is the basis of this DVD. It explores
how globalization has changed the nature of criminal opportu-
nity, focusing on human smuggling, arms trafficking, money
laundering, and music bootlegging. Smuggling activities are
352
Print and Nonprint Resources

estimated to constitute 10% of the world’s trade in goods.
Smuggling has negative political consequences including cor-
ruption of officials and subversion of government. Because il-
licit goods and people cross borders, job loss, violence, and
death can be a consequence.
Narco-State. 50 mins. National Geographic, 2009. $19.95
The positioning of Mexico as the leading source of cocaine and
other drugs has impacted Phoenix, Arizona. This program
shows the operations of the Phoenix police department as they
investigate a drug-related kidnapping, discover marijuana,
and arrest suspects. The program also details the crime beat in
the border city of Ciudad Juarez, Mexico, a leading transship-
ment point.
Lives for Sale: Human Trafficking. 60 mins. Films for the
Humanities and Sciences, 2006. $169.95
Slavery has re-emerged in the form of a black market in human
beings for labor and the sex trade. Poverty leads migrants to
seek employment abroad and, in the process, some become vic-
tims of exploitation at some point during their journey. This
film features the Coalition to Abolish Slavery and Trafficking
(CAST) and their work to free those trafficked. Interviews with
U.S. Border Patrol agents and other law-enforcement officers
add information on this human rights issue.
Dying to Leave: The Dark Business of Human Trafficking. 57
mins. Films for the Humanities and Sciences. 2003. $149.95
Human traffickers are not choosey about how they transport
people across borders, using sewage tunnels, shipping contain-
ers, ship holds, and even car chassis. Despite motivation to get
ahead, many of those trafficked become sex workers and forced
laborers. This Australian Wide Angle documentary looks at the
social context of mass unauthorized migration, its connection to
trafficking, and the situations endured by those who are enslaved.
Frontline: Sex Slaves. 60 mins. PBS Educational Media. 2006. $59.95
This exploration of human trafficking uses hidden cameras to
examine the activities of traffickers, pimps, and middle men
DVDs
353

who sell women. It uses the story of Katia, whose husband is
searching for her, to illustrate the issue. It details the process of
attracting women through offer of legitimate employment or
smuggling services and how this can lead to entrapment
involving rape, drugs, and confinement for prostitution.
Transnational Gangs
18 With a Bullet: El Salvador’s American Style Gangs. 57 mins.
Films for the Humanities and Sciences, 2006. $149.95
During the era of revolutionary armed conflict in El Salvador in
the 1990s, thousands fled to the United States. Since then, thou-
sands have been deported to El Salvador, including youth social-
ized in Los Angeles gang culture. This Wide Angle documentary
reports on the ‘‘18,’’ a transnational street gang based on the
L.A. 18th Street gang. The gang culture and organization repli-
cated in San Salvador, capital of El Salvador, includes violent
beating for initiation, helping peers, turf wars, and connections
to members inside El Salvador’s prisons. The result has greatly
increased crime and violence in El Salvador. A film segment fea-
tures Daljit Dhaliwal, a news anchor, discussing U.S. policy on de-
portation and its antigang initiatives with Assistant Secretary of
State for Narcotics and Law Enforcement Affairs Anne W. Patterson.
National Geographic: World’s Most Dangerous Gang. 53 mins.
National Geographic Channel, 2007. $24.95
MS-13 is a transnational gang with a violence-oriented culture
and rituals now found in many different states and communities
ranging from cities to small towns. This documentary traces
their rise from a Los Angeles gang to an international organized
crime organization. Interviews with law enforcement and gang
members provide first-hand information. Some graphic content.
Femicide
Dual Injustice: Femicide and Torture in Ciudad Juarez. 17 mins.
Wittness.org, 2009. $29.95 (institutional, K-12); $19.95 (home;
may be available online)
Witness.org, an international human rights organization, in
partnership with Comision Mexicana de Defensa y Promocion
354
Print and Nonprint Resources

de los Derechos Humanos (CMDPDH), provides an overview
of the violent deaths of women in Ciudad Juarez. Since 1993,
more than 400 women have been tortured and murdered in this
border city. This largely unprosecuted wave of femicide (vio-
lent deaths of women) is an international human rights issue.
Electronic Resources
Congressional Research Service. http://opencrs.com.
Executive Office for Immigration Review. http://www.usdoj.
gov/eoir.
General Accountability Office. http://www.gao.gov.
GovTrack.us. http://wwwgovtrack.us.
U.S. Census Bureau. http://www.uscensus.gov.
Yearbook
of
Immigration
Statistics.
http://www.uscis.gov/
graphics/shared/aboutus/.
Border
Morphing map of changes in the U.S.-Mexico border Source:
PBS
http://www.pbs.org/kpbs/theborder/history/index.html
This map displays the changing contours? of the U.S.-Mexico
border after the U.S.-Mexico War of 1848.
Ports of Entry
http://apps.cbp.gov/bwt/index.asp
A major issue about the impact of intensified border security is
the impact that it has on travelers and commerce. The approxi-
mate wait times to pass through any Canadian or Mexican port
of entry are posted.
Terrorism
Worldwide Incidents Tracking System
http://wits.nctc.gov/
This is an international terrorist incident tracking system main-
tained by the National Center on Counterterrorism. The NTC
definition is ‘‘terrorism occurs when groups or individuals act-
ing on political motivation deliberately or recklessly attack
civilians/non-combatants or their property and the attack does
Electronic Resources
355

not fall into another special category of political violence, such
as crime, rioting, or tribal violence.’’
Immigration
Children of Immigrants Data Tool
http://datatool.urban.org/charts/datatool/pages.cfm
This site provides online generation of charts on immigrant
children for use in research and related reports.
U.S. Immigration Historical Trends Data Tool
http://www.migrationinformation.org/datahub/historicaltrends.
cfm
Information on immigration patterns and the changing social
characteristics of the immigrant population through time is pro-
vided. It allows tracing of the historic patterns of immigrant
community formation and composition. Statistics include immi-
grant source countries since 1960, immigrants in the U.S. labor
force, children in immigrant families, region of birth of the for-
eign-born, and immigrant age and sex distribution.
State Responses to Immigration: A Database of All State
Legislation
http://www.migrationinformation.org/datahub/statelaws_home.
cfm
This searchable data tool provides information on all immigration-
related bills and resolutions introduced in state legislatures.
They are classified by state, region, subject area, legislative type,
and bill status. This time-sensitive site is periodically updated.
356
Print and Nonprint Resources

Glossary
admissible
A noncitizen who may be granted entry to the United
States because he or she is not excludable or has a waiver of exclusion.
aggravated felony
Categories of crime or specific crimes resulting in a
sentence of longer than one year which render an unauthorized or per-
manent resident alien deportable and excludable for a period of time or
permanently.
alien
A person who is not a citizen or authorized permanent resident
of the United States.
amnesty
A term that originally refers to a provision of the Immigration
Reform and Control Act of 1986. A conditional amnesty allowed legal-
ization of undocumented noncitizens who could offer proof that they
had resided in the United States prior to January 1, 1982, and were able
to support themselves.
apprehension
The process of taking an unauthorized migrant or
immigrant into custody.
arms trafficking
The sale of weapons such as handguns or automatic
rifles for cross-border movement in violation of national or international law.
Arrival/Departure Card
The formal term for Form I-94. It is issued at
all U.S. ports of entry by an officer of U.S. Customs and Border Patrol.
The form states the legal period of stay, conditions, and status for the
noncitizen. It is supposed to be returned upon departure.
asylees
Individuals granted asylum in the United States because they
are able to prove that they are unable to return to their home country
because of past persecution or a ‘‘well-founded’’ fear of persecution if
they are returned to the home country.
asylum
Under U.S. law, a status that can be given to an alien physi-
cally present in the United States who satisfies the statutory criteria for
classification as a refugee. After one year of continuous residence, the
alien may petition for adjustment to permanent resident status.
357

asymmetrical political relations
A situation in which one country is
more powerful than another country and dominates it, often engaging in
unilateral or one-sided decision-making rather than bilateral decisions
or, in the case of multiple countries, multilateral decisions.
asymmetrical warfare
The use of unconventional, subversive, and
unexpected violent tactics and weapons by terrorists for disruption of
governments. Indiscriminate attacks, technology-based terrorism, and
weapons of mass destruction are examples of efforts to inflict mass casu-
alties and disrupt societal operations and the security environment.
authorization
The process in which a visitor or immigrant proceeds
from document acquisition and visa application through presentation
and approval by an immigration inspector at a port of entry.
authorized stay
The period of time allocated to a foreign national for a
stay in the United States. The return date is stamped on the I-94 form.
bilateralism
A method of decision-making in which two countries
have equal influence.
biological weapon
A virus, bacteria, or other biological agent used to
threaten or be intentionally released to harm human life. Examples: an-
thrax, smallpox, or other infectious disease.
biometric identification technology
Computer technology which
allows the matching of facial features in digital photographs and finger-
prints with suspected terrorists or persons attempting the use of a stolen
or altered passport.
bioterrorism
The threatened or intentional release of viruses, bacteria,
or other germs (agents) through the air, water, or food to harm of kill
people, animals, or plants.
bipartisan effort
Political cooperation between the members of two or
more competing parties.
black market
Financial sales of illicit goods in violation of national
and/or international law. These may be sales which avoid paying a
cross-border tariff or illegal sales of arms, drugs, and other contraband.
Board of Immigration Appeals (BIA)
Appeals of administrative deci-
sions made by immigration judges in an immigration court are for-
warded to the BIA. During an appeal, foreign nationals can be legally
present in the United States.
Border Patrol
An organization within U.S. Customs and Border Pro-
tection. It monitors the border between ports of entry.
border security
Covers processes for maintaining orderly entrance
and exit at a nation’s borders, whether they have been crossed by land,
at sea, or in the air. Inspection of people and goods is expected to realize
an end-state of preventing unauthorized entrance and smuggling.
358
Glossary

cell
A group of terrorists that operates autonomously but may be
affiliated with a larger movement without being overly influenced by
hierarchical control. This term is also applied to drug trafficking organi-
zation units.
cell-based terrorism environment
An environment in which semiau-
tonomous groups of terrorists form cells which are only loosely con-
nected to a hierarchical authority. The lack of central organization makes
counterterrorism efforts more difficult.
chemical agents
Chemicals that can be used or converted into weap-
ons of terrorism. Certain chemicals, such as pesticides, are readily found
while others can be easily manufactured by terrorists with widely avail-
able instructional materials. Counterterrorism can involve tracking pur-
chases of these chemicals.
civil law
The branch of law concerned with relations between individ-
uals or organizations.
civil sanction
A fine issued under civil law impacting relations
between individuals or organizations.
Consulate
An office of the U.S. government, typically located in a U.S.
embassy, which handles visa applications and other consular duties.
contraband
Goods subject to a tariff or illegal items that are smuggled.
counterterrorism
Preventative policies for the identification and elimi-
nation of terrorist environments and groups. Counterterrorism laws that
criminalize terrorist acts and intelligence operations to capture or assas-
sinate terrorists are proactive counterterrorism activities.
crime
Actions or lack of action in violation of the criminal laws of a
local jurisdiction, the state, or the federal government for which there is
no legally acceptable excuse.
criminal law
The branch of law concerned with offenses against soci-
ety, individual members, their property, and the social order.
criminal sanction
A fine or punishment issued under criminal law.
criminalization
The process by which a previously accepted or unclas-
sified behavioral practice is made illegal through legislative action.
Customs
The division in U.S. Customs and Border Protection respon-
sible for monitoring goods being sent across a border, confiscating con-
traband hidden in the goods, and collecting any applicable tariff.
cyberterrorism
A term referring to the use of technology to disrupt in-
formation systems.
debt bondage
A condition in which an individual is falsely induced or
coerced to enter into a labor contract that does not pay enough to meet
individual need or a past debt, such as for being trafficked across a
Glossary
359

border into a new country. The individual is forced to labor under harsh
conditions without being able to clear his or her economic obligation.
This situation, also referred to as peonage, is illegal in the United States.
deportation
The former term describing the formal process of return
of an alien who has been deemed removable due to violation of immi-
gration laws. Deportation is ordered by an immigration judge and is not
legally considered punishment. Now termed removal.
detention
The process and condition in which foreign nationals are
held in legally authorized confinement in ICE facilities and subcon-
tracted jail or prison bedspace.
deterrence
The use of criminal law and security procedures to increase
the risk of an act, thereby preventing individuals from carrying it
through. Examples are unauthorized immigration and antiterrorism law
and security procedures.
dirty bomb
A toxic explosive device using non-weapons-grade radio-
active materials acquired from medical or other uses. The radioactive
contamination could cause catastrophic damage by rendering areas
uninhabitable. This is thought to be the type of weapon of mass destruc-
tion most accessible to terrorists.
domestic terrorist acts
Terrorist acts committed by American citizens.
drug cartel
Large sophisticated criminal organizations which contain
more than one drug-trafficking organization (DTO) and cells with spe-
cific duties related to production, transport, distribution, security, and
money laundering. The drug command structure is located outside of
the United States but U.S. DTOs that are a part of the cartel or have an
alliance with it assist in drug distribution.
drug trafficking
The large-scale practice of transporting prohibited
substances over the border for purpose of sale. It is differentiated from
drug dealing, which involves street-level distribution and sales.
drug-trafficking organizations (DTOs)
Complex organizations with
developed command structures to produce, transport, and distribute
mass quantities of one or more types of illegal drugs.
due process of law
A right provided by the Fifth, Sixth, and Four-
teenth Amendments the U.S. Constitution. It is generally understood to
refer to the process in which legal proceedings are conducted so as to
protect individual rights. For citizens involved in a criminal proceeding,
these rights include being charged with a specified criminal offense;
being heard before an impartial judge and court having jurisdiction over
the case; accusations made in proper form with notice and opportunity
to defend according to established procedure; and the right to obtain a
lawyer and, under certain circumstances, to appeal.
emigrant
A foreign national who leaves his or her country of origin for
the purpose of immigration to a receiving country.
360
Glossary

emigration
The process in which foreign nationals leave countries of
origin for immigration to a receiving country. Historically and at pres-
ent, the United States has been a major receiving country.
employer sanctions
Civil and criminal fines and penalties for any
employer who hires, recruits, or refers for a fee aliens known to be unau-
thorized to work in the United States. These penalties were established
by the Immigration Reform and Control Act of 1986.
enhanced security
Counterterrorism measures that ‘‘harden’’ targets
to prevent or reduce terrorist attack severity.
equal protection under the law
The guarantee under the Fourteenth
Amendment of the Constitution that all persons should be treated
equally in legal proceedings. This right is currently interpreted as held
by citizens and not foreign nationals in immigration court proceedings.
EWIs
The abbreviation for ‘‘entered without inspection.’’ It refers to
foreign nations who entered without inspection of documents by immi-
gration officials. Most commonly this occurs by crossing the Canadian
or Mexican land border away from a port of entry. A foreign national
who is EWI cannot apply for legal entrance unless seeking asylum.
exclusion
A legal term for denial of entry of an alien to the United
States. Before passage of the Illegal Immigration Reform and Immigrant
Responsibility Act of 1996, the decision to exclude was made by an im-
migration judge in an exclusion hearing. After April 1, 1997, the adjudi-
cation of inadmissibility can take place in either an expedited removal
process without an immigration judge and hearing or before an immi-
gration judge at a hearing.
expedited removal
The process in which a foreign national or perma-
nent resident alien considered to have no legal right to be in the country
is deported (removed) without further judicial action.
expulsion
The process by which a foreign national is removed
(deported).
felony
A criminal offense punishable by incarceration of at least a
year, sometimes culminating in the death penalty.
globalization
Internationalization of trade, investments, services, in-
formation, and other human practices. Globalization has eroded the
power of sovereign states and made certain individuals, organizations,
and even criminal enterprises more powerful.
guest-worker program
A temporary migration program in which for-
eign nationals are admitted for specified time periods to do work in
areas in which there as a documented shortage of workers.
human intelligence (HUMINT)
Intelligence gathered by human oper-
atives on persons through tracking, interviews, and interrogations. In
the United States, this activity is primarily carried out by the Central
Intelligence Agency (CIA).
Glossary
361

human rights
The basic rights and freedoms to which all persons are
entitled. These rights are often considered to include the right to life and
liberty, freedom of thought and expression, and equality before the law.
human trafficking
A process in which individuals seeking to migrate
come under the control of criminal enterprise and through coercion,
force, or fraud, lose their freedom and are forced to labor for no compen-
sation, including in prostitution.
identity papers
Documents such as a visa and passport, which estab-
lish who a person is and what his or her country of residence is.
illegal alien or immigrant
A term often used in the media to refer to
individuals present in the United States who entered without inspection
of documents and approval by an immigration official or who entered
legally and overstayed their visit.
immigrant
A person born in another country who has been granted
permission to permanently reside in the United States, either as a legally
resident alien or a naturalized citizen.
Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE)
The enforcement divi-
sion of the U.S. Department of Homeland Security. This branch includes
detention and deportation officers and immigration court trial attorneys.
immigration court
The administrative court for immigration matters.
Immigration judges have the authority to administer removal (deporta-
tion) proceedings and to grant foreign nationals legal status to remain in
the United States. Immigration court appeals are heard by the Board of
Immigration Appeals.
inadmissibility
A person who seeks to come to the United States at a
port of entry but does not meet the criteria in the Immigration and
Nationality Act for admission and presence in the United States. The
person may be placed in removal proceedings or, under certain condi-
tions, allowed to withdraw an application for admission. Such a person
is inadmissible.
intelligence
Data collected for an information database. The purpose
can be to track entry and exit of individuals or to monitor terrorist activ-
ity, among other reasons.
interdiction
The process of intercepting unauthorized migrants, drugs,
or contraband at the nation’s borders. Interdiction is a strategy for control-
ling unauthorized immigration, terrorist entry, and drug trafficking.
international law
Laws agreed upon by governments that are
enforced by international agreements.
jihad
Islamic term referring to a holy war against religious or political
oppression.
law
Formally written rule of conduct for the operation of a society
which proscribes or mandates certain behavior.
362
Glossary

law enforcement
A term referring to all agencies responsible for
enforcing the law and maintaining public order.
legal permanent resident
A status granting a foreign national permis-
sion to reside in the United States permanently and, if so desired, to
apply for naturalization.
legalization
Elimination of laws and criminal penalties associated
with having entered without documents or overstayed a visa. A process
of changing the status of unauthorized immigrants to permanent resi-
dent aliens.
literacy test
A procedure initiated by the 1917 Immigration Law in
which individuals must demonstrate that they are able to read and write
before being allowed entrance as an immigrant.
migrant
An individual who has crossed a border without inspection of
documents authorizing entrance.
militia
A citizens’ group organized for provision of paramilitary activ-
ity such as patrolling a border.
misdemeanor
An offense punishable by incarceration, typically in a
local jail, for a period whose upper limit is typically up to one year.
money laundering
The process in which money or assets acquired
through criminal means is entered into the banking system disguised as
legitimate business proceeds or income.
mujahedeen
Muslim fighters engaged in jihad, the fighting of a holy
war.
multilateralism
A method of decision-making in which a group of
countries have mutual influence in decision-making.
narcoterrorism
Drug trafficking–related violence involving terroriza-
tion, such as use of threats, torture, and beheading, which often occurs
as a result of interdrug trafficking organization disputes or as an attempt
to coerce government officials.
narcotraffickers
Latin American drug traffickers who use terroristic
violence for intimidation.
naturalization
Process through which a noncitizen becomes a citizen
which includes a residency and civics requirement.
new terrorism
An emergent type of terrorism with a loose cell-based
form of organization that uses asymmetrical tactics including weapons
of mass destruction with potential for high casualties.
nuclear weapons
Military weapons using weapons-grade plutonium
and uranium with a high-explosive capacity inside a blast zone. Radio-
active debris from these weapons can return to the ground as fallout.
Fallout contaminates the region around the blast zone, irradiating it and
making it uninhabitable.
Glossary
363

overstay
A situation in which a noncitizen with a visa has stayed
beyond the date of departure approved and recorded on an arrival/de-
parture (I-94) form. Overstay is a grounds for penalizing the noncitizen
through cancellation of a visa or denial of permission to visit based on
overstay duration. Visa overstay is a major source of unauthorized im-
migration although only a small portion of all visa-related travel.
passport
A legal identification document issued by a country of origin
which attests to citizenship for purpose of international travel.
permanent resident alien
An individual who is not a citizen of the
United States but is legally and lawfully residing in the United States.
All lawful permanent residents are required to have and carry a green
card, which is a permit to work.
persecution
Harm committed by a government or people that a gov-
ernment is unable or unwilling to control.
port of entry
Designated locations at which international travelers and
cargos can receive authorization to cross a border and enter a country.
Individuals must present visas and passports and cargos must have
accompanying paperwork and are subject to inspection to prevent
smuggling. There are land, sea, and air ports of entry.
protocol
An international agreement regarding procedures that the
parties to such a treaty agree upon, such as the Protocols on Human
Trafficking and Immigrant Smuggling.
racial profiling
A type of criminal profiling solely based on the race or
ethnicity of a person. Race or ethnicity is not acceptable as the principal
descriptor for suspect apprehension but it can be a secondary aspect of a
criminal profile. An example would be a traffic stop of a person solely
on the basis of race.
radiological agents
Radioactive materials that can harm biological
organisms when eaten or inhaled. Non-weapons-grade radiological agents
used in medicine could theoretically be used to construct a ‘‘dirty bomb.’’
refugee
Under the Immigration and Nationality Act, a person outside
of the country of nationality who is unable or unwilling to return
because of persecution or a well-founded fear of persecution on the basis
of race, religion, nationality, membership in a particular social group, or
political opinion.
removal
The expulsion of a noncitizen from the United States on
grounds of inadmissibility or deportability. A formal term used to refer
to deportation.
rogue states
Nations that support terrorist activities and groups.
securitization
The process by which an activity not previously consid-
ered to endanger the public becomes subject to security precautions and
procedure.
364
Glossary

security checks
Background investigations carried out to determine if
individuals should be allowed into the United States.
signal
intelligence
(SIGINT)
Systematic
intelligence
gathering
through electronic intercepts of messages using high technology.
slavery
The process of holding a person under coercion for the pur-
pose of forced labor.
sleeper cell
A group of terrorist operatives who establish themselves
in residences in another country and await orders for a terrorist attack.
smuggling
Unlawful movement of goods and people across a national
border.
sovereignty
The power of a government to rule and issue laws for a
given territory. National sovereignty was first recognized in the Treaty
of Westphalia (1648), which recognized principles of national territorial
integrity, supremacy of a nation in law-making, and inviolability of
national borders.
spillover violence
Drug-trafficking organization or terrorist-related
violence which occurs inside of the borders of a country that is not the
target of the violence or harbors groups that are targets of the violence.
terrorist incident
A threat or an attack carried out by terrorists.
trafficking
The organized movement of illicit goods or people across
international borders.
trafficking victim
An individual who was recruited, provided, har-
bored, or obtained through force, fraud, or coercion and subjected to
involuntary servitude, forced labor, or commercial sex.
transnational organized crime
Unlawful activity such as drug, arms,
or human trafficking, practiced or supported by organized criminal
groups across national boundaries.
transnational threat
A potential source of harm that originates outside
the United States connected to criminal or terrorist activity.
unauthorized alien or immigrant
A person present in the United
States who entered without authorization through the inspection of
approved documents.
unauthorized immigration
The federal government term for the proc-
ess through which an undocumented population comes to migrate and
then reside in the United States.
undocumented alien or immigrant
A term used by immigrant rights
advocates to describe a person present in the United States who entered
without authorization through the inspection of approved documents.
unilateralism
A method of decision-making in which a powerful country
dominates the decision-making of another country or group of countries.
Glossary
365

visa
A permit issued by a U.S. consulate which gives an individual
permission to seek entry at a port of entry to the United States.
voluntary departure
Relief given to a foreign national in removal pro-
ceedings when he or she agrees to leave the U.S. voluntarily by a certain
date instead of being deported.
War on Terror
A phrase adopted after the 9/11 attacks on the World
Trade Center and Pentagon to refer to the concerted effort against terror-
ism led by the United States on a worldwide scale.
weapons of mass destruction
High-yield weapons capable of inflict-
ing mass casualties when used by terrorists. Examples include biologi-
cal, chemical, radiological, and nuclear weapons.
World Trade Center
a complex of two towers located in New York
City which was damaged when bombed by Islamic terrorists in 1993
and destroyed by Islamic terrorists using two hijacked jet aircraft to
crash into the buildings on September 11, 2001.
366
Glossary

Index
Accord on Our Shared Border (1995),
167
Administration for Children and
Families (ACF), 297
Advance Passenger Information
System (APIS), 30, 291
Afghanistan, 177, 225
Agency for Health Care Research and
Quality (HCRQ), 297
Agency for the Management of
External Borders (FRONTEX),
146
Agricultural Act (1949), 164
Aguilar, David V., 178–179
Alaska, 4
Albuquerque, 85
Algeria, 201
Alien and Sedition Act (1798), 157
Alien Contract Labor Law (1885), 161
Alliance to Stop Slavery and Stop
Trafficking, 181
al-Qaeda, 24, 177, 201, 208;
trafficking heroin, 42
Al-Thager Model School, 177
American Anthropological
Association Committee on
Human Rights, 305
American Arab Anti-Discrimination
Committee, 185
American Bar Association’s
Individual Rights and
Responsibilities Section, 185
American Civil Liberties Union
(ACLU) Immigrant Rights
Project, 313
American Community Survey, 296
American Conservative Union (ACU),
305–306
American Friends Service Committee
(AFSC), 303–304
American Immigration Control
Foundation, 306
American Immigration Council (AIC),
306
American Immigration Law
Foundation, 306
American Immigration Lawyer’s
Association (AILA), 306, 307
American Muslim Council, 185
Amnesty International USA (AIUSA),
137, 304
Anarchist Exclusion Act, 161
Animal and Plant Health Inspection
Service, 290
Annual Conservative Political Action
Conference, 306
anthrax, 230–231;
types of, 230;
symptoms, 230–231
Anti-Drug Abuse Act, 21–22, 294
Anti-Slavery International, 181, 304
Anti-Terrorism Act (2001), 147
Anti-Terrorism and Effective Death
Penalty Act (AEDPA), 22, 56–57,
168, 248–252
Appropriations and Intelligence
Committee, 200
Arellano Felix brothers, 186–187, 224
Arizona Republic, 101
Arizona’s law, 68
367

Arizona volunteer group, 311
arms trafficking, 352
arrests, 53
Ashbury College, 186
Ashcroft, John, 43–44, 179–180
Assembly of God, 179
Associate Judge, 194
attempted solutions:
border inspections, 30–33;
counterterrorism, 24–25;
homeland security, department of,
28–29;
immigration, criminalization of,
20–23;
layered traveler screening, 29–30;
ports of entry, monitoring of,
25–28;
terrorism, 23–24;
U.S. border patrol, 19–20
Attorney General, 195
Automated Commercial Equipment
(ACE), 218
Automated Commercial System
(ACS), 218;
Automated Broker Interface (ABI),
218–219;
Automated Line Release (ALR),
219;
Automated Manifest System
(AMS), 219;
Border Cargo Selectivity System,
219;
Border Release Advanced
Screening and Selectivity
(BRASS) program, 219;
Customs Cargo Selectivity, 219;
Entry Summary Selectivity, 219;
National In-Bond System, 219;
quota, 220
aviation and transportation security,
strategies for, 227
Aviation and Transportation Security
Act (Public Law 107-71), 292
Avila Beltran, Sandra, 181
Baja California, 187
Bales, Kevin, 180–181
Baltimore Police Department, 196
Barnett, Roger, 89
Barrie, Ontario, 186
Beck, Roy, 312
Bemidji State University, 196
Bentley Christian Center, 186
Best Spoken Word Album Grammy
Awards, 200
bibliographies, 344–346;
borders, 346;
border security, 345;
drug trafficking, 345–346;
human trafficking, 345;
terrorism, 346;
unauthorized immigration, 345
bin Laden, Osama, 177–178, 351
biological weapons of mass
destruction (BWMD), 227–232
biometric screening system, 226
bioterrorism, 227–232
blistering agents, 229
blood agents, 229
Board of Immigration Appeals, 293
Bogard, Chris, 348
books and articles, 321;
border conditions, crime, and
human rights, 325–329;
border control policy, 321–325;
immigration and interior
enforcement, 329–330;
terrorism, 334–335;
trafficking, 332–334;
U.S.-Canada border, 331–332
border:
definition of, 1;
geography of, 2–3
Border and Transportation Security
Integrator, 178
border conditions, 82–83
border control, future of, 95–101
border crime, 340
border-crossing card, 26, 52, 217
border documents and visas, 49–52
border infrastructure and technology
integration, 282
border law enforcement, 290
Border Patrol, 26;
agents, 291
Border Safety Initiative (1998), 168
border security, 209–211;
challenges of, 3–4
Border Tunnel Prevention Act, 174,
201
368
Index

Borja, 17
Bosnia, 198
botulism, 231–232
boundary agreement (1818), 158
Bracero program (1942), 163
Brewer, Jan, 67
Brookings Institution, 314
Brookline, Massachusetts, 195
Brownsville, 85
Buchanan, Patrick, 18, 60
Buffalo, 221
Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms,
and Explosives (ATF), 138, 139
Bureau of Citizenship and
Immigration services, 28
Bureau of Population, Refugees, and
Migration (PRM), 297
Bush, George H. W., 181
Bush, George W., 57, 181–183, 190,
285
Bush, Jeb, 99
Bush Exploration, 182
Business International Corporation,
199
Business Roundtable, 307
Calderon, Felipe de Jesus, 173, 183,
189
California, 2, 91, 351
Canada, 332
Canada’s Partners in Protection (PIP),
218
Canada-U.S. Cross-Border Crime
Forum, 128
Canada-U.S. Partnership (CUSP)
(1999), 168
Canadian Alliance party, 186, 194
Canadian-border agents, 44
Canadian Border Services Agency
(CBSA), 29
Canadian Immigration Act (1911), 162
Canadian independence (1867), 160
Canadian Public Safety Minister, 186
Canadian security, 54–56
Canadian Security Intelligence Service
(CSIS), 53, 299–300
Canutillo, Texas, 202
Carafano, David, 97
cargo crossing and inspection,
218–220
Caribbean, 135
Carillo, Rodolfo, 189
Carnegie Endowment for
International Peace (1910),
314–315
Carnhan, Mel, 180
Castaneda, Jorge, 132
catch-and-release policy, 80
Category II Consultative status, 308
Cato Institute, 315
CBP Air and Marine agents, 291
Celis, Leopoldo Sanchez, 188
Celis, Rodolfo Sanchez, 188
Cellucci, Paul, 54
Center for American Progress (CAP),
307–308
Center for Comparative Immigration
Studies (CCIS), 315
Center for Democracy and
Technology, 308
Center for Global Risk and Security, 319
Center for Immigration Studies (CIS),
17, 316
Center for Migration Studies (CMS),
316
Center for Strategic and International
Studies (CSIS), 316
Center for Terrorism Risk
Management, 319
Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention (CDC), 296
Central America, 135, 240
Central Intelligence Agency, 205
Centrist Democrat International, 190
Centro de Informacion de Seguridad
Nacional (CISEN), 147, 300
Champlain, Samuel de, 5, 221
Cheney, Dick, 46
Chertoff, Michael, 72, 99, 184
Chicago, 199, 204
Children’s Health Insurance Program
(1997), 185
China, 123, 125
Chinese Exclusion Act, 13
Chinese immigration (1850–1859), 159
choking agents, 229
Chowan College, 197
citizenship, 335
Citizenship and Immigration Services
(CIS), 213
Index
369

Citizenship Studies, 335
Civil Rights Act (1957), 296
Civil Rights Legal Advocacy
Organizations, 313–314
Clinton, Bill, 184
Clinton, Hillary, 132, 184–185
Coahuila, 8
Coalition Against Trafficking in
Women (CATW), 308
coalition partners, 309
Coalition to Abolish Slavery and
Trafficking (CAST), 353
Coast Guard patrols, 26
cocaine, 223;
trafficking of, 165
Cold War, 46, 352
Cole, David, 185
Columbia Law School, 194
Columbia University, 194, 199
Comision Mexicana de Defensa y
Promocion de los Derechos
Humanos (CMDPDH), 355
Comision para Asuntos de la Frontera
Norte, 85
Command, Control, Communications,
and Intelligence (C3I), 220
Commissioner’s Award, 178
Common Operating Picture (COP)
Program, 220
Congressional committees, 295
Consejo Nacional de Seguridad
Privada de Mexico (CNSP), 147,
300
Conservative Party, 193
Constitutional Bill of Rights, 43
Container Security Initiative (CSI), 31,
291
Continued Presence (CP), 125
contraband, 12
Controlled Drugs and Substances Act,
128
Controlled Substances Act, 293
Convention to Prevent and Punish
Acts of Terrorism, 288
Cooperative Threat Reduction (CTR)
Program, 46
Cornelius, Wayne, 90, 315
Corporate libertarians, 60
corrupt guardians, 125
corruption, 13, 135, 136
countering terrorism, 299
counterintelligence, 299
counter-terrorism, 291, 295
count of aliens (1819), 158
Covington & Burling, 195
credibility determination, 278
Crime, Law and Social Change, 340
Crime and Justice International, 340
Criminal Alien Program (CAP), 21
criminal aliens, 125
criminal enterprise, 42
criminal felony, 20
Cross-Border Advanced Traveler
Information System (ATIS), 216
Cross-Border Crime Forum (1999),
168
cross-border tunnels, 74
CTC Sentinel, 341
Culiacan, 189
cultural violence, 62
Customs and Border Patrol (CBP), 52
Customs Consolidation Act (1841), 12,
159
Customs Trade Partnership Against
Terrorism (C-TPAT), 31, 45, 218
cyber-threat warnings, 299
Czech Republic, 123
Daimler-Chrysler, 96
Danforth, John, 179
Day, Stockwell, 186
Daytime Emmy Award, 200
Decennial Population and Housing
Census, 296
Dechert, Price and Rhoads 206
Declaration Alliance, 311
degree of monitoring, 161
Deletetheborder.org, 308
de-Mexicanization, 3
Democratic Caucus Homeland
Security Task Force, 203
demographic planning, 337
Denver, Colorado, 206
Department of Defense, 26
Department of Homeland Security
(DHS), 4, 63, 146, 211–213
Department of Justice (DOJ), 63, 194,
298
deportation versus detainment, 77–82
Deputy Attorney General, 194
370
Index

Derechos Humanos, 348
Designated Foreign Terrorist
Organizations, 233–234
detainees, 79
detainee-transfer system, 79
detection and interdiction, 292
deterrence, 98
deterring migrants, 91
Detroit, 221
Developing Communities Project, 199
Dickinson School of Law, 204
Dillingham Commission Report
(1911), 162
dirty bomb, 47
discrimination, 336
Division of International Security
Studies, 319
Dobbs, Lou, 98
Domestic Advocacy Organizations,
305–313
domestic and international campaign,
beginning of, 164
Domestic Nuclear Detection Office
(DND), 289
Domestic Security Organizations,
298–299
Dominican Republic, 135
Drake Junior High School, 207
driver’s license, security for, 280–282
Drug Enforcement Administration
(DEA), 130, 165, 196
drug policy, critics 134–135
drug prohibition, 327
drug-prohibition agenda, 134
drug-related violence, 176
drug trade, 223
drug trafficking, 43, 223–224, 322;
Mexican drug trafficking, 128–135;
Merida Initiative, 135–137;
The U.S.-Canada border,
127–128
drug-trafficking organizations
(DTOs), 42, 128, 183, 188, 190,
200, 223, 334
Dunn, Timothy J., 215
DVDs:
femicide, 354–355;
terrorism, 351–352;
trafficking, 352–354;
transnational gangs, 354;
U.S.-Mexico border law enforce-
ment, 346–347;
unauthorized immigration and
crime, 347–351
Eastern British America rebellion
(1837), 158
Economic Census, 296
economic globalization, 41
Egypt, 177
Electronic Advanced Passenger
Information System (eAPIS), 216
electronic eavesdropping, 93
electronic monitoring, 82
electronic resources, 355;
border, 355;
immigration, 356;
terrorism, 355–356
Electronic System for Travel
Authorization (ESTA), 216
El Paso Community College, 202
El Salvador, 125
Emergency Supplemental
Appropriations Act for Defense,
the Global War on Terror, and
Tsunami Relief, 278–283
Emmy awards, 180
employer sanctions, 21
England, 207
Enhanced Border Security and Visa Entry
Reform Act (2002), 29, 268–271
Ensenada, 187
entry and exit data system, 275
Episcopal High School, 197
Escobar, Pablo, 188
establishment of U.S. Border Patrol
(1924), 163
ethnic conflict, 336
ethnographic research, 327
e-trace technology, 224
European expansion, history of, 4–5
European Organized Crime Threat
Assessment (OCTA), 300
European Police Office (Europol), 300
European Security and Defense Policy
(ESDP), 146
European Terrorism Situation and
Trend Report (TE-SAT), 300
European Union (EU), 141–143;
counter-terrorism, 144–147
Index
371

Europol (European Police Office),
300
explosive screening of passengers, 227
faith-based citizen-action group, 310
federal agency, 291
Federal Air Marshalls program, 292
Federal Aviation Agency (FAA), 26
Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI),
124, 205, 209, 225
Federal Criminal Code, 297
Federal Emergency Management
Agency (FEMA), 289
Federal Immigration Reform and
Enforcement Coalition (FIRE
Coalition), 308–309
Federal Investigative Agency (AFI),
193
federal firearms licensees (FFLs), 138
Federal Preventative Police, Mexico,
301
Federal Rules, 297
Federation for American Immigration
Reform (FAIR) (1979), 309
Felix, Francisco Javier Arellano, 186
femicide, 328, 354
Fisher, Michael J., 187–188
Forde, Shawna, 90
Foreign Affairs Committee, 207
Foreign Assistance Act of 1961 (FAA),
252
Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act
(FISA), 258
Foreign Policy Institute, 318
Foreign Relations Committee, 200
foreign terrorist organizations (FTOs),
233
Fox, Vincente, 169, 190
Free and Secure Trade (FAST)
program, 44, 218
Free Trade and Security, 44–45
Fuentes, Vincente Carillo, 188–189
Fuentes, Amado Carillo, 189
funnel effect, 91
Gadsden Purchase of territory (1853),
159
Gallardo, Miguel Angel Felix, 181, 188
Geary Act (1892), 161
Gentleman’s Agreement (1908), 162
Georgetown Immigration Law Journal,
338
Georgetown University, 185
Gilchrist, Jim, 89, 311
Global Crime, 340
global inequalities, 117–118
globalization, 41, 119, 325, 349
Global Strategy Institute, 316
global terrorists, 54
Global War on Terror, 94
Gonzales, Alberto, 190–191
Gore, Albert, 182
Government Accountability Office
(GAO), 31, 52
government agencies and
organizations, 289–298
Governmental Affairs Committee, 200
government reports, 343–344
Great Britain, 5
great recession, 237
Griswold, Daniel, 60
Guanajato, 190
Guantanamo Bay, 198
Guerrero, Gilberto Higuera, 187
Guerrero, Ismael Higuera, 187
Guillen, Osiel Cardenas, 191–192
Gulf Cartel, 131, 192
Haiti, 135
Hamilton, Lee H., 205
Hanson, Gordon H., 18
Harken Energy, 182
Harper, Stephen, 193–194
Harvard Business School, 182, 190
Harvard Law Review, 184
Harvard Law School, 191, 199
Harvard Law School Association
Award, 191
Harvard University, 184, 203
Hayworth, J. D., 72
Health Resources and Services
Administration (HRSA), 297
Hefner First Amendment prize, 185
Heritage Foundation (1973), 309
Hernandez, Ezequiel, 168
heroin, 223
Herzegovina, 198
Hi-B cap visas, 315
High Intensity Drug Trafficking Area
Programs (HIDTA), 221
372
Index

Hispanic National Bar Association,
191
Holder, Eric H., 194–195
Holy Family High School, 206
Homeland Security, 200
Homeland Security Act (2002), 28, 171
Homeland Security and
Counterterrorism Program, 316
homicide, 326;
factors associated with, 84
Honolulu, Hawaii, 199
House Judiciary Committee, 206
House of Representatives, 298
Houston, 125
human and civil rights, 339
Humane Borders, 310
human rights, 339;
abuse, 88
Human Rights and Security Initiative,
316
Human Rights Watch, 304–305
human smuggling, 121, 328, 347
Human Smuggling and Trafficking
Center, 272
human trafficking, 121;
causes and consequences of,
120–125;
pursuing and prosecuting, 125–127;
stages of, 122–123
Hunter, Duncan, 348
Hussein, Saddam, 182
ICE Office of Intelligence, 292
Idaho, 6
Illegal Immigration Reform and
Immigrant Responsibility Act
(IIRIRA), 22, 29, 57, 65
illicit goods, 42
Illinois Senate, 199
immigrants, rights of, 92–95
Immigrants and Minorities, 336
immigration, 11, 49, 56–69;
closing of nation’s borders to,
162–164;
and federal government, 63–64;
issues, 339;
key players, 56–58;
and law enforcement, 64–69;
opposing viewpoints, 58–63;
securitization of, 169–176
Immigration Acts:
1882, 160;
1891, 161;
1906, 12;
1921, 163;
1924, 163, 167
Immigration and Customs
Enforcement (ICE), 64, 124, 209
Immigration and Nationality Act
(1965), 164, 233, 244;
era of criminalization of
immigrants, 246–256;
Immigration Reform and Control
Act (IRCA), 244–246;
securitization of immigration, 256;
war on terrorism documents,
285–288
Immigration and Naturalization
Service (INS), 20, 25, 27, 202,
290, 322
Immigration and Naturalization
Service Data Management
Improvement Act of 2000, 29, 169
Immigration and Refugee Act (2000),
54, 331
immigration control, 327
immigration law, 338;
and enforcement, 226–227
Immigration Reform and Control Act
(IRCA) (1986), 21, 64, 165,
244–246
Immigration Reform Caucus (IRC),
298
Immigration Subcommittee of the
Judiciary Committee, 195
impunity, 85
independence for Mexico (1821), 158
Independence Institute, 207
inquisitorial system, 136
Institute of Terrorism Research and
Response (ITRR), 301
Institutional Removal Program (IRP),
21
Institutional Revolutionary Party
(PRI), 333
Instituto Technologico de Mexico
(ITAM), 183
insurgency, causes of, 343
Integrated Border Enforcement
Teams, 128
Index
373

Integrated Surveillance Intelligence
System (ISIS), 75
Intelligence Collection Analysis
Teams, 128
Intelligence Electronic Data System,
268
Intelligence Reform and Terrorism
Prevention Act (IRTP) (2004), 30,
271–278
Inter-American Development Bank
(1959), 302
Inter-Institutional Coordination Unit
Gruppa Antiterrorista
(UCIDGAT), 147, 302
International Association for
Counterterrorism and Security
Professionals (IACSP), 301
International Association for the
Study of Organized Crime
(IASOC), 341
International Bank for Reconstruction
and Development (IBRD), 303
International Center for the
Settlement of Investment
Disputes (ICSID), 303
international comparative research,
317
international coverage, 336
International Crime Control Act
(1996), 168
International Criminal Police
Organization (INTERPOL)
(1956), 164, 301
International Cultures celebration
Expo-Fest, 310
International Development
Association (IDA), 303
International Finance Corporation
(IFC), 303
International Global Entry, 216–217
international governmental
organizations (IGOs), 317
International Human Rights
Advocacy Organizations,
303–305
International Human Rights and
Terrorism Related Documents,
288
International Immigrants Foundation,
310
International Intelligence Exchange,
226
International Migration, 336
International Migration Institute
(INM), 45
International Migration Review (IMR),
336
International Organization for
Migration (IOM), 316–317
international organizations, 302–303
international population movements,
336
International Security Program, 316
international terrorism, 11
Interoperable Law Enforcement, 268
INTERPOL (International Criminal
Police Organization), 164, 301
Irish Republican Army (IRA), 146
irritating agents, 230
Islamabad, 208
Islamic terrorism, 24, 144, 145
Jalalabad, Afghanistan, 177
Jamestown Foundation, 317
Jay Treaty (1794), 157
jihadist air hijackers, 4
jihadist terrorists, controlling, 43
Jihad Prevention Act (2008), 207
John F. Kennedy School of
Government, 178, 183
Johns Hopkins University School of
Advanced International Studies,
318
Johnson Reed Act, 237
joint investigative teams, 300
joint operational intelligence, 299
joint tribunal (1903), 161
Journal of Ethnic and Migration Studies
(JEMS), 336
Journal of International Migration and
Integration, 337
Juarez cartel, 189
judicial review, 265
Judith Sargeant Murray Award, 180
Kean, Thomas, 205
Kennedy, Edward, 195–196
Kennedy, John F., 195, 206
Kennedy School of Government, 187
Khartoum, 177
374
Index

King Abdulaziz University, 177
Kirkorian, Mark, 316
Kochar, 17
Kolbe, Jim, 101
Kopechne, Mary Jo, 195
Krauthammer, Charles, 59
Kuwait, 197, 207
La Armitas, 188
La Familia Michoacana, 133
Lake, Jennifer E., 211
Lake of the Woods, 5
Laredo Community College, 178
Laredo State University, 178
Lateral Repatriation Program, 172
Latham and Watkins, 184
Latin America, 315
layered inspection, 30
layered security system, 227
Lee, Matthew, 84
Legal Action center, 307
Legal Services Corporation (LSC), 254
legislative developments, 336
Lennox, Patrick, 56
Leon, Nuevo, 189, 191
Leonhart, Michele Marie,
132, 196
Lewis and Roca, 198
Leyva, Vincente Carillo, 189
Liberty and Security Committee of
the Constitution Project, 185
linewatching, 167
Loera, Joaquin Guzman, 192–193
London School of Economics, 180
Los Angeles, 125
Los Angeles Airport, 178
Lower Rio Grande Valley, 202
low-intensity conflict doctrine, 216
Manager of the Year, 188
maquiladoras, 3
marijuana, 223
marine domain awareness, 221
Massachusetts, 182, 195
Massey, Douglas, 71, 98
Mass Immigration Reduction Act
(1999), 207
McCain, John, 196–197
Medicaid, 296
Medicare, 296
Memorandum of Agreement (MOA),
65
Merida Initiative, 136, 175, 176
Mexicali, 187
Mexican cities, 85
Mexican Constitution, 8
Mexican Migration Field Research
program, 315
Mexican Revolution, 162
Mexican twin-city homicide rates, 85
Mexico, 98, 125, 135, 240;
drug addiction in, 134–135;
traffickers, 131
Mexico City, 190
Michigan Journal of Race and Law, 338
migrant deaths, 91;
causes of, 91
migrant hunters, 89
Migration, 337
Migration Letters, 337
Migration News, 337
Migration Policy Institute, 317
millennium attack plot, 201
Milwaukee County Day School, 204
Minister of Social Services (1996), 186
Minuteman Civil Defense Corps Inc.,
310–311
Minuteman Project, 89, 311
Mohammed, Khalid Shaikh, 197–198
money laundering, 352
Montana, 6
Monterrey, 189, 191
Moral panics, 61
Morelia, Michoacan, 183, 191
Moselle River, 141
MS-13, 354
Mujahideen, 177
Multilateral Investment Guarantee
Agency (MIGA), 303
multilateralism, 120
music bootlegging, 352
Napolitano, Janet Ann, 64, 132,
198–199
narcoterrorism, 129, 223
narcotraffickers, 333
National Border Patrol Council
(NBPC), 178
National Center on Counter-
Terrorism, 97, 172, 355
Index
375

National Citizen’s Coalition, 194
National Cocoa Institute, 180
National Crime Information Center
(NCIC), 67;
Interstate Identification Index
(NCIC-III), 260
National Cyber-Security Division
(NCSD), 299
National Day Laborer Organizing
Network, 15
National Drug Assessment (2010), 133
National Drug Control Strategy, 294
National Governors Association, 199
National Guard, 216
National Immigration Forum, 311
National Institutes of Health (NIH),
296
National Intelligence, 294
Nationality Act (1965), 237
National Lawyers Guild, 185
National Legal Conference, 316
National Legislative Award, 203
National Network for Immigrant and
Refugee Rights (NNIRR), 311
National Security Entrance-Exit
Registration System (NSEERS)
program, 171
national security policies, 1, 327
national sovereignty, definition of, 1
National War College, 197
Naturalization Act (1795), 157
Naturalization Act (1870), 160
nerve agents, 228
nerve gas attack symptoms, 228–229
Network Warfare operations, 298
New Mexico, 2
New York, 125, 221
New York City, 4, 198
New York Public Interest Research
Group, 199
NEXUS card, 217
9/11 attacks, 42, 351
9/11 Commission, 4, 24–25
No More Deaths (No Mas Muertes),
311
nongovernmental organizations
(NGOs), 316
nonprofit corporation, 301
nonstate criminal actors, 41, 333
North America:
continental security perimeter,
143–144;
counter-terrorism, 147–148
North American Free Trade
Agreement (NAFTA), 10, 44,
117, 118, 119, 247–248, 315, 324,
326
North Atlantic Seaboard, 5
North Atlantic Treaty Organization
(NATO), 147
Northern Border Project, 220
Numbers USA, 312
Nunn-Lugar Cooperative Threat
Reduction Program, 48
NYU Center on Law and Security, 317
Obama, Barack Hussein, 50, 199–200
Occidental College, 199
Office of Detention and Removal
(DRO), 292
Office of Homeland Security, 204
Office of Intelligence and Analysis
(OIA), 289
Office of Investigations (OI), 292
Office of Operations Coordination
(OOC), 289
Office of the Minister of the Interior, 300
Omar, Mohammed, 177
Omnibus Anti-Drug Abuse Act
(1988), 166, 246–247
ongoing issues:
border security, 11;
border smuggling, 12–13;
border trade, 11–12;
immigration, 13–19
opening of the nation’s borders,
164–166
Operation Blockade, 323
Operation Condor, 171
Operation Gatekeeper (1994), 76, 167,
324
Operation Hold the Line, 203
Operation Streamline, 80
Operation Wetback (1954), 164
Oregon, 4, 6
Oregon Treaty (1846), 159
Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE),
253
Organization of American States, 253
376
Index

Padilla, Felix, 93
Page Law (1875), 160
Pakistan, 225
Palermo Protocol, 170
Panama Canal Zone, 196
Partido Accion Nacional (PAN), 190
Peabody Award, 180
Pearl Harbor (1941), 163
Pelosi, Nancy, 200–201
Pelosi, Paul, 200
Pennsylvania law practice, 206
Pentagon, 4, 178
Peonage Abolition Act (1867), 125
People for the American Way, 318
periodicals and publications, 335–343;
human rights, 339;
immigration, 335–338;
immigration law, 338–339;
terrorism, 341–343;
transnational crime and trafficking,
340–341
Perry, Rick, 71
personal identification cards, security
for, 280–282
Perspectives on Terrorism, 341
PEW Hispanic Center, 318;
national survey, 17
PEW Research Center, 318
Phillips Academy, 182
Pig War, 159
Podesta, John, 307
Policia Federal de Preventa (PFP)
(Federal Preventative Police),
147, 301–302
policing organizations, 88
Political Asylum and Immigrant
Rights Project, 185
Population Studies, 338
Port Modernization Project,
221
ports of entry (POEs), 24, 26, 200, 211;
monitoring of, 25–28
Posadas-Ocampo, Jan Jesus, 192
Posse Comitas Act (1878), 160
poverty, 119, 353
pre-globalization terrorist
organizations, 45
Presidential Gold Medal for
Humanitarianism (2008),
194
Presidential Rank Awards, 179
Privy Council, 186
prohibition, of importation of slaves
(1808), 158
pro-immigration lobby, 307
Protect America Act (2007), 174
Protection Project, 318
Pull for Kids, 182
Qadhafi, Muammar, 47
Qatari Ministry of Electricity, 198
racism, 336
Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt
Organization (RICO), 249
Ramirez, Juan Diego Espinoza, 181
Rand Corporation, 319
Ratification of the Fourteenth
Amendment (1868), 160
reaffirmation of the policy (1945), 164
Reagan, Ronald, 207
REAL ID Act (2005), 173, 277
Red Scare due to the Bolshevik
Revolution (1919), 163
Registration Law (1940), 163
Report Cards, 317
Research Centers, 314–319
Ressam, Ahmed, 169, 201–202
Reyes, Silvestre, 202–203
Rhinard, Mark, 211
Rice University, 191
Richview Collegiate Institute, 193
Ridge, Tom, 203–204
Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, 177
Roca-Suarez, Jorge, 196
Rocking, 87
Roehampton University, 180
Royal Canadian Mounted Police
(RCMP), 13, 24, 163
Rumbaut, Ruben, 83
Russia, 123
Sandia High School, 198
Santa Clara University, 198
Saudi Arabia, 177
SBInet Technology Program, 220
Scheer, Robert, 18
Schengen agreement, 141, 142
Schengen Information System (SIS),
142
Index
377

Schroeder, Mary M., 198
Schumer, Charles, 60, 101
Schwarzenegger, Arnold, 90
Scott Act (1888), 161
Second U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals,
184
Secretary of State, 185
Secure America and Orderly
Immigration Act, 201
Secure Border Initiative (SBI), 75,
220–221
Secure Electronic Network for
Traveler’s Rapid Inspection
(SENTRI), 31
Secure Fence Act (2006), 72, 174, 201,
283–285, 347
securitization of immigration policy,
63, 99, 256, 337
Security and Policing Organizations,
International, 299–302
Security and Prosperity Agreement
(2005), 173
security perimeter, 143
security priorities, 32–33
Security Screening Program, 299
Select Committee on Immigration
(1978), 165
Senate Bill 1070, 67
Sensenbrenner, James, 204–205
SENTRI card, 217
Separatist terrorism, 144
Shaikh Mohammed, Khalid, 30
Simcox, Chris, 310
Sinaloa, 181, 187, 189, 192
Sinaloa Cartel Federation, 131, 188
‘‘sin cities,’’ 10
Sistema Nacional de Seguridad
Publica (SNSP), 147, 302
Sixth Amendment, 79
slavery, 353
smallpox, 231
smart and secure borders, 12
Smart Border Declaration (2002), 171
Smigielski, David, 48
Smith, Lamar, 17
smugglers, 95
smuggling, 352;
of alcohol, 163;
of weapons, 137–141
social disorganization theory, 329
social exclusion of immigrant groups, 337
social justice, 339
Social Justice:
A Journal of Crime, Conflict, and
World Order, 339
Southern Poverty Law Center (SPLC)
(Immigrant Justice Project),
313–314
Southwest Missouri State University,
179
Specter, Arlen, 206
Spener, David, 76
Spitzer, Elliot, 93
Springfield, Missouri, 179
stand-alone division, 293
Stanford University, 204
State Criminal Assistance (SCAP)
program, 81
State Department, 130
status, 10
Staudt, Kathleen, 86
Stowell, Jacob, 84
straw purchasers, 140
Student and Exchange Visitor System
(SEVIS), 217, 291
Studies in Conflict and Violence, 341
Subcommittee on Terrorism, 207
subservience, 3
Substance Abuse and Mental Health
Services Administration
(SAMHSA), 297
Sudan, 177
Swansea Institute, 207
Swanton, 221
symposia, 342
tables and figures on immigration,
236–243;
interior enforcement, 237–243
Tactical Infrastructure (TI) Program,
220
Taliban, 177
Tancredo, Tom, 206–207
Targeted Actionable Monitoring
Center (TAM-C), 301
Tariff Act (1789), 12, 157
Teaching Tolerance program, 314
Tecate, 187
technology standard to confirm
identity, 262–263
378
Index

terrorism, 45–46, 169–176, 225–236,
351;
biological weapons, 230–232;
bioterrorism, 227–230;
causes of, 343;
designation criteria, 235;
incidents of, 232–234;
legal ramifications, 235–236;
9/11 Commission Recommendations,
226–227;
9/11 hijackers, 225;
other effects, 236;
prevention of, 43;
terrorist exclusion list, 235
Terrorism and Political Violence, 342
Terrorism and Security Monitor, 342
Terrorism Research Center (TRC), 319
terrorist activity, 235, 343
terrorist aliens, detention of, 264
terrorist attacks, targets for, 170
Terrorist Exclusion List (TEL)
authority, 235
terrorist organizations, criminal
activities of, 45
terrorists:
financial crimes, 45;
other criminal activities of, 43;
suspected, rights of, 92–95
terrorist travel, 226, 273–274
Texas, 2, 4, 91, 182
Texas Air National Guard, 182
Texas independence from Mexico
(1836), 158
Texas National Guard Counter Drug
Forces, 71
Texas Rangers, 71, 214
Thachuk, Kimberly, 42
Thailand, 123
Third U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals, 184
Thomas Jefferson Center, 185
Tijuana, 187
Tijuana Cartel Federation, 131, 186
Toronto, 193
torture, 129
trade, 221–223;
and border enforcement, expansion
of, 166–169
traffickers, 121, 122, 123, 126, 131
Trafficking and Violence Protection
Act (2000), 318
trafficking networks, 96
transnational crime and trafficking,
340
transnational threats, 333;
major trends increasing, 41
Transnational Threats Project, 316
Transnational Threats Update, 343
Transportation Security
Administration (TSA), 289
travel documents, 276
traveler processing and inspection,
216–218
Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo
(1846–1848), 159
Treaty of Paris (1783), 157
Trends in Organized Crime, 341
Trilateral Security and Prosperity
Partnership(SSP), 12
Trinity College, 200
trusted-traveler program, 216
Tularemia, 232
T visas, 125, 254
two-tier system, 329
two-way drug-trafficking, 127
Ukraine, 123
undefended, 2
undocumented immigrants, 20
unilateralism, 120
United Nations, 303;
Office of the High Commissioner
for Human Rights, 303;
Office on Drugs and Crime, 303;
Universal Declaration of Human
Rights, 304
United Nations Global Program, 181
United Nations International
Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights, 288
United Nations Security Council
Resolution (1373), 288
United States, 177;
geographical boundaries of,
157–162
Uniting and Strengthening America
by Providing Appropriate Tools
Required to Intercept and
Obstruct Terrorism Act (USA
PATRIOT Act) (2001), 29, 170
Universidad Iberoamericana, 190
Index
379

University of Alberta Human Rights
Award (2005), 180
University of Calgary, 193
University of California, 315
University of Chicago Law School,
179, 199
University of Hull, 18
University of Northern Colorado, 206
University of Pennsylvania (1951), 206
University of Texas, 178
University of Toronto, 193
University of Virginia School of Law,
195, 198
University of Wisconsin Law School, 204
Urban Institute, 319
USA PATRIOT Act (2001), 92, 256,
257–267, 308, 352
U.S. Border Patrol (USBP), 44, 187,
213–215, 290, 322;
line watching (1994–2004), 167;
tactics, 323
U.S. Border Watch, 312
U.S -Canada border, 2–3, 4–7, 28, 53–54
U.S. Census Bureau, 295–296
U.S. Central Intelligence Agency
(CIA), 294–295
U.S. Chamber of Commerce, 312–313
U.S. Citizenship and Immigration
Services (USCIS), 100, 289,
291–292
U.S. Coast Guard (USCG), 289, 293
U.S. Commission on Civil Rights, 296
U.S. Customs and Border Protection
(USCBP), 28, 187, 188, 289,
290–291
U.S. Department of Defense, 48
U.S. Department of Health and
Human Services, 127, 296–297
U.S. Department of Homeland
Security, 289–290
U.S. Department of Justice Executive
Office for Immigration Review
(EOIR), 293
U.S. Department of State, 295
U.S. Department of State Bureau of
Population, Refugees, and
Migration, 297
U.S. District Attorney, 194
U.S. Drug Enforcement
Administration (DEA), 293–294
U.S. Federal Bureau of Investigation
(FBI), 294
U.S. Government Accountability
Office (GAO), 295
U.S. Hispanic Chamber of Commerce,
191
U.S. House Committee on the
Judiciary, 297
U.S. House of Representatives, 296
U.S. Immigration and Customs
Enforcement (ICE), 28, 289, 290,
292
US INS-CIC Border Vision (1999), 168
U.S. Joint Forces, 132
U.S.-Mexico border, 2, 7–9, 44, 82, 322;
crossing zones, 88;
migrant deaths, 90–92
U.S.-Mexico border, militarization of,
69, 165;
barriers in, 72–75;
migrant smuggling, impact on, 75–77
U.S.-Mexico sister cities, 83
U.S.-Mexico war, 8
U.S. National Counterterrorism
Center (NCTC), 299
U.S. National Institute of Justice (NIJ),
298
U.S. Office of National Drug Control
Policy (ONDCP), 294
U.S. Office of the National
Counterterrorism Executive
(ONCIX), 299
U.S. Secret Service, 289
U.S. Senate Committee on the
Judiciary, 297
U.S. Transportation Security
Administration (TSA), 292–293
U.S. VISIT (U.S. Visitor and
Immigrant Status Indicator)
Program, 51
U.S. Visitor and Immigrant Status
Indication Technology
(US-VISIT), 217, 271–278, 291
Vermont, 221
vesicants, 229
Victims of Trafficking and Violence
Protection Act (VTVPA) (2000),
121, 124, 169, 252–256
Vietnam War, 197
380
Index

Villa, Pancho, 9, 162
violations, 83–90
visa overstay, 49
warning migrants, 92
War of 1812, 158
War on Drugs, 323
War on Terror, 42;
documents, 285–288
Warren Commission, 206
Washington, DC, 4, 6, 43
watch-group members, 89
weapons-grade fissile, 47
weapons of mass destruction, 46–49,
343
Web-based program, 217
Webster-Ashburton Treaty, 6, 159
Wellesly College, 184
western boundary, 5
Western Governors Association, 199
western hemisphere travel initiative,
331
Westmount High School, 186
White House, 190
White Slave Traffic Act (1907), 162
Wichita, Kansas, 206
Wilberforce Institute, 180
wiretapping, 93
Wisconsin State Assembly, 204
Witness, 305, 354
Woodrow Wilson International
Center for Scholars, 319
World Bank, 118, 120, 303
World Trade Center, 4, 178;
bombing (1993), 167
Yale Law School, 184, 206
Yale University, 179, 182, 185
Yousef, Ramzi, 30, 197, 207–208
zero-tolerance risk management
approach, 28
Z-Portal Passenger Imaging System,
217
Index
381

This page intentionally left blank 

About the Author
Judith A. Warner is a professor of sociology and criminal jus-
tice at Texas A & M International University (TAMIU). In 2008,
she received TAMIU’s Distance Educator of the Year Award
and in 1991, TAMIU’s Scholar of the Year Award. She is the
editor of Battleground Immigration (2009), and co-editor of the
Journal of Social and Ecological Boundaries. She has published in
the areas of immigration, homeland security and domestic vio-
lence. Her research interests include border security, immigra-
tion and the intersection of race, class and gender.

