www.ebook3000.com

Unboxing IT

www.ebook3000.com

Unboxing IT
A Look Inside the Information
Technology Black Box
Christopher McCay
ROWMAN & LITTLEFIELD
Lanham • Boulder • New York • London

Published by Rowman & Littlefield
A wholly owned subsidiary of The Rowman & Littlefield Publishing Group, Inc.
4501 Forbes Boulevard, Suite 200, Lanham, Maryland 20706
www.rowman.com
Unit A, Whitacre Mews, 26-34 Stannary Street, London SE11 4AB
Copyright © 2016 by Christopher McCay
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced in any form or by any
electronic or mechanical means, including information storage and retrieval systems,
without written permission from the publisher, except by a reviewer who may quote
passages in a review.
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Information Available
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Names: McCay, Christopher.
Title: Unboxing IT : a look inside the information technology black box / Christopher McCay.
Description: Lanham : Rowman & Littlefield, [2016]
Identifiers: LCCN 2016004768 (print) | LCCN 2016008079 (ebook) | ISBN 9781475822113 (cloth :
alk. paper) | ISBN 9781475822120 (pbk. : alk. paper) | ISBN 9781475822137 (Electronic)
Subjects: LCSH: Telecommunication—Popular works. | Computer networks—Popular works. | In-
formation technology—Popular works.
Classification: LCC TK5101 .M377 2016 (print) | LCC TK5101 (ebook) | DDC 004—dc23 LC
record available at http://lccn.loc.gov/2016004768
TM The paper used in this publication meets the minimum requirements of American
National Standard for Information Sciences Permanence of Paper for Printed Library
Materials, ANSI/NISO Z39.48-1992.
Printed in the United States of America
www.ebook3000.com

v
Contents
Preface
vii
Acknowledgments
xi
Introduction
xiii
I: The Dimensions of the Box
1
History of IT
3
2
Talking Tech
9
II: What’s In the Box
3
What Do the Organization and IT Want from Each Other?
17
4
Communicating with the Organization
23
5
What Numbers to Watch
29
III: The Walls of the Box
6
Hardware
37
7
Software
45
8
Networks
53
9
Help Desk
61
IV: How Do We Build the Box?
10
Project Management and Methodologies
69
11
Process Improvement
77
12
Risk Management
83
13
Vendor Management
91
14
Security
97
V: Who Holds the Box?
15
Staffing
105

Contents
vi
VI: Your Personal Box
16
Living a Digital Life and IT Consumerization
115
17
Future Watching
123
VII: Closing the Box
18
Conclusion
131
About the Author
135
www.ebook3000.com

vii
Preface
Information technology can really scare the pants off of some people. It is
complicated, nuanced, specialized, speaks its own language, and is truly
invasive. It has crept into almost every aspect of our daily lives. It has
changed the way we work. The way we learn. The things we buy. The
way we buy. And it has become a driving force in the way the world is
changing, connecting, and expanding.
While we have come a long way from thinking of everyone who
understands IT as some kind of technowizard that dwells in a dark base-
ment and makes strange things happen by waving his or her hands over
a keyboard, to most people IT is still a complete mystery. A black box. I
am astonished, almost daily, how little people truly understand about the
technology we all use so frivolously. With this book I am hoping to
demystify some of that world. To unbox IT.
Information technology is such a huge topic that to truly delve into
every nook and cranny that exists within that world could take an entire
volume of books. So think of this as an overview of a truly rich and dense
topic of study. IT 101, as it were. I will attempt to give a basic understand-
ing of the various disciplines that exist within the IT world, some of the
thought processes behind the methodologies IT professionals follow, and
touch on some of the realities of living in a truly technological wonder-
land.
We will look at computer hardware, software, networks, and much
more. And while you certainly won’t be ready to take on a vicious mal-
ware attack or design a fully virtualized disaster recovery site when you
finish this book, you will have a greater understanding of what your
friendly neighborhood IT tech goes through on a regular basis. (And also
know what the blazes a “fully virtualized disaster recovery site” is!)
I feel this understanding is imperative for any nontechnology per-
son—but especially for anyone in the education field. Technology ad-
vances at breakneck speeds, and understanding that world is a key to
understanding the next generation. The current generation (my chil-
drens’ peer group) was born into a world with a computer in every

Preface
viii
classroom; they don’t remember a time when we didn’t all have access to
the entire worldwide knowledge base in our pockets.
The base level of knowledge they possess is the equivalent of a decent
entry-level help desk technician these days. I’ve been working in the
information technology world for over fifteen years, and I have seen all
kinds of crazy things. I started as one of those help desk technicians and
have worked my way up to my current position as the head of IT for a
national program management firm. I’ve designed networks from
scratch, migrated entire companies from one backend server platform to
an entirely new system (hardware and operating system), managed
million-dollar IT budgets, and pulled many an all-nighter to ensure that a
system update didn’t disrupt the workday.
I have spent my career in the for-profit industry, but I have had the
good fortune for the last five years to work for a company that is heavily
involved in advancing the education world. We work with all levels,
from K–12 to higher education. We work with individual charter schools,
as well as entire school districts. I’ve also been married to a teacher for
eighteen years, and we have two school-age children. I’ve seen the evolu-
tion of technology in the classroom, watched my children work a mouse
and touchscreen without any practice or confusion, and, like all of us, I
have lived through the evolution of technology in our lives.
My parents had to walk to the local library and sort through encyclo-
pedias, old newspapers, and (if they were lucky) microfiche records of
events. My children have access to the entire collected knowledge of the
planet through a wire in our house. That is, for many of us, an unbeliev-
able change in the way we view the world. And yeah, some days that
weirds me out too.
Ultimately, my goal is to give you the tools to better understand this
fully integrated aspect of our lives. Computers and technology have
reached a level of invisibility in our lives that is equal to indoor plumbing
and electricity. We don’t think about the mechanics of how they work,
but when any of those systems breaks it is a massive disruption in our
lives. All of us understand the basics of how a fuse box works or how to
plunge a toilet, and with this book you will learn those equivalents in the
IT world.
www.ebook3000.com

Preface
ix
SO WHAT?
So what is the point, really? My boss is very fond of that simple two-
word question. And it really does rip right into the heart of everything,
doesn’t it? Why is all of this important? Why should we spend the next
hundred pages or so together? And what can you hope to get out of this?
Well, if I haven’t made it clear yet, technology is an omnipresent
thing. We simply can’t escape from it without completely cutting our-
selves off from the world. And the people who have dedicated their lives
to learning about IT, fixing IT, bettering IT, and presenting IT to everyone
else are an eclectic, eccentric, sometimes frustrating, always fascinating
breed of individuals. IT may be everywhere, but not everyone under-
stands it or appreciates it. And more than a few people are downright
terrified of it.
By the end of this book, I hope that you won’t be one of those people.
Instead, you will be someone who either works with, teaches, manages,
or employs IT professionals, and you will have a much better under-
standing of what it is they do and what type of people they are.

www.ebook3000.com

xi
Acknowledgments
While there are an almost countless number of people throughout my life
that deserve thanks and praise, I will keep this fairly simple.
Mom and Dad, thanks for everything.
Nathaniel and Zander, you guys are the best boys any father could
ask for. Sorry my deadline made me miss out on Halloween last year.
And Melissa. Thank you for everything. You are an amazing woman,
and the best wife ever. I love you!

www.ebook3000.com

xiii
Introduction
As stated earlier, information technology is a huge topic to cover in one
sitting. Obviously, there are multiyear advanced degrees on the subject.
So what can we hope to accomplish with just one book? How about
advancing from little to no knowledge to a basic entry-level understand-
ing? Every IT professional agrees that everyone should have a base-level
understanding of the technology world.
So many questions, frustrations, problems, and misunderstandings
that IT professionals deal with on a daily basis could be solved by ensur-
ing that everyone had this basic set of information. This is especially
important in the ever-evolving world of education. Anyone who is
school-age these days does not know what it is like to live in a world that
does not hum with technology. And those who choose to work in the
education field will be required to have a base-level technological under-
standing to properly interface with these kids.
This book will start with an overview of the history of information
technology. It is a topic that, surprising to many of you, stretches back (at
the writing of this book) almost two hundred years. Like all good stories,
there are heroes and villains, wins and losses, and a glimpse into a magi-
cal future. And then the journey continues into the wonderful world of
“talking tech.” I’m sure you have noticed that the IT world speaks its
own language. In fact, there are all kinds of subdialects within informa-
tion technology.
Mostly, the “talking tech” chapter will concern itself with understand-
ing some core technology terminology (a crash course, as it were) that
will help you to understand many of the topics covered in the rest of the
book. Don’t worry; this won’t be as dry as a dictionary. But just as you
need to understand the symbols of arithmetic to have any kind of discus-
sion about math, so too will you need this overview to understand IT.
After we have established our baseline we will dive into a discussion
of IT as a function of the larger organization. Whatever the organization,
be it a business, a school, a nonprofit, or a startup, they all have some set
of requirements for what they want to get out of IT. What is often surpris-

Introduction
xiv
ing is that those organizations aren’t very good at knowing what it is they
want from IT. Mostly this appears to be because the people in charge
don’t know enough about IT to know what they want. Many of them are
operating from an old model that turns to technology for the absolute
minimum set of business needs. It has long been a struggle within the IT
world to try and change that. One of the problems, however, is that while
organizations don’t always know how to talk to IT, it is equally true that
IT doesn’t know how to talk to the organization.
Most IT professionals have progressed through a career track that has
kept them elbow deep in technology. Then, one day, they are handed a
title that includes the words manager or supervisor in it and the non-IT
managers are surprised that the IT person has trouble adjusting from tech
talk to business talk. It is an important goal to make sure that everyone
who works in IT gets exposure to the nontechnical side of the businesses
they are working for. We will be looking at both sides of the equation,
then, to make sure that you can see what it is that both groups (informa-
tion technology and the organization) need from each other.
How do you ensure that you are doing a good enough job at what you
do? Do you track improvements? Are you reviewed annually? One of the
things that most children dread in school is being graded. They never
really understand the importance of tracking progress at the time. It is
just what is expected. IT professionals, by comparison, love to be graded.
Metrics are a key aspect of daily life in the IT world.
There is nothing more satisfying than an uptime dashboard that
shows all systems green. Or a help desk satisfaction survey that shows
you are meeting all of your service level agreements and your customer
feedback has you rated at 97 percent. So you better believe we will spend
some time covering important IT metrics and learning what they mean.
We will also cover the metrics that are most important to the organization
and to you as a technology user. Interestingly these are not always the
same thing.
From there, we will venture into the wonderful world of hardware.
Servers, laptops, desktops, tablets, smartphones; we will touch on all of
those. There are so many aspects to the hardware we all use on a daily
basis that no one really thinks about. Most people have heard the terms
hard drive, processor, and memory, but do you understand them? (File cabi-
net, brain, and countertop by the way, but we will get into that later.)
And the obvious place we will go from there is software.
www.ebook3000.com

Introduction
xv
Do you know why we need operating systems? Who knows just how
many software processes are running when you are just staring at your
desktop with nothing open? And we will look at the evolution of the app
as we have become an increasingly mobile world. After those (for most
people) relatively comfortable topics, we wander into one of the truly
hidden areas of IT. We’ll spend some time unpacking networking and
understanding how information flows from one computer to another.
And no, it isn’t magical fairies . . . it’s spiders, of course. World Wide
Web, and all that. Honestly, though, this is an area that even IT profes-
sionals find confusing, and anyone who is not an IT professional and can
actually talk to their network technician about what he or she does will
greatly impress them.
When you read the words IT professional, what is the first type of
person that comes to mind? More than likely most of you are picturing
someone wearing a headset, sitting in a cube, and answering questions
about why something is broken. That would be the glamorous (insert
your own sarcastic eye-roll here, please) life of the help desk technician.
This is truly a skill set unto itself, and where most in IT started.
We will talk about the help desk process, why it is important that you
do open a ticket properly instead of just asking for a favor, and cover
some basic troubleshooting topics. And yes, before you ask, you should
reboot. You’d be amazed what that can fix, and we will even talk about
why that is. Oh, and save often. But you should know that one already.
That’s it, right? We talked about IT as a part of an organization. We’re
going to look at what to measure, hardware, software, networks, and
someone to fix things when it breaks. What else could there possibly be,
right? You are picking up on the sarcasm in that last sentence, I hope.
From these more visible areas of IT we will be shifting into the processes,
methods, and secret sauce behind the scenes. Because there is an awful
lot to this gig that non-IT folks don’t ever really see.
Did you know that the IT profession has invented multiple methods
for project management (PM)? Most people don’t think of IT work as
project-based, but so much of what happens inside the IT black box is
project-driven: new system designs, network build-outs, software devel-
opment, and so much more. These are the things that are going on at
three in the morning so that the average worker doesn’t see any down-
time. And obviously if there wasn’t a plan in place things would get ugly,

Introduction
xvi
and that’s why we’ve designed these PM methodologies as flexible and
redundant.
We will then discuss the never-ending cycle that is process improve-
ment. Those who have chosen to make a living within the technology
realm tend to be driven by the need for efficiency. How can we make it
smaller? Faster? How can we take that manual process that you are doing
that takes thirty minutes and automate it so it takes five? This is a fun,
and frustrating, topic. And one that is becoming increasingly difficult in
our current technical landscape.
With so much that we can do with just a few clicks, anything that
takes more effort is seen as not good enough. And every time we raise the
bar, we reset the expectation level. Hence the never-ending cycle.
Think we’ve covered everything yet? Come on. You know better than
that! So let’s talk risk. Risk management is another one of those “we can
write a whole book on it” subjects. The simplest way to think about it is
this: Where am I vulnerable, and what can we do to prevent that? There
will always, always, be people out there who are attempting to use a lack
of technology understanding on your part to their advantage.
It is unfortunate, and it says more about the human condition than we
can cover here, but it is true. So what do we in IT do to prevent that? How
do we prepare and plan? And we absolutely do prepare and plan! It
would be astonishing to find that you haven’t already met people who
live for this battle.
No man is an island, and unless you work for a megacorporation, no
IT department can do it alone. Vendors help us fill those gaps. Vendor
management is an evolving area within IT. Who do the technology peo-
ple turn to when they have questions about technology? Who supplies all
that amazing technology? How do we choose who to purchase from?
Who are our trusted consultants? And where is the line drawn as to
which group is in charge of what service? And just who is answering
when you call for support in the wee hours of the morning?
After all of that, there is still one more area of concern within informa-
tion technology that we will need to cover. That is the topic of security.
Security is another one of those broad topics that could easily fit into its
own book, but it is an essential part of what we do in IT. Understanding
where the risks are, who the risks are coming from, and how to attempt
to mitigate those security risks is essential. And more and more, that
understanding is important within our daily lives as well. This is, per-
www.ebook3000.com

Introduction
xvii
haps, the most universal topic to discuss given the high level of techno-
logical integration into our daily lives.
All of that, in various levels of importance and depth of knowledge, is
what is going on in the head of an IT professional. So let’s talk about the
kind of people that willingly take all of this on for their profession. There
are so many different types of IT professionals, and we will examine an
overview of all the different areas based on the information we will have
already covered. From application developers to hardware engineers to
help desk technicians, we will explore all of the kinds of folks who make
their living in this crazy world.
We’ll also dive into an understanding of how best to interface with IT
professionals in ways that you, and they, will be able to learn from the
experience. I have spent my entire career asking the question, “What can
we learn here?” and I have found several scenarios where non-IT people
can learn from their IT comrades and vice versa. We will talk about that,
and even more importantly, when you need to get out of the way and let
IT get the job done without having to stop and explain things.
It doesn’t happen often (one would hope), but when the entire IT team
is barreling through the hallway jabbering quickly to each other in what
sounds like a combination of your high school algebra class and some
weird foreign language (there is a lot of math in IT), remember to get out
of the way! We promise; we’ll explain as soon as we aren’t worried about
something crashing and causing some very expensive damage to the
system.
And then we will round out all of these explorations of information
technology with a dive into your personal digital life. As we are all well
aware, there is no escaping technology anymore. Our refrigerators have
Internet access now. Did you know that Internet-accessible appliances
have already been hacked and used as bridging points for illegal spam-
ming activity? So it’s probably a good idea to put some thought into what
all this tech means for everyone in their daily lives.
Additionally, we will look into what impact the growing consumer-
ization of technology has had on IT in the workplace. The IT department
doesn’t hold all the keys to the technology kingdom anymore. Is that
good or bad? Well, that depends on who you ask. And in the final area of
exploration into our digital lives, we will look into the future. What will
technology look like in just a few years?

Introduction
xviii
And what can we expect as this generation, which has never known
what it is to not be connected, comes of age? The current crop of technol-
ogy explosions are the result of the generation that came of age with the
dawn of the Internet; just imagine what will happen once the generation
that could work a mouse before they could properly spell starts making
their mark.
So make sure you have your work backed up. Reboot to ensure your
memory is free. And let’s get started.
www.ebook3000.com

I
The Dimensions of the Box

www.ebook3000.com

3
ONE
History of IT
How far back do you think the use of the computer goes? If you read the
introduction, that is a bit of a trick question. The first machine to be
considered a programmable computer was built by Charles Babbage. He
designed what he termed an “analytical engine” that took input from a
series of punch cards and could output the result of the programmed
computation via a printer. His presentation of the project to Parliament
apocryphally included this question from a member of Parliament: “If
you input the wrong information, will it still output the answer you
desire?” Thus proving from moment one that user error would be inher-
ent in the usage of every computer from then on.
There were several computational machines that were designed and
built in the first half of the twentieth century, but all of them were analog
devices—meaning that they could only perform one computational task
at a time. While this did increase the efficiency of the computation, it
would not revolutionize public use of these systems. The next leap for-
ward, from analog to digital, occurred when Alan Turing designed the
first Turing machine. This was a computational device that utilized algo-
rithmic mathematics. This device is widely held as the first “modern”
computer.
Another key aspect of early computers was size. As you may or may
not be aware, the physical devices required to perform the work were
oversized and machined by hand. It wasn’t until World War II that com-
puters evolved into electromechanical devices. This allowed the process
of miniaturization to begin. As more and more electronic elements were

Chapter 1
4
added to replace the large, cumbersome, moving physical parts, comput-
er processors were able to shrink. Storage of data was still a problem at
this time though, as most data was still being stored on magnetic tapes.
The invention of the transistor once more changed the landscape of
computers. These smaller devices replaced the vacuum tubes that had
been used up until that point. The final piece of the miniaturization puz-
zle snapped into place with the invention of the integrated circuit. This
single device, made up of multiple transistors, is what continues to drive
miniaturization today. As this chip gets smaller and faster, we can build
more efficient portable devices.
PERSONAL COMPUTING
The more recent past is what is most interesting and exciting to the aver-
age computer user. In fact, the very concept of the average computer user
only exists because of the personal computer (PC) revolution. Everyone
has heard the stories of the scrappy kids in their garages who invented
global brands. The mid-1970s into the early 1980s saw an explosion of
home-built computers that would evolve into what we recognize today
as a standard computer setup.
However, while the garage builders started a trend, it was IBM that
finally brought PCs to the masses. For much of the 1980s PC hardware
was either built of, or based on, IBM hardware. Apple, as we all know,
was also prominent during this time. And the beginning of the Windows/
Apple debate started here. Apple had brand-specific hardware and soft-
ware. IBM, and the IBM clones that flooded the market, were all
Windows-based.
Later, hardware and software will be covered in depth, but it is impor-
tant to note some major historical landmarks that aided in the personal
computer evolution. The earliest forms of computers required an input of
commands in a programming format that the system recognized to tell
the computer what to do. “Back in the day,” as we older computer users
like to say, input was done through punch cards. These were a stack of
cards, roughly index card sized, with holes punched into them.
These holes, arranged in a format the card reader converted to inter-
nal commands, were the only way of feeding commands into the com-
puter. And these early computers could only accept one computational
input/output challenge at a time. As you can imagine, this did not make
www.ebook3000.com

History of IT
5
learning how to use and program a computer an easy thing. The addition
of keyboard data entry was the first hurdle necessary to bringing com-
puter use to the masses.
Additionally, the development of the operating system meant that
computer users no longer had to tell the computer everything to do. The
computer, through the OS, already had a set of internal commands and
parameters. The addition of the mouse and the graphical user interface
(GUI) completed the evolution of the early PC into a machine that was
accessible to everyone.
A COMPUTER ON EVERY DESKTOP
The PC revolution meant a change in the way that businesses utilized
computers. Until the advent of the PC, if a business made use of comput-
ers, it was in the form of a mainframe, which was a large centralized
computer that was used to manage and calculate large data sets. It was
not available to everyone, and to use it required specialized skill sets in
computer operation and programming.
Time-sharing of computer resources began to evolve the use of the
mainframe, as it opened up computer use and programming to a wider
set of users. This concept, that everyone could benefit from the computa-
tional power of their own computer, helped fuel the PC revolution. By
the mid-1980s, businesses had embraced the idea of the PC as a device
that could enhance and enable the workforce. And by the turn of the
century, most daily work tasks had been computerized to an ever-grow-
ing extent.
GOING MOBILE
As computer use increased and technology improved, the goal of a truly
portable computer was achieved. Laptops have now become the stan-
dard computer form factor, and it is stunning to think how far we have
come in so short a time. Mobile technology leapt forward again with the
invention of the smartphone and the evolution of the tablet into a usable
piece of mobile computing.
Along with mobile technology, the World Wide Web was invented.
This system of interconnected devices has evolved alongside the technol-
ogy over the last twenty years and has now become the primary way in

Chapter 1
6
which we interact with our mobile systems. We have developed a toolset
that has enabled access to the collected knowledge of everyone that is
connected to the Internet. Whether that is good or bad is a point that is
debatable on its own. The mere fact of its existence, however, is
astonishing.
COMPUTERS IN THE CLASSROOM
Since so many early computers were nothing more than giant mathemati-
cal analysis engines, it makes sense that many of their uses were for
educational pursuits. While it wasn’t until the PC revolution that most
K–12 schools had access to computers of any kind, universities have
played key roles in the development of computer invention and evolu-
tion. Turing did much of his early work while at Cambridge. Cambridge,
along with the University of Pennsylvania and many others, continued to
construct and refine various computer types.
With the advent of the PC, however, computer use as an educational
tool became more ubiquitous. Early computer use focused on learning
programming languages and teaching how to use the computer itself as a
tool. However, once computer use itself became a skill set, utilizing com-
puters to enhance the learning experience became the goal. And with the
growth of technology in all of its various forms, computer-assisted learn-
ing has become the norm.
Computer-based learning and curriculums that are developed, pre-
sented, interacted with, and graded entirely on a computer are now a
standard form of educational delivery. Schools at every level are using
the Internet to enhance outreach and as a tool for developing new digital
age skill sets with students. The current generation has had the benefit of
growing up with computers as a standard tool. They inherently know
and understand how to interact with them.
Additionally, the interactive capabilities that touch-screen technology
provides allow students with multiple learning styles to learn in their
own way. Educational software utilizes multiple sensory inputs and
adaptive learning tools that adjust the difficulty levels based on the re-
sponses of the student. This allows the teacher to customize and individ-
ualize the curriculum in ways that can be challenging in a standard, non-
computer-assisted classroom setting.
www.ebook3000.com

History of IT
7
KEY IDEAS IN THIS CHAPTER
• Charles Babbage created the first analytical engine, which is consid-
ered the first computer.
• Alan Turing evolved the computer from analog to digital when he
created the Turing machine.
• In World War II, computers evolved into electromechanical devices
and began the process of miniaturization.
• The personal computing revolution exploded in the mid-1970s and
led to the current environment of a computer in every home.
• The mid-1980s saw businesses embrace the PC as an enhancement
device for the workforce.
• The Internet expansion and mobile technology has led to the cur-
rent interconnected world that we exist in.
• Education has always been closely tied to computer evolution, as
most early computer design and exploration was performed by
universities.
• Computer-based learning has evolved to the point where we are no
longer just learning about computers; they are a tool to assist with
learning in general.

www.ebook3000.com

9
TWO
Talking Tech
IT has its own language, and to a nontechnological person it can sound
very intimidating. As with all specialty areas, it has terms and phrases
that are thrown around with ease by those in the know, and it is filled
with acronyms and long strings of numbers. This internal language can
make it very difficult to speak with IT professionals about what they do
for any length of time. Many in the IT profession find themselves teach-
ing about and explaining what it is they are attempting to do more than
actually working on a problem. The sheer ubiquity with which technolo-
gy has entered our daily lives can make it seem as though everyone
should know more than they actually do about that technology, even
though that is not the case.
This book is a very broad overview of the technology world. While we
won’t be diving deep into the weeds of how things work, it is important
to be able to speak about and understand a common set of concepts
within IT. This language barrier is usually what intimidates people the
most about understanding IT. Once a technician starts talking about how
the offsite disaster recovery site is made up of a virtualized environment
that is updated across a high-speed full mesh topology to a facility with
N plus 1 redundancy, that can all start to sound like the wah-wah noises
the adults make in a Charlie Brown cartoon. So let’s start small.
IT encompasses a wide variety of hardware and software types. Most
of us are familiar with the “poster child” for IT, the computer. We are
aware of the fact that a computer has a processor, memory, a keyboard, a
hard drive, a motherboard, and a mouse. It is important to note that these

Chapter 2
10
basic pieces are replicated in most IT hardware. All technology, whether
a server or a smartphone, has some version of those components. Obvi-
ously, the scale is different for each based on the size of the device.
It is also important to understand that any device that is Internet
accessible has some form of NIC (network interface card) for communi-
cating with the Internet. Addressing on the Internet is done by IP (Inter-
net protocol) address. This is a string of numbers, much like a phone
number, that identifies the location and physical connection port of the
device.
IPv4 is the most prevalent form of this addressing, and it consists of
four octets of up to three numbers each (8.8.8.8 or 67.215.71.202, for exam-
ple). But because the human brain is pretty horrible at remembering long
strings of numbers, we have developed a method for converting those
numbers into names. DNS (domain name system) is the system that con-
verts an IP address into a website or computer name. That way you only
need to remember Google.com, not 74.125.226.7.
BINARY
At the fundamental level, all information on a computer comprises ones
and zeroes. This is known as a binary counting system. Using an ever-
increasing number of places, any number can be expressed in binary
terms. 00 is obviously zero. 01 is one. 10, read in binary, is two. And the
pattern continues in that manner. So it is possible to express a number
like 137 in binary as a string of ones and zeroes like this: 10001001.
The reason for binary being used as the base counting system for
computers is very simple. Electrical impulses can be either on (1) or off
(0). So by stringing a series of on and off impulses together, any number
can be generated. And by then converting those number strings into data
formats (using various conversion software), the computer can read the
binary input as the data we, the users, wish to see.
BITS AND BYTES
All data is stored electronically in a series of ones and zeroes. A comput-
er’s processor is designed to interpret strings of ones and zeroes and
convert them into various characters, commands, inputs, and outputs.
These strings are made up of bits and bytes. One bit is the smallest unit of
www.ebook3000.com

Talking Tech
11
data storage. It is either a one or a zero. Not much can be done with a
single bit, so eight bits are grouped together to form a byte.
One byte is the standard unit for data storage. One byte is enough
data to equal one typed letter in a word processing application. From
there, we scale up metrically to the data storage sizes we are familiar
with. A kilobyte (Kb) is a thousand bytes. A megabyte (Mb) is a million
bytes, and most network data transmission happens in multiples of
megabytes. Most hard drives come in multiples of gigabytes (Gb), which
is a billion bytes.
However, we are increasingly seeing data storage mediums in multi-
ples of terabytes (Tb), which is a trillion bytes. Storage mediums can, and
do, go even higher than these numbers. Storage capacity now is limited
only by the physical size and number of hard drives that can be intercon-
nected. But the average user will only interact with storage sizes like
these for the foreseeable future.
MOORE’S LAW
It is impossible to spend any significant amount of time talking about IT
and the advancements within it without first discussing and understand-
ing Moore’s law. Gordon Moore, the cofounder of Intel, made an obser-
vation about computer chip capacity over time. He noted that capacity
roughly doubled, while size and price stayed the same, every year to two
years. And while this is not a universal law, like gravity, it has appeared
to hold true over time.
Therefore, we can assume that the ability for a computer to perform
advanced functions will continue to increase all while size and cost will
lower over time. This is one of the driving forces behind the miniaturiza-
tion and mobilization movements. This exponential curve has yet to level
out. And while there have been bumps and slowdowns, on average the
curve has continued to rise.
USERS
Without a doubt, you have heard an IT professional refer to anyone who
is not a member of the IT team as a “user.” Some people, I am sure, find
this term slightly jarring and possibly derogatory. It is not, however,
meant in that way. It simply means those who use the computers, as

Chapter 2
12
opposed to administrators (the IT department) who oversee the
computers.
And while it is true that, from time to time, IT professionals can get
frustrated with non-IT folks, the use of the general term is meant only as
shorthand and not as an insult. Therefore, from time to time, the term
will be used in that way throughout this book.
EDUCATIONAL TECHNOLOGY
The world has come a long way when it comes to IT. We have invented,
customized, streamlined, and miniaturized the components that make up
the computer so rapidly (thanks in part to the effects of Moore’s law) that
within three generations we have gone from a select number of highly
skilled users putting men on the moon to virtually everyone having a
computer in their pocket that has more computing power than the
Apollo 11.
The education world has been hard pressed to keep up with these
rapid fire advancements in technology. When I was in school, we had one
small computer lab with eight black and white televisions hooked up to
basic PCs. Now, my children have multiple computers per classroom and
laptops at home. And there are still a number of teachers in the workforce
who were there when I was in school. So how can it not be hard for these
advances to impact methodologies and curriculums?
The debate over technology and whether it is being used too much or
not enough is not the subject of this book. No matter where you fall on
that particular subject, it is still important to understand how to commu-
nicate with a generation that is eternally plugged in, and how to teach
anyone, of any age at this point, how to navigate in a world that is
becoming increasingly technology and Internet dependent.
As such, it is important to understand why it is that technological
advancements seem to be happening at a faster and faster rate (once
again, Moore’s law rears its head) and how to adjust to and anticipate the
changing needs of the classroom. We have already seen, with even a
minimal amount of technological advancement, that the traditional class-
room structure can be exploded using remote connection tools and edu-
cational software platforms.
It is no longer necessary to be in the same room, or even the same
continent, as the students you are teaching. And while this creates its
www.ebook3000.com

Talking Tech
13
own set of educational challenges, the capacity for educational advance-
ment through these methods can’t be diminished. Distance and corre-
spondence learning are not new concepts, but the interactivity that tech-
nology allows is what has changed the game.
The challenge you will now face comes in taking this overall under-
standing of the IT world presented in the following pages and adapting it
to your own environment. There will be a few specific educational tech-
nologies that we discuss, but the thrust of this work is to gain an overall
understanding of IT as a whole, so we won’t be spending too much time
on specific educational tools.
KEY IDEAS IN THIS CHAPTER
• To better understand the IT world, there are some basic terms and
concepts that need to be understood.
• All computer-based technology consists of the same basic parts:
processor, memory, keyboard, hard drive, mouse, motherboard,
and NIC.
• Addressing on the Internet is done by IP (Internet protocol) ad-
dress.
• All information on a computer comprises ones and zeroes. This is
known as a binary counting system.
• One bit is the smallest unit of data storage. It is either a one or a
zero.
• Eight bits are grouped together to form a byte. Large amounts of
bytes make up data storage rates.
• Moore’s law states that capacity roughly doubles, while size and
price stay the same, every year to two years.

www.ebook3000.com

II
What’s In the Box

www.ebook3000.com

17
THREE
What Do the Organization and IT
Want from Each Other?
IT really is everywhere. Nobody thinks about how integrated into our
lives and our workplaces it has become. Until, of course, it stops working
properly. A very busy workday can come crashing down by something
as simple as an Internet connection not properly working. So with that in
mind, what exactly does an organization want from the IT department?
Well, the basics would seem pretty straightforward: a working Inter-
net connection, e-mail, a platform for creating work product, and mini-
mal interruptions in the daily work flow. That last one, while it sounds
very simple, is what keeps many a systems and network engineer up at
night—both metaphorically and literally, as major changes and upgrades
need to happen during off hours.
Obviously, the reality of what the organization needs from IT is much
deeper and complicated than that. But this basic framework is helpful to
keep in mind. Technology needs to work properly. Technology needs to
enhance the workflow of the day-to-day, not get in the way of getting
work done, and, perhaps most importantly, make that day-to-day work
easier. This means that a good IT group is constantly striving to find the
better, faster, more efficient way to accomplish these goals.
How do these goals translate to the educational world? It’s all well
and good to talk about IT as a function of business, but the same basic
framework can be applied at all levels of education. The primary differ-
ence is that the day-to-day work isn’t a report or a product; it is teaching.
And technology has become deeply integrated into the classroom. So

Chapter 3
18
much so that we now have classrooms that are entirely virtual! They exist
only because of technology.
EDUCATIONAL NEEDS
The modern classroom houses many IT devices. Whether it is an elemen-
tary class or a graduate-level one, computers are everywhere. All stu-
dents will interact with some type of computer multiple times within any
given week. That could be for something as simple as typing up a paper,
or as interactive as a website-based learning program. Computers have
become an essential teaching tool.
IT is also integrated into the communication process between teach-
ers, students, and parents. E-mail is the medium in which information is
disseminated to large groups by the school administration. Websites list-
ing classroom assignments, rules, and information are the norm. Univer-
sities use social media to promote themselves, stay in touch with alumni,
and recruit new students. Rapid response information is sent via text
messages when necessary.
Students today have an innate understanding of the technology
world. Multitasking with multiple devices comes easy to them. There-
fore, utilizing various technology tools in a classroom setting can help to
enhance the learning environment. YouTube allows for demonstrations
of activities with relative ease. Music of all varieties and styles is available
to sample and learn from. Cultural information and examples are at our
fingertips for historical and current event analysis.
Where technology in the classroom can truly excel, though, is in ena-
bling the various individual learning styles of the students. Touch sensi-
tive technology allows for more hands-on learning for those who respond
better to that. Translation technology is available to assist with non-na-
tive-speaking students and for better teaching tools in language study.
Audio/video options are almost too numerous to count and are available
via simple Internet access. And learning through play and story software
allows for even the youngest students to find ways to interact with and
learn from technology.
These needs are the same no matter the grade level, no matter the
location. However, the ability for certain school districts to fulfill those
needs can be difficult. Some rural school districts can have more prob-
lems accessing reliable high-speed Internet connections. Technology ad-
www.ebook3000.com

What Do the Organization and IT Want from Each Other?
19
vancements happen at a rate that is hard for many school districts, no
matter the size or location, to keep up with.
Additionally, educators at the K–12 level tend to feel that their pri-
mary use of technology is for administrative tasks. While they are able to
use some technology as a teaching enhancement, the access for every
student to benefit from the technology is limited. This changes dramati-
cally at the college level, as most schools now make it a requirement that
all students have their own computers, thus enabling the use of technolo-
gy as a teaching tool more readily.
Therefore, what the elementary classroom needs most from IT is the
understanding that what little technological means are available need to
stretch as far as possible. This has long been one of the areas where IT
excels the most: finding those areas where efficiency and productivity
meet and making more happen with less.
While it is true that budgeting and availability issues certainly come
into play with this particular need, many state and local agencies are
working on making technology more available to as many students as
possible. Especially at the local level, school districts are aware of the
differentiator that technology can be. And as technology continues to
evolve and become more affordable, more schools will be able to make IT
available to more students.
The technology industry as a whole is also making strides in learning
what education needs from IT. Mobile technology, custom learning apps,
and education-specific hardware are being turned out by the IT world on
a regular basis. The need for IT-based learning, which has been fueled by
the current generation’s constant need for newer and better ways to input
data, has already led to numerous learning websites and “brain game”
apps.
Special education can benefit from IT in multiple ways as well. Assis-
tive and adaptive technology has grown by leaps and bounds as more
emphasis is being placed on those arenas. Physical disabilities are no
longer the hurdle to education they once were with the assistance of
various technologies designed specifically to aid those with various
physical limitations. Computers that can read eye movement, reading
applications that translate words on a page into spoken language, hard-
ware that can translate websites into Braille—all of these are just a few
examples of the ways in which IT can be used to enable and enhance the
learning environment.

Chapter 3
20
What education as a whole needs from technology is not that different
from what the organization needs: enhancement and efficiency, nontradi-
tional methodology that enables change and growth, a means to connect
with and manage the goals of those who are using the technology, and
possibly some radical changes to approaches that aren’t working the
same way they used to.
BUSINESS NEEDS
Modern business is deeply tied to IT. There is no aspect of the business
world that does not utilize technology in some way to perform daily
tasks and functions. No matter what your product is, technology is help-
ing to make it happen. This is true whether your end product is a technol-
ogy itself, or if your end product is nothing more than consultation and
analysis.
Where business needs differ most from educational needs are that the
end product of education is teaching, which can be assisted by and some-
times even performed entirely by technology, while the end product of
business is whatever that business is selling, and more often than not that
end product can only be achieved through the use of technology. Reports
and analysis require software, and computers on which to do them. As-
sembly lines are automated and computer monitored for efficiency. Con-
struction is managed and monitored through various technology tools
and actually achieved through massive applications of technology and
hardware.
Technology is a requirement of modern business, not an option.
Therefore, business requires IT to be available and aware of what makes
the business function. IT must find where the problem areas are in the
daily operation of a business and work to determine if new or different IT
solutions can solve those problems. Business needs IT to know and antici-
pate what new technologies can make a business achieve its goals better.
Most importantly, business needs IT to be unobtrusive. IT is a tool,
and repeatedly we have talked about how important efficiency and en-
hancement are. However, IT can also be highly disruptive. New technolo-
gy and changes to what we are accustomed to can drastically reduce the
ability of a business to function if not properly prepared and rolled out. It
is essential for IT to ensure that all essential functions of the business are
maintained without causing massive delays.
www.ebook3000.com

What Do the Organization and IT Want from Each Other?
21
IT NEEDS
As much as we may all wish we were, IT professionals are not miracle
workers. Yes, we have been known to make amazing things happen with
little time and even less money. We are all experts at finding creative
ways to solve the problems that are presented to us. But even we have
our limitations. And usually those limitations are defined by one of three
things: time, money, or the current limits of technology.
The most important thing that the organization can understand about
IT is what is and what is not possible. Believe it or not, there is an outer
limit to what is possible via technology. That limit is constantly moving,
and Moore’s law shows that the limit expands very rapidly, but it is still
there nonetheless. Most businesses are not reliant on the bleeding edge of
technology. That can be a scary place to work, as brand-new and experi-
mental IT can’t be relied on for the kind of execution consistency that is
required to ensure business profitability.
Some businesses and educational facilities are designed specifically to
live on that outer edge. They are aware of the risks involved in using
experimental technology, and they have prepared themselves with con-
tingencies and backup options for when the inevitable breakdown oc-
curs. Also, they usually have enhanced amounts of the other two dynam-
ics of the limitation equation (time and money), which means they are
not set back drastically when a bleeding-edge piece of IT fails to perform
properly.
That is a key understanding that IT needs the organization to have.
Any one of the three aspects can be pushed to the limit to enhance the IT
experience. But if that happens, then the other two aspects have to be
maintained and respected. IT can find a solution to any problem quickly,
but it will be expensive and can’t rely on untried technology. If the solu-
tion has to cost as little as possible, then it will take time and once again
can’t rely on untested technology. And as we’ve already discussed, if
testing the untested is the goal, then there will need to be a lot of time and
money to recover if and when there are problems.

Chapter 3
22
COMMUNICATION IS KEY
As with all good relationships, IT and the organization need to know
how to communicate with each other. In the next chapter, we will delve
into this much more, but for now, let it be enough to know that open
communication between the two is essential. IT is a function of the great-
er whole and can only create the necessary enhancements and efficiencies
when it is treated as such. While IT has become as operationally expected
as water and electricity, there is much more to the requirements IT has to
fulfill than either of those utilities.
KEY IDEAS IN THIS CHAPTER
• The organization needs technology to work properly, to enhance
the workflow of the day-to-day, to not get in the way of getting
work done, and, perhaps most importantly, to be able to make that
day-to-day work easier.
• Education needs technology for administrative as well as instruc-
tional use.
• Where business needs differ most from educational needs are that
the end product of education is teaching, which can be assisted by
and sometimes even performed entirely by technology, while the
end product of business is whatever that business is selling, and
more often than not that end product can only be achieved through
the use of technology.
• The most important thing that an organization can understand
about IT is what is and what is not possible.
• IT limitations are usually defined by one of three things: time, mon-
ey, or the current limits of technology.
www.ebook3000.com

23
FOUR
Communicating with the
Organization
One of the hardest things for an IT professional to do is learn how to not
talk tech with anyone who asks them about IT. The goal of the “Talking
Tech” chapter was to ensure that everyone had a solid baseline under-
standing of certain terms and conditions within the IT world that we who
work within it simply take for granted. And it can be difficult for an IT
professional to remember that not everyone functions with that same
baseline of knowledge.
As a result, communication between IT and the organization can be-
come strained and difficult sometimes. IT professionals can be curt and
dry when communicating. We like to deal in crisp realities. We do, after
all, work in the world of binary. Something either is or is not. And that is
the lens through which many IT professionals view the world. The organ-
ization, however, functions within a world where technology can be
viewed as a utility.
Therefore, it is easy to misunderstand how much effort goes into en-
suring that systems and technology are functioning properly at all times.
This communication gap can be very difficult to overcome, but is essen-
tial for the proper functioning of IT within any given organization. Let us
explore this gap further and find ways to overcome it on both sides of the
equation.

Chapter 4
24
HOW IT SHOULD APPROACH COMMUNICATING WITH THE
ORGANIZATION
The first thing any and all IT personnel need to keep in mind is that,
unless they work for a technology firm, the organization is not as deeply
engrained in technology as they are. Any and all acronyms and techno-
speak must be explained thoroughly. In fact, it is best to attempt to avoid
them at all costs. Sometimes it is impossible to explain why a malfunction
has occurred without getting technical. When that is necessary, ensure
that all technical terms are explained within the sentence they are used in.
Analogies are an IT professional’s best friend when it comes to com-
munication. The phrase “kind of like this” is one that is used often. While
not many people understand what a full mesh is, they do understand
what a spider web looks like. The network chapter of this book relies
heavily on picturing network traffic as a road, not a water pipe. The more
grounded and ubiquitous the reference, the more people will be able to
understand the concept that is being explained.
It is also important for an IT professional to remember that although
metrics (as we will discover in the next chapter) are a favorite tool for IT,
most people have very little interest in discussing the five 9s of uptime or
how low the emergency change numbers are (99.999 percent system
availability and infrequent emergency system updates). They do, though,
want to know that, yes, the server is available for saving their file and
there’s nothing for them to worry about with the equipment.
To an IT person, those are far too simplistic ways of looking at those
problems. But to non-IT people, any more information is simply too
much. They have their own job-related technical language, and they sim-
ply don’t have room in their personal hard drive (brain, to all you non-
tech folks) for the IT speak. And the more the IT professional uses termi-
nology that is hard for them to understand, the less they will want to
even approach the IT team when they have questions or problems.
The one time all of this gets thrown out the window, and an overuse
of technical terminology is required, is when explaining an unexpected
outage or some kind of emergency problem fix. Once the problem has
been resolved, an extensive outage explanation should be circulated to
the entire organization. Yes, the technical terms will need to be explained
within the report, but it is essential to ensuring the organization main-
tains trust and confidence in the ability of the IT department to handle
www.ebook3000.com

Communicating with the Organization
25
these kinds of problems. When something is broken, that’s when the
organization wants to know the IT team is capable of handling any
problem.
As with any professional communication, it is important, especially
when discussing some form of emergency that needed to be resolved, to
maintain the proper tone. The organization can get nervous when tech-
nology problems happen, as it becomes so apparent in those moments
just how reliant on technology we have all become. Like a doctor with a
patient, the IT team must maintain a level of calm and ensure that all
explanations are understood by those who were affected by the problem.
Patience and thoroughness are the key.
COMMUNICATING WITH IT
Yes, IT professionals can be overly technical sometimes when we talk, but
we are capable of communicating like human beings. It can be valuable,
much as we discussed earlier, to gain some baseline knowledge of the IT
world first—that is, after all, the goal of this book. But even if you know
nothing about IT, it is still possible to effectively communicate with the IT
department without becoming completely overwhelmed.
Firstly, it is important to know that IT professionals love to solve
problems. It is, in fact, one of the few things that are universal among all
of the various IT professions. We can’t stand it when there is a problem in
front of us and we aren’t able to find a solution. It will eat away at an IT
professional until the solution is found! But that doesn’t mean that we are
always available to help solve your particular problem the second you
walk in the door.
The largest pet peeve of any IT professional is that most people who
approach the IT department assume that there is nothing going on at the
moment. When there is no emergency going on, no outage being tended
to, and no flurry of activity by the IT department over some apparent
issue, that does not mean that there is no work being done. In fact, one of
the most frustrating truths about the IT world is that often work means
waiting.
Much like cooking, sometimes you just have to let it sit. An IT profes-
sional can, in fact, be working on multiple machines at any given time
and if one is downloading updates, another is loading software, and yet
another is running an internal diagnostic test—and that is a lot to juggle.

Chapter 4
26
But it looks like the IT pro is simply sitting and doing nothing. That is
why it can be very frustrating when someone approaches who doesn’t
understand that this is what IT work looks like sometimes and assumes
the IT pro has a lot of availability to work on their problem.
So while you do not need to approach IT like they are a group of
caged animals who may strike out at any moment, you also should not
assume they are a group of bored teenagers who just feel like staring at
the wall. Yes, IT will be happy to help you with a problem, but please
don’t be offended if they need a moment or two before they can be
available to work on it. And then don’t be surprised if, like a dog with a
bone, they simply don’t give up until your problem is completely solved.
When bringing your problems to IT, make sure you have as much
information as possible. We will look into the wonderful world of the
help desk a little later and cover several troubleshooting steps that you
can try yourself. But details of a problem are always the best way to get a
problem solved. And having those details already with you when coming
to IT about the issue is the best way to get a solution started quickly.
While the first inclination of anyone is to assume that the only thing
the IT department can fix is your computer or a broken application, one
of the things that IT excels at is process improvement. We will look into
the various methods and processes IT uses for this later, but it is impor-
tant to know that we are interested in making your work better and
easier to accomplish. IT doesn’t implement a new system simply because
it would be fun (usually); they do it to make an improvement on the way
things are being done. To find a better way.
Consulting IT on upcoming projects or issues with current workflows
can only be beneficial to all parties. The earlier IT can be involved in
something that may need a technology solution, the better. Remember
the three factors discussed last chapter. More time means there is more
wiggle room when it comes to budget and the kinds of technology
needed for the solution. Even if the initial thought for the project does not
include technology, involving IT can result in an unexpected solution.
IT is one of the few areas that has insight into almost all areas and
levels of the organization. IT is aware of which other departments may be
facing the same types of problems and can help them interact to find
solutions. IT is aware of newer methodologies that are being deployed by
certain personnel because they needed IT to help get things set up. IT is
capable of bridging the gaps in knowledge across the organization, even
www.ebook3000.com

Communicating with the Organization
27
if they don’t have the knowledge themselves. IT knows where to point
everyone to get the knowledge.
MAINTAINING COMMUNICATION
It is important for both IT and the organization to remember that open
communication is beneficial to all. IT houses and maintains essential, and
sometimes confidential, information for the organization. As such, IT can
sometimes become insular and wary of too much communication. Yes,
security is important, but isolationism is not. And the organization needs
to remember that IT is not a group of antisocial misfits that are unable to
talk about anything other than technology, although we will be happy to
discuss the cool new tech toys if you’d like.
KEY IDEAS IN THIS CHAPTER
• One of the hardest things for an IT professional to do is learn how
to not talk tech with anyone who asks them about IT.
• The first thing any and all IT personnel need to keep in mind is that,
unless they work for a technology firm, the organization is not as
deeply engrained in technology as they are.
• Analogies are an IT professional’s best friend when it comes to
communication.
• It can be valuable to gain some baseline knowledge of the IT world
to effectively communicate with the IT department without becom-
ing completely overwhelmed.
• The largest pet peeve of any IT professional is that most people
who approach the IT department assume that there is nothing go-
ing on at the moment.
• When bringing your problems to IT, make sure you have as much
information as possible about the problem.
• The earlier IT can be involved in something that may need a tech-
nology solution, the better.

www.ebook3000.com

29
FIVE
What Numbers to Watch
It is widely known that what is measured is what is understood. It is also
true that what is measured is what gets acted upon. Metrics are a key
aspect of information technology. So much of what we do in the IT world
can be impacted by bad system performance, so it is vital to track and
understand what the systems are doing at all times. It is also important to
be able to report out usage, availability, return on investment, and more
to ensure the continued viability of IT within an organization.
IT METRICS
We will start by looking at a set of standard internal IT metrics. These are
the things that matter to the IT professional. They allow the IT depart-
ment to understand their environment, make any necessary changes, and
gauge the need for updates and upgrades. They can also be used as a
troubleshooting device when there are problems. Without understanding
what normal looks like, it can be difficult to respond to abnormal properly.
The first, and some would argue most important, metric is uptime.
Uptime measures how long a given system has remained powered on.
This is essential to understanding possible wear and tear on the physical
parts of a system. It is also essential to ensuring that whatever task that
system is performing is being performed. Various systems require differ-
ent levels of uptime. Network equipment, for example, requires near 100
percent uptime to ensure that access to all internal and Internet-based

Chapter 5
30
resources are available. Printers, however, can have windows of sched-
uled downtime that will have minimal impact on workload.
Side by side with uptime is availability. There is a key distinction
between uptime and availability in that a machine can be powered on,
but if it is not properly network accessible, it is not available. So uptime
may not be impacted, but availability will be. Some will measure these
two things as one metric, but as you can see, there is a slight but key
distinction between them. And that distinction is very important, because
it can be highly frustrating to have the response to “I can’t get to some-
thing” be “Well, it’s turned on.”
Once system availability and uptime is being recorded, it is important
to measure any and all impacts on system usage. Incident metrics are
used to measure problems that have occurred. Incident metrics usually
track several different things: overall time to resolve individual incidents,
average time to resolve incidents over a period of time, number of inci-
dents within a given period of time, and number of users affected by an
incident.
While it is the goal of every IT department to have zero problems with
their systems, it is inevitable that something will occur. How that is dealt
with and recorded for future learning and efficiency is vitally important.
As such, incident metrics can prove to be the most important and telling
indicator about the overall IT system infrastructure. Keeping them mini-
mized is important, but most important is keeping the time to resolution
numbers as small as possible. Most people understand that problems
occur, but extended periods of downtime will lead to complaints.
System performance during normal usage is also important to meas-
ure. How the various pieces of the infrastructure behave when not in a
crisis is essential to ensuring that you can maintain (and return to) a
normal state. It is also good to remember that while data within a given
system is electronic, the hardware itself still consists of moving parts that
can break down over time. Usage metrics help to anticipate the need for
repairs and replacement of devices.
Application metrics look an awful lot like system metrics. Enterprise
level applications also need to maintain uptime and availability. They
require incident management and usage metrics. They also require met-
rics that monitor their interaction with the various systems and other
applications. Are the applications utilizing the hardware systems effi-
ciently? Do updates to the software require updates to the hardware?
www.ebook3000.com

What Numbers to Watch
31
Does the application suite function and interact properly with other ap-
plications? These are all key things to measure and track.
Changes are also important to measure and track. Change manage-
ment metrics track planned and emergency changes to hardware and
software. Change success rates are important to understanding how often
attempted changes run into issues. And total number of required changes
is important to understanding the overall stability of the infrastructure.
Once changes have been made, the quality of the system or application
performance is tracked for a period of time to measure the overall quality
of the change.
ORGANIZATION METRICS
Many of the metrics that should be tracked and analyzed, as we have
seen, are essential to the IT department understanding their world. Most
non-IT executives are not interested in any of what we have just covered.
However, there are a number of metrics that are essential to the operation
of an IT department that are important for the organization to under-
stand. These will have a direct impact on budgets, staffing levels, and
overall satisfaction with the IT department.
While there are many important things to measure, the essentials for
reporting IT performance and viability to the organization can be broken
down into three key areas: employee satisfaction, security status, and
financial status. There are numerous aspects to each of these areas, but
we will cover why this breakdown cuts directly to the heart of the organ-
ization understanding IT’s role within it.
Several metrics that have already been mentioned as IT-specific met-
rics can be rolled up into an overall business-level metric that shows
infrastructure stability. Metrics for uptime and availability, change man-
agement, and incident management can be rolled up into an overall met-
ric for stability. Most non-IT folks aren’t interested in the minutiae of how
and why the system is functioning. They just want to know that it is, it
will continue to, and changes won’t impact employee performance. This
in turn is one piece that will roll up into the employee satisfaction metric.
Staff satisfaction is measured both internally to IT, and with every
other employee’s satisfaction with IT performance. Internal IT staff satis-
faction and performance is a key management metric. It is also important
to rate and measure the usage of external vendor support. Help desk

Chapter 5
32
metrics will include such things as number of tickets over a given period,
average time to close a ticket, number of tickets resolved within service
level agreements (SLAs), and overall satisfaction with the help desk expe-
rience. All of these will roll up into a satisfaction metric that in turn will
also be a piece of the employee satisfaction metric.
Security incidents are an unfortunately high-profile issue within the
IT world. Because of the growing reliance on technology to perform our
daily work tasks, and the fact that so much sensitive data is now being
housed by so many areas within an organization, it is essential that secur-
ity be measured and reported on at the organization level. Number and
types of security incidents must be measured and tracked. Risk exposure,
potential loss of data, and damage to contractual obligations (both to
clients and to staff) must also be measured and tracked.
Financial metrics that should be measured may seem simple (how
much does all this technology cost?) but can be fairly complex. While
budget usage is an important metric to track, it is not the be all and end
all of the financial matrix within IT. Return on investment and cost medi-
ation are key aspects of reporting on how technology usage is lowering
the cost of doing business. For example, how does the cost of a video
communication system offset the benefit of no longer needing to travel to
visit every client?
Additionally, tracking application and system implementation cost
against the time regained by the staff now that a given application or
system is faster and more efficient can show the impact IT makes on the
overall financial bottom line. IT departments that generate product di-
rectly for a client have their own set of financial goals and metrics to
measure. But this book is focusing on IT as a supporting aspect and not a
revenue generation center.
EDUCATION METRICS
While the idea of metrics defining educational needs or changes can be
hotly debated, it is important to note there are IT-based metrics that can
be used within education that are more specifically geared for that envi-
ronment. Several of the examples mentioned above are easily transfer-
able, as system stability and user satisfaction with those systems is fairly
universal. Security is an area that is even more imperative in educational
www.ebook3000.com

What Numbers to Watch
33
IT. Family and child information, safety, and security are all highly regu-
lated areas and as such must be monitored and maintained.
It is absolutely true that attempting to use metrics to drive any
changes or evaluations of the current educational landscape would be
hotly debated and criticized. However, as more and more businesses and
organizations are looking to utilize data analysis and trends to anticipate
changes and needs within their respective environments, the same tools
could be used to help anticipate needs in the educational arena.
Enrollment trends, demographic changes over time, overall response
to any changes in curriculum: these are just a few examples of metrics
that, if tracked over a specified period, could be used to gauge what
kinds of adjustments specific schools, school districts, or entire state
infrastructures may need to make. Remember, what gets measured can
be made better!
As the debate over the educational viability of certain types of tech-
nology use continues, metrics will become essential to determining the
outcome. The addition of technology-based curriculum will be measured
and monitored. The variances between traditional brick-and-mortar-
based education and entirely digital-based education must be measured.
The different ways that individual students react and respond to differ-
ent delivery methods is also essential information.
It should also be noted that these metrics, while in their infancy, will
change drastically very quickly. The current generation, and all subse-
quent generations to come, have been born into a world where technolo-
gy is the status quo. They expect and respond to a different kind of
interactivity with technology. They are not awed or intimidated by IT.
For them, it is as impressive as an oven or a toaster. Therefore, the expec-
tations for how technology is woven into the educational experience will
grow exponentially, and we must be ready to anticipate that. And only
that which is measured can be prepared for.
KEY IDEAS IN THIS CHAPTER
• Metrics are a key aspect of information technology.
• They allow the IT department to understand their environment,
make any necessary changes, and gauge the need for updates and
upgrades.

Chapter 5
34
• They can also be used as a troubleshooting device when there are
problems. Without understanding what normal looks like, it can be
difficult to respond to abnormal properly.
• Some key IT metrics are uptime, availability, incident resolution,
system performance, and change management.
• IT performance and viability to the organization can be broken
down into three key areas: employee satisfaction, security status,
and financial status.
• As more and more businesses and organizations are looking to
utilize data analysis and trends to anticipate changes and needs
within their respective environments, the same tools could be used
to help anticipate needs in the educational arena.
www.ebook3000.com

III
The Walls of the Box

www.ebook3000.com

37
SIX
Hardware
Everyone knows what a computer is, I’m sure. However, as we have
already discussed, computers are really nothing more than processing
engines. And those engines can be housed in all kinds of different physi-
cal devices. For the next several pages, we will talk about all of the vari-
ous types of hardware we can call “computers.” Additionally, we will
talk about the hardware that runs the background infrastructure nobody
outside of IT ever thinks about.
When is the last time you wondered how the information gets from
the ether that is “the Internet” to your laptop as you are browsing? Or
how the phone call you are taking on that smartphone actually knows it’s
a phone call and not a text? The hidden world of networking is some-
thing we know we will be discussing in depth later on, but here we will
be learning about the various devices that power that part of the IT
world.
COMPUTER HARDWARE BASICS
A computer is any device with a processor, a hard drive for storage, and
memory to allow the various programs to run. Your car has a computer
in it. So does your air conditioner, your water heater, your cell phone,
and possibly even your refrigerator. But what most people understand
and recognize as a computer falls into one of two standard form factors: a
desktop or a laptop.

Chapter 6
38
Desktop computers, as we know from our overview of IT history,
became commonplace in the 1980s. They were large tower boxes that
would connect to (in most cases) an old television for a monitor. Desktop
computers stole the keyboard input from old typewriters, and once the
GUI (graphical user interface) came around, allowing for a mouse and
pointer on the screen, we had what we would all recognize as a standard
desktop setup. Once the GUI became so essential, monitors themselves
began to evolve to give the best possible visual experience.
The inside of the tower is where all of the magic happens. There the
computer is broken down into various parts to manage the various tasks.
The motherboard is what houses all of the connections and what moves
electricity throughout the device. This is where the serial bus is located,
and it has modular slots for expansion and addition of hardware.
The most common modular components that are added to enhance
the user experience are graphics cards, sound cards, and network cards.
Graphics cards are designed specifically to enhance the visual experience.
They have their own independent processor and memory, so they aren’t
drawing on resources that are being shared by other parts of the comput-
er. Sound cards work the same way, to enhance the audio experience. We
will cover network connection hardware shortly.
The processor is the brain of the computer. This is where all of the
computation occurs. And, at its heart, it is still Babbage’s computational
device. It opens and closes various gates to perform input and output
procedures, and in a series of on and off sequences (performed in binary)
that happen in incalculable fractions of a second, it makes decisions and
changes to the software.
The hard drive is the storage for the device. This is where all of the
software is kept for the processor to process, along with the operating
system (OS). This is also where all data is stored for later retrieval. And
without this the computer would be nothing but a simple (albeit fast)
addition/subtraction machine. I refer to this as the “file cabinet” of the
system. It is where everything is kept. Which is very different from the
memory of the computer.
Memory is the working space of the computer. The processor, as pow-
erful as it is, has a limited amount of space in which it can hold informa-
tion. The hard drive, as large as it is, is not designed for quickly feeding
information to the processor and then pulling out the responses from the
processor. The memory is designed to do just that. When a program
www.ebook3000.com

Hardware
39
needs to run, it actively moves the information that it needs to the memo-
ry. The memory then feeds into, and retrieves from, the processor. And
then returns the finished program data to the hard drive for permanent
storage.
These three key components work together to form the basic function-
ality of the computer. And it is easy to understand now why the specifi-
cations for these three devices are used to sell the computer. A faster
processor allows for faster and more complicated “thinking.” A bigger
hard drive allows for more data storage, more advanced program use
(due to the space the program information takes up), and longer useful
life of the machine. More memory allows for faster program speeds,
multiple programs to run efficiently at the same time, and smoother over-
all operational feel.
In addition to these devices, computers also have network connection
hardware. Generally this is a hardwire connection port (RJ-45), but in-
creasingly this is a wireless network connection device. Wireless connec-
tions are essential for laptop usage, and more often will be found in
desktop hardware. It is important to note that wireless network connec-
tivity is not as reliable or as fast as a wired connection. Those who have
grown used to lightning fast Internet connection can find this fact frus-
trating when they are unable to connect via a hardline.
Computers also require some form of input device. The standard set
of inputs is a keyboard and mouse. The mouse, as we know, is used to
control the cursor and pointer on the screen to interact with the various
pictograms that make up the GUI. And the keyboard is used to input
characters. Increasingly, we are seeing a touch-screen interface to allow
direct screen contact to take the place of the mouse and cursor. And there
are other forms of input such as eye-tracking and voice activation.
Laptop computers, as the name implies, are portable versions of com-
puters. They contain the same internal devices as can be found in a desk-
top computer. And, as we move further up the exponential curve of
Moore’s law, the hardware has shrunk enough and become fast enough
to make laptops a viable alternative for most people. The days when a
desktop computer was, by definition, best to have are long behind us. In
fact, most desktop devices can now rival a server-sized machine in capa-
bilities, which has made these larger versions of computers also less nec-
essary.

Chapter 6
40
Servers are the big brothers of the desktop. Servers are designed to
run far more complex and resource-intensive systems, such as the
enterprise-level components that run an organization. E-mail systems,
file systems, websites, and more are run from these bigger and beefier
versions of the standard computer. They usually include multiple proces-
sors, much higher levels of memory, and terabytes of data storage. These
enhanced hardware components allow them to be faster and respond to
more usage requests than the average computer.
STANDARD NETWORK EQUIPMENT
Networking equipment falls into three basic categories: switch, router,
firewall. Many of us are most familiar with the term firewall, as we have
some passing understanding that this helps to protect us from computer
viruses. But the other devices that move information and power across
networks are much more elusive.
The network cable that snakes out of the back of the computer and
connects into the wall jack is connected back to a central network closet.
At this location, all of the various cables are terminated into a patch
panel. This panel is a static connection from the network closet to the wall
jack. The network cable that attaches from your computer to the wall jack
is a modular component. There is another cable that connects the patch
panel to the switch. The switch is the first step in the networking system.
Switches gather network connections and facilitate the movement of
information from one device to another. They regulate power and data
flow. In the networking chapter we will go into more detail about how
this is accomplished. But the easiest way to think of them is as telephone
operators. They take an incoming request for one device to communicate
with another and send that request along.
Routers are the brains of the networking world. Routers know where
all of the devices actually physically connect to the switch. Switches ask
the routers to help move traffic around when the data request comes
from a device that is not directly connected to the switch. Routers are the
power horses of the networking world, and they make the Internet flow.
Firewalls are, as the name implies, the walls that protect and guard
individual networks. Networks are broken down into internal and exter-
nal connections. Anything that talks directly to the Internet is externally
facing. Anything that does not is internally facing and needs to traverse
www.ebook3000.com

Hardware
41
through the firewall to access information on the Internet. Firewalls are
used to control what data is allowed into a network, which devices are
allowed to talk into and out of the network, and what should be blocked.
WIRELESS DEVICES
Wireless devices are a special kind of router. They perform the function
of a router, without having to be physically connected to the devices that
talk to it. They maintain the same kind of routing information internally,
but use over-the-air communication rather than direct wire communica-
tion.
BASIC PHONE HARDWARE
Increasingly phones are becoming integrated parts of the IT infrastruc-
ture. As voice over IP (VoIP) connectivity increases in usage, we are
seeing phones use more of the same types of hardware that the computer
infrastructure uses. Phones now connect to the same types of switches as
computers do. They need routers to differentiate the types of traffic from
data and voice. And they require their own types of firewall connections
due to the type of information that is being passed out to the Internet.
Handsets have come a long way from the days of Ma Bell. Now we
have Internet-ready devices for our phones. These handsets require a
standard RJ-45 network connection. They have their own internal com-
puters that maintain the firmware that allows the device to function.
They can be modular and upgradable, much like a standard computer.
And increasingly they use some form of visual interface in addition to the
standard number touchpad.
The phone infrastructure is run by a PBX (private branch exchange).
This is a centralized system, usually a computer running specialized soft-
ware, that maintains all of the various routing information for the
phones. It knows what phone numbers the phones are allowed to claim
as their own and how to communicate out to the larger telecom world to
connect to phones that are not part of the internal system. This PBX is the
telecom version of a data router.

Chapter 6
42
PORTABLE DEVICES
What makes a tablet different from a laptop? Most would say it is the
interface type. Tablets are built and designed for a touch-screen interface.
A keyboard and mouse can be used, but they aren’t required for interfac-
ing with the device. Additionally, the internal hardware is not as robust.
The processor, hard drive, and memory are smaller and lighter. This
increases the portability factor but decreases the types of complex pro-
grams that can be run on these devices. That is why more complex soft-
ware, like video and photo editing, won’t work on a tablet.
What makes a smartphone different from a tablet? Again, it is a matter
of size and intended purpose. A smartphone, at least in original intent,
was built to be a phone first and a computer second. Now, however, it
seems as though they are designed the other way around, with the phone
features being secondary. But they do still exist and this sets the smart-
phone apart (albeit slightly) from the tablet.
As we now enter the era of wearable devices (smart glasses, smart
watches, etc.), we will find that our definition of what is a “computer”
becomes more and more blurred. As these devices become smaller, light-
er, and more portable, they are no longer built to resemble a desktop at
all. Input devices are now designed for all of our senses (eye motion,
voice control, body movement, etc.) rather than just the standard key-
board and mouse. And as we move increasingly up the right-hand side of
the Moore’s law curve, we will find these devices become more and more
portable, changing the form factor virtually overnight. But they are all,
still, computers.
KEY IDEAS IN THIS CHAPTER
• A computer is any device with a processor, a hard drive for storage,
and memory to allow the various programs to run.
• The motherboard is what houses all of the connections and what
moves electricity throughout the device.
• The processor is the brain of the computer.
• The hard drive is the storage for the device.
• Memory is the working space of the computer.
• In addition to these devices, computers also have network connec-
tion hardware and some form of input device.
www.ebook3000.com

Hardware
43
• Networking equipment falls into three basic categories: switch,
router, and firewall.
• Switches gather network connections and facilitate the movement
of information from one device to another.
• Switches ask the routers to help move traffic around when the data
request comes from a device that is not directly connected to the
switch.
• Firewalls are the walls that protect and guard individual networks.
• Wireless devices are a special kind of router. They perform the
function of a router without having to be physically connected to
the devices that talk to it.
• Phones now connect to the same types of switches as computers do.

www.ebook3000.com

45
SEVEN
Software
With our basic understanding of various types of hardware complete, we
can now turn to understanding the software that allows these devices to
run. As was discussed earlier, without the various types of software that
have been developed over the years, a computer would still be nothing
more than a highly advanced abacus. An extremely efficient mathematical
engine, but not anything more than that. Software is where the magic
happens.
Software is what allows us to type on a keyboard and have words
appear on the screen. It allows us to use a mouse to maneuver through
files and application lists rather than having to input long and tedious
strings of commands to tell the computer what we want it to do. And
increasingly, it is what allows us to simply touch the screen and literally
put a world of knowledge at our fingertips.
OPERATING SYSTEMS
Any discussion of software has to start at the most basic level. What runs
the basics of the computer? We are all familiar with the term operating
system, but I doubt we have put a lot of thought into what that system
does. At any given moment, the operating system has dozens of hidden
functions running to present to the user the view we have all become
accustomed to when we look at a computer screen. Most of us are used to
seeing a background of some kind (usually with a picture we have cho-
sen ourselves) with a series of icons on it. This graphical interface is

Chapter 7
46
called a GUI (graphical user interface) and has been the standard for
personal computers for over thirty years.
However, this interface was created for the ease of use of the human
user and not for computational efficiency. As was discussed in the histor-
ical overview of IT, user input has gone through several iterations and
upgrades over the centuries. The GUI was the final hurdle needed to
bring computer use to the masses. No longer were long strings of com-
mands necessary to tell the computer what you wanted accomplished.
Everything was available at the click, or double-click, of a mouse.
But why is an operating system important? If computers are simply
devices that are designed to do what we tell them to, why do we need
any kind of framing system that takes up resources and space on a com-
puter? Why don’t we simply have applications that live directly on the
hardware? Wouldn’t that make things faster? The short answer is no.
Operating systems are essential to telling all of the various parts and
pieces of a computer how to function. Without an OS, the various hard-
ware pieces would be just that: pieces. They would have no way of know-
ing what tasks to perform, or what order to perform those tasks in. As an
operator, you would have to individually control each piece of the ma-
chine and tell it how to manipulate the application that you are attempt-
ing to run. The OS is your hidden helper, overseeing and managing all of
the thousands of tasks that are required in the proper sequence to ensure
that your computer does what you ask it to do.
This means that even when you as a user of the computer aren’t doing
anything, the computer itself is doing lots of things. As soon as you turn
on the computer, the OS is controlling and manipulating hardware. It is
determining what personal settings you have saved for how you like to
view and interact with the machine. It is learning and confirming what
hardware is available to it and what purposes those hardware pieces are
designed for. Has the hardware state changed since last start-up? If so,
what new processes will be needed to manage that new hardware? What
application software is available, and what resources will those applica-
tions need? All of these are management tasks that the OS is performing
constantly, without you even being aware.
www.ebook3000.com

Software
47
FIRMWARE
Personal computers aren’t the only devices that require an OS to func-
tion. Any computer-assisted device needs a set of operational parame-
ters. On most other devices we call this the firmware. It is the basic set of
operational instructions that allow the device to know what its hardware
is, what its task list is, and how to perform the basic operations that are
expected of it. Your phone has firmware. Your car has firmware. And
every piece of networking equipment that is used to enable the Internet
to function has firmware. It is, at its core, a base-level operating system,
but it is coded and manipulated very differently.
Most casual technology users will never need to worry about how to
access firmware. However, this may change as our world evolves into a
more computer-driven society. You may, someday, be required to run
firmware diagnostics and upgrades on your personal appliances. Your
car may need annual updates. And the more that this basic operational
system is understood as a necessary part of system function and mainte-
nance, the more you will understand about the way things work in the
world around you.
APPLICATIONS
So what is an application? We should all be able to answer this question.
It is, at its most basic level, a set of commands that tell the computer to
perform a series of tasks. Whether that be as simple as typing in a docu-
ment editor, or as complicated as running a space shuttle launch, it still
comes down to executing a specific set of tasks in the proper order. But
how does that work?
Software design has become highly complicated. That is driven, most-
ly, by our needs for any given application to be able to do hundreds of
things at once. We don’t want to just type. We want to control type size,
font style, color, placement, and countless other style choices. We want
the computer to anticipate what we meant to type, so it will tell us that
something was misspelled or grammatically incorrect.
We want to be able to move large quantities of information across
several different kinds of applications, which means that those applica-
tions need to be able to understand and communicate with each other.

Chapter 7
48
And that is just a small example of the complications involved in what
we, as users of technology, have asked software to do for us.
This is why software can no longer be stored on a small floppy disk
and must instead be downloaded directly over the Internet. It is also why
hard drive sizes have needed to grow so large for individual machines,
and why it is still possible, with all of the amazing power and speed that
modern computers have available to them, for a computer to eventually
run slowly. Application software is highly specialized and takes up a
decent amount of physical space on your hard drive even when it is not
in active use.
When a given piece of software is in active use, no matter what kind
of software it is, it goes through a standard set of hardware interactions.
First, it is read by the OS from the hard drive. The application commands
are then moved to the processor for, wait for it, processing. Most proces-
sors, as we have discussed, have a limited amount of storage space for
housing commands and data that a given piece of software will require to
function.
So the OS will load the required commands, data, and functions that
can’t live on the processor into the memory. This process, moving re-
sources from hard drive to processor to memory and back again, is re-
peated for each additional piece of software that you have open. And
some applications are more resource intensive than others. This is why
processor speed, memory size, and hard drive read/write speeds are so
important to determining what kinds of software you will be able to use.
This process is also why it is possible to overload the system. Remem-
ber, data at its most basic level is housed as a series of binary ones and
zeroes within the computer hardware. And this data is moved and ma-
nipulated via electrical impulses that travel throughout the motherboard.
The more applications that are open and running, the more the hardware
is taxed. And, as we all know, this can lead to slower performance as
more and more data is required to be manipulated.
This is also how corruption can sometimes occur. When data is being
moved and manipulated, sometimes the OS misplaces a one or a zero.
This causes data corruption. And this can lead to broken applications,
lost work, or a computer crash. Additionally, it is possible to overload the
amount of data that is housed within active memory. This can also lead to
a systems crash.
www.ebook3000.com

Software
49
SOFTWARE DEVELOPMENT
Because of the intricacies involved in the interaction applications have
with the physical equipment it runs on, software development has be-
come a highly specialized skill. It can differ widely based on the types of
applications being designed, the hardware it is being designed for, or the
OS it is being designed to operate under. Software development has its
own long, storied history, and many of the innovations created for the
process of designing and building software have led to the various types
of project management methodologies used today. We will be delving
deeper into those methodologies later in the book.
The problems involved in dealing with so many potential hardware
configurations when developing and designing software can’t possibly
be stressed enough. Each computer processor has its own internal meth-
od for inputting and outputting data, known as the architecture of the
processor. Each additional hardware component that the processor needs
to speak to when the OS or software requires it also has its own internal
architecture.
Because computer hardware is not standardized completely (there are
“families” of different hardware types that allow for some levels of stan-
dardization), software can’t simply be designed one way for universal
use across all platforms. For a piece of software to operate on different
brands of machine, especially when those machines have different oper-
ating systems, the software must be coded differently for the specific
types of different hardware and OS combinations.
This is why, when certain types of hardware become too old, they can
no longer run updated software. That hardware type is no longer being
supported by the software code. This is also why it is important to note
what type of OS the software you wish to buy functions on, and whether
or not the new piece of hardware you are purchasing is compatible with
the OS and software that you currently own.
DESIGN OVERVIEW
As with most creative efforts, software development begins with an idea,
a function that is desired. Whether for a game, a work-enhancement
product, a new video streaming technology, or the latest mobile app for
“life hacking,” all software begins with the initial idea of what is desired

Chapter 7
50
as the end product. How to get from that initial idea to the end product,
however, is a long and involved process. Generally software develop-
ment involves a team of programmers and designers who are working on
various pieces of the software puzzle.
Software is designed and coded with modular pieces for multiple
reasons. It is faster and more efficient to create it that way. It also allows
the finished product to load only the modular functions that it requires to
perform an action into memory and the processor. Also, if there are func-
tions that will need to be repeated multiple times in multiple areas of the
code, breaking those out into one-time functions that can be called when
needed helps to keep the code clean and efficient.
There are too many coding languages to name here, but it is important
to note that programming is a language skill. Certain programming lan-
guages are used for different types of application development. But all of
them are built around a logical framework that consists of a series of
commands that tell the hardware of the computer what to do and when
to do it. Those commands can also be self-referential as they tell the
application how to deal with various parts of its own internal logic.
Software coding languages allow us to interact with and manage the
tasks of the computer without having to talk to the computer directly in
its own internal language. As stated before, computers only understand
binary (ones and zeroes) because the hardware is able to interpret the
electrical impulses as either on or off. Each coding language exists to help
manage and manipulate those ones and zeroes in different ways.
WEB DESIGN
Website software is its own specialized subset of software. Since the
Internet has become such a ubiquitous part of our daily lives, it is easy to
gloss over and forget how complicated this system truly is. There are
numerous browser software available for accessing the information on
the Internet. These various browsers are built and coded slightly differ-
ently. This is why some websites will work better in different browsers
and why some website functions will only work in certain browser types.
It is also important to note that website design is its own specialty area
as well. Website design was one of the areas that really brought the
overall look and interactive experience of the process of using software to
the forefront. Most software that existed before the Internet was based on
www.ebook3000.com

Software
51
more of a functional-needs format. The functions and options that the
user was more likely to want most often were presented first, and so on.
Website design, and subsequent growth of mobile applications, has
revolutionized the way that software is thought of. Now, how the person
who is using the software can move around the screen and access the
various functions of the software is far more prevalent in the designer’s
thoughts. User experience is its own job function and area within soft-
ware development. And customer feedback on how easy it is to use a
given piece of software drives changes more often than advancements in
hardware nowadays.
MOBILE APPLICATIONS
Mobile applications (apps) are the most recent iteration in software de-
sign. They are smaller, more compact pieces of software that are built
specifically for mobile hardware platforms. The explosion in the mobile
hardware marketplace has forced software development to make another
evolution. Now, software can no longer be hardware-specific. The sheer
volume of different hardware styles in the mobile world have required
software developers to create multiple iterations of their own software so
that it can function on multiple hardware platforms.
This movement toward hardware agnosticism has opened up the
world of software development to more areas of growth than ever before.
Now a development team needs to know how the end goal required
function will perform on any and all available (and future) pieces of
hardware. This will lead to even more interactive capabilities between
software types, and even more opportunities for the software develop-
ment world to evolve.
KEY IDEAS IN THIS CHAPTER
• Without the various types of software that have been developed
over the years, a computer would still be nothing more than a
highly advanced abacus.
• Operating systems are essential to telling all of the various parts
and pieces of a computer how to function.
• An application is a set of commands that tell the computer to per-
form a series of tasks.

Chapter 7
52
• When a given piece of software is in active use, no matter what
kind of software it is, it goes through a standard set of hardware
interactions. Some applications are more resource intensive than
others.
• This process is also why it is possible to overload the system and
how corruption can sometimes occur.
• Because of the intricacies involved in the interaction that applica-
tions have with the physical equipment they run on, software de-
velopment has become a highly specialized skill.
• Software is designed and coded with modular pieces to keep the
code as clean and efficient as possible.
• Various Internet browsers are built and coded slightly differently.
This is why some websites will work better in different browsers,
and why some website functions will only work in certain browser
types.
• Thanks to the increase in mobile hardware and consumerization,
software can no longer be hardware-specific.
www.ebook3000.com

53
EIGHT
Networks
How information moves across a network can seem almost magical. Most
people tend to think of it like water flowing through a pipe. This analogy
is most likely perpetuated by the fact that we tend to refer to the data
transmission medium as “the pipe.” This is, unfortunately, not a very
useful analogy in helping us understand how and why data moves across
the network in certain ways. A better way of thinking about it would be a
road, one with very specific rules for the order and speed in which cars
are allowed to move.
NETWORK TRAFFIC
As with everything else at the root of IT, it starts with ones and zeroes.
The data that is being transmitted is packaged within a data frame, and
that frame is then packaged within a network packet. The network packet
includes addressing information and allows for error detection. The
layering of this information is called the OSI (open systems interconnec-
tion) stack. This model has seven layers and becomes increasingly com-
plex as you move up the stack from layer 1 to layer 7. We will only be
concerning ourselves with a deeper understanding of the first three
layers.
In most standard Internet-based network connections, the first three
layers will determine how traffic is packaged, presented, and routed
throughout the network. Addressing, sending, and receiving all occur in
these three layers. We will briefly discuss some of the functions of the

Chapter 8
54
higher layers, but they are not as important to a base level understanding
of networking. Networking, perhaps even more than coding, is a com-
plex rabbit hole that can confuse even the most seasoned IT professional.
Layer 1 is the physical layer. This is where the raw transmission oc-
curs. This layer is defined by the medium in which the data is being
transmitted. Whether it is cable or radio waves, how the data moves has a
direct effect on transmission speed. This is also, in basic network trouble-
shooting, the first place you look to fix a problem. Is the cable still
plugged in? Has it gone bad? Is there something that could be causing RF
(radio frequency) interference and disrupting your wireless signal? All of
these are possible layer 1 transmission problems.
Layer 2 is the data link layer. This provides data transfer between two
connected nodes. There is some error detection that can occur at this layer
within the network, and flow control is also possible here. However,
since layer 2 is only concerned with point-to-point data transfer, it is
limited. If the endpoint that you are trying to contact is not directly con-
nected, then transmission can’t occur. While this isn’t necessarily an issue
within a room, this severely limits the number of connections that can
occur over any kind of distance.
Layer 2 devices are only aware of the other devices they are directly
connected to. They maintain this listing within a MAC (media access
control) table. All network connection devices have a unique MAC ad-
dress. When a device is attempting to create a point-to-point connection,
it will search for the MAC address of the other device by sending an ARP
(address resolution protocol) request. This request and response process
is how a layer 2 device learns which devices are directly reachable.
Layer 3 is the network layer. This layer is where routing occurs.
Routes are used to reach devices that are not directly connected to your
device. A routing table allows traffic to request a certain physical destina-
tion across the network. A router establishes a translation between the
physical connection ports it has, and which network addresses can be
reached using those ports. Routers are essential in network traffic flow-
ing properly over any kind of distance, from as short a distance as be-
tween floors in a building to as long a distance as across oceans.
www.ebook3000.com

Networks
55
ANATOMY OF A PACKET
With this very basic understanding of network traffic flow established, it
is important to dissect what is in a network packet. This is how network
traffic shaping occurs. Different packet types will be treated differently
and are ordered based on established protocols. This is why the water
pipe analogy doesn’t work properly. Water through a pipe simply flows,
or it doesn’t. It doesn’t line up according to molecule type or number.
And thinking of the Internet as just a big flow of data without under-
standing how that data moves can cause frustration when something
doesn’t behave the way you would expect.
Different types of protocols use different types of packets. So to at-
tempt to avoid any more deep technological overload, we will be looking
at a standard Internet data packet. It includes network addressing infor-
mation (from both where it originated and where it is going), error detec-
tion components, a length indicator, a prioritization indicator, and the
actual data. That is, as you can see, a lot going on. There are a few things
it is very important to note.
The network addressing information is critical to ensuring that data is
transmitted to the correct place. As we saw above, if the network location
the data is trying to reach is not immediately connected, then routing is
required. The desired endpoint address will determine how the router
sends the data on to the next location. Depending on where that location
is, it could travel through a series of routers. Each time it enters a new
router, the packet needs to be read and processed forward.
Another key aspect, and the one that makes the water pipe analogy
truly break down, is the prioritization indicator. Quality of service (QoS)
is a system by which a router can be told what type of traffic should be
allowed to travel across the network more frequently. Where we see this
most often is with voice and video traffic. If voice and video are not given
proper priority, and are forced to travel through the network along with
other data mixing into the transmission, then video jumping and voice
quality disruptions occur.
By giving these types of network traffic a higher priority, more of
them are allowed to travel together. This keeps the quality of the phone
call, or the video stream, intact. When you are on a VoIP phone and the
person on the other end starts to clip and drop out, this is the reason why.
This is also the reason why simply increasing the size of your network

Chapter 8
56
connection does not always fix these kinds of problems. If you are simply
letting in more overall traffic, it doesn’t fix the order in which that traffic
is traveling.
NETWORK DEVICES
As was discussed in the hardware chapter, there are three basic network
devices in the standard Internet capable network: a switch, a router, and
a firewall. Thus far, we have touched on the layers of network traffic
protocol and mentioned routing and what that is. Now we will take a
deeper look at these different types of devices.
If data transmission is a road, then switches are the on and off ramps.
They are the first, and most prolific, network device within network man-
agement. Switches do the bulk of the work directing network traffic, only
passing off to the router the packets they are unable to manage them-
selves. Switches are usually layer 2 devices; however, it is possible to
implement layer 3 capable switches. This minimizes the amount of hard-
ware required on a local network, as the one device can handle both the
switching and routing traffic.
Routers are the traffic directors of the networking world. They know
where everything should be going, and through QoS they know the order
in which everything should proceed. As we learned in chapter 2, “Talk-
ing Tech,” IP addressing is the method by which devices track physical
address location on the Internet. Route tables are made up of blocks of IP
addresses that are translated to physical ports on the router. Thus, when
a request for a specific IP address comes to the router, it is able to deter-
mine which physical wire to send that request on to.
Firewalls are the gatekeepers of the network realm. They allow traffic
to flow into and out of private networks based on a set of rules estab-
lished by the network administrator. These rules are known as ACLs
(access control lists). An ACL determines what types of traffic are al-
lowed to pass and can be programmed to allow only certain protocols to
have access. Here, some layer 4 to 7 interaction happens as the transport
protocols on layer 4 can be used to determine proper network access
types.
Firewalls also act as the main route out from private networks to the
Internet at large. As such, they can also be programmed to ensure that
only certain types of traffic are allowed out to ensure that no harmful
www.ebook3000.com

Networks
57
problems that may occur within your private network affect the Internet,
if possible. As an example, a server that is designed to transmit website
traffic can have all other types of traffic (e-mail, file transfer, etc.) locked
down at the firewall level. This limits the exposure to the Internet at large
and minimizes the risk of that machine being used for malicious intent.
WIRELESS CONNECTIVITY
Wireless routers are a very different, and yet very similar, type of device.
They perform all of the functions of a router, but also operate a radio
frequency antenna that broadcasts the availability of network connectiv-
ity within a given range. This broadcast capability can be hidden, but
most wireless routers choose a password encryption method to manage
user access. Their range is only limited by the signal power of their
antennae.
Wireless, by the very definition of its transmission medium, is a slow-
er method for moving data. Most standard wireless is capable of moving
data at speeds up to 150 Mb/S (megabytes per second). This is fairly
decent; however, most wired connections now move at speeds of multi-
ple Gb/S (gigabytes per second), which is exponentially faster. Addition-
ally, wireless signals can degrade due to environmental interference.
Other RF signals, such as remote controls and cell phones, can cause
transmission interference. Physical objects can also cause issues by either
warping or blocking the transmission signal.
INTERNET BROWSING
For most people, the network is equal to the Internet. As we can now see,
the network is in fact much larger than that. It encompasses all connected
devices, whether they are hosting a website or not. However, Internet
browsing is our most frequent interaction with anything that moves data
across the various network devices and mediums that we have been dis-
cussing. Websites are coded using layer 7 applications that can be read by
browser applications. We are familiar with most of them; Internet Explor-
er and Chrome are a few examples.
How a web browser functions is also a fairly complex program to
understand, but again there are important pieces of the software it is
good to be aware of. Browsers use different encoding and decoding tech-

Chapter 8
58
nology, which is why different browsers can render websites in different
ways. The primary set of website development tools, though, is readable
by all standard browsers. Websites are created, and read into the brows-
er, in zones. This is why pieces of a website may appear before others if
you are on a slower connection.
And this is—it is important to note—how some viruses are able to
enter a system. It is possible for a virus to be injected into a computer
through malicious code on a website. As the various zones are loaded
into a web browser, the code pieces have to move through the processor
and potentially into memory for interactive system use. Malicious code
can be written in such a way that once it is read into the processor it
activates itself as a separate program.
Website antivirus and ad blocking software is designed to anticipate
this possibility and prevent it from occurring. We will be discussing vi-
ruses and how to deal with them in more depth in chapter 14.
KEY IDEAS IN THIS CHAPTER
• Most people tend to think of network traffic like water flowing
through a pipe. But a better way of thinking about it would be as a
road, one with very specific rules for the order and speed in which
cars are allowed to move.
• In most standard Internet-based network connections, the first
three layers of the OSI (open systems interconnection) stack will
determine how traffic is packaged, presented, and routed through-
out the network.
• Network traffic shaping occurs when different network packet
types are routed and treated differently based on established
protocols.
• Quality of service (QoS) is a system by which a router can be told
what type of traffic should be allowed to travel across the network
more frequently.
• Switches do the bulk of the work directing network traffic, only
passing off to the router the packets they are unable to manage
themselves.
• Routers are the traffic directors of the networking world. They
know where everything should be going, and through QoS they
know the order in which everything should proceed.
www.ebook3000.com

Networks
59
• Firewalls are the gatekeepers of the network realm. They allow
traffic to flow into and out of private networks based on a set of
rules, known as ACLs (access control lists), established by the net-
work administrator.
• Wireless, by the very definition of its transmission medium, is a
slower method for moving data.
• Browsers use different encoding and decoding technology, which is
why different browsers can render websites in different ways.
• It is possible for a virus to be injected into a computer through
malicious code on a website. Website antivirus and ad blocking
software is designed to anticipate this possibility and prevent it
from occurring.

www.ebook3000.com

61
NINE
Help Desk
While we will be looking into the various job positions and functions in
the IT world later, it is important to understand the various aspects of the
help desk a little more deeply. Everyone who works in the IT field has
had to assist with troubleshooting to some degree. And no matter how
high you are promoted, there will always be someone asking for help
with some aspect of their technology. As we become more personally
reliant on technology, it is important to understand what the require-
ments of the help desk are and what you can do beforehand to help the
process along to a rapid solution.
Anyone who has owned any kind of technological device has dealt
with problems that they could not fix themselves. The help desk exists,
obviously, for these occasions. Most help desks are set up along the same
lines. There is an entry level at which you provide detailed information
about what the problem is. Some systems are designed to take this infor-
mation and find the appropriate technician to respond. Others have a
generalist technician who will attempt to fix the problem first before
escalating to a specialist.
The escalation process is one that can be frustrating but is essential to
the efficient operation of the overall help desk. The end of that statement
is important to note. It is for the efficiency of the overall help desk, not
necessarily for the efficiency of your particular problem. No tiered sys-
tem is designed specifically to make the resolution of your problem take
longer or delay the process, but the queuing and tiered systems are in

Chapter 9
62
place so that the specialists can focus on the harder problems in the order
in which they are presented.
Within many school districts, this tiered system is broken down along
the generalist/specialist framework, but it is also broken down geograph-
ically as well. Many schools have a school-based tech specialist. This
person is there to respond to very basic IT needs within one or two local
schools. However, their abilities and access levels may be limited. They
are the first line of defense and are there for quick turnaround requests.
The next tier up is an area technician. This person is the one who
responds to all server level and infrastructure needs, as well as all of the
more complex problems that the tier 1 specialist is unable to accomplish.
Any requests that move to this level, by definition, will take longer to
resolve. This extra time is important to note and be prepared for. And
above the tier 2 IT personnel there are the district-level IT teams. They are
responsible for all of the backend technology that keeps everything run-
ning (e-mail, websites, network topologies, etc.).
While at the college level, we find that most IT help desks are staffed
by students of the university. Again, there is a tiered system in place with
the higher levels staffed by full-time employees of the university. But no
matter what type of help desk your particular educational organization
uses, it is important to know and understand how to navigate and com-
municate within it.
TICKETING SYSTEMS
While this may sound obvious, when confronted with wait times and
what seem to be obstacles to the resolution of your particular problem,
many people lose patience with this type of system very quickly. They do
not understand why it is important to take the time to create a tracking
ticket for what they believe to be a simple and fast problem fix or ques-
tion. But the tracking system is in place for multiple reasons.
It is there so that if more than one technician is required to work on a
given problem, there are notes on what has already been done—thus
saving you from having to go over the same troubleshooting steps every
time someone new works on the problem. It is also there so that the
technicians themselves can track resolution options for when these types
of problems occur in the future, thus building the efficiency of future
problem resolution.
www.ebook3000.com

Help Desk
63
Additionally, the ticketing system is there to ensure that work is com-
pleted to your satisfaction. It gives you a reference point for what has or
has not been accomplished. And it allows you, as the person who started
the process, to request more input and assistance until a proper resolu-
tion is found. While it will not help the process to beleaguer and hound
the technicians, you can request that a ticket not be listed as closed until
you are satisfied. This will keep the problem an active presence in the
technician’s workload.
SERVICE LEVEL AGREEMENTS
Service level agreements (SLAs) are an essential part of the help desk.
They establish the contract that the help desk makes to the employees of
the organization. SLAs determine the amount of time it will take to re-
spond to a given issue. Each issue is categorized by the level of the SLA
that is falls under. Generally SLAs are listed as low, medium, high, and
system down. And each level has a corresponding severity level and
response time anticipated. It is important to note that SLAs guarantee
response time, and not resolution time. Some SLAs can include remedia-
tion clauses for any actions that will take longer than anticipated, but it is
impossible to guarantee resolution time without knowing precisely what
the problem is.
PERSONAL TROUBLESHOOTING
There are several things that you can do before initiating a help desk
ticket to make the process go faster and smoother for everyone. It is
important to know what kind of machine you have, what your operating
system is, and as much detail about the problem you are experiencing as
possible. Your machine make and model should be listed, along with
some kind of identifying serial number on the outer casing. Most tablets
and smartphones have a general information area in the settings that has
this information.
Your OS can be found in the main computer settings. It is important to
note what version number of the OS you are using, and what update
level as well. Along with this information, any error codes that you have
experienced will greatly increase IT’s ability to find a rapid resolution to
your problem. Lacking any error codes, the details of what you were

Chapter 9
64
doing or attempting to do when you experienced the problem can be
very helpful. How many other applications were running? Did you hear
any sounds when the problem occurred? Details like this can help to
hone in on the problem.
There are also several troubleshooting steps that you can take yourself
before attempting to contact the help desk. The one that is joked about
most often is rebooting. “Have you turned it off and back on?” is a ques-
tion that is asked almost every time a help desk ticket is opened. While
this seems like a lazy way to fix a problem, there are very valid reasons
why it can be helpful. As we discussed in the software chapter, all appli-
cations are just moving ones and zeroes around from the hard drive to
the processor and the memory. And that is where corruption and prob-
lems can sometimes occur.
Rebooting the machine causes the memory buffer to be released. It
empties the active programs out of the processor and resets the OS to the
initial startup configuration. This can clear out many issues at once that
without a reboot could require extensive troubleshooting to find the exact
problem location. A reboot also forces the OS to once again query the
various pieces of hardware that are attached to the system to determine
what is and isn’t available as a resource. This can clear up hardware
usage issues and make connections function properly.
If a reboot does not fix your immediate issue, then physical problems
should be the next thing that you look into. Are all of the cables securely
connected? Is everything plugged in and powered on? Are there power
issues anywhere else in your area that could be causing issues with your
system? Does your work area have sufficient space around your machine
to allow air flow for cooling? Are all of your peripheral devices clean and
operational? Once you have run this checklist, you can tell the help desk
technician that you have looked into all of these things already and found
no solutions yourself.
All of that being said, please don’t be frustrated when a technician
checks these things again. It is important that the technician also runs
through this checklist to ensure they have looked at all the possible prob-
lems before performing a deep dive into the system to determine where
the problem is. There is nothing more frustrating for everyone involved
than spending hours trying to fix a network problem and discovering the
cable was bad and everyone assumed someone else had already checked
that possibility.
www.ebook3000.com

Help Desk
65
ANTIVIRUS
No discussion of problem solving and help desk issues can be complete
without an overview of virus and antivirus systems. It is an unfortunate
reality of the world that viruses exist. Malicious pieces of software can be
designed to be nothing more than an annoyance (advertising pop-ups) or
can be designed to lock you out of your computer, encrypt all of your
files, and demand payment for the decryption process (ransomware).
How do these viruses infect a system? And what can be done to prevent
it?
Viruses have a myriad of ways to enter a computer. A computer user
can actively infect a machine by opening a piece of software they were
either sent or downloaded that unknowingly contains malicious code.
Some viruses, known as worms, are programmed to seek out open sys-
tems on a network (using standard network learning protocols like a
switch would) and then hop from machine to machine without any hu-
man interaction required. Others are injected onto a machine through
application exploits on various websites. They are hidden in the website
code, and once read into a browser for viewing they are able to enter the
computer.
So, as you can see, it is entirely possible to get a virus on your machine
without any action on your part. But it is important to be aware of these
attack vectors so that you can attempt to minimize them. Make sure that
all software that you download is from a reputable source. Maintain
antivirus programs that are designed to proactively keep malicious code
from accessing your system. And perform routine antivirus sweeps of
your machine to ensure that if anything has gotten in, it is cleaned and
removed as quickly as possible.
Any truly good antivirus software is made up of three parts: the up-
dater, which maintains all of the latest virus definitions so that new mali-
cious code can be identified; the firewall, which prevents known mali-
cious code from entering and infecting your machine; and the cleaner,
which sweeps all areas of your hard drive for malicious or unexpected
code and removes it. Antivirus is one of the few essential pieces of soft-
ware that all computers require.

Chapter 9
66
KEY IDEAS IN THIS CHAPTER
• Most help desks are set up along the same lines. There is an entry
level at which you provide detailed information about what the
problem is. Some systems are designed to take this information and
find the appropriate technician to respond. Others have a generalist
technician who will attempt to fix the problem first before escalat-
ing to a specialist.
• Within many school districts, this tiered system is broken down
along the generalist/specialist framework, but it is also broken
down geographically as well.
• The ticketing system is there so that if more than one technician is
required to work on a given problem there are notes on what has
already been done, as well as to ensure that work is completed to
your satisfaction.
• Service level agreements determine the amount of time it will take
to respond to a given issue.
• Rebooting the machine causes the memory buffer to be released. It
empties the active programs out of the processor and resets the OS
to the initial startup configuration.
• If a reboot does not fix your immediate issue, then physical prob-
lems should be the next thing that you look into.
• Viruses have a myriad of ways to enter a computer.
• Any truly good antivirus software is made up of three parts: the
updater, the firewall, and the cleaner.
www.ebook3000.com

IV
How Do We Build the Box?

www.ebook3000.com

69
TEN
Project Management and
Methodologies
Project management has existed throughout human history in some form
or another. Undoubtedly, the seven wonders of the world were planned
and managed during the building process. However, since the second
half of the last century it has been distilled and defined into various
complex and different approaches.
At its core, project management is the process for overseeing all of the
various aspects of a specific project to ensure the end goal is met on time,
on budget, and the desired goal has been achieved. These various pro-
cesses have been defined and refined by the IT industry since the mid-
1950s, and it is here that the most practical world application can be
derived from a study of information technology.
Project management, as it is currently practiced, began to take form
through the efforts of various civil engineering, US Defense divisions,
and early computer programmers. In an effort to control process ap-
proach and gain a better understanding of the various aspects and influ-
ences of a project, the early methodology was evolved to include timeline
and cost estimates. PERT (program evaluation and review technique) and
CPM (critical path method) were devised to better determine scheduling
approaches when building an order of operations for a project.
IT began to develop its own project management approach when soft-
ware development began in earnest. The various aspects of bringing a
piece of software into fruition can be very time sensitive and labor inten-
sive. It is important, since there is no physical product to see take shape,

Chapter 10
70
that you understand what is being coded at all times. There have been a
number of approaches that have been defined over the years, and we will
explore them now. We will also look at how these approaches have been,
or could be, applied to an educational setting.
WATERFALL
Waterfall is the traditional approach to software development project
management. It is broken down into very distinct phases and is still the
most used approach for software creation. It begins with defining the
requirements of the project. This initial phase is very extensive and re-
quires inputs from any and all possible end user types. This is where the
goal of the software is being defined. What is it you want the software to
do? This will define the entire scope of the project. At the end of this step,
the timeline and budget are set for the project.
Next comes the design phase. This is, as the name implies, where all of
the various concepts for the look and feel of the software are developed.
The function and usability has already been defined by the requirements,
so now those aspects must be incorporated into the design in ways that
will make sense. After design approval, coding begins. This is broken up
into modular pieces, as we discussed in the software chapter. The reasons
why this makes sense for how the software is presented to the processor
and memory have already been reviewed.
The practical reasons for why this makes sense in creation should be
obvious. To enable a schedule that is not overly long, it is necessary to
have multiple people working on the various pieces of the software. This
does present the problem, though, of having the code exist in pieces and
not as a single usable piece of software. Thus, the next phase is integra-
tion. This is where the various code fragments are brought together
under the overall application framework that will run the software and
call the various functions and code portions when needed.
Until now, the software has been built in a vacuum. While the individ-
ual functions themselves can be tested to ensure they work while being
coded, there is no way to know if there will be problems when the entire
project is brought together. Therefore, after integration we enter the test-
ing/debugging phase. This is when all of the original requirements are
tested to ensure that the software can meet all of the needs as requested.
www.ebook3000.com

Project Management and Methodologies
71
Additionally, any bugs in the code that cause the software to function
improperly are found and rectified.
This can be a very long phase and can sometimes last even longer than
the coding phase. Ensuring that all requirements have been met and there
are no obvious problems with the software functionality requires repeti-
tive testing of the same functions. Once this phase has been deemed
complete, installation can occur. This is when the software is released to
the intended end users. And with that we move into the final phase,
maintenance.
Maintenance is the last and longest phase in this process. After release
of the finished software, problems will inevitably be discovered. These
will need to be fixed. Updates to hardware may impact the software’s
functionality, so patches will need to be released. And as long as the
software is in active use, some level of technical support must be main-
tained. That is why this phase is by far the longest.
There are many things about the waterfall approach that make it a
desirable method for performing a series of tasks. Most especially, it can
be useful to determine all of the required end goals before embarking on
any other aspects of the project. From an educational perspective, this is
the equivalent of determining a program of studies. The key aspect to
remember is that the requirements are gathered by the design team from
the needs of the end users. They are not handed down to the end users by
the design team and told “this is what you need.” It is a collaborative
process.
The biggest downfall to this approach should be self-evident. There
are four full phases, and a large portion of the entire work budget and
schedule is expended before any testable product has been developed.
This can be dangerous if the requirements have not been properly ex-
plained or understood. This can, and has been known to, lead to a com-
plete need to redesign the product from the ground up. This will result in
cost and timeline overruns, and can sink a project if not properly man-
aged.
AGILE
Agile development is an attempt to combat the downfalls of the linear
waterfall method. As the name implies, agile is a rapid development
process that uses continuous delivery as a method of refining the product

Chapter 10
72
over a series of iterations. The project does not start with extensive and
detailed requirements gathering. It begins with the idea of what the end
product should be. Then, an initial rough design and build of a portion of
the product is produced.
Agile requires near constant communication between the project team
and the end user. With each iteration, called sprints, small pieces of the
end product are delivered and pieced together. This way immediate feed-
back and testing can be built into the process. While this seems more
chaotic and haphazard, it is in fact a highly disciplined approach to pro-
ject management. It requires the discipline to not overreach with each
sprint.
Again, it is important to ensure that costs and deliverable dates are
not exceeded and that each sprint focus only on one new aspect of project
definition. Once this has been completed, the next part is begun. Thus the
project is brought into shape slowly and methodically over time, not all
at once as with the waterfall integration phase. All along communication
and feedback from the end user help to ensure that the end goal of the
project will still be met and no surprises or misinterpretations can get too
far before they are discovered.
The constant feedback and communication model is one that can be
applied to many different aspects of education. It is, in fact, a method that
can be utilized when integrating technology into different areas and as-
pects of curriculum development. The teachers and students who will be
using the technology to better their skill set should be an integral part of
understanding how IT can be better utilized in the educational world.
LEAN
The primary principle behind lean project management is a reduction of
waste. Lean focuses on understanding the tasks required for executing a
given project, who will be executing the tasks, and reducing the waste
that can be generated by focusing on deadlines. By understanding the
order in which tasks must be accomplished and who is focused on ac-
complishing the tasks, the handoff of finished tasks to the next person in
line can be streamlined.
This approach does not depend on deadlines to drive work; it de-
pends on the completion of tasks as efficiently and error free as possible.
This method, like agile, also requires near constant communication
www.ebook3000.com

Project Management and Methodologies
73
throughout the process: communication among the project team to en-
sure task handoff is occurring properly, as well as communication with
the end users to ensure the tasks are coming together to form the proper
end product. The downfall here, of course, is in focusing too much on
eliminating waste. It is possible to become too focused on finding ways to
cut back and not leaving your team or your project with enough re-
sources to complete the project.
This method can have the most personal application and real-world
impact. Not only is it important to be looking for ways to streamline any
given project, whether it is in the world of education or elsewhere, but it
is also imperative to find ways to reduce waste overall in life. Finding
ways to more efficiently flow from task to task, even if the task is relaxa-
tion, completing that task, and being able to move on to something else in
the knowledge that there is nothing lingering and no need to worry about
something that wasn’t finished can be life changing.
METHODOLOGIES
While project management approaches have been defined and refined by
IT, so too have methodologies for the daily operation of an IT infrastruc-
ture. These methodologies can also give insight into ways to structure
and perform operational efficiencies in other areas. These frameworks
were developed to take advantage of the leverage that technology can
give us in performing routine tasks, as well as the capacity enhancements
created by technology.
ITIL
The IT infrastructure library (ITIL) is a growing set of methodologies that
uses process modeling to define a set of operational management and
controls. ITIL covers service support and delivery, infrastructure man-
agement, security management, application management, asset manage-
ment, and implementation management. This is a very extensive set of
models and regulations for the proper operation of an IT department.
The key is the model-based method.
By understanding the various models of how processes should opti-
mally flow, it is possible to understand where the breakdowns in a given
process are occurring. It is also possible to manipulate the various models

Chapter 10
74
to better understand how operational processes overlap and depend
upon each other. There can be many moving parts to operating an IT
department, and it is easy to fall into the habit of seeing them in isolation
from each other, as a series of tasks and obligations that need to be com-
pleted before something else can be done. So it is important to under-
stand how all of the pieces can, and should, interact.
COBIT
Control objectives for information and related technology (COBIT) is a
series of governance and oversight tools specifically designed to align IT
with business objectives. This is achieved by defining business goals and
objectives and linking various IT goals. These goals have metrics estab-
lished and timelines for determining their maturity and accomplish-
ments. Where ITIL uses modeling to determine optimal process methods,
COBIT uses the goal definitions to determine the process methods.
This methodology is easier to adapt for educational purposes. By
aligning individual classroom goals and guidelines with the established
curriculum, the achievement of those goals can be more easily measured
and managed. It is also a methodology by which you can more easily
establish which goals are not easily achieved or aligned. This review
method, where the higher level goals are tested against the abilities of the
lower level processes to achieve them, can be a critical piece in curricu-
lum evolution.
There are many more project management and methodology frame-
works that can be studied. This small window into these practices has
hopefully helped to show how their various applications can be adapted
from the IT realm to any larger organizational needs.
KEY IDEAS IN THIS CHAPTER
• Project management is the process for overseeing all of the various
aspects of a specific project to ensure the end goal is met on time, on
budget, with the desired goal achieved.
• IT began to develop its own project management approach when
software development began in earnest.
• Waterfall is the traditional approach to software development pro-
ject management.
www.ebook3000.com

Project Management and Methodologies
75
• Agile development is an attempt to combat the downfalls of the
linear waterfall method through a rapid development process that
uses continuous delivery as a method of refining the product over a
series of iterations.
• The primary principle behind lean project management is a reduc-
tion of waste by focusing on understanding the tasks required for
executing a given project, who will be executing the tasks, and
reducing the waste that can be generated by focusing on deadlines.
• The IT infrastructure library (ITIL) is a growing set of methodolo-
gies that uses process modeling to define a set of operational man-
agement and controls.
• Control objectives for information and related technology (COBIT)
is a series of governance and oversight tools specifically designed
to align IT with business objectives.

www.ebook3000.com

77
ELEVEN
Process Improvement
As we were just discussing in the last chapter, IT is highly focused on
finding methodologies for making work more efficient. Process improve-
ment is an area in which IT is always striving to find the better way to do
things. This focus is both internal to the IT department and to the organ-
ization as a whole. We know that IT has insight into many different areas,
and IT uses that insight to make the organization better.
DEFINING PROCESSES
The first step in fixing any problem is defining the problem. We have
already spent a considerable amount of time defining and discussing the
various metrics by which we define the IT world. Many of these same
metrics can be modified slightly to better understand the organization
and the problems that the organization needs to overcome. Let’s take a
deeper look at the process by which that can be done.
Availability is a key metric, and one that can be translated to many
different process areas. In the educational arena, availability can be de-
fined many different ways. At the university level, are certain classes and
study areas available to the students? At the K–12 level, what school
programs and additional services are available? These, and many other
areas, are important to understand and measure so that the problems
within them can be defined.
Performance is another key metric that can be translated to find pro-
cess improvement. Measuring this at the educational level is, obviously,

Chapter 11
78
already taking place with the students. There is an ongoing debate about
how teachers and administrators have their performance monitored and
measured. Again, this book is not designed to pick sides but to show
possibilities. By finding ways to measure performance at all levels, it is
possible to find where things can be improved.
Change metrics are essential to understanding whether process im-
provement is working or not. Measuring the starting position of any
process change and then the result after the process change is the only
way to plot a true understanding of process improvement. Since process
improvement should be an ongoing effort, change metrics over time be-
come one of the most essential things to track and measure.
Once the process of defining what will be measured is completed,
mapping the process can begin. Start by defining all of the steps involved
in performing the process. This may seem tedious, but it is essential to
finding where the improvements can happen. This mapping process al-
lows the metrics that have been established to translate to actual steps
within the process. Then, the process improvement methodology can be
applied.
FINDING THE GAPS
Discovering and determining the areas where processes can be improved
is sometimes very easy, but gets harder as processes become more re-
fined. Most times, when starting this process, it is because of an already
known area that needs improvement. In fact, it is easiest to start with
these because even without proper measurements improvements can be
felt once they have been made.
However, before changes are made it is imperative that metrics be
established for the process and tracked over a period of time. This period
does not need to be excessively long, but it does need to be long enough
to ensure there is a solid understanding of what the preimprovement
reality of the process is. There is no way to ensure improvement is true
and will last without this baseline information.
Once the gaps have been found, it is important to prioritize the order
in which they are adjusted and improved. Something that is not often
thought of, but needs to be remembered as an essential part of this pro-
cess, is that making changes in one area of a process can sometimes have
an unexpected effect on other areas of the process. So, while measuring
www.ebook3000.com

Process Improvement
79
the specific changes that are being made, it is important to also be aware
of the entire process as a whole during the gap analysis and improve-
ment phase.
Also, it is important that the prioritizing of the gaps ensures that while
working on improving one or two specific problem areas no other new
problems are created. Fixing the speed in which something is accom-
plished is not helpful if the end result is worse than when the fix was
applied. Slow and correct is always better than fast and wrong. So, when
prioritizing, keep the ultimate outcome of the process in mind to ensure
the integrity of the process goal is maintained.
PROCESS IMPROVEMENT WITHIN IT
IT performs process improvement on an ongoing basis. The cycle of met-
ric definition, process mapping, metric tracking, and improvement im-
plementation is ongoing. As improvements are made, the metrics are
reviewed to ensure they are still tracking the proper information. The
process map is reviewed and updated as efficiencies are implemented.
But how are process improvements defined?
Process improvement must be able to answer one of these questions
about the process itself. What value is it providing to the organization?
How can that be enhanced? What specific issue is this process meant to
address? How can this be streamlined? Does this process create more
work, or reduce individual work levels? If it is busy work, how can that
be reduced or eliminated?
While this seems like a simple set of questions, the answers will be
large and complex. Most processes and tasks that IT undertakes started
as an essential function of the organization. But Moore’s law shows that
over time the hardware (and software) that perform the tasks will be-
come more efficient and capable. So it is imperative that the applications
of the tasks themselves be reviewed and updated along with the systems
themselves.
So process improvement within IT is an ongoing cycle and one that
can be replicated across the organization. What is the task or process that
needs to be accomplished? How is it currently accomplished, or what is
the first concept for achieving it if it is new? Implement and measure the
successfulness of the process. Map the process and find where the ineffi-

Chapter 11
80
ciencies are by assessing it against the questions above. Improve the pro-
cess based on the results found, and start the cycle over again.
PROCESS IMPROVEMENT IN EDUCATION
As the focus of this book is the IT world, let’s take some time to look into
how IT has already begun to find process improvement within the educa-
tional sphere and where there is still room for improvement. IT has al-
ready become integrated into the daily lives and activities of teachers at
all levels. Administration of a school is accomplished through the use of
various technologies and custom designed software. And disruptive
technologies, like tablets and educational website development, have al-
ready begun to find the gaps in the processes of individual learning styles
and fill them.
The basic principle of process improvement through the application of
IT resources is to answer the question: “How can this be done better?”
While the answer is not always one that can be achieved through the use
of technology, more often than not IT can help to find ways to make
things faster and require fewer physical resources to achieve the goal. By
applying the methodology we have already established for this process,
we can and will find ways to make improvements.
Let us walk through an example of how this can be done. Let’s look at
how books, a physical resource, have begun to make the transition to the
digital world. The initial process is very straightforward. Each student as
required to have a textbook for the subject they are studying. The process
for making this happen is also a fairly straightforward one. Books are
purchased based on the number of students who will be attending the
class. The books are then distributed to the students.
Right away, there are several gaps that can be found without even
putting metrics into place. What if the cost of the books is too much for
the budget allowance for the class? What if the number of books available
is limited and not enough can be purchased for every student? What is
the distribution process for ensuring that all students receive a book? We
haven’t even gotten halfway through the cycle yet, and already gaps can
be identified.
The metrics for this process are also fairly straightforward and can
help to easily define the needs for improvement. What is the cost for the
books? What is the timeline for receiving them? How many books will be
www.ebook3000.com

Process Improvement
81
required each session? How much additional inventory of the books will
be required to ensure any new students who join late will have access to
them? Once these metrics are established, they can be tested and verified
over the span of one or two class cycles.
Where can IT improve this process? Again, the metrics and gaps help
to define these improvements. While still maintaining the physical assets,
IT can be utilized to track inventory and delivery availability. IT can be
leveraged to estimate the need for a refresh cycle based on current and
future enrollments. By moving from physical assets to virtual books, IT
can completely take over the cycle. The costs will lower due to no longer
needing to purchase physical books. The timeline for delivery will shrink
to zero since a digital asset can be deployed instantaneously. And then
the metrics are once again reapplied, and the process is evaluated again
for improvement.
CONTINUAL PROCESS IMPROVEMENT
The cycle of improvement doesn’t end. Even once a particular process
has been evolved to its most optimal solution, other processes will need
work and improvement. And as we have seen with some of the amazing
leaps in technology, disruptive new advancements can dramatically
change the way processes are performed. There can be no “set it and
forget it” if the goal is to always find the better, more efficient way.
Therefore, it is important to review all processes on an ongoing basis.
This concept of being never satisfied is what has driven every innovation
in IT. It is never the goal to make changes just to be able to say changes
were made. While the cycle is continuous, the operative word is improve-
ment. Any changes must be made with that goal, improvement, always in
mind.
KEY IDEAS IN THIS CHAPTER
• Process improvement is an area in which IT is always striving to
find the better way to do things.
• By finding ways to measure performance at all levels, it is possible
to find where things can be improved.

Chapter 11
82
• Discovering and determining the areas where processes can be im-
proved is sometimes very easy, but gets harder as processes be-
come more refined.
• Process improvement must be able to answer one of these ques-
tions about the process itself. What value is it providing to the
organization? How can that be enhanced? What specific issue is
this process meant to address? How can this be streamlined? Does
this process create more work, or reduce individual work levels? If
it is busy work, how can that be reduced or eliminated?
• The basic principle of process improvement through the applica-
tion of IT resources is to answer the question: “How can this be
done better?”
• The cycle of improvement doesn’t end. There can be no “set it and
forget it” if the goal is to always find the better, more efficient way.
www.ebook3000.com

83
TWELVE
Risk Management
There are several professions where risk is the daily operating paradigm.
Firefighters, soldiers, and policemen come to mind. IT professionals,
however, abhor risk. It is one of the factors that IT focuses the most on
planning for and actively preventing. There are all kinds of IT-related
risks that face the organization, and while some are obvious there are
many that most non-IT folks don’t even think about.
IT RISKS
The first, and most widely understood, are hardware and software fail-
ures. We have already covered the various aspects of what makes up
hardware and software, so here we will talk about the various ways they
can break down. Hardware, as we have discussed, is simply that—mov-
ing parts and pieces that will wear down with age. Computers are run via
electricity, and basic physics tells us that when running electricity
through a wire some of the energy is lost to heat.
This is why computers have fans and require space around them for
air flow. The larger the computer, the larger the size and number of fans
needed. The reason that a server is so loud when turned on is because
there are so many fans to help pull the heat off of the motherboard.
Additionally, processors (where the most electrical work is being done)
have heat sinks installed above them to help pull the heat directly off the
chip and dissipate it out into the chassis of the computer.

Chapter 12
84
Hard drives also generate heat, but the biggest failure area for them is
if the discs or read/write arms are damaged. Much like a record player,
the inside of a hard drive is made up of several spinning discs and an arm
that reads and writes to and from the discs. These can be damaged,
causing physical inability to access the data. The movement to solid state
hard drives, hard drives without moving parts, has begun to mitigate
against this risk, but the bulk of hard drives still in use are of the spinning
disc variety.
Other physical parts of the computer can, and do, go bad. The mother-
board develops a short and can no longer carry electrical current proper-
ly. The power unit burns out and can no longer power the device. The
cable that carries the network traffic (usually made up of copper wire)
burns out or develops a break, which causes a network disruption. The
list is almost endless when it comes to the possibility of hardware failure.
Software failure can be even more frustrating to deal with. All code,
no matter how meticulously tested, has flaws. Sometimes those flaws are
only found in certain physical environments. Sometimes they only sur-
face once, cause a disruption that can’t be fixed, and upon a reboot are
never seen again. And sometimes they can cause a cascading series of
failures that corrupts the entire data retrieval system and crashes the
entire machine.
These errors, hardware and software, can happen at any time. There
are ways to anticipate them, and we will cover that later in this chapter.
The errors that are hardest to anticipate, though, are human errors. IT
and the technology it manages are only as good as the people who are
using the technology. Most human errors only impact the individual who
made the mistake, such as having a file overwritten or closing an applica-
tion without saving.
Where the human error problem is escalated is when it occurs at the
enterprise level of the IT systems. Deleting your own saved file is frus-
trating. Deleting a saved file that is accessed by the entire organization
can be devastating. Many of the risk management tools that have been
developed by IT have been in response to human error and the need to
recover from some kind of human input mistake.
Viruses and malicious software are things that we touched on in the
help desk chapter, and we will cover them again in the chapter on secur-
ity. We should note here, though, that this is an overlapping area of
responsibility as software attacks are a risk that need to be planned for
www.ebook3000.com

Risk Management
85
and mitigated against. Most virus attacks, while malicious, are not in-
tended to be criminal actions.
Criminal attacks are also a risk area that IT must guard against. IT is
the gatekeeper to an extensive amount of private and confidential infor-
mation. Whether that be the intellectual property of the organization or
the personal information of those who are employed there, all of it re-
sides within a computer somewhere. And that makes the safeguarding of
that data the responsibility of IT.
Attacks, unfortunately, can come from both without and within the
organization. And while that is not something anyone wants to have to
think about, it is something that IT needs to be prepared for. Security is
an essential part of risk management and has so many parts to it that we
will explore it as its own topic soon.
The final area of risk that IT must prepare for is natural disasters.
While we tend to think of the Internet and the Cloud as nebulous things
that exist separate from the physical world, the truth of the matter is all
data is data that lives within a physical machine somewhere. Even the
Cloud is simply a set of servers that are managed somewhere else, by IT
professionals who are not part of the organization.
If the organization chooses to maintain its data in the Cloud, then the
provider chosen should be able to explain what the contingencies are for
natural disasters in their server farm location. If the organization chooses
to maintain its data locally, those questions have to be answered by the
internal IT team. Depending on where the organization chooses to house
its systems, there are various natural disasters that must be planned for
whether they be earthquakes, tornadoes, hurricanes, or something else.
RISK MITIGATION
Now that we have explored the various types of risks that IT must con-
tend with, let’s look at the tools and methods IT has developed for com-
bating risk. The important thing to remember is there is no way to ensure
100 percent risk aversion. Something will go wrong. Thank you, Mr.
Murphy. The only thing that can be controlled is how you are prepared
for whatever that possible wrong thing is.
The first step in any determination of risk mitigation is reviewing the
legal requirements of the organization. Without any knowledge of what
the organization does, it is already possible to list several legal respon-

Chapter 12
86
sibilities that must be taken into account. Privacy of the personal informa-
tion of all employees is at the top of the list. Ensuring that any and all
financial data generated by the organization is properly secured is essen-
tial. All intellectual property belonging to the organization must be cate-
gorized and secured as well.
In the educational realm, FERPA (Family Educational Rights and Pri-
vacy Act) and HIPPA (Health Insurance Portability and Accountability
Act) are at the top of the list of regulations that must be understood and
followed. COPPA (Children’s Online Privacy Protection Act), while out-
dated, is also a key legal regulation that must be reviewed. All of these,
and many more, will be updated and changed as technology advances.
So it is important to maintain a solid legal understanding of IT require-
ments in education.
Once the legal requirements are understood, it is important to move
on to an assessment of all of the various risk types listed above. What is
the current state of the hardware throughout the organization? What are
the software release and update levels? What kind of training has been
developed and implemented to help everyone understand how to inter-
face with the technology? What are the antivirus and security procedures
for IT? Where is the infrastructure housed, and what needs to be done to
ensure its stability and safety?
Hardware replacement should be an ongoing cycle. The risks of older
and out-of-warranty hardware have already been established, and the
easiest way to mitigate those risks is to replace the hardware. Most hard-
ware can function properly for roughly five years. Within the five- to
seven-year window, risk grows exponentially. Not only might hardware
die out, but also newer software might not be able to function on such old
equipment. And while it can be difficult to think of anything that is only
five years old as old equipment, the Moore’s law cycle will have seen at
least two jumps in physical technology capabilities during that time.
Software updates should also occur on an ongoing cycle. Software
manufacturers routinely put out updates to their software, as long as
they are actively maintaining that software. It is important to note that all
software manufacturers do institute an end of life cycle for their software.
Once a sufficient number of advanced versions of the software have been
released, older versions will no longer be maintained by the manufactur-
er. This should be taken into account when determining an update and
upgrade cycle.
www.ebook3000.com

Risk Management
87
Human error, while hard to predict, can best be mitigated through
training and system usage reviews. When problems do occur, those are
good times to review what was done incorrectly and how to keep it from
happening again. Ongoing training in the use of various IT systems
should be undertaken by everyone to help keep this from happening.
When something does inevitably happen, backups and disaster recovery
systems are an important aspect of repairing the damage.
We’ve already touched on, and will again review soon, the impor-
tance of antivirus protection. It can’t be said enough, however, so take
this as a reminder to ensure your antivirus is up to date and has swept
your computer recently. Since we will be discussing security in depth in
the next chapter, we will move past criminal attack mitigation and look at
natural disaster planning.
Physical placement of all IT systems must be secure and weather-
proof. While this seems as though it should go without saying, comput-
ers shouldn’t be kept out in the open air. Personal computers, laptops,
smartphones, and tablets are capable of resisting a limited amount of
certain weather conditions but it is not recommended. Infrastructure
equipment (servers, networking equipment, phone systems, etc.) should
always be housed in a secure indoor environment.
The choice of physical location may be dictated by the location of the
organization, but there are data center locations (buildings designed spe-
cifically for the housing of IT infrastructure equipment) that can be uti-
lized to ensure better physical security and stability. Physical and geo-
graphic redundancy is another way to mitigate natural disasters. Keeping
a copy of the organization’s infrastructure in a separate physical location
that can be used if the primary location goes down can greatly reduce the
impact of natural disaster risks.
DISASTER RECOVERY AND CONTINUITY
Even with all of the awareness of possible risks, and the goals and plans
in place to keep things from happening, disasters do occur. How IT pre-
pares for and responds to them is an essential function of IT. It is not
possible to simply cross your fingers, wish on a star, and hope that bad
things won’t happen. IT has to assume the worst may one day occur and
take steps to ensure the organization can continue to operate even amid
these disasters.

Chapter 12
88
The first step in any disaster recovery plan is to ensure that backups of
the infrastructure are occurring on a routine basis. The easiest problem to
recover from is one where data is lost, or a computer has crashed, and all
that is required is a restore from the most recent backup. Backup plans
should also include a physical redundancy, as the system that performs
the backup is not immune from the same risks as all of the other systems.
It is important to note here, as an aside, that personal backups are just
as important as backups performed by the IT department of the organiza-
tion. Whether it is your personal machine, or the machine that has been
designated for you by the organization, data backups should happen on a
regular basis. Most IT departments do not back up the individual ma-
chines within an organization. They are concerned with the infrastruc-
ture that runs the organization. And they leave individual-level machine
backups to the users of those machines.
The next step in the disaster recovery process is to determine what the
essential systems are for the organization to function at a minimal level of
IT availability. These systems, whatever they are, must have some form
of redundant capability. And when planning for the worst possible sce-
nario (physical loss of all equipment) this means these systems must have
some ability to be duplicated. This can take the form of a second set of
hardware housed in a separate location, or a virtual backup kept in the
Cloud.
These essential system redundancies must be kept as up to date as
possible. How up to date will be determined by how essential the func-
tion and data on them is. For some, this means the ability to restore at
least to yesterday’s reality with only the possible loss of a day’s work. For
the stock exchange, this means real-time backups that allow a restoration
with only a second’s worth of information lost.
This is the continuity aspect of risk mitigation: What is the lowest
level of IT required to ensure the organization can continue if everything is
lost in a disaster? Once that has been determined, the order in which the
infrastructure needs to be rebuilt and recovered from backups must be
established. This will mean that some loss of work and data occurs, but
nothing that will cause the organization to completely shut down.
Disaster recovery plans should be in place for organizations of every
size. Drills and testing should occur once or twice a year to ensure that all
redundant systems are capable of handling the full workload of the or-
www.ebook3000.com

Risk Management
89
ganization if necessary. Personnel both within the IT department and the
organization as a whole should know what a disaster looks like and what
the plans are for ensuring continuity of operations.
KEY IDEAS IN THIS CHAPTER
• Risk is one of the factors that IT focuses the most on planning for
and actively preventing.
• The first, and most widely understood, are hardware and software
failures.
• Hardware is made up of moving parts and pieces that will wear
down with age.
• Software code, no matter how meticulously tested, has flaws and
can lead to innumerable types of potential problems.
• The errors that are hardest to anticipate are human errors. IT and
the technology it manages are only as good as the people who are
using the technology.
• Criminal attacks are also a risk area that IT must guard against.
• Depending on where the organization chooses to house its systems,
there are various natural disasters that must be planned for, wheth-
er they be earthquakes, tornadoes, hurricanes, or something else.
• The first step in any determination of risk mitigation is reviewing
the legal requirements of the organization.
• In the educational realm, FERPA (Family Educational Rights and
Privacy Act) and HIPPA (Health Insurance Portability and Ac-
countability Act) are at the top of the list of regulations that must be
understood and followed.
• COPPA (Children’s Online Privacy Protection Act), while outdat-
ed, is also a key legal regulation that must be reviewed.
• Hardware replacement and software updates should be an ongoing
cycle.
• Human error, while hard to predict, can best be mitigated through
training and system usage reviews.
• IT has to assume the worst may one day occur and take steps to
ensure the organization can continue to operate even amid these
disasters.
• The first step in any disaster recovery plan is to ensure that backups
of the infrastructure are occurring on a routine basis.

Chapter 12
90
• Disaster recovery plans should be in place for organizations of eve-
ry size. Drills and testing should occur once or twice a year to
ensure that all redundant systems are capable of handling the full
workload of the organization if necessary.
www.ebook3000.com

91
THIRTEEN
Vendor Management
No matter how good, efficient, and hardworking an IT team is, there will
always be a need to utilize external vendors. Whether that be simply for
purchasing equipment, for individual project support, or for outsourcing
entire portions of IT support, vendors, and how they are managed, are an
essential aspect of the IT world. How an IT department works with these
vendors is the key to these relationship successes or failures.
TRUSTED ADVISORS
Here is the bottom line. For a vendor to work best for an IT department
(and that is the key in this relationship, the vendor must work for the IT
department, not the other way around), the vendor has to be a “trusted
advisor.” There is a vast difference between an advisor and an order
taker. Order takers call once a month or quarter. They ask how things are
going with current hardware, talk up their current specials, and then go
away.
Order takers answer when they are called, but all they are doing is
filling out an invoice and sending what the IT team says they need. But
what if they don’t know what they need? What if what the IT team thinks
they want isn’t right? That’s why trusted advisors are the key. A trusted
advisor takes the time to get to know the environment, the needs, the
plans, and what other vendors are in the mix.
This is a key behavior in essential vendors. None of them act as
though the other vendors an IT department is working with are the ene-

Chapter 13
92
my. The IT department can put two or three of these vendors together on
one call and have a very good conversation about what the IT team’s
needs are, where the pitfalls are, and what they should really be looking
to do. This is not a sales pitch where the IT department says, “I think I
want this,” and the vendor tries to pigeonhole them into a product that
the vendor needs to move on their end.
VENDOR SELECTION
Vendor selection can be a frustrating, confusing, and very difficult pro-
cess. It is easy to fall into the trap of looking at nothing but the bottom
line, and while that is an important thing to know about it is not the
proper driving factor. It can lead to being locked into contracts that are
not beneficial to the IT department if they are only focusing on cost. This
will leave an IT team working with vendors that they do not trust once
the ink is dry and they can see how the vendor really behaves.
It is important to narrow your selection of potential vendors. There
are various methods for doing this, but we will be focusing on categoriz-
ing vendors based upon the following vendor types: one-stop shop, best
of breed, lowest bidder, hybrid, and outsourced. One-stop shop vendors
are the most tempting. They can, though, be one of the biggest vendor
problem areas. It seems, unfortunately, that anyone who claims to be
good at everything is not really very good at anything.
Contract understanding is so essential with all vendor negotiations,
but most especially with one-stop shops. It is important to remember that
you can’t just accept their contract at face value. While that sounds sim-
ple, contracts are not easy and many all-in-one shops have the worst
kinds of blanket contracts. Make sure you are looking for clauses that
include acceptable service outages and areas of responsibility. This is
usually where you find the problem you are facing is not one covered
under the contract.
Best of breed is where everyone wants to start, because we all want
the best. But the best can be very pricy, and so we can’t always get that. A
more effective way to approach this is to look at the top five vendors in
any area. The vendors in slots four and five are going to be pretty good,
and they aren’t going to demand the same type of pricing as the top
vendor. These vendors also tend to be the ones who are most willing to
www.ebook3000.com

Vendor Management
93
work with you. They have a high-end reputation to uphold, but they
aren’t so arrogant that they feel they can dictate terms all the time.
Lowest bidder can be decent for startups and in times of budgetary
trouble. It can also be good to keep a few discount vendors available after
you have purchased a few products from them and worked with them on
a few projects. Don’t discount a vendor because they are lowest bidder,
but you should approach them with caution and ensure you aren’t sacri-
ficing quality.
Hybrid, as the name implies, is some combination of these. A horrible
hybrid is the one-stop/lowest-bidder. This is not a vendor type that is
recommended. Outsourced is a vendor type that almost everyone is fa-
miliar with. They supply IT services at a lower rate than maintaining an
internal staffing position. They generally operate by making a rotating
staff of IT professionals available for an IT department’s use as needed.
VENDOR RELATIONSHIP MANAGEMENT
Vendor relationships are just that: relationships. They must be main-
tained and managed. As with all aspects of IT, there are several moving
parts to vendor relationships. These will allow for better communication
with the vendor, along with mitigation against possible problems before
they happen. Contracts are the key to the relationship. The IT department
must always have a contract with its outside vendors. Two-way contracts
are the best way to ensure that both sides of the relationship know and
understand what the responsibilities are for both parties.
Communication must happen on a regular basis. Both sides, the IT
team and the vendor, should feel comfortable initiating conversation.
These conversations should be substantive and about the needs of the IT
department, not what the vendor is currently attempting to sell. Also,
any and all vendors should be able to communicate with the IT team at
the same time. There will be projects that involve multiple vendors, and it
is essential that they feel comfortable talking to each other as well as the
IT team.
Find the right representative with the vendor. It is possible to have a
good vendor contract and well-laid-out plans, but the person who is the
contact with the IT team for the vendor just isn’t the right fit for some
reason. It is a truth that not all people get along all the time. And there is
nothing wrong in talking to a higher authority at the vendor to tell them

Chapter 13
94
that the relationship is strained because of the representative assigned to
the IT team. Remember, the vendor works for the IT team, and they
should ensure that they are properly interacting with the IT team.
Set expectations and ensure the vendor meets them. This is all part of
the communication cycle. Make certain the vendor knows what it is the
IT team wants and how best to accomplish it. And all of this interaction
must be driven by the budget of the process. Budgets should always be a
consideration, but they should never be the driving force for a decision.
Decisions based solely on budget will hamper the choices available.
VENDOR REVIEW CYCLE
It is important for an IT department to review their vendor group on a
regular basis. This is best performed on an annual review cycle. This can
also help with new vendors who could call or ask for business. By estab-
lishing a vendor review cycle at the same time every year (March into
April for example), potential new vendors can send whatever materials
they want to be reviewed at that time.
Let’s now explore a multiphase approach for vendor review. Contract
review is imperative to ensure both sides are staying within the contract.
Any issues of note should be dealt with as soon as possible, especially if
legal consultation is required. Metrics of “on time” and “on budget”
should be established for all projects in the past year. Again, cost and
budget are not the only factors that should be reviewed, but they are
important.
It is also important to know what the upcoming needs and projects for
the next year are. Vendors who are trusted advisors should already be
aware of what these needs and plans are, and should be working to help
define and achieve them. And while it may sound odd when all of these
other criteria are based on facts and hard knowledge, it is also important
to keep in mind what feels right. Does the IT team work well with the
vendor? Are the vendor’s personnel pleasant people and easy to get
along with? These are important things to note.
All vendor contracts should include a termination timeline. None of
them should assume autorenewal. This way, the IT department has to
choose to keep them. Some of the decisions to keep or let go of a vendor
will be driven by those contract timelines. If the decision is made to bring
on a new vendor, then it is important to talk to your outgoing vendor to
www.ebook3000.com

Vendor Management
95
let them know why you won’t be continuing the relationship. It is essen-
tial to maintain that communication loop even when you are ending the
relationship.
KEY IDEAS IN THIS CHAPTER
• No matter how good, efficient, and hardworking an IT team is,
there will always be a need to utilize external vendors.
• For a vendor to work best for an IT department, the vendor has to
be a “trusted advisor.”
• Vendor selection can be a frustrating, confusing, and very difficult
process.
• Contracts are the key to the vendor relationship.
• Remember, the vendor works for the IT team, and they should
ensure that they are properly interacting with the IT team.
• It is important for an IT department to review its vendor group on
an annual basis.
• All vendor contracts should include a termination timeline. None
of them should assume autorenewal.

www.ebook3000.com

97
FOURTEEN
Security
IT security is a vast and extensive topic. It is also one that is imperative
for everyone to understand some of the basics. As our world becomes
more and more reliant on and run by computer technology, security will
continue to rise in importance for everyone. We will review what kinds
of security must be maintained, what can and should be secured in vari-
ous ways, how security is breached, and the ways that security is evolv-
ing and advancing with new technologies.
PHYSICAL SECURITY
Physical security is as old as the first fire set to keep the animals away at
night. And while the means by which we physically secure IT systems
are more advanced, the concept remains the same. Be aware of what
could attack. See where the attack could come from. And be prepared to
fight off the attack if necessary.
Locked doors and no windows are a must for any IT area, minimizing
the ability to physically access the equipment. Some equipment can be
physically locked directly on the case, preventing any physical access to
the internal parts of the server. Network and server racks can also be
locked to minimize access to the equipment itself. And all computer
equipment should be kept in a building that itself has doors that can lock
and be secured.
Additionally, limiting the physical access to those who are only re-
quired to interact with the IT technology is a must. Only IT personnel and

Chapter 14
98
other authorized individuals should be allowed into the secure server
area. Vendors should have minimal access to only the areas required for
them to perform the task they have been hired to do. And no one should
be granted access without IT supervision to ensure nothing happens.
NETWORK AND SOFTWARE SECURITY
Network security is a trickier thing to manage, but it follows the same
principles. Physical access to network resources should be limited to au-
thorized employees of the organization. Anyone who needs physical con-
nectivity access should be limited via access control lists to ensure they
are only accessing the network resources they are allowed to access. Fire-
walls, redundant and separate Internet connections, and managed
switching and routing can all be utilized to ensure that network traffic
remains secure.
Access to network resources, once granted access to the network itself,
should be managed by secure login and authentication. Logins must be
updated, and passwords changed, on a regular basis. Infrastructure sys-
tems should have administrative logins that are known only to the IT
department. And all login activity should be logged so that any unau-
thorized activity can be discovered and acted upon.
Software-level security can be managed through both physical and
virtual means. Some software is limited to only certain machines on
which it can be run. Access to these machines can then be physically
monitored and maintained. Some enterprise-level software suites require
their own individual account and login to access, even if anyone can see
them as available on the network. Individual files can also be encrypted
to require password access to read them.
WHAT TO SECURE
As we discussed in the chapter on risk management, there is a list of
ways to determine what can and should be secured. At the top of the list
should be the physical assets of IT. All of the servers, networking equip-
ment, phone systems, and so forth should be kept both physically and
virtually secured. Once that has been accomplished, legally required data
must be restricted and secured. This can be both organizational data that
www.ebook3000.com

Security
99
falls under various regulations and laws and any data that the organiza-
tion is contractually obligated to secure by the nature of its work.
Intellectual property is also essential to secure. While this might not
fall under a contractual obligation, it is the essential set of information
that differentiates the organization. Thus, it must be kept secure and safe.
And lastly, any and all work product must be kept secure. Anything that
has not already been covered by the contractual obligations or intellectu-
al property security should be, at a minimum, secured from external
access.
BREACHING SECURITY
Attacks are, unfortunately, something that all IT departments must pre-
pare for. No one wants to have to think about what might happen in an
attack, but it is almost a guarantee that an attack of some kind will take
place. IT must be prepared for that and part of that preparation is ensur-
ing that the rest of the organization knows what to look out for.
Physical attacks don’t usually look like they do in the movies. When
someone is attempting to access the IT infrastructure of an organization
through physical means they will rarely (read that as never) rappel down
from the ceiling on a wire to access the computers. They instead will
attempt to gain access through social engineering. Social engineering is
the term for physical attempts to circumvent IT security. Generally this
takes the form of an individual, or individuals, who are attempting to
pose as needing legitimate access to the systems.
Most of us have seen some form of this; we are familiar with the
phone calls, letters, or e-mails that attempt this. They reference some
organization or authority they claim to be a part of. Then they explain
what the problem is they are attempting to solve. And then they close by
requesting personal information or access to information for the sake of
solving the problem.
It can be very easy to fall for social engineering. While we have be-
come leery of odd sounding e-mails and chain letters, phone calls can still
effectively use this method. Those who utilize it are very good at talking
a person in circles and being just confusing enough as to why the infor-
mation is important to hand over. IT staff are trained to ask for certain
identifying things, like a ticket or contract number, to ensure that some-
one asking for information is legitimate.

Chapter 14
100
Network attacks are complicated and highly sophisticated. Generally,
the purpose of a network attack is to access data for some kind of mali-
cious use. However, network attacks have also been known to have the
motive of solely blocking the capability of an organization to function
properly. Network attacks can occur from outside or inside an organiza-
tion and take multiple forms.
Hacking, a term most people are familiar with, is the general term for
anyone attempting to access information for illegal purposes. Internal
hacking can occur when an employee purposefully accesses data or sys-
tems they are not authorized to for some personal gain. External hacking
is any kind of computer-based attack that is designed to find and capture
data. Sometimes that data is used for criminal intent. Sometimes the data
is simply destroyed or corrupted in an attempt to destroy the organiza-
tion’s ability to function.
Denial-of-service is an Internet-based attack in which a website or
online resource is overloaded with requests for response. The over-
whelming number of requests forces the resource to go offline as there is
no way for it to service that number of requests properly. This attack is
solely geared toward halting the proper workflow of the organization. If
it is unable to be resolved quickly, it can cause lasting damage to the
resource as it overloads its physical capabilities.
Malware and virus attacks are a specialty breed of network attacks.
Generally, as we have already discussed, these are meant to be nothing
more than a nuisance. They cause systems to act erratically but there is no
monetary gain for those who implemented the attack. However, more
often lately malware attacks have been instigated with the purpose of
forcing or stealing monetary access. Keylogger malware is designed to
track all passwords and where they are used to gain access to secure
information. Ransomware is designed specifically to disable access to a
machine and force the user to pay to have that access restored.
SECURITY MEASURES
The tactics used to secure against all of the various forms of hacking are
equally varied and complex. As educators, it is important to know about
and be wary of all of the means a malicious attack can utilize. As with
any large organization, a school district or university will employ IT-
based security procedures to minimize these kinds of attacks. But every-
www.ebook3000.com

Security
101
one must note that no matter how much time and effort is put into secur-
ity, there is no 100 percent foolproof security system.
All organizations will utilize the steps laid out above to secure the
various levels (physical, network, and software) and will employ person-
nel whose responsibility it is to manage security. But it is imperative that
everyone is aware of, and wary of, the possibility of malicious attacks.
And everyone, no matter their personal level of technological skill, must
do what they can to ensure the security of the data they have access to.
EVOLVING SECURITY
While we are still using many of the security measures that were created
even before IT, technology has evolved our security possibilities. Pass-
word encryption capabilities have become more complex as more diffi-
cult algorithms are invoked to build the encoding process. Physical keys
have been replaced with IR swipe devices, and even those have begun to
give way to biometric security. Soon, individual access to everything will
be keyed to our own fingerprints and eye patterns.
No matter the technology involved in security, it is important to know
and understand the various ways that security breaches are attempted.
The human factor is the most important one to be aware of. Everyone
should understand what it is important to secure and how they are a part
of the security process, whether it is as simple as not giving anyone their
password or as complex as writing the next encryption algorithm to en-
sure data security.
KEY IDEAS IN THIS CHAPTER
• As our world becomes more and more reliant on and run by com-
puter technology, security will continue to rise in importance for
everyone.
• Physical security requires that you be aware of what could attack,
see where the attack could come from, and be prepared to fight off
the attack if necessary.
• Network and software level security can be managed through both
physical and virtual means.
• You should secure the physical assets of IT, legally required data,
intellectual property, and any and all work product.

Chapter 14
102
• No one wants to have to think about what might happen in an
attack, but it is almost a guarantee that an attack of some kind will
take place.
• Social engineering is the term for physical attempts to circumvent IT
security.
• Network attacks are complicated and highly sophisticated. Gener-
ally, the purpose of a network attack is to access data for some kind
of malicious use.
• Hacking, a term most people are familiar with, is the general term
for anyone attempting to access information for illegal purposes.
• As educators, it is important to know about, and be wary of, all of
the means a malicious attack can utilize.
• No matter the technology involved in security, it is important to
know and understand the various ways that security breaches are
attempted. The human factor is the most important one to be aware
of. Everyone should understand what is important to secure and
how they are a part of the security process.
www.ebook3000.com

V
Who Holds the Box?

www.ebook3000.com

105
FIFTEEN
Staffing
IT staffing covers a wide variety of areas. And it is an ever-growing job
base that is hungry for new ideas and new innovations. As educators, it is
important to know the basics of the various IT jobs to help encourage and
guide those who are interested in IT as a career. While many of the titles
may sound similar, the breadth and depth of knowledge required for all
the various IT job requirements ensures that there will always be differ-
ences and challenges specific to each area.
As we have already discussed the help desk in depth, let’s start there.
It is the entry-level job position for most aspects of IT. It does require a
minimal amount of technology knowledge, but it is also the most general
area within the IT field. Help desk personnel tend to know a little bit
about everything, but not a lot about any one particular area of IT. It is a
good position to start in, because it is the one that is closest to the end
user.
As IT professionals advance through their career, it is possible for
them to forget some of the important lessons learned when working the
help desk. Not everyone is a computer specialist. And especially those
who are not IT professionals need to be treated with more empathy and
understanding, not frustration and contempt. Starting at a help desk al-
lows a growing IT staff member to see where the inevitable problems
with the system are and gets them interested in specializing in ways to fix
them.
After leaving the help desk, there are several paths to take within the
IT world—hardware and systems, networking, security, or application/

Chapter 15
106
web development. Some people are able to generalize in two or three of
these areas, but there is simply too much to know to ever specialize in all
of them. And it is certainly possible to move from one area to another, as
many of the concepts do overlap.
Systems administrators are the first line of defense in the hardware
and systems world. They are in charge of managing and maintaining the
hardware. Generally, they have some level of responsibility for the soft-
ware that sits on the hardware, but it is usually limited to ensuring the
operating systems are properly functioning. They are not responsible for
any of the networking systems, but they can sometimes be responsible
for the phone systems. They also usually function as the second tier in the
help desk system.
Systems engineers help to implement upgrades and changes to the
systems. Where the admins run the equipment, the engineers build and
implement the equipment. They are usually in charge of a small group of
admins and can also sometimes be in charge of the help desk. They man-
age project implementations of new system rollouts.
System architects design the systems. They are the most senior mem-
bers of the systems team and rarely actually interact with the monitoring
and maintenance of the current systems. They maintain an awareness of
the current system levels, especially as upgrades occur, but they are fu-
ture focused. Architects are looking at multiyear plans to see what needs
to be prepared for and planned in the next three to five years.
On the network side, the job descriptions break down in much the
same way. Network administrators oversee the daily use of the network
systems. They grant and restrict access as needed. They monitor traffic
flow and ensure quality of service is maintained. Network engineers are
the builders of the network. It is important for them to know what re-
sources are needed where and what importance is placed on certain types
of traffic. Network architects design the network, and much like systems
architects, are focused on future needs.
Security roles take a slightly different track. Security administrators
are responsible for overseeing all security and safety policies. They will
ensure all software vulnerabilities are patched and maintained. They up-
date and manage the antivirus system throughout the organization, and
they respond whenever a threat detection has occurred.
Security analysts are not only responsible for developing and design-
ing the security policies of the organization, but they are also responsible
www.ebook3000.com

Staffing
107
for overseeing the training of the staff to ensure all policies are under-
stood and followed. They conduct penetration tests and analysis to en-
sure the security measures are adequate and maintained. And they are
responsible for the physical security of all IT assets as well.
An offshoot of the security world is vulnerability and penetration
testing. While this can be a role assumed within the analyst level, there
can be sufficient need for this as its own job function. It is certainly a
specialty that is sought after. The ability to ensure the security of the
systems by attempting to access them through the methods an attacker
would use is a valuable tool.
Within the software development world, there are several tracks to
take as well. Software developers tend to be limited only by the various
programming languages they know. Software development itself is a
skill set, but what project a developer can work on will be determined by
the need for the programming languages they know. Software testing is,
much as it sounds, where the various software requirements are put to
the test. Applications are documented and utilized over and over in very
specific ways to determine what could break where.
Software development is also varied by the types of software there are
to design and develop. Mobile apps are very different from websites.
Video games require a team with various skills in both artistic and appli-
cation design. Operating systems require an intimate understanding of
how various hardware will interact with the various applications and
how to oversee and manage that process.
While several of the job functions already discussed do have some
level of managerial oversight, as with many other jobs, there is delinea-
tion between the doers and the managers. IT managers oversee specific
areas within IT. They are usually senior-level practitioners of the area
they manage. This is also the level at which specialists once again need to
start becoming generalists. In order to oversee larger and larger areas of
responsibility, it is important to give up the lower-level skills and learn a
little bit about everything again.
IT directors and vice presidents generally oversee the entire IT depart-
ment and all of the various job functions therein. They are no longer
managing systems, networks, or applications. They manage budgets and
personnel. It is their responsibility to oversee vendor relationship man-
agement and overall systems satisfaction. They are usually the interface
between upper-level management within the organization and IT.

Chapter 15
108
Above the director/VP tier we enter the C-Suite. Most everyone has
heard the term CIO (chief information officer), but there are also CTOs
(chief technology officer) and CSOs (chief security officer). Their job func-
tions do have some levels of overlap and are not always separated out at
the C-Suite level. Many organizations do not feel the need to single out
security for such a high-level position, but if security is a key aspect of the
organization this can be a worthwhile position to have.
CIOs are responsible for the overall technological direction of the or-
ganization. They propose and manage budgets, approve purchasing and
vendor contracts, provide guidance for the future growth and technologi-
cal upgrades, and manage day-to-day operation of all aspects of the IT
department. CTOs differ in that they tend to be more hardware and
research based in their efforts. Research and development fall under their
purview, as well as any scientific aspects of the organization.
IT JOB PROSPECTS
As with all career paths, IT has its ups and downs. Some jobs that were
once the highest paid in the industry are now considered commonplace.
New technologies are always changing the various interactions of the job
roles and responsibilities discussed here. And though it is true that there
are no guarantees in life, IT isn’t going anywhere. So while it may be
necessary to move between organizations to maintain career growth,
there is no doubt that IT offers career stability.
TEACHABLE MOMENTS
Thus far, we have explored all of the various aspects of the IT world. We
have talked about how IT can relate to, enhance, and disrupt education.
Hopefully you are now more comfortable interacting with those in the IT
profession and are prepared to have more meaningful interactions with
the generation for whom dealing with technology is like breathing. Now,
let us take some time to see what IT has adapted and learned from educa-
tion.
While the sheer volume of technology in the world means that we are
forced to interact with and attempt to understand it, no one is born with
an innate technological ability. It is a learned set of skills. How those
skills are learned is as important as ensuring that learning is always
www.ebook3000.com

Staffing
109
happening to advance those skills. And as with education as a whole, IT
has a series of curricula and teaching tools to make that happen.
APPRENTICE LEARNING
IT adapted and adopted the idea of learning by working alongside some-
one with more advanced skills early on. This is still practiced in virtually
every IT department around the world as team members work together
to learn new skills and advance their own personal development. Where
IT has truly found the disruption in this methodology is the introduction
of virtual presence. Through video and interactive technology, it is now
possible to “apprentice” with someone who is a world away physically.
IT is continuing to improve upon this method to gain better and faster
skill growth.
TRADITIONAL UNIVERSITY LEARNING
IT and IT-related degrees are taught at every major university around the
world. These involve theory and practical studies to ensure that students
understand and can apply all of the essential concepts of IT methodolo-
gy. Additionally, the IT community has developed and maintains an ex-
tensive set of certification systems that can enhance the learning and
skills of any IT professional.
Again, IT has found ways to advance this model through technology-
specific institutes and distance learning technologies. IT teaching out-
reach has stretched down to the lowest elementary grades, starting those
students with an early aptitude along the path of IT skill set adoption.
And as technology begins to integrate even more into different areas and
careers, basic IT understanding will become a requirement for all of those
degrees.
CONTINUAL LEARNING
Even after degrees have been obtained, certificates have been awarded,
and apprentices have become masters, it is important to maintain a level
of IT learning. Moore’s law means technology advancement does not
stop. Skills that were cutting edge can become unusable within a few

Chapter 15
110
short years. In a career that could potentially last forty years, ongoing
education is a requirement to stay employable within the IT world.
TEST ENVIRONMENTS
Another teaching tool that IT adopted was the concept of the test envi-
ronment. Testing environments are separate technical resources that can
be used to test new hardware, new software, software updates and up-
grades, and new application designs. This separate environment means
that none of the essential IT resources for running the organization will
be compromised during testing.
Test environments are an essential method for exploring the possibil-
ities of IT. They are designed to be broken, fixed, rebroken, completely
taken apart and rebuilt, and redesigned from scratch again. They are
modular and useful tools for finding new ways to make IT better. And
they are equally important in advancing individual skill sets. Hands-on
learning is an important aspect of IT skill building.
The importance of being able to make mistakes cannot be underval-
ued. Technology has such a hold on our lives that we are afraid of what
breaking it could mean. But there is no greater teaching tool for searing a
technology fix into the brain than having to survive an emergency of
some type. When something is broken and the organization simply can’t
function without it, the way it was fixed and the discovery of what
caused it to break will never be forgotten.
But before those kinds of crises can be averted or dealt with, it is
important to spend time breaking and fixing nonessential infrastructure.
Hence, the test environment. It is the area where the IT professional
learns to become desensitized to hardware errors and software crash
reports. Like a doctor going through a residency to gain the repetition
needed to treat each case with ease and professionalism, the test environ-
ment trains an IT professional how not to panic.
KEY IDEAS IN THIS CHAPTER
• As educators, it is important to know the basics of the various IT
jobs to help encourage and guide those who are interested in IT as a
career.
www.ebook3000.com

Staffing
111
• Help desk is the entry-level job position for most aspects of IT. It
does require a minimal amount of technology knowledge, but it is
also the most general area within the IT field.
• IT job prospects branch off into several different areas: hardware
and systems, networking, security, or application/web develop-
ment.
• Systems administrators are in charge of managing and maintaining
the hardware.
• Systems engineers help to implement upgrades and changes to the
systems.
• System architects design the systems.
• Network administrators oversee the daily use of the network sys-
tems.
• Network engineers are the builders of the network.
• Network architects design the network, and much like systems
architects, are focused on future needs.
• Security administrators are responsible for overseeing all security
and safety policies.
• Security analysts are not only responsible for developing and de-
signing the security policies of the organization, but they are also
responsible for overseeing the training of the staff to ensure all
policies are understood and followed.
• Software developers tend to be limited only by the various pro-
gramming languages they know. Software development itself is a
skill set, but what project a developer can work on will be deter-
mined by the need for the programming languages they know.
• IT managers oversee specific areas within IT. They are usually
senior-level practitioners of the area they are given management of.
• IT directors and vice presidents generally oversee the entire IT de-
partment and all of the various job functions therein.
• CIOs are responsible for the overall technological direction of the
organization.
• CTOs differ in that they tend to be more hardware and research
based in their efforts.
• How those skills are learned is as important as ensuring that learn-
ing is always happening to advance those skills. And as with edu-
cation as a whole, IT has a series of curricula and teaching tools to
make that happen.

www.ebook3000.com

VI
Your Personal Box

www.ebook3000.com

115
SIXTEEN
Living a Digital Life and
IT Consumerization
Personal IT use took off with the PC evolution of the 1970s and 1980s.
Since that time, our lives have become more and more digitally focused.
Once we all had a PC, either at home or at work, it was followed soon
thereafter by personal cell phones. Then the Internet exploded and we all
had e-mail and websites. Social media took off, and we all began to live
interconnected digital lives. Smartphones changed the game again, com-
bining all of our various connection methods into one device.
There is no denying that IT is everywhere. It is so important to under-
stand what this means for our lives now and in the future. Here we will
explore the personal side of IT, what that means at home and at work,
and what the impact of personal technology in the classroom has been. In
the next chapter, we will look ahead at what the next several years has in
store for IT both professionally and personally.
PERSONAL DIGITAL EVOLUTION
Most of us didn’t have a digital presence until our first e-mail address.
This form of communication, that is virtually the default for how we
converse now, began our introduction into a digital existence. It was a
relatively easy transition. We were used to having phone numbers and
home addresses. And in the beginning it wasn’t as obtrusive and con-
stant as it is now.

Chapter 16
116
Along with e-mail, early blog sites gave people the opportunity to
start presenting their personal thoughts and point of view to the world at
large via the Internet. Chat rooms and message boards also became a new
communication tool. We discovered that people of all types, when given
access to like-minded individuals, wanted to be able to converse and
communicate with them.
Social media was born from this desire to interact and connect with
people no matter where they are located. The Internet has allowed the
world to become a global interactive community, and social media con-
tinues to find new ways to present personal thoughts and opinions to the
world. And while whether this is good or bad is debatable, there is no
denying the impact that social media has had in just the few short years it
has existed.
Smartphone technology was the last key piece in creating our digital
lives. While most people had some form of digital presence before smart-
phones, it was their introduction to the masses that truly pushed the
digital revolution into overdrive. Once a smartphone or tablet became a
part of our everyday life, we never unplugged from the digital world. We
are constantly bombarded by e-mail, text messages, updates from our
various social media platforms, and sometimes even an actual phone call!
With all of that as our new reality, it is imperative to remember there
is no separation anymore between our digital selves and our real life. The
person we present to the world via our digital devices and technologies is
the person the world sees. Even those of us who know each other IRL (in
real life) use the digital information presented to us to form thoughts and
opinions of each other. And no matter what the website or application
promises, once it has been released to the Internet there is no deleting
whatever that information is.
As such, while it is never a good idea to live a life of seclusion and
paranoia, it is important to regulate and monitor your digital life. Poten-
tial employers do utilize social media to learn about job candidates. A lost
phone that is connected via apps to every account and system that you
own (credit cards, bank account, online pay apps, etc.) means that some-
one else could potentially have access to all of those pieces of your per-
sonal information. Make sure that, if you are utilizing all of those sys-
tems, you have sufficient security built into your device.
www.ebook3000.com

Living a Digital Life and IT Consumerization
117
DISRUPTIVE TECHNOLOGY
By their very definition, disruptive technologies cause upheaval upon
their release. Disruptive technologies are the things that come along that
no one anticipated that completely change the way something is pro-
duced, delivered, or consumed. Fire was a disruptive technology. So was
YouTube. And the nature of Moore’s law means that disruption will
occur faster and faster now.
The latest example of disruptive technology is 3D printer technology.
Shortly after this technology burst onto the scene, it was adapted for use
in creating artificial limbs cheaply and quickly. It has been adjusted up-
ward in size and is now being tested as a means for creating low cost,
quickly constructed housing. Adaptations on the printing materials are
being worked on to enable printing of food, again at low costs and with
rapid deployment. The limits of what this technology can enable have not
even begun to be discussed.
Virtualized environments and advances in 3D visualization technolo-
gy are poised to be the next big disruptive technology. This might include
virtual and enhanced reality glasses that will allow us to experience and
interact with the world around us in a much more advanced way, from
simple things like having news and interesting facts about the things we
are looking at pop up for us if we are interested, to much more advanced
things like interactive 3D environments that will allow us to manipulate
and maneuver within a completely digital world.
No matter what forms these kinds of disruptive technologies take, the
reality is that Moore’s law can all but guarantee that we will start to see
these occurring on an almost annual basis in the near future. What we
will all need to determine for ourselves is just how disruptive to our own
personal IT existence we want them to be. Some will embrace every new
technology, while others will fight to their last breath to hold on to what
they see as the “proper” way things should be.
Change is never easy. And change on such a scale as these technolo-
gies have brought us, that can revolutionize (and in some cases entirely
replace) ways that we go about our lives on a daily basis, can be the most
difficult to understand and embrace. But these kinds of changes can also
be the most exciting and rewarding on a personal level. And finding
ways to embrace them, and to fold them into our daily lives, will be its
own kind of personal technology evolution.

Chapter 16
118
IT CONSUMERIZATION
The IT world used to be full of gatekeepers—those who held the access
keys and ensured that technology was handed out only to those who
were deemed able to properly use the technology. And the non-IT masses
understood that this was the way technology was to be regarded. It was a
complex and difficult world that only a select few had the skills to pene-
trate. The PC boom began to change this, though.
Once it was possible for everyone to not only have a computer in their
own home, but also build it themselves, the equation began to change.
The Internet boom, which included personal access to e-mail and other
technical resources that were usually only controlled and handed out by
the IT department, continued this change in the way IT and technology
were viewed. If it was possible to find a piece of hardware or software for
purchase online, why does the IT department need to be bothered?
As with so many other things when it comes to personal IT, the smart-
phone pushed everything over the edge. Once smartphones and tablets
became available, and they were capable of performing the same kinds of
tasks as a work computer, massive imbalances began to appear between
corporate IT and personal IT. The corporate world found it hard to keep
up with the rapid advancements of the personal IT revolution.
There are many reasons for this. The smartphone came at a tipping
point in the Moore’s law curve. This meant that rapid jumps in technolo-
gy began to happen almost annually at that point. Most corporate IT
operated on a multiyear roadmap. They looked at potential hardware
and software advancement needs on a three to five year plan. Budgets,
projects, resources, and timelines were built and developed with those
goals in mind.
Technology that outpaces those plans at nearly three times the speed
simply can’t be competed with. And even when those plans are altered to
take advantage of newer and more rapidly advancing technology, the
infrastructure of most organizations is simply not robust enough to offer
the same kinds of experiences companies that provide technology re-
sources on the personal level can.
The reason that Microsoft, Apple, and Google can offer so many re-
sources at relatively low prices is because of the sheer number of people
who are purchasing those products. There are very few organizations
that can replicate the amount of resources companies of that size can
www.ebook3000.com

Living a Digital Life and IT Consumerization
119
provide. So the personal experience with technology is now different
from what an organization can provide to its employees.
SHADOW IT
This phenomenon has given rise to what IT calls shadow IT. This is when
IT resources are sourced, purchased, and implemented without the
knowledge of the IT department. This can cause problems when unantici-
pated systems attempt to gain access to the organization’s IT resources.
As we’ve already covered in the risk and security sections, there are
massive potential problems in bringing in unknown and nonapproved
technology to an organization.
IT has attempted to battle the rise of shadow IT through various secur-
ity measures. Network access and resource usage can be physically re-
stricted to minimize the addition of nonauthorized technology. Policies
prohibiting the use of personal devices can be instituted throughout the
organization. But the easiest way to minimize the rise of shadow IT is to
consult IT on all potential technology needs. While it may be faster,
sometimes, to purchase the equipment without IT authorization, the
walls that IT puts up to prevent the usage of those resources cost time
and effort on all sides.
PERSONAL IT IN THE CLASSROOM
The use of personal technology in the classroom is an evolving reality.
Most university classes look incomplete without a laptop in front of each
student these days. Smartphones are present in every student’s pocket.
Their use can be hard to restrict, especially when there is obviously a
precedent for technology use with all those laptops present. However,
there is nothing wrong with requesting the common courtesy of no
phone calls in a class.
In the lower grades this is a different debate. Younger and younger
children now have smartphones and laptops. The resources that are
available by allowing the use of those devices is hard to argue against.
However, it is also understandable that they can be more of a distraction
than an assistance at such a young age. But, on the other hand again, we
don’t want to hamper the growing skill set of young technology users

Chapter 16
120
when their ability to use technology is going to be such an important part
of their lives as they get older.
What it is important to prepare for is how these personal devices can
make the learning experience such an individualized one. Personal tech-
nology, within the educational context, can be used by teachers as a
means to bring the interests of the students into the classroom. Utilizing
these devices as a teaching tool, or as an enhancement to the resources
already available within the classroom, is a skill set that many teachers
are already embracing.
This debate will continue and evolve as technology grows. As we will
see in the next chapter, the near future of technology shows that IT will
become even more integrated into our daily lives. Once IT has become a
part of our clothes, is what we use instead of glasses, and is embedded in
our very skins, how will we be able to keep it out of the classroom? So,
while it is important to teach the skills of learning without technological
assistance, it won’t be too long before the idea of being separated from IT
in any way is anachronistic.
KEY IDEAS IN THIS CHAPTER
• Personal IT use took off with the PC evolution of the 1970s and
1980s. Since that time, our lives have become more and more digi-
tally focused.
• With all of the various technologies available as our new reality, it
is imperative to remember there is no separation anymore between
our digital selves and our real life. The person we present to the
world via our digital devices and technologies is the person the
world sees.
• Disruptive technologies are the things that come along that no one
anticipated that completely change the way something is produced,
delivered, or consumed.
• The infrastructure of most organizations is simply not robust
enough to offer the same kinds of experiences that companies that
provide technology resources on the personal level can.
• Shadow IT is when IT resources are sourced, purchased, and imple-
mented without the knowledge of the IT department. This can
cause problems when unanticipated systems attempt to gain access
to the organization’s IT resources.
www.ebook3000.com

Living a Digital Life and IT Consumerization
121
• The use of personal technology in the classroom is an evolving and
hotly debated reality.
• Personal technology, within the educational context, can be used by
teachers as a means to bring the interests of the students into the
classroom. Utilizing these devices as a teaching tool, or as an en-
hancement to the resources already available within the classroom,
is a skill set that many teachers are already embracing.

www.ebook3000.com

123
SEVENTEEN
Future Watching
There is no doubt that technology is here to stay. And once again, we
look to Moore’s law to see that rapid advancement will likely continue to
increase. PCs begat laptops, which begat tablets and smartphones, which
have already begun to beget new forms of technology to interact with.
Advances in product development and rapid creation have begun with
3D printing and have already started to evolve. And the world of biotech-
nology is one that we haven’t even begun to discuss within these pages,
but it is making major advancements right alongside all of these hard-
ware advancements.
WEARABLE TECHNOLOGY
We are already, as of the writing of this book, seeing an evolution in the
way technology is integrated into our very person. Wearable technology
is something that science fiction writers have long predicted, and usable
and practical wearable tech is now in existence and making rapid ad-
vancements. Watches as smart as computers are on the horizon, as well
as glasses that act as screens and enhance the very reality we are looking
at. And this just scratches the surface.
Medicine is already experimenting with wearables that provide con-
tinuous updates on blood pressure, blood oxidation levels, body temper-
ature, blood glucose levels, and more. As the technology continues to
miniaturize and be applicable using small patches, these sensors will
enable medical care to rapidly asses the vitals of anyone they apply a

Chapter 17
124
patch to. The speed at which this will increase the possibility of proper
care being administered can sometimes be a matter of life or death.
We already discussed how 3D printing technology has been adapted
to create rapid and inexpensive artificial limbs. Wearable technology has
also begun the integration of nerve endings into these artificial limbs,
thus giving the sensation of feeling in those appendages. The next evolu-
tion that is being worked on is the ability to control those limbs with the
central nervous system, just like we do with our natural appendages.
Various wearable devices are in development that will facilitate per-
sonalized coaching in the sports world. All kinds of metrics on body
movement, posture, muscle use, and energy output will be able to be
monitored remotely to provide individualized changes and coaching
tips. With the addition of the medical technology, these wearables will
also be able to monitor and maintain the health of athletes, thus minimiz-
ing the number of injuries an athlete could potentially receive.
These are just the beginning of the wearable revolution. Other break-
throughs and advancements are being made in internalizing various
technologies. Again, the medical applications are enormous: personal-
ized diet and exercise that is based on our own internal metabolism and
the best possible ways to impact it, microsurgery that can be conducted
using robots that are ingested by the patient. And much more!
WEARABLE IN THE CLASSROOM
This revolution is not just going to impact the worlds of medicine and
sports. The potential applications in the classroom are staggering. Ima-
gine glasses, or even tabletops, with the ability to track eye movement to
help gauge the attention levels of the students. Or pulse and respiration
monitors to help determine stress levels and to facilitate determining
areas of study that are problematic for children.
Treadmills and bicycles are already being used in some classrooms to
help with integrating movement into the learning environment. Attach-
ing these to computers would allow students to power their own work-
stations, while also helping to monitor fitness levels to help with keeping
them healthy and active. Again, these things are all just the tip of a very,
very large evolution in the way we are about to interact with our technol-
ogy within the next several decades.
www.ebook3000.com

Future Watching
125
THE INTERNET OF THINGS
The Internet of Things refers to the interconnected devices that are now
coming to market: appliances that link to the Internet to give updates on
internal use, houses that include security and environmental controls that
can be accessed via the Internet, refrigerators that can sense the freshness
and amounts of the food inside and then send a shopping list update to
your smartphone.
This is what we mean by IT becoming integrated into everything that
we do and every aspect of life. The technology will be in our furniture,
allowing us to conform the chairs and beds to our ergonomic needs based
on the sensors in our clothes. IT will be embedded in our pets, allowing
us to track their movements and ensure their health along with our own.
Predictive algorithms will determine our potential needs and provide
access to purchase those items via the smart glass on our windows.
This may sound like science fiction, but this will all be here within the
next few years. We have reached a point on the Moore’s law curve where
advancement is not small when it happens; it is a massive leap forward.
Each advancement in the hardware enables more and more application
advancement. And those applications require better and more advanced
hardware, and the cycle continues.
SMART TRANSPORTATION
Self-driving cars are no longer a question of if they will happen. It is now
a question of how quickly they will be adopted by everyone. And self-
driving cars aren’t the only form of smart transportation that is being
adopted. Rapid transit bullet trains are already a reality. The next evolu-
tion, the hyperloop, has gone into active development.
Personal transportation will shortly take the form of nonintrusive
movement. We will not need to fight transportation methods to get
places. We will simply tell our technology where we want to go, and it
will determine what the most efficient means is for getting us there. And
this doesn’t even begin to look at the possible impact that virtual environ-
ments could have on travel. The need to physically go places to interact
with them will never fully go away, but it will certainly evolve over time.

Chapter 17
126
EVOLUTION OF INFORMATION
The sheer volume of information available to us thanks to the Internet is
sometimes beyond comprehension. That volume of data will continue to
grow at an exponential rate. Therefore, it is likely that in the next five
years, over 50 percent of the things that we as a species will know do not
presently exist. Additionally, connection speeds and transfer mediums
are evolving at such a rate that near instantaneous data transfer around
the globe will be possible within the same timeframe.
This means that as we continue to expand our capacity for knowledge,
and the things that we now know, we will be able to broadcast that
knowledge worldwide the moment it is learned. This, perhaps more than
any other upcoming advancement, will have a truly disruptive impact on
education. The collective knowledge of the world is already available to
us, but when we are all wearing a computer and can access groundbreak-
ing knowledge at the very instant that it becomes available, how quickly
will our capacity for learning evolve?
THE SINGULARITY
All of this technological evolution is converging on what is known as the
singularity. This is the moment at which humanity and technology truly
merge. Many look at this point as when human consciousness will be
convertible to digital content. Others view this as the point when true
artificial intelligence has been created. When this may occur is still a
matter of intense debate, but the fact remains that technological evolution
is no longer science fiction.
It is certainly still a ways away. And we don’t really know what it will
mean or look like when it does occur. But there is no doubt that over the
next several decades we will continue to see the evolution of our personal
connection to technology. The future is a very bright and exciting one.
And IT will always be there to help shepherd that future along. Just don’t
forget to reboot.
www.ebook3000.com

Future Watching
127
KEY IDEAS IN THIS CHAPTER
• There is no doubt that technology is here to stay. And once again,
we look to Moore’s law to see that rapid advancement will likely
continue to increase.
• Wearable technology is something that science fiction writers have
long predicted, and usable and practical wearable tech is now in
existence and making rapid advancements.
• This revolution is not just going to impact the worlds of medicine
and sports, as we will also see rapid classroom application and
functionality.
• The Internet of Things refers to the interconnected devices that are
now coming to market, and what we mean by IT becoming inte-
grated into everything that we do and every aspect of life.
• Personal transportation will shortly take the form of nonintrusive
movement. We will simply tell our technology where we want to
go, and it will determine what the most efficient means is for get-
ting us there.
• It is likely that in the next five years, over 50 percent of the things
that we as a species will know do not presently exist.
• The future is a very bright and exciting one. And IT will always be
there to help shepherd that future along.

www.ebook3000.com

VII
Closing the Box

www.ebook3000.com

131
EIGHTEEN
Conclusion
Thank you for taking the time to go on this crash course with me. I hope
that this book, while there were a lot of technical concepts thrown
around, was still grounded and understandable enough to be of use to
you. It is simply impossible to discuss IT without getting somewhat tech-
nical, so thank you for hanging in there during those parts.
Finding ways to make IT accessible to everyone is not always easy,
but if the last two chapters of this book have shown anything, it is that it
is essential to understand and accept IT throughout our lives. It will not
be going away, and it will only become more and more of an essential
tool in the fabric of everything that we do. And when the time comes that
you will be faced with that inevitability, you don’t need to be so scared.
Now that the overview of the facts and facets of IT and how it inter-
acts with the organization and education has been completed, I would
like to take this opportunity to voice my personal thoughts on technology
in education. This is something that I struggle with for many reasons.
And I honestly do see and understand both sides of the argument.
Because my wife is a teacher, I am aware of the distractions inherent
in allowing too much technology into the classroom. I know what tech-
nology is currently being used and what level of technological knowl-
edge she is required to have to ensure she knows how to use all of the
tools effectively. I understand how hard it can be to maintain classroom
discipline in the best of times. Adding a personal distraction device (in-
sert your favorite piece of portable technology here) can only make it
harder.

Chapter 18
132
I also have school-age children. I see on a daily basis the allure that
computers have for them. My oldest, in fact, amazes me at his capacity to
be playing an online video game with his friends, whom he is talking to
via video chat on a separate device, while he is watching a video explain-
ing how to work through the level they are on, and consulting a book that
he has about the game. This ability to take in so many forms of input and
successfully process them is astonishing to me.
And here is where my IT background really kicks in and starts to fuel
the other side of the argument for me. Technology is essential. And on a
daily basis, I interact with people who are either intimidated by it or
simply cannot understand the leverage that technology can offer. We
don’t exist in a world where you can get by with a calculator and a piece
of paper anymore. Sometimes I wish that we did, but we simply don’t.
I know what is coming in the technology world. I know that the ad-
vancements in hardware are going to make more capacity and greater
performance available at lower prices and in smaller devices. All of that
translates to devices that are even better than our current generation of
smartphones, and they’ll be on our wrists. Or work as a headband. And
before we know it, they may simply be implanted at birth. (Yes, this is a
ways off, but it just might happen.)
So because of all of that, I simply don’t understand why there is such a
fight to keep technology out of the classroom. Technology is essential.
Understanding how to use it, when to use it, what is appropriate usage,
and what isn’t are all things that should be taught right beside math and
reading. We are already teaching our children how to properly use re-
sources when we teach them how to respect other people’s property and
how to properly hold a book.
Why does technology need to be any different? We already have the
answers to the questions on the test in the book, but we teach children not
to use that when the test comes around. They need to know how to learn
and maintain that information in their heads. Why shouldn’t using the
resources that technology affords us be taught the same way? Yes, you
can use your tablet or smartphone when working on the assignment as
part of the learning process, but you still need to be able to retain the data
for the test.
Technology is a tool. Like the typewriter and the encyclopedia before
it, the learning environment only got better when those tools were inte-
grated into classroom use. And thus, we need to find ways to integrate
www.ebook3000.com

Conclusion
133
technology into the classroom more. I understand there are limits to re-
sources, and we need to ensure that everyone has a fair advantage. I’m
certainly not advocating for any kind of technological class system.
But I do think that everyone should be afforded the opportunity to
learn and utilize the tool sets that technology affords us. Education needs
to stop fighting technology and learn to embrace it, to stop fearing the
disruption and learn to use the disruptive capabilities that technology has
created. I have started to see this happen already, and I wholeheartedly
encourage it to continue.
So now I will get down off of my soap box. Technology is here to stay,
and like water finding its level, it will be used to the best of the capacities
of those who are using it. Thank you for your time. Now, hit the save
button. Make sure this has all been moved to permanent memory. And
shut down.

www.ebook3000.com

135
About the Author
Christopher McCay has worked in the IT field for sixteen years, the last
six of them as director of information technology for Brailsford and Dun-
lavey, a national program management firm. When he isn’t playing with
technology, he is enjoying time with his wife and two sons, playing video
games, and spending time with their pets.

