
Unclear Physics

a volume in the series
Cornell Studies in Security Affairs
Edited by Robert J. Art, Robert Jervis, and Stephen M. Walt
A list of titles in this series is available at www​.­cornellpress​.­cornell​.­edu.

Unclear  
Physics
Why Iraq and Libya Failed to  
Build Nuclear Weapons
Målfrid  
Braut-­Hegghammer
Cornell University Press
Ithaca and London

Cornell University Press gratefully acknowledges receipt of a subvention 
from the Department of Po­liti­cal Science, University of Oslo, which aided in 
the publication of this book.
Copyright © 2016 by Cornell University
All rights reserved. Except for brief quotations in a review, this  
book, or parts thereof, must not be reproduced in any form without 
permission in writing from the publisher. For information, address 
Cornell University Press, Sage House, 512 East State Street, Ithaca, 
New York 14850.
First published 2016 by Cornell University Press
Printed in the United States of Amer­i­ca
Library of Congress Cataloging-­in-­Publication Data
Names: Braut-­Hegghammer, Målfrid, author.
Title: Unclear physics : why Iraq and Libya failed to build nuclear 
  weapons / Målfrid Braut-­Hegghammer.
Description: Ithaca : Cornell University Press, 2016. | Series: Cornell 
  studies in security affairs | Includes bibliographical references  
  and index.
Identifiers: LCCN 2016010768 | ISBN 9781501702785  
  (cloth : alk. paper)
Subjects: LCSH: Nuclear weapons—­Political aspects—­Iraq. | Nuclear 
weapons—­Political aspects—­Libya. | Hussein, Saddam, 1937–2006. | 
  Qaddafi, Muammar.
Classification: LCC UA853.I75 B73 2016 | DDC 623.4/511909567— 
  dc23 LC rec­ord available at http://­lccn​.­loc​.­gov​/­2016010768
Cornell University Press strives to use environmentally responsible 
suppliers and materials to the fullest extent pos­si­ble in the publishing 
of its books. Such materials include vegetable-­based, low-­VOC inks 
and acid-­free papers that are recycled, totally chlorine-­free, or partly 
composed of nonwood fibers. For further information, visit our 
website at www​.­cornellpress​.­cornell​.­edu.
Cloth printing  10  ​9  ​8  ​7  ​6  ​5  ​4  ​3  ​2  ​1

List of Illustrations	
vii
Acknowl­edgments	
ix
	
Introduction	
1
PART I. IRAQ
1.	
Iraq Explores the Atom, 1956–1973	
21
2.	
Ambiguity and Ambition, 1973–1981	
46
3.	
Saddam’s Nuclear Weapons Program, 1981–1987	
71
4.	
Crises and a Crash Program, 1988–1991	
103
PART II. LIBYA
5.	
Searching for Uranium in Libya, 1951–1973	
127
6.	
Cultural Revolution and Nuclear Power, 1973–1981	
149
7.	
Nuclear Weapons Remain Elusive, 1982–1989	
169
8.	
Sanctions, Centrifuges, and Exit, 1989–2003	
196
	
Conclusion	
218
Notes	
231
Index	
263
Contents
v


vii
1.1.	 Dr. M. Menarchi of the Iraqi National Nutrition Institute  
examines pupils for enlargement of the thyroid gland,  
one of several applications of nuclear medicine in Iraq	
32
1.2.	 An Iraqi technician from the Radioisotope Department  
of the National Nutrition Institute mea­sures radioiodine  
uptake in a patient in a village near Baghdad	
37
3.1.	 Iraqi nuclear weapons program reorganizations, 1982–88	
84
3.2.	 Map of nuclear and military-­industrial sites, Iraq	
88
4.1.	 Iraq nuclear weapons program timeline, 1982–1991	
105
6.1.	 Dr. Abdel Fattah Eskangy, head of the Libyan nuclear  
program, signs a safeguards agreement with Professor  
Ivan S. Zheludev, acting director general of the  
International Atomic Energy Agency, on 8 July 1980	
163
7.1.	 Reorganizations of Libya’s nuclear weapons program,  
1973–1986	
173
7.2.	 Libyan nuclear weapons program timeline, 1981–2003	
174
7.3.	 Map of nuclear and military-­industrial sites, Libya	
191
Illustrations


ix
This book could not have been written without the assistance, funding, and 
support of many individuals and organ­izations. It gives me ­great joy to ac-
knowledge ­these debts, and express my deep and heartfelt gratitude.
This proj­ect has had several homes, including the Norwegian Institute 
for Defence Studies, London School of Economics and Po­liti­cal Science 
(LSE), the Belfer Center at the John F. Kennedy School of Government at 
Harvard University, the Center for International Security and Cooperation 
(CISAC) at Stanford University, and the University of Oslo. It has been gen-
erously supported by the Stanton Foundation, the MacArthur Foundation, 
CISAC, the Norwegian Ministry of Defence, and the Department of Po­liti­
cal Science at the University of Oslo.
The Norwegian Defence University College was the incubator and first 
home. Warm thanks are due to Louise K. Dedichen, Torunn L. Haaland, 
Sven G. Holtsmark, Kristine Offerdal, the late Olav Riste, and Rolf Tamnes. 
Numerous nuclear fellows gave feedback along the way, including Kristin 
Ven Bruusgaard, Damon Colletta, Eliza Gheorghe, Henrik Hiim, Gaurav 
Kampani, Sebastien Miraglia, Maral Mirshahi, and Jayita Sarkar. I completed 
the book at the Department of Po­liti­cal Science, University of Oslo. I am in-
debted to my colleagues ­there, particularly Ida Weseth Bjøru, Dag Harald 
Claes, Bjørn Høyland, Anne Julie Semb, and Håvard Strand, for support and 
feedback.
In the early stages of my research I conducted fieldwork and interviews 
in numerous countries, including Libya, Jordan, Egypt, the United Arab 
Emirates, Qatar, Italy, Canada, and the United States. My fieldwork in the 
­Middle East was facilitated by the Libyan Institute for Gradu­ate Studies, as 
well as networks of scientists across the region. Many of the individuals I 
Acknowl­edgments

Acknowl­edgments
x
spoke to ­later requested anonymity; some retracted their statements. ­These 
contributions ­were, in some cases, made at considerable personal risk. 
They all helped shape my understanding of how scientists, engineers, aca-
demics, doctors, military officers, and regime officials lived and worked 
­under extraordinary conditions in Iraq and Libya. I have accessed numer-
ous archives, including the Arab World Documentation Unit at Exeter 
­University, the British National Archives, the Conflict Rec­ords Research 
Center, the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), as well as the pri-
vate papers and archives of numerous individuals in several countries. Very 
special thanks are due to the indefatigable Leopold Kammerhofer, Marta 
Riess, and their colleagues at the IAEA Archives. In Prince­ton, the Institute 
of Advanced Study kindly provided a workspace in their beautiful library in 
2009–2010 and the summer of 2015.
I have received generous guidance and support at ­every stage of this 
proj­ect. I am greatly indebted to the se­nior scholars at the Belfer Center and 
CISAC. At the Belfer Center, Graham Allison, Matthew Bunn, Martin Malin, 
Steven Miller, Richard Rosecrance, and Monica Toft generously offered 
(much needed) advice and guidance. At the LSE, Christopher Coker was 
consistently encouraging. At CISAC, I was challenged and inspired by 
Lynn Eden, David Holloway, and Scott Sagan. I cannot overstate how much 
I have learned, or how much it has meant for this book.
One of the ­great pleasures of working on this proj­ect was joining the com-
munity of fellows at the Belfer Center and CISAC. Many of my colleagues 
became role models, friends and, in several cases, extended ­family. Special 
thanks are due to Emma Belcher, James Cameron, Sarah Daly, Michal 
Ben-­Josef Hirsch, Jonathan Hunt, Shiri Krebs, Nelly Lahoud, Benjamin Less-
ing, Megan MacKenzie, Jonas Meckling, Vipin Narang, Ragnhild Nordås, 
Negeen Pegahi, Karthika Sasikumar, Paul Staniland, Maya Tudor, Keren 
Yarhi-­Milo, and Melissa Willard-­Foster. At Stanford, I received much encour-
agement and advice from Lisa Blaydes, Amir Goldberg, Norman Naimark, 
Gil-li Vardi, and Chick Perrow. I am very grateful to the (past and current) 
codirectors of CISAC: Mariano-­Florentino Cuéllar, Siegfried S. Hecker, David 
Relman, and Amy Zegart. I am much obliged to the incomparable Anna C. 
Coll, Elizabeth Gardner, Megan Gorman, Tracy Hill, Natasha Lee, Reid Pauly, 
and the broader CISAC community. Warm thanks are due to Susan Lynch at 
the Belfer Center.
It has been my good fortune to benefit from the support and friendship 
of many as the pro­cess of writing this book took me (and, frequently, my 
­family) to dif­fer­ent places. During our ­family’s time in Prince­ton, Jeff Col-
gan, Jeff Domanski and Kristan Flynn, Rachel Riedl, Noah Salomon, Jake 
Shapiro, and Keren Yarhi-­Milo (with families) excelled at all-­round men-
schiness, making this a home away from home. In Palo Alto, Gil-li Vardi 
and Amir Goldberg, Shiri Krebs and Amit Hetsron, Karthika Sasikumar 
and Matija Ćuk (with ­children) became our Californian extended ­family. 

Acknowl­edgments
xi
Warm thanks are also due to Hans Blix, Wyn Bowen, Avner Cohen, Charles 
Duelfer, Rolk Ekéus, Christina and Ariel Ezrahi, Frank Gavin, Gudrun Harrer, 
Jacques Hymans, Nick Kitchen and ­family, Amal Obeidi, Leopoldo Nuti, 
the organizers and participants of the International Nuclear History boot 
camp in Allumiere, Or Rabinowitz, Elisabeth Röhrlich, and Alison Par-
geter. I am very grateful to Robert Kelley for help and advice in preparing 
the map of Libyan sites. I apologize to anyone I may have forgotten.
In the late stages of this proj­ect, CISAC generously or­ga­nized a manu-
script review workshop (which was aptly renamed a “murder board” by 
Scott Sagan) on 26–27 May 2014. The murder board did in the first draft, 
and helped me produce a much better manuscript. I am extremely grateful 
to CISAC and all the participants: Emma Belcher, Lisa Blaydes, Benjamin 
Buch, James Cameron, Zachary Davis, Lynn Eden, Tom Fingar, Siegfried 
Hecker, David Holloway, Jonathan Hunt, Neil Joeck, Jeffrey Lewis, Neil 
Narang, Vipin Narang, Brad Roberts, and Scott Sagan. Special thanks are 
due to Anna C. Coll, who or­ga­nized this session, and Lauren Williams who 
took meticulous notes.
At Cornell University Press, Roger Haydon and the series editors ­were a 
dream team for this first-­time author. I am deeply grateful to Roger and the 
reviewers, whose feedback and advice helped me write a better book. I 
also express heartfelt thanks to Teresa J. Lawson for terrific editing. Philip 
Schwartzberg of Meridian Mapping created the maps.
While completing the manuscript I received assistance from several 
gradu­ate students. In Palo Alto, Caroline Abadeer at the Stanford Depart-
ment of Po­liti­cal Science prepared ­tables and figures, while Maral Mirshahi 
helped recheck the facts for several chapters. At the University of Oslo, Karl 
Bjurstrøm, Martin G. Søyland, and Malin Østevik had the thankless task of 
rechecking footnotes one last time before the book went to print. Malin 
Østevik also assisted with preparing ­tables. Remaining inaccuracies and 
errors are solely my responsibility.
I owe my greatest debt of gratitude to my ­family. The love from my 
­children, Arne and Haldis, nurtured me throughout the years spent re-
searching and writing this book. My husband, Thomas, has been a model of 
kindness and patience, asking the right questions at the right time. You 
make every­thing better. My parents, Jarle and Astrid, have always helped 
and encouraged me in all my efforts. Tone and Odd, my parents-­in-­law, 
share my love of books and ­were supportive as I wrote this one. Fi­nally, my 
maternal grandparents, Arne and Hanna Nåvik, delighted in my research 
adventures even as ­these took me far away from them. I dedicate this book 
to their memory, with much love and gratitude.


1
Introduction
This book is about two dictators who failed to get nuclear weapons. It is an 
account of secret programs and regimes that are now confined to the dust-
bins of history. Leaders in Pyongyang, Teheran, and Washington have drawn 
dif­fer­ent lessons from ­these cases; scholars continue to debate their implica-
tions. In fact, much of what we thought we knew about the Iraqi and Libyan 
nuclear weapons programs turns out to be wrong. This book reveals that 
neither Saddam Hussein nor Muammar Gaddafi was ­really determined to 
acquire nuclear weapons. Neither leader was capable of micromanaging 
­these programs, which they mostly left in the hands of scientists. They lacked 
the capability even to pay close attention to the per­for­mance of ­these pro-
grams ­because they had weakened their states to strengthen their own hold 
on power. If I am right, we may have to reconsider what ­else we think we 
know about ­these regimes.
To understand how autocrats fare in their pursuit of nuclear weapons pro-
grams, we can learn much from how they treat their states. Saddam solidified 
his hold on power by proliferating and fragmenting state institutions, Gad-
dafi by dismantling them. ­These choices ­later tied their hands by limiting their 
ability to monitor their nuclear program and to intervene when necessary. 
Both leaders had much less direct influence over their nuclear weapons 
programs than has been realized. But Saddam’s approach—of proliferat-
ing state institutions—­ultimately gave him a larger toolbox than Gaddafi, 
who sought to dismantle the Libyan state. Saddam was able to fix some of 
the prob­lems facing his country’s nuclear weapons program, once he deci­
ded to intervene; Gaddafi’s attempts met with much less success. This real-
ization helps us make sense of the outcomes of ­these programs: Iraq’s pro-
gram was on the brink of a breakthrough when it was interrupted by the 
1991 Gulf War, while Libya’s program was an abject failure when Gaddafi 
fi­nally dismantled it in late 2003.
This argument highlights the trade-­offs personalist leaders face when en-
hancing their power at the expense of effective state institutions. ­These trade-­
offs solve some prob­lems, from the perspective of ­these leaders, but create 

Introduction
2
­others. Some of the consequences—­minor corruption, flawed reporting, 
and underperformance—­were calculated risks. Other consequences ­were 
unexpected—­notably, the difficulties of accounting for an un­regu­la­ted and 
widely dispersed industry of multiple weapons of mass destruction (WMD) 
proj­ects—­and ­later played an impor­tant role in the international community’s 
confrontation with Saddam that began in 1991 and culminated in 2003.
This book is based on extensive primary source material collected over a 
de­cade, much of which has not been explored by other scholars, as well as 
fieldwork and interviews with scientists and decision makers. The chapters 
pres­ent the programs as scientists and officials perceived them at the time, as 
well as visiting foreign experts. Through their perspectives, and by combin-
ing what we might term “top-­down” and “bottom-up” lenses, the relation-
ship between science and politics in both states is explored in detail. This is a 
departure from the “high politics” perspective of studying authoritarian 
regimes through the eyes of their leaders. More broadly, this analy­sis sheds 
light on how much each leader knew about their nuclear weapons program 
at dif­fer­ent times. As I show, many impor­tant decisions and initiatives came 
from the scientists, often without the permission or even the knowledge of 
the se­nior leadership. Many small decisions made by scientists and engi-
neers cumulatively ­shaped the per­for­mance of each nuclear weapons pro-
gram while the attention of its leader—­Saddam and Gaddafi—­was mostly 
focused elsewhere.
Seen from this perspective, ­these two nuclear weapons programs look very 
dif­fer­ent from how they have previously been portrayed. Saddam and Gad-
dafi did not pay close attention to ­these programs; rather, their scientists did 
not always have a clear sense of what their objectives ­were supposed to be. 
At one point, Iraqi scientists jokingly characterized their program as one of 
“unclear physics.”1 Scientists who ­were disobedient or incompetent often 
got away with it, although Saddam did not hesitate to imprison his leading 
scientists when he became concerned about their loyalties in the wake of the 
1979 Ira­nian Revolution. Most striking, perhaps, is the fact that Saddam deci­
ded to invade Kuwait—­a high-­risk move that provoked the 1991 Gulf War—­
just as the Iraqi nuclear weapons program stood on the verge of a major 
breakthrough. Libya’s program, although in many ways still a closed book, 
is revealed in the following chapters as consistently dysfunctional as the 
regime’s interest in nuclear weapons ebbed and waned.
Misjudging how much leaders know about their nuclear weapon programs, 
or the determination and effort with which they pursue ­these weapons, 
is dangerous and costly. For policymakers, understanding how domestic 
­factors shape the outcomes of nuclear weapons programs is essential for 
designing nonproliferation policies and countermea­sures. For authoritarian 
leaders who want nuclear weapons, the two cases in this book offer a cau-
tionary tale of difficult trade-­offs and costly ­mistakes. Foreign leaders, view-
ing Iraq and Libya or other closed authoritarian regimes, had no clear picture 

Introduction
3
of the domestic-­level ­drivers and obstacles to the acquisition of nuclear 
weapons in ­these regimes when weighing their policy options. Saddam was 
toppled in a disastrous U.S.-­led war in 2003, well over a de­cade ­after the Iraqi 
nuclear weapons program had been dismantled; U.S. and British diplomats 
struck a deal with Gaddafi to dismantle his failing nuclear program the 
same year. ­These decisions set in motion events that continue to redraw the 
po­liti­cal map of the ­Middle East.
The Lit­er­a­ture
Scholars have produced impor­tant new insights about the domestic politics 
of nuclear proliferation and, more broadly, how authoritarian leaders make 
decisions about nuclear weapons and national security. This work explores 
the mechanics of decision making and the many obstacles facing autocrats 
seeking the absolute weapon. I hope to build on this lit­er­a­ture by shedding 
new light on two crucial cases and highlighting a variable that is largely 
­unexamined in this body of work, namely the role of state capacity.
The first strand of this lit­er­a­ture focuses on decision making in authoritar-
ian regimes seeking nuclear weapons. Etel Solingen’s book Nuclear Logics: 
Contrasting Paths in East Asia and the ­Middle East explores how ruling co­ali­
tions’ strategies for po­liti­cal survival inform regime decisions regarding 
­whether to pursue or to abandon nuclear weapons programs.2 Specifically, 
she argues that ruling co­ali­tions that seek to integrate their domestic econ-
omy in the global economy are less likely to pursue nuclear weapons than 
­those who seek isolation. Solingen’s work echoes broader debates in po­liti­
cal science about how state leaders choose between spending money on guns 
or butter, that is, their militaries or economic development benefiting the 
population. In ­these debates, personalist regimes in oil states (such as Iraq 
and Libya) are described as being particularly prone to spending their pet-
rodollars on guns. Scholars point to two sets of ­factors to explain this ten-
dency: Jeff Colgan highlights the crucial role of the oil economy in enabling 
authoritarian leaders such as Saddam and Gaddafi to invest vast amounts 
in their militaries, while a body of lit­er­a­ture points to the lack of domestic 
constraints (in terms of weak institutions and ­these leaders’ lack of concern 
for domestic audiences) as an impor­tant enabling ­factor.3 For example, Jes-
sica Weeks and Christopher Way argue that leaders such as Saddam and 
Gaddafi who lack institutional constraints in their regimes are more likely 
to initiate nuclear weapons programs.4 ­These contributions demonstrate the 
importance of the domestic po­liti­cal context for understanding how dif­fer­ent 
autocrats make decisions about nuclear weapons programs. The evidence 
presented in this book underlines the need for a better understanding of 
how authoritarian regimes and their state institutions affect decisions about 
pursuing nuclear weapons. Iraq and Libya, as we ­will see, pursued nuclear 

Introduction
4
weapons while seeking integration into the global economy. More broadly, 
both regimes deliberated how much they should invest in domestic develop-
ment versus nuclear and conventional arms, reaching dif­fer­ent conclusions 
at dif­fer­ent times.
Still, we need more work that examines how other domestic-­level con-
straints, notably in the form of institutional capabilities and resources, af-
fect the implementation of ­these decisions inside nuclear establishments. In 
Achieving Nuclear Ambitions: Scientists, Politicians, and Proliferation Jacques 
Hymans takes impor­tant steps in this direction. Observing that many au-
thoritarian states strug­gle to acquire nuclear weapons, he argues that neopat-
rimonial rulers undermine the professional culture inside nuclear weapons 
programs through constant interference. Hymans argues that ­these leaders 
do so ­because their weak state institutions permit, and even encourage, such 
interventions. For this reason, he posits, Libya and Iraq ­were doomed to fail.5 
Hymans’s rich and influential account is representative of what has become 
the conventional wisdom: that Saddam and Gaddafi essentially microman-
aged their nuclear scientists, that they ­were determined to get nuclear weap-
ons, and that they failed largely ­because their scientists ­were unwilling or 
unable to deliver ­these capabilities. The findings presented in this book chal-
lenge all three ele­ments of this conventional wisdom.
­After the fall of Saddam’s regime, scholars began to explore the inner life of 
key institutions including the Baath Party, the intelligence ser­vices, and the 
military. ­These studies, drawing on extensive archives brought from Iraq to 
the United States, offer impor­tant insights. Joseph Sassoon’s Saddam Hussein’s 
Ba‘th Party: Inside an Authoritarian Regime describes how Saddam held scien-
tists in special esteem, believing they ­were essential for building a strong and 
modern state.6 Furthermore, Sassoon shows how the intelligence ser­vices 
strug­gled to assess the per­for­mance of such specialized agencies and instead 
focused on indicators of individual loyalty, for example through vetting mar-
riages. Other work explores how the Iraqi regime’s efforts to secure po­liti­cal 
power affected the per­for­mance of the armed forces. In The Dictator’s Army: 
Battlefield Effectiveness in Authoritarian Regimes Caitlin Talmadge explores 
how efforts at “coup-­proofing,” that is, preventive mea­sures to reduce the 
likelihood that actors can successfully or­ga­nize and implement a coup d’état, 
and how threat assessments ­shaped the per­for­mance of the military in Sad-
dam’s Iraq.7 Kevin M. Woods traces the effect of purges and other regime 
­interventions on the Iraqi military’s per­for­mance in The Iran-­Iraq War: A Mili-
tary and Strategic History.8
The lit­er­a­ture on Libya remains scant, primarily ­because of the difficul-
ties associated with carry­ing out fieldwork during Gaddafi’s tenure. That 
­being said, excellent studies detail the emergence of the modern state in Libya 
and the impact of the influx of oil and Gaddafi’s revolution on the evolving 
state apparatus.9 In Libya since In­de­pen­dence: Oil and State-­Building Dirk 
Vandewalle notes the idiosyncratic ways in which the Libyan state evolved 

Introduction
5
­after Gaddafi seized power in 1969, even when compared with other author-
itarian oil-­exporting regimes in the ­Middle East. It was characterized by a 
hybridization of formal and informal administrative practices, the Gaddafi 
regime’s undermining of the formal bureaucracy’s information-­gathering 
capabilities, and the consequent erosion of planning and decision-­making 
capabilities.10 This lit­er­a­ture notes that the Gaddafi regime sought to dis-
mantle the Libyan state while si­mul­ta­neously using the state apparatus to 
distribute oil wealth. Limited attention has been given to the consequences 
of the uneven development of the Libyan state for dif­fer­ent areas of state ac-
tivities, again primarily ­because of the difficulties associated with carry­ing 
out fieldwork and archival research. The fate of Libya’s archives ­after the 
Gaddafi regime’s fall is still unknown. Many rec­ords appear to have been 
displaced or destroyed during and ­after the 2011 uprising.
Scholars of nuclear proliferation are paying increasing attention to dif­fer­
ent domestic-­level ­factors that define a state’s capacity to build nuclear weap-
ons. One impor­tant variable is the ability to absorb technology and assistance 
from abroad. Alexander Montgomery argues that neopatrimonial regimes 
are less capable of absorbing nuclear technology from foreign suppliers.11 
More broadly, a study by R. Scott Kemp of the diffusion of centrifuge tech-
nology (a pathway for uranium enrichment ­adopted by many states includ-
ing Pakistan, North ­Korea, and South Africa) concludes that the recipient 
state’s orga­nizational capabilities ­matter more than access to foreign tech-
nology for the per­for­mance of a nuclear weapons program.12 Sonia Ben 
Ouagrham-­Gormley’s study of biological weapons programs delves even 
deeper, showing that it is necessary to disaggregate ­factors working at the dif­
fer­ent levels—­the regime, state organ­izations, and laboratories—­that influ-
ence a state’s technological absorption capacity.13 This suggests that regime 
type is not a sufficient explanation and that we have to look inside bureaucra-
cies and even laboratories to untangle why some programs fare better than 
­others. Iraq and Libya are pertinent cases for such an analy­sis ­because, as this 
book shows, Iraq was able to benefit much more than Libya from access to 
foreign assistance and technology.
Some authoritarian leaders use state institutions as vehicles for domina-
tion and pursuit of grandiose schemes.14 Some succeed in this; ­others fail. 
Joel S. Migdal notes that inefficiencies are prevalent in many authoritarian 
states.15 More broadly, institutional weakness has been a per­sis­tent challenge 
for many postcolonial states in the developing world. In ­these states, formal 
state institutions vary in terms of stability (their durability against environ-
mental shocks) and enforcement (their ability to shape be­hav­ior). Scholars 
are paying more attention to how and why institutional strength varies.16 
For authoritarian states in par­tic­u­lar, more needs to be done to explain the 
­causes and consequences of varying levels of institutionalization.
As this book shows, the Iraqi and Libyan state institutions ­were not ca-
pable of realizing many of Saddam’s and Gaddafi’s transformative ideas. In 

Introduction
6
­these states, formal institutions ­were instruments of power, despite their im-
perfections, but they ­were also sites of negotiation and even re­sis­tance. The 
expansive lit­er­a­ture on principal-­agent theory, which explores prob­lems of 
oversight and control in state bureaucracies, holds pertinent insights for this 
analy­sis. At the same time, this study improves our understanding of how 
states that have weak institutional resources monitor agents and dif­fer­ent 
ways in which regimes nonetheless attempt to enforce agents’ compliance 
with the rules set down by the principal.17 The chapters in this book show 
that drift and underper­for­mance ­were not uncommon in ­these nuclear pro-
grams and explain how and why scientists got away with it.
The Argument
This book explores how state capacity affected the nuclear weapons pro-
grams of Iraq and Libya. Put simply, weak states often lack the institutional 
resources to set up and operate nuclear weapons programs. This is particu-
larly problematic in so-­called personalist regimes, such as Iraq and Libya, 
whose leaders undermine formal state institutions and seek to govern through 
informal structures of patronage and control. The ways in which ­these leaders 
coup-­proof their states can further weaken their ability to monitor and inter-
vene in the management of nuclear weapons programs. Personalist leaders 
choose dif­fer­ent strategies to address the resulting prob­lems, with varying 
outcomes.
The argument developed in this book cuts against the conventional wis-
dom in numerous ways, by showing that authoritarian leaders in weak states 
have limited capacity—­and sometimes limited interest—in managing their 
nuclear scientists. To be clear, I am not making an argument about how ­these 
dynamics unfold in strong states or other po­liti­cal systems, where the im-
pact of management strategies is likely to be dif­fer­ent. But the findings ­will 
hopefully offer insights for analyzing other states and regimes, particularly 
authoritarian ones, that may suffer from similar pathologies.
In this section, I lay out the bare bones of the arguments that I develop 
further in the exploratory analy­sis presented in subsequent chapters. First, 
I define state capacity and explain how it varies. Second, I describe how, in 
weak states, coup-­proofing affects how personalist leaders manage their 
nuclear weapons programs. Fi­nally, I examine how ­these leaders deploy 
dif­fer­ent management strategies to cope with their oversight and control 
prob­lems in the nuclear field.
1)  state capacity and nuclear proliferation
Broadly conceived, state capacity refers to the ability of bureaucracies to 
carry out tasks on behalf of the po­liti­cal leadership. This is a slippery con-

Introduction
7
cept that must be carefully defined and operationalized. For the purposes 
of this book, I define state capacity narrowly, in terms of the professional-
ism of the state bureaucracy, following Francis Fukuyama and ­others.18 This 
has two dimensions: the ability to carry out specialized functions; and in­de­
pen­dence from state elites and the po­liti­cal leadership. Both are essential for 
creating the strong institutions that underpin a robust state apparatus.
While we often define state capacity as ­either strong or weak, scholars 
point out ­there is a lot of variation within each category. Furthermore, ­there 
can be variation within states, as evidenced by “islands of excellence” in 
other­wise inefficient states.19 For ­these reasons, the estimates of strong ver-
sus weak state capacity are better conceived of as points on a spectrum rather 
than binary categories. To estimate state strength, po­liti­cal scientists look at 
how institutions perform in ensuring compliance with formal and informal 
rules and how vulnerable ­these agencies are to changes in their environ-
ment.20 Conventional output mea­sures of state strength, such as extractive 
capabilities, are difficult to mea­sure in oil-­exporting authoritarian states, 
quite simply ­because such regimes do not tend to tax their citizens. It is 
impor­tant to distinguish between “output” indicators of how well institu-
tions perform in implementing rules, on one hand, and “input” indicators 
showing how capable states are of designing rules and developing enforce-
ment and monitoring mechanisms, on the other hand. This distinction is 
particularly impor­tant in weak states, where institutions can be created with-
out receiving the necessary resources from the state principal to effectively 
implement rules. This happens for dif­fer­ent reasons, Steven Levitsky and 
María Victoria Murillo argue. In some cases, this is intentional “win­dow-­
dressing,” demonstrating that the state apparatus is a façade while real po­
liti­cal power resides outside the formal institutions of the state.21 In Libya 
and Iraq, for example, nonstate actors (such as the Libyan Revolutionary 
Committees and tribal leaders) played impor­tant roles in monitoring be­hav­
ior and distributing resources on behalf of the leadership.
State weakness, then, can be the result of two distinct, but sometimes co-
inciding, ­causes: the absence of necessary capabilities in the state itself to 
carry out monitoring and sanction be­hav­ior; and a lack of willingness by the 
state leadership to ensure that institutions serve this purpose. As we ­will see, 
­these variables can change over time, with distinct consequences for the gov-
ernance of nuclear programs.
To estimate state capacity in terms of the robustness and enforcement of 
formal institutions, we can use several indicators: ­whether bureaucrats are 
educated and trained for their specific tasks; ­whether recruitment is merito-
cratic; ­whether the public sector is a vehicle of social mobility; ­whether state 
institutions are subject to purges following po­liti­cal transitions; ­whether 
institutions are directly influenced by the preferences of state elites (or non-
state elites); and ­whether ­there is widespread embezzlement and corruption 
by state officials.22 In other words, we look for indicators of ­whether state 

Introduction
8
institutions can perform their tasks consistently over time, without being al-
tered or disrupted by changes in their environment, and ­whether they have 
the necessary resources to carry out their tasks (notably ­whether they can 
oversee implementation of formal and informal rules and sanction ­those who 
fail to comply). It is impor­tant to recognize that ­these mea­sures can change 
considerably in personalist authoritarian regimes run by a single individ-
ual for an extended period, as was the case in both Iraq and Libya. For ex-
ample, purges associated with a leader’s emergence to power can undermine 
state capacity, or leaders taking mea­sures in response to external threats to 
enhance the capacity of his military-­industrial organ­izations. During the 
Iran-­Iraq War, for example, Saddam gave such organ­izations more freedom 
to develop weapons for the war effort.
It is also impor­tant to clarify what state capacity is not. While the level of 
economic development in a country can have effects that resemble ­those of 
state capacity, and scholars at times conflate ­these effects, ­these are distinct 
variables. In this book, state capacity refers to the professionalism of bureau-
cracies, while economic development is an output variable referring to re-
sources and growth. It is similarly impor­tant to distinguish between state 
capacity and plain ineptitude: if poor per­for­mance is the result of unedu-
cated or inadequate staff, this reflects state weakness. If scientists or ­others 
who have adequate knowledge to carry out a given task nevertheless per-
form poorly, this is incompetence.
The combination of personalist rulers and weak state capacity can have 
puzzling consequences. In the case of Libya, for example, the Gaddafi re-
gime’s attempt at agricultural reforms was unsuccessful ­because the regime 
was unable to shift sufficient ­people to work on the new agricultural sites. 
It failed to set up infrastructure, such as housing and transport, or the 
administrative apparatus to make this happen. Similarly, Libyan nuclear 
scientists often simply failed to turn up for work, or they moonlighted at 
other academic institutions during working hours to add to their salaries, 
apparently without any ­consequences.
2)  coup-­proofing the state
Paradoxically, personalist leaders weaken their states to accumulate power. 
Their most threatening security challenges come from within, often in the 
form of army coups or popu­lar uprisings. Still, ­these leaders need the state 
apparatus to strengthen their hold on power through repression or co-­option. 
To cope with this dilemma some create a large state apparatus capable of 
detecting and preempting potential threats but fragment state institutions to 
prevent alternative power centers from forming. Less frequently, leaders dis-
mantle their formal state bureaucracy to keep power centers from forming 
and to deny potential challengers the institutional resources with which they 
could mobilize.

Introduction
9
­Either strategy has detrimental consequences for the ability of the state 
bureaucracy to perform specialized functions. In other words, coup-­proofing 
is an intervening variable defining the strength of state institutions in weak 
authoritarian states. Fragmentation creates a chaotic system with limited 
transparency and coordination, while dismantlement (which may be accom-
panied by the rise of nonstate actors that effectively usurp state functions) 
robs bureaucracies of vital resources and instruments. In both cases, it is 
difficult for leaders to secure adequate oversight ­because they lack institu-
tional mechanisms to vet and assess the per­for­mance of specialized activi-
ties such as nuclear weapons programs. I argue that ­these strategies have 
significant consequences for the development of an effective nuclear weap-
ons program in a weak state and for the ability of authoritarian leaders to 
monitor and intervene when necessary.
In a weak state governed by a personalist leader, the underdeveloped state 
apparatus makes it difficult to plan and coordinate complex proj­ects such 
as nuclear weapons programs. ­These states are bewildering even to seasoned 
civil servants; they are designed to give only the se­nior leadership a clear 
view of the state and its institutions (but, as we ­will see, even the se­nior lead-
ership cannot keep track of every­thing that goes on inside their byzantine 
institutions). As a result, managing clandestine activities that, like a nuclear 
weapons program, require collaboration from several dif­fer­ent agencies is 
uniquely challenging. Collaboration in such systems is fraught with risk, 
­because no one wants to be blamed if a proj­ect falls ­behind schedule or fails 
altogether. Such a strategy, meant to make the state apparatus opaque from 
anyone outside the top leadership, also has detrimental consequences for 
leader scrutiny. To protect themselves from the eyes of the leadership, sci-
entists may inflate the number of ongoing proj­ects or may constantly change 
the design of their or­ga­ni­za­tion to make it nearly impossible for anyone to 
keep track of their ­actual pro­gress. Institutions can blame each other for 
­mistakes.
In states with such a fragmented structure and proliferating state insti-
tutions, conditions are ripe for turf fights. To encourage innovation and 
stimulate per­for­mance in the state sector, which often suffers from ineffi-
ciencies, man­ag­ers may launch competing proj­ects. At the same time, fierce 
internal competition creates distrust inside organ­izations, as scientists and 
engineers fear that colleagues ­will steal or claim credit for their ideas, or 
­will secretly report ­mistakes and failures to the leadership. ­Under such con-
ditions, collaboration is difficult, and this, in turn, inhibits innovation.
Dismantlement weakens the state through a very dif­fer­ent route. A per-
sonalist leader may seek to prevent challenges or alternative power centers 
from forming by eroding institutions, or by creating nonstate organ­izations 
that take over some (or all) their key functions. But by thus eroding special-
ized agencies, or by failing to set them up despite having the economic 
capacity to do so, the state fails to create resources essential to plan and 

Introduction
10
oversee specialized activities such as technological proj­ects. The absence of 
formal oversight mechanisms makes it very difficult to create any meaning-
ful audit mechanisms or self-­regulation by the nuclear establishment. In-
formal oversight mechanisms (­those that are nonstate agencies, such as back-­
channel reporting from party members directly to the se­nior leadership) 
typically ­will not be able to assess technical issues effectively. Furthermore, 
if the dismantlement strategy goes as far as replacing key state functions 
(such as the diplomatic ser­vice) with nonstate agency representatives (such 
as ­family members of the leader or representatives from ideological move-
ments who answer to the leader but are not part of the state structure) this 
can undermine vital resources such as negotiations with other states for nu-
clear cooperation or assistance.
At a more prosaic level, if the state lacks adequate structures for recruitment 
and training this undermines the development of ­human resources for the 
nuclear weapons program. Furthermore, if the regime is hesitant to invest in 
higher education ­because it is seen as a breeding ground for po­liti­cal opposi-
tion, this limits the development of a pool of potential recruits. This can also 
lead the regime to prefer outsourcing of the nuclear program, ­either to other 
states through a nuclear cooperation agreement or to black market actors, if 
the opportunity arises. Such outsourcing inhibits the development of neces-
sary skills and the development of institutional memory and the tacit knowl-
edge essential to enable scientists and engineers to find solutions to the inevi-
table challenges that emerge. At the same time, this interaction can lead the 
recipient state to attempt to model its own institutions on ­those recommended 
by the supplier without necessarily having the orga­nizational infrastructure 
in place (or wanting to create this infrastructure) to make this work.
3)  management strategies
Nuclear weapons programs pres­ent autocrats with a severe principal-­agent 
prob­lem: the preferences of the principal and agents are not aligned; ­there is 
high information asymmetry; and it is difficult to audit the scientists’ per­for­
mance. In weak states, ­these challenges are especially acute. This gives nu-
clear scientists both motive and opportunity to shirk or drift from their 
task. How do dictators deal with this prob­lem? The conventional wisdom is 
that they micromanage. I dispute this view. In fact, autocrats attempt to cope 
with the principal-­agent prob­lem in dif­fer­ent ways, with varying results.
Management strategy represents a choice between del­e­ga­tion and subor-
dination of the operations of a program. The crucial difference between the 
two is who makes decisions—­scientists or the state leadership—­about how 
the program is or­ga­nized, what its objectives are, and how ­these ­will be 
achieved. We can evaluate which strategies states opt for by using the fol-
lowing indicators: the quantity and quality of mandates given to the agents 
by the principal, who sets the goals and deadlines for the nuclear program 

Introduction
11
(and how precise ­these are); and ­whether the po­liti­cal leadership defines 
clear rules for the program.
­Either approach has drawbacks: del­e­ga­tion to scientific man­ag­ers runs the 
risk that the scientists ­will abuse this by shirking, while subordination (e.g., 
to a trusted representative of the regime who lacks technical expertise) could 
lead to uninformed choices and an unproductive program.23 But personal-
ist leaders often want to defer committing to a program ­until they have a 
better sense of how well it ­will perform. This creates strong incentives for the 
leadership to delegate, at least in the early stages of the nuclear program, to 
avoid the potential costs associated with getting directly involved in a pro-
gram with an uncertain outcome.
Po­liti­cal scientists debate how choices between del­e­ga­tion and subordina-
tion in dif­fer­ent po­liti­cal systems affect the per­for­mance of nuclear weapons 
programs and other large proj­ects in the military-­industrial sphere.24 The 
conventional wisdom suggests that del­e­ga­tion may lead to drift, where 
bureaucrats redefine their tasks and objectives according to their own pref-
erences. On the other hand, interventions such as frequent changes of lead-
ership create instability inside bureaucracies; purges rob organ­izations of 
scarce expertise; and po­liti­cal vetting undermines meritocracy and recruit-
ment. The historical lit­er­a­ture shows that autocrats have used vari­ous strat-
egies. Stalin, for example, granted more freedom to nuclear scientists than 
to ­those in other branches of science for a while (noting that they could al-
ways shoot the scientists ­later.25) But when it comes to authoritarian regimes 
and nuclear weapons programs, Matthew Evangelista and Hymans suggest 
that subordination is bad. I argue that the results of ­either strategy depend 
on state capacity.
This argument may seem counterintuitive. ­There is a prevalent view, con-
sistent with the impression Saddam and Gaddafi wanted to give, that ­these 
leaders had a clear view of what was ­going on inside their states. Leaving 
aside the issue of ­whether they ­were capable of ­doing this for the moment, 
is it even pos­si­ble that ­these leaders did not have clear idea of how their nu-
clear scientists performed?
Consider the example of the Iraqi military-­industrial complex. The pro­
cess of research and development in the Iraqi military-­industrial complex 
­under Saddam’s rule differed from that of other highly centralized states 
(such as the Soviet Union). The investigations by United Nations (UN) in-
spectors into Iraq’s past WMD programs show that this was in many ways 
a bottom-up pro­cess, where scientists and officials could pitch proj­ects to se­
nior officials. Iraqi documents that emerged ­after the 2003 U.S.-­led invasion 
also show that—­contrary to assumptions held by policymakers and aca-
demic studies—­the regime did not monitor or follow up on many of ­these 
proj­ects ­because they lacked the know-­how and institutional resources. In a 
meeting of se­nior Iraqi regime officials in the fall of 1995, the following ex-
change between Saddam and an out­spoken se­nior general is revealing:26

Introduction
12
General Amir: Sir, ­there are proj­ects that at best are meaningless. I ­really 
would prefer not to use a more cruel word. . . . ​Sir, when someone comes up 
with an idea and says: “Let me use this biological toxin, ­because once I use 
it, the entire Ira­nian Army ­will dis­appear.” No one then would dare to dis-
cuss it with him ­because it is something more difficult to judge than, say, a 
bomb or a rocket. [Consequently], they give him the green light to start and 
they support him. . . . ​­There are many secondary biological programs that did 
not bring any results, produce any weapons, or do anything of value. . . . ​But 
you know them; ­there is a type of exaggeration to the issue. He is taking ad-
vantage of this—[interrupted]
Saddam [Hussein]: Did not they know of this earlier?
General Amir: Definitely not, Sir, ­because the [biological activities] did not 
bring any results or anything of substance. . . . ​
As this exchange suggests, the Iraqi regime did not systematically vet 
WMD proj­ects in terms of their scientific or technological merit.27 ­There was 
no meaningful peer review or monitoring of smaller proj­ects, while larger 
programs (such as the nuclear program) often reported their achievements 
and objectives to the po­liti­cal leadership in ambiguous terms. Failure in this 
“cottage industry” was apparently inconsequential, as the responsible indi-
viduals ­were not punished for failing to deliver what they had promised. 
This pattern, which appears to have intensified ­after 1991 ­until the fall of the 
regime in 2003, stands in sharp contrast to the notion that the regime con-
sistently interfered in the ­running and management of sensitive proj­ects. As 
we ­will see in the following chapters, this pattern also applied to the nuclear 
program.
It is impor­tant to distinguish between management strategy and control 
mechanisms. Irrespective of the management strategies they select, state 
leaders can impose vari­ous control mechanisms—­such as reporting proce-
dures, bud­get approval, informal rules, and norms—to monitor and respond 
to the per­for­mance of their scientists and man­ag­ers.28 In states with weak 
institutions, leaders face additional hurdles to the imposition of effective con-
trol mechanisms. In such cases, leaders can resort to other mechanisms to 
induce compliance, such as economic incentives, or fear.
The argument that authoritarian leaders of weak states, such as Saddam 
and Gaddafi, do not necessarily ­favor micromanagement may seem coun-
terintuitive. But micromanagement is very costly in personalist regimes. In-
formation asymmetries between technical specialists and the po­liti­cal lead-
ership make this especially difficult when it comes to technical and scientific 
proj­ects. This, in turn, makes it pos­si­ble for scientists and man­ag­ers to exag-
gerate their pro­gress and their achievements. The personalist leader has lim-
ited capacity to pro­cess technical information, and multiple issues compete 
for his attention. Saddam and Gaddafi ­were aware of ­these challenges. But 

Introduction
13
for them, the nuclear weapons program was not “Prob­lem Number One” as 
it was for other authoritarian leaders, such as Stalin. Saddam and Gaddafi 
­were very concerned, however, about the trustworthiness of the designated 
leaders of their nuclear programs. As we ­will see, this concern overrode 
other considerations, even at the cost of bringing the Iraqi program to a halt.
Sources
When I began this research in 2005, much information presented in this 
book was unavailable. Libya was in the pro­cess of dismantling its WMD pro-
grams, while Iraq was in the throes of war. I began by carry­ing out fieldwork 
across the ­Middle East and North Africa where I met statesmen, scholars, 
scientists, military officers, and journalists. What I learned suggested that 
many of the presumed facts and assumptions that had informed Western 
analyses ­were inaccurate.29
Years ­later, I was granted access to primary documents from several dif­
fer­ent sources. This material yielded rich new insights, particularly the con­
temporary assessments by scientists and visiting con­sul­tants. What I found 
enabled me to develop a much more detailed account of each program than 
I had earlier thought pos­si­ble, leading me to set aside the initial version and 
start again, using ­these sources as my vantage point. The material included 
archival documents from Iraq, Italy, the United States, and the International 
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA). I was also fortunate to gain access to many 
private archives of diplomats, scientists, weapons inspectors, and scholars. 
­These sources are, as a ­whole, more comprehensive than ­those supporting 
any other study of ­these programs.
For the Iraqi case, I have been able to gather a rich set of primary and sec-
ondary sources. In the early stages of this research I met most of the se­nior 
scientists who planned, or­ga­nized, and restructured the Iraqi nuclear weap-
ons program. I also met a number of scientists who worked at lower levels of 
the organ­izations. Some of ­these individuals requested anonymity out of con-
cern for their safety, while ­others asked me not to cite the information they 
gave me. I have used public reports from the IAEA and the United Nations 
Special Commission (UNSCOM) that oversaw the dismantlement of Iraq’s 
WMD programs ­after the 1991 Gulf War. I also consulted the 2004 report by 
the Iraq Survey Group that summarizes the findings of the U.S., British, and 
Australian inspectors searching for WMD programs ­after the 2003 war.
Gradually, I obtained access to private papers from several Iraqi scientists, 
including unpublished memoirs and reports from the nuclear program. I 
also received access to key Iraqi documents and transcripts from meetings 
between UN inspectors, Iraqi officials, and other state leaders. A key source 
was the Iraqi rec­ord of the state’s nuclear program submitted to the UN Se-
curity Council in late 2002, which has not been released to the public.

Introduction
14
I have also explored archival material in several other countries. I accessed 
rec­ords from the British archive on early assistance to the Iraqi program in 
the 1950s through the Baghdad Pact. At the Conflict Rec­ords Research Center 
at the National Defence University in Washington, DC, I explored captured 
Iraqi rec­ords of Cabinet conversations, transcripts from high-­level meetings, 
correspondence, and intelligence reports. Some of ­these documents have 
since become available online in new translations. I have sought to include 
the link to online versions of ­these and other documents whenever pos­si­ble. 
The National Security Archives, also in Washington, provided several valu-
able sources. I also examined rec­ords from the IAEA detailing correspon-
dence between the agency and the Iraqi nuclear establishment. The Techni-
cal Assistance archive included reports from visiting IAEA con­sul­tants on 
the pertinent institutions, individuals, and organ­izations from the late 1950s 
­until the mid-1980s. It also held correspondence between IAEA con­sul­tants 
and se­nior officials in Vienna commenting on draft reports; on proposals 
from the Iraqi Atomic Energy Commission; and on how to respond to re-
quests from the host state. ­These files include the IAEA experts’ confidential 
assessments of the Iraqi state’s ability to absorb assistance in several fields 
and analyses of its bureaucratic capacity to manage and oversee technologi-
cal proj­ects.
The case of Libya remains much more difficult to research. Few official 
Libyan statements or documents about the nuclear program have been re-
leased. I have analyzed public statements by Libyan officials about the nu-
clear program, trial rec­ords ­after the unraveling of the Abdul Qadeer Khan 
network, and IAEA reports on Libya’s efforts to account for their past clan-
destine program. In 2005 and 2006, I carried out fieldwork in Libya where I 
interviewed se­nior regime officials, academics, officials involved in the dis-
armament pro­cess, and journalists.30 During meetings with lower-­level of-
ficials ­there ­were occasionally intelligence officers in the room. Some of my 
interviewees ­were told not to speak to me, or got into heated arguments with 
their colleagues in my presence about ­whether they ­ought to talk to me, 
while ­others ­later retracted their statements. I have honored ­those requests. 
While this book mainly builds on archival sources, ­these interviews ­were 
crucial in making me aware of dif­fer­ent perceptions within the regime on 
Libya’s nuclear program and the decision to dismantle this proj­ect.
While the available evidence suggests a complete absence of oversight 
mechanisms in Libya, my conclusions are necessarily tentative. The Libyan 
regime made few public statements about its nuclear program, and ­those 
who ­were in charge had strong incentives not to implicate themselves in its 
existence. It is unclear what further evidence can be unearthed from the for-
mer regime’s archives, especially as rec­ords have been lost or destroyed in 
the wake of the fall of Gaddafi.
The IAEA Technical Assistance archives, which I first explored in early 
2013, offered a wealth of new information about the or­ga­ni­za­tion and man-

Introduction
15
agement of the Libyan program. For the first time I was able to examine the 
or­ga­ni­za­tion of each nuclear establishment and its formal and informal links 
with other state actors in detail. ­These sources also afforded impor­tant new 
insights into the absorption capacity prob­lem. The IAEA experts gave de-
tailed assessments of the capacity of the Libyan scientists to adopt recom-
mendations for the or­ga­ni­za­tion and planning of their nuclear programs; the 
extent to which the Libyan staff benefited from IAEA training courses; and 
their ability to install and use new technical instruments and equipment ac-
quired with the assistance of the agency. Furthermore, technical requests 
from the Libyan nuclear experts show their assessments of their existing re-
sources and how they planned to begin and expand their nuclear program. 
Sudden changes, such as abrupt shifts in each regime and their nuclear estab-
lishment’s priorities and geo­graph­i­cal limitations on where IAEA con­sul­
tants could travel, are also reported in ­these files.
For both case studies, I examined con­temporary intelligence assessments 
of their nuclear programs. In par­tic­u­lar, U.S. intelligence assessments and 
the perspectives of vari­ous other foreign intelligence ser­vices on the Iraqi 
program ­after the 1991 Gulf War are useful indicators of what was known 
about the program at the time. Reviews of U.S. intelligence assessments ­after 
the 2003 war point to lessons learned from their earlier analytical errors in 
estimating the technical capacity of both Iraq and Libya.
Methods
This is an exploratory analy­sis of what state capacity is and how it works in 
the context of nuclear weapons programs in weak states run by personalist 
regimes. I develop my arguments through two iterations. First, I explore the 
emergence of the Iraqi nuclear program in four consecutive chapters. The 
following four chapters analyze Libya’s nuclear program. The final chapter 
explores how state capacity and management strategies ­shaped each pro-
gram and influenced their outcomes. I also briefly apply the argument to 
another case, Syria’s nuclear program, and indicate some broader lessons for 
policymakers and scholars in the concluding chapter.
For both states, I begin by tracing the development of state organ­izations 
from in­de­pen­dence, looking at early state-­building efforts through monar-
chial rule, coups, and revolutions; Saddam and Gaddafi’s rise to power; and 
their reforms of their state apparatus. I also examine attempts at large-­scale 
reforms (including land re­distribution, collective agriculture, education, and 
economic reforms) to see how ­these ­were planned and implemented. ­These 
observations give a broader basis for assessing ­these states’ resources for 
planning and proj­ect implementation. I describe the available infrastructure 
and ­human resources, and each state’s administrative capabilities. Against 
this backdrop I trace the nuclear prehistory of each state in detail, exploring 

Introduction
16
the emergence of nuclear research and development programs, with close 
attention to how ­these activities ­were or­ga­nized and managed ­under dif­fer­
ent rulers and regimes. I also compare the emerging nuclear program in each 
state with the contemporaneous exploration of chemical and biological 
weapons. This analy­sis sheds light on the background of individuals and in-
stitutions that would ­later become involved in the nuclear weapons program.
In chapters analyzing the shift ­toward nuclear weapons research and the 
per­for­mance of the nuclear weapons programs, I trace changes in the man-
agement of ­these programs, and how this compared with sideprojects and 
crash programs that emerged along the way, such as the Iraqi crash program 
to develop a nuclear device ­after the 1990 invasion of Kuwait. ­Here, I dis-
tinguish between formal and informal mechanisms of oversight, such as 
formal per­for­mance reviews versus secret reporting by colleagues to the do-
mestic intelligence agencies about the po­liti­cal preferences of their se­nior 
man­ag­ers, or secret reporting directly to the state leader. I also note how the 
nuclear weapons program related to ministries and agencies overseeing 
­these programs; including instances of passive re­sis­tance and obfuscatory 
reporting as well as direct clashes and confrontation.
In focusing on the management and or­ga­ni­za­tion of ­these nuclear pro-
grams, this book neglects several other in­ter­est­ing aspects. For example, I 
do not systematically examine how other states assessed ­these nuclear pro-
grams, except when par­tic­u­lar states intervened to end or delay them. I do 
not focus on ­grand-­strategic deliberations or Cabinet discussions on strategic 
issues, except when ­these are directly relevant to the per­for­mance of the nu-
clear weapons program.31 I do not examine the Iraqi Baath Party or the 
Libyan Revolutionary Committees as organ­izations, except to note when and 
where they played an impor­tant role in the management of the nuclear proj­
ect. Fi­nally, for the sake of scope and clarity, I do not explore the pro­cess of 
dismantlement of ­these programs, nor do I explore what kind of nuclear 
weapons states Libya and Iraq might have become.
Case Se­lection
Iraq and Libya are crucial cases for understanding the pro­cess of nuclear pro-
liferation at the unit level in both theory and practice. Given the small num-
ber of states that have pursued nuclear weapons in a serious manner, ­these 
cases are inherently impor­tant for ­those interested in understanding why 
some states pursue but do not acquire ­these weapons. The outcomes of ­these 
programs have also had an outsized effect on international relations. ­These 
­factors make it all the more impor­tant to establish what we got right and 
what we got wrong.
I was initially drawn to ­these cases ­because of their apparent similarities, 
at a time when ­little was known about the inner lives of ­either program. But 

Introduction
17
what I learned suggested that their differences have not been fully realized 
or adequately explained. Iraq and Libya ­were both oil-­rich ­Middle Eastern 
states. Fueled by a booming oil economy, both countries began a series of 
aggressive foreign policy adventures in the 1970s. ­After launching dedi-
cated programs to develop nuclear weapons in the early 1980s, they experi-
enced defeats in protracted wars with their neighbors. Ultimately, neither ac-
quired nuclear weapons. This has led many po­liti­cal scientists to treat them as 
equal cases and outcomes. But this runs the risk of obscuring impor­tant differ-
ences. For example, even though Libya had more access to foreign technology 
and had more time than Iraq to develop nuclear weapons, its program per-
formed much worse. Furthermore, the Libyan state ­under Gaddafi’s rule 
evolved in a highly idiosyncratic manner, which was quite distinct from where 
the Iraqi state was headed ­after Saddam seized power.
When it became clear to me that ­there was significant variation in terms 
of the governance and per­for­mance of both programs, I reframed this proj­
ect and started again. While I was still seeking to explain why neither state 
acquired nuclear weapons, I also wanted to explain the differences of the per­
for­mance of each program, and why Saddam and Gaddafi tried to apply 
similar treatments to their programs with varying results.
Or­ga­ni­za­tion of the Book
In this book I first examine Iraq, and then Libya, in two main sections. 
Chapters 1–4 examine the emergence of a nuclear program in Iraq between 
the late 1950s and the 1991 Gulf War. ­These chapters step inside the Iraqi 
nuclear establishment, whose emergence was shaken by frequent po­liti­cal 
turmoil, revealing the controversial origins of the nuclear weapons program. 
The conventional wisdom argues this program was launched in the early 
1970s, at Saddam’s behest.32 But, as I demonstrate, it began as a bottom-up 
initiative by Baath Party members inside the nuclear establishment. I trace 
how pro-­bomb co­ali­tions and scientists interested in developing nuclear en-
ergy each sought to shape the direction of this program in the 1970s, while 
the se­nior po­liti­cal leadership sent ambiguous signals about its preferences 
and intentions.
My analy­sis of the nuclear weapons program of the 1980s, ­after an Israeli 
air raid on an Iraqi nuclear reactor, shows that the scientists or­ga­nized and 
ran the program with ­little interference. This led to drift and inefficiencies, 
which in turn sparked a series of internal conflicts and reor­ga­ni­za­tion. The 
scale of the delays in the program was not, however, communicated to 
Saddam. ­After the leaders of the program picked a fight with Saddam’s son-­
in-­law, the power­ful minister of the military-­industrial establishment, over 
whose fault ­these delays ­were, Saddam intervened. The program made pro­
gress ­toward the weapons threshold during the second half of the 1980s, 

Introduction
18
despite facing many difficult obstacles, but the leaders continued to report 
selectively (and even broke Saddam’s rules with impunity, in some cases). 
The program was disrupted ­after Saddam blundered into the 1990 invasion 
of Kuwait. This led to the decision to launch a nuclear crash program, which 
the scientists knew was a mission impossible from the outset.
Chapters 5–8 detail, for the first time, how the Libyan nuclear program 
was or­ga­nized and how it actually operated. I show that the nuclear pro-
gram began earlier than other studies have suggested; explore the ambitious 
plans the Libyan scientists made at this early stage; and identify how changes 
in the state ­after Gaddafi’s takeover affected the program’s management and 
per­for­mance. The first two chapters explore the Libyan regime’s plans for a 
nuclear program and how research and development ­were carried out. A 
striking finding is the growing gap between the regime’s ambitions and the 
­actual activities on the ground.
Chapter 8 details how, ­after the collapse of the nuclear energy program, 
the Libyans focused their energies on the weapons route. ­After a de­cade of 
failing to build centrifuges at home, the regime made a strategic decision to 
try another approach: outsourcing. The program was taken over by a regime 
insider, not a scientist, who spent a fortune buying centrifuges from the nu-
clear black market. This program, however, suffered a fate similar to the 
nuclear energy program: while the regime focused on procurement, the sci-
entists ­were preoccupied with other issues. The program strug­gled, but se­
nior regime figures ­were led to believe that a nuclear weapons option could 
soon be within reach. Gaddafi maintained an ambivalent position on the nu-
clear question ­until, at the recommendation of his advisers, he dismantled 
the program in late 2003.
In the concluding chapter I compare the findings from Iraq and Libya and 
explore their implications for scholars and decision makers. Fi­nally, I sug-
gest questions for further research and implications for policy.

PART I. IRAQ


21
chapter 1
Iraq Explores the Atom, 1956–1973
This chapter explores the origins of the Iraqi nuclear weapons program and 
traces its fate between the 1958 coup d’état, the decisive ascent of the Baath 
regime in 1968, and Saddam Hussein’s restructuring of the Iraqi Atomic 
Energy Commission (IAEC) in 1973. ­Little is known about Iraq’s nuclear 
“prehistory,” namely what happened before the launching of the weapons 
program. This chapter fills several gaps in our knowledge by describing 
how Iraq first came to explore nuclear science and when its earliest interest 
in a nuclear weapons option emerged.
Scholars dispute basic facts about the Iraqi nuclear weapons program such 
as when the order to develop a weapons capability was first given; with what 
level of determination it was implemented; and what role civilian infrastruc-
ture was intended to play in this clandestine proj­ect.1 Armed with new 
evidence, this chapter and ­those that follow in this part provide more com-
prehensive answers to ­these questions. The analy­sis also highlights two issues 
that have received less attention, namely how Iraq’s nascent state capacity 
and management strategies ­shaped the nuclear program during its initial for-
mative stages.
Seen from this perspective, a surprising picture emerges: the Iraqi program 
was characterized by the absence of strong leadership, and the earliest nu-
clear weapons ambitions ­were articulated by scientists, not the se­nior lead-
ership. As Iraq began to explore nuclear science and technology, the state 
lacked the institutional capacity to plan and oversee ­these activities. Iraq’s 
po­liti­cal leaders remained aloof and left the planning and management of 
the nuclear program in the hands of foreign suppliers and Iraqi scientists. The 
result was a program at drift, without clear objectives or guidelines. As this 
chapter shows, this ambiguity nurtured dif­fer­ent visions for the ­future in-
side the nuclear establishment. Still, with few institutional resources and 
limited support from the po­liti­cal leadership dif­fer­ent factions strug­gled to 
achieve their preferred alternatives. In contrast to the conventional wisdom, 
this chapter demonstrates that Baath scientists harboring nuclear weapons 
ambitions tried but largely failed to redefine the goals and objectives, i.e., 

22
chapter 1
“capture” the program in the early 1970s. This was not a program driven 
­toward developing a weapons option; it is far from clear that the program 
actually had any objectives.
A Fragile Monarchy
When it achieved in­de­pen­dence in 1932, the Kingdom of Iraq was a relatively 
affluent young state with a modest-­sized population, estimated at about three 
million, and proven (but not fully exploited) petroleum resources. The king-
dom was a fragile po­liti­cal entity, comprising diverse ethnic groups with few 
common ties. King Faisal I saw several challenges ahead, as he noted in a 
confidential memorandum in March 1933: “­There is still—­and I say this with 
a heart full of sorrow—no Iraqi ­people but unimaginable masses of ­human 
beings, devoid of any patriotic idea, imbued with religious traditions and ab-
surdities, connected by no common tie, giving ear to evil, prone to anarchy, 
and perpetually ready to rise against any government what­ever. . . . ​Out of 
­these masses we want to fashion a ­people which we would train, educate, and 
refine.”2 
Over the next two de­cades, Iraq faced a series of shocks and transformations 
that further complicated the task of creating a modern state more or less from 
scratch. In a landmark history of Iraqi po­liti­cal movements, Hanna Batatu lists 
some of ­these upheavals: “rapid buildup of monarchic state institutions, the 
world-­wide depression of 1929, the land settlement policies of 1932 and 1938, 
the severe shortages and the spiraling inflation during the Second World War 
and in the immediate postwar years, the mass exodus of Jews in the late for-
ties and early fifties, the sudden inpouring of oil money ­after 1952, and the 
fourfold increase of the population of Baghdad between 1922 and 1957.”3
But the young king did not want to develop a strong state or a strong civil 
society for that ­matter. Faisal based his rule on support from the British and 
tribal leaders.4 He repeatedly banned po­liti­cal parties to prevent a strong civil 
society from emerging. Access to the center of power was restricted. ­There 
was ­little social mobility in Iraq, and the civil ser­vice was not considered par-
ticularly prestigious. While the number of government officials ­rose steadily 
(from only 3,143 in 1920 to 20,031 in 1958), the security forces (including the 
police and royal guard) grew at a faster pace (from 2,470 in 1920 to 23,383 in 
1958).5 The military was the strongest institution in the state. Universal male 
conscription made it a formative institution for the young state’s male citi-
zens, and the officer corps offered one of the few routes to social mobility. 
However, the officer corps was divided along several po­liti­cal and ethnic 
lines. This resulted in intermittent coup attempts but also prevented the 
armed forces from posing a unified challenge.
Iraq’s new leaders had modest ambitions in the field of development, but 
still strug­gled to develop and implement reforms given the limited state in-

23
Iraq Explores the Atom, 1956–1973
stitutions. The monarchy gave priority to expanding primary education. 
Primary education was ­free, but far from universal. In 1958, more than six-­
sevenths of Iraqis ­were illiterate.6 Nonetheless, Iraq was, along with Syria 
and Lebanon, one of the Arab states with the highest number of university 
students, although it was considerably ­behind Egypt.7 Ambitious students 
could also pursue postgraduate degrees abroad, some funded privately and 
­others by government scholarships. In 1959, 2,000 Iraqi students went to the 
United Kingdom, 1,500 to the Soviet Union, and 1,050 to the United States; 
an additional 1,685 studied in other countries.8
During the 1950s, oil money enabled the monarchy to reshape the Iraqi 
state. Between 1950 and 1958, the state income from oil exports ­rose from 
£5.2 million to £79.8 million.9 While foreign companies, especially British 
ones, had a heavy-­handed role in shaping the Iraqi oil industry and exports, 
this oil boom enabled a series of transformations in the Iraqi state. It also 
made the state more in­de­pen­dent from society. From this point on, the Iraqi 
government set out to develop more systematic economic planning and a 
more prominent role for the state.10
But neither history nor infrastructure had prepared Iraq for rapid techno-
logical or industrial development. Iraq was an agrarian society, with roughly 
three-­quarters of the population working in the agriculture sector. Nearly 
all manufactured goods ­were imported, and the existing Iraqi industries 
could not meet local demand. The oil industry was managed by foreign com-
panies at this time, with ­little spillover to Iraqi society, and was the most 
impor­tant economic and industrial activity in the country. The government’s 
industrialization policy was incremental: developing large-­scale industrial 
resources outside of the oil sector was not a ­matter of urgency.
With few exceptions, industry and trade remained small-­scale and local. 
In the mid-1940s, only 0.5 ­percent of the population worked in industry. Ac-
cording to a con­temporary British study, “The few undertakings worthy of 
the name ‘industrial’ owe their existence partly to state support which, by 
the way, is given in a less active and systematic form than in other ­Middle 
East countries such as Turkey and Iran.”11 In 1953, a survey identified only 
269 industrial units that employed more than twenty ­people across the en-
tire country.12 One of the oldest modern industries in Iraq was production 
of weapons and munitions. The British had established local factories for the 
production of machine guns and ­rifles during the 1930s.13 ­These factories 
continued to produce British-­designed weapons, but Iraqis did not develop 
new weapons systems. The Iraqi military-­industrial complex remained small 
and did not spur technological innovation.
Given the relatively small population (estimated at 6.5 million in 1957) and 
underdeveloped economy, it is not surprising that electricity was not wide-
spread. By the late 1950s construction of three large electric power stations 
was ­under way to supply the three main regions (Kirkuk, Basra, and Bagh-
dad).14 In 1959 Dhiya Jafar, the minister of development, inaugurated the 

24
chapter 1
Dukan and Darbandikhan hydropower dams in Kurdistan. Despite the ex-
pansion of the national power grid, ­there ­were no indications of an interest 
in exploring nuclear energy or acquiring nuclear weapons at this stage.
the baghdad pact brings nuclear assistance
Nuclear science first came to Iraq as a result of the Baghdad Pact, an uneasy 
alliance established in 1955 to ­counter Soviet influence in the ­Middle East. As 
a stronghold of British influence Iraq was a key member of this new ­union, 
which included Turkey, Pakistan, and Iran. From the outset, this alliance had a 
nuclear dimension, as the British lacked the capacity or the willing­ness to pro-
vide a conventional defense for their Baghdad Pact allies against Soviet ag-
gression. Instead, Britain envisioned deploying nuclear weapons to deter the 
Soviets.15 A group of Iraqi officers, including Abdul Karim Qasim, resented 
Iraq’s entry into this alliance and started plotting a coup.
Britain was also keen to provide nuclear assistance as part of a broader 
package of economic assistance to Baghdad Pact member states and pro-
posed establishing a nuclear research center in Iraq.16 This center, which 
would be located at Salhiya, near the Tigris River in central Baghdad, was 
intended to showcase British contributions and spur regional industrial de-
velopment.
At this time the notion of an Iraqi nuclear weapons program must have 
seemed an alien prospect to the British. Bolstering the anticommunist alli-
ance in the ­Middle East, on the other hand, was a pressing ­matter. Sir John 
Cockcroft, director of the British nuclear establishment, played a central role 
in designing British nuclear assistance for the Baghdad Pact allies. His mo-
tives ­were fundamentally po­liti­cal, in the sense that he believed science could 
play an impor­tant role in curbing Soviet influence in the world. In his 
1951 Nobel ac­cep­tance speech, Cockcroft characterized science as a shield 
against Communism: “overwhelming evil and danger comes not from sci-
ence but from po­liti­cal ideas which reject the freedom of the ­human spirit 
and the values and rights of individual ­human beings. In ­these difficult times 
science can be one of the strongest shields of our Western Civilisation.”17
In Baghdad, the ambitions for nuclear science had not yet reached a for-
mative stage. In 1956, the state set up the IAEC as part of a broader initia-
tive to nurture science and technology. The IAEC was attached to the Prime 
Minister’s Office and included representatives from key ministries, includ-
ing industry, agriculture, health, education, transport, and defense. The first 
secretary-­general of the IAEC was Mohamed Kashif Ghita, who had stud-
ied physics at the University of Chicago. One of his main supporters was 
Khalil al-­Zobaie, a chemical corps commander who represented the Minis-
try of Defense.18 Iraq did not yet have a scientific or technological commu-
nity capable of taking the lead in ­these early efforts. Despite setting up an 
or­ga­ni­za­tion to explore the potential benefits of nuclear technology, the Iraqi 

25
Iraq Explores the Atom, 1956–1973
government did not develop specific plans or objectives in the nuclear field. 
As the IAEC began to lay the foundation for an indigenous nuclear pro-
gram over the next few years, they relied heavi­ly on foreign advisers and 
con­sul­tants.
On 31 March 1957, the Baghdad Pact Nuclear Training Centre was for-
mally inaugurated. The opening ceremony was attended by King Faisal II 
and distinguished guests, with Cockcroft as the inaugural speaker. As Cock-
croft noted in Nature, “the Centre is an experiment in introducing the new 
techniques of radioisotopes to an impor­tant group of ­Middle East coun-
tries.”19 Furthermore, Cockcroft suggested that Iraq was not a likely candi-
date for nuclear power in the near term: “The application of nuclear power 
­will not be worthwhile in Iraq and Turkey in the foreseeable ­future, owing 
to the abundant supply of oil and hydro power. Iran and Pakistan are, how-
ever, interested in the potentialities of nuclear power . . . ​and the Centre ­will 
help by advice to promote this development.”20
­After the ceremony Dhiya Jafar, Iraq’s minister for development, invited 
Cockcroft for lunch at his home in Baghdad. ­Here, he introduced his guest 
to his thirteen-­year-­old son Jafar, ­later to play a prominent role in Iraq’s nu-
clear programs. The younger Jafar recalls that when Cockcroft asked what 
he would like to do in the ­future, he replied that he wanted to build an atomic 
bomb. But first, he had to go to boarding school.21
The Baghdad Pact Nuclear Training Centre was ­housed in a pleasant two-­
story building in Salhiya. While this building was initially intended for 
agricultural research on dates, it was converted to a center equipped with 
laboratories, a library, a lecture room, and staff offices.22 The Iraqi hosts 
­were deferential to the advice of British scientists. At the same time, the Iraqis 
­were reluctant to pay the costs of ­running the center.23 The center was sup-
posed to be jointly funded by all Baghdad Pact member countries from 
August 1957, but Britain provided the lion’s share of technical assistance 
and training. The British estimated that the operations of the center would 
amount to £23,000 per calendar year. During 1956–1957, the United King-
dom spent £29,500 on the Baghdad Pact Nuclear Training Centre; the fol-
lowing year they subsidized it with £75,500.24
The British considered providing a nuclear research reactor to the center, 
but deci­ded against it ­because they ­were concerned that this could be seen 
as favoring Iraq too much in the eyes of the other Baghdad Pact members. 
Furthermore, they did not consider a reactor necessary for the purposes of 
the center before 1958–1959. But when they realized that the Americans ­were 
considering providing a research reactor to Iraq the British Foreign Office 
revisited this issue. In early 1957, Foreign Office officials noted that “to 
make sure of beating the Americans . . . ​we (prob­ably) should look at the idea 
again in consultation with the Atomic Energy Authority.”25
The British Atomic Energy Authority advised the Foreign Office during 
the development of the Salhiya center, which was staffed and overseen by 

26
chapter 1
British scientists. Britain anticipated that Iraqis (presumably with the sup-
port of other Baghdad Pact members) would take over the ­running of the 
center within a few years. At the 1957 inauguration, Cockcroft was appointed 
chairman of the center’s scientific council. Professor W. J. White­house, sec-
onded from the British Atomic Energy Research Establishment at Harwell, 
was appointed director. Four additional Harwell employees ­were seconded 
to Baghdad for an initial period of one year.26 Furthermore, two lecturers 
would spend six months at the center. In 1956 the first two Iraqi instructors 
traveled to Harwell in Oxfordshire to receive training. Over the next ­couple 
of years (1957–1958), six Iraqi students received training in isotope research 
at Harwell.27
Britain provided technical equipment and staff to oversee the initial plan-
ning and development of the center. The United States, for its part, donated 
a library of books and reports on nuclear energy. ­These included declassi-
fied reports from the Manhattan Proj­ect detailing technical pathways to 
produce the bomb that had been deemed inefficient or overly complex. A 
Californian com­pany, General Atomics, would supply a 5-­megawatt light-­
water research reactor for the center.28
The Salhiya center was set up to provide courses for up to twenty students 
three or four times a year. ­These ­were modeled on Harwell’s Isotope School 
course.29 They began to train students in basic techniques and the applica-
tions of radioisotopes. ­These early efforts focused on medical diagnostics and 
therapy for cancer and thyroid disease. Subsequent studies would focus on 
uses of radioisotopes for the petroleum industry, agriculture, and ­water con-
servation.30
The Iraqis did not have specific targets or a plan for how the potential of 
nuclear power could best be tapped. They ­were prepared to explore the tech-
nology given to them by the British as part of a broader modernization proj­
ect without predefined objectives or expectations. In a 1959 preliminary 
assistance report by the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), the 
objectives of the Iraqi program ­were described as follows:
Iraq, conscious of the constructive contribution that radioisotope tracer 
techniques could make ­towards the development of medicine, industry and 
­agriculture, has taken steps to initiate a long-­term programme to meet the 
requirements of research into ­these techniques and their applications. That 
programme covers specialist training in basic and applied nuclear science, 
the establishment of a training and research centre, the installation of a re-
search reactor, and expansion of the existing Medical Radioisotope Centre.31
To say that ­there was limited local demand for nuclear technology would 
not be an understatement. However, the Baghdad Museum expressed inter-
est in carbon dating.32 In early 1958, a carbon-­dating course was held as 
part of a joint proj­ect with the British Museum to establish an Iraqi center 

27
Iraq Explores the Atom, 1956–1973
for dating archaeological finds.33 One of the participants, Numan Saadaldin 
al-­Niaimi, went on to study radioisotopes in inorganic chemistry at Oxford 
University and, upon his return, became a se­nior figure in the Iraqi nuclear 
establishment.
A Republic Is Born
On 14 July 1958, a group of officers led by Col­o­nel Abdul Salam Arif and 
Abdul Karim Qasim seized power in a coup d’état. The officers assassinated 
the Iraqi royal ­family and their staff in the courtyard, then turned their at-
tention to the former monarchial regime and its supporters.
Qasim soon sidelined the main architect of the coup, Col­o­nel Arif. Arif fa-
vored taking a pan-­Arab po­liti­cal direction to bring Iraq more in line with 
Egypt and Syria. Qasim, on the other hand, wanted a more in­de­pen­dent po­
liti­cal trajectory.34 Over the next ­couple of years he severed several of Iraq’s 
pro-­Western alliances, fulfilling his long-­standing ambition to exit the Bagh-
dad Pact, and attempted to rebalance the Iraqi domestic po­liti­cal landscape. 
As a result, Arif found himself increasingly isolated and vulnerable.
On the surface, the new republic appeared to be more inclusive than the 
monarchy had been. Qasim set up a Revolutionary Council with representa-
tives of the three largest ethnic groups and a Cabinet including representa-
tives from across the po­liti­cal spectrum. The Cabinet was dominated by the 
Baath [Re­nais­sance] Party, which had a socialist and nationalist orientation. 
The Baath Party had supporters across Arab republics and monarchies, no-
tably including Syria and Egypt. To ­counter their influence, Qasim enlisted 
the support of the Iraqi Communist Party, the oldest po­liti­cal party in the 
country. He also tried to improve his standing with the officer corps and in-
telligence ser­vices.35 Despite his attempts to build broader support among 
elites, the state of Iraq was increasingly threatened by fragmentation in the 
face of a Kurdish push for autonomy.
­Behind the scenes, however, Qasim intensified the concentration of 
decision-­making power. State institutions ­were weak, and factions became 
embroiled in power strug­gles. The republic inherited civil servants who had 
suffered disproportionately relative to other professions in the upper and 
­middle classes during the economic downturns of the 1940s. Civil servants 
did not recover their pre-­Second World War standard of living ­until ­after the 
1958 coup.36 Members of the armed forces fared better, enjoying perks such 
as servant and housing allowances that ­were not available to civil servants.
The resulting state weaknesses ­were apparent in the failure to implement 
ambitious reform programs. Within months of the July coup a series of large-­
scale reforms was announced. In October 1958 Qasim announced that land 
was to be distributed among farmers working in cooperatives. Despite the 
ambitious tone, ­these initiatives—­intended to strengthen the hand of the 

28
chapter 1
state in social planning—­failed to materialize. Qasim lacked the necessary 
elite support and institutional capacity.
Qasim’s room for maneuver was therefore constrained. The state’s main 
source of income was at the mercy of foreign companies effectively controlling 
Iraq’s oil extraction and export. Qasim could not risk an outright nationaliza-
tion, having observed the consequences of the 1951 Ira­nian nationalization, 
but tried to improve Iraq’s income and influence over the foreign compa-
nies. His most significant reform was Public Law 80 of 1961, which placed 
the vast majority of Iraqi oil fields that had up ­until then been held by for-
eign oil companies ­under state control. This, and the establishment of an 
Iraqi national oil com­pany, signaled stronger state control over its main eco-
nomic asset.37
starting over at salhiya
The 1958 coup had a transformative impact on Iraq’s foreign relations and, 
consequently, the fate of the Salhiya center. ­After Iraq formally withdrew 
from the Baghdad Pact on 24  March  1959, relations with their nuclear 
benefactors soured. Britain opted to redirect its assistance efforts to a new 
nuclear center in Tehran. The American research reactor intended for Iraq, 
but was similarly redirected to Iran. Abandoned by its patrons, Iraq was 
unable to continue research and development in the nuclear field. The 
Baghdad Pact Nuclear Training Center closed in the turmoil of the July 
coup and did not reopen ­until November 1960.
­After the departure of the British scientists, the Salhiya nuclear research 
center became the temporary home for the IAEC. Salah Izzat Tahsin took 
over as the commission’s new secretary-­general. The Iraqi nuclear establish-
ment continued to depend heavi­ly on foreign staff, assistance, and equipment 
and had to look abroad for other helpers to build their nascent program.
The 1958 coup opened the door to greater Soviet assistance. The Soviet 
Union was encouraged by Iraq’s departure from the Baghdad Pact. The 
Qasim government saw the USSR as an impor­tant source of economic assis-
tance but was reluctant to grant Moscow too much leverage.38 Nonetheless, a 
set of agreements between the two states paved the way for a strong Soviet 
influence on the Iraqi nuclear program. In February 1959, an Iraqi del­e­ga­tion 
went to Moscow to sign a broad economic cooperation agreement. ­Under 
this agreement, signed on 16 March, the Soviet Union provided a credit loan 
of 550 million rubles (then equivalent to £49 million) and offered technical 
assistance with the development of Iraqi industrial capabilities for the next 
seven years. Then, on 17 August 1959, they signed an agreement to collabo-
rate on atomic energy for peaceful purposes. Iraq purchased a 2-­megawatt 
thermal research reactor (IRT-2000) from the Soviets, which they named “14 
Tammuz” (14 July) in honor of the 1958 coup. Iraq paid $5.6 million to acquire 

29
Iraq Explores the Atom, 1956–1973
this reactor.39 A new nuclear complex, which would be located at Tuwaitha 
some 20 kilo­meters outside Baghdad, would also include a radioisotope 
laboratory, supporting workshops, and a library.40 This was a fairly stan-
dard Soviet starter package, but it heralded a more ambitious approach to 
exploring nuclear science and technology in Iraq.
While the Iraqis waited for the construction of the Tuwaitha complex, they 
sought help with developing the institutional and ­human resources for their 
nuclear program. Specifically, they pursued nuclear assistance and training 
through bilateral ties and the IAEA, which was formed in 1957. The IAEA 
offered training courses and support for planning and managing nuclear re-
search and development. During the 1960s the IAEA focused on supporting 
nuclear energy programs in developing states, acting as con­sul­tants to as-
sess reactor bids and even supplying technical instruments to member states. 
In 1961, Baqir Husaini joined the Board of Governors of the IAEA as the Iraqi 
representative. Several of his fellow board members would play impor­tant 
roles in other developing states’ efforts to explore the civilian and military 
applications of nuclear technology.41
The IAEA’s technical assistance was, at this early stage, closely coordinated 
with other assistance programs provided by United Nations (UN) agencies 
in Iraq. In 1959, Ambassador Jens Henrik Malling was appointed UN Resi-
dent Representative in Iraq, where he would oversee the administration of 
a broad portfolio of assistance programs.42 ­These efforts ­were nominally co-
ordinated with Iraqi ministers and local staff, but due to their limited ad-
ministrative capacity, foreign experts led the planning and implementation 
of individual proj­ects. They also fulfilled other roles that could not be served 
by Iraq’s limited administrative resources. Malling’s successor, U Hla Maung, 
reported that the Iraqis used foreign experts to assess bilateral programs of 
technical assistance from the Soviet Union and Eastern Eu­ro­pean countries. 
In 1959, Iraq received $4 million in technical aid from the UN, which was 
primarily used for agricultural proj­ects and telecommunications. At this time, 
Iraq declined the offer of further nuclear assistance from the UN, citing lim-
ited ­human resources as an obstacle.
The Salhiya center reopened in November 1960, but remained largely idle. 
Despite being stocked with ample equipment and materials, only routine 
mea­sure­ments ­were conducted.43 The local staff did not plan any research 
and development activities and, in any case, Iraq lacked adequately skilled 
scientists and technicians to take charge of such activities. Some planning 
activities could be outsourced to foreign experts provided by the Soviet 
Union and the IAEA. Through the efforts of the IAEA, Iraq would be able 
to receive foreign experts who advised on how to develop a technical infra-
structure and plan research and development activities. But the implemen-
tation of this advice largely hinged on the limited orga­nizational and ­human 
resources in Iraq. The agency initially offered more assistance than the IAEC 

30
chapter 1
was able to absorb, given the conditions at Salhiya. Still, more support was 
forthcoming. In 1962, visiting IAEA experts recommended an increase to the 
assistance bud­get of 33 ­percent for the coming year.44
To benefit from foreign technical assistance the Iraqis needed to overcome 
two obstacles: limited manpower (some aid programs lacked adequately 
qualified local counter­parts); and limited administrative capability.45 ­There 
­were skilled Iraqi counter­parts in some proj­ect sectors, such as telecommuni-
cations and agriculture, while other proj­ects, such as developing an Iraqi cen-
sus, lacked adequate local support in many other areas. ­There was a general 
shortage of staff capable of providing administrative assistance to English-­
speaking foreigners.46 While Qasim’s government recognized ­these prob­lems, 
it was difficult to find short-­term solutions. Maung noted, “It is not always 
desirable—or fruitful—to press governments too hard in this re­spect, for 
the required facilities are just not ­there.”47 For this reason, the UN experts as-
sisted with tasks such as assessment of bilateral assistance programs and, in 
the nuclear field, se­lection of candidates for IAEA fellowships. But it proved 
difficult to find foreign nuclear experts to help Iraq with ­these ­matters. In 
1961, for example, the IAEA’s approved bud­get for twelve months of expert 
assistance for Iraq was not utilized as no foreign experts had been recruited.48
As a developing country, Iraq faced prob­lems when adapting foreign 
equipment to local infrastructure and lacked the technical know-­how to 
tackle ­these prob­lems. Installing and using instruments that sometimes ar-
rived without training or adequate instructions often proved difficult. An 
IAEA del­e­ga­tion to Iraq in 1962 noted that ­there was only one physicist 
working at the Salhiya center. Finding suitable technicians and medical ex-
perts was difficult and would remain so for several years.49 The technicians 
working in the college laboratories at this time mostly came from other coun-
tries, notably Pakistan.
In the face of ­these challenges, the early initiatives of the Iraqi nuclear es-
tablishment had mixed results. The IAEC initially focused on exploring 
medical applications of nuclear technology in health and agriculture. For ex-
ample, Ali Hindawi oversaw the development of a radioisotope depart-
ment at the Republic Hospital.50 This unit became operational in 1957. Over 
the next three years his center pioneered efforts to apply radiation therapy 
in Iraq. Researchers studied anemia, thyroid treatments, and vari­ous thera-
peutic applications of isotopes (see Figure 1.1).51 In the early 1960s, this 
hospital opened Iraq’s first cancer treatment center in which Hindawi es-
tablished the country’s first radiation therapy center.52
The IAEC also planned to set up a National Radioisotope Center. This cen-
ter was led by Thabit Hiti, who had trained as a resident doctor in Hindawi’s 
radioisotope department. Hiti wanted to develop more interaction with na-
tional and international organ­izations, including the Loma Linda University 
Hospital in the United States and the IAEA. Foreign experts ­were supplied 

31
Iraq Explores the Atom, 1956–1973
by the IAEA in 1961, but apparently got ­little backing from the IAEC and 
the Iraqi government. Over the next de­cade his center continued to languish 
in a remote building, which had been intended as a temporary location. The 
center was isolated from the other activities in the nuclear establishment and, 
curiously, cut off from the hospital they ­were intended to serve. When an 
IAEA inspector revisited the site in 1971, he reported that the same “anti-
quated” equipment he saw in 1961 was still ­there.53
In the early 1960s, agricultural applications ­were the most active compo-
nent of the Iraqi nuclear research program. Agriculture was an impor­tant 
part of the Iraqi economy, and nuclear techniques could address prob­lems 
with soil (e.g., by increasing fertility) and cultivation.54 The IAEA’s techni-
cal assistance programs offered equipment, training, and advice for devel-
oping states such as Iraq. Abdul Hadri Islail was the director general of the 
Ministry of Agriculture’s Department of Research and Proj­ects. His ju­nior 
colleague, Lonay Kadri, a soil chemist, led the Soils Division. In this capac-
ity, Kadri interacted with visiting IAEA del­e­ga­tions. He explained to ­these 
officials why the Iraqis strug­gled to absorb foreign assistance and technol-
ogy. For example, the IAEA had granted $4,800 for equipment supporting 
agricultural proj­ects but, as Kadri explained, much of the technical equip-
ment Iraq had received was still in the crates they arrived in. The Iraqis feared 
that serious fluctuations in voltage could destroy the instruments and had not 
installed them.55 Moreover, the shortage of skilled manpower remained a 
key challenge. Iraq lacked technical workers and administrative resources 
to tackle more complex prob­lems. ­There was not much that the IAEA could 
do to solve ­these prob­lems. While it could provide additional equipment, 
developing a pool of ­human resources was a more pressing—­and difficult—­
matter.56 Although Iraq had dedicated and enterprising scientists who ­were 
keen to benefit from foreign assistance programs and develop international 
connections, the administrative resources of the state continued to fall short.
The Qasim government set up a coordination committee to oversee the 
technical assistance programs provided by the UN and states from the East-
ern bloc. This was a large committee that consisted of twenty-­one represen-
tatives from government ministries and other academic and governmental 
agencies.57 Despite its impressive size and broad repre­sen­ta­tion, the com-
mittee did not have the capacity to review all assistance programs, and in-
dividual proj­ects ­were examined incrementally. Salah Izzat Tahsin, the new 
director of the Salhiya nuclear research center and the second secretary-­
general of the IAEC, represented the IAEC, which was made part of the Min-
istry of Industry. The coordination committee experienced frequent changes 
in leadership.58 Nouri al-­Kadhim was demoted from his position as director 
of the committee in July 1961. Just two months ­later his successor, Fakhri 
al-­Qaisi, was replaced by Usamah Kadry. Given this turbulence, the commit-
tee largely failed to fulfill its basic mandate.

32
chapter 1
Developing ­Human Resources.  ​Educating more scientists, engineers, and 
technicians was the main priority of the IAEC during its first de­cade (1956–
1966). Iraqi universities could not meet this sudden demand, but a general 
expansion of science and engineering faculties helped. In 1956, the Univer-
sity of Baghdad comprised twelve colleges and institutes, including schools 
of science and engineering.59 Several of their alumni would ­later join the Iraqi 
nuclear establishment, notably including Dhafir Selbi, who received a bach-
elor’s degree in mechanical engineering in 1965 and who would play a cen-
tral role in the Iraqi nuclear program during the 1970s and 1980s.
Iraqi colleges and universities offered education in pure science but lacked 
resources for experimental research. The University of Baghdad, for example, 
taught theoretical nuclear science, chemistry, and physics. But the students 
did not receive much training in practical applications of nuclear technol-
Figure 1.1. Dr. M. Menarchi of the Iraqi National Nutrition Institute examines pupils for 
enlargement of the thyroid gland, one of several applications of nuclear medicine in Iraq 
(IAEA Archives, Photographic Collection, A005).

33
Iraq Explores the Atom, 1956–1973
ogy. ­After graduation, ­there was no industry that could generate useful ex-
perience for the pool of recruits for the Iraq nuclear establishment. Most 
of the science faculty was foreign, and the college leaders ­were keen to 
strengthen their Iraqi faculty. The college dean requested IAEA fellowships 
to train departmental scientists abroad, among whom was Abdul Wahab 
Derwish, who would ­later emerge as a leader in the development of the 
nuclear establishment.60
The broad agreements of technical cooperation between Iraq and the 
Soviet Union opened impor­tant ave­nues for education and training. The 
Soviets had committed to provide a research reactor (14 Tammuz), and they 
provided hands-on training for Iraqis to operate the reactor. During the 
early 1960s Iraqi students traveled to the USSR to study reactor operations, 
in addition to ­others studying for degrees in science or technology at Soviet 
universities.61
In 1962, IAEA officials visited the Iraqi nuclear establishment. They high-
lighted ­human resources and management as key challenges: “The main 
prob­lem of the Center continues to be the lack of scientific personnel.”62 Un-
like the university, the IAEC appeared wary of taking advantage of IAEA 
training fellowships. The IAEA con­sul­tants noted that their individual Iraqi 
counterpart was reluctant to send an Iraqi candidate for an IAEA fellowship 
­because he was concerned that the commission had to pay half of the candi-
date’s salary. Once he was told this was not the case, ­there ­were no further 
objections.63
While the majority of Iraq’s first nuclear scientists and engineers ­were 
trained in the Soviet Union, the first generation of leaders of the nuclear 
establishment was educated in the West during the 1940s and 1950s. Post-
graduate degrees from Western universities, particularly British and Amer-
ican universities, ­were considered more prestigious than degrees offered by 
Soviet institutions. The first two secretary-­generals of the IAEC, Ghita and 
Tahsin, both studied nuclear physics in Amer­i­ca. Wahab and his successor 
at the nuclear research center, A. K. Wahid, studied in Britain and the United 
States. (Many Soviet-­educated scientists ­were, as we ­will see, purged from 
the program in anticommunist campaigns during the 1960s and 1970s, leav-
ing the nuclear program with significantly diminished ­human resources.)
The second generation of prominent Iraqi physicists primarily studied in 
Britain, Canada, and the United States during the early to mid-1960s. Sev-
eral came from impor­tant Iraqi families or the upper ­middle class, but op-
portunities ­were also opening for talented individuals from more ­humble 
backgrounds. The aforementioned son of the former Iraqi development 
minister, Jafar Dhiya Jafar, set out to follow in the footsteps of his ­father by 
obtaining a doctorate in high-­energy physics at Birmingham University. 
During the early 1960s, Jafar carried out doctoral research at the Ruther-
ford Laboratory in Oxford. He would become a pivotal figure in the civilian 
and military Iraqi nuclear programs. At the same time Numan Saadaldin 

34
chapter 1
al-­Niaimi, who came from a more modest ­family background in Dohuk, 
northern Iraq, completed his doctorate in inorganic chemistry at Oxford. An-
other prominent figure in Iraq’s nuclear program, Hussein Shahristani, stud-
ied in London for a master of science degree in chemical engineering. ­After 
graduating from the Imperial College in 1965, Shahristani received a doctor-
ate in activation analy­sis from the University of Toronto two years ­later.
While several talented scientists returned to play impor­tant parts in the 
Iraqi nuclear program, inadequate planning contributed to a loss of scarce 
­human resources at lower levels of the or­ga­ni­za­tion. For example, ­there was 
an apparent lack of in-­house institutional planning and se­lection of candi-
dates for education and training abroad. Visiting IAEA con­sul­tants noted 
that a former IAEA fellowship recipient trained in Japan had not yet been 
employed at the center, despite the lack of Iraqi nuclear scientists at Salhiya. 
Two health physicists who had studied in the Soviet Union and West 
Germany wanted to change fields of specialization ­after they returned to 
Iraq, suggesting that the se­lection of candidates did not sufficiently ­factor in 
what candidates ­were interested in and how this matched the needs of the 
or­ga­ni­za­tion. Another former IAEA fellow estimated that he had spent 
90 ­percent of his time in ­Eng­land studying other subjects.
the 1963 ramadan revolution
Qasim survived several assassination attempts—­including a 1959 plot in-
volving a young Saddam Hussein—­but his domestic position was perilous. 
Furthermore, his radical foreign policy re­orientation alienated potential for-
eign supporters. In the so-­called Ramadan Revolution of February 1963, the 
Baath Party seized power with the help of the armed forces. Qasim was ex-
ecuted on 9 February. In the months that followed, vio­lence and instability 
shook Iraq to the core.
The Iraqi Communist Party had been a key supporter of the Qasim regime 
and thus had been an obstacle to the expansion of the Baath Party’s influ-
ence. The revolution marked the beginning a purge throughout Iraqi soci-
ety, ultimately causing the deaths of thousands of civilians. Suspected com-
munists ­were hunted down and killed. The targets included scores of 
white-­collar workers. Hundreds of doctors, teachers, ­lawyers, and techni-
cians ­were killed or imprisoned by the Baathists.
On 10 November 1963, a group of army officers overthrew the new regime. 
Abdul Salam Arif took over as president. He monopolized power and re-
lied on a few trusted individuals. General Ahmed Hassan al-­Bakr, a Baathist, 
became prime minister. The Baath movement was riddled with divisions, 
both between the Iraqi and Syrian wings and within the Iraqi chapter, and 
lacked a sound orga­nizational structure. The Iraqi Baath Party was described 
as “less a party than a confederation of cliques.”64 The purpose of state in-
stitutions increasingly appeared to be to concentrate power in the hands of 

35
Iraq Explores the Atom, 1956–1973
the ruler. ­After Arif’s death in a dubious he­li­cop­ter crash in 1966, his ­brother, 
Abdul Rahman Arif, seized the presidency. Both ­brothers had wanted to 
create a more homogenous society and a more unified state, but neither suc-
ceeded.65
The Baath Party wing associated with Bakr went underground, where 
they plotted to oust the incumbent regime and seize power. Bakr appointed 
his relative, Saddam Hussein, as his deputy.
nuclear ­futures at tuwaitha
In the early 1960s the Soviets began constructing a nuclear complex at Tu-
waitha. In 1962, experts from the Soviet State Committee for the Peaceful 
Utilization of Atomic Energy ­were based in the Iraqi Ministry of Industry to 
oversee ­these efforts. Monachov from the Soviet State Committee for the Uti-
lization of Atomic Energy led the del­e­ga­tion, assisted by the proj­ect head 
Kamenski, Toraskin, chief designer of the Iraqi site, and Tikhonov (electric 
engineer).66 They oversaw the development of the site assisted by Iraqi 
counter­parts, offered to train Iraqi technicians, and gave advice for suitable 
research activities. The Soviet Union anticipated playing such a role for Iraq 
for the foreseeable ­future and planned a joint nuclear research program.67 
The Soviets agreed to provide additional reactor fuel upon Iraqi requests, 
and once the reactor was completed laboratories would be added to facili-
tate research.
The Soviet research reactor became the hub of research activities at 
­Tuwaitha. The Iraqi scientists developed a research program based on rec-
ommendations from the Joint Committee of the IAEC and the Soviet State 
Committee for the Utilization of Atomic Energy.68 While the IAEC nomi-
nally planned on a five-­year horizon, ­little planning actually took place at 
the se­nior level. The Soviets ­were keen to steer the Iraqi program ­toward 
peaceful applications and wanted a strong hand in shaping the direction of 
Iraqi research and development efforts. Their advisers, including  A.  M. 
Demidov (who also served as IAEA expert in Iraq on a separate occasion) 
and M. G. Zemlyanov, proposed that the initial IRT-2000 research program 
would focus on neutron activation analy­sis, neutron-­diffraction, neutron 
capture, radiation chemistry, and radiobiology.69 By 1969 pro­gress had been 
made in research on neutron capture by Jafar—­“whose efficiency has con-
tributed [greatly] to this par­tic­u­lar sphere of works”—­with the assistance 
of IAEA experts Josef Kajfosz and Z. Kosina.70 This technique, which can 
detect the chemical composition of ­matter, has applications for mineral 
exploration (such as uranium).
The Tuwaitha complex was intended to spur basic research activities, 
which had thus far been taking place in scattered locations, and lay the foun-
dation for more advanced research and development. The estimated start-up 
date was October 1963. Ghazi Abdul Wahab Derwish was the first director 

36
chapter 1
of the Nuclear Research Center (NRC) at Tuwaitha.71 Construction ran 
­behind schedule, and the research reactor fi­nally went critical in December 
1967. By January 1968 the reactor was fully operational, although it did not 
produce radioisotopes on a regular basis ­until the end of 1969.
Neither the NRC leadership nor the IAEC played a central role in the plan-
ning of research activities. Individual scientists, in collaboration with IAEA 
and Soviet experts, planned much of the research activities. In the mid-1960s 
­these activities ­were loosely structured into the five departments: Nuclear 
and Radiochemistry (headed by Numan Saadaldin al-­Niaimi); Nuclear 
­Physics (headed by Zuhair Mahdi al-­Saffar); Health Physics (headed by 
Subhi al-­Hashimi); Radiobiology (headed by Faisal al-­Khalisi); and Nu-
clear Geology (headed by Ibrahim al-­Fadhli).72 Within each department 
researchers ­were ­free to explore basic and applied research in their own 
fields. The NRC continued to explore basic applications for agriculture and 
medicine. Figure 1.2, below, illustrates one of the early applications of 
health physics in Iraq.
During the lengthy construction pro­cess, several students returned from 
abroad with advanced degrees. Jafar joined the NRC in February 1967 and 
was appointed research scientist in nuclear physics. He was warmly wel-
comed by the director, Derwish, and Numan, who had joined the chemistry 
department upon his return from Oxford.73 Jafar and Shahristani, who re-
turned from Toronto in 1970, brought theoretical insights about reactors back 
to the Iraqi nuclear establishment.
The NRC offered research opportunities that began to attract postgradu-
ate Iraqi students and experts studying or working abroad. Tuwaitha also 
facilitated collaboration with foreign experts. To reap this potential, the NRC 
started planning a series of conferences and seminars to engage Iraqi scien-
tists, engineers, and technicians living abroad.74
The late 1960s was also a time of orga­nizational expansion in the nuclear 
field, which led to some institutional growing pains. As students returned 
from studies abroad, the IAEC acquired a pool of gradu­ates who could ben-
efit from opportunities such as scholarships and assistance from the IAEA. 
Students returning from the Soviet Union with advanced gradu­ate degrees 
included three physicists, two radiobiologists, a geologist, and a health phys-
icist. The influx of gradu­ates spurred initiatives to carry out research in new 
areas including nuclear and solid-­state physics, agriculture, isotope produc-
tion, reactor physics, and engineering.75 From late 1969, the NRC produced 
radioactive isotopes for medical purposes.76 ­These activities ­were directed 
by individual scientists, while the se­nior leadership at Tuwaitha was preoc-
cupied with administrative ­matters. But this growth spurt was not matched 
in terms of administrative capacity. Despite ample funding, everyday oper-
ations ­were struggling. Even basic items ­were lacking at the NRC, such as 
adequate calculators and a copying machine. The following observations, 
made by a visiting IAEA expert in late 1968, are revealing: 77

37
Iraq Explores the Atom, 1956–1973
Although I have been informed that very adequate funds are available from 
the Iraqi Government for support of the Tammuz Reactor Centre, a stringent 
situation seems obvious, particularly evidenced in securing funds for day-­
to-­day operating supplies. ­There are two reasons for this. First, the adminis-
trative or­ga­ni­za­tion has not advanced in capability fast enough to take care 
of the expanded laboratory staff, i.e. the administrative or­ga­ni­za­tion is geared 
to ­handle the needs of 60 ­people instead of 200 to 250 ­people. Secondly, more 
industry members are needed on the Iraq Atomic Energy Committee, who 
­will use their influence to provide more funds for operating needs.
With a fully operational research reactor (14 Tammuz), the scene was 
set for a broader range of experiments. The Iraqis set out to develop a 
Figure 1.2. An Iraqi technician from the Radioisotope Department of the National Nutrition 
Institute mea­sures radioiodine uptake in a patient in a village near Baghdad (IAEA 
Archives, Photographic Collection, A007).

38
chapter 1
data-­processing system with the assistance of foreign experts to pro­cess the 
complex data acquired from experiments. By mid-1969, this system was ca-
pable of mea­sur­ing experiments in areas such as activation analy­sis and 
nuclear spectroscopy.78 Once this infrastructure was set up, experiments 
could be carried out. Iraqi researchers—­notably Jafar, Khalid Ibrahim Said, 
and Abdullah Khail—­carried out a series of experiments in the research re-
actor. Their efforts ­were guided and facilitated by Soviet scientists, as the 
Iraqis had entered into a cooperative agreement with the Soviet Union. As 
part of this agreement, two scientists went to the Kurchatov Institute in Mos-
cow to study activation analy­sis techniques (to facilitate more reactor ex-
periments) in 1968. Fifteen Iraqi scientists ­were trained by Soviet experts in 
Baghdad in fields such as nuclear physics, neutron activation analy­sis, and 
solid-­state physics.79 The Kurchatov Institute also provided material (seven 
separated stable isotopes), equipment (pneumatic tubes), and visiting 
staff (A. M. Demidov and L. I. Govor) to the NRC. Their initial experiments 
­were promising and produced valuable new data.
The Baath Coup of 1968
In 1968, Iraq once again was subject to forcible change of government. The 
Baath Party wing led by Hassan al-­Bakr and his deputy, Saddam Hussein, 
seized power on 17 July with the support of the armed forces. Bakr became 
president and Saddam his deputy. Saddam took charge of the intelligence 
ser­vices and became deeply involved in overseeing Iraqi economic institu-
tions. Over the next few years, Saddam worked to increase his personal 
influence. In this section, we ­will survey some of the broader changes and 
reforms that followed the 1968 coup before exploring the consequences for 
Iraq’s nuclear program in more detail.
The Baath coup led to a transformation of the size and scope of the Iraqi 
state. This enabled the new regime to design and implement reforms, nota-
bly in the field of education, where other leaders had failed. At the same 
time, Iraq’s new rulers continued their pre­de­ces­sors’ efforts to concentrate 
power in their own hands. The regime wanted to use state institutions as 
instruments of power and also to detect and deter dissent through a series 
of purges and infiltration of the state bureaucracy. Baath Party members set 
up organ­izations in their workplace from which they sought to influence lo-
cal planning and management. ­Behind the scenes, Saddam built a network 
of influential regime officials at the se­nior leadership level. This network was 
motivated primarily by a desire for power and material interest, not a uni-
fied ideological vision.80 The net result was an expansion of the state and at 
the same time a fragmentation of state power, as party and elite networks 
sought to assert their power at the expense of formal institutions.

39
Iraq Explores the Atom, 1956–1973
The initial Baath program appeared to be ambitious: a broad socialist vi-
sion, including collectivization of agriculture and building a strong state.81 
The armed forces ­were a key priority. To this end, the regime set out to pro-
vide state-­sponsored training of scientists and engineers to develop a pool 
of ­human resources that could create a modern and well-­equipped military. 
The new regime also set out to revitalize the languishing military-­industrial 
sector. Between 1968 and 1972, for example, Iraq built industrial complexes 
at Musayyab, Yarmuk, and Abu Ghraib for production of conventional small 
arms of Soviet design.82
From 1970, primary education was ­free, universal, and mandatory. The 
expansion of the education system was fueled by oil wealth; an ideological 
emphasis on education was also seen as a means to fulfill the Baath Party’s 
socialist objectives. Within a de­cade this campaign had placed the Iraqi pri-
mary education system among the best in the ­Middle East. The Ministries 
of Education and Research developed a national curriculum, provided 
teacher training and increased salaries, and required universal attendance 
during the first six years of primary school. Education’s share of the national 
bud­get increased from 11.5 ­percent in 1976 to 13.9 ­percent in 1978.83 The gov-
ernment further demonstrated its commitment to higher education by ex-
empting enrolled students from military ser­vice.
In the mid-1970s the Baath government launched a series of campaigns to 
reduce illiteracy and teach basic mathe­matics. ­These efforts yielded impres-
sive results. Between 1978 and 1987 illiteracy was reduced from 48.4 ­percent 
to 19.9 ­percent, an effort that was recognized by several United Nations Ed-
ucational, Scientific and Cultural Or­ga­ni­za­tion (UNESCO) awards.84 In 
1975 the ruling Revolutionary Command Council (RCC) passed a law to de-
velop vocational education to meet Iraq’s development challenges. By 1978 
the percentage of students enrolled in vocational courses had doubled from 
9.8 ­percent in 1972 to 17.8 ­percent.85 Over the next de­cade student recruit-
ment for technical subjects increased threefold, reaching over 120,000 in 
1986.86
The government also expanded higher education facilities in other major 
cities and regions. At that time, the majority of university colleges and tech-
nical institutes ­were concentrated in the Baghdad area. ­These provided ed-
ucation in basic science and vari­ous technical fields (notably the Foundation 
of Technical Institutes and the University of Technology in Baghdad). By the 
late 1970s, fourteen technical institutes provided two-­year training courses 
for mid-­level technicians.87
In the mid-1970s, the government greatly expanded efforts to send mili-
tary officers and university gradu­ates abroad for postgraduate degrees. 
Gifted individuals from rural backwaters could rise through the ranks in the 
Baath Party or the state through state schools and scholarships in selected 
fields. The Ministry of Higher Education and Scientific Research and the 

40
chapter 1
Mukhabarat (the main intelligence or­ga­ni­za­tion) or­ga­nized ­these efforts. 
They prioritized scientists, engineers, and military officers who could ac-
quire skills that ­were relevant for Iraqi military industries.88 However, Iraqi 
postgraduates could pursue degrees in vari­ous technical and scientific fields, 
including medicine and pure sciences. The majority of ­these students did 
not work in the Iraqi weapons programs ­after returning home from their 
studies.89
The new regime’s leaders sought to purge state institutions of potential 
dissent, particularly in sensitive areas such as defense and the military. In 
the first months ­after the 1968 coup, the regime rounded up suspected po­
liti­cal opponents, including communists, Baathists who favored the pan-­
Arab ideology of the Syrian wing of the party, Nasserists, and pro-­Western 
businessmen; it also purged the civil ser­vice and officer corps.90 The new rul-
ing clique persecuted its perceived enemies and, in a series of executions 
and public ­trials, demonstrated the costs of suspected opposition to the 
wider public.
At Tuwaitha, the nuclear establishment braced itself for change. The cen-
ter was renamed the Tammuz Center, in honor of the July revolutions of 1958 
and 1968, but was referred to as the Nuclear Research Center (NRC) by the 
staff. Within six months of the 1968 coup, new leaders (with Baath creden-
tials) ­were installed. In 1969 Moyassar al-­Mallah replaced Awadh as 
secretary-­general of the IAEC, just a few months ­after returning from stud-
ies in nuclear engineering in the United States.91 The IAEC was made a part 
of the Ministry for Higher Education and Research, and the minister of this 
department was also the chairman of the commission. Although this was the 
formal arrangement, the IAEC emerged as a largely autonomous entity that 
was monitored by the security and intelligence ser­vices (which ­were ­under 
the purview of Saddam Hussein).92 Then, in the fall of 1969, Ali Atiya Ab-
dulla was appointed as the new head of the NRC. He replaced Jafar, who 
had served as acting director from mid-1968 ­until early 1969 while the then 
director, Derwish, was on technical assignment for the IAEA in Syria.
­These changes made it clear to the nuclear establishment that party affili-
ation could affect their ­career prospects. In fact, several ambitious scientists 
(including Jafar and Shahristani) did not join the Baath Party. But at this early 
stage, the regime sent a clear signal that se­nior management positions would 
be reserved for party members. Scientists could get away with not joining 
the party as long as they ­were found trustworthy (i.e., not suspected of har-
boring communist sympathies or other po­liti­cal affiliations). Over the next 
­couple of years, as we ­will see, the regime carried out purges against non-­
Baathist scientists suspected of communist sympathies. While many of ­these 
scientists ­were ­later welcomed back to the nuclear program, it was clear that 
the perceived loyalty and trustworthiness of scientists was becoming a more 
central concern in the hiring and management of the nuclear program. In 
addition, the presence of two factions—­party members and nonparty 

41
Iraq Explores the Atom, 1956–1973
members—­created a cleavage inside the nuclear establishment that would 
become increasingly tense over the next de­cade.
Visiting IAEA experts observed that the change in leadership had ­little or 
no consequence for the research activities, as the se­nior management mainly 
focused on administration.93 Most of the research activities continued to be 
developed by Iraqi scientists in conjunction with foreign experts. Over the 
next ­couple of years, scientists and engineers that did join the party tried to 
exert a strong influence on the activities at Tuwaitha and lobbied to secure 
higher-­level interest and support for the nuclear program. This created new 
conflicts and divisions within the nuclear establishment. From 1970, the 
Baath group’s efforts ­were increasingly disruptive. The Baathists sought to 
sideline their nonaffiliated colleagues. They targeted gradu­ates from Soviet 
or East Eu­ro­pean universities, who formed the majority of the scientists and 
engineers in the IAEC.94 ­These individuals ­were reassigned to provincial ac-
ademic positions (such as the Salah Al-­Din University in Sulaimaniyah) 
and mid-­level government posts. As a result, the NRC lost qualified scien-
tists, engineers, and technical workers. This also included some se­nior sci-
entists who had not studied in the Eastern Bloc but ­were dissatisfied with 
the intensifying politicization in Tuwaitha.
Between 1969 and 1970, several se­nior figures opted to leave the NRC, hav-
ing grown tired of the stifling conditions at Tuwaitha. In 1970, Jafar left to 
work in the Physics Department at London’s Imperial College.95 Shahristani, 
a rising star in the Iraqi nuclear establishment, was transferred to a univer-
sity position in Mosul in 1973. The following year he became an assistant 
professor at the University of Baghdad, where he assumed a leading role in 
radioisotope production and nuclear chemistry. Numan opted to work in the 
academic sector but was transferred back to the NRC some months ­later.
This reduced the already small pool of scientists and engineers in the na-
scent nuclear program. Recruitment for the nuclear program was not always 
easy. Competent candidates ­were dissuaded by the restrictions of the IAEC. 
The NRC was more security-­minded than universities. For example, em-
ployees could not publish their research ­unless they had official approval. 
Also, some ­were deterred by the harsh treatment of ­those suspected of 
supporting prohibited po­liti­cal parties. On a more prosaic level, Tuwaitha 
was a lengthy commute for many, compared with the campus of Baghdad 
University.96
The turbulence of this period did not affect the Bakr regime’s commitment 
to ensure continued access to foreign nuclear assistance. Iraq signed the Nu-
clear Non-­Proliferation Treaty in Moscow on 1 July 1968, less than three 
weeks before the Bakr coup, and ratified it in late October 1969. Three years 
­later Iraq signed an additional safeguards agreement to facilitate IAEA in-
spections of declared nuclear facilities. This paved the way for further as-
sistance and development. An IAEA adviser based in Baghdad reported in 
January 1969 that the country remained “outwardly calm . . . ​attempts are 

42
chapter 1
being made by the pres­ent [Bakr] administration to draw together divisive 
ele­ments.”97
The IAEA experts traveling to Iraq in the late 1960s ­were staying for lon-
ger stretches, several weeks or months, and provided assistance with sev-
eral aspects of ­these programs. They assisted the Iraqis with orga­nizational 
planning, creating new ave­nues of research, and delivered lectures as well 
as hands-on training. The younger scientists in par­tic­u­lar welcomed ­these 
experts, instruments, and information, as they ­were keen to explore new ave­
nues of research.
The Iraqi scientists ­were beginning to form their own preferences with re-
gard to the direction of their research activities and weighed ­these against 
the advice from foreign agencies and experts. For example, foreign experts 
repeatedly recommended that a greater portion of ­these activities should be 
dedicated to applied research (to increase the contributions to development), 
but the Iraqis continued to explore both basic and applied areas. At this time, 
nuclear energy was not yet on the Iraqi horizon.
Gilbert Smith, the IAEA expert based in Baghdad in early 1969, developed 
a new research program suitable for staff with undergraduate degrees at the 
request of the acting NRC director, A. K. Wahid (who would be replaced by 
Jafar as acting director in the fall of 1969 before Abdulla took over as direc-
tor). This program focused on practical applications of neutron activation 
analy­sis for mineral surveys carried out by the geological department. De-
spite the Iraqi nuclear establishment’s exploration of radioisotopes over the 
past de­cade, few industrial applications had been developed. One area high-
lighted by IAEA experts as particularly promising was the application of 
nuclear technologies to oil refining.98 The IAEA con­sul­tants developed a pro-
gram reaching out to such organ­izations as the Petroleum Research Institute, 
the UN Food and Agriculture Or­ga­ni­za­tion, and the Institute for Applied Re-
search on Natu­ral Resources.99 Still, the Iraqi scientists appear to have had 
limited interest in industrial applications of nuclear technology.
“department of unclear physics”
By the late 1960s, the broader objectives and purpose of the NRC remained 
largely undefined. Neither po­liti­cal nor scientific elites had yet developed 
clear preferences for Iraq’s nuclear ­future. Jafar recounted how his secretary 
erroneously typed the heading “Department of Unclear Physics,” and drily 
told Numan that this was an accurate characterization.100
With infrastructure in place, and students returning from abroad with new 
expertise, a pressing challenge was to or­ga­nize a research program. Accord-
ing to IAEA con­sul­tant Kajfosz, who spent several months advising the Iraqi 
nuclear establishment, “The crucial ser­vice point seems now to be the or-
ganisation of the scientific work.”101 He further noted: “This question ­will 
most prob­ably determine to what extent all this effort ­will result in a suc-

43
Iraq Explores the Atom, 1956–1973
cessful and continuous scientific work and growth of this group in ­future. 
This, however, is a complicated prob­lem which is related to the character of 
the ­people and general conditions, which can be hardly influenced by tech-
nical assistance.”102
At Tuwaitha, the absence of a strong central leadership gave younger sci-
entists opportunities for bottom-up initiatives. The level of leadership, plan-
ning, and interaction varied between the five departments, which by 1970 
focused on the following areas: reactors, isotopes production, physics, ra-
diobiology, and geology.103 Some departments made good pro­gress, due to 
the leadership of ambitious young scientists, while ­others made more lim-
ited advances.
Several new proj­ects exploring uranium deposits and extraction tech-
niques emerged as bottom-up initiatives. ­These produced some valuable 
findings, but their implementation suffered from poor management and co-
ordination. The Geology Department at Tuwaitha started to explore the 
uranium content in Iraqi soil. This was a bottom-up initiative and was not 
directed by the se­nior leaders. Due to outdated equipment, this proj­ect, and 
another effort to map oil fields, made very limited pro­gress. Visiting IAEA 
con­sul­tants noted that if this department had cooperated more closely with 
other departments, and the NRC had invested in adequate equipment, this 
proj­ect could have made more rapid advances.104 Nonetheless, surveys iden-
tified Iraq’s western desert as a source of uranium. The chemists at Tuwaitha 
studied techniques to extract uranium from phosphate ore, but ­these efforts 
did not advance beyond initial experiments.105
Jafar’s Physics Department was noted for making significant pro­gress in 
scientific experiments, in addition to acquiring necessary equipment for fur-
ther experimentation, which was credited to his initiative and leadership.106 
Other research proj­ects within this department, notably neutron activation 
analy­sis, lacked a dedicated leader and team. As a result, this research ap-
peared scattered and lacked a clear sense of direction. When Shahristani re-
turned from postgraduate studies in North Amer­i­ca in 1970, he became a 
capable leader of this unit. In other departments, the pro­gress of research and 
development was determined by ­whether mid-­level man­ag­ers and individ-
ual scientists took any initiatives in this direction. The youn­gest department, 
Radiobiology, which was headed by al-­Khalisi, was in the early stages of 
staking out a research program in agricultural applications.107
The lack of central direction, combined with institutional growth and com-
peting power centers, encouraged competing visions for Iraq’s nuclear 
­future. By the early 1970s, factions ­were vying for control over the nuclear 
establishment. This was a tumultuous time in Iraqi politics, following an un-
successful 1973 coup attempt led by the head of the state security ser­vices. 
The RCC, by now effectively ­under the control of Saddam Hussein, formally 
oversaw the nuclear establishment through the IAEC. The Baath group based 
at Tuwaitha, led by Abdul Razzak al-­Hashimi (a scientist from the Geology 

44
chapter 1
Department), sought to increase its own relative standing within the center. 
This made working life at Tuwaitha unpleasant and, in some cases, intoler-
able for non-­Baathist employees. ­These bullying tactics ­were toned down in 
1972–1973, as the Baath regime attempted to co-­opt the Iraqi Communist 
Party. In 1972, Numan, not a member of the Baath Party, was appointed di-
rector of the Tammuz Center. ­Others ­were also asked to return. Jafar returned 
in 1975 at the invitation of the IAEC.108 Shahristani was also invited back by 
Humam Abdul Khaliq, a nuclear physicist and Baathist who became head 
of the NRC in 1978, to head the Chemistry Department. Both scientists ­were 
committed to developing and strengthening the research and development 
activities at Tuwaitha, and to strengthening the management of ­these ac-
tivities at the se­nior level. Their return introduced dif­fer­ent perspectives 
and preferences with regard to Iraq’s nuclear ­futures into the se­nior tier of 
scientists at Tuwaitha.
During this period ­there ­were some increasingly creative attempts by fac-
tions at Tuwaitha to demonstrate relevance to the se­nior po­liti­cal leadership. 
In September 1972, the IAEC chairman instructed a committee to reanalyze 
a lunar soil sample provided by the Soviet Union and pres­ent the results as 
their own findings. This committee was led by al-­Hashimi, a prominent 
Baathist at the NRC, the center’s director, Numan, and the IAEC secretary-­
general, al-­Mallah.109 This apparently pointless exercise was intended to 
demonstrate that the nuclear establishment was capable of carry­ing out ad-
vanced tasks.
Within the Baath group at Tuwaitha, nuclear weapons ambitions began 
to rise to the surface in 1971–1972.110 They began to openly challenge the 
leadership concerning the direction of the nuclear program. In December 
1972, al-­Hashimi walked in during the Scientific Council’s annual assessment 
meeting. He criticized their plans and proposals and recommended what 
­Jafar regarded as “glamorous proj­ects” intended to attract funding and at-
tention.111 Se­nior scientists dismissed his suggestions as unrealistic, given 
the limits of Iraq’s knowledge base and infrastructure.
While ­these overtures may have encouraged higher-­level interest, ­there 
was no rush to develop a nuclear weapons option. Saddam was well placed 
to call for the development of a nuclear weapons option if he had wanted 
to.112 He appeared to hold a special affection for nuclear science and gave 
scientists a privileged position.113 Saddam even told the RCC: “we all 
love Iraq; one atom of it is equivalent to one atom of enriched uranium.”114 
Rhe­toric aside, ­there was no green light for a nuclear weapons program yet. 
That would not change ­until ­after Saddam seized the formal reins of power 
at the end of the de­cade.
This chapter challenges per­sis­tent ideas about Iraqi decision making and de-
cisions during this early period. First, this updated history challenges the 
widespread impression that the Iraqi nuclear program was a highly central-

45
Iraq Explores the Atom, 1956–1973
ized, focused, and hierarchical program geared ­toward developing nuclear 
weapons. Second, the chapter demonstrates that prior to 1973, the program 
was exploratory and, for all practical purposes, aimless.
Despite extensive nuclear assistance, and the emergence of an authoritar-
ian regime, ­there was a striking absence of pro-­bomb ­drivers during this pe-
riod. This finding, which stands in striking contrast to earlier analyses and 
theories of nuclear proliferation, underlines perhaps the greatest puzzle of 
Iraq’s early nuclear history: despite Saddam’s apparent interest in the nu-
clear program and lobbying by pro-­bomb co­ali­tions, the program simply 
continued to drift.
As this chapter has demonstrated, state capacity and management strategy 
are crucial for explaining this outcome. Successive leaders had undermined 
Iraqi state institutions, and oil wealth made the state more autonomous from 
society. As a result, the state apparatus remained weak. The planning and 
administration of the nuclear program was largely outsourced. This was the 
result of two dif­fer­ent, but mutually enforcing, ­factors: the absence of ­human 
and orga­nizational resources to plan and implement a nuclear program; 
and several foreign offers of assistance with all aspects of launching nuclear 
research and development programs. ­These administrative shortcomings re-
mained constant through several po­liti­cal transitions between 1958 and 1968. 
This slowed down domestic capacity building (as the state lacked a strong 
influence on planning and implementation) and absorption of foreign assis-
tance.
The nuclear program was subject to formal oversight mechanisms, includ-
ing oversight committees and government ministries (and, ­after 1968, the 
RCC). But ­these mechanisms lacked the capacity to effectively monitor and 
oversee the nuclear program. As most of the research activities ­were set up 
in cooperation with foreign advisers, the formal oversight mechanisms did 
not set rules, targets, or priorities. On the ground, Baathist scientists com-
peted with non-­Baathist scientists to control the program and set its ­future 
direction. Departments strug­gled to coordinate, not to mention collaborate, 
which inhibited their work from ­going beyond basic studies. When more sci-
entists and engineers joined the nuclear establishment in the late 1960s, the 
supporting administrative resources at Tuwaitha ­were clearly outpaced. The 
result was a program that by default focused on basic research rather than 
industrial applications, let alone nuclear energy or a weapons option.

46
chapter 2
Ambiguity and Ambition, 1973–1981
Between 1973 and 1981, the Iraqi nuclear establishment pursued a nuclear 
energy program. But ­were they also developing a weapons option? This 
chapter sheds new light on this contested question. Con­temporary sources 
show that as the program was taking an ambiguous turn it was open to dif­
fer­ent interpretations among technical and po­liti­cal elites. This led to grow-
ing tensions inside the Iraqi nuclear establishment, detailed for the first time 
in this chapter, while the Iraqi leadership was led to believe a weapons op-
tion was coming within reach.
As Saddam Hussein worked ­behind the scenes to increase his power and 
influence, he instructed a group of scientists to launch a nuclear power pro-
gram and explore the nuclear fuel cycle. This was an ambitious, but also am-
biguous, proj­ect, whose long-­term objectives (i.e., nuclear power or nuclear 
weapons) ­were largely undefined. The implementation of this proj­ect was 
left in the hands of the nuclear scientists, and much of their work was treated 
as secret. Saddam placed new man­ag­ers in charge of administering this 
program and made sure that the best scientists ­were hired and placed in 
leading technical positions. But Saddam and the Revolutionary Command 
Council (RCC) lacked institutional mechanisms to vet or review their pro­
gress, despite making large investments in nuclear technology. Further-
more, the secrecy that Saddam imposed on this proj­ect stood in the way of 
peer review inside the nuclear establishment.
­After Saddam fi­nally sidelined the ailing President Bakr in 1979, he be-
gan to openly signal his nuclear weapons ambitions to his scientists and the 
general public. Still, even at this stage ­there was no plan, bud­get, or or­ga­ni­
za­tion dedicated to developing a weapons capability at Tuwaitha. Nor had 
the scientists assessed what resources they would need for a weapons pro-
gram, or how the technology they ­were buying from other countries would 
fit with a clandestine weapons program.
The administrative leaders of the nuclear program became anxious as they 
began to realize that the weapons option Saddam apparently wanted was 
not within immediate reach. As it turned out, they got away with it ­because 

47
Ambiguity and Ambition, 1973–1981
Israel bombed a research reactor complex at Tuwaitha in June 1981. This re-
moved the possibility of carving out a ­future plutonium route to nuclear 
weapons and necessitated redesigning the entire Iraqi program. Meanwhile, 
their colleagues ­were less fortunate: Saddam imprisoned the two scientists 
he had put in charge of the sensitive new proj­ects before the Israeli strike 
­because he had doubts about their loyalty. Trust was more impor­tant, or ur-
gent, than acting on his weapons ambition ­because Saddam feared the 1979 
Ira­nian Revolution would spill over into Iraq. Saddam still wanted ­these sci-
entists to lead the ­future weapons program, but even ­after he asked them to 
take charge of the ­future weapons program they remained prisoners. This, 
and much more, changed ­after Israel bombed Tuwaitha.
Two Five-­Year Plans
In June 1972, the Iraqi government nationalized the national petroleum com­
pany. The windfall profits, which surged ­after the 1973 Or­ga­ni­za­tion of the 
Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC) crisis, ­were spent on guns and butter.1 
Iraq undertook the most dramatic and sustained arms buildup of any Arab 
state in the region and began to explore opportunities for developing noncon-
ventional weapons at home. A sprawling military-­industrial complex emerged, 
which outpaced the state’s mechanisms for oversight and monitoring.
While the arms buildup was primarily driven by financial opportunity, the 
Arab confrontation with Israel and enmity with Iran ­were impor­tant moti-
vating ­factors. The Iraqis aspired to increase their regional status following 
Egypt’s defeat against Israel in the 1973 Yom Kippur War.2 In October 1973, 
Egypt and Syria launched a surprise attack on Israel to reclaim lands that 
had been occupied by the Israelis since the 1967 Six-­Day War. ­After the joint 
conventional assault failed, Iraq’s government wanted to develop better con-
ventional and nonconventional weapons systems. Furthermore, they ­were 
concerned about Iran’s larger and more power­ful army. Saddam ordered 
new industrial and technological proj­ects to bolster Iraq’s military capabili-
ties. Science and technology programs ­were, from his perspective, long-­term 
investments in prestige and national security. Iraq’s 1979 declaration to the 
United Nations (UN) Conference on Science and Technology for Develop-
ment cited the regime’s commitment to developing “the armament indus-
try in order to achieve self-­reliance and national security for both Iraq and 
the Arab world.”3
As part of the military buildup, Saddam initiated reform of the once lan-
guishing military-­industrial sector. ­These efforts would proceed in two 
stages, defined in separate and partly overlapping five-­year plans. The first 
focused on creating industrial capabilities, and the second focused on ex-
ploring and developing new weapons options through science and technol-
ogy programs.

48
chapter 2
The first five-­year plan (starting in 1973–1974) focused on strengthening 
Iraq’s basic industrial capacity to produce conventional weaponry. The Min-
istry of Industry set up a committee to coordinate ­these efforts, the so-­called 
Military Industry Follow-­Up and Executive Committee, headed by the min-
ister of industry, Yasin Ramadan.4 Iraq would import technology to jump-
start indigenous research and development. This created industrial facilities 
that would ­later support conventional and nonconventional weapons proj­
ects, including the nuclear weapons program. One such fa­cil­i­ty was the 
sprawling Al Qaa Qaa General Establishment, which produced explosives, 
propellants, and pyrotechnics. The second five-­year plan (starting in 1974) 
emphasized exploring new conventional and nonconventional weapons op-
tions. A 1974 government decree ordered research and development efforts 
to explore pos­si­ble applications for defense in chemistry, biology, and phys-
ics.5 This led to research on weapons applications in all three fields over the 
next few years, with mixed results.
The pattern of research and development in the Iraqi military-­industrial 
complex differed from other highly centralized authoritarian regimes such 
as the Soviet Union. In Iraq, low-­level officials or individual academics usu-
ally pitched proj­ects to se­nior officials. If the idea or proposal met with inter-
est, the applicants ­were asked to submit a more detailed proposal. Saddam 
would examine the proposal personally, usually ­after a review by a higher-­
level official. If he gave the green light to go ahead, scientists would be ap-
pointed as man­ag­ers responsible for the entire proj­ect, including personnel, 
procurement, and scientific content.
The investigations by UN inspectors accounting for Iraq’s past weapons 
of mass destruction programs show that this was actually a bottom-up 
pro­cess, where scientists and officials could pitch proj­ects to se­nior officials. 
Iraqi documents that have emerged ­after the 2003 war also show that—­
contrary to assumptions held by policymakers and made in recent academic 
studies—­the regime did not monitor or follow up on many of ­these proj­ects 
­because they lacked the institutional resources to do so.
restructuring the iraqi atomic energy commission
In early 1973, Saddam restructured the Iraqi Atomic Energy Commission 
(IAEC) and ordered the se­nior leaders of the nuclear program to pursue a 
nuclear energy program. As vice-­chairman of the RCC, Saddam became head 
of the reformed commission. The other members ­were recruited based on 
“personal merit,” rather than their institutional affiliation.6 They ­were in-
structed to consider the IAEC’s work classified. Information about the pro-
gram, and certain lines of research, was compartmentalized even within the 
nuclear establishment.
Saddam requested three IAEC members—­Khalid Ibrahim Said, Moyas-
sar al-­Mallah, and Humam Abdul Khaliq—to prepare a plan for a nuclear 

49
Ambiguity and Ambition, 1973–1981
power program and, more ambiguously, explore the nuclear fuel cycle. This 
was their first explicit instruction from the se­nior leadership to develop a 
nuclear energy program. The governance of the Iraqi nuclear program was 
transformed: se­nior staff members ­were replaced, a new cooperation policy 
was instituted with the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), and 
information about the objectives and activities of the program was com-
partmentalized within the or­ga­ni­za­tion. ­These developments ­were doubly 
ambiguous: first, ­because the technology could be useful for weapons-­
related research; and second, ­because the regime’s long-­term objectives ­were 
increasingly open to dif­fer­ent interpretations.
In April 1973, the program, bud­get, and leadership of the NRC ­were re-
structured according to Saddam’s edicts. Several research proj­ects, such as 
the nuclear materials prospecting proj­ect, ­were cut, and more changes soon 
followed. This had to be explained to the IAEA, who was providing sup-
port to the Iraqi nuclear program, in a manner that was consistent with the 
IAEC’s new policy of keeping information about the program secret. In a let-
ter to the IAEA, al-­Mallah, the secretary-­general of the IAEC, simply stated: 
“unforeseen circumstances and current developments have dictated on us 
the revision of our entire programme, especially the priority of committed 
proj­ects.”7 Subsequently, the Iraqi nuclear establishment limited the IAEA’s 
assistance to a few select areas.
The new emphasis on secrecy made it more difficult for the Iraqi nuclear 
establishment to deal with foreign actors and agencies providing assistance. 
This was a challenging balancing act, as Iraq relied on support from ­these 
foreign actors. The nuclear energy program would be based on acquiring 
technology and facilities from abroad, as well as foreign training of person-
nel. Iraq reached out to several countries to develop research collaboration 
and purchase technology, including France, Italy, Poland, and Brazil. The 
Iraqi program would continue to engage with the IAEA and nuclear estab-
lishments in the states offering assistance, which included hosting resident 
foreign experts (Soviet and, ­later in the de­cade, French) at Tuwaitha. The 
compartmentalization created some tensions in Iraq’s relations with its for-
eign suppliers. For example, changes in the leadership within the NRC and 
reor­ga­ni­za­tion of the research activities in the mid-1970s ­were reported to 
the IAEA, but not explained. Technical assistance programs ­were suddenly 
interrupted, leaving the foreign experts with nothing to do.8
­These changes in the governance of the nuclear program affected hiring 
decisions in ways that ran ­counter to what we might expect in an authori-
tarian regime. Saddam instructed the IAEC to recruit scientists based on 
merit, selecting the staff whose skills would be most useful.9 As a result, some 
of the most se­nior scientists in the program, including Jafar Dhiya Jafar and 
Hussein Shahristani, ­were not members of the Baath Party. Over the next two 
years the IAEC nominated several individuals to be transferred to Tuwaitha 
from academic positions. ­These included some previously suspected of 

50
chapter 2
being communist or harboring “divergent” po­liti­cal views. However, the 
se­nior managerial positions ­were mostly reserved for party members.
The se­nior management of the NRC changed ­after Saddam’s intervention in 
1973. On 29 July that year, a new director, Husham Sharif, was appointed. 
Several staff members ­were reassigned or demoted, including the former 
head of the Geology Department, Ibrahim al-­Fadhli, who was replaced by his 
former assistant, Salem al-­Dabbagh.10 In 1974 Khalid Said, a party member, 
was appointed director of Tuwaitha immediately upon his return ­after ob-
taining a doctoral degree in the United Kingdom. Another returning doctoral 
student, Imad Khadduri, recounts that he was told by al-­Mallah that if his 
party credentials had been in order, he could have been appointed instead.11
While the regime attempted to increase its control over the IAEC in this 
manner, the objectives of the nuclear program ­were increasingly open to 
interpretation. Several ­factors contributed to this ambiguity: compartmen-
talization; a sense among the technical elites that Saddam saw the nuclear 
program as a lever to increase Iraq’s prestige in the region; the emergence of 
competing visions of Iraq’s nuclear ­future inside Tuwaitha; and growing se-
crecy in relation to foreign experts and agencies that ­were supporting the 
development of a more advanced nuclear infrastructure in Iraq. This ambi-
guity encouraged speculation about the direction of the program at Tuwaitha. 
Se­nior scientists began to suspect that Saddam’s long-­term objective was to 
carve out a nuclear weapons option. Still, Saddam did not make any state-
ments to the IAEC clarifying his position at this stage.
This modus operandi—­where organ­izations and bureaucracies explored 
options while the po­liti­cal leadership delayed making a strategic decision—­
was not unusual. In fact, it was quite common in Saddam’s Iraq. This ap-
proach had the benefit of enabling competing factions to pursue their 
preferred course of action ­until the se­nior po­liti­cal leadership—­the RCC 
with Saddam at the helm—­made a decision. By delaying their decision in 
this manner, the decision makers could obtain more information about their 
options, stimulate competition between dif­fer­ent factions, and avoid com-
mitting to a failing policy. Absent effective monitoring, competition could 
stimulate scientists to perform better. In other words, this approach solved 
the thorny information prob­lem that Saddam faced with regard to assess-
ing technical proj­ects.
The expansion of the nuclear program enabled dif­fer­ent actors in the nu-
clear establishment to further competing agendas. The scientific leaders of 
the program wanted to develop a strong foundation for science and tech-
nology. They ­were interested in scientific exploration and, to a lesser degree, 
industrial applications. As seen in the previous chapter, the opportunity to 
develop an ambitious new program had encouraged scientists such as Jafar 
and Shahristani to return to Tuwaitha. Meanwhile, the Baathists at the NRC 
seemed to take the lead in assembling a dual-­use infrastructure, creating a 
­future nuclear weapons option.

51
Ambiguity and Ambition, 1973–1981
Apparent inconsistencies between Baghdad’s nuclear acquisition efforts 
and its stated objectives—to explore nuclear technology and develop 
energy—­were duly noted by outside observers. In par­tic­u­lar, the Iraqis’ 
emphasis on exploring plutonium extraction and repro­cessing at an experi-
mental level—­dual-­use technologies that could be useful for both an indig-
enous nuclear power program and for a nuclear weapons program—­raised 
suspicions about Baghdad’s nuclear intentions and capabilities.
Other states began to suspect that Saddam had weapons ambitions but 
­were uncertain how far Iraq was from acting on such ambitions. For example, 
in September 1980 the British Cabinet Office indicated Iraq might acquire nu-
clear weapons as early as 1990 (or within an eight-­to-­ten-­year time frame) and 
pondered the consequences for Israel’s closeted nuclear posture.12 While this 
assessment appears very optimistic, given what we now know about the state 
of the Iraqi program, it indicates the level of concern raised by that program. 
In the mid-1970s, several states in the ­Middle East contemplated a nuclear 
option. Israel became known as an undeclared nuclear weapons state by the 
1967 war. Among Arab states, Egypt was widely considered the most likely 
to seek a nuclear weapons option. While President Gamal Abdel Nasser 
stated that Egypt saw no choice but to match an Israeli nuclear weapons 
capability, Egypt’s nuclear program suffered from limited backing and bick-
ering among the nuclear establishment and the se­nior executive, and ulti-
mately fizzled out ­after the 1973 war with Israel. Syria tentatively explored 
nuclear technology, but made no serious effort to develop nuclear weapons 
during the 1970s. Iraq’s neighbor Iran was making more pro­gress in the nu-
clear field. Iran’s nuclear program was expanding rapidly in the mid-1970s; 
the shah’s public ambiguity about a military dimension for this program 
caused concern in the international community.
Baghdad monitored the Ira­nian program closely. The NRC staff submit-
ted regular reports on the Ira­nian program to Saddam.13 The shah’s reported 
1974 statement—­that Iran would “certainly” acquire nuclear weapons 
“sooner than is believed”—­did not go unnoticed in Baghdad.14 For example, 
this was cited as evidence that the shah was pursuing a nuclear weapons 
option during the 1970s in a 1994 study forwarded to Saddam.15 According 
to Jafar, Iraq’s nascent program sought to emulate the Ira­nian program on a 
more modest scale.16 The Iraqis ­were not competing with the Iranians—­the 
scope and scale of the Ira­nian program was far greater than the Iraqi 
efforts—­yet Baghdad did not want to fall too far ­behind.
exploring the fuel cycle
Iraq’s oil revenue increased eightfold between 1973 and 1975, allowing 
Baghdad to launch a series of ambitious proj­ects in civilian and military 
fields. While 40 ­percent of this income was spent on buying weapons, money 
was also spent on social reforms focused on health, education and housing.17 

52
chapter 2
The influx of cash afforded ample business opportunities to well-­connected 
policy entrepreneurs inside the Iraqi state.18 For the IAEC, and the broader 
military-­industrial complex, the time was ripe for an ambitious procurement 
campaign. Their immediate objective was to purchase the technological in-
frastructure that would allow them to explore dual-­use nuclear fuel cycle 
technologies.
The Iraqi nuclear establishment launched an ambitious shopping spree to 
assem­ble the technological building blocks of the entire nuclear fuel cycle, 
from uranium excavation to repro­cessing spent reactor fuel. In other words, 
the Iraqis sought the ability to extract raw uranium, prepare and pro­cess 
it, and then extract and repro­cess the spent reactor fuel, which would give 
them the range of technology necessary for a nuclear energy or weapons pro-
gram. ­These efforts unfolded in three steps. First, Iraq asked the Soviet Union 
to upgrade the IRT-2000 research reactor. Second, Iraq convinced France to 
supply a new research reactor complex that included laboratory-­scale repro­
cessing technology. This package, which was called 17 Tammuz (17 July) at 
Tuwaitha, gave Iraq access to the basic science and technology of the back 
end of the nuclear fuel cycle. Third, Italy provided a uranium fuel labora-
tory and a radiochemical laboratory. This proj­ect package, called 30 Tammuz 
at Tuwaitha, gave Iraq access to the technology of the front end of the nuclear 
fuel cycle. In addition to ­these three large proj­ects, Iraq explored opportuni-
ties with other suppliers to purchase technology and even uranium, despite 
the fact that ­there was uranium in Iraqi soil. For example, between 1975 
and 1976, the Iraqi Ministry of Industry and Minerals (MIM) signed contracts 
with a Belgian com­pany to construct a unit to extract phosphate, an impor­
tant step ­toward extraction of uranium from Iraqi soil.
First, the Iraqis secured an agreement with the Soviet Union to upgrade 
the 2-­megawatt IRT-2000 research reactor at Tuwaitha (called 14 Tammuz) to 
5 megawatts (IRT-5000). In 1976, the reactor was shut down in preparation 
for the upgrade. As part of this pro­cess, the fuel was changed from 
10 ­percent and 36 ­percent enrichment to 80 ­percent enrichment.19 This fuel, 
as we ­will see in subsequent chapters, played a key role in the 1990–1991 
“crash program” to produce a nuclear explosive. The upgrade was com-
pleted in mid-1978. Iraq received financial assistance from the IAEA for this 
proj­ect, which was spent on technical equipment and assistance.20 Further-
more, the Iraqis asked the IAEA to assess ­whether they ­were overcharged 
by the Soviets, as the price they ­were asked to pay was “2–3 times inflated,” 
according to their estimates.21 This reactor, once modified, facilitated exper-
imental research and production of radioisotopes.22 The Iraqis also asked 
the IAEA to provide “spare parts, machinery and tools for the Institute’s 
workshop and vari­ous materials needed for the operation of the reactor.”23
The IAEC also set out to buy new and more power­ful reactors and 
laboratory-­scale repro­cessing technology. This created tension in Iraq’s rela-
tions with supplier states, as Baghdad requested more sensitive technology 

53
Ambiguity and Ambition, 1973–1981
than they ­were willing to provide, and tension within the NRC, where turf 
fights between dif­fer­ent groups of scientists ­were coming to a head.
The French Reactor.  ​In the fall of 1974 Saddam brought a del­e­ga­tion to 
France that included Humam (IAEC vice-­chairman), Said (NRC director) 
and Ahmed Bashir al-­Naib (head of the Iraqi Electricity General Establish-
ment). They wanted to purchase a gas-­cooled graphite-­moderated power 
reactor. ­Because Iraq’s electricity grid was much smaller than that of Iran, 
nuclear scientists believed that a single nuclear power plant was suitable. 
This type of reactor was especially well suited for plutonium production, 
which would be useful for a weapons program, but seemed to make less 
sense for the purposes of a small nuclear power program in a developing 
country.24 Their request raised concerns in other states, notably Israel, the 
United States, and countries in Western Eu­rope.25 France turned down 
the Iraqis’ request, ostensibly ­because graphite-­moderated power reactors 
­were being phased out, but informally indicated a willingness to supply 
other research and power reactors.26
In November 1976, Iraq signed an agreement with five French companies 
to provide two reactors. This included an IRT-5000 materials-­testing reactor 
of 40-­megawatt thermal power (Tammuz-1), for research and testing of ma-
terials for nuclear power plants, and a 500-­kilowatt swimming-­pool reactor 
(Tammuz-2).27 The package also included a materials-­testing hot laboratory 
(called LAMA) for pro­cessing and analyzing irradiated fuel rods, a work-
shop, and waste treatment station. Iraq paid around $450 million for this 
complex, which the international press referred to as “Osirak,” in reference 
to the French-­designed template reactor, which was named Osiris. The en-
tire complex would be ­under IAEA safeguards, meaning that the site and 
materials would be inspected regularly. In addition to this nuclear assistance, 
the French agreed to sell Mirage fighter airplanes to the Iraqi air force and 
as well as a series of industrial assistance contracts.28
Several governments, including ­those of Israel and the United States, ­were 
concerned about the reactor deal. They feared that Iraq could divert mate-
rial from the reactor fuel to build a bomb, or produce plutonium for the pur-
poses of a clandestine weapons program by modifying the reactor. This 
was a large research reactor, which foreign observers feared could be recon-
figured to produce substantial amounts of plutonium.29 But Tammuz-1 was 
designed to be dif­fer­ent from similar reactors based on the French Osiris 
design—­notably the Dimona reactor in Israel, which played a central role 
in the Israeli nuclear weapons program—in order to reduce the risk that the 
Iraqis could divert the fa­cil­i­ty for the purposes of a weapons program. For 
example, the Iraqi reactor was a 40-­megawatt reactor, which was consider-
ably smaller than the 70-­megawatt Dimona reactor. In addition, the Iraqi 
reactor would be ­under IAEA safeguards, unlike the Israeli reactor. Fi­nally, 
French experts would be on site for the first de­cade. Their formal role was 

54
chapter 2
to assist the Iraqis in operating the new technology, but their presence pro-
vided additional transparency to the activities on site.
The concerns that this reactor complex could move Iraq closer to a nuclear 
weapons option focused on three scenarios: diversion of the reactor fuel in 
a crash program to quickly assem­ble a nuclear weapon; reconfiguration of 
the core of the reactor to increase its production capability; or experimental 
­handling of fuel and plutonium repro­cessing in gram quantities to acquire 
skills that would be useful if Iraq acquired a more power­ful reactor, for the 
purposes of a weapons program, that was not subject to safeguards.30 I dis-
cuss ­these scenarios below and indicate what Iraqi scientists made of ­these 
options, thereby showing, for the first time, that ­there may have been dif­fer­
ent views inside the Iraqi nuclear establishment on this question.
Following Israeli allegations that Tammuz-1 could produce up to 12 kilo-
grams of plutonium per year, which would suffice for a nuclear weapon, the 
Iraqis assessed the production capacity of all their reactors. They concluded 
that if Iraq withdrew from the Non-­Proliferation Treaty (NPT), which would 
remove their ­legal obligation not to pursue nuclear weapons and give Iraq 
the option of discontinuing the IAEA safeguards, the larger reactor (Tam-
muz-1) could have produced up to 2 kilograms of plutonium per year by 
irradiating natu­ral or depleted uranium; the smaller Soviet-­supplied research 
reactor could produce up to 250 grams of plutonium per year. ­These assess-
ments ­were consistent with ­later in­de­pen­dent studies by IAEA officials.31 A 
more recent analy­sis suggests that if Iraq had withdrawn from the NPT, the 
Tammuz-1 reactor could have produced the minimal amount of plutonium 
for a nuclear weapon (8 kilograms) in just over seven years.32 This estimate 
assumes that the reactor would operate at its theoretically feasible maximum 
production level and does not account for probable delays and interruptions. 
If the Iraqis had made changes to the reactor to further optimize its opera-
tion, this could reduce the time frame to just ­under five years.33
Neither option was particularly appealing. Leaving the IAEA, and being 
cut off from the assistance Iraq needed for its nuclear program, was not a 
feasible option. Producing enough fissile material for a nuclear weapon be-
tween IAEA inspections would be difficult, ­because such activities would 
alert French inspectors—­who remained on site for the first de­cade of the re-
actor’s operations—or the IAEA, as the reactor was a declared site subject 
to inspection ­every few months. ­These conclusions ­were shared by con­
temporary U.S. assessments.34 Furthermore, Iraq did not have the ability to 
repro­cess plutonium in large quantities, as repro­cessing in the small hot cell 
fa­cil­i­ty on site would take a long time; nor did it have the capacity to con-
struct a nuclear weapons device.
Even with ­these constraints in place, Tammuz-1 could contribute to de-
veloping a weapons option in the longer term. It could help to develop skills 
that would be necessary if and when Iraq opted to develop a nuclear weap-
ons capability. This was an ambition shared by some in the IAEC but, at this 

55
Ambiguity and Ambition, 1973–1981
stage, ­there was no plan spelling out how ­these skills would be developed 
or sufficiently skilled staff obtained.
Within the Iraqi nuclear establishment, ­there ­were dif­fer­ent perspectives 
on ­whether, and how, the 40-­megawatt reactor could contribute to a weap-
ons program. In theory, the reactor could have been diverted for a weapons 
program, a fact that may have led some Iraqis to believe this was a possibil-
ity. In practice, however, this was not feasible given the constraints of the 
reactor design and the IAEA inspection regime. Jafar did not believe that the 
reactor could play a direct role in a weapons program. The pro-­bomb Baath 
co­ali­tion at Tuwaitha apparently held a dif­fer­ent view. A prominent member 
of this group, Abdul Razzak al-­Hashimi, had become director of the NRC and 
vice-­chairman of the IAEC. Mahdi Obeidi, a promising young scientist, was 
summoned to a meeting with se­nior IAEC directors including al-­Hashimi, 
Dhafir Selbi, Humam, and Said in late 1979 or 1980, around the time when the 
IAEC assessed the plutonium production capacity of the reactors. In this 
meeting, an agitated al-­Hashimi asked Obeidi ­whether Tammuz-1 could 
serve what he described as strategic purposes. Obeidi got the impression 
that al-­Hashimi was asking ­whether the reactor could produce enough plu-
tonium for a weapons program, but knew he could not ask for clarification 
on such a sensitive question. Obeidi did not want to say no to his tempera-
mental boss, and prudently answered that the reactor would fulfill its re-
quirements. Al-­Hashimi, who was not reassured by this diplomatic response, 
turned to the other IAEC members and told them that his head would be 
the last to be chopped off.35
­There is an apparent mismatch between the nuclear weapons ambitions 
held by se­nior Baathists and the lack of planning and preparation for such 
a program during the late 1970s.36 ­There was apparently no attempt to as-
sess what a nuclear weapons program would require, and the se­nior IAEC 
directors’ meeting on ­whether the French reactor complex could play a role 
in such a proj­ect appears to have been an afterthought. Even at this stage, 
weak management and state capacity slowed Iraq’s drift ­toward a bomb op-
tion.
Three years ­after the Osirak contract was signed, France, following pro-
tests from Western and ­Middle Eastern countries including Syria and Saudi 
Arabia, proposed a number of changes. It suggested changing the reactor 
fuel from highly enriched uranium to a new so-­called caramel fuel (enriched 
to just 9 ­percent). The Iraqi scientists had dif­fer­ent opinions about ­these 
changes, and how to respond to them. Jafar and Shahristani, who had par-
ticipated in the technical discussions prior to the signing of the contract along 
with al-­Hashimi and Humam, did not mind: the reactor would still be suit-
able for a variety of experiments, regardless of the proposed changes in the 
reactor fuel. Yet the IAEC was adamant that the fuel should not be changed. 
Al-­Hashimi angrily refused to make this amendment to the original contract, 
protesting that the caramel fuel had not been proven on an industrial scale.

56
chapter 2
­These contracts ­were part of a set of agreements between France and Iraq 
that included, along with the reactor sale, training and assistance. In early 
1980, some sixty Iraqi technicians, scientists, and engineers ­were trained in 
reactor operations for one year at the Saclay Nuclear Research Center.37 
Within the Iraqi del­e­ga­tion, ­there ­were disagreements as to ­whether all mem-
bers ­were sufficiently technically qualified. A discussion regarding the 
se­lection criteria led to one vocal critic, who had argued that some Baath 
delegates ­were not sufficiently qualified, being sent back to Baghdad.38 Dur-
ing their training abroad, the Iraqis ­were approached by what they believed 
­were foreign intelligence officers asking questions about the direction of the 
Iraqi nuclear program.
As ­these examples suggest, tensions ­were rising between Baath members 
and nonmembers in the nuclear establishment. The se­nior IAEC manage-
ment held dif­fer­ent views about the technical limitations of the technology 
they had purchased. It is plausible that the pro-­bomb lobby gave a mislead-
ing impression to the po­liti­cal leadership that the newly acquired technology 
could help Iraq develop nuclear weapons. Indeed, al-­Hashimi’s comments 
to Obeidi strongly suggest that the se­nior regime level may have believed 
that Tammuz-1 could play a part in such a program.
Iraq continued to pursue a more power­ful reactor that would be able to 
produce plutonium in greater quantities. In 1976 and 1977, the Iraqi nuclear 
establishment searched for a supplier who could provide a nuclear power 
generating plant. Iraqi scientists and technicians visited potential suppliers 
in Japan, Sweden, and West Germany. In Tokyo, the Iraqis began negotia-
tions with Mitsubishi for a suitable reactor. ­These talks ­were interrupted fol-
lowing U.S. pressure. The Iraqis concluded that the United States would 
resist their efforts to purchase a power reactor.39 Due to this pressure, the 
Soviet Union appeared to be their most probable option. Iraq continued dis-
cussions for purchasing a power reactor with French, Italian, and Soviet 
suppliers.40
The Italian Contracts.  ​As France emerged as a key supplier of nuclear tech-
nology and training, Baghdad nurtured an equally close relationship with 
Italy. Italy and Iraq had signed a cooperation agreement in 1974 that pro-
vided a framework for extensive assistance in industry and development. 
In January 1976, Iraq also signed a nuclear cooperation agreement with the 
Italian National Commission on Nuclear Energy. The Italians reached out 
directly to Saddam in late December 1976, inviting him to Italy to discuss 
cooperation in several fields of economic development. Prime Minister 
Giulio Andreotti, who penned the letter to Saddam, noted his country’s in-
terest in purchasing Iraqi crude oil.41 During tense negotiations in 1976–1979, 
Italy agreed to sell a uranium fuel laboratory and a radiochemical labora-
tory to Iraq. This package, described as the 30 Tammuz proj­ect by the IAEC, 
marked another impor­tant step ­toward an in­de­pen­dent nuclear fuel cycle.

57
Ambiguity and Ambition, 1973–1981
­After signing the nuclear cooperation agreement, the Italian National 
Commission on Nuclear Energy approved a contract for a laboratory-­scale 
radiochemistry laboratory, which could pro­cess plutonium in gram quali-
ties, to be purchased by Iraq from the SNIA Viscosa com­pany in 1978.42 This 
laboratory was operational by 1979, and this line of research was treated as 
secret within the IAEC.
Newly discovered sources show how Iraq tried to bargain for technology 
that would be useful for a weapons program during the talks that led to the 
30 Tammuz contract. What the Iraqis asked for—­including fuel fabrication, 
a nuclear power reactor, and a repro­cessing plant—­involved technology that 
was be equally applicable to an energy program or a weapons program. For 
example, during the negotiation of the contract for the so-­called Technology 
Hall in 1976, a fa­cil­i­ty to recover natu­ral uranium from reactor fuel rods, 
which contained sensitive chemical separation technology, the Italians seemed 
to be getting cold feet. The Italian government was aware that this was sensi-
tive technology, and the Foreign Ministry noted in an internal memorandum 
that “the construction of a ‘technology hall’ remains a first though small step 
­towards the acquisition of technological knowledge that could be potentially 
dangerous ­later on.”43 Italy asked for two postponements of the signing of 
this contract. Meanwhile, the Iraqis began to make several additional de-
mands. They wanted more and bargained hard. They asked the Italians to 
commit to provide a nuclear repro­cessing plant (i.e., on an industrial scale) 
and a laboratory for fabricating nuclear fuel.44 In late October 1977, the Iraqis 
demanded that Italy grant the authorization by the end of the month or they 
would pull out of the entire order, which was worth $45 million. The Italians 
agreed to provide a nuclear fuel laboratory to Iraq, despite the fact that as-
pects of this ­were placed on a list defined as “sensitive” by the London Club 
(of nuclear suppliers).45 Iraq was politely requested to not use this laboratory 
for producing nuclear weapons and to subject the fa­cil­i­ty to IAEA safe-
guards or bilateral verification with Italy.
The IAEC became more aggressive in their dealings with the Italians in 
the summer of 1979. As the two parties discussed the contract for the nu-
clear fuel fabrication laboratory, including supplies of uranium, al-­Hashimi 
criticized the proposed contract as violating Iraqi sovereignty ­because it stip-
ulated safeguard mea­sures that went beyond Baghdad’s basic safeguards 
associated with the IAEA and the NPT. Al-­Hashimi made it clear that Iraq 
did not want to submit to additional verification mea­sures beyond ­those of 
the IAEA and NPT.46 As in the case of France, attempts to impose additional 
conditions or safeguard mea­sures that went beyond Iraq’s existing agree-
ments ­were furiously resisted.
Baghdad’s rash be­hav­ior caused alarm in the Italian com­pany, the SIGEN-­
GIE consortium, that wanted to sell a 600-­megawatt nuclear power station 
to Iraq. The United States, who held the license for the design of this reac-
tor, strongly objected to the prospective reactor deal. The Italian Foreign 

58
chapter 2
Ministry was less concerned about ­these protests, apparently believing that 
this sale would not pose a proliferation risk as the Iraqis would subject the 
fa­cil­i­ty to the safeguards of the IAEA and ­those specified by the London 
Club.47
While the talks eventually stranded, the Iraqi nuclear establishment con-
tinued to seek a more power­ful reactor. According to U.S. intelligence the 
Iraqis approached the Italians in the spring of 1981 asking them to provide a 
plutonium-­producing 300-­megawatt CIRENE reactor that used natu­ral ura-
nium, which was available in Iraq. This was still a prototype and not com-
mercially available.48 They also asked the Italians to begin initial feasibility 
studies in Iraq with the expectation that the reactor would be constructed in 
nine to ten years. If the Italians had agreed, the Iraqis could have had a reac-
tor that was technically suitable for a weapons program in the country by 
1991–1992.49
Although Iraq had indigenous uranium sources, the IAEC also went on a 
uranium shopping spree. The Iraqis wanted to develop basic skills at the 
front end of the nuclear fuel cycle (i.e., uranium refinement and fuel pro-
duction) but strug­gled to do so. In 1979, Iraq purchased 4,000 kilograms of 
natu­ral uranium (in the form of uranium oxide powder) and 508 kilograms 
of uranium fuel pellets from Italy. This material was intended to be used for 
research and development in an Experimental Research Laboratory for Fuel 
Fabrication. In the same year Iraq also imported over 6 metric tons of depleted 
uranium from Italy. Between 1979 and 1982, Iraq purchased yellowcake (a 
uranium concentrate used for production of nuclear fuel or enrichment) from 
Portugal and Niger and uranium dioxide from Brazil.50 The yellowcake and 
uranium dioxide shipments ­were only partially declared to the IAEA, as nei-
ther Niger nor Brazil had joined the NPT at this time.51 The IAEC submitted 
design information for the experimental fuel fabrication laboratory to the 
IAEA in June 1980. In November 1980, a “highly secret” IAEC mission visited 
China to request the supply of 5 metric tons of uranium hex­a­fluor­ide 
(5 ­percent enriched uranium). This was intended to be the initial feed mate-
rial for isotope separation experiments, which ­were necessary for nuclear 
fuel production, but could also be applied to uranium enrichment. The Chi-
nese ultimately did not follow through on this agreement, citing the out-
break of the Iran-­Iraq War.52
A new group of leaders was appointed to oversee the negotiation and im-
plementation of the French and Italian contracts. In 1978, Humam was ap-
pointed director of the NRC. Humam was a nuclear physicist with solid 
Baath Party credentials.53 ­After obtaining a master’s degree in reactor phys-
ics from Westfield College in London, Humam became the liaison officer 
between Saddam’s Vice-­Presidential Office and the IAEC’s Secretariat-­
General.54 Jafar and Shahristani ­were appointed directors general to over-
see the scientific planning and infrastructure development associated with 
the 17 Tammuz (plutonium ­handling and repro­cessing) and 30 Tammuz (fuel 

59
Ambiguity and Ambition, 1973–1981
production) proj­ects. They ­were assisted by Khalid Ibrahim Said, head of the 
IAEC Proj­ects Department. ­These two proj­ects ­were large investments, as 
Iraq spent approximately $600 million on them between 1976 and 1982.55
Notwithstanding their efforts, as the procurement campaign forged ahead, 
advances at home ­were hobbled by the nuclear establishment’s limited 
orga­nizational and ­human resources.56 Consistent with their mandate from 
Saddam, the IAEC explored a wide range of technologies but did not fo-
cus on consolidation in specific areas. For example, Said asked the Chem-
istry Department to develop research activities in chemical repro­cessing, 
heavy-­water production, isotope separation, and helium chemistry.57 But 
they lacked sufficient experts to explore ­these technologies. To address 
this shortcoming, some gradu­ates started lit­er­a­ture surveys and carried 
out small experiments in conjunction with the Nuclear Research Center in 
Warsaw.
At Tuwaitha the Iraqi scientists continued to explore the back end of the 
nuclear fuel cycle, and paid par­tic­u­lar attention to plutonium repro­cessing. 
Where pos­si­ble, the IAEC tried to purchase technology and know-­how to 
compensate for Iraq’s limited capacities. Several of ­these efforts ­were 
slowed or halted due to export controls or limited domestic know-­how. 
For example, in 1976 Abdul Qader Ahmed was asked to develop a sub-
critical assembly to carry out theoretical calculations for a team of reactor 
physicists.58 The following year Ahmed approached a West German com­
pany, Nukem, to purchase 10 metric tons of depleted uranium pins. This 
overture failed, as the West German government denied export licenses, yet 
it raised concerns about the increasingly ambiguous direction of the Iraqi 
nuclear program.
As ­these observations suggest, the ambitious procurement efforts ­were not 
matched by the activities on the ground. An IAEA expert described Tuwaitha 
as having “ideal” working conditions, with well-­designed laboratories and 
facilities.59 But ­there was a shortage of skilled scientists, and technical and 
engineering staff ­were “nearly completely missing.”60 Installing and servic-
ing the new technology was often difficult. More ambitious proj­ects, such as 
the attempt in 1981 to explore indigenous production of heavy ­water, which 
was an essential component for building reactors at this time, was deemed 
infeasible due to insufficient industrial capacities.61
Between 1979 and 1981, Iraqi scientists explored isotope separation tech-
niques. Salman Lami, an electrical engineer working in the Tuwaitha reactor 
department, led efforts to familiarize Iraqi technicians with isotope separa-
tion. They attempted to produce ­simple ion sources—­which could produce 
ions for research, including separation of uranium—at the Badr Establishment, 
a mechanical manufacturing site that was part of the military-­industrial com-
plex.62 As part of this effort, Lami traveled frequently to CERN in Geneva.
Even with access to training and technology through bilateral agreements 
and technical cooperation agreements, the Iraqis strug­gled to install and use 

60
chapter 2
their purchased equipment. For example, in 1976 the Chemistry Department 
at Tuwaitha received a Varian mass spectrometer, which they intended to 
use for precision isotope analy­sis. According to an IAEA technical con­sul­
tant, the center had not “sufficiently considered” how this instrument would 
be appropriately used before purchasing it.63 It took more than a year to in-
stall the spectrometer, partly due to delay on the part of the firm but also 
­because the Iraqi scientists ­were uncertain about appropriate applications.
The activities at Tuwaitha ­were becoming increasingly diversified and 
opaque. According to a visiting IAEA expert, it was clear that the leaders of 
this center ­were planning on a “big scale,” and that they ­were not “afraid of 
­great expenses.” At this stage, he noted, their main challenge was to find 
enough staff capable of operating and servicing the purchased equipment, 
as ­there ­were hardly any trained engineers or technical staff capable of ­these 
tasks. The best foreign-­trained Iraqi scientists held se­nior positions and ­were 
not capable of supervising the operation of technological instruments.64
On their own initiative, the Iraqi scientists at Tuwaitha explored a series 
of calculations examining chain reactions and plutonium production. Mas-
tering ­these calculations, Imad Khadduri and Yehya Meshad analyzed vari­
ous implosion scenarios that could generate a self-­sustaining chain reaction.65 
Their results could be checked against similar studies from the Manhattan 
Proj­ect, which ­were available in the library. Khadduri and Jafar then began 
a series of calculations, which ­were not disclosed to their Egyptian colleague 
Meshad, on the production of weapons-­grade uranium-239 (U-239) from the 
regular operations of the IRT-2000 research reactor acquired from the Soviet 
Union. As expected, their calculations showed that it would take de­cades to 
accumulate enough U-239 to build nuclear weapons.
­There was no plan to divert the Soviet reactor for the purposes of a weap-
ons program. Rather, as Khadduri saw it, the point of the exercise was to 
develop the appropriate analytic tools for calculating production of weapons-­
grade plutonium.66 The Iraqis further calculated the pos­si­ble production of 
weapons-­grade plutonium from the Osirak reactors, and concluded that the 
larger reactor could, if natu­ral uranium was introduced, produce about 2 ki-
lograms per year while the smaller reactor could produce 250 grams.67 To 
build a reactor suitable for producing significant quantities of plutonium for 
the purposes of a weapons program would require an extensive research and 
development effort. It would also require a large site that could not be eas-
ily concealed.
By the end of the de­cade, Iraq had acquired infrastructure to carry out ba-
sic experiments in the front and back ends of the nuclear fuel cycle. This 
raised concerns, particularly in Israel. A series of covert attacks targeted sci-
entists and engineers associated with the Iraqi nuclear program. The first 
casualty was Meshad, who had played a central role in the acquisition 
of the Tammuz reactors from France. He was found murdered in a ­hotel 
room in Paris in June 1980. Only days ­later, the last person to see Meshad 

61
Ambiguity and Ambition, 1973–1981
alive (other than his murderer) was killed. Then, on 13 December 1980, Ab-
dul Rahman Rasoul, a con­sul­tant engineer, died in Paris.68 In the summer of 
1981 Lami was found dead in Geneva.
A series of attacks also targeted items that had been purchased by Iraq as 
well as the companies that ­were providing technology for Iraq’s nuclear 
program. In early April 1979, the French reactor cores ­were prepared for 
transport in the Constructions Navales et Industrielles de la Méditerranée 
ware­house, in a port near Toulon. On 7 April, two days before shipment, 
the reactor cores ­were damaged in an explosion. When the cores arrived in 
Iraq, it appeared that they ­were significantly affected.69 On 7 August 1980, 
another round of attacks targeted French and Italian companies supplying 
technology to the Iraqi nuclear program. Two bombs exploded in the Rome 
offices of SNIA Techint, the com­pany that provided equipment for experi-
mental fuel fabrication, chemical engineering, and materials testing, while 
a third targeted the home of the director, Mario Fiorelli. Another bomb ex-
ploded in the Paris home of a French reactor con­sul­tant.70
At the same time, export controls and U.S. pressure on states supplying 
the Iraqi program posed significant obstacles. ­These covert actions generated 
unwanted publicity. On 16 September 1980, in a meeting with the RCC, Sad-
dam stated: “The Zionists know us very well and they know the Ba’ath 
party very well. . . . ​But every­one ­else ­will know us better and better.”71 His 
adviser responded: “The Arabs, the Zionists, and the Americans are ­going 
to work hard against us ­because they are afraid, which is a prob­lem.” Only 
two weeks ­later, on 30 September, Ira­nian jets attempted to bomb the Osirak 
reactor site in a surprise raid.
saddam’s nuclear ambition
As Saddam’s position in the Iraqi regime grew stronger, his nuclear ambi-
tions began to surface in internal regime discussions as well as public state-
ments. In a June 1978 speech at Al Bakr University, Saddam spoke openly of 
his desire for nuclear weapons: “From ­here, we ­will recognize our true sci-
entific underdevelopment. . . . ​We should generate the unusual capabilities 
of the Arab nation, including the capability to have a bomb, and that is no 
longer a monopolized science. The atom is a widespread and thorough sci-
ence, and any country can produce the atomic bomb.”72
­Behind the scenes Saddam, still vice president ­under the now ailing Bakr, 
prepared his decisive ascent to power. In late 1978 and early 1979, Saddam 
monitored se­nior Baathists to ascertain which ones ­were loyal to his pre-
ferred “Iraq first” policy and which leaned ­toward the Syrian Baath Party’s 
more pan-­Arab nationalist orientation.73 Saddam’s statements during this pe-
riod, even with regard to the nuclear weapons option, ­were carefully tai-
lored to test his audience, and should be seen in this light rather than taken 
at face value.

62
chapter 2
­After forcing Bakr to resign on 16 July 1979, Saddam became president. 
He immediately purged the Baath Party of ­those he suspected ­were sympa-
thetic to the Syrian wing and ­adopted an increasingly nationalist stance. 
Saddam stated that Baath ideology would be what­ever he said it would be.74
Saddam’s regional ambition underpinned his focus on matching the tech-
nological and military achievements of his non-­Arab rivals, Iran (then in 
the throes of revolution), and Israel. He characterized the developmental gap 
between Iraq and Israel as an instrument of oppression. At a July 1980 press 
conference, Saddam stated: “The Zionist entity has, with all its sympathiz-
ers and supporters, been basing its calculations on the scientific gap between 
the Zionist entity and the Arab nation.”75 Saddam drew a strong link between 
modern technology and the regional power balance: “The nation which is 
lagging ­behind in knowledge is more easily defeated than a scientifically ad-
vanced nation.”76 He considered Iraq’s lack of development as increasing its 
vulnerability to external challenges.77 Israel’s clandestine attempts to deny 
Iraq nuclear technology ­were interpreted as evidence for the linkage between 
superior technological capabilities and regional domination.
While Saddam’s nuclear ambitions ­were growing, his rationale for pur-
suing a nuclear weapons option was conceived in broad and rather general 
terms. As Saddam began to discuss the relevance of nuclear weapons for 
Iraq with other officials, he increasingly referred to how a nuclear weapons 
capability would bolster Iraq’s regional standing in relation to Iran and Israel.
In a meeting on 3 June 1978, Saddam argued that Israel’s nuclear mono­
poly undermined Arab states. He expressed concern that this mono­poly 
enabled Jerusalem to in­de­pen­dently define “red lines” and, accordingly, co-
erce Arab states into compliance. He also noted that once an Arab state 
acquired nuclear weapons, this would weaken Israel’s strategic position, as 
most Arab states would be able to survive a first nuclear strike while Israel 
most prob­ably would not.78 While Iran’s nuclear program had not yet pro-
duced a weapons option, Israel’s nuclear mono­poly was an obvious con-
straint for any Arab state aspiring for a leading regional role, such as Iraq. 
Furthermore, Saddam believed that Iraq or Egypt was a more likely target of 
an Israeli strike than Syria or Jordan. A nuclear strike on ­those states could 
have damaging consequences for Israel, the Iraqis believed, due to their geo­
graph­i­cal proximity.79
The series of attacks on the Iraqi program convinced Saddam that Israel 
was committed to preventing Iraq from acquiring an advanced nuclear ca-
pacity, let alone a nuclear weapons option. In discussions with se­nior mili-
tary officers in 1980, Saddam argued that Iraq was a primary target for an 
Israeli strike:
Saddam: And they are waiting for the Iraqi Army to strike them, so they ­will 
respond by striking Baghdad, this is if they have an atomic bomb and we 
­don’t have it. We have already came to this judgment and figured it out about 

63
Ambiguity and Ambition, 1973–1981
4–5 years ago. If we ­didn’t have one or more of ­these bombs, in the next Arab-­
Israeli war they ­will . . . ​
Air Force and Air Defense Commander: Destroy us.
Saddam: And the first striking target ­will be Baghdad, not Damascus or 
­Amman.80
In the spring of 1979, Saddam told the RCC that Iraq would put pressure 
on the Soviet Union to acquire a weapon to match Israel’s capabilities.81 Sad-
dam also referred to having made a request to an allied country in early 
1979 for a weapon capable of deterring Israel from striking Iraq in a dif­fer­
ent meeting.82 ­Whether such requests ­were made remains unclear, but Sad-
dam’s nuclear appetite was growing.
At a July 1980 press conference, Saddam responded to the series of attacks 
on the Iraqi program. Criticizing Israel, he did not disguise his ambitions 
for Iraq’s nuclear program: “The Zionist entity and all its supporters and 
sympathizers should realize that the Arab nation is beginning to rise, 
and that ­there is no power to check it, and that the Arabs ­will know how to 
deal with atomic energy for peaceful purposes, ­will know how to use arms 
and industry, ­will have millions of Arab gradu­ates ­every year in vari­ous 
technical fields. Then they should have another view of the Arab nation, 
their ­future, their rights.”83 Then Saddam elaborated on his long-­term am-
bitions for the nuclear program: “They [Arab ­peoples] may lack the practi-
cal means of expression, but this is a question of time. So, the ­people have 
realized that honour and in­de­pen­dence cannot be protected without reach-
ing a stage in scientific development comparable to that achieved by ­others, 
including the ­enemy, and especially the Zionist entity.”
Saddam also issued a thinly veiled warning about the consequences of at-
tacking Iraq’s nuclear program:
You ask how far Israel has gone to handicap our programme. We have no 
programme to make a bomb for Israel to handicap. Our programme is known 
to France, to Italy, to international public opinion and to all who seek the 
truth. It is using atomic energy for peaceful purposes. The Zionist Mossad 
and all the Zionist supporters in Eu­rope try to chase all the Arabs with open 
eyes and minds in their dealing with science, even to the extent of physical 
liquidation, which is what happened to an Egyptian citizen lately.
He concluded by warning that “whoever wants to antagonize us ­will find this 
nation in one state ­today but in a differently advanced state a few years hence.”
Around this time, Saddam discussed how a nuclear option might affect 
Iraq’s regional standing with se­nior regime figures. He noted that matching 
Israel’s nuclear weapons capability could make Israel more vulnerable to 
conventional onslaughts, and described a scenario where Iraq could join a 

64
chapter 2
co­ali­tion assault with Syria and Jordan to recapture the Golan Heights, which 
­were occupied by Israel in the 1967 war.84 However, as Saddam was also con-
cerned that the Syrian Assad regime would invade Iraq—he had requested 
Jordanian air support in the event of such an attack—­this war alliance was 
not an entirely realistic one, even in Saddam’s eyes.85 In any case, Saddam 
knew that Israel had many more nuclear weapons than Iraq would have for 
the foreseeable ­future, and that the United States would step in to guaran-
tee their survival in the event of a co­ali­tion attack from Arab states.
Under­neath his pan-­Arab rhe­toric, Saddam’s ambition for an Iraqi nuclear 
weapons option was beginning to manifest itself. As Saddam strengthened 
his hold on power in the late 1970s, he began to articulate his desire for a 
nuclear ambition to his inner circle and the scientists he wanted to develop 
this option. During an IAEC meeting in late 1979, Shahristani recalls, NRC 
director Humam instructed ­those pres­ent that Saddam wanted the nuclear 
program to take a more “strategic” direction, both in terms of the acquisi-
tion pro­cess and capacity building.86 The term “nuclear weapon” was not 
used, but several scientists assumed that this was what Saddam had in 
mind.87 But, by the turn of the de­cade, Saddam’s concerns about internal 
­security effectively ground the program to a halt. This fact, curiously over-
looked in the lit­er­a­ture, tells us something impor­tant about how Saddam 
wanted to govern his nuclear program as it edged ­toward carving out a 
weapons option. Meritocracy trumped nepotism when it came to selecting 
the scientific leaders of his nuclear program. However, as Saddam was get-
ting in a position to act on his ambitions, in a context where the Ira­nian Rev-
olution threatened to spill over into Iraq, his security concerns trumped all 
other considerations.
purge
In July and August 1979 Saddam purged po­liti­cal and administrative 
elites.88 In a recorded July meeting, Saddam accused se­nior figures of plot-
ting against him. Some individuals ­were merely sidelined, including Bakr, 
but many ­were imprisoned or executed. Deputy Prime Minister Adnan 
Hamdani, former minister of planning, was one of twenty-­one se­nior offi-
cials sentenced to death. Hamdani had been a popu­lar and power­ful figure 
supported by leading officials from key ministries including Planning, In-
dustry, and Education. It was rumored that Hamdani had objected to Sad-
dam’s decision to invest more in defense than in education and industry. He 
was also said to be at the center of one of several alleged cliques or factions 
formed by individuals from the RCC or ministries. The executions ­were car-
ried out in early August, allegedly by party members in the presence of the 
RCC. The message to ­those pres­ent, which subsequently echoed through-
out the regime and state, was that no one was above suspicion. At the same 
time, Saddam raised salaries for officials and military personnel.89

65
Ambiguity and Ambition, 1973–1981
Saddam then appointed his trusted men to key leadership positions. Sad-
dam increasingly governed through patronage networks that ­were in­de­pen­
dent of formal state structures. The Baath Party, despite having a central 
role at the apex of the formal state apparatus, was often bypassed in strate-
gic or sensitive decision-­making pro­cesses. At the same time, the state bu-
reaucracy was populated by mushrooming institutions whose purpose and 
­actual workings ­were increasingly ambiguous. Complex routines, even for 
supposedly ­simple ­matters, made it more difficult for officials to understand 
policymaking and implementation pro­cesses. Saddam’s tendency to commit 
to a policy option late in the pro­cess, and his preference for verbal commu-
nication rather than formal written ­orders, made it more difficult for state 
officials to know for certain what he ­really wanted. This could create paral-
ysis during moments of crisis. On the other hand, it encouraged policy en-
trepreneurship among se­nior officials with close ties to Saddam.
Over the next few years, Saddam continued to consolidate his power and 
increase his personal influence over the Iraqi state apparatus and society. By 
the early 1980s Saddam was redrawing the Iraqi state according to his own 
preferences. He had already seized personal control over the oil income in 
1977, which he spent as he wished. Once in power, Saddam began to trans-
form the state apparatus, getting rid of suspected opponents or potential ri-
vals, and nurtured new elites.
War, Arrests, and Interruptions
At first, the leadership of the nuclear program was unaffected by Saddam’s 
purge, with one exception. The IAEC’s ­legal adviser, Hamid Younis, was ar-
rested. He was released ­after several weeks, but his injuries from torture 
made him unable to return to Tuwaitha.90 As Saddam was now president, 
he could no longer serve as chairman of the IAEC. Vice President Izzat Ibra-
him took over this role, and received regular briefings about the nuclear 
program and its pro­gress. Just as Saddam strengthened his hold on power, 
and set the scene to begin developing a nuclear weapons program in ear-
nest, a series of crises and upheavals disrupted the nuclear program.
The first challenge came in the wake of the Ira­nian Revolution, which 
posed an ideological challenge to secular Arab rulers; nowhere was this chal-
lenge more keenly felt than in Iraq. Several incidents of po­liti­cal vio­lence, 
including terrorist attacks apparently targeting se­nior regime members such 
as Tariq Aziz, former foreign minister and now deputy prime minister, cre-
ated growing concern about spillover effects among the majority Shiite pop-
ulation. Shiites ­were widely arrested in Iraq at this time ­because the regime 
feared that they might seek to emulate the Ira­nian Revolution and rise up 
against the more secular, Sunni-­dominated, Baath regime. A series of terror-
ist attacks led to further persecution of Shiites and additional scrutiny of 

66
chapter 2
non-­Baathists in se­nior positions. On 4 December 1979, Shahristani was ar-
rested by the Tuwaitha security officer on suspicion of being a member of 
the illegal Da’wa Party. Rumors started circulating at Tuwaitha. Some of his 
colleagues alleged that Shahristani had criticized mass arrests of Shiites 
and that he had smuggled Da’wa propaganda back from Paris in tooth-
paste containers.91
Jafar protested Shahristani’s arrest, citing the negative impact it had on the 
nuclear program.92 Without the leader of the repro­cessing proj­ect, he argued, 
the pro­gress of the nuclear energy program would be held back. Jafar wrote 
to Saddam on 8 December, and again in early January, arguing that Shah-
ristani should be released. Then, Jafar himself was arrested on 16 January 
1980. Unlike Shahristani, however, Jafar was not tortured.93
In June 1980, still a prisoner, Jafar was taken to meet Saddam’s ­brother Bar-
zan Al-­Tikriti, the director of Intelligence Ser­vices, and IAEC vice-­chairman 
al-­Hashimi. Barzan told Jafar that Saddam wanted him to develop nuclear 
weapons. This was reportedly the first explicit green light for a weapons pro-
gram. While Jafar believed he did not have the necessary knowledge or 
experience to lead a nuclear weapons program, he agreed to try.94 He was 
rewarded with a more comfortable ­house arrest, with a garden, a tele­vi­sion, 
and a telephone. Furthermore, he gained access to books from the IAEC.95 
He found Karl Cohen’s The Theory of Isotope Separation as Applied to the Large 
Scale Production of U235, and Manson Benedict and Thomas Pickford’s Nu-
clear Chemical Engineering most useful. Over the next few months, Jafar made 
it clear to Barzan that he would refuse to return to Tuwaitha as long as al-­
Hashimi remained IAEC vice-­chairman.96
Shahristani also received a visit from Barzan. On a stretcher, temporarily 
para­lyzed by torture, he received the same proposition: to rejoin the IAEC 
and develop a nuclear weapons program. This was the first time Shahristani 
heard the term “nuclear weapon” stated explic­itly.97 He blankly refused, say-
ing that he was both mentally and physically unfit and, in any case, did not 
have the skills to produce a nuclear weapon.98 Barzan responded that he 
­ought to do this as a ser­vice to his country, but Shahristani remained firm. 
He would remain in prison for another de­cade, ­until he was able to escape 
during the 1991 Gulf War.
­After the 2003 U.S.-­led invasion, both Jafar and Shahristani reflected on 
their respective choices. Looking back more than two de­cades ­later, Jafar in-
dicated that he did not have a sense that Saddam was in any rush to de-
velop a bomb or to use it. The lack of urgency was indicated by the absence 
of any deadline. Moreover, Jafar was not convinced that Iraq could manage 
to set up a successful nuclear weapons program. But Jafar’s ­future appeared 
to hinge on his answer to the demand relayed by Barzan. And the scientific 
and technological challenge—or set of nested challenges—­appealed to him 
professionally.99

67
Ambiguity and Ambition, 1973–1981
Iran was still in turmoil ­after the 1979 revolution, and the armed forces 
­were weakened. This seemed to be an opportune moment for Saddam to put 
a check on Ira­nian power. On 22 September 1980, Iraq attacked Iran, appar-
ently hoping to strike their neighbor a power­ful blow and thereby prevent 
the Islamic Revolution from spilling over into their own territory. Saddam’s 
attention switched to the war effort, which turned out to be far more diffi-
cult and demanding than the Iraqis had anticipated. On the eve of war, in a 
meeting between Saddam and his se­nior advisers on 16 September 1980, one 
adviser warned that Iran could raise concerns about Iraq’s nuclear program: 
“They want to instill fear [of Iraq] in the Zionists and the Americans and how 
it is ­going to affect our efforts regarding the other issue of the nuclear power 
in Iraq. Iraq does not own a bomb yet and they [the United States and Zion-
ists] are already afraid, so what if Iraq actually owned a bomb! [Laughter].”100
­After the outbreak of the Iran-­Iraq War, the Iraqis immediately began to 
fear for the safety of the Tuwaitha site. In a conversation among se­nior re-
gime officials about pos­si­ble Ira­nian targets, this question surfaced. As the 
transcripts reveal, the Iraqi regime was concerned about the vulnerability 
of the nuclear program. Military personnel told Saddam: “If we ­were to build 
[a] nuclear reactor for peaceful purposes in the Baghdad region, we should 
think differently and not place it in Baghdad, we should place it in a location 
completely unknown to every­one, including our ­people, except for a lim-
ited number of ­people; and ­those locations are in abundance in our country.”101 
The Iraqis ­were well aware that the Tuwaitha site was vulnerable, and noted 
­enemy aircraft, which they suspected ­were Israeli, near the site.102 The com-
mander of the Iraqi air force noted that the Ira­ni­ans ­were targeting the 
nuclear reactor and stated plainly that their air defense system on site was 
inadequate. He recommended approaching the Jordanians and asking for 
additional antiaircraft machine guns.103 Saddam disagreed, stating that he 
would not make this request of the Jordanians, who he believed ­were a 
bulwark against a Syrian invasion into Iraqi territory. At Tuwaitha, some pre-
cautions ­were taken. NRC director Humam requested studies of the likely 
consequences of an air strike against the reactors once they ­were opera-
tional.104 As the reactor site was only about 20 kilo­meters from Baghdad, he 
was concerned about the radioactive fallout that could result from such an 
attack. Drawing on Soviet ideas, their initial mea­sure was to erect an earth 
mound around the site rising to 25 meters and two tunnels to protect against 
floods.105
Only a few days into the war, on 27 September 1980, two Ira­nian F-4 jets 
broke out from a larger group attacking an electric power plant outside of 
Baghdad, and struck the Osirak reactors. The strike caused damage to an-
cillary buildings, but not the reactors. In the aftermath of the attack, the Iraqis 
once again considered the need for additional protection of the reactor com-
plex. Saddam was concerned about this, describing the Ira­nian regime as a 

68
chapter 2
“tool for Israel to hit the Iraqi nuclear reactor.”106 At this time, Saddam ap-
peared sanguine about this possibility, stating: “In case they destroy the re-
actor, ­those who brought its technical equipment can bring again technical 
equipment.”107
In the aftermath, few additional protection mea­sures ­were taken to pro-
tect the reactor against ­future strikes. The options ­were, at any rate, fairly 
limited. In a meeting on 1 October, Saddam’s military adviser proposed that 
covering the reactor with sand bags could protect against exploding missiles, 
but not a direct hit. They also discussed options such as trenches and dirt 
dams to protect against a more direct hit. During this discussion, Saddam 
and his advisers expressed anger at the reluctance of the nuclear establish-
ment to build the reactor on a less vulnerable site. The planning director 
complained that ­there had been “many efforts” to implement security mea­
sures, while Saddam said that scientists had come up “too many trouble-
some difficulties” and ­ought to have been punished.108 The technical estab-
lishment’s views had prevailed with regard to the location. ­There had been 
an earlier proposal to set up a new underground site at Hamrin, presumably 
for the more power­ful reactor Iraq was hoping to acquire, but the scientists 
had refused (or, in the words of the general secretary of the Ministry of De-
fense, ­didn’t “want to bother themselves”) to move to this location.109
The Ira­nian attack interrupted development of the Osirak complex by a 
few months, but construction continued ­after this hiatus. The two reactors 
­were scheduled to receive their initial load of nuclear fuel from France in 
the summer of 1981. The fuel had arrived in early 1981, and the shipment 
had been formally registered by the Iraqi representative on the IAEA, Ab-
dul Qader Ahmed.110 The reactors ­were expected to become operational 
some months ­later. In early June, the smaller reactor was fully loaded with 
nuclear fuel.111
The Iraqis ­were not alone in expressing concern about pos­si­ble attacks. In 
a U.S. intelligence assessment of April 1981, the possibility of a preventive 
strike on Iraq was raised:
During the highly asymmetrical and unstable period of transitional vulner-
ability, ­those states which wish to retain regional superiority or fear a neigh-
boring state’s nuclear intentions would have an incentive to remove nascent 
threats. Preventive “surgical” strikes against the nuclear facilities of prolifer-
ating states are pos­si­ble. Similarly, countries may be tempted to engage in 
covert operations against the nuclear programs of suspected proliferator 
states; this is already happening to Iraq. . . . ​Long before Iraq is actually ca-
pable of a nuclear explosion we may have an Israeli ­counter action that poses 
grave regional prob­lems.112
And indeed, at dusk on 7 June 1981, the Israelis bombed the reactor com-
plex in a surprise raid. Jafar could hear the bombardment from his ­house in 

69
Ambiguity and Ambition, 1973–1981
Baghdad, where he was ­under ­house arrest. Dhafir Selbi arrived on site 
within fifteen minutes of the attack.
Three facets of this revised history contradict the established narrative of the 
Iraqi nuclear program between 1973 and 1981 as a centrally directed, trans-
parent, and hierarchical effort. First, the program was characterized by am-
biguous objectives and limited oversight. Second, the regime did not always 
receive reliable information about how far they ­were from a weapons op-
tion even ­after Saddam began to signal his desire for such weapons in pub-
lic and in private. Third, the nuclear scientists did not implement Saddam’s 
apparent order to develop a nuclear weapons option. One se­nior scientist 
refused to help Saddam build nuclear weapons, while Jafar would only agree 
to do so on his own terms. When Saddam got Jafar to agree, he remained 
­under ­house arrest ­because he refused to return to Tuwaitha as long as al-­
Hashimi remained on site.
How can we reconcile ­these surprising observations with the broader ar-
gument that Saddam’s tactics to strengthen his hold on power eroded the 
Iraqi state and undermined the nuclear weapons program? First, the ex-
pansion of the Iraqi state during this period helps to explain the observed 
challenges of oversight and monitoring. As the state apparatus proliferated, 
especially in the military-­industrial sector, principals lacked the capacity 
to keep track of the myriad proj­ects that emerged during the 1970s. Under­
lying this proliferation, which was intended to make oversight difficult for 
anyone except the se­nior po­liti­cal leadership, was a power strug­gle at the 
top between the Baath Party and Saddam’s efforts to strengthen his per-
sonal hold on power. Before Saddam’s decisive ascent to power in 1979, this 
power strug­gle was also reflected in the management of the nuclear program. 
Specifically, the Baath Party members at Tuwaitha attempted to increase their 
influence over the management of the program through direct interventions 
as well as purges. While they ­were able to push out several of their colleagues 
during the early 1970s, ­after Saddam took a stronger interest in the nuclear 
program in 1973 he ensured a more meritocratic approach to hiring of the 
scientific staff, and many of ­those pushed out ­were brought back in. Still, the 
opaque goals of the program fed the emergence of two competing camps at 
Tuwaitha—­a Baath group and another group with apparently opposing pref-
erences for the direction of the nuclear program as it took an increasingly 
ambiguous direction. As a result of ­these three ­factors—­lack of oversight, 
delegated management, and turf fights—­the se­nior Iraqi leadership may 
have been led to believe a nuclear weapons option was coming within reach 
when this was, in fact, a fairly distant prospect.
One of the most striking findings is the program’s apparent failure to re-
spond to Saddam’s requests to begin preparing a weapons option during 
1979–1980. The arrest of Shahristani and then Jafar does not explain why the 
program as a ­whole appears to have made no tangible advances ­toward a 

70
chapter 2
weapons option in their absence. The scientists at Tuwaitha do not appear 
to have started preparing for or planning a nuclear weapons program in ear-
nest during this period, even with pro-­bomb advocates at the helm. This 
challenges the influential argument that the Iraqi nuclear program was 
­shaped by Saddam’s ­orders and preferences. Furthermore, it shows that, 
in absence of action, a clear green light to develop a nuclear weapons op-
tion from the se­nior leadership—­which Saddam gave his two top scien-
tists in 1980—is not necessarily a trigger for action in a weak authoritarian 
state. Even ­after Jafar agreed to lead a nuclear weapons program, Saddam 
kept his intended bomb maker ­under ­house arrest ­until the Israeli strike on 
Osirak forced his attention back to the nuclear program.
As this chapter has shown, Saddam’s interest in a nuclear weapons op-
tion was inconsistent. His ­orders to his scientists ­were ambiguous prior to 
1980, and he was apparently not too concerned with ­whether they ­were im-
plementing his ­orders at this time. The nuclear program, including the French 
reactors, took a back seat to other geopo­liti­cal and domestic considerations 
related to national and regime security. While it is plausible that Saddam was 
led to believe a nuclear weapons option was coming within reach, before 
the Israeli strike on Osirak he was in no hurry.

71
chapter 3
Saddam’s Nuclear Weapons Program, 
1981–1987
This chapter examines the Iraqi nuclear weapons program that emerged ­after 
the strike on Osirak on 7 June 1981 ­until early 1987. In the wake of the strike, 
Saddam Hussein asked Jafar Dhiya Jafar to create the capacity for clandes-
tine, large-­scale production of fissile material. This proj­ect was planned and 
executed ­under Jafar’s leadership, with minimal involvement from Saddam. 
The Baath Party’s influence was reduced, while a group of scientists, with 
Jafar at the helm, was given unpre­ce­dented autonomy in managing the pro-
gram. Over the next few years, they encountered difficulties and mounting 
delays, leading to a crisis in 1987 when Jafar and his colleagues realized that 
the program was failing to meet its objectives.
This phase of the Iraqi nuclear weapons program has been subject to spec-
ulation. Why did the scientists select uneconomic technologies, and why 
did they make such slow pro­gress? Some have argued that the program was 
quite simply poorly managed. ­Others point to their numerous constraints—­
the Iran-­Iraq War, international concerns about the Iraqi nuclear program, 
and having to adopt a new technological route ­under international scrutiny.1 
This chapter traces the emergence of this program, analyzing both domestic 
and international constraints. It also demonstrates that the program was cap-
tured by scientists i.e., that they effectively redefined the activities of the 
program according to their own interests and preferences rather than ­those 
defined by the regime principals, and operated with unlimited bud­gets and 
weak oversight mechanisms. The program stalled as the technical leadership 
stuck with their technological preferences and discarded more efficient al-
ternatives.
To make sense of the path the Iraqis followed, we must not only delve deep 
into the weapons program, but also place it in the context of the Iraqi state 
at war. This brings several surprising facts to light. During the Iran-­Iraq War 
Saddam’s military-­industrial complex became an inflated or­ga­ni­za­tion in 

72
chapter 3
which scientists got away with not delivering results, despite ample funding. 
Scientists set their own priorities and targets, and Saddam did not inter-
vene in the management of the program. Even in the face of war, the nuclear 
weapons program was not subject to pressure during the first six years. 
When finally pressed by the Iraqi leadership to set a deadline in 1985, the 
nuclear scientists ­were deliberately opaque about the target they intended 
to meet. When they realized they would not make this deadline in early 1987, 
they did not tell Saddam. Instead, they asked for his permission to start 
working on the design and explosive packaging for a nuclear weapon.
Osirak Bombing: A Watershed Event
­After the Israeli attack, Saddam’s attention returned to his nuclear program. 
The destruction of Osirak was a public humiliation that could not be ignored. 
This view was shared by some of the se­nior nuclear scientists, who had 
previously been lukewarm about developing a weapons option. At the same 
time, Saddam had to calibrate his response to avoid alienating the United 
States and other moderate Arab states, whose support he needed for the war 
effort against Iran. The Iraqi Atomic Energy Commission (IAEC) summarized 
the situation they faced ­after the attack: “Following the Israeli aggression of 
June 1981 on the Tuwaitha site, Iraq was forced to resort to self-­reliance. . . . ​
­There was not a gesture, let alone a guarantee, from anyone ensuring that 
the aggression . . . ​would not be repeated.”2
During the war with Iran, the Iraqi state apparatus was transformed to 
support the war effort. The military-­industrial complex was expanded while 
the domestic economy suffered. The nuclear weapons program was an ex-
ception; shielded from the demands on the conventional arms industries to 
contribute to the war effort it operated without any bud­getary restrictions.
When Saddam responded to the Israeli attack, he was mindful of how his 
reaction might affect his standing in the regime and abroad. This was a blow 
to his prestige, at a time when Saddam was aligning himself with the more 
moderate Arab countries and the United States. Saddam managed to keep 
their support and was careful not to provoke the United States in his response 
to the strike. But, as U.S. intelligence documents point out, Saddam’s mod-
erate response to the strike, including avoiding criticism of the United States 
in his official statements, and accepting a compromise resolution at the 
United Nations (UN) in response to the attack, was unpopular among other 
se­nior regime officials. It also intensified the dissatisfaction among se­nior 
Iraqi officials about the costs of the war with Iran.3
­After the bombing raid on 7 June 1981, Saddam ordered his defense min-
ister, General Adnan Khairallah, to examine the damage.4 Ten Iraqi soldiers 
and a French engineer had been killed in the attack; the main reactor was 
destroyed, and unexploded Israeli munitions ­were still scattered on the site.5 

73
Saddam’s Nuclear Weapons Program, 1981–1987
A team of soldiers was sent to secure the area. The deputy chairman of the 
IAEC, Abdul Razak al-­Hashimi, and Dhafir Selbi, an engineer at the Nu-
clear Research Center (NRC), took a closer look at the destruction.
­After the military completed its assessment, Saddam requested a meet-
ing with the IAEC.6 The challenge before them was momentous. Israel’s ac-
tion suggested that any attempt to develop a nuclear energy program (let 
alone a nuclear weapons program) would be strangled in the cradle. With 
international suspicion cast upon Iraq’s nuclear program, foreign states 
would be reluctant to supply Baghdad with another, more power­ful, reac-
tor. While French companies agreed to replace the destroyed research reac-
tor, this never came to fruition due to reluctance on the part of the French 
government. To develop a nuclear weapons capability, Iraqi scientists would 
have to take a completely dif­fer­ent technical route.
In the immediate aftermath, Baghdad did not comment on the attack. But 
over the next ­couple of weeks Saddam made a series of statements to do-
mestic and foreign media. ­These ­were reasonably mea­sured and avoided di-
rectly antagonizing the United States. Saddam told the Iraqi public that the 
strike “­will not stop the course of scientific and technical pro­gress in Iraq. 
Rather, it is an additional strong stimulus to develop this course . . . ​with 
even greater resources and with more effective protection.”7 Despite ­these 
statements, however, foreign governments believed that the prospect of an 
Iraqi nuclear weapons capability was more distant than ever.
Two days ­after the strike, the Israeli prime minister, Menachem Begin, held 
a press conference where he stated that Israel would not ­under any circum-
stances permit its enemies to develop weapons of mass destruction (WMD). 
The Israelis had to act, Begin claimed, ­because the IAEA did not know the 
true purpose of the Osirak complex and would not be able to detect clan-
destine activities.
On 12 June, the Iraqi foreign minister Sa’adoun Hammadi spoke to the 
UN. His remarks mainly focused on the Israeli nuclear weapons program. 
Hammadi emphasized the point that Israel, a nonmember of the Non-­
Proliferation Treaty (NPT) and an undeclared nuclear weapons state, had 
destroyed a declared civilian fa­cil­i­ty in an NPT member state. Israel’s objec-
tive, he argued, was to deny Arab states advanced science and technology 
which could threaten Israel’s forcible domination of Arab ­peoples. He 
pointed out that Iraq’s Western allies had helped Israel develop its nuclear 
arsenal. Hammadi characterized the Iraqi nuclear program as a “vast and 
ambitious programme of development.”8 He added: “My Government rec-
ognized at an early stage the importance of science and technology, includ-
ing the peaceful application of nuclear energy, for the achievement of social 
and economic development. Working ­towards that goal, we have made ef-
forts to expand our nuclear-­research facilities and to widen the scope of the 
peaceful uses of atomic energy.”9 The Israeli attack, he concluded, was an 
illegal act intended to “undermine the new Iraq and all that it stands for.”10

74
chapter 3
­Behind the scenes in Baghdad, the Osirak raid challenged both Saddam’s 
pro-­Western shift—at a time when he was embroiled in an unpopular war—­
and his own position in the regime. As con­temporary intelligence assess-
ments indicate, both the Soviet Union and Baath hardliners attempted to use 
the attack to “reverse Iraq’s shift ­toward the West.”11 But, as a U.S. document 
indicates, Saddam remained firm, not least ­because of the need for interna-
tional support for the war with Iran.12 Saddam’s reaction, and pro-­Western 
inclination, did not go unchallenged at home: “Israel’s raid, however, plus 
deep suspicion that the United States was an accomplice, have bolstered the 
hand of hardline [Baathists] who oppose Saddam’s recent tilt ­toward the 
West.”13
The Board of Governors of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) 
met two days ­after the attack. The credibility of their safeguards and inspec-
tions system was dented by the Israeli strike. The deputy director for safe-
guards said that even “fantasy did not move us to expect an event like the 
Israeli attack.”14 On 12 June the board ­adopted a resolution criticizing the 
Israeli attack, which was subsequently presented to the UN Security Coun-
cil. Baghdad requested that Sigvard Eklund, director general of the IAEA, 
participate in the upcoming Security Council discussion of a draft resolution 
criticizing the Israeli attack.
Eklund refuted the Israeli allegations that Iraq could have used the reac-
tor to produce significant quantities of plutonium or extract highly enriched 
uranium from the fuel rods, arguing that material balance accounting and 
visual inspections would have revealed such activities. He also denied the 
Israeli claim that ­there was a secret laboratory 40 meters below the reactor 
(­later amended to 4 meters), that inspectors had missed. In fact ­there was 
no such laboratory, only a small room for the control rod drives that the IAEA 
was well aware of.15
Eklund pointed out that the attack had grave implications for the credi-
bility of the safeguards regime and the IAEA itself: “A non-­NPT country has 
evidently not felt assured by our findings and by our ability to continue to 
discharge our safeguarding responsibilities effectively. . . . ​One can only 
conclude that it is the Agency’s safeguards system which has also been at-
tacked.”16 On 19 June, the Security Council approved a resolution condemn-
ing the attack, saying that it was “in clear violation of the Charter of the 
United Nations and the norms of international conduct.”17
In the United States, the attack was described as “a watershed event” that 
could create new military and po­liti­cal realities in the ­Middle East and in-
tensify the regional arms race.18 As Israeli officials rejoiced, Iraq’s response 
remained muted, and Baghdad abstained from retaliation (e.g., sabotage or 
terrorist sponsorship). While U.S. intelligence reported that Saddam had 
publicly called for other states to give Iraq a nuclear deterrent against Israel, 
it assessed that such statements would only make it harder for Iraq to 
persuade ­others to assist.19 This, we ­will see, was largely but not entirely 

75
Saddam’s Nuclear Weapons Program, 1981–1987
correct, as Iraq’s Eu­ro­pean suppliers (Italy and France) turned their back on 
the country while other suppliers entered the Iraqi market. In any case, it 
would take years to recover what had been lost, as Iraq had to look else-
where for help with creating a nuclear weapons option.
­going underground
Immediately ­after the strike, Humam Abdul Khaliq assembled a team at 
Tuwaitha to explore technical options for setting up a weapons program.20 
They scoured the NRC library for information on pos­si­ble technical routes 
for producing fissile material for a nuclear weapons program.21 This was 
their first effort to assess technical, practical, and logistical aspects of dif­fer­
ent technical pathways to produce fissile material on a large scale. They 
found that sensitive design information was hard to come by, while the meth-
ods detailed in the American Atoms for Peace library had several drawbacks.
In choosing a way forward, a key consideration was the need to make their 
program less vis­i­ble to the outside world. Several scientists, including Jafar 
and Hussein Shahristani, believed that the French had provided information 
to the Israelis about the design of the reactor complex. In their opinion, it 
was highly suspicious that the Israelis targeted the par­tic­u­lar chimney lead-
ing to the reactor core. Shahristani received a visit from Barzan al-­Tikriti 
­after the attack, and they agreed it was highly probable that the French had 
advised the Israelis. Although ­there was no clear evidence of such collusion, 
the Iraqis ­were determined to deny other states information about their nu-
clear program in the ­future.
Still ­under ­house arrest, Jafar prepared his own memorandum for Saddam 
recommending technical pathways to creating an indigenous nuclear weap-
ons capability. Jafar had few illusions about the challenges of taking this 
route. Looking back, he wrote: “Uranium enrichment ­isn’t like baking a cake. 
It is an incredibly complex pro­cess, which requires not only know-­how but 
also hundreds of thousands of components as well as hard work to obtain 
raw materials, procurement of which was made doubly difficult due to the 
programme’s covert nature. . . . ​No one in Iraq had prior experience of ura-
nium enrichment or bomb making and, therefore, ­there was no guarantee 
our efforts would eventually be successful.”22
One of the fundamental questions was ­whether Iraq would remain within 
the NPT or exit the global nonproliferation regime. Having suffered an at-
tack from a nonmember on a declared fa­cil­i­ty, Jafar advocated leaving the 
NPT over the next two years. In his view, it did not make sense to adhere to 
the constraints of the treaty if the nuclear program could still be attacked 
with impunity by a nuclear weapons state who had not signed the NPT.23 
The other commissioners disagreed. Withdrawing from the NPT would raise 
additional concerns about the Iraqi program and could cut off potential ave­
nues of assistance. Furthermore, remaining within the NPT gave Iraq an 

76
chapter 3
impor­tant alibi that could help protect the new program from detection. It 
also gave Baghdad the moral high ground in criticizing Israel, in their view. 
Ultimately, Iraq remained a member of both the NPT and the IAEA.
During the weeks and months that followed the Israeli strike, Saddam 
made a number of public and private statements suggesting that he wanted 
a nuclear deterrent. In speeches and interviews with foreign journalists, as 
well as in closed meetings with advisers and the Revolutionary Command 
Council (RCC), he invoked the need to defend Iraq from similar attacks. In 
an interview with American journalist Barbara Walters, Saddam argued: 
“Whenever ‘Israel’ has the technical requirements of aggression it ­will com-
mit it against any Arab country. . . . ​This, in fact, is the main lesson whose 
implications and details ­will no doubt preoccupy us.”24 His conclusion was 
that Iraq had to match Israel’s technical capabilities in the military realm to 
deter or deny ­future attacks. In a press conference, Saddam declared that “we 
­will let the Iraqis’ minds operate to the maximum, and try by ­every pos­si­
ble means to protect ourselves.”25
In a meeting with the Iraqi Cabinet Saddam made clear his determination 
to get the bomb: “If we stopped work on our atom bomb, they would sub-
sequently say that they caused the failure of the so-­called Arab atom 
bomb. . . . ​Let every­one realise that ­those who can bring over a laboratory 
or a nuclear reactor are also capable of bringing over ten other such labora-
tories and reactors.”26
­Behind closed doors, Saddam remained hopeful that France would rebuild 
the destroyed reactors. But Iraq did not receive compensation or assistance 
with rebuilding the reactors from France or the IAEA. This meant ­going it 
alone. Saddam told his Cabinet members to prepare for ­great obstacles:
Work hard. Work hard. Work hard. Work hard! You know, it is like the neck 
of a ­bottle and they do not want us to get out of it. . . . ​The Israeli strategic 
planners know better than anyone the meaning that Iraq is building and Iraq 
is winning militarily. Technically, they are right in all of their attempts to harm 
Iraq. I do not rule out that they might even hit Iraq with the atomic bomb 
someday when they reach a certain stage and we are prepared for it, and God 
willing, we ­will be ready to face it.27
Faced with ­these constraints, Saddam wanted the most capable minds to 
oversee the efforts to chart a new course ­toward a weapons capability. Jafar 
had already agreed in princi­ple to lead this program, but refused to return 
to Tuwaitha as long as al-­Hashimi remained head of the IAEC. In mid-­August, 
al-­Hashimi was promoted to the Ministry of Education.28 On 1 September 
1981, Jafar was summoned to meet Saddam. He was taken to a Presidential 
Palace in Karradat Maryam where Barzan—­Saddam’s trusted half-­brother—­
waited for him. As they walked to Saddam’s office, Barzan whispered con-
spiratorially that al-­Hashimi was not his favorite person ­either.29

77
Saddam’s Nuclear Weapons Program, 1981–1987
Dressed in military uniform, Saddam lamented that Israel was permitted 
to have nuclear weapons while Iraq was to be denied nuclear technology. 
The president stressed the need to rebuild what had been lost and, from this 
day, to work ­toward a nuclear deterrent. Without such a deterrent, he noted, 
Iraq would not be able to ward off ­future Israeli attacks.30 This statement, 
made in the presence of Jafar, Barzan, and Saddam’s personal secretary 
Sabah Mirza Mahmoud, was Saddam’s green light. ­There was no written 
or formal decree issued, and no specific order detailing what Jafar would 
do next. In Jafar’s eyes, his order was to create the ability to enrich uranium 
on a large scale. Saddam gave Jafar a piece of paper with the presiden-
tial letterhead, and asked him to list his demands. Jafar thought it best to 
leave the page blank. Saddam then told his half-­brother to grant any ­future 
requests from Jafar. In effect, this was a blank check. As they ­were leaving, 
Barzan told Jafar to give Saddam what he wanted for the sake of their 
country.31
war and nonconventional weapons
Saddam initially believed the war he launched opportunistically in Sep-
tember 1980 would be a short-­lived affair. By 1982, the Ira­nian counteroffen-
sive had made it clear that this war would not be so easily won. Although the 
Iraqi military machinery had gone through a massive buildup in the years 
prior to the war, and Iraq received support from several Western states, in-
cluding French jets and American intelligence support, Iran’s new leaders 
mobilized armies that far outnumbered Iraqi forces. Their sheer numerical 
superiority quickly became a key concern for the Iraqi leaders. The first three 
years of the war depleted Iraq’s foreign reserves from $30 billion to $3 
billion.32
The Iran-­Iraq War triggered new efforts to explore nonconventional weap-
ons. To meet the Ira­nian challenge, Iraq’s military-­industrial complex 
would develop nonconventional weapons, including chemical and biologi-
cal weapons. The RCC gave ­these research and development programs ex-
traordinary autonomy and resources.33 The majority of decisions regarding 
technical priorities and resource utilization ­were effectively delegated to the 
program man­ag­ers.34 Saddam was apprised of the pro­gress of the noncon-
ventional weapons programs by confidential reports from staff, man­ag­ers, 
and the Mukhabarat. Chemical weapons ­were made a top priority for the 
State Or­ga­ni­za­tion for Technical Industries (SOTI).
­There are several similarities between the Iraqi chemical, biological, and 
nuclear weapons programs during the 1980s. ­These include the timing of key 
decisions, disruptions at the managerial level, the inclusion of several ad-
ditional proj­ects of questionable value, competing parallel proj­ects, and lim-
ited oversight and auditing by the se­nior regime. On the other hand, ­there 
­were impor­tant differences. As we ­will see, during the Iran-­Iraq War the 

78
chapter 3
chemical and biological programs ­were requested to contribute to the war 
effort, while the nuclear program was shielded from such demands.
The chemical and biological programs began in 1973–1974 at the Al-­Hazen 
Ibn Al Haitham Institute (Al-­Hazen Institute). Both proj­ects moved from ba-
sic research and development to weaponization during the mid-1970s and 
mid-1980s. In 1974, a government decree ordered state organ­izations to ex-
plore scientific and applied research in chemistry, biology, and physics.35 
During the late 1970s Iraqi scientists synthesized several agents, including 
nerve gas, on an experimental scale and purchased equipment for pilot-­scale 
production.36 At the end of the de­cade, turbulence hit the Al-­Hazen Insti-
tute. Se­nior leaders, including the director, ­were accused of mismanagement 
and financial fraud. They ­were imprisoned and the institute was closed in 
1978. As a result, research and development activities stalled.
During the war with Iran, however, Iraq’s chemical weapons complex be-
came a sprawling enterprise. According to an Iraqi official interviewed by 
UN inspectors, “anyone who came to us with an idea of a weapon, we would 
study and try to develop. The fact is that during the [Iran-­Iraq] war, it was 
masses of ­people attacking Iraq. . . . ​Any idea that was presented to us to find 
a solution to this prob­lem on [our] border [with Iran] of 1200 km was wel-
comed.”37 Over the next few years, Iraq used chemical weapons on a large 
scale.
The biological weapons program, the most secretive of Iraq’s nonconven-
tional programs, began as a research and development effort in the early or 
mid-1970s. According to Iraqi scientists, ­little was achieved in the biological 
program before the 1978 closure of the Al-­Hazen Institute.38 In 1983 a biolo-
gist proposed to Baath officials that biological weapons could aid Iraq’s 
strug­gle against Ira­nian forces. Then, in late 1985 Iraqi biologists resumed 
their efforts to explore and develop biological weapons. This proj­ect was car-
ried out in more than one location, and dif­fer­ent agencies, including the 
Ministry of Defense and the state security apparatus, ran parallel programs. 
In this atmosphere, entrepreneurship was relatively low-­risk while the re-
wards ­were considerable. In late 1986 the director of the Muthanna State 
Establishment (MSE) requested production of large quantities of botulinum 
toxin for use in the war.39
In early 1987, officials ­were concerned that the research and development 
was not advancing fast enough. To accelerate the program, the research ac-
tivities ­were reor­ga­nized, more staff ­were hired, and additional equipment 
purchased. In 1987–1988 weaponization ­trials began. In 1988, ­after break-
throughs in research, Hakam was selected as a production site. In parallel 
with continuing research and development, the program started purchasing 
technical equipment and growth media. When the Iran-­Iraq War ended in 
1988, the scientists ­were instructed to continue the biological weapons pro-
duction program, but it was made less of a priority.40 In the fall of 1990 the 

79
Saddam’s Nuclear Weapons Program, 1981–1987
program was disassembled due to concerns about an imminent bombing at-
tack by the United States.
Exploring Enrichment, 1982–1987
Exploring and preparing for large-­scale production of enriched uranium 
required changes at ­every level of the nuclear establishment, from the se­
nior levels of the leadership to recruitment. Over the next few years it was 
expected that several other transformations would follow as the true scope 
and requirements of the new program ­were still largely undefined. Saddam 
had only instructed Jafar to create the ability to enrich uranium on a large 
scale; no words had been said about how or what the following steps would 
be. Securing a greater pool of skilled staff was an immediate priority. The 
IAEC began a recruitment campaign headhunting recent gradu­ates from 
other sectors in the Iraqi state. Several scientists returned to Tuwaitha, some 
­were motivated by the Israeli destruction of Osirak. The number of techni-
cal employees increased ­every year. From an initial group of 150–200 skilled 
technical staff, the staff totaled 7,500 by late 1990.41
To scale up the pool of Iraqi scientists and engineers, new tactics ­were nec-
essary. Some, such as Jafar, ­were told that Saddam personally requested 
their ser­vice. ­Others, including se­nior engineers, ­were simply transferred 
from other programs despite their own preferences. Material incentives—­
including attractive plots of land and expensive cars—­were also used to re-
cruit and reward scientists. The nuclear scientists enjoyed high salaries—­
some ­were paid the equivalent of a government minister’s salary—­and 
social status. For par­tic­u­lar achievements Saddam would provide scientists 
with medals and commendations or a new car. Failure was rarely penalized, 
though it could lead to demotion or being sidelined in extreme cases.
By 1982–1983, the war with Iran was taking a toll on the economy, but stra-
tegic sectors ­were shielded to support the war effort. Indeed, “Army offi-
cers and technicians employed in military industries ­were arguably better 
off than during the prewar period.”42 The war economy reflected Saddam’s 
increasing dominance in the Iraqi state. According to Tariq Aziz, deputy 
prime minister at the time, only Saddam could scrutinize the military bud­get. 
Individuals could pitch proposals for weapons programs directly to Saddam, 
who would direct them to Military Industrial Commission (MIC). Even 
when MIC officials realized ­these proj­ects ­were of questionable technical 
merit, and they failed to produce results, it was difficult to discontinue 
them.43 This was wasteful and made planning more difficult. Not even high-­
ranking officials knew ­whether ­there was a bud­get for the power­ful MIC. 
Looking back, Aziz lamented the lack of transparency and accountability in 
the military-­industrial complex: “God knew how they worked.”44

80
chapter 3
­There ­were no financial restrictions on the nuclear weapons program 
­either. Within three years the expenditure for the program increased tenfold. 
According to the official Iraqi declaration submitted to the UN in 2002, the 
nuclear program’s bud­gets grew enormously between 1982 and 1985. Starting 
in 1982, the estimated bud­get allocation was 918,658 Iraqi dinars (ID), while 
the final allocation (plus capital investment and spent foreign currency) 
was 948,134 ID. The following year 1,063,019 ID ­were allocated and 
1,222,959 ID ­were spent. In 1984 1,919,552 ID ­were estimated while 3,199,278 
ID ­were allocated. In 1985 2,566,470 ID ­were estimated while a staggering 
9,784,558 ID ­were spent.45 The large discrepancies between the estimates 
and ­actual expenditure did not lead to any questions, nor did they create 
any prob­lems, for the leaders of the nuclear weapons program.
reviewing technical options
In the second half of 1981, scientists and engineers at Tuwaitha researched 
and compared dif­fer­ent routes to producing large quantities of fissile mate-
rial. At this stage, researching and producing large-­scale uranium enrich-
ment was their objective. ­There was no attempt to explore weaponization 
or develop a weapons design during ­these first years of the program.
Saddam had one clear order for his nuclear scientists: avoid sensitive for-
eign assistance that could alert the outside world to the nuclear weapons 
program.46 The Iraqis ­were thus confined to a primarily indigenous route, 
unlike other developing states seeking nuclear weapons, despite lacking in-
dustrial resources similar to ­those in other states that had produced nuclear 
weapons previously. Their restrictions ­were the following: they could not 
purchase items on export control lists, but items that ­were not on ­those lists 
could be purchased, ideally as a package complete with training. At the 
same time, they had to select a route that would be practically feasible. ­These 
two ­factors ­were more impor­tant than other issues such as how eco­nom­ical 
or efficient the method was and how much effort was required in terms of 
research and development.
When Jafar returned to Tuwaitha in September 1981, he asked a team of 
scientists and engineers to study the available lit­er­a­ture on enrichment tech-
nologies. The teams began to scour the lit­er­a­ture for options, and then re-
viewed ­these in view of Iraq’s capabilities and constraints. They faced more 
constraints than most states have when setting out to develop a nuclear 
weapons capability: a severe shortage of skilled manpower; underdeveloped 
industrial capabilities; having to avoid foreign assistance that could alert 
other states to the true nature of their program; and fear of another Israeli 
strike.
As a plutonium route was now out of the question, given the threat of 
­future Israeli attacks and the absence of suitable reactors in the country, the 
Iraqis focused on uranium enrichment technologies. Their initial assessment 

81
Saddam’s Nuclear Weapons Program, 1981–1987
focused on four options: ­laser isotope separation; gaseous centrifuges; gas-
eous diffusion; and electromagnetic isotope separation (EMIS). Some of ­these 
­were methods that had been discarded by other states better equipped to 
pursue more advanced alternatives. But the Iraqis’ prime concern was not 
­whether a par­tic­u­lar method was eco­nom­ical or efficient; they ­were looking 
for methods that ­were feasible given their constraints and would emit few 
obvious signals to the outside world.
As a frequent observation of the Iraqi program is that technical choices 
­were inefficient and suboptimal, it is useful to examine how Iraqi scientists 
weighed ­these options in some detail. ­Laser isotope separation was not a 
proven method for producing sufficiently large quantities of enriched ura-
nium, and the Iraqis lacked the basic know-­how and the technological 
capacity to pursue this method. Gaseous centrifuges ­were deemed too dif-
ficult; this method required special materials that could not be indigenously 
produced, and the engineering challenges associated with the high-­speed 
rotation of the centrifuges ­were considered too demanding given Iraq’s lim-
ited know-­how. In other words, ­because centrifuges could not be pursued 
without foreign assistance they ­were ruled out at this stage.
Gaseous diffusion, where uranium hex­a­fluor­ide is separated through a po-
rous membrane, was an old and proven methodology. But this approach 
presented considerable challenges. First, the NRC lacked the basic technical 
know-­how and industrial capacity to produce the barrier material. Further-
more, the machines required ­were ­under export controls and could not be 
built locally. The IAEC also judged this to be an uneco­nom­ical method, re-
quiring thousands of cascades of porous membranes to separate the enriched 
uranium from the other compounds. Fi­nally, the uranium feed material 
would be difficult to produce.47 Notwithstanding ­these challenges, this ap-
proach was found promising.
Fi­nally, EMIS had been used to produce uranium feed material for the 
Manhattan Proj­ect. This method was described in reports from the proj­ect 
gifted to the NRC library in the 1950s. The technology was ­simple; the mag-
nets could be manufactured in Iraq and the American reports described the 
method in detail.48 The Iraqi scientists noted that this was an uneconomic 
method and that it would necessitate considerable research and development. 
But the scientists had some basic experience from working with ion sources 
in Germany and Switzerland. Prior to his death (a suspected assassination), 
Salman Lami had explored basic isotope separation at CERN. The assess-
ment teams concluded that they could produce a prototype and manufac-
ture the equipment domestically. Furthermore, key pieces of equipment 
­were not subject to export control restrictions. Another advantage lay in the 
simplicity of this pro­cess. EMIS had only two stages of enrichment, while 
gaseous diffusion and enrichment would require thousands of rounds. EMIS 
also appeared to be a more robust technology than centrifuges. Whereas the 
malfunction or power outage of individual centrifuges could disrupt an 

82
chapter 3
entire batch of material, and possibly damage other centrifuges, the malfunc-
tion of individual EMIS separators would not have compounding effects.49
In late 1981 Jafar and his colleagues completed their review. They deci­
ded to move forward with EMIS as their primary uranium enrichment tech-
nology and explore two alternatives: ­laser isotope separation and gaseous 
diffusion. While both seemed to be beyond the industrial and scientific re-
sources of Iraq, the se­nior leadership insisted they look into alternatives in 
case they failed with EMIS. Specifically, in the fall of 1981 Humam requested 
that the Physics Department at Tuwaitha looked into ­laser isotope separation 
as a potential enrichment option. This was a relatively new method, devel-
oped in the United States during the 1970s. For Iraq, this was a long shot. 
While the scientists continued to examine this method on a small scale, they 
­were unable to set up an experimental trial.50
The research and development efforts would proceed in three steps. First, 
the scientists would study the available lit­er­a­ture. Then, they would carry 
out research and development to familiarize themselves with the basic pro­
cess and engineering challenges. The final step would be a pilot-­scale trial. 
Once successful, or even before, the pilot-­scale lineup would be scaled up 
to the production stage. This approach involved considerable uncertainty 
and—­particularly with technologies that required more development and 
advanced industrial capabilities—­risks of delay and failure.51
The scientists explored several enrichment technologies with varying levels 
of effort, and this approach has been criticized for its apparent lack of focus.52 
But in Saddam’s Iraq this was the norm. Indeed the Manhattan Proj­ect had 
also set out to explore several technologies, mainly focusing on two main 
tracks, admittedly with much greater resources. Exploring other technological 
options, however unrealistic, had the added benefit of creating more activities 
to report. Accordingly, as instructed by the IAEC, Jafar and his team ­adopted 
parallel proj­ects to distribute the risks of failure and delays in the short 
term, as failure in one area could be compensated by pro­gress in another.
But this policy had several unintended consequences. It spread limited re-
sources thinly and created destructive rivalries in technical communities 
working ­toward the same goal. It also created turf fights among officials 
seeking to increase their portfolio and influence. Some went so far as to pla-
giarize the work of their colleagues. ­Others took care to not share the results 
of their research ­until an occasion came along, such as an internal seminar, 
where they could publically claim credit for their achievements, lest ­others 
claim credit in the interim. The emphasis on pro­gress led to a tendency 
among se­nior man­ag­ers, and in some cases ministers, to deliver vague 
reports cluttered with calculations and technical assessments and overly 
optimistic prognoses for achieving objectives. In this atmosphere, where 
colleagues had to be wary of each other, the scant expertise available was 
isolated within the or­ga­ni­za­tion.

83
Saddam’s Nuclear Weapons Program, 1981–1987
reor­ga­ni­za­tion
In January 1982, the IAEC was reor­ga­nized in preparation for its new task. 
This was the first of several orga­nizational changes that ­shaped informa-
tion sharing, decision making, and management of the nuclear program. 
Figure 3.1 below offers a snapshot overview of the orga­nizational changes 
and adaptations during the 1980s. As with many other organ­izations in Sad-
dam’s war state, the nuclear program became an opaque or­ga­ni­za­tion with 
a bewildering number of offshoots. The scientists, led by Jafar, ­were given 
essentially ­free rein with minimal oversight. They faced the overwhelming 
task of developing an indigenous nuclear weapons program in secret, at a 
time of war, but ­were given no specific targets or deadlines from the po­liti­cal 
leadership. The program was a priority, as evidenced by Saddam’s blank 
check, but it was not an urgent effort.
The IAEC was restructured into six units: International Relations, the Of-
fice of Studies and Development (the OSD), Administration, Management 
of Building Proj­ects, the NRC, and Manpower Training. The IAEC chairman 
at this time was Izzat Ibrahim al-­Doori, who served in his capacity as RCC 
vice-­chairman. His role was formal, as the IAEC would brief Saddam’s of-
fice directly about the weapons program (through Saddam’s personal secre-
tary) and only briefed Izzat Ibrahim occasionally.53 The new vice-­chairman 
was Humam. The other commissioners ­were Rahim Abdul al-­Kittal as head 
of International Relations, Jafar as head of the OSD, Dhafir Selbi as head of 
Administration, Khalid Said as head of Management of Building Proj­ects, 
and Moyassar al-­Mallah as head of Manpower Training.54
The IAEC charged the OSD, led by Jafar, with the uranium enrichment 
program.55 The initial staff of the IAEC was around 150 in 1983.56 Over the 
next five years, the staff increased and additional departments (as well as 
subunits) ­were added to cope with specific tasks. As a result, the program 
became increasingly byzantine and difficult to monitor.
The commissioners had mixed feelings about their responsibilities. Their 
task was intimidating in the face of their limited ­human and industrial re-
sources, especially compared with the Manhattan Proj­ect, which had been 
able to draw upon the expertise of leading scientists from several countries 
and massive industrial resources. While the Iraqi program, like the Manhat-
tan Proj­ect, explored several technical options and scientists would reor­ga­
nize the program in light of the findings, the restrictions facing the Iraqis 
made it more difficult to cope with risks and uncertainties. Moreover, they 
could not pursue the optimal technological pathways for fear of detection. 
Their limited domestic expertise, experience, and infrastructure made the 
pursuit of alternative technologies a towering challenge, and diverted man-
power from the main priorities of the program. Furthermore, they had no 
experience with research and development for any proj­ect on this scale. It 

1982                                                 1983  1984  1985                                                                1986  1987                                              
                              1988
Early 1982 
The Ofice of Studies and 
Development (OSD)  
Head ofice 
Applied science 
Industrial 
Technology 
Mechanical design and 
fabrication 
Electronic design and 
fabrication 
Heat transfer 
Theoretical studies 
Late 1985
OSD is renamed Ofice 3000 
3000 Head ofice 
3010 Planning and follow-up  
            section 
3020 Coordination and  
            documentation section 
3030 Administration section 
3040 General engineering  
            support section 
3110 Applied science  
            department 
3120 Industrial department 
3130 Technology department 
3210 Electronic department 
3220 Engineering design  
            department 
3230 Mechanical fabrication  
            department 
3240 Theoretical studies  
            department 
May 1987
Ofice 3000 is reorganized 
Head ofice  
Group 1 
−1A Barrier development 
−1B Separation process 
−1C Chemical activities for gaseous   
diffusion technology 
−1D Mechanical engineering 
−1E Control and instrumentation design  
Group 2 
−2A Basic EMIS research 
−2B Phase 2 separators 
−2C Design and operation of chemical projects 
−2D Training for chemical production plants 
−2F Engineering design 
−2G Material science 
Group 3 
−3A Planning 
−3B Purchasing 
−3C Administration 
−3D General engineering support 
−3G Mechanical fabrication 
−3H Installation of equipment and utilities 
−3I Control cabinets and power  
supplies 
−3F Documentation, information and technical  
support 
Group 4 
−40A Theoretical studies 
−40B Experimentation 
−40CR Radiochemistry 
−40CF Metallic uranium 
−40E Engineering services 
−40F Design 
−40G Material experiments 
−40N Material characterization 
−40S Metallurgical technology 
−40M Powder technology
Late 1982 
IAEC restructuring:  
1000 Head ofice 
2000 Ofice of science policy  
            and programs 
3000 Ofice of studies and  
            development 
4000 Ofice of administration  
            and engineering services 
5000 Ofice of projects 
6000 Nuclear research center 
August 1987
Group 1 transferred to   
PMIC, renamed 
Engineering Design 
Directorate (EDD) 
1988
IAEC is replaced 
by the Iraqi 
Atomic Energy 
Organization   
(IAEO) 
EDD is renamed 
Engineering 
Design Center 
(EDC) and 
becomes one of    
the institutions of 
the Military 
Industrialisation 
Commission (MIC) 
REORGANIZATIONS, 1982–88
Figure 3.1. Iraqi nuclear weapons program reorganizations, 1982–88.

85
Saddam’s Nuclear Weapons Program, 1981–1987
was impossible to estimate a timeline. This made planning more difficult and 
incremental adaptation essential.
The upward chain of command for the IAEC led straight to the Presiden-
tial Office, as the formal chain of command, through the RCC, was largely 
ignored from the beginning. This distinguished the nuclear program from 
other weapons programs. The chemical and biological weapons programs 
­were formally part of the Ministry of Industry and Military Industrializa-
tion (MIMI) and reported to the minister, who was formally ju­nior to the 
RCC. Since the mid-1970s, by contrast, the nuclear program had acquired a 
special status within the state apparatus, with the standing of a ministry and 
enjoying direct access to the center of po­liti­cal power, namely the Presiden-
tial Office. Reporting directly to Saddam’s office was beneficial for the IAEC, 
as this streamlined access to resources. Saddam appeared to be genuinely 
interested when he was briefed about the nuclear program. In contrast, 
­Jafar recounts that when he briefed Izzat Ibrahim, he seemed bored and 
often changed the subject.57
The nuclear weapons program was compartmentalized within the NRC. 
The se­nior tier of the IAEC, and ­those in charge of organ­izing the enrich-
ment proj­ects, knew that their objective was to produce weapons-­grade 
uranium on a large scale. The second tier (mid-­level man­ag­ers) and regular 
employees ­were not informed about this. They ­were aware that their col-
leagues explored enrichment technologies but made their own judgments 
as to ­whether this was meant to serve peaceful or military purposes in the 
end. As the program moved forward, the amount of resources poured into 
the proj­ect at a time of war led some to assume that the final objective was 
to produce weapons. Over time, the internal compartmentalization was un-
dermined by rumors and conversations among colleagues. For example, a 
radiation physicist at Tuwaitha first heard about the weapons proj­ect from 
a colleague in 1989.58
As the IAEC was put in charge of one of the most clandestine and sensi-
tive weapons programs in the Iraqi state, surveillance intensified. Intelligence 
officers ­were based at the NRC and watched the offices of se­nior IAEC mem-
bers, but most Mukhabarat officers focused on monitoring contacts between 
the Iraqi nuclear establishment and supplier companies, both domestic and 
foreign. They would also accompany IAEC staff on any foreign trips. The 
Iraqi intelligence apparatus gathered personal information about IAEC em-
ployees, including their po­liti­cal sympathies. The Baath Party encouraged 
members working at the NRC to monitor their colleagues.59 This made sci-
entists cautious but did not affect the technical decisions or priorities as the 
intelligence lacked the necessary knowledge to effectively monitor the ad-
vances of the program.
To move the program from initial research and development ­toward the 
production stage, Iraq also had to develop new indigenous production 
capabilities. During 1980–1981 the MIC finalized a series of contracts to 

86
chapter 3
import large quantities of machines, equipment, and raw materials. In late 
1981, Humam enquired ­whether the military production complex could 
fabricate equipment needed for the new program. This had the added ben-
efit of disguising imports actually intended for the weapons program at 
Tuwaitha that, if detected, could have attracted unwanted attention. Subse-
quently, a joint committee was set up between the IAEC and SOTI to facili-
tate this assistance.60 This collaboration was similar to that set up between 
SOTI and the chemical and biological weapons programs.
While the program focused on enrichment technologies, the Iraqis did not 
yet completely abandon the hope of a plutonium route to a weapons capa-
bility. While the planning team had concluded that indigenous uranium 
enrichment would be the most preferable option for the weapons program, 
the IAEC tried to persuade France to rebuild the Tammuz reactors. A French 
consortium agreed to rebuild the reactor on 19 March 1983.61 But the French 
government was not willing to assist Iraq with rebuilding their nuclear pro-
gram. By 1985 it was clear that this was not ­going to happen. In late 1984 
the IAEC launched Proj­ect 182 to study the design of a 40 megawatt heavy-­
water reactor. The proj­ect focused on basic reactor design, fuel fabrication, 
and heavy-­water production. Realizing the scope of the challenges associated 
with building a nuclear reactor suitable for a weapons program in secret 
and without foreign assistance, the Iraqis began to consider making this an 
“open” proj­ect in order to seek assistance from other countries or the IAEA. 
Proj­ect 182 was scaled down in 1988, when the program was streamlined to 
focus on enrichment facilities. The proj­ect led the scientists to the conclu-
sion that building a reactor indigenously would be too demanding in terms 
of resources and too vulnerable to air attacks.62 As this exercise suggests, the 
IAEC directed scientists to explore an unrealistic option rather than focus 
scarce resources on creating a large-­scale enrichment capacity.
Jafar and his colleagues looked for ways to reduce their infrastructure’s 
vulnerability to ­future attacks. The NRC at Tuwaitha would remain the hub 
of all research and development activities. The buildings on site would not 
receive additional physical protection and ­were simply painted with cam-
ouflage. Manufacturing and production plants would be built elsewhere, 
­either in military-­industrial facilities or in new secret locations. The new sites 
would be designed to be able to withstand air strikes or physical sabotage. 
­These sites ­were to be scattered around Iraq, so that an attack on all of them 
would require an extensive air campaign.63 Documentation from the pro-
gram was sent to four dif­fer­ent sites: two sites at Tuwaitha; a third in the 
Karradat Maryam district; and a fourth center in a Baghdad guest­house be-
longing to the IAEC.64
The distribution of sites came into conflict with the need for scientists and 
engineers to be physically proximate during the research and development 
pro­cess, particularly as ­these ran in tandem. Also, spreading workshops 
added costs (as this required duplicating manpower and machines) and de-

87
Saddam’s Nuclear Weapons Program, 1981–1987
lays. Nonetheless, creating a more robust infrastructure was seen as impera-
tive. Eventually, all the sites directly involved in the research and develop-
ment of uranium enrichment technologies ­were scattered around Baghdad, 
while duplicate sites and facilities focusing on extraction and refinement of 
uranium feedstock ­were located in northwestern Iraq.
As a small group, with Jafar at the helm, was charged with planning, 
­administering, and implementing the new program, they had limited re-
sources to devote to all of ­these areas. An ele­ment of improvisation also 
­shaped how the scientific man­ag­ers deci­ded to or­ga­nize the weapons pro-
gram. While this institutional “commotion” could be disruptive for research 
and development efforts, it appeared to signal rapid development, and made 
it difficult for ­others to closely track the aggregate pro­gress.
As the nuclear weapons program grew in size and complexity, Saddam 
held Jafar and Humam responsible for the pro­gress of the overall program. 
The scientific leaders did the planning and much of the management and 
the proj­ect was overseen by the IAEC commissioners (led by Humam) and 
Abdul Kader Abdul Raman Ahmed, the director of the NRC. The program 
came to resemble that of other state agencies: frequent reor­ga­ni­za­tion, rapid 
institutional growth, and intra-­agency competition.
Within a few months the OSD was reor­ga­nized into a new administrative 
structure comprised of six sections, each distinguished by number: the Head 
Office (Office 1000); the Office of Science Policy and Programs (Office 2000); 
the OSD (Office 3000); the Office of Administration and Engineering Ser­vices 
(Office 4000); the Office of Proj­ects (Office 5000); and the NRC (Office 6000).65 
Over the next three years, ­these six departments would morph into twelve 
sections. (For an overview, please consult Figure 3.1)
Office 3000 (led by Jafar) oversaw several—­perhaps too many—­crucial ar-
eas of scientific and technical development. First, Jafar and colleagues ex-
plored technical options for uranium enrichment. Second, this unit was in 
charge of finding and developing suitable research, development, and man-
ufacturing resources. This included the construction of laboratories, finding 
industrial buildings that could fabricate equipment, and selecting suitable 
locations for proj­ect sites. This required working with the domestic military-­
industrial complex and foreign companies. Figure 3.2, below, illustrates the 
sites and facilities associated with the nuclear weapons program. The Al Fao 
General Establishment Com­pany built facilities for the chemical and nuclear 
weapons programs.66 Third, Office 3000 was charged with setting up pro-
curement units in other state organ­izations to avoid foreign detection.67
The NRC continued other plausible research activities and international 
publishing to reduce foreign suspicions. ­These activities ­were completely 
separate from ­those of the clandestine program. The NRC continued to carry 
out basic research consistent with previous proj­ects in chemistry, physics, 
biology, agriculture, medical diagnostics, and radioisotopes. Their findings 
­were communicated in scholarly publications and at academic conferences.68 

Persian
Gulf
E
u
p
h
r
a
tes
Ti
g
r
i
s
BAGHDAD
Kuwait
Basra
Abadan
Mosul
Arbil
Sulaymaniyah
Baqubah
Samarra
Tikrit
Urfa (Edessa)
Diyarbakir
Malatya
Van
Karbala
Hillah
Kut
Al Amarah
Ramadi
Fallujah
Kirkuk
Najaf
Diwaniyah
Nasiriyah
Hamadan
Tabriz
Urmia
Bakhtaran
Ahvaz
S A U D I
A R A B I A
KUWAIT
I R A N
I
R
A
Q
S
Y
R
I
A
JORDAN
T U R K E Y
0
Nuclear facilities
Supporting sites
100
50
150 miles
Al Tuwaitha
Saladdin General
Establishment
Al Sharqat
Al Jazira
Al Tarmiya
Karbala
Al Musayyib
Al Fallujah
Abu Guraib
Habbaniyah
Sarabadi
Baqubah
Hillah
BAGHDAD
Bahr
al–Mith
E
u
p
h
r
a
t
es
Tigris
Al Amir Factory
Saddam General
Establishment
Nasser General 
Establishment
Engineering
Design Center
Al Tarmiya
Badr General
Establishment
Al Atheer
Sehee
Al Tuwaitha
Facilities
Al Rabee Factory
Al Dujla Factory
Al Radwan
Factory
0
30 miles
Figure 3.2. Map of nuclear and military-­industrial sites, Iraq.

89
Saddam’s Nuclear Weapons Program, 1981–1987
In this way, Iraq hoped to distract the outside world from the emergence of 
its secret program.
research and development
Between 1982 and 1985, the scientists studied several enrichment technol-
ogies. Their purpose was to develop a clearer understanding of the basic 
pro­cesses of each technique, in theoretical and technical terms and assess 
­whether Iraq could produce or acquire the machines and raw material re-
quired for each route.69 At this stage, no thought was put into bomb design 
or how a nuclear arsenal would be integrated with Iraq’s military capabili-
ties.
Given their limited experience with enrichment, Office 3000 spent more 
time analyzing technical pro­cesses than working on engineering chal-
lenges. The usual way in which each stage—­laboratory-­scale research, pilot-­
scale test, and large-­scale production—­would inform the next was compro-
mised by the IAEC’s preference to run ­these pro­cesses in parallel. In many 
cases, production units ­were constructed si­mul­ta­neously with initial exper-
imental efforts despite the established princi­ple of following a sequential 
approach.70 This entailed risks and a greater need for adaptation and impro-
visation (i.e., downstream prob­lems). Their guiding princi­ple was to proceed 
wherever pos­si­ble, even in pursuing technologies with ­great uncertainty.71 
Being seen as making tangible pro­gress ­toward a nuclear weapons capabil-
ity was imperative. Prob­lems would simply have to be worked around as 
they arose.
The scientific leaders of the program had more autonomy than during the 
more ambiguous period of the late 1970s. Jafar had received carte blanche 
from Saddam, and his position as the scientific head of the clandestine pro-
gram could not be easily questioned within the or­ga­ni­za­tion. The vice-­
chairman of the IAEC, Humam, had Baath credentials and a good working 
relationship with Saddam. Over the next few years, Humam helped create 
a more stable and supportive working environment at Tuwaitha. This was 
not just the case for the weapons program: other lines of research, such as 
radiation protection, also had considerable in­de­pen­dence. According to one 
scientist working on radiation issues, for example, Humam made no attempt 
to steer his research activities.72
The absence of clear benchmarks and deadlines did not, however, create 
a carefree atmosphere. The active role of Baath members in facilitating 
the arrest of their colleagues over the recent years—­and their ongoing 
monitoring—­necessitated caution. Efforts by Jafar and his colleagues had to 
be seen, both by their Baath colleagues and the Presidential Office, as mov-
ing forward. This would come to influence their approach to research and 
development, and their reporting, over the coming years. Given the highly 
technical nature of their research and development efforts, few ­others ­were 

90
chapter 3
capable of vetting or questioning their choices. As a result, Office 3000 en-
joyed considerable autonomy. Jafar and his colleagues ­were able to pursue 
what they perceived to be the most feasible, if not necessarily the most effi-
cient or economic, enrichment technologies.
The or­ga­ni­za­tion of research and development underscored the necessity 
of incremental adaptation. Individual proj­ects would rapidly move from ba-
sic research to development to production or, in many cases, run ­these pro­
cesses in parallel. The IAEC’s guiding princi­ple was, in their own words, to 
forge ahead with upstream activities (i.e., creating industrial-­scale enrich-
ment facilities) wherever pos­si­ble, even if downstream efforts (research 
and development, refinement of uranium feed material) ­were moving 
slowly.73 ­There may have been several reasons ­behind this, including a per-
ceived need to make observable pro­gress to ward off accusations of delay 
or, worse, failure.
As the planning of the enrichment research program was done in haste, 
implementation was expected to change over the next few years. As it turned 
out, ­there would be technical adaptations (such as the choice of open mag-
nets for the production stage of EMIS), and major changes in the choice of 
enrichment technology (as with the decision to discard gaseous diffusion and 
adopt centrifuges as a secondary technology) as well as the overall or­ga­ni­
za­tion of the program. This required flexibility at all levels of the or­ga­ni­za­
tion, which was difficult to pull off given the highly centralized nature of 
the program. Furthermore, given the challenges of coordination in Saddam’s 
state, this was a tall order. While ­there ­were cases of incremental adaptation, 
in other areas the leadership remained committed to the basic approach—­
adaptation through experimentation—­and preferred existing technological 
paths over adapting incrementally.
While the nuclear weapons program was not subject to direct pressure 
from Saddam or other se­nior regime officials, tensions grew inside the or­
ga­ni­za­tion. Despite making real pro­gress in some areas, such as developing 
an industrial base more or less from scratch with the help of the military-­
industrial complex, failure to make equally rapid pro­gress in other areas 
led to mounting frustration within the program sections. Several se­nior 
and mid-­level man­ag­ers ­were frustrated that their proposals for alterna-
tive ion sources and enrichment technologies ­were brushed aside or re-
ceived scant resources. Their dissatisfaction was aggravated by the man-
agement of the program, which followed the classic pattern of military 
innovation in Iraq: administration, planning, management, and per­for­
mance reviews ­were typically carried out by a small number of individu-
als with ­little transparency or input from other levels of the or­ga­ni­za­tion. 
Jafar’s role as scientific leader of the program was curtailed by the admin-
istrative influence and purview of the IAEC. He would at times receive di-
rect ­orders to start additional tracks or prioritize certain areas of the proj­ect, 
and he was not in a position to object. Nonetheless, ­these changes led to 

91
Saddam’s Nuclear Weapons Program, 1981–1987
mounting criticism of Jafar by mid-­level proj­ect man­ag­ers in the nuclear 
weapons program.
Tensions among the proj­ect man­ag­ers and IAEC commissioners mounted 
­toward the mid-1980s. The pressures of the enormous task also began to 
wear on the scientists and engineers at Tuwaitha. The se­nior management 
was stretched to the limit. The experimental approach meant that most teams 
had to return to the drawing board repeatedly, and the engineering teams 
became demotivated and exhausted.74 ­Under such conditions, and given the 
stakes of failure, the scene was set for clashes.
Gaseous Diffusion.  ​The Iraqi scientists ­were interested in gaseous diffusion, 
despite its challenges, ­because it could make the EMIS pro­cess more efficient. 
Gaseous diffusion is a pro­cess where uranium isotopes are separated through a 
physical barrier; uranium-235 (U-235) is aggregated through repeated cycles. 
This low-­enriched uranium (LEU) would be used as feed material for EMIS.75
In early 1982 a team began to explore the basic science and engineering 
challenges of this approach. They started research and development to as-
certain the technical specifications of key items such as compressors and 
making the basic configurations work on a miniature scale. This group faced 
three key challenges: producing suitable porous barriers; understanding how 
molecules flow through such barriers; and setting up cascades.76 Their ob-
jective was to build several hundred cascades to produce 4–5 tons of LEU 
(3–4 ­percent) as feed material for EMIS.77 Over the next six years, they ­were 
unable to develop an appropriate porous barrier, as they lacked the advanced 
industrial capacity to produce suitable materials.
While gaseous diffusion was a proven technology, it required an advanced 
industrial infrastructure. Producing the porous barrier and large compres-
sors ­were well beyond the industrial capabilities of Iraq. Engineers attempted 
to reverse-­engineer compressors procured from the United States. A suitable 
barrier had 10 trillion holes per square centimeter; producing such material 
was well beyond the capabilities of the Iraqi industrial establishment.78 Ex-
perimental facilities for testing dif­fer­ent barrier designs and diffuser mod-
els ­were built at the NRC and Rashidiya, northwest of Baghdad. Along with 
research and development efforts focusing on porous barriers, Office 3000 
also tried to develop compressors and, when ­these efforts failed, attempted 
to purchase compressors from abroad. In late 1988, a barrier material was suc-
cessfully developed. The next challenge was to design and produce a porous 
tube. The department developed a suitable design and started laboratory-­
scale production, but was unable to take this to large-­scale production due to 
their limited industrial capabilities.79 By late 1989, the gaseous diffusion proj­
ect was shelved.
EMIS.  ​In early 1982, Office 3000 began a five-­year program exploring the 
basic science and technology of EMIS, considered the most feasible option 

92
chapter 3
­under the constraints of secrecy and primarily indigenous production. Most 
of the personnel and resources at the Applied Science Department (sub-­
division 3110; please see Figure 3.1 for further details) ­were devoted to this 
line of research and development. Key personnel included Khaloow Raof 
Hamdi, Thamer Numan Mawlood, and engineers Razzak Obais Marzook 
and Lath Jamil Bunni.80 They planned to proceed in three overlapping stages: 
initial research and development (focusing on all aspects of EMIS, but primar-
ily magnetic fields and ion sources); setting up a pilot-­scale experimental 
trial; and building a production unit capable of producing 15 kilograms of 
93 ­percent enriched uranium per year (a bomb required at least 8 kilograms 
and more likely 15–25 kilograms). This output could be increased further by 
using LEU (rather than natu­ral uranium) as feed material. LEU could be 
produced through gaseous diffusion, the supporting enrichment method 
that was being developed (ultimately unsuccessfully) in a separate depart-
ment (initially this track was pursued by the Technology department 3130, 
then Group 1 ­after 1987).
The EMIS method of uranium separation did not require high-­speed 
movement machinery, which led Office 3000 man­ag­ers to conclude that 
this was a more realistic option for the limited pool of scientists and engi-
neers who would be responsible for the design and manufacture of ­these 
items. As they set out to explore this technology they deci­ded to focus on 
understanding the scientific princi­ples of magnet separators and to experi-
ment with dif­fer­ent types of magnets. Once they had successfully achieved 
separation of U-235, design and fabrication efforts of the larger equipment 
was halted while the teams focused on improving ion sources and collec-
tors.81
In designing, producing, and operationalizing magnet separators the first 
challenge was to familiarize Iraqi scientists and engineers with the separa-
tion pro­cess using magnets in theoretical and practical terms. To do so, 
Office 3000 set up an initial series of research and development proj­ects 
(Proj­ects 101, 102 and 103). In Proj­ect 101 the Applied Science Department 
constructed a small-­scale model to develop some basic insights into magnet 
separation. Over the next five years they designed, manufactured, and oper-
ated three types of magnets (R40, R50, and R100). In Proj­ects 102 and 103, 
two identical magnets ­were fed dif­fer­ent ion sources for isotope extrac-
tion. In January 1982 they deci­ded to set up a laboratory-­scale program 
for developing uranium tetrachloride, which was the feed material for 
EMIS.82 The MSE provided precursor chemicals for ­these experiments and 
­trials.83 Once ­these systems ­were operational, Office 3000 began to compare 
the observed magnetic field configuration with their theoretical calcula-
tions. Matching results ­were confirmed in September 1984.84 Some sixteen 
months ­later, in January 1986, they successfully separated uranium isotopes 
from uranium tetrachloride vapor.85

93
Saddam’s Nuclear Weapons Program, 1981–1987
The construction of ­these magnets was supported by the military indus-
try. The joint committee between SOTI and the IAEC facilitated the import 
and assembly of the machinery to produce magnets in the Badr General Es-
tablishment.86 The design, production and assembly of the magnets took 
place at the Office 3000 departments at Tuwaitha. Components ­were pro-
duced at the Badr General Establishment and the General Establishment 
for Electrical Industries.87 The separators ­were assembled with components 
from the Badr General Establishment, the NRC, and the Oqba Bin Nafi Es-
tablishment, while some items (vacuum pumps, gauges, and valves) ­were 
procured from abroad.88
One of the many impor­tant decisions made at this early stage was choos-
ing an ion source for EMIS. While making this decision, the scientists ­were 
influenced by the level of experience and familiarity they had with the dif­
fer­ent options. They deci­ded to focus on PIG ­because some staff members 
had been trained in working with similar technology in connection with 
their earlier efforts to develop linear accelerators. In early 1980 three NRC 
employees had traveled to Darmstadt in Germany as part of their effort to 
develop heavy-­ion sources. While the methods they learned ­there ­were rel-
evant for EMIS, ­there ­were impor­tant differences (e.g., EMIS required sin-
gly charged uranium ions). The benefits of their experience ­were limited by 
a lack of detailed information in the lit­er­a­ture about PIG. Still, Jafar and col-
leagues opted for PIG instead of calutron mass spectrometers, an alterna-
tive technology used in the Manhattan Proj­ect.
The second stage of this research and development ensued in 1983 with a 
series of proj­ects (104, 105, 106) focusing on fabricating and operationaliz-
ing pre-production ­scale separators. ­These proj­ects ­were geared ­toward set-
ting up a pilot-­scale trial of the basic components of EMIS. In Proj­ect 105, the 
Iraqis fabricated a model separator with an open magnetic field. In Proj­ect 
106 they explored dif­fer­ent configurations of ion sources, specifically how 
double or qua­dru­ple ion sources would perform compared with single 
sources in the separator. In tandem with ­these proj­ects, a series of research 
proj­ects explored how to collect the desired uranium from the separators 
more efficiently.
As the program moved forward, a pressing concern was to produce the 
feed material in larger quantities. The chemists in Office 3000 developed the 
capacity to produce 1 kilogram of uranium tetrachloride (the feed material 
used to test the separators) per day.89 But collecting the uranium from 
the  separator pockets was a considerable challenge. Fi­nally, in October 
1987, Numan and his colleague Abdul Razzak al-­Qaraghouli collected a 
sample tube of uranium dioxide (2–3 ­percent enriched).90 To move from 
such laboratory-­scale samples to kilograms would require, as Jafar put it, a 
quantum leap: it could not be achieved by scientific ingenuity alone but 
required manufacturing capabilities of a daunting scale and precision. 

94
chapter 3
­These challenges had to be addressed in tandem with several other de-
manding tasks, including the or­ga­ni­za­tion and supervision of the develop-
ment of manufacturing sites at Tuwaitha, the Rabie mechanical workshop, 
and the Dijla electronics and control workshop.91
Jafar and his colleagues began preparations for the production stage in 
tandem with the first and second series of proj­ects. The production plant 
(Proj­ect 8119) was envisaged as two identical facilities with seventy separa-
tors, each producing (at design capacity, which assumed optimum per­for­
mance) 15 kilograms of highly enriched uranium per year. If their col-
leagues ­were able to produce LEU feed (less than 20 ­percent U-235), or if this 
could be procured from another country, they could expect increased out-
put and possibly shorten the time required to produce enough highly en-
riched uranium for one nuclear weapon by two years.92 In late 1987 the IAEC 
deci­ded to have two EMIS sites, in case one was attacked or other­wise be-
came nonoperative, and to bolster production when necessary.93 ­These 
two sites ­were Tarmiya (to be constructed by a Yugo­slav com­pany) and 
Sharqat (a replica of the Tarmiya site built by the Iraqi military-­industrial 
complex). The Fao General Establishment and the nuclear establishment 
constructed ­these sites, ­under the direction of a joint committee.
The collaboration between the IAEC and the General Establishment com-
panies (i.e., the military-­industrial production sites) also included several re-
lated proj­ects such as development and production of munitions and 
bombs. One such proj­ect was the production of radiological bombs, a proj­
ect that has received ­little attention from scholars. In the second half of the 
1980s, the IAEC requested that the MSE produce casings for radiological 
weapons. ­These designs ­were based on aerial bombs developed at the Nasr 
factory since 1984 for dispersal of chemical and biological weapons. In 1988 
MSE began feasibility studies of casings for a bomb filled with radiological 
material. The initial design weighed more than 1,400 kilograms, which meant 
that only two Iraqi aircraft (TU-16 or TU-22) would be able to deliver them.94 
The teams at MSE, on their own initiative, developed two additional de-
signs that ­were smaller: a 400-­kilogram design called the Muthanna-4 
carry­ing between 500 grams and 1 kilogram of irradiated material; and a 
1,000-­kilogram bomb.95
Preparing Uranium for Centrifuges.  ​To produce feed material for the ura-
nium enrichment program, the so-­called front end of the nuclear fuel cycle, 
geologists and chemists revived earlier efforts to search for and exploit 
indigenous uranium. During the 1970s teams from Tuwaitha had located 
uranium deposits in northern Iraq. At that time, indigenous uranium ex-
ploration (not to mention mining and refinement) was set aside as the 
French agreement included provision of reactor fuel. Interest in producing 
yellowcake (a uranium concentrate powder that can be further refined into 
nuclear fuel or undergo enrichment) from natu­ral uranium surfaced again 

95
Saddam’s Nuclear Weapons Program, 1981–1987
in 1979, but it was only ­after September 1981 that the front end of the fuel 
cycle (i.e., refining uranium) became a priority.
In May 1982, the Iraqi Ministry of Industry and Minerals (MIM) commis-
sioned a Belgian com­pany to build a unit to extract yellowcake from phos-
phoric acid. In January 1985 this unit, located at the Al-Qaim Establishment 
(a phosphate fertilizer production complex established by MIM in 1979), be-
came operational. At design capacity, assuming optimal conditions, this 
unit could have produced 103 metric tons of yellowcake per calendar year. 
As it turned out, the plant at Al-Qaim would produce only around 168 tons 
before it was shut down in mid-1990.96 This was due to several ­factors: the 
low concentration of uranium in the feed material; an extraction rate that 
was half of the design rate; and fewer days of operation (only 214 days per 
year).97 In addition, much of the phosphoric acid at Al-Qaim went directly 
into fertilizer production rather than uranium extraction.98
The next step in the pro­cess was to convert the yellowcake to a form that 
was suitable feed material for EMIS. Specifically, the yellowcake had to be 
converted into suitable uranium oxide and pure uranium tetrachloride. ­These 
products would then be sent to Tarmiya, one of the two EMIS production 
sites. This was a very challenging step for the chemists at Tuwaitha. In 1983, 
the Iraqis attempted to build a small plant themselves, but found this too 
difficult given their lack of experience in this area.99 A Brazilian plant to con-
vert yellowcake to uranium oxide was commissioned. This design would 
be modified by the Iraqis and additional equipment purchased to suit their 
specifications. ­These design modifications ­were completed in the late sum-
mer of 1987.100 A site north of Mosul for the conversion plant, named Al-­
Jazira, was selected in the spring of 1989.
A Deadline, 1985
During the first three years of the nuclear weapons program (1982–1985), 
­there had been no explicit pressure from Saddam to produce weapons. ­There 
is no evidence suggesting that anyone had started to think about what kind 
of weapons ­these ­ought to be and how they would be delivered. The road-
map of the program was based on Jafar’s memorandum from 1981, which 
focused on technological options and assessments rather than deadlines or 
benchmarks. In the spring of 1985, however, this would change.
In April 1985, Saddam summoned the leaders and five se­nior members of 
the IAEC—­Chairman Izzat Ibrahim, Vice-­Chairman Humam, and Com-
missioners al-­Kittal, Said, al-­Mallah, Jafar, and Selbi—to review the pro­
gress of the weapons program. They ­were taken to the Radwanya district 
of Baghdad where he was waiting in a caravan. As the meeting began, 
Humam reviewed the ongoing proj­ects. His remarks ­were based on a re-
port he had prepared with Jafar that had not been precirculated to the 

96
chapter 3
other commissioners. As they listened to Humam’s pre­sen­ta­tion, the other 
commissioners ­were surprised that they had not been consulted or briefed 
prior to the meeting.
They ­were even more surprised when Humam completed his pre­sen­ta­
tion by announcing that the program would fulfill its objective within five 
years, by 1990. Humam did not specify what this objective was, or what 
­exactly would be achieved by 1990. Some of the other commissioners as-
sumed that this was a promise to reach a new milestone in the enrichment 
programs.101 But it was not clear what exactly would be delivered. Saddam 
reacted with vis­i­ble emotion, according to the recollection of Selbi.102 When 
Saddam invited the other commissioners to comment on Humam’s pre­sen­
ta­tion they remained ­silent.
Humam’s promise was remarkable for two reasons. It was the first com-
mitment by the IAEC to Saddam with an explicit deadline attached, although 
it was not clear what exactly would be delivered. Further, the announcement 
was made while enrichment technologies ­were being explored at a theoreti-
cal or experimental stage, and no significant breakthroughs had yet been 
achieved. The IAEC had imposed a deadline before the scientists had found 
an experimentally proven enrichment technology.
­After the meeting the commissioners ­were presented with new cars 
and mobile caravans. They drove to Tuwaitha, where al-­Kittal confronted 
­Humam and demanded an explanation as to why a promise had been made 
without internal consultation. All of the commissioners would be held re-
sponsible for meeting this deadline. The conversation rapidly escalated into 
a furious argument. Staff ­were cleared from the corridors so they would not 
overhear.103
Where did the initiative ­behind this commitment come from? Was it 
self-­imposed by Humam and Jafar, orchestrated ­behind the scenes by Sad-
dam, or someone ­else? It seemed out of character, as no one in the nuclear 
establishment had previously set a timeline or deadline. But a similar prom-
ise had been made in early 1985, when the director of the MSE promised the 
minister of defense he would deliver biological weapons within five years.104 
This ambitious, and quite possibly arbitrary, promise seemed unfounded, 
given that the program had only just started recruiting scientists. Two years 
­later, the BW program was still focusing on basic experiments. In short, an 
apparently premature promise was made in both programs by se­nior man­
ag­ers to se­nior officials with a seemingly arbitrary deadline. It is pos­si­ble that 
Humam’s commitment was made on his and Jafar’s initiative, to buy some 
time to make substantial advances ­toward the production stage. Many of 
Jafar’s colleagues in the IAEC and Office 3000 blamed him and Humam for 
making what they believed was an unrealistic promise.105 It is perhaps more 
likely that se­nior man­ag­ers of both the nuclear and biological weapons pro-
grams had been asked by se­nior officials to review their achievements and 
indicate a deadline.

97
Saddam’s Nuclear Weapons Program, 1981–1987
Most of the reporting of the program was carried out informally through 
personal briefings and back-­channels to the most se­nior members of the 
regime. Had Saddam wanted more detailed assessments he would surely 
have requested them, but, Jafar noted, he seemed content to let the scientists 
work at their own pace.
The leaders of the nuclear program updated Saddam in a series of occa-
sional meetings. During ­these Humam and Jafar would describe their pro­
gress to Saddam, who typically listened without interruption. According to 
Jafar’s recollection, Saddam never asked about weaponization or hinted at 
a deadline (or even a time frame) during ­these meetings. Neither Humam 
nor Jafar brought up such questions but focused on the developments in the 
enrichment program in their comments. ­These sessions ­were intimate and 
informal; at times Saddam would come out from a nap and other times he 
would play with his ­daughter Hala.106 The men would at times sit and en-
joy a meal together ­after the update. The intimate setting of ­these meetings 
indicated that the two scientists ­were considered part of Saddam’s close cir-
cle of advisers.
Saddam and his subordinates in the security ser­vices and RCC had few 
other sources of information about the proj­ect. Such information was heavi­ly 
compartmentalized within the or­ga­ni­za­tion. Even the IAEC commissioners 
felt that Jafar and Humam rarely consulted them about the priorities and 
challenges facing the program. Nor did they specify exactly what had been 
achieved and where they ­were falling ­behind. This led to frustration and 
speculation, particularly by ­those who disagreed with the priorities laid down 
by Humam and Jafar. From their perspective, their reporting tended to ex-
aggerate the pro­gress of the program. According to some commissioners, 
quarterly pro­gress reports ­were “general outlines that ­were not coupled to 
target values or mea­sured outcomes nor to scheduled dates.”107 This cur-
tailed the possibility of rigorous internal review, as the commissioners ­were 
only able to make general comments rather than focus on the per­for­mance 
of par­tic­u­lar proj­ects. Foreign experts ­later concurred that ­these reports 
blurred the lines between what had already been achieved and the antici-
pated next steps.108
The complexity of the program, where downstream and upstream activities 
­were carried out si­mul­ta­neously, added to the difficulties of monitoring the 
overall pro­gress ­toward large-­scale uranium enrichment. As the leaders of 
the nuclear weapons program reported that they ­were moving forward with 
the exploration of enrichment technologies, details about the rate of pro­gress, 
and the challenges they faced, ­were absent.
growing tensions
While the po­liti­cal leadership remained aloof, frustration began to mount 
within the departments at Tuwaitha. The decision to pursue EMIS as the 

98
chapter 3
primary enrichment technology was particularly controversial. Se­nior sci-
entists and engineers complained that Jafar continued to set the technical 
priorities of the program while ­others continued small-­scale “pet proj­ects.” 
The mounting delays led to disputes and divisions within the se­nior tiers 
of the program.
­There ­were two focal points for ­these criticisms, both related to the design 
of the electromagnetic separators. First, ­there was inadequate theoretical 
analy­sis of the be­hav­ior of low-­charge ions ­under magnetic conditions to 
guide the design of the ionization gauze. Second, the PIG models ­were un-
stable and basically unpredictable. As some of the engineers bitterly com-
plained, continuing down this track was essentially flogging a dead PIG.109 
Yet their proposal to pursue a less complicated ion source, the calutrons 
­adopted in the Manhattan Proj­ect, was brushed aside.
In early 1987, a group of engineers (Selbi, Basil al-­Qaisi, and Numan) 
appealed to Humam to end the stalemate. They argued that their experi-
ments with the PIG failed consistently and that it was necessary to adopt 
calutrons as an alternative ion source. The decision to do so was made in a 
larger meeting involving all leaders of related Office 3000 proj­ects (Humam, 
Jafar, the head of the Electronics and Electrical Engineering Department, the 
head of the Mechanical Engineering Department, the ion source mechanical 
designer, and the head of the Mechanical fabrication Workshops).110 None-
theless, this decision was not implemented in a serious manner. Months 
­later, it emerged that the prototype calutron—­designed by Yahya Nus-
saief, who was head of manufacturing—­was still stored at the mechanical 
workshops. ­After yet another meeting, the shift from PIG to calutrons was 
effected.111
The management of research and development activities was also criti-
cized for its emphasis on experimental adaptation to guide both upstream 
and downstream activities. The research and development pro­cess began 
with basic analy­sis and then moved to design and pilot-­scale development 
(often in parallel). The lion’s share of prob­lem solving was thereby shifted 
to the second stage of the program, where it was far more costly and compli-
cated, not to mention time-­consuming, to make adjustments. The centralized 
management of the program, whereby Jafar was the key decision maker, also 
contributed to stifle crucial feedback between the research and development 
pro­cesses. Proposals that could have made the research and development 
stage more efficient, such as relying more on computer modeling than experi-
mental ­trials, ­were ignored.
The slow pro­gress of the enrichment proj­ects led some Tuwaitha scientists 
and engineers who ­were not involved with the weapons program to believe 
that ­those who ­were ­were not keen to produce nuclear weapons. One scien-
tist noted that several of his colleagues did not like nuclear weapons and 
speculated that some may have wanted to delay the program.112 But ­there is 
no evidence that scientists willingly sabotaged or slowed down the weap-

99
Saddam’s Nuclear Weapons Program, 1981–1987
ons program. The prob­lem was more prosaic: the more the se­nior leaders 
invested in their chosen technologies, the more difficult it was to revisit this 
decision.
When Jafar presented a quarterly pro­gress report to the IAEC in April 
1987, however, he seemed ner­vous.113 This report went into far more detail 
than previous quarterly reports, and the conclusion was bleak: it would be 
impossible to make the major leap forward within the deadline promised to 
Saddam two years earlier. Having put massive resources into the EMIS re-
search program, they ­were still not seeing reliable results during pi­lot ­trials. 
­Because other approaches had been marginalized in order to pour resources 
into the EMIS proj­ect, ­little pro­gress was forthcoming elsewhere.
The reactions ­were strong and immediate. The first commissioner com-
menting was al-­Kittal, who asked ­whether this finding would be reported 
to Saddam—it was not. ­Others asked for a more specific description of the 
prob­lems in the EMIS proj­ect, in the hope that some solution could be found. 
Even at this stage, the commissioners did not have a full picture of the techni-
cal challenges or the status of ongoing programs.114 Se­nior participants ­later 
described the discussion, which lasted for hours, as the most stressful meet-
ing of the weapons program.115 While no immediate solution to the technical 
prob­lems was found, the commissioners agreed to restructure the manage-
ment of the program to give Jafar more time to focus on the bottlenecks in the 
EMIS proj­ect. More broadly, it was apparent that the management of the pro-
gram had to be reformed to focus on key challenges and give the commis-
sioners a clearer view of the prob­lems that ­were accumulating.
The IAEC deci­ded to create a more streamlined or­ga­ni­za­tion. The first 
round of reor­ga­ni­za­tion followed the program leaders’ begrudging realiza-
tion that the program had outgrown the management structure. The weapons 
program had grown in size and complexity, while the centralized manage-
ment of all of ­these proj­ects suffered from over-­stretch. The result was a 
bloated program that did not focus resources on the most promising techno-
logical development tracks. Furthermore, the centralized management ap-
proach ­adopted thus far had prevented the other se­nior figures from helping 
to solve the outstanding prob­lems facing the program.
In response to the April 1987 report, Selbi volunteered to assume some of 
Jafar’s administrative obligations, while Jafar remained scientific leader of 
the enrichment-­related proj­ect portfolio in Office 3000. ­These changes ­were 
reported to IAEC chairman Izzat Ibrahim, but the findings of the internal 
report of April 1987 ­were not communicated to him, or to Saddam.116
­Later that spring, the se­nior management initiated another round of reor­
ga­ni­za­tion of the main research and development units in the program. In 
May, se­nior figures in Office 3000 traveled to the Habaniya resort outside 
Fallujah to discuss the or­ga­ni­za­tion of the weapons program. This meeting 
was set in pleasant surroundings, and the scientists ­were joined by their fam-
ilies. This set the scene for a constructive discussion. Jafar and Selbi led the 

100
chapter 3
deliberations on how to optimize the or­ga­ni­za­tion and management of the 
weapons program.
They deci­ded to reor­ga­nize Office 3000 into a simpler structure of three 
groups, each focusing on distinct clusters of activities. Group 1, led by Mahdi 
Obeidi, was dedicated to gaseous diffusion; Group 2, led by Jafar, focused 
on EMIS; and Group 3, led by Selbi, ­housed vari­ous related activities (plan-
ning, administration, documentation, procurement, manufacturing, and in-
stallation).117 This revised structure, the scientists hoped, would pool ­human 
resources more efficiently. ­These groups ­were overseen by a steering commit-
tee, Committee 3000, whose members included Jafar (head), Selbi, Numan 
(director general), Ahmed (director general), and Obeidi (deputy director 
general). As signs of this turbulence registered at the se­nior level of the re-
gime, at a time when Saddam was trying to regain control over the proliferat-
ing military-­industrial complex, the autonomy of the proj­ect would be called 
into question.
a first step ­toward weaponization
In early 1987, Humam and Jafar discussed the issue of weaponization.118 
This was a complex challenge in terms of design and engineering. They 
agreed that it would be unwise to dedicate ­human resources to another de-
manding line of research and development at that stage, as Groups 1 and 2 
­were still facing many challenges with enrichment technologies. Nonethe-
less, they deci­ded to commission a preliminary report for Saddam’s perusal. 
They asked Kidhir Hamza, who had written one of the earliest proposals 
for a weapons program in 1971–1972, to prepare this report. Hamza com-
manded ­little re­spect from the se­nior figures of the IAEC or even his col-
leagues. The fact that he was chosen to lead the first study of weaponization 
could be taken to suggest that this line of research was not seen as urgent.
Humam and Jafar agreed that Saddam had to sanction research and de-
velopment on weaponization. Jafar recommended that this line of research, 
which they proposed to name the al-­Hussein proj­ect, should be carried out 
in a separate location. In Humam’s view, weaponization introduced a host 
of new challenges, including physical risks to buildings, staff, and surround-
ings, and heightened risks of detection. Thus far, Saddam had only sanc-
tioned the development of a large-­scale production of fissile material. Moving 
forward with weaponization required his explicit approval. Preparing the 
technical infrastructure would also require collaboration from other institu-
tions in the MIC. For example, the Al-­Qaa-­Qaa General Establishment would 
provide the explosive package for the nuclear weapon. The likelihood that 
word would spread about the highly secretive weapons program further 
underlined the need to get Saddam’s explicit approval.119
In April 1987, Humam indicated in a memorandum to Saddam that the 
program was approaching a new stage. Around this time, the IAEC com-

101
Saddam’s Nuclear Weapons Program, 1981–1987
missioners suspected that Saddam was receiving unflattering reports about 
the nuclear program.120 General Amir al-­Saadi, who was the deputy of 
­Saddam’s son-­in-­law, Hussein Kamil, noted that Saddam inserted “eyes” in 
weapons proj­ects, just as the IAEC suspected. For example, during 1987–
1988, Saddam sent a team to rec­ord missile tests to provide him with a video 
in­de­pen­dent of the MIC’s reporting channels. He also received reports out-
side of MIC’s formal channels. As ­these mea­sures suggest, the Iraqi leader 
was aware of the prob­lems of drift and overly optimistic reporting in the 
military-­industrial complex, and was looking for ways to avoid being mis-
led by his officials.121
When Saddam received Humam’s memorandum he consulted Kamil, who 
was head of the MIMI. Kamil was a rising star, having merged the General 
Institute for Industries and the special security agency (Amn Al Khas), and 
then becoming a minister in rapid succession.122 His new portfolio included 
all arms production, including WMD (chemical, biological, and nuclear 
weapons programs). Kamil recommended lifting the weaponization proj­ect 
from the IAEC and making it his personal responsibility.
Saddam accordingly ordered that Kamil would take direct charge of the 
weaponization proj­ect. This weakened the IAEC’s influence over a particu-
larly sensitive dimension of the program, which was a blow to the commis-
sion, particularly Jafar and Humam. As the program moved closer to the 
threshold of a nuclear weapons capability, the exclusive reign of the IAEC 
was about to end. Kamil transferred a dozen scientists and engineers from 
Tuwaitha to Amn Al Khas. Kamil told Hamza, the team leader who had lob-
bied for a weapons program since the early 1970s, to use the name Moham-
med Hazem, presumably due to the sensitivity of the proj­ect.123 (Incidentally, 
when Kamil talked to UN inspectors ­after his 1995 defection to Jordan, he 
confirmed that Hazem was Hamza’s pseudonym, and characterized him as a 
“professional liar.”)124
Hamza and his team would to study the lit­er­a­ture to define the challenges 
of weaponization, assess what resources would be required, and consider 
what available resources could be mobilized for the weaponization program. 
They had not received any specifications for the size or basic design prefer-
ences of the weapon. The group assumed that their objective was to develop 
a minimum 10-­kiloton weapon.125 This assumption, along with several ­others 
in the study, revealed the lack of direction from the military and po­liti­cal 
leadership, as well as the group’s lack of relevant expertise.126
In September 1987, Saddam’s secretary Hammadi called a meeting to dis-
cuss Hamza’s findings. General al-­Saadi listed the key conclusions, which 
specified that a weaponization program would take a de­cade and require 
some three hundred specialists and a billion-­dollar bud­get.127 The initial es-
timates of the reports cited a need for $600 million worth of equipment and 
infrastructure, a figure that did not include the establishment of a new power 
station and several new facilities for explosive tests and laboratories. The 

102
chapter 3
other attendees ridiculed ­these assessments. Said, the director of the NRC, 
said that this proj­ect could be done in five years with the available resources 
at Tuwaitha. He was promptly put in charge of weaponization. Al-­Saadi 
transferred a group of scientists from the weaponization program back to the 
IAEC and Tuwaitha in November. They formed a new unit, Group 4, at 
Tuwaitha dedicated to weaponization.128
­After the Osirak strike, the Iraqi nuclear program was transformed. It re-
ceived much greater resources and benefited from a plan and a dedicated 
or­ga­ni­za­tion. The immediate objective was to produce enriched uranium on 
a large scale. To this end Saddam gave Jafar carte blanche, made him respon-
sible for the planning and implementation of the program, and removed 
influential Baathists from the se­nior leadership. Saddam set the basic rules 
for the program but remained a remote figure between 1981 and 1987.
During this period we can see several indications of capture, as scientists 
explored technologies that ­were unlikely to yield results for several years. 
­These choices have previously been attributed to Jafar, but the evidence pre-
sented in this chapter shows that the IAEC ordered Jafar and his colleagues 
to open additional research tracks, which diverted resources from the main 
priorities of the program. To be clear, this was not the result of Saddam’s per-
sonal interference or scientists acting “as if” Saddam interfered. As a result, 
Jafar and Humam designed the program to maximize the number of activi-
ties, while constant reor­ga­ni­za­tion made auditing and peer review difficult 
for the regime, and even for the IAEC. This seems to have been one way of 
coping with the many uncertainties associated with their momentous task 
and the potential risks of failure.
Despite increased motivation and resources, the program continued to fal-
ter. Undoubtedly, being cut off from foreign support was a contributing 
cause. Another was the delegatory management of the program that, in the 
absence of adequate monitoring and auditing mechanisms, facilitated drift. 
Despite committing to a deadline, the man­ag­ers of the program did not re-
vise their priorities when their preferred technologies ­were not working. The 
absence of effective monitoring mechanisms in the Iraqi state also failed to 
alert the se­nior po­liti­cal leadership of the prob­lem. It is telling that the first 
reor­ga­ni­za­tion of the program came at the initiative of se­nior engineers, fol-
lowing months of intense in-­fighting, and not as the result of external inter-
vention. Meanwhile, the scientists withheld the information that they would 
not meet the 1990 deadline from Saddam. Instead, they asked for permis-
sion to launch a weapons program.

103
chapter 4
Crises and a Crash Program,  
1988–1991
In 1988, tensions came to a head when the leaders of the nuclear weapons 
program accused the military-­industrial complex of delaying their pro­gress. 
­After Jafar Dhiya Jafar and Humam Abdul Khaliq clashed with Hussein 
Kamil, Saddam’s power­ful son-­in-­law (and minister of military industries), 
Kamil took charge of the program. The program was split into two tracks, 
focusing on dif­fer­ent enrichment technologies. Each was subject to more 
scrutiny and pressure to deliver. As the war with Iran came to an end in the 
fall of 1988, both tracks ­were making pro­gress ­toward large-­scale produc-
tion of fissile material. Meanwhile, a dedicated group was developing a 
weapons design.
­These two groups played by dif­fer­ent rules. Specifically, Jafar’s group fol-
lowed the rules while Kamil’s group largely ignored them. Both groups made 
pro­gress, but Kamil’s unit withheld information from Saddam to pres­ent 
their results in a more flattering light. In addition, Kamil exaggerated the 
prospects of an imminent breakthrough to Saddam by late 1990. Saddam at-
tempted to open his own lines of information, apparently without much 
success. At any rate, Saddam’s attention turned to the economic crisis ­after 
the war with Iran ended, which posed a potential threat to his survival. The 
nuclear program was less impor­tant.
­After Saddam invaded Kuwait in August 1990, Kamil ordered a crash pro-
gram to develop a crude nuclear explosive. The scientists knew this was a 
“mission impossible,” due to remaining challenges in basic design and dif-
ficulties in scaling up models from experiments to production. Saddam and 
Kamil, on the other hand, ­were oblivious of this fact. As the allied forces 
started a bombing campaign in February 1991, the crash program was in-
terrupted, and subsequently dismantled. Bombing destroyed many of the 
sites, and within a few months the program was reor­ga­nized. The scientists 
­were tasked with rebuilding the destroyed infrastructure.

104
chapter 4
Reor­ga­ni­za­tion and New Directions
In 1987–1988 the weapons program was reor­ga­nized from within and with-
out to create a more efficient and transparent or­ga­ni­za­tion. The internal re-
structuring that followed the April 1987 report described in the previous 
chapter redefined the proj­ect’s administrative structure. A second series of 
changes in 1988 placed the program ­under Kamil’s purview. ­These changes 
are summarized in Figure 4.1 below, which illustrates the administrative 
restructuring of the program, as well as the emergence of competing techni-
cal proj­ects within the nuclear weapons program. ­Under Kamil’s direction, 
Saddam seems to have hoped, the leadership could regain control and bring 
the program back on track.
In 1988, two additional rounds of reor­ga­ni­za­tion transformed the gover-
nance and oversight of the proj­ect. First, in early 1988 Saddam replaced the 
Iraqi Atomic Energy Commission (IAEC) with a new body, the Iraqi Atomic 
Energy Or­ga­ni­za­tion (IAEO), led by Humam as chairman and Jafar as vice-­
chairman. Some of the former IAEC commissioners became directors general 
of the IAEO (Dhafir Selbi and Khalid Said); al-­Kittal left the commission 
and took a position at the Iraqi Embassy in Austria.
Second, in late 1988 the program was lifted from the IAEO and placed 
­under Kamil’s Ministry of Industry and Military Industrialization (MIMI). 
In the fall of 1988 Humam sent a report to Saddam describing the status of 
the program, pointing out (some) prob­lems and suggested solutions.1 The 
majority of the bottlenecks Humam identified ­were blamed on delays caused 
by the Military Industrial Commission (MIC) in the construction of work-
shops at the Oqba bin Nafi General Establishment and the Tarmiya site, 
which was the main electromagnetic isotope separation (EMIS) production 
site.
Saddam submitted ­these criticisms to Kamil, as the responsible minister. 
He then called a meeting of the se­nior leaders of MIC in October 1988, in-
cluding Kamil; Directors General Amir al-­Saadi, Mahdi Obeidi, Nazar 
Juma Kaseer, Ahmed Murtadha Ahmed; the director general of the Al Fao 
General Establishment, Abdul Fattah; as well as directors general from the 
military-­industrial complex.2 The contingent from the IAEO—­Humam, Ja-
far, and Selbi—­was outnumbered. Assuming the role of chair of the meet-
ing, Kamil began by accusing Humam of falling ­behind with the weapons 
program. He cited information passed from insiders and deflected any MIC 
responsibility for delays, blaming poor management of the nuclear weap-
ons program. He also claimed that if the MIMI, ­under his leadership, ­were 
in charge of the program, the situation would improve.3 The following day, 
Kamil transferred the nuclear weapons program from the IAEO to the MIMI.
Kamil maintained Group 1, focusing on gaseous diffusion, as a separate 
entity, to stimulate competition. The remaining proj­ects would be led by 

Crash Program
Dhafer’s Project: weaponization, explosive lenses (Al-Qa Qaa G.E.)
Engineering Directorate Center (EDC)
Group 4: weapon design
Al-Hussein Project: weaponization (MIC)
Group 3: support
Group 2: EMIS
Engineering Design Directorate
Group 1: gaseous diffusion
Engineering Design Centre: centrifuges (MIC)
Research and Development (Dept. 3000)
Office of Studies and Development (IAEC)
Petrochemical Program 3 (MIMI)
1982
1983
1984
1985
1986
1987
1988
1989
1990
1991
MIC: Military-Industrial Commission subproject
( ): parentheses indicate ministry project is under
Italics indicate focus of subprojects
OSD (later PC-3) Programs
Iraq Nuclear Weapons Program Timeline, 1982–1991
Figure 4.1. Iraq nuclear weapons program timeline, 1982–1991.

106
chapter 4
­Jafar, who was appointed deputy head of the MIMI. He would be sup-
ported by Said, Zafir Rashid Salman, and Thamer Numan Mawlood, who 
­were appointed as man­ag­ers of the new program by Presidential Decree on 
1 April 1988.4 In January 1989, the entire weapons program (Office 3000) 
was officially transferred to Kamil’s ministry and renamed Petrochemical 
Proj­ect No. 3 (PC-3 for short).
Kamil had a reputation for applying ruthless pressure and was known for 
his success rate in high-­level turf fights. Related to Saddam through blood 
and marriage, he had good access to financial resources. He had already ap-
propriated several large and prestigious proj­ects since taking charge of the 
MIMI in 1988.5 Kamil put pressure on PC-3 to make rapid pro­gress, but 
lacked a realistic understanding of timelines or of the technical requirements 
to succeed. When staff told him that developing a prototype of an advanced 
machine would take two years, but could perhaps be done in one, Kamil 
gave them a deadline of six months.6 Any delays could mean not being able 
to leave the site ­until the work was done. While such deadlines led to ac-
celeration in some areas, other prob­lems could not be easily resolved through 
rushed intensive campaigns.
­These campaigns ­were grueling, intensive efforts that rarely succeeded in 
finding breakthroughs, despite Kamil’s pressure and scare tactics. In Selbi’s 
recollection, “The meeting would usually last for five or six hours, and ­until 
backs ached, to end up with discussing only one or two points of the set 
agenda. The rest of the time was spent discussing issues outside the stipu-
lated agenda. . . . ​Discussions would get so diverse and fruitless to the point 
that many who attended began to label them as meetings that ended in nega-
tive results.”7 Selbi also recollects that, ­under Kamil, “any proven deliberate 
delay would expose the responsible to be taken to a court of law.”8 This threat 
was never carried out. But it does suggest that, even during the Iran-­Iraq War, 
the nuclear weapons program’s man­ag­ers strug­gled with implementation, 
while the regime lacked the tools to improve the situation. As frustrations 
grew, Selbi and Jafar proposed that Selbi chair the review sessions to ensure 
a more focused and prob­lem-­oriented approach.
two tracks: centrifuges and emis
­After Group 1 (initially focusing on gaseous diffusion, then adopting cen-
trifuges as their main technology) was transferred to Kamil in August 1987, 
most of the staff left Tuwaitha for the new location in Rashidiya, situated 
northwest of Baghdad. Upon arrival, Group 1 was renamed the Engineer-
ing Design Directorate (EDD) and placed ­under Obeidi’s leadership. ­Under 
Kamil’s direction, the basic strategies of the EDD and the other departments 
(Groups 2–4) began to diverge. While the EMIS program remained consistent 
with Saddam’s diktat to adopt an indigenous route, the EDD increasingly 
relied on foreign assistance despite the increased risks of detection. Kamil 

107
Crises and a Crash Program, 1988–1991 
also encouraged dropping long-­standing investments—he deci­ded to aban-
don gaseous diffusion, for example—­and ­adopted new ave­nues if ­these 
seemed more promising. In this re­spect, the pace of this group’s work seemed 
faster than their competitors as new activities ­were constantly added to the 
overall portfolio. In other re­spects, Kamil’s management style was not that 
dif­fer­ent from other state elites in the military-­industrial complex. Kamil 
compartmentalized information, preferring to report to Saddam only once 
major pro­gress had taken place. As Kamil came ­under increasing criticism 
from other se­nior regime figures, including for a series of arguments with 
Saddam’s son Uday, he took care to cast his managerial per­for­mance in the 
most positive light pos­si­ble.
The transition of Group 1 to Rashidiya was not altogether smooth. The 
scientists experienced challenges and delays in moving from research and 
development ­toward developing industrial-­scale production, similar to ­those 
experienced previously by their colleagues at Tuwaitha. In the face of such 
prob­lems, Kamil simply postponed reporting to Saddam. Meanwhile, EDD 
subgroups discreetly started pursuing alternative technologies, such as cen-
trifuges, with the hope of being able to report some much needed success in 
the near ­future.9
Shortly ­after their relocation, the EDD teams at Rashidiya ­were subsumed 
into a new ministry. In 1988, the MIMI was formally created (having existed 
since 1987), and absorbed several agencies, including the MIC. The EDD was 
then given the status of a MIC directorate and renamed the Engineering De-
sign Centre (EDC). The EDC retained its existing five technical departments 
and gained additional nontechnical departments supporting them. All de-
partments ultimately answered to Kamil.
This or­ga­ni­za­tion, now a ministerial department, was not subject to 
bud­getary restrictions or financial planning. ­There was not even an annual 
bud­get during their first two years. Expenditures, including salaries, ­were 
funded by loans from the MIMI. From the spring of 1989, annual financial al-
locations ­were made by the Ministry of Finance based on the needs and re-
quirements of the program.10 Its expenditure increased tenfold during the first 
year (excluding foreign expenditure and costs of construction shouldered by 
the MIC). Kamil’s group at the EDC did not even have a bud­get ­until 1989.11
The guiding princi­ple for Kamil’s group at Rashidiya was to adopt small 
proj­ects, purchase equipment and raw materials at the design stage (so they 
could launch quickly into production if the technology proved feasible), and 
focus resources on design challenges while outsourcing production and 
manufacturing to other organ­izations in the military-­industrial complex. 
This led to a proliferation of proj­ects, reaching a total of more than seventy 
dif­fer­ent working teams in 1989. This was ultimately deemed detrimental 
to the or­ga­ni­za­tion, as it diverted resources from the key challenges.12 Sub-
sequently, resources ­were focused more sharply on what was then seen as 
the main task at hand: to produce centrifuges.

108
chapter 4
While research and development on EMIS was moving forward at Tu-
waitha, the EDC’s research on gaseous diffusion languished. The Rashidiya 
building (originally designed to be a ­water research centre) was not prepared 
for research and development activities. The Al Fao General Establishment 
provided designs for laboratories and workshops. While the main building 
was redesigned, work on gaseous diffusion slowed down. In other words, 
Jafar’s program was performing better than Kamil’s group, which became a 
prob­lem for Kamil, who also had enemies in Saddam’s closest circle, includ-
ing his most volatile son. Despite having dedicated a portion of the weapons 
program’s resources to this line of research (15 ­percent of ­labor and funding 
since 1982), the group working on gaseous diffusion was not making sig-
nificant pro­gress ­toward large-­scale production. This led Kamil to rethink 
his options. The difficulties of producing suitable barriers had been appar-
ent to the leaders of this proj­ect for a while. Kamil and his scientists began 
to explore alternative technologies to produce feed material for EMIS, and 
began to explore centrifuges as an alternative enrichment technology in com-
petition with EMIS.
Gaseous diffusion had been intended to be a complementary approach for 
EMIS, producing low-­enriched uranium to use as feed material for the sep-
aration pro­cess instead of natu­ral uranium (a much less efficient and more 
time-­consuming option). If this option was ­going nowhere, an alternative 
had to be found. In the spring of 1988 the scientists or­ga­nized a meeting to 
assess three alternative options: ­laser isotope separation, mass diffusion, and 
chemical enrichment. ­Laser isotope separation had previously been dis-
carded by the IAEC. Mass diffusion was a relatively new method, and the 
Iraqis had no available information or strong indications suggesting this 
could be a workable technology. This option was also discarded, as it seemed 
at least as challenging as gaseous diffusion. They therefore deci­ded to ex-
plore chemical enrichment as a potential alternative.
In 1989 and 1990, teams intensively explored ion exchange chromatogra-
phy (Redox) and solvent extraction (Chemex), two technologies that sepa-
rate enriched uranium ions from other compounds.13 While the chemists 
­were optimistic about taking this research to the production stage, this posed 
numerous challenges. Many of ­these would—as per usual—­have to be tack-
led ­later in the pro­cess. In late 1990, the Rashidiya group placed ­orders for 
a pi­lot plant producing equipment for chemical extraction.14 ­Those efforts 
did not pro­gress beyond initial design assessments before the 1991 Gulf War 
broke out.
As the EDC discreetly turned their attention to the centrifuge option, they 
realized that Saddam’s rule about avoiding sensitive nuclear assistance was 
becoming an impor­tant obstacle to making pro­gress. To perform better than 
their colleagues had done thus far—­Kamil had promised Saddam that the 
scientists would ­under his leadership—­they ignored Saddam’s rule and be-
gan to seek help from abroad.

109
Crises and a Crash Program, 1988–1991 
First, teams set out to build and assem­ble an oil-­bearing Beams gas cen-
trifuge, an old design that was described in the lit­er­a­ture. In December 1987, 
the first Beams centrifuge was constructed. But the model did not work.15 It 
was clear to the scientists that their immediate challenge was to develop bet-
ter design analy­sis, to identify what caused the vibration and rotation caus-
ing the breakdown of the centrifuges. But even ­after attempts to improve the 
design analy­sis through tools such as computer simulations, which frus-
trated engineers at Tuwaitha had advocated for years, troubleshooting 
often failed to identify and target the under­lying prob­lems. Two years ­later, 
many of the prob­lems had been solved with the help of two German scientists 
and the Beams centrifuge eventually reached a speed of 50,000 revolutions per 
minute. Meanwhile, the EDC explored alternative centrifuge designs based 
on the advice and designs provided by the two foreign scientists. Some of 
­these proposed designs ­were constructed and tested. By August 1988 the 
bulk of resources ­were dedicated to another design, the magnetic-­bearing 
centrifuge.16
Cooperating with the military-­industrial complex proved problematic. 
This was particularly troubling for Kamil, who was in charge of this sector. 
During the construction of the Beams centrifuge model, for example, Iraqi 
industry was not capable of producing the components with their existing 
know-­how and machinery. This caused delays and high levels of waste. Sim-
ilarly, the buildings constructed for development and production of centri-
fuges had insufficient ventilation, making the environment less clean than 
it ­ought to be for such sensitive pro­cesses. Faced with ­these challenges, which 
did not have any obvious short-­term solutions, the centrifuge program 
sought help from foreign companies.
The EDC’s main target was to develop enough centrifuges to produce 10 
kilograms of highly enriched uranium (HEU) annually by 1994.17 To get re-
sults, the leaders of the centrifuge program pursued design information 
and the necessary machinery from abroad.18 This meant searching for highly 
sensitive design information and purchasing centrifuge components from 
foreign suppliers, which entailed considerable risk of detection. A significant 
portion of the most difficult design and manufacturing work was outsourced 
to profit-­driven Western Eu­ro­pean suppliers. With their assistance—­which 
included training and advice by German engineers traveling to Iraq—­the 
centrifuge program made pro­gress.
In the second half of 1988 they deci­ded to also explore a magnetic-­bearing 
centrifuge, the so-­called Zippe model developed in 1960. Over the summer, 
Obeidi and colleagues tracked down early designs and detailed blueprints 
from Eu­ro­pean and American sources. In July or August 1988, a former em-
ployee of the MAN com­pany (a Munich-­based subcontractor to the Dutch 
nuclear fuel com­pany URENCO) provided the Iraqis with several early de-
sign drawing for magnetic-­bearing centrifuges. This triggered the decision 
to switch from gas centrifuges to the Zippe model.19 With this information 

110
chapter 4
in hand, they deci­ded to immediately begin purchasing manufacturing 
equipment and raw material to build thousands of centrifuges, even though 
the design had not been fully assessed or tested. They ­were not yet certain 
that they could make the centrifuge model work.
The decision to move forward with large-­scale sensitive procurement 
at this early stage led to considerable internal discussion. Some warned that 
this was a high-­risk strategy, given that ­there was not yet even a prototype 
that could prove the ­actual per­for­mance of this centrifuge model. Nonethe-
less, the EDC ordered the construction of a development and manufactur-
ing site at Yousifya called Al Furat.20 ­Here, a pi­lot cascade of one thousand 
centrifuges would be built ­after the prototype design had been tested experi-
mentally.21 This site had to be constructed according to very specific criteria, 
beyond Iraq’s existing industrial capabilities, to be suitable for the production 
of highly sensitive components.
In 1989 another former MAN employee gave the Iraqis further design 
drawings, technical reports, and specifications for producing and operating 
centrifuges sourced from URENCO from the 1970s and 1980s.22 In 1989–1990 
the Iraqis also purchased twenty specialized centrifuge rotors from Ger-
many.23 Some sensitive items, including maraging steel and computer nu-
merically controlled (CNC) machines (necessary to produce key components 
for centrifuges), ­were seized at Frankfurt Airport by the authorities.24 Despite 
some difficulties, much of the ordered equipment began to arrive in the fall of 
1989. Still, construction of the Al Furat plant was delayed. An alternative 
building at Rashidiya was used as a temporary site, where a small cascade of 
120 centrifuges would be set up.
In 1989–90, other states ­were beginning to suspect that the Iraqi nuclear 
program had a military dimension, but agencies remained unaware of the 
­actual scope and pro­gress of the Iraqi program.25 In February 1989 the Cen-
tral Intelligence Agency (CIA) prepared a report concluding that Iraq had a 
strong interest in nuclear weapons, citing their procurement activities and 
suggesting that Iraq could have a nuclear weapon by “the mid-­to-­late 1990’s,” 
perhaps within two years.26
At home, the program was also subject to increasing scrutiny. Obeidi, who 
was the head of the centrifuge program, recalled: “Saddam’s security men 
at Rashidiya began asking technical questions well beyond their understand-
ing. Some of my engineers told me they seemed to be probing for flaws in 
our program that they could report to their superiors.”27 In other words, Sad-
dam was not prepared to fully trust Kamil or his scientists to provide a 
realistic appraisal. However, security ser­vice officers lacked the technical 
ability to confirm what the scientists told them.
In early 1990 Obeidi and his colleagues began to work on a prototype mag-
netic centrifuge. Obeidi was now ­under so much pressure that he devel-
oped a heart condition. Having failed with the initial Beams centrifuge, it 
was now imperative for him to deliver results. ­After intensive efforts, a suc-

111
Crises and a Crash Program, 1988–1991 
cessful test was carried out of a single magnetic centrifuge in the spring of 
1990.28 Looking forward to the production stage, initial projections suggested 
producing a pilot-­scale cascade of one thousand oil centrifuges during the 
first year and then scaling up to four thousand centrifuges.29 ­After the switch 
to the magnetic Zippe centrifuge model, the centrifuge team focused on set-
ting up an initial pi­lot cascade of one thousand centrifuges.
As ­these cascades ­were being planned and prepared, the EDC began to 
prepare sites that would produce feed material for the centrifuges (uranium 
hex­a­fluor­ide [UF6]) in addition to other preparations for scaling up centri-
fuge enrichment. As locations ­were selected to ­house ­these new facilities, the 
EDC was keen to avoid distant locations ­because this ran the risk of spread-
ing scarce resources too thin. While this made sense from an orga­nizational 
perspective, it ­violated the princi­ple of geo­graph­i­cal dispersal to make the 
program less vulnerable.
scaling up emis
At Tuwaitha, Jafar prepared to scale up EMIS. Despite the inevitable delays 
in building highly sophisticated infrastructure and machinery, long-­standing 
technical challenges ­were being resolved. Jafar’s group had remained faithful 
to the princi­ples Saddam had established for the program by relying on in-
digenous resources and taking secrecy seriously.
Their next step was to build production sites for feed material, EMIS, and 
weapon development. Beyond Tuwaitha, the sites for production of feed 
material ­were given a higher status, and Jazira was made a directorate. Group 
4, focusing on weaponization, moved to a new site called Atheer, 50 kilo­
meters west of Baghdad. Several new directorates ­were established to over-
see the development of the industrial-­scale buildings required for the next 
phase of the program.30
In late 1987 and early 1988, Group 2 began developing the EMIS produc-
tion sites. The construction of the Tarmiya plant started in late 1987. The plant 
would have seventy R120 separators (1,200 millimeters wide) and twenty 
R60 separators (600 millimeters wide).31 The uranium feedstock would first 
enter the R120 separators, where up to 18 ­percent enriched uranium would 
be collected. This uranium would then be passed on to the R60 separators, 
where the enrichment would increase to 93 ­percent. The Iraqis assessed that, 
at design value, the R120 separators could collect 55 kilograms of 18 ­percent 
enriched uranium per year, while the R60 separators could collect 11 kilo-
grams of 93 ­percent highly enriched uranium per year.32
Between February and September 1990, the first eight R120 separators 
­were installed at Tarmiya. By 1991, another seventeen separators had been 
manufactured but not yet installed.33 The pro­cess of installing the separa-
tors turned out to be riddled with difficulties. The per­for­mance of the sepa-
rators was far below the design capacity (none reached above 20 ­percent). 

112
chapter 4
As a result, only 685 grams of uranium (4 ­percent enriched) was produced 
at Tarmiya.34 This did not come as a surprise, given that the pi­lot separators at 
Tuwaitha had an average per­for­mance of 7.2 ­percent enrichment and only 
produced 640 grams of enriched material.35 Between July 1990 and January 
1991, three of the seventeen separators of the second R120 series ­were in-
stalled. In total, five R60 separators ­were constructed. In November prepara-
tions started for the installation of the R60 separators, although ­these efforts 
­were ultimately interrupted the following year.36 During initial runs the per­
for­mance was only 16 ­percent.37
As the installation of separators at the production sites was delayed, the 
production of the feed material was halted. But large-­scale production of 
feed material was not an immediate concern, given the delays in the instal-
lation of separators. Production of uranium oxide began at the Jazira plant in 
1989, while the production of uranium tetrachloride was halted in 1990, due 
to the delayed installation at the two EMIS production sites.38 Meanwhile, a 
series of research proj­ects explored how to recover uranium more efficiently 
from EMIS separators and how to purify uranium tetrachloride.39 In addi-
tion, chemists ­were developing vari­ous supporting systems to prepare the 
sensitive feed material to be fed into the EMIS separators. Despite inevita-
ble delays in scaling up both the production of feed material and separators 
from the pi­lot programs, the scientists and engineers ­were overcoming long-­
standing challenges.
weaponization moves forward
Group 4 at Tuwaitha had to juggle several dif­fer­ent tasks, including the 
preparation of HEU into a metal sphere and designing and producing the 
explosive package and weapons components. Weaponization work required 
theoretical analyses, chemical work, design, and manufacturing of high ex-
plosives and trigger mechanisms. The scientists and engineers at Tuwaitha 
had to prepare for ­these tasks using what they could find in the available 
lit­er­a­ture.40 The program was divided into two subcomponents. Group 4 
remained responsible for the overall design, production, and testing of the 
bomb. A separate unit, the Dhafir Proj­ect, focused on detonators and explo-
sive lenses.41 The theoretical and chemical work was carried out at Tuwaitha, 
while the components for the bomb and the high explosives ­were to be de-
veloped and tested at Atheer.42
Group 4 began by specifying the requirements for weaponization and set-
ting up the or­ga­ni­za­tion of this proj­ect. This group was led by Said, who 
had extensive administrative experience from serving as the director of the 
Nuclear Research Center (NRC). He had committed to completing this proj­
ect, with no additional resources, within five years.
Initially, Said and his staff did not have any specifications in terms of the 
size and weight of the bomb. In April 1988, Group 4 started developing the 

113
Crises and a Crash Program, 1988–1991 
explosive casing for the weapons core. During an initial planning meeting, 
MIC staff cited the American “Fat Man” design—­the bomb used against Na-
gasaki on 9 August 1945—as a pos­si­ble template.43 This was accepted as a 
working model, at least for the time being, and some even referred to the 
device as “Fat Man.” Prior to the formation of Group 4, the earliest theoreti-
cal studies of weaponization (in the al-­Hussein proj­ect) focused on a gun-­
type device. By 1988, the Iraqis had selected an alternative design: an implo-
sion fission device with an expected yield of 20 kiloton.44 This was a more 
complicated design than the gun-­type weapon but would require a smaller 
quantity of HEU.45
Less thought was given to how this weapon would be delivered at this 
stage. Quite simply, the Iraqis assumed that the weight of the bomb would 
determine ­whether it could be delivered by missile or airplane.46 It was only 
in December 1990, much ­later in the pro­cess, that Group 4 started serious 
discussions about coordination with Iraq’s missile program.47 When the scien-
tists engaged with the missile proj­ect, they learned that the initial weapons 
design was too heavy and too large to fit on even the largest missile design. 
Specifically, the estimated weight of the device (1,200 kilograms) had to be 
reduced to about 700 kilograms to fit in the missile load. Group 4 modified 
their design to reduce the total weight to about one ton or less.48 In addi-
tion, engineers ­were working on the placement of the nuclear warhead in-
side the missile warhead. Working with an empty warhead, delivered on 
site in September 1990, they developed several dif­fer­ent proposals for how 
to mount the warhead inside the missile.49
Group 4 prepared a very detailed plan with specified deadlines for 962 
individual tasks. This plan also gave estimates for how long it would take 
to achieve ­these tasks, taking into consideration the limits of their experi-
ence and manpower, but for some tasks they did not have the information 
to be able to estimate the date of completion. The report, finished by August 
1988, concluded that it would take three years to design and construct a nu-
clear weapon. One month ­later, Group 4 reported to the IAEC president in 
September 1988 citing late 1992 as their target date.50 Initially, staff submit-
ted monthly reports for individual proj­ects, which ­were fed into a rigorous 
system. Within a few months, this system was found too cumbersome and 
was replaced by verbal reporting.51
The weaponization proj­ect was run in a dif­fer­ent manner to the hierar-
chical managerial style of the IAEC. The activities ­were subject to three 
sets of internal reviews: periodic group meetings, periodic activities meet-
ings, and open lecture seminars. This produced a more interactive atmo-
sphere and fostered a more concerted approach to overcoming challenges. 
Between 1988 and 1990 the proj­ect was reor­ga­nized five times, due to changes 
in the “under­standing of the work and the technical requirements.”52 This 
entailed moving technical teams, which may have had some disruptive 
effects.

114
chapter 4
The ­Atheer site was developed for the weaponization proj­ect at the 
cost of 1 million Iraqi dinars. This site was designed to “develop, fabricate 
and cold-­test a nuclear weapon and its individual components.”53 Most of 
the Group 4 departments relocated to ­Atheer; three departments remained 
at Tuwaitha. This site was designed to facilitate vari­ous tests and construc-
tion activities, including experiments with explosive material of up to 1 
metric ton. The layout of the site was carefully designed to avoid raising 
suspicion.54 ­There ­were many delays in the construction of this new site, 
which took at least a year. ­These ­were caused by several ­factors: late arrival 
of equipment, poor management, and some design errors. Even in May 1990 
the site was not ready, as basic utilities ­were still not in place, including elec-
tricity, ­water, and suitable air systems.55
To make up for lost time, a series of mea­sures ­were taken in the late spring 
of 1990. Each task that was lagging ­behind was now subject to an intensive 
review. In addition to this internal review pro­cess, Kamil frequently in-
spected Atheer, putting further pressure on ­those responsible for con-
structing the laboratories and the assembly hall where the nuclear bomb 
would be constructed.56 The design teams started producing items such as 
metal spheres of vari­ous dimensions and experimented with detonator sys-
tems. In late 1990 the teams at the Al-Qa-Qaa General Establishment (QGE) 
carried out CNC machining—­a highly precise manufacturing tool—to pro-
duce high explosives.57
In early 1990 preparations began for developing a test site. Group 4 in-
tended to carry out an underground test, which required finding a suit-
able location. Several sites in Western Iraq near Najaf and Muthanna ­were 
considered from mid-1990 ­until January 1991.58 The group envisioned a 
300-­metre-­long vertical tunnel, with a dia­meter of 90–100 centimeters to 
accommodate the nuclear bomb.59 This posed yet another engineering 
challenge, as Iraq’s largest drills ­were no larger than 30 centimeters in dia­
meter.
First, the QGE assisted with the development of an explosive package for 
the weapons design. The Dhafir Proj­ect carried out tests and development 
during 1990. Specifically, the scientists and engineers made pro­gress with 
explosives research through a series of tests, and with the manufacturing of 
components for the explosive package of the weapon (notably lenses).
Still, their collaboration with Group 4 was not ­free of tension. The nuclear 
scientists criticized the Dhafir Proj­ect members for their experimental ap-
proach, arguing that they had to adopt the more systematic analytic meth-
ods of Group 4 in assessing the results of explosive tests. By the second half 
of 1990, the Dhafir Proj­ect and Group 4 improved their cooperation, realiz-
ing that this would be necessary to move forward in the program.60
The weaponization program attracted international attention to the Iraqi 
nuclear program, as Humam had anticipated. Two incidents in par­tic­u­lar 
alerted the international community to the possibility of a nuclear weapons 

115
Crises and a Crash Program, 1988–1991 
program in Iraq, which involved Iraqis getting caught buying sensitive 
equipment abroad and a loud bang at home.
Since November 1987, the QGE had worked on sophisticated triggering 
mechanisms for an implosion bomb. By late 1989, the staff placed an order 
for such mechanisms, so-­called krytrons, with a U.S. com­pany. This led to a 
sting operation at Heathrow in March 1990, where five Iraqis ­were arrested. 
The QGE also placed an order for high-­speed detonators in 1989, which was 
intercepted by U.S. authorities, drawing attention to the Iraqi program in the 
international media. This especially annoyed Jafar and his colleagues, as 
Group 4 had not requested the QGE staff to place ­these ­orders.61
In mid-­August 1989 a huge explosion rocked the QGE. This was heard in 
Baghdad and Tuwaitha and led to foreign press speculation, including al-
legations that the blast could have been a nuclear accident.62 In fact, the blast 
was not the first accident at QGE, and an investigation determined it was 
caused by ­human error and inadequate safety procedures. The incident dam-
aged several buildings on site, including a nitric acid production building. A 
British journalist, Farzad Bazoft, who traveled to Iraq to investigate this acci-
dent, was apprehended and subsequently executed. The regime was con-
cerned about espionage, particularly ­because they feared it would enable Is-
rael to launch targeted strikes against the nuclear program. When Saddam 
discussed the execution of Bazoft with other se­nior officials, he expressed con-
cern that Bazoft was gathering information that would help Israel and Iran 
attack the Iraqi nuclear facilities. Saddam elaborated:
We are dealing with a country that considers the war between us not to be 
over, with aggressive purposes, and this country applied this concept by at-
tacking the Iraqi nuclear reactor. . . . ​Therefore, the issue of dealing with a spy 
for this country or any other foreign country becomes more significant when 
he is a spy for Israel—­a country with which we are still in a state of war. . . . ​
Moreover, we do not have a truce with Israel, so what does this mean? It 
means that it is ­going to ease the mission for Israel to hit Iraq, as it was hit in 
1981. So, isn‘t it the right of ­every citizen in this [weapons] factory, being a 
target of Israel, to hit him [the spy] and kill him inside the factory? Isn‘t this 
his right, as well as the right of neighboring villages or factories, to defend 
their selves from this [attack] according to the code of ­human rights?63
As ­these comments suggest, the Iraqis ­were concerned that Israel would 
strike again ­because the Iraqi nuclear weapons program was making pro­
gress and the war with Iran had ended. ­After the 1981 Osirak strike, the main 
purpose of developing nuclear weapons became to deter another conven-
tional or nuclear attack from Israel, a possibility taken very seriously by the 
Iraqi regime. The regime feared Israel might launch another conventional 
attack and even considered a nuclear strike by Israel. In other words, the 
Iraqi regime feared that Israel would not allow an Arab state to acquire 

116
chapter 4
nuclear weapons and believed Tel Aviv was prepared to use force to prevent 
this from happening. In late 1990, for example, civilian defense plans ­were 
prepared in case of a strike by a 20-­kiloton nuclear weapon on Baghdad.64
Proj­ect 22: Plutonium Extraction.  ​While the secret reactor development pro-
gram, Program 182, did not go beyond initial design studies, the Iraqis did not 
completely abandon research and development in this vein. Between 1988 
and 1990 a group of scientists studied the basic techniques of the plutonium 
route to a nuclear weapons capability. They fabricated reactor fuel and carried 
out experiments where they extracted plutonium from irradiated fuel pins.
Between April 1988 and April 1990 scientists carried out three series of 
experiments in the hot cell laboratory at Tuwaitha using PUREX technology 
to extract plutonium.65 The first two series of experiments used fuel pins 
from the Soviet-­supplied IRT-5000 research reactor, while the third used three 
fuel cassettes produced by the Iraqis. The Iraqis had requested, and received, 
permission from the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) to exempt 
the fuel pins from the IRT-5000 reactor from safeguards. As a result, they car-
ried out experiments that helped create know-­how and relevant experi-
ence. The Iraqis separated a total of 5 grams of plutonium and extracted 11 
kilograms of uranium.
Why did the Iraqis launch another line of research with ­little prospect of 
contributing to the ongoing nuclear weapons development? This can seen 
as another new offshoot from the program that was pleasing to industrious 
scientists but bore ­little direct relation to the main challenge at hand. While 
this experiment had ­little applicability to the enrichment work, ­these expe-
riences would turn out to be directly applicable to the crash program that 
emerged ­after the invasion of Kuwait in the fall of 1990.
Invasion and War, 1990–1991
­After the end of the drawn-­out war with Iran in August 1988, Iraq was left 
with a large war machine and a decimated economy. While Iran had suf-
fered greatly during the war, Iraq’s Arab neighbors (notably the United Arab 
Emirates and Kuwait) had produced more oil than their quota stipulated by 
the Or­ga­ni­za­tion of the Petroleum Exporting Countries. This reduced Iraq’s 
oil income and undercut its economic recovery, which was of concern to Sad-
dam for several reasons, including his own po­liti­cal survival. ­These con-
cerns trumped other considerations, including the pro­gress in the nuclear 
weapons program.
On 2 August 1990, Iraq’s Republican Guard invaded Kuwait. While Sad-
dam had repeatedly expressed dissatisfaction with the Kuwaitis, particularly 
their refusal to raise the oil price despite Iraq’s struggling economy, this act 
surprised Iraqis and the international community alike. This was a fairly im-

117
Crises and a Crash Program, 1988–1991 
pulsive move; according to Saddam, the decision came only one month be-
fore the invasion.66 Tariq Aziz recalls the Revolutionary Command Council 
(RCC) discussing the invasion in mid-­July 1990, suggesting that most se­nior 
officials supported the idea to placate Saddam.67 But ­there ­were exceptions. 
Aziz warned Saddam that this could lead to war with the United States, 
while Vice President Izzat Ibrahim al-Doori remained ­silent.68 Kamil was 
in charge of the Republican Guard forces that carried out the invasion, and 
he joined his forces in Kuwait.69 The invasion was not particularly well 
planned. The military intelligence did not have detailed maps of Kuwait, and 
the generals had to use tourist maps during the invasion.70
This was perhaps Saddam’s most consequential strategic blunder, ­because 
he underestimated how the United States would react to his attempt to an-
nex a neighboring state. Saddam’s high-­risk move came at a sensitive time 
in the nuclear weapons program, as the scientists ­were scaling up ­toward 
industrial-­scale enrichment. Surprisingly, perhaps, this does not appear to 
have influenced his decision to invade Kuwait.
The fact that Saddam made a high-­risk move at such a sensitive time in 
the nuclear weapons program underscores a bigger point: for Saddam, the 
nuclear weapons program was not the main priority. In other words, he 
never made it “prob­lem number one.” His economic concerns did not lead 
him to pursue nuclear weapons with greater determination; they led him to 
take a risk that ultimately jeopardized the program.
­After the invasion, a series of United Nations (UN) Security Council reso-
lutions imposed sanctions on Iraq and demanded that Iraqi forces withdraw 
from Kuwait. Having gotten away with numerous transgressions over the 
past few years, including massive use of chemical weapons against Ira­nian 
soldiers and Iraqi civilians, Saddam had emerged as an ally of the West. 
Iraq had secured support from many impor­tant states in the international 
community—­notably the United States—by challenging Iran as a regional 
power. Now ­these former supporters ­were preparing for a militarized con-
frontation ­unless Saddam withdrew from Kuwait, while the sanctions im-
posed on Iraq by the Security Council had broad impact, including halting 
the arrival of equipment ordered for Group 4 and the PC-3 program.
Faced with ­these reactions, a new sense of purpose emerged for the nu-
clear weapons program. Shortly ­after Kamil’s return from Kuwait, on 18 Au-
gust he traveled to the NRC where he met with al-­Saadi, Said, Numan, and 
Jafar.71 Kamil told them to initiate a “crash program” to develop a nuclear 
bomb. This would involve taking irradiated fuel from the safeguarded re-
search reactor and using it as feed material for HEU for a nuclear weapon. 
This program, they estimated, could produce 26 kilograms of HEU.72
Numan countered that this would violate the Nuclear Non-­Proliferation 
Treaty, but Kamil ignored this objection. Jafar offered a technical response 
that appeared to defuse the tension in the meeting room. According to Numan 
and Jafar’s recollection:73

118
chapter 4
[Kamil] now turned his attention to Jafar and once again laid out his vision 
of the new programme. Rather than point out obstacles, Jafar initiated a dis-
cussion concerning the technical aspects of such a plan, which [Kamil] took 
to be an implicit ac­cep­tance of his order. He immediately demanded the new 
programme be put into effect without delay and afforded the highest prior-
ity. Jafar had ­little choice other than to acquiesce and with that the meeting 
was brought to a close.
Jafar and colleagues found this plan dangerous and misguided. First, re-
moving safeguarded material would alert the IAEA that clandestine activi-
ties ­were taking place. The IAEA inspections ­were scheduled to take place at 
regular intervals of two to three months, and refusing to admit the inspectors 
would immediately alert the international community to Iraq’s efforts. The 
scientists realized that this was a mission impossible. They did not believe 
the crash program could succeed in such a short time frame, given the scope 
of the challenge.
Refusing Kamil what he wanted was not an option, even though what he 
asked for could not be done. Similarly, telling him something could not be 
done was an equally unattractive option from the scientists’ point of view. 
Still, Jafar requested confirmation of the order to be on the safe side, given 
the high-­risk nature of this move.74 Kamil remained unaware of the numer-
ous obstacles facing the crash program, such as the fact that the centrifuges 
­were still facing challenges, and the weaponization group could not easily 
accelerate its advances. Neither Kamil nor Saddam realized that the nuclear 
crash program was doomed to fail up against an unrealistic deadline and a 
mounting international crisis over the invasion of Kuwait.
the crash program
To plan and manage the crash program, a new committee was established 
­under Numan’s leadership. This committee prepared a detailed plan for a 
breakout proj­ect from the clandestine nuclear weapons program. The pro-
gram consisted of four components: extract reactor fuel (Proj­ect 601); con-
version of HEU into uranium metal (Proj­ect 602); further enrichment of the 
extracted uranium in centrifuges (Proj­ect 521C); and weaponization. All sub-
projects included designing, producing, and operating new capabilities. To 
support ­these activities, resources would have to be reallocated from the reg-
ular program.75
True to form, Kamil set a deadline of six months for the crash program.76 
He allocated more resources to some of the existing proj­ects and additional 
proj­ects would be established. Constructing new pro­cess equipment was a 
steep challenge, especially in such a short time.
The first challenge was to extract uranium from fuel rods. Proj­ect 601 fo-
cused on the design, construction, and operation of a small-­scale repro­cessing 

119
Crises and a Crash Program, 1988–1991 
plant. During the meeting with Kamil in August, Jafar had committed to 
completing the extraction within two to three months.77 Uranium would be 
extracted from French and Rus­sian fuel cassettes (sixty-­eight fresh rods and 
thirty-­eight lightly irradiated fuel pins).78 The design portion of the uranium 
extraction proj­ect could draw on earlier research and development in the 
LAMA radiochemical laboratories (Proj­ect 22). But new equipment had to 
be constructed. A new lab in the hot cells at Tuwaitha to extract the uranium 
from the fuel rods was completed in December 1990. This lab was intended 
to pro­cess between one and two fuel rods per day.79 When the lab was ready, 
however, Kamil did not grant permission to begin pro­cessing the fuel rods. 
Three fuel ele­ments ­were opened a few days before the beginning of the Gulf 
War in January 1991, but none ­were pro­cessed.80
The extracted HEU from Proj­ect 601 would be handed over to Proj­ect 602, 
for conversion into metal suitable for the nuclear weapon core.81 The con-
version pro­cess would consist of several stages and required developing 
several fabrication units. The design phase was completed rapidly and con-
struction began at Tuwaitha in late 1990.82 Installation was scheduled from 
early 1991 but was delayed, as components ­were still being constructed in 
January. At this time the uranium tetrafluoride (UF4) plant was near comple-
tion, and a first round of 10 kilograms of uranium oxide was pro­cessed. Dur-
ing the Gulf War air campaign, Building 64, which ­housed ­these activities, 
was hit, and the conversion pro­cess was halted.83
In September 1990, the EDC was asked to set up a centrifuge cascade to 
convert the UF4 (produced in Proj­ect 602) to UF6 through centrifuge enrich-
ment. No decision was made as to what chemical form the UF6 would take.84 
The cascade of forty-­nine or fifty centrifuges was to be designed, built, and 
constructed at Rashidiya using some foreign-­supplied components and 
­others that ­were indigenously constructed.85 This cascade was expected to 
include dif­fer­ent types of centrifuges, distinguished by their rotors. The in-
stallation of the cascade was delayed by two months, pushing back the 
planned first run to July 1991. While preparations to set up the intended pro-
duction hall began, no efforts ­were made to assem­ble the centrifuges before 
the cease-­fire agreement. One reason is that some of the equipment to man-
ufacture centrifuge components had not been shipped, and transport was 
halted by the trade embargo put in place ­after the invasion of Kuwait.86
In parallel with ­these efforts, Group 4 teams began to prepare a new pro-
duction unit and to design a small explosive device. ­After the crash program 
was launched, the weaponization teams focused on developing an initial de-
sign to enhance the skills and expertise of their engineers. One of their main 
technical bottlenecks was the production of explosive lenses for the weapon 
package. Initially, the Dhafir Proj­ect was given two months to produce such 
lenses. By late October it was clear that this would not be achieved before 
late December at the earliest. The overall deadline for the program was then 
adjusted to four months ­after the production of spherical lenses.87 During 

120
chapter 4
the second week of January 1991, several pressed lenses ­were tested, and the 
proj­ect could move forward to the production stage.
The scientists also had to find suitable delivery vehicles. They assessed two 
options: an adaptation of the al-­Hussein missile already explored in the 
weapons program, which could deliver a 1-­ton nuclear warhead within a 
range of 650 kilo­meters; if this was unsuccessful, they could use an unmod-
ified al-­Hussein missile with a range of 300 kilo­meters.88
In the fall of 1990, Iraq received an offer of assistance with its nuclear weap-
ons program from Abdul Qadeer Khan, a prominent figure in the Pakistani 
centrifuge program who was ­running a for-­profit proliferation network on 
the side. In early October 1990, he offered Iraq a proj­ect design for a nuclear 
warhead and assistance with purchasing enrichment technology from West-
ern Eu­ro­pean countries.89 Khan could provide technology and materials 
from his extensive network. His stated objective was personal financial gain. 
This was not the first offer of this nature made to the Iraqi intelligence ser­
vice. The offer was considered, and scientists ­were keen to request more 
information to be able to better assess the offer, but officials ­were wary.
The centrifuge program had pursued foreign assistance over the past 
­couple of years, and had found that any such proposal required extreme 
caution. The Khan offer could be a setup by a foreign intelligence ser­vice, a 
ploy by investigative journalists (as the Iraqis had experienced previously), 
or simply a hoax. Nonetheless, some se­nior figures believed that it would be 
sensible to ask to see some of this material in case it could help the program 
move forward more quickly.90 The scientists suggested asking for more 
information to assess the quality of what the Khan network could provide, 
but the Iraqi intelligence ser­vices did not follow up. The internal correspon-
dence on this ­matter cited the current circumstances—­presumably the 
highly charged international atmosphere—as a reason not to meet with 
Khan.91 While we cannot know if the Iraqis would have taken up Khan’s of-
fer if their circumstances had been dif­fer­ent, it is clear that the centrifuge 
program had benefited greatly from similarly sensitive assistance from Ger-
man scientists.
In November 1990 Kamil brought Jafar to the Radhwaniyah Palace to brief 
Saddam on the pro­gress of the crash program. Kamil told Saddam that the 
proj­ect was making good pro­gress and that a nuclear weapon could be pro-
duced within months. However, Jafar left the meeting with the impression 
that the president was preoccupied and not particularly impressed by 
Kamil’s message.92
On 16 January 1991, the U.S.-­led alliance began the Gulf War campaign to 
drive Iraqi forces from Kuwait. Bombing raids targeted several sites associ-
ated with Iraq’s nonconventional weapons programs, including the nuclear 
weapons program. ­After Iraq accepted UN Security Council Resolution 687 
(the so-­called cease-­fire resolution) on 6 April 1991, all crash program efforts 
­were halted.93 The nuclear weapons program was dissolved, but the IAEO 

121
Crises and a Crash Program, 1988–1991 
remained intact. ­After the bombing campaigns of 1991, Jafar and his col-
leagues focused on other tasks, such as rebuilding the Iraqi power grid. 
­Between 1991 and 1998, UN inspectors unraveled the story of Iraq’s past 
weapons of mass destruction programs and destroyed any remaining com-
ponents and infrastructure.
distance from the nuclear weapons threshold
How far ­were the Iraqis from the nuclear weapons threshold when they 
­were attacked in January 1991? The consensus view, supported by the 1997 
assessment of the IAEA, is that Iraq was at, or close to, the nuclear weapons 
threshold.94 Furthermore, the IAEA assessed that the crash program could 
have reduced Iraq’s distance from the weapons threshold by two years.95 For 
the IAEA, this assessment was deeply troubling, as the weapons program 
had been carried out clandestinely in a declared fa­cil­i­ty subject to routine 
inspections within a member state.
To assess how far Iraq was from a nuclear weapons capability in 1991 we 
must distinguish between producing a single crude device (the aim of the 
crash program) and producing an arsenal of several weapons (the aim of 
the regular nuclear weapons program). Let us begin by comparing esti-
mates by Iraqis, scientists and man­ag­ers, and foreign governments before 
and ­after the 1991 Gulf War. While ­these actors may have dif­fer­ent views on 
the definition of “threshold” and how far the Iraqis ­were from it, they con-
cur that the program could have produced a nuclear weapons option dur-
ing the 1990s.
When Saddam invaded Kuwait, the regular weapons program was in the 
pro­cess of scaling up production of fissile material. The installation of EMIS 
separators at Tarmiya had been delayed. Undoubtedly, this pro­cess would 
have encountered several engineering challenges over the next few months. 
Meanwhile, the centrifuge program at Rashidiya was making pro­gress. Their 
initial target was to produce 10 kilograms of HEU per annum by 1994.96 This 
target proved overly optimistic; Iraqi scientists ­later estimated that Iraq 
would have been able to set up the pilot-­scale one thousand-­centrifuge cas-
cade around 1997 or 1998.97
The weaponization proj­ect was ­behind schedule due to the delayed con-
struction of the main facilities but was moving forward. The infrastructure, 
including the construction of sites for hot and cold tests, was ­under way. Jafar 
­later estimated that production and cold testing of a nuclear weapon could 
have started in 1993.98 Kamil, as per usual, had a dif­fer­ent deadline in mind. 
In late 1995, a se­nior Iraqi official wrote to Saddam that Kamil had said that 
he believed a nuclear weapons option was between eight and twelve months 
away in 1991.99
The crash program was lagging ­behind the unrealistic six-­month deadline 
imposed by Kamil. This is not surprising, given Kamil’s poor understanding 

122
chapter 4
of the technical challenges facing this effort, and the fact that this program 
added new and time-­consuming demands, such as preparation of pro­cess 
equipment and weapon components, on top of long-­standing challenges. 
In late 1990, Obeidi’s team calculated that a fifty-­centrifuge cascade, once 
operational, could pro­cess enough HEU (70 ­percent enriched) for a weapon 
within a few months.100 In light of delays in individual proj­ects, the crash pro-
gram’s deadline was adjusted to July 1991. Looking back ­later, Jafar indicated 
that the crash program could have succeeded within one to two years, in 
other words by about mid-1992.101 Of course, further delays would have 
­incurred, notably if the Iraqis wanted to deliver the weapon on their mis-
siles.
Several Iraqi scientists concur that a realistic completion date for the reg-
ular nuclear weapons program could have been the mid-­to-­late 1990s. But it 
is not at all clear that the timelines ­imagined by the leadership ­were consis-
tent with the scientists’ timelines. While we know ­little about Saddam’s per-
spectives on this, ­these are likely to have been informed by Kamil. Kamil’s 
assessment was far more optimistic than ­those of the scientists and may have 
­shaped the expectations of the se­nior tier of the Iraqi leadership as to the 
nuclear weapons threshold.
What ­were the assessments of other states before the 1991 Gulf War? In 
early 1991, the international community was largely oblivious to the size and 
scope of Iraq’s nuclear weapons program. Before the Gulf War, British intel-
ligence assessed that Iraq was at least a de­cade away from the nuclear weap-
ons threshold.102 In 1989, the CIA assessed that Iraqi the program could 
succeed in the mid-1990s, possibly even before.
When other states learned about the scope and achievements of the Iraqi 
weapons program ­after the 1991 Gulf War, they revised their earlier assess-
ments. In late 1992, the British Ministry of Defence acknowledged to UN of-
ficials that Iraq had been much closer to being able to produce a nuclear 
warhead than they had expected.103 At the same time, French experts as-
sessed that the Iraq program had been about two years away from this 
threshold.104 While ­there ­were varying estimates of the exact timelines, in 
light of this new information ­there was a broad consensus that Iraq was not 
far away from a major breakthrough in 1990–1991. New evidence presented 
in this chapter suggesting that added delays ­were likely to incur does not 
undermine the long-­standing judgment that the Iraqi program was well on 
its way ­toward a nuclear weapons capability.
In retrospect, Saddam’s invasion of Kuwait prevented Iraq’s acquisition 
of a nuclear weapons capability. That was Kamil’s conclusion in 1995, and 
this view was shared by other se­nior figures of the program, including 
­Jafar, many years ­later. While this statement was undoubtedly self-­serving 
from Kamil’s point of view, his basic assessment appears to have been es-
sentially correct.

123
Crises and a Crash Program, 1988–1991 
More recently, however, Jacques Hymans has argued that the Iraqis would 
never have succeeded: “Even if the Gulf War had not intervened the Iraqi 
nuclear weapons proj­ect would prob­ably have been no more successful in 
the 1990s than it had been in the 1980s. Indeed, it would likely have run de-
finitively into the ditch.”105 As this and the foregoing chapters in this book 
have suggested, the weight of the evidence does not support this interpre-
tation.
The reor­ga­ni­za­tion and changing management of the Iraqi nuclear weap-
ons program in the late 1980s brought the program back on track, but the 
leadership still lacked a clear picture of the program’s pro­gress and likely 
timelines. ­These changes ­were initiated by scientists who persuaded the 
leaders of the program that a dif­fer­ent or­ga­ni­za­tion was necessary. They 
­were proven right, as the EMIS program made impor­tant breakthroughs 
­after the 1987 reor­ga­ni­za­tion. When the se­nior level of the regime intervened 
­after the leaders of the nuclear program quarreled with the power­ful MIC, 
the program made increasingly rapid pro­gress.
Ultimately, however, their efforts ­were in vain. Despite a series of long-­
awaited breakthroughs ­toward the end of the de­cade, Saddam was distracted 
or simply lost interest. He remained distant from the program, and his high-­
risk move against Kuwait in August 1990 resulted in its interruption and 
dismantlement.
But while the Iraqi regime was able to regain control over the program, 
Saddam still strug­gled to get a clear sense of how well the scientists ­were 
performing, and he appears to have been unaware that Kamil broke his rules 
for the program. The results of the intervention ­were mixed, but overall the 
program made impor­tant advances with regard to both EMIS and centri-
fuges between 1988 and August 1990. Kamil’s annexation raised the risks of 
detection and encouraged scientists to drop approaches that ­were not yield-
ing results. He was also able to mobilize the resources of the vast MIMI, 
which assisted the nuclear weapons program with its implementation as it 
approached the production stage. Furthermore, the infusion of foreign as-
sistance into a more efficient or­ga­ni­za­tion gave the centrifuge program a wel-
come boost.
On the other hand, Kamil did not always understand the consequences 
of his decisions. He lacked technical know-­how, which the scientists occa-
sionally exploited by obscuring their reports and recommendations in overly 
technical language. When they received the order to begin the crash program, 
the scientists did not tell him that it would be impossible to succeed 
within the given deadline. As Iraq stood on the precipice of the 1991 Gulf 
War, Kamil and Saddam may have believed that a nuclear weapon was 
within reach.


PART II. LIBYA


127
chapter 5
Searching for Uranium in Libya,  
1951–1973
While the outcome of Libya’s nuclear weapons program is well known, the 
origins and operational details of this program remain murky. Libya dis-
closed very ­little about the program ­after it was dismantled in late 2003, 
and less has emerged since. So ­little has been known that scholars have con-
cluded that ­little can be said about Libya’s nuclear program except that ­those 
responsible did not seem to know what they ­were ­doing.1
This chapter, which draws extensively on International Atomic Energy 
Agency (IAEA) archival sources that have not previously been available to 
scholars, pres­ents the emergence of nuclear research and development in 
Libya against the backdrop of an unusually underdeveloped state. The chap-
ter sheds new light on the ­drivers and constraints facing the Libyan nuclear 
proj­ect and reveals that the few facts and assumptions that have ­shaped our 
understanding of this program are misleading. For example, the Libyan 
nuclear program began as early as 1970, not in 1973 as Libya ­later declared. 
Furthermore, contrary to the conventional wisdom, the Gaddafi regime had 
very ­little control over the program, particularly ­after the 1973 Cultural Rev-
olution eroded Libya’s weak state institutions. Foreign scientists and advis-
ers led this program with minimal input from the Libyan state, which lacked 
the capacity to plan and implement technical proj­ects. Gaddafi remained dis-
tant and noncommittal.
To make sense of the Libyan program, which seemed to stumble from one 
costly blunder to another, we must first understand its highly unusual envi-
ronment. The Libyan state during this period was a case of extremes: a move 
from poverty and underdevelopment to rapid economic growth, followed 
by a revolution that sought to dismantle the state. ­After Gaddafi seized 
power in 1969, state institutions ­were dismantled and rendered powerless. 
When bureaucracies and academics became targets of the Cultural Revolu-
tion, even a privileged proj­ect such as the nuclear program strug­gled to 

128
chapter 5
develop basic institutional capacities. While scientists made sound plans, 
they lacked the institutional resources to fulfill them.
Libya’s nuclear program was characterized by ample funding and virtu-
ally no planning. The Libyans not only sought technology from other states, 
they also outsourced much of the planning and operations to foreigners. But 
Libya’s nuclear establishment, modeled on Western nuclear organ­izations, 
failed to assume ­these tasks even ­after the emergence of a nuclear energy 
program in 1970. As a result, Libya strug­gled to establish a ­viable research 
program. This pattern persisted over the next three de­cades, even as the proj­
ect attempted to launch a nuclear energy program and pursued nuclear 
weapons. The mismatch between the regime’s plans and the program’s per­
for­mance deepened as the program drifted ­toward exploring a weapons 
option.
This chapter begins by tracking the emergence of the Libyan state during 
the 1950s and 1960s and tracing early Libyan interest in uranium exploration 
during the final days of the monarchy. ­Here, I explore Libya’s extreme un-
derdevelopment and how this ­shaped the state’s state institutions prior to 
Gaddafi’s coup, as well as the virtual absence of educated elites and indus-
trial resources. Then, I investigate the impact of Gaddafi’s 1969 coup on the 
state’s capacity to plan and implement a nuclear program. Against this back-
ground, subsequent chapters trace the curious trajectory of the Libyan nu-
clear program over the next three de­cades to its end in 2003.
State of Sand
When the United Libyan Kingdom became an in­de­pen­dent country on 
24 December 1951, it was perhaps the poorest state in the world. The desert 
country had been ravaged by the brutal colonial rule of Italy and the ­battles 
of the Second World War. Libya’s population of less than one million, scat-
tered over the fifth-­largest country in Africa, shared few formative experi-
ences other than displacement and poverty. Unlike many other postcolonial 
states, Libya did not inherit an educated elite or class of bureaucrats.2 With 
no industry, an illiterate population, and a meager 2 ­percent of its land suit-
able for agriculture, Libya was unlikely to be able to maintain its gross do-
mestic product, already one of the lowest in the ­Middle East.
Given its lack of natu­ral resources, development experts looked to Libya’s 
population as the country’s main asset.3 Libya was an attractive target for 
foreign aid ­because, with a small population, smaller interventions could 
have a bigger impact.4 At the same time, Libya’s most fundamental chal-
lenges revolved around its limited ­human resources. A 1948 study had 
noted some of the development challenges facing the ­future Libyan state: 
a 94 ­percent illiteracy rate; fewer than twenty Libyan college gradu­ates; an 
annual income of just £15 per capita; a 40 ­percent infant mortality rate; and 

129
Searching for Uranium in Libya, 1951–1973 
a population suffering from a host of preventable diseases.5 More than 
80 ­percent of the ­labor force worked in agriculture.6
Adrian Pelt, a Dutch diplomat appointed United Nations (UN) high com-
missioner for Libya in 1949, oversaw the preparation of Libya’s constitu-
tion. He described Libya as being in “the greatest need of help.”7 Libya did 
not have the resources to solve its challenges alone. In his first official report, 
Pelt wrote that the new state would need “as much financial and technical 
assistance as the United Nations can supply. . . . ​It is obvious that the coun-
try requires very substantial outside assistance in order to maintain even its 
pres­ent standards, and yet more for development in the economic and so-
cial fields.” If ­these needs ­were not met, he warned, this could “jeopardise 
the very existence of the new State.”8
Notwithstanding ­these challenges, Pelt handed over power to Libya’s new 
monarch on 24 December 1951. King Idris al-­Senussi had limited ambitions 
for the new state. His rule was supported by alliances with key tribal lead-
ers and with foreign powers, notably ­Great Britain and the United States.9 
His foreign policy, seen as moderate by Western powers, was not favored 
by the Libyan public. ­There was widespread popu­lar support for the ­Free 
Officers Movement led by Gamal Abdel Nasser, which had overthrown 
the British-­friendly Egyptian monarch in 1952, and for the growing Baath 
movement that espoused Arab unity and socialism.10 Idris did not ­favor a 
strong state or military. He required, for example, that Libya’s small military 
seek his approval before carry­ing out any field exercises.11 His reservations 
may have arisen ­after the ­Free Officers Movement seized power in Egypt, 
and to prevent the military from emerging as an in­de­pen­dent po­liti­cal force 
he split the armed forces, while mobilizing tribal ties to secure loyalty.12
Idris was reluctant to support the development of a central state appara-
tus with strong institutions. Libya was a federation of three provinces—­
Cyrenaica, Fezzan, and Tripolitania—­each of which comprised a number of 
municipalities. The provincial governments ­were, generally speaking, better 
equipped, in terms of civil servants and administration, than the central 
state apparatus.13 The central government in Tripoli, headed at in­de­pen­dence 
by Prime Minister Mohammed Montasser, provided grants to the provinces, 
which also received financial and military aid directly from foreign coun-
tries. Building central state institutions was a heavy economic burden. For 
example, setting up an army of just one thousand, in a country of about one 
million ­people, was beyond the new state’s financial means.14 The minimal 
state apparatus lacked the resources to extract taxes or to build a centralized 
system of government.
Underdeveloped institutionally, the young state also lacked a healthy civil 
society. ­After the first election in February 1952, the opposition co­ali­tion was 
banned.15 Power increasingly rested with power­ful families in eastern Libya. 
Observers decried the absence of po­liti­cal order at the national level, point-
ing out that Libya was a “non-­party state.”16 The business of ­running the 

130
chapter 5
new state was largely in the hands of a handful of oligarchical families while 
the average person remained disenfranchised.17 While the population at 
large harbored support for Arab nationalist movements—­and for Egyptian 
leader Nasser, in particular—­this was manifested in single-­issue protests, 
and street demonstrations ­were met with repression. In 1968, for exam-
ple, more than one hundred citizens ­were detained preventively. In the 
southwestern province of Fezzan, a young Muammar Gaddafi was expelled 
from school for organ­izing a demonstration to protest Syria’s withdrawal 
from the United Arab Republic.18 He nevertheless was ­later able to join 
Libya’s military, and it was ­there in the mid-1960s that Gaddafi and a group 
of his military acad­emy friends began to plot a coup.19
science, industry, and education
Libya was an unlikely candidate for nuclear technology. The scale of its 
underdevelopment was extreme, even by comparison with other develop-
ing states. ­There was no indigenous industry to speak of, and the main 
exports—­prior to the discovery of oil fields—­were esparto grass (used for 
making goods such as paper and cords) and scrap metal from the battlefields 
of the Second World War. Development experts characterized Libya as “a 
prototype of poor country . . . ​where ­there are no sources of power and no 
mineral resources, where agricultural expansion is severely limited by cli-
matic conditions . . . ​where ­there is no skilled ­labour supply and no indige-
nous entrepreneurship. . . . ​Libya is at the bottom of the range in income and 
resources and so provides a reference point for comparison with all other 
countries.”20
Against this backdrop, Libya’s first development plan (1963–1968) focused 
on education. ­There was ­little to build on. During the Italian colonial era, 
education and training for Libyans had largely been neglected. ­There ­were 
only three secondary schools for Libyans in 1939, focused on religious stud-
ies or crafts; seven secondary schools ­were reserved for Italian ­children.21 
Modern subjects such as mathe­matics ­were taught in Italian, a language that 
the majority of the Libyan population did not speak.22 During the Second 
World War, the education system had largely shut down. ­After the Allied 
defeat of Italy in 1943, the situation did not improve, and a local petition 
criticizing the lack of primary education and the continued exclusion of Lib-
yans from public institutions was delivered to the British chief administra-
tor of Tripoli and Cyrenaica.23
Libya continued to lag ­behind in higher education too, as well as in the 
fields of science and technology. In late 1955, Libya’s first university was 
founded in Benghazi, in eastern Cyrenaica, with thirty-­one students. The fac-
ulty was largely foreign, mostly from Egypt.24 Nasser had agreed to pro-
vide four lecturers for the new Libyan University for its first four years.25 
About a de­cade ­later, two colleges ­were established in 1966 and 1967 in 

131
Searching for Uranium in Libya, 1951–1973 
Tripoli; they ­later merged as the new University of Tripoli and ­were renamed 
the Colleges of Engineering and Education.26 Notwithstanding ­these initia-
tives, the state did not make technical education a priority. Science and tech-
nology ­were not seen as impor­tant for Libya’s economy or development; in-
stead, the main purpose of the colleges was to train civil servants and 
administrators. Between 1957 and 1967–1968, the number of enrollments fell, 
possibly reflecting an effort to curtail or prevent po­liti­cal protest move-
ments.27 Con­temporary observers believed that “the two sources of upheaval 
and revolution in the po­liti­cal life of the ­Middle East, the students and the 
army, have remained calm in Libya.”28 This would soon change.
With a largely unskilled ­labor force and without energy resources—no 
hydropower, no coal and, at that point, no known oil fields—­Libya’s indus-
trial potential was almost non­ex­is­tent.29 Postwar migration to the newly 
created state of Israel, which left only seven thousand Libyan Jews in the 
country, decimated the small-­scale entrepreneurial sector of the economy.30 
Italians owned the larger enterprises and banks. Most foreign observers as-
sumed, like Pelt, that the way to stimulate economic development would be 
through foreign aid and technical assistance. But the shortage of natu­ral 
and ­human resources made it impossible to launch larger development 
proj­ects.31 ­There ­were diverging views among Libyan leaders as to how 
they could spur economic development, but it clearly would require exten-
sive foreign assistance with training, financial aid, and basic state-­building. 
Libya lacked the ability to collect information, make plans, or see that they 
­were implemented.
Energy—­both its production and transmission—­was an early priority. An 
immediate challenge was to improve the power supply to the capital as a first 
step ­toward creation of a national grid. The cost of electricity was very high. 
The Italian-­built electrical power plant in Tripoli was defective and required 
subsidies; between 1956 and 1958, the new government spent over $4 million 
on repairs.32 The United States gave the government a loan for a new electri-
cal power station, which became operational on 24 December 1961.33
The issue of nuclear weapons first emerged in Libyan public debate in the 
early 1960s, in connection with the lease of the Wheelus Air Base outside 
Tripoli to the United States.34 This arrangement was controversial domesti-
cally, with the population roused by Nasser’s pan-­Arab rhe­toric and by Baath 
socialism.35 Fears that the United States could use this air base to support 
Israel against hostile Arab neighbors, perhaps even with nuclear weapons, 
caused stormy discussions and threats by Idris of abdication. To calm critics 
in the press and in the parliament, the Libyan prime minister asked the U.S. 
ambassador in June 1960 for assurances that nuclear weapons would not be 
stored at Wheelus.36 In response, the United States said that such weapons 
­were not stored on the base.37 Still, rumors circulated in Tripoli that the U.S. 
bases ­were preparing to store nuclear and hydrogen bombs and ­were con-
structing rocket-­launching pads.38 ­After the 1967 Six-­Day War, suspicions 

132
chapter 5
that Wheelus had been used to support the Israeli war effort once again made 
the base a sensitive issue between Libya and the United States.
oil and uranium
The discovery of large oil deposits in Libya in the mid-1950s transformed 
the economy and the state. ­After extensive surveys for petroleum and min-
eral resources, the first oil fields ­were being commercially exploited in late 
1961. As an array of foreign companies arrived, it became necessary to de-
velop institutional resources at the national level to facilitate ­these proj­ects 
and, following the large influx of petrodollars, to build an oil economy.
Whereas newly in­de­pen­dent Libya had been described as an extreme ex-
ample of an impoverished country, its economic growth during the 1960s 
was extraordinary.39 The gross national product per capita increased by 
42 ­percent from 1966 to 1967, and income per capita grew from $40 at in­de­
pen­dence to $1,018 in 1967.40 ­These newfound riches suggested that Libya’s 
poverty and underdevelopment could soon be history. This extraordinary 
and unpredictable growth also made large-­scale planning a challenge, no-
tably with regard to building up industry.41 Libya’s lack of skilled manpower, 
an obstacle to development prior to the discovery of oil, continued to 
hinder development even as Libya experienced rapid economic growth. 
While skilled ­labor could be imported from other countries, development 
also required sound planning and implementation at the national level. Lib-
ya’s institutions could not keep up. In 1963, therefore, Idris abolished the 
federal system and sought to streamline the central state apparatus.42
The scope of ­these challenges was apparent in the 1963–1968 development 
plan and its implementation.43 The plan had emphasized infrastructure proj­
ects to develop the road network, energy supplies, and communication. But 
industry received only 4 ­percent of the allocations. In 1961 a Ministry of In-
dustry had been set up to oversee state-­owned production and to “plan the 
development of private and nationalised industries.”44 This was a top-­down 
effort on a modest scale and was not seen as a significant priority at the time. 
By 1969, ­there ­were only 189 industrial enterprises in the country, of which 
only a small minority ­were Libyan-­owned.45
Given this context, nuclear science and technology ­were not obvious pri-
orities for the monarchial government. No mea­sures ­were taken to explore 
nuclear science; physics was not taught at the university. Nonetheless, the 
kingdom joined the IAEA in 1963, and it signed the Nuclear Non-­Proliferation 
Treaty in 1968 as one of several states that had neither ongoing research and 
development in the nuclear field nor plans to carry out such activities.
In January 1969, the Ministry of Industry received a request from the Oce-
anic Exploration Com­pany of Denver, Colorado, for exclusive prospecting 
rights for uranium, thorium, and other radioactive materials.46 This alerted 
the Libyan government to the possibility of becoming an exporter in the lu-

133
Searching for Uranium in Libya, 1951–1973 
crative uranium market. The com­pany wrote to the ministry again on 
14 April, narrowing down their preferred exploration to two areas: Jabal Ben 
Ghenemeh near the border with Chad; and Jabal al Awaynat near the bor-
der with Sudan.47 In June 1969, Abdul Alim Shaari, the Libyan minister of 
industry—­who would play a central role in the development of Libyan in-
dustry over the next decades—­traveled to the IAEA in Vienna asking for 
assistance with ­either setting up a Libyan uranium-­prospecting proj­ect or 
assessing the offer from the U.S. com­pany. He followed up with a formal 
request for IAEA assistance on 16 June.48 The assistant undersecretary of 
state, Ahmed al-­Attrash, then requested IAEA assistance with developing a 
uranium-­prospecting program on 19 August 1969.49 The agency was pre-
pared to provide con­sul­tants to help with prospecting carried out ­either 
indigenously or by the Oceanic Exploration Com­pany.
The kingdom’s first interest in nuclear material was driven by a desire to 
exploit the commercial potential of uranium, a raw material for nuclear 
energy and nuclear weapons. Refining this raw material to suitable feed 
material for enrichment requires the development of sophisticated infra-
structure, but ­there ­were no indications that the Libyan government in-
tended to set up such capabilities at this stage. Natu­ral uranium could be 
exported to states that ­were able to refine this material indigenously. The 
global uranium market was lucrative, with relatively few suppliers. Uranium 
was one of several raw materials whose commercial potential appealed to 
the Ministry of Industry. It does not appear that the option of a nuclear 
weapons program was considered at this stage, although it is pos­si­ble that 
this was part of the discussion ­behind closed doors.
development and defense
Libya’s first development plan allocated only 5 ­percent of the country’s bud­
get to defense, roughly half the rate typical for most Arab states at the time.50 
The army was small and Libya’s borders ­were difficult to defend—in 1968, 
­there was one Libyan soldier per 100 square miles.51 The police force outnum-
bered the armed forces ­because Idris was more concerned about domestic 
challenges to his rule than foreign threats. Nonetheless, Libya had to develop 
national defenses. In 1966–1967, the government established a navy and an 
air force, and considered purchasing missiles. In 1967 a new prime minister, 
Abdul Hamid Bakkush, increased the armed forces.52 Bakkush, a thirty-­two-­
year-­old technocrat from the petroleum sector, developed a more ambitious 
national program based on socialist and nationalist ideas and brought a new 
young cadre of skilled professionals into the state administration and plan-
ning departments. He was also a driving force ­behind negotiations with 
Britain to obtain missiles for Libya’s armed forces.53 Within a year, however, 
conservative forces around the king deemed Bakkush too progressive and 
replaced him with Wannis Gaddafi (no relation to Muammar Gaddafi).54

134
chapter 5
To the Libyan government, a missile system appealed for several reasons. 
First, the armed forces ­were kept small to prevent the military from becoming 
an in­de­pen­dent po­liti­cal actor. Po­liti­cal considerations aside, the severe 
shortages of skilled manpower and the need to find candidates for the civil 
ser­vice also contributed to government reluctance to prioritize expansion of 
the armed forces.55 Given the combination of Libya’s geography and its small 
population, a missile system seemed to be an ideal solution: it could be 
purchased from abroad, complete with the training of technicians, and it 
required few operators. A mobile system was particularly useful for a coun-
try with such vast borders. This idea had taken hold by late 1966, and the 
Six-­Day War enhanced the desire for a highly mobile defense system.56 While 
it was not ­really apparent who Libya’s enemies ­were—­relations with neigh-
boring states ­were good—­Tripoli’s defense plans ­were based on technical 
fixes that would, they hoped, compensate for their limited ­human and in-
frastructural capabilities.
Con­ve­niently, a package comprising radar, communications, missiles, and 
aircraft could be purchased from ­Great Britain.57 One of Prime Minister Bak-
kush’s achievements during his short tenure was to finalize the contract for 
purchasing a missile system from ­Great Britain. This deal, announced in May 
1968, included the purchase of a complete missile air defense system, making 
it more expensive than any previous British contract in this area.58 The pack-
age included Rapier and Thunderbird missiles, radar systems, and training 
courses for the Libyan army. The large missile system contract was the first in 
a series of acquisitions: Libya needed aircraft for its new air force, and possi-
bly also tanks, as it remodeled its military along more modern lines.59
By the late 1960s, a number of plots against the monarchy ­were ­under way. 
Dissident groups believed that a coup was inevitable; the only real question 
was when it would happen. One such group included Muammar Gaddafi 
and the seventh graduating class from the Military Acad­emy.60 Gaddafi and 
his officer comrades began to prepare a coup d’état in August 1968 when 
they ­were assembled at the Garrison Command Camp in Tripoli. They opted 
to make their move in early September 1969 when, they believed, they ­were 
about to be apprehended by the internal security forces.61
1 September 1969: Gaddafi Seizes Power
On 1 September 1969, at 6:30 a.m., a representative of the self-­proclaimed 
Revolutionary Command Council (RCC) announced a coup from a radio sta-
tion in Benghazi. His brief statement declared that Libya would now be 
known as the Libyan Arab Republic and that the “hour of work has come.”62 
The monarch’s strategy for retaining power—­relying on tribal loyalties and 
a weak army divided into rival factions—­had failed. The Libyan state was 
seized by a small group that did not even have to resort to vio­lence.

135
Searching for Uranium in Libya, 1951–1973 
Gaddafi and his officer colleagues did not have a plan or clear sense of 
what would come next. For more than a week ­after the coup, the RCC mem-
bers refused to reveal their identities. They did not initially announce any 
kind of po­liti­cal program, beyond reassuring foreign oil companies that their 
contracts would be respected. Egypt’s Nasser soon intervened, arguing that 
­unless the individuals leading the coup stepped forward they risked losing 
power. Gaddafi emerged as the face of the new government, and chairman of 
the RCC, but it took four months ­after the September coup before the mem-
bership of his Council of Ministers was made public.63 The first Council of 
Ministers of the Libyan Arab Republic did not include any of the ­Free Offi-
cers who had brought Gaddafi to power.64 This was the first indication that 
the organs of the state would be kept remote from the center of real power.
To create a “new society,” the RCC set out to dismantle the administrative 
structures of the state.65 A series of ­trials ­were held by new ­People’s Courts 
and military tribunals to purge the state of remnants of the former regime, 
such as former Prime Ministers Bakkush and al-­Muntasir (the latter died in 
prison within a year), leading to the detention of key figures of the small tier 
of Libyan technocrats. ­Those who escaped this purge, such as the former 
minister of industry Shaari, and ­others who replaced the purged officials, 
had to be extremely cautious to avoid accusations of working against the 
revolution. To fill se­nior government posts, the new regime proceeded in an 
apparently haphazard manner. Astonishingly, Gaddafi asked a group of stu-
dents for recommendations—an indication of how ­little importance he 
placed on the formal structures of the state.66 He would rely instead on his 
closest co-­conspirators, most notably his deputy, Abdessalam Jalloud. With 
Gaddafi at the helm, the twelve men of the RCC, whose numbers would soon 
decline following internal tensions, would be the supreme decision-­making 
body, accountable to no one.
If the RCC’s initial reticence suggested a lack of preparation for power, its 
attempts to shore up support demonstrated how unprepared its members 
­were to govern. The military had emerged as the most impor­tant source of 
po­liti­cal power in Libya, which also made it a crucial arena for securing sup-
port and removing potential opposition. Initially only sixty to eighty offi-
cers formed the core of the RCC’s support in the army. The majority of the 
officers ­were more inclined ­toward pan-­Arab nationalism and Baathist ide-
ology, and many had been trained in Baghdad. To placate them, Gaddafi 
bankrolled a conventional military buildup during the 1970s. However, he 
also wanted to prevent the army from becoming a power­ful actor inside the 
state and closed the Ministry of Defense shortly ­after the coup.
The RCC isolated itself from the formal structures of government.67 The 
council governed from seclusion at the Aziziya base in central Tripoli, where 
Gaddafi also took up residence. This seclusion, combined with purges and 
a general atmosphere of fear, brought the operation of public institutions to 
a halt during this period. During the 1970s the distance between weak state 

136
chapter 5
institutions and the real center of decision making—at first the RCC but 
increasingly Gaddafi himself and a small circle of individuals around 
him—­would increase further.
At this stage, Libya appeared to adopt the state-­centered model of gover-
nance seen in other Arab republics, notably Egypt. However, real decision-­
making power lay with the RCC. To secure their fragile hold on power, they 
sought to remove alternative structures of authority and influence, includ-
ing, at this early stage, tribal and religious leaders, whose authority they saw 
as a potential challenge. Coupled with their initial purge of former officials, 
the RCC put students and intellectuals on trial in the ­People’s Courts. Dur-
ing the 1970s, the persecution of individuals suspected of opposing the 
regime would intensify. Over the next de­cades, the Gaddafi regime pre-
vented the formation of alternative power centers inside the bureaucracy 
“through an intricate mix of ideology, the constant reshuffling of personnel, 
the dissolving of ministries, the threat of further decentralizing the coun-
try’s bureaucratic system, and the creation of new bureaucratic structures 
when the old developed a potential to be politicized.”68
It was unclear what the new Libyan republic would become. The RCC did 
not issue edicts specifying its program. Gaddafi gave many speeches sug-
gesting that he intended to recast the Libyan state and society, but did not 
set out a program for such a transformation. His deputy Jalloud said that 
the RCC had to develop a program for radical change “to convince the ­people 
and the world at large that it was not a movement aiming only at seizure of 
power. This was the way army leaders could prove that they had led not a 
military coup d’état but a revolution.”69 Their premise was the malleable 
concept of “­people power,” which would take pre­ce­dence in Libya over state 
or other organ­izations such as ­unions or po­liti­cal parties. The RCC would 
tap ­people power directly, without any intermediate state structures, as such 
structures ­were said to “corrupt” the revolution. Gaddafi declared that bu-
reaucracy was incompatible with revolution: “The age of dealing with the 
prob­lems which disturb the classes of the toiling masses by means of coun-
terfeit promises from air-­conditioned offices has now irrevocably ended.”70
The remaining state institutions did not, however, join the revolution volun-
tarily. For example, civilian judges would on occasion acquit students and in-
tellectuals accused of working against the revolution.71 Widespread popu­lar 
reluctance to embrace the revolution led to the RCC experiencing increasing 
frustration with the model of government seen in Egypt.72 Gaddafi, frustrated 
with the lack of pro­gress of the revolution, blamed the “pecuniary lust . . . ​
rooted in the hearts of officials.”73 To remove this obstacle, he argued, ­people 
power had to be mobilized against ­those “who have formed a barrier between 
the revolution and the masses . . . ​[against] this bourgeois class, the bureau-
crats. . . . ​The masses must destroy bureaucracy and destroy barriers.”74
The new regime’s foreign policy ambitions ­were vague but radical. Gad-
dafi wanted to reduce the influence of former colonial states such as Italy, 

137
Searching for Uranium in Libya, 1951–1973 
France, and Britain in the ­Middle East and North Africa. Israel was de-
nounced as the main example of Eu­ro­pean postcolonial influences at work 
in the ­Middle East. The Libyan regime ­adopted a confrontational set of pol-
icies, including support for vari­ous terrorist organ­izations, which it would 
pursue primarily by oil wealth, through funding proxy actors pursuing goals 
that the Libyans deemed consistent with their own radical princi­ples, rather 
than engaging in direct military confrontations with other states.
Despite its fiery rhe­toric, Libya was not in a position to pose a military 
challenge to her neighbors, let alone the Israeli armed forces. Even develop-
ing a military that would be capable of defending the long Libyan borders 
posed a ­great challenge. According to Mohamed Ennami, who would emerge 
as a se­nior figure in the Libyan nuclear establishment during the 1980s, na-
tional security was “the number one priority [­after the 1969 revolution]. . . . ​
Libya started rebuilding its armed forces, buying military equipment from 
all over the world, [as well as] establishing new educational and industrial 
institutions (schools, universities, training centers, research and development 
units, hospitals, farming and construction industries, ­etc).”75
But Gaddafi’s initial defense policy was strongly influenced by his con-
cern to secure a loyal military. Expenditure on military hardware surged to 
30 ­percent of the bud­get ­after the 1969 coup.76 The new regime’s approach 
mirrored that of the monarchy as it purchased sophisticated military equip-
ment and technology from abroad. A strong air force seemed to address 
Gaddafi’s basic dilemma, so purchasing airplanes was also a priority for the 
regime. In January 1970, Libya purchased Mirage jets from France with the 
tacit ac­cep­tance of the United States. In 1974 the Libyan regime signed an 
agreement with the Soviet Union to supply MIG-23 and TU-22 aircraft, 
SCUD-­B missiles, and surface-­to-­air missiles.77
­After seizing power, the RCC prepared to “launch a frontal attack” on the 
oil industry, which was dominated by foreign companies, to ensure greater 
revenues for the state and increase decision-­making power for the Libyan 
oil or­ga­ni­za­tion.78 The regime renegotiated the oil price and terms of opera-
tion directly with the companies operating in the country and managed to 
raise the price—­and thus their own income—by 35 ­percent. Then, in 1971–
1973, Libya nationalized the Sarir oil field that had belonged to British Pe-
troleum and the U.S. Bunker Hunt Oil Com­pany and secured a 51 ­percent 
participation share in the management and property of the foreign oil com-
panies, while other Or­ga­ni­za­tion of the Petroleum Exporting Countries 
(OPEC) members only asked for 20 ­percent. Equipped with much stronger 
influence over prices and sales than several Gulf oil exporters, Libya reaped 
­great benefits from the OPEC crisis ­after the Yom Kippur War in October 
1973.
From 1973, Libya’s oil-­fueled economic boom enabled a tremendous con-
ventional buildup. By the late 1980s, Libya would become one of the main 
importers of military equipment in the Arab world.79 The Gaddafi regime 

138
chapter 5
purchased much advanced equipment without ensuring that it suited the 
needs or capabilities of the armed forces and often without provision for train-
ing the armed forces to use what had been purchased.80 As a result, the Libyan 
military’s per­for­mance, as ­later chapters ­will show, was often abysmal even 
against far less equipped adversaries.
Supplying the military with more advanced equipment did not resolve 
concerns about po­liti­cal challenges from the armed forces. For example, re-
gime officials ­were concerned that airplanes could be hijacked.81 Gaddafi’s 
solution was to weaken the armed forces as an or­ga­ni­za­tion; he introduced 
“revolutionary” actors into their ranks and undermined formal lines of 
­authority. Gaddafi in this way deprived the armed forces “of the authority 
they require to operate effectively. Strong institutions ­were “anathema to 
[Gaddafi’s] demand for total dominance. . . . ​His dominance and security 
values . . . ​create[d] much . . . ​ambivalence and apparent unpredictability in 
[his] behaviour ­toward Libya’s po­liti­cal institutions.”82
seeking nuclear options
Despite the general slowdown of the Libyan state apparatus ­after the coup, 
the new regime immediately started exploring several options for acquiring 
nuclear weapons. Some of ­these efforts are well known: Gaddafi’s hench-
men contacted other nuclear weapons states for help in acquiring nuclear 
weapons and also requested nuclear assistance from non-nuclear weapons 
states. At the same time, new sources show, the Ministry of Industry began 
to explore options for a nuclear energy program with the assistance of the 
IAEA in December 1970.
Why did the Libyan regime begin to explore ­these options when they ­were 
barely capable of ­running the country? Looking back at ­these efforts, a se­
nior figure in Libya’s nuclear program described how “falling ­behind in 
areas of education, health, technology and ser­vices, in addition to the in-
creasing gap . . . ​especially in industrial-­technological productivity and 
ser­vices . . . ​[contributed] to feelings of insecurity.”83 Thus Libya’s early in-
terest in nuclear technology was ­shaped by its comparative underdevelop-
ment. The desire for regional status was another impor­tant motive ­behind 
the regime’s nuclear weapons ambitions. Looking back on this in 2005, a se­
nior Libyan official indicated to the author that Israel’s nuclear advances 
became another key motivating ­factor for the Libyan regime’s early nuclear 
aspirations.84
Gaddafi’s nuclear weapons ambition was informed more by his po­liti­cal 
ambitions than by strategic assessments. In the early 1970s, the nuclear weap-
ons proj­ect was cast in terms of a “pan-­Arab proj­ect” that Libya would un-
dertake on behalf of the Arab world.85 Acquiring nuclear weapons would 
provide Tripoli a leading regional role in the confrontation with Israel and, 
at the same time, position Libya as a candidate to supplement or—­after 

139
Searching for Uranium in Libya, 1951–1973 
Nasser’s death—­replace Egypt as the leading confrontational Arab state. 
Looking back on ­these issues in 2004, Gaddafi stated that “in 1969 and early 
1970s we did not reflect on where or against whom we could use the nu-
clear bomb. Such issues ­were not considered. All that was impor­tant was to 
build the bomb.”86
In 1970, the Gaddafi regime started to examine options for setting up a 
nuclear program exploring research and energy applications, and sought as-
sistance to begin ­these efforts from the IAEA.87 In March 1972, the regime 
set up the National Committee for Atomic Energy (NCAE), as an autonomous 
agency of the Ministry of Industry to plan and oversee the establishment of 
an indigenous nuclear program. ­There was no research and development 
program at this early stage and the Libyans focused on developing basic 
resources for teaching nuclear physics at the gradu­ate and postgraduate 
levels. No bud­get was set aside, nor had the Ministry of Industry—in 
charge of the plans for uranium exploration and technical assistance in the 
nuclear field—­prepared a plan.88
­After Libya’s nationalization of oil and the 1973 rise in oil prices due to 
OPEC action in 1972–1973, the Gaddafi regime did not have significant 
financial constraints: Libya could easily afford to explore several routes to 
nuclear weapons si­mul­ta­neously. Even so, the regime’s initial plans ­were 
remarkable in their ambition and scope. By early 1973, the regime contem-
plated investing in research reactors and possibly power reactors. The Min-
istry of Planning included a nuclear-­powered desalination fa­cil­i­ty in its 
plans for power reactors, even though this did not make sense from an eco-
nomic perspective, as seven other gas and turbine desalination plants ­were 
already planned.89 In the nuclear field, as elsewhere, the guiding princi­ple 
of Libyan development planning at this time was to ask for more rather than 
to prioritize.
A nuclear energy program made sense both as a route to a weapons op-
tion and from a development perspective. Although Libya was an oil-­
exporting state, energy was a pressing concern. The country’s entire power 
supply at this time came from thermal (petroleum) sources. The national 
power grid was still a work in pro­gress. Nuclear energy appeared to be a 
good option for diversifying the national power supply. In 1973, total Lib-
yan power production amounted to 300 megawatts out of a total capacity 
of 600 megawatts.90 The Libyan Electricity Corporation aimed to integrate 
the existing networks by 1976 and to create a unified national power net-
work by 1980–1984 with a total capacity of 2,000 megawatts. A nuclear power 
station was initially envisaged to contribute 300 megawatts. In 1973, only 
one nuclear power station was being considered, and the Libyans hoped to 
acquire such a station around 1980–1984.91 Over the next few years, ­there 
was a steep rise in electricity demand, with an estimated 25 ­percent growth 
rate per annum between 1974 and 1978, which subsequently moderated to 
about 10 ­percent per year.92 The decision to include nuclear energy in the 

140
chapter 5
national grid came from the se­nior level of the regime.93 This target was based 
on the assumption that electricity consumption would continue to grow; es-
timates indicated, however, that Libya’s total consumption would still be at 
the “lower end of the pres­ent OECD range.”94
The Libyan regime deci­ded to pursue nuclear weapons at a time when 
Egypt had made the opposition decision.95 The Arab-­Israeli Wars strength-
ened the appeal of nuclear weapons as a means of enhancing Libya’s status 
in the context of the regional conflict. Israel’s resounding military victory 
over the Arab co­ali­tion in the 1967 war had demonstrated a growing gap in 
military capabilities. As suspicions over Israel’s nuclear intentions mounted 
over the next few years, nuclear weapons became increasingly salient as a 
lever for adjusting the regional power balance. On the other hand, Libya did 
not have any obvious enemies or rivals except for ­those defined by the Gad-
dafi regime’s ideological precept of anti-­imperialism, and, by extension, an-
ticolonialism. Closer to home, Libya was not yet involved in conflicts with 
its neighbors (Egypt, Sudan, Chad, Niger, Algeria, and Tunisia).
Earlier studies of the Libyan nuclear program have argued that the pur-
suit of nuclear weapons was security-­driven.96 Nuclear weapons appealed 
to the regime ­because they could provide a deterrent that did not require a 
large standing army. Seen from this perspective, nuclear weapons could 
deter external enemies and help prevent the emergence of threats to the 
Gaddafi regime at home. But the argument that the Arab-­Israeli conflict 
motivated the Libyan interest in nuclear weapons is not ­really persuasive: 
Libya was neither involved in nor directly affected by the conflict. Israel’s 
nuclear weapons arsenal may have motivated the Libyan nuclear ambition, 
but arguably more as a po­liti­cal and symbolic issue than as a threat. As En-
nami’s statement above indicates, the Libyans ­were concerned about the 
implications of the widening technological gap between Israel and Arab 
states for the regional power balance. This likely outweighed any potential 
concern that the Israeli nuclear arsenal represented a direct threat to Libya.
The ideological lenses through which the Gaddafi regime viewed regional 
issues, along with its preference for advanced technological solutions, 
further enhanced the appeal of nuclear weapons. First, the regime’s ideo-
logical opposition to colonialism and imperialism was reflected in its ­grand 
strategy and its emphasis on deterrence. Libyan territory had been subject 
to successive colonial proj­ects, which had a power­ful influence on Libya’s 
national legacy and foreign policy outlook. In May 1973 Gaddafi stated: “If 
[other countries] have the power they ­will enslave ­others; and if they know 
that ­others are unable to retaliate, they ­will attack them. This is the crux of 
imperialism. The big powers make war against other countries without 
any constraints ­because they do not fear reciprocal action.”97 Thus it was 
the legacy of colonialism, rather than imminent threats, which informed 
Gaddafi’s emphasis on deterrence strategies, including nuclear deterrence.

141
Searching for Uranium in Libya, 1951–1973 
foundations for a nuclear program
In March 1970, Gaddafi’s deputy Jalloud traveled to China to nurture bi-
lateral ties and request cooperation in the areas of science and technology. 
He reportedly asked for nuclear assistance but was apparently advised to 
develop an indigenous technological base first. It has been widely reported 
that Jalloud asked to purchase nuclear weapons, but ­there is no clear evi-
dence of an explicit request at this early stage.98
Gaddafi discussed the possibility of Libya funding Egyptian nuclear re-
search with Nasser, perhaps with the hope of acquiring know-­how for Libya’s 
program.99 ­After Nasser’s sudden death in September 1970, the relationship 
between Libya’s and Egypt’s leaders began to cool. Nonetheless, Gaddafi 
continued to explore the option of cooperation in the nuclear field with 
Nasser’s successor, Anwar Sadat, including Libyan funding for nuclear re-
search in Egypt.100 In early 1972, Gaddafi appears to have given the green 
light to develop a nuclear-­powered desalination plant to be jointly operated 
with Egypt.101 In 1973, the two states discussed entering a po­liti­cal ­union 
with Sudan, and Gaddafi and Sadat also envisaged cooperation between 
their nuclear establishments.102 ­After the ­union failed to materialize, ­these 
tentative plans ­were shelved. The Egyptian nuclear program was scaled 
down over the next few years as the country’s leadership abandoned ambi-
tions to try to match Israel’s nuclear capabilities. While formalized coopera-
tion between Libya and Egypt did not come to fruition, Egyptian scientists 
who left the country as the nuclear program was being downsized would 
come to play a crucial role in the nascent Libyan program. As we ­will see, 
Egyptians formed the majority of scientists in Libya’s nuclear establishment 
initially and many played key leadership roles in the early stages.
Creating an indigenous foundation for a nuclear weapons option was a 
tall order for a state that was effectively pre­industrial and lacked gradu­ates 
with relevant degrees and experience. However, Libya’s unexploited uranium 
deposits offered another route to a nuclear ­future, and the IAEA offered 
resources that the Libyans lacked. By 30 September 1969, the new regime 
had already contacted the UN resident representative to ask for assistance 
with planning of prospecting for uranium.103 The IAEA interpreted the re-
quest as having a high priority for the Libyans.104 Although the Oceanic 
Exploration Com­pany that had made initial inquiries apparently lost inter-
est ­after the September coup, the new Ministry of Planning was keen to 
follow up. Over the next two years, the Ministry requested assistance from 
the IAEA with setting up a uranium exploration survey, acquiring the tech-
nical infrastructure for basic and applied research, and exploring other op-
tions for a nuclear energy program.105
­These plans ­were taking shape as the new regime prepared its first bud­
get and sought to carve out a development policy. As we ­will see, ­there are 

142
chapter 5
several similarities between the regime’s planning for its industrial devel-
opment efforts and its planning for a nuclear program. It is useful, therefore, 
to briefly outline how the regime prepared development efforts in other ar-
eas, and the role of state organ­izations and foreign experts in this pro­cess.
The overall approach was characterized by ample funds, a virtual absence 
of planning, and significant incentives to scale up developments proj­ects. The 
organ­izations and departments that ­were charged with overseeing industrial 
development did not develop any basic concepts or plans to guide their ef-
forts. They received advice from foreign con­sul­tants in a range of areas but 
tended to ignore their reports. When in 1972 a new three-­year development 
bud­get was announced, a plan to guide ­these efforts was suggested but did 
not materialize.106 Development planning was not based on any explicit plan 
but rather on unpublished “guidelines.” Development bud­gets ­were pre-
pared on a rolling basis on a three-­year horizon, with bud­get updates each 
subsequent year.107 In April 1973, for example, the development bud­get in-
creased by nearly 50 ­percent compared with the annual bud­get announced 
just four months earlier. Si­mul­ta­neously, the allocations for industry and 
mineral developments, which included nuclear prospecting and steel pro-
duction, increased from 174 million to more than 238 million Libyan dinars.108
The government had plenty of money, but lacked the vision and capacity 
to transform an underdeveloped state to an advanced industrialized econ-
omy. Although the new regime invested 50 ­percent more in the develop-
ment of industry than the monarchy had done, it had few results to show 
for it. The regime’s large investment offered few incentives for entrepreneur-
ship: for example, only smaller enterprises could be private; all medium-­to-­
large industries ­were state-­owned. ­There was ­little industry in ­either state 
or private hands to begin with. The industrial enterprises on rec­ord at the 
time of the 1969 coup consisted only of “a tobacco factory in Tripoli employ-
ing 500 workers; two textile factories in Benghazi; a gypsum factory in Trip-
oli, with barely more than fifty workers; small plants for the pro­cessing of 
macaroni, olive oil and fizzy drinks, detergents (based on foreign patents) 
and tomato canning. ­There was one cement factory.”109 The cement factory 
was built by the Ministry of Planning ­under the monarchy to stimulate pri-
vate enterprise, but “officials complain[ed] that it took four years for private 
capital to establish a cement factory, although government had provided 80 
per cent of the finance.”110 This lack of initiative only worsened ­under Gad-
dafi, which was perhaps not surprising in light of the regime’s restrictions 
on how much businesses in private hands could grow, and its growing zeal 
for redistributing private wealth and property.
In the public sector, too, ­there was an abundance of funding and a short-
age of proj­ects. The funding allocation process—­whereby proposals would 
be forwarded to the Ministry of Planning and then approved by the RCC—­
encouraged ministries to adopt large proj­ects with inflated bud­gets.111 ­These 
proj­ects ­were typically based on foreign assistance and imported technol-

143
Searching for Uranium in Libya, 1951–1973 
ogy, following the example of the petroleum industry.112 For example, agri-
culture was a key priority for the Gaddafi regime and central to its ideologi-
cal proj­ect of redistributing land and wealth. Between 1970 and 1980, 2,349.9 
million Libyan dinars ­were spent on agricultural proj­ects across the coun-
try.113 By comparison, only 70 ­percent as much (1,629.1 million Libyan di-
nars) was spent on industry during the same time period.114 ­These proj­ects 
­were nominally run by the state, but in practice oversight was difficult.
At first, the nuclear program ­adopted a similar approach. The National 
Committee of Atomic Energy (NCAE) was an agency of the Prime Minis-
ter’s office (Jalloud was then the Prime Minister) with links to the Ministry 
of Foreign Affairs, but lacked institutional resources to actually plan and 
oversee the nuclear proj­ect. The first chairman of this committee was chemist 
Yusuf Elmehrik, who was also the Dean of the Faculty of Science at the Uni-
versity. The Committee had six other members representing the ministries of 
agriculture, health, education, industry, planning and petroleum. The com-
mittee’s only employee was its secretary, Mustafa Ghiriyani, who was Secre-
tary at the Prime Ministerial Office.
The program was overseen by the NCAE but in practice Jalloud, who was 
the most influential figure in the RCC ­after Gaddafi, took charge of the pro-
gram. The main purpose of the NCAE was to coordinate technical assistance 
from the IAEA. Its seven members ­were from the University of Libya and 
from the Ministries of Agriculture, Health, Education, Industry, Planning, and 
Petroleum. The committee had no bud­get, only one employee—­Mustafa 
Ghiriyani, a secretary from the Prime Minister’s Office—­and did not carry out 
any activities or research. The NCAE forwarded information from the IAEA 
to relevant organ­izations, provided the agency with information, coordinated 
national policy on agency ­matters, submitted requests for assistance to the 
agency, and secured resources for implementation of any such proj­ects.115 In 
other words, the committee had neither a mandate nor resources to prepare 
proposals or plans for nuclear research and development in­de­pen­dently. In 
fact, no one did.
On 26 April 1970, Mohamed Mughrabi, the deputy director general of the 
UN Office of Technical Cooperation, approved the proposal of the resident 
UN representative in Libya to seek IAEA assistance. The IAEA’s technical 
assistance programs could give Libya access to several resources that could, 
at least initially, substitute for what Libya lacked. The agency offered con­sul­
tants who could help plan a nuclear research (or power) program, provide 
detailed expertise in planning procurement, install the equipment upon ar-
rival, give advice on how to set up organ­izations to run and audit nuclear 
research and development, and offer peer review of large contracts.
Libya’s institutions for planning and technical development ­were not 
equipped for carry­ing out fairly straightforward tasks, let alone planning a 
proj­ect of this nature. Libya at this point apparently had no nuclear scien-
tists or engineers with relevant experience, and its state institutions would 

144
chapter 5
remain understaffed ­until gradu­ate students began to return ­after complet-
ing their degrees abroad ­later in the 1970s. While Libya was keen to get 
assistance from the IAEA, along with other UN resources, it did not neces-
sarily follow the advice they gave. Although Libya’s bureaucrats may 
have appreciated sound advice, they often lacked the resources or influence 
necessary to implement the recommended mea­sures.
In late September 1969 the Ministry of Economy and Industry requested 
assistance from the IAEA to advise them on how to begin prospecting for 
nuclear raw materials. This request was framed as part of a program of min-
eral resources exploration. The IAEA nominated James Cameron, an expert 
provided by the agency, and Cameron visited Libya for week in early De-
cember 1970. The IAEA offered a wide range of advice and technology to 
support developing states who ­were interested in nuclear technology but 
who lacked the institutional resources to plan ­these programs. Cameron rec-
ommended that Libya request an IAEA “Atomic Energy Planner” who, as a 
­later con­sul­tant described, could “advise the government on the potential 
role of nuclear techniques in their economic and social development plans.”116
The Libyan counterpart or­ga­ni­za­tion for the prospecting proj­ect was the 
Industrial Research Center. This center, located some kilo­meters east of Trip-
oli, was an autonomous agency of the Ministry of Industry.117 The center’s 
main responsibility was to assist in industrialization programs.118 The Libyan 
point of contact for any nuclear issues was the center’s director, Abdul Alim 
Shaari who, as Minister of Industry, had first contacted the IAEA for pros-
pecting assistance in 1969. ­Under his capable leadership, the center had over-
all responsibility for the nuclear portfolio.119 As early as 1970, Shaari began to 
explore options for regional nuclear collaboration, including the ­Middle East-
ern Regional Radioisotope Center in Cairo, in addition to assistance from the 
IAEA and other nuclear supplier states, notably the Soviet Union.120 He ex-
pressed to visiting IAEA con­sul­tants a broad interest in nuclear technology.
One of the center’s three departments was the General Department of Geo-
logical Research and Mining. Directed by Jadallah Azzouz Ettalhi, who 
would play a pivotal role in developing Libyan industry for de­cades to come, 
this unit was responsible for all geological and mineral exploration, includ-
ing petroleum. With only seven employees, including three foreigners, it had 
ambitious plans for expansion and generous funding to support institutional 
growth.121 However, its staff lacked relevant scientific and technological ex-
pertise and the center also lacked the necessary equipment, due not to a lack 
of financial resources but to insufficient planning and experience. ­There ­were 
still too few Libyan nationals with the education and experience essential 
for planning and launching an industrial-­scale program in the field of min-
eral resources.
In 1973 IAEA expert J. A. K. Quartey also visited the University of Tripoli 
to assess the potential recruitment of gradu­ates. Although staffed by foreign 
faculty and well equipped, the university lacked the expertise to teach phys-

145
Searching for Uranium in Libya, 1951–1973 
ics, chemistry, or other modern applied sciences. The dean of the Faculty of 
Sciences, Yusuf Elmehrik, who was also the first chairman of the NCAE, 
asked for help from the IAEA to develop courses in nuclear physics and 
chemistry. Elmehrik would ­later emerge as a central figure in the Libyan nu-
clear establishment.122 Most of the university’s geology gradu­ates (on aver-
age fifteen per year) ­were recruited in the oil sector, but some might also be 
recruited in the nuclear program.123 In 1974, the University of Benghazi also 
set up engineering and science faculties.124 Despite ­these additions, ­there was 
much competition for the small pool of students from which the nuclear pro-
gram could recruit.
By 1973, the University of Tripoli was developing resources for postgradu-
ate research in physics. A visiting IAEA con­sul­tant found ­these beginnings to 
be positive: “­There are very-­well qualified members of staff to ­handle this line 
of research; construction of the required laboratory is well advanced; finan-
cial allocation has been made for the years 1972–75, and an order has now 
been placed for the necessary equipment.”125 The Physics Department seemed 
to be well on its way to launching postgraduate courses in classical physics.
Given the continuing shortage of skilled personnel, the IAEA’s technical 
assistance was a very useful resource. Ettalhi, the director of the General 
­Department of Geological Research and Mining who would, in the 1980s, 
serve twice as Libya’s prime minister, asked for help in developing a plan 
for utilizing uranium deposits and establishing training fellowships and 
other educational opportunities.126 Ettalhi indicated further that the center 
was interested in receiving an Atomic Energy Planner from the IAEA.127 The 
Agriculture Research Center, set up in March 1972 and staffed primarily by 
foreign experts, also expressed interest in radioisotopes research. The direc-
tor, Mohamed Zehni, became a member of the NCAE.128
requesting a research reactor
In December 1970, the Ministry of Industry was contemplating not only 
a program for uranium exploration but also a nuclear energy program. In 
late 1971 and the spring of 1972, several requests for further IAEA assistance 
­were made by the Department of International Organ­izations and Techni-
cal Cooperation at the Ministry of Unity and Foreign Affairs. The University 
of Tripoli also wanted to expand its resources in the nuclear field and, in 
1971, its Physics Department requested assistance from the IAEA to acquire 
a 2-­megawatt research reactor with supporting facilities. IAEA experts saw 
this request, and especially the additional facilities requested by the Libyans, 
as an indication that the state was “beginning to embark upon studies in 
atomic energy.”129
The University of Tripoli’s Physics Department wanted the research reactor 
to be located in the Tripoli area, as part of a broader effort to develop research 
and training resources in the field of nuclear energy, including “facilities for 

146
chapter 5
material testing and isotope production.”130 The request was framed as part of 
a broad expansion of Libya’s technical and scientific education. As the IAEA 
report noted: “Many other small proj­ects requested by the Libyan University 
for Benghazi Campus and Tripoli are ­under study and are of major impor-
tance. The execution of ­these proj­ects requires several tens of millions of di-
nars which ­will constitute a heavy burden on the Libyan bud­get.”131
The university explained to IAEA representatives that they wanted such 
a reactor for training and research in the field of nuclear energy.132 The Lib-
yan nuclear establishment saw the next logical step as acquiring a power 
reactor, which they expected to obtain during the early 1980s. The IAEA 
challenged this assumption, and an agency expert noted in a 1973 report to 
the Libyan government:
It is recognized that a nuclear research centre, including a research reactor, 
can contribute greatly to the development of a nuclear power programme 
[but] it is not a strictly necessary prerequisite to the introduction of nuclear 
power. Concern was expressed regarding the high drain which would be 
caused on already scarce scientific manpower. A research reactor did not, 
therefore, appear to be of a high order of priority. The general view was that 
while a research reactor may well be incorporated into long-­term plans, 
it was realized and agreed that a programme which would be of more im-
mediate importance and would make a far greater contribution to the coun-
try’s general development would be one in radioisotope applications in ag-
riculture, medicine, industry, ­etc.133
It is unclear why the Libyan nuclear establishment believed that a research 
reactor was necessary, but it is also unclear how committed they ­were to 
this proj­ect in the first place. The Libyans seemed receptive to the points 
made by the IAEA, but still placed a request for a research reactor (for ex-
periments) with the Ministry of Planning for the 1973–1976 development 
plan.134 This may be explained by Libya’s laissez-­faire approach to planning 
at this time. Tripoli could afford to pursue both options—­a radioisotope lab-
oratory and a research reactor—­despite IAEA advice that a research reactor 
was not a necessary step ­toward developing a power program.
In light of ­these remarkable ambitions, it is not surprising that the Liby-
ans created a dedicated or­ga­ni­za­tion to oversee the nuclear program already 
in March 1972, nor that they ­were soon frustrated with the or­ga­ni­za­tion’s 
per­for­mance.135 The members of the NCAE met infrequently to discuss 
IAEA proj­ects and to serve as liaison with the agency.136 The mandate of the 
committee was to lay the foundation for the development of nuclear sci-
ence and technology in Libya. A year ­after its inception, the government was 
apparently not too pleased with its pro­gress. IAEA expert Quartey reported 
­after his 1973 visit that “the Committee ­faces prob­lems resulting from lack of 
funds and, within its structure, the Government is preparing a new struc-

147
Searching for Uranium in Libya, 1951–1973 
ture.”137 In 1973, the Libyan government passed the Nuclear Energy Act, 
placing the responsibility for the nuclear energy portfolio with the NCAE.138 
The same year, however, the committee was merged into a new entity, the 
National Atomic Energy Authority (NAEA).139 The NAEA then took charge 
of carving out a new path for the Libyan nuclear program.
The nuclear scientists at the University of Tripoli ­were deferential to the 
NCAE and ­later the NAEA, and quite frank about the modesty of their ac-
tivities in communications with the IAEA. Quartey wrote in 1973:
In view of the links between the Centre and vari­ous scientific departments, 
ministries, and industry generally, and also considering the relatively high 
concentration of analytical facilities and instruments at the Centre, the ad-
viser discussed the possibility of incorporating radioisotope applications and 
some nuclear instruments into the Centre. However, the advisor was in-
formed that ­because of the lack of gradu­ates, interest in nuclear ­matters so 
far has been limited to attending conferences, receiving publications, ­etc. The 
general feeling was therefore that radioisotope applications equipment 
should be the responsibility of the National Committee for Atomic Energy.140
As Libya’s nuclear program was scaling up in its ambition, focusing on the 
prospect of nuclear energy, Libya’s economic boom transformed the state’s 
financial resources. Shukri Ghanem, a Libyan economist who worked at OPEC 
and would ­later became prime minister, said that at this time “­there was so 
much money that it was not difficult to follow a policy of ‘all ­things to all 
­people.’ ”141 He noted further that the planning of industrial activity was “in-
discriminate” with regard to the economic feasibility of individual proj­ects.142
The economic boom was also reflected in the nuclear proj­ect. The Indus-
trial Research Center had taken a conservative approach to planning the new 
program, preferring to delay purchasing more nuclear equipment ­until they 
had recruited and trained more skilled staff. The new nuclear authorities 
took a dif­fer­ent view: training could be a by-­product of larger acquisitions 
from nuclear supplier states.
As the government chose which proj­ects to fund, they selected several 
heavy-­industry proj­ects such as a steel plant, an aluminum smelter, and 
several petrochemical proj­ects rather than investing in light-­industry or 
knowledge-­based proj­ects.143 ­These choices ­were originally motivated by the 
rich mineral resources of Libya, but it proved difficult to link ­these proj­ects 
with extraction of raw materials. The plants ­were essentially transplants from 
abroad, notably Japan, purchased as turnkey proj­ects, and offered few op-
portunities for building Libyan know-­how. Even ­after their completion, 
Libya remained unable to extract minerals for ­these plants from its proven 
deposits. In a study of the Libyan development economy written in the mid-
1980s, Ghanem noted that ­these industrial proj­ects ­were based on imported 
raw materials, imported ­labor, and imported technical know-­how.144 While 

148
chapter 5
this gave cause for concern to economists such as Ghanem, not to mention 
development experts, the se­nior tier of the Libyan regime was apparently 
not worried. As Libya’s oil income continued to rise, it was pos­si­ble to af-
ford both guns and butter.145
This chapter has presented, for the first time, a history of the emergence of 
Libya’s nuclear program prior to the previously accepted “official” start-up 
date of 1973. This prehistory shows how the Libyan state’s underdevelop-
ment, and the legacy of the monarchy’s weak central state apparatus, ­shaped 
the nuclear program that emerged ­after Muammar Gaddafi seized power 
in September 1969. Most importantly, the acute lack of technical expertise 
and resources for development planning at the national level led to an in-
flated set of nuclear ambitions, whose realization required extensive foreign 
assistance across the board, from staffing research institutes to designing a 
research and development program, to advising the government on the in-
frastructure for the nuclear program. On the ground, the embryonic scien-
tific community made sound plans and recommendations but lacked the 
institutional resources to fulfill their ambitions.
Libya faced many obstacles in its postin­de­pen­dence state-­building pro­
cess. Initially, the state lacked both ­human and financial resources. ­After the 
discovery of oil, unbalanced growth created new opportunities but also in-
troduced additional challenges as the Libyan state apparatus strug­gled to 
develop capabilities for development planning and implementation. ­These 
challenges, which ­were key ­factors limiting the scope and scale of develop-
ment assistance to the country, only intensified ­after Gaddafi’s coup created 
greater distance between weak state institutions and the real center of deci-
sion making—at first the RCC, but increasingly Gaddafi himself and a small 
circle of individuals around him. As both Gaddafi’s circle and Libya’s state 
institutions lacked the capacity to assess technical recommendations in the 
nuclear field, the nascent nuclear program mirrored the unbalanced growth 
that characterized broader trends in Libyan development during the late 
1960s and early 1970s.
From the outset, the nuclear program was affected by the division of 
decision-­making authority, which rested with Gaddafi’s inner circle, from 
formal institutional arrangements. The main consequence for the nuclear 
program prior to 1973 was the shift from a gradual approach to building in-
frastructure and know-­how ­toward a laissez-­faire approach that outsourced 
most aspects of this pro­cess to foreign experts and agencies. But, at a more 
structural level, the combination of informal lines of authority and oversight, 
especially by Gaddafi’s most impor­tant deputy, Jalloud, undermined the 
tenuous link between the nuclear program and the state. ­After 1973, when 
Gaddafi launched a Cultural Revolution to undo the state, the institutional 
foundation for the nuclear program would erode further.

149
chapter 6
Cultural Revolution and Nuclear Power, 
1973–1981
As Libya’s Atomic Energy Authority (NAEA) prepared for a nuclear power 
program, Muammar Gaddafi set out to eradicate the state. His April 1973 
announcement of a “Cultural Revolution,” and the radical program it her-
alded, apparently came as a surprise even to the Revolutionary Command 
Council (RCC).1 The Cultural Revolution gave Gaddafi increasingly unre-
strained power, created a shadow apparatus challenging the formal institu-
tions of the state, and caused turbulence throughout the country. As Gaddafi 
pursued increasingly radical policies at home and abroad, fueled by oil 
wealth and the growing influence of vigilante Revolutionary Committees, 
the state dwindled.
The ambitious expansion of the nuclear program throughout the 1970s 
strained Libya’s faltering state institutions. This was manifest in increasingly 
ambitious plans for nuclear power and, by the end of the de­cade, prospect-
ing for uranium. As International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) reports 
show, foreign experts deemed the initial plans prepared by Libyan scientists 
sound and appropriate but, by the late 1970s, the Libyan technical commu-
nity had been outpaced by the regime’s ambitions. The main prob­lem was 
not ineptitude; it was a lack of state capacity. Over the next few years, the 
Libyan regime strug­gled with planning and coordination at all levels of the 
nuclear or­ga­ni­za­tion. The scientists seemed demotivated, foreign experts 
noted, and their new and well-­equipped laboratories ­were often idle.
­Because so ­little is known about the early history of the Libyan nuclear 
program, scholars have overlooked how the Cultural Revolution affected its 
early stages. As we ­will see in this chapter, the Cultural Revolution, which 
undermined the administrative capabilities of the state to an extreme degree, 
eroded the Gaddafi regime’s resources for monitoring and controlling the 
nuclear program. At the same time, the Cultural Revolution marked inten-
sifying efforts by the regime to target potential sources of opposition in the 

150
chapter 6
state and the student body. ­These coup-­proofing efforts contributed to un-
dermine the nuclear program. Like many of Libya’s other technical devel-
opment proj­ects, the nuclear program was largely planned and operated by 
foreign scientists and the regime remained disengaged. This combination—­a 
weak state and a delegated nuclear program—­explains the striking mis-
match between the Gaddafi regime’s ambitions and ­actual developments 
between 1973 and 1981.
The Cultural Revolution Hits the Nuclear Establishment
In early 1973, having grown disillusioned with trying to emulate Gamal Ab-
del Nasser, Gaddafi set out to create a new state called “Jamihiriyah,” a ne-
ologism meaning “state of the masses.” This was a radical reformation: ­there 
was no longer a Libyan constitution; all laws ­were abolished; and Gaddafi 
himself would rule in an informal capacity, as “­Brother Leader” and “Guide 
of the Revolution.”
Libya was to become “stateless.” The institutions of the state—­ministries 
and official agencies—­were to be replaced by “popu­lar committees,” and all 
citizens would participate in grassroots-­level committee structures. ­After this 
proj­ect failed to mobilize the citizenry, Revolutionary Committees ­were set 
up to eradicate opposition and further the transformation envisaged by Gad-
dafi. The members of the Revolutionary Committees ­were answerable only 
to Gaddafi, as the “Leader of the Revolution.” They would monitor, and in 
some cases eventually replace, key state institutions—­even the diplomatic 
corps. The committees led a purge of civil servants, academics, and cap­i­tal­
ists such as business ­owners and landlords who ­were seen as antithetical to 
Gaddafi’s revolutionary ambitions. This further weakened Libya’s already 
fragile administrative capacity. Private companies strug­gled as Revolution-
ary Committees seized land and buildings and replaced the managements 
of public companies.
Some state institutions ­were carefully shielded to preserve the regime’s 
ability to provide funds and ser­vices to the population. For example, the state 
bank and petroleum com­pany ­were exempted from the Revolutionary Com-
mittees’ appropriations. While they ­were apparently subject to some limits, on 
the ­whole ­these committees took over control of Libya’s “centrally unplanned 
economy,” as some con­temporary observers described it.2 They would also 
come to play a key role in the layered network of surveillance and security 
organ­izations that proliferated in Libya’s public and private spheres. Even 
the nuclear program, exempt from most of the other pressures of the Cultural 
Revolution, was closely monitored by the intelligence ser­vices.
Gaddafi’s Cultural Revolution set out to recast civil society. Along with 
his close advisers Abdessalam Jalloud, Abu Bakr Yunis Jabr, Khaled Hu-
meidi, and Mustafa Kharroubi, Gaddafi recognized that the regime’s early 

151
Cultural Revolution and Nuclear Power, 1973–1981
ideological initiatives, such as sending volunteers to fight in Palestine or to 
work in remote agricultural settlements, did not inspire the population.3 To 
get Libyans more involved in the revolutionary proj­ect, they created what 
has been described as a hybrid state, with institutions representing the for-
mal traditional state organs and parallel institutions representing the revo-
lutionary authorities that held the real power.4 In practice, this divested the 
formal state institutions of decision-­making authority, as Revolutionary 
Committees wielded unrestrained power over society and effectively 
usurped some branches of the state. Particularly affected ­were the universi-
ties and the diplomatic ser­vice, both crucial for the development of a nuclear 
program through a combination of indigenous ­human resources and foreign 
technology.
As the regime continued to weaken the institutions of the state in order to 
avoid challenges, it nevertheless had to maintain some basic state functions, 
such as distribution of wealth and basic security. Even so, the regime was will-
ing to experiment with some key institutions, such as the armed forces, which 
seemed to pose a particularly potent latent challenge to the regime’s long-­
term survival. In late 1977 Gaddafi created a “popu­lar army” comprising of 
the entire adult population. Universal military training was compulsory—
at times ­women ­were also drafted—­and weapons ­were distributed to citizens. 
­These steps ­were intended both to strengthen the population’s revolutionary 
zeal and to protect against foreign invasion. As a consequence, the armed 
forces ­were effectively deprofessionalized. This move further reduced the 
standing of the professional armed forces and thus their potential challenge to 
the Gaddafi regime.
To get rid of residual re­sis­tance to the Cultural Revolution, university stu-
dents and civil servants—­whom Gaddafi described as “perverts and 
deviationists”—­were prime targets.5 The Revolutionary Committees seized 
control of educational institutions, replacing staff and curricula that ­were 
deemed counterrevolutionary.6 ­After hundreds, possibly thousands, of 
students mobilized to protest, Revolutionary Committee members hunted 
down leading figures in the student community who ­were subjected to tor-
ture and, in some cases, public executions. The secret police also targeted 
academics, ­lawyers, intellectuals, and civil servants to deter potential sources 
of opposition. This disruption affected recruitment in the dwindling state 
bureaucracy, as well as for the nuclear program, ­because se­nior figures in 
engineering departments ­were targeted.
The small nuclear establishment thus had to navigate carefully while the 
state was being transformed and fragmented. The nuclear community at this 
time largely comprised foreign scientists and technical staff who ­were mostly 
Egyptian, Tunisian, or Pakistani, as Libya was still in the very early stages 
of educating students in ­these technical fields. Their relationship with the 
new po­liti­cal elite had to be built from scratch, as ­there ­were virtually no 
existing ties to build on in a state that had been completely overturned since 

152
chapter 6
the 1969 September coup. The small technical community had limited re-
sources in terms of or­ga­ni­za­tion, infrastructure, and potential new recruits. 
Scientists ­were in a particularly difficult position in the changing Libyan state 
where technocrats ­were primary targets of the regime’s revolutionary zeal. 
For the departments that formally oversaw the nascent nuclear program, the 
erosion of formal state institutions left few opportunities to play a direct or 
active role in overseeing or directing nuclear research and development. The 
Libyan state’s resources for technical planning, coordination, and follow-up 
­were already weak, and the Cultural Revolution aggravated ­these prob­lems.
Faced with this real­ity, the Libyan state apparatus had to adapt. One way 
in which it did so was to delegate detailed planning and implementation to 
agencies, both domestic and foreign, rather than to carry out coordinated 
and centralized state planning. This practice was consistent with how plan-
ning had been carried out previously ­under Gaddafi. In April 1973, as IAEA 
con­sul­tant J. A. K. Quartey observed, the role of the Ministry of Planning was 
to approve long-­range general objectives and allocate funding for individ-
ual organ­izations “which, in turn, are responsible for drawing up their own 
programmes of activities for approval.”7 Such approval, it appears, was usu-
ally granted and rarely subject to substantial review or questioning.
From 1973 onward, the links between the regime’s ambitions and the 
activities in the Libyan nuclear field ­were increasingly tenuous. Initially, con-
tact between the regime and the nuclear establishment had been facilitated 
through the Ministry of Industry, but it soon shifted to the Prime Minister’s 
Office, ­under Jalloud. ­After the Cultural Revolution began, authority was 
increasingly personalized rather than orga­nizational or institutional. Within 
government departments, authority and decision-­making power depended 
upon personal connections rather than formal titles and defined responsi-
bilities. This undermined internal lines of authority, and made it difficult for 
foreign con­sul­tants and organ­izations to provide meaningful input to plan-
ning and decision-­making pro­cesses. The regime’s intelligence organ­izations 
monitored the nuclear establishment but appear to have been more con-
cerned with vetting candidates for potential foreign trips and scholarships 
than the activities (or lack thereof) within the nuclear establishment. Efforts 
to launch nuclear research, including installing and using laboratory equip-
ment, ­were largely non­ex­is­tent, but the regime apparently did nothing to 
amend the situation.
planning for nuclear power
In 1973, the University of Tripoli and the University of Benghazi, which 
­were created ­after the splitting up of the former University of Libya, ­were 
expanding in the fields of nuclear physics, engineering, and chemistry with 
the aim of offering both undergraduate and gradu­ate education in applied 
science and technology. This required extensive foreign assistance. The 

153
Cultural Revolution and Nuclear Power, 1973–1981
University of Tripoli submitted a request to the IAEA stating that “purely 
[for] academic reasons, the Faculty of Science has deci­ded to establish the 
Atomic and Nuclear Physics Laboratory in the Department of Physics, and 
it ­will welcome scientists and technicians from IAEA to share information 
and conduct research and training. . . . ​The planned research programme . . . ​
is actually the first proj­ect in the field of atomic and nuclear physics.”8 The 
dean of the faculty, Yusuf Elmehrik, was also then head of the National 
Committee for Atomic Energy (NCAE). The University’s plans ­were ambi-
tious, but did not seem unrealistic. As a 1973 IAEA report noted, the univer-
sity drew up sound plans, hired qualified staff, enjoyed sufficient funding 
from the government, and ordered relevant equipment.9
To be able to offer postgraduate education in atomic and nuclear physics, 
the university needed new facilities and equipment for research and train-
ing. The faculty already had qualified foreign staff and a laboratory, but more 
equipment and space was needed to accommodate the new programs. The 
university allocated additional space for ­these facilities, including new build-
ings, equipped with research facilities, for the Chemistry and Civil Engi-
neering Departments.10
In the spring of 1973, the university set up a laboratory for basic experi-
ments in physics, started a nuclear mea­sure­ment proj­ect, and made ambi-
tious plans for further expansion.11 With the assistance of the IAEA, the 
Faculty of Science ordered equipment for a new radioisotope laboratory to 
enable students to carry out research experiments. According to Libyan state-
ments and visiting IAEA con­sul­tants, this equipment, which included a 
400-­kiloelectron-­volt Van de Graaff generator and a duoplasmatron ion 
source, was suitable for carry­ing out “research on basic prob­lems of atomic 
and low energy nuclear physics, both for undergraduate and post gradu­ate 
students, and to start research in ­these topics as a first step to introduce this 
branch of physics in the Faculty of Science.”12 The faculty proposed a grad-
ual build-up of its capacities, noting in its initial request to the IAEA that 
“­future work and proj­ects of larger scale ­will follow as more trained gradu­
ates become available.”13
The faculty continued to pursue a nuclear research reactor ­after its 1971 
bid for IAEA support failed. The Libyans argued that this reactor would fa-
cilitate additional training, teaching, and research in materials testing and 
isotope production, which would stimulate basic research and development 
in a number of fields.14 However, the IAEA con­sul­tants viewed Libya’s re-
quest for additional equipment, along with the reactor, as suggesting that 
the Libyans had greater ambitions and wanted to explore nuclear energy, 
rather than simply carry out basic research and development. When a visit-
ing IAEA con­sul­tant asked the Libyans in the spring of 1973 ­whether they 
­were contemplating embarking upon a nuclear energy program, and ­whether 
the request for a research reactor was intended as a step ­toward an energy 
program, the answer was yes.15

154
chapter 6
A ­couple of years ­later, in June 1975, the Libyans reportedly attempted to 
purchase a TRIGA (Training, Research, Isotopes, General Atomics) research 
reactor from the United States.16 They ­were denied the TRIGA—­a small re-
actor suitable for research distinguished by the ease with which it can be 
operated—­for reasons IAEA con­sul­tants privately described as “strategic.”17 
This reflects the nature of planning in Libya at this time, which encouraged 
scaling up requests rather than prioritizing, and perhaps also suggests that the 
scientists ­were less focused on the pursuit of nuclear energy than the regime 
was and wanted the opportunity to carry out basic research experiments.
The nuclear mea­sure­ments proj­ect at the University of Tripoli was the 
country’s first step ­toward designing and carry­ing out a research program 
in the nuclear field.18 The government gave the university a generous bud­
get.19 The Faculty of Science planned to establish the infrastructure for vari­
ous experiments and basic research including a laboratory for spectroscopic 
mea­sure­ments, another for radioactive materials, a high-­vacuum laboratory, 
and a plasma physics laboratory. This rapid expansion was, according to the 
faculty, driven by an “urgent need for creating opportunities of research in 
the impor­tant field of atomic and nuclear physics” at the undergraduate and 
gradu­ate levels.20
To move forward with ­these plans, the Libyans pursued assistance from 
the IAEA and other states, notably the USSR. Initial proj­ects included plans 
for low-­energy nuclear reactions, activation analy­sis, radiochemistry, and 
neutron physics. The faculty sought assistance from the IAEA to install the 
equipment and obtain the associated items necessary to start experiments 
and research.21 They also asked for an IAEA expert to train local staff in the 
operation of this equipment. Nuclear science was a new discipline in Libya; 
all of its scientists and technicians ­were young and relatively inexperienced. 
IAEA con­sul­tants noted that “­there is obviously no real scientific research 
tradition in Libya.”22 Despite ­these challenges, within a de­cade the faculty 
had established four areas of research—­nuclear physics, theory, plasma 
physics, and solid-­state studies—­and its scientists ­were publishing regu-
larly in international journals.23
Although up to two hundred Libyans ­were pursuing gradu­ate degrees in 
physics and nuclear science in the mid-1970s, the Libyans still lacked tech-
nical staff who ­were experienced in the installation, operation, or mainte-
nance of nuclear instruments and equipment. Libyan universities started to 
run courses in nuclear engineering in 1978 but still had far too few technical 
workers with the skills necessary for operating specialized nuclear instru-
ments. As a result, the Libyans strug­gled to install the new equipment for 
the radioactive materials laboratory. In October 1974, the Van de Graaff gen-
erator was nearly operational, but essential computing and analytic equip-
ment was still lacking.24 A year ­later, some of this equipment was still in its 
shipping containers as the staff did not have experience or know-­how in this 
area.25 During 1976–1977, an IAEA con­sul­tant helped to install this equip-

155
Cultural Revolution and Nuclear Power, 1973–1981
ment so that the generator could be used for physics experiments.26 Even 
this proved challenging, however, as importing necessary equipment and 
manuals took several months, partly due to Libya’s inefficient postal ser­vice 
and delays by the exporter.
Therapeutic applications ­were typically an area that interested develop-
ing states who ­were in the early stages of exploring nuclear technology with 
IAEA assistance. Libya’s initial attempts in the early 1970s to develop can-
cer treatments soon ran into prob­lems, and a de­cade ­later ­there ­were still no 
nuclear diagnostics facilities in the country. Libya’s minimal forays into this 
field illustrate the broader challenges facing the nuclear program, particu-
larly manpower and technology absorption.
Setting up basic radiation therapy for cancer treatments proved difficult, for 
example, despite access to foreign assistance and equipment. In 1972 British 
health physicist J. Eric Roberts advised the Libyan Central Government Hos-
pital on setting up a radiotherapy cobalt-60 unit supplied by Canada. How-
ever, as the IAEA noted, ­these efforts faced the continuing shortage of Libyan 
scientists and especially technicians; operating this unit would require two 
doctors, two gradu­ate physicists, and technicians trained in radiography.27 
Libya had trained one gradu­ate in Egypt but had to recruit two foreign ex-
perts specializing in ­these techniques as ­there ­were none in the country.
At the new Physics Department of the University of Tripoli, the staff was 
expanding: at least twenty PhDs ­were hired, but most ­were foreign scien-
tists, mainly Egyptians, on contracts of two or three years.28 The head of the 
department, Izzat Abdelaziz, was an Egyptian; he would come to play an 
essential role in the development of the Libyan nuclear establishment dur-
ing the second half of the 1970s. The deputy head, Anwar Zaki, was an Egyp-
tian scientist then completing his doctoral dissertation.
The Libyan program continued to suffer from shortages of skilled physi-
cists, chemists, and engineers despite attempts to educate more students. A 
key prob­lem was the lack of ­human resources management and opportuni-
ties for training. Once gradu­ates returned home, their opportunities for 
further learning ­were few and far between. IAEA fellowships for gradu­ate 
students to visit nuclear research institutions in other countries ­were an 
impor­tant training resource, especially as the Libyan nuclear establishment 
did not have the resources to train scientists and engineers in operating and 
maintaining specialized technological instruments, let alone nuclear reactors. 
But the Libyans put ­little effort into ­human resources management or re-
cruitment. ­There was apparently no systematic merit-­based recruitment 
or management of fellowship opportunities offered by the IAEA. The agency 
attempted to help the Libyans select suitable candidates by suggesting pro-
cedures and criteria for se­lection of qualified individuals. ­These decisions 
would instead be influenced by the intelligence agencies, who ­were less con-
cerned with scientific merit than with suspected po­liti­cal sympathies. The 
Libyan nuclear establishment, notably the NCAE and its successor, the AEA, 

156
chapter 6
lacked procedures to select candidates or to identify what kind of placements 
would be suitable to further an individual’s expertise.29 Candidates apply-
ing for such placements often stated very general areas of interest such as 
“reactors and generators” or “neutron physics” and usually asked to visit 
the most prestigious institutions such as the U.S. fa­cil­i­ty at Oak Ridge, Ten-
nessee, despite having very weak foreign language skills.30 Scientific merit 
and skill development apparently played very minor roles in their se­lection.
While ­these challenges ­were not seen as a significant concern by the Lib-
yan regime, se­nior Egyptian scientists attempted to explain the importance 
of ­human resources management to Jalloud. They appear to have persuaded 
him to send more Libyan gradu­ate students abroad.31 However, regime lead-
ers remained reluctant to scale up their investment in education, preferring 
to hire foreign scientists. They ­were perhaps concerned that universities, and 
especially the faculties of science and engineering, could once again become 
fertile breeding grounds for po­liti­cal opposition.
The University of Tripoli started to produce small numbers of gradu­ates 
in the early 1970s. In 1973, the Faculty of Science had a total of 345 students 
and sent 61 Libyan students abroad for postgraduate studies (12 in chemistry 
and 9 in physics).32 By 1975, more than 200 students ­were pursuing post-
graduate degrees in nuclear sciences abroad, with an emphasis on nuclear 
energy.33 Of ­these, 128 students had entered five-­year programs in nuclear 
energy in the United States.34 By the mid-1970s, se­nior Libyan officials 
estimated, ­there ­were about 2,500 Libyan students in the United States.35 
Students ­were expected to return to Libya ­after their studies, but some did 
not. Such “brain drain” occurred on a large scale: during Gaddafi’s reign an 
estimated 100,000 citizens, mostly the better-­educated, left the country. In 
addition, large numbers of skilled foreign workers ­were deported, peaking 
at 90,000 in 1985 alone.36 For a population of just a few million, this was a 
significant loss. But brain drain posed an even more serious prob­lem for the 
nuclear program, given the very small pool of ­people with appropriate skills 
and knowledge.
In the mid-1970s, research in physics progressed slowly at the University 
of Tripoli. The department’s staff continued to expand, but the level of activ-
ity was still low. For example, lectures in the fall semester did not start ­until 
November each year. In late 1976, Abdelaziz, the Egyptian head of depart-
ment, resigned and was replaced by a Libyan scientist, S. A. Swedan.37 At this 
time, as IAEA observers noted drily, “The atmosphere at the University . . . ​
[was] certainly anything but stimulating . . . ​[although] ­future plans seem to 
be rather impressive.”38
gaddafi’s ambivalent nuclear ambitions
In the mid-1970s, as the Libyan regime intensified its efforts to acquire in-
frastructure necessary to explore the nuclear fuel cycle, Gaddafi made pub-

157
Cultural Revolution and Nuclear Power, 1973–1981
lic statements expressing interest in nuclear technology. In April 1975, for 
example, he told a Sudanese newspaper that he hoped to make Libya a 
nuclear power, pointing out that nuclear weapons technology was not a 
secret.39 While ­little evidence is available concerning internal regime dis-
cussions about the nuclear program at this time, ­there ­were disagreements 
within the RCC during the early 1970s about ­whether Libya should become 
an increasingly radical actor on the international arena or invest in “build-
ing the revolution at home” through economic development. According to 
se­nior regime figures interviewed by the author in 2005 and 2006, the divi-
sion between ­those in the se­nior tiers who wanted to pursue anticolonial 
policies and ­those who wanted to invest in economic development remained 
a key fissure in the regime over the next several de­cades.40 While Gaddafi 
listened to both sides, he did not commit consistently to ­either faction. 
Whereas previously the RCC may have been a restraining influence on Gad-
dafi, by 1974–1975 he acted in an increasingly unrestrained manner.41
Gaddafi often sent mixed messages about his policy preferences and de-
layed committing to any one position (or faction) ­until late in the decision-­
making pro­cess. This was as true in the nuclear field as elsewhere. Some of 
Gaddafi’s public statements during the mid-1970s strongly suggested that 
he wanted to acquire nuclear weapons; some stated the opposite, suggest-
ing principled opposition to the notion of an Islamic bomb or the existence 
of nuclear weapons. Other states, notably Israel and the United States, in-
terpreted them as indications of a nuclear weapons ambition.
Meanwhile, the Libyan nuclear program advanced in a haphazard man-
ner. Even as regime officials entered talks with foreign companies, the nu-
clear establishment strug­gled to develop a ­viable research and development 
program. The erosion of state structures during this period further under-
mined the Libyan regime’s capacity to manage and monitor large and com-
plex proj­ects. Power and authority rested with Gaddafi, his advisers, and 
the Revolutionary Committees, but some ministries remained nominally re-
sponsible for implementation and oversight of individual proj­ects. Gover-
nance ­under ­these conditions was often based on guesses or assumptions 
about Gaddafi’s intentions and preferences, rarely explicit instructions. Gad-
dafi concentrated po­liti­cal power outside the remaining state institutions, 
while his personal views dictated strategic policy. This was particularly true 
in the military realm, Gaddafi having closed the Ministry of Defense shortly 
­after the 1969 coup.
­There was a puzzling contrast between the uneven advances on the ground 
and the Gaddafi regime’s stated ambitions for nuclear power. This may have 
reflected a calculated ambiguity or internal disagreement about the direc-
tion of the nuclear program. It certainly reflected a mismatch between the 
regime’s far-­reaching ambitions and the limited capabilities of its scientists 
and administrators. The po­liti­cal elite and the nuclear establishment ­were 
only tenuously connected, and ­there ­were no institutions attempting to 

158
chapter 6
regulate or monitor the nuclear program. Jalloud held regular meetings 
with the se­nior Egyptian scientists leading the efforts to develop nuclear 
infrastructure in Libya. Still, Jalloud’s limited technical know-­how, the fre-
quent turnover of foreign scientists in leading positions, and the absence of 
oversight mechanisms in the state made monitoring difficult. Nor is it clear 
what Jalloud reported to Gaddafi about the ­actual pro­gress of the nuclear 
program, or how frequently Gaddafi was briefed on this issue.
Notwithstanding Gaddafi’s public ambiguity about the long-­term objec-
tives of his nuclear program, the nuclear establishment explored the nuclear 
fuel cycle without interruption and attempted to develop an ambitious nu-
clear energy program. ­There is no evidence to suggest that the orientation 
of the program changed due to a re­orientation of the regime’s nuclear pol-
icy during the 1970s. Inside the nuclear establishment, however, ­there was 
no consistent push to fulfill the regime’s ambitions. ­There was no discern-
ible pressure from the regime on the scientists to speed up their efforts, nor 
­were ­there any deadlines to deliver a nuclear weapons option.
building nuclear networks
From 1973, the Libyan nuclear proj­ect took an ambiguous turn, exploring 
technology suited to both nuclear energy and weapons development.42 Al-
ready by 1974, Gaddafi’s statements led U.S. intelligence estimates to see 
Libya as a state pursuing nuclear weapons capabilities.43 To U.S. analysts, 
Libya’s “shotgun” approach—­buying a wide range of facilities and ser­vices 
from abroad—­suggested that the regime wanted to launch a crash program.44 
As it turned out, the explanation was more prosaic: Libya’s efforts reflected 
a lot of money and very ­little planning.
In parallel with the effort to explore applied nuclear technologies with the 
aid of the IAEA and bilateral nuclear cooperation agreements with several 
countries, Libya began to explore clandestine technologies associated with 
sensitive aspects of the nuclear fuel cycle such as uranium enrichment, plu-
tonium production, and repro­cessing. In so ­doing, the Libyans pursued 
multiple ave­nues at once: developing indigenous capabilities with foreign 
help; outsourcing; and purchasing off the shelf. For example, the Libyan 
nuclear establishment explored the front end of the nuclear cycle (finding 
uranium and refining it into uranium ore concentrate, or yellowcake, and 
pro­cessing nuclear fuel) with foreign assistance, as well as importing raw 
materials and technology. The regime imported 2,263 metric tons of yellow-
cake from Niger.45 As con­temporary U.S. intelligence assessments noted, 
­these amounts ­were in excess of any existing or foreseeable needs, but they 
could provide raw material for the power reactors the Libyans ­were hoping 
to acquire—or a clandestine weapons program.46 In 1973 rumors surfaced 
that the Libyans tried to purchase twenty electromagnets, suitable for en-
riching uranium, from a French com­pany.47 This com­pany, Thomson-­CSF, 

159
Cultural Revolution and Nuclear Power, 1973–1981
had been operating in Libya for several years in connection with servicing 
French-­supplied Mirage planes, and some of its engineers had also assisted 
the University of Tripoli’s Physics Department with establishing its com-
puter systems.48 By the mid-1970s, U.S. intelligence viewed the Libyan pro-
curement activities, which seemed to pursue several options at once, as 
geared to “leapfrog” ahead in the development of key capacities to pursue 
nuclear weapons.49
While the Libyan regime continued to rely on other states to supply equip-
ment and know-­how, Gaddafi’s radical policies ­were creating tensions in 
Libya’s foreign relations. By the late 1970s, the regime was supporting what 
it saw as postcolonial re­sis­tance movements that often took the form of vio-
lent actions against Israel and former colonial powers in Eu­rope, notably 
France, Italy, Belgium, and Britain. France, Britain, and the United States, 
who ­were key suppliers of nuclear technology, ­were by now reluctant to 
support Libya’s nuclear program. For example, Libya had attempted to pur-
chase a research reactor from the United States in 1975 and would try to se-
cure larger contracts with French and Belgian companies during the 1980s, 
but ­these agreements fell through ­after initial agreements ­were signed.
The Libyans turned elsewhere, setting up cooperation agreements, formal 
and informal, with Brazil, Argentina, Pakistan, and the Soviet Union. They 
also approached India and China: in 1978, se­nior Libyan officials allegedly 
offered to pay India’s foreign debt in exchange for a nuclear weapon.50 Two 
years ­later, Libyan scientists traveled to nuclear establishments in Bombay, 
Delhi, and Calcutta requesting assistance with training, apparently without 
success.51 The Chinese government was also reluctant to provide nuclear as-
sistance to Tripoli. Despite ­these difficulties, the Libyan regime was able to 
nurture two relationships that held the promise of nuclear assistance, namely 
­those with Pakistan and the Soviet Union.
In the early 1970s, Gaddafi struck up a close relationship with the Pakistani 
premier Zulfikar Ali Bhutto. Bhutto traveled to Libya in early 1972, shortly 
­after he had given the green light for a Pakistani nuclear weapons program. 
Although Libya’s generosity ­toward the Pakistani program was presumably 
motivated by a desire for help with its own, this relationship does not seem 
to have been based on an explicit series of quid pro quo exchanges. Built on a 
personal connection between the two leaders, it began to fade ­after Bhutto 
was ousted from power in 1977. Still, as late as 1979 Libya funded the Paki-
stani nuclear weapons program with an estimated $133 million.52
Libyan support for the nuclear weapons program of Pakistan also included 
up to 450 metric tons of yellowcake.53 ­There is no available evidence to sug-
gest that this led to transfers of sensitive technology from Pakistan to Libya 
during the 1970s; the Libyans may not even have requested such assistance 
then, as their program was still in the preliminary stages. However, eigh­
teen Libyan nuclear scientists did receive training at the Pakistani Insti-
tute for Nuclear Technology.54

160
chapter 6
Seen from the outside, the Libyans’ be­hav­ior gave cause for concern: Jal-
loud had approached other states asking for weapons-­sensitive technology; 
Libya had aided Pakistan’s nuclear weapons program; and the Libyans ­were 
planning to launch an energy program that could give them the opportu-
nity to develop a weapons program. But, as we have seen, by the mid-1970s 
the Libyan nuclear program presented, at best, a mixed picture. On the one 
hand, returning gradu­ates with degrees in nuclear science developed a small, 
but growing, domestic knowledge base for the nuclear program, which was 
bolstered by help and advice from the IAEA as well as foreign states. Gen-
erous financial allocations permitted the pursuit of more hardware than the 
nuclear establishment was capable of utilizing. Both the IAEA and the So-
viet Union, which was emerging as Libya’s main supplier of nuclear tech-
nology at this time, tried to help Libya with planning and managing their 
program. On the other hand, even with such assistance, ­there was no system-
atic approach by Libyan authorities to or­ga­nize research and development 
activities, nor was ­there effective coordination of the technical assistance, as 
the Libyan organ­izations with ostensible authority over the nuclear pro-
gram seemed incapable of performing ­these tasks. ­There was ­little room for 
enterprising scientists: according to an IAEA con­sul­tant visiting in 1977 
and 1978, the scientists held “mainly nominal functions within the pres­ent 
establishment.”55
The IAEA provided technical assistance with several key challenges that 
the Libyans ­were not capable of ­handling with indigenous resources—­from 
planning a nuclear energy program, training manpower, advising on nuclear 
prospecting, sourcing and installing nuclear technology—­which gave the 
agency a clear picture of some of the pressing challenges the Libyan nuclear 
establishment faced. This led the IAEA’s technical assistance effort to priori-
tize help with training, planning, and managing a nuclear energy program 
in the second half of the 1970s. But IAEA con­sul­tants found it very difficult 
to make tangible pro­gress. First, con­sul­tants who offered training courses 
­were met with an unmistakable lack of enthusiasm on the part of the Lib-
yan staff, who ­were often absent—­occasionally due to vacation or military 
training but at times just ­because the training center was too remote. Even 
candidates for IAEA fellowships stayed away from the training courses of-
fered by foreign experts, and sometimes shunned contact with them. This 
reluctance was, in all likelihood, at least partly due to security concerns and 
monitoring by domestic intelligence agencies. Libyan scientists ­were frus-
trated by rigid administrative rules, restrictions on contacts with foreigners, 
and their own limited influence inside the nuclear establishment. This 
frustration created broader prob­lems: a lack of motivation and a lack of re-
search and development activities, despite the influx of advice and the 
regime’s grandiose plans for nuclear power. During the summer, for exam-
ple, the laboratories and offices emptied as all staff went on vacation.56 The 
high proportion of foreign technical staff slowed the indigenous develop-

161
Cultural Revolution and Nuclear Power, 1973–1981
ment of necessary skills and ­human resources; it also made the or­ga­ni­za­
tion’s institutional knowledge base very vulnerable, as the most se­nior in-
dividuals ­were foreign nationals. During the 1977 war between Libya and 
Egypt, the program came to a halt. Some Egyptian scientists left, while 
­others used the opportunity to go on strike for better pay and conditions.
The Physics Department at the University in Tripoli continued to expand 
its facilities for education and research—­described in 1975 as sophisticated 
and state-­of-­the-­art by visiting IAEA consultants—­but apparently ­little re-
search actually took place.57 IAEA experts noted that ­there was a lack of 
working discipline among the students. As noted above, another challenge 
was the fact that most of the staff ­were foreigners, including more than 
twenty PhDs on short-­term contracts. The faculty ­were nearly all foreign: 
mainly Egyptian and some Pakistani nationals.58
This state of affairs puzzled the foreign experts who ­were charged with 
advising the Libyan government. Despite Libya’s petrodollars, the country 
was underdeveloped, and basic ser­vices such as telephone and postal ser­
vices ­were unreliable. It could take several days to arrange to make a tele-
phone call “if the telephone operator at the post office [was] not in the proper 
mood.”59 The IAEA con­sul­tants strug­gled to find ways to spur the develop-
ment of nuclear science ­under ­these conditions. Commenting on a 1976 
report from an IAEA expert deployed in Libya, IAEA technical officer Joze 
Dolnicar responded: “Mr. Spits’ first Field Report should be evaluated by a 
sociologist rather than a physicist. . . . ​At this time, the technical pro­gress is 
not evident, and ­there is nothing that the Agency can do to accelerate the 
activities.”60
Shopping for Reactors.  ​In the mid-1970s, the Libyan regime started to look 
for suppliers for nuclear reactors. During this period they ­were turned down 
by the United States (in 1975), France (a preliminary agreement was canceled 
in 1976), and China (in 1978), which led to Tripoli approaching Moscow for 
a wide array of technical and military assistance.61 The Libyans requested 
that the Soviet nuclear establishment provide infrastructure for the complete 
nuclear fuel cycle, which would constitute an in­de­pen­dent technological 
foundation for a nuclear energy program and give insights into the dynam-
ics of weapons-­related technologies as well. Jalloud led a Libyan del­e­ga­tion 
to Moscow to ask for a heavy-­water reactor, a heavy-­water plant, and a spent-­
fuel repro­cessing fa­cil­i­ty, a package that could have given Libya a weapons 
option.62 According to a se­nior Soviet official, it was obvious to both parties 
that this was intended to be a military program.63 The estimated price, at 
this stage, was $10 billion. In 1977, Libya was successful with part of its re-
quest: the Soviet state com­pany Atomenergoexport agreed to construct a 
nuclear plant for power production in Libya.64 ­After this initially fairly pos-
itive reception, however, the Soviet Ministry of Foreign Affairs raised con-
cerns about pos­si­ble proliferation risks and dug their heels in.

162
chapter 6
Libya’s decision to seek a nuclear power reactor from the Soviet Union—­a 
request that would be, by 1982, increased to two reactors—­was made at the 
highest level of the regime. This power reactor was ostensibly meant to sup-
ply 440 megawatts to the national power grid. But se­nior regime figures 
apparently believed that this reactor could be the source of fissile material 
in a ­future weapons program.65 U.S. intelligence ­later estimated that the two 
reactors, if built, could have produced enough fissile material for some thirty 
nuclear weapons annually.66 Gaddafi’s closest circle selected a location for 
the power reactor at Sirte, Libya’s intended new capital and Gaddafi’s home-
town, apparently without assessing the suitability of the site.67
Very ­little other planning or preparation took place to prepare Libya for a 
nuclear power program at this stage. As research and development was still 
at a rudimentary stage, the prospect of operating a nuclear reactor appeared 
to cause unease in the Libyan nuclear establishment.68 The Libyan scientists 
received some advice on how to set up a nuclear energy authority from the 
IAEA during 1981, but did ­little to follow up. The details of the power reac-
tor and its intended role in the Libyan nuclear program ­were only loosely 
defined. The nuclear establishment did not become involved in any de-
tailed deliberations ­until later, when the proposed delivery date was much 
closer.
­Under Soviet pressure, Libya ratified the Nuclear Non-­Proliferation Treaty 
and placed all of its nuclear facilities ­under safeguards as of 8 July 1980.69 
(Figure 6.1 below shows the head of the Libyan nuclear program signing this 
agreement at the IAEA in Vienna.) The Libyans ­were noticeably reluctant to 
discuss their plans with visiting IAEA con­sul­tants.70 While this may have 
been interpreted as reluctance on the part of Libyan scientists to discuss a 
proj­ect with potentially sensitive dimensions, it is equally pos­si­ble that the 
scientists lacked the information to discuss ­these plans. In fact, during the 
mid-­to-­late 1970s, Libya’s nuclear establishment does not appear to have 
been involved with—or informed in any detail about—­the se­nior level of the 
regime’s plans, which illustrates the lack of interaction between the se­nior 
tier of the regime and the scientific establishment, even at this stage of the 
program.
While negotiating for the nuclear power plant, the Libyan nuclear estab-
lishment also agreed to purchase a Soviet research reactor. The research re-
actor was a secondary objective for the Libyans, but remained on the wish 
list of the nuclear establishment. In a 1975 visit to Libya, Soviet premier 
Alexei Kosygin discussed providing technical assistance and a research reac-
tor with Libyan officials. In June 1975, the Soviet Union agreed to provide a 
research reactor. The understanding was that the center would focus on op-
erating low-­power nuclear reactors, suitable for research and development as 
well as familiarizing Libyans with reactor operations. Soviet technicians 
would remain on site to help with training and general assistance.71 The re-
search reactor intended for Libya could produce no more than 1.2 kilograms 

163
Cultural Revolution and Nuclear Power, 1973–1981
of plutonium per year, meaning that it would take a de­cade to produce 
enough fissile material for a single nuclear bomb.72
Gaddafi signed the agreement for the research reactor in Moscow in Au-
gust 1975. The Soviet Union’s Kurchatov Institute oversaw its installation and 
operation, while Atomenergoexport oversaw its construction. Atomenergo-
export also shipped 11.5 kilograms of enriched uranium to fuel the reactor, 
which arrived in early 1981. The 10-­megawatt research reactor—­which 
would remain Libya’s only nuclear reactor as it turned out—­became opera-
tional in November 1983. But the Libyans ­were still negotiating a power re-
actor agreement with the Soviets, and in 1981 ­there ­were no indications that 
this agreement would not move forward. In November that year, IAEA con­
sul­tants traveled to Libya to help with planning and preparing for a nuclear 
energy program. They expected the contract for the two Soviet power reac-
tors to be signed in the near ­future. Their report also described the schedule 
they anticipated for the Libyan power program at that stage: “Pres­ent plans 
including the construction of two 440-­MW PWR units of the Soviet type, con-
struction to start in early 1982; construction time for the first unit is expected 
to be six-­and-­a-­half years and the second unit three years ­later.”73 But within 
Figure 6.1. Dr. Abdel Fattah Eskangy, head of the Libyan nuclear program, signs a 
safeguards agreement with Professor Ivan S. Zheludev, acting director general of the 
International Atomic Energy Agency, on 8 July 1980 (IAEA Archives, Photographic 
Collection, A0057).

164
chapter 6
five years the Libyan regime had squandered their prospects of making an-
other deal with the Soviets. They never received ­those two reactors.
the tajoura nuclear research center
In tandem with their efforts to purchase nuclear reactors, the Libyans 
wanted to set up a nuclear research center to nurture more training and re-
search and development for the expected power program. In 1977, two years 
­after the contract was signed by Gaddafi in Moscow, construction of a re-
search center began at Tajoura, 25 kilo­meters outside Tripoli. While the Lib-
yans ­were expecting that more facilities would be added elsewhere, such as 
an institute for training nuclear technicians, the Tajoura Nuclear Research 
Center (TNRC) would become the hub of the Libyan nuclear program.
The AEA was led at that time by two Libyan scientists, Abdel Fattah Es-
kangy and his deputy, Hajji M. Kershman, who had been the first Libyan 
nuclear scientist to obtain a PhD during the early 1970s.74 Eskangy was 
a nuclear scientist who specialized in radioisotope techniques for ground­
water studies, which ­were of central interest to the regime’s ambitious plans 
for ­water extraction from the desert.75 ­Under Eskangy’s directorship, the nu-
clear program focused on exploring dual-­use technologies that would be rel-
evant to both a nuclear energy program and a weapons program. The TNRC 
was initially directed by Mustapha Torki, a Tunisian scientist. Jalloud headed 
the committee overseeing the development of the center. He reportedly ex-
pressed interest in enrichment technology and plutonium repro­cessing to the 
Egyptian scientists working at the TNRC.76 ­Under the leadership of the AEA 
and the man­ag­ers of the TNRC, the loosely defined objective of the nuclear 
program was to examine the nuclear fuel cycle, but it apparently lacked more 
specific targets or guidelines. Although the leaders of Libya’s nuclear estab-
lishment set up a small health physics unit and remained interested in nu-
clear ­water desalination, which had obvious applications in a desert coun-
try, they did not prioritize other applications of nuclear technology.
The development of a large nuclear research center at Tajoura was a wel-
come boost to the struggling nuclear program. While construction was on-
going, the Libyans set up dif­fer­ent research departments for the new research 
center. ­These departments could carry out basic research and training for sci-
entists and technical workers while waiting for the new facilities to become 
operational. By 1977, the TNRC had several departments, but only one—­the 
Activation Analy­sis Department—­had ongoing research activities. ­There was 
a Physics Department without a research program or activities; a Plasma De-
partment; a Radiation Protection Department; a Maintenance, Operation 
and Construction Department; an Engineering Research Unit; and a Com-
puter and Documentation Department.77 Some of ­these departments had no 
staff. The center had a total staff of six hundred, with one hundred engineers, 
technicians, and workers. The Engineering Research Unit appeared to be 

165
Cultural Revolution and Nuclear Power, 1973–1981
particularly strong in the eyes of visiting IAEA experts.78 The staff held de-
grees from universities in Libya and abroad but had virtually no practical 
or professional experience with nuclear power.79
As the development of the TNRC moved forward, its approach for acquir-
ing technical instruments was described as “haphazard.” Nowhere ­were 
­there specifications for training staff in how to use this equipment to develop 
research programs.80 The Libyan nuclear establishment was keen to buy 
more instruments even though they continued to have prob­lems with the 
equipment they had and lacked scientists with the capacity to make use of 
advanced research equipment.
Inefficient administration and cumbersome regulations stalled initiative 
and slowed the pace even during this time of expansion. Teaching at the Uni-
versity of Tripoli was now geared ­toward training students in all aspects of 
reactors and preparing them to work with the research reactor expected to 
arrive from the Soviet Union in five years’ time (1982).81 In effect, the Phys-
ics Department became the training ground for the staff of the expanding 
TNRC. Beyond this role, however, ­there was limited collaboration or coor-
dination between the Physics Department and the center.82 At times, the 
TNRC apparently demanded priority access to visiting IAEA con­sul­tants who 
offered classes or other training opportunities, while the university had to 
wait. Such exclusionary tactics ­were particularly unproductive since, as noted 
above, the TNRC scientists rarely bothered to turn up to ­these classes anyway.
The se­nior management at the TNRC during this period, and most of the 
se­nior technical staff, ­were foreign experts recruited by the Libyan authori-
ties. For example, the Geology Department was directed by an Egyptian sci-
entist, Mohamed El Aziz; and the AEA was supported by Haschisch, an 
Egyptian from the Cairo Nuclear Center.83 The TNRC was initially staffed 
mainly by about one hundred Soviet technicians training Libyans to oper-
ate the site.84 Visiting foreign experts ­were nonetheless struck by how un-
derstaffed the center was, and encouraged their Libyan hosts to make more 
efforts to develop an indigenous base of relevant skills and know-­how. Pay-
ing the scientists and engineers adequately would, of course, also have 
helped. In January 1975, Gaddafi announced that Libya would seek to re-
cruit Arab scientists from the West to help Libya’s nuclear program. A mem-
ber of the RCC began to approach individual scientists seeking to recruit 
them.85 Recruiting scientists and engineers was still a challenge, as was de-
veloping a more efficient administration. As a visiting IAEA expert observed 
in 1976, “the low level of activities may be retraceable to the inefficiency of 
related ser­vices such as the Administration and the Purchase Department. 
Besides, ­because of underpayment, it is difficult to attract technicians match-
ing a high standard.”86 While the university planned to gradu­ate about ten 
students per year in nuclear engineering beginning in about 1982, this 
would not be enough to satisfy the growing demands of the nuclear power 
program.87

166
chapter 6
Se­nior regime figures provided key support for the expansion of the pro-
gram. Jalloud was a central driving force in Libya’s early pursuit of nuclear 
technology. The committee charged with overseeing the establishment of the 
nuclear reactor at the TNRC reportedly met ­every week. The Egyptian sci-
entist heading up the Physics Department, Abdelaziz, who assisted with the 
expansion of the center, was assured that Gaddafi would provide what­ever 
resources deemed necessary.88 Gaddafi did not meet Abdelaziz personally, 
but Jalloud continued to follow the nuclear proj­ect closely, and he reported 
directly to Gaddafi.89
The TNRC was becoming operational, but visiting experts from the IAEA 
­were struck by a sense of apathy among its scientists. A visiting IAEA con­
sul­tant noted that ­there was a brief flurry of activity in 1975–1976, when sev-
eral proj­ects ­were launched, but that the TNRC had become stagnant by 
1977–1978.90 Explanations ranged from inefficient administration and poorly 
motivated scientists to military ser­vice and a halt of activities in prepara-
tion for a further expansion of the research center. The acute shortage of 
skilled staff and the heavy reliance on foreign staff also contributed to make 
the management and operations vulnerable to disruption.
The lack of planning at the TNRC made ­little sense. ­There did not seem 
to be any meaningful leadership guiding the efforts at the center. According 
to an IAEA con­sul­tant, “the most con­spic­u­ous feature is the notable lack of 
any clearly discernible general plan envisaging specific objectives for the 
pres­ent utilization and ­future development of this nuclear research center.”91 
However, once the Soviet research reactor arrived in 1981, the situation at 
the TNRC improved. Fathi Nuh, who had studied nuclear physics in the 
United States and would remain a significant figure in the Libyan nuclear 
establishment for years to come, and Eskangy, director of the AEA, oversaw 
the initial operation of the reactor. The IRT research reactor section in the 
TNRC’s Reactor Department carried out a series of experiments.92
In tandem with ­these efforts, the AEA returned to the front end of the 
nuclear fuel cycle, renewing its efforts to explore uranium deposits. An ex-
ploration program had been run by the Prospecting Department at the 
Ministry of Geological Research and Mining since 1974, with a team of 
twelve geologists plus one technician and a pi­lot. In 1979, the AEA reached 
out to the IAEA, announcing a “major effort in uranium prospecting” and 
created a Raw Materials Division.93 This proj­ect was envisioned on a five-­
year basis, and would draw on extensive foreign assistance. The uranium 
exploration program, led by M. A. Ghuma at the AEA, undertook sample 
collection and analy­sis.94 The director of the AEA, Eskangy, requested that 
the laboratory develop the capacity to analyze yellowcake.95
Between 1977 and 1981, the overall pro­gress of the nuclear program was 
uneven. Although ­there was more equipment available in the university 
­laboratories, at the TNRC activities ­were kept on hold, despite having the 
Soviet-­supplied equipment giving the option of carry­ing out up to thirty dif­

167
Cultural Revolution and Nuclear Power, 1973–1981
fer­ent types of experiments.96 Visiting IAEA experts noted that the planned 
expansion had turned into an extended “transitional period” in which not 
much was happening. Eskangy and his staff had only started to plan research 
and training activities in late 1977.97 Furthermore, “the general objectives in 
training and research ­were only vaguely defined . . . ​and many administra-
tive and orga­nizational ­matters on which effective implementation of the as-
signment depended, ­were not resolved.”98 The scientists “showed lack of 
interest in the initiatives of the [IAEA] expert to provide training aimed at 
improving their background in Nuclear Science.”99 The frustrated con­sul­
tant instead wrote up a training manual, which could be useful in the ­future 
if the conditions at the TNRC became more amenable to support research 
and development activities.
One would have expected the TNRC to seek ways to adapt their existing 
resources to facilitate applied research tailored to meet Libya’s development 
challenges. But the Libyan scientists ­were more interested in basic research 
and acted accordingly: “The planners of the Nuclear Research Centre ­were 
largely concerned with assembling an excellently equipped institute, and 
very ­little attention was paid to designing appropriate research programmes. 
As a result the type of equipment available or planned in the Centre, favours 
fundamental research, of the type with [only] marginal relevance to the coun-
try’s requirements.”100
Despite the IAEA’s impressions, some of the inexperienced staff at the 
TNRC ­were keen to receive more training and travel abroad for fellowships. 
They complained privately to visiting IAEA con­sul­tants that they ­were pre-
vented from ­doing so by regulations.101 Still, it was unclear why they did 
not take advantage of opportunities to learn from visiting experts. For ex-
ample, an IAEA con­sul­tant spent several months at the TNRC to advise and 
train the staff in radioisotope research. His lectures ­were halted ­after the 
Libyan staff failed to turn up. Another con­sul­tant noted that the “occasional 
participation [of Libyans] in ­these programmes is on a schedule of unpre-
dictable randomness.”102 The Libyans ­were frequently absent, leaving an 
audience of just three or four foreign scientists and one or two Libyans in 
attendance at classes.103 The AEA, which at that time had fifty or sixty 
employees, did not always fulfill their counterpart obligations to the IAEA 
when receiving such assistance.104
This state of affairs raised questions within the IAEA about the purpose of 
this expansion and about the direction of the Libyan nuclear program. It be-
came “increasingly clear” to the IAEA con­sul­tants that “the continued exis-
tence of the Tajura Nuclear Research Center must obviously be based mainly 
on administrative considerations rather than any consistent plan for the effec-
tive development of its scientific capabilities within the foreseeable ­future.”105
During the 1970s, Libya pursued a nuclear weapons option in two ways: as 
a clandestine off-­shoot of a nuclear energy program and by investing in 

168
chapter 6
nuclear weapons programs in other states, notably Pakistan. By the early 
1980s, its efforts to develop nuclear energy and carve out a weapons option 
at home would intensify, as Libya began to explore both the plutonium and 
centrifuge routes to a nuclear weapons program. But the Libyan nuclear es-
tablishment faced many hurdles: a shortage of qualified staff; a lack of nec-
essary industrial capacities; and a leader whose main ideological proj­ect was 
to dismantle the state. Over the 1980s, Libya’s nuclear prospects would de-
teriorate, adversely affected by war, international proliferation concerns, re-
taliatory air strikes, sanctions, and isolation.
By 1981, the Gaddafi regime anticipated the imminent arrival of nuclear 
power and, they believed, a weapons option. As this chapter shows, neither 
ambition was founded in real­ity. The gap between ­actual capabilities on the 
ground and the regime’s ambitions increased dramatically during the 1970s. 
Despite assistance from the Soviet Union and the IAEA, Libya’s nuclear in-
stitutions remained strangely underdeveloped. The program lacked the 
essential orga­nizational capacity to plan, or­ga­nize, and carry out a nuclear 
program in line with the regime’s objectives and ambitious procurement 
activities. The orga­nizational weaknesses of Libya’s nuclear establishment, 
at both the TNRC and national levels, influenced ­every aspect of Libya’s re-
search and development activities, from planning to implementation. The 
nuclear establishment lacked a se­nior tier of leaders capable of organ­izing 
and ­running a research program and continued to suffer from a shortage of 
technicians and scientists. Scientists made the most of the lavish acquisition 
campaign carried out by the regime by developing well-­equipped laborato-
ries for basic research. Meanwhile, IAEA experts worried about the prospects 
of an imminent arrival of two large nuclear power reactors in a country that 
was clearly unprepared and ill-­equipped to cope. In short, the stunted de-
velopment of Libya’s nuclear program during the 1970s was an overdeter-
mined outcome.
To understand how Libyan scientists could get away with underperform-
ing—to the point of absurdity—­while the Gaddafi regime came to believe 
its scientists ­were capable of launching a nuclear energy program is impos-
sible without considering how Gaddafi’s Cultural Revolution had eroded an 
already weak state. Gaddafi’s revolution was intended to culminate in “state-
lessness” in theory, but in practice it unleashed vigilante Revolutionary 
Committees on an already brittle state and alienated potential nuclear sup-
pliers. Meanwhile, the Libyan nuclear program, which was modeled on 
Western organ­izations, emerged in a state that lacked the orga­nizational re-
sources to launch a complex technological program. It would take more than 
five more years before ­these prob­lems became apparent to the regime, as 
the nuclear energy program continued to dawdle along ­until the mid-1980s. 
In the interim, the Libyan nuclear scientists launched a secret program to 
develop centrifuges as an alternative route to the bomb. But by the close of 
the 1980s this program still seemed to be ­going nowhere.

169
chapter 7
Nuclear Weapons Remain Elusive,  
1982–1989
In 1981, Libyan nuclear scientists anticipated two Soviet nuclear power re-
actors to arrive the following year. At the same time, a team of researchers 
began to explore centrifuges in secret, hoping to develop an alternative tech-
nical route to a nuclear weapons capability. A de­cade ­later, nuclear energy 
remained an unfulfilled ambition while the centrifuge program failed to 
produce even a single operational model. ­After 1989 the Libyans aban-
doned both tracks, disillusioned with the options of developing a nuclear 
weapons capability as an offshoot from an energy program or through 
indigenous research and development efforts, and turned to the nuclear 
black market.
This chapter explains how and why both the energy program and the clan-
destine centrifuge proj­ect failed so completely. It also raises the question of 
why the Libyan regime stood idly by, and ­whether Muammar Gaddafi was 
aware of the extent to which the nuclear program was failing. ­Little has 
previously been known about the Libyan program during this de­cade, 
especially the highly secretive centrifuge program. New primary sources—­
including con­temporary International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) re-
ports, statements from scientists attempting to lay the foundation for nu-
clear research and development, and the author’s interviews with se­nior 
officials from the former Libyan regime—­elucidate how the erosion of the 
Libyan state affected the nuclear establishment as it prepared to launch a 
nuclear power program. ­These sources show how the reactor program was 
stymied by the absence of planning and preparations prior to the collapse 
of the Soviet reactor deal in 1986. This helps to explain why the Libyan pro-
gram was so vulnerable to the loss of foreign assistance, and why the 
decade-­long research and development program focusing on centrifuges 
failed to launch. As Libyan scientists ­were increasingly left to their own 
devices, myriad prob­lems due to failures of planning, management, and 
oversight came to the fore. It was not simply a question of investing enough, 

170
chapter 7
getting more foreign assistance, or making the program enough of a prior-
ity: the state lacked the orga­nizational capability to support the planning 
and overseeing of a proj­ect of this size and complexity. This affected ­every 
stage from planning to implementation and oversight. ­There was no clear 
prioritization of tasks or formulation of clear and mea­sur­able objectives; 
neither was ­there a sequential approach to the acquisitions that ­were part of 
the planning for the ­future weapons program.
During the mid-1980s and early 1990s, the Gaddafi regime found itself 
­increasingly isolated and vulnerable. Despite investing in a conventional 
arms buildup, the Libyan armed forces ­were also humiliated by poorly 
equipped Chadian forces in clashes during the 1980s. It was clear that Lib-
ya’s armed forces ­were incapable of both defending the regime and prevail-
ing against the forces of neighboring states. As oil revenues declined during 
the 1980s, the collapsing economy put new domestic pressures on the re-
gime, and led regime factions to question the large cost of pursuing nuclear 
technology. The United States targeted Gaddafi’s residence, as well as 
Libya’s air force, in a series of clashes during the 1980s. The air force was in 
an even worse state. When the relationship between Libya and the USSR 
soured ­after 1986, the air force lost critically impor­tant support from Soviet-­
bloc advisers and technicians.1 As Gaddafi began to crave a nuclear deterrent 
to secure his regime’s po­liti­cal and physical survival, the nuclear program 
went nowhere.
Isolation and New Vulnerabilities
The 1980s ­were a disastrous period for Libya’s foreign relations and, by 
extension, the nuclear program, which relied almost entirely on foreign as-
sistance. The Gaddafi regime’s foreign relations became increasingly radical-
ized, both in terms of policies (attempting to redraw Libya’s maritime border 
and supporting terrorists and terrorist groups such as the Abu Nidal Or­ga­
ni­za­tion) and methods (assassination attempts reportedly targeted expatri-
ate Libyans, foreign ambassadors, and U.S. president Ronald Reagan).2 This 
had dramatic consequences, most notably Reagan declaring regime change 
in Libya to be a U.S. policy objective.3 In 1983, the Reagan administration 
also banned Libyans from studying nuclear science in the United States.
Relations between Libya and the United States had deteriorated badly 
since 1979, when the American embassy in Tripoli was closed ­after demon-
strators burned it down. In May 1980, the United States closed its diplomatic 
mission in Tripoli. ­After the Gaddafi regime began to dispute the Libyan 
maritime border in the Gulf of Sirte, tensions spilled over. In September a 
Libyan jet fired at a U.S. reconnaissance aircraft above ­those ­waters. The fol-
lowing year, in August 1981, the Libyan air force fired two missiles against 
American aircraft, which retaliated by shooting down two Libyan jets. Two 

171
Nuclear Weapons Remain Elusive, 1982–1989 
weeks ­later, on the twelfth anniversary of the 1969 coup, Gaddafi threatened 
to strike against U.S. nuclear arsenals in the Mediterranean if this happened 
again.4 ­There was another altercation in 1983 in which no fire was exchanged.5
The Soviet Union was Libya’s single strong ally and main supplier of nu-
clear technology ­until the Libyan economy plummeted in the mid-1980s. 
As detailed in the previous chapter, in 1981 the two countries had entered a 
broad agreement including contracts for conventional arms, technology 
transfers—­including nuclear technology—­and a promise of Soviet support 
if Libya ­were subjected to foreign aggression.6 However, as Libya’s foreign 
exchange reserves quickly drained during the early 1980s, the Soviets ap-
pear to have begun to question how Libya would pay for the reactors and 
may have considered accepting a barter arrangement.7
In 1986, the relationship between the Soviet Union and Libya deteriorated 
rapidly ­after Tripoli deci­ded not to move forward with the nuclear reactor 
deal. The United States applied pressure on other states including Belgium, 
which was considering replacing the Soviets as a key supplier of technol-
ogy for the Libyan nuclear energy program. Over the next few years, the 
Libyan program launched several initiatives to explore uranium enrichment 
technologies, but none of their efforts moved beyond initial studies. Libya 
also found it increasingly difficult to find nuclear suppliers. With or with-
out foreign assistance, the Libyan program seemed incapable of developing 
an indigenous path to nuclear weapons prior to 1989.
preparing for nuclear power
In 1981 an amendment to the Nuclear Energy Act replaced the Libyan 
Atomic Energy Authority (NAEA) by a new institution, the Secretariat of 
Atomic Energy (SAE), which was formally tasked with the highest executive 
role in planning, overseeing, and managing the nuclear energy program. The 
National Committee of Atomic Energy (NCAE), which formally oversaw the 
SAE, was chaired by SAE secretary Abdel-Majid Gaoud. On 7 January 1981 
the Libyan General ­People’s Congress (GPC) rubber-­stamped the creation of 
the SAE, which had the formal status of a ministry.8 If this gave the impres-
sion that the Libyan nuclear authorities ­were given more institutional powers, 
this was an illusion. The IAEA had advised the Libyans to create an adequate 
institutional framework for their nuclear energy program. The creation of the 
SAE and the orga­nizational restructuring that took place in 1981 was an at-
tempt to separate executive responsibilities inside the nuclear establishment. 
But creating a new set of organ­izations could not fix the fundamental prob­
lems facing Libyan state institutions: inadequate resources for proj­ect plan-
ning and implementation, a steady erosion of authority by Gaddafi’s revolu-
tionary agitators, and the absence of adequate monitoring mechanisms.
The SAE was led by Gaoud, a close associate of Gaddafi who would play 
a central role in the Libyan regime over the next several de­cades, and had six 

172
chapter 7
members.9 Gaoud’s role as SAE secretary came with the title of minister of 
atomic energy for peaceful uses, as well as chairman of the National Com-
mittee of Atomic Energy (NCAE). He reported directly to Gaddafi and his 
inner circle in the ministerial Cabinet.10 Gaoud also played a leading role 
in another prestige proj­ect that was highly favored by Gaddafi, the “­Great 
Man-­Made River” intended to transport groundwater across the Libyan 
desert. Other members of the SAE included ­Under-­Secretaries Fathi Nuh, 
Ibrahim al-­Hasain and four other specialists in nuclear energy. The 
­Under-­secretaries headed the two wings of the or­ga­ni­za­tion; Nuh, the Ex-
ecutive Committee for Scientific Affairs, and al-­Hasain, the Executive Com-
mittee for Financial and Administrative Affairs.11 All six members of the SAE 
­were university professors with no practical experience of planning or 
operating a nuclear power program. Figure 7.1 below provides a snapshot 
overview of the administrative reorganizations of the Libyan nuclear estab-
lishment during the 1970s and 1980s.
The SAE’s Executive Committee for Scientific Affairs ­under Nuh, who also 
worked in the Department of Nuclear and Electronic Engineering at Al-­Fateh 
University (as Tripoli University had been renamed in April 1976), took 
charge of launching and overseeing the nuclear power program. The com-
mittee was the official liaison with foreign organ­izations such as the IAEA 
and with the foreign companies assisting Libya’s nuclear program.12 A sep-
arate unit, the Committee for the Technical Review of the Nuclear Power 
Plant Contract, was led by former AEA director Abdel Fattah Eskangy and 
would study the technical aspects of the Soviet contract.13 In 1983 the new 
Department for Training and Technical Cooperation led by Najib Sheibani 
was added to the SAE portfolio. The second wing of the SAE, the Executive 
Committee for Financial and Administrative Affairs, had departments fo-
cusing on ­legal, administrative, and financial ­matters, as well as foreign re-
lations.14
The NCAE—­which had been merged inside the now defunct NAEA—­was 
now given a combined decision-­making and advisory role with the SAE and 
was chaired by SAE secretary Gaoud. The NCAE was an appointed state 
committee, which meant that it was not part of the GPC structure. As an au-
tonomous and essentially technocratic body, the NCAE was largely insu-
lated from the radical actors in the Libyan regime.
Meanwhile, despite ­these orga­nizational changes the nuclear program 
continued to face increasingly complex tasks, while struggling with inade-
quate institutional and ­human resources. Figure 7.2 gives an overview of the 
main tracks and orga­nizational developments in the Libyan nuclear weap-
ons program.
Visiting IAEA experts described the administrative and technical infra-
structures of the Libyan nuclear program in late 1981 as “extremely weak.”15 
The staff ­were all fairly recent gradu­ates who ­were not only stretched thin, 
in the sense that they had to fulfill more functions than their job titles sug-

Figure 7.1. Reorganizations of Libya’s nuclear weapons program, 1973–1986.
Atomic Energy Establishment
Secretariat of Atomic Energy
Research and Development: isotope production, physics and material science,
centrifuges, precision machinery, centrifuge feed material, uranium conversion
Power Reactor Negotiations
Centrifuge Procurement
Plutonium: reprocessing
Gas Centrifuge: research and development
Uranium: prospecting and refining
1981 1982 1983 1984 1985 1986 1987 1988 1989 1990 1991
Libyan Nuclear Weapons Program Timeline, 1981–2003 
2003
2002
2001
2000
1999
1998
1997
1996
1995
1994
1993
1992
National Board of Science and Research
KEY
 
 
Thin gray line indicates organizations involved in 
                    running the program 
                    Thick solid line indicates subproject tracks
                    Dotted black line indicates program was temporarily  
                    suspended
Dashed line style indicates uncertainty about stop or start date
Italics indicate project description or details

Figure 7.2. Libyan nuclear weapons program timeline, 1981–2003.
National Board of Science and Research
Atomic Energy Establishment
Secretariat of Atomic Energy
Research and Development: isotope production, physics and material science,
centrifuges, precision machinery, centrifuge feed material, uranium conversion
Power Reactor Negotiations
Centrifuge Procurement
Plutonium: reprocessing
Gas Centrifuge: research and development
Uranium: prospecting and refining
1981 1982 1983 1984 1985 1986 1987 1988 1989 1990 1991
KEY
 
 
indicates uncertainty about stop and/or start date
 
 
indicates program was temporarily suspended
 
 
indicates organizations involved in running the program 
 
 
indicates sub-project tracks
Italics indicate project description/details
Libyan Nuclear Weapons Program Timeline, 1981–2003 
2003
2002
2001
2000
1999
1998
1997
1996
1995
1994
1993
1992

175
Nuclear Weapons Remain Elusive, 1982–1989 
gested, but strug­gled to meet even the demands of their primary responsi-
bilities.16 For example, the SAE’s Department of Power, with just five staff 
members, was in charge of planning and launching the nuclear power 
proj­ect.17 The IAEA con­sul­tants reported to the director general that this 
department “must divide its pres­ent efforts between the technical proposal 
evaluation, nuclear power programme planning, evaluation of safety and 
regulatory aspects, or­ga­ni­za­tion and training of the ­future operating and 
maintenance team and sending away ju­nior engineers for further training 
to universities, courses and industry.”18
It was clear that the Libyans needed help. For example, as late as mid-1982 
­there does not appear to have been any detailed schedule at the SAE for the 
introduction of a nuclear energy program. The Libyan technical staff seem 
to have found the IAEA’s advice—­focus on basic capacity building and 
sound orga­nizational planning rather than ambitious and abstract targets—­a 
constructive influence. However, as con­temporary U.S. intelligence assess-
ments noted, the Libyan scientists had limited influence, and while they at-
tempted to adopt some of this advice they lacked the ­human resources and 
institutional authority to use it to emulate the or­ga­ni­za­tion of nuclear pro-
grams in other states.19
The se­nior regime members had selected a site for the power reactor com-
plex at Sirte, Gaddafi’s hometown. Sirte was becoming a new home for 
Libya’s state buildings and was intended to showcase the revolution. Plac-
ing the reactor ­here indicated the prestige associated with the nuclear power 
proj­ect. However, the SAE did not offer the IAEA any information about the 
specifications of the site, nor did it indicate that preparations had begun in 
earnest. This had a ­simple explanation—­the SAE had not yet carried out any 
such assessment or started preparations. This, United States analysts sus-
pected, reflected deeper divisions inside the SAE with regards to the need 
for such reactors, or, perhaps, what purpose they would actually serve.20
At this point, in 1981–1982, the Libyans had not started preparing insti-
tutional resources or mechanisms for tracking imported nuclear material, 
nor did they have safety procedures in place at nuclear facilities, despite 
the IAEA’s advice. The notion of regulation and oversight, which the IAEA 
considered essential for governing a nuclear energy program, was not fa-
miliar to Libyan civil servants. Furthermore, the Libyan institutional land-
scape was unlike that found in other states. The Libyan regime was reluc-
tant to set up an institutional mechanism for oversight that would be 
in­de­pen­dent of the SAE, the chief agency for nuclear affairs. In Libya, over-
sight was carried out by individuals trusted by Gaddafi, not facilitated by 
institutions. ­After visiting the Libyan nuclear establishment in 1982, an 
IAEA con­sul­tant noted that the “concept of the regulatory body is not ap-
preciated, nor have positive steps been taken to establish such a body.”21 
The IAEA had encouraged the Libyan nuclear establishment to set up an 
in­de­pen­dent regulatory authority for radiation protection, but the Libyans 

176
chapter 7
pointed out that the updated law had made the SAE the responsible agency 
for nuclear affairs, and ­were reluctant to set up an in­de­pen­dent body for 
radiation protection. The IAEA con­sul­tants concluded that “it might be po­
liti­cally difficult and ineffectual in practice to attempt to establish a nuclear 
regulatory authority reporting to a dif­fer­ent Secretariat, as would in princi­ple 
be desirable to achieve full in­de­pen­dence for the authority.”22 Nevertheless, 
following advice from the IAEA, SAE secretary Gaoud attempted to address 
­these concerns by placing the NCAE (rather than the SAE) in charge of over-
seeing operational ­matters.
Although the nuclear establishment still had a “thin bench”—­limited tech-
nical expertise held by a small number of individuals—it was able to launch 
some initiatives. At the SAE, staff members ­were taking steps ­toward creat-
ing a managerial framework for research and development activities. For ex-
ample, at the Department of Radiation Protection at the SAE, a small group 
comprised of Nouri Ali Addaroughi, Fawzia Ali Bakkoush, and Ibrahim 
­Abdul Rahman, prepared radiation protection guidelines. When they be-
gan, Libya had no licensing authority, nor any mechanism for control over 
the import, transport, or use of radioisotopes in Libya. Their recommenda-
tions, based on ­those of the IAEA, formed the basis of a proposed regula-
tory law prepared in 1981.23 In practical terms, however, it was difficult to 
develop institutional capacities with such limited ­human resources and un-
defined room for maneuver. ­These conditions ­were a fragile foundation for 
an expansive new program.24
The SAE made it plain that it had ambitious plans for the ­future role of 
nuclear energy in Libya. As the Gaddafi regime continued to invest heavi­ly 
to spur indigenous industrial development, energy demand ­rose at what 
IAEA officials described as “spectacular growth rates.”25 In a rare 1982 in-
terview, SAE secretary Gaoud explained:
­Today we consume about 3,800 MW of electricity. . . . ​By 1995 it ­will be about 
6,000 MW and our nuclear programme ­will cover about 20% of our energy 
needs. . . . ​This means we have to get about 1,200 MW, which ­will be distrib-
uted between four [nuclear] stations. One is in the final stages of study 
and negotiations right now. It is a pressurised ­water reactor, and it ­will be 
signed for at the beginning of 1982. It ­will be built by the Soviet Union and 
should be in operation by 1986. We are still discussing the three other power 
plants. The hope is that by the year 2000 we ­will have all four plants in 
­operation. . . . ​We expect to use ­these power plants for a dual-­use purpose—­
power for heavy industry and heat for desalinising brackish ­water.26
­These plans ­were staggeringly ambitious. As IAEA experts reported in 
1981, Libya sought to launch an ambitious nuclear energy program before 
they had managed to set up a ­viable research program.27 The Libyan nuclear 
establishment made no secret of the urgency and ambition ­behind its pro-
gram. In September 1981, while visiting the IAEA, M. A. Ghuma of the SAE’s 

177
Nuclear Weapons Remain Elusive, 1982–1989 
Raw Materials Division characterized the nuclear program as a broad effort 
driven by the government, which included a five-­year uranium exploration 
program.28 He stressed the commitment with which his government backed 
the nuclear proj­ect.29
The regime’s ambitions seem to have taken no account of the ­actual capa-
bilities and resources of the Libyan nuclear establishment at that time. The 
shortage of qualified staff was still a critical challenge. The emergence of 
several new institutes at the universities and the expansion of the Tajoura 
Nuclear Research Center (TNRC) and the SAE, not to mention other indus-
tries, stretched Libya’s trained and qualified ­human resources even further.30 
In 1982, of a total of four hundred staff at the TNRC, just one hundred ­were 
engineers or technicians.
To develop a nuclear power program on this limited foundation would 
require intensive effort and investment over a number of years. In May 1982 
the Libyan government requested the IAEA “on an urgent basis” to advise 
them on how to prepare and plan for the launching of the nuclear power 
program.31 The IAEA del­e­ga­tion reported its concerns to the IAEA director 
general in somewhat understated language, saying that the nuclear program 
might not “obtain the necessary national priority” to become “an island of 
excellence in a generally not quite satisfactory state of technological develop-
ment and manpower qualifications.”32 In their internal reporting, the IAEA 
con­sul­tants ­were more blunt: this was a program facing severe challenges.
In the report following the IAEA visit in late 1982, IAEA con­sul­tants de-
scribed the talks between the SAE’s Department of Power and the Soviet sup-
plier com­pany Atomenergoexport on the nuclear reactor contract. The talks 
had progressed to a discussion of two 440-­megawatt reactors and a ­water 
desalination unit. The contract had not been signed, and the scope of the de-
liverables, such as training for Libyan engineers and technical workers, was 
not yet deci­ded. As a result, IAEA experts reported that “no work or train-
ing is presently being performed” by the Soviets in preparation for the de-
livery of ­these two units.33 Apparently, the Soviets intended to complete this 
proj­ect as they had in the case of the TNRC, as a complete turnkey (or “super-­
turnkey”) proj­ect constructed completely by their own technicians with 
minimal Libyan involvement.34
How did the Libyan nuclear establishment attempt to cope with their in-
adequate basic orga­nizational and technical resources in their efforts to 
plan and operate a nuclear power program? While individual staff members 
did their best, despite being asked to carry out tasks they ­were not trained 
for, ­there was a fundamental mismatch between the institutional resources 
and the task at hand. As a result, the Libyan nuclear establishment fell ­behind 
on all fronts. ­There are no indications suggesting that this was communi-
cated to the se­nior regime leaders, and it does not appear that this lack of 
capabilities in any way affected the anticipated schedule of beginning prep-
arations for the construction of the new power reactor site in 1982.

178
chapter 7
The Department of Power, for example, had the lead responsibility to train, 
operate, and initially regulate the energy program, but had only eigh­teen 
employees.35 IAEA con­sul­tants gave advice on planning, oversight, and 
­human resources, but they ­were concerned that the Libyans did not seem to 
make much use of their input, and strug­gled to operate even basic research 
proj­ects. For example, the Libyan nuclear establishment, with the help of So-
viet and IAEA con­sul­tants, launched research proj­ects including “radiation 
and nuclear physics, nuclear and radiochemistry, shielding and radiation 
protection, neutron and reactor physics,” but ­these seemed to falter at the 
very initial stages.36 Meanwhile, the regime’s acquisition efforts moved for-
ward at a rapid and increasing pace. This created concern among IAEA 
experts, who tried to tailor their advice to target “major prob­lem areas in a 
situation which would seem too full of prob­lems.”37
The Libyan nuclear establishment’s failure to develop sufficient ­human re-
sources for the planning or operation of a nuclear energy program stood in 
sharp contrast to the physical infrastructure they ­were acquiring from abroad. 
This was the result of several institutional shortcomings. No one drew up a 
plan to scale up training from basic research and development to ­running a 
nuclear energy program. In any case, the Libyan institutions ­were produc-
ing too few candidates, and several state institutions ­were competing to re-
cruit from the small pool of gradu­ates. When the TNRC was completed, it 
offered several facilities suitable for research and training, including the 
10-­megawatt research reactor that became operational in 1983, two acceler-
ators, and a tokamak research device.38 The SAE had a large room available 
for training activities, but this apparently saw ­little use.39 The SAE planned 
to build a separate fa­cil­i­ty some 60 kilo­meters outside Tripoli, initially re-
ferred to as the Institute of Nuclear Technology, for training of up to five hun-
dred technicians. This institute was intended to produce the necessary 
manpower for the nuclear energy program. It was unclear when this would 
be built or operational, however; according to IAEA con­sul­tants, as of late 
1981 ­there ­were no plans for the proposed institute’s “curricula, laborato-
ries, or technical fields.”40 As it turned out, the institute did not materialize.
The nuclear scientists ­were not involved in the regime’s decisions about 
the two Soviet reactors ­until they ­were asked to assess the technical aspects 
of the contract proposal in the late stage of negotiations. The SAE became 
belatedly involved only in 1981, just a year before the new reactors ­were ex-
pected to arrive, and its pre­de­ces­sor, the AEA, does not appear to have been 
consulted ­either. While SAE secretary Gaoud was a rising star with strong 
po­liti­cal connections, and former se­nior figures in the uranium exploration 
program had risen to se­nior regime positions (notably Jadallah Azzouz Et-
talhi, who became minister of industry and minerals in the late 1970s), the 
institutions of the nuclear establishment, the SAE and the NCAE, do not ap-
pear to have been systematically consulted in high-­level deliberations. As a 

179
Nuclear Weapons Remain Elusive, 1982–1989 
result, the regime’s assumptions about its technical options ­were in all like-
lihood inaccurate.
For example, the Gaddafi regime appears initially to have believed that 
the nuclear power reactors obtained from the Soviet Union could be the 
source of fissile material in a ­future weapons program.41 This was techni-
cally pos­si­ble—­U.S. intelligence estimated that the two nuclear power reac-
tors could produce enough fissile material for some thirty nuclear weapons 
per year—­but practically it was infeasible.42 The Soviet Union had insisted 
that Libya subject their nuclear facilities to IAEA safeguards and, accord-
ingly, they ­were subject to monitoring and regular inspections. If Libya left 
the Non-­Proliferation Treaty (NPT), or was caught diverting fissile material, 
it would risk a preemptive strike and would certainly be cut off from ­future 
assistance from the Soviet Union. This fact would have been obvious to the 
scientists, but apparently escaped the se­nior regime officials ­until the mid-
1980s.
The two 440-­megawatt Soviet reactors ­were meant to serve multiple pur-
poses: they could produce nuclear energy, give Libyan scientists access to 
technology and training that would be essential if they ­later opted for a plu-
tonium route to a nuclear weapons capability (though this would require 
additional infrastructure that was not subject to the NPT safeguards), and 
provide opportunities for scientific research. U.S. opinion was, however, that 
an ambitious and expanding civilian nuclear power program could create 
orga­nizational pressures in ­favor of peaceful applications.43 At this early 
stage, ­there appears to have been no discernible efforts in the Libyan nuclear 
establishment to steer the program in any par­tic­u­lar direction: neither ­toward 
nor away from nuclear weapons.
By the mid-1980s, the Libyan regime had recognized that the power reac-
tors could not be used directly for a weapons program as long as the coun-
try remained dependent on the Soviet Union or any other state for nuclear 
assistance. The se­nior regime leaders ­were believed to see the reactors as a 
symbol of industrial achievement, in addition to being a source of energy.44 
Thus, the nuclear energy program could both showcase an impor­tant tech-
nological achievement and develop indigenous know-­how (such as pluto-
nium repro­cessing) potentially useful for a nuclear weapons program.
A Contested State: Technocrats vs. Revolutionaries
As Libya prepared to introduce nuclear power, the Cultural Revolution was 
intensifying. In March 1979, Gaddafi had announced the “separation of the 
state and the revolution,” introducing a new stage in his ideological proj­ect 
in which nonstate actors—­the Revolutionary Committees—­would wield 
more power. As ­these nonstate actors became more power­ful than state 

180
chapter 7
agencies, it was not always clear where decision-­making authority was lo-
cated. The power to make decisions and wield influence was increasingly 
a reflection of individual connections, not formal titles or orga­nizational 
roles.
Gaddafi, the self-­proclaimed “Leader of the Revolution,” distanced him-
self from the official institutions of the state. By early 1981, the Revolution-
ary Command Council had been reduced from the original twelve to just 
five individuals: Gaddafi, Abdessalam Jalloud, Khaled Humeidi, Mustafa 
Kharroubi, and Abu Bakr Yunis Jabr. The GPC, overseen by a secretariat 
and twenty-­three officials, met about once a year to rubber-­stamp the se­nior 
regime members’ decisions and appointments. Gaddafi ruled ­behind the 
scenes, based on advice from his informal “Kitchen Cabinet”—­who pro-
posed vari­ous policies for his approval—­rather than formal reporting by 
the ministries.45 An ambitious new generation of leaders emerged from the 
Revolutionary Committees who would come to play key roles in the se­nior 
tier of the regime and, in the case of Matuq M. Matuq, the nuclear program.
­These changes, and the general radicalization of Libyan policies during 
the 1980s, caused tension in the se­nior tiers of the regime. Several high-­profile 
officials in key government positions defected. By May 1981, Gaddafi had 
lost his first prime minister, a former head of intelligence, a former foreign 
minister and ambassador to the United Nations, a former minister of econ-
omy and planning, the former oil minister, and several se­nior ambassadors.46 
One of ­these defectors was Libya’s ambassador to India, Mohammed Maga-
ryef, a former auditor general who had targeted regime corruption (he would 
return to Libyan politics ­after the Arab Spring). His departure in par­tic­u­lar 
resulted in a further weakening of the oversight capacities of the state. 
Through this string of defections, the regime lost some of its key techno-
cratic elites and se­nior figures who ­were capable of some mea­sure of over-
sight. Over the next years, tensions would continue between the radical 
wing of the regime and the wing advocating economic regeneration. The 
nuclear question would surface repeatedly as one of the divisive issues de-
bated by ­these factions, particularly in the early 1990s as the “revolutionar-
ies” favored pursuing nuclear weapons while the other group, comprising 
several longtime associates of Gaddafi, was critical of the rising costs asso-
ciated with the program.
Institutions, such as ­those making up the nuclear establishment, had very 
­little direct influence on decision making at the se­nior tiers of the regime. 
However, a small number of individual technocrats would play a significant 
role in managing the flagship technical proj­ects of that era, such as the nu-
clear program, heavy-­industry proj­ects, and the ­Great Man-­Made River proj­
ect.47 Some of the more prominent technocrats originally came from the 
nuclear program, such as Gaoud, or the oil sector, such as Shukri Ghanem, 
an economist who would ­later serve as prime minister. Ettalhi also held sev-
eral key posts. He was director of the General Department of Geological 

181
Nuclear Weapons Remain Elusive, 1982–1989 
Research and Mining in 1970 and ­later became minister of industry and min-
erals, as noted above. He served as prime minister twice (1979–1984, 1986–
1987) and as secretary for strategic industries in 1990.48 He also played a lead-
ing role in the ­Great Man-­Made River proj­ect and was a key adviser to the 
team participating in negotiations that would lead to the dismantlement of 
Libya’s weapons of mass destruction (WMD) programs in 2003. Another 
prominent technocrat was Omar Montasser, the nephew of Libya’s first 
prime minister, Mohammed Montasser, who served as minister for heavy 
industry during the late 1970s and ­later as prime minister himself (1987–
1990), and minister for planning in 1992.49 However, the technocrats pro-
moted from the nuclear program had no incentives to pinpoint the many 
structural challenges facing this proj­ect. Nor would it be pos­si­ble to blame 
prob­lems on Gaddafi’s effort to dismantle state institutions. Gaddafi held 
­individuals, more than institutions, directly accountable. This created a 
strong incentive to keep failing proj­ects afloat rather than point out failures.
The radical wing of the regime got the upper hand in the early 1980s, when 
Gaddafi was determined to realize his vision of dismantling the state. In Sep-
tember 1981, Gaddafi announced a broadened set of responsibilities for the 
Revolutionary Committees. They took over Libya’s embassies abroad, where 
they carried out systematic assassinations targeting the exiled Libyan oppo-
sition.50 The consequences would be dramatic. In the spring of 1984, shots 
­were fired from the Libyan embassy in London at a group of demonstrators, 
killing British police officer Yvonne Fletcher. Inside the embassy ­were 
Matuq, who would take over the nuclear program in the 1990s, and Musa 
Kusa, the power­ful head of Libyan intelligence, who swiftly left the coun-
try using diplomatic passports. Diplomatic relations between Libya and the 
United Kingdom ­were severed as a result. The regime also continued to 
weaken the professional armed forces. For example, Gaddafi set up a popu­lar 
army to rival the professional military. In 1977 he began arming and training 
civilians to serve as a popu­lar army, ostensibly to defend against foreign inter-
vention through guerilla warfare. In 1981, the popu­lar army counted half a 
million men and ­women.51
Although Gaddafi spent more than his neighbors on armaments and the 
number of Libyan soldiers increased, the armed forces ­were undermined on 
several fronts. Numbering only 7,000 in 1969, the armed forces expanded to 
55,000 in 1982 and totaled 86,000 by 1988.52 Still, this was one of the smallest 
regular armed forces in the region.53 A series of unpopular Libyan interven-
tions in Chad, Uganda, and the Sahara raised concerns about the loyalty 
of the armed forces to the Gaddafi regime.54 As Libya and Chad clashed 
over the Auzou Strip, an area of uranium deposits, between 1978 and 1987, 
many Libyans ­were drafted for military ser­vice without adequate training.
The revolutionary proj­ect also set out to recast the Libyan economy, with 
severe consequences for industry and society. ­These consequences ­were 
mainly due to disruption, but the regime failed to implement its vision of a 

182
chapter 7
new economic order bringing industrialization and collective agriculture. 
Property and wealth ­were seized by the regime or by Revolutionary Com-
mittee members. The state seized control over large-­ and small-­scale eco-
nomic enterprises, even shops and supermarkets, and undertook new heavy-­
industrial proj­ects, including a steel plant. However, the state did not provide 
sufficient electricity, housing, and transport for workers assigned to remote 
proj­ect sites. Many employees failed to turn up for work, partly ­because the 
supporting infrastructure was missing, and many ­were drafted to compul-
sory military ser­vice and sent to fight in Chad.55 As we ­will see, the result-
ing productivity failures also afflicted the TNRC.
To make ­matters worse, Libya’s oil income began to decrease during the 
1980s due to falling world oil prices. This led to having to make choices and 
setting priorities, in stark contrast to the lavish “guns and butter” policies of 
the late 1970s. As Ghanem recounted in 1985, the regime opted for “maxi-
mum arms and minimum food”—­hardly a popu­lar move, he conceded.56 By 
1983, the regime was forced to make more trade-­offs and chose, somewhat 
arbitrarily, to prioritize heavy industry over light industry. By 1985 all new 
proj­ects had been stopped other than the steel plant, aluminum smelter, and 
petrochemical proj­ects. ­These proj­ects, like the nuclear energy program, con-
tinued to rely heavi­ly on foreign expertise, raw materials, and technology.57
Trou­bles at Tajoura, 1981–1986
At the TNRC, the consequences of years of expansion without planning ­were 
becoming apparent to visiting experts. The impressive equipment and fa-
cilities offered “extraordinary possibilities for nuclear-­oriented research and 
represents a tremendous research potential, from the equipment viewpoint,” 
as IAEA experts noted in late 1981.58 But the research facilities had been 
acquired without a definite list of objectives or activities. As the IAEA re-
ported, “The distressing effect . . . ​is now realised when a number of labora-
tories are completed. Equipment is installed, but is idling ­because of the 
shortage of personnel and lack of research programmes.”59 Some equipment 
was not in use; other items, such as accelerators, ­were duplicated in neigh-
boring laboratories. The se­nior regime leaders appear to have remained un-
aware of ­these prob­lems, or the general inactivity on site.
The 10-­megawatt research reactor fi­nally became operational in Novem-
ber 1983. Between 1981 and 1983, the TNRC had hosted around two hun-
dred Soviet specialists who assisted with testing and initial operations of the 
reactor and associated facilities.60 This was not always an easy collaboration; 
nor did it take place in a calm work environment. According to U.S. intelli-
gence reports, the Soviets and Libyans clashed over “the vaguely worded 
Tajura contract, inadequate fresh ­water supplies to cool the reactor, and con-
struction prob­lems.”61

183
Nuclear Weapons Remain Elusive, 1982–1989 
The Soviets had cause for concern. The Libyan regime was hoping to move 
away from exclusive dependence on the Soviet nuclear establishment for the 
acquisition and operation of the nuclear power reactors. One alternative was 
to discard the initial approach, which had seen the Soviets supply a complete 
set of turnkey facilities, and instead pursue a set of contracts with dif­fer­ent 
suppliers, including the Soviets, ­under the leadership of Libyan officials.62
Meanwhile, the Libyans pursued a large number of contracts with other 
states—­ranging from heavy-­water production (essential for building power 
reactors) to nuclear fuel production—to support their nuclear energy and 
weapons programs. While ­there was still a large contingent of foreign spe-
cialists at the TNRC—­including scientists from Egypt, Tunisia, and Sudan—­
there was a growing number of Libyans in the se­nior echelons. For ­these 
scientists, the opportunity to carry out extensive experimental research held 
a stronger appeal than building nuclear weapons. At this time, the scientists 
focused on experimental research rather than the engineering challenges as-
sociated with nuclear weapons programs. Access to new technology, com-
bined with the absence of monitoring mechanisms capable of assessing the 
relevance of their research for the purposes of building nuclear weapons, 
gave the scientists ample opportunities to steer their research and develop-
ment activities in their preferred directions.
The Libyan nuclear weapons proj­ect is better described as a plan than a 
program. It was based on an understanding of scientific and technological 
princi­ples but the Libyans lacked both the ­actual experience in operating 
­these technologies and the necessary numbers of scientists, engineers, and 
technicians. Libya mobilized its purchasing power hoping to buy facilities, 
technologies, advice, and training from ­others, but the shaky domestic foun-
dations continued to undercut their efforts. ­There was not even a small group 
of scientists and engineers with the experience of operating a research pro-
gram, let alone an industrial-­scale proj­ect, among ­those attempting to plan 
and assess the Soviet proposal.
The Soviet-­Libyan nuclear talks unsurprisingly began to run into difficul-
ties. The Libyans realized that the Soviets ­were charging very high prices. 
For example, the Soviets requested a $450 million initial payment for signing 
the contract. Between 1981 and 1983, the Soviets wanted to finalize the 
talks—­not least to recover their expenditures arising from site survey, adap-
tation, and preparation—­but the Libyans introduced a series of technical 
amendments to postpone final signing.63
To say that the Libyan nuclear establishment was not satisfied with the 
Soviet reactor proposal would be an understatement. The 1981 SAE scien-
tific assessment had revealed serious flaws, which in turn required costly and 
time-­consuming revisions. Specifically, the review found that the reactor de-
sign was flawed and raised concerns about safety.64 ­These findings fur-
ther delayed the talks, and Soviet technical advisers worked on site to 
fix ­these prob­lems. As the Libyans began to suspect that the Soviets ­were 

184
chapter 7
overcharging them, they consulted with other states, notably Belgium, to 
find alternative suppliers or at least pressure the Soviets to lower their 
price. By mid-1983 Libya was ­running out of foreign exchange reserves, and 
faced mounting economic prob­lems at home. When the USSR ended up of-
fering a lower price for the power reactors—­perhaps in response to a more 
competitive bid from Belgium in May 1984—it was far from clear that Libya 
could afford even the revised proposal.65 But, as Libya had few alternative 
suppliers for a proj­ect on this scale, and the Soviets had invested time and 
money in the Libyan contract, negotiations continued ­until March  1986, 
when the Libyans fi­nally pulled the plug.
Moreover, the bilateral relationship between the two countries was steadily 
declining. The Soviets considered Gaddafi unstable, but ­were prepared to 
supply military equipment and nuclear technology as long as Libya could pay 
in cash.66 When Libya was attacked by the United States in 1986, ­after having 
turned down the reactor contract offered by the Soviets, Tripoli appears to 
have made other demands on Moscow, including a de facto security guaran-
tee against further U.S. attacks. The Soviets would not meet ­these demands.
As the talks with the Soviets dragged on, Libyan efforts to train manpower 
for the nuclear energy program stalled. The Libyans now had a larger pool 
of gradu­ates to choose from: in 1981, an estimated two to three hundred Lib-
yans studied nuclear engineering in Eu­rope, and possibly an even larger 
number in the USSR.67 But the nuclear establishment was incapable of de-
veloping a training program for ­these gradu­ates to prepare the ground for a 
nuclear energy program. What training they did receive took place at the 
TNRC and at the Physics Department of Al-­Fateh University. In 1981 visit-
ing IAEA inspectors noted: “The administrative and technical infrastructure 
necessary to establish a nuclear power proj­ect is extremely weak. The con-
cept of manpower planning is not understood by the Department, nor is the 
magnitude of the manpower requirements for the proj­ect. None of the pro-
fessional staff has had significant practical experience related to a nuclear 
power proj­ect.”68
Given ­these shortcomings, fellowships for training abroad—­through the 
IAEA or courses offered by companies such as the Belgian com­pany 
Belgonucleaire—­were a very impor­tant resource. In the early 1980s Belgo-
nucleaire trained twenty engineering students from Al-­Fateh University in 
“the operation of research and power reactors and the metallurgy of ura-
nium, as well as a variety of uranium pro­cesses, ranging from mining to the 
fabrication of fuel for power reactors.”69 However, the limited language skills 
of some Libyan scientists prevented them from benefiting from such oppor-
tunities. In the early 1980s several Libyans who had been selected for IAEA 
fellowships had to postpone their plans ­because they lacked sufficient 
English-­language skills.70
Seeking yet another route to nuclear assistance, Libya also reached out to 
other Arab states seeking to develop cooperation in the nuclear field, along 

185
Nuclear Weapons Remain Elusive, 1982–1989 
the lines of the Eu­ro­pean Atomic Energy Community. In 1981 Libya, Iraq, 
and Syria proposed setting up an Arab nuclear energy agency. In early 1982 
SAE secretary Gaoud explained, “since last March a group of Arab scien-
tists and experts have made a study of ­these proposals and have drafted a 
good report proposing many alternatives—­dif­fer­ent nuclear research cen-
tres, their tasks and so forth.”71 But as relations soured between the three 
countries, the initiative faltered in its very early stages.
The regime continued to recruit foreign (mainly Arab) scientists for the 
TNRC and Al-­Fateh University. It channeled ­these efforts through another 
institution, the Arab Development Institute (ADI; ­later called the National 
Acad­emy of Science), which also recommended scientific proposals and proj­
ects to the Libyan Cabinet. ­These recommendations ­were formally channeled 
through SAE secretary Gaoud.72 The head of the ADI, Ali Ben Lashihar, set 
up the Nuclear Technology Group.73 This unit recruited nuclear scientists 
from Arab states to work on proj­ects exploring applications of nuclear tech-
nology. In contrast to the terms and conditions for Libyan employees, the 
ADI offered foreign scientists good salaries, ­free housing, excellent work-
ing conditions, and well-­equipped laboratories.74 In October 1981, the in-
stitute held an international conference on nuclear technology in Tripoli.75
elusive nuclear options
Once the regime recognized that the anticipated Soviet reactor complex 
would not bring them much closer to a nuclear weapons capability, they 
started exploring alternative technical routes. First, they considered ­whether 
they might be able to build or acquire a suitable reactor that would not be 
­under safeguards, and explored the basic technologies associated with the 
plutonium route on an experimental scale. Second, they si­mul­ta­neously 
­began to consider and explore enrichment technologies as an alternative to 
the plutonium route.
Frustrated with their reliance on the Soviets, the Libyans attempted, with-
out much success, to search for other ways to develop a weapons option. 
Libya courted a number of states for a wide range of nuclear assistance.76 
Libya already had agreements for scientific cooperation exchanges with 
Argentina and Pakistan, but it sought more hands-on help.77 For example, 
between 1981 and  1984 Libyans sought Romanian help with developing 
heavy-­water nuclear reactors, as well as technical assistance for the TNRC. 
The Romanians ­were tempted by the generous financial offer from the Lib-
yan regime, but ultimately ­these talks failed to produce an agreement.78 Si­
mul­ta­neously, the Libyan regime tried to persuade other states to supply 
power reactors or heavy-­water production facilities.
The Libyan nuclear establishment explored plutonium repro­cessing on an 
experimental level during the 1980s. At the TNRC, technicians fabricated 
dozens of uranium oxide and uranium metal targets. ­These targets ­were 

186
chapter 7
irradiated in the research reactor to explore fission radioisotope products.79 
In other words, they ­were developing some basic skills that would prove 
useful for a ­future weapons program. Between 1983 and 1985, they also re-
ceived two boxes of documentation with details of the nuclear fuel cycle, 
which could be of value for weapons-­related research and development.80 
For example, German-­origin documents provided design details of nuclear 
repro­cessing.81 But the SAE did not make developing a repro­cessing capa-
bility a priority in their research and development activities. The Radiochem-
istry Department was considered low priority and had not been pushed or 
encouraged to explore repro­cessing on a systematic or large scale.82
As the Tajoura operations increasingly began to include clandestine ac-
tivities ­later in the 1980s, security concerns began to affect the governance 
of the center as well as cooperation with foreign advisers. Security person-
nel from the intelligence and army ­were on-­site to monitor the staff work-
ing at both the TNRC and the SAE. The scientists and engineers took care 
not to discuss with foreign experts what they perceived to be sensitive proj­
ects. The SAE did not declare the complete design information about the 
TNRC to the IAEA and omitted the details concerning the hot cells in the 
radiochemical laboratory that ­were used for sensitive research on irradia-
tion of uranium targets during the second half of the 1980s.83
The Libyans intensively courted Belgium seeking extensive nuclear 
­cooperation but ­were once again unable to secure an agreement. In May 
1984, Libya offered Belgonucleaire a contract for two 440-­megawatt nuclear 
reactors, apparently hoping this would provide an alternative to the Soviet 
proposal.84 The contract was initialed in May 1984, and was expected to 
be signed in June, but was canceled following U.S. pressure. The proposed 
cooperation with Belgonucleaire was extensive, ranging from assistance 
with the Soviet reactor proj­ect to proposals for a plant to convert yellow-
cake into uranium hex­a­fluor­ide (UF6), a feed material for centrifuges or 
nuclear fuel. The draft protocol was interpreted by U.S. intelligence to sug-
gest that Libya could receive assistance to facilitate the indigenous con-
struction of nuclear reactors.85 This was, to put it mildly, a distant prospect, 
given Libya’s lack of “any relevant industrial base.”86 The regime may have 
hoped for this, having no real sense of their ­actual capabilities in the nu-
clear field, and ­were prob­ably delighted at the prospect of reducing Libya’s 
long-­term dependence on the Soviet Union. At a minimum, the cooperation 
agreement with Belgium could have enabled Libyans to operate the TNRC 
without reliance on Soviet on-­site technicians in the longer term. In the 
shorter term, it could also have given Libyan engineers greater ability to ex-
plore weapons-­related technologies clandestinely.
During the early 1980s, in parallel with the talks with the Soviet Union, 
Libyan scientists also explored gas centrifuges and alternative enrichment 
technologies such as ­laser isotope separation. In 1983, Libya probed poten-
tial suppliers for acquiring ­laser equipment technology. This was intended 

187
Nuclear Weapons Remain Elusive, 1982–1989 
for an isotope separation proj­ect at the TNRC but, like so many other proj­
ects, appears to have faltered in the initial stages. The challenges facing the 
Libyan illicit enrichment proj­ects (i.e., centrifuges and ­laser enrichment) ­were 
noted by other states. A 1985 U.S. intelligence assessment concluded that 
“both Libyan enrichment proj­ects are at a very rudimentary stage, and ­there 
is ­little likelihood that Libya ­will be able to develop a uranium enrichment 
capability in the next 10 years.”87
The only enrichment proj­ect that became a serious effort was focused on 
centrifuge technology. In 1982, Libyan nuclear scientists and engineers 
­began clandestine research and development activities focusing on gas cen-
trifuges.88 ­These experiments ­were intended to explore gas centrifuges on 
an experimental scale and then to be scaled up to produce fissile material 
for nuclear weapons. The proj­ect was led by a German scientist who had 
recently been fired from the MAN com­pany, a subcontractor to the Dutch 
nuclear fuel com­pany URENCO. He was invited to the TNRC to help with 
the Libyan centrifuge development program.89 He brought with him equip-
ment and centrifuge design drawings.90
­Under the guidance of this foreign scientist, the Libyans attempted to de-
velop a prototype gas centrifuge. In January 1984, the Libyans sought help 
with their centrifuge program from Abdul Qadeer Khan, the mastermind 
­behind Pakistan’s centrifuge program, but ­later turned down his offer 
­because they lacked the necessary infrastructure to scale up a centrifuge pro-
gram beyond pilot-­scale studies.91 This would require extensive imports of 
machines, raw materials, and equipment, which the Libyans ­were not pre-
pared to undertake at this stage. Nevertheless, the gas centrifuge proj­ect 
continued ­under the lead of the foreign scientist. By late 1984, ­after what 
con­temporary U.S. intelligence assessments described as “years of promises 
and delays,” the centrifuge proj­ect had made ­little pro­gress.92 The research 
and development proj­ect dragged on as a small-­scale and low-­visibility ef-
fort but was fi­nally discontinued in 1992 without having constructed a sin-
gle operational centrifuge.93 Despite their failure, the Libyan engineers and 
scientists obtained valuable experience in the design, ­handling, and opera-
tion of centrifuge equipment.94
Looking for Uranium.  ​Tripoli also pursued several other fuel-­cycle capabili-
ties during the first half of the 1980s, including uranium exploration and 
fuel production. ­These resources could have enabled the Libyans to produce 
the raw material for both nuclear power and nuclear weapons. True to 
form, the Libyans launched a Five-­Year Plan in 1981 that was largely out-
sourced to foreign companies with minimal oversight or tangible results.
The search for uranium deposits, which had been ongoing since the 1960s, 
had met with ­little success. Early estimates assessed that one-­seventh of 
Libya’s land area could be geologically favorable for uranium deposits.95 
The SAE’s aerial surveys had discovered few deposits, but the (revised) 1981 

188
chapter 7
Five-­Year Plan for uranium exploration recommended that aerial surveying 
continue nonetheless. Ultimately, none of the surveyed areas proved suitable 
for large-­scale extraction.96
The Raw Materials Division explored several uranium deposits during 
the 1980s with the assistance of four foreign companies: Belgatom, Belgonu-
cleaire, and Union Mirac (all Belgian), and the Mineral Resources Prospect-
ing Com­pany (Brazilian). By mid-1982 the Raw Material division, initially 
led by M.A. Ghuma and then taken over by Khaled Hangary during this 
year, opted to limit the access of the IAEA experts to the north and eastern 
sections of the Al Kufrah Basin to avoid duplicating the foreign assistance 
from ­these countries.97 The prospecting efforts, combined with training and 
advice from IAEA experts, helped develop not only the prospecting program 
but also the skills of the local staff. The Brazilian assistance was formalized in 
a working group, the Group Management Committee, set up in 1984. The 
Libyan geologists benefited from this cooperation, which included some ad-
vice and training.
In the mid-1980s, the Libyan nuclear establishment also started to explore 
uranium conversion technology. In 1984, Libya started secret laboratory-­
scale uranium conversion experiments using the imported natu­ral uranium 
at the TNRC.98 Libya was also attempting to purchase facilities for convert-
ing uranium on a large scale. Between 1981 and 1984, Libya negotiated with 
a Belgian com­pany, reportedly Belgonucleaire, for construction of a ura-
nium conversion complex.99 The Belgians ­were prepared to assist the Lib-
yan program with what they considered to be less proliferation-­sensitive 
technologies. However, their reluctance to provide facilities that would 
help Libya edge closer to a weapons option began to create tension. Libya 
wanted a plant for converting yellowcake into UF6. Reportedly, ­these 
talks focused on a proposal that included three sets of facilities: first, a set 
of pro­cessing and analytic laboratories; second, a set of laboratories to 
convert yellowcake to uranium tetrafluoride (UF4) along with the option 
of a uranium metal laboratory; and third, buildings (but not necessarily 
equipment) to convert UF4 to UF6.100 ­These talks quickly came ­under U.S. 
pressure.101
In April 1983, the Libyans attempted to give Belgonucleaire an ultima-
tum, claiming that ­future business prospects depended on ­whether Belgium 
would supply a UF6 conversion fa­cil­i­ty.102 This could have made Libya ca-
pable of producing nuclear fuel indigenously, and would have taken it closer 
to a weapons option through the enrichment route. The Belgians balked and 
instead offered a UF4 plant that produced an intermediate uranium com-
pound. Neither proj­ect ever materialized due to several ­factors including U.S. 
pressure, the protracted talks on the power reactors, and the fact that few 
uranium deposits had actually been located in Libya.103 In 1984, Libya signed 
an agreement with Japan for a modular uranium conversion fa­cil­i­ty. The 
modules arrived in 1986 ­later without instructions for assembly; they re-

189
Nuclear Weapons Remain Elusive, 1982–1989 
mained in storage for over a de­cade ­until they ­were partly assembled and 
moved to Al Khalla, a suburb of Tripoli, in 1998 and ­later relocated to an-
other storage site at Sawani, on the outskirts of the city. The Libyans carried 
out cold tests (i.e., allegedly not pro­cessing uranium) of some of the uranium 
conversion components in 2002.104
In addition to trying to acquire their own facilities, the Libyan nuclear es-
tablishment secretly sent some of its imported yellowcake to an undisclosed 
nuclear weapons state in 1985. The yellowcake was pro­cessed into “natu­ral 
UF6 (39 kg), UF4 (5 kg), UO2 (6 kg) and U3O8 (6 kg)” and returned to Libya 
the same year.105
exploring other weapons of mass destruction
The Gaddafi regime also tried to acquire chemical and biological weap-
ons. The chemical weapons program in par­tic­u­lar became closely linked 
with the security challenges of the 1980s, notably Libya’s war in Chad. The 
timelines—­starting from tentative exploration during the late 1970s to at-
tempted production in the early 1980s—­were similar for all of the WMD 
programs. This is perhaps no coincidence, as the shift ­toward production of 
clandestine weapons capabilities coincided with Libya’s increasing isolation.
The chemical and biological weapons programs faced comparable pro­
cesses of technological absorption. The biological weapons program does 
not appear to have advanced much beyond procurement, but may have in-
cluded laboratory-­scale experiments at a dedicated site. In contrast, the 
chemical weapons program made somewhat better pro­gress.
The Libyan regime started exploring the option of a chemical weapons 
program as early as 1980, but efforts intensified ­after the effects of such weap-
ons ­were demonstrated during the Iran-­Iraq War.106 In 1984 the chemical 
weapons program began to create a production capacity: foreign companies, 
including the German firm Imhausen-­Chemie, built a fa­cil­i­ty at Rabta 65 
kilo­meters southwest of Tripoli. This fa­cil­i­ty was dual-­purpose: most of it 
was dedicated to commercial production but a small clandestine unit inside 
was suitable for chemical weapons production.107 At this stage, the Libyans 
imported both equipment and precursors (raw materials) for weapons pro-
duction. Not all of the equipment they ­were able to buy was useful. For ex-
ample, the automatic equipment for loading mustard agent into containers 
was poorly constructed and caused leaks. As a result, workers resorted to 
filling the storage containers manually.108
The chemical weapons program never moved beyond small-­scale produc-
tion of mustard gas and initial exploration of soman and sarin.109 The re-
gime deci­ded to limit the chemical weapons program to research and de-
velopment, diverting resources instead to the nuclear weapons program.110 
The program ultimately produced or acquired 25 metric tons of precursors, 
3,500 aerial bombs designed for dispersing chemical weapons, and three 

190
chapter 7
production facilities.111 During the war between Libya and Chad, Libyan 
forces reportedly released chemical weapons from airplanes, but ­these did 
not have the desired effect as the wind was blowing in the wrong direction.112
In 1994 the Libyan chemical weapons program prepared to set up a 
production plant. Rumors began circulating that the intended site was in 
Tarhuna, east of Tripoli, where large underground tunnels ­were being 
constructed.113 Figure  7.3 below shows key sites associated with Libya’s 
WMD programs, as well as key military-­industrial sites in the country. By 
the mid-1990s, several states ­were concerned about the Libyan chemical 
weapons proj­ect. In March 1996, the U.S. Central Intelligence Agency direc-
tor John Deutch described Tarhuna as ‘‘the world’s largest underground 
chemical weapons plant.”114 In April Harold P. Smith Jr., assistant to the 
secretary of defense, said: “If we wanted to destroy [Tarhuna], B-61 [ther-
monuclear bombs] ­will be the nuclear weapon of choice.”115 This suggestion—­
that the United States might use nuclear weapons in a targeted strike—­sent 
a strong signal to the Libyan regime.
upheaval: u.s. airstrikes and collapsing  
nuclear talks, 1986
In early 1986, the Libyans canceled a scheduled IAEA visit to assist with 
the planning of a nuclear energy program.116 Talks had been underway for 
several years, an initial agreement had been signed, and in late 1985 IAEA 
con­sul­tants had traveled to Sirte to review the intended reactor site.117 ­After 
the Soviet Union fi­nally withdrew from the nuclear power reactor agree-
ment, however, Libya’s nuclear program found itself in a deepening crisis. 
­After the two countries had spent several years attempting to iron out an 
agreement, it looked like the Libyan regime was not likely to find an alter-
native supplier, given its increasingly precarious relationship with the inter-
national community.
In March 1986, the SAE was dissolved. It is unclear why, but the timing 
suggests it may have been a decision triggered by the collapsed nuclear talks 
with the Soviet Union, which seemed to dash Libya’s hopes for nuclear en-
ergy. The nuclear establishment would continue to explore alternative paths 
to nuclear weapons technology, and the centrifuge program continued, de-
spite no tangible signs of pro­gress. The former SAE minister, Abdel-­Majid 
Gaoud, would continue to rise in the regime and became prime minister 
in 1994. Col­o­nel Ahmad Mahmoud Ali, previously in charge of the mili-
tary procurement office, took charge of the nuclear weapons proj­ect.118 His 
cousin, Abdel Rahim Bader, was put in charge of procurement for the mis-
sile proj­ects.119
Although the Libyan regime changed the personnel charged with man-
agement and oversight of the nuclear proj­ect, activities on the ground dwin-
dled.120 The loss of Soviet support soon had tangible consequences at the 

0
Nuclear-related
sites and capabilities
Other technical
infrastructure
Supporting sites
5 miles
First centrifuge R&D site
National Board of
Scientific Research
headquarters (NBSR)
New uranium
conversion
facility
Salah
Eddin
Chemistry building 
(Tripoli University)
Ber Osta Milad
Centrifuge machine shop
First uranium conversion facility
Tajura Nuclear
Research Center
(TNRC)
Welding institute Tripoli
Polymer institute
Central Organization for
Electronic Research (COER)
First uranium conversion facility;
Centrifuge equipment storage
First construction
materials storage
Artillery refurbishment site
Rabta
pharmaceutical
plant
Explosives plant
Artillery site
Propellant site
Great Man-Made
River Project (GMMR)
To Tarnuna, 6 Miles
Casting
Institute
Rocket engine
test stand
Rocket motor
plant
Rabta Bomb Filling Plant
Azzaziyah storage site
New centrifuge R&D site
Jamariyah heat
treatment center
Flow forming machine
Tajura
Al Ezeizia
Gharyan
TRIPOLI
Janzour
Suwani
Al Fallah
Al Hashan
Al Khalla
Benghazi
Derna
Sirte
Selected reactor site
Yellowcake storage
Uranium exploration area
Uranium exploration area
Brega
Misrata
Tarhuna
Rabta
TRIPOLI
Al Kufrah
Ghat
Sabha
Murzuq
Ghadamis
L
I
B
Y A
CHAD
NIGER
A
L
G
E
R
I
A
TUNISIA
E
G
Y
P
T
0
100
200
300 miles
M e d i t e r r a n e a n S e a
Gulf of Sidra
Figure 7.3. Map of nuclear and military-­industrial sites, Libya.

192
chapter 7
TNRC, where the Libyans used unfiltered groundwater to cool the research 
reactor. This led to clogged pipes, which necessitated extensive repairs.
­After 1986, the new leaders of the nuclear program had to carve out a new 
direction for the weapons program ­under difficult circumstances. Few state 
suppliers remained willing and able to provide what Tripoli wanted, and 
the nuclear black market was an increasingly appealing alternative. It was 
certainly more appealing than trying to scale up the clandestine research 
and development program, which would be held back by Libya’s missing 
industrial capabilities. As early as 1984, the nuclear establishment consid-
ered moving ­toward a procurement strategy based on “major contracts that 
would be put together by a con­sul­tant ­under Libyan leadership.”121 This 
alternative route, developing an indigenous foundation with the help of 
on-­site foreign experts, was more uncertain. It raised the prob­lem of lead-
ers’ reluctance: the greater the indigenous component of a nuclear weapons 
program, the greater ­were the personal risks of failure for ­those responsible. 
Although it was sometimes pos­si­ble to fail in Libya with impunity, the 
“­Brother Leader” held se­nior officials personally accountable for the outcomes 
of proj­ects. Blaming failures on unreliable supplier states was a more accept-
able excuse.
Libya’s foreign relations with the United States also deteriorated further 
in 1986. In January that year, concerned about WMD proliferation and Lib-
ya’s sponsorship of terrorism, the United States imposed additional unilat-
eral sanctions and froze all Libyan assets in the United States. ­After Libya 
launched six missiles against American aircraft in the Gulf of Sirte in 
March  1986, the United States sank a Libyan ship and struck a Soviet-­
supplied SA-5 missile site on the Libyan coast.122 Two weeks ­later, on 
5 April, a bomb exploded in a nightclub in Berlin frequented by American 
ser­vicemen, killing a Turkish ­woman and two Americans, and injuring more 
than two hundred ­others, of whom seventy-­nine ­were American. In retalia-
tion, the United States launched strikes the same month against Libya’s cap-
ital Tripoli and Benghazi, its second-­largest city. ­These attacks also struck 
air bases, air defense, naval, and military installations, and Gaddafi’s com-
bined residence and command centre.123 This attack was a profound shock 
for Gaddafi and the se­nior regime members and raised questions about their 
personal survival.124 In the aftermath of the attack, it also became clear that 
they could not expect protection from the Soviet Union.
Libya’s initial response to the U.S. air strikes reflected Gaddafi’s shock at 
coming ­under direct attack from a superpower. His son was injured in the 
strikes, and he ­later claimed that an ­adopted ­daughter had been killed, mak-
ing the point that the U.S. action affected the first ­family of the Libyan revo-
lution. From this point, Gaddafi saw the prospect of U.S.-­imposed regime 
change as a real option. In the longer term, the attack triggered a rethinking 
of Libyan foreign policy and also made the leadership begin to question its 
policy of confronting the United States.125 The regime concluded that it 

193
Nuclear Weapons Remain Elusive, 1982–1989 
“could no longer ignore the real­ity of American power,” nor its own vulner-
ability.126 Gaddafi therefore called for deterrent capabilities: “If we had pos-
sessed a deterrent—­missiles that could reach New York—we would have hit 
it at the same moment. Consequently, we should build this force so that they 
and ­others ­will no longer think about an attack. . . . ​[If] the world has a nu-
clear bomb, we should have a nuclear bomb.”127
In addition to the U.S. attack, the regime faced a collapsing economy. The 
long-­lasting oil boom ground to a halt in the mid-1980s, while the regime’s 
experiments with the domestic economy, involving the banning of private 
enterprise, had had catastrophic consequences. This made the regime worry 
about its domestic prospects for survival, which seemed predicated on main-
taining a high standard of living for the population. The economic down-
turn triggered a rethinking of the regime’s radical policies, which led to some 
modest attempts to reduce the radical actors and princi­ples that had ­shaped 
Libyan domestic and foreign policy since the 1970s. The weaknesses of the 
state apparatus ­were becoming a source of growing concern for the regime. 
At this point, prob­lems with mismanagement, corruption, and abuses of 
power by the Revolutionary Committees ­were becoming too apparent to 
ignore.128 As a result, the regime attempted to reverse some of the more 
radical policies in the domestic economic sphere, but strug­gled to effectuate 
significant change given the limited resources of the state apparatus. By 
1987, the Gaddafi regime also set out to improve its relations with neigh-
boring countries.
Against this backdrop, the U.S. attack seems to have had a mixed impact 
on Libya’s foreign and security policy. Tripoli’s attempts to improve relations 
with neighboring countries stood in sharp contrast with the involvement of 
Libyan intelligence officers in the bombing of Pan Am Flight 103 over the 
Scottish town of Lockerbie in December 1988 and a French UTA flight over 
Niger in 1989. ­These apparently contradictory developments reflected a fun-
damental division in the regime, which remained split between hardliners 
and reformists, and Gaddafi’s indecision over what relationship with the in-
ternational community to pursue: rapprochement with the outside world 
versus continued use of radical means and ends, such as support for terror-
ists and terrorist acts abroad.
This tension translated as ambivalence, as Libya’s po­liti­cal institutions de-
bated pursuing WMD ­after the U.S. attack. For example, ­after the 1986 U.S. 
air raids, the GPC instructed the leadership to protect the regime by any and 
all necessary means and with any and all weapons.129 Just two years ­later, 
however, in 1988, the GPC advocated the global destruction of WMD in a 
­human rights declaration.130
In the short term, however, the idea of a nuclear deterrent to protect the 
Libyan regime against the consequences of its foreign adventures still car-
ried a strong appeal. In June 1987, Gaddafi argued: “The Arabs must pos-
sess the atom bomb to defend themselves ­until their numbers reach one 

194
chapter 7
thousand million, and ­until they learn to desalinate ­water, and ­until they lib-
erate Palestine.”131 In September that year he declared: “Now that the Israe-
lis possess the atomic weapon, the Arabs have . . . ​to work day and night to 
possess the atomic weapon in order to defend their existence.”132
However, this securitization of Libya’s nuclear proliferation proj­ect did not 
lead to any intensification of efforts to build or other­wise acquire nuclear 
weapons. Growing doubts about Libya’s radical foreign policy practices and 
changes in its ­Middle East policy objectives fed the regime’s ambivalence 
about the pursuit of nuclear weapons. The regime was also facing growing 
domestic discontent following failed economic reforms and revolutionary 
excesses. In 1987–1988, Gaddafi publically conceded that the Revolutionary 
Committees had “deviated, harmed, tortured” and declared that they would 
be brought ­under control. ­These mounting challenges led to a sharpened 
­focus on regime security both at home and abroad, and a more critical view 
of the role of revolutionary ideology and actors in shaping Libyan foreign 
and domestic policy.
At the TNRC, the loss of Soviet technical support had significant conse-
quences for the ­running of the technical equipment as well as their prospects 
of developing a nuclear weapons option. For example, research and devel-
opment activities with pos­si­ble applications in a centrifuge program—­such 
as converting yellowcake into UF4 and uranium metal—­were discontinued 
in the late 1980s in the absence of foreign assistance, and the Libyans strug­
gled even to maintain the site.
While Libya’s nuclear program appeared to be moving fast in the direction 
of nuclear energy in 1981, within five years the entire program fell apart. 
­After the Libyan nuclear establishment was reconfigured in 1986, it soon be-
came clear how difficult it would be to reconstitute the fledgling nuclear 
program without strong support from the Soviets. While this coincided with 
a stronger desire for nuclear weapons at the se­nior level of the regime, the 
dismantlement of the SAE and general upheaval in the state combined to 
undercut the development of an indigenous route. The failure of the nuclear 
program between 1986 and 1989 to produce nuclear energy or create a weap-
ons option was an overdetermined outcome, as the Libyans had lost their 
main nuclear supplier and faced a series of crises abroad and at home.
At the core of this collapse, as this chapter has shown, was the weak 
Libyan state institutions. At two critical junctures during this de­cade, the 
Libyan nuclear establishment demonstrated their inability to fulfill the re-
gime’s nuclear ambitions: first, by lack of preparation for the nuclear energy 
program in the early 1980s; and second, by failure to devise a workable 
weapons option, even ­after Gaddafi’s desire for a nuclear deterrent intensi-
fied in 1986. Despite ­these failures, ­there are few indications that the re-
gime attempted to intervene to ensure the program moved forward. In fact, 
the only known action that might possibly have been such an intervention 

195
Nuclear Weapons Remain Elusive, 1982–1989 
(though it is far from clear) was the dissolution of the SAE in 1986. While 
the regime changed the leadership and or­ga­ni­za­tion of the nuclear program 
several times, they did not attempt to micromanage, the proj­ect.
The Gaddafi regime was apparently unaware of the accumulating delays 
in the nuclear energy proj­ect prior to 1986, and of the ongoing failure of 
the centrifuge program that lasted a de­cade. Furthermore, ­because the re-
gime rarely even consulted their scientists, they initially misunderstood the 
role the Soviet reactor complex could have played in a weapons program. 
The se­nior leaders of the nuclear program ­were promoted to other se­nior 
positions and had no incentive to point out the prob­lems facing the program—­
many of which could be blamed on the supplier state, rather than attributed to 
the program’s own shortcomings. The scientists benefited from the influx of 
technology and inadequate monitoring mechanisms, which left them ­free to 
focus on basic research and experiments. While the scientists explored the 
nuclear fuel cycle and assessed dif­fer­ent enrichment technologies, they 
lacked the resources to plan or prepare for a nuclear energy program, let 
alone a weapons program.
As the Libyans began to explore the nuclear black market more in the mid-
1980s, they appear to have believed that ­these clandestine suppliers could 
provide turnkey facilities for a weapons program, much along the lines they 
had expected from the failed Soviet nuclear power plant contract. As Libya 
began to strike deals with black-­market suppliers in the 1990s, any such 
hopes would be proven false, at ­great cost.

196
chapter 8
Sanctions, Centrifuges, and Exit,  
1989–2003
Between 1989 and  2003, the Libyan nuclear weapons program took a 
clandestine turn while the regime’s ambivalence on the nuclear question 
deepened. The regime pursued reintegration into the global society and 
economy, reor­ga­nized the nuclear weapons program once more and turned 
to the black market. A se­nior regime figure, Matuq M. Matuq, took charge 
of the program and attempted to secretly purchase a complete turnkey 
centrifuge plant. But the program continued to fail, even ­after the scientists 
received thousands of centrifuge components, ­because the Libyan nuclear 
establishment lacked the capacity to operate this technology and fix prob­
lems that emerged along the way.
At this time, the regime faced compounding pressures: a collapsing econ-
omy; an Islamist uprising; and international isolation. Crippling economic 
sanctions and domestic turmoil triggered a rethinking of Libya’s relationship 
with the outside world. The regime concluded that it would be in Libya’s inter-
est to abandon the pursuit of nuclear weapons if a favorable “exit strategy” 
could be found.1 In other words, they did not abandon the program but pur-
sued it as a secondary objective. While Matuq tried to revitalize the nuclear 
weapons track, a small group of se­nior officials reached out to the United States 
hoping to normalize relations and have sanctions lifted. Muammar Gaddafi 
authorized this group to offer up the nuclear weapons program as a bargaining 
chip to try to improve Libya’s standing with the United States and the interna-
tional community. They ultimately failed, as Libya faced more pressure and 
sanctions from 1992, and the nuclear weapons program continued.
In the late 1990s, se­nior regime officials returned to this debate, arguing 
that Libya had to choose between guns and butter, or, more specifically, 
­between nuclear weapons and reintegration in the global economy. The 
regime opted to combine ­these two tracks, but intensified their efforts to 
improve their international standing. In 1999, the Libyan regime held se-

197
Sanctions, Centrifuges, and Exit, 1989–2003 
cret talks with the United States and the United Kingdom. ­These resulted in 
the announcement, on 19 December 2003, that Libya would give up its nu-
clear, chemical, and biological weapons programs. The programs ­were dis-
mantled and U.S. inspectors took centrifuges and the nuclear weapon de-
signs back with them to the United States. The Libyan leadership disclosed 
few details about their past efforts over the following years.
Few details about Libya’s nuclear program have emerged since, with one 
exception: the Libyan government reluctantly admitted that their turn to the 
nuclear black market did not begin in mid-1995, as they had first suggested, 
but dated back several years earlier. This chapter pres­ents new evidence, 
drawing from interviews with se­nior Libyan regime officials and Libyan dec-
larations about their nuclear weapons program, that shows the Libyan 
turn ­toward the black nuclear market began as early as 1989, and, for the 
first time, places this in the context of regime debates about ­grand strategy 
and nuclear deterrence. As we ­will see, the ­future of this program was in-
tensely contested at the se­nior levels of the regime, while Gaddafi remained 
noncommittal. This chapter also shows that the program continued to suf-
fer from basic prob­lems of control and oversight, giving new insights into the 
or­ga­ni­za­tion of the nuclear weapons program that emerged on the ground. 
While scholars tend to dismiss the Libyan program as a nonstarter, or con-
clude that the Libyans downgraded their program out of a desire to rejoin the 
global economy, this chapter shows that the scientists on the ground laid 
sound plans and set sensible priorities. However, they lacked the necessary 
institutional resources and, as a result, suffered from underdeveloped ­human 
resources. Ultimately their efforts ­were stymied by the regime’s mounting 
security concerns.
­These sources show how and why the Libyan regime’s attempt to bring the 
program back on track ­toward developing a weapons option failed: even ­after 
the program was reconfigured, giving the regime more direct control, Libyan 
scientists failed to make tangible pro­gress ­toward the declared goal of giving 
Libya a nuclear weapons option. For example, they used funding that was 
intended for the weapons program for basic maintenance; even ­after the 
weapons program was revitalized in mid-1995 they focused on understand-
ing basic pro­cesses, rather than installing centrifuges and assessing the weap-
ons design they had acquired from their clandestine suppliers. In other words, 
even with Matuq at the helm the Libyan regime failed to effectively oversee 
and control the nuclear program. As a result, the program continued to drift.
Searching for a Nuclear Exit, 1989–1992
The regime’s response to the crises of the second half of the 1980s led to a 
broad policy shift, with impor­tant consequences for the nuclear program. 

198
chapter 8
While scholars often equate the Libyan regime, or state, with Gaddafi, we 
­will see that regime factions and institutions played an impor­tant role in this 
pro­cess. Specifically, regime officials revived long-­standing debates about 
building the revolution at home by focusing on economic development ver-
sus pursuing revolution abroad by supporting radical foreign actors. As part 
of ­these discussions, se­nior regime officials began to question the usefulness 
of a nuclear deterrent. They also launched competing initiatives, one in the 
form of a diplomatic overture to the West and one led by Matuq M. Matuq 
and the head of the intelligence ser­vices, Musa Kusa, which searched for new 
ways to buy nuclear technology and know-­how. In 1989, Libya reconnected 
with the black market network led by Abdul Qadeer Khan, the Pakistani 
metallurgist.
The apparent discrepancy between investing in a nuclear program while 
seeking to open negotiations with the West, in which this program would 
be put on the negotiating ­table, was not unusual in the Gaddafi regime. Gad-
dafi had issued contradictory statements about weapons of mass destruc-
tion (WMD) throughout the 1970s and 1980s, and in 1996 he would sign the 
Treaty of Pelindaba declaring Africa a nuclear-­weapons-­free zone, all while 
actively seeking to acquire nuclear weapons. By encouraging separate and 
apparently contradictory policy tracks, Gaddafi could permit both options 
to develop further, delaying his final decision while balancing the dif­fer­ent 
regime factions. Gaddafi wanted his trusted officials to develop each track 
­until he was prepared to choose between them.
In a series of interviews carried out by the author in 2005 and 2006, some 
of the participants described ­these discussions and their consequences. ­These 
included former Libyan ambassador Mohamed Zwai to London, who was 
one of the three key figures in the team that began the negotiation attempts 
with the West in 1990–1992 and who ­later completed an agreement in late 
2003; Seif al-­Islam Gaddafi, Muammar Gaddafi’s son, who also played a cen-
tral role in the talks between 2001 and 2003; a former prominent Revolu-
tionary Committee figure with close personal ties to Muammar Gaddafi; and 
a former speaker of the Libyan General ­People’s Congress (GPC). Other con-
versations and interviews ­were carried out with Libyan diplomats and aca-
demics associated with the rapprochement efforts during the 1990s, some 
of which could be attributed while ­others ­were strictly not for attribution.
­These interviews reveal that internal debate and bargaining featured in 
the se­nior leadership’s decision making in the nuclear arena, as elsewhere. 
Zwai, for instance, noted that the costs and benefits of pursuing nuclear 
weapons had been debated within the Revolutionary Command Council 
(RCC), the GPC, and other regime institutions “since the beginning.”2 While 
the formal organs of the regime, such as the GPC, mainly served to rubber-­
stamp decisions (e.g., the establishing of the Secretariat of Atomic Energy in 
the early 1980s), they also served as a sounding board for debates and pro-
vided a mea­sure of legitimacy for key decisions. Debates among se­nior of-

199
Sanctions, Centrifuges, and Exit, 1989–2003 
ficials, in the RCC or ministerial Cabinet, ­were an opportunity to promote 
policy preferences and launch competing initiatives.
In their discussions on the nuclear question, dif­fer­ent regime actors ex-
pressed par­tic­u­lar interest with regard to the nuclear program. Zwai and 
Gaddafi’s son Seif-­al-­Islam each separately told the author that the military 
wanted to invest in conventional and nonconventional, including nuclear, 
weapons.3 The latter noted that the se­nior figures in the regime considered 
the nuclear weapons program “an old dream.”4 In addition, a scholar noted 
that Libyan officials involved in procurement for the nuclear program dur-
ing the 1990s had personal stakes, perhaps even economic incentives, to con-
tinue the program as long as their attempts to repair their relationship with 
the United States remained unsuccessful.5 Nonetheless, Zwai noted, Gad-
dafi became convinced that the regime had to pay more attention to devel-
opment at home.6
In the late 1980s and early 1990s, se­nior Libyan officials debated the stra-
tegic value of nuclear weapons and ­whether they ­were worth the costs of 
pursuing them. This discussion focused on the regime’s analy­sis of clashes 
between nuclear and nonnuclear states, such as the Falklands War and 
­Israel’s invasion of Beirut in 1982, where nuclear weapons ­were not seen as 
having played a useful role.7 Libyan officials perceived nuclear weapons as 
a passive deterrent unable to yield positive results. According to one se­nior 
official, nuclear weapons ­were deemed insufficient for states with weak con-
ventional military capabilities.8 In other words, given the imminent chal-
lenges associated with the growing U.S. pressure on Libya, conventional 
capabilities seemed more appropriate than the long-­term option of a nu-
clear weapons capability. Having noted that nuclear weapons did not offer 
Libya the kind of security capabilities they desired, critics of the nuclear 
weapons option argued that Libya’s security needs did not necessitate a 
nuclear deterrent.9
­After this informal review, several se­nior officials called for the disman-
tlement of the program, arguing that Libya should instead spend more 
money on health care, education, and development.10 This was a tense pe-
riod in the regime. ­After the United Nations (UN) Security Council sanctions 
­were imposed in late March 1992, the Libyan regime found itself in a criti-
cally vulnerable situation.11 At home, the regime’s support from key domes-
tic bases began to crumble; opposition movements challenged the regime’s 
control over parts of Libya’s territory. In 1995, the Gaddafi regime faced a 
significant rebellion: a militant Islamist uprising in the eastern part of the 
country would remain undefeated ­until 1998. The military’s inability to de-
feat the Islamists for three years on Libya’s own territory, while other vio-
lent Islamist groups ­were posing a significant threat to the regimes in Egypt 
and Algeria, gave the regime ­great cause for concern. In short, the Gaddafi 
regime’s most immediate challenges ­were domestic. Abdessalam Jalloud, 
who was widely considered the second-­most prominent figure in the Libyan 

200
chapter 8
regime, became a vocal critic of the leadership during this period and was 
placed ­under ­house arrest in the spring of 1995. Gaddafi concluded that the 
country’s international situation had to be improved in order to “enable 
Libya to regenerate itself and its economy.”12 This necessitated changes in 
Libya’s foreign policy practices and her international standing, particularly 
with regard to the United States. The dormant nuclear program was seen as 
a potential bargaining chip, if talks could be opened.
In this environment, the growing influence of more moderate regime ele­
ments also led to questions about the ­future of the nuclear weapons program. 
In 1990, three se­nior Libyan officials—­the se­nior diplomats Abdellati Obeidi 
and Mohamed Zwai, and Musa Kusa—­began to reach out to U.S. and Eu­ro­
pean states to signal Libya’s desire to improve relations and its willingness, 
if necessary, to abandon the pursuit of nuclear weapons. This policy reversal, 
and the efforts of this group (who would ­later negotiate the talks leading to 
the 2003 agreement), have received ­little attention in the academic lit­er­a­ture. 
However, together they suggest that the nuclear weapons program was 
controversial within the regime and had, at best, ambivalent support from 
Gaddafi. They also demonstrate that se­nior regime figures, with strong per-
sonal ties to Gaddafi, played a significant and proactive role in debates about 
the nuclear program.
Obeidi, Zwai, and Kusa ­were instructed by Gaddafi to reach out to the 
United States and Eu­ro­pean governments in the hope of improving bilateral 
relations and having economic sanctions lifted. Their high standing with 
Gaddafi gave each of them some room for in­de­pen­dent initiative and ma-
neuver. This group also sought advice and support from other se­nior regime 
officials, notably Jadallah Azzouz Ettalhi, who had been associated with the 
management of the nuclear program during the 1970s, was ­later appointed 
Libyan representative to the UN, and served as minister of strategic indus-
tries in the early 1990s; Libyan academics educated in the West ­were also 
consulted. This group attempted to reach out to U.S. officials during 1992 
and 1993. ­Later in the 1990s, they also attempted to approach France. Ac-
cording to Zwai, Gaddafi was prepared to discuss the nuclear program as 
part of a broader negotiation framework and intended to work closely with 
this team if they ­were able to open talks with the United States.13
In 1990–1992, the Libyans ­were cautiously optimistic about their prospects 
of improving relations with the West. According to Zwai, they had found 
relations with the United States particularly difficult during the Reagan ad-
ministration (1981–1989), but ­were hopeful that the new Bush administra-
tion would be more open to contacts with the regime. The Libyan team 
reached out to lower-­level officials in the Bush administration. In 1992, the 
Libyans attempted to signal that their leader was prepared to develop a 
new relationship with the United States.14 Their timing was catastrophic: 
faced with an increasingly hostile international environment, their overture 
failed.

201
Sanctions, Centrifuges, and Exit, 1989–2003 
On 13 November 1991, the United States and Britain indicted two Libyan 
officials, Abdelbaset al-­Megrahi and Lamin Khalifah Fhimah, charging them 
with the murder of 270 passengers on board Pan Am Flight 103, which ex-
ploded over Lockerbie in Scotland. On 21 January 1992, the UN Security 
Council demanded that Libya respond to the findings of the investigation. 
Ettalhi, the Libyan representative at the Security Council meeting, protested 
that the indictments ­were simply “cover for military and economic aggres-
sion on a small country.”15 ­After Libya refused to extradite the two suspects, 
the Security Council imposed sanctions on air travel and banned imports of 
weapons and equipment on 31 March.16 The sanctions ­were expanded in De-
cember that year: Libyan foreign assets ­were frozen and a ban on importing 
equipment for the oil industry was added to the existing set of restrictions. 
Over the next years, Tripoli watched neighboring states benefit from oil sales, 
while the country’s economy suffered from a plummeting gross domestic 
product and inflation, which reached 50 ­percent by 1994.17
The imposition of sanctions undermined the efforts of moderate ele­ments 
in the regime to open up to the West and to carry out reforms at home. In 
the short term, ­these developments strengthened the case for ­those in the 
regime who opposed such opening up and reform. They also fed Gaddafi’s 
concerns, shared by several in the regime, that the United States would at-
tempt to overthrow him.18 Both developments strengthened the case of ­those 
in the regime who argued for the development of a nuclear weapons option. 
However, the added constraints on trade and imports made procurement 
more difficult, which created an obstacle to Matuq’s efforts to import centri-
fuges from the nuclear black market.
Second­hand Centrifuges
In 1989, the regime started to pursue complete centrifuges, spare parts, and 
supporting infrastructure from the Khan network. A new body, the National 
Board for Scientific Research (NBSR), took charge of the nuclear weapons 
proj­ect. An umbrella or­ga­ni­za­tion, it oversaw several technical research in-
stitutes in addition to the nuclear program. The head of the NBSR was Ma-
tuq, who had risen to prominence through the ranks of the Revolutionary 
Committees during the 1980s; he would ­later become deputy prime minis-
ter in the early 2000s. Matuq had a reputation as a competent proj­ect man­
ag­er, but he lacked expertise in the nuclear field. His role was to oversee the 
program and ensure that it ran efficiently and achieved the objective of cre-
ating a nuclear weapons capability. Matuq took this task seriously, even re-
ferring to the nuclear weapons program as his “baby” in meetings with U.S. 
officials in Tripoli in January 2004.19
The nuclear weapons program that emerged ­under Matuq’s leadership 
in the 1990s was dif­fer­ent from the earlier incarnations. From the very 

202
chapter 8
beginning, the program had relied heavi­ly on foreign assistance and turn-
key procurement, but ­under Matuq, the program cut back on its previous 
attempts to carry out indigenous research and development and sought 
instead to purchase ready-­made technology. Matuq outsourced the two key 
technological bottlenecks—­developing centrifuge cascades and acquiring 
suitable feed material—to the Khan network. This program would be based 
on a set of super-­turnkey contracts from the nuclear black market, reducing 
the demands on the Libyans in several key areas such as planning, or­ga­ni­
za­tion, and training. This approach was tailored to suit Libya’s limited 
­human and industrial resources. The proj­ect was also designed to minimize 
detectability and vulnerability, as the centrifuges and other components 
­were designed to be mobile and could be moved between dif­fer­ent sites. It 
required only a small local workforce.20 It was also designed to be adaptable 
to changing opportunities and constraints, given Libya’s turbulent interna-
tional environment.
The Libyan regime’s security concerns ­shaped their preferences for how 
the nuclear weapons program ­ought to be carried out. This is perhaps the 
only area where the regime attempted to intervene directly in the manage-
ment of the program by laying ground rules for site dispersal. They duly 
noted how, in 1981, Israel had been able to destroy a safeguarded reactor in 
Iraq without drawing punishment from the international community. Con-
cerns about similar attacks informed decisions made at the se­nior regime 
level to reduce vulnerability, for example by developing secret sites and by 
making sensitive units of the nuclear program mobile in the 1990s. The nu-
clear scientists ­were instructed to adopt technologies that could be moved 
between dif­fer­ent sites, such as centrifuges. As a result, the technologies that 
they purchased ­were often disassembled or even kept in the shipping crates 
for moving between dif­fer­ent storage sites. ­These security mea­sures added 
to the difficulties of planning, operation, and coordination. The Libyan nu-
clear weapons program was designed to be modular, and while the decision 
to leave purchased equipment such as the uranium enrichment fa­cil­i­ty in 
storage was consistent with this policy, it also made it more difficult for the 
Libyan scientists to make ­these items operational.
This program was not subject to formal reviews or audits. Matuq was ul-
timately responsible for implementation and for reviewing its per­for­mance. 
A small group of six se­nior technicians educated in the United States worked 
with Matuq as advisers guiding and overseeing ­these efforts. One such in-
dividual was Mohamed Ennami, who had close ties with Matuq and ­later 
served as his scientific adviser in the GPC.21 Another prominent figure was 
an individual referred to as Karim, who had played a leading role in the gas 
centrifuge program of the 1980s and the nuclear weapons program that 
emerged during the mid-1990s.
Matuq’s first challenge was to revitalize the languishing centrifuge track. 
The research and development program focusing on gas centrifuges that had 

203
Sanctions, Centrifuges, and Exit, 1989–2003 
been started in 1982 was failing and was discontinued in 1992. The Libyans 
­were left with the black market as their only ­viable track. Having reestab-
lished contact with the Khan network in 1989, the Libyans placed an initial 
order for P-1 centrifuges in early 1991. Shortly ­after, they received some cen-
trifuge components and designs from Khan.22 This centrifuge model had 
been retired from the Pakistani program, and Khan sold it on at a handsome 
profit. A newer design, the P-2 centrifuge, was introduced to the Pakistani 
program from the mid-1980s.23 The new sanctions imposed in March 1992 
affected air cargo and travel, and made it very difficult to import equipment 
on a large scale. The Khan network prepared the items, but it was difficult 
to send centrifuges to Libya during the embargo. ­After the Libyans refused 
payment, the Khan network sold Libya’s original order of centrifuges to Iran 
in 1993.24
The Libyan authorities ­were dissatisfied and ­were not persuaded that 
what Khan had delivered was what they had paid for. As a result, they opted 
out of this initial agreement.25 This initial deal left the Libyans disillusioned 
with the nuclear black market. In an interview with the author, a se­nior 
Libyan academic explained that acquiring technology via the black market 
was cumbersome, both in the case of the nuclear program and items im-
ported for the oil industry, ­because the 1993 round of UN sanctions also 
prohibited sales of petroleum technology.26 For the small Libyan state, evad-
ing the UN sanctions was a difficult logistical and orga­nizational challenge. 
Still, it was their only feasible option.
buying a centrifuge plant
In July 1995, the Libyan leadership placed a larger order with the Khan 
network. Libyan officials initially described this as a strategic decision to re-
launch the centrifuge track, but in 2007–2008 admitted that the July 1995 
decision simply marked the scaling up of the outsourcing efforts that dated 
back to 1989. During the 1990s Libya would pursue the building blocks for 
a nuclear weapons program through the Khan network, which could sell 
equipment, designs, and training. In public, Gaddafi appeared defiant: in 
January 1996, he called for Arab states “to try by any means” to get nuclear 
weapons.27
The Khan network was not the only source from which the Libyans at-
tempted to clandestinely import nuclear technology. In the spring of 1995, 
Libyan intelligence officers approached Libyan physicists based abroad 
about setting up a “Libyan Science Center” as a cover for clandestine tech-
nology transfers.28 Kusa authorized this proposal in May 1995, but the cen-
ter does not appear to have materialized. The proposal stipulated that sci-
entists would be monitored by members of the Revolutionary Committees 
who reported directly to Kusa. ­There ­were no formal oversight mechanisms 
in this proj­ect ­either, and the informal mechanisms consisted of individuals 

204
chapter 8
and groups who lacked an understanding of the technical challenges asso-
ciated with operating centrifuges.
In the summer of 1997, a Libyan del­e­ga­tion led by Matuq and Karim met 
with Khan and his deputy Bukhary Seyed Tahir in Istanbul. This was the 
first of a series of meetings between Libyan officials and representatives of 
the Khan network; ­later meetings ­were held in other cities across the ­Middle 
East, including Casablanca. In 1997, the Libyans received twenty preassem-
bled P-1 centrifuges and ordered two hundred unassembled centrifuges of 
this model.29
­After Matuq caught on to the fact that what he had ordered was in fact an 
outdated model, he ordered a gas centrifuge plant using the newer P-2 cen-
trifuge model for a price around $100–­$200 million.30 Specifically, he first 
placed an order for five thousand P-2 centrifuges, which was ­later expanded 
to ten thousand. The target date for completion of the centrifuge plant was 
June 2003.31 This plant could, in theory, produce enough highly enriched ura-
nium for several—­estimates range between four and ten—­nuclear weapons 
per year.32
The Khan network’s offer seemed like a complete package: blueprints in-
cluding a Chinese nuclear weapons design, design information, feed material 
(including 1.7 metric tons of uranium hex­a­fluor­ide [UF6]), a turnkey centrifuge 
plant, and including installation and training.33 The package also included de-
sign information and documentation from the Pakistani enrichment program 
including test results, calculations, and experiences. The equipment would be 
supplied by members of the Khan network. Its suppliers—­some of whom ­were 
unaware of the destination of the equipment they sold to network members—­
were based in a number of countries apart from Pakistan, including the United 
Arab Emirates, Switzerland, South Africa, Spain, Turkey, Italy, France, the 
United Kingdom, Taiwan, and Japan.34 In practice, however, the network did 
not deliver a complete turnkey fa­cil­i­ty, leaving the Libyans with the chal-
lenge of installing and operationalizing the centrifuge plant themselves.
The Khan network shipped designs, technology, and partly enriched ura-
nium (UF6) in a Pakistani airplane in 2001.35 The UF6 feed material was 
intended for testing the centrifuges, but the amount provided by the net-
work—1.7 tons of approximately 1 ­percent enriched uranium—­would have 
sufficed for a small nuclear weapon if it was further enriched.36 In addition, 
Libya imported two smaller cylinders of UF6 in September 2000.37
Apart from the oversight of Matuq, the nuclear weapons program does 
not appear to have been subject to other technical reviews or audits. But it 
was clear that this was not a cost-­effective proj­ect. Members of the Khan net-
work referred to the Libyan contract as a “cash cow” and ­were apparently 
not concerned about the accumulation of rising costs or delays.38 The Liby-
ans grudgingly accepted ­these, but felt that they ­were being taken advan-
tage of.39 In an interview with the author, a se­nior Libyan academic described 
the equipment purchased by the Khan network during the 1990s as “old” 

205
Sanctions, Centrifuges, and Exit, 1989–2003 
and “invalid,” very expensive, and apparently not well suited for a nuclear 
weapons program.40
installing centrifuges and organ­izing  
a weapons program
The Khan network contract provided the Libyans with the critical techno-
logical components (centrifuges), designs (including a weapons design), user 
manuals (from the Pakistani program), and feed material (UF6 and yellow-
cake) for large-­scale uranium enrichment. But getting this plant up and 
­running would require intensive efforts by the Libyan nuclear establishment. 
The se­nior engineer Mohamed Ennami would have had enough experience 
to recognize the scope of this challenge. According to a nuclear expert who 
visited all sites associated with the Libyan weapons program ­after the De-
cember 2003 announcement, Libyans ­were focusing their efforts on the me-
chanics and engineering of centrifuges.41
As noted above, the Khan network provided designs and documentation, 
but the assembly would be left to Libyans with, at best, marginal relevant 
experience.42 Some of the items supplied ­were incomplete or not prepared 
for installation. For example, ring magnet components for the centrifuges 
­were shipped without having been magnetized and placed in holders.43 The 
Libyans had no other option than to make the most of what they had ­under 
the circumstances, but this is one example of how delays ­were accumulat-
ing as the nuclear weapons program prepared to enrich uranium on an in-
dustrial scale.
But to produce nuclear weapons, the Libyans also had to revive their dor-
mant proj­ects focusing on uranium refinement and pro­cessing in order to 
produce feed material for the centrifuge plant and launch new proj­ects ded-
icated to weaponization. While the Khan package could in theory produce 
a nuclear weapon, producing an entire arsenal or becoming self-­sufficient 
in the longer term required developing a broad range of engineering re-
sources at the Tajoura Nuclear Research Center (TNRC). Facing ­these chal-
lenges with extremely limited ­human resources, the Libyans opted to focus 
on one challenge at a time. At a UN conference in 2006, Ennami, who worked 
closely with Matuq and the centrifuge proj­ect, provided a brief overview of 
the Libyan nuclear weapons program during the mid-1990s.44 The main 
­focus of the program at this time, Ennami explained, was to enrich uranium. 
Other tasks, such as weaponization, ­were set aside for the time being. In late 
2001 or early 2002, Libya received designs and documents on nuclear weap-
ons fabrication from the Khan network. The Libyans ­later declared that they 
did not attempt to explore this information, or even assess it, ­because they 
lacked the necessary expertise and manpower.45
The nuclear weapons program at the TNRC was nominally or­ga­nized 
around six sets of activities.46 First, research carried out in the Tajoura 

206
chapter 8
laboratories explored isotope production, separation and enrichment; 
chemical conversion of uranium; and irradiation of samples to study their 
properties. ­These activities ­were geared ­toward creating basic know-­how 
concerning the nuclear fuel cycle, especially the front end: transforming 
natu­ral uranium to suitable feed material for centrifuges. This line of re-
search drew on skills and resources acquired in the 1980s. As described in 
the previous chapter, Libyan scientists had carried out uranium conversion 
experiments between 1983 and 1989 at the TNRC, converting yellowcake 
into uranium tetrafluoride (UF4) and uranium metal. Foreign scientists 
from a nuclear weapons state—­presumably the Soviet Union—­supported 
this research between 1983 and 1986. The Libyans used 35–40 kilograms of 
yellowcake for ­these experiments. This line of research was revived in 1994, 
but ultimately no UF6 was produced. The production of nuclear fuel was 
not the main priority of the program at that time.47
The second cluster of activities focused on physics and material sciences, 
including nuclear structure, spectroscopy, activation analy­sis, and radiation 
protection. ­These activities, geared ­toward developing basic skills and un-
derstanding pro­cesses, helped develop useful insights but ­were not directly 
related to the challenges of setting up centrifuge cascades.
The third set of activities focused on constructing and testing a uranium 
conversion fa­cil­i­ty to transform natu­ral uranium concentrate (yellowcake) 
to feed material for the centrifuges (UF6). This line of research and develop-
ment built upon earlier efforts to develop the capacity to convert yellowcake, 
which the Libyans had imported from several countries in large quantities 
since the late 1970s, to UF4 and further, they hoped, to UF6. In 1984, Libya 
ordered a modular uranium conversion fa­cil­i­ty from an unspecified Asian 
country (possibly Japan). ­These modules, built to Libyan specifications, ar-
rived in 1986 without instructions for assembly or operation. They remained 
in storage ­until 1998, when they ­were assembled south of Tripoli at the Al 
Hashan Uranium Conversion Fa­cil­i­ty.48 While Libya had ordered a conver-
sion fa­cil­i­ty to produce UF6, what they received was a fa­cil­i­ty able to pro­
cess up to 30 metric tons per year of uranium concentrate to intermediate 
stages: uranium oxide or UF4. Libyan scientists also requested that the gov-
ernment purchase equipment to produce 15–30 metric tons of UF6 annually—­
presumably to complement the uranium conversion fa­cil­i­ty—­but no such 
equipment was purchased.49 Libyan technicians carried out cold tests of the 
Uranium Conversion Fa­cil­i­ty modules in early 2002, before the leaders of 
the program moved ­these modules to Salah Eddin and Sawani, due to secu-
rity concerns.50 As the map of Libyan nuclear sites and other technical infra-
structure shows, ­these sites ­were both south of Tripoli but at a considerable 
distance from each other.
The fourth cluster of activities focused on acquiring centrifuges and sup-
porting equipment: “complete centrifugal machines, parts, auxiliary system 

207
Sanctions, Centrifuges, and Exit, 1989–2003 
such as feeding units, vacuum pumps, control and mea­sure­ment instrumen-
tation, balancing machines ­etc.”51 Libya ­later declared to the International 
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) that scientists received training from the 
Khan network in several foreign locations on “power systems, mass spec-
trometers, welding, gas ­handling, quality control, computerized machining 
techniques and heat treatment of materials.”52 But no practical training was 
given to the Libyans in how to operate or assem­ble centrifuges. For exam-
ple, one of the attendees of a training session in northern Spain left disap-
pointed that he had not learned how to make centrifuge components.53
Despite their limited training and experience, the Libyans ­were able to set 
up the simpler P-1 centrifuge models in small cascades. By October 2000, 
they had set up and successfully run a single P-1 centrifuge model provided 
by the Khan network.54 ­Later that year, they began to install three P-1 centri-
fuge cascades at Al-Hashan. One cascade of nine centrifuges was completed; 
the second cascade was partly assembled, with ten of nineteen centrifuges 
completed; and the third cascade of sixty-­four centrifuges was prepared 
for installation. This work was interrupted in April 2002 when the centri-
fuges ­were disassembled and placed in storage at another site in Tripoli, 
Al-­Fallah, due to security concerns.55
The fifth cluster of activities focused on setting up a precision machinery 
workshop at Janzour, west of Tripoli. Called Proj­ect Machine Shop 1001, it 
would produce spare parts for centrifuges. This was intended to ensure self-­
sufficiency ­after the stocks from the Khan network ­were used as well as to 
produce tools for the program. Ennami noted that the Libyans hoped that 
this workshop would produce complete new centrifuges. As part of this ef-
fort, Libya purchased specialized materials for producing centrifuge com-
ponents from the Khan network, including maraging steel and high-­strength 
aluminum alloys, as ­these could not be produced indigenously.56 The Khan 
network also provided training for Libyan technicians, reportedly on at least 
three occasions, so they could learn how to operate ­these machines.57
The sixth cluster of activities focused on purchasing, including feed ma-
terials for centrifuges and other chemicals for uranium conversion and high-­
grade manufacturing materials for equipment and centrifuges. This makes 
it clear that the Libyans ­were trying to develop the capability to produce such 
materials, not just to import them. As noted in previous chapters, the Liby-
ans had encountered difficulties in the basic industrial pro­cesses involved 
in refining raw materials such as iron. The challenges of producing ­these 
components ­were of a much higher order, requiring sophisticated and spe-
cialized equipment.
The decision to delay working on weaponization and to focus on uranium 
conversion was arguably a necessary adaptation to the constraints of the Lib-
yan program. Facing a host of challenges, and with such limited manpower, 
it was necessary to adopt an incremental approach. Matuq told the IAEA in 

208
chapter 8
2004 that the program’s first priority had been to set up a pi­lot enrichment 
plant to develop necessary experience, and that they had not yet started to 
establish a large-­scale enrichment capacity.58 Developing suitable feed ma-
terial for the centrifuges was an impor­tant, but not urgent, challenge.
Ennami similarly indicated that the man­ag­ers of the nuclear weapons pro-
gram took an incremental approach to solving prob­lems. As specific prob­
lems ­were solved, he noted, “new tasks are set, ­future is becoming more and 
more clear, and even expected date of completion was discussed.”59 Over-
all, Ennami concluded, the program had been “progressing reasonably well.” 
Libyan officials who ­were not directly involved with the management of the 
program ­were less optimistic. According to a Libyan academic who was in-
volved in the negotiations leading to the dismantlement of the nuclear 
weapons program, the program’s pro­gress was very slow.60 Echoing ­these 
observations, several other Libyans described the nuclear program as not 
much more than a plan, with ­little ­actual implementation or activity on 
the ground.
­After the dismantlement of the program in late 2003, se­nior Libyan diplo-
mats and officials apparently held dif­fer­ent views of how far the nuclear 
program had been from a weapons capability. Some se­nior figures appear 
to have believed that Libya was just a few years away from acquiring nu-
clear weapons. In 2006, Matuq told a U.S. journalist that the program could 
have produced weapons fairly soon, stating that the Libyan target was 
2006–2008, with the option of “accelerating” the program to produce a 
weapon by 2007.61 In 2005, Seif al-­Islam Gaddafi estimated that, as of late 
2003, a nuclear weapons option was within five years.62 ­These assessments 
­were unrealistic to say the least, given the difficulties facing the Libyan nu-
clear establishment. But Libyan regime officials may still have believed that 
a nuclear weapons option was coming within reach. Other Libyans had a 
more realistic impression, at least with the benefit of hindsight. In 2006, a 
se­nior Libyan diplomat who was involved in the attempts to start negotia-
tions with the West, but lacked a bird’s-­eye view of the details of the nuclear 
weapons program, simply dismissed the nuclear proj­ect as not much of a 
program at all.63
When foreign technical experts ­were granted access to the Libyan nuclear 
program, it became apparent that a weapons option was further away than 
the se­nior Libyans believed. Mohamed el-­Baradei, the IAEA director gen-
eral, visited Libya on 29 December 2003, ­after the decision to dismantle the 
program. He described the proj­ect as several years away from acquiring a 
nuclear weapon, at the very least. Although the nuclear establishment was 
already receiving equipment and was expected to launch an operational cen-
trifuge plant producing weapons quantities of fissile material within five 
years, which was an optimistic estimate, no one had started preparing or 
planning activities beyond getting the centrifuge fa­cil­i­ty up and ­running.64

209
Sanctions, Centrifuges, and Exit, 1989–2003 
oversight and management
The management of the nuclear weapons program that emerged in the 
early and mid-1990s differed from the 1970s and 1980s in two impor­tant re­
spects: ­there was more direct involvement by regime officials, and the de-
velopment of infrastructure and technology was outsourced to a multina-
tional profit-­driven supplier network. Through ­these mea­sures, the regime 
attempted to take direct charge over the program and reduce the influence 
of the scientific community that seem uninterested in pursuing regime goals. 
The combination of weak institutions and outsourcing proved problematic, 
however, ­because the regime’s information about the pro­gress of the pro-
gram was heavi­ly influenced by the assessments of the suppliers of the 
technology and the Libyan officials involved in making ­these contracts, es-
pecially Matuq.
The nuclear weapons program was highly compartmentalized. Few indi-
viduals outside Gaddafi’s closest circle had detailed information about the 
program. In an interview with the author, Seif al-­Islam Gaddafi said that only 
five individuals in the regime knew the full scope of the program’s activi-
ties.65 At the TNRC, the nuclear establishment compartmentalized the centri-
fuge program—­which was a separate proj­ect with sites scattered around 
Tripoli and surrounding areas—­separating it from other departments. The 
purpose of the activities in both the chemical and nuclear programs—­
weapons—­was hidden even from many of the employees in each program.66 
This made effective peer review difficult, if not impossible.
In the nuclear establishment, as elsewhere in the Libyan state, the level of 
personal influence did not always match official titles. Se­nior figures in the 
nuclear establishment such as Ennami enjoyed personal connections with 
se­nior regime officials such as Matuq, which ­were more impor­tant than for-
mal roles. Accountability and decision making continued to be based on 
personal relationships not institutional lines of authority. A deputy could 
wield more power than his nominal superior if he had better links with 
Gaddafi and his closest circle. This was also reflected in the flow of infor-
mation in state institutions: staff would report to the minister rather than 
to the ministry.
While se­nior regime officials lacked both the technical and institutional 
capacity to monitor or question technical choices, they ­were able to follow 
the money trail involved in the large contracts with foreign suppliers. All 
procurement in the realm of security and defense tended to involve large 
contracts ­under Gaddafi’s personal purview. ­After he shut down the Minis-
try of Defense following an attempted coup in 1970, ­there was ­little over-
sight or lateral coordination between the vari­ous security forces and the 
branches of the military. Instead, Gaddafi set up an informal committee to 
monitor contracts and distribute financial benefits to se­nior officials. The 

210
chapter 8
large amounts of money involved in the nuclear contracts gave significant 
incentives to the se­nior tier of the intelligence ser­vices, confidantes of Gad-
dafi, to keep a close watch over the weapons program. Two or three se­nior 
officials appear to have profited personally from the nuclear agreements, 
which apparently caused some tension ­after the program was dismantled.67
Tensions also emerged between the dif­fer­ent institutional ele­ments of the 
atomized Libyan military-­industrial complex. ­Under the NBSR’s aegis, sev-
eral technical institutes ­were created between 1994 and  1998. Some of 
­these—­the Casting Institute, Welding Institute, Advanced Center of Tech-
nology, and the Higher Technical Center for Training and Production—­had 
more relevant equipment than did the universities. The machine shop for 
centrifuge production was colocated with the sites. Still, the Libyan govern-
ment insisted that none of ­these institutes ­were linked with the nuclear 
program.68 For example, the Libyan authorities told the IAEA that no insti-
tutional interaction took place between the NBSR and the Central Or­ga­ni­za­
tion for Electronic Research, the or­ga­ni­za­tion responsible for the missile 
program.69 The universities appear to have had only a tangential relation-
ship with the nuclear program at this stage; they possessed very ­little rele-
vant laboratory equipment. If this is accurate, it suggests the scale of the 
coordination prob­lems in the Libyan regime at a time when the nuclear 
weapons program was, in their eyes, approaching the operational stage.
As the building blocks for a weapons program began arriving in Tripoli 
in 2001–2003, the Libyan regime faced a series of challenges. Would the nu-
clear establishment be capable of setting up an operational nuclear weap-
ons program? And was the regime prepared to take the risk of setting up a 
large-­scale operational nuclear weapons program as the international com-
munity prepared for war with Iraq over its alleged WMD programs?
Negotiations, 1999–2003
While Libyan scientists and technicians ­were installing centrifuges, se­nior 
regime officials tried to trade the program in exchange for relief from inter-
national economic sanctions. Secret negotiations began in 1999 between 
Libya, Britain, and the United States to facilitate a trial of the two Libyan 
suspects in the Lockerbie bombing. In the fall of 2001 the talks then turned 
to the issue of Libya’s nonconventional weapons programs.
By the late 1990s, the Libyan regime sensed that many states, particularly 
in Africa, ­were increasingly reluctant to uphold the international sanctions 
against Libya. This, they believed, offered a new opportunity to reach out 
to the West.70 The Libyan negotiating team approached Britain seeking to 
reach a settlement over the 1984 shooting of police offer Yvonne Fletcher and 
to resolve the Lockerbie issue. In a Geneva meeting with U.S. representatives 
in May 1999, the Libyans offered to dismantle their WMD programs. Accord-

211
Sanctions, Centrifuges, and Exit, 1989–2003 
ing to a se­nior member of Libya’s team, Gaddafi had authorized them to 
discuss the WMD issue at this first meeting.71 The Libyan team made it plain 
that they ­were prepared to address all issues standing in the way of improved 
relations: they ­were ready to cooperate in the U.S. campaign against al-­
Qaeda; they ­were prepared to play a very dif­fer­ent role in the ­Middle East 
and Africa; they ­were willing to support U.S.-­sponsored peace talks in the 
­Middle East and to contribute to conflict resolution in Africa.72 In July 1999, 
diplomatic relations ­were restored between Britain and Libya; this allowed 
closer dialogue between ­those two countries, but it remained difficult for 
Libya to engage the Americans.
The Libyan troika from the early 1990s, comprised of se­nior regime figures 
Obeidi, Zwai, and Kusa, was supported by other se­nior officials, including 
Ettalhi, who could provide input on technical and other relevant issues. In 
the late 1990s, Libyan academics with doctoral degrees from the United 
States and the West also became involved. ­These academics added a “unique 
ele­ment” to the Libyan team, according to a se­nior member.73 Furthermore, 
he argued, the fact that the team worked together over an extended time 
period, both prior to and during the negotiations between 1999 and 2003, 
enabled the members to iron out any disagreements on the Libyan side and 
craft responses to their British and American counter­parts.74 But they had 
to work hard, without a guarantee of success: while Gaddafi supported their 
efforts in princi­ple, he had not made a binding commitment. As the talks 
advanced, the Libyan team had to balance their efforts to strike a deal with 
the United States and the United Kingdom against the risk that Gaddafi 
could pull back from their proposed agreement.
While Libya offered to abandon its WMD programs as early as May 1999, 
the Americans and the British had demanded a sequential approach, insisting 
first on a trial of the Lockerbie suspects in a third country (the Netherlands) 
before addressing the WMD issue. They did make it clear to the Libyans 
that the WMD programs stood in the way of improved relations, and that 
this issue would have to be addressed ­after the Lockerbie trial was com-
pleted. Furthermore, the U.S. representatives insisted that Libya cooperate 
with U.S. efforts against Islamist terrorism and must pay reparations to the 
families of the Lockerbie victims. According to Martin S. Indyk, former U.S. 
ambassador to Israel and leader of the U.S. del­e­ga­tion in subsequent talks 
with the Libyan team, a key U.S. goal was to ensure that the sanctions re-
mained in force. Therefore, they agreed to proceed with secret talks on the 
condition that Libya would cease lobbying to have the sanctions lifted.75 At 
that point, ambassador Indyk noted, the United States did not consider Lib-
ya’s chemical weapons program “an imminent threat” and believed that its 
nuclear program “barely existed.”76
The Libyan team—­Obeidi, Zwai, and Kusa—­were successful in persuad-
ing Gaddafi to extradite the two Lockerbie suspects for trial in The Hague. 
­After the trial ended in January 2001 with the conviction of one suspect 

212
chapter 8
(al-­Megrahi) and the acquittal of the other (Fhimah), the Libyan team 
wanted to return to the negotiating ­table. With Libya and the United King-
dom having resumed diplomatic relations, Zwai—­a close associate of 
Gaddafi—­was appointed Libya’s ambassador to the United Kingdom; he 
moved to London in the fall of 2001. He ­later recalled that he was instructed 
to engage right away in focused disarmament talks. However, ­after the 9/11 
terrorist attacks the talks ­were postponed.77
Resolving the Lockerbie bombing issues built confidence among the three 
parties, showing that they could solve difficult issues through diplomacy. 
From Libya’s perspective, the situation was beginning to improve. The UN 
Security Council sanctions, in force since 1992, ­were lifted in October 2003. 
During the vote in the Security Council, the United States and France ab-
stained; the United States explained its abstention by referring to Bush 
administration concerns about Libya’s WMD programs.78
On 15 October 2001, the Libyan team met British and U.S. representatives, 
including the American ambassador in London, Central Intelligence Agency 
(CIA) and Secret Intelligence Ser­vice (MI6) officers, and the Italian deputy 
foreign minister.79 The main Libyan objective was to have the bilateral U.S. 
sanctions lifted and to improve its relations with the United States. ­These 
sanctions stood in the way of modernizing Libya’s petroleum complex and 
opening up its economy to the global marketplace. The United States made 
it clear that halting the Libyan WMD programs (nuclear, chemical, and 
biological) and reducing the range of Libya’s SCUD-­B missiles to below 300 
kilo­meters—so that they could not reach Israel—­were preconditions for 
moving forward on ­these other issues. But first, Libya was enlisted to help 
with the U.S. War on Terror by sharing intelligence information.
In the fall of 2002, Libyan and British officials sought to develop a new 
dialogue focusing specifically on WMD questions. The British had attempted 
to reach out to the Libyans two or three times to talk about the WMD issue, 
according to a se­nior Libyan diplomat involved in ­these conversations.80 At 
a Camp David meeting in September 2002, Prime Minister Tony Blair per-
suaded President George W. Bush that they should explore ­whether Gad-
dafi would trade his WMD programs in return for relief from sanctions. In 
October, Blair wrote to Gaddafi, who replied tentatively that his ­people 
would be in touch.81
­After continuing for nine months in 2003, the trilateral talks fi­nally turned 
to the WMD issue. The Libyan team came to include the heads of military 
and foreign intelligence, the heads of the nuclear and chemical weapons pro-
grams, and Seif al-­Islam Gaddafi as a self-­described “trou­ble-­shooter.”82 
They worked closely with Muammar Gaddafi but faced difficulties in secur-
ing his support at critical points during the negotiations.83
In making their case to their leader, the Libyan negotiating team cited the 
changing costs and risks of pursuing nuclear weapons in the post-9/11 

213
Sanctions, Centrifuges, and Exit, 1989–2003 
world. According to one of the three se­nior members of the team, they had 
concluded that pursuing nuclear weapons would be to “shoot themselves 
in the foot” from a security perspective.84 ­After the initial meeting with the 
British in the fall of 2001, the Libyan del­e­ga­tion had become convinced that 
pursuing WMD carried greater risks than potential benefits: pursuing them 
would simply worsen strug­gles with the United States, now the world’s only 
superpower. According to Seif al-­Islam Gaddafi, the Libyan regime con-
cluded that it risked a U.S. invasion or preemptive strikes ­after 9/11.85 
Furthermore, the leadership believed that it was necessary to channel funds 
­toward education, health, and the economy rather than further spending on 
the WMD programs.86
In Seif al-­Islam Gaddafi’s recollection, it took several meetings over the 
course of two months in 2003 to persuade the leader to move forward with 
the unilateral dismantlement of the WMD programs. ­There ­were domestic 
hurdles to be overcome: the military had to be convinced that the negotia-
tions ­were not aimed at disarming Libya but focused only on WMD.87 The 
Libyan team was concerned about how to pres­ent such an agreement to the 
Libyan population. Seif-­al-­Islam ­later noted that such an agreement had to 
be presented as a “win-­win” deal, and not seem to be the result of external 
force or pressure.88 Furthermore, Gaddafi’s son noted, as talks intensified in 
early 2003 the Libyan leader feared that it could be a trap, and that ­there was 
a hidden agenda at play aiming for the overthrow of his regime.
One point of tension throughout the negotiations, and even ­after they ­were 
completed, was Libya’s demand for security guarantees and conventional 
military equipment as compensation for abandoning its pursuit of a nuclear 
deterrent. Gaddafi apparently wanted a promise that Libya would not be 
subject to attacks by the United States or the United Kingdom using nuclear 
or chemical weapons—­nor presumably by their allies, including Israel. In ad-
dition, Libya wanted a security guarantee from the United States and Britain; 
access to advanced conventional arms; and help to expand its civilian nuclear 
program. In a tele­vi­sion interview in December 2004, Gaddafi expressed his 
desire for a security guarantee: “The international community should ban the 
use of nuclear or chemical weapons against that country which has disman-
tled its own program on its own initiative. It must provide it with defensive 
weapons in order to protect itself against any danger.”89
In early March 2003, before the U.S.-­led invasion of Iraq, Libyan represen-
tatives Seif al-­Islam Gaddafi and Kusa made the offer to their British 
counter­parts that Libya would abandon its WMD programs.90 In mid-­
October, fifteen U.S. inspectors led by Stephen Kappes of the CIA secretly 
traveled to Libya to examine the WMD facilities as well as other relevant in-
frastructure, including laboratories and conventional military factories.91 
Although their Libyan interlocutors had been instructed not to disclose the 
full scope of their programs, the inspectors found that the nuclear program 

214
chapter 8
was larger than they had anticipated and that Libya had more chemical 
weapons than expected.92
Also in October 2003, inspectors at the port of Taranto, Italy, found centri-
fuge equipment sourced by the Khan network aboard the cargo ship BBC 
China in transit from North ­Korea to Libya. The incident has often been de-
scribed as influential on the talks: the argument is that it forced Gaddafi to 
commit to the deal by blowing Libya’s cover.93 Although U.S. State Depart-
ment statements ­were initially cautious, putting this event in the context of 
ongoing talks in late 2003, subsequent statements by Undersecretary of State 
for Arms Control and International Security John Bolton and by Secretary 
of State Condoleezza Rice claimed that it was a key turning point.94 British 
officials, however, emphasized the role of the negotiation pro­cess rather than 
the BBC China discovery. In December 2003, for example, British foreign sec-
retary Jack Straw described the Libyan decision to give up its WMD as the 
product of “painstaking diplomacy . . . ​­going back for six or seven years 
where we sought to re-­establish a diplomatic relationship.”95
Libyan regime figures have privately stressed that the interdiction had 
­little effect on their willingness to abandon the WMD programs. In the years 
following the BBC China incident, per­sis­tent rumors even suggested that 
Libyan intelligence sources actually facilitated the interdiction, by tipping 
off the Americans and the British. ­Whether or not this is true, ­there is ­little 
reason to believe that the BBC China incident was pivotal in the Libyan de-
cision. Incidentally, as the IAEA ­later noted, the inspectors overlooked one 
P-2 centrifuge container, which arrived in Libya in March 2004.96
The Libyans perceived that the Americans especially wanted to claim the 
dismantlement of Libya’s nuclear program as a victory ­because of the U.S. 
failure to find the WMD it expected in Iraq.97 A se­nior member of the nego-
tiating team described Libya’s decision to dismantle its nuclear program as 
a “gift to Bush and Blair.”98 Seif al-­Islam Gaddafi commented that the Lib-
yan leadership wanted to postpone the announcement, however, ­because 
they did not want it to appear as if U.S. moves against Iraq had frightened 
them into making the decision.99
While the British and the Americans had been aware of the Khan network 
for several years, their assessments of the Libyan program changed in the 
course of negotiations, and especially ­after the October 2003 visits. In the late 
1990s, the U.S. intelligence community had indications of an enrichment pro-
gram in Libya but had not gone public with this information.100 In 2001 a 
Pentagon report stated that “Libya . . . ​made ­little pro­gress” on its nuclear 
program ­because the program lacked “well-­developed plans, expertise, con-
sistent financial support, and adequate foreign suppliers.”101
­After the October visits, the parties began to iron out an agreement. As 
the talks ­were extremely sensitive, few outside the negotiating teams ­were 
aware of what was ­going on, even at the highest levels of the three govern-

215
Sanctions, Centrifuges, and Exit, 1989–2003 
ments. To avoid leaks or anyone spoiling the pro­gress of the talks, the teams 
did not inform the IAEA about the existence of a nuclear weapons program 
in Libya or about the October 2003 technical visits inspecting sites associ-
ated with the program. On 16 December 2003, se­nior officials met at the Trav-
ellers Club in London to discuss a draft statement prepared by Kusa. The 
se­nior members of the Libyan del­e­ga­tion—­Kusa, Obeidi, and Zwai—­met 
British officials David Landsman and William Ehrman from the Foreign Of-
fice, two se­nior MI6 officials, and Robert G. Joseph of the U.S. National Se-
curity Council.102 During a six-­hour meeting, they pressed the Libyans to 
make more explicit what they ­were giving up and what they ­were agreeing 
to.103 The Libyans wanted an explicit quid pro quo—­that the United States 
would agree to lift sanctions in exchange for Libya’s dismantlement—­but 
the United States refused an explicit linkage.104 The Libyan del­e­ga­tion also 
wanted to include a statement in the agreement about Libya’s desire for a 
WMD-­free zone in the ­Middle East—­this was intended to put pressure on 
Israel—­but the United States representatives resisted taking this route.105 
They reached an agreement but Gaddafi was still hesitant; he fi­nally com-
mitted to the deal on 17 December ­after Blair telephoned him personally. 
Gaddafi refused, however, to make a public announcement; he left that to 
his Foreign Ministry. Up to the day of the announcement, U.S. officials ­were 
not certain that the deal was on.106
On 19 December 2003, a Libyan Foreign Ministry official announced that 
Libya would abandon its pursuit of internationally proscribed weapons, stat-
ing that Libya “believes that the arms race ­will neither serve its security nor 
the region’s security and [that it] contradicts [Libya’s] ­great concern for a 
world that enjoys peace and security.”107 The British government waited ­until 
a translation of the statement was available to be sure that it was consistent 
with what they had agreed; only then did Blair and Bush publicly commend 
Gaddafi’s decision.
Between January and April 2004, Libya’s nuclear weapons program was 
dismantled by U.S. and British inspectors, ­under the formal auspices of the 
IAEA, which had been kept out of the secret trilateral negotiations prior to 
December 2003. This was not an easy collaboration ­because the sensitive 
items, such as the weapons design, ­were seized by the United States despite 
the protests of the IAEA del­e­ga­tion. Libyan officials declared that their de-
cision should serve as a model for other countries; that message was echoed 
by statements from British and American officials. Gaddafi made several 
statements explaining why Libya gave up the pursuit of WMD. In an inter-
view with an Italian journalist on 17 December 2004, for example, he ex-
plained that Libya had neither the need nor the capacity to acquire nuclear 
weapons: “Libya [had] risked becoming involved in producing weapons at 
an inappropriate level. This [was] ­because such weapons need a solid base, 
­great technological expertise, and vectors. Moreover, in which field could 

216
chapter 8
such weapons be used, in which theater of combat? Indeed, I believe that 
this question ­faces all countries producing nuclear weapons. . . . ​So the best 
decision, the most courageous decision, was to dismantle it.”108
By late 2004, however, the Libyan government became frustrated with 
what they felt was a failure by the United States and the United Kingdom 
to deliver their part of the bargain, as Libya had not received the security 
assurances or weapons systems it expected, and the pro­cess of lifting the U.S. 
sanctions was dragging on. Libyan officials soon stopped referring to their 
negotiated dismantlement of their WMD programs as a model for other 
states. During the 2011 Arab Spring, the support from NATO forces for the 
insurgent forces confirmed Gaddafi’s worst fears: that abandoning the nu-
clear weapons program left him vulnerable to being overthrown by a popu­
lar uprising backed by the West.
As this chapter has shown, the Libyan nuclear weapons program continued 
to underperform even ­after the regime revived it and made enormous invest-
ments. This seems baffling, as the nuclear black market appeared to solve 
Libya’s main bottleneck: enriching uranium on a large scale. The Libyans 
could buy a turnkey centrifuge plant from the Khan network, complete with 
manuals and (some) training. ­There was a well-­qualified se­nior tier of lead-
ers in the nuclear weapons program, and Libyan scientists ­were making 
sound, incremental plans for the weapons program. Libyan engineers and 
technical workers appeared to be quite capable of assembling centrifuges. 
In other words, ineptitude was not the prob­lem. Nonetheless, the program 
seemed to go nowhere.
The absence of technological determinism is a striking feature of the Lib-
yan nuclear program: even the arrival of a complete set of imported build-
ing blocks for a nuclear program failed to trigger any real momentum. This 
was a recurring pattern observed since the late 1970s: ­after suppliers pro-
vided new nuclear technology, an initial flurry of activity was quickly fol-
lowed by inertia. ­Here, again, the institutional weakness and small size of 
the Libyan nuclear establishment are critical ­factors. More specifically, Ma-
tuq’s failure to transform the nuclear weapons program into a more effec-
tive and goal-­oriented proj­ect demonstrated that money, centrifuges, and 
a strategic decision by Gaddafi ­were not enough given the structural prob­
lems their scientists faced on the ground.
Libya lacked institutionalized governance mechanisms to collect informa-
tion on how the program was proceeding and to intervene where necessary 
to see that regime decisions ­were implemented. Even with Matuq at the 
helm, scientists continued to explore basic pro­cesses while they faced com-
pounding prob­lems tackling the diverse challenges associated with an op-
erational weapons program. The lavish funding for the program, combined 
with an absence of technical reviews or oversight mechanisms, enabled the 

217
Sanctions, Centrifuges, and Exit, 1989–2003 
program to drift while the se­nior leadership was led to believe a nuclear 
weapons capability was on the horizon.
As this chapter has demonstrated, the failure of Libya’s program was an 
overdetermined outcome. At the same time, the analy­sis has revealed that 
state capacity was an impor­tant intervening variable contributing to this 
result.
Given the unimpressive advances of this program, we can ask ­whether the 
nuclear weapons program was predominantly intended as a bargaining chip. 
Was the program ever intended to become operational? As this chapter has 
shown, ­there ­were dif­fer­ent opinions on this question among se­nior Libyan 
officials. ­Those with more information about the program, including some 
who had a personal stake in the proj­ect, suggested that a nuclear weapons 
capability was perhaps only five years away when the program was disman-
tled in late 2003. ­Others scoffed at this notion, arguing that the program 
was not much more than a plan. Ultimately, the truth lies somewhere in be-
tween: the Libyans had a sound plan—­thousands of centrifuges ­were on 
their way to Tripoli—­but lacked the orga­nizational resources to implement 
a large-­scale operational weapons program. As they moved closer to an op-
erational program, ­these weaknesses became increasingly obvious.
Some observers have ascribed the weaknesses of the Libyan program to 
the parallel pursuit of rapprochement with the United States between 2001 
and 2003. While it may be tempting to assume that ­these deliberations and 
tensions ­were reflected in the nuclear program, this is not how the Libyan 
regime worked. To assume that ­there was such a link would be to seriously 
overestimate the coordination within the Libyan state.

218
Conclusion
In this book I have tried to accomplish three tasks. First, I have sought to 
explain why Iraq and Libya failed to acquire nuclear weapons and to pro-
vide a richer account of both programs than is available elsewhere. In so 
­doing, I have argued that several facts and their implications have previously 
been misunderstood. Second, I have explored how state capacity worked as 
an intervening variable shaping the per­for­mance and governance of nuclear 
weapons programs in two weak states with personalist regimes. Third, my 
findings challenge long-­standing assumptions about personalist regimes, no-
tably the notion that they are inevitably prone to nepotism and microman-
agement. Drawing on ample primary sources, many previously unexplored 
by scholars, I have attempted to revisit basic assumptions and long-­held be-
liefs about each case.
My argument focused primarily on the effects of weak state capacity on 
nuclear weapons programs in personalist regimes. In my analy­sis I have 
tried to highlight state capacity and distinguish this from other domestic-­
level variables such as control mechanisms, plain ineptitude, and varying 
leader interest and commitment. I have used a narrow definition of state ca-
pacity, conceptualizing it as the professionalism and in­de­pen­dence of the 
state apparatus, ­because this concept can easily become vague or unwieldy. 
I have sought to demonstrate how state capacity affects nuclear weapons 
programs from nose to tail, including planning, operationalization, over-
sight, and auditing. In so ­doing, I have treated state capacity as an inter-
vening variable that conditions the effect of other ­factors, such as foreign 
assistance and leader interest in nuclear weapons. I have not argued that 
state capacity can explain regime decisions about pursuing or abandoning 
nuclear weapons programs, nor have I suggested that state capacity is the 
only variable that ­matters in shaping the per­for­mance and outcomes of ­these 
programs.
In my analy­sis of Iraq and Libya, I have observed how two personalist 
leaders attempted to address the prob­lems associated with weak state ca-
pacity through their choice of management strategies, that is, ­whether they 

Conclusion
219
opted for centralized control, or even micromanagement, or for devolving 
much of the decision making to the scientific leaders of the program. Man-
agement strategy is a choice that I ­can’t predict, but I show that ­there is choice 
variation rather than constant micromanagement in the two cases studied 
in this book. ­Whether or not leaders want to intervene directly in the man-
agement of the nuclear weapons program reflects the intensity of their de-
sire to get the bomb, among other ­things. But the efficacy and impact of their 
interventions are ­shaped by state capacity via information pro­cessing and 
auditing mechanisms, as well as by the institutional resources at their dis-
posal (e.g., to launch alternative research tracks or proj­ects).
­These findings ­matter for historians and po­liti­cal scientists, but also for 
decision makers. While fewer states ­today pursue nuclear weapons than be-
fore, ­those that do tend to be authoritarian states that cannot mobilize 
­human and industrial resources on the scale that earlier proliferators like the 
Soviet Union and China ­were able to. As we move ­toward a world with 
more nuclear-­capable authoritarian states, understanding how ­these states 
might seek to develop a weapons option—­and the par­tic­u­lar constraints they 
are likely to face in this process—is a pressing ­matter. If the arguments and 
analy­sis developed in this book are correct, we ­will need more refined tools 
capable of differentiating between authoritarian regimes with varying state 
capacity to understand and assess ­these developments.
In the following, I revisit the main findings and their implications for the-
ory and policy, summarized in four lessons. While it falls beyond the scope 
of this book to apply the argument to other states, I include a mini-­case study 
of Syria’s nuclear program to see how the argument fares when applied to 
another personalist regime in the ­Middle East. Then, I assess alternative ex-
planations for the outcomes of Iraq and Libya’s nuclear programs. Fi­nally, I 
conclude with some final remarks about the broader implications of the find-
ings presented in this book.
The Findings and Their Relevance
This book has portrayed Iraq’s and Libya’s nuclear programs from an inside-­
out perspective, drawing on the con­temporary perspectives of scientists 
and technical experts and primary sources that open up ­these establish-
ments to an unpre­ce­dented degree. Where relevant, I have included per-
spectives from regime officials and the states’ leaders on ­these programs and 
their purpose. I have argued that many of our key assumptions about how 
science “worked” in ­these regimes ­were misguided. Seen from this vantage 
point, the po­liti­cal leadership appears more distant from the weapons pro-
grams and, oftentimes, disinterested. Saddam and Gaddafi certainly appear 
to have been less omnipresent and omniscient than how they wanted to 
come across. This was a trade-­off whose consequences ­were recognized, in 

Conclusion
220
part, ­because ­these leaders and regimes ­were ultimately more concerned with 
coup-­proofing against internal threats than acquiring a nuclear deterrent.
Personalist leaders ­don’t always get what they want—­particularly if they want nu-
clear weapons. While leaders such as Saddam and Gaddafi try to nurture a 
public image as all-­seeing and all-­power­ful, they are constrained by the mis-
match between the information they have to pro­cess and the number of 
decisions they need to make. ­These challenges multiply when such leaders 
weaken their states to increase their own personal power. All leaders strug­
gle to penetrate the technical details of nuclear technology, but ­these leaders 
arguable strug­gle more ­because they weaken the state’s institutional re-
sources to monitor and audit highly specialized activities such as nuclear 
programs. This paradox is perhaps particularly evident in the case of nu-
clear technology, which is difficult to understand and audit for leaders and 
regime elites who lack technical expertise. As this book has shown, person-
alist leaders may suspect or even realize that their officials are not delivering 
what they want. But they have limited options for addressing ­these prob­
lems, given the incentives facing their regime officials and the limitations of 
their own information-­processing and auditing mechanisms in formal state 
institutions.
Nor should we assume that just ­because personalist leaders seem to want 
nuclear weapons, or say that they do, that they want them badly. Nuclear 
weapons ­were never Saddam’s or Gaddafi’s primary concern. Other crises 
and challenges constantly vied for their attention and, unlike Stalin, they 
­were never convinced that nuclear weapons ­were their “number one prob­
lem.” Their attention and commitment to ­these programs ­were inconsistent 
for extended periods of time. ­Here, the inside-­out perspective applied in the 
case study analy­sis reveals a gap between the public and private rhe­toric of 
­these leaders and their actions. Furthermore, both leaders ultimately cared 
more about threats to their domestic survival—­either in the form of domes-
tic opposition or the longer-­term risks associated with domestic discontent 
during economic downturns—­than they did about acquiring a nuclear de-
terrent.
Some personalist leaders are less likely than ­others to get nuclear weapons.  This 
book has attempted to demonstrate variation in the per­for­mance of Iraq’s 
and Libya’s nuclear weapons programs. I have argued that state capacity 
is an impor­tant part of the explanation for why Iraq got much closer to a 
nuclear weapons capability than Libya ever did, despite having less access 
to sensitive assistance and less time on their hands. The implication of this 
argument for other cases is that we should not expect that nuclear weapons 
programs in personalist regimes are likely to be the same in terms of per­for­
mance based on regime type alone. This argument suggests that variation 
in state capacity affects the per­for­mance of nuclear weapons programs. We 

Conclusion
221
should not expect uniform outcomes among personalist regimes with dif­
fer­ent levels of state capacity. Nor should policymakers assume that all per-
sonalist regimes ­will fail in their efforts to pursue nuclear weapons: Iraq 
came close. Other leaders may not stumble as they approach the nuclear 
weapons threshold as Saddam did.
The domestic constraints facing nuclear scientists in personalist regimes 
do not readily reveal themselves. The cases of Iraq and Libya could be of 
use for analysts seeking to disentangle ­these constraints and their interac-
tive effects. If the findings are correct, then coup-­proofing strategies may of-
fer impor­tant clues to how state capacity is affected by personalist leaders 
attempting to gain and strengthen their hold on power. State capacity is not 
static, even in weak states, and dif­fer­ent coup-­proofing strategies have dis-
tinct consequences. As the case of Libya suggests, erosion of formal institu-
tions have particularly damaging, and long-­lasting, consequences for state 
capacity.
The findings of this book also suggest that some of the observed be­hav­ior 
interpreted as incompetence was caused by other ­factors. In the analy­sis of 
Iraq’s and Libya’s programs, I have found several examples—­including 
duplication of ­orders for laboratory equipment; failure to prepare for the 
introduction of nuclear energy; inadequate education and training of scien-
tists; or simply the absence of specific targets or objectives to guide a re-
search program—­where what looked like incompetence from the outside 
actually reflected weak state capacity. This is not meant to suggest ­there 
was no incompetence at play in ­these nuclear programs. The inertia ob-
served by visiting con­sul­tants in Libya is a dif­fer­ent prob­lem, but it is argu-
ably related to the failure to plan and facilitate research.
Personalist leaders in weak states prefer not to micromanage nuclear pro-
grams.  A counterintuitive finding is that neither Saddam nor Gaddafi mi-
cromanaged their nuclear weapons programs. ­These leaders ­were inconsis-
tent in terms of their attention to their nuclear weapons programs and largely 
let scientists—­and ­later other regime officials—­set up and manage ­these pro-
grams. While I do not try to predict when a personalist leader ­will opt for 
more or less controlling management strategies, I do show that ­there is choice 
variation in the two cases studied in this book. As noted in the foregoing 
chapters, even scientists ­were surprised by how distant the leaders ­were.
­These leaders preferred to not get too deeply involved with the detailed 
management of their nuclear programs. This was costly and, further-
more, both leaders preferred to delay ­intervening until late in the pro­cess, 
­unless they faced a crisis. This was evident on two occasions. First, both 
leaders intervened—­after internal bickering in the Iraqi case and ­after years 
of failure in the Libyan one—by placing a regime stalwart rather than a sci-
entist in charge of the program. Second, both leaders set new ground rules 
for their programs when they began to fear military attacks: Saddam did 

Conclusion
222
so ­after the 1981 attack by Israel and Gaddafi in 2002 ­after increasing con-
cerns in the Libyan regime that the program could come ­under fire. In ­these 
instances, rules set down by the se­nior po­liti­cal leadership led to subopti-
mal technical choices. In Iraq’s case this was to avoid detection and a re-
peat strike; in Libya’s this led to inertia (e.g., the disassembled Libyan 
nuclear facilities). However, ­these interventions stand in sharp contrast to 
the general avoidance of interference by both Saddam and Gaddafi dur-
ing ­these programs.
Personalist leaders are more constrained than we tend to realize.  Fourth, and 
fi­nally, a finding with broader implications is that ­these leaders ­were more 
constrained than we have realized, or po­liti­cal scientists tend to assume. I 
have argued that Saddam and Gaddafi ­were constrained in two ways in their 
pursuit of nuclear weapons: first, by the weak capacity of their states; and 
second, by their concerns about domestic survival weighed against their de-
sire for a nuclear deterrent to ward off foreign attack. In the case of Libya, 
regime elites had a direct impact on Gaddafi’s decisions at key moments in 
the nuclear weapons program. I discuss the implications of ­these findings 
for theory below, including the long-­standing debate on how authoritarian 
leaders make decisions about investing in military capabilities or domestic 
development to benefit their citizens.
Implications for Theory
This book has argued that the lit­er­a­ture is mistaken about several impor­tant 
aspects of the Iraqi and Libyan programs: how they ­were governed; what 
triggered key decisions; and the outcomes of each program. ­Because the case 
universe of nuclear proliferation is very small, ­these findings have signifi-
cant implications for theory and analy­sis. In this section, I highlight some of 
­these implications and suggest how my argument might fare if applied to 
other cases.
Broadly, the findings shed new light on the internal politics and decision 
making of personalist regimes. For example, the cases of Iraq and Libya 
speak to long-­standing debates about how leaders make choices about 
spending on guns or butter. A rich body of lit­er­a­ture explores how leaders 
weigh dif­fer­ent domestic-­level interests in making ­these decisions, how dif­
fer­ent ­factors in their environment affect ­these deliberations, and ­whether 
authoritarian leaders are less constrained in making ­these decisions than 
demo­cratic leaders who have to consider the interests of the electorate. In a 
study of how oil income affected dif­fer­ent authoritarian leaders with revi-
sionist preferences, Jeff Colgan finds that “petro-­states” engage more often 
in armed conflict with their neighbors.1 Both Iraq and Libya spent many pet-
rodollars on military capabilities ­under Saddam’s and Gaddafi’s leader-

Conclusion
223
ship. As Colgan shows, oil enabled Gaddafi to spend at least 25 ­percent of 
total revenues on arms in some years.2 More broadly, scholars often assume 
that personalist leaders such as Saddam and Gaddafi are unconstrained in 
making decisions about spending on guns or butter, as well as conflicts and 
war, ­because they are not constrained by domestic state institutions and care 
less about the interests and well-­being of the population.3 Personalist leaders 
are less constrained than other leaders, due to the absence of strong institu-
tional checks and balances and ample petrodollars. But, as this analy­sis has 
demonstrated, even these leaders face constraints. For example, debates 
about guns or butter ­were a recurring feature of the Libyan regime. Further-
more, ­these debates ­were consequential: the two wings of the regime—­one in 
­favor of nuclear weapons and the other lobbying for economic development 
at home—­influenced Gaddafi’s perspectives and decisions. Indeed, balanc-
ing ­these wings was part of Gaddafi’s efforts to avoid ­either faction becoming 
too influential, thereby threatening his own relative power. Saddam also had 
to weigh his choices about the nuclear program against the balancing of re-
gime factions, as was clear in his temperate public reaction to the 1981 attack 
on the Osirak reactor, which led hardliners to further oppose his policies at a 
time of widespread dissatisfaction with the Iran-­Iraq War.4
An implication of this observation for policymakers and analysts is that 
personalist leaders are influenced by regime elites in their decisions about 
nuclear weapons, particularly if they face an economic environment where 
they can no longer pursue both guns and butter si­mul­ta­neously. Further-
more, if personalist leaders face widespread domestic dissatisfaction due to 
adverse economic conditions their calculations may change. In Gaddafi’s 
case, mounting domestic dissatisfaction contributed to his shift away from 
guns—­including nuclear weapons—to butter. In Saddam’s case, even at a 
time of economic hardship at home during the Iran-­Iraq War, spending on 
the nuclear weapons program continued to soar. Understanding the mech-
anisms bringing about ­these outcomes is an impor­tant subject for further 
analy­sis.
The findings also highlight the trade-­offs ­these leaders and regimes made 
between coup-­proofing and the per­for­mance of their states in dif­fer­ent is-
sue areas. A counterintuitive finding is that even in Saddam’s regime, se­nior 
officials realized that they ­were unable to keep track of the per­for­mance of 
proj­ects in the cottage industries that emerged in the military-­industrial com-
plex. ­These observations speak to emerging debates about the varied per­for­
mance of personalist regimes in dif­fer­ent issue areas. They also tell us some-
thing impor­tant about implementation of decisions in ­these regimes, an issue 
area that has received less attention than why personalist leaders make par­
tic­u­lar decisions about acquiring nuclear weapons.5
­These trade-­offs can evolve over time. Saddam and Gaddafi sought to se-
cure their hold on power initially by purges and then by weakening the 
standing and influence of alternative power centers—or just getting rid of 

Conclusion
224
them. Over time, they became more focused on balancing dif­fer­ent state 
elites and regime factions. In Saddam’s case, his tendency to selectively pay 
close attention to certain issue areas (notably the per­for­mance of the mili-
tary) during the 1980s stood in contrast to his more detached style of lead-
ership in ­later years, when he had fewer monitoring mechanisms in place 
and was difficult to get hold of even for se­nior regime officials.
Two central findings—­that neither Saddam nor Gaddafi micromanaged 
the nuclear weapons programs and that their nuclear programs ­were not as 
rife with nepotism as has been widely assumed—­challenge the conventional 
wisdom about ­these leaders and regimes. They also raise questions for fur-
ther study. For example, the findings invite further analy­sis of how analysts 
and po­liti­cal scientists can interpret the be­hav­ior of nuclear scientists as in-
dicators of intentions and decisions at the se­nior level of the regime. As we 
have seen, personalist regimes in weak states ­don’t always know or under-
stand what their nuclear scientists are up to. The two leaders studied in this 
book knew they ­were being misinformed and occasionally tried to impose 
additional control mechanisms, with mixed results. This holds significant im-
plications for how scholars interpret observed be­hav­ior in weak states, in 
coding decisions as well as qualitative analyses.
More broadly, the findings challenge the enduring assumption that regime 
type is a reliable indicator for ­whether states are likely to pursue and acquire 
nuclear weapons. This takes many guises, from the Cold War arms races 
where the centralization of the Soviet state was interpreted as an obstacle to 
innovation, to theories arguing that neopatrimonial regimes are structurally 
determined to want nuclear weapons while at the same time arguing that 
such states are too incompetent to acquire them. The findings in this book 
suggest that state capacity is an impor­tant intervening variable shaping the 
governance and per­for­mance of ­these programs in authoritarian regimes.
The case universe of states pursuing nuclear weapons is small; the num-
ber of weak states run by personalist regimes is smaller. Iraq and Libya faced 
par­tic­u­lar obstacles that many other states have not faced, or faced to a much 
lesser degree. For example, neither Pakistan nor India ­were subject to the 
restrictions of the Non-­Proliferation Treaty; neither experienced a targeted 
strike on their nuclear establishment (even though India apparently consid-
ered striking against Pakistani nuclear sites during the 1980s); and both ben-
efited from foreign technology and assistance. North ­Korea is in many ways 
a strong state, even if this is dominated by leaders who attempt to redefine 
the state in their own image. The same can be said about Iran. But other states 
in the ­Middle East that have been suspected of harboring a nuclear weap-
ons ambition—­including Algeria, Syria, and Egypt—­fit the description of 
relatively weak states with personalist regimes. While ­there are several stud-
ies of the case of Egypt’s past nuclear program that demonstrate how state 
capacity and the regime’s concern about empowering new technical elites 

Conclusion
225
obstructed the emergence of its program, less is known about Syria and 
Algeria.6 In the following, I briefly explore Syria’s past program using new 
sources highlighting the contemporary perspectives of International Atomic 
Energy Agency (IAEA) con­sul­tants, including a formerly se­nior Iraqi nu-
clear scientist, to probe the explanatory power of the state capacity argu-
ment in another case.
syria
Syria is a weak state governed by a personalist regime that has been sus-
pected of seeking a nuclear weapons option. The program appears to have 
been dismantled or interrupted ­after a suspected reactor site—­allegedly pro-
vided by North ­Korea—­was destroyed by a 2007 Israeli air strike. Very ­little 
is known about the Syrian nuclear program, and even less is known about 
the domestic-­level ­drivers of this program. Previously unexplored IAEA 
sources reveal that ­there are numerous similarities between the prob­lems ob-
served in Iraq and Libya and ­those that faced the Syrian nuclear program.
In Syria, foreign assistance—­including technical assistance from the 
IAEA—­offered an opportunity to launch an ambitious exploratory nuclear 
program despite lacking the ­human resources and orga­nizational and tech-
nical infrastructure to support this effort. In February 1968, the Syrian gov-
ernment requested assistance from the IAEA with surveying options for 
pos­si­ble nuclear research and development, including the drafting of a plan 
for the development of atomic energy.7 In this request, the Syrian govern-
ment cited its intention to launch a “preliminary” program that would be 
based on twenty scientists trained in relevant fields. A university scientist 
was, the IAEA noted, interested in acquiring a research reactor, despite the 
fact that ­there ­were no trained staff available and the infrastructure was not 
equipped to support such a reactor.8 In other words, the Syrian program 
lacked the necessary support (from the po­liti­cal and institutional levels) and 
resources (technical and ­human) to succeed. Given ­these prob­lems, IAEA ex-
perts ­were reluctant to provide additional support.
In Syria, the main domestic obstacles to a nuclear energy program at this 
time included a weak state as well as general underdevelopment. In 1969, 
Ghazi Derwish, a visiting IAEA con­sul­tant who was at that time director of 
the Tuwaitha Nuclear Research Center, summarized ­these challenges as fol-
lows: “staff shortage, large student population, limited funds and poor sup-
ply of equipment and laboratory facilities, are the main ­factors, besides poor 
pay, contributing to the meagreness of research done in ­these colleges. . . .”9 
In addition, he noted, ­there was no defined government policy on the issue of 
nuclear energy.
Despite ­these modest circumstances, the Syrian scientists believed that the 
IAEA would help them acquire a nuclear reactor and requested quotes from 

Conclusion
226
suppliers. The IAEA area officer for the ­Middle East and Eu­rope wrote to 
Derwish before he traveled to his mission in Syria: “You can very well imag-
ine this is absolutely out of the question that the Agency could enter into 
any expenditure of this sort. Personally I think that the best advice you could 
give them is to forget about such a proj­ect for several years. We understand 
that ­there is practically no trained personnel available and that the general 
infrastructure is not adequate to support a research reactor.”10
­After completing his assignment, Derwish noted in his final report that 
Syria had a “very ambitious development programme with very limited and 
in some cases poor scientific and technical structures to support it, with the 
resultant dependence on foreign or international technical aid.”11 ­There was 
no national agency at that time responsible for, or capable of, drawing up 
plans or overseeing implementation of a nuclear program. The Syrian Atomic 
Energy Committee and the Supreme Council of Sciences lacked the decision-­
making power and resources to carry out such tasks. Nor was ­there a gov-
ernment policy on the question of nuclear energy.12 Despite the presence of 
qualified nuclear experts, the IAEA con­sul­tant concluded, the country lacked 
the necessary ­human resources and technical and orga­nizational structures 
to support “scientific research and work covering wide areas in the field of 
atomic energy and its peaceful applications.”13 A reactor, he noted, was not 
something that the country could afford ­under pres­ent conditions.14
Syria continued to seek IAEA assistance with programs focusing on agri-
culture, health, and hydrology. In ­these areas, the IAEA con­sul­tants reported 
per­sis­tent absorption capacity prob­lems, ranging from the absence of local 
counter­parts and adequate working facilities (one con­sul­tant had to work 
from a lavatory) to a lack of interest on the part of se­nior authorities over-
seeing the nuclear program. In light of ­these obstacles, an IAEA con­sul­tant 
based in Syria in 1973 on a one-­year assistance mission wrote: “I do not seem 
to have accomplished much at all.”15 He described the Radioisotopes in Med-
icine Proj­ect as “farcical.”16 The leader of this proj­ect, based in the Syrian 
Center for Nuclear Medicine, requested equipment worth some $78,000 
without accompanying experts or training, even though the center lacked 
trained experts and technicians capable of ­handling this equipment. But, the 
IAEA con­sul­tant noted, “this is clearly not on.”17 Three years ­later another 
IAEA official noted their reluctance to support the isotope laboratory proj­
ect in Syria: “I do not believe it is worthwhile supporting such an isotope 
laboratory proj­ect without genuine prospect of success, and success could 
only come if the trained scientists are ­really competent.” This internal as-
sessment came in the wake of another visiting expert’s report, citing exten-
sive prob­lems with “the or­ga­ni­za­tion of hydrological research in Syria, and 
the in­effec­tive per­for­mance of the Syrian Atomic Energy Commission. The 
root of the prob­lem prob­ably lies in the almost complete lack of competent 
scientists and a structure within which they can work effectively.”18 In other 

Conclusion
227
words, by the mid-1970s it was apparent that weak institutional resources 
­were at the core of the Syrian program’s trou­bles.
During the 1980s the Syrians, like the Libyans, tried to secure a nuclear 
research reactor from the Soviet Union but ultimately failed due to domestic 
economic difficulties. The Syrians then turned to other suppliers, reportedly 
including the Abdul Qadeer Khan network, over the next few years; they fi­
nally secured a research reactor from China in the 1990s. The Syrians con-
tinued to seek support from the IAEA and received assistance with the front 
end of the nuclear fuel cycle. But they also continued to fail to develop the 
infrastructure and ­human resources necessary to operate an indigenous nu-
clear energy program. However, the limited evidence that has surfaced in 
the wake of the 2007 Israeli strike on a suspected clandestine reactor site sug-
gests that Syria may have benefited from more secret sensitive assistance 
than the outside world had realized. In 2011, the IAEA concluded that the 
building destroyed in the strike was similar to a North Korean reactor.19 This 
suggests that Syria, like Libya, appears to have made unexpected strides in 
their nuclear program boosted by sensitive foreign assistance, but also indi-
cates that the Syrian program depended on foreign expertise in light of their 
own shortcomings. This underscores the importance of assessing how do-
mestic constraints, such as state capacity, work in weak states with access to 
extensive foreign assistance.
Implications for Policy
For policymakers, understanding how personalist leaders make decisions 
about nuclear weapons, and how capable their states are of implementing 
­those decisions, is useful for risk assessments as well as crafting nonprolif-
eration policies. Much of the recent po­liti­cal science lit­er­a­ture on personal-
ist regimes tends to emphasize two aspects: that ­these leaders are essentially 
unconstrained by state elites and domestic audiences; and that ­these states’ 
scientific establishments are often inept. The findings of this book qualify 
­these judgments, with significant implications for decision makers who need 
to know how personalist regimes tick.
The first insight is that personalist leaders are not as unconstrained as they 
might seem. Saddam and Gaddafi ­were influenced by their closest circle 
at key moments of their nuclear weapons programs. Both leaders had to 
manage and balance regime factions. Se­nior officials played a key role in 
negotiations with foreign suppliers and developed vested interests, which 
reportedly led to personal financial gain in Libya, in the continuation of the 
nuclear weapons programs. Both leaders maintained ambiguous positions, 
enabling regime factions to deliberate and promote dif­fer­ent policies, includ-
ing, in the case of Libya, on the question of nuclear weapons. Furthermore, 

Conclusion
228
the findings qualify the common assumption that personalist regimes are 
populated with yes-­men who only pass on good news. The two nuclear pro-
grams appear to have been less nepotistic than many have assumed. Sad-
dam ensured that recruitment of scientists to the nuclear program was 
(mostly) meritocratic. Se­nior man­ag­ers did not voluntarily report bad news 
to Saddam but individuals and institutions did not hesitate to report bad 
news if the blame could be attributed to rival individuals or institutions. Col-
leagues reported on each other. Competing institutions, including units of 
the military-­industrial complex, badmouthed other proj­ects, such as the nu-
clear weapons program, to deflect potential blame when collaborative proj­
ects did not go according to plan.
A second insight is that the per­for­mance of nuclear weapons programs 
in personalist regimes is affected by state capacity, which varies from state to 
state. This suggests that the assumption that nuclear weapons programs in 
all personalist regimes are likely to fail, or to be inefficient, may be mislead-
ing. In this analy­sis of Iraq and Libya, I have argued that what might 
appear to be incompetence was in some cases the product of inadequate 
institutional resources. We cannot simply assume that scientists and engi-
neers in personalist regimes are less capable than scientists elsewhere. How-
ever, they do face distinct obstacles, particularly if they work in states with 
weak institutional resources.
A third insight is that ­these leaders’ interest in, and oversight of, their nu-
clear programs may have been significantly less than scholars have real-
ized. Contrary to the conventional wisdom, the nuclear weapons programs in 
both states ­were largely delegated to scientists with ­little oversight and in-
terference from the state leaders. As it turned out, this had very dif­fer­ent 
consequences for each regime. Saddam’s oversight was at the crux of the 2003 
casus belli, when Iraq’s incomplete declarations ­were taken as evidence that 
Iraq was not in compliance with United Nations resolutions. Gaddafi, in con-
trast, apparently got the benefit of the doubt and secretly kept stocks of 
undeclared chemical weapons even ­after the nuclear weapons program was 
dismantled ­under international supervision.
alternative explanations
In this section, I revisit alternative explanations for the per­for­mance of the 
Iraqi and Libyan nuclear weapons programs: access to foreign assistance; 
disruptive micromanagement; and economic underdevelopment.
First, I am not disputing that access to foreign technology and advice had 
impor­tant effects on ­either program. Changing access to foreign help and 
technology clearly had a significant impact on the per­for­mance and outcomes 
of both nuclear weapons programs. In my analy­sis, I do not conceptualize 
access to civilian and sensitive nuclear technology as a rival hypothesis 

Conclusion
229
­because I treat state capacity as an intervening variable that shapes the im-
pact of other ­factors, including foreign assistance.
­There was significant variation in terms of how much Iraq and Libya ben-
efited from foreign assistance, which suggests that state capacity is a sig-
nificant ­factor affecting absorption capacity in personalist regimes. Also, this 
helps to explain the disproportionate impact of being cut off from technol-
ogy and assistance on Libya as opposed to Iraq. An in­ter­est­ing finding from 
­these two cases is the weak impact of civilian nuclear assistance on ­either 
state’s efforts to edge closer to nuclear weapons.20 In Iraq, scientists who 
wanted nuclear weapons lobbied to take the program in this direction be-
fore it shifted ­toward an energy program in 1973. ­After the Iraqis accessed 
civilian and sensitive technology during the 1970s, this did not have the ef-
fect of triggering a weapons program or attempts to move the program in 
this direction ­until ­after the 1981 Osirak attack.
Second, micromanagement by Saddam and Gaddafi is an alternative ex-
planation for—or perhaps more accurately the conventional wisdom on—­the 
per­for­mance of each program. The evidence examined in this book suggests 
that ­these leaders delegated the management of their programs without be-
ing able to monitor what their leaders were ­doing, and only intervened to 
take more control when they realized that their initial strategy had backfired. 
This is not to suggest ­there was no micromanagement or that interventions 
did not demotivate the scientists. For example, Jafar Dhiya Jafar was at times 
ordered to pursue additional technical routes by the Iraqi Atomic Energy 
Commission, which further stretched scant resources. But overall, ­these lead-
ers ­were constrained rather than enabled by their weak state institutions in 
terms of how they could feasibly govern their nuclear scientists. This trade-­
off—­between the per­for­mance of ­these states and their leaders’ hold on 
power—­and its consequences ­were evident in both states. Saddam and his 
regime officials ­were aware of some of the consequences of this tradeoff, and 
circumstantial evidence suggests this was also the case in Libya. The me-
chanics of this tradeoff is an impor­tant and fertile area for further research.
Third, an alternative explanation for the stunted per­for­mance and out-
comes of ­these nuclear weapons programs could be that they ­were based in 
developing states with limited resources. While other developing states have 
developed nuclear weapons without the aid of petrodollars, such as North 
­Korea, India, and Pakistan, they too strug­gled. It is impor­tant to revisit the 
relationship between development and state capacity and the pos­si­ble in-
teractive effects. ­Under Saddam’s rule, the Iraqi state made significant pro­
gress in education, arguably at all levels. Creating a more modern and thus 
power­ful Iraq was at the core of the regime’s self-­image. In the case of Libya, 
poverty combined with the ravages of colonialism followed by war is clearly 
an impor­tant part of the explanation for why the Libyan state lacked basic 
resources during the early years of in­de­pen­dence. But the uneven growth 

Conclusion
230
of both states ­after petrodollars started flowing in suggests that underde-
velopment in itself is an insufficient explanation. Neither program lacked 
money but both ­were held back by weak institutional resources and capa-
bilities. Weak management facilitated additional disruptions, such as power 
strug­gles between dif­fer­ent factions and the expulsion of scarce expertise by 
the Baathists inside the nuclear establishment during the early 1970s. In the 
case of Libya, ­there ­were many lost opportunities to educate and train more 
scientists and technicians. The thin bench of scientists and technical work-
ers was in no small part the result of the regime’s reluctance to invest more 
in higher education, a hotbed of regime opposition.
The findings of this book challenge the conventional wisdom about why Iraq 
and Libya failed to acquire nuclear weapons and portray ­these regimes and 
leaders in a dif­fer­ent light. For this reason, the findings are likely to be con-
troversial. But this is an opportune moment to revisit our assumptions about 
personalist regimes, particularly in the ­Middle East. In the wake of wars and 
revolutions following the Arab Spring, mercurial regimes are collapsing or 
have been overthrown, while ­others appear to emerge in countries such as 
Egypt. As new sources open up ­these states and regimes to scrutiny, what 
we learn might lead us to revisit our assumptions about how they worked, 
in the nuclear realm and elsewhere. For example, we may develop a better 
understanding of the trade-­offs personalist leaders make between their hold 
on power and state capacity on one hand, and how their calculations about 
guns and butter evolve in times of crisis. More broadly, ­these findings en-
courage scholars to explore the role of state capacity in dif­fer­ent kinds of au-
thoritarian regimes. The fates of Iraq and Libya show that the long-­term 
costs of getting this wrong can be catastrophic. What we have learned from 
­these cases can be of value for assessing proliferation risks in dif­fer­ent au-
thoritarian states in years to come. Assumptions about the intentions and 
capabilities of leaders such as Saddam and Gaddafi informed crucial deci-
sions about ­going to war, as well as ­whether and how to engage ­these re-
gimes through diplomacy. Realizing that personalist leaders face complex 
constraints inside their own states is a useful insight for leaders facing nu-
clear proliferators in the ­future. As the cases of Iraq and Libya show, the 
stakes are high.

231
Notes
Abbreviations
Arab World Documentation Unit	
Arab World Documentation Unit, University of Exeter, 
United Kingdom
CAFCD	
Iraqi National Monitoring Directorate, Currently Accurate, 
Full and Complete Declaration, National Monitoring 
Directorate, Baghdad, Republic of Iraq, December 4, 2002
CIA	
Central Intelligence Agency
CNSAS	
Romanian National Council for the Study of the 
Securitate Archives, Bucharest
Compendium	
United Nations Monitoring, Verification and Inspection 
Commission, Compendium of Iraq’s Proscribed Weapons 
Programmes in the Chemical, Biological and Missile Areas 
(New York: United Nations, 2007)
CRRC Archives	
Saddam Hussein Regime Collection, The Conflict 
Rec­ords Research Center, National Defense University, 
Washington DC
CRS	
Congressional Research Ser­vice
Ekéus Papers	
Ambassador Rolf Ekéus Papers, private collection, 
Stockholm
GPC	
General ­People’s Congress, Libya
IAEA	
International Atomic Energy Agency
IAEA Archives	
International Atomic Energy Agency Technical 
Assistance Archives, Vienna
IAEC	
Iraqi Atomic Energy Commission
National Archives	
National Archives, Kew, Surrey, United Kingdom
National Security Archive	
National Security Archive, George Washington 
University Washington, DC

232
Nuti Papers	
Leopoldo Nuti Papers, Roma Tre University, Rome
Rabinowitz Papers	
Or Rabinowitz Papers, Hebrew University of Jerusalem, 
International Relations Department
Richelson Papers	
Jeffrey Richelson Papers
SAE	
Secretariat of Atomic Energy, Libya
UN	
United Nations
UNDP	
United Nations Development Program
UNESCO	
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural 
Or­ga­ni­za­tion
UNSCOM	
United Nations Special Commission
Introduction
  1.  ​Jafar Dhiya Jafar, unpublished manuscript (no title), Version 1, May 13, 2004, 6.
  2.  ​Etel Solingen, Nuclear Logics: Contrasting Paths in East Asia and the ­Middle East (Prince­ton: 
Prince­ton University Press, 2009).
  3.  ​See Jeff D. Colgan, Petro-­Aggression: When Oil ­Causes War (Cambridge: Cambridge Uni-
versity Press, 2013); Bruce Bueno de Mesquita and Alastair Smith, “Domestic Explanations of 
International Relations,” Annual Review of Po­liti­cal Science 15 (2012): 161–181.
  4.  ​Christopher Way and Jessica L. P. Weeks, “Making It Personal: Regime Type and Nu-
clear Proliferation,” American Journal of Po­liti­cal Science 58, no. 3 (2013): 705–719.
  5.  ​See Jacques E. C. Hymans, Achieving Nuclear Ambitions: Scientists, Politicians, and Prolif-
eration (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2012).
  6.  ​Joseph Sassoon, Saddam Hussein’s Ba‘th Party: Inside an Authoritarian Regime (Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 2011), 78.
  7.  ​Caitlin Talmadge, The Dictator’s Army: Battlefield Effectiveness in Authoritarian Regimes 
(Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 2015); Caitlin Talmadge, “The Puzzle of Personalist Per­for­
mance: Iraqi Battlefield Effectiveness in the Iran-­Iraq War,” Security Studies 22, no. 2 (2013): 
180–221.
  8.  ​Williamson Murray and Kevin Woods, The Iran-­Iraq War: A Military and Strategic History 
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2014).
  9.  ​See Marius Deeb and Mary Jane Deeb, Libya since the Revolution: Aspects of Social and Po­
liti­cal Development (New York: Praeger, 1982); Ruth First, Libya: The Elusive Revolution (Harmonds­
worth, UK: Penguin African Library, 1974); Dirk Vandewalle, Libya since In­de­pen­dence: Oil and 
State-­Building (Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1998); John Wright, Libya (London: Ernest Benn, 
1969).
10.  ​Vandewalle, Libya since In­de­pen­dence, xv.
11.  ​Alexander H. Montgomery, “Stop Helping Me: When Nuclear Assistance Impedes Nu-
clear Programs,” in The Nuclear Re­nais­sance and International Security, ed. Adam Stulberg and 
Matt Fuhrmann (Stanford: Stanford University Press, 2013), 177–202.
12.  ​R. Scott Kemp, “The Nonproliferation Emperor Has No Clothes: The Gas Centrifuge, 
Supply-­Side Controls, and the ­Future of Nuclear Proliferation,” International Security 38, no. 4 
(2014): 39–78.
13.  ​Sonia Ben Ouagrham-­Gormley, Barriers to Bioweapons: The Challenges of Expertise and Or­
ga­ni­za­tion for Weapons Development (Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 2014).
14.  ​See, for example, Dan Slater, “Iron Cage in an Iron Fist: Authoritarian Institutions and 
the Personalization of Power in Malaysia,” Comparative Politics 36, no. 1 (2003): 81–101; James C. 
Scott, Seeing Like a State: How Certain Schemes to Improve the ­Human Condition Have Failed (New 
Haven: Yale University Press, 1998).
15.  ​Joel S. Migdal, Strong Socie­ties and Weak States: State-­Society Relations and State Capabilities 
in the Third World (Prince­ton: Prince­ton University Press, 1988).
NOTES TO PAGES 2–5

233
NOTES TO PAGES 5–23
16.  ​Steven Levitsky and María Victoria Murillo, “Variation in Institutional Strength,” Annual 
Review of Po­liti­cal Science 12 (2009): 115–133.
17.  ​See ibid., 121.
18.  ​­Here I draw on Francis Fukuyama, “What Is Governance?,” Governance 26, no. 3 (2013): 
347–368.
19.  ​Peter B. Evans, Dietrich Rueschemeyer, and Theda Skocpol, Bringing the State Back In 
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1985).
20.  ​Levitsky and Murillo, “Variation in Institutional Strength,” 117.
21.  ​Ibid., 118.
22.  ​Output mea­sures such as successful reforms or distribution of rents are better seen as de-
pendent variables rather than indicators of state capacity. See Fukuyama, “What Is Governance?”
23.  ​Mathew McCubbins, Roger G. Noll, and Barry R. Weingast, “Administrative Procedures as 
Instruments of Po­liti­cal Control,” Journal of Law, Economics, & Or­ga­ni­za­tion 3 (Fall 1987): 243–277.
24.  ​See, for example, Matthew Evangelista, Innovation and the Arms Race: How the United States 
and the Soviet Union Develop New Military Technologies (Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1988); 
Hymans, Achieving Nuclear Ambitions.
25.  ​David Holloway, Stalin and the Bomb: The Soviet Union and Atomic Energy, 1939–1956 (New 
Haven: Yale University Press, 1994), 204.
26.  ​“Saddam Meeting with Ba‘ath Party Members to Discuss the Results of the UN Inspec-
tors’ Mission to Look for WMD,” 1995, Rec­ord No.: SH-­SHTP-­A-001-295, 6–7, CRRC Archives.
27.  ​For more details see Charles Duelfer, Comprehensive Report of the Special Advisor to the DCI 
on Iraq’s WMD (Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office, 2004), vol. 1: Regime Strate-
gic Intent.
28.  ​See, for example, Kent  D. Peterson, “Mechanisms of Administrative Control over 
Man­ag­ers in Educational Organ­izations,” Administrative Science Quarterly 29, no. 4 (1984): 
573–597.
29.  ​I explore this in more detail in an article revisiting the controversies over the 1981 Israeli 
attack on an Iraqi nuclear reactor. Målfrid Braut-­Hegghammer, “Revisiting Osirak: Preventive 
Attacks and Nuclear Proliferation Risks,” International Security 36, no. 1 (2011): 101–132.
30.  ​­These interviews ­were conducted in En­glish, except one interview with an official from 
the Libyan General ­People’s Congress who brought an interpreter to the interview.
31.  ​­These aspects have been explored in more detail elsewhere. See, for example, Kevin M. 
Woods, David D. Palkki, and Mark Stout, The Saddam Tapes: The Inner Workings of a Tyrant’s Regime, 
1978–2001 (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2011); Murray and Woods, Iran-­Iraq War.
32.  ​See, for example, Solingen, Nuclear Logics.
1. Iraq Explores the Atom, 1956–1973
  1.  ​See Målfrid Braut-­Hegghammer, “Revisiting Osirak: Preventive Attacks and Nuclear 
Proliferation Risks,” International Security 36, no. 1 (2011): 101–132.
  2.  ​Hanna Batatu, The Old Social Classes and the Revolutionary Movements of Iraq: A Study of 
Iraq’s Old Landed and Commercial Classes and of Its Communists, Ba’thists, and ­Free Officers (Prince­
ton: Prince­ton University Press, 1978), 25–26, citing the memorandum from Abd-­ur-­Razzaq 
al-­Hasani, Tarikh-­ul-­Wizarat-­il-­Iraqiyyah [History of the Iraqi Cabinets] (Sidon, 1953), 3:283–293.
  3.  ​Batatu, Old Social Classes, 5.
  4.  ​Ibid., 31.
  5.  ​Ibid., 33.
  6.  ​Ibid., 34.
  7.  ​Albert Hourani, A History of the Arab ­Peoples (London: Faber and Faber, 1991), 389.
  8.  ​Jaime Balcazar Aranibar to  U.  L. Goswami, “Iraq—­Follow-­Up Mission,” 6  February 
1962 (TA/IRQ-1), 2, IAEA Archives.
  9.  ​Batatu, Old Social Classes, 34.
10.  ​See Joseph Sassoon, Economic Policy in Iraq, 1932–1950 (New York: Frank Cass, 1987).

234
NOTES TO PAGES 23–30
11.  ​Alfred Bonné, The Economic Development of the ­Middle East: An Outline of Planned Recon-
struction ­after the War (London: Kegan Paul, Trench, Trubner, 1945), 38.
12.  ​IAEA, “Iraq Briefing Material for Preliminary Assistance Mission,” Vienna, September 
1959, TTI/STI/21 (TA/IRQ-1), 6, IAEA Archives.
13.  ​Compendium, chap. 2, 32.
14.  ​IAEA, “Iraq Briefing Material,” 6.
15.  ​For details see Mark S. Bell, “Beyond Emboldenment: How Acquiring Nuclear Weapons 
Can Change Foreign Policy,” International Security 40, no. 1 (Summer 2015): 107.
16.  ​Behcet Kemal Yesilbursa, The Baghdad Pact: Anglo-­American Defence Policies in the ­Middle 
East, 1950–59 (London: Routledge, 2004), 160.
17.  ​Arne Holmberg, ed., “John Cockcroft: Banquet Speech, Les Prix Nobel en 1951,” Stock-
holm, 1952,accessed from http://­www​.­nobelprize​.­org​/­nobel​_­prizes​/­physics​/­laureates​/­1951​
/­cockcroft​-­speech​.­html.
18.  ​Jafar Dhiya Jafar, unpublished manuscript (no title), May 13, 2004, Version 1, 3.
19.  ​John Cockcroft, “The Baghdad Pact Nuclear Training Centre,” Nature 179, no. 4567 
(1957): 936.
20.  ​Ibid.
21.  ​Jafar, unpublished manuscript, 2.
22.  ​Cockcroft, “Baghdad Pact.”
23.  ​UK Foreign Office Foreign Relations Department, Baghdad Pact estimates for 1957–1958: 
Foreign Office minute of 17 January 1957, Baghdad Pact Economic Assistance Committee, Ref. 
FO 371/127840/4, Economic Committee of Baghdad Pact, National Archives.
24.  ​Foreign Office Foreign Relation Department, “Foreign Office Supplementary Estimates 
1956–57” and “Estimates 1957–58,” “Technical Assistance ­under the Baghdad Pact,” draft re-
vised as of 11 January 1957, Baghdad Pact Economic Assistance Committee, Reference FO 
371/127840, from The National Archives (hereafter Foreign Office supplementary estimates).
25.  ​Foreign Office Foreign Relation Department, Baghdad Despatch no. 19, 17 January 1957, 
Baghdad Pact Economic Assistance Committee, Reference FO 371/127840, from the National 
Archives.
26.  ​“News of Science,” Science 127 (1958): 803–807.
27.  ​“Foreign Office Supplementary Estimates 1956–57” and “Estimates 1957–58,” Technical 
Assistance ­under the Baghdad Pact, revised as of January 11, 1957 (FO 371/127840), National 
­Archives.
28.  ​Jafar, unpublished manuscript, 4.
29.  ​Cockcroft, “Baghdad Pact.”
30.  ​Ibid.
31.  ​IAEA, “Iraq Briefing Material.”
32.  ​Cockcroft, “Baghdad Pact.”
33.  ​Jafar, unpublished manuscript, 2.
34.  ​Eugene Rogan, The Arabs: A History (New York: Basic Books, 2011), 316.
35.  ​Charles Tripp, A History of Iraq (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2007), 153.
36.  ​Batatu, Old Social Classes, 473–474.
37.  ​Ibid., 289.
38.  ​Tripp, A History of Iraq, 158.
39.  ​IAEA, “Request from the Government of Iraq (Expert),” 15 February 1967, Job Descrip-
tion (TA/IRQ/2/03), IAEA Archives.
40.  ​U.S. Directorate of Intelligence, The Iraqi Nuclear Program: Pro­gress despite Setbacks, June 
1983, 1, National Security Archive. Available at http://­nsarchive​.­gwu​.­edu​/­NSAEBB​/­NSAEBB82​
/­iraq19​.­pdf.
41.  ​I. H. Usmani, the first architect of the Pakistani nuclear program, was vice-­chairman of 
the board during this period.
42.  ​IAEA, “Iraq Briefing Material,” 11.
43.  ​Aranibar to Goswami, 6 February 1962, 5.
44.  ​Ibid., 4–5.

235
NOTES TO PAGES 30–36
45.  ​U Hla Maung, Evaluation Report on the 1961 Expanded Programme of Technical Assistance in 
Iraq, Confidential IAEA Report, 5 November 1961,(TA/IRQ/1), IAEA Archives.
46.  ​Ibid., 6–7.
47.  ​Ibid.
48.  ​Ibid., 8.
49.  ​Aranibar to Goswami, 6 February 1962, 4–5.
50.  ​This hospital was originally built and staffed by American health scientists from Loma 
Linda University, California. ­After the 1958 coup, the U.S. assistance was discontinued.
51.  ​IAEA, “Medical Isotope Applications in Iraq,” Bulletin 42 (April 1962): 26–27.
52.  ​“Aranibar to Goswami, 6 February 1962; Ralph Adams to Melvin Jenkins, Director, De-
partment of Radiology, Loma Linda University School of Medicine, California, “Site Visits to 
Radiation Therapy and Nuclear Medicine Installations in Baghdad, Iraq, October, 1971,” 17 No-
vember 1971, IAEA Archives.
53.  ​Ibid.
54.  ​See Pieter Buringh, Soils and Soil Conditions in Iraq (Baghdad: Ministry of Agriculture, 
1960).
55.  ​Aranibar to Goswami, 6 February 1962, 2.
56.  ​Ibid., 3.
57.  ​In 1962 the coordination committee was slimmed down to twenty-­one members: Ihsan 
Sulaiman, director general of the Auditing Department, Council of Ministers; Col­o­nel Duraid 
al-­Damalouji, assistant director of Military Training, Ministry of Defense; Abdul Razzak al-­
Jalili, director general of Cultural Relations Ministry of Education; Abdullah Nakishbani, 
­assistant ­director general of the Ministry of Finance; Nadhim Sarsam, inspector general of 
agriculture, Ministry of Agriculture; Sabih al-­Wahbi, director general of international relations, 
Ministry of Health; Fuad Abdullah, president of the Grain Board, Ministry of Commerce; 
Brigadier Mohamed Ali al-­Baghdadi, director of technical and engineering affairs at Abu 
Ghraib, Ministry of Guidance; Salah Izzat Tahsin, secretary-­general of the IAEC, Ministry of 
Industry; Mohamed Ali Saib, Ministry of Communications; Badi Sharif, codification officer, 
Ministry of Justice; Jamal Ahmed, director general of the ­Legal Department, Ministry of Inte-
rior; Rahim al-­Musleh, Ministry of Social Affairs; Yousef al-­Ubaidi, director general of the Plan-
ning Board; Qabtan al-­Madfa‘I, director of planning, Ministry of Municipalities; Abdulla Shakir 
al-­Sayyad, Ministry of Oil; Abbas al-­Sarraf, secretary-­general of Baghdad University; Mahdi al-­
Hassani, Ministry of Works and Housing; Abdul Mahdi Hassan, director general of industrial 
planning, Ministry of Industry; Abdul Majid al-­Qaisi, Ministry of Agrarian Reform; Usamah 
Kadry, chairman of the committee, Ministry of Foreign Affairs; and Suha al-­Turaikhi, Technical 
Assistance Department, Ministry of Foreign Affairs. Maung, Evaluation Report, 2–3.
58.  ​Ibid.
59.  ​IAEA, “Iraq Briefing Material,” 10.
60.  ​Aranibar to Goswami, 6 February 1962, 5.
61.  ​Jafar, unpublished manuscript, 5.
62.  ​Aranibar to Goswami, 6 February 1962, 1.
63.  ​Ibid.
64.  ​Tripp, History of Iraq, 169.
65.  ​Ibid., 171–172.
66.  ​Aranibar to Goswami, 6 February 1962, 4–5.
67.  ​Ibid., 4.
68.  ​A. M. Demidov, “Field Report No. 1, 13 September–6 October 1969” (TA/IRQ/1/02), 1, 
IAEA Archives.
69.  ​Ibid.
70.  ​Ibid.
71.  ​Ihsan al-­Rawi, a pharmacist, was the secretary-­general of the IAEC during the construc-
tion of the center at Tuwaitha. Jafar, unpublished manuscript, 2–4.
72.  ​Ibid., 5.
73.  ​Ibid.

236
NOTES TO PAGES 36–44
  74.  ​Dhafir Selbi, Zuhair al-­Chalabi, and Imad Khadduri, Unrevealed Milestones in Iraq’s Na-
tional Nuclear Program: 1981–1991 (CreateSpace In­de­pen­dent Publishing Platform, 2011), 18.
  75.  ​Jafar, unpublished manuscript, 6.
  76.  ​A. M. Demidov, “Final Report, 13 September, 1969–13 January, 1970” (TA/IRQ/1/02), 
2, IAEA Archives.
  77.  ​Gilbert W. Smith, “Field Report No. 2, 5 January 1969” 4, IAEA Archives.
  78.  ​Josef Kajfosz, “Field Report No. 3, 29 May–15 October 1969,” 10 November 1969 , 1, 
IAEA Archives.
  79.  ​Demidov, “Field Report No. 1.” The isotopes (silicon-30, sulphur-34, selenium-74, 76, 
77, 80, and 82) ­were on loan for a period of four to six months.
  80.  ​Tripp, History of Iraq, 190–191.
  81.  ​Ibid., 190.
  82.  ​Compendium, chap. 2, 32–38.
  83.  ​Ministry of Education, Development of Education in Iraq during 1976/77 and 1977/78 A 
report presented to the XXXVII session of the International Conference on Education, Palais 
Wilson, Geneva, 5–14 July 1979 (Baghdad: University of Baghdad Press, 1979), 11.
  84.  ​UNESCO, Situation Analy­sis of Education in Iraq (Paris: UNESCO, 2003), 48. Available at 
http://­unesdoc​.­unesco​.­org​/­images​/­0013​/­001308​/­130838e​.­pdf.
  85.  ​Ministry of Education, Development of Education, 28.
  86.  ​Compendium, chap. 2, 38.
  87.  ​Ministry of Education, Development of Education, 29.
  88.  ​Compendium, chap. 2, 38.
  89.  ​Ibid., chap. 7, 1053.
  90.  ​Tripp, History of Iraq, 188–189.
  91.  ​Jafar, unpublished manuscript, 7.
  92.  ​Similar institutional arrangements ­were made in the chemical and biological weapons 
programs emerging in Iraq at this time. See Compendium, chap. 2, 33.
  93.  ​Kajfosz, “Field Report No. 3,” 2.
  94.  ​Jafar, unpublished manuscript, 7.
  95.  ​Ibid., 12.
  96.  ​Ibid., 48.
  97.  ​Smith, “Field Report No. 2,” 4.
  98.  ​Ibid., 4; Demidov, “Final Report,” 2.
  99.  ​Smith, “Field Report No. 2,” 3.
100.  ​Jafar, unpublished manuscript, 6.
101.  ​Kajfosz, “Field Report No. 3,” 3.
102.  ​Ibid., 3–4.
103.  ​Ibid.
104.  ​Demidov, “Final Report,” 3.
105.  ​Jafar, unpublished manuscript, 9.
106.  ​Demidov, “Final Report,” 3.
107.  ​Jafar, unpublished manuscript, 10.
108.  ​Ibid., 16.
109.  ​Ibid., 12.
110.  ​Hussein Shahristani, author interview, Oslo, November 2011.
111.  ​Jafar, unpublished manuscript, 13.
112.  ​Shahristani interview.
113.  ​Charles Duelfer, Comprehensive Report of the Special Advisor to the DCI on Iraq’s WMD 
(Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office, 2004), vol. 1: Regime Strategic Intent, 19.
114.  ​“President Saddam Hussein Presiding over a Meeting with the Iraqi Revolutionary Com-
mand Council to Discuss the ‘Arab Stan crisis,” undated, Rec­ord No.: SH-­SHTP-­A-001-400, 
CRRC Archives.

237
NOTES TO PAGES 47–54
2. Ambiguity and Ambition, 1973–1981
  1.  ​Anoushiravan Ehteshami, “Oil, Arms Procurement and Security in the Persian Gulf,” 
Asian Affairs 34, no. 3 (2003): 261; Jahangir Amuzegar, Managing the Oil Wealth: OPEC’s 
Windfalls and Pitfalls (London: I.B. Tauris, 1999), 216; Compendium, chap. 2, 32; Ahmed Hashim, 
“Saddam Husayn and Civil-­Military Relations in Iraq: The Quest for Legitimacy and Power,” 
­Middle East Journal 57, no. 1 (2003): 25.
  2.  ​Hashim, “Saddam Husayn,” 26; Andrew Parasiliti and Sinan Antoon, “Friends in Need, 
Foes to Heed: The Iraqi Military in Politics,” ­Middle East Policy 7, no. 4 (2000): 135.
  3.  ​Cited in Simon Henderson, Instant Empire: Saddam Hussein’s Ambition for Iraq (San Fran-
cisco: Mercury House, 1991), 124.
  4.  ​Compendium, chap. 2, 32–33.
  5.  ​Ibid., chap. 5, 768.
  6.  ​Jafar Dhiya Jafar, unpublished manuscript (no title), Version 1, May 13, 2004, 15.
  7.  ​Moyasser al-­Mallah, Secretary-­General of the IAEC, to  A.  E. Cairo, IAEA, Vienna, 
12 September 1973 (TA/IRQ/3), IAEA Archives.
  8.  ​M. Mutru, Head of Eu­rope and ­Middle East Section, Division of Technical Assistance, 
IAEA, to S. M. Mahmood, Director of the International Relations Division, IAEC, 1 November 
1979, IAEA Archives.
  9.  ​Jafar, unpublished manuscript, 15.
10.  ​Omar Adeel, Resident UN Representative in Baghdad, to U. L. Goswami, Department 
of Technical Assistance and Safeguards, 7 August 1973 (TA/IRQ/3/02), 1, IAEA Archives.
11.  ​Imad Khadduri, Iraq’s Nuclear Mirage: Memoirs and Delusions (Toronto: Springhead, 2003), 54.
12.  ​UK Cabinet Office, ­Middle East Nuclear, Secret, 15 September 1980, Israel: Nuclear En-
ergy ­Matters, File: MEN 166/408/1, Rabinowitz Papers.
13.  ​Charles Duelfer, Comprehensive Report of the Special Advisor to the DCI on Iraq’s WMD 
(Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office, 2004), vol. 1: Regime Strategic Intent, 30.
14.  ​U.S. Embassy Paris Cable 15305 to Department of State, “Interview with Shah,” 24 June 
1974, unclassified, National Security Archive. Available at http://­nsarchive​.­gwu​.­edu​/­nukevault​
/­ebb268​/­doc01a​.­pdf.
15.  ​Khalil Ibrahim al-­‘Azawi, “The Third Study: Objectives and Strategic Specifics of Nuclear 
Armament in the Period Succeeding the Shah,” 6 February 1994, Rec­ord No.: SH-­GMID-​
D-000-342, CRRC Archives.
16.  ​Jafar Dhiya Jafar, author interview, Rome, 4–5 May 2005.
17.  ​Charles Tripp, A History of Iraq (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2007), 206.
18.  ​Ibid., 207.
19.  ​Jafar, unpublished manuscript, 16.
20.  ​Mutru to Mahmood, 1 November 1979.
21.  ​IAEC to A. E. Cairo, Department of Technical Assistance, IAEA, from the, 20 November 
1973 (SC/512-­IRQ), IAEA Archives.
22.  ​Jafar, unpublished manuscript, 18.
23.  ​“Iraq, Assistance Required, Research Reactor Upgrading,” GOV/COM.8/64/Add.1 
(GOV/1922/Add.1), Request from the Government of Iraq, 15 February 1967 (TA/IRQ/2/03), 
IAEA Archives.
24.  ​Jed C. Snyder, “The Road to Osiraq: Baghdad’s Quest for the Bomb,” ­Middle East Journal 
(1983): 568–569.
25.  ​Leonard S. Spector, Nuclear Proliferation ­Today: The Spread of Nuclear Weapons (New York: 
Vintage Books, 1984), 167.
26.  ​Jafar, unpublished manuscript, 17.
27.  ​Duelfer, Comprehensive Report, 1:30.
28.  ​Jafar, unpublished manuscript, 17.
29.  ​Spector, Nuclear Proliferation ­Today, 167.
30.  ​See Målfrid Braut-­Hegghammer, “Revisiting Osirak: Preventive Attacks and Nuclear Pro-
liferation Risks,” International Security 36, no. 1 (2011): 111–112. For one scenario see Richard 

238
NOTES TO PAGES 54–59
Wilson, “A Visit to the Bombed Nuclear Reactor at Tuwaitha, Iraq,” Nature 302 (31 March 
1983): 376.
31.  ​Hans Gruemm, “Safeguards Verification: Its Credibility and the Diversion Hypothesis,” 
IAEA Bulletin 25, no. 4 (1983): 27.
32.  ​“Estimation of Feasible Unreported Plutonium Production in Thermal Research Reac-
tors in the Potential Nuclear Weapon States,” Los Alamos National Laboratory, January 1997 
(LA-13209-­MS). Available at http://­www​.­fas​.­org​/­sgp​/­othergov​/­doe​/­lanl​/­lib​-­www​/­la​-­pubs​
/­00412501​.­pdf.
33.  ​Ibid.
34.  ​CRS, How Long Would It Take for Iraq to Obtain a Nuclear Explosive ­after Its Research Reactor 
Began Operation?, CRS Report for Congress, House Committee on Foreign Affairs, Hearings: 
­Israeli Attack on Iraqi Nuclear Fa­cil­i­ty, 97th Cong., 1st sess., 25 June 1981.
35.  ​Mahdi Obeidi and Kurt Pitzer, The Bomb in My Garden: The Secrets of Saddam’s Nuclear 
Mastermind (Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons, 2004), 48.
36.  ​Ibid.; Jafar, unpublished manuscript.
37.  ​Khadduri, Iraq’s Nuclear Mirage, 73; Dhafir Selbi, Zuhair Al-­Chalabi, and Imad Khadduri, 
Unrevealed Milestones in Iraq’s National Nuclear Program: 1981–1991 (CreateSpace In­de­pen­dent 
Publishing Platform, 2011), 25.
38.  ​Khadduri, Iraq’s Nuclear Mirage, 75–76.
39.  ​Ibid., 64–65.
40.  ​Jafar, unpublished manuscript, 16–19.
41.  ​Giulio Andreotti, President of the Council of Ministers, to General Saddam Hussein, Vice-­
Chairman of the Revolutionary Command Council, Baghdad, 31 December 1976, Nuti Papers.
42.  ​CAFCD, extended summary, 3.
43.  ​Italian Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Letter to the Minister, 077, Stamped by the General 
Secretariat on 28 September 1976, Rome, 24 September 1976., Nuti Papers.
44.  ​Minister Plenipotentiary Umberto La Rocca, Diplomatic Adviser to the Prime Minister, 
Italian Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Directorate General for Economic Affairs 077/ 17771, Rome, 
14 October 1976, Nuti Papers.
45.  ​Italian Ministry of Foreign Affairs 077/ Office VII, Classified, Letter, Subject: Italy-­Iraq 
Nuclear Cooperation—­Safeguards Agreements, Rome, 14 July 1979, Nuti Papers.
46.  ​Ministerial Tele­gram, Italdipl Bagdad, date 10 July 1979, Extremely Urgent, “Subject: 
Italy-­Iraq Nuclear Cooperation,” Nuti Papers.
47.  ​Italian Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Secret: Urgent, N.060/18135, Rome, 20 October 1977, 
Giulio Andreotti to Carlo Donat-­Cattin (Ministry of Industry) and in copy Arnaldo Forlani (Min-
ister of Foreign Affairs), Rome, 26 October 1977, Nuti Papers.
48.  ​U.S. Directorate of Intelligence, The Iraqi Nuclear Program: Pro­gress despite Setbacks, June 
1983, 12, National Security Archive. Available at http://­nsarchive​.­gwu​.­edu​/­NSAEBB​
/­NSAEBB82​/­iraq19​.­pdf.
49.  ​Ibid.
50.  ​IAEA, Fourth Consolidated Report of the Director General of the International Atomic Energy 
Agency ­under Paragraph 16 of Security Council Resolution 1051 (1996), S/1997/779, 8 October 1997, 
appendix, 25. Available at https://­www​.­iaea​.­org​/­OurWork​/­SV​/­Invo​/­reports​/­s​_­1997​_­779​.­pdf.
51.  ​Ibid., 26.
52.  ​Selbi et al., Unrevealed Milestones, 24.
53.  ​Jafar, unpublished manuscript, 25.
54.  ​Ibid.
55.  ​CAFCD, part 2a, chap. 4.1.1, Electromagnetic Isotope Separation (EMIS), 4.1.1, strategy 1.
56.  ​See also Braut-­Hegghammer, “Revisiting Osirak,” 107.
57.  ​Selbi et al., Unrevealed Milestones, 19.
58.  ​Ibid., 20.
59.  ​Gunther H. Haase, “Field Report No. 1, 31 January–28 February 1979,” 1 March 1979, 3, 
IAEA Archives.
60.  ​Ibid.
61.  ​Selbi et al., Unrevealed Milestones, 22.

239
NOTES TO PAGES 59–66
62.  ​Ibid., 23.
63.  ​Haase, “Field Report No. 1,” 1.
64.  ​Ibid., 3.
65.  ​Khadduri, Iraq’s Nuclear Mirage, 67–68.
66.  ​Ibid.
67.  ​CAFCD, extended summary, 5.
68.  ​Jafar, unpublished manuscript, 35.
69.  ​Obeidi and Pitzer, Bomb in My Garden, 50.
70.  ​For details see Uri Bar-­Joseph, Michael Handel, and Amos Perlmutter, Two Minutes over 
Baghdad (London: Routledge, 2003).
71.  ​Saddam and His Advisers Discussing Iraq’s Decision to Go to War with Iran,” 16 Sep-
tember 1980, Rec­ord No.: SH-­SHTP-­A-000-835, CRRC Archives (hereafter SH-­SHTP-­A-000-835).
72.  ​“Transcript of a Speech Given by Saddam Hussein on ‘The Role of the Iraqi Armed Forces 
in the Arab-­Zionist Conflict’ at Al Bakr University,” Document Date: 3 June 1978, Rec­ord No.: 
SH-­PDWN-­D-000-341, 28, CRRC Archives (hereafter SH-­PDWN-­D-000-341).
73.  ​Tripp, A History of Iraq, 211–212.
74.  ​Ibid., 228.
75.  ​Hussein, Iraqi Policies in Perspective, 9.
76.  ​Ibid.
77.  ​Duelfer, Comprehensive Report, 1:28.
78.  ​Saddam stated: “The Arab atom ­will finish them off, but the Israeli atom ­will not finish 
the Arabs. But when the atom does not have a match on the other side, it would end the ­battle.” 
SH-­PDWN-­D-000-341.
79.  ​Meeting between Saddam Hussein and Nijirfan al-­Barzani regarding the Situation in Iraq 
and Possibility of U.S. Attack, 14 March 2002, Rec­ord No.: SH-­SPPC-­D-000-304, 10, CRRC Ar-
chives.
80.  ​“Transcript of a Meeting between Saddam Hussein and His Commanding Officers at the 
Armed Forces General Command,” 22 November 1980, Rec­ord No.: SH-­SHTP-­D-000-856, 45, 
CRRC Archives.
81.  ​“Revolutionary Command Council Meeting,” 27 March 1979, Rec­ord No.: SH-­SHTP-­​
A-000-553, 10, CRRC Archives.
82.  ​Meeting between Saddam Hussein and His Se­nior Advisers Following the Israeli At-
tack on Osirak, undated, Rec­ord No.: SH-­SHTP-­A-001-480, CRRC Archives.
83.  ​Saddam Hussein, Iraqi Policies in Perspective, 13–15.
84.  ​Hal Brands and David Palkki, “Saddam, Israel, and the Bomb: Nuclear Alarmism Justi-
fied?,” International Security 36, no. 1 (2011): 133–166.
85.  ​Meeting between Saddam Hussein and His Commanders regarding the Iran-­Iraq War, 
undated (­after 23 September 1980), Rec­ord No.: SH-­SHTP-­D-000-846, 39, CRRC Archives (here-
after SHTP-­D-000-846).
86.  ​Hussein Shahristani, author interview, Oslo, November 2011.
87.  ​Ibid.; Jafar interview; Imad Khadduri, interview by author, Toronto, Canada, March 31, 
2005.
88.  ​Claudia Wright, “Iraq—­New Power in the ­Middle East,” Foreign Affairs 58 (Winter 1979–
1980): 267.
89.  ​Ibid., 268.
90.  ​Jafar, unpublished manuscript, 23.
91.  ​Khadduri, Iraq’s Nuclear Mirage, 78.
92.  ​Jafar, unpublished manuscript, 29.
93.  ​Despite some claims to the contrary; see Etel Solingen, Nuclear Logics: Contrasting Paths 
in East Asia and the ­Middle East (Prince­ton: Prince­ton University Press, 2009), 157.
94.  ​Ibid.; Jafar Dhiya Jafar, Numan Saadaldin al-­Niaimi, and Lars Sigurd Sunnanå, Oppdraget: 
Innsidehistorien om Saddams atomvåpen [The mission: The inside story of Saddam’s nuclear weap-
ons] (Oslo: Spartacus, 2005).
95.  ​Jafar, unpublished manuscript, 33.
96.  ​Ibid., 38.

240
NOTES TO PAGES 66–74
  97.  ​Shahristani ­interview.
  98.  ​Ibid.
  99.  ​Ibid.
100.  ​SH-­SHTP-­A-000-835.
101.  ​Discussion between Saddam Hussein and Iraqi High-­Ranking Officers regarding the 
Iraqi Society Situation, undated, Rec­ord No.: SH-­SHTP-­A-001-323, CRRC Archives.
102.  ​Meeting between Saddam Hussein and His Commanding Officers at the Armed Forces 
General Command regarding Preparing Forces for ­Battle, Estimated Document Date: Novem-
ber 1980Record No.: SH-­SHTP-­D-000-847, 7, CRRC Archives (hereafter SH-­SHTP-­D-000-847).
103.  ​SH-­SHTP-­D-000-846, 39.
104.  ​Khadduri, Iraq’s Nuclear Mirage, 72.
105.  ​Ibid., ­71.
106.  ​SH-­SHTP-­D-000-847, 25.
107.  ​Ibid.
108.  ​“Saddam and Se­nior Iraqi Officials Discussing the Conflict with Iran, Iraqi Targets and 
Plans, a Recent Attack on the Osirak Reactor, and Vari­ous Foreign Countries,” Document Date: 
1 October 1980, Rec­ord No.: SH-­MISC-­D-000-827, 11, CRRC Archives.
109.  ​Ibid.
110.  ​Selbi et al., Unrevealed Milestones, 26.
111.  ​Ibid.
112.  ​U.S. Deputy Director for National Foreign Assessment, “Request for Review of Draft 
Paper on the Security Dimension of Nonproliferation,” 9 April 1981, 9, National Security Ar-
chive. Also available at https://­www​.­documentcloud​.­org​/­documents​/­347018​-­doc​-­5​-­4​-­9​-­81​
-­state​-­dept​-­draft​-­paper​.­html.
3. Saddam’s Nuclear Weapons Program, 1981–1987
    1.  ​See, for example, Jeremy Tamsett, “The Israeli Bombing of Osiraq Reconsidered: Suc-
cessful Counterproliferation?” Nonproliferation Review 11, no. 3 (2004): 70–85, 114–142; Dan Re-
iter, “Preventive Attacks against Nuclear Programs and the ‘Success’ at Osiraq,” Nonproliferation 
Review 12, no. 2 (2005): 355–371; Richard K. Betts, “The Osirak Fallacy,” National Interest 83 
(2006): 22–25.
    2.  ​Iraqi Atomic Energy Commission, “Preface,” in Iraqi Nuclear Programme, 1956–1991 
(Baghdad: Al-­Adib, 1992), vii.
    3.  ​U.S. Interagency Intelligence Assessment, “Implications of Israeli Attack on Iraq,” 
1 July 1981, 8, National Security Archive (hereafter “Implications of Israeli Attack on Iraq”).
    4.  ​Dhafir Selbi, Zuhair Al-­Chalabi, and Imad Khadduri, Unrevealed Milestones in Iraq’s Na-
tional Nuclear Program: 1981–1991 (CreateSpace In­de­pen­dent Publishing Platform, 2011), 27.
    5.  ​“Factfile: How Osirak Was Bombed,” BBC News, http://­news​.­bbc​.­co​.­uk​/­2​/­hi​/­middle​
_­east​/­5020778​.­stm.
    6.  ​Selbi et al., Unrevealed Milestones, 28.
    7.  ​President Saddam Hussein’s Speech on National Day (1981), Thirteenth Anniversary of the 
17–30 July 1968 Revolution, trans. Naji Al-­Hadithi (Baghdad: Dar Al-­Ma’mun, 1981), 17.
    8.  ​Sa’adoun Hammadi , The Israeli Aggression against the Peaceful Nuclear Installations in 
Iraq: Statement Made by Dr. Sa’adoun Hammadi, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Iraq, before the Se-
curity Council, 12 June 1981 (Baghdad: Ministry of Foreign Affairs, 1981), 4.
    9.  ​Ibid.
  10.  ​Ibid., 12.
  11.  ​“Implications of Israeli Attack on Iraq,” 4.
  12.  ​Ibid., 4–8.
  13.  ​Ibid., 8.
  14.  ​Hans Gruemm, Deputy, “Safeguards and Tamuz: Setting the Rec­ord Straight,” Interna-
tional Atomic Energy Agency Bulletin 23, no. 4 (1981): 10–14.

241
NOTES TO PAGES 74–83
15.  ​IAEA, “Text of the Statement Made by the Director General to the Security Council,” GC 
(XXV)/INF/196/Rev.1, , 4, Annex, 3. Available at https://­www​.­iaea​.­org​/­About​/­Policy​/­GC​
/­GC25​/­GC25InfDocuments​/­English​/­gc25inf​-­196​-­rev1​_­en​.­pdf. See also Sigvard Eklund, 
“Peaceful Nuclear Development Must Continue,” International Atomic Energy Agency Bulletin 23, 
no. 3 (1981): 3.
16.  ​Eklund, “Peaceful Nuclear Development,” 3.
17.  ​UN Security Council Resolution 487 (1981), ­adopted on 19 June 1981.
18.  ​Ibid., 1.
19.  ​“Implications of Israeli Attack on Iraq,” 2.
20.  ​Selbi et al., Unrevealed Milestones, 29.
21.  ​Ibid.
22.  ​Jafar Dhiya Jafar, unpublished manuscript (no title), Version 1, May 13, 2004, 38.
23.  ​Jafar Dhiya Jafar, author interview, Rome, 4–5 May 2005.
24.  ​President Saddam Hussein Interviewed on Zionist Raid on Iraqi Reactor, trans. Naji Al-­Hadithi 
(Baghdad: Dar Al-­Ma’mun for Translation and Publishing, 1981), 10–11. This is the Iraqi tran-
script of Barbara Walters’s interview with Saddam Hussein on 28 June 1981 for the ABC network.
25.  ​President Hussein’s Press Conference on Iraq’s Internal, Arab and International Policies (July 19, 
1981) (Baghdad: Dar Al-­Ma’mun for Translation and Publishing, 1981), 14.
26.  ​President Saddam Hussein Addresses Cabinet of Conflict with Iran, trans. Namir A. Mudhaf-
fer (Baghdad: Dar Al-­Ma’mun for Translation and Publishing, 1981), 17.
27.  ​“Saddam Meeting with His Cabinet to Discuss the 1982 Bud­get,” undated (c. 1982), Rec­
ord Number: SH-­SHTP-­A-000-635, 21, CRRC Archives.
28.  ​Jafar, unpublished manuscript, 39.
29.  ​Ibid., 35.
30.  ​Ibid., 36.
31.  ​Ibid.
32.  ​Charles Tripp, A History of Iraq (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2007), 226.
33.  ​Compendium, chap. 2, 34.
34.  ​Ibid., 35.
35.  ​Ibid., 139.
36.  ​Ibid., 140.
37.  ​Ibid.
38.  ​Ibid., 151.
39.  ​Ibid., 153.
40.  ​UNSCOM, “Note for the File: Meeting at Military Industrial Commission,” 1 July 1995, 
Ekéus Papers.
41.  ​Jafar, unpublished manuscript, 49.
42.  ​Steven Heydemann, War, Institutions, and Social Change in the ­Middle East (London: Uni-
versity of California Press, 2000), 273.
43.  ​Charles Duelfer, “Addendums to the Comprehensive Report of the Special Advisor to 
the DCI on Iraq’s WMD,” March 2005, 39. Available at https://­www​.­cia​.­gov​/­library​/­reports​
/­general​-­reports​-­1​/­iraq​_­wmd​_­2004​/­addenda​.­pdf.
44.  ​UNSCOM, “Note for the File: Rolf Ekéus Meeting with Tariq Aziz, Deputy Prime Min-
ister of Iraq,” 5 August 1995, 8–12, Ekéus Papers.
45.  ​CAFCD, part 1, chap. 3, 2–3.
46.  ​Jafar, unpublished manuscript, 39.
47.  ​CAFCD, part 1, chap. 1, 9.
48.  ​Selbi et al., Unrevealed Milestones, 38.
49.  ​Ibid.
50.  ​Ibid., 18–19.
51.  ​CAFCD, part 1, chap. 1, 10–11.
52.  ​Robert E. Kelley, “The Iraqi and South African Nuclear Weapon Programs: The Impor-
tance of Management,” Security Dialogue 27, no. 1 (1996): 27–38.
53.  ​Jafar, unpublished manuscript, 43–44.
54.  ​Ibid.

242
NOTES TO PAGES 83–97
  55.  ​Ibid., 4; CAFCD, part 1, chap. 2, 1.
  56.  ​CAFCD, part 1, chap. 2, 1.
  57.  ​Jafar, unpublished manuscript, 49.
  58.  ​Iraqi nuclear scientist, author interview, Doha, 17 November 2006.
  59.  ​Ibid.
  60.  ​For more on this collaboration see Jafar, unpublished manuscript, 54–57.
  61.  ​CAFCD, extended summary, 6.
  62.  ​Ibid., 25.
  63.  ​Jafar, unpublished manuscript, 66.
  64.  ​Ibid., 124.
  65.  ​CAFCD, part 1, chap. 2, 1.
  66.  ​Compendium, chap. 7, 1044–1045.
  67.  ​CAFCD, part 1, chap. 3, 12.
  68.  ​Ibid., chap. 1, 8.
  69.  ​Ibid., part 2a, chap. 1, 1.
  70.  ​Ibid., part 1, chap. 1, 10–11.
  71.  ​Ibid.
  72.  ​Iraqi nuclear scientist interview.
  73.  ​CAFCD, part 1, chaps. 1, 2, 15.
  74.  ​Selbi et al., Unrevealed Milestones, 59.
  75.  ​CAFCD, extended summary, 9.
  76.  ​Jafar, unpublished manuscript, 41.
  77.  ​CAFCD, part 1.1, 9.
  78.  ​Mahdi Obeidi and Kurt Pitzer, The Bomb in My Garden: The Secrets of Saddam’s Nuclear 
Mastermind (Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons, 2004), 54.
  79.  ​Jafar, unpublished manuscript, 67.
  80.  ​Ibid., 45.
  81.  ​CAFCD, part 2a, chap. 4, 4.1.1, 1.
  82.  ​Ibid., part 5, chap. 11, 11.
  83.  ​Compendium, chap. 7, 1047.
  84.  ​CAFCD, part 5, chap. 11, Achievements, 1–2.
  85.  ​Ibid.
  86.  ​Jafar, unpublished manuscript, 68.
  87.  ​CAFCD, part 5, chap. 11, Achievements, 3–4.
  88.  ​Ibid.
  89.  ​Jafar, unpublished manuscript, 64.
  90.  ​Ibid.
  91.  ​Ibid., 63–64.
  92.  ​CAFCD, part 1, chap. 1, 1.2.1, 8.
  93.  ​Ibid., part 5, chap. 11, Achievements, 5.
  94.  ​Compendium, chap. 7, Interlinks between Iraq’s Weapons Programmes, 1049.
  95.  ​Ibid., 1051.
  96.  ​CAFCD, part 5, chap. 11, Achievements,14–15.
  97.  ​Jafar, unpublished manuscript, 20.
  98.  ​CAFCD, part 5, chap. 11, Achievements, 14–15.
  99.  ​Ibid., 16.
100.  ​Ibid.
101.  ​Selbi et al., Unrevealed Milestones, 41–44.
102.  ​Ibid.
103.  ​Ibid.
104.  ​Compendium, chap. 5, Biological Weapons Programme, 152.
105.  ​Selbi et al., Unrevealed Milestones, 45–46.
106.  ​Jafar, unpublished manuscript, 56.
107.  ​Selbi et al., Unrevealed Milestones, 26.
108.  ​Kelley, “Iraqi and South African Nuclear Weapons Programs.”

243
NOTES TO PAGES 98–110
109.  ​Selbi et al., 58–59.
110.  ​Ibid., 59–60.
111.  ​Ibid.
112.  ​Iraqi nuclear scientist interview.
113.  ​Selbi et al., Unrevealed Milestones, 48.
114.  ​Ibid., 51.
115.  ​Ibid., 49.
116.  ​Ibid.
117.  ​Jafar, unpublished manuscript, 50.
118.  ​Ibid., 51.
119.  ​Ibid.
120.  ​Selbi et al., Unrevealed Milestones, 80.
121.  ​Duelfer, “Addendums,” 40.
122.  ​Simon Henderson, Instant Empire: Saddam Hussein’s Ambition for Iraq (San Francisco: Mer-
cury House, 1991), 88–89.
123.  ​Jafar, unpublished manuscript, 52.
124.  ​“Note for the File: Meeting between General Hussein Kamal, Ambassador Rolf Ekéus, 
Prof. Maurizio Zifferero, Nikita Smidovich, Amman 22 August 1995, UNSCOM/IAEA Sensi-
tive.” Available at http://­www​.­informationclearinghouse​.­info​/­pdf​/­unscom950822​.­pdf.
125.  ​CAFCD, part 3a, chap. 5, Device Development., 2.
126.  ​Ibid.
127.  ​Ibid.; Jafar, unpublished manuscript, 52–53.
128.  ​Jafar, unpublished manuscript, 77.
4. Crises and a Crash Program, 1988–1991
    1.  ​Dhafir Selbi, Zuhair Al-­Chalabi, and Imad Khadduri, Unrevealed Milestones in Iraq’s Na-
tional Nuclear Program: 1981–1991 (CreateSpace In­de­pen­dent Publishing Platform, 2011), 83–84.
    2.  ​Ibid.
    3.  ​Jafar Dhiya Jafar, unpublished manuscript (no title), May 13, 2004, 15, 57.
    4.  ​“Correspondence from the Presidential Cabinet regarding Designation of a New Ad-
ministration for the Iraqi Atomic Energy Department,” 1 April 1988, Rec­ord No.: SH-PDWN-
D-000-419, CRRC Archives.
    5.  ​For example, he had taken charge of a large new undertaking called Petrochemical Proj­ect 
2 and selected a group of experts from the oil ministry to join this separate effort. Simon Henderson, 
Instant Empire: Saddam Hussein’s Ambition for Iraq (San Francisco: Mercury House, 1991), 49–50.
    6.  ​Mahdi Obeidi and Kurt Pitzer, The Bomb in My Garden: The Secrets of Saddam’s Nuclear 
Mastermind (Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons, 2004), 158.
    7.  ​Selbi et al., Unrevealed Milestones, 70–71.
    8.  ​Ibid.
    9.  ​Obeidi and Pitzer, Bomb in My Garden.
  10.  ​CAFCD, part 1, chap. 3, 3.1, 1.
  11.  ​Ibid., 10.
  12.  ​Ibid., part 2b, chap. 4.4, 72–73.
  13.  ​Ibid., part 1, chap. 1, 23–38.
  14.  ​Ibid.
  15.  ​Ibid., extended summary, 33–34.
  16.  ​Ibid.
  17.  ​Ibid., 32.
  18.  ​See Obeidi and Pitzer, Bomb in My Garden, 92.
  19.  ​CAFCD, part 2b, chap. 4.4, 4.
  20.  ​Ibid., 4–6. See also Obeidi and Pitzer, Bomb in My Garden.
  21.  ​CAFCD, part 2b, chap. 4.4, 6–7.

244
NOTES TO PAGES 110–116
22.  ​Ibid., extended summary, 33–34.
23.  ​David Albright and Mark Hibbs, “Supplier-­Spotting,” Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists 
(January–­February 1993): 8.
24.  ​Ibid.
25.  ​See, for example, Jeff Gerth, “Atom Bomb Parts Seized in Britain En Route to Iraq,” New 
York Times, 29 March 1990; “Iraq’s ­Silent Allies in Its Quest for the Bomb,” Businessweek, 13 Jan-
uary 1991.
26.  ​Elaine Sciolino, “Iraq’s Nuclear Program Shows the Holes in U.S. Intelligence,” New York 
Times, 20 October 1991.
27.  ​Obeidi and Pitzer, Bomb in My Garden, 120.
28.  ​CAFCD, extended summary, 35.
29.  ​Ibid., part 2b, chap. 4.4, 4–6.
30.  ​Ibid.
31.  ​Ibid., part 1, chap. 1, 12–15.
32.  ​Ibid, part 5, chap. 11, 22.
33.  ​Ibid, 17.
34.  ​CAFCD, part 5, chap. 11, 23.
35.  ​Jafar, unpublished manuscript, 64; Selbi et al., Unrevealed Milestones, 122.
36.  ​CAFCD, part 2a, chap. 4.1, 4–5.
37.  ​Ibid., part 5, chap. 11, 6–8.
38.  ​Ibid.
39.  ​Ibid., 20–23.
40.  ​Ibid., part 3a, chap. 5.1, 1.
41.  ​Ibid., part 1, chap. 1, 1.2.3, 27.
42.  ​Jafar, unpublished manuscript, 78.
43.  ​CAFCD, part 3a, chap. 5, 3–6.
44.  ​CAFCD, part 5, chap. 11, 11.3 Nuclear Device Development, 49.
45.  ​CAFCD, part 3a), chap. 5, 5.2.4, 6. S/1997/779, Attachment 1, 56.
46.  ​S/1997/779, Attachment 1, 56.
47.  ​CAFCD, part 3a), chap. 5, 5.2.4, 6.
48.  ​Ibid.
49.  ​Ibid., part 3a, chap. 5.7, 28.
50.  ​Ibid., 17.
51.  ​Ibid.
52.  ​CAFCD, part 3a, chap. 5.2. 3.
53.  ​Jafar, unpublished manuscript, 79.
54.  ​Selbi et al., Unrevealed Milestones, 98.
55.  ​CAFCD, part 3a, chap. 5.2, 17–18.
56.  ​Ibid., part 3a, chap. 5.2 5.
57.  ​Selbi et al., Unrevealed Milestones, 97.
58.  ​CAFCD, part 3a, chap. 5.3, 36–37.
59.  ​Ibid., 38.
60.  ​Ibid., part 3a, chap. 5.2, 26.
61.  ​Jafar, unpublished manuscript, 78–80.
62.  ​Ibid., 82.
63.  ​“Meeting between Saddam and Se­nior Iraqi Officials Discussing the Execution of British 
Journalist Farzad Bazoft, Modifications to Iraq’s Constitution, and an Israeli Attack on Iraq’s 
­Nuclear Reactor”, undated (­after 1981 Israeli strike on Osirak reactor), Rec­ord No.: SH-­
SHTP-­A-000-910, CRRC Archives, 5. Available at http://­crrc​.­dodlive​.­mil​/­files​/­2013​/­01​/­SH​
-­SHTP​-­A​-­000​-­910​_­English​.­pdf.
64.  ​“The Impact of a 20-­Kiloton Nuclear Bomb on the City of Baghdad,” Deputy Director of 
the Nuclear Energy Or­ga­ni­za­tion, Presidency of the Republic Secretariat, General Security Di-
rectorate Number: (IL) 51723, 29 December 1990, Top Secret and Confidential, CRRC Archives; 
Handwritten note, 19 November 1990, Ministry of Interior, Supreme Control Command, nr. 88, 

245
NOTES TO PAGES 116–121
top secret and confidential, meeting minutes, Office of the Presidency, 18:00 hours on 17 No-
vember 1990, SH-­idgs-­d-001-4311.pdf, CRRC archives.
65.  ​CAFCD, extended summary, 25–26.
66.  ​“Minutes of Meeting the President of Iraq: Saddam Hussein with the President of 
­Yemen: Ali ‘Abdallah Salih,” 8 April 1990, Rec­ord No.: SH-­MISC-­D-000-652, CRRC Archives.
67.  ​Ali al-­Dabagh interview with Tariq Aziz, Parts 1 and 2 [this interview took place in sum-
mer 2010 but was given to Al-­Arabiya News Channel by Al-­Dabagh in spring 2013], translated 
by Mohammed Baban. Available at http://­crrc​.­dodlive​.­mil​/­2013​/­07​/­23​/­crrc​-­releases​
-­translation​-­of​-­interview​-­with​-­tariq​-­aziz/.
68.  ​Al-­Dabagh interview with Aziz.
69.  ​Jafar, unpublished manuscript, 86.
70.  ​Joseph Sassoon, Saddam Hussein’s Ba‘th Party: Inside an Authoritarian Regime (Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 2011), 145.
71.  ​CAFCD, extended summary, 45–46, citing 18 August as the date of the order.
72.  ​Ibid.
73.  ​Jafar, unpublished manuscript, 86–7.
74.  ​Jafar Dhiya Jafar, author interview, Rome, 4–5 May 2005.
75.  ​CAFCD, part 5, chap. 5.11, 1.
76.  ​See UN Security Council Report, Appendix, S/1997/779, 17–18, and Attachment 1, 1.3: 
“The Intended Diversion of Research Reactor Fuel”, 48; Charles Duelfer, Comprehensive Report 
of the Special Advisor to the DCI on Iraq’s WMD (Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Of-
fice, 2004), vol. 1: Regime Strategic Intent, appendix, 3.
77.  ​Jafar, unpublished manuscript, 87.
78.  ​Ibid.
79.  ​CAFCD, part 3b, chap. 5.11, 1.
80.  ​Ibid., extended summary, 47.
81.  ​Ibid., 18.
82.  ​Ibid., 21.
83.  ​Ibid., 19.
84.  ​Ibid., 50.
85.  ​Ibid., 48.
86.  ​Ibid., 56.
87.  ​Ibid., 64.
88.  ​Ibid., 45.
89.  ​“Correspondence between the Military Industrialization Commission and the Petro 
Chemical Group regarding Letter from A.Q. Khan Offering Assistance to the Iraqi Government 
in Developing a Uranium Enrichment Program,” Estimated Document Date: October 1990, Rec­
ord No.: SH-­MICN-­D-000-741, CRRC Archives (hereafter SH-­MICN-­D-000-741).
90.  ​Dhafir Selbi, author interview, Amman, ­2005.
91.  ​SH-­MICN-­D-000-741.
92.  ​Jafar, unpublished manuscript, 88.
93.  ​CAFCD, part 3b, chap. 5.11, 29.
94.  ​IAEA, Fourth Consolidated Report of the Director General of the International Atomic Energy 
Agency ­under Paragraph 16 of Security Council Resolution 1051 (1996), S/1997/779, 8 October 
1997, 21. Accessed from https://­www​.­iaea​.­org​/­OurWork​/­SV​/­Invo​/­reports​/­s​_­1997​_­779​.­pdf.
95.  ​Ibid, Attachment 1, 48.
96.  ​Jafar, unpublished manuscript, 69.
97.  ​David Albright, Frans Berkhout and William Walker, Plutonium and Highly Enriched 
Uranium 1996: World Inventories, Capabilities and Policies (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 
1997), 337. Accessed from http://­books​.­sipri​.­org​/­files​/­books​/­SIPRI97AlBeWa​/­SIPRI97AlBe​
Wa​.­pdf
98.  ​Jafar Dhiya Jafar, Numan Saadaldin al-­Niaimi, and Lars Sigurd Sunnanå, Oppdraget: 
Innsidehistorien om Saddams atomvåpen [The mission: The inside story of Saddam’s nuclear weap-
ons] (Oslo: Spartacus, 2005), 98–99.

246
NOTES TO PAGES 121–131
  99.  ​Hussam Mohammad Ameen al-­Yassin, Director of the National Monitoring, to Director 
of the Private Security Forces, August 1995, Rec­ord No.: SH-­INMD-­D-000-657, 1, CRRC Archives.
100.  ​Obeidi and Pitzer, Bomb in My Garden, 134.
101.  ​Jafar, author interview, Dubai, United Arab Emirates, November 12, 2006.
102.  ​“Meeting at the Ministry of Defence with the Minister of State for the Armed Forces 
Mr. Hamilton—­October 22, 1992,” Ekéus Papers.
103.  ​Ibid.
104.  ​“Note for the File: Meeting with Joxe [French Minister for Defense], November 17, 1992, 
Compiled at 12:25 hours, October 21, 1992,” Ekéus Papers.
105.  ​Jacques E. C. Hymans, Achieving Nuclear Ambitions: Scientists, Politicians, and Prolifera-
tion (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2012), 115.
5. Searching for Uranium in Libya, 1951–1973
    1.  ​Jacques E. C. Hymans, Achieving Nuclear Ambitions: Scientists, Politicians, and Prolifera-
tion (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2012), 242.
    2.  ​See Marius Deeb and Mary Jane Deeb, Libya since the Revolution: Aspects of Social and 
Po­liti­cal Development (New York: Praeger, 1982), 112.
    3.  ​See Benjamin Higgins and Jacques Royer, “Economic Development with Unlimited 
Supplies of Capital: The Libyan Case,” Libyan Economic and Business Review 3, no. 2: 1–28.
    4.  ​Ruth First, Libya: The Elusive Revolution (Harmonds­worth, UK: Penguin African Li-
brary, 1974), 142.
    5.  ​John Wright, Libya (London: Ernest Benn, 1969), 199.
    6.  ​Higgins and Royer, “Economic Development,” 3.
    7.  ​Wright, Libya, 224.
    8.  ​Ibid., 222.
    9.  ​Youssef Mohammad Sawani, “Post-­Qadhafi Libya: Interactive Dynamics and the Po­
liti­cal ­Future,” Con­temporary Arab Affairs 5, no. 1 (2012): 1–26.
  10.  ​Wright, Libya, 260–261.
  11.  ​First, Libya, 89.
  12.  ​Ibid.
  13.  ​Wright, Libya, 260.
  14.  ​Ibid., 223.
  15.  ​First, Libya, 80.
  16.  ​Ibid., 79–80; Wright, Libya, 264.
  17.  ​Wright, Libya, 241.
  18.  ​First, Libya, 102.
  19.  ​Ibid.
  20.  ​Benjamin Higgins, Economic Development: Prob­lems, Princi­ples, and Policies (New York: 
Constable, 1959), 26.
  21.  ​Wright, Libya, 183.
  22.  ​Adrian Pelt, Libyan In­de­pen­dence and the United Nations: A Case of Planned Decolonization 
(New Haven: Yale University Press, 1970), 671.
  23.  ​Deeb and Deeb, Libya since the Revolution, 26.
  24.  ​Wright, Libya, 243.
  25.  ​Mohammed Faraj Dghaim, “Al Jami’a Al Libiya fi Eidi’a Al Khamseen: Safha Mushriqa 
fi tarikh Libia,” Al Jamei Magazine, no. 10 (2005), Al-­Fateh University.
  26.  ​Deeb and Deeb, Libya since the Revolution, 31.
  27.  ​Ibid., 40.
  28.  ​Wright, Libya, 260.
  29.  ​Higgins and Royer, “Economic Development,” 3.
  30.  ​Ibid., 3–4.
  31.  ​Ibid., 6.

247
NOTES TO PAGES 131–136
32.  ​Waniss Otman and Erling Karlberg, The Libyan Economy: Economic Diversification and In-
ternational Repositioning (New York: Springer, 2007), 322.
33.  ​Pelt, Libyan In­de­pen­dence, 693.
34.  ​Higgins and Royer, “Economic Development,” 4; Wright, Libya, 261.
35.  ​Wright, Libya, 261.
36.  ​“Daily Brief,” Central Intelligence Bulletin, 22 June 1960, 1.
37.  ​U.S. Senate, United States Security Agreements and Commitments Abroad, Hearings before the 
Subcommittee on United States Security Agreements and Commitments Abroad of the Committee on 
Foreign Relations, Ninety-­first Congress, first [and second] session[s] (Washington, DC: U.S. Govern-
ment Printing Office, 1969–1970), 2000–2001.
38.  ​Ibid.
39.  ​Ragaei El Mallakh, “The Economics of Rapid Growth: Libya,” ­Middle East Journal (1969): 
308.
40.  ​Ibid.
41.  ​Higgins and Royer, “Economic Development,” 8.
42.  ​First, Libya, 81.
43.  ​Wright, Libya, 272.
44.  ​Ibid., 271.
45.  ​This number excludes quarries. Deeb and Deeb, Libya since the Revolution, 111–112.
46.  ​J. Cameron to Ol. Lloyd, “Technical Assistance Mission to Libya, 4–11 December 1970,” 
15 December 1970 (C2-­LIB-3.002), 4, IAEA Archives.
47.  ​Ibid.
48.  ​A. Shaari, Deputy Director General for Industrial Research Department, Ministry of In-
dustry, Kingdom of Libya, to the IAEA, 16 June 1969, IAEA Archives.
49.  ​Ahmed El-­Atrash, Assistant ­Under-­Secretary of State, Kingdom of Libya, to Resident Rep-
resentative of the UNDP, 19 August 1969 (LIB/3/002), IAEA Archives.
50.  ​Wright, Libya, 274.
51.  ​Ibid.
52.  ​Wright, Libya, 278; First, Libya, 82–83.
53.  ​Wright, Libya, 278.
54.  ​Ibid., 279.
55.  ​Wright, Libya, 274.
56.  ​First, Libya, 95.
57.  ​Ibid., citing “Arms and the Super Salesman,” Sunday Times, 2 June 1968.
58.  ​First, Libya, 94.
59.  ​Ibid.
60.  ​Ibid., 107.
61.  ​Ibid., 106.
62.  ​Ibid., 119.
63.  ​Ibid., 112.
64.  ​Ibid., 113.
65.  ​Umar Ibrāhaim Fatòhalai, Monte Palmer, and Richard Chackerian, Po­liti­cal Development 
and Bureaucracy in Libya (Lexington, MA: Lexington Books, 1977), 75.
66.  ​First, Libya, 120.
67.  ​Ibid., 121.
68.  ​Dirk Vandewalle, Libya since In­de­pen­dence: Oil and State Building (Ithaca: Cornell Univer-
sity Press, 1998), 185.
69.  ​Cited in First, Libya, 162, note 41.
70.  ​First, Libya, 123.
71.  ​See oral histories from former po­liti­cal prisoners on the “42 Years of Oppression: Per-
sonal Accounts of ­human rights abuses during the Gaddafi era in Libya” website: http://­en​
.­libya42​.­org​/.
72.  ​Fatòhalai et al., Po­liti­cal Development, 95–96.
73.  ​First, Libya, 132.
74.  ​Fatòhalai et al., Po­liti­cal Development, 96.

248
NOTES TO PAGES 137–141
75.  ​Mohamed M. Ennami, Scientific Adviser to the Secretary of the General ­People’s Commit-
tee for Manpower, Training and Employment, “The Libyan Case” (paper presented at the 18th 
UN Conference on Disarmament Issues in Yokohama, 21–23 August 2006, Yokohama, Japan).
76.  ​First, Libya, 154; Lisa Anderson, “Libya and American Foreign Policy,” ­Middle East Jour-
nal 36, no. 4 (1982): 526.
77.  ​Wyn Q. Bowen, Libya and Nuclear Proliferation: Stepping Back from the Brink (London: In-
ternational Institute for Strategic Studies/Routledge, 2006), 15.
78.  ​First, Libya, 204–211.
79.  ​Libya had to rely on external sources for military equipment as it had not developed pro-
duction capabilities of its own. Pierre Shammas, ed., “Libya Survey—­Part 2—­Arms Consumption 
Is Rising: Chad Drama Is Imminent,” Strategic Balance in the ­Middle East 15, no. 4 (11 April 1988): 29.
80.  ​“­Middle East Arms Race, Libya: Qadhafi Games Endanger Military Power Base,” Strate-
gic Balance in the ­Middle East, Arab Press Ser­vice Or­ga­ni­za­tion, Beirut, January 1981, 7.
81.  ​Memorandum of Conversation between Mansor Kikhia, Libyan Permanent Representa-
tive to the UN, and Secretary of State Henry Kissinger, 2 December 1976, American Embassy 
Residence, Mexico City, 2. National Security Archive.
82.  ​Fatòhalai et al., Po­liti­cal Development, 159.
83.  ​Ennami, “Libyan Case,” n.p.
84.  ​Se­nior official of the Libyan GPC, author interview, Tripoli, 16 June 2005.
85.  ​Former Revolutionary Committee member, author interview, Tripoli, 15 June 2005.
86.  ​“Libya: Al-­Qadhafi Addresses General ­People’s Congress,” Tripoli, ­Great Jamahiriyah 
TV (in Arabic), 2 March 2004, from FBIS.
87.  ​J. A. K. Quartey, “Report to the Government of Libya: Atomic Energy Planning,” Techni-
cal Assistance Report No. 846, 14 May 1973, limited distribution, 1, IAEA Archives.
88.  ​James Cameron, “Nuclear Raw Materials Prospection Programme: Report to the Gov-
ernment of Libya, 4–11 December 1970,” 18 December 1970, limited distribution (LIB/3/002), 
IAEA Archives.
89.  ​Quartey, “Report to the Government of Libya,” 18.
90.  ​Ibid., 17.
91.  ​Ibid., 18.
92.  ​“Attachment 1 to Travel Report: Background Information on Libya, Report on Nuclear 
Power Manpower Development, Mission to the Socialist ­People’s Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, 15 
to 24 June 1982, December 3 1982, Report to Director General” (TA-­LIB-0/005), 1, IAEA Archives.
93.  ​J. Dolnicar and S. B. Hammond, “IAEA, Nuclear Programming: Report to the Secretariat 
for Atomic Energy of the Socialist ­People’s Libyan Arab Jamahiriya” (draft), November 
1981(LIB/0/004), 9, IAEA Archives.
94.  ​“Attachment 1 to Travel Report,” 1.
95.  ​On the Egyptian program and decision see Maria Rost Rublee, “Egypt’s Nuclear Weap-
ons Program: Lessons Learned,” Nonproliferation Review 13, no. 3 (November 2006): 555–567.
96.  ​See Bowen, Libya and Nuclear Proliferation.
97.  ​Zainab Abbas, ed., The ­Battle of Destiny: Speeches and Interviews by Col­o­nel Muammar Gad-
hafi (London: Kalahari Publications, 1976), 55.
98.  ​References to Libyan requests for nuclear assistance can be found in the following: Evan S. 
Medeiros, Reluctant Restraint: The Evolution of China’s Nonproliferation Policies and Practices, 1980–
2004 (Singapore: NUS Press, 2009), 35; Gordon Corera, Shopping for Bombs: Nuclear Proliferation, 
Global Insecurity, and the Rise and Fall of the AQ Khan Network (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 
2006), 12; Stephen M. Meyer, The Dynamics of Nuclear Proliferation (Chicago: University of Chicago 
Press, 1986), 7; Etel Solingen, Nuclear Logics: Contrasting Paths in East Asia and the ­Middle East 
(Prince­ton: Prince­ton University Press, 2009), 212; Gawdat Bahgat, Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons 
in the ­Middle East (Gainesville: University Press of Florida, 2007), 129; Joseph Cirincione, Jon B. 
Wolfsthal, and Miriam Rajkumar, Deadly Arsenals, Tracking Weapons of Mass Destruction (Washing-
ton, DC: Car­ne­gie Endowment for International Peace, 2002), 307; Kenneth Timmerman, Weapons 
of Mass Destruction: The Cases of Iran, Syria, and Libya (Los Angeles: Simon Wiesenthal Center, 1992), 
88. See also “Writer Reports Libya A-­Bomb Bid,” Washington Post, 16 April 1979.
99.  ​Bowen, Libya and Nuclear Proliferation, 28.

249
NOTES TO PAGES 141–146
100.  ​Ibid.
101.  ​CIA, Intelligence Memorandum 279, “Qadhafi’s Nuclear Weapon Aims,” May 1975 (ap-
proved for release 4 February 2002), 2, Richelson Papers.
102.  ​Quartey, “Report to the Government of Libya,” 21.
103.  ​S. Habib Ahmed, Resident Representative of the UNDP, to O. E. S. Lloyd, Area Officer 
for Africa, Division of Technical Assistance, IAEA, “Prospecting for Radioactive Materials in 
Libya,” 29 April 1970 (LIB/3/002), IAEA Archives.
104.  ​IAEA request from the Government of Libya, Job Description, New Materials Prospec-
tion, 25 November 1969 (LIB/3/002), IAEA Archives.
105.  ​Mohamed Mughrabi, Deputy Director General, Office of Technical Cooperation, Lib-
yan Arab Ministry of Planning, to Resident Representative of the UNDP, 26 April 1970 (TA/​
3/002), IAEA Archives.
106.  ​First, Libya, 153–156. The bud­get allocations in the new regime’s second development 
plan (1972–1975) set aside more money for industrial and mineral proj­ects (15 ­percent) than any 
other bud­get ele­ment (agriculture was a close second).
107.  ​Quartey, “Report to the Government of Libya.”
108.  ​Source lists figures in pounds, but Libya changed the name of their currency from 
pounds to dinars ­after the 1969 revolution. The value of both currencies was equivalent. First, 
Libya, 157.
109.  ​Ibid., 170.
110.  ​Ibid., 171.
111.  ​Ibid., 160.
112.  ​Ibid., 169.
113.  ​Shukri Ghanem, “Changing Planning Policies in Libya,” in Planning and Development in 
Modern Libya, ed. Mukhtar M. Buru, Shukri Mohammed Ghanem, and Keith S. McLachlan (Lon-
don: Lynne Rienner, 1985), 225. Proj­ects ­were planned for Jifarah Plain, Jabal Al Akhdar, Fez-
zan, Al Kufrah, and Sarir Salul Elkhudor.
114.  ​The state set up about one hundred factories between 1970 and 1980 (ibid.).
115.  ​Quartey, “Report to the Government of Libya,” 20.
116.  ​Ibid., 1–2.
117.  ​J. Cameron to O. Lloyd, 15 December 1970, 1.
118.  ​Quartey, “Report to the Government of Libya,” 15.
119.  ​Ibid., 2.
120.  ​Ibid.
121.  ​Ibid.
122.  ​Ibid., 3.
123.  ​Ibid.
124.  ​Deeb and Deeb, Libya since the Revolution, 40.
125.  ​Quartey, “Report to the Government of Libya,” 6.
126.  ​Cameron, “Nuclear Raw Materials,” 2. Ettalhi became secretary-­general of the GPC 
(equivalent to prime minister) in the mid-1980s.
127.  ​Ibid., 4.
128.  ​Quartey, “Report to the Government of Libya,” 23.
129.  ​Ibid., 9.
130.  ​Ibid., 7.
131.  ​Ibid., 8.
132.  ​Ibid., 6.
133.  ​Ibid., 9.
134.  ​Ibid., 20.
135.  ​Ibid., 20. Most sources, including official Libyan statements, instead date the beginning 
of Libya’s nuclear energy program to 1973. See, for example, Ali Gashut, Atomic Energy Estab-
lishment, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, “Ministerial Pre­sen­ta­tion: Libya,” in Nuclear Energy in the 
21st ­Century: Addressing Energy Needs and Environmental Challenges: Proceedings of an International 
Ministerial Conference, Beijing, 20–22 April 2009 (IAEA: Vienna, 2009).
136.  ​Quartey, “Report to the Government of Libya,” 20.

250
NOTES TO PAGES 147–154
137.  ​Ibid., 21.
138.  ​Ibrahim Adly, Resident Representative of the UNDP, to O. E. S. Lloyd, Area Officer for 
Africa, Division for Technical Assistance, IAEA, “Establishment of the Board of Directors of the 
Atomic Energy Authority in the LAR,” 22 December 1973 (TA/LIB-2), IAEA Archives.
139.  ​IAEA, “­Legal Aspects of Nuclear Regulation and Establishment of the Nuclear Regula-
tory Body, Report to the Government of the Socialist ­People’s Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,” Techni-
cal Cooperation Report No. 1946, August 1982 (LIB/0/005), IAEA Archives.
140.  ​Quartey, “Report to the Government of Libya,” 17.
141.  ​Ghanem, “Changing Planning Policies in Libya,” 225.
142.  ​Ibid.
143.  ​Ibid.
144.  ​Ibid., 226.
145.  ​Ibid.
6. Cultural Revolution and Nuclear Power, 1973–1981
    1.  ​Lindsey Hilsum, Sandstorm: Libya in the Time of Revolution (London: Penguin, 2012), 55.
    2.  ​John Wright, A History of Libya (London: C. Hurst, 2012), 207.
    3.  ​Ruth First, Libya: The Elusive Revolution (Harmonds­worth, UK: Penguin African Library, 
1974), 137; Dirk J. Vandewalle, ed., Qadhafi’s Libya, 1969–1994 (London: St. Martin’s Press, 1995), 182.
    4.  ​Vandewalle, Qadhafi’s Libya, 182.
    5.  ​Ibid., 102, 182.
    6.  ​First, Libya, 138–140.
    7.  ​J. A. K. Quartey, “Report to the Government of Libya: Atomic Energy Planning,” Tech-
nical Assistance Report No. 846, 14 May 1973, limited distribution, 2–3, IAEA Archives.–­
    8.  ​Faculty of Science, University of Libya, “Request for Technical Assistance from 
IAEA” (TA/LIB/4/002), 3–4, IAEA Archives.
    9.  ​Quartey, “Report to the Government of Libya,” 6; J. Dolnicar to A. Abu Bakr, “1974 
Regular Programme of Technical Assistance—­Libya,” 6 July 1973, IAEA Archives.
  10.  ​J. Dolnicar and S. B. Hammond, “IAEA, Nuclear Programming: Report to the Secre-
tariat for Atomic Energy of the Socialist ­People’s Libyan Arab Jamahiriya” (draft), November 
1981, (TA/LIB/0/004), 20–21, IAEA Archives.
  11.  ​Yusuf Elmehrik, Dean of the Faculty of Science, University of Libya, to U. Goswami, 
(TA/LIB/4/002), 12 June 1973, IAEA Archives.
  12.  ​Quartey, “Report to the Government of Libya,” 5.
  13.  ​Faculty of Science, “Request for Technical Assistance from IAEA,” 4.
  14.  ​Quartey, “Report to the Government of Libya,” 6.
  15.  ​Ibid., 9.
  16.  ​CIA, Intelligence Memorandum 279, “Qadhafi’s Nuclear Weapon Aims,” May 1975 
(approved for release 4 February 2002), Richelson Papers.
  17.  ​A.  M.  J. Spits, IAEA Expert, Tripoli, to  J. Dolnicar, Division of Technical Assistance, 
12 November 1976 (TA/LIB/4/02), IAEA Archives.
  18.  ​Faculty of Science, University of Libya, “Request for Technical Assistance from IAEA: 
Nuclear Mea­sure­ments Proj­ect,” attached to Elmehrik to Goswami, 12 June 1973, 3. This request 
was supported by letter from Mohamed al-­Mabruk al-­Bahi of the Libyan Arab Republic Minis-
try of Foreign Affairs (with a carbon copy to the Ministry of Planning, Tripoli), 29 March 1973 
(TR/505), IAEA Archives.
  19.  ​Faculty of Science, “Request for Technical Assistance from IAEA: Nuclear Mea­sure­
ments Proj­ect,” 1.
  20.  ​Ibid.
  21.  ​For example, the Libyans requested assistance with electronics and the installation and 
operation of the analytic equipment (Libyan Government to M. Kenyeres and A. Abu Bakr, 4 July 
1973, IAEA Archives).

251
NOTES TO PAGES 154–159
22.  ​Dolnicar to Bakr, 6 July 1973.
23.  ​Dolnicar and Hammond, “IAEA, Nuclear Programming,” 22.
24.  ​J. Dolnicar, IAEA, to A. Ben Hameida, Vice Dean, Faculty of Science, University of Trip-
oli, 8 May 1974 (TA/LIB/4/02), IAEA Archives.
25.  ​Milovan Vidmar, IAEA Expert, to A. Abu Bakr, 27 December 1975 (TA/LIB/9/02), 1, 
IAEA Archives.
26.  ​A. J. M. Spits, “Libya: Final Report,” 12 July 1976–11 April 1977 (TA/LIB/4/02), IAEA 
Archives.
27.  ​O. E. S. Lloyd, Area Officer for Africa, Division of Technical Assistance, IAEA, to Ibrahim 
Adly, Resident Representative of the UNDP, Libya, 10 May 1973 (TA/LIB-2), IAEA Archives.
28.  ​A. J. M. Spits, “Libya: Field Report No. 1,” 13 July–6 August 1976 ) (TA/LIB/4/02), 2, 
IAEA Archives.
29.  ​In late 1977, an IAEA con­sul­tant offered to develop some guidelines for se­lection of can-
didates for fellowships. Robert  W. Thiele, “Radioisotopes Centre (LIB/0/03) Report to the 
Government of Libya,” 20 January 1977–20 March 1978 (TA/LIB/0/003), 4, IAEA Archives.
30.  ​J. Dolnicar, Physics Section, to A. J. M. Spits, IAEA Expert, Tripoli, 2 November 1976 (TA/
LIB/4/02), IAEA Archives.
31.  ​See “Libya: Tajura Nuclear Reactor Se­nior Scientist on Its Construction, Capabilities,” Al-­
Majallah (London), 1 February 2004, 26–29, FBIS; Wyn Q. Bowen, Libya and Nuclear Proliferation: 
Stepping Back from the Brink (London: International Institute for Strategic Studies/Routledge, 
2006), chap. 2.
32.  ​“Libya.”
33.  ​Vidmar to Bakr, 27 December 1975, 1.
34.  ​CIA, “Qadhafi’s Nuclear Weapon Aims,” 2.
35.  ​Memorandum of Conversation between Mansor Kikhia, Libyan Permanent Representa-
tive to the UN, and Secretary of State Henry Kissinger, 2 December 1976, American Embassy 
Residence, Mexico City, 2, National Security Archive.
36.  ​Wright, Libya, 209.
37.  ​A. M. J. Spits, “Libya: Field Report No. 2,” 7 August–12 November 1976, 1, IAEA Archives.
38.  ​J. Dolnicar, Physics Section, IAEA, to A. M. J. Spits, IAEA Expert, Tripoli, 23 November 
1976 (TA/LIB/4/02), IAEA Archives.
39.  ​“Rumors of Libyan Atomic Bomb Quest Raise Fears,” Washington Post, 30 July 1979. The 
Libyan nuclear chronology is available at http://­www​.­nti​.­org​/­media​/­pdfs​/­libya​_­nuclear​.­pdf​
?­​_­​=­1316466791.
40.  ​See Målfrid Braut-­Hegghammer, “Libya’s Nuclear Turnaround: Perspectives from Trip-
oli,” ­Middle East Journal 62, no. 1 (2008): 55–72.
41.  ​CIA, “Qadhafi’s Nuclear Weapon Aims,” 1.
42.  ​Author’s interview with a se­nior Libyan GPC official, Tripoli 2005, cited in Braut-­
Hegghammer, “Libya’s Nuclear Turnaround,” 8.
43.  ​CIA, “Qadhafi’s Nuclear Weapon Aims,” 1.
44.  ​Ibid.
45.  ​IAEA, “Implementation of the NPT Safeguards Agreement in the Libyan Arab Jama-
hiriya,” Report by Director General to the Board of Governors, GOV/2008/39, 12 September 
2008, annex, 2.
46.  ​U.S. Directorate of Intelligence, The Libyan Nuclear Program: A Technical Perspective, An In-
telligence Assessment, February 1985 (approved for release 22 November 2011), 8, National Secu-
rity Archive.
47.  ​Leonard Spector, Nuclear Proliferation ­Today: The Spread of Nuclear Weapons (New York: Vin-
tage, 1984), 151; Bowen, Libya and Nuclear Proliferation, 28.
48.  ​A. J. M. Spits, IAEA Expert, Tripoli, to J. Dolnicar, Division of Technical Assistance, IAEA, 
1 August 1976, IAEA Archives.
49.  ​CIA, “Qadhafi’s Nuclear Weapons Aims,” 3.
50.  ​Kenneth Timmerman, Weapons of Mass Destruction: The Cases of Iran, Syria, and Libya (Los 
Angeles: Simon Wiesenthal Center, 1992), 89.
51.  ​U.S. Directorate of Intelligence, Libyan Nuclear Program, 13.

252
NOTES TO PAGES 159–165
52.  ​Feroz Khan, Eating Grass: The Making of the Pakistani Bomb (Palo Alto, CA: Stanford Uni-
versity Press, 2012), 111.
53.  ​Ibid.
54.  ​Bowen, Libya and Nuclear Proliferation, 31.
55.  ​Robert W. Thiele, “Final Report, Proj­ect: LIB/0/03—­Establishment of Radioisotope Lab-
oratory,” 20 January 1977–20 March 1978 (TA/LIB/0/003), 1, IAEA Archives.
56.  ​Spits, “Field Report No. 1,” 1.
57.  ​Ibid., 2
58.  ​Ibid.
59.  ​Spits to Dolnicar, 1 August 1976.
60.  ​J. Dolnicar, Division of Technical Assistance, IAEA, to B. Radischat, Division of Techni-
cal Assistance, 31 August 1976 (LIB/4/03) IAEA Archives.
61.  ​A. M. J. Spits, IAEA Expert, Tripoli, to J. Dolnicar, Division of Technical Assistance, IAEA, 
2; Frank Barnaby, The Invisible Bomb: The Nuclear Race in the ­Middle East (London: I.B. Tauris, 
1993), 98; “Soviet Union Denies It Plans Bases in Libya,” New York Times, 28 May 1975; “Libya 
Said to Buy Soviet A-­Power Plant,” Washington Post, 12 December 1977; “Nuclear Power Agree-
ments,” Washington Post, 4 October 1978.
62.  ​Roland Timarbaev, “On Libya, Antimissile Defense, As Well As Other Autobiographical 
Events,” Security Index 14, no. 1 (1983): 113.
63.  ​Ibid.
64.  ​Bowen, Libya and Nuclear Proliferation, 29.
65.  ​U.S. Directorate of Intelligence, Libyan Nuclear Program, 1–2.
66.  ​Ibid., 13.
67.  ​Dolnicar and Hammond, “IAEA, Nuclear Programming,” 9.
68.  ​U.S. Directorate of Intelligence, Libyan Nuclear Program, 14.
69.  ​U.S. Deputy Director for National Foreign Assessment, “Request for Review of Draft 
­Paper on the Security Dimension of Nonproliferation, Libya: The Proliferation Threat,” 9 April 
1981, 1. National Security Archive.
70.  ​Spits to Dolnicar, 12 November 1976, 2.
71.  ​Timarbaev, “On Libya,” 113.
72.  ​Joseph V. R. Micallef, “A Nuclear Bomb for Libya?,” Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists 
(August–­September 1981): 14.
73.  ​Dolnicar and Hammond, “IAEA, Nuclear Programming,” 9.
74.  ​Vidmar to Bakr, 27 December 1975, 1; Spits, “Field Report No. 1,” 1.
75.  ​The government had made plans in the 1980s for an agro-­industrial proj­ect comprising 
two hundred wells expected to produce 200 million gallons of ­water per day. F. M. Swailem, M. S. 
Hamza, and A. I. M. Aly, “Isotope Composition of Groundwater in Kufra, Libya,” ­Water Re-
sources Development 1, no. 4 (1983): 333.
76.  ​“Libya.”
77.  ​“1977 Plan: Establishment of a Neutron Activation Analy­sis Laboratory,” Radioisotopes 
Centre, 24 May 1975, TA Report No. 1345, 9–10, IAEA Archives.
78.  ​Ibid., 6.
79.  ​Dolnicar and Hammond, “IAEA, Nuclear Programming,” 9.
80.  ​Robert  W. Thiele, “Libya: Field Report No. 1,” 23  January–28  February 1977 (TA/
LIB/0/003), 1, IAEA Archives.
81.  ​A. M. J. Spits IAEA Expert, Tripoli, to J. Dolnicar, Division of Technical Assistance, IAEA, 
29 November 1976 (TA/LIB/4/02), IAEA Archives.
82.  ​Thiele, “Field Report No. 1,” 2.
83.  ​Thiele, “Field Report No, 1,” 3–5.
84.  ​Pierre Shammas, ed., “Libya Survey—­Part 2—­Arms Consumption Is Rising: Chad Drama 
Is Imminent,” Strategic Balance in the ­Middle East 15, no. 4 (11 April 1988): 35.
85.  ​Memorandum of Conversation between Mansor Kikhia, Libyan Permanent Representa-
tive to the UN, and Secretary of State Henry Kissinger, 2 December 1976, American Embassy 
Residence, Mexico City, 2, National Security Archive.
  86.  ​Spits, “Field Report No. 2,” 2.

253
NOTES TO PAGES 165–172
  87.  ​Dolnicar and Hammond, “IAEA, Nuclear Programming,” 21.
  88.  ​“Libya.”
  89.  ​Ibid.
  90.  ​Thiele, “Field Report No. 1”; Robert W. Thiele, “Field Report No. 2,” 1 March–31 May 
1977 (TA/LIB/0/003), 1, IAEA Archives; Robert W. Thiele, “Field Report No. 3,” 1 June–30 Sep-
tember 1977 (TA/LIB/0/003), IAEA Archives.
  91.  ​Thiele, “Radioisotopes Centre,” 5.
  92.  ​Ibid., 1–7
  93.  ​P. Barretto, “Uranium Exploration Programme in Libya,” Interoffice Memorandum, 
9 May 1979 (LIB/03), 1, IAEA Archives.
  94.  ​Thiele, “Radioisotopes Centre.”
  95.  ​Ibid., 4.
  96.  ​Ibid., 1.
  97.  ​A. M. Eskangy, General Director, Atomic Energy Authority, to A. Abu Bakr, Division of 
Technical Assistance, IAEA, received 18 November 1977 (TA LIB/03/03), IAEA Archives.
  98.  ​Thiele, “Radioisotopes Centre,” 1.
  99.  ​Ibid.
100.  ​Dolnicar and Hammond, “IAEA, Nuclear Programming,” 19.
101.  ​Thiele, “Final Report.”
102.  ​Thiele, “Field Report No. 2,” 1.
103.  ​Thiele, “Final Report,” 3.
104.  ​A. Abu Bakr, Area Officer for Africa, Division of Technical Assistance, to Robert W. 
Thiele, 13 June 1977, IAEA Archives.
105.  ​Thiele, “Field Report No. 2,” 1.
7. Nuclear Weapons Remain Elusive, 1982–1989
    1.  ​Pierre Shammas, ed., “­Middle East Arms Race, Libya: Qadhafi Games Endanger Mili-
tary Power Base,” Strategic Balance in the ­Middle East, Published by the Arab Press Ser­vice Or­
ga­ni­za­tion, January 1981, Beirut, Lebanon, 7.
    2.  ​CRS, Issue Brief for Congress:  Libya, 24  February 2003,  Foreign Affairs, Defense, and 
Trade Division, 6, available at http://­fpc​.­state​.­gov​/­documents​/­organization​/­18216​.­pdf.
    3.  ​Robert Litwak, Rogue States and US Foreign Policy: Containment ­after the Cold War (Wash-
ington, DC: Woodrow Wilson Center Press, 2000), 173.
    4.  ​Leonard S. Spector, Nuclear Proliferation ­Today (New York: Vintage, 1984), 156.
    5.  ​CRS, Issue Brief for Congress, 6.
    6.  ​Wyn Q. Bowen, Libya and Nuclear Proliferation: Stepping Back from the Brink, (London: 
International Institute for Strategic Studies/Routledge, 2006), 15.
    7.  ​U.S. Directorate of Intelligence, The Libyan Nuclear Program: A Technical Perspective, In-
telligence Assessment, February 1985 (approved for release 22 November 2011), 14, National 
Security Archive.
    8.  ​The new SAE was established through an amendment to the 1973 Nuclear Energy 
Act.
    9.  ​“Nuclear Energy Aide and Foreign Adviser Appointed in Tripoli,” New York Times, 
8 January 1981.
  10.  ​U.S. Directorate of Intelligence, Libyan Nuclear Program, 17–18.
  11.  ​Ibid.
  12.  ​The Executive Committee for Scientific Affairs initially consisted of five subdepart-
ments: the Department of Power led by M. Bara Fathi with initially five staff; the Department 
of Fuel Cycle headed Elborai Mahmed with eight staff members; the Department of Radiation 
Protection led by Nouri Ali Addarougi with three staff members; the Department of Explora-
tion and Mines (also known as the Raw Materials Division), led by M. A. Ghuma with thirteen 
staff; and the Department of the Nuclear Research Centre led by Ibrahim al-­Hasain, who was 

254
NOTES TO PAGES 172–181
also a member of the SAE (and director of the Executive Committee for Financial and Admin-
istrative Affairs). J. Dolnicar and S. B. Hammond, “IAEA, Nuclear Programming: Report to the 
Secretariat for Atomic Energy of the Socialist ­People’s Libyan Arab Jamahiriya” (draft), No-
vember 1981 (TA/LIB/0/004), 7, IAEA Archives.
13.  ​U.S. Directorate of Intelligence, Libyan Nuclear Program, 17.
14.  ​IAEA Interoffice Memorandum from J. Dolnicar and S. B. Hammond to Director Gen-
eral, “Travel Report: Programming Mission to Libya, 1–8 November 1981,” 9 November 1981 2, 
IAEA Archives (hereafter “Travel Report: Programming Mission”).
15.  ​Ibid., 5.
16.  ​Ibid., 2.
17.  ​Ibid., 5.
18.  ​IAEA Interoffice Memorandum to the Director General from R. Schmidt, “Report on Nu-
clear Power Manpower Development,” 3 December 1982 (C2-­LIB-0.005), 1, IAEA Archives.
19.  ​U.S. Directorate of Intelligence, Libyan Nuclear Program, 2.
20.  ​U.S. Directorate of Intelligence, Libyan Nuclear Program, 14.
21.  ​IAEA, “Travel Report: Programming Mission,” 5.
22.  ​IAEA Interoffice Memorandum from L. W. Herron and A. Vuorinen to the Director Gen-
eral, “Travel Report—­Mission to Libya, 25 April–2 May 1982,” 25 May 1982, 1, IAEA Archives.
23.  ​“Travel Report: Programming Mission,” 3.
24.  ​Ibid., 5.
25.  ​“Report on Nuclear Power Manpower Development Mission to the Socialist ­People’s Lib-
yan Arab Jamahiriya, 15 to 24 June 1982,” Attachment 1 to “Travel Report: Programming Mis-
sion” (TA/LIB/0/005), 1, IAEA Archives.
26.  ​Claudia Wright, “Libya’s Nuclear Programme,” ­Middle East, February 1982, 47.
27.  ​“Travel Report: Programming Mission,” 5.
28.  ​IAEA Interoffice Memorandum from M. Tauchid to A. Abu Bakr, “T.A. Programme in 
Uranium Exploration in Libya,” 30 September 1981 (LIB/3/003-004), IAEA Archives.
29.  ​Ibid.
30.  ​“Report on Nuclear Power Manpower”, 2.
31.  ​IAEA, “Nuclear Power Manpower Planning,” 2.
32.  ​“Report on Nuclear Power Manpower,” 2.
33.  ​IAEA, “Nuclear Power Manpower Planning,” 7.
34.  ​Ibid., 8.
35.  ​Ibid., 11.
36.  ​Mohamed M. Ennami, Scientific Adviser to the Secretary of the General ­People’s Commit-
tee for Manpower, Training, and Employment, “The Libyan Case” (paper presented at the 18th 
UN Conference on Disarmament Issues in Yokohama, 21–23 August 2006, Yokohama, Japan).
37.  ​IAEA Interoffice Memorandum from H. J. Laue to J. A. K. Quartey, “Comments on the 
Travel Report ‘Programming Mission to Libya by Messrs. Dolnicar and Hammond,’ ” 14 Janu-
ary 1982 (TA/LIB/0/005), 1, IAEA Archives.
38.  ​A tokamak is a research device that can be used for studying nuclear fusion. Dolnicar 
and Hammond, “IAEA Nuclear Programming,” 17.
39.  ​Ibid., 16.
40.  ​Ibid.
41.  ​U.S. Directorate of Intelligence, Libyan Nuclear Program, 1–2.
42.  ​Ibid., 13.
43.  ​Ibid.
44.  ​Ibid.
45.  ​“Nuclear Energy Aide.”
46.  ​“Qaddafi Opposition Is Getting Stronger,” New York Times, 27 May 1981.
47.  ​“Libya: Members of the Libyan Cabinet,” The ­Free Library, http://­www​.­thefreelibrary​
.­com​/­LIBYA​+­​-­​+­Members​+­of​+­the​+­Libyan​+­Cabinet​.­​-­a055288463.
48.  ​Ibid.
49.  ​Ibid.

255
NOTES TO PAGES 181–186
50.  ​Dirk Vandewalle, A History of Modern Libya (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 
2012), 123–124.
51.  ​John Wright, A History of Libya (London: C. Hurst, 2012), 236.
52.  ​Hanspeter Mattes, “Challenges to Security Sector Governance in the ­Middle East: The 
Libyan Case” (paper presented at a workshop on “Challenges of Security Sector Governance in 
the ­Middle East,” 12–13 July 2004, Geneva).
53.  ​“Libya Survey—­Part 1—­A Military Structure Set for Big Geo-­Political Games,” Strategic 
Balance in the ­Middle East 15, no. 3 (21 March 1988).
54.  ​Pierre Shammas, ed., Strategic Balance in the ­Middle East, January 1981: ­Middle East Arms 
Race (Beirut: Arab Press Ser­vice Or­ga­ni­za­tion, 1981).
55.  ​Shukri Ghanem, “Changing Planning Policies in Libya,” in Planning and Development in 
Modern Libya, ed. M. M. Bury, S. M. Ghanem, and K. S. McLachlan (London: Lynne Reiner, 1985), 
226–227.
56.  ​Ibid., 228.
57.  ​Ibid., 229.
58.  ​“Travel Report: Programming Mission,” 4.
59.  ​Ibid.
60.  ​U.S. Directorate of Intelligence, Libyan Nuclear Program, 14.
61.  ​Ibid., 2.
62.  ​Ann MacLachlan and Mike Knapik, “Belgium and Libya ­Will Sign an Agreement on Nu-
clear Cooperation,” Nucleonics Week, 24 May 1984, 6.
63.  ​U.S. Directorate of Intelligence, Libyan Nuclear Program, 14.
64.  ​Ibid.
65.  ​Ibid.
66.  ​Lisa Anderson, “Libya and American Foreign Policy,” ­Middle East Journal 36, no. 4 (Au-
tumn 1982): 526.
67.  ​Joseph V. R. Micallef, “A Nuclear Bomb for Libya?,” Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists 
(August–­September 1981): 15.
68.  ​“Travel Report: Programming Mission,” 5.
69.  ​U.S. Directorate of Intelligence, Libyan Nuclear Program, 13.
70.  ​A. Abu Bakr to  M. Tauchid, “Field Report of Mr.  Kanaziewicz,” 7  September 1982 
(LIB/3/003), IAEA Archives.
71.  ​Claudia Wright, “Libya’s Nuclear Programme,” 47.
72.  ​U.S. Directorate of Intelligence, Libyan Nuclear Program, 17.
73.  ​Mohamed Ezzat Abdelaziz, Particle Accelerators (Beirut: Arab Development Institute, 1980).
74.  ​Bowen, Libya and Nuclear Proliferation, 27.
75.  ​Ibid.
76.  ​U.S. Directorate of Intelligence, Libyan Nuclear Program, 9–10. Among the countries Libya 
approached ­were West Germany, Iran, Belgium, Romania, Finland, Yugo­slavia, Britain, Paki-
stan, China, Italy, Argentina, Canada, Switzerland, and India.
77.  ​“Nuclear Energy Aide.”
78.  ​Case File “OLGA,” D13891/Vol. 43, 1985, CNSAS. I am grateful to Eliza Gheorghe for 
sharing this source.
79.  ​Ibid., 6.
80.  ​IAEA, “Implementation of the NPT Safeguards Agreement in the Libyan Arab Jama-
hiriya,” Report by the Director General to the Board of Governors, GOV/2008/39, 12 Septem-
ber 2008, accessed from http://­www​.­globalsecurity​.­org​/­wmd​/­library​/­report​/­2008​/­libya​_­iaea​
_­gov​-­2008​-­39​_­080912​.­htm.
81.  ​Peter Crail, “Libya Adds New Pieces to Its Nuclear History,” Arms Control ­Today, 6 Octo-
ber 2008.
82.  ​IAEA, “Implementation” (GOV/2008/39).
83.  ​Ibid.
84.  ​“Belgium in Dilemma over Libyan N-­Power Offer,” Financial Times, 19 May 1984.
85.  ​U.S. Directorate of Intelligence, Libyan Nuclear Program, 15.

256
NOTES TO PAGES 186–192
  86.  ​Ibid.
  87.  ​Ibid., 11.
  88.  ​Bowen, Libya and Nuclear Proliferation, 35.
  89.  ​David Albright, Peddling Peril: How the Secret Nuclear Trade Arms Amer­i­ca’s Enemies (New 
York: ­Free Press, 2010), 116.
  90.  ​IAEA, “Implementation of the NPT Safeguards Agreement of the Socialist ­People’s 
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,” Report by the Director General to the Board of Governors, 
GOV/2004/12, 20 February 2004, 5.
  91.  ​IAEA, “Implementation” (GOV/2008/39), annex, 3.
  92.  ​U.S. Directorate of Intelligence, Libyan Nuclear Program, 8.
  93.  ​Bowen, Libya and Nuclear Proliferation, 35; IAEA, “Implementation” (GOV/2004/12), 5.
  94.  ​IAEA, “Implementation” (GOV/2004/12), 4.
  95.  ​M. Petrovic, “Nuclear Radiometric Surveying: Report to the Government of the Libyan 
Arab Jamahiriya LIB/3/003,” abstract (LIB/3/003), IAEA Archives.
  96.  ​Bowen, Libya and Nuclear Proliferation, 29.
  97.  ​Jerzy Kanasiewics, “Interim Report: Proj­ect LIB/3/003, 23.05-22.11.82,” Tripoli, 20 Au-
gust 1982 (LIB/3/003), IAEA archives.
  98.  ​IAEA, “Implementation” (GOV/2004/12), 4.
  99.  ​IAEA, “Implementation” (GOV/2008/39), 4. See IAEA, “Implementation of the NPT 
Safeguards Agreement of the Socialist ­People’s Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,” Report by the Direc-
tor General to the Board of Governors, GOV/2004/33, 28 May 2004, Restricted distribution, 
annex 1, paragraph 27; Bowen, Libya and Nuclear Proliferation, chap. 2, p. 35.
100.  ​IAEA, “Implementation of the NPT Safeguards Agreement of the Socialist ­People’s Lib-
yan Arab Jamahiriya,” Report by the Director General to the Board of Governors, GOV/2004/59, 
30 August 2004, 4.
101.  ​Bowen, Libya and Nuclear Proliferation, 35.
102.  ​U.S. Directorate of Intelligence, Libyan Nuclear Program, 8.
103.  ​MacLachlan and Knapik, “Belgium and Libya,” 6.
104.  ​IAEA, “Implementation” (GOV/2004/12), 4.
105.  ​Ibid., 3.
106.  ​Andrew Terrill, “Libya and the Quest for Chemical Weapons,” Conflict Quarterly 14, no. 
1 (1994): 49.
107.  ​Jonathan Tucker, “The Rollback of Libya’s Chemical Weapons Program,” Nonprolifera-
tion Review 16, no. 3 (November 2009): 372.
108.  ​Ibid.
109.  ​Ibid., 373.
110.  ​Ibid., 376.
111.  ​Patrick Wintour, “Britain Sends Officials to Libya to Help Destroy Chemical Weapons,” 
Guardian, 14 November 2011.
112.  ​Michael R. Gordon, “U.S. Thinks Libya May Plan to Make Chemical Weapons,” New 
York Times, 24 December, 1987.
113.  ​Tucker, “Rollback,” 373.
114.  ​Ibid.
115.  ​Art Pine, “Only A-­Bomb Could Destroy Libya Plant, Scientist Says: Pentagon: Expert 
Declares Ordinary Weapons Incapable of Carrying Out U.S. Threat to Hit Suspected Chemical 
Arms Fa­cil­i­ty,” LA Times, 24 April 1996; “U.S. Said to Have No Non-­Nuclear Way to Destroy 
Suspect Libyan Plant,” Associated Press, 23 April 1996.
116.  ​Bowen, Libya and Nuclear Proliferation, 33.
117.  ​Libya reported to the IAEA that the talks ­were canceled in 1985. IAEA, “Implementa-
tion” (GOV/2008/39), 4.
118.  ​Pierre Shammas, ed., “Libya Survey—­Part 2—­Arms Consumption Is Rising: Chad 
Drama Is Imminent,” Strategic Balance in the ­Middle East 15, no. 4 (11 April 1988): 35.
119.  ​Ibid.
120.  ​Ennami, “Libyan Case.”
121.  ​Bowen, Libya and Nuclear Proliferation, 33.

257
NOTES TO PAGES 192–202
122.  ​Eleanor Clift and James Gerstenzang, “U.S. Warplanes Destroy Libya Missile Site, Sink 
Patrol Craft: Strike ­after Attack by Kadafi Forces; No American Losses,” Los Angeles Times, 
25 March 1986.
123.  ​Litwak, Rogue States, 176.
124.  ​Målfrid Braut-­Hegghammer, “Libya’s Nuclear Turnaround: Perspectives from Tripoli,” 
­Middle East Journal 62, no. 1 (2008): 55–72.
125.  ​Ibid.; se­nior official in the Libyan GPC, author interview, Tripoli, 16 June 2005.
126.  ​George Joffé, “Libya: Who Blinked, and Why,” Current History 103, no. 673 (May 2004), 
221–225.
127.  ​Leonard S. Spector, Nuclear Ambitions: The Spread of Nuclear Weapons, 1989–1990 (Boul-
der, CO: Westview Press, 1990), 183.
128.  ​Dirk Vandewalle, Libya since In­de­pen­dence: Oil and State Building (Ithaca: Cornell Uni-
versity Press, 1998), 140.
129.  ​Ibid.; Se­nior official in the Libyan GPC interview.
130.  ​La Grande Charte Verte des Droits de L’Homme de l’ere Jamahiriyenne, Le Congrés Général 
du Peuple de la Grande Jamahiriya Arabe Libyenne Populaire et Socialiste, 12 June 1988, 14.
131.  ​Frank Barnaby, The Invisible Bomb: The Nuclear Race in the ­Middle East (London: I.B. Tau-
ris, 1993), 150.
132.  ​“Arabs Need Atomic Weapons to ­Counter Israel, Khadafy Says,” Toronto Star, 2 Septem-
ber 1987.
8. Sanctions, Centrifuges, and Exit, 1989–2003
    1.  ​Libyan journalist, author interview, Tripoli, 26 January 2006.
    2.  ​Ambassador Mohamed Zwai, author interview, London, 2 May 2006.
    3.  ​Ibid.; Seif al-­Islam Gaddafi, author interview, Tripoli, 18 June 2005.
    4.  ​Seif al-­Islam Gadhafi interview.
    5.  ​Libyan academic 1, author interview, Tripoli, 24 January 2006.
    6.  ​Zwai interview.
    7.  ​Se­nior official in the Libyan GPC, author interview, Tripoli, 16 June 2005.
    8.  ​Ibid.
    9.  ​Målfrid Braut-­Hegghammer, “Libya’s Nuclear Turnaround: Perspectives from Trip-
oli,” ­Middle East Journal 62, no. 1 (2008): 55.
  10.  ​Se­nior official in the Libyan GPC, author interview, Foreign Ministry, Tripoli, 28 Janu-
ary 2006 (via interpreter).
  11.  ​“Defence in Peacetime—­Part 2C—­Libya,” Strategic Balance in the ­Middle East 31, no. 2 
(5 February 1996), in Arab World Documentation Unit.
  12.  ​Alison Pargeter, “Libya: Reforming the Impossible?,” Review of African Po­liti­cal Econ-
omy 33, no. 108 (2006): 221.
  13.  ​Zwai interview.
  14.  ​Ron Suskind, “The Tyrant Who Came in from the Cold,” Washington Monthly, October 
2006. Available at http://­www​.­washingtonmonthly​.­com​/­features​/­2006​/­0610​.­suskind​.­html.
  15.  ​Trevor Rowe, “U.N. Presses Libya on Bombing,” Washington Post, 22 January 1992, A01.
  16.  ​UN Security Council Resolution 748 (31 March 1992). ­Adopted by the Security Council 
at its 3,063rd meeting on 31 March 1992.
  17.  ​Pargeter, “Libya,” 220.
  18.  ​Former central Revolutionary Committee figure, author interview, Tripoli, 15  June 
2005.
  19.  ​William Tobey, “Analy­sis: A Message from Tripoli: How Libya Gave Up Its WMD, 
Part 3: What Do You Do with a Plastic Shopping Bag Full of Nuclear Weapon Designs?,” Bul-
letin of Atomic Scientists, 5  December 2014, http://­thebulletin​.­org​/­message​-­tripoli​-­part​-­3​
-­how​-­libya​-­gave​-­its​-­wmd7843.
  20.  ​Ambassador Donald Mahley, author interview, Washington, DC, 6 March 2007.

258
NOTES TO PAGES 202–205
21.  ​“ISN/CTR Visit: Libya Moves Forward on Scientist Engagement Programs,” cable sent 
by U.S. Embassy, Tripoli, 3 November 2009, WikiLeaks, http://­wikileaks​.­org​/­cable​/­2009​/­11​
/­09TRIPOLI886​.­html.
22.  ​David Albright, Peddling Peril: How the Secret Nuclear Trade Arms Amer­i­ca’s Enemies (New 
York: ­Free Press, 2010), 117.
23.  ​David Albright, Libya: A Major Sale at Last, Institute for Science and International Secu-
rity Special Report, 1 December 2010. Available at http://­isis​-­online​.­org​/­uploads​/­isis​-­reports​
/­documents​/­Libya​_­and​_­the​_­Khan​_­Network​_­1Dec2010​.­pdf.
24.  ​Ibid., 5.
25.  ​Peter Crail, “Libya Adds New Pieces to Its Nuclear History,” Arms Control ­Today, 6 Octo-
ber 2008.
26.  ​Libyan academic 1, author interview, Tripoli, 24 January 2006.
27.  ​“Defence in Peacetime.”
28.  ​“(S/NF) Kudos for biographic reporting on Libyan Nuclear officials (C-­ME9-01366),” 
17 July 2009, WikiLeaks, https://­wikileaks​.­org​/­plusd​/­cables​/­09STATE74778​_­a​.­html; “Bazelya’s 
Pos­si­ble Involvement in Technology Transfer Secret and Personal,” Covering Top Secret Deli-
cate Source UK Eyes A The Security Ser­vice G9A/S Our Ref: PF690551/G9/0, 1 December 1995, 
Wikileaks, https://­cryptome​.­wikileaks​.­org​/­mi5​-­lis​-­uk​.­htm.
29.  ​Albright, Peddling Peril, 122.
30.  ​Ibid.
31.  ​Plea and Sentence Agreement of G. Wisser in State vs. Geiges, Wisser, and Krisch Engineer-
ing, available at http://­isis​-­online​.­org​/­uploads​/­conferences​/­documents​/­Southaf​_­Relevant​
_­Facts​.­pdf (hereafter Plea and Sentence Agreement).
32.  ​Raymond Bonner and Craig S. Smith, “Pakistani Said to Have Given Libya Uranium,” 
New York Times, 21 February 2004; Albright, Peddling Peril, 124; Gordon Corera, Shopping for 
Bombs: Nuclear Proliferation, Global Insecurity, and the Rise and Fall of the AQ Khan Network (Ox-
ford: Oxford University Press, 2006), 109.
33.  ​Henry D. Sokolski, ed., Pakistan’s Nuclear ­Future: Worries Beyond War (Carlisle, PA: Army 
War College, Strategic Studies Institute, 2008) 26, available at http://­www​.­dtic​.­mil​/­dtic​/­tr​
/­fulltext​/­u2​/­a475702​.­pdf.
34.  ​Ibid., 15.
35.  ​Bonner and Smith, “Pakistani.”
36.  ​Ibid.
37.  ​IAEA, “Implementation of the NPT Safeguards Agreement of the Socialist ­People’s Lib-
yan Arab Jamahiriya,” Report by the Director General to the Board of Governors, GOV/2004/12, 
20 February 2004, Annex 1, 3, accessed from https://­fas​.­org​/­nuke​/­guide​/­libya​/­iaea0504​.­pdf.
38.  ​Albright, Libya, 19.
39.  ​Libyan academic 1, author interview, Tripoli, January 24, 2006.
40.  ​Ibid.
41.  ​Yojana Sharma, “Libya: Nuclear Research ‘Not Up to Scratch,’ ” University World News 
169, 1 May 2011.
42.  ​Plea and Sentence Agreement.
43.  ​Albright, Libya, 33.
44.  ​Mohamed M. Ennami, Scientific Adviser to the Secretary of the General ­People’s Com-
mittee for Manpower, Training and Employment, “The Libyan Case” (paper presented at the 
18th UN Conference on Disarmament Issues in Yokohama, 21–23 August 2006, Yokohama, 
­Japan). The Libyan regime provided a very sparse account of their nuclear weapons program 
to the IAEA. The most detailed overview was a four-­page summary of the program’s activities 
submitted on 29 December 2003, with very ­little supporting information. That account is not 
publicly available.
45.  ​IAEA, “Implementation of the NPT Safeguards Agreement of the Socialist ­People’s Lib-
yan Arab Jamahiriya,” Report by the Director General to the Board of Governors, GOV/2004/12, 
20  February 2004, IAEA, 6, accessed from http://­www​.­securitycouncilreport​.­org​/­atf​/­cf​
/­%7B65BFCF9B​-­6D27​-­4E9C​-­8CD3​-­CF6E4FF96FF9%7D​/­Disarm%20GOV200412​.­pdf.
46.  ​Ennami, “Libyan Case.”

259
NOTES TO PAGES 206–213
47.  ​IAEA, “Implementation of the NPT Safeguards Agreement of the Socialist ­People’s Lib-
yan Arab Jamahiriya,” Report by the Director General to the Board of Governors, GOV/2004/33, 
28 May 2004, annex 1, 3–4.
48.  ​Ibid., 4.
49.  ​Ibid., 5.
50.  ​Ibid., 4.
51.  ​Ennami, “Libyan Case.”
52.  ​IAEA, “Implementation” (GOV/2004/33), annex 1, 6.
53.  ​Albright, Libya, 40; “Técnicos libios fueron instruidos en España sobre maquinaria de po-
sible uso nuclear,” El Pais, 24 February 2004.
54.  ​IAEA, “Implementation” (GOV/2004/12), 5.
55.  ​Ibid.
56.  ​Ibid., 6.
57.  ​Bonner and Smith, “Pakistani.”
58.  ​IAEA, “Implementation” (GOV/2004/12), 2.
59.  ​Ennami, “Libyan Case.”
60.  ​Libyan academic, author interview, Tripoli, 24 January 2006.
61.  ​Judith Miller,  “How Gadhafi Lost His Groove: The Complex Surrender of Libya’s 
WMD,” Wall Street Journal, 16 May 2006.
62.  ​Seif al-­Islam Gadhafi interview.
63.  ​Libyan ambassador involved in trilateral negotiations, author interview, Tripoli, 18 Jan-
uary 2006.
64.  ​Andrea Koppel, “ElBaradei: Libya nuclear program dismantled,” CNN​.­com, 29 Decem-
ber 2003, http://­edition​.­cnn​.­com​/­2003​/­WORLD​/­africa​/­12​/­29​/­libya​.­nuclear​/­.
65.  ​Seif al-­Islam Gadhafi interview; Libyan journalist, author interview, Tripoli, 2005.
66.  ​Miller, “How Gadhafi Lost His Groove”; Zwai interview.
67.  ​Mahley interview.
68.  ​IAEA, “Implementation” (GOV/2004/33), annex 1, 7.
69.  ​Ibid.
70.  ​Zwai interview.
71.  ​Ibid.
72.  ​Ibid.
73.  ​Ibid.
74.  ​Libyan academic 1, author interview, Tripoli, 24 January 2006.
75.  ​Martin S. Indyk, “The Iraq War Did Not Force Gadaffi’s Hand,” Financial Times, 9 March 2004.
76.  ​Ibid.
77.  ​Zwai interview.
78.  ​Paul Kerr, “U.S. Refuses to Lift Sanctions against Libya,” Arms Control ­Today, 1 October 
2003, available at http://­www​.­armscontrol​.­org​/­act​/­2003​_­10​/­Libya.
79.  ​Peter Beaumont, Kamal Ahmed, and Martin Bright, “The Meeting That Brought Libya 
in from the Cold,” Observer, 21 December 2003.
80.  ​Zwai interview.
81.  ​Miller, “How Gadhafi Lost His Groove.”
82.  ​Seif al-­Islam Gadhafi interview.
83.  ​Zwai interview.
84.  ​Ibid.
85.  ​Seif al-­Islam Gadhafi interview.
86.  ​Zwai interview.
87.  ​Seif al-­Islam Gadhafi interview.
88.  ​Ibid.
89.  ​“Libyan Leader Laments No ‘Concrete’ Reward for Giving up WMD,” RAI Tre [in Ital-
ian], 17 December 2004, FBIS.
90.  ​Sharon A. Squassoni and Andrew Feickert, Disarming Libya: Weapons of Mass Destruction, 
CRS Report for Congress, Congressional Research Ser­vice, Library of Congress, 22 April 2004, 
3; Miller, “How Gadhafi Lost His Groove.”

260
NOTES TO PAGES 213–226
  91.  ​Miller, “How Gadhafi Lost His Groove.”
  92.  ​Squassoni and Feickert, Disarming Libya, 3.
  93.  ​See also Miller, “How Gadhafi Lost His Groove.”
  94.  ​Paul Kerr, “Libya Vows to Dismantle WMD Program,” Arms Control ­Today, 1 January 
2004, available at http://­www​.­armscontrol​.­org​/­act​/­2004​_­01​-­02​/­Libya.
  95.  ​Ibid.
  96.  ​IAEA “Implementation” (GOV/2004/33), annex 1, 6.
  97.  ​Seif al-­Islam Gadhafi interview.
  98.  ​Zwai interview.
  99.  ​Seif al-­Islam Gadhafi interview.
100.  ​Kerr, “Libya Vows to Dismantle WMD Program.”
101.  ​Ibid.
102.  ​Beaumont et al., “Meeting That Brought Libya In from the Cold”; William Tobey, “Analy­
sis: A Message from Tripoli: How Libya Gave Up Its WMD, Part 2: Qaddafi Agrees ‘So That the 
Color Green ­Will Be All Over the World,’ ” Bulletin of Atomic Scientists, 3 December 2014, http://­
thebulletin​.­org​/­message​-­tripoli​-­part​-­2​-­how​-­libya​-­gave​-­its​-­wmd7839.
103.  ​Tobey, “Message from Tripoli, Part 2.”
104.  ​Judith Miller, “Gadhafi’s Leap of Faith,” Wall Street Journal, 17 May 2006.
105.  ​Tobey, “Message from Tripoli, Part 2.”
106.  ​William Tobey, “Analy­sis: A Message from Tripoli: How Libya Gave Up Its WMD, Part 1: 
The Path to Interdiction,” Bulletin of Atomic Scientists, 3 December 2014, http://­thebulletin​.­org​
/­message​-­tripoli​-­how​-­libya​-­gave​-­its​-­wmd7834.
107.  ​“On This Day: 19 December: 2003: Libya Gives Up Chemical Weapons,” BBC News, 
http://­news​.­bbc​.­co​.­uk​/­onthisday​/­hi​/­dates​/­stories​/­december​/­19​/­newsid​_­4002000​
/­4002441​.­stm.
108.  ​“Libyan Leader Laments.”
Conclusion
    1.  ​Jeff D. Colgan, Petro-­Aggression: When Oil ­Causes War (Cambridge: Cambridge Univer-
sity Press, 2013).
    2.  ​Ibid., 149.
    3.  ​Bruce Bueno de Mesquita and Alastair Smith, “Domestic Explanations of International 
Relations,” Annual Review of Po­liti­cal Science 15 (2012): 161–181.
    4.  ​U.S. Interagency Intelligence Assessment, “Implications of Israeli Attack on Iraq,” 
1 July 1981, 8, National Security Archive.
    5.  ​See Jacques E. C. Hymans, Achieving Nuclear Ambitions: Scientists, Politicians, and Prolif-
eration (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2012).
    6.  ​See, for example, Rublee, “Egypt’s Nuclear Weapons Program” The nonproliferation re-
view 13, no. 3 (2006), 555–567.
    7.  ​Request from the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic for an Atomic Energy Plan-
ning Expert, 26 February 1968, IAEA Archives.
    8.  ​A. E. Cairo, Area Officer for the ­Middle East and Eu­rope, Division of Technical Assis-
tance, to Ghazi Derwish, 7 August 1968 (TA/SYR/0/002), IAEA Archives.
    9.  ​Ghazi Derwish, “Syrian Arab Republic: Plans for Nuclear Research with Special Refer-
ence to Radioisotope Applications,” IAEA Report, 1969 (TA/SYR/0/002), 6, IAEA Archives.
  10.  ​Cairo to Derwish.
  11.  ​Derwish, “Plans for Nuclear Research,” 6.
  12.  ​Ibid., 7.
  13.  ​Ibid.
  14.  ​Ibid., 31.
  15.  ​Peter Watson to  R. A. Northwick, Safeguards Section, IAEA, Syrian Arab Republic, 
4 May 1973 (TA/SYR/6/02), IAEA Archives.

261
NOTES TO PAGES 226–229
16.  ​Ibid.
17.  ​Ibid.
18.  ​Interoffice Memorandum from C. B. Taylor, Division of Research and Laboratories, to 
M. Mutru, Technical Assistance, “Evaluation of Final Report by Mr. Kuoppamaki on His Visit 
to Syria,” 2 November 1976 (SYR/8/02), IAEA Archives.
19.  ​See IAEA, “Implementation of the NPT Safeguards Agreement in the Syrian Arab Re-
public,” Report by the Director General to the Board of Governors, GOV/2011/30, 24 May 2011, 
IAEA Archives. See also “Syria: Nuclear,” NTI​.­org, http://­www​.­nti​.­org​/­country​-­profiles​/­syria​
/­nuclear​/.
20.  ​See Matthew Fuhrmann, Atomic Assistance: How “Atoms for Peace” Programs Cause Nu-
clear Insecurity (Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 2012).


263
Index
Abdelaziz, Izzat, 155–56, 166
Abdulla, Ali Atiya, 40, 42
Abdul Rahman, Ibrahim, 176
Abu Nidal Organ­ization, 170
Addaroughi, Nouri Ali, 176, 253n12
Africa, Libya’s role in, 128, 198, 210, 211
Ahmed, Abdul Kader Abdul Rahman,  
87, 100
Ahmed, Abdul Qader, 59, 68
Ahmed, Ahmed Murtadha, 104
Al Bakr University, 61
Al Fao General Establishment Com­pany,  
87, 104, ­108
Al-­Fateh University, 172, 184, 185
Al Furat plant, 110
Algeria, 199, 224, 225
Al Hashan Uranium Conversion Fa­cil­i­ty, 
206, ­207
Al-­Hazen Institute, 78
Ali, Ahmad Mahmoud, ­190
Al-­Jazira site, 95, 111, 112
Al Qaa Qaa General Establishment (QGE), 
48, 100, 114, ­115
Al-­Qaim Establishment, 95
Andreotti, Giulio, 56
Arab Development Institution (ADI; ­later 
National Acad­emy of Science), ­185
Arab-­Israeli Wars, 140
Arab Spring, 180, 216, 230
Argentina, 159, 185
Arif, Abdul Rahman, 35
Arif, Abdul Salam, 27, 34–35
al-­Assad, Bashar, 64
Atheer site, 111, 112, 114
Atomenergoexport, 161, 163, 177
Atoms for Peace, ­75
al-­Attrash, Ahmed, 133
authoritarian regimes: decisions about 
pursuing nuclear weapons, 2–3, 4, 10, 
219, 222–23, 224, 227–30; and hiring 
decisions, 49; levels of institutionaliza-
tion in, 5; and management strategies 
­toward nuclear scientists, 6, 9, 10–13; 
national security decisions of, 3; nuclear 
weapons programs of, 2–3; oil-­exporting 
states, 7; use of state institutions as 
vehicles for domination, 5. See also 
personalist leaders
Awadh (secretary-­general IAEC), 40
Aziz, Mohamed El, 165
Aziz, Tariq, 65, 79, 117
Baath Party: and Egypt, 27; and Libya, 129, 
131, 135; in Syria, 27, 34, 40, 61, 62.  
See also Iraqi Baath Party
Bader, Abdel Rahim, 190
Badr General Establishment, 59, 93
Baghdad Museum, 26–27
Baghdad Pact, 14, 24–27, 28
Baghdad Pact Nuclear Training Centre, 
Salhiya, 25–26, 28, 29–30, 31, ­34
al-­Bahi, Mohamed al-­Mabruk, 250n18
Bakkoush, Fawzia Ali, 176
Bakkush, Abdul Hamid, 133–34, ­135
Note: Italic page numbers refer to illustrations.

264
Index
al-­Bakr, Ahmed Hassan, 34, 35, 38, 41–42, 
46, 61–62, ­64
el-­Baradei, Mohamed, 208
Batatu, Hanna, 22
Bazoft, Farzad, 115
BBC China, 214
Begin, Menachem, 73
Belgatom, 188
Belgium: and Iraqi nuclear research and 
development programs, 52, 95; and 
Libyan nuclear weapons program, 159, 
171, 184, 186, 188
Belgonucleaire, 184, 186, 188
Benedict, Manson, 66
Ben Lashihar, Ali, 185
Ben Ouagrham-­Gormley, Sonia, 5
Bhutto, Zulfikar Ali, 159
Birmingham University, 33
Blair, Tony, 212, 214, 215
Bolton, John, 214
Brazil, 49, 58, 95, 159, 188
Britain: alliance with Libya, 129; and 
Baghdad Pact, 24–26, 28; and Faisal I’s 
rule of Iraq, 22; Muammar Gaddafi’s 
attitude ­toward, 137; and Iraqi nuclear 
research and development programs,  
24, 25–26; and Iraqi nuclear weapons 
threshold, 122; and Iraqi oil industry, 23; 
Iraqi students in, 26, 33–34; and Iraqi 
weapons and munitions industry, 23; and 
Libyan nuclear weapons program, 159; 
Libyan relations with, 181, 196–97, 201, 
210, 211, 212, 213–16; negotiations with 
Libya for missiles, 133–34
British Atomic Energy Authority, 25–26
British Atomic Energy Research Establish-
ment, Harwell, 26
British Cabinet Office, 51
British Foreign Office, 25–26
British Ministry of Defence, 122
British Museum, 26–27
British Petroleum, 137
Bunker Hunt Oil Com­pany, 137
Bunni, Lath Jamil, 92
Bush, George H. E. W., 200
Bush, George W., 212, 214, 215
Cairo Nuclear Center, 165
Cameron, James, 144
Canada, 33, 34, 155
CERN, 59, 81
Chad, 170, 181, 182, 189, 190
China: and Iraqi nuclear weapons program, 
58; and Libyan nuclear research and 
development program, 141, 159, 161, 204; 
nuclear weapons program of, 219; and 
Syrian nuclear program, 227
CIRENE reactor, 58
Cockcroft, John, 24–26
Cohen, Karl, 66
Cold War, 224
Colgan, Jeff, 3, 222–23
Colleges of Engineering and Education 
(Libya), 131
Constructions Navales et Industrielles de la 
Méditerranée, 61
control mechanisms, ­12
coup-­proofing, 6, 8, 9–10, 221, ­223
al-­Dabbagh, Salem, 50
Da’wa Party, 66
Demidov, A. M., 35, 38
Derwish, Ghazi Abdul Wahab, 33, 35–36, 
40, 225–26
Deutch, John, 190
developing states: IAEA’s support for 
nuclear research and development in, 29, 
31, 144, 155; Libya compared to, 130; 
nuclear weapons development in, 80, 229
Dolnicar, Joze, 161
al-Doori, Izzat Ibrahim, 65, 83, 85, 95, 99, 117
Eastern Eu­rope, 29, 31, 41
Egypt: and Baath Party, 27; education in,  
23; emergence of personalist regime in, 
230; Islamist uprisings in, 199; Libya 
compared to, 136, 139; Libya funding 
nuclear research of, 141; Libya’s war with, 
161; and Gamal Abdel Nasser’s over-
throw of monarch, 129; nuclear program 
of, 141, 224; nuclear weapons option  
for, 51, 140; and pan-­Arab politics, 27; 
Saddam on Israel’s targeting of, 62; 
scientists in Libyan nuclear research and 
development programs, 141, 151, 155, 
156, 158, 161, 165, 166; and Yom Kippur 
War, 47, 51
Ehrman, William, 215
Eklund, Sigvard, 74
Elmehrik, Yusuf, 145, 146, 153
Ennami, Mohamed, 137, 140, 202, 205, 207, 
208, 209
Eskangy, Abdel Fattah, 163, 164, 166–67, 172
Ettalhi, Azzouz, 144–45, 178, 180–81, 200, 
201, 211
Eu­ro­pean Atomic Energy Community, 185
Evangelista, Matthew, 11
Experimental Research Laboratory for Fuel 
Fabrication, ­58
al-­Fadhli, Ibrahim, 36, 50
Faisal I (king of Iraq), 22
Faisal II (king of Iraq), 25
Falklands War, 199
Fao General Establishment, 94
Fathi, M. Bara, 253n12

265
Index
Fattah, Abdul, 104
Fhimah, Lamin Khalifah, 201, 212
Fiorelli, Mario, 61
Fletcher, Yvonne, 181, 210
Foundation of Technical Institutes, 39
France: Muammar Gaddafi’s attitude 
­toward, 137; and Iraqi nuclear research 
and development programs, 49, 52, 53–56, 
58, 60, 61, 68, 70, 73, 75, 76, 86, 94; and 
Iraqi nuclear weapons threshold, 122;  
and Israel, 75; and Libyan nuclear reactor 
request, 161; and Libyan nuclear weapons 
program, 158–59; Libyan relations with, 
200; Libya purchasing jets from, 137, 159; 
support for Iran-­Iraq War, 77
­Free Officers Movement, 129
Fukuyama, Francis, 7
Gaddafi, Muammar: agricultural reforms 
of, 8; ambitions for nuclear program, 1, 
149, 150, 152, 156–58, 162–63, 164, 165, 
166, 168; ambitions for nuclear research 
and development programs, 1, 149, 150, 
152, 156–58, 162–63, 177; ambivalent 
ambitions for nuclear weapons program, 
157, 194, 196, 197, 198, 200, 220; aware-
ness of failure of nuclear program, 169; 
brain drain during reign of, 156; and 
capacity of state institutions, 5–6, 148; 
coup of 1969, 134–35, 148, 152, 157; coup 
planned by, 130, 134; Cultural Revolu-
tion’s impact on state apparatus, 4, 
127–28, 148, 149, 150–52, 168, 179–80,  
181, 193; defense policy of, 137, 140;  
and deterrent capabilities, 193–94,  
199; dismantling of nuclear weapons 
program, 1, 3, 14, 18, 127, 197, 208, 
215–16; dismantling of state institutions, 
1, 5, 127, 149, 181; domestic challenges of 
regime, 199–200; and Egyptian nuclear 
research funding, 141; foreign policy of, 
136–37, 159, 193, 194, 196–97, 200; and 
Abdel-­Majid Gaoud, 171–72; ideological 
precept of anti-­imperialism, 136–37, 140, 
159; idiosyncratic evolution of Libya 
­under, 17; and indigenous industrial 
development, 176, 194, 199; inner circle 
of, 136, 148, 150, 162, 172, 180, 209–10, 
212, 227; isolation of, 170, 189, 196; 
management strategy of, 11, 12–13, 127, 
135, 175, 179, 219, 221, 224, 227–28, 229; 
po­liti­cal ambitions concerning nuclear 
weapons, 138–39, 195, 196, 203; priorities 
of, 2, 137–38, 157, 222–23; protest of 
Syria’s withdrawal from United Arab 
Republic, 130; public image of, 220; and 
re­distribution of private wealth and 
property, 142, 143; relations with Soviet 
Union, 184; relations with U.S., 170–71, 
192–93, 201; revolutionary ambitions of, 
150; rise to power, 15, 18, 128, 130, 134–35, 
148; and sanctions negotiations, 211, 
212–13, 214, 215; speeches of, 136; on 
weapons of mass destruction, 198
Gaddafi, Seif al-­Islam, 198–99, 208, 209, 
212–14
Gaddafi, Wannis, 133
Gaoud, Abdel-­Majid, 171–72, 176, 178, 180, 
185, 190
General Atomics, 26
General Establishment for Electrical 
Industries, 93
Germany, 110, 120, 186, 189. See also West 
Germany
Ghanem, Shukri, 147–48, 180, 182
Ghiriyani, Mustafa, 143, 146
Ghita, Mohamed Kashif, 24, 33
Ghuma, M. A., 166, 176–77, 188, 253n12
Govor, L. I., 38
Group Management Committee, 188
Gulf War (1991): effect on Iraqi nuclear 
weapons program, 1, 17, 103, 108, 119, 
120–23; effect on Iraqi WMD programs, 
13; Saddam’s defeat in, 3; and Saddam’s 
invasion of Kuwait, 2, 120; and Hussein 
Shahristani’s escape, 66
Hakam production site, 78–79
Hamdani, Adnan, 64
Hamdi, Khaloow Raof, 92
Hammadi, Sa’adoun, 73, 101
Hamza, Kidhir, 100–101
Hangary, Khaled, ­188
al-­Hasain, Ibrahim, 172, 253–54n12
al-­Hashimi, Abdul Razzak, 43–44, 55–57, 66, 
69, 73, ­76
al-­Hashimi, Subhi, 36
Hazem, Mohammed. See Hamza, Kidhir
Hindawi, Ali, 30
Hiti, Thabit, 30–31
Humam Abdul Khaliq: in del­e­ga­tion to 
France, 53; as head of Nuclear Research 
Center, 44, 58, 67; and IAEC, 83; and 
IAEO, 104; and Iraqi nuclear weapons 
program, 55, 64, 75, 82, 83, 86–87, 89, 
95–98, 100–102, 114; and Hussein Kamil, 
103; and plan for nuclear power program, 
48–49; and plutonium production 
capacity, 55; and weaponization,  
100–102
Humeidi, Khaled, 150, 180
Husaini, Baqir, 29
Hussein, Hala, 97
Hussein, Saddam: ambitions for nuclear 
weapons program, 44, 45, 46–47, 50, 51, 
61–64, 69–70, 76, 83, 89–90, 104, 120, 121, 

266
Index
Hussein, Saddam (continued)
	 122; attitude ­toward scientists, 4, 11–12, 
13; and Baath Party coup of 1968, 38; and 
capacity of state institutions, 1, 5–6; 
defeat in Gulf War, 3; as deputy of 
Ahmed Hassan al-­Bakr, 35, 38, 61; 
dominance of Iraqi state, 79; five-­year 
plans for Iraqi military-­industrial 
complex, 47–48; and French reactor, 53; 
internal security concerns of, 64; invasion 
of Kuwait, 2, 16, 18, 116–17, 118, 119, 121, 
122, 123; involvement in nuclear weapons 
program, 1, 4, 12–13, 17, 59, 66, 70, 71, 75, 
79, 80, 82, 85, 87, 95–97, 99, 100–102, 103, 
104, 106–8, 110–11, 117, 118, 219, 221, 228; 
and Iran-­Iraq War, 8, 67–68, 74, 77–78, 
116; “Iraq first” policy, 61; and Israeli air 
raid on Osirak reactors, 72–75, 115, 223; 
and Israeli espionage, 115–16; and Italian 
contracts, 56; long-­term objectives of, 49; 
management strategy of, 11–13, 221, 224, 
227–28, 229; and military-­industrial 
complex, 101; on nuclear deterrent, 76–77; 
and nuclear power program, 46; and 
patronage networks, 65; plot against 
Abdul Qasim, 34; priorities of, 2, 17, 220, 
222–23; pro-­Western shift of, 73, 74; 
public image of, 220; purges of, 62, 64–65, 
223; on regional power balance, 62, 63–64, 
239n78; restructuring of Iraqi Atomic 
Energy Commission, 21, 48–51; and Revo-
lutionary Command Council, 43; rise to 
power, 15, 61–62, 65, 69; secrecy of 
nuclear weapons program, 46; and 
security and intelligence ser­vices, 38, 40, 
110; state apparatus ­shaped by, 1, 65, 69; 
Vice-­Presidential Office of, 58
Hussein, Uday, 107–8
Hymans, Jacques, 4, 11, 123
Idris al-­Senussi (king of Libya), 129, 131, 
132, ­133
Imhausen-­Chemie, 189
India, 159, 224, 229
Indyk, Martin S., 211
information asymmetry, 10, 12
Institute for Applied Research on Natu­ral 
Resources, 42
International Atomic Energy Agency 
(IAEA): on administrative capabilities of 
Iraqi nuclear research and development 
programs, 36–37, 41; assessment of Iraqi 
nuclear weapons program, 121; assess-
ment of Libyan nuclear research and 
development program, 165, 166–67, 179; 
assessment of Soviet charges for technical 
equipment in Iraq, 52; assistance for 
Libyan nuclear energy program, 138, 139, 
144, 145–46, 153, 160–61, 162, 163, 171, 
172, 175–76, 177, 178, 190; assistance for 
Libyan nuclear research and develop-
ment program, 139, 143, 144, 145–46, 149, 
152–55, 156, 160, 161, 165, 168, 178, 188, 
250n21, 251n29; assistance for Libyan ura-
nium exploration, 133, 141, 143–44, 166, 
188; assistance for Syrian nuclear 
program, 225–27; cooperation policy with 
Iraq, 49; inspections of declared nuclear 
facilities, 41; inspections of Iraqi nuclear 
research and development programs,  
53, 54, 55, 57, 58, 59, 73, 74, 116, 118; 
inspections of Libyan nuclear research 
and development programs, 179, 182, 
184, 186, 188, 207–8, 214, 215, 256n117; 
Iraq as member of, 76; and Israel’s air raid 
on Osirak reactors, 73, 74, 76; Libya as 
member of, 132; Libyan report on nuclear 
weapons program for, 258n44; nuclear 
assistance and training for Iraq, 29–31,  
33, 34, 35, 36, 41–42, 43, 54, 60, 86; on 
objectives of Iraqi nuclear research and 
development programs, 26; planning of 
nuclear research activities for Iraq, 36,  
42; reports on Libyan nuclear research 
and development program, 169, 172,  
175, 177; sources from, 13, 14–15, 127; 
Technical Assistance archives, 14–15
Iran: Arab enmity with, 47; and Baghdad 
Pact, 24, 28; electricity grid of, 53; 
industrial development in, 23; national-
ization of oil industry in, 28; nuclear 
power in, 25, 51, 62; nuclear program  
of, 203, 224; raid on Iraqi reactor site, 61;  
and Saddam’s espionage concerns, 115; 
and Saddam’s regional ambition, 62
Ira­nian Revolution (1979), 2, 47, 64, 65, ­67
Iran-­Iraq War: and Iraqi military-­industrial 
complex, 8, 71–72, 116; and Iraqi nuclear 
weapons program, 58, 67, 71–72, 79, 83, 
106, 115, 223; and Libyan chemical and 
biological weapons, 189; and nonconven-
tional weapons, 77–78; and Saddam, 8, 
67–68, 74, 77–78, 116; U.S. support for,  
77, 117
Iraq: British influence in, 22, 23, 24; civil 
servants of, 27; development of state 
institutions in, 15–16, 22, 38, 229–30; 
education in, 23, 32–34, 38, 39–40, 51, 64, 
229; electricity grid of, 23–24, 53; in­de­pen­
dence of, 22; industrialization policy in, 
23; integration in global economy, 3–4; 
intelligence ser­vices of, 4, 38, 40, 66, 77, 
85, 120; intermittent coup attempts in, 22; 
and Kurdish push for autonomy, 27; land 
reforms in, 27–28; monarchy in, 22–27; 
petroleum resources of, 22, 23, 25, 28; 

267
Index
population of, 23; Ramadan Revolution 
of 1963, 34–35; relationship between 
science and politics in, 2; as republic, 
27–38; role of nonstate actors in, 7; Shiite 
population of, 65; social reforms in, 51; 
and state capacity, 1, 15, 21, 55, 59, 218, 
220, 221, 222, 228–29; terrorist attacks by 
Shiites, 65–66
Iraqi Amn Al Khas (security agency), 101
Iraqi Atomic Energy Commission (IAEC): 
books from, 66; chain of command in, 85; 
establishment of, 24–25, 28; and ­human 
resources development, 32, 33, 36, 37, 
49–50; on Israel’s air raid on Osirak 
reactors, 72, 73; and Italian contracts, 57, 
58; Joint Committee of, 35; and laboratory-­
scale repro­cessing technology, 52–53; 
leadership of, 65; and National Radioiso-
tope Center, 30–31; and nuclear weapons 
program, 54, 55, 56, 79, 81, 82, 89, 90–91, 
93, 94, 95–96, 97, 99, 100–102, 113, 229; 
oversight of, 83, 102; as part of Ministry of 
Higher Education and Research, 40; as 
part of Ministry of Industry, 31; procure-
ment campaign of, 52, 58, 59; Proj­ect 182 
launched by, 86; Proj­ects Department of, 
59; proposals from, 14; reor­ga­ni­za­tion of 
1982–1988, 83, 84, 85–87, 89, 99–100; 
replacement of, 104; and Saddam’s nuclear 
weapons ambition, 64; Saddam’s 
restructuring of, 21, 48–51; socialist 
objectives of, 39; Soviet affiliation of 
scientists and engineers, 41; technical 
assistance from IAEA, 29–30. See also 
Nuclear Research Center (NRC), Tuwaitha
Iraqi Atomic Energy Organ­ization (IAEO), 
104, 120–21
Iraqi Baath Party: as apex of state appara-
tus, 65; ascent of, 21; and coup of 1958, 
27–28, 40; and coup of 1968, 38–44; inner 
workings of, 4; and Israel’s air raid on 
Osirak reactors, 74; purges of state 
institutions, 38, 40, 69, 230; Ramadan 
Revolution of February 1963, 34–35; role 
in management of nuclear weapons 
program, 16, 21–22, 44, 50, 55, 71, 85, 89, 
102; role in nuclear establishment, 17, 
40–41, 43–44, 45, 49–50, 55, 56; and 
Saddam’s “Iraq first” policy, 61; Saddam’s 
purges of, 62; and secular, Sunni-­
dominated regime, 65; and state 
institutions, 34–35
Iraqi Cabinet, 76
Iraqi chemical and biological weapons: 
institutional arrangements of, 85, 86, 
236n92; and Iran-­Iraq War, 77–79, 117; 
and Hussein Kamil, 101; nuclear weapons 
program compared to, 16
Iraqi Communist Party, 27, 34, 44
Iraqi Military Industrial Commission 
(MIC), 79, 85–86, 100–101, 104, 107, 113, 
123
Iraqi military-­industrial complex: adminis-
trative capabilities of, 48; and arms 
buildup, 47–48, 77, 79; and Baath Party 
coup of 1968, 39; and Badr Establishment, 
59; drift in, 101; effect of regime interven-
tions on, 4; elites’ management of, 107; 
and ­human resources development, 
39–40; industrial complexes for arms 
production, 39; and Iran-­Iraq War, 8, 
71–72, 77–79; and Iraqi nuclear weapons 
program, 87, 89, 90, 93, 94, 103, 104, 107, 
109, 113; Hussein Kamil as minister of, 17; 
and Mirage fighter airplanes, 53; and 
missile program, 113; and nonconven-
tional weapons, 77–79, 120; origins of, 23; 
per­for­mance of, 223–24; procurement 
campaign of, 52; Saddam’s management 
of, 11, 47–48, 79; scientists as man­ag­ers of 
proj­ects in, 48, 72; scientists’ bottom-up 
initiatives in, 48, 79; sites of, 88
Iraqi Ministry of Defense, 78
Iraqi Ministry of Education, 39, 76
Iraqi Ministry of Finance, 107
Iraqi Ministry of Higher Education and 
Scientific Research, 39–40
Iraqi Ministry of Industry, 31, 35, 48
Iraqi Ministry of Industry and Military 
Industrialization (MIMI), 85, 101, 104, 
106, 107, 123
Iraqi Ministry of Industry and Minerals 
(MIM), 52, 94–95
Iraqi Mukhabarat (intelligence or­ga­ni­za­
tion), 40, 77, 85
Iraqi Muthanna State Establishment (MSE), 
78, 92, 94, 96
Iraqi nuclear medicine, 30, 32
Iraqi nuclear research and development 
programs: and administrative capabili-
ties, 15, 29, 30, 31, 33, 36–38, 41, 42, 43, 45, 
46; agricultural applications, 31; 
ambiguity in, 17, 21, 46, 51, 53, 57, 58, 59, 
63, 69, 70; anticommunist campaigns of, 
33; applications of health physics, 36, 37; 
and Baath Party coup of 1968, 38, 40; 
Baath Party’s role in, 17, 40–41, 43–44,  
45, 49–50, 55, 56; and Baghdad Pact, 
24–27, 28; changes in governance of,  
49; coordination committee overseeing 
technical assistance programs, 31, 235n57; 
data-­processing system of, 37–38; and 
dual-­use fuel cycle technologies, 46, 
52–61; dual-­use infrastructure of, 50, 51, 
52; emergence of, 16, 17, 21; factions in, 
40–42, 43, 44, 45, 46, 50, 56; and foreign 

268
Index
Iraqi nuclear research and development 
programs (continued)
	 advisers and con­sul­tants, 5, 25, 26, 28, 
29–31, 36, 41–42, 45, 49, 50, 56, 60; goals 
of, 26, 42–45, 46, 50, 51, 69, 73; and ­human 
resources development, 29, 31, 32–34, 36, 
37, 39, 41, 45, 46, 49–50, 59–60; leadership 
of, 65; management of, 33, 43, 45, 46, 69; 
medical applications, 30–31, 32, 36, 37; 
nuclear energy program, 46, 48–49, 51,  
52, 53, 56, 57, 73; oil refining applications, 
42; and oversight mechanisms, 45, 69; 
plutonium production capacity of, 54–55, 
56, 59, 60, 80; and radioisotopes, 26–27, 
29, 30–31, 36, 42, 52; Scientific Council, 44; 
and scientists’ bottom-up initiatives, 17, 
43; and scientists’ competition, 50, 228; 
and scientists’ interest in industrial 
applications, 42, 45; and scientists’ loyalty 
to Baath Party, 40, 41; and scientists’ 
planning research activities, 36, 42, 46; 
and scientists’ skills, 29, 30, 31; secrecy 
emphasized in, 48, 49, 50, 57, 60; Dhafir 
Selbi’s role in, 32; training of Iraqis, 26, 35, 
38, 56. See also Nuclear Research Center 
(NRC), Tuwaitha
Iraqi nuclear weapons program: analy­sis of, 
15–16, 218; Baath Party’s role in, 16, 
21–22, 44, 50, 55, 71, 85, 89, 102; case 
study of, 16–17; and centrifuges, 81–82, 
90, 94–95, 106, 107, 108–11, 118, 119, 120, 
121, 122, 123; clandestine nature of, 46, 71, 
75–77, 80, 81, 83, 86, 87, 89, 92, 100, 106, 
109, 111, 114–15, 118, 121; crash program 
of 1990–1991, 16, 18, 52, 54, 103, 116, 
117–22, 123; Dhafir Proj­ect, 112, 114, 119; 
dissolving of, 120–21; distance from 
nuclear weapons threshold, 121–23;  
and distribution of sites, 86–87, 111;  
and diversion of reactor fuel in crash 
program, 54; drift in, 17, 21, 45, 55, 102; 
and dual-­use fuel cycle, 52–54; dysfunc-
tional nature of, 2; and electromagnetic 
isotope separation (EMIS), 81–82, 90, 
91–94, 95, 97–98, 99, 100, 104, 106, 108, 
111–12, 121, 123; and enriched uranium 
production, 79–83, 85–87, 89–95, 96, 97, 
100, 102; and foreign assistance, 80, 106, 
108, 109, 115, 119, 120, 123, 228–29; and 
gaseous diffusion, 81–82, 90, 91, 92, 100, 
104, 106, 107, 108; Gulf War’s effect on, 1, 
17, 103, 108, 119, 120–23; and ­human 
resources development, 79, 80, 100; 
industrial facilities supporting, 48; and 
Iran-­Iraq War, 58, 67, 71–72, 79, 83, 106, 
115, 223; Israel’s covert attacks on, 60–63; 
and Italian contracts, 56–58; and Jafar 
Dhiya Jafar, 55, 66, 69, 70, 71, 75, 76–77, 
79–83, 85–87, 89–91, 93–101, 102, 104,  
106, 108, 111, 115, 117–22, 229; lack of 
bud­getary restrictions on, 72, 80, 107; 
Libyan nuclear weapons program 
compared to, 17; management of, 1, 16, 
17, 21, 46–47, 55, 71, 77, 83, 87, 90–91, 
98–100, 102–4, 106, 107, 113, 123, 221–22; 
and Nuclear Research Center, Tuwaitha, 
29, 46, 50, 55, 69–70, 75, 80, 81, 85, 91, 93, 
95, 97–100, 102, 107, 108, 111–14, 117, 119; 
objectives of, 2, 21–22, 71; origins of, 17, 
21, 46; and Osirak reactors, 53–56, 60, 61, 
67, 68, 70, 71, 72–79, 102, 115, 223, 229; 
oversight mechanisms of, 1, 71, 77, 83, 
87, 97, 102, 220, 228; per­for­mance of, 1, 2, 
17–18, 87, 95–96, 97, 123, 229–30; and 
plutonium extraction, 116, 118–19; 
portrayal of, 2; reorganizations of 
1982–1988, 83, 84, 85–87, 89, 99–100, 102, 
104, 123; and research and development 
proj­ects, 89–95, 98–100; role of civilian 
infrastructure in, 21; Saddam’s ambitions 
for, 44, 45, 46, 46–47, 50, 51, 61–64, 69–70, 
76, 83, 89–90, 104, 120, 121, 122; and 
Saddam’s invasion of Kuwait, 117, 119, 
122; Saddam’s involvement in, 1, 4, 
12–13, 17, 59, 66, 70, 71, 75, 79, 80, 82, 85, 
87, 95–97, 99, 100–102, 103, 104, 106–8, 
110–11, 117, 118, 219, 221, 228; scientists’ 
articulation of ambitions of, 21–22, 71, 
72; scientists’ autonomy in, 89, 221; 
scientists’ initiatives in, 1, 2, 4, 13, 17; 
and scientists’ loyalty to Saddam, 47; 
and scientists’ rewards, 79; scientists 
setting deadline in 1985, 72; scientists’ 
technical choices in, 81–82, 86; scientists’ 
timelines for, 122; sites and facilities 
associated with, 87, 88; sources on, 
13–14; and state capacity, 1, 15, 21, 55,  
59, 218, 220, 221, 222, 228–29; tensions  
in, 82, 90–91, 96, 97–100, 102, 103, 114; 
and terrorist attacks by Shiites, 65–66; 
timeline of 1982–1991, 105; and weapon-
ization proj­ect, 80, 97, 100–102, 103, 111, 
112–16, 118, 119, 121
Iraqi Revolutionary Command Council 
(RCC): decision-­making role of, 50; and 
education, 39; establishment of, 27; 
factions in, 64; and invasion of Kuwait, 
117; and Iraqi nuclear weapons program, 
97; and nonconventional weapons, 77; 
and oversight mechanisms, 45, 46; and 
reor­ga­ni­za­tion of IAEC, 85; and Saddam 
on covert actions against nuclear 
program, 61; and Saddam on nuclear 
deterrent, 76; Saddam on Soviet help in 
deterrence of Israel, 63; Saddam’s control 
of, 43, 44, 48, 50

269
Index
Iraqi State Organ­ization for Technical 
Industries (SOTI), 77, 86, 93
Iraq Survey Group, 13
Islail, Abdul Hadri, 31
Israel: air raid on Nuclear Research Center, 
Tuwaitha, 17, 47, 68–69, 70, 71, 72–79, 115, 
202, 222, 223; air strike on Syria in 2007, 
225, 227; concerns about Iraqi nuclear 
weapons program, 53, 54, 60, 67; covert 
attacks on Iraqi nuclear weapons 
program, 60–63, 67; Dimona reactor in, 
53; and France, 75; Muammar Gaddafi’s 
attitude ­toward, 137; invasion of Beirut, 
199; and Libya, 131, 132, 138–39, 140, 157, 
159, 194, 213; nuclear weapons program 
of, 51, 53, 62–63, 64, 73, 76, 138, 140, 141, 
194, 239n78; postwar migration to, 131; 
and regional power balance, 140; Saddam 
on Iraq’s development gap with, 62; and 
Saddam’s espionage concerns, 115–16; 
and Yom Kippur War, 47, 51
Italian National Commission on Nuclear 
Energy, 56–57
Italy: colonial rule of Libya, 128, 130, 131, 
136; and Iraqi nuclear research and 
development programs, 49, 52, 56–58, 61, 
75; and Libyan nuclear weapons 
program, 159, 214
Jabr, Abu Bajr Yunis, 150, 180
Jafar, Dhiya, 23–24, 25, 33
Jafar, Jafar Dhiya: arrest of, 66, 69, 70, 75; 
and Baath Party, 40, 49; and John 
Cockcroft, 25; education of, 33; as head of 
Office of Studies and Development in 
IAEC, 83, 87; and IAEO, 104; at Imperial 
College, London, 41; and infrastructure’s 
vulnerability, 86–87; on Iran’s nuclear 
program, 51; and Iraqi nuclear weapons 
program, 55, 66, 69, 70, 71, 75, 76–77, 
79–83, 85–87, 89–91, 93–101, 102, 104, 106, 
108, 111, 115, 117–22, 229; and Hussein 
Kamil, 103; and Non-­Proliferation  
Treaty, 75; and Nuclear Research Center, 
Tuwaitha, 36, 40, 42, 43, 44, 50, 58–59, 60, 
68–69, 80; protest of Hussein Shahristani’s 
arrest, 66; and rebuilding of power grid, 
121; research of, 35, 38
Jalloud, Abdessalam: and cooperation with 
China in science and technology, 141; 
criticism of leadership, 199–200; and 
Cultural Revolution, 150, 180; as deputy of 
Muammar Gaddafi, 135, 148; and nuclear 
research and development program, 143, 
152, 156, 158, 166; and nuclear weapons 
program, 141, 160, 161; as prime minister, 
146; on program for radical change, 136; 
and Tajoura Nuclear Research Center, 164
Japan, 34, 56, 147, 188–89, 206
Jordan, 62, 64, 101
Joseph, Robert G., ­215
al-­Kadhim, Nouri, 31
Kadri, Lonay, 31
Kadry, Usamah, 31
Kajfosz, Josef, 35, 42–43
Kamil, Hussein, 17, 101, 103–4, 106–10, 114, 
117–23, 243n5
Kappes, Stephen, 213
Karim (Libyan scientist), 202, 204
Kaseer, Nazar Juma, 104
Kemp, R. Scott, 5
Kershman, Hajji M., 164
Khadduri, Imad, 50, 60
Khail, Abdullah, 38
Khairallah, Adnan, ­72
al-­Khalisi, Faisal, 36, 43
Khan, Abdul Qadeer: and Iraqi nuclear 
weapons program, 120; and Libyan 
nuclear weapons program, 187, 198, 
201–5, 207, 214, 216; network of, 14; and 
Syrian nuclear program, 227
Kharroubi, Mustafa, 150, ­180
al-­Kittal, Rahim Abdul, 83, 95, 96, 99,  
104
Kosina, Z., 35
Kosygin, Alexei, 162
Kurchatov Institute, Moscow, 38, 163
Kusa, Musa, 181, 198, 200, 203, 211, 213,  
215
Kuwait: oil production in, 116; Saddam’s 
invasion of, 2, 16, 18, 116–17, 118, 119, 121, 
122, 123
Lami, Salman, 59, 61, 81
Landsman, David, 215
Lebanon, 23
Levitsky, Steven, 7
Libya: absence of oversight mechanisms in, 
14, 180; administrative capacity of, 150; 
and agricultural development, 143; 
agro-­industrial proj­ect, 252n75; and Arab 
nationalist movements, 130; and Baath 
Party, 129; bureaucracy of, 5, 15–16, 
127–28, 136, 151; civil society in, 129, 
150–51; collapse of economy in, 193, 196; 
currency of, 249n108; defense plan of, 
133–34, 137, 140; development challenges 
facing, 128–29, 131, 148; development of 
state institutions in, 15–16, 129, 131, 132, 
148; development plan of 1963–1968, 130, 
132–34; development plan of 1972–1975, 
142, 249n106; development plan of 
1972–1976, 146; diplomatic ser­vice of, 150, 
151; economic development in, 157, 198; 
economic growth in, 132; education in, 

270
Index
Libya (continued)
	 130–31, 139, 141, 144–45, 151, 152–56, 165, 
230; effect of oil economy in, 4–5, 132–33, 
135, 137–38, 147–48, 149, 161, 170, 193, 
201, 222–23; electrical power grid of,  
131, 139–40, 176; energy production as 
priority in, 131; entrepreneurial sector of, 
131, 142; evolution of state in, 4–5, 128; 
exports of, 130, 132–33; Five-­Year Plan of 
1981, 187–88; and foreign assistance, 129, 
131, 137, 148; foreign policy of, 17, 129, 
136–37, 140, 159, 170, 192, 194, 196–97, 
198, 200, 202, 211–12; Muammar Gaddafi’s 
dismantling of state institutions, 1, 5,  
127, 149, 181; ­Great Man-­Made River 
proj­ect, 172, 180, 181; in­de­pen­dence of, 
128; industrial development in, 132, 133, 
141–42, 144, 147–48, 176; integration into 
global economy, 3–4; Islamist uprising in, 
196, 199; and Israel, 131, 132, 138–39, 140, 
157, 159, 194, 213; Italian colonial rule  
of, 128, 130, 131, 136; lack of industrial 
potential in, 131, 192; lack of natu­ral 
resources, 128, 130, 131; maritime border 
in Gulf of Sirte, 170; nuclear and 
military-­industrial sites of, 190, 191; 
oligarchical families in, 129–30; planning 
approach in, 132, 142, 143, 144, 146, 147, 
148, 152, 154, 158, 166, 171; population of, 
128, 134, 156; provincial governments of, 
129; relationship between science and 
politics in, 2; role of nonstate actors in, 7, 
179–80; sanctions against, 168, 192, 201, 
203, 210–16; science and technology in, 
130–31; shortage of ­human resources in, 
128–29, 130, 131, 132, 134, 143, 145, 147, 
148, 154, 155–56, 177, 178; Soviet Union 
relations with, 171, 184, 190; state 
capacity in, 15, 127, 128, 132, 148, 149, 
169–70, 177, 180, 194–95, 209–10, 216, 217, 
221, 229–30; underdevelopment of, 5, 127, 
129, 130, 131, 132, 138, 148, 161; U.S. 
airstrikes of 1986, 184, 190, 192, 193; U.S. 
relations with, 170–71, 184, 190, 192–93, 
196–97, 199, 200–201, 210–16, 217; and 
vigilante Revolutionary Committees, 149, 
150; WMD programs dismantled in, 13
Libyan Agriculture Research Center, 145
Libyan Central Government Hospital, 155
Libyan Central Organ­ization for Electronic 
Research, 210
Libyan chemical and biological weapons: 
and centrifuge program, 209; Muammar 
Gaddafi’s dismantling of, 197, 215; 
Muammar Gaddafi’s exploration of, 
189–90; nuclear weapons program 
compared to, 16; and sanctions negotia-
tions, 211, 214
Libyan Council of Ministers, 135
Libyan Cultural Revolution: coup-­proofing 
efforts of, 150; and defection of govern-
ment officials, 180; and economy, 181–82; 
impact on nuclear research and develop-
ment program, 149–52; impact on state 
apparatus, 4, 127–28, 148, 149, 150, 
151–52, 168, 179–80, 181, 193, 209–10;  
and personalized authority, 152; and 
Revolutionary Committees’ deviations, 
194; Revolutionary Committees’ 
monitoring of Libyan scientists, 203;  
and Revolutionary Committees’  
network of surveillance organ­izations, 
150; and Revolutionary Committees’ 
power, 7, 16, 151, 168, 179–80, 181, 182, 
193, 201; and Revolutionary Committees’ 
purges, 150, 223; students and civil 
servants as targets of, 151; tensions with 
technocrats in, 180–82
Libyan Electricity Corporation, 139
Libyan General ­People’s Congress (GPC), 
171, 172, 180, 193, 198
Libyan Industrial Research Center, 144, 147
Libyan military-­industrial complex: 
Cultural Revolution’s impact on, 151, 181; 
and defense plan, 133–34, 137, 140; and 
dismantlement of WPM program, 213; 
foreign sources of equipment, 137–38, 
248n79; Muammar Gaddafi joining, 130; 
Muammar Gaddafi’s buildup of, 135, 
137–38, 170; and Idris al-­Senussi, 129; 
institutional ele­ments of, 210; and nuclear 
weapons program, 199; per­for­mance of, 
138, 140; po­liti­cal power of, 135, 138; and 
Wheelus Air Base leased by U.S., 131–32
Libyan Ministry of Defense, 135, 157, 209
Libyan Ministry of Economy and Industry, 
143
Libyan Ministry of Foreign Affairs, 146, 215, 
250n18
Libyan Ministry of Industry: and nuclear 
energy program, 145; and nuclear 
research and development program, 139; 
and state-­owned production, 132; and 
uranium exploration, 133, 139, 144, 145
Libyan Ministry of Planning, 139, 141, 
142–43, 152
Libyan Ministry of Unity and Foreign 
Affairs, 145
Libyan National Atomic Energy Authority 
(NAEA): creation of, 147; and ­human 
resource management, 155–56; and 
nuclear energy program, 149, 178; 
replacement of, 171; and Tajoura Nuclear 
Research Center, 164, 166, 167
Libyan National Board for Scientific 
Research (NBSR), 201, 210

271
Index
Libyan National Committee for Atomic 
Energy (NCAE): coordination of technical 
assistance from IAEA, 143, 153; establish-
ment of, 139, 143; Abdel-­Majid Gaoud as 
chairman of, 172; and ­human resource 
management, 155–56; oversight of nuclear 
energy operational ­matters, 176, 178; 
oversight of Secretariat of Atomic Energy, 
171; per­for­mance of, 143
Libyan nuclear energy program: collapse of, 
18, 169, 194–95; development of, 158, 160, 
162, 172; and dual-­use technologies, 164; 
emergence of, 128, 249n135; focus on, 147; 
and foreign technical staff, 160–61, 162; 
and ­human resources management, 175, 
176, 178; and IAEA assistance, 138, 139, 
143, 145–46, 153, 160–61, 162, 163, 171, 
172, 175–76, 177, 178, 190; institutional 
framework for, 171, 172, 175–76, 194; 
monitoring by intelligence agencies, 160, 
179; and national power grid, 139–40,  
149; and nuclear fuel cycle, 156–57,  
158, 161, 166, 195; oversight of, 172, 
175–76; planning for, 152–56, 163–64,  
175; preparations for, 171–72, 175–79; 
Sirte as site of reactor, 175, 190; as 
technological achievement, 179
Libyan nuclear research and development 
programs: and administrative capabili-
ties, 15, 165, 166, 168; brain drain as 
prob­lem for, 156; clandestine nature of, 
192, 195; costs of, 170; crisis in, 190, 192, 
194; Cultural Revolution’s effect on, 
149–52; and education, 144–45, 151; 
Egyptian scientists of, 141, 151, 155, 156, 
158, 161, 165, 166; emergence of, 16, 18, 
127–28, 148; and Mohamed Ennami, 137; 
exit strategy for, 196, 197–201; expansion 
of, 149; and foreign advisers, 127, 128, 
149, 152, 155, 162, 170, 172, 178, 187, 
228–29; and foreign scientists, 150, 
151–52, 155, 158, 161, 165, 183, 185; and 
foreign technology, 128, 158, 162, 169; 
foundations for, 141–45; funding of, 128; 
Muammar Gaddafi’s ambitions for, 1, 
149, 150, 152, 156–58, 162–63, 177; and 
­human resources management, 155–56, 
160, 165, 168, 172, 175, 176, 177, 178, 184, 
195, 197; and IAEA assistance, 139, 143, 
144, 145–46, 149, 152–55, 156, 160, 161, 
165, 168, 178, 188, 250n21, 251n29; 
institutional capacities of, 127–28, 148, 
149, 197; and medical applications, 155, 
164; and nuclear black market, 169, 192, 
195, 196, 197; and nuclear-­powered 
desalination plant, 139, 141, 164, 177; 
objectives of, 164, 170; and oversight 
mechanisms, 158, 169, 170, 179, 190; 
planning approach in, 128, 149, 152, 154, 
158, 166, 168, 169, 170; and radioisotopes 
research, 145, 146, 153, 164; reorganiza-
tions of 1973–1986, 173; and research 
reactor, 145–48, 153–54, 162–63, 169, 171, 
177, 178, 179, 190; and Revolutionary 
Committees’ intelligence ser­vices, 150, 
152, 155–56; and state capacity, 128, 132, 
149, 157–58, 160, 169–70, 177, 194–95; and 
uranium conversion technology, 188–89; 
and uranium enrichment, 158–59, 171, 
187; and uranium exploration, 128, 
132–33, 139, 141, 145, 149, 166, 177, 
187–89; viability of, 128, 162, 170–71.  
See also Tajoura Nuclear Research Center 
(TNRC)
Libyan nuclear weapons program: 
abandonment of, 169; absence of 
technological determinism in, 216; 
acquisition of nuclear weapons, 138, 194, 
198; alternative technical routes for, 
185–89, 190; analy­sis of, 15–16, 218; case 
study of, 16–17; and centrifuges, 18, 168, 
169, 186, 187, 190, 196, 197, 201–9, 210, 
214, 216, 217; clandestine nature of, 169, 
186, 187, 189, 195, 196, 197, 202, 203; and 
cooperation agreements, 159; develop-
ment of, 158; drift in, 217; and dual-­use 
technologies, 164; and enriched uranium 
production, 158–59, 187, 202, 204, 205, 
214, 216; exploration of, 128; and foreign 
assistance, 5, 185, 186, 187, 208, 255n76; 
and foreign technology, 128, 158–59, 
161–62, 169, 170, 171, 209, 216; Muammar 
Gaddafi’s ambivalent ambitions for, 157, 
194, 196, 197, 198, 200, 220; Muammar 
Gaddafi’s dismantling of, 1, 3, 14, 18, 127, 
197, 208, 215–17; ­human resources for, 8, 
141, 159, 183, 202, 207–8, 230; Iraqi 
nuclear weapons program compared to, 
17; Libyan scientists of, 202, 203, 204, 205, 
207, 216, 221; management of, 8, 16, 179, 
194, 200, 202, 208, 209–10, 221–22; nuclear 
and military-­industrial sites of, 190, 191, 
202, 206; and nuclear black market, 
201–10, 216; and nuclear deterrence, 140, 
193–94, 197, 198, 199, 213; and nuclear 
power reactors, 179, 185, 188, 195; 
objectives of, 2, 18, 138, 158, 167–68, 192, 
201–2; origins of, 127, 133; oversight of, 
201, 203–4, 209–10, 216–17, 220, 228; 
per­for­mance of, 17, 158, 196, 202, 208, 210, 
211, 214, 216, 229–30; and planning, 202, 
214; and plutonium, 179, 185–86; public 
debate on Wheelus Air Base, 131–32; 
regime debates on, 198, 199–200, 201, 223, 
227; regional status as motive for, 138–39, 
140; scientists’ role in, 1, 2, 4; and security 

272
Index
Libyan nuclear weapons program (continued)
	 issues, 140, 197, 199, 202, 206, 207; sources 
on, 13, 14–15; and state capacity, 1, 15, 
209–10, 216, 217, 218, 220, 221, 222, 
228–29; timeline (1981–2003) of, 174; and 
weaponization, 205, 207–8
Libyan ­People’s Courts, 135, 136
Libyan Revolutionary Command Council 
(RCC): coup announcement, 134–35; and 
Cultural Revolution, 149, 180; decision-­
making power of, 136, 148, 198–99; and 
funding allocation pro­cess, 142–43; 
isolation from formal structures of 
government, 135–36; and nuclear research 
and development programs, 157, 165; and 
nuclear weapons program, 198; and oil 
industry, 137; ­people power concept of, 
136; purges of former regime, 135, 136; 
tensions in, 135, 157
Libyan Revolutionary Committees, 7, 16
Libyan Secretariat of Atomic Energy (SAE): 
clandestine activities of, 186; Committee 
for the Technical Review of the Nuclear 
Power Plant Contract, 172; Department 
for Training and Technical Cooperation, 
172; Department of Power, 175, 177, 178; 
Department of Radiation Protection, 176; 
dissolution of, 190, 194, 195; divisions 
within, 175; establishment of, 198; 
Executive Committee for Financial and 
Administrative Affairs, 172; Executive 
Committee for Scientific Affairs, 172, 
253–54n12; Abdel-­Majid Gaoud’s 
leadership of, 171–72, 176; and ­human 
resources management, 178; and 
management of research and develop-
ment activities, 176; Raw Materials 
Division, 176–77, 188; and uranium 
exploration, 187–88
Libyan Secret Intelligence Ser­vice, 212
Lockerbie bombing, 193, 201, 210, 211–12
London Club, 57, 58
Magaryef, Mohammed, 180
Mahmed, Elborai, 253n12
Mahmoud, Sabah Mirza, ­77
al-­Mallah, Moyassar, 40, 44, 48–49, 50,  
83, 95
Malling, Jens Henrik, 29
MAN com­pany, 109, 110, 187
Manhattan Proj­ect, 26, 60, 81, 83, 93, 98
Marzook, Razzak Obais, 92
Matuq, Matuq M.: and Libyan nuclear 
weapons program, 196, 201–2, 204, 205, 
207–8, 209, 216; role in Libyan nuclear 
program, 180, 181, 197–98
Maung, U Hla, 29–30
al-­Megrahi, Abdelbaset, 201, 212
Menarchi, M., 32
Meshad, Yehya, 60–61
micromanagement, in personalist regimes, 
12, 218, 219, 221–22, 224, 229
­Middle East: and Baghdad Pact, 24; Libya’s 
role in, 211, 215; oil-­exporting regimes in, 
5, 17; state contemplating nuclear option 
in, 51. See also specific states
­Middle Eastern Regional Radioisotope 
Center, 144
Migdal, Joel S., 5
Mineral Resources Prospecting Com­pany, 
188
Mitsubishi, 56
Montasser, Mohammed, 129, 135, 181
Montasser, Omar, 181
Montgomery, Alexander, 5
Mughrabi, Mohamed, 143
Murillo, María Victoria, ­7
al-­Naib, Ahmed Bashir, 53
Nasser, Gamal Abdel, 51, 129–31, 135, 139, 
141, 150
Nasserists, 40
National Defence University, Conflict 
Rec­ords Research Center, 14
National Radioisotope Center, 30–31
National Security Archives, Washington 
DC, 14
NATO, 216
neopatrimonial rulers, 4, 5, 224
Niger, 58, 158
9/11 terrorist attacks, 212
nonproliferation policies, 2, 227–30
Non-­Proliferation Treaty (NPT): Iraq 
considering withdrawal from, 54, 75–76; 
and Iraq’s crash program of 1990–1991, 
117; Iraq’s signing of and membership 
status, 41, 76; and Israel’s nonmember 
status, 73, 74, 75–76; Libya’s signing of, 
132, 162, 179; restrictions of, 224; 
safeguards associated with, 57, 58
nonstate actors, 7, 9–10, 179–80
North ­Korea, 224, 225, 227, 229
Nuclear Energy Act (Libya), 147, 171
Nuclear Non-­Proliferation Treaty (1968). See 
Non-­Proliferation Treaty (NPT)
nuclear proliferation, 3, 5, 16, 45
Nuclear Research Center (NRC), Tuwaitha: 
administrative capacity of, 36–37, 43, 45; 
Baath Party’s role in, 40–41, 43–44, 50, 55, 
69, 85; Chemistry Department of, 59, 60; 
and computer simulations, 109; construc-
tion of, 35–38, 235n71; and electromag-
netic isotope separation (EMIS), 108, 
111–12; factions in, 43, 53, 69, 97–100; 
Geology Department of, 43; Humam 
Abdul Khaliq as director of, 44, 58, 67; 

273
Index
and ­human resources development, 36, 
41, 60; and Iran-­Iraq War, 67–68; Iraqi 
surveillance of, 85; and IRT-2000 nuclear 
reactor (14 Tammuz), 28, 33, 35, 37–38, 52, 
60; and IRT-5000 nuclear reactor, 116; 
Israeli air raid on Osirak reactors, 17, 47, 
68–69, 70, 71, 72–79, 115, 202, 222, 223; 
location of, 68; and nuclear fuel cycle, 59; 
and nuclear weapons program, 29, 46, 50, 
55, 69–70, 75, 80, 81, 85, 91, 93, 95, 97–100, 
102, 107, 108, 111–14, 117, 119; objectives 
of, 42–44, 87, 89; Physics Department of, 
43, 82; protection of, 86; Saddam’s 
restructuring of, 49; and 17 Tammuz, 52, 
58–59; shortage of skilled scientists at, 41, 
59; staff reports on Ira­nian nuclear 
program, 51; and 30 Tammuz, 52, 56, 57, 
58–59; and weaponization, 112–13, 114; 
working environment of, 89
Nuclear Research Center, Warsaw, 59
Nuclear Technology Group, 185
nuclear weapons programs: authoritarian 
regimes’ decisions concerning, 2–3, 4, 10, 
219, 222–23, 224, 227–30; of coup-­proofing 
of states, 8–10; development of ­human 
resources for, 10; domestic ­factors shaping, 
2, 3, 4, 218; drift and underper­for­mance 
in, 6, 11, 17; management strategies  
for, 10–13, 218–19; outsourcing of, 10; 
per­for­mance of, 220–21; and state 
capacity, 6–8, 218, 220–21, 225–27, 228, 
229; in weak states, 4, 6, 8–10, 15, 70, 218. 
See also Iraqi nuclear weapons program; 
Libyan nuclear weapons program
Nuh, Fathi, 166, 172
Nukem (West German com­pany), 59
Numan Mawlood, Thamer, 92, 93, 98, 100, 
106, 117–18
Numan Saadaldin al-­Niaimi, 27, 33–34, 36, 
41, 42, 44
Nussaief, Yahya, 98
Obeidi, Abdellati, 200, 211, 215
Obeidi, Mahdi, 55–56, 100, 104, 106, 109–11, 
122
Oceanic Exploration Com­pany, 132–33, 141
oil economy: impact in Libya, 4–5, 132–33, 
135, 137–38, 147–48, 149, 161, 170, 193, 
201, 222–23; and Iran-­Iraq War, 116; and 
Iraqi education, 39; and Iraqi foreign 
policy, 17, 28; Iraqi nationalization of, 47; 
and Iraqi proj­ects, 51–52, 222–23; Iraqi 
state reshaped by, 23, 28, 45; and Libyan 
Cultural Revolution, 150; and Libyan 
foreign policy, 17, 137, 212; Libyan 
nationalization of, 137, 139; and 
personalist leaders, 3, 222–23, 229–30
Oqba Bin Nafi Establishment, 93, 104
Organ­ization of Petroleum Exporting 
Countries (OPEC), 47, 116, 137, 139, 147
Pakistan: and Baghdad Pact, 24; and Libyan 
nuclear research and development 
program, 161; and Libyan nuclear 
weapons program, 159, 168, 185, 198; 
nuclear power in, 25; nuclear program of, 
234n41; nuclear weapons program of, 
159, 160, 187, 203, 204, 205, 224, 229
Pakistani Institute for Nuclear Technology, 
159
Palestine, 151, 194
Pan Am Flight 103, Lockerbie, 193, 201, 210, 
211–12
patronage, in personalist regimes, 6
Pelt, Adrian, 129, 131
Penning ionization gauge (PIG), 90, 93, 98
personalist leaders: assumptions concern-
ing, 230; constraints of, 222, 223; and 
coup-­proofing, 6, 8–10; implications of 
decision making, 227–28; and informal 
structures of patronage and control, 6; 
and mea­sures of state capacity, 8, 218; 
micromanagement of, 12, 218, 219, 
221–22, 224, 229; and per­for­mance of 
nuclear weapons programs, 220–21,  
228; public image of, 220; spending of 
petrodollars on guns, 3; trade-­offs in 
enhancing power at expense of state  
institutions, 1–2, 6, 8, 220, 230; and  
weak states, 8, 9, 15, 218, 224–25. See also 
authoritarian regimes
Petroleum Research Institute, 42
Pickford, Thomas, 66
Poland, 49
Portugal, 58
preference alignment, ­10
principal-­agent prob­lems, 10, 11, ­12
principal-­agent theory, 6
Proj­ect Machine Shop 1001, 207
Public Law 80 (1961), ­28
al-­Qaeda, ­211
al-­Qaisi, Basil, ­98
al-­Qaisi, Fakhri, ­31
al-­Qaraghouli, Abdul Razzak, 93
Qasim, Abdul, 24, 27–28, 30, 31, 34
Quartey, J. A. K., 144, 146–47, 152
Ramadan, Yasin, 48
Rashidiya site, 91, 106, 107–8, 110, 119, 121
Rasoul, Abdul Rahman, ­61
al-­Rawi, Ihsan, 235n71
Reagan, Ronald, 170, 200
Republic Hospital, 30
Rice, Condoleezza, 214
Roberts, J. Eric, 155

274
Index
Romania, 185
ruling co­ali­tions, ­3
al-­Saadi, Amir, 12, 101–2, 104, 117
Saclay Nuclear Research Center, 56
Sadat, Anwar, ­141
al-­Saffar, Zuhair Mahdi, 36
Sahara, 181
Said, Khalid Ibrahim: as director of Nuclear 
Research Center, Tuwaitha, 50, 53,  
112; and IAEO, 104; and infrastructure 
development, 59; and Iraqi nuclear 
weapons program, 95, 102, 104, 106, 
112–13, 117; and plan for nuclear power 
program, 48–49; and plutonium produc-
tion capacity, 55; and reor­ga­ni­za­tion of 
IAEC, 83; research of, 38
Salah Al-­Din University, 41
Salman, Zafir Rashid, 106
Sassoon, Joseph, 4
Saudi Arabia, 55
Selbi, Dhafir: education of, 32; and IAEC, 
83; and IAEO, 104; and Iraqi nuclear 
weapons program, 95–96, 98, 99–100, 106; 
and Israeli air raid on Nuclear Research 
Center, Tuwaitha, 69, 73; and plutonium 
production capacity, 55
Shaari, Abdul Alim, 133, 135, 144
Shahristani, Hussein: arrest of, 66, 69; and 
Baath Party, 40, 49; education of, 34; and 
infrastructure development, 58–59; and 
Iraqi nuclear weapons program, 55, 64, 
66, 75; and Nuclear Research Center, 
Tuwaitha, 36, 43, 44, 50; at University of 
Baghdad, 41
Sharif, Husham, 50
Sharqat site, 94
Sheibani, Najib, 172
SIGENGIE consortium, 57–58
Six-­Day War (1967), 47, 64, 131–32, 134, 140
Smith, Gilbert, 42
Smith, Harold P., Jr., 190
SNIA Techint, 61
SNIA Viscosa, 57
Solingen, Etel, 3
Soviet State Committee for the Peaceful 
Utilization of Atomic Energy, 35
Soviet Union: Baghdad Pact countering 
­Middle East influence of, 24; centraliza-
tion of, 224; and Iraqi military-­industrial 
complex, 39; Iraqi military-­industrial 
complex compared to, 48; and Iraqi 
nuclear research and development 
programs, 28–29, 33, 35, 36, 38, 44, 49,  
52, 56, 60, 236n79; Iraqi students in, 23, 
33, 34, 36, 41; and Israel’s air raid on 
Osirak reactors, 74; and Libyan advisers, 
170; and Libyan nuclear research and 
development program, 178, 190, 192, 206; 
and Libyan nuclear weapons program, 
159, 160, 171; Libyan relations with, 171, 
184, 190; Libya purchasing aircraft and 
missiles from, 137; Libya requesting 
assistance in nuclear technology from, 
144, 154, 161–64, 166, 168, 169, 171, 172, 
177, 178–79, 183–84, 186, 190, 194; and 
Nuclear Research Center, Tuwaitha, 35, 
67; Saddam’s request for nuclear weapon 
to deter Israel, 63; Syria requesting 
assistance in nuclear technology from, 
227
Stalin, Joseph, 11, 13, 220
state capacity: definition of, 6–7, 8, 218; 
indicators of, 7–8, 233n22; in Iraq, 1, 15, 
21, 55, 59, 218, 220, 221, 222, 228–29; in 
Libya, 15, 127, 128, 132, 148, 149, 169–70, 
177, 180, 194–95, 209–10, 216, 217, 221, 
229–30; and management strategies,  
11, 15, 218–19; and nuclear weapons 
programs, 6–8, 218, 220–21, 222, 225–27, 
228, 229; and professionalism of bureau-
cracies, 7, 8; purges associated with 
leaders undermining, 7, 8, 11; role in 
decision making, 3; role of institutional 
strength in, 5, 7–8. See also Iraqi nuclear 
research and development programs; 
Iraqi nuclear weapons program; Libyan 
nuclear research and development 
programs; Libyan nuclear weapons 
program; weak states
Straw, Jack, 214
Sudan, 141
Swedan, S. A., 156
Sweden, 56
Syria: Baath Party in, 27, 34, 40, 61, 62; 
education in, 23; and Iraqi nuclear 
weapons program, 55; and Israel, 47, 225, 
227; nuclear program of, 15, 219, 224, 
225–27; and nuclear technology, 51; and 
pan-­Arab politics, 27, 40; Saddam on 
co­ali­tion assault with, 64; Saddam on 
Israel’s targeting of, 62; withdrawal from 
United Arab Republic, 130
Syrian Atomic Energy Committee, 226
Syrian Center for Nuclear Medicine, 226
Tahir, Bukhary Seyed, 204
Tahsin, Salah Izzat, 28, 31, 33
Tajoura Nuclear Research Center (TNRC): 
and centrifuges, 187, 194, 205, 206–7, 209; 
clandestine activities of, 186; develop-
ment of, 164–67; and foreign specialists, 
165, 183, 185, 186, 187, 192, 194, 206; and 
­human resources management, 165, 178, 
182, 183, 184, 205; isotope separation 
proj­ect at, 187; nuclear weapons program 

275
Index
of, 205–6; objectives of, 182; and planning, 
166, 167, 182; and plutonium pro­cessing, 
185–86; Soviet technical assistance for, 
165, 177, 182–84, 194; and uranium 
conversion, 188, 206, 207–8
Talmadge, Caitlin, 4
Tammuz Center. See Nuclear Research 
Center (NRC), Tuwaitha
Tarmiya site, 94, 104, 111–12, 121
technological absorption capacity, 5
Technology Hall, 57
terrorist organ­izations, 137, 170, 192, 211, ­212
Thomson-­CSF, 158–59
al-Tiriti, Barzan, 66, 75–77
Torki, Mustapha, 164
Treaty of Pelindaba (1996), 198
TRIGA (Trianing, Research, Isotopes, 
General Atomics) research reactor, 154
Turkey, 23, 24, 25
Uganda, 181
Union Mirac, 188
United Arab Emirates, 116
United Arab Republic, 130
United Kingdom, 23, 25, 33. See also Britain
United Nations (UN): assistance programs 
in Iraq, 29, 30, 31; compromise resolution 
on Israel’s air raid on Osirak reactors, 72; 
inspection of Iraq’s WMD programs, 
11–12, 48, 78, 101, 121; Iraqi declaration 
on nuclear weapons, 80, 228; and Iraqi 
nuclear weapons threshold, 122; and 
Libya’s constitution, 129
United Nations (UN) Conference on Science 
and Technology for Development, 47
United Nations (UN) Educational, Scientific 
and Cultural Organ­ization (UNESCO), 39
United Nations (UN) Food and Agriculture 
Organ­ization, 42
United Nations (UN) Office of Technical 
Cooperation, 143
United Nations (UN) Security Council, 13, 
74, 117, 199, 201, 212
United Nations (UN) Special Commission 
(UNSCOM), 13
United States: alliance with Libya, 129; 
concerns about Iraqi nuclear weapons 
program, 53, 54, 67, 68, 72, 73, 110,  
115; and Muammar Gaddafi’s nuclear 
weapons ambitions, 157; Muammar 
Gaddafi’s residence targeted by, 170; and 
Iraqi nuclear research and development 
program, 26, 56, 57, 58, 61; Iraq invasion 
of 2003, 66; Iraqi students in, 23; and 
Israel, 64, 131–32; on Israel’s air raid on 
Osirak reactors, 74–75; ­laser isotope 
separation developed in, 82; Libyan 
airstrikes of 1986, 184, 190, 192, 193; and 
Libyan nuclear energy program, 175;  
and Libyan nuclear research reactor 
request, 154, 159, 161; and Libyan nuclear 
weapons program, 158, 159, 162, 188; 
Libyan relations with, 170–71, 184, 190, 
192–93, 196–97, 199, 200–201, 210–16, 217; 
Libyan students in, 156; loan for Libyan 
electrical power station, 131; 9/11 
terrorist attacks, 212; and Saddam’s 
invasion of Kuwait, 117; support for 
Iran-­Iraq War, 77, 117; Wheelus Air Base, 
Libya leased to, 131–32
University of Baghdad, 32–33, 41
University of Benghazi, 145, 152
University of Libya, 130–31, 143, 146, 152
University of Technology, Baghdad, 39
University of Tripoli, 131, 144, 146, 147, 
152–56, 159, 161, 165
URENCO, 110, 187
U.S. Central Intelligence Agency (CIA), 110, 
122, 190, 213
U.S. intelligence assessments: of Iraqi 
nuclear weapons program, 15, 58, 68, 72, 
74; of Iraqi weapons of mass destruction, 
214; of Libyan nuclear power reactors, 
162, 179; of Libyan nuclear weapons 
program, 158, 159, 175, 186, 187, 214; of 
Tajoura Nuclear Research Center, 182
Usmani, I. H., 234n41
U.S. Pentagon, 214
U.S. State Department, 214
U.S. War on Terror, 212
UTA flight over Niger of 1989, 193
Vandewalle, Dirk, 4–5
Wahid, A. K., 33, 42
Walters, Barbara, 76
Way, Christopher, 3
weak states: control mechanisms in, 12; 
coup-­proofing in, 6, 8–10, 221; and 
management strategies ­toward nuclear 
scientists, 10–13; nuclear weapons 
programs in, 4, 6, 8–10, 15, 70, 218;  
and personalist leaders, 8, 9, 15, 218, 
224–25; variations within states, 7
weapons of mass destruction (WMD): 
accounting difficulties of, 2; and Israel’s 
air raid on Osirak reactors, 73; Libya’s 
dismantling of, 13, 181, 215–16; Libya’s 
exploration of, 189–90, 193, 198; Libya’s 
negotiations on dismantling of, 210–
15; U.S. failure to find in Iraq, 214; 
and U.S. sanctions on Libya, 192; UN’s 
dismantlement of Iraq’s programs, 13; 
UN’s inspection of Iraq’s programs, 
11–12, 48, 78. See also Iraqi chemical and 
biological weapons; Iraqi nuclear 

276
Index
weapons of mass destruction (WMD) 
(continued)
	 weapons program; Libyan chemical and 
biological weapons; Libyan nuclear 
weapons program
Weeks, Jessica, 3
West Germany, 34, 56, 59. See also Germany
Wheelus Air Base, Libya, 131–32
White­house, W. J., 26
Woods, Kevin M., 4
World War II, and Libya, 128, 130
Yom Kippur War (1973), 47, 51,  
137
Younis, Hamid, 65
Zaki, Anwar, 155
Zehni, Mohamed, 145
Zemlyanov, M. G., 35
Zheludev, Ivan S., 163
al-­Zobaie, Khalil, 24
Zwai, Mohamed, 198–200, 211–12,  
215

