

UNDERSTANDING
STOCKS
Michael Sincere

Copyright © 2004 by The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. All rights reserved. Manufactured in the
United States of America. Except as permitted under the United States Copyright Act of 1976, no part
of this publication may be reproduced or distributed in any form or by any means, or stored in a data-
base or retrieval system, without the prior written permission of the publisher. 
0-07-143582-4 
The material in this eBook also appears in the print version of this title: 0-07-140913-0 
All trademarks are trademarks of their respective owners. Rather than put a trademark symbol after
every occurrence of a trademarked name, we use names in an editorial fashion only, and to the benefit
of the trademark owner, with no intention of infringement of the trademark. Where such designations
appear in this book, they have been printed with initial caps. 
McGraw-Hill eBooks are available at special quantity discounts to use as premiums and sales pro-
motions, or for use in corporate training programs. For more information, please contact George
Hoare, Special Sales, at george_hoare@mcgraw-hill.com or (212) 904-4069. 
TERMS OF USE
This is a copyrighted work and The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. (“McGraw-Hill”) and its licensors
reserve all rights in and to the work. Use of this work is subject to these terms. Except as permitted
under the Copyright Act of 1976 and the right to store and retrieve one copy of the work, you may not
decompile, disassemble, reverse engineer, reproduce, modify, create derivative works based upon,
transmit, distribute, disseminate, sell, publish or sublicense the work or any part of it without
McGraw-Hill’s prior consent. You may use the work for your own noncommercial and personal use;
any other use of the work is strictly prohibited. Your right to use the work may be terminated if you
fail to comply with these terms. 
THE WORK IS PROVIDED “AS IS”. McGRAW-HILLAND ITS LICENSORS MAKE NO GUAR-
ANTEES OR WARRANTIES AS TO THE ACCURACY, ADEQUACY OR COMPLETENESS OF
OR RESULTS TO BE OBTAINED FROM USING THE WORK, INCLUDING ANY INFORMA-
TION THAT CAN BE ACCESSED THROUGH THE WORK VIA HYPERLINK OR OTHERWISE,
AND EXPRESSLY DISCLAIM ANY WARRANTY, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT
NOT LIMITED TO IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A
PARTICULAR PURPOSE. McGraw-Hill and its licensors do not warrant or guarantee that the func-
tions contained in the work will meet your requirements or that its operation will be uninterrupted or
error free. Neither McGraw-Hill nor its licensors shall be liable to you or anyone else for any inac-
curacy, error or omission, regardless of cause, in the work or for any damages resulting therefrom.
McGraw-Hill has no responsibility for the content of any information accessed through the work.
Under no circumstances shall McGraw-Hill and/or its licensors be liable for any indirect, incidental,
special, punitive, consequential or similar damages that result from the use of or inability to use the
work, even if any of them has been advised of the possibility of such damages. This limitation of lia-
bility shall apply to any claim or cause whatsoever whether such claim or cause arises in contract, tort
or otherwise.
DOI: 10.1036/0071435824

Want to learn more?
We hope you enjoy this McGraw-Hill eBook!  If you d like
more information about this book, its author, or related books
and websites, please click here.
,

Contents
Acknowledgments
v
Introduction
vii
PA RT O N E
WHAT YOU NEED TO KNOW FIRST
1
Welcome to the Stock Market
3
2
Stocks: Not Your Only Investment
19
3
How to Classify Stocks
29
4
Fun Things You Can Do (with Stocks)
37
5
Understanding Stock Prices
49
6
Where to Buy Stocks
55
PA RT T WO
MONEY-MAKING STRATEGIES
7
Want to Make Money Slowly? 
Try These Investment Strategies
69
8
Want to Make Money Fast? 
Try These Trading Strategies
77
For more information about. this title, click here.
Copyright © 2004 by The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. Click here for Terms of Use.

PA RT T H R E E
FINDING STOCKS TO BUY AND SELL
9
It’s Really Fundamental:
Introduction to Fundamental Analysis
89
10
Fundamental Analysis: Tools and Tactics
97
11
Let’s Get Technical:
Introduction to Technical Analysis
107
12
Technical Analysis: Tools and Tactics
131
13
The Psychology of Stocks:
Introduction to Sentiment Analysis
141
PA RT F O U R
UNCOMMON ADVICE
14
What Makes Stocks Go Up or Down
149
15
Why Investors Lose Money
157
16
What I Really Think about the Stock Market
171
Index
189
iv
CONTENTS

Acknowledgments
I’d like to give special thanks:
To Stephen Isaacs and Jeffrey Krames at McGraw-Hill for once
again giving me the opportunity to do what I love most, and to Pattie
Amoroso for helping me put the pieces together to produce a book.
To my researcher, Maria Schmidt, who found the answer to nearly
everything I asked; Tine Claes, who never fails to find something that
needs improvement; and Lois Sincere, who has truly mastered the idio-
syncrasies of the English language.
ToTom Reid, a teacher at Deerfield High School in Florida, for help-
ing to make the most complicated financial concepts seem easy; student
Bailey Brooks for helping with editing; Dan Larkin, CEO and senior
consultant for Larkin Industries, Inc., for his extremely insightful sug-
gestions and comments; Mike Fredericks, Brad Northern, and Howard
Kornstein for their thoughtful financial analysis and insights; Colleen
McCluney for her encouragement and patience; and Oksana Smirnova
for her inspiration and enthusiasm.
To the hardworking and friendly staff at Barnes & Noble bookstore
and Starbucks in Boca Raton, Florida.
Finally, to my friends, family, and acquaintances:
Idil Baran, Krista Barth, Bruce Berger, Andrew Brownsword,
Sylvia Coppersmith, Lourdes Fernandez-Vidal, Alice Fibigrova, Joe
Harwood, Jackie Krasner, Johan Nilsson, Joanne Pessin, Hal Plotkin,
Anna Ridolfo, Tim Schenden, Tina Siegismund, Luigi Silverstri, Alex
Sincere, Debra Sincere, Miriam Sincere, Richard Sincere, Harvey
Copyright © 2004 by The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. Click here for Terms of Use.

Small, Bob Spector, Lucie Stejskalova, Deron Wagner, and Kerstin
Woldorf.
For additional reading, I recommend the following books:
The Stock Market Course (John Wiley & Sons, 2001), by George
Fontanills and Tom Gentile
A Beginner’s Guide to Short-Term Trading (Adams Media Corpo-
ration, 2002), by Toni Turner
Reminiscences of a Stock Operator (John Wiley & Sons, 1994), by
Edward Lefevre
vi
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

Introduction
This book will be different.
Thousands of books have already been written about the stock mar-
ket, many of them technical and tedious. Before I wrote this book, I was
amazed that so many boring books had been written about such a fas-
cinating subject. Just like you, I hate reading books that put me to sleep
by the second chapter. That is why I was so determined to write an
entertaining, easy-to-read, and educational book about the market.
I wanted to write a book that I can hand to you and say, “Read
everything in this book if you want to learn quickly about stocks.” You
don’t have to be a dummy, idiot, or fool to understand the market. You
also don’t have to be a genius. After you read this book, you will real-
ize that understanding stocks is not that hard. (The hard part is making
money, but we’ll get to that later.)
I also don’t think you should have to wade through 300 pages to
learn about the market. Too many books on stocks are as thick as col-
lege textbooks and not nearly as exciting. Even though this book is
short, it is packed with information about investing and trading. I did
my best to make sure that you would have a short and easy read.
I wrote this book because I wanted you to know the truth.
As I was writing, a corporate crime wave was sweeping across
America. Dozens of corporations were accused of cheating people out
of millions of dollars. It upset me that so many investors have become
victims of the stock market. It seems as if the name of the game is entic-
Copyright © 2004 by The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. Click here for Terms of Use.

ing individual investors into the market so that they can be duped out of
all their money.
The insiders on Wall Street and in many corporations understand
the rules and know how to use them to lure you into putting your money
in the market. In this book, I promise to tell you the truth about how the
markets operate. Without that knowledge, you hardly have a chance to
win against the pros who do business on Wall Street. They go to work
every day with one goal in mind: to take money away from you.
Because the stock market is a brutal game that is often rigged in
favor of the house, you should be quite sure you know what you’re up
against before you invest your first dime. Unfortunately, you can’t win
unless you know how to play. One goal of this book is to educate you
about how the markets operate so that you can decide for yourself
whether you want to participate. By the end of the book, you’ll know
the players, the rules, and the vocabulary.
I don’t want to scare you, just prepare you.
After my unsettling introduction, you may decide that you don’t
want to have anything to do with the stock market. In my opinion, that
would be a mistake. First of all, understanding the market can help you
make financial decisions. The stock market is the core of our financial
system, and understanding how it works will guide you for the rest of
your life. In addition, the market often acts as a crystal ball, showing
where the economy is headed.
This book is also ideal for people who still aren’t sure whether to
participate in the market. By the last chapter, you should have a better
idea as to whether investing directly in the stock market makes sense
for you. Although I can’t make any promises, it is also possible that
understanding the market will help you build wealth. Perhaps you will
put your money into the stock market, but I will give you other invest-
ment ideas.
How to Read this Book
If you are a first-time investor (and even if you’re not), I suggest you
begin by reading the first, second, and fourth sections. This will give
you an overview of the market (Parts One and Two), and ways to avoid
viii
INTRODUCTION

losing money (Part Four). Because Part Three is the most challenging
and technical, it should be saved for last. As a special bonus, at the end
of the last chapter I reveal a trading strategy that has not lost money
during the last eight calendar years. I think you’ll be intrigued by this
simple but effective strategy that contradicts the advice included in
nearly every other investment book.
I wish you the best of luck. I sincerely hope you find that learning
about stocks is an enlightening experience, one that you will always
remember.
INTRODUCTION
ix

This page intentionally left blank.

PART ONE
WHAT YOU NEED
TO KNOW FIRST
Copyright © 2004 by The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. Click here for Terms of Use.

This page intentionally left blank.

1
3
Welcome to the 
Stock Market
You may be surprised, but the market is not as difficult to understand as
you might think. By the time you finish reading this chapter, you
should have enough knowledge of the market to allow you to sail
through the rest of the book. The trick is to learn about the market in
small steps, which is exactly how I present the information to you.
The Stock Market:The Biggest Auction in the World
Think of the stock market as a huge auction or swap meet (some might
call it a flea market) where people buy and sell pieces of paper called
stock. On one side, you have the owners of corporations who are look-
ing for a convenient way to raise money so that they can hire more
employees, build more factories or offices, and upgrade their equip-
ment. The way they raise money is by issuing shares of stock in their
corporation. On the other side, you have people like you and me who
buy shares of stock in these corporations. The place where we all meet,
the buyers and sellers, is the stock market.
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
Copyright © 2004 by The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. Click here for Terms of Use.

What Is a Share of Stock?
We’re not talking about livestock! Actually, the word stock originally
did come from the word livestock. Instead of trading cows and sheep,
however, we trade pieces of paper that represent ownership—shares—
in a corporation. You may also hear people refer to stocks as equities or
securities. Most people just call them stocks, which means supply.
(After all, the entire stock market is based on the economic theory of
supply and demand.)
When you buy shares of stock in a corporation, you are com-
monly referred to as an investor or a shareholder. When you own a
share of stock, you are sharing in the success of the business, and you
actually become a part owner of the corporation. When you buy a
stock, you get one vote for each share of stock you own. The more
shares you own, therefore, the more of the corporation you control.
Most shareholders own a tiny sliver of the corporation, with little
control over how the corporation is run and no ability to boss anyone
in the corporation around. You’d have to own millions of shares of
stock to become a primary owner of a corporation whose stock is
publicly traded.
In summary, a corporation issues shares of stock so that it can
attract money. Investors are willing to buy stock in a corporation in
order to receive the opportunity to sell the stock at a higher price. If the
corporation does well, the stock you own will probably go up in price,
and you’ll make money. If the corporation does poorly, the stock you
own will probably go down in price, and you’ll lose money (if you sell,
that is).
Stock Certificates: Fancy-Looking Pieces of Paper
Stock certificates are written proof that you have invested in the cor-
poration. (Some people don’t realize that you invest in companies,
not stocks.) Although some people ask for the stock certificates so
that they can keep them in a safe place, most people let a brokerage
firm hold their stock certificates. It is a lot easier that way. To be
4
UNDERSTANDING STOCKS

technical, there are actually two kinds of stock, common and pre-
ferred. In this book, we will always be talking about common stock,
because that is the only type that most corporations issue to
investors. Remember, not all companies issue stock. A company has
to be what is called a corporation, a legally defined term. Most of the
large companies you have heard of are corporations, and, yes, their
stocks are all traded in the stock market. I’m talking about corpora-
tions like Microsoft, IBM, Disney, General Motors, General Electric,
and McDonald’s.
You Buy Stocks for Only One Reason:To Make Money
The stock market is all about making money. Quite simply, if you buy
stock in a corporation that is doing well and making profits, then the
stock you own should go up in price. (By the way, the profits you make
from a stock are called capital gains, which are the difference between
what you paid for a stock and what you sold it for. If you lose money, it
is called a capital loss.)
You make money in the stock market by buying a stock at one price
and selling it at a higher price. It’s that simple. There is no guarantee, of
course, that you’ll make money. Even the stocks of good corporations
can sometimes go down. If you buy stocks in corporations that do well,
you should be rewarded with a higher stock price. It doesn’t always
work out that way, but that is the risk you take when you participate in
the market.
New York:Where Stock Investing Became Popular
Before there was a place called the stock market, buyers and sellers had
to meet in the street. Sometime around 1790, they met every weekday
under a buttonwood tree in New York. It just happened that the name of
the street where all this took place was Wall Street. (For history buffs,
the buttonwood tree was at 68 Wall Street.)
A lot of people heard what was happening on Wall Street and
WELCOME TO THE STOCK MARKET
5

wanted a piece of the action. On some days, as many as 100 shares of
stock were exchanged! (In case you don’t think that’s funny, in today’s
market, billions of shares of stock are exchanged every day.)
It got so crowded in the early days that 24 brokers and merchants
who controlled the trading activities decided to organize what they
were doing. For a fixed commission, they agreed to buy and sell shares
of stock in corporations to the public. They gave themselves a quarter
for each share of stock they traded (today we would call them stock-
brokers). The Buttonwood Agreement, as it was called, was signed in
1792. This was the humble beginning of the New York Stock Exchange
(NYSE).
It wasn’t long before the brokers and merchants moved their
offices to a Wall Street coffee shop. Eventually, they moved indoors
permanently to the New York Stock Exchange Building on Wall Street.
Keep in mind that a stock exchange is simply a place where people go
to buy and sell stocks. It provides an organized marketplace for stocks,
just as a supermarket provides a marketplace for food.
Even after 200 years, the name Wall Street is a symbol for the U.S.
stock exchanges and the financial institutions that do business with
them, no matter what their physical location. If you go to New York,
you’ll see that Wall Street is just a narrow street in the financial district
of Lower Manhattan. Therefore, the stock market, or Wall Street, is
really a convenient way of talking about anyone or anything connected
to our financial markets.
Three Major Stock Exchanges
After the NYSE was formed, there were also brokers trading stocks who
weren’t considered good enough for the New York Stock Exchange.
Traders who couldn’t make it on the NYSE traded on the street curb,
which is why they were called curbside traders. Eventually, these traders
moved indoors and established what later became the American Stock
Exchange (AMEX).
There is also a third major stock exchange, the National Association
of Securities Dealers Automated Quotation System (Nasdaq), which
6
UNDERSTANDING STOCKS

was created in 1971. This was the first electronic stock exchange; it was
hooked together by a network of computers. (Yes, they did have com-
puters back then.)
Competition is good for the stock market. It forces the stock
exchanges to fill your orders faster and more cheaply. After all, they want
your business. There are stock exchanges in nearly every country in the
world, although the U.S. market is the largest. U.S. stock exchanges other
than the three major ones include the Cincinnati Stock Exchange, the
Pacific Stock Exchange, the Boston Stock Exchange, and the Philadel-
phia Stock Exchange (the Philadelphia Stock Exchange is our country’s
oldest organized stock exchange). Other countries with stock exchanges
include England, Germany, Switzerland, France, Holland, Russia, Japan,
China, Sweden, Italy, Brazil, Mexico, Canada, and Australia, to name
only a few.
A few years ago, in order to compete more effectively against the
NYSE, the National Association of Securities Dealers (NASD), which
owns the Nasdaq, and the AMEX merged. Although the two exchanges
are operated separately, the merger allowed them to jointly introduce
new investment products. This is interesting, but it doesn’t really affect
you as an investor. In the end, it doesn’t really matter from which
exchange you buy stocks.
Joining a Stock Exchange
It’s not easy for a corporation to be listed on, or join, a stock exchange
because each exchange has many rules and regulations. It can take
years for a corporation to meet all the requirements and join the
exchange. The stock exchanges list corporations that fit the goals and
philosophy of the particular exchange.
For example, the companies that are listed on the NYSE are some of
the best-known and biggest corporations in the United States—blue-chip
corporations like Wal-Mart, Procter & Gamble, Johnson & Johnson, and
Coca-Cola. The Nasdaq, on the other hand, contains many technology
corporations like Cisco Systems, Intel, and Sun Microsystems. In addi-
tion, stocks that are traded “over the counter” (OTC) are located on the
WELCOME TO THE STOCK MARKET
7

Nasdaq. By the way, there are over 5000 stocks traded on the three U.S.
stock exchanges and another 5000 smaller companies traded over the
counter.
Corporations: Convincing People to Buy Their Stock
Once a corporation goes public and allows its stock to be traded, the
trick is to convince investors that the corporation will be profitable.
Corporations do everything in their power to attract money from in-
vestors. Bigger corporations spread the word through print and televi-
sion advertising. Smaller corporations might rely on word of mouth,
emails, or news releases. The more people there are who believe in a
corporation, the more people there will be who will buy its stock, and
the more money the people on Wall Street will make. Now do you
understand why everyone is always saying such good things about the
market? If you’re lucky, you’ll also make a few bucks if you invest in a
profitable corporation.
Now that you have some idea of what happens in the back rooms of
the stock brokerage, I’m going to take you upstairs. First, I will intro-
duce you to the three types of people who participate in the market:
individual investors, traders, and professionals. By the time you finish
this book, you should have a better idea of where you fit in.
Individual Investors
Investors buy stocks in corporations that they believe in and plan to
hold those stocks for the long term (usually a year or longer). Investors
generally choose to ignore the short-term day-to-day price fluctuations
of the market. If all goes according to plan, they find that the value of
their investment has increased over time.
One of the most profitable buy-and-hold investors of our time,
Warren Buffett, likes to say that he is not buying a stock, he is buying a
business. He buys stocks for the best price he can and holds them as
8
UNDERSTANDING STOCKS

long as he can—forever, if possible. (When asked when he sells, Buf-
fett once said, “Never.”)
Keep in mind, however, that Buffett buys stocks in conservative
(some would say boring) corporations like insurance companies and
banks and rarely buys technology stocks. Buffett became a billionaire
using his long-term buy-and-hold investment strategy (a strategy is a
plan that helps you determine what stocks to buy or sell).
Investors who bought shares of stock in Caterpillar (CAT), Lock-
heed Martin (LMT), and Minnesota Mining and Manufacturing
(MMM), for example, saw the value of their investments increase over
time, especially during the latter half of the 1990s. Actually, there was
never a better time to be an investor than during the 1990s. You bought
shares of a corporation you knew and believed in, then sat back and
watched the value of the shares increase by 25, 50, or 100 percent.
(This is as good as it gets for investors!)
Short-Term Traders
Unlike investors, short-term traders don’t care about the long-term
prospects of a corporation. Their goal is to take advantage of the short-
term movements in a stock or the market. This means that they may
buy and then sell a stock within 5 minutes, a few hours, a few days, or
even a week or month on occasion. When you are a trader, you are pri-
marily focused on the price of a stock, not on the business of the cor-
poration.
There are many kinds of short-term traders. Some of you may have
heard the term day trader, which refers to a very aggressive short-term
trader. For example, a day trader might buy a stock at $10 a share with
a plan to sell it at $10.50 or $11, usually within the same day. If the
stock goes down in price, he or she will probably sell it quickly for a
small loss. In other words, day traders buy stocks in the morning and
sell them for a higher price a few minutes or hours later. Generally, they
move all their money back to cash by the end of the day. Keep in mind
that it’s extremely hard to consistently make money as a day trader.
Only a small percentage of people make a living at it.
WELCOME TO THE STOCK MARKET
9

Professional Traders
Professional traders use other people’s money (and sometimes their
own) to make investments or trades on behalf of clients. Professionals
include individuals who work for Wall Street brokerages and stock
exchanges, but they also include institutional traders like pension
funds, banks, and mutual fund companies.
There is no doubt that institutional investors that have access to
millions of dollars influence not only individual stocks but the entire
market. Some of these institutions have set up computer programs that
automatically buy or sell stocks when certain prices have been reached.
(On days when the market is up or down hundreds of points, the stock
exchanges limit how much institutional investors can buy or sell.)
If you want to be a professional Wall Street trader, you can also
apply to become a member of one of the exchanges. At current prices,
it will cost you several million dollars to buy a seat on the NYSE, and
all you get for this is the freedom to trade stocks directly on the
exchange floor. (For that kind of money, you’d think they’d let you play
golf and swim! For a few million dollars less, you can trade directly
from the comfort of your own home.) Some people with seats rent them
out to professional traders and thus bring in extra income.
How Wall Street Keeps Score
Wall Street has several ways to keep track of the market. One of the eas-
iest ways to find out how the market is performing each day is to look
at a newspaper, television, or the Internet. Typically, people look at the
Dow Jones Industrial Average (DJIA), the most popular method of
determining whether the market is up or down for the day.
The Dow Jones Industrial Average
In 1884, a reporter named Charles Dow calculated an average of the
closing prices of 12 railroad stocks; this became known as the Dow
10
UNDERSTANDING STOCKS

Jones Transportation Average. His goal was to find a way to measure
how the stock market did each day. He then wrote comments about the
stock market in a four-page daily newspaper called a “flimsie,” which
later became the Wall Street Journal.
A few years later, the company Charles Dow helped start, Dow
Jones, launched the Dow Jones Industrial Average, consisting of 12
industrial stocks. If you know about averages, you know that you basi-
cally add up the prices of the stocks in the index and divide by the num-
ber of stocks to create a daily average. By watching the Dow, you can
get a general idea of how the market is doing. It also gives us clues to
the trend of the market, whether it is going up, down, or sideways. (The
trend is simply the direction in which a stock or market is going.)
The original 12 stocks in the Dow were the biggest and most popu-
lar companies at the end of the nineteenth century—for example, Amer-
ican Tobacco, Distilling and Cattle Feeding, U.S. Leather, and General
Electric, to name a few. Guess which stock still remains in the index? (If
you guessed General Electric, you are right. The other corporations
either went out of business or merged with other corporations.)
By 1928, the Dow Jones Industrial Average was increased to 30
stocks, which is the number of stocks in the index today. (By the way,
this index is sometimes called the Dow 30.) These 30 stocks are a cross
section of the most important sectors in the stock market. (A sector is a
group of companies in the same industry, such as technology, utilities,
or energy.) Over time, the Dow changed from an equal-weighted index
to one in which different stocks have different weights. This means that
stocks with a higher weighting affect the Dow index more than stocks
with a lower weighting. For example, since American Express is
weighted high in today’s market, if this stock is having a bad day and
falls by several points, the Dow could end up down for the day.
It’s easy to find out how the Dow did each day—it’s reported in the
media. Since more than half of the public is invested in the stock mar-
ket, there is a lot of interest in what the Dow does each day.
Therefore, when we talk about the Dow Jones being up or down
each day, we’re really talking about a representative group of 30 stocks,
the Dow 30. Even if the market is down for the day, the stock you own
could be up, or the other way around.
WELCOME TO THE STOCK MARKET
11

Other Indexes
Although the Dow (operated by the Wall Street Journal) was the first
index to keep track of stocks, hundreds of other indexes have been cre-
ated to track almost everything from transportation to utilities to tech-
nology stocks. Some sophisticated investors keep an eye on many of
these indexes, but most people watch just three.
The next most popular index (after the Dow) is the Nasdaq Com-
posite Index, which tracks the more than 5000 stocks listed on the Nas-
daq. On television or on the Internet, when you see the Dow listed, you
will almost always see the Nasdaq below it.
The third index that many people watch closely is the S&P 500. If
you guessed that this contains 500 stocks, you are right. These are 500
stocks that Standard & Poor’s Corporation (S&P) has selected to repre-
sent the overall stock market. They are usually the largest stocks and
include a lot of technology stocks. Other popular indexes are the Rus-
sell 2000 index and the Wilshire 5000. You’ll learn later that you can
invest directly in them, since they trade just like stocks.
If you were a professional money manager, your goal each year
would be to beat the major indexes. What does this mean? It means that
if the Dow is up 15 percent this year, you would try to get 15 percent or
more. The bad news is that it’s very hard for people, even professional
investors, to beat the indexes. In 2001, it was reported that 50 percent
of the professional money managers don’t beat the indexes each year.
In 2002, it was reported that only 37 percent of the professional man-
agers beat the indexes.
It’s All About Points
To measure how much you make or lose in the stock market, Wall
Street uses a system of points that represent dollars. For example, if
your stock went from $5 a share to $10 a share, we would say that your
stock went up 5 points. That’s how we keep score on Wall Street, but
accountants and market analysts make it seem a lot more complicated
than it is.
The same type of scoring is done with the major indexes like the
Dow, the Nasdaq, and the S&P 500. If the Dow went from 10,000 to
12
UNDERSTANDING STOCKS

10,100, you would say the market went up by 100 points. If your stock
went from $10 a share to $11 a share, you made a point, not a dollar.
Note: Although it’s okay to tell people how many points you made or
your percentage gain, it’s not polite to tell people the exact amount of
money you made on a stock deal. Even if you made $5000 in 5 min-
utes, it’s best to keep it to yourself. To be polite, stick to the point sys-
tem and avoid talking about money.
How Much Is It Going to Cost?
If you can figure out the following calculation, then you will under-
stand how to buy or sell stock. Just as in an auction, every stock has a
price. This price changes frequently—every few seconds for some
stocks. Let’s say that a stock you’re interested in, Bright Light, is cur-
rently trading at $20 a share. You decide you want to buy 100 shares.
The math goes like this: 100 shares multiplied by $20 a share will cost
you $2000. That means you must pay $2000 if you want to buy 100
shares of Bright Light (plus commission, of course).
This is so important that I’ll give you another example. Let’s say
you want to buy 1000 shares of a stock that is selling for $15 a share.
How much will it cost you? The answer is $15,000. One more example:
Let’s say you want to buy 100 shares of a stock that costs $5 a share.
The answer is $500.
How Much Did You Make?
Let’s say you decide to buy 1000 shares of a stock that costs $15 a share.
It will cost you $15,000. If the stock goes to $16, you have made 1 point.
If the stock goes to $17, you have made 2 points. Here’s the important
part: If you have 1000 shares of a stock and you made 1 point, you made
$1000 in profit. If the stock goes up 2 points, you made $2000 in profit.
So the more shares you own, the more money you’ll make (or lose).
(More examples? If you own 100 shares of a stock and it goes up
1 point, you made $100. If you own 100 shares of a stock and it goes
up by 5 points, you made $500.)
WELCOME TO THE STOCK MARKET
13

What If No One Wants to Buy or Sell Your Stock?
This is actually a very good question. It’s like having a house sale that
no one goes to. To solve this problem, the stock exchanges have set up
a system in which there is always someone on the other side of a trans-
action. In other words, there will always be a buyer or seller for you.
You may not get the best price, but at least you know that there is
someone who is willing to sell you the stock or buy it from you if you
own it.
On the NYSE, there is one person, a specialist, who acts as the
intermediary for each stock. The specialists “make a market” for every
stock listed on the exchange. This means that the specialist keeps track
of and fills all of the orders for a particular stock that comes in, some-
times using his or her own money if no one else wants to buy or sell the
stock. Does this sound like a fun job? Handheld computers make the
job a lot easier. Before computers, the specialists used to fill the orders
by hand. Once orders increased from hundreds to billions of shares,
computers were installed to handle the orders.
You might wonder how the specialists get paid, since they are using
their own money to fill the orders. First of all, because specialists know
the stock so well, they are able to buy it at the lowest possible price and
sell it to you at the highest possible price. It doesn’t sound really fair,
but that’s how they make their money. They also get a cut on every trade
they make. They claim this is to compensate them for the risk they take
when they use their own money to buy or sell.
If you are investing in only a few hundred shares, or even a few
thousand, it’s not worth your time to worry too much about the pennies
the intermediaries make on each trade. It’s the million-share traders
who try to save money on each trade. By the way, those pennies add up
to thousands of dollars every day for the specialists. They make money
whether the market goes up or down.
At the Nasdaq market, the computerized stock exchange, buyers
and sellers are matched with the help of an intermediary called a mar-
ket maker. Unlike the arrangement at the NYSE, where only one spe-
cialist is assigned to a stock, at the Nasdaq you can have multiple
market makers for a stock. The more popular the stock, the more mar-
ket makers will be assigned to the stock.
14
UNDERSTANDING STOCKS

For instance, a stock like Microsoft could have as many as 30 market
makers, while a $1 stock might have only one market maker. There is,
however, at least one market maker assigned to each Nasdaq stock. Keep
in mind that all of this happens behind the scenes within seconds.
Because billions of shares are traded each day, your orders end up being
routed by computers. It is nice to know, however, that there will always be
someone who is willing to buy or sell shares of your stock.
Why Stocks Are a Good Idea
There are a number of reasons why you should buy stocks. According
to researchers, stocks have beaten every other type of investment over
any 10-year period during the last 75 years. They are a good buy even
after a market crash or an extended bear market. According to research
conducted by Jeremy Siegel, best-selling author of Stocks for the Long
Run (McGraw-Hill, 2002), over the long term stocks gained an annual-
ized 8 percent after inflation after the market has fallen by over 40 per-
cent or more. (Inflation is the expansion of the money supply. As a
result, the price of goods and services go up, which lowers or erodes the
amount you can buy with your money.) In the short term, stocks are
riskier than fixed-income assets, but in the long run, says Siegel, stocks
outperform every other investment.
According to many experts, stocks have returned an average of 11
percent annually for the last 75 years, handily beating inflation as well
as bonds, money market accounts, and savings accounts. In addition,
it’s cheaper to buy stocks over the long term, especially if you buy and
hold. And according to the experts, the odds are quite good that the
market will continue to go up just as it’s done in the past (although there
are no guarantees).
Risk:The Chance You Take When You Buy Stocks
A lot of people enter the stock market without a clear idea of the risks.
(Too many people look up at the stars without looking out for the rocks
below.) Let’s be clear: when you invest or trade in the market, there is a
WELCOME TO THE STOCK MARKET
15

chance that you could lose some or all of your money. It’s even possible
to lose more money than you put in. The goal for many investors and
traders, therefore, is learning how to recognize and minimize risk. Keep
in mind, however, that you can’t completely eliminate risk, but you can
learn to manage it.
There are all kinds of risk. First, the entire stock market could go
down in price because of outside events like war, recession, or terrorism.
Second, even if the stock market as a whole goes up, there are a number
of reasons why your stock could go down. Third, even if you avoid the
stock market and put your money in a savings account (or under your
mattress), there is the risk that your money will be worth less because of
inflation. And finally, if you do not invest in the market, there is the risk
that you will miss out on some very profitable buying opportunities.
Therefore, whether you invest in the market or not, there will be risks.
By the time you finish this book, you’ll be able to decide for yourself
whether the risks you take are worth the rewards you’ll make.
The Dow 30 (including ticket symbol)
Alcoa (AA)
American Express Co. (AXP)
AT&T Corp. (T)
Boeing Co. (BA)
Caterpillar, Inc. (CAT)
Citigroup, Inc. (C)
Coca-Cola Co. (KO)
DuPont Co. (DD)
Eastman Kodak Co. (EK)
ExxonMobil Corp. (XOM)
General Electric Co. (GE)
General Motors Corp. (GM)
Hewlett-Packard Co. (HPQ)
Home Depot (HD)
Honeywell International Inc. (HON)
Intel Corp. (INTC)
International Business Machines Corp. (IBM)
International Paper Co. (IP)
J.P. Morgan Chase (JPM)
Johnson & Johnson (JNJ)
16
UNDERSTANDING STOCKS

McDonald’s Corp. (MCD)
Merck & Co. (MRK)
Microsoft (MSFT)
Minnesota Mining and Manufacturing Co. (MMM)
Philip Morris and Co. (MO)
Procter & Gamble Co. (PG)
SBC Communications (SBC)
United Technologies Corp. (UTX)
Wal-Mart Stores, Inc. (WMT)
Walt Disney Co. (DIS)
In the next chapter, you will learn how to invest in bonds, cash,
mutual funds, and real estate.
WELCOME TO THE STOCK MARKET
17

This page intentionally left blank.

2
19
Stocks: 
Not Your Only 
Investment
When most people talk about the stock market, they are usually refer-
ring to buying or selling individual stocks. There are, however, a num-
ber of other investments besides stocks. Becoming familiar with other
types of investments—for example, bonds, cash, real estate, and
mutual funds—will help make you a more knowledgeable investor.
Bonds: Misunderstood but Popular 
Fixed-Income Investments
Wall Street helps corporations raise money not only by issuing stocks,
but also by issuing bonds. Technically, a bond is a fixed-income invest-
ment issued by a corporation or the government that gives you a regu-
lar or fixed rate of interest for a specific period.
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
Copyright © 2004 by The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. Click here for Terms of Use.

To understand bonds, you have to think like a lender, not an investor.
After all, a bond is an IOU. When you buy bonds, you are lending money
to the corporation or the government in return for a promise that the
money will be paid back in full with interest.
In “bondspeak,” the corporation or government promises to pay
you a fixed rate of interest, let’s say 7 percent per year. The fixed rate
of interest is called a coupon. You are guaranteed to receive this fixed
interest rate for the length of the loan. At the end of the period (called
the maturity date), you are given your original money back, and you
get to keep all the interest you made on the loan.
There are three types of bonds: Treasuries, munis, and corporate.
Bonds issued by the U.S. government are called Treasuries. They are
considered the safest bond investment because they have the full back-
ing of the U.S. government. Munis are issued by state and local gov-
ernments and are usually tax-free. Corporate bonds have the most risk
but also provide the highest returns.
There are three categories of bonds: bills, notes, and bonds. Bills
have the shortest maturity dates, from 1 to 12 months; notes have matu-
rity dates ranging from 1 to 10 years; and bonds have maturity dates of
10 years or longer, often as long as 30 years. Usually, the longer the
term of the loan, the higher the yield will be. (The yield is what you will
actually earn from the bond.)
Bonds can be confusing so I’ll give several examples: Let’s say you
decide to lend a corporation $5000 for 10 years. In return, the corpora-
tion pays you 10 percent a year. That means that for the next 10 years
you’ll receive $500 a year in interest payments. To review, the bond has
a $5000 face value (how much it costs), a 10 percent coupon (a fixed
interest rate), and a 10-year maturity (time period). That wasn’t hard,
was it?
Usually, people who don’t like a lot of risk tend to buy bonds rather
than stocks. With stocks, there is the chance you could lose all your
money if the stock goes to zero. Unfortunately, bonds aren’t perfect
either. In fact, there are risks in buying bonds.
For example, there is always the chance that the corporation you
lent money to will go bankrupt. This is what happened to the bond-
holders of Enron, WorldCom, Global Crossing, and other corporations.
When you buy a bond, it is given a rating (highly rated AAA bonds are
20
UNDERSTANDING STOCKS

considered the safest). The lower the bond rating, however, the higher
the interest you receive. Some bonds are so risky that they are called
junk bonds. For the risk you take when you own lower-rated bonds, you
receive an extremely high yield.
Bondholders are very concerned about interest rates. After all,
many bondholders live off the interest payments they receive from
their bonds. After the market peaked in 2000, the Federal Reserve Sys-
tem (the Fed) lowered interest rates more than 12 times. Existing
bondholders were delighted because they had already locked in a
favorable yield at a higher interest rate and could resell their bonds for
a higher price. After all, when interest rates fall, the value of the bond
goes up.
The inverse relationship between bond prices and interest rates can
be confusing. Many people don’t realize that the price you received
when your bond was issued rises or falls in the opposite direction with
interest rates (the inverse relationship). For example, let’s say you pur-
chased a bond for $1000 with an 8 percent coupon (it pays $80 annu-
ally per $1000 of face value). If interest rates drop below 8 percent,
your bond will be worth more than $1000 because investors will pay
more to receive the higher interest rate on your bond. On the other
hand, if interest rates rise, your bond will be worth less than $1000
because buyers won’t pay you face value for a bond that pays a lower
interest rate.
To summarize, the advantage of owning bonds is that you receive
a guaranteed interest payment and a promise that your original money
(called principal) will be repaid to you in full. Basically, you lend
money to a corporation, and it promises to pay you back in full after a
specified period of time. The disadvantage is that the corporation
could go out of business, leaving you with nothing. You may be sur-
prised to learn that more people buy bonds than invest in the stock
market. Bonds are especially popular with people who are nearing
retirement.
If bonds seem confusing, don’t worry; they are. That is why many
people prefer to buy bond mutual funds, which are more convenient
and easier to understand. Speaking of mutual funds, it’s about time we
learned more about this fascinating investment. It fits in perfectly with
our discussion about the stock market.
STOCKS: NOT YOUR ONLY INVESTMENT
21

Mutual Funds:A Popular Alternative 
to Individual Stocks and Bonds
Instead of investing directly in the stock market, you can buy mutual
funds. An investment company creates a mutual fund by pooling
investors’ money and using it to invest in an assortment of stocks,
bonds, or cash. In a way, investing in a mutual fund is like hiring your
own professional money manager. The best part is that the fund man-
ager who manages the mutual fund makes the buying and selling deci-
sions for you. This is ideal for people who don’t have the time or
knowledge to research individual companies and determine whether
the stock is a good buy at its current price. This is one of the reasons
that mutual funds have become so popular in the last few years.
For a relatively low fee, especially when compared with stock
commissions, mutual funds give you instant diversification. For a min-
imum investment of $2500, or sometimes less, you can buy a slice of a
whole basket of stocks. (Many mutual fund companies have raised their
minimum from as little as $100 to $2500.) If you are interested in
mutual funds, you should begin by looking in the financial section of
your local newspaper. There are well over 7000 mutual funds to choose
from, each with its own style and strategy.
For example, you could buy a mutual fund that invests in stocks
(called a stock fund), technology (a sector fund), or bonds (a bond
fund), or one that invests in international stocks (an international fund).
No matter what kind of investment you’re interested in, there is a
mutual fund that should meet your needs.
When you find a mutual fund that meets your goals and fits your
investment strategy, you send a check to the investment company.
Because there are so many mutual funds, you should take as much time
to choose the correct mutual fund as you would take to choose a stock.
Keep in mind that although most mutual funds did extremely well dur-
ing the 1990s, many have faltered during the last few years. That’s why
it’s important to find a fund that is successful even when the economy
is doing poorly.
One of the smartest ways to invest in mutual funds is through a
401(k), a voluntary tax-deferred savings plan that is provided by a
22
UNDERSTANDING STOCKS

number of companies. The popular 401(k) plan is one of the reasons so
many people became involved in the stock market to begin with. The
brilliant part of the 401(k) is that you don’t have to pay taxes on the
money you earn until you are 591⁄2. If you leave the company before
you’re 591⁄2, you can convert your 401(k) to an IRA, another type of tax-
deferred savings plan.
Why People Choose Mutual Funds
The main reason that people choose mutual funds is to allow diversi-
fication, which means that instead of investing all of your money in
only one stock—a frequently risky move—you are able to buy a slice
of hundreds of stocks. For example, let’s say that most of your money
was invested in WorldCom on the day it announced that it had mis-
stated its earnings by $3.8 billion. The stock fell by over 90 percent in
1 day! If you had owned this stock directly, you would have lost 90
percent of your money. On the other hand, if you owned a mutual fund
that owned WorldCom, you might have lost no more than 3 percent of
your money that day. Now do you see why mutual funds are a good
idea for investors?
On the other hand, some people are looking for a whole lot more,
which is what brings them to the stock market in the first place. If you
owned a mutual fund that contained a stock that went up a lot in price
in 1 day, you might make 1 or 2 percent on your fund that day. But if
you owned the stock directly, you could make 10 or 20 percent, or per-
haps more, in 1 or 2 days. (I’ve owned stocks that have gone up as much
as 50 percent in 1 day.)
Net Asset Value
A net asset value (NAV) is similar to a stock price. It technically refers
to the value of one share in the mutual fund. You can find NAVs in the
financial section of your daily newspaper. The math is very similar to
that for a stock. If you want to buy 100 shares of a mutual fund with an
NAV of $10, it will cost you $1000. You’ll also be charged a very small
management fee, which is simply subtracted from the NAV.
STOCKS: NOT YOUR ONLY INVESTMENT
23

You can also look in the newspaper to see how well your mutual
fund did during various periods, from yesterday to 3 years ago. The
mutual fund corporations have done an excellent job of letting their
shareholders know exactly what their performance records are. If you
don’t like a fund’s investment performance, you can always switch to
another mutual fund.
If you have never invested in the stock market, you might seriously
consider getting your feet wet with mutual funds. You should know that
there are two types of funds: no-load and load. In my opinion, you are
better off with a no-load fund (which means that you won’t have to pay
extra sales charges for investing in the fund) because it’s cheaper. There
is no evidence that load funds are any better than no-load funds.
Cross your fingers, but the highly regulated mutual fund industry has
so far avoided the kind of scandals that have beset many of America’s
corporations. Although it is possible for you to lose money with mutual
funds, at least you know you are getting a fair shake in the market. It is
extremely unlikely that a mutual fund corporation will try to rip you off.
Mutual funds aren’t perfect, of course. Sometimes they go down,
almost as much as stocks. During the recent bear market, many mutual
funds went down a lot (a few lost as much as 70 percent)—not all
mutual funds, but many of them. Most mutual funds are designed to do
well in bull markets and tend to fail miserably during bear markets
(although a handful of specialized mutual funds shine in bear markets).
Index Funds:A Popular Alternative to Actively Managed Mutual Funds
The mutual funds I’ve talked about so far are run by fund managers
who keep close tabs on how their funds are doing. They will buy or sell
stocks in order to make more money for the fund. These fund managers
are actively involved in improving the performance of their mutual
fund; that’s why they’re called active managers.
Index funds are run differently. Like other mutual funds, they use
money pooled by investors. But unlike other mutual funds, index funds
do not have active managers. They simply contain the stocks that make
up one of the various indexes. For example, you could buy the Dow 30
index (DIA), the S&P 500 index (SPY), or the Nasdaq 100 index
(QQQ). The idea is that if you can’t beat the indexes, you might as well
24
UNDERSTANDING STOCKS

join them. Therefore, if the Dow index is having a good year and is up
10 percent, you will get a 10 percent return on your fund.
Index funds are less expensive than other mutual funds because
you don’t have to pay an active manager and there are no extra sales
charges. For these reasons, index funds have become very popular with
the public. More than 50 percent of portfolio managers have failed to
beat the index funds (in some years, the records are even worse), and so
index funds are a popular alternative.
Keep in mind that in a bull market, index funds do well. During a
lengthy bear market, however, their performance will be terrible. (Bull
markets are markets in which the major stock indexes are consistently
going up because investors are buying stocks. On the other hand, bear
markets are markets in which the major stock indexes are consistently
going down because investors are avoiding or selling stocks.) Never-
theless, the low cost and high performance of index funds have made
them attractive to many investors.
Cash
During the 1990s, putting your money in cash or a certificate of deposit
(CD) seemed like a dumb idea. After all, a CD, offered by most banks
and financial institutions, gave you a return of no more than 5 percent
a year. At the time, people became giddy when they saw the value of
their stocks go up by huge amounts. A 5 percent return on a CD seemed
like a bad joke.
The joke backfired, however, when people held their favorite
stocks too long. By the year 2001, the market had reversed. Many
investors who had held onto their favorite stocks lost nearly everything.
Those 5 percent CDs and an old-fashioned savings account (paying
only 1 percent a year) seemed like mighty good ideas. One percent a
year isn’t much—in fact, it’s a terrible return—but it’s better than los-
ing money.
If you have a preference for cash, you can also put your money in a
money market fund, which pays a little more than a bank. (A money mar-
ket fund is a mutual fund that invests in such short-term securities as CDs
and commercial paper.) You can also invest directly in U.S. Treasury bills,
STOCKS: NOT YOUR ONLY INVESTMENT
25

which offer the advantage of safety because they have the backing of the
U.S. government. (Money market funds aren’t insured.)
Remember when I talked about diversification? By keeping some
of your excess cash in a money market account, you are protected from
vicious bear markets. In addition, you can use excess cash to buy your
favorite stock or mutual fund. You’ll also learn that it’s nice to have
extra cash on the side to pay for emergencies and unexpected expenses.
There’s no rule that says that every cent you have should be invested in
the stock market.
Investing in Real Estate and Real Estate 
Investment Trusts (REITs)
One of the smartest investments you can make is to buy your own
home. Not only will you get tax breaks, but over the years the prices of
many homes have skyrocketed. (In some parts of the country, the price
of real estate has gone up so high that it reminds people of what hap-
pened to the stock market after it peaked in 2000.) Owning a home is
usually cheaper than renting, it allows you to build long-term wealth
the old-fashioned way, and, most important, it feels great to be a home-
owner.
The biggest negative of owning a home is that real estate is an illiq-
uid investment (meaning that you can’t sell it quickly, as you can a
stock or mutual fund). The other downside is that you are required to
make monthly mortgage payments. If for some reason you fall behind
with your payments, the bank can attempt to take over your home. Also,
when you own a home, you have to pay property taxes, homeowner’s
insurance, and interest on the loan. Even with these drawbacks, owning
a home is a worthy financial goal, although it’s not for everyone. (For
example, renting is simpler and more convenient for some people. In
addition, you could use the money you aren’t spending on the house to
invest in the stock market.)
Many people use real estate as an investment. This includes buying
a residential property, such as a single-family home, condominium, or
townhouse. If all goes according to plan, you can turn around and sell it
26
UNDERSTANDING STOCKS

for a higher price or rent it out. As with investing in the stock market,
you never want to buy real estate until you have done extensive research.
An alternative to buying real estate is to invest in a REIT, a publicly
traded company whose stock can be bought and sold on one of the
stock exchanges. These companies purchase and manage various real
estate properties. If you don’t want to take the time to buy stocks in
these companies, you can always buy REIT mutual funds.
Unlike real estate, the main advantage of REITs is their liquidity. In
addition, you can enjoy the benefits of buying and selling real estate
without having to do the work. Of course, there is the risk that the com-
pany or fund manager will make poor real estate investments, causing
the REIT to go down in price.
Bull, Bear, and Sideways Markets
Bear Market
Sometimes the market goes through a period of months or even
years when it keeps going down. That has happened a number of
times in the history of the stock market. When the stock market
is officially in a bear market, it means that the major market
indexes—the Dow, Nasdaq, and S&P 500—are declining. People
sell their stocks for whatever price they can get. In general, the
economy is weak, and corporate earnings are declining.
A bear market is pretty depressing for Wall Street. People
begin to avoid the stock market and put their money in cash, gold,
or bonds. On Wall Street, the major brokerages stop hiring or lay
off employees. Since the stock market often predicts what will
happen to the economy, a lengthy bear market may signal that a
recession is coming. No one can predict how long a bear market
will last, although bear markets in the past have been relatively
short.
Bull Market
Bull markets are very profitable for most traders and investors.
During a bull market, there are plenty of jobs on Wall Street, and
investors are flush with cash that they eagerly use to buy more
STOCKS: NOT YOUR ONLY INVESTMENT
27

stocks. Everyone seems to be in a stock buying mood, and the
major indexes have nowhere to go but up. People are optimistic
about the direction of the country. Everyone is talking about how
much money they made in the market. In the early 1920s, the bull
market was fueled by the increased use of automobiles and elec-
tricity. In the great bull market of the 1990s, it was the Internet
that drove stock prices higher.
Sideways Market
Wall Street dreads a sideways market because it’s hard for anyone
to make money in such a market. In a sideways market, the mar-
ket indexes attempt to go up or down but end up just about where
they started. People just sit on the sidelines, holding their cash and
refusing to participate in the market. For example, the market
reached its low 3 years after the 1929 market crash, then went
nowhere for the next 10 years. It took another 12 years for the
market to return to its 1929 highs. Another sideways market began
in 1966, when the Dow was at 983.51. You had to wait 16 years,
until 1982, for the Dow to permanently break 1000 (although it
temporarily broke through in 1972 before retreating.) Investors
had to endure a number of mini-bear markets during this period.
In the next chapter, you will learn about growth, income, and value
stocks, and introduced to penny stocks.
28
UNDERSTANDING STOCKS

3
29
How to 
Classify Stocks
If you want to understand the stock market, you should learn the differ-
ent ways in which people classify and identify stocks.
Stock Sectors
A sector is a group of companies that loosely belong to the same indus-
try and provide the same product or service. Examples of stock sectors
include airlines, software, chemicals, oil, retail, automobiles, and phar-
maceuticals, to name just a few. Understanding sectors is important if
you want to make money in the stock market. The reason is simple: No
matter how the market is doing and no matter what the condition of the
economy, there are always sectors that are doing well and sectors that
are struggling.
For example, during the recent bear market, the semiconductor sec-
tor, the Internet sector, and the computer sector were going down on a
regular basis. A lot of savvy investors shifted their money out of these
losing sectors and moved into the retail and housing sectors. That’s
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
Copyright © 2004 by The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. Click here for Terms of Use.

right, the retail and housing sectors soared during 2001 and 2002. (Wal-
Mart was particularly strong.)
Some professional traders shift their money into and out of sectors
every day. Once they identify the strongest sectors for the day, they pick
what they think is the most profitable stock in each of these sectors. Like
anything connected to the stock market, shifting into and out of sectors
sounds easier on paper than it is in real life. It’s always easier to look in
the rearview mirror to figure out what sectors were most profitable.
It’s very easy for me to say that you should have shifted out of tech-
nology in March 2000 and moved into the housing sector. But now,
right now, how confident are you that housing stocks will continue to
go up in price? It’s a lot harder to pick successful sectors than many
people think. Nevertheless, it’s worth taking the time to understand and
identify the various sectors and to be aware of which sectors are strong
and which are weak. This could give you a clue as to where the econ-
omy is headed.
Classifying Stocks: Income,Value, and Growth
Income Stocks
The first category of stocks is income stocks, which include shares of
corporations that give money back to shareholders in the form of divi-
dends (some people call these stocks dividend stocks). Some investors,
usually older individuals who are near retirement, are attracted to
income stocks because they live off the income in the form of dividends
and interest on the stocks and bonds they own. In addition, stocks that
pay a regular dividend are less volatile. They may not rise or fall as
quickly as other stocks, which is fine with the conservative investors
who tend to buy income stocks. Another advantage of stocks that pay
dividends is that the dividends reduce the loss if the stock price goes
down.
There are also a number of disadvantages of buying income stocks.
First, dividends are considered taxable income, so you have to report the
money you receive to the IRS. Second, if the company doesn’t raise its
30
UNDERSTANDING STOCKS

dividend each year—and many don’t—inflation can cut into your prof-
its. Finally, income stocks can fall just as quickly as other stocks. Just
because you own stock in a so-called conservative company doesn’t
mean you will be protected if the stock market falls.
Value Stocks
Value stocks are stocks of profitable companies that are selling at a rea-
sonable price compared with their true worth, or value. The trick, of
course, is determining what a company is really worth—what investors
call its intrinsic value. Some low-priced stocks that seem like bargains
are low-priced for a reason.
Value stocks are often those of old-fashioned companies, such as
insurance companies and banks, that are likely to increase in price in
the future, even if not as quickly as other stocks. It takes a lot of
research to find a company whose price is a bargain compared to its
value. Investors who are attracted to value stocks have a number of fun-
damental tools (e.g., P/E ratios) that they use to find these bargain
stocks. (I’ll discuss many of these tools in Chapter 9.)
Growth Stocks
Growth stocks are the stocks of companies that consistently earn a lot
of money (usually 15 percent or more per year) and are expected to
grow faster than the competition. They are often in high-tech indus-
tries. The price of growth stocks can be very high even if the company’s
earnings aren’t spectacular. This is because growth investors believe
that the corporation will earn money in the future and are willing to
take the risk.
Most of the time, growth stocks won’t pay a dividend, as the corpo-
ration wants to use every cent it earns to improve or grow the business.
Because growth stocks are so volatile, they can make sudden price
moves in either direction. This is ideal for short-term traders but unnerv-
ing for many investors. During the 1990s, when growth stocks were all
the rage, even buy-and-hold investors couldn’t resist investing in growth
companies like Cisco, Sun Microsystems, and Dell Computer.
HOW TO CLASSIFY STOCKS
31

Dividends:Another Way to Make Money
You already know that many investors are attracted to income stocks
because they pay dividends. Let’s take a closer look at exactly how div-
idends work.
As mentioned before, a corporation that has made a lot of profits
passes some of those profits to shareholders in the form of a payment
called a dividend. It is usually given to shareholders in cash (in fact, by
check), or, if desired, it can be used to buy more shares of the stock.
Dividends are a great idea. Not only do you make money as the
price of your stock goes up, but you can also receive a bonus from the
corporation in the form of a dividend every quarter. Keep in mind that
the corporation’s board of directors is not required to distribute a divi-
dend but often does so when the corporation is doing well.
If you own a lot of shares of a stock, perhaps 5000 shares or more,
your dividend payments can add up substantially. Let’s say, for exam-
ple, that a corporation pays $0.25 per share quarterly dividend on your
5000 shares, which adds up to $1 in dividends each year. That means
that every 3 months you will receive $1250, for a total of $5000 a year.
In addition, if the stock you own goes up in price, then you also make
money on the gain (assuming you sell the stock).
People used to talk a lot about dividends, especially investors who
were nearing retirement age, because so many investors depended on
their dividend checks to live. Some people will buy only stocks that pay
hefty dividends. The corporations that traditionally paid dividends were
the large blue-chip companies that are included in the Dow Jones
Industrial Average (in the game of poker, blue chips are the most valu-
able). Corporations of these types tended to attract older investors who
were more interested in the dividends than in the stock price.
Unfortunately, a lot of corporations, even the blue chips, have low-
ered or eliminated their dividends. In the go-go 1990s, corporations
wanted to use every cent they had to enlarge or improve their business
and weren’t willing to give some of that money back to their share-
holders. Technology corporations in particular weren’t in the habit of
paying dividends. You can easily find out the amount of the dividend, if
any, that a corporation pays by looking in the newspaper.
32
UNDERSTANDING STOCKS

Penny Stocks
Just as their name suggests, penny stocks are stocks that usually sell for
less than a dollar a share (although some people define a penny stock
as one selling for less than $5 a share). Because the stocks of these
small corporations usually don’t meet the minimum requirements for
listing on a major stock exchange, they trade in the over-the-counter
market (OTC) on the Nasdaq. They are also called pink sheet stocks
because at one time the names and prices of these stocks were printed
on pink paper. (To check the prices of unlisted OTC stocks, try the Web
site www.otcbb.com.)
The advantage of trading penny stocks is that the share price is so
low that almost everyone can afford to buy shares. For example, with
only $1000 you can buy 2000 shares of a $0.50 penny stock. If the
stock ever makes it to a dollar, you made a 100 percent profit. That is
the beauty of penny stocks. On the other hand, you could put your order
in at $0.75 a share, and a couple of days later the stock could fall to
$0.50. It happens all the time. A number of traders specialize in these
stocks, although this is not easy.
After all, penny stocks are so cheap for a reason. That reason could
be poor management, no earnings, or too much debt, but whatever it is,
there usually aren’t enough buyers to make the stock go higher. Even
with their low price, the trading volume on penny stocks is exception-
ally low. (For example, a stock like Microsoft will trade millions of
shares per day, whereas a penny stock might trade 10,000 shares, or
sometimes even less.)
With a low-volume stock, it’s easy for someone to manipulate the
price. Manipulation? Yes, it happens, especially with penny stocks. If
you have a $1 stock that is trading only 25,000 shares a day, when
someone comes in to buy 10,000 shares, that trade is likely to affect the
price. (That’s also why some people prefer trading penny stocks.)
Because of their low volume, penny stocks are also the favorite
investment of unethical people who work in boiler rooms. A boiler
room is an operation that hires a team of people to make phone calls to
people they don’t know in order to convince them to buy a nearly
worthless stock. As the stock price goes up (because people are urged
HOW TO CLASSIFY STOCKS
33

34
UNDERSTANDING STOCKS
to buy the stock), the workers (the insiders) in the boiler room sell their
shares for a substantial gain. By the time you want to sell, it is often too
late. More than likely, you’ll lose most or all of your investment.
A bit of advice: If a cold-calling salesperson begs you to buy a
penny stock, just hang up. “Hey, buddy, the stock is only $0.10 a share.
For $1000, you can buy 10,000 shares. If the stock goes to a dollar, you
could make $10,000. How does that sound? So can I count on you for
10,000 shares? Trust me, this stock is hot.”
It is reported that thousands of people fall for this scam every sin-
gle day. The boiler room brokers are skilled at making you feel that you
are going to miss out on the deal of a lifetime if you don’t buy in the
next 10 minutes. In reality, it’s unlikely that the penny stock will ever
claw its way out of the basement. (An entertaining movie called Boiler
Room described some of the tactics used to convince unsuspecting
investors to buy penny stocks.)
Like anything connected to the stock market, exceptions can be
found. There are a number of once high-flying companies that trade for
less than a dollar. Because of these companies’ history and book value
(how much the company is worth), they are generally better buys than
unknown penny stocks with no price history and negative earnings.
However, it is essential that you do your homework before you pur-
chase your first penny stock.
The SEC: Protecting Investors
against Fraud
You may wonder whether there is a government organization that
protects the needs and interests of the individual investor. Actu-
ally, there is. Congress created the U.S. Securities and Exchange
Commission (SEC) in 1934 to regulate the securities industry
after the disastrous 1929 crash. The SEC is something like the
police officer for the investment industry. It sets the rules and
regulations and standards that Wall Street must follow. The pur-
pose of the SEC (paid for by your tax dollars) is to protect indi-
vidual investors against fraud and to make sure the markets are

run fairly and honestly. Its Web site, www.sec.gov, contains help-
ful articles and resources about the SEC’s mission and about
individual companies. It’s worth mentioning that knowledge is
your best weapon against fraud, and the SEC does its best to keep
you informed. It will also make life miserable for anyone it
catches breaking the securities laws.
Unfortunately, not everyone wants a government organiza-
tion like the SEC breathing down the necks of corporations.
Although Congress created the SEC, there are powerful people
with special interests who want to keep the SEC as weak as pos-
sible. To make sure that the SEC is ineffective, some politicians
see to it that the SEC doesn’t have the funds or resources it needs
to go after companies that break securities laws.
A weak SEC is nothing but an invitation to corporate crooks
to use the stock market to finance their illegal trading activities.
It may take a market crash or some other financial disaster before
the SEC gets the tools it needs to rid the market of crooks. As an
individual investor or trader, however, it pays to know your rights
(and what is allowed by law), especially if you are a victim of
fraud by anyone connected with the securities industry.
In the next chapter, you will learn about all the things that people
do with stocks, including other ways to classify stocks.
HOW TO CLASSIFY STOCKS
35

This page intentionally left blank.

4
37
Fun Things You Can
Do (with Stocks)
You can do a number of interesting things with stocks: You can diver-
sify, allocate, compound, split them, and short them. Let’s look at each
of these concepts in turn.
Diversification:Avoiding Putting All of Your Eggs 
in One Basket
I’ve already mentioned the importance of diversification, meaning that
instead of betting your entire portfolio on one or two stocks, you spread
the risk by investing in a variety of securities, with the number and the
specific securities depending on how much risk you want to take and
how long you will stick with your investment. (A portfolio is a list of
the securities, including stocks, mutual funds, bonds, and cash, that you
own.) The idea behind diversification is that even if one investment
goes sour, your other investments might soar.
Many people’s portfolios were destroyed during the recent bear
market because they invested all of their money in one stock, often that
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
Copyright © 2004 by The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. Click here for Terms of Use.

of the company for which they worked. For example, if the only stock
you owned was Enron because you worked there, not only did you lose
your job when Enron filed for bankruptcy, but you lost your investment
as well.
Let’s see how diversification works when you are 100 percent
invested in the stock market. First of all, you need a lot of money to prop-
erly diversify, more than most people can afford. That’s because you need
to own at least 25 to 50 stocks in various industries to be properly diver-
sified (now you understand why mutual funds are such a good idea).
Many financial experts suggest that you own a mixture of growth, value,
and income stocks, along with a smattering of international stocks. You
might also own stocks in both large companies and smaller ones.
It takes considerable skill to determine how you should diversify
because so much depends on how much risk you are comfortable with
(called risk tolerance), your age, and your investment goals. For exam-
ple, when the Internet stocks were going up, many people put 100 per-
cent of their money into those stocks. Unfortunately, this wasn’t proper
diversification. Although putting all their eggs in one basket did make
some people rich on paper, most of the people who did this didn’t
understand the risks they were taking until it was too late. (Many peo-
ple thought they were properly diversified until all of their investments
went down at once.)
In my opinion, if you insist on investing 100 percent of your money
in stocks (and even if you add mutual funds, bonds, and cash to the
mix), you should speak to a financial planner or adviser about proper
diversification. There are so many possible combinations that diversi-
fying your money can be mind-boggling. On the one hand, you don’t
want to play it too safe by being overdiversified. On the other hand, you
don’t want to expose yourself to too much risk.
Asset Allocation: Deciding How Much Money 
to Allot to Each Investment
Once you have diversified, you have to decide what percentage of your
money you want to allocate (or distribute) to each investment. For
38
UNDERSTANDING STOCKS

example, if you are 30 years away from retirement, you might invest 65
percent in individual stocks and stock mutual funds and 25 percent in
bonds, and keep 10 percent in cash. This is asset allocation.
As with diversification, the correct asset allocation depends on
your age, your risk tolerance, and when you’ll need the money. In the
old days, you were told to subtract your age from 100 to determine the
percentage to put into stocks. Unfortunately, it’s a lot more complicated
than that. Once again, it is a good idea to seek professional help in
determining the ideal asset allocation for yourself.
In a real-life example, one 80-year-old man I know had 90 percent
of his portfolio in only two stocks, Lucent and Cisco Systems. When
these stocks plummeted, his two-stock portfolio was ruined. Now he’s
worried that he won’t have enough money to survive, and he’s right.
The goal for this man is to protect his original investment. On the other
hand, I have a 21-year-old friend who is putting much of her money in
stocks and stock mutual funds, and she can afford to do so because her
time horizon is so much longer.
Compounding: Creating Earnings on Your Earnings
There is something you can do with stocks that can make you rich,
according to the mathematicians who dream up this stuff. The idea
behind compounding is the reason that people began to buy and hold
stocks in the first place. Compounding works like this: You reinvest any
money you make on your savings or investments: interest, dividends, or
capital gains. The longer you keep reinvesting your earnings, the more
money you’ll make.
For example, if you invest $100 and it grows by 10 percent in one
year, at the end of the year you’ll have a total of $110. If you leave the
money alone, you’ll have $121 by the end of the next year. The extra
$11 is called compound earnings, or the earnings that are earned on
earnings. The more your investment is earning, the faster the com-
pounding. The advocates of compounding remind you to invest early if
you want to have more money later.
Compounding is a neat accounting maneuver that can make you
rich if you live long enough to see it work. The idea is that as the stock
FUN THINGS YOU CAN DO (WITH STOCKS)
39

you own goes up, it compounds in value, bringing you even greater prof-
its. The longer you leave your money in a stock, the more it compounds
over time. John Bogle, ex-chairman of the mutual fund company Van-
guard, called compounding “the greatest mathematical discovery of all
time for the investor seeking maximum reward.”
The only problem with compounding formulas is that they make
assumptions that may not occur in real life. Compounding works like a
charm as long as your stock goes up in price. The problem with the
stock market (and compounding) is that there are no guarantees that
your stock will go up in price or that you’ll make 8 percent or more a
year in the market.
The Stock Split: Convincing People to Buy Your Stock
When a corporation announces a 2-for-1 stock split, this simply means
that the price of the stock is cut in half but the number of shares you
own is doubled. For example, let’s say you own 100 shares of IBM at
$80. If IBM announces a 2-for-1 stock split, the price of IBM would be
cut in half, to $40 a share. Now, instead of owning 100 shares of IBM,
you’d own 200 shares. From a mathematical perspective, nothing has
changed at all. You own twice as many shares, but since the price of the
stock is reduced by half, the value of your investment is exactly the
same. (You can also have a 3-for-1 or 4-for-1 stock split.)
A stock split is often done for psychological reasons more than
anything else. In this example, the price of IBM has dropped from $80
to $40 a share. Investors who are primarily focused on price might con-
sider the $40 price a bargain, something like a half-off sale. In reality, a
stock split doesn’t change the corporation’s financial condition at all.
Instead, the biggest advantage of a stock split is that it may lure more
investors—those who felt that they couldn’t afford to buy IBM at $80.
During the bull market, after a company announced a stock split, the
stock price often went up.
Nevertheless, there are practical reasons for a company to split
its stock. For example, do you know what would happen if a corpo-
ration never split its stock? Think about Berkshire Hathaway, Warren
40
UNDERSTANDING STOCKS

Buffett’s corporation. As I write this book, his stock is trading at
$70,000 a share. That is not a typo! Most people couldn’t afford even
one share of stock at that price. So from a practical standpoint, stock
splits do make sense for corporations. They do nothing to increase
the value of the corporation, however. Splitting the stock is purely an
accounting (or marketing!) procedure designed to make a stock more
enticing to investors.
Some companies with low stock prices have used another type of
maneuver, the reverse split, to artificially pump up the price of their
stock so that they aren’t delisted from a stock exchange. For example, if
a stock is trading for $1 a share, after a 1-for-5 reverse split, the price
will rise to $5 a share. Just as with the regular stock split, fundamentally
nothing has changed in the company. If you are a shareholder, the value
of your shares remains the same, but you now own fewer shares. (Let’s
say you own 100 shares of a $1 stock. After a 1-for-5 reverse split, the
stock rises to $5, but the 100 shares you own are reduced to 20 shares.
From an accounting standpoint, you still own $100 worth of stock.) The
bad news about reverse splits is that most of the time the higher stock
price doesn’t last. Before long, the stock may return to $1 a share.
Selling Short: Profiting from a Falling Stock
When you invest in a stock hoping that it will rise in price, you are said
to be “long” the stock. Your goal is to buy low and sell high. Your profit
is the difference between the price at which you bought the stock and
your selling price. On the other hand, if you hope that a stock will go
down in price, you are said to be “short” the stock. When you short a
stock, you first sell the stock, hoping to buy it back at a lower price.
Your profit is the difference between the price at which you sold the
stock and the price at which you bought it back. If you’ve never shorted
stocks, it sounds strange until you do it a few times.
Imagine making money when a stock goes down in price! For
many people, it sounds almost un-American or unethical to profit from
a falling stock. In reality, you’re in the market for only one reason: to
make money. It doesn’t matter whether you go long or short as long as
FUN THINGS YOU CAN DO (WITH STOCKS)
41

you make profits. It’s neither un-American nor unethical to short
stocks. It’s a sophisticated strategy that allows you to profit even during
dismal economic conditions.
For example, let’s say you are watching Bright Light, and you
believe that over the next month it will go down in price. Perhaps there
is negative news about the industry, or perhaps you notice that the com-
pany has a lot of debt. You account and decide to short 100 shares of
Bright Light at the current market price of $20 a share, so you call your
brokerage firm or use your online account. When you place the order,
the brokerage firm will lend you 100 shares of Bright Light (since you
don’t own it). Let’s say Bright Light falls to $18 a share. You now buy
back the shares that you borrowed for a 2-point profit.
There are a few rules that you must follow in order to short stocks.
First, you must buy when the stock is temporarily rising, which is
called an uptick. If a stock is falling quickly and buyers have aban-
doned it, you may not be allowed to short it. You have to wait for the
next uptick, when buyers have taken a position on the stock, a techni-
cal rule that prevents short sellers from piling onto a losing stock.
Another rule is that you can’t short a stock whose price is less than $5
a share.
Although selling short sounds like an easy strategy, a lot of things
can go wrong. First, when you go long a stock, the most you can lose is
everything you invested. I know, that’s pretty bad. On the other hand,
when you short a stock, you can lose more than you invested, which is
why shorting can be risky. Let’s see how this works.
If you sell short 100 shares of Bright Light at $20 a share, you
receive $2000. If Bright Light drops to $18 a share, you made 2 points,
or a $200 profit. Let’s say you are wrong and Bright Light goes higher.
For every point Bright Light goes up, you lose $100. How high can
Bright Light rise? The answer is frightening: infinitely! The problem
with shorting is that if the stock goes up, not down, your losses are
incalculable.
I knew a group of guys who shorted Yahoo! in 1997 when it
reached $90 a share. They were convinced that Yahoo! was overpriced.
Perhaps they were technically correct, but that didn’t stop the stock
from soaring to as high as $400 one year later. (It actually went over
$1000 in 1999, or a split-adjusted price of $445.) These guys were
42
UNDERSTANDING STOCKS

forced to buy back the shares early, losing over 100 points, because the
losses grew so large. A few years later, after the market came to its
senses, Yahoo! dropped to less than $20 a share (adjusted for splits), but
it was too late for my acquaintances.
Personally, I find it very enlightening to listen to short sellers. Too
often, investors delude themselves into thinking that the market will
always go higher. Professional short sellers are good at poking holes in
the “too-good-to-be-true” proclamations of market bulls. In my opin-
ion, you should listen to both sides of an argument, but in the end you
should do what you think makes the most sense.
Other Ways to Classify Stocks
Outstanding Shares
As you remember, corporations issue shares of stock, which are made
available to investors through a stock exchange. The total number of
shares that a corporation has issued is called its outstanding shares. (I
agree it’s not the most exciting name.) In a real-life example, you might
ask someone in the corporation, “What is the number of outstanding
shares?”
To save yourself time, you could also look up the number of out-
standing shares on the Internet—for example, at Yahoo! Finance. Keep
in mind that the bigger the corporation, the more outstanding shares
there are. Because the stock market goes up and down based on supply
and demand, a corporation doesn’t want to issue too many shares unless
it is pretty sure that people will scoop them up.
Let’s say that over a 10-year period, Microsoft issues a total of 1 bil-
lion shares to the public and to corporate insiders; therefore, the number
of outstanding shares for Microsoft is 1 billion shares. (It is up to the
board of directors of Microsoft to decide how many shares it wants to
issue.) Obviously, the board keeps millions of shares of the stock for the
company’s officers and employees. Because they are company insiders,
they got the shares at extremely low prices, perhaps for a few dollars a
share. (This is one of the reasons that so many people who worked at
Microsoft became millionaires.) In addition, the board of directors also
FUN THINGS YOU CAN DO (WITH STOCKS)
43

sets aside millions of shares to be used for equipment, computers, and
research and development.
The Float
The total number of shares issued by the corporation is called the out-
standing shares. Can you guess what the shares are called when we
refer only to those owned by outside investors like you and me? Those
shares are called the float.
I’ll explain this as simply as possible. Let’s say a corporation has a
total of 5 million outstanding shares. Of those 5 million shares, corpo-
rate insiders hold 3 million. The question of the day: How many shares
have been allocated to outside investors to be actively traded? If you
guessed 2 million shares, you’re right. The float is 2 million shares.
These are the shares that are traded every day on the stock exchange by
investors and traders.
Why Outstanding Shares and Float Are Important
Although some people don’t care how many shares are outstanding or
what the float is, others think this information is extremely important.
Why? Keep in mind that the market is all about supply and demand. If
you know how many shares are outstanding and what the float is, you
can calculate whether there is too little supply and too much demand
(the stock will go up in price) or too much supply and not enough
demand (the stock price will go down). Also, it’s a good idea for new
investors to become familiar with market vocabulary.
Market Capitalization
Another way to classify stocks is by size. The market capitalization
(market cap) of a stock tells you how large the corporation is. (To cal-
culate market cap, you multiply the number of outstanding shares by
the current stock price. Therefore, the market cap of a stock varies
depending on both the number of outstanding shares and the stock
price. For example, a large corporation with 10 billion outstanding
shares and a stock price of $50 has a market cap of $500 billion.)
44
UNDERSTANDING STOCKS

Some people will invest only in large-cap stocks (those of large
corporations worth more than $5 billion), which include the stocks of
corporations like Coca-Cola, Alcoa, and Johnson & Johnson, because
they feel that the stocks of these corporations are safer and the corpo-
rations will never go bankrupt. (This isn’t always true, however, since
the fifth largest company in the country, Enron Corporation, filed for
bankruptcy in 2002.) Other investors are attracted to mid-cap stocks
(those of medium-sized corporations worth between $1 and $5 billion),
while still others invest in small-cap or microcap stocks (those of small
corporations worth between $250 million and $1 billion) because they
cost less and their price often moves quickly.
When you compare the stock price to the market cap, you can see
how difficult it is for large-cap stocks to double or triple. For example,
let’s say you own shares in a $50 large-cap stock of a company with a
market cap of $500 billion. In order for the stock price to double, the
company would have to increase in value from $500 billion to $1 tril-
lion—not impossible, but extremely difficult and time-consuming. One
reason some investors prefer small-cap stocks is that there is a better
chance that they will double or triple. On the other hand, the smaller the
stock’s market cap, the higher the risk.
The IPO
Stocks that are being sold to the public for the first time are
called initial public offerings, or IPOs. (Wall Street refers to this
process as “going public.”) The IPO is an exciting time for the
corporation. The biggest advantage of going public for a com-
pany is that it allows the company to raise money. It can use this
money to expand, to pay off debt, or to pay for research and
development of a new product. In addition, if the IPO is success-
ful, it can make company insiders extremely rich. There are two
types of IPOs, the start-up (a company that never existed before)
and the private company that decides to go public.
The corporation will appoint a major Wall Street stock bro-
kerage firm (identified as the lead underwriter) to manage the
IPO process and bring the stock to market. Investment bankers
FUN THINGS YOU CAN DO (WITH STOCKS)
45

who work for the brokerage firm will determine how many
shares of stock to issue to the public and what price to set.
Before the company goes public, early investors are given a
chance to buy the stock at cut-rate prices. For example, corporate
insiders could get thousands of shares of the stock for a dollar.
Meanwhile, investment bankers will work with the underwriters
to try to create investor interest in the corporation. Once the com-
pany goes public, research analysts that work for the underwriter
may issue buy recommendations on the stock and make positive
comments about the corporation.
We all saw the power of the Internet stocks when Netscape
went public in April 1995. The lead underwriter, a major New
York brokerage firm, calculated that the stock would be worth
$28 a share. Minutes after the stock opened for the day, it rose to
$75 a share, a price move that surprised many on Wall Street
(although in later years some Internet IPOs rose by even more—
for example, in 1998 TheGlobe.com went from $9 to $87 in one
day, and in 1999, an IPO called VA Linux jumped 700 percent in
one day, opening at $30 and rising to a high of $299). For the next
5 years, any stock that had anything to do with the Internet was
given a robust reception by Wall Street. The demand for these
Internet stocks was nothing short of phenomenal.
Like all good things, however, the fun ended after a few
years. Most of the Internet stocks made a round trip back to their
original price, and many went out of business. For example, a
few years after its IPO, VA Linux was trading for less than $5,
and TheGlobe.com was recently at less than a dollar. In addition,
many of those who bought Internet IPOs on the first day lost
thousands of dollars because they bought too high.
As an individual investor without inside connections, it is
probably best if you avoid buying IPOs. More than likely, you
will end up buying at the top and be forced to sell at a loss.
Although some traders made small fortunes on IPOs on the way
up, the IPO game is difficult to win, unless you are a company
insider and buy early shares.
If you do want to participate in an IPO, however, be sure you
read the prospectus, a legally binding document filed with the
46
UNDERSTANDING STOCKS

SEC, that includes the company’s future plans as well as its cur-
rent financial condition. To cover themselves, startup companies
will mention, often in small print, that there are no guarantees the
company will succeed and there are tremendous risks. After
reading all the risks, you may decide not to invest in the company
at all!
In the next chapter, you will learn everything you need to know
about stock prices.
FUN THINGS YOU CAN DO (WITH STOCKS)
47

This page intentionally left blank.

5
49
Understanding 
Stock Prices
Many people think that all they have to know about a stock is its share
price. While this is an important piece of information, it’s only one piece
of the puzzle. Nevertheless, stock price is important. After all, since the
stock market is an auction, you should know how much a stock costs,
and most important, what it’s worth before you buy or sell it.
Basic Stock Quote
A stock quote (or quotation) is simply the current price of a stock. An
example of a stock quote is given in Figure 5-1.
If you don’t know the current price of a stock, you can simply ask
your broker, for example, “Could you give me a quote for Cisco?” In
the example in Figure 5-1, the person will reply, “$15.04.” This simply
means that if you wanted to buy one share of Cisco at that moment, it
would cost you $15.04. For many people, the stock quote is the most
important piece of information they can receive about a stock; it tells
them exactly how much it will cost them to buy the stock, or what they
will receive if they sell it.
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
Copyright © 2004 by The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. Click here for Terms of Use.

For years, some stock exchanges were unwilling to give out real-
time stock quotes and news unless they were paid exorbitant fees for
the information. Individual investors who didn’t pay the fees received
free stock quotes, but with a 20-minute delay.
Today, however, it’s very easy to get free real-time stock quotes any
time of the day or night. You can look on financial television programs
like CNBC, Bloomberg, or CNNfn. If that is inconvenient, you can
pick up the phone and call your stockbroker (if you have one). If you
are patient, you can always wait for tomorrow’s newspaper. The easiest
way of checking stock quotes is by logging on to the Internet. There are
hundreds of financial sites that provide real-time quotes.
As you can see in Figure 5-1, each stock has it own ticker symbol.
(In addition to stocks, mutual funds, index funds, bonds, and options
have ticker symbols.) Some are easy; for example, the stock symbol for
IBM is IBM. The symbol for Microsoft is MSFT, that for AT&T is T,
that for General Electric is GE, and that for Cisco Systems is CSCO. If
you aren’t sure of the exact ticker symbol, type in the name of the com-
pany, and the computer will give you the ticker symbol in seconds.
Most people refer to a stock by its symbol rather than its full name.
Every experienced investor has memorized the ticker symbols for the
most popular stocks. You can tell what exchange the stock is listed on
by counting the number of letters in the symbol. If the stock is on the
Nasdaq, the symbol will have 4 or 5 letters. If the stock is on the NYSE,
it will have 1, 2, or 3 letters.
Detailed Stock Quote
Let’s take a look at a detailed stock quote for Cisco Systems (CSCO),
shown in Figure 5-2.
50
UNDERSTANDING STOCKS
Symbol
Last Trade
Change
Volume
CSCO
9:49am
15.04
+0.21
+1.42%
6,007,203
Chart, Financials, Historical Prices, Industry, Insider, Messages,
News Options, Profile, Reports, Research, SEC Filings, more . . .
Figure 5-1

Bid: This is the price you will receive if you want to sell the stock.
Ask: This is the price you will pay if you want to buy the stock.
Previous Close: The stock closed at this price on the previous day.
When you look at the detailed stock quote in Figure 5-2, you will
see two stock prices, one higher than the other. These are the bid price
and the ask price. The bid and ask prices are extremely important but
also confusing (at least they were to me).
The lower price (the one on the left) is the bid price (or offer price),
which is the price you will receive if you own the stock and want to sell
it. In Figure 5-2, the bid price for Cisco is $15.05. The higher price (on
the right) is the ask price, the price you will have to pay if you want to
buy this stock. The ask price for Cisco is $15.07.
The difference between the bid and ask prices is called the spread. In
Figure 5-2, the difference between the bid price ($15.05) and the ask price
($15.07) is 0.02. A few years ago, when stock quotes were in fractions,
the spread on some stocks was very high, sometimes as much as a dollar.
UNDERSTANDING STOCK PRICES
51
Views: Basic - DayWatch - Performance - Real-time Mkt - Detailed - [Create New View]
CISCO SYSTEMS (NasdaqNM:CSCO) - Trade: Choose Brokerage
Last Trade
Change
Prev Cls
Open
Volume
9:49am–15.06
+0.23 (+1.55%)
14.83
15.12
6,103,711
Day’s Range
Bid
Ask
P/E
Mkt Cap
Avg Vol
14.96–15.19
15.05
15.07
40.08
108.8B
81,647,045
52-wk Range
Bid Size
Ask Size
P/S
Div/Shr
Div Date
8.12–21.92
22,300
10,400
5.55
0.00
22-Mar-00
1y Target Est
EPS (ttm)
EPS Est
PEG
Yield
Ex-Div
15.34
0.37
0.54
1.27
N/A
23-Mar-00
Chart, Financials, Historical Prices, Industry, Insider, Messages,
News Options, Profile, Reports, Research, SEC Filings, more . . .
Figure 5-2

When the spreads were very wide, if you bought a stock and then
sold it quickly, you would immediately lose money on the spread. The
lower the spread, the better for investors. Because of decimalization
(instead of displaying stock quotes in fractions, the exchanges now dis-
play them in decimals), the spread between the bid and ask prices is
often quite small, sometimes only a penny or two. That makes it fairer
for investors.
Other important information is how much the stock has risen or
fallen in both absolute and percentage terms during the day. In Figure
5-2, Cisco is up 0.23, or 1.55 percent. Many people also look at the
52-week lows and highs to get an idea of where the stock price has
been in the past.
The detailed stock quote also gives the market capitalization, the
outstanding shares, how much dividend the company pays (if any), and
the volume. (In the detailed stock quote example, note that you can do
a historical price search as well as do extensive research on any stock or
mutual fund.) You can learn a lot by studying the detailed stock quote.
Stock Price
Keep in mind that the detailed stock quote is just a quick snapshot of
what is happening with the stock. Although these numbers can be use-
ful, if you want to really get to know a stock, you’ll have to dig deeper,
as you’ll learn as you read the rest of the book. A lot of people don’t real-
ize that the stock price is just one small piece of information you need to
know about a stock. Some claim that it’s the least important piece!
Too many people believe that the stock price determines whether a
stock is a bargain or not. What many people don’t realize is that a stock
selling for $50 can be a better value than a stock selling for $10. If the
$10 stock has little or no earnings and loads of debt, you’d be better off
buying fewer shares of the $50 stock rather than more shares of the $10
stock. (Warren Buffett once said, “It’s far better to buy a wonderful
company at a fair price than a fair company at a wonderful price.”)
That’s why some investors spend so much time looking at ratios like the
P/E (when you divide a stock price by its earnings per share, you end
up with a P/E, or price/earnings, ratio) to determine what is a fair price.
52
UNDERSTANDING STOCKS

After all, you don’t want to be the kind of person who knows the price
of everything but the value of nothing (to paraphrase Oscar Wilde).
After-Hours Trading:
Making Money 24 Hours a Day
During the bull market, a lot of people, myself included, thought
that people would flock to the after-hours market. We figured
that people who couldn’t trade during the day would be eager to
trade at night. As the markets fell, so did interest in after-hours
trading. In the middle of the bull market, online and traditional
brokerage houses were aggressively offering clients the ability to
trade at any time of the day or night. But as the market plum-
meted and investors lost money, the after-hours market fizzled
out. Although professional traders continue to trade at night, only
a handful of investors still participate in the after-hours market.
(The after-hours market also includes the premarket, which usu-
ally begins around 8:00 a.m. EST.)
After-hours trading works like this:The major stock exchanges
remain open for electronic trading through electronic communica-
tion networks (ECNs) so that investors can trade outside of regular
hours.
Only a few million shares are traded in the after-hours mar-
ket, unlike the regular market, where billions of shares are traded
during the day. In fact, the volume is so small that most investors
would be well advised to avoid night trading altogether (unless
you take the time to thoroughly understand how it works). The
low volume can cause strange things to happen to stock prices. If
you are unfamiliar with after-hours trading, you can end up buy-
ing or selling a stock for a terrible price. Trading after hours is a
tricky strategy, and my advice is to do most of your investing and
trading during the regular market.
In the next chapter, you will learn how to buy and sell stock.
UNDERSTANDING STOCK PRICES
53

This page intentionally left blank.

6
55
Where to Buy Stocks
Although buying and selling stocks is easy, making money at it is hard
work. Many very smart people have tried and failed to beat the market.
If you’ve never invested in the market before, there is no need to rush.
The stock market will be there when you’re ready. The first step is to
open an account with a brokerage firm.
You may wonder how much money you need in order to get
started. (Some will say that you should invest only what you can cheer-
fully afford to lose.) You can start investing in the market with $5000
or less, although it will be harder for you to diversify and thus reduce
your risk. With $5000 or more, it’s possible to create a fairly well diver-
sified portfolio.
Full-Service Brokerage Firm: Bells and Whistles 
for a Price
Full-service brokerage firms include some of the largest and most influ-
ential stock brokerage firms on Wall Street. These firms provide a huge
variety of financial and investment products. They pretty much have it
all, offering you investment advice, research, banking services, and the
ability to buy and sell stocks, bonds, mutual funds, and fixed-income
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
Copyright © 2004 by The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. Click here for Terms of Use.

products like CDs. Although the full-service firms are particularly inter-
ested in attracting a wealthy clientele, anyone can open an account. Just
don’t expect to receive a high level of personalized service unless you
have a large portfolio.
If you open an account with a full-service brokerage firm, you will
be assigned a person to handle your account. (Some of these companies
also have an online brokerage division that caters to do-it-yourself
investors.) Such people used to be called stockbrokers, but because
unscrupulous brokers gave the industry a bad reputation, they now refer
to themselves in a variety of creative ways: financial advisers, financial
consultants, account executives, or money managers.
Stockbrokers not only are paid to advise you what stocks to buy or
sell but will personally fill the order. For this service, they are paid a
commission on each trade; the commission on one trade can easily cost
you several hundred dollars. You are basically paying the broker to
oversee your portfolio and provide investment advice. Stockbrokers at
full-service firms often have access to research reports that are sup-
posed to be more detailed and accurate than the information that is
released to the public.
The problem with the commission-based system is that it is in the
best interest of brokers to see to it that you buy or sell frequently because
the more you trade, the larger the commissions that they receive. (Some
stockbrokers have been known to urge clients to buy or sell a lot so that
they could get more commissions. This well-known but illegal practice
is called churning.) It is also in the broker’s best interest to direct you
toward products that provide the highest commissions.
If you do hire a stockbroker, my advice is to find an honest, com-
petent individual who truly cares about your investment portfolio.
What you don’t need is fast-talking salesperson who wants to make
money for the firm by generating bigger commissions. Many retail
stockbrokers, in my opinion, don’t have the time or knowledge to give
you top-notch investment advice. On the other hand, a skilled stock-
broker can definitely do wonders for your portfolio.
In response to complaints about the commission-based system,
some brokerages have changed their fee structure for clients with large
portfolios. Instead of charging commissions on each trade, they now
charge a 1 or 2 percent annual fee. In the end, it is really your choice
56
UNDERSTANDING STOCKS

whether a full-service stock brokerage meets your needs. It is a deci-
sion you should take seriously, since it’s your money at stake.
The 1987 Stock Market Crash: Electronic 
Trading Is Born
Before 1987, the only way you could trade stocks was by calling your
stockbroker on the phone (unless you were one of the lucky few who
had enough money to buy a seat on one of the stock exchanges). The
weakness of this system was revealed in October 1987, when the U.S.
markets crashed, falling by more than 20 percent in one day.
Because many investors and institutional investors panicked and
tried to sell at the same time, the phone lines jammed or stockbrokers
refused to answer their phones. On more than a few occasions, the floor
brokers filled the orders of institutional investors but ignored orders
from individual investors. (As you can imagine, many investors lost
everything because they sold too late.)
Because of this fiasco, the Nasdaq created a special computerized
system called SOES (Small Order Execution System) that allowed
traders to place orders electronically and at the most competitive price.
The first to take advantage of SOES were day traders, who discovered
that they could bypass a stockbroker and send their orders directly to
the stock exchange. This was the beginning of the online trading revo-
lution, but it was only for day traders. It was another 10 years before
retail investors were allowed to trade online.
Online Investing and Trading: Saving Money 
on Commissions
Before people traded stocks on the Internet, they could save money by
going to discount brokerages. Discount brokerages were geared toward
the do-it-yourself investor who wanted low commissions. In return for
low commissions, these brokers provided minimal advice and little
research.
WHERE TO BUY STOCKS
57

The Internet, however, changed Wall Street forever. Discount bro-
kers were the first to connect their customers to the Internet. For
extremely low commissions, people could trade stocks from the com-
fort of their own homes via the Internet without first contacting a stock-
broker. Although there are still discount and deep discount brokers, as
far as many people are concerned, they are all online brokerages.
Online investing or online trading simply means that you buy and
sell online from your own computer. When you open an account with
an online firm, you will not receive investment advice. That’s the price
you pay for commissions that are sometimes less than $10 a trade.
Because of increased competition, online brokers will give you instant
quotes, stock charts, and interactive research. You can open an online
account with an online trading brokerage for as little as a few hundred
dollars.
The downside to opening an account with an online brokerage is
that some people desperately need investment advice. (Many people
thought it was easy to make money online, and it was—until the recent
bull market ended.) If you’re looking for advice, or you have a huge
portfolio, an online broker might not be right for you.
What Happens after You Open a Brokerage Account?
The retail brokerage firm or online brokerage sends you an enrollment
packet with forms to fill out. After you send the firm a check or money
order, it usually puts your money into a money market account, which
is similar to a savings account. It usually takes about 10 days for your
account to become active.
The Types of Orders You Can Place 
with a Brokerage Firm
Before you buy your first stock, you need to know what kind of order
to place. It is essential that you learn the vocabulary so that you’ll be
able to communicate with your stock brokerage.
58
UNDERSTANDING STOCKS

Market Order: Fast Fills but Not the Best Price
The fastest and easiest type of order is a market order. It is also the most
common. Let’s say we look up the stock quote on Bright Light (BRLT)
and see that it is trading at $20 by $20.25. To refresh your memory, if
you wanted to buy Bright Light, the current market price is $20.25,
which is how much you would have to pay if you wanted to buy it right
now. You don’t like that price? Don’t worry—it will change in a second.
(It’s kind of like Chicago weather.)
When you pay the market price for a stock, it is filled fast. Why?
Because the people selling it to you know that the price they’re giving
you is the best price for them. It’s kind of like buying a car and paying
the list price. If you want the stock quickly, you pay the market price.
Just remember that you are paying a little bit more for the speed.
Let’s take a closer look at the other kinds of orders you can place.
Limit Order: Slower Fills at Competitive Prices
There is another type of order that is a little more complicated but that
allows you to negotiate a better price—the limit order.The advantage of
a limit order is that you can decide for yourself the price at which you
want to buy or sell the stock. The disadvantage is that a limit order often
takes more time to fill. In fact, it may never be filled, especially if the
price you picked is too low or too high.
Here’s how the limit order works: Let’s say Bright Light is trading
at $20 a share and you want to buy it, but you feel you could get it for
a better price. Instead of buying it at the market price, $20, you put an
order in to buy it at a limit price of $19. If Bright Light ever falls to $19,
then the order will be initiated and filled at the current market price. If
the stock never makes it to $19, then your order won’t be filled.
You have a couple of choices when you enter a limit order. For
example, let’s say you place a limit order to buy 100 shares of Bright
Light at $19 a share (even though it’s selling for $20 a share). At this
time, you must specify whether the order is good for the day only (day
order) or good until you cancel the order (good-till-canceled order, or
GTC). If you select good-till-canceled, you can go about your business
WHERE TO BUY STOCKS
59

and not worry about the order until it’s filled one day in the future. With
a day order, if the brokerage can’t fill your order that day, it will be
automatically canceled at the end of the day.
Sometimes, for whatever reason, no matter where you put your limit
order, you never seem to get it filled at the most competitive price. Nev-
ertheless, the limit order gives you a lot more flexibility. If you really
want to shop around, you can put in limit orders for almost any price you
want. For example, you could put in a low-ball offer at 10 points below
the current stock price. (If your order does get filled, however, there’s
nothing to stop the stock from going even lower.)
Stop-Loss Order: Protecting You from Financial Disaster
As the name implies, the purpose of a stop-loss order is to protect your
profits (if the stock is a winner) or to cut your losses (if the stock is a
loser). A stop-loss order instructs your brokerage to sell the stock at a
price that you specify. In real life, it works like this: Let’s say you buy
Bright Light at $20 a share. At the time you buy the stock, you place a
stop-loss order at $18 a share. This means that if Bright Light drops to
$18 a share, the brokerage will automatically sell your shares, and your
loss is limited to approximately 10 percent. (The order is guaranteed to
be executed, but there is no guarantee that it will be at the exact price
you want.)
Many people don’t believe in stop-loss orders. They think that if a
stock falls in price, this is a good opportunity to buy, not to sell. One
well-known fund manager said that stop-loss orders can chip away at
your portfolio—like death by a thousand cuts.
The stop-loss order isn’t perfect, of course. In volatile markets, for
example, your stop-loss order can be filled inadvertently. Here’s what
can happen: You set up a stop loss at $18 a share (using Bright Light as
an example). A couple of hours later, Bright Light drops to $18, and the
stop loss is triggered. At first, you’re relieved because you sold before
the stock fell any further. Unfortunately, after being down as much as
10 percent, Bright Light rallies to $22 a share, but you have already
sold for a loss.
60
UNDERSTANDING STOCKS

Some people solve this problem by using a “mental” stop loss (some
people write it on paper). Unfortunately, most investors do not have the
discipline to sell a stock when it hits the target price. They freeze in fear
when their beloved stocks fall by dozens of points, or they convince
themselves that the lower price is only temporary. Others won’t get rid of
their losing stocks because “they are too cheap to sell.”
The bottom line: Before you buy a stock, think in advance about
when you’ll sell it in case you are wrong. A stop-loss order is like an
insurance policy that you use when the unexpected happens. It can help
to prevent you from losing everything. (At some brokerages, you can
place a trailing stop order that rises as the stock price goes up.)
You can also place a stop limit order, which is similar to a stop-loss
order except that after the specified price is hit, the order becomes a
limit order instead of a market order. With a stop limit order, you enter
two prices: the stop price and the limit price. I know this sounds con-
fusing, but it becomes clear after a few weeks of practice.
Placing Your First Order
Ready to have some fun? Let’s say you have filled out the necessary
paperwork and opened an account with an online broker. Your begin-
ning balance is $2500, which is sitting safely in a money market
account. You are now at your computer, and you want to buy 100 shares
of Bright Light at the market price. Fortunately, online brokers have
made it very easy to buy and sell stocks. If you have a stockbroker, you
call the stockbroker on the phone (most brokerages also allow you to
enter the order on their Web site) to place your order.
If you have an online broker, you follow the on-screen instructions.
Begin by typing the symbol for Bright Light (BRLT), type 100 shares,
and select market order. (Be sure you don’t make any mistakes.) After
you press the Enter key, the computer does the rest. A lot of what then
happens to your order depends on the stock you pick.
A minute ago, Bright Light was trading at $20.25. Now it’s at
$21.00. Because you placed a market order, it is immediately filled.
The brokerage firm automatically transfers $2100 from your money
WHERE TO BUY STOCKS
61

market account to buy 100 shares of Bright Light for $21.00 a share.
The brokerage also deducts a commission of $9.99. Congratulations!
You are now a Bright Light shareholder.
If Bright Light goes up a point, you have what we call a paper gain
of $100. Not a bad way to make a living, is it? Now you can go to the
beach or to work and watch your money make money. Instead of your
working for your money, your money is working for you.
Order Routing: How Your Order Is Sent
As mentioned earlier, if you chose to buy a NYSE stock, the order is
routed to a specialist on the exchange, who fills your order electroni-
cally. If you buy a Nasdaq stock, a market maker will also handle the
order electronically. More than likely, no matter which stock you
choose, your order will be routed to an ECN (electronic communica-
tion network), where it will be matched electronically.
As an investor (not a day trader), you care only that your order is
executed quickly and for a reasonable price. Some online brokers who
cater to day traders offer “price improvement,” which means that their
software will find the most competitive price. There is also special trad-
ing software that allows you to specify who will handle your orders.
This software, called Level II, allows you to see the names of all mar-
ket makers, specialists, and ECNs. Then you can pick the most com-
petitive price.
Unless you are an experienced trader or the software is provided
for free, there’s little reason to install Level II software. In most cases,
your online broker will route your order to an ECN, where it will be
handled as efficiently as possible. The best time to evaluate how
quickly your broker handles your orders is during a fast-moving mar-
ket. The best brokers are efficient under all market conditions.
Note: The best time to place an order is after 10:00 a.m. Eastern time.
The reason is that professional traders and institutional investors often
use their own money to force prices in the direction they want them to
go. Often, the market moves aggressively in one direction, only to
reverse course an hour later. In general, if you are new to the stock
62
UNDERSTANDING STOCKS

market, avoid placing orders in the middle of the night or during the
first half-hour and the last half-hour.
If You Don’t Have the Money
When a brokerage firm lends you money to buy stocks, it’s called
“going on margin.” Margin simply means that you are borrowing
money from the brokerage firm so that you can buy additional shares
of the same stock.
Usually, the brokerage will give you a 2-to-1 margin rate. For exam-
ple, if you pay the brokerage $2000 to buy shares of Bright Light, the
brokerage will lend you an additional $2000, allowing you to use a total
of $4000 to buy shares of Bright Light. You will be charged interest on
the extra $2000 that you borrowed at current interest rates.
The advantage of margin is that you are using other people’s money
(called leveraging) to make more money. This works great if your stock
goes up in price. On the other hand, if your stock loses money, not only
do you lose some or all of your original investment (which is painful
enough), but you’ll still owe all the money that you borrowed. In the
stock market, stocks go down faster than they go up, so margin can be
extremely dangerous.
In the 1920s, margin requirements were as low as 10-to-1, so if you
had only $1000 to invest, the brokerage would lend you an additional
$9,000. One of the reasons the market crashed in 1929 was because of
margin. As the stock market fell, people who had bought stocks on
margin didn’t have the money to pay back what they had borrowed.
That’s when banks and brokerages stepped in to take possession of peo-
ple’s savings accounts, houses, and anything else they could get their
hands on.
In 1934, President Franklin Delano Roosevelt created the Securi-
ties and Exchange Commission (SEC), the government agency charged
with making sure that the stock market is run fairly and protecting
investors. One of the rules the SEC agreed on was an increase in mar-
gin requirements.
If your stocks fall a lot while you are on margin, you might get the
dreaded margin call. The brokerage will call you demanding that you
WHERE TO BUY STOCKS
63

provide more cash. If you don’t move fast enough, the brokerage has
the right to sell the stock until the margin percentage is at the proper
levels (usually 30 percent or more). During the recent bear market, it is
estimated that thousands of people were forced to liquidate their stocks
because they couldn’t come up with enough cash to support their mar-
gin accounts.
Most people don’t have the discipline to handle margin correctly,
which is why I think you should avoid it. In my opinion, margin is a
dangerous tactic that is best left to professional traders. Invest what you
can afford without borrowing from the brokerage to pump up your
returns. If the only way you can invest in the market is with margin, you
are gambling, not investing. You’ll know what I mean after you receive
your first margin call.
Electronic Communication Networks
Electronic Communication Networks (ECNs) are networks of computers
that work behind the scenes to match buy and sell orders electronically.
ECNs work in conjunction with the various stock exchanges to process
your order faster, more efficiently (since there is no human interaction),
and more cheaply. When ECNs were first introduced, they revolutionized
the way stocks were traded and helped to lower commissions.
For a small fixed fee of pennies per share, the ECN acts as an elec-
tronic middleman. By going directly through an ECN, investors and
traders avoid many of the financial games played by market makers and
specialists. Although what happens to your order behind the scenes can
be fascinating, most people are hardly aware that ECNs exist. As long
as their order is filled quickly and cheaply, most investors don’t care
what happens to it.
The 1929 Stock Market Crash
“Those who cannot remember history are condemned to repeat
it,” warned philosopher George Santayana. There is no more
glaring example than the 1929 stock market crash, which in some
64
UNDERSTANDING STOCKS

ways was eerily similar to the boom and bust cycle that the stock
market went through beginning in March 2000.
It wasn’t the Internet that fascinated the nation and helped
usher in the roaring 1920s, it was electricity. At the same time,
many people became enamored with the stock market. With very
favorable margin rates (you could borrow 9 times the amount of
your original investment), it seemed as if everyone was in the
stock market. As more and more people entered the market, the
prices of stocks went up. (In a way, it was like a huge Ponzi
scheme. People paid off what they owed on their original invest-
ment with the paper profits they made on their rising stocks.)
The attitude of the Coolidge administration was laissez-
faire, a French term meaning “letting things be.” The government
wanted to let the forces of capitalism work without interference.
As the stock market got shakier and the economy got worse, the
new president, Herbert Hoover, realized that something had to be
done. The goal was to increase margin requirements (which
many considered the main culprit) without causing panic. Unfor-
tunately, the market panicked.
After a series of frightening stops and starts, the market finally
crashed on October 24, 1929. Over $10 billion of investors’money
was wiped out before noon. Huge crowds of angry and shocked
investors packed the visitor’s gallery of the NYSE to watch the
debacle. By noon the market was in a “death spiral.” Investors
around the world were horrified at the extent of the financial dam-
age. By October 29, 1929, all the market’s gains from the past year
had been wiped out. Eventually, the market fell 89 percent from its
1929 high of 381.
After the crash, economists tried to figure out what had gone
wrong. It was obvious that many people had missed the signs the
market was overpriced. For example, the P/Es of many stocks
were high, well beyond what was considered the P/E safe zone of
15. In addition, the Fed decided to raise interest rates, which
many economists considered to be the wrong move. Congress
also had a hand in turning what really was a recession into a full-
blown depression. For example, during this period it doubled
income taxes and raised tariffs on imports and exports.
WHERE TO BUY STOCKS
65

Another problem was that banks were allowed to operate with
few restrictions on how much they could lend. After the crash,
many of the banks’ customers had no way of paying back the
money they had borrowed, forcing many banks to close. Finally,
many people believed that fraud and insider activity was to blame.
After the initial crash, the United States entered a 3-year bear
market; the Dow finally bottomed at 41 in 1932.
The new president, Franklin Delano Roosevelt (FDR), took
a number of unprecedented steps to bring stability and trust to the
market, including creating the SEC in 1932. Wall Street was
skeptical about letting the government interfere with the private
sector, but the steps FDR took eventually helped turn the econ-
omy around. However, it took 25 years for the Dow to make it
back to 381.
In the next chapter, you will learn how to build wealth over time by
using long-term investment strategies.
66
UNDERSTANDING STOCKS

PART TWO
MONEY-MAKING
STRATEGIES
Copyright © 2004 by The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. Click here for Terms of Use.

This page intentionally left blank.

7
69
Want to Make Money
Slowly? Try These
Investment Strategies
As mentioned in the first chapter, a strategy is a plan that helps you
determine what stocks to buy or sell. If you are new to the stock mar-
ket, it’s best to keep an open mind before choosing a strategy. If a par-
ticular strategy seems to make sense to you, take the time to do more
research. It can take a long time before you find an investment strategy
that not only makes sense but also increases the value of your portfolio.
Keep in mind that you aren’t limited to only one strategy. Some
investors and traders use a variety of strategies, whereas others are
comfortable using only one. No matter what strategy you use, here are
a few things you should remember:
1. A strategy is only as good as the person using it. In other words,
no matter how brilliant and ingenious the strategy, you can still
lose money.
2. Not all strategies work during all market conditions.
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
Copyright © 2004 by The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. Click here for Terms of Use.

3. Don’t become so devoted to a strategy that you are blind to the
fact that you are losing money. Money is the scorecard that deter-
mines whether your strategy is working.
You have to take the time to find the strategy or strategies that fit
your personality and lifestyle. Unfortunately, there are no magic
answers to finding success in the stock market. For most people, the
only way to find out what ultimately works on Wall Street is through
trial and error.
Buy and Hold: The Most Popular Strategy for Investors
The reasoning behind the buy-and-hold strategy is that if you buy a
stock in a fundamentally sound company and hold it for the long term
(at least a year), you’ll realize a profit. The beauty of a buy-and-hold
strategy is that you can buy a stock and watch it rise in price without
having to constantly watch the market. Investors who bought compa-
nies like IBM, GE, and Microsoft in the early days made huge sums of
money on paper without having to pay much attention to the market.
The other advantage of buy and hold is that because you are not con-
stantly buying and selling stocks, you are paying very little in brokers’
commissions. Buy and hold is the easiest investment strategy to use,
and, in retrospect, it worked extremely well during the bull market of
the 1990s.
Perhaps the only time buy-and-hold investors sell is if something
fundamentally changes in a company. They don’t sell because of what
is happening to the market, the economy, or the stock price. They are
focused only on the business, and they intend to hold their reasonably
priced stocks as long as possible.
One of the most successful buy-and-hold investors of the twentieth
century is billionaire Warren Buffett. He rarely buys stocks in technol-
ogy companies, but rather buys the stocks of mundane companies such
as insurance companies and banks, and he has the skill (along with a
team of independent analysts) to buy low and sell high.
In the hands of a professional, buy and hold can work, although
many investors who used this strategy ended up losing their shirts dur-
ing the recent bear market. Rather than buying low-priced value stocks,
70
UNDERSTANDING STOCKS

they bought and held high-priced technology stocks. Buy and hold does
work, but it’s not as easy to use as people think.
Buy on the Dip:An Offshoot of Buy and Hold
The buy-on-the-dip strategy was also very popular during the 1990s. In
this strategy, when a stock you like goes down in price, especially if you
believe the decline is only temporary, you buy more shares. The idea is
that because the market always goes up over time (or generally has in
the past), the shares you bought at a lower price will eventually be
worth more. People who used this strategy in the past made tons of
money as the shares they bought kept going higher.
The problem with buying on the dip is that stocks sometimes dip
two or three times before dropping permanently. In the late 1990s, mil-
lions of people poured their life savings into stocks that seemed like
bargains but actually were extremely overpriced. With every dip, more
buyers stepped in. Then, during the 2000 bear market, many of these
stocks didn’t just make a temporary dip, they crashed. During the bear
market, the stocks that made up the Nasdaq fell by over 80 percent. It is
still too early to know if these stocks will ever return to the price levels
they were at before.
Bottom Fishing: Finding Bargains among Unloved Stocks
If you are a bottom fisher, you look for stocks that are so low that they
seem to have hit bottom. Professional bottom fishers are constantly
on the lookout for stocks that are so low that they have nowhere to go
but up.
The danger of bottom fishing is that you never know exactly when
the bottom has been reached. For example, when Enron went from
nearly $100 a share to $15, many people bought more shares, assuming
that the stock couldn’t go much lower. When the stock was trading at $1
a share, the bottom fishers stepped in. The stock then fell almost 94 per-
cent before really hitting bottom, finally closing at 6 cents. You also face
the danger that companies like Enron will eventually go out of business.
Because it could be years before many of these unloved stocks rise
in price, you have to be extremely patient to be a successful bottom
WANT TO MAKE MONEY SLOWLY? TRY THESE INVESTMENT STRATEGIES
71

fisher. Stocks that are in the basement tend to stay there a while. (Many
bottom fishers will wait 2 or 3 years before scooping up favorite stocks
that other investors have ignored.)
Dollar-Cost Averaging:A Systematic Stock-Buying Approach
Instead of buying stocks whenever you have extra money in your
pocket, with dollar-cost averaging you buy stocks on a regular, sys-
tematic basis. You invest a set amount of money, perhaps $100, each set
period of time—for example, each month. The beauty of this system is
that as you buy stocks that are dropping in price, your average price per
share also drops.
For example, let’s say you buy 100 shares of Bright Light at $20.
The next month it drops to $10, so you buy another 200 shares. Your
average cost is now $13.33 a share. As long as the market keeps bounc-
ing back, dollar-cost averaging is a winning strategy. The problem is that
if your stocks keep dropping, you will be left with substantial losses.
A strategy similar to dollar-cost averaging is called averaging down.
With this strategy, instead of investing a set amount of money each set
period, you buy additional shares of stock on the way down. With dollar-
cost averaging, you have a plan. With averaging down, you buy addi-
tional shares of stock whenever you please.
Value Investing: Buying Good-Quality Companies at a Cheap Price
Value investors primarily use fundamental analysis to pick good-quality
stocks that are a bargain compared with their actual worth. In other
words, value investors are looking for stocks that are on sale. Often,
value investors will buy stocks in companies that other investors don’t
want. These are the low-P/E stocks of companies whose earnings grow
slowly, such as insurance companies and banks. Value investors are
long-term investors and are willing to wait years for their stocks to
become profitable.
During the 1990s, value investors were ridiculed for not buying the
high-flying technology stocks. While some growth stocks were doubling
or tripling in price, many value stocks were producing what some con-
sidered pitiful returns. Ironically, after the 1990s ended, value stocks
72
UNDERSTANDING STOCKS

were back in favor. It seemed as though everyone wanted to buy fairly
valued stocks in companies run by competent and honest managers that
showed signs of improved earnings performance.
Growth Investing: Buying Growing Companies
In general, growth investors use fundamental analysis to find stocks that
are growing faster than the economy or earning more than other stocks
in the same industry. Growth investors like to see earnings growing by
at least 15 or 20 percent a year for the next 3 or 4 years. Most important,
these companies’ earnings are growing faster than those of other com-
panies in competitive industries. Usually, these stocks don’t pay divi-
dends because whatever extra money the company earns is plowed back
into the company.
For many years, growth investing worked spectacularly well. Invest-
ing in growth stocks, particularly technology and Internet companies,
was all the rage during the 1990s. It was not uncommon for investors 
to see returns of 100 percent or more per year. Although investing in
growth stocks can be risky, the rewards can be tremendous.
An offshoot of growth investing is called growth at a reasonable
price (GARP). Investors who engage in this strategy basically combine
value and growth investing into one strategy. They are looking for
growth stocks, but they are willing to wait until they can get the stocks
at a reasonable price.
Momentum Investing: Buy High and Sell Higher
Momentum investors are growth investors who look for stocks that are
ready to make explosive moves upward. They buy stocks at a high
price but plan to sell them at an even higher price. They don’t care too
much about the price they paid as long as the stock goes higher.
Momentum investing works best during bull markets when there is a
lot of liquidity. In the late 1990s, it seemed as if no matter which stock
you bought—especially if was an Internet stock—the stock would go
higher.
Some critics call momentum investing the “greater fool theory,”
which means that no matter how high the stock price is, you will always
WANT TO MAKE MONEY SLOWLY? TRY THESE INVESTMENT STRATEGIES
73

be able to find a bigger fool who is willing to buy it from you. Momen-
tum investors tend to use technical analysis to look for stocks that will
make sudden and dramatic moves in a short period.
In the go-go 1990s, a surprise announcement or positive rumor
could send stocks up 20 or 30 points in one day. Although it is still pos-
sible to find momentum stocks, it’s not as easy as it was a few years
ago. (And it’s unlikely that we’ll see that kind of market environment
again for many years to come.)
Momentum investing, although exciting and potentially profitable,
is a difficult strategy. Many momentum stocks can explode in either
direction, often costing you a lot of money. Although it’s possible to
catch some of these stocks on the upside, it is definitely not as easy as
it looks. (Perhaps you should wait for the next bull market before using
a momentum strategy.)
Contrarian Investing: Doing the Opposite of Everyone Else
Contrarians, as they call themselves, use fundamental analysis to find
high-quality companies with low P/Es that other investors have aban-
doned. The more unloved the stock, the more contrarian investors like it.
When everyone else was accumulating technology stocks in the late
1990s, contrarians were buying out-of-favor companies like Waste Man-
agement (WMI) and Red Hat (RHAT). After many technology stocks
imploded, contrarians were scooping up shares of stock in unloved com-
panies like Xerox (XRX).
Contrarians are especially fascinated by a company that the media
and other investors hate. However, it takes a tremendous amount of
skill and patience to find formerly high-flying stocks that will once
again outperform the market. In addition, it takes courage to buy stocks
that no one else wants.
There is also a group of contrarian traders called “investolators”
who use technical analysis, especially charts and institutional owner-
ship, to find stock picks. Just like contrarian investors, investolators
look for unloved companies that have hit bottom. Ted Warren coined
the term investolator in the 1930s, combining the words investor and
speculator.
74
UNDERSTANDING STOCKS

CANSLIM: A Disciplined Method
of Picking Stocks
William O’Neil, founder and publisher of Investor’s Business
Daily, designed a rule-based investing system called CANSLIM.
What is most helpful about CANSLIM is that it combines both
technical and fundamental analysis, although it leans more
toward the technical. Each letter of CANSLIM stands for a char-
acteristic of a winning stock:
C: Current quarterly earnings per share
A: Annual earnings increase
N: New products, new management, new highs
S: Supply and demand
L: Leader or laggard
I: Institutional sponsorship
M: Market direction
Ideally, a winning stock should have all of these attributes,
according to what O’Neil wrote in his best-selling book How to
Make Money in Stocks.
C: Buy stocks with large increases in current earnings, prefer-
ably 25 percent or more. The higher the earnings per share,
the better. Buy stocks in companies with accelerating earn-
ings, especially when compared to previous quarters or
years.
A: Concentrate on stocks that have increased earnings per share
every year for the last 3 years. In addition, look for stocks
with recent quarterly earnings improvement. Stocks with
strong earnings improvement will have a higher probability
of success.
N: Look for companies that have introduced new products or
changed management. In addition, using technical analysis,
WANT TO MAKE MONEY SLOWLY? TRY THESE INVESTMENT STRATEGIES
75

look for stocks that have consolidated for a while before
breaking out to reach new price highs.
S: The stock market is all about supply and demand. Find
stocks that are rising in price on rising volume, a signal that
institutional investors might be buying. Trading volume
should be 50 percent above normal. In addition, look for
companies that buy back their own stock and upper-level
managers who privately own shares in their company.
L: Buy the strongest stocks in an industry group or sector.
There is no reason to buy weak stocks (the laggards) even if
the price is lower. In particular, buy the strongest stocks in a
weak market (what technicians call relative strength). You
want the leading stocks in the strongest industries with a rel-
ative price strength of 80 or more (a statistic found exclu-
sively in Investor’s Business Daily).
I: Buy stocks that are also owned by institutional investors
such as pension funds, banks, and mutual funds. Stocks with
strong institutional support are liquid, so it’s easy to enter
and exit.
M: Study price and volume indicators to understand the strength
and weakness of the market. Use stock charts to identify
market tops and bottoms. Use technical analysis not to make
predictions but to understand what the stock is doing right
now.
In the next chapter, you will learn how to make money quickly
using short-term trading strategies.
76
UNDERSTANDING STOCKS

8
77
Want to Make Money
Fast? Try These 
Trading Strategies
Many of the following strategies are popular with aggressive short-
term traders who want to make money quickly by taking advantage of
volatile stock prices. These traders primarily use technical analysis to
look for profitable trading opportunities, although some of them con-
firm their picks using fundamental analysis before buying or selling a
stock.
Day Trading: Buying and Selling in Minutes
Unlike investors, who may wait years before selling, day traders buy
and sell within seconds, minutes, or hours. Day trading is an extreme
trading strategy that involves constantly moving into and out of stocks.
Using technical analysis, professional day traders try to anticipate
where a stock will go in the near future and trade accordingly. Usually,
day traders sell all their stocks and move to cash by the end of each day.
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
Copyright © 2004 by The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. Click here for Terms of Use.

Day traders can trade from their home or trade stocks at a day trad-
ing firm, which provides high-speed telephone lines and customized
trading software. Although there have always been day traders, this
strategy became particularly popular during the late 1990s. In fact, so
many people were trading stocks from home that they were called
online traders.
An online trader can use a number of short-term strategies besides
day trading. For example, swing trading involves buying a stock early
in the week and selling it a few days later. Another short-term trading
strategy, called position trading, is to buy stock and hold it for a few
months. Some traders follow the trend of the market, buying when the
market is trending up and selling when the market is trending down.
Even with the best equipment and software, however, only a small
percentage of people are actually able to make money consistently by
day trading. First, it takes an incredible amount of discipline, trading
capital, and knowledge to be a successful day trader. Most people don’t
have the patience to sit by a computer all day and watch stock positions.
Although day traders can make money on occasion, it is an extremely
difficult game to play unless you have the power of a bull market
behind you. (It was no coincidence that just before the Nasdaq topped
out at 5000, thousands of people quit their jobs to become day
traders—a clear signal that things were going to end badly.)
Market Timing:A Controversial and Difficult Strategy
If you thought day trading was hard, imagine being a market timer.
With market timing, you predict in advance where a stock or the market
is headed. Then you make your move before the market does. For
example, if you believe that the market will rise in the next week, you
will shift your money out of cash or bonds and into stocks. The idea is
to shift your money to the most profitable investment before it goes up
(something that is easier said than done).
Market timing is a risky strategy that can cost you if you make the
wrong bet. To be a successful market timer, you have to know not only
when to get into the market, but also when to get out, which is why so
few traders are successful market timers. Timing the market is difficult
78
UNDERSTANDING STOCKS

for most people. That hasn’t stopped people from trying, however. (You
could argue that even buy and hold is a form of market timing because
you are trying to time your purchase so that you buy low and sell high.)
Short the Rallies:The Opposite of Buy and Hold
A very effective, but rather risky, trading strategy is to short the rallies.
Instead of buying more stock when the market falls (buying on the dip),
you do the opposite: When the market or your stock goes up a lot, you
sell short (that is, you sell the stock, then buy it back at a lower price).
Shorting the rallies is extremely risky, although it worked quite well for
several years. After all, stocks go down faster than they go up.
Nevertheless, keep in mind that successfully shorting the rallies
takes a tremendous amount of time, skill, and patience. If you are
wrong and the stock keeps rising, it takes considerable discipline to buy
back the shares (called covering your position) for a small loss.
Exchange-Traded Funds:A Clever Way 
to Spice Up Your Portfolio
Trading exchange-traded funds (ETFs) has recently become popular
with traders and investors, including many professionals. An ETF is an
investment product that is similar to a mutual fund, but that trades like
a stock. You can buy and sell ETFs on any major stock exchange just as
you would a stock. For as little as $500 you can buy an ETF that tracks
a specific index or sector. The most common ETFs are index funds,
such as the stocks that make up the Nasdaq 100 (QQQ), the S&P 500
(SPY), and the Dow Jones Industrial Average (DIA). Because of the
sudden popularity of these investments, new ETFs are being created all
the time. Just like those of stocks, prices of ETFs change continuously
during the day.
The advantage of trading ETFs is that they are cheap, liquid, and
tax-friendly. Because they consist of a basket of individual stocks,
ETFs provide instant diversification. After all, it would be too costly
WANT TO MAKE MONEY FAST? TRY THESE TRADING STRATEGIES
79

and time-consuming to buy so many individual stocks on your own.
Because they are similar to stocks, you buy or sell ETFs through your
brokerage firm or Internet broker. Ultimately, it’s easy for both
investors and traders to find an ETF that meets their investment needs.
The disadvantages of trading ETFs are similar to those of trading
stocks. You pay a commission when you buy or sell. In addition, because
ETFs are relatively new, they haven’t much of a track record. Although
it takes time to learn how to trade ETFs successfully, it’s worth your time
to learn how this popular investment product works.
Trading on News
Like day trading, trading stocks based on the news is a difficult method
to play and win. It’s impossible to know how the market will react to
news about your stocks. There is a wise old saying: Buy on the rumor
and sell on the news. Often a stock will rise or drop in price in antici-
pation of a news event, such as an earnings release or a Fed meeting.
Once the news is released, however, the stock will go in the opposite
direction, which explains why it is so difficult to buy or sell stocks
based on what is in the news.
In reality, news is coming at you from dozens of different direc-
tions: newspapers, magazines, the Internet, television, and friends. The
hard part is figuring out which information is valuable and which
should be ignored. It’s amazing how wrong people (both professionals
and amateurs) have been about the market. Most of what people tell
you about the market is useless. Nevertheless, keep in mind that stocks
go up or down based on what people perceive to be the truth.
Some people deliberately try to influence the direction of stocks by
spreading false information about companies. A few years ago, a stock
could rise or fall based on nothing more than a well-placed rumor in an
Internet chat room. So many people lost money by trading on tips and
rumors that they stopped listening, at least temporarily. When the next
bull market appears (and it is likely to be a long wait), the scam artists
will crawl from beneath the rocks to lure unsuspecting investors into
losing money on stocks.
80
UNDERSTANDING STOCKS

Trading Options
Although options are rather difficult to understand, with a little prac-
tice, they begin to make more sense. That’s why many professional
traders include option strategies in their portfolios. In particular, traders
will use options to hedge their position (taking the opposite side of a
trade to reduce risk). For example, if a trader is long a stock, he or she
might use options to short the same stock. While options can seem a bit
overwhelming even for experienced investors, I’ll do my best to explain
them so that they make sense.
Think of an option as a contract that gives you the right, but not the
obligation, to purchase or sell an item. It could be a house, a commod-
ity like oil or corn, or a stock. One type of stock option, for example,
gives you the right to purchase a particular stock at a given price by a
certain date. The wonderful part about options is that you don’t have to
own the stock to trade them. Options are also called derivatives because
their price comes from, or is derived from, the stock price.
The two most popular types of options are the call and the put. A
call option gives you the right to buy a stock at a specified price. A put
option allows you the right to sell a stock at a specified price. You have
the right to buy or sell the underlying stock, but most people don’t exer-
cise this right. They simply buy and sell the option. For a fraction of the
price, you can control hundreds or thousands of dollars worth of stock.
For example, let’s say Bright Light is selling for $20 a share. You
like Bright Light, and you think it will rise to $25 a share. So you
decide to buy a call option with a strike price of $25. (You can choose
any strike price. The further away the strike price is from the current
price, the cheaper the option. For example, an option with a $20 strike
price will be more expensive than one with a $25 strike price.) If Bright
Light does hit $25 or higher, you will be “in the money.” The higher the
stock goes, the more money you will make.
There is a catch, however. When you buy an option, you also have
to specify an expiration date, usually from 1 to 3 months from the date
of purchase. This means that Bright Light must rise to or above the strike
price before the expiration date or you will lose your entire investment.
WANT TO MAKE MONEY FAST? TRY THESE TRADING STRATEGIES
81

You also have the right to sell before the expiration date. (Some options
double or triple within days, so it’s wise to lock in a profit.)
When you call your broker (or enter your order online), you might
say, “I would like to buy five June contracts with a strike price of $25 a
share.” Each contract is worth 100 shares of stock. In this case, Bright
Light has to rise to $25 a share or higher before the third Friday in June
for you to make a profit (although you could sell it before the expira-
tion date for a profit). How much will this cost you? The farther away
the expiration date, the more it costs. For example, the June contracts
might cost you $2 each. If you buy five option contracts, it will cost you
$1000 (500 shares times $2 each). The July contracts might be $4 each,
(although keep in mind that the price changes constantly during the
day). There are contracts for every month of the year.
So you buy the June contracts for Bright Light at $2 each, for a cost
of $1000. (If you bought 500 shares of Bright Light stock, it would cost
you $10,000—$20 a share times 500 shares. When you buy the option,
it costs you only $1000. So for $1000 you are controlling $10,000
worth of stock.) Let’s say Bright Light rises to $25 within a week. You
are now “at the money.” As the price of Bright Light goes higher, the
price of the option rises. You can also exercise your right to buy Bright
Light stock for $25 a share.
The downside to options is that a lot of things have to go right for
you to make money. First, if Bright Light doesn’t rise to $25 a share by
the third Friday in June, you lose the entire $1000. The option will
expire worthless; as a matter of fact, according to studies, 90 percent of
options contracts expire worthless. After commissions and taxes, most
individuals don’t make a dime trading options.
Instead of buying a call option, you could always buy a put option.
In this case, you are anticipating that the price of the stock will go
down, not up. During the recent long bear market, people who bought
and sold put options cleaned up, assuming that they sold before the
expiration date.
The options game is a tough one to win. To make money on
options, you have to be right about both the timing and the price direc-
tion of the underlying stock. If you’re wrong on either count, you will
lose your entire investment. However, if you are still fascinated by
options and want to learn more, there are dozens of option strategies.
82
UNDERSTANDING STOCKS

Ask your brokerage firm for the brochure Characteristics and Risks of
Standardized Options, which explains in detail how options work and
the risks you take by trading them.
Writing Covered Calls:An Advanced Option Strategy to Generate Income
There is an intriguing but somewhat confusing option strategy that
actually works well in a sideways market. It’s called writing covered
calls on a stock that you already own. This is considered one of the
most conservative option strategies because it lowers the cost basis of
the stock that you own.
Writing covered calls works like this: You sell a call option on a
stock that you own to a call buyer, giving the buyer the right to take the
stock out of your account at the agreed-upon price. For example, let’s
say you own 500 shares of Bright Light, which is currently selling for
$20 a share. You write 5 calls (or 500 shares) for Bright Light with a
strike price of $25 a share. When you sell the calls, you immediately
receive money from the call buyer. (If the calls were selling for $1 each,
then $500 would be placed into your account.)
Let’s see what happens next. If Bright Light never makes it to $25
a share by the expiration date, then you keep the $500 and the option
expires worthless for the call buyer. You then can write another 5 calls
for another $500. On the other hand, if Bright Light does make it to $25
a share, you still keep the $500, but your Bright Light stock will auto-
matically be sold at $25 a share.
The ideal market environment for a call writer is one in which
stocks are going sideways. In a sideways market, the stock is unlikely
to go very high, which is why writing calls can be a consistent money-
maker. Even if Bright Light falls in price and you are forced to sell it at
a loss, you get to keep the $500, which is called the premium. Many
investors write calls no longer than a month in advance.
What is the disadvantage of writing covered calls? First, think
about what would happen if Bright Light were to keep going higher,
perhaps to $30 or $35? You have already sold it at $25, and so you won’t
participate in the price spike. Second, many option traders are so
focused on the premium that they don’t pay attention to the underlying
stock. If you make 10 percent on the premium but lose 40 percent on
WANT TO MAKE MONEY FAST? TRY THESE TRADING STRATEGIES
83

the stock, you have lost money. That is why if you are going to trade
options, it is essential that you first understand how to trade stocks.
ETF Workshop: Trading the QQQs
One of the skills of a professional trader is to search for ways to
make money during any market environment. Although it was
easy for people to book profits during a raging bull market, the
current indecisive market has been a lot more challenging on a
day-to-day basis. That is why experienced traders are always
looking for new and aggressive strategies to let them survive and
win in today’s market.
One surprisingly effective strategy for both investors and
traders is trading the Nasdaq 100 index on the American Stock
Exchange, known as “the Qs” from its symbol, QQQ. This index
consists of the largest and most actively traded stocks on the
Nasdaq. Many professional traders and investors have discov-
ered the Qs, making it one of the most liquid stocks on the
American Stock Exchange.
There are a number of advantages to trading the Qs. With
just one stock, you are basically trading the entire Nasdaq mar-
ket, and with a lot more control than if you owned a mutual fund.
In addition, the high liquidity of the Q’s means that your order
will be filled quickly. And finally, because there is no uptick rule
with the Qs, you can short stocks even as they are falling. (The
uptick rule means that on traditional stocks you aren’t allowed to
short a stock until there is an “uptick,” or a temporary spike in the
price.)
The disadvantage of trading the Qs is that they don’t move as
far or as fast as many traditional stocks. This, however, could also
be perceived as an advantage, since for a little less potential
profit, you are also reducing your risk. Keep in mind that because
trading the Qs is similar to trading a stock, it’s easy to lose money
if you are on the wrong side of the trade.
One of the reasons that many individual investors avoid
investing in the Qs is that the index fell from a high of $100 a
84
UNDERSTANDING STOCKS

share when it was introduced in 1999 to as low as $20 three years
later. Obviously, anyone who shorted the Qs made a small for-
tune. If you aren’t comfortable trading the Qs, you can also try its
relatives, the SPY (S&P 500) or the DIA (Dow 30).
If you are a new short-term trader, the Qs are a fantastic way
of learning how to trade the NASDAQ long or short with a little
less risk. On most days, the Qs trade within a well-defined trad-
ing range. If you are an investor who thinks the Qs hit bottom at
$20, you could buy shares for a long-term investment. In any of
these situations, be sure to use protective stop losses.
In the next chapter, you will learn how investors use funda-
mental analysis to buy and sell stocks.
WANT TO MAKE MONEY FAST? TRY THESE TRADING STRATEGIES
85

This page intentionally left blank.

PART THREE
FINDING 
STOCKS TO BUY
AND SELL
Copyright © 2004 by The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. Click here for Terms of Use.

This page intentionally left blank.

9
89
It’s Really 
Fundamental: 
Introduction to 
Fundamental Analysis
The two main methods that people use to pick stocks are fundamental
analysis and technical analysis. Fundamental analysis is the study of
the underlying data that affect a corporation. Technical analysis, on the
other hand, is the study of a stock’s price.
Some of you may find that fundamental analysis is all you need in
order to be a successful investor. After all, understanding and applying
fundamental stock analysis helped make billionaire investor Warren
Buffett a very rich man. In addition, successful mutual fund managers,
such as Peter Lynch, Robert Rodriguez, and William Miller, to name a
few, have also used fundamental analysis to find stocks in high-quality
companies at bargain prices. If you want to learn about the stock mar-
ket, you must have at least a basic understanding of fundamental analy-
sis. It is worth your time to study it.
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
Copyright © 2004 by The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. Click here for Terms of Use.

Fundamental Analysis:An Overview
When you buy a stock on the basis of fundamental analysis, you are not
simply buying a piece of paper; rather, you are buying a piece of a cor-
poration. If you’re going to buy a stock, you should find out as much as
you can about the corporation. This is the essence of fundamental
analysis: You study the corporation to decide whether it is a worthwhile
investment.
This includes looking at a number of factors, including the com-
pany’s assets and liabilities, its earnings, the managers who are running
the company, the competition, the kind of business the company is in,
and the amount of debt it has. (You can find many of these items in the
balance sheet, a brief financial report of the corporation that will be
discussed shortly.) By using fundamental analysis, you should be able
to pick out stocks that offer you the best chance for profits. You want to
buy a stock whose price is reasonable when compared with its earn-
ings—what fundamental analysts call “fair value.”
You should know that fundamental analysis is one of the most popu-
lar methods of determining whether a stock is a good bargain or is better
left alone. If you have done your homework and closely studied all as-
pects of a corporation, you should be rewarded with a higher stock price.
Nevertheless, fundamental analysis is merely a tool to help you
find and evaluate which stocks offer good value. Like anything related
to the stock market, this method is more art than science. Just because
you use fundamental analysis doesn’t mean that you’ll make a lot of
money in the market. The more methods you learn, however, the better.
This will also give you a chance to determine whether fundamental
analysis is right for you.
The Concepts behind Fundamental Analysis
Learn Everything You Can about the Industry
The first thing an investor has to determine when engaging in funda-
mental analysis is what industry to look at. If we are in the middle of a
recession, when jobs are scarce and people are struggling to stay out of
90
UNDERSTANDING STOCKS

debt, you might look at recession-proof industries like food, oil, and
retail. Once the country is out of the doldrums and jobs are plentiful, you
take a look at industries like technology that could take the market higher.
Peter Lynch, a successful fund manager of the 1980s and 1990s,
got many of his stock ideas by watching where his children shopped at
the mall. If you go to the mall and The Gap, Starbucks, Hott Topic, or
Victoria’s Secret is filled with shoppers, this is a clue that these stores
are making money. This doesn’t mean that you should run out and buy
stock in one of these companies—first you should use fundamental
analysis to find out everything you can about the company. You should
also take the time to read the annual report, call investor relations for an
investment packet, and log on to the company Web site. You don’t want
to invest a lot of money in a stock without finding out everything you
can about the company’s business. Ideally, the business will be simple
and understandable with good long-term prospects for the future.
Identify the Leading Company
Once you have identified the industry you want to invest in, you want
to choose companies that are stronger and more profitable than their
competition. Let’s say you want to invest in the retail sector because
you believe (after careful research) that people will flock to discount
stores that can save them money. What stores come to mind? Wal-
Mart? Home Depot? Walgreen’s? Exactly. Choose the stores that have
name brand recognition and that advertise heavily. These companies
are called industry leaders. If people are buying the company’s prod-
ucts, the company’s earnings will go up, which should cause the stock
price to rise. To find industry leaders, you want to look for companies
that have superior sales and earnings with little or no debt.
The financial newspaper Investor’s Business Daily rates the relative
strength of stocks in leading industries, giving them a score between 1
and 99. A relative strength rating higher than 90 is considered excellent.
You can also find information about industry leaders in the Value Line
Investment Survey, which can be found at the public library. (The Value
Line Investment Survey has loads of information about individual stocks
condensed on one page. Nearly all of the fundamental information you
need to know about a stock can be found in this periodical.)
IT’S REALLY FUNDAMENTAL: INTRODUCTION TO FUNDAMENTAL ANALYSIS
91

Talk to the Managers
Many investors who use fundamental analysis believe in talking to the
CEO and company managers to get a feel for how the corporation is
being run. Ideally, when you speak to management, you can ask how
the business is doing, where it will be spending its money, and who its
competitors are; you can also get insights about the corporation. Ques-
tioning managers is something that many professional fund managers
do. They want to invest in companies with experienced, innovative
managers who have a vision for the future. They try to avoid companies
that have too much debt, are losing business to competitors, and have
other liabilities (like lawsuits) that can affect earnings.
As an individual investor, it is highly unlikely that you will be able
to sit down with the CEO or upper management to share a drink and a
game of golf and to try to find out exactly what is going on in the cor-
poration. And even if you could, it is doubtful that the CEO would say
anything negative about the corporation. That is why management
interviews are somewhat controversial and why some professional
investors would rather study the balance sheet than talk with managers.
Company Insiders:Watch Them Closely
According to the SEC, officers and directors of a corporation who have
access to proprietary information and people who own more than 10
percent of the corporation’s stock are considered corporate insiders.
You can get clues to how a stock will do by looking at whether insid-
ers are buying or selling the stock. To find what insiders are doing, log
onto Yahoo! Finance (finance.yahoo.com), CBS Marketwatch (www.
marketwatch.com), or Bloomberg (www.bloomberg.com). In addition,
the SEC’s Web site, www.sec.gov, manages the EDGAR (Electronic
Data Gathering Analysis and Retrieval) database, which contains many
fascinating financial documents about the actions of insiders.
Some investors have created strategies that involve copying insid-
ers. After all, insiders are more knowledgeable about the future
prospects of the company than others are. On the other hand, there are
problems with tracking insider transactions. Sometimes insiders buy or
sell for reasons that have nothing to do with what is happening at the
92
UNDERSTANDING STOCKS

company. In addition, because of the way insider transactions are
reported, you may not find out what insiders are doing until it is too late.
For example, while the CEOs of Enron and WorldCom dumped millions
of shares of stock in their companies, their action wasn’t made public
until the stocks were trading for pennies a share (insider reports are
sometimes delayed by up to 3 months).
The Balance Sheet: Uncovering the Truth about a Company’s Finances
A balance sheet is a report of the financial condition of a business,
including items that only an accountant could love. And yet, to really
understand the company you have invested in, you should study its bal-
ance sheet.
Unfortunately, most people buy stocks without taking the time to
read the balance sheet. Just remember this: You shouldn’t waste thou-
sands of dollars investing in a company unless you know a few facts
about it, like how much the company earns, how much it spends, and
how much it owes. When you have found out the truth about a com-
pany’s earnings, expenses, and debt, you’ll have a better idea of
whether you should buy its stock.
The balance sheet is found at the back of a company’s annual
report. You can also find any company’s balance sheet by registering
free at www.businessweek.com. Type in the stock symbol and select
SEC filings. You can also log on to Edgar Online, a subscription-based
service that allows you access to all SEC filings, including the quar-
terly 10-Q filing and the annual 10-K filing.
Let’s take a quick look at some of the items on a balance sheet
(which by no means includes everything):
1. Assets (what the company owns, such as cash, property, equip-
ment, real estate, and accounts receivable)
2. Liabilities (what the company owes, such as declared and unpaid
dividends and accounts payable)
3. Shareholders’ equity, or net worth (assets minus liabilities)
Let’s take a look at Bright Light’s consolidated balance sheet,
shown in Figure 9-1.
IT’S REALLY FUNDAMENTAL: INTRODUCTION TO FUNDAMENTAL ANALYSIS
93

Simply put, a balance sheet is a list of everything a company owns
and everything it owes. This gives shareholders a snapshot of the com-
pany’s finances. The best way to study a balance sheet is to compare it
to the balance sheets of other companies in the same industry. In addi-
tion, you should look at the balance sheet for previous years to get a
better idea of where the company has been and where it might be going.
94
UNDERSTANDING STOCKS
Bright Light Balance Sheet 
(in thousands)
December 31, December 31, 
2002
2001
ASSETS
Current Assets
Cash and cash equivalents
1,196
1,098
Accounts receivables
1,637
1,367
Inventories
528
530
Deferred income taxes
158
120
Property and equipment
978
877
Other assets
325
103
——————
——————
Total Current Assets:
4,822
4,095
LIABILITIES AND STOCKHOLDER’S EQUITY
Current Liabilities
Accounts Payable
879
525
Accrued Expenses
578
502
Income taxes payable
186
179
Current Portion of Long-Term Debt
98
75
——————
——————
Total current liabilities:
1,741
1,281
Stockholder’s Equity
Common stock
1,567
1,567
Retained earnings
1,514
1,247
——————
——————
Total stockholder’s equity:
3,081
2,814
Total liabilities and 
stockholder’s equity:
4,822
4,095
Figure 9-1

As long as the company is not hiding debt or liabilities, the balance
sheet gives you a glimpse of its financial condition. However, reading a
balance sheet takes skill because some companies are clever at hiding
their expenses and debt while exaggerating their earnings.
For example, only a handful of knowledgeable investors figured
out that the balance sheets of companies like Enron and WorldCom
didn’t add up. As it turned out, upper management at these two compa-
nies gave an extremely distorted view of the true financial picture. It
would have been difficult, if not impossible, for investors to uncover
the truth. Nevertheless, before Enron’s collapse, financial expert War-
ren Buffett reminded investors he never invested in a company in which
he didn’t understand how they made money. The lesson: If you’re still
confused after reading the balance sheet, invest your money elsewhere.
The Annual Report
For many people, there isn’t anything more boring than reading
the annual report, a financial report of large, publicly owned cor-
porations. These reports are often long, generally 30 or more
pages containing important financial statements such as the bal-
ance sheet and income statement. In addition, there might be a
letter from the CEO about the steps he or she is taking to make
the business more profitable, how the company has performed,
and business strategies. Unless you are an accountant or lawyer,
it could easily take you all day to wade through the entire report,
which often contains public relations fluff. Many pros have
learned to focus only on the information in the report they
believe is important and ignore the rest.
To cover themselves, many companies will mention all of the
risks you’ll take if you invest in the company. They also tend to
highlight the positive aspects of their business while minimizing
the negative. As mentioned before, a few companies purposely
deceived investors into believing they were more profitable than
they were, although a careful read of the annual report could pro-
vide clues that the company was not entirely truthful. Some of the
most fascinating tidbits can be found in the footnotes. This is per-
IT’S REALLY FUNDAMENTAL: INTRODUCTION TO FUNDAMENTAL ANALYSIS
95

haps where you’ll learn about perceived risks, ongoing legal
issues, and other unforeseen problems.
Although it might be painful to read the entire annual report,
it’s worth your while to understand where you are putting your
hard-earned money. If you are a long-term investor, you want to
learn whether or not the company is making money, whether its
debt is rising or falling, and if management has a successful busi-
ness plan.
In the next chapter, you will learn the tools and tactics that funda-
mental analysts use to value stocks.
96
UNDERSTANDING STOCKS

10
97
Fundamental Analysis:
Tools and Tactics
Fundamental analysts use a number of tools to evaluate and measure
stocks. After all, before you buy a stock, you want to be sure that the
company is of good quality and that it is a good value at the price.
Investors who primarily use fundamental analysis to choose stocks typ-
ically use a variety of tools to decide which stocks to pick. In this sec-
tion, I briefly describe some of the most popular.
Income Statement: Learning How 
a Company Makes Money
One of the best ways to determine how much money a company is mak-
ing is by looking at its income statement. This contains a lot of useful
information, such as the company’s sales, operating expenses, and
earnings. Figure 10-1 gives the income statement for Florida Star.
The top line of the income statement gives the company’s sales or
revenue (also referred to as the top line). Look to see if the company’s
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
Copyright © 2004 by The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. Click here for Terms of Use.

revenue is increasing when compared to that in earlier years. For exam-
ple, if you are a growth investor, look for companies whose revenue is
increasing by 15 percent or more each year.
The next section of the income statement gives operating expenses.
These are the costs of doing business, such as salaries, advertising,
training employees, and buying new computers, to name a few. There is
usually also a line for research and development (R&D), which is the
cost of developing and investing in new products.
The next three sections of the income statement describe the com-
pany’s income. Have you heard someone say, “What is the bottom
line?” This refers to a company’s net income (which happens to be on
98
UNDERSTANDING STOCKS
Florida Star Consolidated Income Statement 
(in thousands)
2002
2001
2000
SALES REVENUES
Net Sales
2,895
2,682
1,654
Services
1,764
1,456
789
Hardware
1,591
1,101
961
Software
897
763
690
——————
——————
——————
Total Sales Revenue:
7,147
6,002
4,094
OPERATING EXPENSES
Cost of sales
2,324
2,643
1,477
Advertising and promotion
987
877
654
Research and Development
104
91
58
Other operating expenses
78
65
29
——————
——————
——————
Total Operating Expenses:
3,493
3,676
2,218
Earnings before income tax:
3,654
2,326
1,876
Provision for income tax:
78
67
43
——————
——————
——————
Net Income:
3,576
2,259
1,833
EARNINGS PER SHARE
Earnings per share 
of common stock
.99
.87
.76
Figure 10-1

the bottom line of the income statement). After paying all expenses,
how much money did the company make? This is net income.
Earnings per Share: Determining How Much Money 
the Company Makes
No matter how good you think a corporation is or how much you love its
managers, if the company isn’t earning money, eventually its stock price
will fall. That’s where EPS comes in. You can find it at the bottom of the
company’s income statement, below net income. (You calculate EPS by
dividing a company’s after-tax profit by the company’s outstanding
shares.) You can also find the EPS in the company’s quarterly or annual
report, on any number of financial Web sites, such as Yahoo! Finance, or
in periodicals like Barron’s, the Financial Times, or the Wall Street Jour-
nal. The financial newspaper Investor’s Business Daily also ranks the
relative strength of EPS on a scale of 1 to 99. Figure 10-2 gives the EPS
for IBM.
If a company is earning more money, it obviously should be
rewarded with a higher stock price. That’s why it’s so useful to compare
the company’s earnings with those of the previous quarter or the previous
year to determine if earnings are going up. (Because some companies are
FUNDAMENTAL ANALYSIS: TOOLS AND TACTICS
99
Earnings Per Share: IBM
Earnings Per Share ($) for Fiscal Year Ending December
2002
2001
2000
1999
1998
1997
1Q
0.68
0.98
0.83
0.77
0.53
0.59
2Q
0.03
1.15
1.06
1.28
0.75
0.73
3Q
0.76
0.90
1.08
0.93
0.78
0.69
4Q
0.59
1.33
1.48
1.12
1.23
1.05
Year
2.06
4.35
4.44
4.12
3.28
3.00
Figure 10-2

seasonal, quarter-to-quarter comparisons may not be as useful as year-to-
year comparisons.)
Unfortunately, finding out how much a company really earns is not
as easy as it appears. Some CEOs will play a number of accounting tricks
to make it appear that earnings are stronger than they really are. (To keep
stock prices artificially high, some CEOs “cooked the books,” or
changed the numbers so it appeared that the company was making more
money than it had in the past. In such cases, when the truth comes out, the
company is often forced to restate its earnings, causing the stock to plum-
met. For example, WorldCom restated its earnings by billions of dollars.)
It’s not enough to buy stocks in companies that grow by more than
15 percent a year—you must also understand how the company makes
that money. It sometimes takes a stock detective to find out the truth.
The Earnings Estimates Game
Adding to the confusion about EPS, stock analysts (people who are
paid to independently research corporations and make buy or sell rec-
ommendations on their stocks) make estimates or predictions of com-
panies’ future earnings. Often, a stock will rise on the expectation that
the company’s earnings will grow in the future. If a company beats ana-
lysts’ estimates, the stock price usually goes up. If a company misses
analysts’ estimates, even by as little as a penny, the stock price usually
falls. Sometimes a company will beat analysts’ published estimates but
not beat the “whisper number,” an unofficial earnings estimate that is
generally not made public. As noted earlier, CEOs are under extreme
pressure to beat the earnings estimates.
Looking at Stock Ratios
The Price/Earnings Ratio: The Granddaddy of Stock Ratios
Many people use the price/earnings ratio (P/E) to get a quick indica-
tion of whether the stock price is reasonable given the company’s earn-
100
UNDERSTANDING STOCKS

ings. When you divide the stock price by the company’s earnings per
share, you end up with a P/E ratio (also known as the multiple), that
can help you determine whether a stock is fairly valued. Many people
think that the P/E is the most effective way to measure a stock. Actu-
ally, the P/E is just one of many tools you can use to decide what
stocks to buy.
For example, a stock that sells for $20 a share and earned $2 last
year has a trailing P/E of 10 ($20 divided by $2); the trailing P/E uses
earnings from the last year. If a $20 stock were expected to earn $4 next
year, it would have a forward P/E of 5 ($20 divided by $4). In this case,
you are using analysts’ estimates concerning what will happen in the
future. The great thing about the P/E is that you can easily and quickly
compare individual stocks with one another, with their sector, or with
the overall market.
Many investors decide whether to buy a stock based on its P/E. For
example, value investors (bargain hunters looking for stocks of high-
quality companies that are selling for a reasonable price) prefer to buy
stocks with low P/Es, ideally under 15. (Warren Buffett, for example,
buys only companies with trailing P/Es of 10 or less.) On the other
hand, growth investors (aggressive buyers looking for stocks in compa-
nies whose sales or earnings are growing rapidly) don’t mind buying
stocks with high P/Es because they expect the companies’ earnings to
improve in the future. If a stock has a P/E of 50 but is growing by 60
percent a year, the stock could be a bargain.
Nevertheless, basing your stock decisions on what a company’s
earnings might be in the future has backfired on many investors. In par-
ticular, analysts’ expectations concerning future earnings have often
been overly optimistic. For example, in the late 1990s, analyst Mary
Meeker continually urged investors to buy shares of Priceline, even
though its P/E was outrageously high (it had no earnings and an
extremely high stock price). She claimed that traditional fundamental
measurements like P/E didn’t matter anymore. That was a few months
before Priceline fell from hundreds of dollars per share to a couple of
dollars. The lesson: P/Es do matter.
Even now, misconceptions about the P/E are common. Just because
a stock’s P/E is low doesn’t mean that you should buy the stock. And
FUNDAMENTAL ANALYSIS: TOOLS AND TACTICS
101

just because the P/E is high doesn’t mean that the stock should be
avoided (although the risk is higher). In general, you can use the P/E to
determine quickly if a stock is cheap or expensive when compared with
its peers and the overall market. (By the way, pay attention to the P/E of
the entire market. For years, the P/E of the S&P 500 was hovering
above 30, a clue that the market was overvalued. Some analysts believe
that the S&P 500 will have to drop to a P/E of 15, its historical average,
before it will be fairly priced.)
Price/Earnings/Growth: Taking the P/E One Step Farther
The P/E ratio is quite useful, but it doesn’t take into account future
earnings potential. That’s what the price/earnings/growth (PEG) ratio is
designed to do. To calculate the PEG, instead of simply dividing the
stock price by the earnings (as you do for the P/E), you divide the P/E
by the earnings growth of the company. For example, if a company has
a P/E of 20 and an annual earnings growth rate of 10 percent, the PEG
will be 2. This allows you to take into account both the P/E and the
company’s growth rate in determining the value of a company. Many
people feel that the PEG is more accurate than the P/E because it takes
future growth into account.
The guideline for PEG users is as follows:
A stock with a PEG of less than 0.50 is desirable (undervalued).
A stock with a PEG between 0.50 and 1 is good (fair value).
A stock with a PEG higher than 1 is not recommended, especially
if the PEG is over 2 (overvalued).
Warning:You should use the PEG as only one piece of a larger cal-
culation. Do not decide to buy a stock based solely on its PEG results.
For the most complete and accurate calculation, it is suggested that
you use the PEG to compare stocks within the same industry. The
problem with the PEG, like that with the forward P/E, is that you are
basing your information on earnings estimates, which have histori-
cally been unreliable. That is why it is so important that you use a vari-
ety of tools before deciding to buy or sell a stock.
102
UNDERSTANDING STOCKS

Price-to-Sales Ratio: Effective for Uncovering Revenue
Because P/E ratios are generally useless with companies that have no
earnings, some investors use the price-to-sales ratio (P/S) to decide
whether to buy a stock. The reasoning is that although you can play
with earnings, you can’t play with revenue. With the P/S ratio, you
compare price to sales revenue. To calculate the price-to-sales ratio,
you divide the company’s total market value by the total sales revenue
booked for the previous year. Some people claim that the P/S is more
reliable than the P/E or the PEG. (By the way, before Enron filed for
bankruptcy, its P/S ratio reportedly rose to over 200! Typically, a P/S of
over 5 is considered high, so 200 was a clear warning sign. It basically
meant that investors were paying $200 for each dollar of Enron’s sales.)
Many value investors will look for stocks with a P/S ratio of less than 1.
Return on Equity: Measuring the Financial Health of a Company
Return on equity (ROE) is a tool that helps you to measure how effec-
tively the company is being managed. Some people consider ROE one
of the most important measures of a company’s overall financial per-
formance. (You calculate ROE by dividing net income by net worth,
although this ratio is not as clear-cut because you must rely on subjec-
tive variables to calculate manager efficiency.
In general, the higher the ROE, the more effective the company is
at using its resources and the more productive the management team. In
other words, ROE gives you an idea of how well the company is man-
aged. The goal is to look for companies with a rising ROE, greater than
15 percent and growing.
There are many other fundamental stock measurements, including
return on investment (ROI), debt-to-equity ratio, price-to-book ratio
(PB), and return on assets (ROA). The purpose of many of these funda-
mental tools is to determine whether a stock is a good value compared
to its price. Because this is an introductory book, my review of funda-
mental analysis ends here. For a more thorough examination of funda-
mental analysis, you’ll find dozens of books about this topic at the
bookstore or public library.
FUNDAMENTAL ANALYSIS: TOOLS AND TACTICS
103

Problems with Fundamental Analysis
One of the problems with fundamental analysis is that you must rely on
the information that a corporation provides. If the corporation is fudg-
ing the numbers or is not entirely truthful, then the future earnings pro-
jections will be off base. As you know from the recent corporate
scandals, many companies, to prop up their stock price, were pressing
their accountants and banks to misrepresent expenses as income.
Some corporations were spending money or making loans to exec-
utives, but classifying these as income. And in a few cases, CEOs were
lying about the numbers. If a corporation gives out overly optimistic
earnings numbers or lies, then fundamental analysis by itself won’t
help you. You need the skill and knowledge of an accomplished
accountant to uncover accounting irregularities.
Another problem is that you are making assumptions about a com-
pany’s future prospects that are hard to prove. Furthermore, fundamen-
tal analysis doesn’t take into account the psychological reasons that
people drive stock prices up. For example, even though the fundamen-
tals showed that many stocks were overpriced during the 1990s, this
didn’t stop them from going obscenely higher.
A final problem with fundamental analysis is that it is extremely
time-consuming. Most individual investors don’t take the time or have
the knowledge to correctly value a company. Professional money man-
agers hire teams of analysts to do fundamental research on individual
companies before they make a stock purchase. Individual investors
have to rely on biased research that is passed down from Wall Street or
by word of mouth on the Internet.
Biography of Warren Buffett
If you ask professional investors to name the greatest investor of
all time, most of them will probably name billionaire Warren
Buffett. He is best known as the CEO of $70,000-a-share Berk-
shire Hathaway, a company involved in a number of businesses,
including insurance, publishing, and manufacturing.
104
UNDERSTANDING STOCKS

Benjamin Graham, the author of two value investment clas-
sics, Security Analysis, first published in 1934, and Intelligent
Investor, influenced Buffett early in his life. Buffett later worked
for Graham at Graham’s brokerage firm, learning from the mas-
ter how to manage investment portfolios and pick value stocks.
Buffett made a number of successful modifications to Gra-
ham’s original strategies. He uses a stock’s book value, P/E, and
dividend yield, among other objective measurements, to calcu-
late the company’s fair value. He believes in buying a company
for less than it’s worth and patiently holding its stock for a life-
time.
One of the reasons Buffett avoided investing in Internet
stocks was that he couldn’t determine their true value. Buffett
strongly believes in buying stocks in companies that are simple
and understandable (so that he can calculate their future earnings
growth). Most Internet companies had little or no earnings and
sky-high P/E ratios. At the time, several pros derided Buffett for
avoiding investments in technology companies. In hindsight,
Buffett was right.
Buffett has earned a reputation for honesty and a sense of
humor. He was one of the first to point out that you should be
cautious about investing in companies that play accounting
games when they use stock options to compensate employees.
Many people have tried to emulate Buffett’s successful buy-
and-hold strategies. A number of excellent books have been writ-
ten about his strategies, most of which are based on common
sense. The difficult part for most investors is learning how to
value a business—something that Buffett has learned how to do
after a lifetime of investment success.
In the next chapter, you will learn how traders use technical analy-
sis to buy and sell stocks.
FUNDAMENTAL ANALYSIS: TOOLS AND TACTICS
105

This page intentionally left blank.

11
107
Let’s Get Technical:
Introduction to 
Technical Analysis
The ironic thing about technical analysis is that it’s sometimes not
technical at all. In fact, some people believe that technical analysis is
easier to understand than fundamental analysis (although not at first).
Have you ever heard the saying that one picture is worth a thousand
words? If you have, then you’ll appreciate technical analysis because it
relies on charts and graphs to help you determine what stocks to buy or
sell. When you rely on mechanical tools like indicators and oscillators,
you will be less inclined to trade on the basis of emotion.
Technical analysis is also used to forecast what could happen in the
future. By looking at how stocks have reacted in the past, you can make
assumptions about what they might do in the future. The shorter the
time frame, the more accurate your prediction can be. [Winston
Churchill once said, “The farther backward you can look, the farther
forward you can see.” Quoted by James C. Humes, Churchill: Speaker
of the Century (Scarborough Books, New York, 1982).]
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
Copyright © 2004 by The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. Click here for Terms of Use.

As you know, fundamental analysis is the study of the data that
affect a company. Technical analysis, on the other hand, is the study of
the stock price. Short-term traders primarily use technical analysis to
help them make buying and selling decisions, although some savvy
traders also use fundamental analysis. Conversely, it might help the port-
folios of many investors if they double-checked their stock picks using
technical analysis.
Nevertheless, keep in mind that technical indicators and charts are
simply tools—there is no guarantee that you will be profitable, no mat-
ter what method you use or how sophisticated your software or equip-
ment. It really depends on how much effort you put into understanding
these stock-picking methods.
The Stock Chart
The key to technical analysis is the stock chart. Technical analysts, as
they are called, believe that looking at a stock chart is similar to a sur-
geon’s looking at x-rays before operating on a patient. Although charts
are not perfect, in the hands of a skilled technician they do provide
important clues as to when people are buying or selling. You can use
them to help you make statistical assumptions about a stock, or at the
very least, to improve the odds that the trade you make will be success-
ful. By reading a stock chart, you can receive clues about how the mar-
ket will behave in the future and when you should buy or sell.
One of the best reasons for looking at a chart is that it keeps your
emotions out of the decision-making process. You may love the com-
pany and its CEO, but if the chart shows that the stock is weak and is
headed down, you’ll probably want to avoid buying it. The good news
is that it’s easy to find a stock chart on any company you’re interested
in. Every financial television program—CNBC, Bloomberg, and
CNNfn, to name a few—and most financial newspapers, show stock
charts. The media discovered a long time ago that one of the easiest
ways to show the public how a stock has performed is to display a chart.
The first decision you make when looking at a chart is which time
frame you’d like to see. You can select a short time frame—for example,
minutes, hours, or a daily chart. Others prefer a longer time frame—
108
UNDERSTANDING STOCKS

weeks, months, or years. Some traders look at several charts at once,
each with a different time frame.
Line, Bar, and Candlestick Charts
Line Charts
A line chart basically plots the closing prices of a stock over a specific
period. A line connects the price points. Although line charts are easy
to read and understand, they are not as popular with experienced short-
term traders because they don’t provide very much information. They
are most useful when they are combined with other technical indica-
tors. However, many newspapers and television programs use line
charts because they are so visually appealing. Figure 11-1 is an exam-
ple of a line chart.
LET’S GET TECHNICAL: INTRODUCTION TO TECHNICAL ANALYSIS
109
CSCO Daily
Volume
11
9
17
Oct
3
7
9
15
13
19
23
25
27
11
21
23
25
17
29 31Nov 5
7
11
13
15
19
21
25
27
4
6
Dec
14.5
15.0
15.5
14.0
13.0
13.5
9.5
10.0
10.5
11.0
11.5
12.0
12.5
8.5
9.5
300
250
200
150
50
100
0
12/06/02
Millions
©Big Charts.com
Figure 11-1
Line chart

In this example, you can see immediately that the stock is moving
higher. The volume bars are on the bottom. Notice that during the week
of October 3, Cisco fell by several points. On October 8, however, there
was a spike in volume, and the stock then began to move higher over
the next few weeks. More than likely, a large institution accumulated
(bought) shares of the stock.
Bar Charts
Bar charts are popular with some short-term traders because they are so
simple to use and understand. Figure 11-2 is an example of a bar chart.
The horizontal scale at the bottom of the chart indicates the specific
period (in Figure 11-2, a day). The vertical scale displays the prices the
stock can take on during the period. The bar is the range of prices for
the period. For example, the top of the bar represents the highest price
for the day, and the bottom represents the lowest price for the day. There
are also two “ticks” attached to the bar, one that extends to the left and
110
UNDERSTANDING STOCKS
CSCO Daily
12/06/02
15.5
15.0
14.5
14.0
13.5
13.0
12.5
12.0
11.5
11.0
10.5
10.0
9.5
9.0
8.5
8.0
300
250
200
150
100
50
0
Millons
10
14
16
18
22
24
28
30
Nov
5
7
11
13
15
19
21
25
27
Dec
4
6
8
Volume
©Big Charts.com
Figure 11-2
Bar chart

one that extends to the right. The left tick stands for the opening price
for the trading day, and the right tic marks the closing price.
You can see at a glance, whether the stock closed above or below its
opening price. Generally, it is a good sign if a stock closes the day above
where it started, especially if there is strong volume right into the close.
Candlestick Charts
Candlestick charts are popular with many traders because they show so
much information, including the psychology of the market at any given
time. Many traders believe that understanding the emotions of the mar-
ket is helpful in determining future trends. (A 17th-century rice broker
in Japan created the candlestick chart to help him trade rice. As it
turned out, his charting methods enabled him to make a fortune in the
Japanese rice markets.)
Figure 11-3 is an example of a Candlestick chart. As you can see,
candlestick charts use two-dimensional bodies to show the range
between the opening and closing prices of a stock during any period.
The high and low prices are plotted as single lines and are referred to as
wicks (or shadows). The price range between the open and the close is
plotted as a narrow rectangle and is referred to as the body. If the stock
price ended the day above the opening price, the body of the rectangle
is white or clear. If the stock price ended the day below the opening
price, the body is black or solid.
Trend Lines
You could say that one of the main purposes of charting is to spot a
trend in its early stages. A trend is simply the direction in which a stock
is moving over a specific period. A stock usually doesn’t move in a
straight line, which is why spotting the trend direction is so important.
There are actually three types of trends: uptrend, downtrend, and
sideways trend. The goal is to participate in uptrends while avoiding
downtrends. A saying that technicians repeat is, “The trend is your
friend (until it ends).” The idea is to ride a trend for as long as possible
until it runs out of steam.
LET’S GET TECHNICAL: INTRODUCTION TO TECHNICAL ANALYSIS
111

Downtrend
A stock that is in a downtrend is moving lower and has been for a
while. To create a downtrend, draw a line along the top of the chart in
such a way that you connect at least two points. If a stock is in a down-
trend with high volume (meaning that a lot of people are selling), the
stock could be in trouble. Figure 11-4 shows an example of a stock in
a downtrend.
If a stock is in a downtrend and has been for a while, you have to be
pretty brave to buy the stock. A few years ago, people used to buy
stocks when they were in a downtrend because they assumed that the
trend was only temporary. This aggressive strategy actually worked
until the 2000 bear market arrived. At that point, instead of there being
a temporary dip, most stocks kept going down, wiping out the accounts
of many investors. No matter what you think of technical analysis, it is
a mistake to ignore what you see on a stock chart.
112
UNDERSTANDING STOCKS
CSCO Daily
Volume
8
10
14
16
18
22
24
28
30
Nov
5
7
11
13
15
19
21
25
27
Dec
4
6
15.5
15.0
14.5
14.0
13.5
13.0
12.5
12.0
10.5
11.0
11.5
10.0
9.5
9.0
8.5
8.0
300
250
200
150
100
50
0
12/06/02
Millions
©Big Charts.com
Figure 11-3
Candlestick chart

Uptrend
A stock that is moving higher and has been for a while is in an uptrend.
To create an uptrend, draw a line along the bottom of the chart in such
a way that you connect at least two points. Many short-term traders like
to buy stocks that are trending higher. (Instead of buying low and sell-
ing high, traders might buy high and sell higher.) Just as in a down-
trend, traders will look at volume to help determine whether the stock
is a good buy. After all, if a stock is moving higher on increasing vol-
ume, a lot of people are buying it. Figure 11-5 shows a stock index in
an uptrend.
Figure 11-5 is a weekly chart of the Dow Jones Industrial Average.
As you can see, although the index didn’t move up in a straight line,
the trend is still up. This is obviously a very positive sign if you are a
buyer. The challenge, of course, is determining how long the uptrend
will continue. Given this chart, since there are signs that the uptrend
LET’S GET TECHNICAL: INTRODUCTION TO TECHNICAL ANALYSIS
113
ERICY Weekly
Volume
02
Feb
Mar
Apr
May
Jul
Jun
Aug
Sep
Oct
Nov
Dec
60
55
50
45
40
35
30
25
10
15
20
5
0
40
30
20
10
12/06/02
Millions
©Big Charts.com
0
Figure 11-4
Downtrend

has ended at $89, short-term traders may sell their long positions or
sell short.
Sideways Trend
There is really nothing more frustrating than watching a stock go up
and down but end up in the same place where it began. This is what we
call a sideways trend. A stock in a sideways trend is moving up and
down like a bouncing ball but is so disorganized that it’s hard to know
which direction it’s going. If you are a trader, you generally avoid get-
ting involved with stocks that are trading sideways. By the way, the vol-
ume in a sideways pattern is often very low. Figure 11-6 shows a stock
in a sideways trend.
Although trading stocks that are in a sideways trend is difficult,
sometimes the sweetest profits come when a stock that is trading
sideways for a while (traders will say that the stock is consolidating)
suddenly breaks violently up or down. The difficult part, however, is
114
UNDERSTANDING STOCKS
.DJX Weekly
Volume
Oct
20
Nov
17
Dec
89
88
87
86
85
84
83
82
80
81
79
78
12/06/02
©Big Charts.com
Figure 11-5
Uptrend

figuring out when the sideways pattern will finally end. It would be
dangerous for a short-term trader to buy the stock in Figure 11-6
because it is so unpredictable. It could easily move in either direction.
Trend Reversal
One of the challenges of technical analysis is to determine when the
current stock trend will run out of steam and reverse direction. In fact,
technicians are constantly on the lookout for the “breaking” of the trend
line, which signifies a trend reversal. Figure 11-7 gives an example of
a stock index that has reversed direction.
In Figure 11-7, the index QQQ was clearly in a downtrend in early
September. By the end of the month, however, it had suddenly reversed
direction, and it continued to move higher. A short-term trader isn’t
especially concerned about why the stock reversed direction—only that
it did. Identifying this trend reversal and buying it during the early
stages could be very profitable for a trader. In this case, holding the
LET’S GET TECHNICAL: INTRODUCTION TO TECHNICAL ANALYSIS
115
T Daily
Volume
8
10
14
16
18
22
24
28
30
Nov
11
13
5
7
15
19
21
25
27
Dec
4
6
29.5
29.0
28.5
27.5
28.0
27.0
26.5
25.5
26.0
25.0
23.5
24.0
24.5
22.5
23.0
22.0
20
15
10
5
12/06/02
Millions
©Big Charts.com
0
Figure 11-6
Sideways trend

stock for a month or longer (until there was another trend reversal)
would have brought the most profits.
The challenge is to identify a trend reversal before it happens. If
you do identify a trend reversal, it’s essential you use other technical
indicators to confirm that it’s real and not just a temporary reversal.
Also, just because a trend has continued for a long time doesn’t mean
that it’s in any danger of a reversal. Long trend lines are very common.
Support and Resistance
Support: Buyers Win the Battle
If you understand support and resistance, you will have a better idea of
when to buy or sell a stock. Support and resistance keep appearing on
stock charts no matter what method of technical analysis you use. If
116
UNDERSTANDING STOCKS
QQQ Weekly
Volume
Sep
22
Oct
20
Nov
17
Dec
21.0
21.5
22.0
22.5
23.0
23.5
24.0
24.5
25.0
25.5
26.0
26.5
27.0
27.5
28.0
20.0
20.5
600
500
400
300
200
100
12/06/02
Millions
©Big Charts.com
0
Figure 11-7
Trend reversal

you want to be a successful trader, you will need to understand how to
identify support and resistance on a stock chart.
When a stock price is falling, there will be certain places on the
way down when buyers will step in and prevent the stock from falling
further. Support is the price level at which a stock’s price has stopped
falling and either is moving sideways or has reversed direction. The
demand for the stock is thought to be strong enough to prevent the price
from dropping further. The buyers are in control.
Support is often at whole numbers because people tend to buy at
whole numbers. When you look at a chart, you can often find support
levels by studying how the stock reacted in the past. Let’s use the pop-
ular 3-month chart given in Figure 11-8 to show support, which is
between $56 and $57 a share.
In Figure 11-8, support is at $56.50 a share, the price that Johnson
& Johnson (JNJ) hit three times before reversing. In fact, after the
period shown in this chart, JNJ couldn’t hold either $56.50 or $56, but
LET’S GET TECHNICAL: INTRODUCTION TO TECHNICAL ANALYSIS
117
JNJ Daily
Volume
8
10
14
16
18
22
24
28
30
7
11
5
Nov
13
15
19
21
25
27
Dec
4
6
61.5
61.0
60.5
60.0
59.5
59.0
58.5
56.0
56.5
57.0
57.5
58.0
55.5
55.0
20
15
10
5
12/06/02
Millions
©Big Charts.com
0
Figure 11-8
Support

continued to fall. In such a case, technicians say that the stock “broke
through support.” When this happens, it is a very bad sign. It means that
there aren’t enough buyers to support the stock at that price level. Tech-
nicians also notice that this stock is making a series of “lower lows,”
which means that the support level keeps going lower. At least in the
short term, this is not a good sign for the stock.
In the 1990s, one of the most closely followed stocks in the United
States was Cisco Systems (CSCO). It seemed as if everyone owned
shares in this company. Although the stock was wildly popular, techni-
cal analysts paid close attention to its support level, which was $50 a
share. Every time Cisco dropped to $50, it bounced back.
In early 2000, Cisco fell below $50 a share, breaking through sup-
port. Once this happened, many short-term traders who used technical
analysis sold their shares. When all these people sold at once, Cisco
headed lower, eventually dropping to a low of $10 a share in 2002.
According to technicians, no matter how good the fundamentals or how
much you love the stock, when the stock breaks through its support
level on increasing volume, it’s time to sell.
Resistance: Sellers Win the Battle
When a stock’s price is rising, there will be certain places on the way
up when sellers step in and prevent the stock from rising further. Resis-
tance is the price level at which a stock’s price has stopped rising and
either is moving sideways or has reversed direction. The stock can’t go
any higher. This is the point at which people, for whatever reason, sold
their shares of stock. The sellers are in control. There isn’t enough
demand for the stock to rise any higher. An example of resistance is
shown in Figure 11-9.
In this example, Boeing (BA) tried to break through resistance at
$37 a share through the entire month of September. When this attempt
was unsuccessful, it tried to break through $36 a share. Once again,
sellers prevented Boeing from going higher. It then retreated until it
reached support at $29.
If Boeing had been able to break through $37 a share, technicians
would have said that the stock “broke through resistance.” This indicates
that a stock is strong and can be bought on the way up. It is common for
118
UNDERSTANDING STOCKS

stocks to break through resistance and go much higher, especially in a
bull market. (By the way, many professional traders wait until a stock
breaks through support or resistance before making a trade.)
Warning: Although it is possible to find fantastic stock plays using
technical analysis, it isn’t easy. For instance, a stock might break
through resistance and move much higher. Right after you place your
buy order, however, the stock suddenly reverses course and drops 5
points! Although technical analysis seems easy on paper or when you
read about it in a book, in real life it is harder to master than it seems.
Introduction to Stock Patterns
Technical analysts are constantly searching for stock patterns that will
give them clues to what might happen in the future. One reason you
repeatedly see the same stock patterns is that people tend to make the
LET’S GET TECHNICAL: INTRODUCTION TO TECHNICAL ANALYSIS
119
BA Daily
Volume
9
13
11
27
25
3
Oct
7
11
9
15
17
23
21
29
25
31Nov 5
11
7
19
15
13
27
25
21
Dec
6
4
17
23
19
37
38
35
36
30
31
32
33
34
28
29
10
6
8
4
0
2
12/06/02
Millions
©Big Charts.com
Figure 11-9
Resistance

same mistakes—for example, buying high and selling low. Stock pat-
terns are one tool that technicians use to evaluate what the crowds are
doing. In fact, so many patterns showed up regularly on the charts that
technicians began naming them.
Although these chart patterns will not absolutely tell you where a
stock is headed, there are signals that technicians look for to help them
decide when to buy or sell. In the hands of an expert, identifying stock
patterns can prevent disaster. Unfortunately, not many people can suc-
cessfully recognize stock patterns until it’s too late. Nevertheless, that
shouldn’t stop you from trying, since some patterns are so obvious that
even a beginner can identify them in their early stages.
Head and Shoulders Pattern (Bearish)
Figure 11-10 shows a bearish reversal pattern that many traders con-
sider one of the most reliable and profitable patterns. The head and
shoulders pattern shows up quite often in charts, indicating that buying
120
UNDERSTANDING STOCKS
BA Daily
Volume
11
8
13
15
18
20
12
14
19
22
21
25
26
27
29
Dec
3
4
6
5
35.5
35.0
34.5
34.0
31.5
32.0
32.5
33.0
33.5
30.5
31.0
8
6
4
2
0
12/06/02
Millions
©Big Charts.com
Figure 11-10
Head and shoulders pattern

has stopped at the top of the trend, and it is about to reverse direction.
Notice the head and the right and left shoulders. The point where the
shoulders meet is the neckline.
Analysis: The stock moves higher but pulls back to form the left
shoulder. It then moves higher to form the head, which seems bullish. It
then falls back to its support level or neckline, which is the alignment
of the two support levels. The stock rises again to form the right shoul-
der but fails to break resistance. Keep your eye on the neckline, because
the stock is doomed in the short term if it breaks below the neckline
(which it did in Figure 11-10). The broken neckline confirms that the
upward trend of the stock has been reversed.
Reverse Head and Shoulders Pattern (Bullish)
Unlike the bearish head and shoulders pattern, the reverse head and
shoulders is bullish. It is a mirror image of a head and shoulders pattern
and shows that a bottom has been reached. In Figure 11-11, because the
LET’S GET TECHNICAL: INTRODUCTION TO TECHNICAL ANALYSIS
121
XOM Daily
Volume
11
8
14
15
18
19
20
21
22
25
26
27
29
3
Dec
4
5
6
12
13
35.00
35.25
34.50
34.75
33.75
34.00
34.25
33.25
33.50
20
15
10
0
5
12/06/02
Millions
©Big Charts.com
Figure 11-11
Reverse head and shoulders pattern

stock moved strongly past the neckline on rising volume, it’s a good
time to buy.
Analysis: The stock drops to $34.25, then reverses direction to
form an inverted left shoulder. It then rallies until it hits resistance and
retreats, forming the head at $34. Once again, the stock rises to resis-
tance and falls to $34.50, where it forms the inverted right shoulder.
The stock then retreats briefly but reverses direction, breaking through
resistance and advancing strongly. Once it breaks the neckline, the
stock is temporarily unstoppable.
Double Top (Bearish—Looks Like an M)
The double top is a common bearish pattern that shows two peaks at the
same price level. The stock has twice failed to break through the resis-
tance level; this indicates that you should switch from buying on the
upside to selling. When the stock tries to break through the top of the
second leg, it will probably fail and sell off. The stock could consoli-
date for weeks or months before breaking down. Figure 11-12 is an
example of a double top.
In this example, the stock falls sharply after twice failing to break
resistance at $19.25 a share, forming the double top. Notice that a very
bearish triple top has been formed at $18.75, setting this stock up for a
short-term fall. If you were a technician, you would sell your long posi-
tion or sell this stock short.
Double Bottom (Bullish—Looks Like a W)
The double bottom is a very common bullish reverse pattern. The
stock has failed to break through key support levels, indicating that
you could switch from selling on the downside to buying on the
upside. The stock could consolidate for weeks or months before break-
ing out to the upside, however. Figure 11-13 is an example of a dou-
ble bottom.
In the example, Coca-Cola falls to its support level of $44.90. The
bulls think they are in control when the stock temporarily rises before
122
UNDERSTANDING STOCKS

retreating to $44.90 a second time. Once again, support holds and the
stock reverses direction. This time, however, Coca-Cola zooms past
resistance and never looks back until it hits $45.50 a share. (By the way,
if the stock retreats and holds support for a third time at $44.90, it
would make a triple bottom, an extremely bullish stock pattern.
How Chart Patterns Could Have Saved Your Portfolio
If you look closely at the 4-year chart of the Nasdaq in Figure 11-14,
you will see two obvious patterns: a head and shoulders in April 2000
followed by a double top. Knowledgeable technical analysts who saw
these patterns should have seen a disaster looming! (In fact, many tech-
nical analysts missed or didn’t believe the signals. However, an
extremely profitable trader friend of mine who saw the head and shoul-
LET’S GET TECHNICAL: INTRODUCTION TO TECHNICAL ANALYSIS
123
MCD Daily
Volume
10
8
14
18
16
22
24
28
30
Nov
11
13
5
7
15
19
21
25
27
Dec
4
6
19.50
19.25
19.00
18.75
18.50
18.25
18.00
17.50
17.75
17.25
17.00
16.75
16.50
25
20
15
10
5
0
12/06/02
Millions
©Big Charts.com
Figure 11-12
Double top

ders formation immediately warned me, in April 2000, to sell all my
stocks and mutual funds.)
In the above example, you can see the Nasdaq topping out in March
2000. It formed a head and shoulders pattern (as well as a double top),
falling back to its neckline before breaking support near 4500 and
eventually falling to 3500, where it temporarily held support. Many
technicians (as well as many fundamental analysts) incorrectly called a
market bottom.
The Nasdaq formed a clear-cut double top pattern at 4200 but
couldn’t break resistance. This gave observant traders a second chance
to get out of the market. After failing to break 4200, it reversed direc-
tion, breaking support levels and making a series of lower lows. By
now, the Nasdaq was doomed. Alert traders bailed out or, even better,
sold short. You can see on the chart how many times the Nasdaq ral-
lied, only to fall further when the rally failed. These false rallies (called
head fakes) can fool even many professional traders. In retrospect, it’s
124
UNDERSTANDING STOCKS
KO Hourly
Volume
T
10
11
12
1
2
3
10
4
11
12
1
2
3
4
F
45.60
45.55
45.45
45.40
45.35
45.30
45.25
45.20
45.05
45.10
45.15
45.00
44.00
44.95
44.90
44.85
1
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
4:12 PM
Millions
©Big Charts.com
Figure 11-13
Double bottom

easy to see the stock patterns, but in the heat of battle they are not that
obvious.
Gaps
Gaps are simply open spaces in the stock pattern. For whatever reason
(perhaps breaking news in the middle of the night), there was no trad-
ing at a particular price level and the stock jumps—there is an order
imbalance between buy and sell orders. Gaps are significant because
they indicate strong buying or selling demand. Figure 11-15 shows an
example of a gap.
In Figure 11-15, notice the gap or open space between the first Tues-
day closing price at 4:00 p.m. and the first Wednesday opening price at
9:30 a.m. On the Wednesday opening, IBM is said to have “gapped up”
from its $85 closing price to $86 with no trades in between. Notice the
strong volume in the stock on the gap up. In the short term, probably
because of positive news that was released after the market closed, buy-
LET’S GET TECHNICAL: INTRODUCTION TO TECHNICAL ANALYSIS
125
NASDAQ Daily
Volume
99
F
M
A
M
J
J
A
S
0
N
D
F
M
A
M
J
J
A
S
0
N
00
D
F
M
M
J
J
A
01
A
S
0
N
D
F
M
02
A
M
J
J
A
S
0
N
4,600
4,200
4,400
5,200
5,000
4,800
3,400
3,200
3,000
2,800
2,600
2,400
2,200
2,000
2,800
1,600
1,200
1,400
1,000
3,600
3,800
4,000
3.5
3
2.5
2
0
1.5
1
0.5
12/07/02
Billions
©Big Charts.com
Figure 11-14
Nasdaq head and shoulders

ers overwhelmed sellers, causing IBM to gap up. Notice that there was
another gap up between Friday and Monday. Unfortunately, what goes
up sometimes comes down. There is a noticeable 2-point “gap down” at
the market opening on the second Wednesday.
Technicians have identified three types of gaps: continuation,
breakaway, and exhaustion.
1. The breakaway gap. This shows a stock gapping up strongly on
high volume. The stock will make a series of new highs. (Techni-
cians love to join breakaway gaps because they are so powerful.)
2. The continuation gap. This is similar to the breakaway gap except
that it occurs in the middle of a price trend, not at the beginning.
It’s possible that the stock will continue to make a strong move in
the same direction, just as with the breakaway gap. Figure 11-15
shows a continuation gap.
126
UNDERSTANDING STOCKS
IBM Hourly
Volume
F
H
T
H
F
11
1
1
1
3
3
3
3
11
11
11
11
1
H
3
1
T 11
H
3
1
11
3
1
T 11
F
3
1
11
3
1
11
3
1
89.5
89.0
88.5
88.0
87.5
87.0
86.5
86.0
85.5
85.0
84.5
84.0
83.5
83.0
82.5
81.0
81.5
82.0
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
5:33 PM
Millions
©Big Charts.com
0
Figure 11-15
Gaps

3. The exhaustion gap. This shows a stock that gaps up or down but
doesn’t reach new highs or lows. As a result, it is likely that the
price move will fail (or be exhausted), and the stock will immedi-
ately return to fill the gap (retreat to the earlier price). If you
identify an exhaustion gap, get out as quickly as you can.
Some short-term traders are skilled at playing gaps. For example, if
you were fast, you could have bought IBM on the market opening at
$86 a share and sold it a few minutes later at $88, for a 2-point gain.
This is the kind of play that short-term traders live for. Unfortunately,
many stocks will gap up or down and suddenly reverse direction to fill
the gap. Keep in mind that trading on the basis of gaps is a difficult
maneuver that takes a lot of practice if it is to be successful.
For example, suppose that when the market opens for trading, the
S&P or the Dow index has gapped up (or down) substantially from its
previous close. Skilled technicians will “buy the gap up” but keep a
tight stop. Others will “fade the gap,” or trade in the opposite direction
from the gap.
As mentioned in an earlier chapter, if you are a first-time trader, it’s
best to avoid making trades as soon as the market opens. This is when
professional traders dominate the market playing field, using large
sums of money to move stocks in one direction or the other. Making
trades based on gaps is best left to the professionals.
Problems with Technical Analysis
Critics of technical analysis claim that reading stock charts is similar to
telling your fortune using tea leaves. They claim that it’s impossible to
make predictions about the future based on what happened in the past.
Tomorrow is all that matters, according to the critics. In addition, crit-
ics claim that there is no proof that technical analysis actually works.
Perhaps the only way to find out for sure is to try it for yourself. Just
like fundamental analysis, technical analysis is as much an art as a sci-
ence. It takes an extremely competent and dedicated technician to find
good stock picks using technical analysis.
LET’S GET TECHNICAL: INTRODUCTION TO TECHNICAL ANALYSIS
127

Biography of Jesse Livermore
One of the best known and most successful traders was Jesse Liv-
ermore. While still a teenager, he quit school to become a “board
boy” for a stock brokerage firm. (Before computers were
invented, board boys updated stock and bond prices on a large
chalkboard.)
The story of Jesse Livermore’s life and the lessons he
learned about trading can be found in his book, Reminiscences
of a Stock Operator, originally published in 1923. Although
the author is given as Edwin Lefevre, many believe that Liver-
more wrote the book himself. It is still one of the most popu-
lar and valuable books ever written on speculating in the stock
market.
Livermore spent much of his time trading in “bucket shops.”
(Bucket shops are unlicensed brokerages; they have been de-
scribed as “gambling dens.”) He was so successful at trading
stocks that he was banned from most bucket shops. He was
forced to wear disguises and use fake names in order to trade.
Nevertheless, this gave him the opportunity to watch how other
traders manipulated the markets. After closely studying the mar-
kets, he created a successful rule-based trading system. As he
became wealthier, Livermore made most of his trades from an
elaborate secret office that was connected by telephone to the
New York Stock Exchange.
Much of the money that Livermore made came from short-
ing stocks (he was famously bearish). He made a lot of enemies
on his roller-coaster ride, and he was often opposed by some of
the country’s most influential financial leaders. Keep in mind
that many of the tactics that Livermore used are now illegal,
including manipulating stocks by using inside information and
arranging with reporters to have incorrect information published.
(One of his tricks was to wait until he had made a profit on a
stock, then reveal to an influential reporter that a particular stock
was a great buy. When the stock went higher, he immediately
unloaded his position.)
128
UNDERSTANDING STOCKS

Not long after making and losing his fourth million-dollar
fortune, Livermore walked into a hotel hat check room and shot
himself in the head. Although he had once been worth millions,
dated glamorous actresses, and owned a number of houses and
boats, at the time of his death at age 63 his estate was reported to
be worth less than $10,000.
In the next chapter, you will learn the tools and tactics that techni-
cal analysts use to evaluate stocks.
LET’S GET TECHNICAL: INTRODUCTION TO TECHNICAL ANALYSIS
129

This page intentionally left blank.

12
131
Technical Analysis:
Tools and Tactics
Just as with fundamental analysis, there are tools that technical analysts
use to determine when to buy or sell a stock. All of the tools explained
in this chapter can be found on a stock chart (since technicians study
stock prices using charts). By the time you finish this chapter, you
should have a better understanding of many of the tools and tactics used
by technical analysts. For some people, technical analysis can seem
confusing. With practice, however, it should make more sense.
Volume:An Underestimated but Powerful Indicator
Volume shows how many shares changed hands during a given period.
It is the fuel that drives stock prices higher or lower. By studying the
volume of shares being traded, you can obtain clues as to whether a
stock is moving because of true buying or selling interest or other fac-
tors that could influence the direction of the stock.
In today’s market, billions of shares of stock are traded every day
on all three stock exchanges. If less than a billion shares are traded dur-
ing the day, it is considered a light volume day. It isn’t hard to guess
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
Copyright © 2004 by The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. Click here for Terms of Use.

why this is true. In 1929, only 8 percent of the people in the United
States were invested in the stock market. Now it is estimated that over
60 percent of the people are invested in the market, either through
mutual funds or directly in stocks.
Sometimes you will hear people on Wall Street talk about a liquid
market. This is another way of saying that there is a lot of volume in
the market or in an individual stock. The pros on Wall Street want to
see a lot of liquidity and do everything in their power to bring people
into the market, especially buyers. The more liquid a stock is, the eas-
ier it is to get into and out of it. That is why you want a lot of liquidity
in the market.
Advanced Technical Indicators and Oscillators
Now I’m going to show you a couple of neat little tools, called techni-
cal indicators and oscillators, that short-term traders use before they
enter or exit a trade. Although there are dozens of these technical indi-
cators, we’ll look at the most popular. Be aware that it takes a while to
thoroughly understand many of these tools.
Moving Averages: Simple but Powerful Tools
One of the simplest but most valuable technical indicators for both
investors and traders is the moving average (MA). A moving average is
the average price of a stock for a specified period—for example, a
specified number of hours, days, or weeks. When plotted on a chart, it
is displayed as a line that moves forward with each trading day. When
moving averages are put on a chart, they give technicians a lot of clues
about where a stock is headed.
Many technical analysts use moving averages as support and resis-
tance. If the stock price rises above the moving average, this is seen as
a bullish sign. Conversely, if the stock price drops below the moving
average, this is seen as bearish and is a signal to sell. In particular, many
institutional investors use the 200-day MA as support and resistance.
For example, if the stock price is trading below the 200-day MA, this is
132
UNDERSTANDING STOCKS

a signal to sell. If the stock price is trading above the 200-day MA, this
is a signal to buy.
Short-term traders tend to use the 40- or 50-day MA to determine
support and resistance levels. It’s sometimes uncanny how a stock can
nudge up to the 40- or 50-day MA and then immediately reverse direc-
tion. Keep in mind that you should not base your trading decisions
solely on moving averages (or any other technical indicator), but the
MA does give you an idea of the strength and direction of the stock
trend. Figure 12-1 shows a stock chart with two moving averages—the
50-day MA and the 200-day MA.
In Figure 12-1, for much of the period shown, Caterpillar remained
well below its 50-day and 200-day MA. Near the end of August, it
bumped up against the 50-day MA before reversing direction. At the
end of October, the stock broke through the 50-day MA on rising vol-
ume, a very positive sign. By the end of November, it also broke
through the 200-day MA. From a short-term technical perspective, this
stock should be held until there are signs that it has run out of steam.
TECHNICAL ANALYSIS: TOOLS AND TACTICS
133
CAT Daily
SMA (50)
SMA (200)
Volume
Feb
Apr
May
Jun
Jul
Aug
Sep
Oct
Nov
Dec
Mar
56
58
60
54
50
52
36
38
40
42
44
46
48
32
34
10
8
6
4
0
2
12/06/02
Millions
©Big Charts.com
Figure 12-1
Moving averages

On-Balance Volume (OBV):A Measure of Volume
On-balance volume (OBV) is one of the most underutilized but impor-
tant indicators. OBV measures volume, which, as you remember, is the
force that makes stocks go up or down. When you put OBV on a chart,
a volume line appears at the bottom of the chart on top of the volume
bars. OBV basically measures how much money is flowing into or out
of a security.
If the OBV line is dropping, it tells you that people are selling. If
the OBV line is rising, it tells you that people are buying. After all, no
matter what is happening in the market, if people are pulling money out
of a stock, its price will go down. Conversely, if people are buying a
stock, its price will go up. Figure 12-2 gives an example of OBV.
Because technical analysis is not an exact science, many traders
use OBV to confirm what is happening with a stock. For example, let’s
say that a stock is up by 3 points but the OBV is dropping. This tells you
that although the stock is temporarily going up, it’s not going to last.
134
UNDERSTANDING STOCKS
CAT Daily
On Balance Volume
8
11
14
15
18
19
20
21
22
25
26
27
29
3
Dec
4
5
6
12
13
49
50
47
48
43
44
45
46
41
42
20
10
0
–20
–10
12/06/02
Millions
©Big Charts.com
Figure 12.2
On-balance volume

For whatever reason, people, most likely institutional investors, are
selling. The dropping OBV is a signal that you should immediately sell
the stock. In Figure 12-2, the OBV initially rose along with the Cater-
pillar stock price. In early December, the OBV was slowly dropping
along with the Caterpillar stock price. This was a clear signal that, at
least for the short term, institutional investors were selling this stock.
One of the biggest problems with technical analysis is that you
sometimes get false signals. OBV helps you determine whether the
buying and selling pressure is real or whether a reversal is imminent.
For example, let’s say that the price of a stock is falling but OBV is ris-
ing. An alert trader will buy, not sell, because it’s possible that the stock
price will reverse as more buyers accumulate shares.
Relative Strength Indicator:A Measure of Whether Stocks 
Are Overbought or Oversold
The relative strength indicator (RSI) measures the relative strength or
weakness of a stock when it is compared to itself over a specified
period. It is an oscillator with an upper and lower band that ranges
from 0 to 100 on a vertical scale. An example of the RSI is given in
Figure 12-3.
To understand the RSI, you need to know what is meant by relative
strength and relative weakness, two of the most important concepts in
technical analysis. Relative strength means that a stock is strong com-
pared to another stock or to an index. For example, if the Nasdaq is
falling but Bright Light is rising, then Bright Light is strong relative to
the Nasdaq. (From a technical viewpoint, stocks with relative strength
are good buys.) Conversely, if the Nasdaq is going up but Bright Light
is dropping in price, then Bright Light has relative weakness. (Gener-
ally, you avoid buying stocks with relative weakness.)
When used in conjunction with other technical indicators such as
moving averages and OBV, the RSI is a powerful tool that can help to
identify whether a stock is overbought or oversold. This allows you 
to determine which stocks are going to run out of energy and succumb
to the bears (overbought). On the other hand, the RSI will also help
you to identify stocks that have fallen and are about to reverse and
move higher (oversold).
TECHNICAL ANALYSIS: TOOLS AND TACTICS
135

For example, if the stock price is dropping, but the RSI rises above
70 and then crosses back down, this is a sign that the stock might
reverse direction (this price reversal is called divergence). Conversely,
if the stock price is rising, but the RSI drops below 30 and crosses back
up, the stock might reverse. The idea is that the stock price will eventu-
ally move in the direction of the RSI.
In Figure 12-3, the RSI dropped as low as 20 twice in the last year,
signaling that Caterpillar might be oversold. For example, in August
the RSI fell to 20 and crossed back up, and the stock immediately
reversed direction. Then, in October, the RSI again fell to 20 and
crossed back up. Note what happened to Caterpillar—the stock
reversed its downtrend and began a strong rally that continued for a
month.
If you are critical of technical analysis, you can argue that the RSI
generated a series of short-term signals, some of which were unclear.
This is why it’s so important to use the RSI in conjunction with other
technical indicators. On the other hand, the RSI did work flawlessly in
136
UNDERSTANDING STOCKS
CAT Daily
Realative Strength Index (14)
02
Feb
Mar
Apr
May
Jul
Jun
Aug
Sep
Oct
Nov
Dec
60
58
56
54
52
50
48
46
36
38
44
42
40
34
32
100
80
50
20
12/06/02
©Big Charts.com
0
Figure 12-3
Relative strength indicator

the end, identifying that Caterpillar was oversold and would eventually
reverse its downtrend.
Bollinger Bands:Another Measure of Whether Stocks 
Are Overbought or Oversold
Like the RSI, Bollinger bands are an oscillator that helps traders iden-
tify whether a stock is overbought or oversold. Bollinger bands have
two lines, an upper and a lower band with a gap between them that
expands or contracts as the stock price moves. You should keep your
eye on the third line in the middle. This is called the price indicator, and
where it goes signals whether a stock is about to reverse direction. An
example of Bollinger bands is given in Figure 12-4.
Technicians look for a number of signals when using Bollinger
bands. First, if the two outer bands move so close together that they are
almost touching (narrow), this is a signal that there could be a sudden
move in the stock price, either up or down. Second, if the price indicator
TECHNICAL ANALYSIS: TOOLS AND TACTICS
137
CAT Daily
Bollinger Bands (20)
12/06/02
64
62
60
58
56
54
52
50
48
46
44
42
38
40
36
34
32
10
8
6
4
2
0
Millons
Feb
Mar
Apr
May
Jun
Jul
Aug
Sep
Oct
Nov
Dec
Volume
©Big Charts.com
Figure 12-4
Bollinger bands

is pushed well outside the upper or lower band, this means that there is
strong buying or selling activity. Many times, a stock will ride the upper
or lower band for minutes or hours and then cross through. Often, if the
price indicator begins in one band, it will cross to the other band. This
tells you that in the next few minutes, or perhaps hours, the stock price
will reverse direction.
The good news is that in the hand of an expert, technical indicators
like Bollinger bands are extremely useful. The bad news is that the indi-
cators change so quickly that they are useful primarily to short-term
traders. As always, you should experiment and practice before risking
real money on technical indicators or oscillators.
Conclusion
One of the problems with technical analysis is that it is extremely diffi-
cult to read the signals correctly. If all it took to be successful in the
market were sophisticated oscillators and indicators, then most people
would use only technical analysis. Although most investors should have
a basic understanding of how to read charts and how to use technical
indicators like moving averages, this probably won’t help for long-term
investments. After all, technical analysis is most useful for short-term
decisions.
Although charting stocks can be fun and profitable, you must also
be careful to keep it simple. Many traders find that the more indicators
they use on a chart, the more confused they get. It is what one trader
friend of mine calls “analysis paralysis.” You spend so much time
studying charts that you don’t make trades. Keep it simple—the less
complicated the information on your chart, the better.
Speculating on Commodities and
Futures Contracts*
The futures exchanges were created to provide a market for pork
bellies, hogs, cattle, corn, and hundreds of other commodities. A
futures contract is simply an agreement that requires the holder
138
UNDERSTANDING STOCKS

to buy or sell a commodity at a predetermined price during a
specified period of time. For only 10 percent down, you can
speculate on commodities for the chance to make a small for-
tune. It is not uncommon for speculators to make as much as
$100,000 or more in a day while risking no more than $10,000.
Although the odds are better than those at gambling, it is
estimated that over 95 percent of the people who trade futures
lose money—and these are the people who supposedly know
what they’re doing. In addition, you could easily lose more than
what you started with.
At the Chicago Mercantile Exchange (the Merc) in Chicago,
Illinois, traders verbally announce the order and price and keep
shouting until the order is filled. In addition, they use hand sig-
nals to communicate with other traders. To an outsider, it looks
like total chaos.
Although directly trading futures is best left to the profes-
sionals, there are mutual funds that specialize in future contracts.
If trading futures fascinates you, a safer idea is to learn how to
trade the E-minis, or future contracts of the S&P 500 and the Nas-
daq 100. If you do lose money trading the E-minis, at least you
won’t lose more than you started with.
By looking at the index futures, you can get an idea as to
whether the markets will open strong or weak. A number of
traders depend on index futures to plan their trades for the day.
Hours before the market opens, the traders at the Merc are already
buying or selling futures contracts for the Dow, Nasdaq, or S&P
500. If you turn to a financial channel like CNBC, CNNfn, or
Bloomberg, you will notice whether the index futures are up or
down before the market opens.
*Some of the text used in this sidebar originally appeared in my first book,
101 Investment Lessons by the Wizards of Wall Street (Career Press, 1999).
In the next chapter, you will learn how to use psychology to deter-
mine whether to buy or sell a stock.
TECHNICAL ANALYSIS: TOOLS AND TACTICS
139

This page intentionally left blank.

13
141
The Psychology of
Stocks: Introduction 
to Sentiment Analysis
Sentiment analysis involves studying psychological clues to help you
determine where the market is headed. It is not as clear-cut as funda-
mental or technical analysis, but it is just as important. Understanding
where the crowds (what Wall Street calls the herd) are investing their
money will help you decide how to invest. Usually, when you find out
where the crowds are investing, you do the opposite!
Sentiment analysts use a number of tools to determine market psy-
chology. For example, when the market was going into the stratosphere,
every psychological indicator showed that people were gorging on
stocks. The market went up so far so quickly that Alan Greenspan, the
Federal Reserve Board chairman, remarked that investors were suffer-
ing from “irrational exuberance.” He made this comment in 1996, four
years before the bull market ended! Although market psychology was
telling us that stocks were due for a nasty fall, it took four years before
it actually happened.
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
Copyright © 2004 by The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. Click here for Terms of Use.

Psychological Indicators
Nevertheless, there are some important psychological indicators that
you should look at if you want to be ready when the market reverses.
The following are four psychological indicators that can help you learn
where the crowds are investing.
The Chicago Board Options Exchange Volatility Index
The Chicago Board Options Exchange Volatility Index (VIX) is an
index that measures the volatility of the U.S. stock market by tracking
S&P 100 option contracts. When you use the VIX as a contrarian indi-
cator, the higher the VIX goes (because option buyers are bearish), the
more likely it is that the market will reverse and go higher. Conversely,
when the VIX goes lower (because option buyers are bullish), it is more
likely that the market will go lower. The more extreme the VIX reading,
the more likely it is that the market will reverse direction.
It probably seems confusing that if option buyers are bullish,
according to the VIX, the market will go lower, and if option buyers are
bearish, the market could go higher. The reason is that 90 percent of
option traders lose money, so according to this theory, the chances are
good that if you do the opposite of what most option traders do, you
will do well. That’s why the VIX is called a contrarian indicator.
The VIX usually stays in a range between 20 and 30. Historically,
when the VIX is well above 30, option traders are bearish (if you look
at the stock market, you will notice that the market is going down).
Conversely, when the VIX drops below 20, option traders are bullish
(the rising market reflects their enthusiasm). Using the VIX as an indi-
cator, when options are too bullish or too bearish, the market is likely to
reverse direction. (There’s an old saying: When the VIX is low, it’s time
to go. When the VIX is high, it’s time to buy.)
If you look at the chart in Figure 13-1, you’ll notice that in early
2000, at the peak of the bull market, the VIX dropped as low as 18
(because option traders believed that the market was going higher). It
wasn’t long before the market topped out and the economy began a
long and slow descent into a bear market.
142
UNDERSTANDING STOCKS

Conversely, right after September 11, 2001, the VIX went as high
as 50 as investors panicked because of terrorism concerns. It turned out
to be an ideal time to buy stocks, at least in the short term. Like any
technical tool, the VIX is by no means foolproof. The VIX often stays
at one level for months, giving no clue to what investors are feeling.
The Media
Many people use the media as a contrarian indicator. In other words, by
the time something is reported in the media, you better do the opposite.
For example, a few years ago, guests appeared on television and on the
radio gushing about the “new economy,” the unstoppable stock market,
and the popularity of the Internet. This was a clear sign that the markets
might reverse. After we made it to the new millennium (remember
Y2K?) without a stock market crash or a computer meltdown, most
people thought that the worst was behind us. Little did they know that,
at least from an investment perspective, the worst was yet to come.
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF STOCKS: INTRODUCTION TO SENTIMENT ANALYSIS
143
VIX Weekly
Volume
00
F
M
M
J
J
A
A
S
0
N
D
01
F
M
M
A
A
S
0
N
D
F
02
J
J
M
M
J
J
A
A
S
0
N
52
50
48
46
44
42
40
38
34
32
30
36
24
28
26
20
22
18
12/06/02
©Big Charts.com
Figure 13-1
VIX

For another popular contrarian signal, look in the financial period-
ical Barron’s for the Investor’s Intelligence reading, which surveys
newsletter writers. If newsletter writers are overwhelmingly bullish
(over 55 or 60 percent), this is a bearish sign. Conversely, if newsletter
writers are overwhelmingly bearish, this is a bullish sign.
Mutual Fund Redemptions
You can learn a lot by keeping an eye out for increased mutual fund
redemptions (which means that individual investors are selling their
mutual funds). This will give you a clue as to what the crowds are think-
ing. The financial newspaper Investor’s Business Daily regularly mea-
sures mutual fund redemptions. In addition, the business section of
most daily newspapers lets you know what mutual fund investors are
doing with their money.
There are two ways to look at increased mutual fund redemptions.
On the one hand, it is bearish because if investors are pulling their
money out of the market at any price, it will force fund managers to sell
shares of the stocks that they hold. On the other hand, it is bullish
because it sets the market up for the next phase, capitulation, which
creates a market bottom.
Capitulation
Capitulation refers to what happens when everyone in the market pan-
ics and immediately sells all of their stocks, causing a stock crash. The
theory behind capitulation is that after everyone sells their stocks and
mutual funds in a panic, the market hits bottom, with nowhere to go but
up. In addition, anyone who has cash comes in to buy unloved stocks at
fire-sale prices. If there is capitulation, the markets will fall by huge
amounts—10 percent or more in one day.
Investors have capitulated twice in the twentieth century, in 1929
(with the market eventually falling 89 percent from its high) and in
1987 (with the market plummeting by over 20 percent in one day).
Nevertheless, it took only a year and a half for the market to recover
from the 1987 crash. After the crash of 1929, however, it took 25
years for the market to return to its precrash level. Although the
144
UNDERSTANDING STOCKS

chances are good that investors will again capitulate one day (a dra-
matic and tragic event that could send people fleeing from the mar-
kets), if history is any guide, if you can keep your head and not panic,
you will hopefully see this as a buying opportunity.
Stock Market Scams
Since we just finished talking about what could go wrong in the
stock market, this is a good time to make you aware of two of the
most common stock scams.
The Pump and Dump
The pump and dump is one of the easiest and most common ways
of taking money away from unsuspecting investors. Although it
is illegal, the use of the pump and dump has actually increased
because the Internet has made it possible to reach millions more
people. Here’s how the pump and dump works.
First, company insiders try to convince outsiders to buy a
stock, usually the stock of a small over-the-counter company.
Investors are led to believe that this is a “once-in-a-lifetime”
opportunity to make a small fortune. The fraudsters will pump up
interest in the stock by sending messages through Internet chat
rooms, attempting to go on television or radio, or posting overly
optimistic press releases. Before the Internet, pump and dumpers
used to call people on the telephone. The idea is to artificially
pump up the price of a stock by spreading false news. The stock
price rises because of increased buying and speculation, not
because of anything positive happening in the company.
As the stock goes higher, those with inside knowledge are
prepared for the “dump.” As more people buy shares of the stock,
the insiders sell all their shares for a huge profit. Eventually, the
truth comes out, and the stock price falls as more people sell.
Guess who is left holding the shares of the now nearly worthless
stock? You guessed it—the unsuspecting investors who bought
into the hype. They probably thought the price could go higher,
so they never sold their shares.
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF STOCKS: INTRODUCTION TO SENTIMENT ANALYSIS
145

The pump and dump is one of the oldest and most effective
scams. Usually, pump and dumps are used on small stocks sell-
ing for between $1 and $5 a share because it is easier for pump-
and-dumpers to manipulate the stock price with smaller stocks.
Insider Trading
There are actually two types of insider trading: legal and illegal.
Legal insider trading is that done by company employees (insid-
ers) who file proper paperwork with the SEC before buying and
selling shares in their company. These documents are available
for viewing on the SEC Web site.
On the other hand, illegal insider trading occurs when com-
pany employees buy and sell stocks based on information that is
not known to the public. For example, it’s illegal for the man-
agers of Bright Light to buy additional shares of stock in the
company if they know that a revolutionary new product is about
to be released. It’s even illegal for you to buy shares of stock in
that situation if company insiders (perhaps your neighbor) tell
you about it.
Do you think insider trading is common? It certainly is; it
occurs a lot more often than many people think. Every once in a
while the SEC catches a celebrity just to make a point that it’s
watching. Nevertheless, it’s my estimate that thousands of insiders
are using information gleaned from the companies they work for
to make profitable transactions. It’s an open secret on Wall Street
that those in the know are trading stocks on inside information.
In the next chapter, you will find out why stocks go up or down,
which will help you determine if and when to participate in the market.
146
UNDERSTANDING STOCKS

PART FOUR
UNCOMMON
ADVICE
Copyright © 2004 by The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. Click here for Terms of Use.

This page intentionally left blank.

14
149
What Makes 
Stocks Go Up 
or Down
When you invest in the market, you should pay attention to anything
that may affect your stocks. Some events seem to come out of
nowhere—perhaps a terrorist attack, a war, or a recession will cause
havoc with the stock market. If there is anything the markets hates, it is
uncertainty. One of the reasons the most recent bear market lasted so
long was that no one knew when the recession would end, whether we
would win the war on terrorism, and whether the United States was
going to war. Any one of these events can send the market lower as
investors seek protection in cash, gold, or real estate.
As an investor or trader, you must be aware of outside events.
Sometimes it helps to step back and see the bigger economic picture. If
you can anticipate how an event could affect the stock market, you can
shift your money into more profitable investments. Some pros believe
that having a thorough understanding of the investment environment is
more important than picking the right stock.
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
Copyright © 2004 by The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. Click here for Terms of Use.

The Federal Reserve System:A Government 
Group You Can’t Ignore
The Federal Reserve System (the Fed) is so powerful that anything it
does influences the stock market. Often, you will hear more about the
actions of the Federal Reserve Board (FRB), a seven-member group
that directs the actions of the Federal Reserve System.
The Fed has many duties, including monitoring the economy for
problems (especially inflation or deflation) and controlling the coun-
try’s money supply. It has a powerful tool that directly affects the stock
and bond markets—the ability to raise or lower interest rates. The Fed
doesn’t lower or raise interest rates by flipping a switch. Instead, it
either buys or sells millions of dollars worth of Treasury securities,
which allows it to adjust interest rates.
Why is this so important? When the Fed lowers interest rates, it
means that it will be cheaper for people to borrow money. After all,
many Americans love to borrow. When interest rates are lower, more
people can afford to buy a house. After they buy their house, they also
need furniture, housewares, and appliances. The more money con-
sumers and businesses spend, the better it is for the economy.
Therefore, when interest rates are lowered, the stock market often
goes up. Conversely, when interest rates are raised, the stock market
tends to go down. Beginning in the 1990s, the Fed began to raise inter-
est rates, a quarter to a half point at a time. The idea was to poke a hole
in the “irrationally exuberant” bull market, which was rising faster than
anyone had ever imagined. The market seemingly ignored the Fed and
continued to go higher.
Finally, in early 2000, the market responded to the multiple interest-
rate increases. The Nasdaq began to fall by hundreds, then thousands, of
points. The Fed, which had so diligently raised interest rates, frantically
began to lower them.
There’s an old saying, “Don’t fight the Fed,” that is known by most
investors, but unfortunately this advice didn’t work the way it had in the
past. Once again, the markets seemingly ignored the actions of the Fed,
continuing to plummet. As a result of the lower interest rates, however,
150
UNDERSTANDING STOCKS

the real estate market boomed, and many people took the opportunity
to refinance their homes.
If you are watching the stock market, it is always a big deal if the
Fed raises or lowers interest rates. The market may rally on news of a
rate cut or fall on news of a rise in the rates. Often, the market moves
dramatically in advance of a Fed decision.
There is something else you should know about the Fed. Techni-
cally, it isn’t supposed to care about the stock market, and if you ask the
board members, they will say that they are not influenced by the mar-
ket. But it’s an open secret that they do pay attention. If the Fed hadn’t
intervened with drastic interest rate cuts, the market might have gone
down a lot faster and farther than it did. The bottom line is, if you are in
the stock market, you should pay attention to what the Fed does.
The Dollar: I’m Falling and I Can’t Get Up
One economic indicator that you should keep your eye on is the dollar.
When the dollar is strong against other currencies, like the yen and the
euro, foreign investors will buy our Treasuries and invest in our stock
market. That’s the good news. The bad news is that the strong dollar
makes our goods undesirable to foreigners because they are so expen-
sive. A strong dollar also makes it hard for people to travel to the United
States because it is so expensive.
On the other hand, when the dollar is falling and is weak against
other currencies, foreigners pull their money out of our stock market.
(Basically, they get hit twice, once when their U.S. stocks fall in price,
and again when they lose money on the currency.) As the dollar falls, the
stock market tends to go down in price. This is also not a good time to
travel overseas, as it will be more expensive. Perhaps the only positive
thing that comes from a weak dollar is that foreigners can now afford to
buy our goods and services, which pleases American manufacturers.
If you are in the markets, keep your eye on the strength or weakness
of the dollar. If you see the dollar falling, as it did in 2002, this is a clue
that foreign investors may get spooked and begin pulling their money
out of our stock market.
WHAT MAKES STOCKS GO UP OR DOWN
151

Inflation
Inflation simply refers to how much the prices of the goods and ser-
vices that you buy go up each year. It is usually written as a percentage.
When you study economics, you hear a lot about inflation. One of the
reasons that people invest in the stock market is to try to beat inflation.
For example, suppose inflation is currently at 1 percent. That
means that it will cost you 1 percent more than the year before to buy
goods and services. When you go shopping, you find that groceries,
cars, and home appliances have gone up in price from the year before.
Because of inflation, the McDonald’s hamburger that cost you 10 cents
in 1959 now costs you $1.20. A seat at the movies that cost 25 cents
back in 1960 now costs $10.00! Now that is inflation!
Too much inflation is not good for the economy, which is why
the markets don’t like it. It means that people are getting less for
their dollars. Conversely, low inflation is good for consumers be-
cause they can afford to borrow, charge purchases on credit cards,
and buy houses. The more consumers spend, the better it is for the
economy.
Economists are generally pleased if inflation remains at no more
than 3 or 4 percent, although in 1980 inflation went as high as 18 per-
cent. In addition, the Fed responds by raising interest rates, which
restricts the flow of money into the economy. In periods of inflation, the
price of investments such as certificates of deposit (CDs) and money
market accounts rises (when the Fed raises interest rates to combat
inflation, fixed-income investments that are dependent on interest rates
move higher).
One of the reasons that investing in the stock market is a good
idea is that historically the market has returned 11 percent a year,
handily beating inflation. Of course, there is no guarantee that the
stock market will come close to returning 11 percent this year or next.
On the other hand, if you see inflation rising, that could be a clue for
you to move some of your money out of the market and into alterna-
tive investments to stocks like a money market account or short-term
Treasuries.
152
UNDERSTANDING STOCKS

Economic Indicators
The government has ways to measure whether the prices of goods and
services are rising or falling. For example, the consumer price index (CPI)
measures changes in everyday prices like those of food, housing, and
clothing. Some people refer to it as the “inflation number” or the “cost-of-
living” index. If the CPI goes up, this means that inflation is rising.
The producer price index (PPI) determines whether inflation is ris-
ing or falling by measuring the prices of commodities, including raw
materials like steel and aluminum. If the prices of raw materials are
going up, consumers will ultimately pay more at the supermarket and
the gas station.
In addition to the CPI and PPI reports, the U.S. Department of
Labor issues the closely watched unemployment report. The results of
this report directly influence the stock market. If the unemployment
rate is low—under 6 percent—there are many jobs available. If the
unemployment rate is high—over 6 percent—the job market is tight
and it’s hard to find jobs. On the day these reports are released, the mar-
ket reacts in unpredictable ways. In general, the market likes to see low
CPI and PPI numbers and a decrease in unemployment.
There are many other reports released by the government that are
watched closely by investors and traders. For example, the gross domes-
tic product (GDP) is a quarterly report that measures the quantity of
goods and services being produced in our economy. The GDP is a use-
ful but broad barometer of how the economy is doing. The higher the
GDP (expressed as a percentage), the faster the economy is growing. If
GDP is growing by more than 3 percent, the economy is on the right
track. If GDP is negative, either the economy is not growing or we could
be in a recession (defined as two or more quarters of negative GDP).
Deflation:An Unusual Nightmare
To understand deflation, let’s review what we mean by inflation. When
the price of goods rises each year, when everything costs more, this is
WHAT MAKES STOCKS GO UP OR DOWN
153

inflation. Deflation, on the other hand, can be defined as an economic
condition in which the supply of money and credit is reduced.
Although inflation is common, deflation is quite rare in the United
States (Japan, however, has been in a deflationary environment for
years).
To the uninformed, deflation seems like a good thing. The prices of
nearly everything fall as the supply of goods piles up. Manufacturers
are forced to cut prices even further to entice shoppers to buy. On the
other hand, companies cut employees, real estate prices fall (because
borrowers cannot pay back their loans), and the stock market goes
through a rough period. Prices are low, but few people have the money
to buy anything. Those who do have money tend to wait for prices to
drop even further.
For a worst-case scenario of what could happen in a deflationary
crash, read Robert Prechter’s book Conquer the Crash (John Wiley &
Sons, 2002). One of the best ways to protect yourself against defla-
tion is to get out of debt. That means paying off your credit cards,
your car loans, and your mortgage (although you should talk to a tax
adviser before doing the last of these). In addition, force yourself to
save more. If we really do have a deflationary crash, those with the
most cash will prosper. Because deflation is rare in the United
States, there is no need to panic—at least, not yet. Just keep a close
eye on economic conditions and be prepared to act if things get
dicey.
Politics:The Government Influences the Stock Market
The actions of the president and Congress affect the stock market.
Whether it is a major presidential speech, higher taxes, or a new law,
how the market reacts depends on how Wall Street interprets the news.
After all, the market is based more on perception and psychology than
reality. Politics is so intertwined with the financial markets that it
would take a political scientist to explain it all.
154
UNDERSTANDING STOCKS

Other Reasons Stocks 
Go Up or Down
The most obvious reason that a stock goes up or down has to do
with how much money the corporation makes. If a company is
making money or might make money in the future, more people
will buy shares of its stock. The name of the game is supply and
demand.
Because of supply and demand, when there are more buyers
than sellers, the stock price will go up. If there are more sellers
than buyers, the stock price will go down. This is Capitalism 101,
the heart of our financial system. (Just think of all the books you
no longer have to read.) At the end of each market day, many
financial experts will try to explain why the market went up or
down, but their explanations often have little to do with what
really happened.
Often stocks go up or down based primarily on people’s per-
ceptions. This is why so many corporations spend a lot of money
on advertising and on actions that will bring them positive pub-
licity. This is also why some shareholders send out emails to
strangers or post messages in Internet chat rooms to try to con-
vince people to buy more stock.
Stocks also go up or down depending on the mood of the
country and the state of the economy. Once again, a lot is based
on perception. If people believe that economic conditions are
improving and the country is on the right track, they will be more
inclined to invest in the stock market. Conversely, the recent bear
market has continued because people are wary of the direction of
the country, the increased threat of terrorism and war, and a feel-
ing that we were in a recession.
In the next chapter, you will learn where to go (and whom to avoid)
for investment advice.
WHAT MAKES STOCKS GO UP OR DOWN
155

This page intentionally left blank.

15
157
Why Investors 
Lose Money
I’ve learned a lot from interviewing some of the top traders and
investors in the country, as well as from my own mistakes and suc-
cesses in the stock market. Unfortunately, no matter how many times
you try to stop people from losing money in the market, they often
don’t listen until it’s too late. It is only after losing most of their money
that they finally admit that they made mistakes.
There is nothing wrong with or unusual about making mistakes.
Actually, the biggest mistake you can make is not recognizing that you
made one. The most obvious clue that something is going wrong with
your investments is that you are losing money. A loss of more than 10
percent on an investment is a signal you have a problem. Remember
this: You do not invest in the stock market in order to lose money. The
goal of this chapter, therefore, is to help you avoid making the mistakes
that trip up and ruin most investors and traders. Most of the time, our
worst enemy is ourselves.
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
Copyright © 2004 by The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. Click here for Terms of Use.

Mistake #1:You Don’t Sell Your Losing Stocks
For a variety of reasons, some people hold onto their losing stocks too
long. Failure to get out of losing positions early is probably the number
one reason why so many investing and trading accounts are destroyed.
The reasons people hold onto losing stocks are primarily psycho-
logical. If you sell a stock for a loss, you deride yourself for not having
sold sooner. Adding insult to injury, you have to admit that you lost
money. No matter what price you sold the stock at, it always seems as
though you could have done better. Many people think they can’t be
wrong about their stock picks or are seduced by hope and greed. Oth-
ers convince themselves that a stock will come back one day or are
afraid to “throw in the towel.”
During the bull market, not only did people not get out when their
stocks fell 10 or 15 percent, but they bought even more shares.
Although there was still plenty of time to get out of the market with
minor losses, many people refused to sell their losing stocks. It took 
3 years of a bear market before many people realized that they had held
on too long. (By the time you’ve lost 80 or 90 percent of your invest-
ment, perhaps it really is too late to sell unless you want a tax write-off.)
To keep your losses small, you need a plan before you buy your first
stock. One rule is so important that you should post it in front of your
computer or on your desk: If you lose more than 10 percent on an invest-
ment, sell. You lost, so you sell the stock. You can put in a stop loss order
at 10 percent below the purchase price when you buy the stock, or you
can make a mental note. The main point is that you take action when
your stock is losing money. (Some stock experts, such as William
O’Neil, publisher of Investor’s Business Daily, recommend selling los-
ing stocks at 8 percent.) Even if the company looks fundamentally
strong, if the stock is going down (for reasons that may not be immedi-
ately apparent), there is only one response: Use the 10 percent rule.
(There are exceptions, of course. If you buy a stock at what appears
to be the bottom and it makes a long sideways move before losing 10
percent, it is acceptable to hold it, especially if you anticipate future
gains. The 10 percent rule is designed to prevent undisciplined
investors and traders from letting a small loss turn into a large one.)
158
UNDERSTANDING STOCKS

Mistake #2:You Let Your Winning 
Stocks Turn into Losers
It seems as if you can’t win no matter when you sell. If you sell a stock
for a gain, you are left with the lingering feeling that if you had held it
a little longer, you’d have made more money. In contrast, some people
made tons of money in the stock market, then sat back and watched
helplessly while all their profits disappeared (what the market gives,
the market takes away). Some are still in denial about the fact that many
of their favorite stocks will never return to even. Many people lost not
only their gains but their original investment as well. For these people,
it would have been less painful to have never made money in the mar-
ket at all than to have won and lost it all.
Let’s take another look at Ericsson, the Swedish telecommunica-
tions company. You could have bought the stock for $20 in 1998. From
there, Ericsson stock took off, reaching a high of $90 per share a year
later. If you were either lucky or a genius, you would have sold all your
shares at $90 and gone on vacation. Instead, most people held onto
Ericsson as it dropped in price until it traded for less than a dollar a
share in 2002 before initiating a 1-for-10 reverse stock split. Thousands
of Swedish and American investors lost their shirts on Ericsson (as well
as on hundreds of other technology stocks). What did investors do
wrong?
If you have a winning stock, you probably think it’s crazy to get out
too early. That’s why you might want to adopt an incremental sell
approach. I call it the “30-30” plan: If your stock rises by more than 30
percent, sell 30 percent of your position. By selling a portion of your
gains, you satisfy the twin emotions of fear and greed. (Legendary con-
trarian investor Ted Warren taught that there’s never a bad time to take
a profit. He summed up this approach when he wrote, “Selling too soon
is good insurance against holding a stock too long.”)
Do you know how many trillions of dollars would have been saved
in the market if people had sold some of their stocks on the way up?
Unfortunately, most people do not have the discipline to sell a winning
stock at the top. They are afraid of taxes, they don’t want to miss out if
the stock goes higher, or they get overconfident.
WHY INVESTORS LOSE MONEY
159

If you make so much money on a stock that you are nearly giddy
(called the high-five effect), sell 30 percent of your winnings. By doing
so, you lock in at least a portion of your gains, and you can reevaluate
your portfolio later. As traders like to say, “You can’t go broke taking a
profit.”
Mistake #3:You Get Too Emotional 
about Your Stock Picks
Inability to control their emotions is the main reason why most people
should not participate in the stock market. When investing in the mar-
ket with substantial money at stake, many people are flooded with emo-
tions that compel them to make the wrong decisions. In fact, becoming
too emotional about your investments is a clue that you could lose
money. Making money should be as boring as waiting in line at the
supermarket.
A common problem, and one that especially afflicts those who
have tasted success in the market, is overconfidence. Although some
self-confidence is necessary if you are going to invest in the market,
allowing your ego to get in the way of your investing is a dangerous
sign. One of the reasons the bull market was destined to end so abruptly
was that too many people were making too much money and thought
they were geniuses. An old but true saying is, “There are no geniuses in
a bull market.” The point is that people thought they were geniuses, but
in fact they were just being carried by the strength of a bull market.
Before the bull market’s abrupt end, many investors got so greedy
that they couldn’t think straight. They were convinced that the good
times would last forever. The signs of greed were everywhere:
• A 15-year-old boy, Jonathon Lebed, made a million dollars pump-
ing and dumping penny stocks. The SEC allowed him to keep half
his profits.
• The CEOs of dozens of companies were paid hundreds of millions
of dollars in salary and compensation, even though their compa-
160
UNDERSTANDING STOCKS

nies were losing money. (Many made their millions through stock
options, which although legal, did not seem fair to shareholders
who lost money.)
• Thousands of people were quitting their jobs to become day
traders.
• Stock prices in companies that had no earnings were doubling and
tripling each day.
• Many mutual funds were going up by over 100 percent a year.
• Books with titles like Dow 36,000 and Dow 100,000 were best-
sellers, along with many books on day trading.
• Stock analysts and CEOs were treated like rock stars.
• Car dealers couldn’t sell SUVs fast enough, it seemed as though
everyone was going to Europe, Starbucks was filled with people
starting investment clubs, and people couldn’t keep their eyes off
financial television programs like CNBC, Bloomberg, and CNNfn.
As the Dow and the Nasdaq plummeted, greed was replaced by hope.
In the award-winning movie The Shawshank Redemption, the movie
character Red (played by Morgan Freeman) said, “Hope is a dangerous
thing.” In love as in life, there is always hope that things will work out in
the end, but in the stock market, hope can destroy your portfolio. If the
only reason you are holding onto a stock is because of hope (and not for
fundamental or technical reasons), you are going to lose money.
The famous speculator Jesse Livermore once said, “People are
hopeful when they should be afraid and are afraid when they should be
hopeful.” Livermore understood the short-term psychology of the mar-
kets about as well as anyone.
The most profitable traders and investors are unemotional about
the stocks they buy. They don’t rely on fear, greed, or hope when they
make trading decisions; they look only at technical and fundamental
data. In 1929 and 1987, there was real fear in the stock market. People
thought that their stocks were going to zero, and they wanted to get out
of the market at any price. Just when people thought that all was lost,
1987 turned out to be the start of a particularly strong market. In 2000,
on the other hand, people were much too hopeful when they really
should have been afraid.
WHY INVESTORS LOSE MONEY
161

Mistake #4:You Bet All Your Money 
on Only One or Two Stocks
One of the problems with investing directly in the stock market is that
most people don’t have enough money to maintain a properly diversi-
fied portfolio. (In general, no one stock should make up more than 10
percent of your portfolio.) Although diversification limits your
upside gains, it also protects you in case one of your investments does
badly.
If you can’t afford to buy more than one or two stocks, you have
several choices. First, you can buy mutual funds, especially index
funds, which allow you to buy the entire market for a fraction of what
it would cost if you bought each stock in the index. Second, you can
hire a certified investment adviser to manage your portfolio and help
you to diversify.
If you feel that you must bet all your money on only one or two
stocks, then buy stocks in conservative companies with low P/Es (less
than 10) that pump up their returns with quarterly dividends. You want
stocks in companies that are so good that they will be profitable for
years.
The Exceptions
If you are a short-term trader (or perhaps a gambler), making big bets
on one or two stocks can pay off big. For example, some traders focus
on one stock, perhaps an exchange-traded fund (ETF) like QQQ, Dia-
monds (DIA), or SPDRs. When you become an expert on only one
investment, you have a better idea of when to buy and sell it. Obviously,
this strategy is better suited to traders than to investors.
It is also true that if you bet all your money on one stock and you
win, you can make a small fortune. However, using this strategy is
more akin to gambling than to investing. Although the odds are better
than in Las Vegas, it is still risky to bet everything on one investment.
To protect yourself, you might be better off betting all your money on a
successful mutual fund than on one stock.
162
UNDERSTANDING STOCKS

Mistake #5:You Are Unable to Be Both 
Disciplined and Flexible
Almost every professional investor will rightly claim that a lack of dis-
cipline is the main reason that most people lose money in the market. If
you are disciplined, you have a strategy, a plan, and a set of rules, and
no matter what you are feeling, you stick to your strategy, plan, and
rules. Discipline means having the knowledge to know what to do (the
easy part) and the willpower and courage to actually do it (the hard
part). It means that you have to stick to your strategy and obey your
rules. This has always worked for successful investors and mutual fund
managers.
Although the pros are right in claiming that you need discipline if
you are to be successful in the market, you also need to balance this
with a healthy dose of flexibility. Some investors were so rigidly disci-
plined about sticking with their stock strategy that they didn’t react
when the market and their stocks turned against them. In the name of
discipline, many investors went down with the sinking ship. Discipline
is essential, but you must be realistic enough to realize that you could
be wrong. You have to be flexible enough to change your strategy, your
plan, and your rules, especially if you are losing money. For every rule
and strategy, there are exceptions. It takes a really exceptional investor
to be both disciplined and flexible.
Mistake #6:You Don’t Learn from Your Mistakes
Most experienced investors and traders know that you learn more from
your losers than from your winners. One of the worst things that hap-
pened to many novice investors in the late 1990s was that they made
money in the market too quickly and easily. When the easy money
stopped and the market plunged, many of them had no idea what to do
next. Why? They didn’t know how it felt to lose money. Because they
had made money the wrong way, they were destined to give it all back.
Losing money can be good for you (as long as you don’t lose all of it).
WHY INVESTORS LOSE MONEY
163

It is worth losing a little money in the market today to protect yourself
from losing a fortune tomorrow.
If you lose more than 10 percent in the market, there are a few
things you can do. Instead of burying your head in the sand, take the
time to understand your mistakes. It’s not useful to make excuses and
act as if your stock losses are only paper losses that will be made up in
the future. In the market, everything doesn’t always work out in the
end. Accept the loss and make sure you don’t make the same mistake
again.
Next, closely review your investment strategy. You should study the
entire market environment and analyze each of the stocks you are hold-
ing. If your investments don’t hold up based on technical and funda-
mental analysis, you might want to make changes to your portfolio.
Mistake #7:You Listen to or Get Tips 
from the Wrong People
If your eyes glaze over when you read about fundamental or technical
analysis, there is a simpler way to find stocks to buy—stock tips. The
beauty of tips is that you can make money without doing any work. If
this sounds too good to be true, it is.
In fact, one of the easiest ways to lose money in the market is by lis-
tening to tips, especially if they come from well-meaning but unin-
formed relatives or acquaintances. These people often become
cheerleaders for a stock, trying to convince you to buy it. Because it’s
hard to say no to easy money (especially when the tip comes from a
trusted source), there are some steps you can take to limit your risks.
First, you should never act on a tip before doing fundamental or
technical research. One look at a stock chart should give you a good
idea as to whether the stock is a loser. As I reported before, most peo-
ple spend more time researching a new television than a stock. Many
people wouldn’t think twice about spending $20,000 on a stock tip but
will spend a month researching a $200 television set. If you do receive
a “can’t lose” tip that is impossible to resist, buy in small quantities—
no more than 100 shares. If the tip turns out to be a dud (and it proba-
164
UNDERSTANDING STOCKS

bly will), you’ve lost only a little money, and you’ve also learned a
valuable lesson.
Should you get your stock picks from experts? Don’t forget that
most of the experts who appeared on television or were quoted in mag-
azines were terrible stock pickers. Analysts lied, economists misjudged
the economy, CEOs were overly optimistic, and accounting firms
fudged the numbers to make losing companies look like winners.
At the same time, greedy and lazy investors (and we’re almost all
guilty) must take responsibility for buying stocks based on tips.
(“Everyone wanted to be a player but we ended up being played.”) The
best advice I ever received on the market was also the simplest: Keep
your ears shut.
Mistake #8:You Follow the Crowd
Do you want to lose money? Then do what everyone else is doing.
Unfortunately, it is excruciatingly difficult to think differently from
everyone else. If you study the lives of some of the greatest traders and
investors in the recent past, you will find that they often made their for-
tunes by doing the opposite of what the crowd was doing. That means
buying when other people are selling and selling when other people are
buying.
If you study the psychology of group behavior, you find many peri-
ods and events in history that attest to herd mentality—or the “madness
of crowds,” as one author put it. Although the crowds can win, they
don’t win for long. As mentioned earlier, the signal that a bull market is
ending is that it seems as though everyone is in the market. Conversely,
a signal of a bear market’s end is that people are too afraid to invest in
the market. When almost everyone is avoiding the stock market, and it
seems like perhaps the worst possible time to invest, the bear market
will end. Unfortunately, no one rings a bell to announce the end. You
have to figure it out for yourself.
So how do you think differently from the crowd? You can start by
taking a look at strategies that most people don’t use. For example, you
could buy covered call options on stocks you own, trade ETFs, or short
WHY INVESTORS LOSE MONEY
165

stocks. Although these strategies are not recommended for average
investors, those of you who have the time to do additional research may
find that taking a different approach can be profitable. Unfortunately,
once everyone finds out about them, many strategies cease to work.
(For example, strategies like the “January effect,” where you sell your
stocks in early December and buy them back in January, worked for
years—that is, until it was widely reported in the media.)
Keep in mind that perceptions about the market change very rap-
idly. From a state of near euphoria about the market, the crowd has
become ornery and pessimistic. A few clues: The public’s interest in
books about the stock market has declined; many people no longer
want to talk about the market except to tell you how much money they
lost; and many people are showing the effects of a reverse wealth effect,
as seen in a decline in the sales of boats, SUVs, and other luxury items.
If you are a contrarian, when the public has thrown in the towel, you’ll
begin to look for buying opportunities.
Mistake #9:You Aren’t Prepared for the Worst
Before you get into the market, you should be prepared, not scared.
Although you should always hope for the best, you must be prepared
for the worst. The biggest mistake many investors make is thinking that
their stocks won’t go down. They are not prepared for an extended bear
market, a recession, deflation, a market crash, or an unanticipated event
that will ruin the market. Even if you don’t expect a financial disaster,
create a “crash-proof” plan based on logic and common sense, not fear.
Here are a few steps you can take to protect your portfolio:
1. Move more of your money into cash. When you are in cash
(including Treasury bills if the economy gets really terrifying),
it’s easy to make unemotional decisions about where to put your
money next. Cash is a comfortable place to be when the economy
is struggling and the market is falling. Temporarily waiting on the
sidelines in cash until the market recovers can be a wise move. If
the market really does capitulate (or we get locked into a defla-
tionary nightmare), one way to win is to be flush with cash when
stocks are selling at bargain-basement prices.
166
UNDERSTANDING STOCKS

2. Trade less. If you are a trader, you should limit the number of
shares that you trade. As it becomes more difficult to make
money in the market, some people mistakenly try to win back
their lost profits. Greed is more powerful than fear, which is why
some people will mortgage the house for a chance to get rich
quickly. If you must trade, trade with less.
3. Study more. If we do enter into a lengthy bear market, use the
time to study the markets, read books, and brush up on funda-
mental and technical analysis. When the market does come back
(it always does eventually), you’ll be prepared with a handful of
new stock picks.
Mistake #10:You Miss Out or Mismanage Money
Managing money is a difficult skill for most people, but it’s one of the
most important skills to have. Unfortunately, if you can’t manage
money, you’re destined to have financial problems (unless you hire
someone to manage it for you). In the end, it’s not how much you make
but how much you keep that matters. Do you want to know the secret to
making money in the stock market or with any investment? Don’t lose
money. (Don’t laugh—it’s true.) If you think about it long enough,
you’ll realize that this makes a lot of sense. Obviously, it’s not easy to
find investments where you don’t lose money, but that shouldn’t stop
you from trying.
Just as harmful as mismanaging money is missing out on money-
making opportunities. A little bit of fear keeps you on your toes, but too
much fear can cause you to miss out on profitable investments or
trades. It’s the fear of loss that prevents many people from buying at the
bottom. It’s the fear of missing out on higher profits that prevents peo-
ple from selling before it’s too late. Usually, fear results from a lack of
information. That is why it’s essential that you do your own research
when a financial opportunity comes your way. This gives you an oppor-
tunity to make an informed decision based on the facts, not on emotion.
Obviously, you aren’t privy to all the information that you need in
order to be 100 percent right. You have to make a decision based on the
best information you have at the time. Many times you’ll be wrong.
WHY INVESTORS LOSE MONEY
167

One of my friends calls it the “Swiss cheese principle.” Often, you
don’t have enough information to make a completely risk-free decision,
but you still must act. There are so many holes—or missing pieces of
information—that you can only wonder if you are making the right
decision. The fear of losing prevents some people from making any
decision at all. And yet, you still must act.
The Dutch Tulip Bulb Mania*
A bubble is a phenomenon in which investors and traders buy
stocks or other items at such a feverish pace that the market rises
to irrational levels. The buyers seem to be under a mass delusion
that the market will only go higher. Before long, speculators hop-
ing for quick profits jump in, creating a mania. Eventually,
investors come back to their senses, causing a selling panic.
There have been a handful of bubbles in history, all of which
have ended quite badly for investors.
One of the most spectacular bubbles in history occurred in
Holland in the seventeenth century. In 1635 people were sud-
denly willing to pay any amount in order to own a single tulip
bulb. These bulbs had become status symbols for the rich and
famous. Some bulbs were beautiful mutations, what the Dutch
called “bizarres” (Famous Financial Fiascos, by John Train).
Speculators would buy one, then immediately sell it for a higher
price.
As the tulip mania increased, speculators pushed the prices
higher. For example, to buy one exotic tulip bulb, you would have
to exchange several horses, pigs, bread, a carriage, tons of
cheese, beer, and house furnishings (using today’s exchange rate,
well over $200,000). Many investors were more than willing to
trade their houses or valuable paintings for one tulip bulb. There
was always a bigger fool willing to pay a higher price for the
bulb. The entire country got swept up in the mania.
168
UNDERSTANDING STOCKS
*Some of the text used in this sidebar originally appeared in my first book,
101 Investment Lessons by the Wizards of Wall Street (Career Press, 1999).

As with most bubbles, most people didn’t know they’re in
one until it was too late. At the time, people thought the tulips
were wise investments that would last forever. In one sense, the
craving for tulip bulbs nearly lasted forever. Today, the Dutch
export millions of dollars worth of tulip bulbs to other coun-
tries—but at more reasonable prices.)
This bubble popped rather abruptly and dramatically. People
stopped and looked around and wondered how anyone could pay
that much for an exotic flower. It was similar to a game of musi-
cal chairs when the music stops. People who only a few months
before hadn’t been able to buy the tulip bulbs fast enough now
couldn’t sell them in time. Family fortunes were wiped out, there
was widespread panic, and the Dutch economy collapsed.
The closest the U.S. stock market came to a bubble occurred
during the Internet mania. It seemed as if the entire country was
deluded into thinking that every Internet stock would go up.
Companies like Excite at Home, Pets.com, HomeGrocer.com,
and hundreds of others were bid up to ridiculously high valua-
tions. At the time, some Internet companies with no earnings had
a higher market cap than some of the largest corporations in
America.
Just like the tulip bubble, the Internet bubble ended abruptly.
Investors also looked around and wondered how they could have
paid so much for companies with little or no earnings. Some peo-
ple are still holding shares of Internet companies that may never
come back to even.
In the next chapter, you will learn my thoughts about the stock
market.
WHY INVESTORS LOSE MONEY
169

This page intentionally left blank.

16
171
What I Really Think
about the Stock 
Market
Because I’m not on anyone’s permanent payroll, I am free to tell you
what I really think about the stock market. You don’t have to agree with
what I say—in fact, I welcome opposing viewpoints. There is no one
right answer when it comes to the stock market. In the end, you should
make up your own mind where to invest your money.
Listen to Traders, Not Investors
If you want to hear the truth (no matter how painful it is), listen to short-
term traders who are in cash by the end of the week. Because traders
don’t care whether the market goes up or down, they are usually more
objective about the direction of the market.
In contrast, most long-term investors are perpetually hopeful that
next year or in 5 years the market will be higher. This includes anyone
who works on Wall Street or is heavily invested in the market. These
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
Copyright © 2004 by The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. Click here for Terms of Use.

people will almost always tell you that the markets are going nowhere
but up. For the sake of their portfolios, I hope they are right, but hope
never made anyone a dime in the market. (To be fair, however, I have
also listened to my share of blowhard day traders, who think they are
geniuses right before they destroy their account.)
Keep a Lot of Cash
In an irrational world, holding cash makes you think rationally, espe-
cially if we’re headed toward a recession or a bear market. Even in a
bull market, keep a little cash on the side. When you hold cash, you
know that you can pay your bills and take care of any unexpected emer-
gencies. In addition, in the event of a crash or economic crisis, your
cash will allow you to invest at bargain prices.
When you have diversified into cash, you aren’t affected by the
daily gyrations of the market. Also, when the market is ornery and
you’re unsure of what to do, cash is the best place to be until you make
up your mind what to invest in. In my opinion, even a 4 percent annual
return is better than losing money. As I said in a previous chapter, mak-
ing money should be boring. Holding cash is about as boring as it gets.
Psychology Makes the Market Go Round
I’m convinced that the emotions of other investors and traders deter-
mine where the market is headed. Most investors and traders agree that
in the short term, investor psychology has a dramatic effect on the mar-
ket. That is why technical analysis, which measures market sentiment,
tends to work over short periods.
At the height of the last bull market, the overall perception was that
the good times would last forever, even to the point where bad news
was spun on Wall Street as being positive. For example, although many
Internet companies consistently reported negative earnings, people bid
their prices up higher in the anticipation and hope that future earnings
would improve. People continued to buy in the hope that many compa-
nies (especially Internet and telecommunications companies) would
see substantial profits.
172
UNDERSTANDING STOCKS

As you can guess, for the first 3 years of the subsequent bear mar-
ket, the reverse occurred. People stopped paying attention to the market
to the point where they refused to look at their account statements.
Even when a company released positive earnings, the stocks often
dropped in price or remained unchanged. In general, people refused to
participate in the market.
You need to understand the importance of psychology in the mar-
ket in order to look for clues that will lead you to profitable investment
opportunities as well as to take steps to protect yourself from losing
money. This means being aware of what is happening in your city, the
country, and the world.
The next bull market will begin when investors are so disgusted
and afraid of the market that they’ve lost all hope that it will ever
recover. There will be numerous signs that the market is rallying, but
only a handful of people will be savvy enough to connect the dots.
Don’t Trust Earnings Estimates
I can’t tell you what a company will earn in the next quarter, let alone
the next year. There is no way you can tell me that a company is going
to be profitable in 5 or 10 years. It amazes me that people act as if they
know for a fact how much a company is going to earn in the future. In
the past, we depended on accounting firms to certify that the numbers
coming from companies were truthful. Once we discovered that there
was a conflict of interest between the accounting firms and the audited
companies, we couldn’t believe anyone’s numbers. We’re hoping that
Wall Street, the accounting firms, and CEOs will give us numbers that
we can trust in the future. Until then, let the buyer beware. (It takes
extraordinary intuition and information to find out what is really going
on behind the scenes at many companies.)
Use Both Technical and Fundamental Analysis
Nearly every book written on the stock market assumes that you will
choose between technical and fundamental analysis when deciding
WHAT I REALLY THINK ABOUT THE STOCK MARKET
173

what stocks to buy. Guess what? You can use both methods. If you are
an investor, you can learn a lot by looking at a stock chart, using tech-
nical indicators, and looking at stock patterns. At the same time, you
should not buy a stock unless you are convinced that the company’s
fundamentals are strong. No matter which method you use, you don’t
want to overpay for the stock.
By using both fundamental and technical analysis, you can study
both the company and its stock price. Although there are advantages
and disadvantages of using either method, in the end, you have to
decide which works best for you. By learning both technical and fun-
damental analysis, not only will you become a more knowledgeable
investor or trader, but you will also have more tools in your toolbox.
This could give you an edge over other market participants. Rather than
choosing one method or the other, be eclectic.
Losing (a Little) Money Can Be Educational
One of the worst things that happened to many people during the last
bull market was that they got the idea that it was easy to beat the mar-
ket. Before they had a chance to cash in their winnings, most of their
profits had disappeared. If you lose money in the stock market (or in
any other financial endeavor), turn this event into an educational expe-
rience. Losing money has a number of benefits:
1. It forces you to analyze what you did wrong. Determine whether
the strategies you (or your financial adviser) are using are on the
right track.
2. It tests your character. If you crunch keyboards or throw things
around when you lose money, you had better change investment
strategies. Successful investing and trading is not supposed to be
exciting—the pros take their gains and losses in stride.
3. It forces you to be disciplined. Everyone always talks about the
importance of discipline, and there’s nothing like losing money to
make you realize that you lack it. You failed to limit your losses
or protect your winnings.
174
UNDERSTANDING STOCKS

4. It forces you to take action. When you lose money in the market,
you have a choice: You can keep repeating the same mistakes, 
or you can find out what you’re doing wrong. You learn nothing
if you ignore the truth. If you find out what you’re doing wrong,
you always have a chance to get it right the next time.
Get Your Finances in Order
In my opinion, you shouldn’t consider investing in the market until
you’ve taken care of some other important details. Here are a few ideas:
1. The first investment you should make is in your home.
2. After buying a house, buy a mutual fund. This will give you a
taste of how the stock market operates. If you have a chance to
open up a 401(k) or an IRA, do so. Earning tax-free money can
eventually make you wealthy.
3. If you have any money left over, invest a portion in the stock
market.
4. Your lifelong goal should be to reduce or eliminate debt. It’s
amazing how quickly your money grows when you are not tied
down with unwanted debt, like credit card bills and car payments.
(I don’t even like mortgage payments, but you had better speak to
a tax adviser before making that move.)
Buying and Holding Isn’t for Everyone
In my opinion, you should not simply buy a stock and hold it indefi-
nitely. For over 60 years, investors have been brainwashed into using
this simple but ineffective strategy. Let’s try to understand why buy and
hold is so popular.
First, there has been a massive public relations campaign by Wall
Street to lure people into buying and holding stocks. If the market is
going up, you buy because you could miss out on the next bull market.
If the market is going down, you buy because stock prices are so cheap.
WHAT I REALLY THINK ABOUT THE STOCK MARKET
175

When the public invests in the market, it keeps people on Wall
Street employed. That is why so few pros advise you not to buy stocks.
And if you’re not buying, hardly anyone will advise you to sell. Sell a
stock? Are you kidding? It will always come back one day, they say.
Even now, people are buying and hoping that their portfolios will
miraculously come back to even by the time they retire. Many of them
will be in for a huge shock.
In the 1990s, it seemed so easy to pick winning stocks. Many advo-
cates of buy and hold point to the successful record of billionaire investor
Warren Buffett. What the experts fail to tell you is that Buffett almost
never buys the stocks of technology companies, has the skill to take apart
and analyze a balance sheet and the patience to stick it out for the long
haul, and is willing to wait indefinitely until he gets the price he wants.
Unfortunately, it’s not easy for people to emulate Buffett. They don’t take
the time to do the necessary research, they get too emotional about their
stock picks, and they get lured into buying the wrong stocks. They’d be
better off in a mutual fund that beats both bear and bull markets.
The Market Doesn’t Always Go Up
Nearly everyone connected to Wall Street says that the average yearly
return on the stock market for the last 60 years is 11 percent (one of the
reasons why you should buy and hold forever). The one fact they forget
to tell you is that the stocks in nearly all the stock indexes are routinely
shifted to make room for more profitable companies. The indexes
remove companies that have gone bankrupt, no longer meet the index
requirements, or no longer reflect the index’s philosophy. In fact, most
major indexes make dozens of changes to their listings each year.
If you want to get really picky, of the original Dow 12 stocks in
1896, only General Electric remains in the index. The other companies,
such as American Tobacco and U.S. Leather, either went out of business
or merged with other companies. I guess you could say that it’s any-
one’s guess how much the market has really gone up or down in the last
100 years. As many people have learned the hard way, buy and hold
fails miserably in a bear market. In addition, even if the market goes up,
that doesn’t mean that your stocks will.
176
UNDERSTANDING STOCKS

The Markets Are Not Fair to Individual Investors
If you are going to participate in the stock market, you have to know the
truth: The markets are not fair to individual investors. To learn what
really happens on Wall Street, read former SEC Chairman Arthur
Levitt’s book Take on the Street: What Wall Street and Corporate Amer-
ica Don’t Want You to Know (Pantheon Books, 2002). It is an inside
look at what happens behind the scenes on Wall Street, including polit-
ical maneuvering, manipulation, lies, distortions, and other schemes
designed to keep individual investors in the dark. Many of the worst
offenders are company insiders and Wall Street players, including stock
analysts, who have access to information that they aren’t willing to
share with individual investors. The insiders know how to maneuver
around the rules.
Martin Weiss, author of The Ultimate Safe Money Guide (John
Wiley & Sons, 2002), mentions a number of outright fraudulent activi-
ties that some companies engage in: padded sales reports, misreported
options, fake analyst ratings, and stockbrokers who attempt to swindle
clients.
In my opinion, the biggest game of all is trying to convince people
that the markets are fair and equitable and that everyone has an equal
chance to make money. Some people who are connected to the financial
markets attempt to manipulate the markets by passing out false email
messages, posting fake messages in Internet chat rooms, calling gullible
strangers on the phone, and going on television to pump up a stock.
Others, such as institutional investors or professional traders, will
buy or sell huge numbers of shares in a single day just to fool the pub-
lic into thinking that there is a “rally” or a “correction” in the stock.
When the public reacts accordingly, these investors do the opposite.
Of course it doesn’t have to be this way. It will take a combination of
government intervention (including a stronger and well-financed Securi-
ties and Exchange Commission), politicians who are willing to stand up
to Wall Street’s special interests, and investors who are unwilling to par-
ticipate in a rigged game. Until the market is truly fair, individual
investors would be advised to be careful. It will take a long time before
many people will trust the markets again. (Perhaps Wall Street likes it
WHAT I REALLY THINK ABOUT THE STOCK MARKET
177

that way. If the markets are too dangerous for individual investors, you
have no choice but to give your money to the professionals.)
Not Everyone Should Invest in Individual Stocks
Although I believe that people should learn everything they can about
the market (which is why I wrote this book), overall I think that most
people should be cautious about buying or selling individual stocks. I
know this is an unusual conclusion after writing a book about stocks.
(And believe me, I know this is not a popular position to take!) In my
opinion, there are many less risky things to do with your money than
investing it directly in the stock market. It’s an extremely tough game to
master, and only a few actually succeed at it.
I think that many individual investors don’t have the time, the
knowledge, or the discipline to buy individual stocks. You can’t just buy
a stock and go to sleep. You have to closely monitor individual stocks,
and, unfortunately, most people don’t have the opportunity to do that.
There are many hidden pitfalls that make investing in the stock
market risky. Until the markets are truly fair for the individual investor,
which isn’t likely to happen anytime soon, my advice is to be very wary
about investing directly in the market. The risks are too great. (This will
change when the stock market environment is as fair for individual
investors as it is for large investors.)
That doesn’t mean, however, that you shouldn’t be paying attention
to the market. The time will come when out of all the chaos a fair, trust-
worthy, and investor-friendly market will be created. When the time is
right, you might consider investing in individual stocks. Until then,
learn everything you can about the market, but don’t participate until
you fully understand the risks and rewards.
And Yet There Are Exceptions
On the other hand, I don’t want to discourage those who feel that they
can win the stock market game. If you are excited by the stock market
and feel that you can make money at it, by all means, set aside a small
178
UNDERSTANDING STOCKS

amount of money and give it your best shot. You don’t need a fortune to
make a fortune in the market. (I know a female trader who turned
$5000 into $500,000 during the bull market.) Even if you make only a
couple of hundred dollars a week in the market, the lessons you’ll learn
will be priceless. As long as you are aware of the risks (that you could
lose all your money), go ahead and take a chance. I still stand by what
I said earlier: Most people should not buy individual stocks (although
buying mutual funds makes sense for many people). Perhaps you’re not
like everyone else (after all, you’re reading a book about a subject that
many people are avoiding).
A Trading Strategy That Works
Now that we nearly at the end of the book, I’m going to do something
different. I’m going to reveal a sophisticated stock trading strategy that
works in both bull and bear markets. It’s likely that you’ll never use the
strategy, and you certainly won’t use it at first, but understanding how
it works may give you an inside look at how some traders attempt to
beat the market.
The trading strategy I’m about to reveal could help you to make a
lot of money, far more than the price of this book. It’s so simple that it
will amaze you, although you must be aware that it’s controversial.
There are a lot of professionals on Wall Street, including many money
managers, who have done everything in their power to prevent people
from using it. It goes against everything that Wall Street has been
preaching for 200 years. 
This strategy was discovered by an acquaintance of mine who
worked at a midsized company. I was surprised to see his portfolios
double and triple, easily beating the returns of nearly every mutual
fund. His biggest mistake: A few years ago, he taught the successful
strategy to other employees. Before long, half the employees in the
company were using the system, disrupting work and annoying those
who didn’t participate (there’s nothing more frustrating than watching
coworkers make more money than you). Eventually, the company he
worked for refused to let him use the strategy.
Finally, this strategy is not for beginners. To use it, you must mon-
WHAT I REALLY THINK ABOUT THE STOCK MARKET
179

itor the U.S. and international markets closely and make last-minute
decisions that could cost you a lot of money if you’re wrong.
How the Strategy Works
The strategy is simple: When the U.S. markets are up a lot (approxi-
mately 1 percent or more), you move your money from a mutual fund
money market account into an international fund. More often than not,
the foreign markets (primarily Europe and Asia) will follow the U.S.
markets. It is estimated that foreign markets follow the U.S. markets
about two-thirds of the time or more.
The strategy works because of the way mutual fund companies price
their funds. Instead of updating the net asset value (NAV) of a particular
fund the next day, mutual fund companies price their funds on the basis
of the previous day’s close, called “stale” pricing. The strategy works
because of the time difference between U.S. and foreign markets—what
some might call a loophole. The 6-hour difference between U.S. and
European markets allow you to arbitrage the funds (take advantage of
the inefficiencies in their prices). According to critic Jason Zweig of
Money magazine, “It’s like knowing tomorrow’s news today.”
The strategy is known by a variety of names, including time-zone
trading, market timing, and in-and-out trading. Gary Smith, author of
How I Trade for a Living (John Wiley & Sons, 1999), briefly wrote
about similar fund trading strategies. However, very few people are
aware that the strategy works most efficiently in a 401(k) or 403(b).
Although mutual fund companies have been aggressive about stopping
people from trading mutual funds in taxable accounts, many have
allowed 401(k) and 403(b) plan participants to continue to use this
strategy. To my knowledge, no one has ever revealed this secret. 
The Rules
1. You begin with a company-sponsored 401(k) or 403(b) tax-
deferred savings plan. The beauty of using the strategy in such a
plan is that your gains are tax-free. (Although this strategy also
works using a regular taxable account, most mutual fund compa-
nies penalize you for using market-timing tactics.)
180
UNDERSTANDING STOCKS

2. Check to make sure that the company you work for allows you to
make unlimited and penalty-free exchanges between investment
funds.
3. Move all of your cash into a money market account and wait.
4. When the Dow is having a particularly strong day (and it’s hoped
that the Nasdaq is, too), especially into the close, transfer all or
part of your money into a European/Asian mutual fund before
4:00 p.m. Eastern time.
5. Perhaps seven times out of ten, the next day, European markets
and sometimes Asian markets will follow the Dow. On a great
day, you’ll get a 2 percent return (not bad for one day). On a
typical day, you’ll get 0.5 to 1 percent.
6. If the Dow is still strong for a second day, keep your money in
the European fund for another day. Otherwise, transfer all your
money back to the money market fund. During a bull market,
keeping your money in European/Asian mutual funds for several
days was not uncommon. In a bear market, you almost always
had to move your money out the next day.
7. When using this system, the most important part of the day is the
last 15 minutes of the U.S. market. This is when you decide
whether to transfer your money. When you’re not sure, you don’t
move, or you move only 50 percent.
8. Although using this method is sometimes boring, making even 1
percent a week adds up to 52 percent a year. In a bear market,
you are lucky to get 0.5 percent a week.
9. The beauty of the system is that you are in cash most of the 
time and enter the market only when you are confident that the
market is going up. Hopefully, you are in cash on the worst
market days and are participating in international markets on the
best days.
When you use this system, you spend no more than 15 minutes a
day deciding whether to enter the market. In a bear market, you are out
of the market most of the time. In a bull market, you are in most of the
time. It can’t get much simpler than that! If you can make as little as 1
or 2 percent a month in the market, a seemingly easy feat, the numbers
really add up. (Most pros will tell you that you should buy and hold
WHAT I REALLY THINK ABOUT THE STOCK MARKET
181

mutual funds so that you don’t miss out on the best days. Although this
makes sense, you also want to avoid the worst days!)
You will have to experiment to determine what are the best days to
move. For example, some people who use this method don’t move on
Fridays. Others move only when the Dow is up a huge amount, at least
1.5 percent. Others move if the Dow is up at least 1 percent. You also
have to check European markets for any news that could affect the next
day’s stock prices. Finally, you need to carefully study which countries
your European fund is investing in.
What the Critics Say
Mutual fund companies don’t like market timers and will do everything
in their power to discourage timing strategies. Many of them penalize
traders with taxable accounts by tacking on 1 percent penalties if they
notice market-timing tactics. [It’s also possible that in the future mutual
fund companies will tack on penalties if you use this strategy in your
401(k) or 403(b).]
Critics contend that this strategy punishes long-term investors in
foreign mutual funds. Jason Zweig wrote in Money magazine that in
just a few years, short-term mutual fund traders have transferred mil-
lions of dollars ($420 million, according to him) from the accounts of
long-term investors to their own accounts. Zweig suggests that the
strategy, although legal, is unethical and should be stopped. Basically,
mutual fund traders are taking advantage of a loophole in the way
mutual funds are priced. Others might argue this is simply the capital-
ist system at work. In the end, you have to judge for yourself whether
it is capitalism at work or unethical greed.
As you know from reading this book, mutual funds are supposed to
be long-term investments, not vehicles for short-term trading. That is
why market timing drives mutual fund managers crazy. They hate it
when you transfer money into and out of international funds. There-
fore, once they identify you as a market timer, it is likely that you will
no longer be allowed to use the strategy.
Although this strategy worked in the past, there is no guarantee that
it will work in the future. Just like other market timing strategies that
have worked before (e.g., the January effect), once too many people
182
UNDERSTANDING STOCKS

find out about them, they cease to work. In addition, Zweig says that
people don’t realize how easy it is to lose money when you use this
strategy. (On the other hand, I know from using the system that when
you are wrong, your risks are minimized because you are trading
mutual funds, not individual stocks.) Even on the worst days, you prob-
ably won’t lose more than .5 or 1 percent. Eventually, you will learn the
best days to “jump,” assuming you are allowed by your 401(k) or
403(b) plan provider. Nevertheless, most experts claim that market-
timing strategies do not work.
Why have I spent so much time telling you about a strategy that
might not work anymore? First, many mutual fund companies do allow
401(k) and 403(b) plan participants to use this strategy. If you thor-
oughly understand the risks, rewards, and limitations of using this strat-
egy and don’t feel it is unethical, you might want to investigate it
further. Second, to be a successful investor or trader, you have to think
differently from everyone else. I’m hoping that revealing this strategy
will help get you started.
The Games Analysts Play
There are a few stock analysts we will never forget. This includes
analyst Walter Piecyk, with his $1000 a share price target for
Qualcomm in 1999 (or $250 if you adjust for a 4-to-1 split).
Although he did lower his price target to $200 in 2000, it was too
little and too late. The press also had a field day with Henry
Blodget, the former Wall Street analyst who put outrageously
high price targets on Amazon.com (AMZN) when it was trading
at $250 a share. (Ironically, Blodget’s price target on Amazon
was initially correct. Amazon rose to a split-adjusted high of
$678 a share before falling to less than $10 a share.) It wasn’t just
Blodget who gave Amazon a buy or strong buy rating—30 other
analysts made the same call.
Years later, it was reported that while Blodget was publicly
telling people to buy many of these overvalued stocks, he was
privately writing emails to his colleagues urging them to sell.
WHAT I REALLY THINK ABOUT THE STOCK MARKET
183

“What a POS,” he reportedly wrote in one email. Most of the
stocks Blodget touted went to under $5 within a year of his rec-
ommendation. Meanwhile, his firm paid him more than $12 mil-
lion for his analysis, perhaps not because of his stock picks but
because of the investment banking clients he brought in.
One of the most infamous Internet bulls was stock analyst
Mary Meeker. She told anyone who would listen to buy Priceline
(PCLN) in 1999, when the stock was trading at $165 a share. She
repeated her buy recommendation at $78, and she continuously
and publicly told investors to buy until Priceline fell to less than
$3 a share. Forget about P/Es, Meeker said. It was reported that
Meeker and the Wall Street firm she worked for made millions in
fees that year. (Finally, when Priceline was at $3 a share, Meeker
told investors to hold.)
Here’s how the game was played: The investment banking
divisions of the major brokerage firms are paid to raise money
for companies, so they strongly encourage the firms’ analysts to
be bullish on the companies the firms represent. That is why ana-
lysts will rarely say anything controversial or negative about a
current or future client.
In a scathing report on how analysts do business, the CBS
program 60 Minutes interviewed Tom Brown, an analyst who had
been fired by a major Wall Street firm. Brown revealed some of
the secrets behind analysts’ recommendations. “I don’t know
frankly how some of these analysts live with themselves,” he said
at the time. Brown said that it was hard to look at himself in the
mirror, knowing that he might have caused some people to lose
50 percent of their retirement money. “They really are cheerlead-
ers,” Brown said of analysts. “The investment banking group
wants you to be wildly bullish about everybody.”
Of course, there were reputable analysts who told investors
the truth about the highly inflated technology stocks, especially
the Internet stocks. For example, Ashok Kumar, a semiconductor
analyst for a Wall Street firm, downgraded Intel from a strong
buy to a buy. The stock lost 20 points over a 2-week period. (In
the wacky world of Wall Street, a downgrade from strong buy to
184
UNDERSTANDING STOCKS

buy is like issuing a sell recommendation.) Other analysts criti-
cized Kumar’s rating and considered the price drop to be a buy-
ing opportunity. They were wrong.
Another reputable stock analyst, Dan Niles, turned negative
on the telecommunication stocks he was covering. As it turned
out, even the public didn’t want to listen. It was reported that he
received hate mail and threats as he candidly analyzed the tele-
com sector. On the other hand, dozens more analysts took advan-
tage of investors’ greed by making outrageous price calls based
on nothing more than pie-in-the-sky stories and ridiculous valu-
ations. If you looked at the fundamentals of many of these com-
panies, it was quite clear that they weren’t going to be making
money anytime soon, if ever.
Although it is too late for those who got talked into buying
many of the Internet stocks at the top, there are many lessons to
be learned from the games analysts play. If you are going to
invest in the stock market, it is essential that you understand how
upgrades and downgrades influence a stock, and that you learn
about the incestuous relationship that analysts have with the
investment banking divisions of the brokerage companies.
The SEC has talked about eliminating the conflict of interest
that exists between investment bankers and the analysts in the
research department. Until the system is changed, however, you
can’t trust what analysts or their research departments say about
stocks.
Conclusion
Before you attempt to buy your first stock, be aware that you are enter-
ing a battlefield populated by sharks that want your money. If you are
going to invest in the market, you must fight them with knowledge (a
very effective shark repellant). If you aren’t willing to do your own
homework (independently do research on companies and stocks) and
WHAT I REALLY THINK ABOUT THE STOCK MARKET
185

must depend on a stockbroker or a stranger on television to tell you
what stocks to buy or sell, you are destined to lose money. You have no
one to blame but yourself when you do.
If you lose money, the government won’t help you, nor will anyone
on Wall Street. Remember that making money in the stock market is
serious business. It is as serious as raising children or working at a full-
time job. In the end, you must take responsibility for your own invest-
ments. You’re completely on your own.
In the past, many investors and traders made money in the market
but had no clue as to how they were doing it. “I’m doing nothing, and
look how much money I’m making,” several investors told me. You
should not be surprised to learn that many of these people lost every-
thing. In a few years, people will be lulled into thinking that it’s safe to
participate in the market again. The historic $8 trillion in losses will be
forgotten. My hope is that after you read this book, you won’t make the
same mistakes that millions of other people made in the past.
Now that you are aware of the risks as well as the rewards, you have
a choice. If you are willing to take the time to learn what works on Wall
Street, you can survive and prosper as a twenty-first-century investor.
To win, you have to be faster, more knowledgeable, and more flexible
than investors in the past. As soon as you put down this book, begin
thinking and planning. Don’t stop until you have created a successful
portfolio.
On the other hand, if you decide that stocks are not for you, at least
you have a better understanding of how the stock market works. This is
information that should help you no matter what you decide to do in
the future. Always be on the lookout for profitable money-making op-
portunities while remaining cautious. When in doubt, however, don’t
do it.
Finally, I have learned from experience that the best investment you
can make is in people. You can’t go wrong spending money on a college
education, your home, a new business, your children, or those who des-
perately need your help. This is what I believe: Why make money if you
don’t use it to improve your life or the lives of others?
It’s been a pleasure sharing my knowledge with you. I wish all of
you the best of luck and hope that all your financial dreams come true.
186
UNDERSTANDING STOCKS

Knowledge: The Greatest Gift You
Can Give Your Loved Ones
After my father passed away last year, I found a letter written by
my grandfather, Charles Sincere, the successful owner of a
Chicago stock brokerage firm. The letter, with the title “Open on
Your 21st Birthday,” contained the following financial advice (my
grandfather also referred to a Wall Street Journal article in his
letter to my father).
1. Begin by paying off all your debts.
2. After being debt-free, you must not be tempted to blow
your money on risky financial ventures.
3. It is hard enough for most people to earn a bare living,
including 95 percent who are unable to keep and acquire a
fortune. This is not to discourage you but to warn you and
give you courage to fight harder to be one of the 5 percent.
4. Always be prepared for the possibility that you may have to
support your parents. In addition, you owe it to your wife
and family to buy life insurance.
5. You want the privilege of helping those who are afflicted
and impoverished.
6. The most important measure of success is integrity, hard
work, and being right more than 55 percent of the time.
This also means diversifying risks so that when you are
wrong it won’t break or crimp you.
7. Never cosign promissory notes to help others.
8. Never buy stocks in small corporations to please friends—
easy to buy, hard to sell.
9. Don’t be easy in loaning money except in extreme cases
(i.e., don’t let a worthy friend down).
10. Only hard experience, proven by facts, should impress you
and cause you to follow the rules just outlined.
WHAT I REALLY THINK ABOUT THE STOCK MARKET
187

This page intentionally left blank.

AAA bonds, 20–21
Advice, 164–165, 171, 187
After-hours trading, 53
Amazon.com, 183
American Stock Exchange (AMEX), 6,
7, 84
Annual reports, 93, 95–96
Arbitrage, 180
Ask price, 51–52
Asset allocation, 38–39
Assets, 93, 94
Averaging down, 72
Balance sheets, 93–94
Bar charts, 110–111
Bear markets, 27
Bearish patterns, 120–123
Berkshire Hathaway, 40–41, 104
Bid price, 51–52
Bills, 20
Blodget, Henry, 183–184
Bogle, John, 40
Boiler Room (film), 34
Boiler rooms, 33–34
Bollinger bands, 137–138
Bond rating, 21
Bonds, 19–21, 20
Boston Stock Exchange, 7
Bottom fishing, 71–72
Breakaway gap, 126
Brokerage firms:
discount, 57–58
full-service, 55–57
going on margin with, 63–64
investment banking divisions of, 184
opening account with, 58
and order types, 58–61
placing orders with, 61–62
Brown, Tom, 184
Bubbles, 168–169
“Bucket shops,” 128
Buffett, Warren, 8–9, 52, 70, 89, 95,
104–105, 176
Bull markets, 27–28
Bullish patterns, 121–124
Buttonwood Agreement, 6
Buy-and-hold strategy, 70–71, 175–176
Buy-on-the dip strategy, 71
Call options, 81–82
Candlestick charts, 111, 112
CANSLIM, 75–76
Capital gains, 5
Capital loss, 5
189
Index
Copyright © 2004 by The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. Click here for Terms of Use.

Capitulation, 144–145
Cash, 25–26, 166, 172
Certificates of deposit (CDs), 25, 152
Characteristics and Risks of Standard-
ized Options, 83
Charts:
bar, 110–111
candlestick, 111, 112
line, 109–110
stock, 108–109
Chicago Board Options Exchange
Volatility Index (VIX), 142–143
Chicago Mercantile Exchange (the
Merc), 139
Churchill, Winston, 107
Churchill (James C. Humes), 107
Churning, 56
Cincinnati Stock Exchange, 7
Commercial paper, 25
Commission-based system, 56
Commissions, 6, 56
Commodities, 138–139
Common stocks, 5
Compound earnings, 39
Compounding, 39–40
Conquer the Crash (Robert Prechter),
154
Consolidating stock, 114
Consumer price index (CPI), 153
Continuation gap, 126
Contrarian investing, 74, 142–144
Coolidge administration, 65
Corporate bonds, 20
Corporate insiders, 92–93
Corporations, 5, 8
Cost, stock, 13
Coupons, 20
Covered calls, writing, 83–84
Covering your position, 79
CPI (consumer price index), 153
Crash(es), market:
of 1929, 65–66, 144, 161
of 1987, 57, 144, 161
Crowd, following the, 165–166
Day traders/trading, 9, 57, 77–78
Debt, 154
Decimalization, 52
Deflation, 153–154
Detailed stock quotes, 50–52
DIA (see Dow 30)
Discipline, 163
Discount brokerages, 57–58
Divergence, 136
Diversification, 22, 26, 37–38, 55, 162
Dividend stocks, 30
Dividends, 32
DJIA (see Dow Jones Industrial 
Average)
Dollar, 151
Dollar-cost averaging, 72
Double bottom pattern, 122–124
Double top pattern, 122, 123
Dow, Charles, 10–11
Dow 12, 176
Dow 30 (DIA), 16–17, 85
Dow Jones Industrial Average (DJIA),
10–11
Dow Jones Transportation Average,
10–11
Downtrends, 112–113
Dutch tulip bulb mania, 168–169
Earnings estimates, 173
Earnings per share (EPS), 99–100
ECNs (see Electronic Communication
Networks)
Economic indicators, 153
EDGAR database (see Electronic Data
Gathering Analysis and Retrieval
database)
Edgar Online, 93
Electronic Communication Networks
(ECNs), 62, 64
Electronic Data Gathering Analysis and
Retrieval (EDGAR) database, 92,
93
Emotional involvement, 160–161,
172–173
190
INDEX

Environment, 149–155
deflationary, 153–154
of dollar, 151
and economic indicators, 153
and Federal Reserve System, 
150–151
inflationary, 152
political, 154
and stock prices, 155
EPS (see Earnings per share)
Equities, 4
Ericsson, 159
Exchange-traded funds (ETFs), 79–80
Exercising your right to buy, 82
Exhaustion gap, 127
Famous Financial Fiascos (John Train),
168
Fast trading strategy(-ies), 77–85
day trading as, 77–78
ETFs in, 79–80
market timing as, 78–79
news-based, 80
and options, 81–84
with QQQ, 84–85
shorting the rallies as, 79
writing covered calls as, 83–84
Fear, 161, 167
Federal Reserve Board (FRB), 150
Federal Reserve System, 21, 65,
150–152
Filling the gap, 127
Finances, 166–167, 175
Fixed-income investments, 19–20
Flexibility, 163
Float shares, 44
Following the crowd, 165–166
Foreign investors, 151
Forward P/E, 101
401(k) plans, 22–23, 180, 183
403(b) plans, 180, 183
Fraud, 34–35
FRB (Federal Reserve Board), 150
Full-service brokerage firms, 55–57
Fundamental analysis, 89–96
annual report in, 95–96
balance sheet in, 93–94
and company managers, 92
concepts behind, 90–95
definition of, 89
and earnings estimates, 100
earnings per share in, 99–100
income statement in, 97–99
industry knowledge for, 90–91
industry leaders identification for,
91–92
and insiders, 92–93
overview of, 90
problems with, 104
stock ratios in, 100–103
and technical analysis, 173–174
Futures exchanges, 138–139
Gaps, 125–127
GARP (growth at a reasonable price), 
73
GDP (gross domestic product), 153
General Electric, 176
“Going on margin,” 63–64
Graham, Benjamin, 105
“Greater fool theory,” 73–74
Greed, 160–161
Greenspan, Alan, 141
Gross domestic product (GDP), 153
Growth at a reasonable price (GARP), 73
Growth investors/investing, 73, 101
Growth stocks, 31
Head and shoulders pattern, 120–121
Head fakes, 124
Hedge, 81
Hedge funds, 180
Home ownership, 26
Hoover, Herbert, 65
Hope, 161, 171–172
How to Make Money in Stocks (William
O’Neil), 75–76
Humes, James C., 107
INDEX
191

“Identifying the leading company,”
91–92
In-and-out trading, 180–183
Income statements, 97–99
Income stocks, 30–31
Index funds, 24–25
Industry knowledge, 90–91
Industry leaders, 91–92
Inflation, 15, 152, 153–154
Initial public offerings (IPOs), 45–47
Insider trading, 146
Insiders, 92–93
Intel, 184–185
Interest rates, 21, 150–151, 152
International funds, 180
Internet, 105, 169
Intrinsic value, 31
Investment banking, 184
Investolator, 74
Investors, individual, 4, 8–9, 176–177
Investor’s Business Daily, 91, 144
IPOs (see Initial public offerings)
IRAs, 23
“Irrational exuberance,” 141, 150
Japan, 154
Junk bonds, 21
Kumar, Ashok, 184–185
“Learn everything you can about the
industry,” 90–91
Learning from mistakes, 163–164,
174–175
Lebed, Jonathon, 160
Lefevre, Edwin, 128
Level II software, 62
Leveraging, 63
Levitt, Arthur, 176
Liabilities, 93, 94
Limit order, 59–60
Line charts, 109–110
Livermore, Jesse, 128–129, 161
Load funds, 24
Losing stock, selling, 158
MA (see Moving average)
Managers, company, 92
Manipulation, 33
Margin calls, 63–64
Margins, 63–64
Market capitalization, 44–45
Market crash(es):
of 1929, 65–66, 144, 161
of 1987, 57, 144, 161
Market makers, 14–15
Market orders, 58–61
Market timing, 78–79, 180–183
Maturity date, 20
The media, 143–144
Meeker, Mary, 101, 184
The Merc (Chicago Mercantile
Exchange), 139
Minis, 139
Mistake(s), 157–169
of bad advisors, 164–165
of emotional involvement, 160–161
of following the crowd, 165–166
of lack of discipline/flexibility, 163
of lack of diversification, 162
of lack of preparation for the worst,
166–167
learning from, 174–175
of letting winning stocks lose, 159–160
of missing out/mismanaging money,
167–168
of not learning from mistakes,
163–164
of not selling losing stocks, 158
Momentum investors, 73–74
Money management, 167–168
Money market funds, 25–26
Moving average (MA), 132–133
Munis, 20
Mutual fund money market accounts,
180
192
INDEX

Mutual fund redemptions, 144
Mutual funds, 22–25, 180–183
NASD (National Association of Securi-
ties Dealers), 7
Nasdaq (see National Association of
Securities Dealers Automated Quo-
tation System)
Nasdaq 100 index (QQQ), 84–85
Nasdaq Composite Index, 12
National Association of Securities Deal-
ers Automated Quotation System
(Nasdaq), 6–8, 14–15, 33, 57, 78,
84–85, 150
National Association of Securities Deal-
ers (NASD), 7
Net asset value (NAV), 23–24, 180
Net worth, 93
Netscape, 46
New York, 5–6
New York Stock Exchange (NYSE), 6,
10, 14
News-based trading, 80
Niles, Dan, 185
1929 stock market crash, 65–66, 144,
161
1987 stock market crash, 57, 144, 161
No-load funds, 24
Notes, 20
On-balance volume (OBV), 134–135
O’Neil, William, 75–76, 158
Online brokerage divisions, 56
Online investing, 58
Online traders/trading, 58, 78
Opportunities, 167–168
Options, 81–84
Orders, market:
going on margin with, 63–64
placing, 61–62
routing of, 62–63
types of, 58–61
Oscillators, 137–138
OTC (over-the-counter) market, 33
Outstanding shares, 43–44
Over-the-counter (OTC) market, 33
Overbought, 135
Oversold, 135
P/E ratio (see Price/earnings ratio)
P/S (price-to-sales) ratio, 103
Pacific Stock Exchange, 7
Patterns, stock, 119–125
double bottom, 122–124
double top, 122, 123
gaps in, 125–127
head and shoulders, 120–121
reverse head and shoulders, 121–122
triple top, 122
PEG (price/earnings/growth) ratio, 102
Penalties, market-timing, 182
Penny stocks, 33–34
Philadelphia Stock Exchange, 7
Piecyk, Walter, 183
Pink sheet stocks, 33
Points, 12–13
Politics, 154
Portfolios, 37
Position trading, 78
PPI (producer price index), 153
Prechter, Robert, 154
Preferred stocks, 5
Premarket, 53
Premiums, 83–84
Preparation for the worst, 166–167, 
175
Previous close, 51
Price, stock, 13, 49–53
reasons for rise/fall in, 155
and stock quote, 49–52
Price/earnings/growth (PEG) ratio, 102
Price/earnings (P/E) ratio, 100–102
Price-to-sales (P/S) ratio, 103
Priceline, 101, 184
Principal, 21
Producer price index (PPI), 153
INDEX
193

Professional traders, 10
Profit, 13–15
Prospectus, 46–47
Psychological indicators, 142–145
Psychology, 172–173
Pump and dump, 145–146
Put options, 81, 82
QQQ (see Nasdaq 100 index)
Qualcomm, 183
Quote, stock, 49–52
Ratings, 21
Ratios, stock, 100–103
Real estate investment, 26–27, 151
Real estate investment trusts (REITs), 
27
Recessions, 153
REITs (real estate investment trusts), 
27
Relative strength, 76
Relative strength indicator (RSI),
135–137
Reminiscences of a Stock Operator
(Edwin Lefevre), 128
Resistance, 118–119
Return on equity (ROE), 103
Reversals, trend, 115–116
Reverse head and shoulders pattern,
121–122
Reverse splits, 41
Risk, 15–16, 20–21, 178
Risk tolerance, 38
ROE (return on equity), 103
Roosevelt, Franklin Delano, 63, 66
RSI (see Relative strength indicator)
Russell 2000 index, 12
Santayana, George, 64
Savings, 154
Scams, 145–146
SEC (see U.S. Securities and Exchange
Commission)
Sectors, 11, 29–30
Securities, 4
Selling short, 41–43, 128
Sentiment analysis, 141–145
and capitulation, 144–145
and the media, 143–144
and mutual fund redemptions, 144
VIX for, 142–143
September 11, 2001 terrorist attacks, 
143
Shareholders, 4
Shareholders’ equity, 93, 94
Shares, 4
float, 44
outstanding, 43–44
The Shawshank Redemption (film), 
161
Short-term traders, 9, 162
Shorting stocks, 128
Shorting the rallies, 79
Sideways markets, 28
Sideways trends, 114–115
Siegel, Jeremy, 15
Sincere, Charles, 187
60 Minutes, 184
Slow investment strategy(-ies), 69–76
bottom fishing as, 71–72
buy-and-hold, 70–71
buy-on-the dip, 71
CANSLIM as, 75–76
contrarian investing as, 74
dollar-cost averaging as, 72
growth investing as, 73
momentum investing as, 73–74
value investing as, 72–73
Small Order Execution System (SOES),
57
Smith, Gary, 180
SOES (Small Order Execution System),
57
S&P 500 (SPY), 85
S&P (Standard & Poor’s Corporation),
12
194
INDEX

Specialists, 14, 62
Split-adjusted prices, 42
Spread, 51–52
SPY (S&P 500), 85
“Stale pricing,” 180, 183
Standard & Poor’s Corporation (S&P),
12
Stock analysis, 100
Stock certificates, 4–5
Stock charts, 108–109
Stock exchanges, 6–8
Stock market, 3–17
corporate influence on, 8
crashes of (see Crash[es], market)
exchanges for, 6–8
history of, 5–6
individual investors in, 8–9
professional traders in, 10
and shares, 4
short-term traders in, 9
and stock certificates, 4–5
tracking the, 10–13
Stock patterns (see Patterns, stock)
Stock price (see Price, stock)
Stock quote, 49–52
Stock splits, 40–41
Stockbrokers, 56
Stocks:
cost of, 13
definition of, 4
dividend, 32
growth, 31
income, 30–31
market capitalization of, 44–45
penny, 33–34
profit from, 13–15
reasons for buying, 5, 15
risk with, 15–16
and sectors, 29–30
types of, 29–35
value, 31
(See also Shares)
Stop limit order, 61
Stop-loss order, 60–61
Strategy(-ies), 9
fast trading, 77–85
guidelines for, 69–70
slow investment, 69–76
successful, 179–183
Supply and demand, 155
Support, 116–118
Swing trading, 78
“Swiss cheese principle,” 168
Take on the Street (Arthur Levitt), 
176
“Talking to company managers,” 92
Tax-deferred retirement plans, 22–23,
180, 183
Technical analysis, 107–129
advanced indicators/oscillators in,
132–138
bar charts for, 110–111
candlestick charts for, 111, 112
definition of, 108
and fundamental analysis, 
173–174
and gaps, 125–127
line charts for, 109–110
problems with, 127
stock charts for, 108–109
stock patterns in, 119–125
support and resistance in, 116–119
trend lines for, 111–116
volume in, 131–132
Technical analysts, 108
Technical indicators, 132–137
10–K filing, 93
10–Q filing, 93
TheGlobe.com, 46
Time-zone trading, 180–183
Top line, 97
Tracking the market, 10–13
Trailing P/E, 101
Train, John, 168
Trend reversals, 115–116
INDEX
195

Trends, 11, 111–116
down-, 112–113
sideways, 114–115
up-, 113–114
Triple top pattern, 122
Tulip bulb mania, 168–169
Unemployment report, 153
Uptick, 42
Uptrends, 113–114
U.S. Department of Labor, 153
U.S. Securities and Exchange Commis-
sion (SEC), 34–35, 47, 63, 66, 92,
146, 185
U.S. Treasuries, 20, 25–26, 166
VA Linux, 46
Value investors, 72–73, 101
Value Line Investment Survey, 91
Value stocks, 31
VIX (see Chicago Board Options
Exchange Volatility Index)
Volume, 33, 131–132
Wall Street, 6
Wall Street Journal (WSJ), 11
Warren, Ted, 74, 159
Weiss, Martin D., 176
“Whisper number,” 100
Wilshire 5000, 12
Winning stocks, losing from, 
159–160
Writing covered calls, 83–84
WSJ (see Wall Street Journal)
Yield, 20
Zweig, Jason, 180, 182, 183
196
INDEX

About the Author
Michael Sincere began trading stocks through the Internet in 1995.
Because he wanted to learn more about the stock market, he inter-
viewed some of the top financial experts in the country. He decided to
write a book about what he learned; the result was 101 Investment
Lessons from the Wizards of Wall Street (Career Press, 1999).
For his second book, The Long-Term Day Trader (Career Press,
2000), coauthored with Deron Wagner, Sincere explained the aggressive
investment strategies he helped develop. His third book, The After-
Hours Trader (McGraw-Hill, 2000), helps investors and traders under-
stand and profit from the high-octane world of after-hours trading.
Sincere has written a number of columns and magazine articles on
investing and trading. He has been interviewed on dozens of national
radio programs and has appeared on financial news programs, includ-
ing CNBC and ABC’s World News Now! to explain his trading strate-
gies and talk about his books.
You can e-mail the author at mikesince@hotmail.com.

