

Understanding Asexuality


Understanding Asexuality
Anthony F. Bogaert
ROWMAN & LITTLEFIELD PUBLISHERS, INC.
Lanham • Boulder • New York • Toronto • Plymouth, UK

Published by Rowman & Littlefield Publishers, Inc.
A wholly owned subsidiary of The Rowman & Littlefield Publishing Group, Inc.
4501 Forbes Boulevard, Suite 200, Lanham, Maryland 20706
www.rowman.com
10 Thornbury Road, Plymouth PL6 7PP, United Kingdom
Copyright © 2012 by Rowman & Littlefield Publishers, Inc.
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced in any form or by any
electronic or mechanical means, including information storage and retrieval systems,
without written permission from the publisher, except by a reviewer who may quote
passages in a review.
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Information Available
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Bogaert, Anthony F., 1963–
Understanding asexuality / Anthony F. Bogaert.
p. cm.
ISBN 978-1-4422-0099-9 (cloth : alk. paper) — ISBN 978-1-4422-0101-9 (electronic)
1. Sex. 2. Gender identity. I. Title.
HQ21.B754 2012
305.8—dc23
2012009164
The paper used in this publication meets the minimum requirements of American
National Standard for Information Sciences Permanence of Paper for Printed Library
Materials, ANSI/NISO Z39.48-1992.
Printed in the United States of America

Contents
Acknowledgments
vii
1
Introduction
1
2
The A, B, C, and Ds of Sex (and Asex)
11
3
History
27
4
The Prevalence of Asexuality
41
5
To Masturbate or Not to Masturbate
55
6
Sex and Gender
67
7
Forging an (A)sexual Identity
83
8
The Madness of Sex
95
9
Do You Have Hypoactive Skydiving Disorder?
105
10
A Monster in All of Our Lives
115
11
Art and Food on Planet Sex
123
12
(A)sexuality and Humor
135
13
Just Because
147
14
The Beginning
161
Bibliography
163
Index
177
v


Acknowledgments
A sincere thanks to the following people who helped at various stages of
the development of this book: Carolyn Hafer, Sasha Noorgaard, Malvina
Skorska, and the editorial staff at Rowman & Littlefield. Your support
and generosity are greatly appreciated. I would also like acknowledge
the love and support of my mother and father throughout the years; my
academic career would not have been possible without them.
For LB.
vii


ONE
Introduction
I teach and research human sexuality in two academic departments—the
Department of Community Health Sciences and the Department of
Psychology—at Brock University in the Niagara region of Canada. My
university is supportive, and I expect that most of my university col-
leagues respect my work, but a few of my fellow professors are a bit
dismissive of what I do. Some joke about what must go on in my human
sexuality courses (e.g., “Your small-group seminars must be quite the
party!” or “I bet there’s a lot of hands-on learning in your courses!”).
Others tout my courses as the first to deserve a “little trimming” when
university budgets are subject to cutbacks, the suggestion being that sex
is taking up too much of the undergraduate curriculum, when, of course,
more important and pithy matters could (and should!) supplant it. Still
others question the utility of government grants being earmarked for the
study of human sexuality.
Why do some of my colleagues treat my research and courses this
way? I imagine that they do so, partly, out of a lingering notion that
sexual activities, including teaching and research about sexual activities,
have to do with the unseemly, the naughty, or at least the “unserious”
side of life. I expect that the seed of this notion is sown very early in the
lives of most Westerners (including in these few nonsupportive col-
leagues), germinates and reaches its peak during adolescence, and then
persists in some form into adulthood. In fact, evidence of the persistence
of this notion is charming, to a degree, when I witness my (usually male)
1

2
Chapter 1
colleagues revisit the raunchy side of their adolescence and engage in sex
banter over a few beers.
I also imagine that these colleagues feel this way because they, like
many of their fellow baby boomers, have slipped unawares into their
current stage of life: middle age. (By the way, I have also reached this
milestone, and have started to label it, somewhat bitterly, as the stage of
“middle-aged ugly.” I call it so because, alas, our beauty—what little we
may have had of it—has now faded, and we are saggy and increasingly
hairless geeks.1 Cruel as it may be, fickle Hollywood, with its eyes fixed
on beauty, has begun to give us the cold shoulder.) For some of my
colleagues, with the best of their youthful charms and vigor behind them,
sex is now increasingly off the radar, and a somewhat “de-sexualized”
worldview holds sway. This reflects, of course, a natural transition most
adults experience as middle-aged bodies start to change and preoccupa-
tions shift to other fancies, including, say, helping one’s children nego-
tiate their lives. The famous psychoanalyst, Erik Erikson, aptly summar-
ized this life stage as one preoccupied with generativity: the care of fu-
ture generations (Stevens, 1983).
But some of my middle-aged colleagues’ newfound worldview has—
yikes!—begun to undermine my work, as they have now started to give
me looks and behave as if they have had an epiphany on academic val-
ues: Why should the study of sex matter so much, when for the vast majority of
the moments in our lives, we are not engaged in it, and when the majority of our
thoughts and preoccupations are not confined to this rather strange activity,
even though, granted, they may have been years ago?
Well, maybe these colleagues are right. Why does sex matter so much?
It is true that the vast majority of our lives, even during periods when our
lives are extremely sexualized, is not spent engaging in sex. For example,
in any given day, much more time is spent eating, watching TV, groom-
ing, or sleeping than having sex. Indeed, sex does not even rate as an
identifiable category when activities of the day are tallied (Longley, n.d.).
Note that I am assuming a straightforward interpretation of these activ-
ities and not one more favorable to a turf-defending sexologist, who
might argue that such tallies often do not take into account “hidden” time
devoted to sex, such as viewing sexualized content on TV or other media,
or “inner-life” activities such as sexual fantasizing. But no, let’s not quib-
ble. It is true that sexual activities do not take much of the day at all, even
if we include “hidden” sex time. So, what is all the fuss about?

Introduction
3
In the 1970s, psychologists became more academically interested in
human sexuality. This occurred for a number of reasons, not the least of
which was that the sexual world opened up personally and scientifically
in the wake of the 1960s sexual revolution. At that time, two publications
by two social psychologists, Zick Rubin and Donn Byrne, put forward
some convincing arguments that all the fuss about sex was in fact worth
it, scientifically speaking (Rubin, 1973; Byrne, 1977). They catalogued a
number of reasons for the importance of studying (and teaching about)
sexuality. Here are some of their choice examples,2 along with a few of
my own.
Sex is intrinsically interesting to most people, even to those who are
not in the reproductive prime of their lives. That my middle-aged col-
leagues often still turn to the subject of sex after a few beers is evidence
that they are still interested in sex, even if their daily lives may contain
little behavior that is actually sexual. The prevalence of sexual allusions,
if not outright sexual content, in the media also attests to the fact that sex
is capable of arousing curiosity in, along with titillating, the young and
old alike. In 2010, the most “Googled” person was not the president of
the United States or the pope, but Lady Gaga, the pop music star with a
hyper-sexed persona.
The level of scientific curiosity about sex is also high, despite some of
my colleagues’ views. There is a 553-page book (at least in the first edi-
tion) called The Female Orgasm (Fisher, 1973), and not even a small
pamphlet on the female sneeze. Yet both an orgasm and a sneeze entail
similar physiological processes: a buildup of muscular tension released in
contorting spasm(s). There must be more intrinsic interest in the former
than the latter, even among us (usually) disinterested scientists, to ex-
plain the disparity in research. Finally, my courses do not suffer from a
paucity of student interest—a fact that even my most skeptical colleagues
cannot ignore; indeed, sex courses are often the most popular offerings
on college campuses.
In short, sex is very interesting to most of us, so why not study and
learn about a subject that piques human curiosity? I think this “high level
of interest/curiosity” argument is a convincing one, assuming that all else
is equal in terms of sex’s scientific importance and health implications
relative to other domains of life. But some of you are surely thinking, Aye,
there’s the rub, because all else is not equal. Sex may pique our curiosity, but it is

4
Chapter 1
not on par with other domains of life in its scientific importance or its health
implications!
I beg to differ. In terms of scientific importance, sex is on par with, or
even trumps, some of the biggest scientific puzzles. Not only do we not
fully understand why sex exists (i.e., why some species, for example,
reproduce using male and female forms; see chapter 3), but sex is often
the clue to unravelling the mystery of a species as a whole, or at least it is
never ignored when biologists (e.g., zoologists) study a species as a
whole. The same can be said for the study of humans. To understand our
sexuality is to understand ourselves. There is an ancient Chinese proverb
that says, “To understand the head, one must begin by studying the tail.”
(Using an animal metaphor to make its point, this proverb is, of course,
meant to reveal the secret to understanding human beings.) Sigmund
Freud,
the
famous
psychoanalyst,
and
evolutionary
psychologists
(strange bedfellows, indeed!) have thought similarly, suggesting that sex
is the major scientific puzzle of human nature, and that to understand sex
is to understand human beings. So, the hows and whys of the way we
think, feel, and behave are determined, arguably, by our sexuality.
However, one does not have to resort to arguing from the scientific
value of decoding the mystery of human nature to make the point that
sex is an important academic pursuit. Sex clearly has a profound effect on
humans on practical levels. Consider two sisters who are close in age but
who differ in their sexual orientation, one being straight and the other
lesbian. Will their life trajectories be the same? The answer is, of course,
in some ways, yes, but in many others, no. The sisters ultimately will
have very different lives, in large part because of their differing sexual
orientations. Sexual orientation—like many components of sexuality—
plays a profound role in our social circumstances and life choices, includ-
ing whether we marry, where we live, or whether we have children. For
example, the majority of heterosexual women give birth to children and
the majority of lesbians do not. Data from the National Survey of Family
Growth (NSFG) in 2002 confirm this, with 65 percent of heterosexual and
bisexual women having given birth to a child, compared to 35 percent of
lesbians. Thus, the study of sexuality is clearly relevant to a variety of
scientific disciplines, including demography (Baumle, in press), which
attempts to understand trends related to marriage and fertility, among
other issues.

Introduction
5
Beyond basic scientific interests, sexuality also relates to health and
social issues, often profoundly so. The list of relevant health and social
ills is long: overpopulation, environmental degradation, gender inequal-
ity, sexually transmitted infections/diseases, divorce/family disruption,
and marital and child abuse. Take, for example, the issues of overpopula-
tion and the environment. Does anyone think that these are not affected
by people’s sexuality (e.g., their contraception practices)? This is not to
say that sex is the only contributing factor to these and other health and
social issues, but rather that all of them are affected by human sexuality,
and for some of these issues, the case could be made that sexuality is the
underlying factor in their development. Thus, if one truly wants to im-
prove the world, sex is a subject that cannot to be ignored.
So, the fuss about sex is well deserved. Sex affects much of our lives,
and its meaning and ramifications do not just have to do with the “act”
itself. At a most basic level, sex is about human life. Interestingly, major
health organizations such as the World Health Organization (WHO) are
recognizing the central role of sexuality in human life, along with the
myriad of ways it impacts health. Consider WHO’s (n.d.) working defini-
tion: “Sexuality is a central aspect of being human and encompasses sex,
gender identities and roles, orientation, eroticism, pleasure, intimacy and
reproduction.”
At this point you may be wondering whether I am perhaps inadver-
tently undermining the task ahead: to convince the reader that asexuality
is an important scientific inquiry. Note that when I refer here to asexual-
ity, I mean the real deal—that is, a complete lack of sexual attraction and/
or sexual interest (see chapter 2 on definitions)—and not just a middle-
age, on-again, off-again malaise about sex, as mentioned above. And so,
given sexuality’s central importance in human life, is it then true that
hard-core asexuality (if I am permitted this description), if it is the oppo-
site of sexuality, must be unimportant, a nonissue, a mere footnote in the
great (sexual) story of life? Why does the study of asexuality matter?
There are many reasons why it matters. In fact, I think the study of
asexuality matters so much that I was compelled to write this book on it.
Here are some of my reasons why asexuality matters and why I am
writing this book.
First, there is value in the opportunity for members of an overlooked
and under-studied population to be able to read about and understand
issues relevant to them. Thus asexual people might be interested in find-

6
Chapter 1
ing out more about themselves, and this is reason enough to write a book
on asexuality. This is not a new concept: books are written about (and to)
specialized audiences all the time.
But this book is written not just for asexual people, or even just for
research scientists studying asexual people. It is also written for anyone
interested in learning more about sexuality. For example, a book on asex-
uality may satisfy curiosity—both scientific and public—about a sexual
minority that has been overlooked until recently. Thus many readers will
get a chance to peek into and learn more about a world that is sexually
different from theirs. Aside from satisfying curiosity, such glimpses into
new worlds may have health and social benefits, as exposure to sexual
minorities may help to increase general tolerance and acceptance. This
idea—called the “contact hypothesis” of prejudice reduction—is often
associated with psychologist Gordon Allport (1954), but the original the-
ory has been extended beyond personal contact to encompass exposure
through the media, including books (Cameron & Rutland, 2006).
A book about asexuality is also a book about sex (how could it be
otherwise?), and therefore many of the reasons listed above to study sex
apply equally well to the study of asexuality. For example, recall that one
of the reasons to study sex is that it informs a number of scientific disci-
plines, including demography, which studies, among other things, fertil-
ity and marriage. There are no published data on the fertility of asexual
people (a topic well worth looking into), but in the first published study
on asexuality using a national probability (or random) sample of adults
in Great Britain, I found that 33 percent of asexual people were currently
in a long-term relationship (e.g., married), compared to 64 percent of
sexual people (Bogaert, 2004). Thus, the study of asexuality reveals how
variations in sexuality profoundly affect one’s (demographically rele-
vant) life trajectories.
There is another equally important reason to study asexuality that has
not yet been mentioned. Asexuality offers us a unique opportunity to
look at sexuality through a new lens, affording perhaps a clearer (or at
least new) view of what sex is and what it is not. In fact, this is one of the
reasons why asexuality is interesting to a sexologist like me: It reveals
hidden truths about sex. In the same way that homosexuality allows us to
understand heterosexuality, and vice versa, asexuality allows us to make
broad comparisons to understand sexuality as a whole. This is also why a
book on asexuality matters.

Introduction
7
In support of my argument, consider further the example above: 33
percent of asexual people were found to be in long-term relationships,
compared to 64 percent of sexual people. Again, this information pro-
vides evidence that life circumstances often differ between asexual and
sexual people, but in these figures (in particular, the 33 percent for asexu-
al people), there is also something interesting revealed or at least sug-
gested about the nature of human sexuality and romance.
We often use the words “sex” (or “sexuality”) and “romance” synony-
mously; in other words, sex equals romance and romance equals sex.
“Romance” is perhaps the softer, gentler, and euphemistic word for “sex”
(more on the meanings of romance in chapter 2), but the two words are
often used interchangeably. In commercials for an erectogenic drug, ad-
vertisers tell men to “Buy Discount Cialis and Enjoy a Romantic Week-
end” (ED Pills, 2010 March 30). Of course, we all know what that means:
Use this drug and there is plenty of sex ahead, boys! Indeed, the ad goes
on to suggest that “With a single pop of Cialis, you will not only enjoy a
romantic night; expect a weekend of sizzling nights with your beloved.”
So, romance equals sex.
But are romantic relationships always the same thing as sexual rela-
tionships (or, to put it somewhat more complexly, does romance always
imply a sexual component)? Recently, some psychologically and evolu-
tionarily minded theorists have argued that sex and romance, although
often co-occurring, are two different things. These theorists argue that the
brain architecture and cognitive processing for lustful attractions
emerged at a very different time in evolutionary history than those for
romantic attachments (Fisher, 2004). Romance may have evolved rela-
tively recently in our evolutionary history, developing out of processes
related to how children attach themselves to parents (Hazan & Shaver,
1987). So, over evolutionary time, the brain architecture and processing
originally reserved for securely attaching ourselves to our mothers—a
good thing—has been co-opted and modified to allow us also to attach
ourselves to our romantic partners. Presto: romantic love is born! In
contrast, our faculty for sexual desire and attraction (“the lust system”)
may have evolved from the ancient animal mating and sexual attraction
systems, much older neuropsychological systems than the attachment
system in the brain. So what are we to make of asexual people who form
long-term (and presumably) “romantic” relationships (33 percent)? The
fact that many asexual people, who presumably do not operate from a

8
Chapter 1
lust/sexual attraction perspective, have an operating romantic-attraction
system gives support to the idea that the sexual attraction and romantic
attraction systems are indeed different. Thus, asexuals who are in rela-
tionships and have romantic attachments to their partners are an impor-
tant test case of the theory that sexual and romantic attraction can poten-
tially operate independently. Asexuals are not necessarily aromantic.
Hence, the nature of sex (and romance) can be revealed by studying
asexuality.
The study of asexuality offers a unique opportunity to view sexuality
through a new lens, but, perhaps more importantly, this new lens affords
a distant, wide-angle view of its subject. When scientists examine a phe-
nomenon, they often try to remove themselves from it so that they can
view it more objectively—to view their earthly phenomenon as if they
were, perhaps, looking down from space. Asexuality may provide this
kind of distance from sexuality. So getting an asexual person’s view on
sex, and/or trying to see sex from an asexual perspective, allows us to see
sex in a new way.
In chapter 8, I show that adopting this distant view of sex offers us
some intriguing insights into the nature of human sexuality. One of these
insights is that sex is odd, if not downright bizarre. For example, when
we deconstruct the sex act—certainly easier to do if one is asexual—its
components can be perceived as “symptoms” suitable to a diagnosis of a
mental disorder: obsessive thoughts, odd vocalizations, repetitive move-
ments, and so forth. This illustration may strike you as a bit strained
(albeit perhaps amusing), but I expect that with some thought, the main
point of this deconstruction of sex is understood. Also, even if not con-
vinced by this illustration, other evidence exists, as shown in chapter 8,
that sexuality is often linked to strange and even pathological behaviors.
So, despite sex being the “great story of life,” it is also sometimes tenu-
ously linked to mental health, broadly defined. These connections cer-
tainly make me wonder about what is a disorder, sexual and otherwise,
and whether, for example, asexuality should be construed as one (Bo-
gaert, 2006b; Bogaert, 2008) (see also chapter 9). In any event, I think the
odd world of sex is worth exploring, especially as viewed from the dis-
tance of an asexual person.
A distant view of sex offered up by asexuality also shows how perva-
sive sexuality is in our own and many other cultures and how very pro-
foundly it affects people’s lives. (Ironically, perhaps some critics of hu-

Introduction
9
man sexuality research need to take a true asexual’s view of sexuality to
see how important sex is in its effects on people and society!) For exam-
ple, in chapter 11, I show how sexuality pervades the media, including
art, and speculate on what the history of art, and aesthetics generally,
would be like without sex. Similarly, in chapter 12, I discuss humor, this
strange and wonderful faculty of the human psyche; I review why so
much humor is sexually oriented and what humor would be like if it was
completely devoid of sex. I also ponder the degree to which asexual
people “get” sexual humor. Again, the asexual view on these issues leads
to important insights into sex and human nature generally, and thus
adopting an “asexual” lens affords a view we shouldn’t miss. So stick
around: I expect the ride will be an interesting one.
NOTES
1.
I know that I am being an ageist to suggest that youth is synonymous with
physical beauty. Well, to all you middle-aged people like me who think I am being
ageist, all I have to say is this: Act your age! Attractiveness can be construed as the
amount of draw or attention we can pull from others, and I think there are two age-
sensitive, attention-getting components of attractiveness/beauty. First, there is a child-
like “cuteness” component, which draws attention from others and is important be-
cause of its role in attaining the attention/care that children receive from competent
others, such as parents. Thus, children have beauty in the form of “cuteness” that
adults find appealing, because children need to draw adult attention to themselves in
order to be cared for. As such, adults who retain some of this cuteness (e.g., boyish
charm) can still draw their share of attention from others. The second youth-based
component of beauty is related to fertility and reproductive vigor. Adolescents and
adults need to draw the attention of others to reproduce, so it is not surprising that
body and face features we find appealing are often cues to these characteristics. Fur-
thermore, most people’s fertility and reproductive vigor (particularly that of women)
peak in their twenties. So, alas, beauty is heavily youth based! We will discuss beauty
and attractiveness in this book, as they also relate, obviously, to both sexuality and
asexuality.
2. I thank the eminent sexologist, William Fisher, who introduced me to the arti-
cles by Rubin and Byrne, and who I believe mentioned some of these examples in one
or more of his human sexuality lectures, which I attended as a graduate student.


TWO
The A, B, C, and Ds of Sex (and Asex)
In this second chapter, I examine some of the fundamental psychological
processes of sexuality as they relate to both sexual and asexual people.
These processes are rather conveniently summarized by the letters A, B,
C, and D. There are two words for A: attraction and arousal. There is one
B: behavior. C refers to cognition, a fancy word for our thoughts. And the
fourth is D: desire. Focusing on these processes will allow us to decon-
struct or break down and examine some of the key components of sexual-
ity; this approach will also allow us to consider definitions of asexuality.
Let’s begin with attraction. It refers to that rather basic, even primal,
lure that draws us to someone or something. Of course, in a general
(nonsexual) sense, we can be “attracted” to nearly anything—for some
reason, French fries come to mind—but, for our purposes, let us keep our
discussion of attraction relevant to the domains of love and sex. But here,
too, we need to make a distinction between romantic and sexual attraction.
Psychologist Lisa Diamond (2003b) describes romantic love as the “feel-
ings of infatuation and emotional attachment” associated with pair bond-
ing. This type of attraction, then, refers to the “love” attraction we have
for others, and the people we find “attractive” (our objects of desire) are
those with whom we may fall in love. This kind of attraction is often the
stuff of drama, as many of the most powerful and enduring stories give
us a heavy dose of love attraction between partners.
In contrast, sexual attraction refers to the “sexual” or lust lure for
others. It also might be termed one’s “sexual orientation.” Sex research-
ers, particularly those with a psychological bent, believe that sexual at-
11

12
Chapter 2
traction to others is the sine qua non of sexual orientation. So, for example,
if you are a woman and primarily lust after—in other words, are turned
on by being with, looking at, thinking about, or fantasizing about—men,
then you have a heterosexual sexual orientation. Thus, you are sexually
attracted to, or have sexual orientation toward, men.
The distinction between romantic and sexual attraction extends even
further. As introduced in chapter 1, some biologists and social scientists
have suggested that romantic and sexual processes are potentially inde-
pendent, governed by different brain systems, and evolved from differ-
ent processes (Diamond, 2003b; Fisher, 2004). Key aspects of romantic
functioning (e.g., affectional bonding) may have evolved relatively re-
cently in our evolutionary history from the attachment system (Hazan &
Shaver, 1987), whereas sexual desire/attraction processes may have
evolved from very basic mating and sexual attraction systems. The basic
mating system is much older, evolutionarily (or phylogenetically) speak-
ing, than the attachment system. Reptilian brains are, after all, geared for
sex, not for love.1
There is a relatively famous Seinfeld episode—and aren’t almost all of
the episodes famous now?—in which the main character, Jerry, develops
a romantic, but not a sexual, crush on a major league baseball player he
meets (Keith Hernandez). The humor of the episode emerges from the
fact that Jerry begins to behave toward Keith as he might toward a female
romantic partner (e.g., infatuation, jealousy, feeling spurned). The epi-
sode illustrates how humans have the capacity to decouple romantic
from sexual attraction. It also illustrates that one’s romantic inclination
(e.g., to a man) may, in fact, be in contrast to one’s typical sexual orienta-
tion (e.g., to women).
This distinction between romantic and sexual attraction may seem
clear, but the two kinds of attraction are, as most people realize, also
intricately related, and they often overlap. After all—Jerry’s romantic
fling with Keith Hernandez notwithstanding—one’s romantic attractions
(e.g., to men) are usually the same as one’s sexual attractions (e.g., to
men). So, if I lust after Bob, I very well may also have romantic feelings
for him; indeed, I may even love him. This is partly because these two
attraction processes influence one another, so a sexual infatuation may
ultimately turn into a romantic bond lasting a lifetime, and a romantic
bond may lead to sexual attraction. Lisa Diamond (2003b) suggests that

The A, B, C, and Ds of Sex (and Asex)
13
this latter sequence—love followed by lust—is more likely to occur in
women than in men.
You may be thinking, The complex relationship between romantic and
sexual attraction is interesting, but what does it have to do with asexuality?
Well, nearly everything, actually. One of the main definitions of asexual-
ity is a lack of sexual attraction. In the first study examining asexuality in a
large national sample, which I conducted in 2004, asexuality was defined
as never having felt sexual attraction to men, women, or both (Bogaert,
2004; Bogaert, 2006b). AVEN (Asexuality Visibility and Education Net-
work), the largest website devoted to asexual issues, also defines asexual-
ity as a lack of sexual attraction. So, many asexual people have no sexual
attraction to others, meaning that there is no “lust lure” for others.2
Does this mean that asexual people are not romantically attracted to
others? The answer to this question—“not necessarily”—should be clear,
given our discussion of the distinction between romantic and sexual at-
traction, and the fact that they can be decoupled. As mentioned in chap-
ter 1, a lack of sexual attraction is not the same as a lack of romantic
attraction, and asexual is not synonymous with aromantic. Some asexual
people demonstrate that you can have one without the other. So, if one
defines asexuality as a lack of sexual attraction to others, one should also
be aware that it is not necessarily defined as a lack of romantic attraction
to others. As also mentioned in the opening chapter, asexuality allows us
to understand sexuality, and the distinction between romantic and sexual
attraction is a good example of this. Sex and romance are often linked,
but not inextricably so.
I often get media requests a few weeks before Valentine’s Day to
discuss sexuality research. A discussion of human sexuality makes for an
interesting news story, generally speaking, but it is pure gold on Febru-
ary 14. In early February 2010, I had a slew of reporters asking about the
distinction between romantic and sexual attraction, and how it relates to
asexuality. Can there be love without sex? And vice versa? For some
reason, that year the media requests were all from Spanish-speaking
countries—Spain, naturally, and a number from South America. I did one
telephone interview for a national radio show in Colombia, using a trans-
lator. I was asked whether the decoupling of sex from love was a modern
phenomenon. I suggested that, although it is not a new phenomenon, its
manifestation (or how this decoupling plays itself out in human behav-
ior) may take different forms, depending on the time period and the

14
Chapter 2
culture. As an example, I explained the relatively modern Western trend
of people hooking up and maintaining “sex-only” relationships. To de-
scribe this trend, I used the rather indelicate but often-heard phrase fuck
buddies. The interview ended very quickly after that, my assumption that
this broadcast was not a live one (and thus could be edited, if deemed
necessary) being, evidently, incorrect.
The distinction between romantic and sexual attraction is important,
but its full implication is not recognized. For example, some definitions of
sexual orientations not only include a sexual attraction component but
also a romantic (or equivalent) one. Take the well-used textbook on sexu-
ality, Understanding Human Sexuality (Hyde, DeLamater, & Byers, 2009).
This text defines sexual orientation as a “person’s erotic and emotional
orientation towards members of his or her own gender or members of the
other gender” (p. 431). This definition goes beyond “erotic” or what
would be termed “sexual” attraction and includes an emotional compo-
nent, suggesting that romantic attachments are important to how we de-
fine a sexual orientation. In some sense, this type of definition is a broad
description for one’s “gender” orientation for love, sex, or both. And it is
true, as mentioned above, that romantic and erotic attachments are often
closely linked. But including an emotional/romantic element in the defi-
nition is also problematic, because (as mentioned above) these types of
attraction are separate phenomena, and some people don’t have sexual
inclinations that match their romantic inclinations.
In fact, I think that people often use their romantic inclinations to
guide their self-identifications about their sexual orientation. So even if
they do not have sexual attractions to one sex or another, their romantic
inclinations toward one sex or another determine whether they self-iden-
tify as homosexual, heterosexual, or bisexual. I think this is often the case
for asexual people, particularly if they are not “out.” Young and/or clos-
eted asexual people may still self-identify as, say, heterosexual when
asked on an anonymous questionnaire about their sexual orientation,
even though in a vague sense they may not feel that this label fully
captures who they are as people. Again, in some sense, such people may
understand “sexual orientation” more broadly to include their love/gen-
der orientation. If so, the true number of asexuals (i.e., those lacking in
sexual attraction) may be underestimated (Bogaert, in press-a; Chasin,
2011). From my perspective, these “romantic” asexual people don’t have
a (traditional) sexual orientation, although they do have a romantic orien-

The A, B, C, and Ds of Sex (and Asex)
15
tation. Interestingly, many contributors to AVEN, who are privy to and
often discuss the latest scientific work on sexuality, have recently picked
up on the romantic/sexual distinction, and have begun to self-identify in
the complex way that this distinction engenders. So, for example, it is not
unusual for an asexual person to say that he is asexual but biromantic, or
that she is asexual but heteroromantic.
Let’s move on to the other A: arousal. This usually refers to the physi-
cal aspects of one’s sexual response, or what happens in the genitals
when sexual stimuli are encountered (e.g., stroking of the inner thigh, or
imagining a sexy scene). So this aspect is less psychological, at least in
comparison to attraction, and more physical, referring primarily to bodi-
ly responses such as erections and vaginal changes (lubrication). Because
these physical changes are detectable, there has been a tradition in sexol-
ogy of researchers measuring psychophysical sexual arousal. The man
who pioneered the technique in the 1950s was Kurt Freund (sounds like
Freud but isn’t), a Czech/Canadian who was primarily interested in see-
ing if men were gay or straight. Later he used this technique to measure
deviant arousal in male sexual offenders. The original device used to
measure physical arousal was a specialized elastic tube placed around
the flaccid penis, which measured changes in blood flow as a man gained
an erection. Still later, in the 1960s, a psychophysical device—a tampon-
like cylinder inserted in the vagina, also measuring genital blood flow—
was developed for women. Today, these techniques, or modern varia-
tions of them, are relatively widely used (at least among sexologists!) to
assess sexual arousal in men and women in a variety of circumstances.
There is also a subjective or purely psychological component to arou-
sal. Most people have a sense of their own arousal (“feeling” aroused),
and this can be simply measured by asking someone, for example, “How
aroused or turned on are you by what you are watching?” People will
typically use their own genital changes as a marker, but there is not
necessarily a perfect correspondence between physical changes and
psychological arousal. This is particularly true for women, for whom
subjective arousal often does not match bodily changes that may or may
not be occurring (Heiman, 1977). Thus, there can be an arousal disconnect
between what happens in our bodies and what happens in our minds.
How are arousal and attraction related? Typically, our level of arou-
sal, both physical and subjective, reflects our sexual attractions. So, if Joe
is sexually attracted to women, then his physical arousal patterns (i.e.,

16
Chapter 2
erections) will likely correspond to that fact. That is, he is going to be
aroused in the presence of women, especially if they are attractive, un-
clothed, and/or engaging in sex with him. Indeed, because of this reason-
able linkage between our arousal and attractions, psychophysical meas-
ures have often been used for detecting a person’s deep-seated attrac-
tions, including whether the person is gay or straight. But, given that
there is a potential decoupling between physical and subjective arousal
(particularly in women), there is also a potential disconnect between
one’s physical arousal and one’s attractions. So, this physical arousal can-
not necessarily be seen as a mirror reflecting one’s basic attractions, espe-
cially in women. Even in men, there can a decoupling between attraction
and arousal. Men can have spontaneous erections without having a cor-
responding attraction to an object of desire. For example, a man may
wake up with a morning erection without necessarily having an object of
desire prompting its appearance. So, one can have a mere physical arou-
sal experience not necessarily attached to an attraction object, or for that
matter to even subjective arousal.
Again, you may be thinking, What does all this have to do with asexual-
ity? Well, plenty. First, if a common definition of asexuality is experienc-
ing a lack of sexual attraction, being asexual doesn’t necessarily mean
that one is incapable of being sexually aroused. In fact, for many asexual
people, physical arousal is not an issue. As one asexual person describes,
“I did, you know, test the equipment . . . and everything works fine,
pleasurable and all, it’s just not actually attracted to anything” (Brotto,
Knudson, Inskip, Rhodes, & Erskine, 2010, p. 612). Note that this quote
also suggests that there may be subjective arousal as well: knowing that
one’s body is aroused and even liking this feeling (pleasure). In short, a
lack of sexual attraction does not automatically mean a lack of physical or
subjective arousal.
Having finished with the two A words of sex, let’s move on to B:
behavior. Behavior is what we do—that is, our actions. There are a variety
of overtly sexual activities, both solitary and partnered: masturbation,
fondling, oral sex, intercourse, and so forth. However, it is not just the
acts themselves but also with whom we do them that comprises our
sexual behavior. Thus, a sex researcher interested in behavior may ask
participants about their frequency of oral sex and also with whom they
do this activity (e.g., men, women, or both). Indeed, there has been a
tradition in the social sciences to use behavior as the main focus of study

The A, B, C, and Ds of Sex (and Asex)
17
or interest, or as the key dependent variable. People’s thoughts and feelings
were not of primary interest, in large part because it was felt that these
aspects of the mind, although obviously important, were not amenable to
clear measurement. Alfred Kinsey, the twentieth century’s well-known
pioneer of human sexuality, was of this tradition and was most comfort-
able with assessing and discussing (sexual) behavior. It is not surprising
that his famous books have the word behavior in the titles: Sexual Behavior
in the Human Male and Sexual Behavior in the Human Female (Kinsey, Po-
meroy, & Martin, 1948; Kinsey, Pomeroy, Martin, & Gebhard, 1953).
Kinsey described people’s sexual orientation on a point scale from
zero to six, again mostly based on their behavior (what they did and with
whom). Kinsey sixes are exclusively gay/lesbian, while Kinsey zeroes are
designated as exclusively heterosexual. Those in the middle (e.g., two to
four) were designated as bisexual. This scale assumes that all people have
a high level of sexual interest in their preferred sexual partners. Thus, it
does not accommodate asexuality. However, Kinsey did have a name for
those who just didn’t fit on this scale: Xs. So, at a party (okay, a rather
unusual party), someone asks, “Are you a Kinsey zero (exclusively
straight)? Perhaps a Kinsey three (bisexual)? Or perhaps a Kinsey six (ex-
clusively gay)?” An asexual person schooled in the Kinsey scheme may
reply, “Well, actually, I am a Kinsey X.”
Most modern sexologists—and, for that matter, social scientists (e.g.,
psychologists, sociologists)—believe that the study of behavior by itself is
too limiting. They happily include in their research the mind’s other key
processes, including its attractions, thoughts, and desires. These other
aspects of the mind are widely accepted today, in part because we now
have better ways of measuring them. Modern sex researchers also know
that making conclusions about people based only on behavior is often
fraught with problems. Here’s an example. Let’s say you know a man
who has had in his lifetime one sexual partner, his wife, with whom he
has sexual intercourse once a week. Based on this behavior, you should
conclude that his sexual orientation is heterosexual. And yet, somehow,
you later find out that this man’s sexual fantasies (reflecting his attrac-
tions), including while having sex with his wife, are exclusively of men.
A shocker, to be sure! Later, you notice that, when drunk at parties, he
also seems to stare rather longingly at attractive men.3 So, what is his
sexual orientation: still heterosexual? I know no one who would suggest
that this man is, in fact, heterosexual. This is because people implicitly

18
Chapter 2
believe that one’s deep-seated sexual attractions always trump overt be-
havior when attempting to understand the essence of a human being’s
sexual orientation. Most modern sexual orientation researchers agree
(Bailey, Dunne, & Martin, 2000; Bogaert, 2003; Storms, 1980; Money, 1988;
Zucker & Bradley, 1995). They suggest that if we want to know whether
someone is gay or straight, we should assess his or her attractions (and
not necessarily his or her behaviors). In actuality, having more informa-
tion, rather than less (including information about behavior), is impor-
tant, but if you were to rely on only one aspect in assessing someone’s
sexual orientation, it would be the person’s attractions, and to exclude
this aspect is very problematic.4
An important reason why sexual behavior is an imperfect reflection of
one’s true sexual desire and attractions is that sexual behavior often re-
flects a compromise between one’s own inclinations and that of others. A
wife’s sexual behavior (e.g., frequency of intercourse) reflects not only
her desires and inclinations but also her husband’s, and vice versa. A
teenage boy’s sexual behavior (frequency of masturbation, intercourse)
reflects his desires and inclinations as well as the availability of partners
and the social constraints imposed by his parents and peers.
As you might expect, behavior’s imperfect reflection of one’s desires
and attractions is also important in understanding asexuality. Sexual be-
havior—or more to the point, the absence of it—is usually not the defin-
ing feature of asexuality.5 A more common definition, as mentioned, is a
lack of sexual attraction—or at least the definition in recent research often
includes this element (Bogaert, 2004; Bogaert, 2006b; Brotto et al., 2010).
Thus, although asexual people often have less sexual experience with a
partner, as one might expect, sexual experience per se would not neces-
sarily mean that a person is not asexual (Bogaert, 2004). For example,
some asexual people may engage in partnered sex (e.g., sexual inter-
course), perhaps out of curiosity or perhaps to please a romantic partner.
The latter type of sexual activity is most likely to occur in those asexuals
with romantic inclinations; it also reinforces the distinction made earlier
between romantic and sexual attraction.
It is also important to note that some people actively abstain from sex
for very long periods of time (e.g., prior to marriage, chastity), and some
people—celibates—actively eschew sex altogether, yet they do not neces-
sarily lack sexual attraction. Indeed, they may be strongly sexually at-
tracted to others but, for religious or other reasons, choose not to have

The A, B, C, and Ds of Sex (and Asex)
19
sex. For example, in Roman Catholic law and theology, “Clerics are
obliged to observe perfect and perpetual continence for the sake of the
kingdom of heaven and, therefore, are obliged to observe celibacy” (Code
of Canon Law, n.d.). Such obligations, of course, are not always upheld in
the long run. That celibacy in some forms of religious life is often so
difficult to uphold attests to the fact that many celibates are not necessari-
ly asexual. They may eventually stray and engage in some form of sexual
behavior, because their sexual attractions and inclinations are so strong
and overwhelm their values. That having been said, it is also not surpris-
ing that asexual people are, on average, more frequently found among
the strongly religious (Bogaert, 2004). Celibacy is obviously much easier
for those who are indeed asexual. A few years ago, a member of the
clergy suggested to me that in his experience, asexuality was not un-
known among those undertaking religious professions.
In 1980, Michael Storms recognized some of the limitations of a strict-
ly behavioral approach to sexual orientation, including Kinsey’s tradi-
tional behavioral scale for measuring sexual orientation. Thus, Storms’s
model of sexual orientation was based only on sexual attraction and not
on actual behavior. He also argued that two seven-point scales/dimen-
sions are better than one (Storms, 1980).
Storms’s two scales or dimensions decouple homoeroticism (sexual
attraction to the same sex) from heteroeroticism (sexual attraction to the
opposite sex). So, if someone were asked on a questionnaire to categorize
his or her sexual orientation using Storms’s model, he or she would indi-
cate the degree to which he or she has attractions to the same sex (homo-
eroticism) on a scale from low (one) to moderate (four) to high (seven),
and then, on a separate scale, would indicate the degree to which he or
she has attractions to the opposite sex (heteroeroticism), again ranging
from low (one) to moderate (four) to high (seven). Having these two
independent dimensions means that one can be high (or low) on one but
also high (or low) on the other. Thus, one’s score on one dimension does
not constrain the score on the other. This means that one can be high on
both (bisexuality) or low on both (asexuality). Storms never investigated
asexuals to see if this model captures their attractions accurately (i.e., low
on both dimensions), but, as mentioned above, there is now some sup-
port for this model (Bogaert, 2004; Brotto et al., 2010).
Now let’s move on to the third letter of the alphabet, C. Recall that C is
for cognition. Cognition is another word for “thoughts.” For example, the

20
Chapter 2
field of cognitive psychology deals with the processing of information
and knowledge. Thus, cognitive psychologists try to understand our
thoughts and their organization in the mind; how, for example, one bit of
knowledge or information is linked to another and how readily accessible
this bit of knowledge is to our conscious mind.
Our thoughts are often organized into “knowledge structures” or
“schemas.” One form of knowledge structure is a script. A script is a
cognitive generalization about the “appropriate sequence of events in a
particular context” (Schank & Abelson, 1977, p. 41). In other words, just
as a movie or a TV script tells an actor what to do and say (and when to
do and say it), our cognitive scripts prompt us to do and say things in a
specific order in a specific context. We may not realize that we carry
around in our heads these cognitive “scripts” of what to do and say in
various contexts, but we do. This type of cognitive processing is often
automatic and unconsciously performed, and can provide very useful
shortcuts for dealing with many contexts in the world around us. Indeed,
it would be extremely time consuming and taxing if we had to deliberate
about every move we make without relying on such mental shortcuts.
In sexual contexts, people also rely on scripts. Thus, humans engage in
rather automated sequences of sexual behavior, dealing with behavioral
contingencies in a rather orderly way (First I will kiss her, then, if she
responds to this, I will touch her breast, then I will . . .). Of course, it takes
time, it requires watching others perform these actions, and it takes prac-
tice (in keeping with the acting metaphor, let’s call it rehearsal!) to make
the sexual scripts unfold in a relatively seamless way, and sexual behav-
ior is not without its complications, to say the least!
Sexual fantasies can be construed as a form of sexual script (see also
chapter 5). Sexual fantasies may be very brief—just flashes of a sexy
image bouncing around in our heads—but they can also be more elab-
orate, with a dramatic storyline or plot. If one has repeated fantasies, this
may allow “rehearsal” to occur, so that we ingrain in our minds (poten-
tially adaptive) sexual sequences of behavior—that is, sexual scripts.
Sexual fantasies, along with other cognitive processes, are important
in understanding asexuality. For example, do asexual people have sexual
fantasies or, if they are asexual but romantic, just romantic ones? If some
asexual people do have sexual fantasies, what does this mean about their
sexual attractions, given that sexual fantasies often closely reflect sexual
attractions? Would such people truly lack sexual attraction?6 We will be

The A, B, C, and Ds of Sex (and Asex)
21
further discussing this issue and how other cognitive elements help us to
understand sexuality and asexuality in various chapters (see, for in-
stance, chapter 5 on masturbation and chapter 12 on humor).
D is for desire. Sexual desire can be defined as “a feeling that includes
wanting to have a sexual experience, feeling receptive to a partner’s sexu-
al initiation, and thinking and fantasizing about sex” (Rosen et al., 2000,
p. 191). Desire is another word for “lust,” or, in more colloquial terms,
“horniness”—that tingly feeling that makes people engage in sexual ac-
tivity and, perhaps, have a release of sexual tension: orgasm.
Desire is related to all four of the above: attraction, arousal, behavior,
and cognition. It is also, for example, very closely related to people’s
sexual attractions, as it usually is in reference to others. But desire and
attraction also can be decoupled. One of the reasons for this decoupling is
that there are separate bodily mechanisms underlying them. Circulating
testosterone, for example, can have a large impact on desire, but it does
not alter the direction of one’s sexual attractions.7 In the checkered early
days of reparative therapy, gay men were administered high levels of
testosterone, with the idea being that a lack of sexual interest in women
occurred in men because of an insufficient amount of this male-associat-
ed hormone (Meyer-Bahlburg, 1977). The bottom line, however, was this:
Testosterone did not make gay men heterosexual; it just made them
horny! There were a couple of problems with this reparative approach
using testosterone, aside from, of course, the ethical issues. First, testoste-
rone, although found in higher concentrations in men than women, exists
in both sexes. So, it is misleading to suggest that it is a male-only hormone
(see also chapter 6). Second, prior to birth, different levels of exposure to
testosterone may have permanent, organizing effects on the brain (as
they do on the body), and may ultimately affect sexual attractions and
one’s orientation development (see also chapter 13). But in adolescence
and adulthood, testosterone has “activating” effects, working like a kind
of fuel on whatever disposition (i.e., brain organization) is already there
in the first place. So it is not surprising that gay men, when given a boost
of testosterone, became more interested in sexual activities generally but
did not change their underlying attraction to men. So, in short, desire and
attraction have different underlying bodily mechanisms, and hence are
“decoupleable.”
In many people’s minds, asexual people must lack sexual desire (i.e.,
have no interest whatsoever in sexual activities). Indeed, very low desire

22
Chapter 2
or a lack of desire is sometimes put forth as an important definition of
asexuality (Prause & Graham, 2007). I, too, think this definition of asexu-
ality is a reasonable one, at least in some ways (Bogaert, 2006b; Bogaert,
2008). For example, I think lack of desire is more viable than lack of
sexual behavior in defining asexuality.
But why I do prefer to define asexuality as a lack of sexual attraction
(Bogaert, 2006b)? For one, if a person truly lacks sexual desire, then there
is likely no sex drive to fuel any underlying sexual attractions, if indeed
such underlying (perhaps) hidden attractions exist; thus, someone with
an absence of desire would lack sexual attraction for others as well, al-
though they still might have romantic attractions. Second, the reverse is
not necessarily true: if one lacks sexual attraction, one does not necessari-
ly have no sexual desire or drive (see chapter 5 on masturbation). Third,
sexual attraction captures the core element of sexual orientation, so, if one
wants to argue that asexual people do not have a traditional sexual orien-
tation (i.e., gay, straight, bi) but instead have a unique asexual one, then a
lack of sexual attraction to others is the important criterion (Bogaert,
2006b). Fourth, I think that a lack of desire may not capture accurately the
phenomenon of asexuality, at least based on existing research. There is
support for this view in two recent studies. Recent research on self-iden-
tified asexuals (Prause & Graham, 2007; Brotto et al., 2010) shows that
they do not necessarily have a lower desire for sexual activity, but they
clearly have a lower desire for sexual activity with others; in other words,
they lack sexual attraction to others. Thus, a lack of sexual attraction is
likely a good overarching definition of asexuality from a number of per-
spectives.8
This is not to say that someone who has had an enduring lack of
desire for all forms of sexual activities, including partnered sex and mas-
turbation, should not be labeled asexual. They should, in my view. This is
because, as mentioned above, this person would lack sexual attraction for
others (although perhaps not lack romantic attraction), along with lack-
ing additional sexual processes (e.g., no sex drive). In fact, using an en-
during lack of sexual desire for all sexual activities is, perhaps, a more
stringent definition of asexuality than the one I have proposed, because it
would include a lack of sexual attraction and a lack of sex drive. Thus, a
lack of sexual attraction may be construed as a “minimal” definition for
asexuality.

The A, B, C, and Ds of Sex (and Asex)
23
A couple of miscellaneous factors remain. One concerns sexual iden-
tity. Why not define an asexual person as anyone who, in fact, defines
himself or herself as asexual? This is a reasonable question, and self-
definitions/identities are important in a number of ways. For one, consid-
ering self-definitions respects the way someone chooses to label him or
herself. There are also many interesting research and health issues about
forging a sexual identity, including an asexual identity, as we will discuss
in chapter 7. But is self-definition the best way to understand the main
factor(s) underlying asexuality as a sexual orientation and/or as a phe-
nomenon? Because one’s sexual identity is often formed by a variety of
factors—such as knowledge of a label or labels, comfort level with com-
ing out, and political and other factors—many sexologists, including my-
self, are often wary of using self-identification as the key dimension in
defining sexual orientation.9 As mentioned above, many sexologists de-
fine sexual orientation in terms of sexual attraction, as we believe it is the
“psychological core” of sexual orientation.
Another miscellaneous factor is pleasure. When we think of sex, we
may think of sexual attractions, arousal, and desire, but we also think of
pleasure. And when we do think of the pleasures of sex, we usually
associate it with the arousal aspect (e.g., feelings of pleasure associated
with erections and vaginal lubrication and the intense pleasure when
physical arousal culminates in an orgasm). This makes sense because the
organs of sex most directly associated with physical arousal (i.e., penis,
clitoris, vagina) are brimming with nerve endings, which ultimately con-
nect to the pleasure centers of the brain that are capable of making us
experience intense pleasure. But all aspects of the sexual experience,
broadly defined (including attraction, behavior, and desire), elicit a cer-
tain amount of pleasure. For example, a heterosexual man may experi-
ence pleasure at the mere sight of a beautiful woman (attraction) without
ever—alas!—experiencing the physical pleasures (arousal/orgasm) of sex
with her.
You may be thinking that this discussion on sexual pleasure is inter-
esting, but also wondering, yet again, what all of this has to do with
asexuality. Do asexual people lack sexual pleasure, and with all aspects
of sex? It is likely the case that some asexual people may not have pleas-
ure with many, if not all, aspects of sex, but a lack of pleasure does not
seem to be the key defining factor associated with asexuality. Some asex-
ual people do, for example, have arousal experiences and evidently re-

24
Chapter 2
ceive pleasure from these experiences, as one of the quotes above, repeat-
ed here, demonstrates: “everything works fine, pleasurable and all, it’s
just not actually attracted to anything” (Brotto et al., 2010, p. 612). How
many asexual people do nonetheless receive some level of pleasure from
their arousal is unknown, but it is clear that a lack of sexual pleasure is
not a defining feature for all asexual people.
SUMMARY
In this chapter we discussed the A (attraction and arousal), B (behavior), C
(cognition), and Ds (desire) of sex. We also mentioned two miscellaneous
factors: identity and pleasure. (I realize that by including I and P, I have
ruined the alphabetical simplicity of my chapter title!) These are the key
psychological processes of sexuality. They also help us to understand
asexuality. Indeed, perhaps some asexual people are devoid of all these
factors; that is, they lack sexual attraction, arousal, behavior, cognitions
(e.g., fantasies), desire, and pleasure, and they also identify as “asexual.”
But one of these—lack of sexual attraction—may be a core psychological
factor among asexual people and may best define the phenomenon, from
both a theoretical and a research perspective. Lack of sexual attraction is
at least potentially independent of these other processes, and it is note-
worthy that those who lack sexual attraction may not lack these other
processes (e.g., desire, arousal). Also, at this point, although lack of sexu-
al attraction seems like a reasonable definition for understanding asexu-
ality, the phenomenon is likely diverse, so it is important to keep in mind
that this is a working definition and open to change. Thus, although I
give some priority in this book, as I have in my past publications, to
defining asexuality as a lack of sexual attraction, I think it is also reason-
able to be sensitive to different definitions of asexuality (including a lack
of desire for all sexual activities) and self-definitions. Another reason for
being open to different definitions is that research on asexuality is just
beginning.
NOTES
1. An interesting exception was pointed out to me when I was visiting a crocodile
farm in Northern Territory, Australia. The caretakers noted a rare case of a male and
female crocodile that seemed to have developed an affinity for one another and, unlike

The A, B, C, and Ds of Sex (and Asex)
25
all the other animals there, preferred to be caged together. They also slept on top of
one another like love-obsessed newlyweds. Surprised that love would emerge in such
an unnatural context, it made me wonder, a bit tongue in cheek, whether human love
is partly a function of being in captivity.
2. For someone to be considered asexual, I think the lack of sexual attraction
should have endured over a long period of time. For example, in my original study, a
person was defined as asexual if he or she never had sexual attraction to others. Thus,
like a heterosexual or homosexual orientation, which implies enduring level of attrac-
tion to others, there should be some level of persistence to one’s lack of sexual attrac-
tions if one has an asexual orientation.
3.
By the way, I call this “the drunk test.” Armchair psychologists can use it to
assess the deep-seated attractions, sexual and otherwise, of their friends, family, and
acquaintances.
4. This is not to deny that there are times when we may not be able to know about
a person’s true inclinations and desires, because he or she may lie (or may not know)
about them. Thus, if the behavior is “observable” in some way (e.g., getting caught
with a prostitute), this may provide more accurate information than what people
“report” on their attractions and desires. But this does not mean that if we had a
faithful window into their minds, their attractions would be a worse indicator of who
they are (as a sexual being) than their behaviors. Indeed, it would not. So, I reiterate:
An accurate assessment of a person’s attractions always trumps an accurate assess-
ment of his or her behavior when it comes to understanding the true nature of that
person’s inclinations.
5. A recent exception to this is a study by Poston and Baumle (2010), which de-
fined asexuality in a number of ways, including a lack of sexual behavior.
6.
Indeed, sexual fantasies are so closely linked to one’s sexual attractions that
Storms’s model of sexual orientation is sometimes referred to as the 2D fantasy model
of sexual orientation (Storms, 1980).
7. I am using testosterone here as an example, but I don’t want to imply that this
hormone is the only factor at work. There are a number of factors other than testoste-
rone—including psychosocial ones, for example—that influence sex drive.
8.
That having been said, more research needs to be done on desire issues in
asexual people. One issue that needs to be clarified is what asexual people mean by
“no sexual desire” and “no sexual attraction,” along with how they discriminate be-
tween these two aspects of sexuality. Most sexologists would likely indicate that de-
sire refers to sex drive and interest, while sexual attraction refers to one’s sexual
inclination toward others. Most sexologists would also likely assert that there is a fair
degree of overlap in what these two aspects capture about sexual expression for most
people (Bogaert, 2006b). However, some (perhaps many) laypeople may use the terms
“desire” and “attraction” differently than most sexologists do. For example, some
people who identify as asexual may prefer to describe their asexuality as an issue of
low/no desire, because they are more familiar with the word “desire,” rather than
“attraction,” within the context of sexuality, and prefer the word “attraction” to de-
scribe romantic and affectionate orientations (and not necessarily a “sexual” inclina-
tion or orientation). Thus, these asexual people may have felt little “sexual” attraction
for a partner of a particular gender (in the traditional sexual orientation sense), but still
have strong romantic and affectionate attraction for these partners (see, for example,
work by Lisa Diamond, 2003b). Consequently, they still describe their “attraction” for
partners of a certain gender because of their romantic feelings/inclinations toward

26
Chapter 2
them. Note: A similar point was made earlier in the chapter on romantic versus sexual
attractions.
9. This is true especially if you consider the various names people use to describe
their identity if they have same-sex attractions: gay, lesbian, queer, butch, femme,
queen, and so forth.

THREE
History
The story of life begins asexually, and for most of Earth’s natural history
(about two-thirds of it), asexual reproduction has predominated (Cowen,
2005). It has only been in the last twelve hundred million years, out of the
thirty-eight hundred million years that life has existed on Earth, that
sexual reproduction has flourished—a mere fraction of geological time.
Now it is the predominant form of reproduction for species on Earth.
The exact date of the emergence of sex—call it, ahem, the little bang
theory—is a bit in question, however. Twelve hundred million years is a
ballpark figure, give or take a few hundred million years. The first sex
likely occurred in simple organisms, eukaryotes (Cowen, 2005). Eukar-
yotes are simple single- and multicell organisms, although they are more
complex than the first single-cell organisms that predominated for about
2.5 billion years. Eukaryotes owe their complexity to sophisticated struc-
tures that the first forms of planetary life did not have, such as nuclei.
There are also other important dates in the evolution of sex beyond its
first appearance. A second milestone in the natural history of sex was
when this form of reproduction first occurred in the genealogical line
leading to modern animals, perhaps about five hundred million years
ago. This prize may belong to a worm-like creature called Funisia, the
fossilized remains of which were originally found in Australia (Droser &
Gehling, 2008). A third milestone was reached when the first “penetra-
tive” sex appeared, around three hundred million years ago in a species
of fish. These fossils were also originally found in Australia (Long, Trinaj-
27

28
Chapter 3
stic, & Johanson, 2009). Evidently, this fish’s pelvic fin was used in pene-
tration during copulation.
Note that not all sex involves penetration/copulation, as the definition
of sexual reproduction is the combination of genetic material from two
parents to form offspring. Sexual reproduction involves two processes:
meiosis, the splitting in half of the parents’ complement of genes, and
fertilization, the recombination of genes by the melding of the parents’
gametes (i.e., sperm and egg). Fertilization can be done in a variety of
ways, one of which is internal, making penetration a common technique,
but there are other ways of achieving this outcome.
It might be asked: If asexual reproduction was the way it all began,
why is sex even here? This is an especially pertinent question, given that
sex is a complex and costly way of reproducing one’s genes. For example,
there is considerable time and risk involved when it comes to finding a
mate. Moreover, only 50 percent of an organism’s (unique) genes are
replicated in traditional sexual reproduction, versus 100 percent in asexu-
al reproduction.
Although it is still debated, the most widely cited explanation for
sexual reproduction concerns the creation of genetic variability, or the
shuffling of the genes, which allows a species to survive in new and
changing environments. This shuffling of genes may be particularly rele-
vant for keeping ahead of various parasites that can take advantage of a
gene pool lacking in diversity (Bell, 1982; Ridley, 1995; Van Valen, 1973).
This explanation for the origin of sex is sometimes called the “Red Queen
hypothesis,” after the character in Lewis Carroll’s Through the Looking
Glass who exclaims, “It takes all the running you can do, to keep in the
same place” (Carroll & Tenniel, 1960, p. 345). In other words, sex may
have evolved as a weapon to win—but just barely so—the arms race
against new environmental threats, including parasites.
This shuffling of genes may also be characterized as a type of “bet-
hedging” strategy, allowing sexual reproducers to keep one step ahead of
unknown threats in constantly new and changing environments. It is as if
sexual reproducers are evolutionary dart players, throwing a variety of
genetic arrows at the game board of life and seeing if one or more sticks.
The Red Queen hypothesis begs the question: If the shuffling of genes
is often good for the health and vigor of organisms, why aren’t there
more than just two sexes? Surely a mating among more than two sexes
would shuffle the genes even better than a mating between just two

History
29
sexes. For example, why don’t we see tri-sexual species—exotic charac-
ters belonging, seemingly, in a sci-fi movie—all over Earth? Well, actual-
ly, there are a number of species on Earth with three or more sexes
(Roughgarden, 2004), but such examples are rare in Earth’s natural histo-
ry. Perhaps the costs associated with three or more sexes—such as having
to find one another, and only reproducing a third of one’s genes—is not
sufficiently offset by the advantages of genetic diversity that combining
three sexes would bring in producing offspring.
Most multicellular organisms are exclusively sexual reproducers. Yet
there are spectacular exceptions to this rule, including some species larg-
er than we are. Some sharks, for example, have the capacity to reproduce
asexually. Scientists discovered this recently by accident when a female
hammerhead shark in captivity in a zoo, without the company of any
males, suddenly gave birth. It turned out that the mother hammerhead
used a form of parthenogenesis, in which an unfertilized egg develops
into an adult without any contribution from a male. The offspring in
parthenogenesis is genetically identical to the mother and thus is always
female. Subsequent biochemical analysis indicated that the offspring in
the hammerhead case was genetically identical to the mother shark; thus,
the scientists ruled out the possibility of stored sperm from a sneak fertil-
ization with a male shark years earlier (Chapman et al., 2007; Eilperin,
2007, May 23). Talk about a virgin birth!
Humans are mammals, appearing relatively late on the planetary
stage, so this ancient capacity to reproduce asexually still lingering in
some very old (phylogenetically speaking) species does not exist in hu-
mans. Sharks have been around for a very long time, about 350 million
years, as compared to humans (i.e., the genus homo), who have existed
for—blink and you will miss it—a mere two to three million years.
There are also examples of seemingly exclusively asexual reproducers
that, surprisingly, sometimes reproduce sexually. The fungus-farming
ant, once thought to be an exclusively asexual reproducer (indeed, the
species consists of all females), has been found to have telltale signs of
sexual reproduction: some of the offspring were not 100 percent identical
to the queen in one of the subpopulations of these ants, and the queen
herself had—aha!—storage organs in her body that were filled with
sperm (Rabeling et al., 2011; Ghose, 2011, July 18). These authors argue
that sexual reproduction in this subpopulation may provide certain ad-
vantages (e.g., the ability to extend its range to new and complex envi-

30
Chapter 3
ronments) over those exclusively asexual subpopulations of ants. Relat-
edly, the authors argue that such glimpses of sexual reproduction in
normally asexual species may provide an important view of how the
evolution of sexuality occurs: “If you come back in five million or ten
million years, there’s a good chance the asexual lineages go extinct, but
the sexual lineages are still existing” (Ghose, 2011, July 18).
The above brief discussion of the natural history of asexual and sexual
reproduction only indirectly relates to the main subject of this book: asex-
ual humans. The type of reproduction of a species—sexual or asexual—is
somewhat different from the phenomenon of asexual beings, including
human beings, within an exclusively sexually reproducing species. There
is also a distinction between sexuality and the capacity for reproduction.
For example, the vast majority of asexual people can still reproduce sexu-
ally (i.e., are still part of the sexually reproducing species of humans),
even if they are not interested in the sexual mechanisms of it. Finally, in
modern humans, sexuality is often divorced from reproduction, so asexu-
ality is (partially) a different phenomenon than asexual reproduction.
More to the main point of this book, then, are there examples of asexu-
al animals within a normally sexually reproducing species? There are.
For example, a chorus line of sexual variability exists in farm and lab
animals, even though they are often bred—and sometimes genetically
altered—to be nearly identical food-producing or lab-friendly machines.
As in humans, you can find some that are studs or sexual dynamos. You
can also find some having “homosexual” tendencies, in that they prefer
sexual relations with the same sex; for example, males not only affiliating
with other males but also actively preferring to mount other males rather
than females. You can also find animals that have no sexual interest
whatsoever in other animals. This pattern of sexual variation among ani-
mals is often most clearly observed in males, as it is sometimes harder to
determine female sexual tendencies, in part because they, relative to
males, are less likely to initiate mating, often having a more subtle sexual
response associated with receptivity (see chapter 6 on gender).
Male rodents raised in experimental labs (e.g., mice, gerbils, guinea
pigs) often demonstrate wide sexual variability, with behaviors ranging
from hypersexual to asexual. These extremes are often called “studs” and
“duds,” respectively. Such variability in rodents may have parallels to
human sexual variability, including asexuality. Yet there are a number of
unknowns. First, some non-mating males may have sexual attraction to

History
31
other males, and so a lack of mating may not mean asexuality. A second,
related unknown is that the conclusions rely on the behavior of the ani-
mals, and this is an imperfect measure of underlying sexual attractions,
particularly if we are using it as a model of human sexual attractions (see
also chapter 2). Third, researchers are unclear as to what factor(s), biolog-
ical or otherwise, underlie the stud/dud difference. One biological expla-
nation is variations in circulating testosterone, as this hormone is related
to sex drive in both animals and humans. However, some animal experi-
ments, including early ones on guinea pigs, indicate that variations in
adult-level circulating hormones are probably not the main cause of the
difference between duds and studs, because these animals, after being
castrated and then readministered a constant level of testosterone, still
showed the same behavioral differences (Grunt & Young, 1952; Adkins-
Reagan, 2005). Another possibility is that there are differences in certain
brain cell structures laid down before birth—called receptors—that make
some animals more or less sensitive to testosterone exposure in adult-
hood. A related possibility is that prenatal hormones organize certain
sites of the brain into groupings of cells (nuclei) with specialized func-
tions. This difference in how brain cells are organized/structured prior to
birth has implications for human sexual orientation, as a leading biologi-
cal theory of human sexual orientation proposes that similar mechanisms
underlie human variations in sexual attraction. Thus, from a sexual orien-
tation perspective, these “dud” animals may have an asexual orientation
because of prenatal factors organizing the brain in a certain way, just as
variations in human sexual attractions, including perhaps asexuality,
may be affected by such prenatal influences.
Did you know that there are sexual-orientation “tests” in male sheep
(rams)? And no, I do not mean measures of genital responding while the
rams view pictures of sheep, or even a “drunk test” (see chapter 2). In the
United States Sheep Experiment Station in Dubois, Idaho, researchers test
the erotic inclinations of their animals by allowing rams to have access to
two “stimulus” females (ewes) in estrus or to two “stimulus” rams. These
sexual-orientation tests occur in specialized pens, over repeated time pe-
riods (e.g., three thirty-minute exposures). The stimulus animals are re-
strained, so the test rams have easy access to them. The rams’ sexual
interest is measured by observing various mating behaviors characteristic
of these animals: sniffs, kicks, mounting attempts, and “flehmans” (i.e.,

32
Chapter 3
head raisings with curling of the upper lip) (Roselli, Larkin, Schrunk, &
Stormshak, 2004).
But why would researchers test rams for their erotic inclinations in the
first place? They do so to understand and ultimately increase the produc-
tivity of rams for sheep farmers, who want, as you might expect, stud
rams to produce lots of little lambs.
If the rams are sexually attracted to ewes, they are called FORs (fe-
male-oriented rams); if they are attracted to other rams, they are called
MORs (male-oriented rams). If they are attracted to neither, they are
called NORs (no-oriented rams), or asexuals.
A surprisingly high percentage are MORs, but equally surprising is
that a high percentage are evidently NORs (i.e., asexual). For example,
here is a quote by researchers Charles Roselli and colleagues in a paper
summarizing their results: “Over the past 2 years, 584 rams were tested.
Of these 12.5% were asexual, 55.6% mounted and attained ejaculation
with ewes, 9.5% mounted other rams, and 22% interacted sexually with
both males and females” (Roselli et al., 2004, p. 235).
As in rodents, there does not seem to be strong evidence that sexual
variation among the rams is related to circulating testosterone. For exam-
ple, asexual rams (NORs) do not have lower levels of testosterone than
the FORS or the MORs (Perkins, Fitzgerald, & Price, 1992), also suggest-
ing that asexual rams may develop their sexual orientation because of
prenatal factors organizing the brain in a certain way.
Rams may be especially relevant to understanding human sexuality;
indeed, they provide a better animal comparison to human sexual orien-
tation than male rodents, because rams show similar patterns of sexual
behavior to human males. For example, MORs actively pursue other
males for sexual liaisons, as do human men sexually interested in other
men. Thus, sexual orientation patterns in both species, perhaps including
asexuality, may emerge because of similar prenatal mechanisms, such as
exposure to prenatal hormones organizing sites of the brain (see chapter
13). Indeed, research suggests that structural differences in a site of the
lower brain, the SDN-POA (sexually dimorphic nucleus of the preoptic
area) of the hypothalamus, is relevant to ram sexual orientation, just as a
similar site is likely relevant to men’s sexual orientation (Roselli, Storm-
shak, Stellflug, & Resko, 2002; LeVay, 1991). However, the researchers
have not as yet examined the brains of NORs to determine if this site is
related to asexual rams’ sexual orientation.

History
33
A final note on these animal studies: They are interesting and well
worth considering as they relate to human asexuality, but recall the cau-
tion about animal behavior being an imperfect model of underlying at-
tractions, particularly as they apply to human sexual attractions (see also
chapter 2 on the attraction/behavior distinction).
Let’s move from natural history to human history. Many humans
throughout history have lived their lives without sex.1 A reality of hu-
man life, from the emergence of human beings to their existence in the
present day, is that some people, even when motivated, do not find
mates. These people may have had certain traits—very low physical at-
tractiveness, extreme shyness, or other factors—that made finding a part-
ner difficult. So, a lack of (partnered) sexual behavior is sometimes not a
matter of choice.
Sometimes a lack of (partnered) sexual behavior has less to do with
the characteristics of the individual per se and more to with the fact that
abstinence is thrust upon them. Elizabeth Abbott, in her book The History
of Celibacy (2001), gives a number of examples of this type of imposed
abstinence. Ming emperors in China, for example, sometimes had young
males in the court castrated. This rather harsh physical change was meant
to encourage loyal service and discourage hanky-panky with the emper-
ors’ wives and courtesans. Similarly, in the royal courts of ancient Rome
and Europe, castration of males was not unknown. This procedure prob-
ably did reduce the sexual behavior of those subjected to it, as the testi-
cles are the major source of the major sex-drive hormone, testosterone. It
also effectively maintained the sweet-sounding voices of some of the top
choirboys, who sang to please the upper classes, including royalty, in
Europe. However, these castrati also attest to the fact that (testicular)
testosterone is not the only influence on sexual behavior, as some of these
castrated men seemed to be sexual, even several years after the procedure
(Heriot, 1956).
A lack of sexual behavior based on one’s own choice has also been a
historical reality. That this is so reflects the value that many societies and
institutions, often religious in nature, have placed on abstinence. Celibacy
or chastity has been a standard vow in many religiously devoted peo-
ple—priests, monks, and nuns—for many years. And, of course, even
today many contemporary clergy and other religiously devoted individ-
uals still adopt a celibate lifestyle.

34
Chapter 3
Many celibates do not lack sexual attraction or a sex drive, and thus
are not asexual using the most common definitions of asexuality. So, we
can now pose the question that is more relevant to the subject of this
book: Is there good evidence of asexuality in the historical record? This is
a difficult question, because human sexual behavior (or the lack of it), like
animal sexual behavior, is more easily measured and recorded than are
(internal) psychological states, such as attractions or desires. Except for
having access to, say, love letters and diaries, such inner states are often
hidden, or at least under the radar, and certainly not routinely recorded
in the history books.
Even so, one’s attractions and desires may be inferred, albeit imper-
fectly, from behavior. If the historical record suggests that a man had a
wife and numerous children, and that he had liaisons with prostitutes,
and along with these liaisons a number of illegitimate children, it is very
likely that he was heterosexual. In contrast, if the man shunned the insti-
tution of marriage, had no children, and there is little evidence of any
liaisons with either sex, we could infer one of two things: either the indi-
vidual was attracted to the same sex, and thus hid potentially socially
undesirable sexual behavior, or he was perhaps sexually attracted to nei-
ther sex.
Based largely on reports of their behavior, it may be surmised that a
number of famous figures throughout history, Isaac Newton and Emily
Brontë among them, were asexual. Newton, for example, never married,
lived a solitary life, likely died a virgin, and seemed completely preoccu-
pied with his science (Christianson, 1984). Although evidence of a lack of
sexual behavior with women suggests that Newton was asexual, such
evidence may also be construed to mean that he had other atypical sexual
inclinations (e.g., same-sex attraction). Indeed, some have suggested
Newton eschewed the company of women because he was sexually at-
tracted to men (White, 1999).
Emily Brontë also very likely lived a life devoid of sexual liaisons;
indeed, she also probably died a virgin. However, if she was asexual, she
likely was not aromantic (see chapter 2 for distinction between sex and
romance), or at least she had a high-level understanding of romance, as
she wrote one of the most intensely romantic novels of her time, Wuther-
ing Heights. Thus, did she eschew the company of men for sexual reasons,
but not necessarily for romantic reasons? Or did she perhaps have a
special insight into the world of romance because she was an outsider

History
35
(asexual/aromantic), as well as a keen observer of humanity? The novelist
Stevie Davies (2004) argues that Brontë may have been sexual in some
form (e.g., masturbated), and may have had sexual attraction, but this
was not overtly expressed in her lifetime because it was directed toward
women. Of course, as is the case with Newton, the assertion that Brontë
had an atypical sexual orientation, either an asexual or same-sex one, is
based on limited evidence.
It is interesting to speculate on whether some individuals who may
have been asexual in the past—that is, experiencing no sexual attraction
or no desire for any sexual activity—may have been sexual if they had
lived in contemporary Western society. This assumes of course that envi-
ronmental and cultural factors play some role in sexualizing individuals
(see chapter 13), and that these factors are (more) prevalent in modern
Western society relative to other time periods and societies. For example,
there is some evidence that, at least up until recently, there may have
been more asexuals, broadly defined, in China than in the West (see
chapter 4), and that this may reflect more restrictive sexual norms in that
society. Thus, could the social environment of the Victorian era in Eng-
land have contributed to Emily Brontë’s asexuality (if she was in fact
asexual)? And if so, had she lived in modern Western society, and was
exposed in childhood and adolescence to its sexualizing influences, such
as Lady Gaga videos, would she have developed into a sexual person? Of
course, we also have to recognize that some people with strong predispo-
sitions to be asexual, because of the prenatal influences mentioned above,
may be immune to such forces. But it is worth considering how cultural
forces, as they have changed over time, can contribute to the sexualiza-
tion, or the lack of it, of individuals.
As we move into very recent history, the evidence for the existence of
asexual people becomes more solid. This is because the modern age of
communication provides a rich source of information on people’s lives,
including recordings of individuals talking candidly about their sexual
feelings.
Paul Erdos, one of the most famous mathematicians of recent history,
was asexual (NNDB.com, 2011). Like Newton, he was profoundly preoc-
cupied with his science. One of his biographies is aptly named The Man
Who Loved Only Numbers (Hoffman, 1998). Erdos spoke about how deeply
moved he was by mathematics, and his aesthetic appreciation of it over
all other things, including (presumably) people: “If numbers aren’t beau-

36
Chapter 3
tiful, I don’t know what is” (Schechter, 1998, p. 7). He also spoke about
his lack of sexual interest: “I can’t stand sexual pleasure” (Csicsery, 1993).
It is not known whether this statement refers to a general disinterest in all
aspects of sexuality—attraction, desire, arousal—or just the arousal/
pleasure component, but it is clear that Erdos did not seek out the inti-
mate company of others. Moreover, given that his aesthetic interests
seemed primarily limited to mathematics, he likely did not have a deep
sexual (or even romantic) attraction to other people (see also chapter 12).
Throughout history, artists have produced figures in paintings and
sculptures and portrayed characters in fiction that project an asexual
aura. Not only do such depictions reflect the artist’s sensitivity to existing
human variability—a variability that the audience can understand and
respond to—but they also serve two dramatic functions: first, to empha-
size a value that the artist or his or her patron holds dear, and second, to
increase the conflict or tension that makes storytelling work.
As an example of the former, an asexual portrayal may serve to rein-
force the notion that a character is immune to worldly temptations, or
perhaps is completely consumed or driven by one goal and motive. So,
the portrayal of a character may de-emphasize secondary sex characteris-
tics (e.g., women’s breasts), or perhaps present them in an androgynous
manner. The Virgin Mary, saints, and angels have often been portrayed
in this way throughout the history of European Christian art.
It was also for this reason that Arthur Conan Doyle gave his fictional
character, Sherlock Holmes, an asexual aura: to portray his character as
being driven by intellect. Interest in the flesh could potentially compro-
mise Holmes’s power of reasoning. Indeed, Holmes is presented as being
above (or somewhat immune to) most other pleasures of the body, in-
cluding eating. In Watson’s words: “It was one of his peculiarities that in
his more intense moments he would permit himself no food, and I have
known him to presume upon his iron strength until he has fainted from
pure inanition” (Doyle, 2003, p. 32).
The second reason for portraying asexual characters—to increase ten-
sion and conflict in drama—is something artists (particularly writers)
understand implicitly, as character is often a driving force in storytelling.
Indeed, theorists of fiction have pointed out the important role of charac-
ter in effective storytelling (Morrell, 2006), and human variability (sexual
and otherwise) is the raw material for the development and portrayal of
character.

History
37
Note that I am not merely referring to high art here. Examples of
asexual characters (or characters who have an asexual aura) help drive
fiction in the popular media, with some of it, of course, far from being
considered high art. Indeed, perhaps the most important examples are
ones found in the popular media, as those venues have a wide appeal to
psychological and social forces common to most, if not all, people.
A prime example of asexuals in low art is the title character in the TV
program Gilligan’s Island. This program ran for three years in the late
1960s, but the relatively short stint on TV belies the popularity of this
program, as it was very successful in reruns for many years. Thus, it had
a large appeal, at least for a segment of the population. Other than the
title character, Gilligan, the male characters on this TV program—the
Skipper, the Professor, and even Mr. Howell—projected an asexual aura
at times, but Gilligan was essentially asexual. Although physically ma-
ture, he evinced little sexual desire or attraction.
Why was he portrayed so? The simple answer, I believe, is the writers
knew that this type of character portrayal had appeal for preadolescent
boys—indeed, a large portion of the audience for this program may have
been boys—who could identify with Gilligan, in part because of their
own asexuality or, more accurately, presexuality. A sexual Gilligan
would not have appealed to their sensibilities, and perhaps even threat-
ened them. Also, his asexuality made good fodder for the type of humor
in which this show reveled: One of the female characters, the movie star
Ginger, was very sexual, at least for that time in TV-land, and thus her
overtures to Gilligan made for comedic tension.
Today there is a character on TV who is Gilligan’s sexual equal: Shel-
don, from the popular show The Big Bang Theory. He is, of course, Gilli-
gan’s intellectual superior by light years, an academic nerd of epic pro-
portions, but the humor of this show partly derives from a similar dra-
matic/comedic tension: the character’s asexuality brushing up against a
sexual world.
Another character with an asexual aura who predates Gilligan and
also may outlive Sheldon is Jughead Jones, Archie’s male sidekick in the
popular comic series created in the 1940s. Jughead is consumed with
interests (hamburgers, mostly) other than the usual teenage preoccupa-
tion of finding and keeping mates. In the modern incarnation of this
series, there has been a suggestion that Jughead is gay—for instance, a
male character “comes out” to him (IBNLive.com, 2011, April 2)—but I

38
Chapter 3
expect that the original writers wanted Jughead presented asexually.
Thus, although the “asexual” word likely did not creep into the writers’
editorial meetings (at least those in the early years), Jughead was likely
created as an asexual (and aromantic) contrast to Archie, who was girl
crazy.
As mentioned, women have also often been portrayed in art and the
popular media as asexual—for example, the iconic virgin. Such icons are
presented in high art (e.g., religiously inspired art of the Virgin Mary) to
highlight virtues, but also in more popular fiction to increase tension and
drama. For example, iconic asexual female characters seem to occur with
regular frequency in dramas or comedies—perhaps a naïve ingénue or a
nerdy, priggish librarian (complete with thick glasses). These portrayals
may enhance the dramatic/comedic arc of a story, because these asexual
female characters may likewise brush up against a sexual world. They
also offer a glimpse, or at least a fantasy, of an asexual character possibly
becoming sexualized. No doubt such glimpses, if they are realized, have
a titillating appeal to some heterosexual male audiences.
That asexual characters seem to be of a “type” or routinely have cer-
tain characteristics—such as the asexual “man-child” (Gilligan), the intel-
lectual nerd (Sheldon), the asexual prig (the librarian)—may speak to our
expectations of how asexuality often manifests itself in people in the real
world, even if these expectations are often distorted stereotypes.
The history of asexuality should also include some mention of the
emergence of asexual identities. As discussed in chapter 6, the identifica-
tion as an asexual person (“I am asexual”) is probably a recent phenome-
non, and largely a Western one at that.2 Use of the word “asexual” to
describe an individual may also be a relatively modern, Western phe-
nomenon. This modern use of the term likely emerged from an increased
public awareness of asexuality in response to recent media attention to
one of my asexuality papers and a popular scientific paper on asexuality
by Sylvia Pagan Westphal, both of which appeared in 2004 (Bogaert,
2004; Westphal, 2004). It also occurred because of David Jay, who is,
speaking of history, an important figure in the modern story of asexual-
ity. He is an asexual man, the founder of the Asexual Visibility and Edu-
cation Network (AVEN), and he has been assertive in promoting aware-
ness of asexuality.
It is unclear exactly how many people in the modern world identify as
asexual (see chapter 10), but the emergence of this term, and an asexual

History
39
identity in general, probably fills an important psychological void for a
number of people not comfortable with traditional categories of sexual
identities (CNN.com, 2004).
SUMMARY
One of this book’s themes is that the study of asexuality informs the
study of sexuality. At a basic biological level, this is true: The study of
asexual species and their adaptability—or lack of it—in changing envi-
ronments gives clues as to why sexuality exists. Within a sexual species,
asexual variation also informs sexuality. For example, sexuality research-
ers are finding some evidence that the potential mechanisms—such as
prenatal hormones organizing brain sites—underlying an asexual orien-
tation are the same as those underlying traditional sexual orientations
(i.e., gay versus straight). It is certain that many humans never mated
throughout history, but it is unclear how many people were asexual—
that is, lacked sexual attraction or desire—for much of human history. In
recent times, however, evidence of asexuality is clear. Asexuality has also
been portrayed throughout the history of art. That humans create asexual
figures and characters attests to a common understanding that sexual
variation exists, and that sexuality, at least in art, sometimes needs a
dramatic foil.
NOTES
1. Of course, some of these people may have never masturbated, if one wants to
define sexuality broadly, beyond sexual activities with a partner.
2. A case in point: in the 1960s, I doubt viewers would likely have identified
Gilligan as an “asexual.”


FOUR
The Prevalence of Asexuality
As if! I do not know if anyone has actually said those exact words to me.
If not, they should have, because they capture the reaction I have gotten
from some people when I have told them the prevalence rate of asexual-
ity (1 percent), based on my first published study of asexuality in 2004
(Bogaert, 2004). In short, some people’s reaction has been one of disbelief
(Fulbright, 2009, January 12), questioning that as many as 1 percent or
more of human beings could be asexual. Frankly, I think that some peo-
ple would question that anyone could be truly asexual, even if I had
reported the rate at .00001 percent.
The 1 percent figure is intriguing, I must admit, perhaps if only be-
cause it is a memorably round number. Such round numbers, be they
large or small, do seem to have a capacity to intrigue and stimulate de-
bate, if not to polarize. Indeed, I think one of the reasons why I was
drawn to publishing these data on asexuality was because this nice round
number did, in fact, intrigue me. Hmmm, I thought. Could this figure be
correct? Could it be true that such a mighty minority has been overlooked on the
sexual landscape? Could it even be that 1 percent is an underestimate?
This figure is also likely one of the reasons why the media chose to
publicize the asexuality story, or perhaps the reason why the story “had
legs.” It is a good headline that reads, “Study: 1 in 100 adults asexual”
(CNN.com, 2004, October 14).
In this chapter, I discuss the prevalence of asexuality. What exactly is
the correct figure, and why does it matter? I also explore this “As if!”
reaction. Specifically, why do some people have this reaction, and what
41

42
Chapter 4
does it reveal about the way we think and about our culture? In other
words, what conclusions can be drawn about the human psyche and our
society if some people do not believe that there could be a small group of
people who are so different from them, sexually speaking?
Traditionally, prevalence research in the sexual orientation field has
centered on gays and lesbians, who constitute a more visible and well-
known sexual minority than asexual people. Most early estimates of
same-sex sexuality were loosely based on data collected by Alfred Kin-
sey, the pioneer sex researcher, who, along with his colleagues, inter-
viewed thousands of Americans from the 1930s through the 1950s (Kin-
sey, Pomeroy, & Martin, 1948; Kinsey, Pomeroy, Martin, & Gebhard,
1953). The most widely cited estimate of same-sex sexuality that was
loosely based on this work was 10 percent (Marmor, 1980; Voeller, 1990).
Note that this 10 percent figure was only “loosely based” on Kinsey’s
work, because it actually only referred to the percentage of men (and not
women) in his original sample who had reported predominantly same-
sex activity, and Kinsey himself never claimed that 10 percent of
Americans were gay.
Like 1 percent, a 10 percent figure is a memorably round number that
draws people in. Thus, it also has “had legs.” Over the years, gay and
lesbian people have used a somewhat cheeky and/or subversive code1 to
identify themselves (e.g., “queer,” “bent,” “friends of Dorothy”), and, not
surprisingly, some have chosen to rally around this 10 percent figure. For
example, some gay people claim proudly to be a member of the “Ten
Percent” club or society (Hecox, n.d.). There are also postmodern, consu-
mer riffs on this figure and its meaning for gay and lesbian people, in
which, for example, shopping online in gay-friendly establishments al-
lows one to snag a 10 percent discount (10percent.com, n.d.).
Yet Kinsey’s sample, although useful even today for a number of dif-
ferent purposes, was never a good one to use for estimating prevalence
rates of sexual behavior (or the people who engage in it). It was not
representative of the United States and skewed to include a high percent-
age of sexual minorities, in which Kinsey had a special interest. Thus, the
10 percent figure is questionable, because it is based on an unrepresenta-
tive, although very historically significant, sample of the U.S. population.
The AIDS era (i.e., post-1985) is not a high point in the history of
human sexuality, because of its effects on sexual minorities, but it did
usher in the age of good sampling methods to study sexuality. These

The Prevalence of Asexuality
43
new, modern samples usually recruit people nationwide and are general-
ly representative of the populations they survey. One form of modern
survey research utilizes national probability sampling. This procedure
selects people randomly from the population but also tries to ensure that
different subgroups of a nation’s population (e.g., regions, ethnicities)
have an equal or a “known” probability of being chosen, even if they are
harder to sample for some reason (e.g., a population that is more remote,
or difficult to contact by phone). For example, if Asian women comprise 5
percent of a nation’s population, then 5 percent of the sample should
contain Asian women. As we will see later, these modern, nationwide
probability samples are not perfect, particularly as the reality of sampling
is different than the theory of sampling, but they are much better than the
majority of other samples used in research. The majority of research sam-
ples are called “convenience” samples, because the participants are re-
cruited at the researcher’s convenience (people who happen to respond
to a recruitment ad in a magazine, an undergraduate class that a profes-
sor recruits for a study she is conducting, etc.). These convenience sam-
ples are certainly useful at times, but they do not represent the broader
population.
Using modern, nationwide probability samples, researchers have
found that the prevalence of both male and female homosexuality is low-
er than the 10 percent figure. The estimate based on one of the best U.S.
samples, the National Health and Social Life Survey, is that gay and
lesbian people make up about 2–3 percent of the population (Laumann,
Gagnon, Michael, & Michaels, 1994). Other samples, including in other
Western countries, have also suggested lower figures than 10 percent
(Billy, Tanfer, Grady, & Klepinger, 1993; Sell, Wells, & Wypij, 1995; Jolo-
za, Evans, & O’Brien, 2010). For example, using the Integrated Household
Survey, researchers found that 1.5 percent of 238,206 British residents
identified as lesbian, gay, or bisexual (Joloza et al., 2010). The author of a
recent book on sexual orientation, biologist Simon LeVay, after reviewing
the available data, suggests that approximately 2–5 percent of men and
approximately 1–2 percent of women are predominantly or exclusively
homosexual (LeVay, 2010).
Although they are the best data available, these modern prevalence
figures of same-sex sexuality come with a few caveats. First, they are
largely, but not exclusively, based on same-sex behavior or on having a
same-sex identity. Yet how should we best define homosexuality: as

44
Chapter 4
same-sex behavior, as a same-sex identity, as same-sex attraction, or as perhaps
all three? As discussed earlier, in chapter 2, many sex researchers, includ-
ing me, place a high value on attraction over overt behavior (or even
identity) in defining a traditional sexual orientation (Bailey, Dunne, &
Martin, 2000; Bogaert, 2003; Money, 1988; Zucker & Bradley, 1995). I con-
tinue this emphasis on attraction in the present book on asexuality. I do
so because sexual attraction is, in my opinion, the “core” psychological
element of sexual orientation; it is less changeable and less subject to
influence by social and political conditions than one’s behavior or how
one chooses to define oneself. Based on same-sex attraction figures alone,
the estimates tend to be slightly lower than, for example, those based on
behavior: about 2 percent of men and 1 percent of women are predomi-
nantly or exclusively gay/lesbian (Laumann et al., 1994).
A second caveat is that there is still stigma about admitting to same-
sex sexuality, so even if these modern samples represent their popula-
tions well, these figures likely underestimate the prevalence of homosex-
uality. Third, non-Western societies are not considered in these figures,
and it is important to remember that the majority of the people in the
world do not live in Western societies, although most people in Western
societies behave as if they do. For example, I do not know of a good
estimate of homosexuality in India, Russia, Iran, or countless other non-
Western societies. A recent exception is China. The estimate of same-sex
sexuality in China is lower than estimates for most Western countries,
with, for example, approximately 1 percent of men and women indicat-
ing that they identify as homosexual. The question was: “Some people
regard themselves as homosexual. Do you so regard yourself?” (Parish et
al., 2003; Parish, Das, & Laumann, 2006; Parish, Luo, Laumann, Kew, &
Yu, 2007). Slightly fewer, just less than 1 percent, indicated that they had
sexual attraction for (i.e., wanted to have sex with) the same sex. The
stigma associated with same-sex attraction is likely high, so one expects
that these figures are underestimating same-sex sexuality, even more so
than in Western societies. However, even factoring in this underestimate,
I expect that it is unlikely that predominant or exclusive same-sex sexual-
ity would reach the memorably round 10 percent figure in either Western
or non-Western societies.
Why is this prevalence research on homosexuality important for
understanding the prevalence rate of asexuality? It is important because

The Prevalence of Asexuality
45
it allows a broad context to understand the prevalence rate of asexuality
and, more specifically, provides a comparison to another sexual minority.
Given our discussion of Kinsey, we should give a nod to his data
before we discuss modern samples and their evidence for the prevalence
of asexuality. As you may recall, Kinsey called asexual (or nonsexual)
people Xs, because they did not conveniently correspond to a number on
his seven-point scale of sexual orientation. Kinsey tallied his numbers for
Xs, just as he did for people with traditional sexual orientations. In the
male sample, 1.5 percent were Xs (Kinsey et al., 1948). In his female
sample (Kinsey et al., 1953), he reported different rates of Xs depending
on their marital status. For example, 14–19 percent of unmarried women
were Xs, whereas 1–3 percent of married women were Xs.2
In the post-AIDs era of good sampling, few social scientists would
dare to make estimates on asexuality without resorting to findings in
national surveys with modern sampling methods (e.g., probability sam-
pling), such as the one I will use here. As mentioned, in the first pub-
lished study using a British national sample, the National Survey of Sexu-
al Attitudes and Lifestyles (NATSAL-I) (Johnson, Wadsworth, Wellings,
& Field, 1994), I found that 1.05 percent of the population reported that
they had “never felt sexual attraction to anyone at all.” This rate was very
similar to the prevalence rate of same-sex attraction (i.e., predominant
homosexuality and bisexuality combined) in this survey, which was 1.1
percent (Bogaert, 2004).
Intriguing as this 1 percent figure is, it does not necessarily represent a
definitive statement on the prevalence of asexuality across societies, or
even across time within the same society. I recently reanalyzed the ten-
year follow-up to this national British sample (NATSAL-II) (Johnson et
al., 2001; National Centre for Social Research et al., 2005), and found that
approximately 0.5 percent had “never felt sexual attraction to anyone at
all” (Bogaert, in press-a). Also, as a comparison, the prevalence rate of
same-sex attraction (again, predominant homosexuality and bisexuality
combined) was higher in NATSAL-II (2.3 percent) than in NATSAL-I and
was significantly higher than the rate of asexuality in NATSAL-II.
Why the difference in prevalence rates of asexuality and homosexual-
ity between these two national British samples? The difference likely oc-
curred because the two samples varied in meaningful ways (Johnson et
al., 2001). First, only sixteen- to forty-four-year-olds were recruited for
NATSAL-II, whereas NATSAL-I had a broader range of ages, sixteen to

46
Chapter 4
fifty-nine. In my original study, I found that asexual people were more
likely to be older rather than younger. Thus, the prevalence of asexuality
may have been lower in NATSAL-II because it contained a restricted age
range. Second, NATSAL-II participants, relative to NATSAL-I partici-
pants, may have been somewhat more sexually liberal in a variety of
dimensions (e.g., attitudes, interests, and behavior). Thus, asexual peo-
ple—who have, for example, less sexual experience relative to sexual
people—may have been less extensively recruited to participate in NAT-
SAL-II relative to NATSAL-I. Similarly, people with more liberal sexual
attitudes and behavior, including gays and lesbians (who often have
more sexual experience and are more liberal), may have been more exten-
sively recruited in NATSAL-II relative to NATSAL-I. But is there evi-
dence that NATSAL-II indeed surveyed more sexually liberal people
than NATSAL-I? Yes, there is some. First, there was a ten-year span
between recruitments for NATSAL-I and NATSAL-II, and sexual atti-
tudes and behaviors often change across time, and usually in the more
liberal direction. Second, there was a more extensive survey of greater
London in NATSAL-II relative to NATSAL-I (see National Centre for
Social Research et al., 2005), and urban people are often more liberal and
sexually experienced relative to more rural people. However, the re-
searchers did attempt to account for the greater recruitment of Londoners
in NATSAL-II versus NATSAL-I using statistical methods (Bogaert, in
press-a). Another consideration is that the method of assessment in NAT-
SAL-II was likely more private than in NATSAL-I, and thus NATSAL-II
participants may have been potentially more open to revealing sensitive
information (e.g., same-sex attraction) (Copas et al., 2002).
How about societies beyond Britain? There is a representative sample
of Australia with relevant information on sexual attraction, the Austra-
lian Study of Health and Relationships (ASHR). Like NATSAL-I, the ages
surveyed were sixteen to fifty-nine, and the sexual orientation question
allowed for the response “I never felt sexual attraction to anyone at all.”
Approximately 0.4 percent reported never having felt sexual attraction to
others, as compared to the 2 percent rate of same-sex attraction in this
sample (again, same-sex and bisexual attraction combined) (Smith, Rissel,
Richters, Grulich, & de Visser, 2003).
In addition to the NATSAL studies in Britain and this national sample
of Australia, there are important data on sexual attraction (or the lack of
it) in the U.S.-based National Survey of Family Growth (NSFG) (Mosher,

The Prevalence of Asexuality
47
Chandra, & Jones, 2005; Poston & Baumle, 2010), also a national sample.
When asked about their sexual attractions (to men, women, or both), 0.8
percent of female participants and 0.7 percent of male participants re-
ported that they were “not sure.” This is in contrast to 1.5 percent of
female participants who reported predominant or exclusive attraction to
women and 1.9 percent who reported equal sexual attraction to both
sexes, and also in contrast to 2.2 percent of male participants who re-
ported predominant or exclusive attraction to men and 1 percent who
reported equal sexual attraction to both sexes. Assuming that “not sure”
is a reasonable proxy for a lack of sexual attraction, these figures should
be considered as “in-between” the prevalence rate of asexuality that I
reported in the NATSAL samples (Bogaert, 2004; Bogaert, in press-a).
However, “not sure” is a vague answer and could mean, at least for
some, something beyond a lack of sexual attraction for others. Also, like
NATSAL-II, the age range was restricted in NSFG, in this case to only
those between fifteen and forty-four.
Some national surveys have also included information on low or ab-
sent sexual desire. Low or absent desire is not completely overlapping
with a lack of sexual attraction—my preferred definition of asexuality—
but it is clearly related, particularly in the case of absent desire, and may
serve as a good proxy for lack of sexual attraction, especially when no
specific information was collected on sexual attraction. Moreover, the
absence of desire is an alternative way to define asexuality (see chapter 2
on definitions of asexuality) (Prause & Graham, 2007). Thus, figures on
low/absent desire should also give us pause about the true number of
“asexuals,” broadly defined. Using a national survey of Danish residents,
Soren Ventegodt (1998) found that 11.2 percent of women and 3.2 percent
of men had “low sexual desire.” In one of the best sex survey samples
from the United States, the National Health and Social Life Survey
(NHSLS), Laumann and colleagues found that approximately one-third
of women and one-seventh of men had “low desire” in the past year
(Laumann, Paik, & Rosen, 1999). In a recent national sample of China, 7
percent of participants reported “no” desire for a year or more (Parish et
al., 2003; Parish et al., 2006; Parish et al., 2007; Bogaert, 2008).
Although these studies are interesting, it should be noted that in two
of the studies (those by Ventegodt and Laumann and his colleagues), low
desire is not necessarily the same as absence of desire. Also, it is impor-
tant to consider the time frame in these studies, as it is unclear whether

48
Chapter 4
these individuals would report low or even absent desire over many
years. I think it is reasonable, after all, to define asexuality as a relatively
long-term, or stable, characteristic (see chapter 2 on definitions).
There has never been a national survey assessing an asexual “iden-
tity.” However, there are intriguing sexual identification data from the
U.S.-based National Survey of Family Growth, mentioned above (Mosher
et al., 2005; Poston & Baumle, 2010). Like in many large-scale surveys, the
respondents were asked to define their sexual orientation. In addition to
the option of endorsing one of the three traditional categories of sexual
orientation—heterosexual, homosexual, bisexual—the respondents could
choose “something else.” Among female participants, 1.3 percent iden-
tified as homosexual and 2.8 percent identified as bisexual, while 2.3
percent of male participants identified as homosexual and 1.8 percent
identified as bisexual. Interestingly, a mighty minority (3.9 percent) of
participants (combined male and female) chose “something else” as their
sexual orientation. A further 1.8 percent did not endorse any of the cate-
gories offered to them (i.e., heterosexual, homosexual, bisexual, or
“something else”). These figures may represent an important piece of the
prevalence puzzle of asexuality. However, it is also important to bear in
mind that “something else” (or a nonresponse) is vague, and using “iden-
tification” is problematic if one wants a relatively conceptually clean defi-
nition of sexual orientation that would also encompass an asexual orien-
tation (see also chapter 2).
Now let’s consider a general issue that may affect the reporting rate of
asexuality, regardless of how it is defined. This issue is volunteer bias, and
it is related to an issue mentioned above: people who choose to partici-
pate in sex studies (relative to those who choose not to) are more liberal
in their sex attitudes, more interested in sex, and have more sexual expe-
rience (e.g., Bogaert, 1996; Morokoff, 1986; Saunders, Fisher, Hewitt, &
Clayton, 1985). This issue is called volunteer bias because there is bias in
favor of recruiting certain types of participants over others in human
research studies. Volunteer bias is a potential problem in all human stud-
ies, but it has been argued to be especially problematic in studies of
sexuality, which, as mentioned previously, seem prone to over-sample
sexually liberal people. If so, the rate of asexuality may be higher than
reported in sexual surveys, because people with less liberal sexual atti-
tudes/behavior often decline to participate in such surveys. This is even
true in the best studies we have: national probability samples, such as

The Prevalence of Asexuality
49
NATSAL-I and NATSAL-II. For example, the so-called refusal rate—
those who were contacted to participate but chose not to—in NATSAL-I
was about 30 percent; in NATSAL-II, it was even slightly higher (around
35 percent). Thus, a high number of asexual people may not have agreed
to participate in past sexual surveys because they were uninterested in or
uncomfortable with the subject matter of these surveys: sex. A sex survey?
Why on earth would I want to do that? It is a bit like getting a call from the
Professional Golfers Association wanting to talk about your favorite
courses, your handicap, the type of clubs you use, and your preferred
brand of ball, and you declining to participate because you don’t play
and, frankly, don’t want to start playing. What! You don’t want to talk
intimately about golf for an hour? (I use this as an example because I am a
golfer but have, over the years, somewhat reluctantly come to terms with
the fact that the game is, evidently, not of interest to everyone.)
Interestingly, then, some of the best sexuality data, including the best
data on the prevalence of asexuality, may come from national samples
that are not, per se, sex surveys. Thus, the NSFG survey mentioned above
may be a better survey to assess asexuality than the NATSAL surveys,
because the former was a “general health survey.” However, as men-
tioned, this study also has its problems: no clear asexuality measure and a
restriction of age range.
So, how many people are asexual? We do not know for sure, as there
are different problems—such as volunteer bias, lack of a long-term time
frame, and questions about how best to define asexuality—with each of
the national studies mentioned above. However, the original estimate
(Bogaert, 2004) of 1 percent may not be a bad one, all things considered,
and it is possible that it may underestimate the true number of asexual
people.3
But why is the prevalence of sexual minorities of interest at all? Does
it matter how many people are gay, lesbian, bisexual, straight, or asexual?
Yes, it does—both to scientists and nonscientists alike, and for a variety of
reasons. One scientific reason is that sexual orientation is a fundamental
aspect of human variability, and thus understanding the prevalence of
heterosexuality, bisexuality, homosexuality, and asexuality helps to map
the distribution of human sexual variability. Second, the prevalence of
sexual minorities is of interest to groups who want to use the figures to
support a political cause or a social issue. For example, some anti-gay
groups are interested in the rate of homosexuality (particularly if it is

50
Chapter 4
low) to try to demonstrate that homosexuality is statistically rare and
thus gay people should be considered abnormal, pathological, or at least
a fringe element of society.4 In contrast, gay, lesbian, and asexuality ad-
vocacy groups are interested in the rate (particularly if it is high) to dem-
onstrate the opposite: that being a sexual minority is not uncommon or
statistically abnormal, and that sexual minorities form a significantly
large segment of society. A third reason why the sexual minority preva-
lence rate is of interest is because of the science of demography. As men-
tioned in the introduction (chapter 1), demographers are interested in
how many members of sexual minorities there are, because their preva-
lence relates to, among other things, trends in marriage and fertility (how
many people marry and/or have children). Fourth, the prevalence of sex-
ual minorities relates to physical health issues and, thus, is of interest to
epidemiologists and health-care workers. A recent example concerns
male homosexuality and the HIV/AIDS pandemic. HIV/AIDS in Western
societies has been largely related to male-male sexual contact. As such,
understanding the prevalence of male homosexuality can help with
understanding the causes of this disease and tracking changes in it in
Western societies. Indeed, some of the national probability surveys of
human sexuality mentioned above (e.g., NATSAL-I, NHSLS) (Johnson et
al., 1994; Laumann et al., 1994) were funded by government agencies
wanting accurate information on people’s behavior as it relates to HIV/
AIDS. Fifth, prevalence rates of sexual minorities are also important from
a mental health perspective. As many people are aware, discrimination
against gays, lesbians, and bisexuals is still a societal problem (Herek,
2000; Herek, 2002). Moreover, the “coming out” process is often stressful
for sexual minorities. For example, one study found that a very high
percentage of gay men (approximately 90 percent) felt troubled, many
“extremely so,” when coming out to their parents (D’Augelli, 1991). But
what about asexuals—are they also subject to discrimination and to sig-
nificant stress in coming out? There is much less research on this issue
but, interestingly, there is recent evidence that asexual people may, in
fact, be viewed more negatively than gays, bisexuals, and lesbians (see
more in chapter 7) (MacInnis & Hodson, in press). Thus, accurate knowl-
edge of sexual minority prevalence rates helps workers in mental health
care gauge the size of, and potentially address, this mental health concern
facing society.

The Prevalence of Asexuality
51
In the final part of this chapter, I explore people’s reactions to the idea
that a certain percentage (e.g., 1 percent) of humanity is, in fact, asexual,
including the “As if!” reaction mentioned earlier.
At the outset, though, let me offer one qualification. Despite the “As
if!” reaction introduced this chapter, I do not want to leave the reader
with the impression that all people have reacted with disbelief—many, if
not most, people have seemed to accept that a small minority of human-
ity is asexual. Also, as I will discuss later in the chapter, some have
actually indicated surprise that the original figure (1 percent) is so low.
Relatedly, my sense is that some people have reacted with relief to the
suggestion that a certain percentage of humanity is asexual. Why relief? I
think some people may feel relieved, if only secretly, to know that not all
people are extremely sexual beings, or that one does not have to be ex-
tremely sexual to be a contented, functioning person in society. There is a
lot of pressure to be very sexual in our society (e.g., from the mass media;
see also chapter 7 on identity formation), so knowing that some people
are completely asexual, and perhaps relatively happy being so, may be a
bit of a relief for some (average) sexual people. It takes the pressure off
them to know that, by comparison, their sex lives are fairly active, and
that they do not have to be the super-sexed athlete the media often sug-
gest is the norm.
But let’s come back to the doubters and deconstruct the “As if!” reac-
tion: Why do some people feel that less than 1 percent of the population
is asexual, and who exactly are these doubters?
One explanation for the “As if!” reaction is that the doubters are right,
and thus their skepticism of this figure may not be misplaced. After all,
we may not have an accurate tally of the number of asexual people. Even
the sarcasm inherent in this “As if!” reaction may not be misplaced, as the
figure could be lower (perhaps even much lower) than 1 percent. Thus,
these doubters could be wise people, knowledgeable in the ways of the
world, and not easily taken in by potentially misguided scientific claims.
A second explanation is that this skepticism reflects, at least partly, a
human tendency to believe that everyone must be just like us. Social
psychologists have labeled this bias the false consensus effect (e.g., Ross,
Greene, & House, 1977). Thus, if I feel sexual, then everyone else must be
sexual too, or just as sexual as I am. So, it is an understandable reaction
that some people can’t believe in asexuality, because everyone, at times,
is prone to these kinds of false consensus reactions. We all live in our

52
Chapter 4
little insulated worlds, and it is sometimes hard to imagine that some-
thing very different exists beyond it.5
But who exactly are the most likely doubters? Interestingly, they seem
to be, almost invariably, men. Perhaps this says something about male
sexuality: that it emerges with such a punch in the groin at adolescence,
thanks largely to pubertal testosterone (Udry, Billy, Morris, Groff, & Raj,
1985), and generally sustains itself as such a major force in many men’s
lives, that some men cannot perceive it could be otherwise in others;
hence, they have a false consensus that everyone has a high, male-like,
sexual attraction and drive.
Conversely, more women than men have questioned whether this
figure was too low. Is this also a false consensus effect? If women have a
lower sex drive than men, and their sexual attractions are more flexible
than men’s (see chapter 6), perhaps they assume that a disproportionate-
ly high number of people are similarly inclined (i.e., have low sexual
drives and/or lack sexual attraction)? Hmmm, only this low, huh? I expected
the figure to be much higher. . . .6
I’ve also noted that some gay men seem to be the most suspicious of
asexual people. This is partially understandable because gay men, of
course, are also part of the high testosterone brood—men. But there may
be other reasons as well. First, openly gay people, especially those with a
bit of seasoning in the sexual marketplace, are often astute enough to
know that people claiming one sexual identity (e.g., “I am bisexual,” “I
am heterosexual”) at one point in their lives may “come out” as gay years
later. I, too, do not discount the possibility that some asexual people, or
those who identify as such, might be gay people in waiting, although I
suspect that this does not apply to the majority of asexual people.
An additional reason why some gay men may be opposed to accept-
ing a 1 percent (or more) prevalence rate may concern justice sensitivity.
Gay and lesbian people have often fought hard for the right to be ac-
cepted in Western society as a visible minority. Thus, although most gays
and lesbians seem very accepting of sexual variations, some may be jus-
tifiably sensitive to issues related to their own rights and recognition.
Now there is a new kid on the block, perhaps encroaching on their hard-
fought and hard-won space. Does yet another sexual minority in some
way diminish the status of the original sexual minority group? Perhaps
some gay and lesbians believe so, if only on an implicit level. Relatedly, I
expect that all humans, as social psychologists have argued, have a ten-

The Prevalence of Asexuality
53
dency to dislike the “out-group” and, sadly and concomitantly, to force
to the back of the metaphorical bus ever more marginalized groups, even
among those who believe that they themselves are near the back of the
bus already.
SUMMARY
Even when we rely on information from national probability samples, we
cannot know for sure how many asexual people exist, although my origi-
nal estimate of 1 percent may not be a bad figure to work with for now.
There are various reasons (e.g., health, demographic, political) why such
prevalence figures are important and of interest; thus, the tallying and
head counting of sexual minorities is not likely to go away soon. Why
people believe or do not believe (i.e., the “As if!” reaction) in the current
estimates of sexual minorities may have less to do with the quality of the
scientific studies surveying this issue (although this factor should not be
discounted) and more to do with human cognitive biases (e.g., the false
consensus effect). The fact that sexuality so often and so strongly evokes
these biases—even when discussing asexuality—reaffirms a main theme
in this book: sex is deeply embedded in our psyches and our cultures,
and not just in our genitals.
NOTES
1. This code is subversive at least in part because it turns the heterosexual world’s
discrimination against gays and lesbians on its ear. It is empowering (for some) be-
cause it often “steals” back the negative words (e.g., queer) that others have used
against gays and lesbians for many years, and thus reclaims for gays and lesbians the
right to use their own language in their own way.
2. As we noted in chapter 3, Kinsey placed a heavy (but not sole) emphasis on
behavior in defining sexual orientation, so the caveats we raised about primarily “be-
havioral” definitions of sexual orientations should be kept in mind. And, of course,
remember that Kinsey’s sample was not representative of the broader U.S. population.
3. Although they should be viewed with a high degree of caution, there have also
been a number of relatively modern nonrepresentative surveys that provide some
information on the prevalence of asexuality. In late 2004, when the popular press
surrounding the issue of asexuality became heightened, CNN conducted an Internet
poll on sexual identity. They asked people to report their sexual orientation using four
categories (straight/heterosexual, gay/homosexual, bisexual, or asexual). Approxi-
mately 110,000 people responded, of whom 6 percent reported that they identify
themselves as “asexual” (CNN.com, 2004, October 14). Furthermore, using a U.S.-

54
Chapter 4
based convenience sample of adults, one researcher reported that about 10 percent of
women and 5 percent of men indicated that they lacked sexual attraction to either men
or women (Nurius, 1983).
4.
It should be pointed out that interest in these figures for political purposes is
partly based on faulty logic. Statistical rarity, at least by itself, is not a good criterion
for demonstrating pathology or the lack of it—consider, for example, extreme musical
talent (see more on this in chapter 9). It is also illogical (and insensitive) to treat a
group of individuals unfairly and inhumanely based solely on their prevalence rate in
society.
5.
Even though we all have this bias to some degree, one of the more intriguing
experiences in life is, arguably, being faced with the incontrovertible evidence of hu-
man diversity. It often makes our lives richer, although perhaps a lot less predictable.
So, while we may want to believe (and hope) that everyone is like us, when faced with
evidence to the contrary, it may be initially threatening but, ultimately, often life
affirming.
6.
In the last two paragraphs, I expect I offended both men and women. In my
defense, although lots of variability exists within each sex, there is also strong evi-
dence that men, on average, have a higher sex drive than women do, and that women
are more flexible in their sex drives/attractions (see also chapter 6) (Baumeister, 2000;
Baumeister, Catanese, & Vohs, 2001).

FIVE
To Masturbate or Not to Masturbate
In this chapter, I ask and perhaps answer a series of seemingly dumb
questions about masturbation. I do so to try to understand masturbation
as a sexual phenomenon, but also to understand some of the variability in
asexuality.
My first dumb question is this: What is the purpose of masturbation?
This first question about the rather delicate subject of masturbation is, at
least on the surface, “dumb,” because there is, of course, in many peo-
ple’s minds no real purpose to masturbation, aside from simple pleasure;
it just feels good, and that’s why people do it. But from an evolutionary
standpoint, it is a good question, because the existence of any form of
sexual variability without clear reproductive benefits (e.g., homosexual-
ity, asexuality, and masturbation) puzzles scientists. After all, how could
a sexual variation without potential procreative sustainability compete
with one—heterosexual intercourse—that has obvious and built-in pro-
creative sustainability (the replication of genes in the form of children)
over millions of years of human evolutionary history? So, masturbation
seemingly serves no obvious reproductive purpose, yet it exists. Thus,
masturbation misses the (evolutionary) point. (And sometimes, in the
case of men, messes the point.)
So the answer, “because it feels good,” begs another question: Why
does it feel good? Or, at least, why does it feel good enough to make
people do it, even sometimes when there is an available partner? Before
we answer this question, let’s give a little background on the incidence
and frequency of masturbation. In the classic survey conducted in the
55

56
Chapter 5
United States by the pioneer sex researcher Alfred Kinsey, nearly all the
men and about 60 percent of the women indicated that they had mastur-
bated at least once (Kinsey, Pomeroy, & Martin, 1948; Kinsey, Pomeroy,
Martin, & Gebhard, 1953). Indeed, one of the great cultural shocks of the
1950s, summarized in Kinsey’s book Sexual Behavior in the Human Female,
was that a majority of women had masturbated. Today, people are less
likely to see this fact as a revelation and more, perhaps, as a titillating
curiosity. A well-conducted national survey of the United States in the
1990s, the National Health and Social Life Survey, sometimes considered
the modern follow-up to Kinsey’s work, indicated that 75 percent of
women had masturbated (Laumann, Gagnon, Michael, & Michaels,
1994). So, there is support for the notion that masturbation is a common
recreation, rivaling—dare I say?—baseball (or hockey if you’re from Can-
ada) as a national pastime.
Returning to our original question, what is the purpose of masturba-
tion? It is true that masturbation does, for most people, feel good and
thus serves “the purpose” of pleasure enhancement. It is also true that
other factors, including the availability of a partner, can influence mas-
turbation frequency. So, some people do it, partly as a substitute for an
unavailable partner.1
Beyond these perhaps rather obvious reasons, the ubiquity of the act
suggests that masturbation may be evolutionarily adaptive or serve a
reproductive “function,” or at least not be detrimental to one’s reproduc-
tive success. Indeed, there is likely a purpose to masturbation beyond
mere pleasure enhancement or replacement for a lack of sexual partner.
In adolescence or young adulthood (particularly if accompanied by fanta-
sy), it may serve as a form of sexual “rehearsal,” or a kind of mental
acting out of sexual scenes (First I’ll kiss her like this, then I’ll stroke her like
that . . .). Thus, it may create or at least reinforce important sexual scripts,
potentially to be played out with partners later on in life (see also chapter
2). In other words, as an actor learns his role—what he needs to say and
do—from a TV script, we learn potentially adaptive sequences of behav-
ior, along with how to deal with behavioral contingencies (If this happens,
do this; if that happens, do that . . .), partially through fantasies.2
Sometimes the fantasies are mere snippets of what, in real life, would
comprise a longer sequence of behavior. So, for a heterosexual male ado-
lescent, it may be as simple as imagining kissing a woman, stroking her
inner thighs, and rubbing her vulva. These imaginings may ingrain into

To Masturbate or Not to Masturbate
57
his psyche a short sexual script, the elements and order of which would
be adaptive to act out if he were to encounter an opportunity to engage in
sexual behavior with a member of the other sex.
Sometimes the imaginings are more elaborate. So, a young heterosex-
ual man may have elaborate “harem-like” fantasies of having a bevy of
beautiful young women as playthings at his sexual beck and call. If a
heterosexual man ever had a chance to encounter and then enter this
situation (i.e., to be a harem master), it would be, at least from an evolu-
tionary perspective, a good idea for him to act out this script, as it would
be a procreative gold mine: men’s genes would be replicated at a high
frequency by mating with many young women. Men have a relatively
low reproductive/parental investment (e.g., lots of sperm that are easily
replaced), so, from the perspective of procreation, it is in a man’s interest
to sow his seed among as many reproductively viable women as possible
(Buss & Schmitt, 1993; Symons, 1979; Trivers, 1972). Conversely, women
have a relatively high reproductive/parental investment (e.g., must ges-
tate a fetus for nine months inside her own body), so it is usually in their
best interest to be picky sexually, potentially securing a man’s resources
to help with raising their offspring and only mating with men of high-
quality genes. Thus, it would be in an average heterosexual woman’s
advantage to form a sexual/romantic bond with, say, Brad Pitt if she had
the opportunity in real life, given the high quality of his genes (My gosh, is
he cute!) and his excellent resources (My gosh, is he rich!). So, a young
woman’s fantasies about Brad Pitt or similar men, even if they might irk
her husband (if he knew), would be adaptive, as they help in rehearsing
reproductively beneficial actions/scenes in case she ever encountered
them.
In sum, it is not surprising that men and women create or are drawn
to fantasies of this kind: they help to create or reinforce sexual scripts
that, if they unfolded in real life, could be a huge boon, reproductively
speaking.3
Masturbation may also have physical health benefits. Men’s prostate
health later in life may be related to frequency of masturbation early in
life (Walsh, 2004). Thus, frequent “flushing out” of the prostate gland (an
important internal reproductive organ providing some of the content of
semen) in early adolescence and young adulthood may serve a man well,
although there is some conflicting evidence of this benefit (Dimitropou-
lou et al., 2009). Masters and Johnson (1966) argued that, for women,

58
Chapter 5
masturbation can be a good remedy for pelvic congestion, which contrib-
utes to menstrual cramps and tension. Similarly, men may also derive
some relief through masturbation from muscular tension and pelvic con-
gestion caused by sexual arousal. This explanation for masturbation—
relief from tension and congestion—partly blurs the distinction between
health and pleasure, as tension reduction is potentially healthy, but it also
can be pleasurable. Finally, there is some evidence that sexual activity,
including masturbation, is associated with heart health (Davey, Frankel,
& Yarnell, 1997).
In sum, all of these factors—pleasure, the creation and rehearsal of
sexual scripts, and various health benefits—may have conspired to create
an impulse in humans to be the rather compulsive masturbators that they
are (call it a “psychological masturbation mechanism”).
My second dumb question is this: Do asexual people masturbate? This
may seem like a bit of an odd question, given that asexual people should
have little interest in sex (right?). Despite the seeming peculiarity of it, the
answer is, yes, some asexual people masturbate. In a recent study by Lori
Brotto and her colleagues, about 80 percent of asexual men reported that
they had masturbated, and about 70 percent of asexual women reported
they had masturbated (Brotto, Knudson, Inskip, Rhodes, & Erskine,
2010). There was no comparison group of sexual people in their study,
but these percentages (80 percent; 70 percent) were only somewhat lower
than the percentage of people who reported masturbating in a national
sample of the United States population. This is an extraordinarily high
percentage, given that asexual people are perceived to have no sexual
desire! However, although interesting, these findings may not be repre-
sentative of the asexual population, as they likely represent only those
who frequent the AVEN website (the most popular asexual website).
These individuals may be more liberal and adventuresome (e.g., more
curious about masturbation) than average asexual people. There was no
information on masturbation available in my first study of asexuality
using the NATSAL-I data (Bogaert, 2004) (see also chapter 4). However,
in the follow-up to this representative British sample (NATSAL-II), I
found that 42 percent of asexual people had masturbated in the last
month (Bogaert, in press-a). This percentage is, as perhaps you might
expect, lower than the percentage for sexual people (70 percent). Also,
this 42 percent figure may be significantly inflated, because it reflects the
responses of those asexual people who had some sexual experience with

To Masturbate or Not to Masturbate
59
a partner; those who didn’t, unfortunately, were not asked about their
masturbation habits. One might expect that asexual people with no sexu-
al experience are less likely to masturbate (thus, the 42 percent should be
a lower figure), because sexual behaviors tend to correlate with one an-
other (i.e., people with more sexual experience also tend to masturbate
more). But we can’t know this for sure. The broad and more important
point, however, is that some percentage—perhaps a substantial percent-
age!—of asexual people masturbate, or at least have tried it once or twice.
One important point to take away from the research on masturbation
among asexual people is that it reinforces the notion that asexuality is a
diverse phenomenon: there are some who do engage in masturbation (a
seemingly sexual behavior) and some who do not. In other words, there
are different types of asexual people.
My next question, then, not really that dumb, is this: Why do some
asexual people masturbate? It’s not really a dumb question because asex-
uality should be associated, presumably, with low, if not totally absent,
sexual activity, and thus pondering why some asexual people engage in
this form of sexual expression is a legitimate question.
Of the main reasons for masturbation (i.e., pleasure, rehearsal, health)
mentioned above, which is the most likely to explain why some asexual
people masturbate? The rehearsal function is not likely to be of ultimate
importance for many asexual people, because they are not inclined to
play out elaborate sexual scripts with partners.4 However, releasing
physical tension and health are likely important. In line with this expla-
nation, some asexual people discuss masturbation in a health-oriented,
utilitarian fashion: for instance, they sometimes engage in it to “clean out
the plumbing” (Brotto et al., 2010, p. 611). Here is a similar quote from
another asexual person discussing masturbation on AVEN: “It just feels
like there’s a tension or something my body needs to release, but my
mind has no interest in it whatsoever” (AnyOtherName, 2010, August
22).
This explanation for masturbation—as a pure physical release—may
seem a bit clinical and devoid of other elements typically comprising a
sexual experience. Yet it is important to keep in mind some of the distinc-
tions made in chapter 2—namely, that one can have physical arousal
(e.g., gain an erection, have lubrication, an orgasm) without necessarily
having, for example, sexual attraction to (or desire for) others.

60
Chapter 5
Such quotes also suggest that the sensation of masturbation experi-
enced by some asexual people may not be particularly “pleasurable,” at
least in not in an intensely “sexual” way. It may still feel good, to some
degree, in the same way that releasing any tension and buildup feels
good to people (i.e., as a relief). And, as mentioned, some sexual people
may masturbate, at times, for this reason: merely to release tension and
pelvic congestion, and less for the intense sexual pleasure of it.
For other asexual people, there may still be sexual feelings and/or
intense physical pleasure, similar to how most sexual people feel when
masturbating or having sex with a partner. Thus, another reason why
asexual people masturbate is relatively straightforward and similar to
why sexual people do it: for physical pleasure. At this point, however, we
do not have good data on what percentage of asexual people derive
intense (sexual) pleasure from masturbation. I expect that some asexual
people do, and if so, this would again suggest that asexuality is a diverse
phenomenon: some asexual people do not masturbate, some masturbate
with “sexual” pleasure, and some masturbate without much sexual
pleasure. If it is true that some asexual people do still experience intense
(sexual) pleasure, it is again important to keep in mind some of the basic
distinctions raised earlier: that one can have a deeply (subjective) sexual-
ly pleasurable feeling of arousal without necessarily having a deep sexual
connection with or attraction to partners (in other words, one can have
that sexual feeling of arousal and still be “asexual” as I define it; see
chapter 2). Relatedly, it is certainly true that sexual people sometimes
have sex and masturbate without necessarily connecting the sexual pleas-
ure to anyone specifically. So, for example, sexual men and women may
enjoy the sheer physical sensation of intercourse without necessarily be-
ing attracted to their partners. A very sexually experienced gay man once
recounted to me that he enjoyed vaginal intercourse with women more
than anal intercourse with men, because of the sheer physical sensation
of his penis being stimulated by the tubular architecture of the vagina,
along with the lubrication it provides when a woman is physically
aroused. Thus, as we have suggested, subjective physical pleasure and
sensation associated with arousal can be divorced from one’s attraction to
others.
My next dumb question is one that I actually posed to an asexual man:
What do asexual people masturbate to? This was clearly a bit of an odd
question for him. For most masturbators (well, okay, much of the planet),

To Masturbate or Not to Masturbate
61
this question is relatively easy to answer. They often masturbate to a
fantasy, a conjured-up image of a favorite person (or group of people), a
picture, moving or otherwise, of sexual scenes. In other words, they mas-
turbate to some sort of image or story of what they are sexually attracted
to. For example, a young woman may masturbate to a story line of an
erotic novel she has read, perhaps replacing the heroine with herself in
the fantasy, or, as mentioned, to an image of hunky Brad Pitt. A young
man may masturbate to the image of a seductively posed nude woman in
a magazine or on the Internet, or, as mentioned above, to harem-like
fantasies.
This is evidently not so for many asexual people who masturbate. In
fact, the asexual person, perplexed, did not answer at first, and then only
responded when I saw him on the next occasion, after having thought
about it, and discussing it with some asexual people on the AVEN web-
site. He suggested that many asexual people just masturbate to nothing in
particular. This makes sense, as asexual people with sexual desire (or
urges, but lacking sexual attraction) do not direct this desire toward any-
one (or anything). So, the question of what an asexual person mastur-
bates to is, perhaps understandably, nonsensical, or best answered with
“nothing in particular” (or at least nothing of particular sexual relevance
to the asexual person).
This nondirected masturbation also reinforces the idea that some, per-
haps many, asexual people often do not have sexual fantasies, or at least
not in the same way that sexual people usually have them. There is some
research by Lori Brotto and her colleagues suggesting that some asexual
people do have fantasies (Brotto et al., 2010), but it is unclear from this
research whether the fantasies co-occur with masturbation, whether they
are primarily “romantic,” and what function they serve (see also discus-
sion below). Interestingly, this nondirected masturbation also reinforces
the idea that masturbation in asexual people probably does not serve a
“rehearsal” function that prepares them to act upon scenarios that they
might encounter in real life. And why would it, given that asexual people
do not need to sexually “practice” sequences of behaviors with preferred
partners?
Here is a follow-up, not-so-dumb, question: What if some (i.e., a small
percentage) asexual people have fantasy-based masturbation? What
would this mean? In addition to understanding sexual fantasies as im-
portant for the development and rehearsal of sexual scripts, human sexu-

62
Chapter 5
ality researchers are interested in sexual fantasies because we know that
their content says something about what people are truly attracted to.
Sexual fantasies are more important than actual behavior—what we actu-
ally do with a partner—in this regard, because partnered behavior repre-
sents a compromise of the individuals engaged in that behavior. Fanta-
sies often do not represent any compromise: they usually only spring
from the individual’s own desires and attractions; thus, they are a (rela-
tively) pure reflection of one’s true attractions.
Pornography contains commercially produced sexual fantasies, or at
least fantasy-enhancement material. This is especially true for men. If so,
the type of pornography men view and/or masturbate to should be an
indicator of their attractions. Gay men are attracted to men, so, not sur-
prisingly, they will view images of naked men or men engaged in sex.
Similarly, heterosexual men are attracted to women, so they will view
images of naked women, men having sex with women, or two or more
women having sex together. This attraction/porn relationship can be
used as a diagnostic tool of a person’s sexual orientation. If, for example,
an adolescent male professes to be heterosexual and yet is found with a
large stash of gay porn, the content of his stash trumps (or at least calls
into question) his professed heterosexual attractions, at least as far as
many sexual orientation researchers are concerned. Interestingly, this di-
agnostic tool can also be used to diagnose deviant sexual attractions. If a
man professes to be attracted to adults but has a stash of child pornogra-
phy (and little or no adult-oriented pornography), then the content of this
stash can be used to help determine that the man is likely a pedophile
(Seto, Cantor, & Blanchard, 2006).5
The pornography/attraction relationship is more complicated for
women, especially given that they are often less visually oriented in their
sexual response than men (see more on sex/gender differences in chapter
6). But the overall point about sexual fantasies as a window into the
sexual attraction “soul” still holds up reasonably well. If so, persistent
sexual fantasies in asexual people, and particularly in asexual men, may
be a partial way of determining whether they have some level of attrac-
tion for men or women, or some unusual thing, such as an object or an
event (see chapter 12).
Interestingly, the fact that the asexual person I referred to above actu-
ally did not comprehend my question about “what do you masturbate to”
indicates to me that he does indeed lack sexual fantasy (and sexual

To Masturbate or Not to Masturbate
63
scripts). Thus, he is asexual as I define it (i.e., a lack of sexual attraction),
and even though he may masturbate, he does not direct his masturbation
to something or someone. Also, that other asexual people like him do not
seem to fantasize in any systematic or directed way, or don’t masturbate
altogether, indicates that many asexual people do not have sexual attrac-
tions, typical or atypical in nature.
However, my discussions with people who identify as asexual (along
with some of the discussion on AVEN) suggest that some do have consis-
tent fantasies or choose specific stimuli (e.g., pornography) to which they
masturbate repeatedly. Also, as mentioned above, some level of fantasy
does occur in asexual people (Brotto et al., 2010). This fact raises ques-
tions about their sexual attractions and whether some of these individu-
als might have unusual sexual attractions, called paraphilias (see also
chapter 10).
Interestingly, when the fantasies do occur in asexual people in a con-
sistent or systematic way, they are often, although not always, still of a
“disconnected” sort. That is, these people often view themselves as not
being part of the sexual acts they are fantasizing about or viewing (e.g.,
pornography). In other words, they themselves are not connected to any-
thing or anyone sexual. It is as if their own identities—who they are as
individuals—are not sexual (they are not attracted to anyone or any-
thing), but their bodies, or (more correctly) aspects of their mind related
to sexual arousal but not fully connected to their identity, may still need
sexual stimulation for them to masturbate (and perhaps receive pleas-
ure). This “disconnect” of identity from masturbation and sexual fantasy
is very intriguing. To me, it still suggests that these people lack sexual
attraction on some level (and thus have an “asexual” orientation), be-
cause their identity—who they are as individuals—is not sexually con-
nected to anyone or anything. However, we will take up these fascinating
questions and their implications—such as whether these people have a
paraphilia and whether they can still truly be labeled asexual (i.e., lacking
in sexual attraction)—further in chapter 10 (Bogaert, 2008).
SUMMARY
There are probably a number of different functions (e.g., pleasure, script
development and rehearsal, health benefits) to human masturbation, this
most common of sexual behaviors. Although they do not masturbate to

64
Chapter 5
the same degree as sexual people do (as one might expect), asexual peo-
ple may have a masturbation history, and some may masturbate at a
relatively high frequency. This fact reinforces the idea that what might be
termed “sexual” behaviors, such as masturbation, are not necessarily
completely absent in asexual people. It also lends support to the idea that
what is termed a “sexual” behavior may, sometimes, be devoid of intense
sexual feelings (even in sexual people), and yet it may still serve a func-
tion (such as health or physical release). The fact that some asexual peo-
ple masturbate and some asexual people do not also reinforces the idea
that asexuality is a diverse phenomenon. In other words, there are differ-
ent types of asexual people, some of whom have desire (or at least im-
pulses and urges, even if they are not intensely “sexual” desires) and
some who do not. There may be a core element to all asexual people,
however: a lack of sexual attraction (see also chapter 2). Finally, the ideas
brought forward in this chapter confirm the notion that researchers
should be aware that some people who identify as asexual may have a
paraphilia, a sexual attraction to something unusual. One way of finding
out more about whether some masturbating asexual people have para-
philias is to study their fantasies, which reveal (often secret) attractions.
More research is also needed to verify some of the conclusions I have
drawn in this chapter, in part because the data on which I have based
these conclusions are incomplete and/or somewhat informal in nature
(e.g., quotes from relatively few individuals). So more questions, even
seemingly dumb ones, need to be asked.
NOTES
1. However, note that a lack of a partner is not a good proxy for high frequency of
masturbation, as sexual behaviors tend to correlate with one another, so those who
have frequent sex with a partner also, on average, masturbate more. But the main
point here is that masturbation can, at least for some, serve as a substitute for an
unavailable partner.
2. Masturbation, then, is like all “play” activity in that it is more frequent in
younger versus older people, but the seeming insignificance of the act belies the fact
that it partially prepares one for later, adult-oriented challenges. Thus, it is not surpris-
ing that our fantasies often match or closely resemble what might be best for us from
an evolutionary perspective, even if this fantasy world never exists in real life.
3. Even though our fantasies often resemble what might be “best” for us, at least
from an evolutionary perspective, modern society also has the capacity to make our
fantasies maladaptive. The modern media, with their high-tech sophistication and
super-realistic images, may make our fantasies more real and powerful than our

To Masturbate or Not to Masturbate
65
brains could ever conjure. Thus, along with ingraining sexual scripts, modern media
probably raise our expectations and, at times, make us too unrealistic about what to
expect in real-life sexual encounters. Thus, these fantasies may be somewhat maladap-
tive in modern society, even if they would have been adaptive in in our evolutionary
past. After all, realistically, we can’t all mate with Brad Pitt!
4. This is not to imply that when (sexual) adolescents engage in masturbation with
fantasies, they do so with the conscious intent of building sexual scripts into their
psyches. Rather, this is done unconsciously; it just happens, especially after the fanta-
sy/script is paired with (often repeatedly!) rewarding sexual pleasure and orgasm. If
unconscious, one could argue that asexual people still retain the ancient mechanisms
of masturbation (even an incentive to masturbate), which would have served this
rehearsal function in our evolutionary past, but which is a somewhat useless byprod-
uct for them now. However, as we will see later in this chapter, asexual people may be
less likely to build sexual scripts into their psyches, because (perhaps not surprisingly)
their masturbation is often without fantasy.
5. People often make a “causal inference” between a person’s exposure to pornog-
raphy and his or her sexual attractions. So people may assume that exposure to por-
nography causes attraction to this material. For example, it is often assumed that an
adolescent boy or a young man’s exposure to child pornography causes a sexual
interest in children. Theoretically, this is possible, but most sex researchers are cau-
tious about making such causal inferences, as they know that when two events co-
occur—a correlation—this is not evidence of causation. When a correlation of this kind
occurs, especially repeatedly (e.g., a man with a large stash of child porn collected over
many different years), this may merely be good evidence that an attraction to this
material occurs, and that we need to be alerted to that fact.


SIX
Sex and Gender
The holy grail of sexual mysteries is female sexuality. Sex researchers
regularly salivate, like Pavlov’s dogs, at the prospect of solving this mys-
tery of mysteries. Even Sigmund Freud, who was never one to shy away
from asserting his knowledge of human behavior, recognized his ignor-
ance and famously queried, “What do they want?”
Some modern examples: There’s a relatively famous song by a female
singer—“I know what boys like; I know what guys want” (The Wait-
resses, n.d.). There is no equivalent song about female desire sung by a
male singer. There is a well-known picture (e.g., on the Internet) of two
black boxes, one of which has a sole “on/off” switch and is labeled “the
man”; the other has a vast array of dials and knobs and is labeled “the
woman.” I show this picture in my human sexuality class when I address
differences in sexuality between men and women. Aside from a few stu-
dents with blank looks, they laugh. The humor occurs because they
know, on some level, that inside the woman’s black box (aptly named) is
that mystery of mysteries—the complex nature of women’s desire—and
that inside the man’s black box (not so aptly named) is, well, one thick
wire leading to that on/off switch.
In this chapter, I discuss the mysterious nature of women’s (and
men’s!) sexuality, particularly as it is relates to asexuality. In other words,
I explore how sex and gender affect sexuality and asexuality.
Let’s start with some context and definitions. Sex and its cultural cou-
sin, gender, are complex constructs. Sex usually refers to the biological
differences between males and females: penis and vagina; XY (male) and
67

68
Chapter 6
XX (female) chromosomes; male hormones (e.g., testosterone) and female
hormones (e.g., estrogens); and so forth. So, sex refers to male and female
anatomy and their biological processes. Gender usually pertains to the
expectations that a culture places on males and females to behave in a
specific way; in other words, what are the typical masculine and feminine
roles in society? Gender also often relates to one’s psychological feelings
or states as a male or a female. So, for example, people who perceive
themselves as a man have a male gender identity.
You may be thinking, This is easy enough, so why are they such complex
concepts? Well, let’s deconstruct these concepts a bit. First, are there just
two sexes? Another one of my dumb questions, you ask? (For more dumb
questions, see chapter 5 on masturbation.) Well, actually, despite what
most people believe, some experts suggest that two sexes are too limiting
and that perhaps as many as five different sexes exist in human beings.
Anne Fausto-Sterling, a biologist at Brown University, advocated this
position, albeit one that she later admitted was argued tongue-in-cheek
and to prove a broader point (1993; 2000). That broader point was that the
rigid binary system of two sexes is not complex enough to understand
the variation that exists in biological sex. John Money, the famous
psychologist and sexologist, also pointed out the ambiguity in biological
sex by noting that whether we call someone a male or female can depend
on a variety of biological variables, not all of which are necessarily
aligned or consistent (Money, Hampson, & Hampson, 1957). So, one can
define sex by XY (male) or XX (female) chromosomes, but what if the
gonads—testes or ovaries—do not match up with a standard XY or XX
chromosomal profile in a given person? In other words, what if someone
has XY chromosomes but also has ovaries? What if someone has the
internal reproductive organs normally reserved for women (e.g., fallo-
pian tubes and uterus) but has external male genitalia? This kind of sexu-
al ambiguity, sometimes called intersexuality, is surprisingly prevalent
(i.e., about 1–2 percent of births) (Fausto-Sterling, 2000), and it illustrates
the need, when speaking about biological sex, for language and concepts
capable of handling complexity.
There is also ambiguity when we refer to male and female hormones.
The so-called female hormones, the estrogens that are produced by the
ovaries in women (e.g., estradiol), also exist in men; in fact, testosterone, a
so-called male hormone, is converted to estradiol in men under the influ-

Sex and Gender
69
ence of the enzyme aromatase. Women also produce testosterone, so this
hormone is also not fully sex specific—that is, it is not limited to men.
There is another level of ambiguity, or at least complexity, associated
with both sex and gender. Some people are born with all of their biologi-
cal variables consistent with traditional maleness or femaleness (XX,
ovaries, uterus, vagina, or XY, testicles, prostate, penis), but have an
internal sense of themselves or their gender identity that is inconsistent
with their biological sex. These individuals are often so dissatisfied with
their biological sex that they may want to alter it so that it will be consis-
tent with their internal sense of themselves as male or female. Tradition-
ally, these individuals have been referred to as transsexual in order to
describe the change in biological sex that many of these individuals
wanted and often accomplished through medical intervention (i.e., sex
re-assignment surgery) to make their bodies, particularly their genitalia,
consistent with their internal sense of themselves (Benjamin, 1966). More
recently, a related word, transgender, has emerged. Originally, this word
was used to describe people who were dissatisfied with their biological
sex but who did not want to alter aspects of their bodies (e.g., via sex re-
assignment surgery) (Kotula, 2002). The meaning of the term transgender
has recently expanded, and is now a kind of “umbrella” term. This term
often describes both traditional transsexuals (i.e., those who want to
change biological sex and perhaps have done so) and anyone who vio-
lates traditional “gender” boundaries but does not necessarily want to
alter aspects of their biological sex. Put another way, transgender can refer
to those whose identity does not conform to their biological sex or those
whose identity does not match their “gender” assigned at birth (Ekins &
King, 2004). So, aside from transsexual people, the transgendered catego-
ry may include those who cross-dress (e.g., drag queens or transvestites)
and those who identify as, for example, “bi-gendered” or “non-gen-
dered.” It may also include the intersexual people mentioned above. Not-
ably, there is often a “political” dimension to the term transgender, or a
transgendered identity (Feinberg, 1992). As we describe in chapter 7,
(public) identities frequently emerge out of and serve political ends.
Here is yet another ambiguity. If we find, on average, a behavioral
difference between men and women, is it a gender difference or a sex
difference? Well, given that this difference has to do with behavior, and
presumably changes across cultures, it should be referred to as a gender
difference, correct? But what if we find that this difference is influenced

70
Chapter 6
not just by culture but also by sex hormones—for example, high levels of
testosterone in men may partially underlie their greater sex drive (Bau-
meister, Catanese, & Vohs, 2001). Should we then call it a sex difference,
because it is largely (or at least partially) biologically based? The answer
is obviously complex, and you may notice that researchers, for this rea-
son, often use the phrase sex differences and gender differences seemingly
inconsistently and interchangeably.
In summary, the constructs of sex and gender are quite complex, so
keep this in mind as you read this chapter and ponder the differences
between men and women, and consider how it all relates to asexuality.
Also note that for the sake of simplicity, I use the phrase gender differences
to refer to any behavioral differences that exist between men and women.
Not all men are alike and not all women are alike—indeed, there is a
lot of variability within each—and so using people’s biological sex as the
only piece of information to predict their sexuality can be misleading and
cause numerous errors. Yet, as the black box pictures mentioned above
suggest, there are fascinating gender differences in sexuality.
One of the main differences is that men have, on average, a higher sex
drive than women (Baumeister et al., 2001). In other words, men are more
“sexualized” than women. Examples include the fact that men mastur-
bate and fantasize more than women do. In one national British survey,
73 percent of men and 37 percent of women reported masturbating in the
previous month (Gerressu, Mercer, Graham, Wellings, & Johnson, 2008).
Relatedly, there is evidence that men (particularly young men) think
about sex on a more frequent basis than women. According to one na-
tional study of the United States, more than half of men (i.e., 54 percent)
think about sex several times during the day, whereas about 20 percent of
women do so at about the same frequency (Laumann, Gagnon, Michael,
& Michaels, 1994).
Another difference is that women’s sexuality is more fluid or flexible,
being more responsive to a variety of cultural and psychological factors,
than men’s (Baumeister, 2000). One example is that women may have a
period of several months of intense sexual activity (masturbation, inter-
course) and then several months of no sexual activity. This pattern is less
common in men, who maintain a more constant level of sexual activity
(e.g., through masturbation, one-night stands) despite, say, the ending of
a romantic/sexual relationship. As psychologist Roy Baumeister notes,
Kinsey himself made this observation: “Discontinuities in total [sexual]

Sex and Gender
71
outlet are practically unknown in the histories of males” (Baumeister,
2000, pp. 681–82; Kinsey, Pomeroy, Martin, & Gebhard, 1953).
Gender differences in asexuality often seem to mirror gender differ-
ences in sexuality. In other words, the gender differences mentioned
above also occur in some way between asexual men and asexual women.
First, if a main gender difference is that women are less sexualized (i.e.,
they have lower sex drive and less sexual attraction) than men, one
would expect women to be overrepresented on the extremely low end of
the sexuality distribution—that is, one would expect to find more asexu-
ality among women.
Is there evidence that women are more likely to be asexual than men?
Yes, there is (Bogaert, 2004; Bogaert, in press-a; Brotto, Knudson, Inskip,
Rhodes, & Erskine, 2010). For example, in my first study of asexuality,
about 70 percent of the asexual people in NATSAL-I, a British national
sample, were women (Bogaert, 2004). Interestingly, some indirect evi-
dence that women are more likely than men to be asexual is that “asexu-
al” partnerships (i.e., “Boston marriages”) have been identified as a rela-
tively common pattern among women forming relationships with wom-
en (Rothblum & Brehony, 1993), but, to my knowledge, such partnerships
have never been identified as a relatively common pattern among men
forming relationships with men.
What is it from a psychological or developmental perspective that
makes women less likely than men to form strong sexual attractions to
others? One possibility relates to masturbation differences between men
and women. As suggested in chapter 5, masturbation, particularly linked
with fantasy, may afford “learning/conditioning” experiences leading to
more permanent sexual attractions. For example, if partners of a specific
gender routinely show up in the fantasies (or pornography) to which one
masturbates, then those partners may become part of one’s permanent
sexual attractions. If so, women who do not masturbate, or do so rarely,
may not develop strong sexual attractions to others.
A biological explanation compatible with the masturbation explana-
tion is hormones. Lower testosterone in women relative to men may
create in women a less intense urge to masturbate, leading to fewer con-
ditioning experiences and, ultimately, to fewer permanent sexual attrac-
tions to others.1
Another explanation relates to the flexibility in women’s sexuality
(Baumeister, 2000). Women’s relatively flexible sexuality may make

72
Chapter 6
them, compared to men, more affected by social and cultural influences.
Thus, if social or cultural influences are extreme, or at least atypical,
women’s sexuality may vary from the norm, including in the develop-
ment of asexuality. Underscoring this point is the fact that women can
adopt celibate lifestyles, sometimes construed as a behavioral “asexual-
ity,” for political purposes—for instance, as a protest against male-domi-
nated society (Fahs, 2010).
Our conception of sexual orientation, or at least how it is traditionally
measured, also may be relevant to gender differences in asexuality (Bo-
gaert, 2004; Bogaert, 2006b; Bogaert, in press-a). Most sexual orientation
measures imply that one’s orientation is always “targeted” toward oth-
ers, either males or females (or both, if bisexual). For example, a sexual
orientation question may be posed as follows: “Who are you sexually
attracted to?” The phrase “attracted to” implies an object or a “target” for
our sexual interests. Thus, in this target-oriented view, usually members
of one group (e.g., females) are the objects of desire, drawing our atten-
tion and fancies, and impelling us to approach members of this group for
sexual activity. Yet this view of sexual orientation is, arguably, based on a
male model of sexuality and thus may not capture many women’s subjec-
tive experience of sexuality. This view may also affect how some women
report being sexually attracted (or not being sexually attracted) to others.
At least three lines of theory and research support this target-oriented
view of sexual orientation. First, there is evidence that proceptive desire—
the urge to seek out and initiate sexual activity—may be more common in
men than in women, whereas receptive desire—the capacity to become
aroused upon encountering certain sexual circumstances—may charac-
terize women’s sexuality more so than that of men (Baumeister, 2000;
Diamond, 2003b). Proceptive desire relative to receptive desire may be
more conducive to a target-oriented view of sexual arousal and thus may
capture the traditional (and hence more male-oriented) conceptions of
sexual attraction.
Second, Meredith Chivers’s recent work on men and women’s arousal
patterns (e.g., genital responses to erotic pictures or films) suggests that
men are more target oriented in their sexuality. Her research has found
that men’s sexual arousal is usually directed toward one sex or another:
women if they are heterosexual, men if they are gay. Women’s sexual
arousal is much more diffuse, and not specific to a category of sex/gen-
der. Overall, women will respond genitally somewhat less than men to

Sex and Gender
73
various types of erotic imagery, and usually to both men and women
actors in the stimuli, even when the women report being exclusively
heterosexual or lesbian. In other words, men’s sexuality seems to have a
specific category of gender as its target—a bull’s eye in their sights. This is
less so for women’s sexuality—or at least women have multiple targets or
bull’s eyes in their sights (Chivers, Rieger, Latty, & Bailey, 2004; Chivers,
Seto, & Blanchard, 2007).
Related to Meredith Chivers’s work is a third line of research support-
ing this target-oriented view of sexual orientation: Julia Heiman’s re-
search, which shows that women are sometimes not aware of their geni-
tal responses (Heiman, 1977). Thus women may not know how their
bodies are responding sexually, at least not to the same degree as men do.
As a consequence, women may not associate sexual responses to a specif-
ic target (e.g., men) because they may not be aware that genital responses
to a target are in fact occurring. This difference in genital response may
be partially related to the way men and women’s bodies work: erections
are obvious, whereas vaginal responses are often more subtle.
If women’s sexuality is less proceptive in nature, if their physical
arousal is non-category-specific (i.e., no bull’s eye in the target), and,
finally, if they are not as aware of their genital responses as men are, then
when women are asked to respond to questions such “who are you sexu-
ally attracted to?,” perhaps it is not surprising that some women simply
do not respond in a traditional (male-oriented) way: as being sexually
attracted to either males or females (or even to both). Indeed, some may
report or label themselves as having no sexual attraction to others (i.e.,
being asexual).
Let’s return to some issues related to women’s non-category-specific
arousal. A basic question that emerges from this work is this: Why do
women have such non-category-specific arousal, whereas men do not?
One explanation that Chivers and colleagues favor is as follows: Nature
may have designed the vagina, along with related arousal mechanisms,
to prepare a woman for any kind of sexual activity that may occur, will-
ing or otherwise. At times throughout human evolutionary history,
women have been subjected to coerced sexual relations. Thus, to prevent
injury, the adaptive response of the vagina, along with the brain and
body mechanisms that support it, may have been to respond with expan-
sion and lubrication at the suggestion of almost any sexual activity. Thus,
the vagina is a pliably indiscriminate organ primed for any sexual contact

74
Chapter 6
that may arise. Indeed, Chivers and her colleagues have shown that
women, unlike men, also respond genitally to chimpanzee sexual activity
(Chivers, 2010). Talk about non-category-specific arousal!
If non-category-specific responding in women is an injury-preventing
mechanism, then one should expect that asexual women also have such
mechanisms in place, and thus also have non-category-specific respond-
ing to sexual stimuli. However, shouldn’t asexual women have very dif-
ferent arousal patterns than sexual women? After all, if asexual women
are truly “asexual,” then shouldn’t they have, presumably, low or absent
arousal? Not necessarily. Recall that asexuality, by my and others’ defini-
tions, is a lack of sexual attraction, not a lack of physical arousal. Thus,
although arousal and sexual attraction are often related, and arousal may
give us information (e.g., feedback) about our sexual attractions, arousal
and attraction are not the same thing. Indeed, it is clear that they are often
“decoupled,” and even sexual women often do not use physical arousal
as a gauge of their sexual attraction/orientation—and cannot, if they are
not aware of this arousal.
Lori Brotto and Morag Yule recently examined arousal patterns in
asexual women. They showed that asexual women, like sexual women,
indeed show non-category-specific responding to sexual stimuli—that is,
some level of genital arousal to both male- and female-oriented sexual
stimuli—very similar to heterosexual women and lesbians. Although this
is a small study (e.g., there was no sample of asexual men), it is also an
intriguing one, as the authors argue that their results give support to the
notion that asexuals do not have a “disorder” as currently defined. For
example, asexual women do not show low arousal (i.e., abnormally low
vaginal responses) to sexual activity, as some women with sexual dys-
function do (see also chapter 11). Relatedly, the authors argue that their
study provides some evidence that asexuality should be understood as a
true sexual orientation, because asexual women respond in similar ways
as sexual orientation groups—in other words, (nondysfunctional) les-
bians and heterosexual women. Finally, this study supports the notion
that non-category-specific responding (at least in terms of physical arou-
sal) is common among women, including asexual women, and may serve
a common, ancient function: to prevent injury (Brotto & Yule, 2011).
Now let’s address one of the most enduring (and endearing?) gender
differences in sexuality—masturbation—and examine patterns of this be-
havior in asexual men and women. As mentioned in chapter 5, many

Sex and Gender
75
asexual men and women masturbate, although they do so less frequently
than sexual people (e.g., Bogaert, in press-a). But most pertinent to the
present chapter, asexual men report a higher frequency of masturbation
than asexual women. For example, about 50 percent of asexual men re-
port masturbating two or more times per week, versus 7 percent of asex-
ual women (Brotto et al., 2010).
Masturbation, then, is clearly a popular pastime for both sexual and
asexual men. Thus patterns of asexuality play themselves out differently
in men and women, and these patterns often mirror differences between
sexual men and women. The reasons why sexual men and women differ
in masturbation may also explain the differences between asexual men
and women in this behavior. For example, if men and women differ in
sex drive (e.g., strength and/or frequency of sexual urges), then asexual
men, even if they do not direct those urges toward others, may be im-
pelled to masturbate more frequently than asexual women. Also, the in-
herent differences in the way men and women’s bodies work—erections
are obvious, whereas vaginal responses are more subtle—may be rele-
vant. Thus, if asexual men, relative to asexual women, receive more obvi-
ous feedback that they are sexually aroused (e.g., notice their erections),
they may be more likely to act on it (by masturbating), despite their lack
of attraction to others.
As mentioned in chapter 5, masturbation, particularly with fantasies
of recurring themes, is of interest to sexologists in part because it can
reveal clues about sexual attraction. Thus masturbation among asexuals
raises questions about whether some do indeed have sexual attraction to
others or perhaps to something unusual (i.e., paraphilia). Given that asex-
ual men masturbate more than asexual women, it also raises questions
about whether asexual men have a potentially higher rate of paraphilias
than do asexual women (also see chapter 10). If so, this pattern would
also be consistent with differences between sexual men and women, as
sexual men are much more likely than sexual women to have paraphilias
(Cantor, Blanchard, & Barbaree, 2009).
Let’s now turn to gender roles. There is evidence that gays and les-
bians often do not conform to traditional gender roles, with lesbians
adopting less feminine behavior patterns and gay men less masculine
behavior patterns than their heterosexual counterparts (Rieger, Linsen-
meier, Gygax, & Bailey, 2008). Thus, some sexual minorities do not neces-
sarily conform to traditional gender roles, but what about asexual peo-

76
Chapter 6
ple? At this point, we do not know whether asexual men are less mascu-
line than heterosexual men, or whether asexual women are less feminine
than heterosexual women. There are standard techniques to assess
whether someone conforms to traditional gender roles—for example, if a
boy or man is interested in sports, is drawn to traditionally masculine
occupations, is more aggressive, and so on—but such techniques have
never been applied to a group of asexuals.
My hunch is that asexual people are less conforming to traditional
gender roles, on average, than heterosexual people. One of the reasons is
because traditional sexual development often may make females more
feminine and males more masculine. For example, asexual women may
be less feminine in attire, manner, and language because they lack what
Lori Brotto and I call object-of-desire self-consciousness (Bogaert & Brotto, in
progress). We argue that heterosexual women’s sexuality is often strong-
ly linked to perceiving themselves as an object of desire in another’s eyes.
We also believe that women have a high likelihood to develop sexual
scripts—learned sequences of sexual behavior (see also chapter 5 on mas-
turbation)—with object-of-desire themes. Indeed, my students and I
found evidence for this in a study examining heterosexual women and
men’s sexual fantasies with, for example, women being more likely than
men to be turned on by having others see them as attractive, rather than
seeing someone else (i.e., their partner) as attractive. Even women’s lan-
guage reflects these themes, as one might expect if sexual scripts per-
meate our cognitions; after all, language and cognition (i.e., our thoughts)
are intimately linked (Bogaert, Visser, Pozzebon, & Wanless, 2011).
But what does this research on women and object-of-desire self-con-
sciousness have to do with asexuality, and with asexual women in partic-
ular? To be sexual (and romantic) for women often emerges out of their
sense of themselves as objects of desire. So, if asexual women are not
interested in being objects of desire (and have not had socializing forces
acting on them in the same way, because of a lack of interest in sex), then
all those elements of femininity typically linked to sexuality in sexual
women will be different in asexual women. I expect, using language as an
example, that words and phrases describing beauty, attractiveness, and
body image, particularly regarding areas normally related to sexuality
(such as their curves, hair, breasts, and vulva), would be different in
asexual versus sexual women. But more than language, I expect that
asexual women’s manner and attire would be different from that of aver-

Sex and Gender
77
age sexual women. For example, relative to sexual women, asexual wom-
en may dress in a less sexualized manner (e.g., not showing cleavage).
This expected difference between sexual and asexual women in manner,
attire, and language partly reflects the idea that gender (i.e., femininity) is
often driven by sex and sexuality.
Related to gender roles is gender identity, the very basic sense of
oneself as male or female. Of course, most people take their gender iden-
tity for granted, breezily checking off either “male” or “female” on sur-
veys that ask about one’s gender. However, as mentioned above, this is
not so for a small group of people. Transgendered and intersex people,
for example, often believe that their sexual anatomy is inconsistent with
their gender identity; a simple “male” or “female” label may thus be
inadequate.
But what about asexual people? Interestingly, although the majority
of asexual people seem to identify as male or female, there is evidence
that a surprisingly high percentage do not want to categorize themselves
in this way. In fact, Brotto and colleagues found that approximately 13
percent did not want to identify as male or female (Brotto et al., 2010).
This may not seem like an overly large percentage, but consider what
proportion of the general population would not want to identify as either
male or female: a small percentage (i.e., 1–2 percent or less) (Veale, 2008;
Fausto-Sterling, 2000). Thus, a nontraditional gender identity is likely
significantly related to asexuality. At this point, however, we do not
know whether transgendered or intersex individuals make up a large
proportion of asexual people.
Does the fact that gender roles and identities relate to asexuality give
clues to its origin? It may. First, let’s consider the potential role of biologi-
cal factors—in particular, the systems involved with sexual differentia-
tion. Sexual differentiation is the biological process whereby males be-
come males and females become females. It occurs primarily prenatally
(before birth) and then secondarily at puberty.
In sexual differentiation, some components are involved with produc-
ing female features (feminization) and male features (masculinization),
but there are also processes that prevent or remove female features (de-
feminization) in male fetuses and prevent or remove male features (de-
masculinization) in female fetuses.
The exposure to hormones prenatally (in the womb) contributes to
male and female sexual differentiation of both the body and brain. In

78
Chapter 6
other words, prenatal hormones (e.g., testosterone) will help to create
male internal and external genitalia in male fetuses, while an absence of
these hormones will help to create female internal and external genitalia.
There is a critical time during gestation when this occurs, when fetal
body tissues are sensitive to the levels of these hormones. Prenatal testos-
terone also affects the brain and potentially helps to create a gender role/
identity and a sexual orientation. There is also a critical time during ges-
tation when this occurs, when fetal brain tissues are sensitive to the level
of these hormones. Thus, male (XY) or female (XX) fetuses exposed to
atypical levels of this hormone during critical time periods of prenatal
development can have altered differentiation of the body (e.g., intersex
characteristics). Similarly, atypical levels of these hormones during criti-
cal time periods may also alter brain development, thus leading to atypi-
cal gender identity (e.g., transgendered) and sexual attractions (e.g., be-
ing gay or lesbian). If so, one might also speculate that male (XY) or
female (XX) fetuses exposed to atypical levels of prenatal hormones,
again at critical time periods, may develop an atypical gender identity
(not feeling “male” or “female”), in addition to a lack of sexual attraction
(i.e., asexuality).
The traditional scientific wisdom was that female sexual differentia-
tion, including brain differentiation, would occur if these male hormones
(e.g., testosterone) were absent. Indeed, females were once seen as the
“default” sex, with typical female development occurring as long as male
hormones were absent. Recent evidence suggests that sexual differentia-
tion is more complex. Male and female sexual differentiation, including
brain differentiation, is indeed related to the presence or absence of male
hormones, but it is also related to other prenatal mechanisms (Arnold,
2004; Kopsida, Stergiakouli, Lynn, Wilkinson, & Davies, 2009). For exam-
ple, there are specific genes on the Y and X chromosomes that affect male
or female brain development directly (without, for instance, affecting
male hormone levels). Thus, without these additional gene-based mecha-
nisms, male and female sexual development, including brain differentia-
tion, would not occur in a typical fashion. If so, male (XY) or female (XX)
fetuses having one or more of these genes inactivated may have altered
differentiation of the body (e.g., intersex). Similarly, if it is a gene very
specific to the brain, any variation or mutation of this gene may alter
neural development, leading to atypical gender identity (such as being

Sex and Gender
79
transgendered) and atypical sexual attractions, including being gay, les-
bian, or asexual.
One related possibility is that altered X- or Y-linked genes or prenatal
hormones, or their combination, create a form of genderlessness in some
asexuals. In other words, some asexuals may lack sexual attraction to
both males and females—a genderless sexual orientation—and lack a
male or female gender identity—a genderless identity—because these
biological processes have a unique effect on brain development. For ex-
ample, asexuality in women may occur because of an absence/alteration
of male hormones (de-masculinization) in combination with an inactiva-
tion of one or more (X) female-specific genes affecting the brain (de-
feminization). Thus, some asexual women may have brains that are nei-
ther “masculine” nor “feminine.” In contrast, the sexual orientations and
identities of gays and lesbians may be the result of some “reversal” of a
typical masculinization or feminization process. For example, prenatal
exposure to a higher-than-typical level of male hormones has been
argued to masculinize lesbians, including their sexual/romantic attrac-
tions (Ellis & Ames, 1987; Grimbos, Dawood, Burriss, Zucker, & Puts,
2010).
Let’s also consider how environmental factors could contribute to
asexuality, particularly through its association with gender identities and
gender roles. One way is through asexual people’s identification or dis-
identification with one or both sexes. Researchers have argued that iden-
tification processes are important in sexual orientation development.
Psychologist Darryl Bem asserts that if one’s gender identity and gender
role are traditional—for example, a boy identifying with other boys and
engaging in traditional “masculine” behaviors, and so forth—it makes
the opposite sex different and “exotic” and, ultimately, sexually arousing.
Conversely, if a boy does not identify with boys but with girls, and en-
gages in traditional feminine behaviors, it may make the same sex seem
different and exotic and sexually arousing. Bem suggests that these pro-
cesses can explain traditional sexual orientation development—in other
words, how masculine boys become attracted to feminine girls. He also
suggests that the same processes can explain how same-sex attraction
occurs in gender nonconforming children—that is, how feminine boys
become attracted to other, more masculine boys (Bem, 1996).
But what if a child has little identification with either sex? Would this
child become bisexual, as both sexes would seem different and exotic?

80
Chapter 6
Or, rather, would a child’s dis-identification with both sexes create, at
least in some, an ambivalence to both and a sexual disinterest in all peo-
ple later in life (i.e., asexuality)? This is an intriguing question and per-
haps worth pursuing in future research. However, it is important to keep
in mind that Bem’s theory, even as it applies to typical sexual orientation
development, is controversial and lacks direct support. Moreover, it is
also important to remember that the causal relationships among these
variables could be viewed in the reverse direction: one’s attractions may
cause the degree to which we identify with our own sex. So, if some
asexual people do not identify as male or female, it may be because their
lack of sexual attraction makes them feel like they have little in common
(or dis-identify) with being male or female, not the other way around.
Moreover, in line with this reasoning, as I suggested above, some wom-
en’s lack of sexual attraction may make them less “feminine,” because
they are not as socialized to be an object of desire.
SUMMARY
Sex and gender are complex constructs, but they are useful in under-
standing asexuality. Gender differences in asexuality seem to parallel
gender differences in sexuality (e.g., masturbation). We do not know
whether asexual people conform to traditional gender roles, although I
speculate that asexual people are, on average, less conforming (e.g., asex-
ual women have less object-of-desire self-consciousness). There is a
strong suggestion in the current literature that many asexual people do
not identify as male or female. The degree to which gender roles and
gender identity play a causal role in the sexuality of asexual people is
unknown, as is the degree to which asexuality plays a causal role in their
gender roles and identities. Finally, I hope you see how exploring asexu-
ality helps us to understand, or at least consider, the complexity of sexu-
ality and the different ways it plays out in men and women. For example,
we learn more about that mystery of mysteries—the nature of women’s
sexuality, particularly the purpose of their non-category-specific re-
sponses—by including asexual women in the mix. And who knows—
perhaps soon we may even be able to answer Freud’s famous query on
the nature of women’s desires. However, even if we aren’t able to answer
this question, there is a still a wealth of knowledge to be discovered by
exploring the intersection of sex, gender, and asexuality.

Sex and Gender
81
NOTE
1. Note that biological and environmental/social explanations are not necessarily
incompatible. As suggested in chapter 13, these two kinds of explanations can coexist
because they offer different levels of analysis: micro (biological) versus macro (envi-
ronment/social). Thus, they may represent different points along a causal stream or
pathway. For example, a specific biological predisposition may make someone partic-
ularly sensitive to a certain environment, which ultimately has a large impact on this
person, whereas a different biological predisposition may make another person espe-
cially sensitive to a completely different environment, which may also have a large
(but different) impact on him or her.


SEVEN
Forging an (A)sexual Identity
There is an Australian children’s book called Miss Lily’s Fabulous Pink
Feather Boa. It is about a cute but nearly extinct marsupial, a long-nosed
potoroo, trying to locate its place in the world. By the end of the book, the
little potoroo discovers—to both its and sympathetic readers’ relief—that
it is not alone: there is a small band of its kind, with whom it forges
lasting and meaningful relationships (Wild & Argent, 1998).
Throughout much of the book, the potoroo wears a pink, feathered
boa, which it claims from the eccentric Miss Lily. This rather odd but
endearing affectation made me wonder if this book, aside from its main
lessons in environmentalism and how to stick it out if you are indeed a
lonely little potoroo, is offering another, more subtle message. I wonder if
it is meant in an allegorical way to represent the solitary existence and
ultimately the “coming out” experience of sexual minorities—particular-
ly gay men, some of whom, of course, have similarly fabulous affecta-
tions (Rieger, Linsenmeier, Gygax, & Bailey, 2008).
If you are a heterosexual person, imagine that you are the only one in
your school, or at work, or in your extended family who has these attrac-
tions to the other sex. All others are attracted to the same sex, or attracted
to no one. How would you feel? Perhaps like the little potoroo?
In this chapter, I discuss sexual identity formation—both in sexual
people and, in particular, in asexual people. Let’s begin by addressing a
fundamental question: Why is a sexual identity important to people in
the first place? Why does a person need to locate, psychologically speak-
ing, his or her sexual self, and perhaps express it, even publicly?
83

84
Chapter 7
This is not just an interesting question for academic types like me; it is
a curious, even burning, question in many laypeople’s minds. Some
heterosexual people, for example, wonder why gays and lesbians have to
“go flaunting their sexualities” all over the place in gay pride festivities.
Perhaps there is an implied homophobia to such statements from hetero-
sexual people (i.e., they do not want to be exposed to a sexuality they
don’t like or are uncomfortable with). Yet I also expect that some hetero-
sexual people just truly wonder what all the fuss is about, because they,
as heterosexual people, don’t have a parade announcing their sexuality.
Similarly, Dan Savage, an outspoken sex columnist (is there any other
kind?), has questioned the need for asexual people to assert their identity,
at least within a public sphere (Chevigny, Davenport, Pinder, & Tucker,
2011). He argues that it is clear why gays and lesbians, for example, need
to assert their identity in a public sphere. Public announcements and
displays of sexual identity are important so that sexual minorities, such
as gay men, can claim the right to engage in, in his words, ahem, “cock
sucking.” Well, what if you are asexual? If you are not engaging in poten-
tially prohibited behavior (e.g., fellatio among men) and thus do not need
public acceptance (or at least tolerance) of it, why go out and make public
displays of your identity, or demonstrate in a parade or a public march?
After all, no one cares that you are not having sex, and no one will put
you in jail for not having sex. So, what is all the fuss about? Just stay at
home when the next gay parade rolls around.
Dan Savage has a point here, and his argument goes some way in
answering the above-mentioned query from some heterosexual people
about why lesbians and gays go about “flaunting their sexualities” at gay
pride parades: they need to achieve acceptance and recognition for po-
tentially prohibited behaviors. Interestingly, this view—that public dis-
plays of identity are particularly important for gays and lesbians and
perhaps less so for asexuals—is probably not lost, at least on some level,
on many asexual people. So while some asexual people do march and
assert their identities publicly (Childs, 2009, January 16), I expect that a
large number of asexuals quietly go about their lives without ever sign-
ing on to a chat-line or a website devoted to asexual issues, let alone
joining a march devoted to sexual minorities.
But let’s get back to Dan Savage’s main point. Although there is some
sense in it, I also think it misses a more important, broader point: The
relevance of having an identity (and being able to express it) goes beyond

Forging an (A)sexual Identity
85
gaining acceptance for, and therefore access to, behavior that might oth-
erwise be prohibited. It has to do with answering some basic questions
about oneself (e.g., Who am I? How do I fit in with others?). It also has to do
with expressing oneself and seeking some level of acceptance from others
for one’s existence (e.g., I exist, and I want the world to know and recognize
that I exist). Identity formation, including the sexual identity process that
is part of the broader identity-formation process, is a fundamental aspect
of human development (Lawler, 2008; Leary & Tangney, 2003; Mathews,
Bok, & Rabins, 2009). Anyone who knows a teenager, or recalls his or her
own teen years, understands how important and fundamental identity
formation can be. Similarly, the fact that most societies, cultures, and
religious groups have “coming of age” rites attests to the importance of
identity formation in human development, particularly within the con-
text of reproductive/sexual maturation. Thus identity issues, sexual and
otherwise, are also relevant to asexual people.
Interestingly, identity formation is increasingly relevant to a group
whose sexuality may not fit comfortably within either the sexual or the
asexual realm. For example, a number of people have migrated to the
AVEN website/community who identify themselves as “gray-a.” Thus,
these individuals feel they fit somewhere on the spectrum between sexu-
al and asexual. This fact also demonstrates the importance of identity
formation and people’s need to find their place in the world. We all need
a language to describe ourselves that reflects our commonalities with
those who share our characteristics and our differences from those who
don’t.
The sexual identity process in asexual people has not been studied
extensively, at least not to the extent to which it has been studied in gays
and lesbians. But processes similar to those that occur in gays and les-
bians are also likely to occur in asexual people, given that there are some
similar issues—namely, being a sexual minority in a heterosexual (and
heterosexist) world (Scherrer, 2008).
Theorists have argued that there are a variety of stages to sexual iden-
tity formation in sexual minorities. One of the first stages is recognizing
one’s own attractions. Later stages include testing and exploring one’s
attractions, along with identifying/labeling oneself (e.g., as gay, bisexual,
or lesbian). Final stages might potentially include making public disclo-
sures and developing identity pride (Cass, 1979; Coleman, 1982; Floyd &
Stein, 2002; Troiden, 1989). When someone is described as “coming out”

86
Chapter 7
(e.g., to one’s parents), this usually refers to public disclosures, or the
formation of a public identity (Cass, 1996). For example, public disclosure
is typically how most gay, lesbian, and bisexual people understand
“coming out.” However, when identity theorists discuss sexual identity
formation in sexual minorities, they usually refer to the whole process,
and not just coming out. Thus, there is recognition of the complexity and
the multiple facets or stages of identity formation. Identity theorists have
also recently recognized that discrete steps or stages may not always
capture the true phenomenology (i.e., the reality or lived experience) of
the sexual identity process in sexual minorities. For example, the so-
called stages may blend into one another, or the timing may be reversed
for some people. Relatedly, there is a recent suggestion that gays and
lesbians can often have different developmental experiences of sexual
identity formation (Diamond, 2006; Rust, 1993). Thus, even while current
theorists recognize the complexity of people’s coming-out experiences
and the importance of considering various stages (as a heuristic or learn-
ing tool), there is probably a need to make the models even more com-
plex. Damn those complex humans!
Despite the limitations, let’s assume that these theoretical stages of the
sexual identity process have heuristic value. Let’s also assume that they
are relevant, at least to some degree, to an asexual person in forging his
or her sexual identity.
As mentioned, one of the stages of the identity process can be coming
out, or the making of public disclosures. What makes a person come out
sooner rather than later, or perhaps never come out at all? There are a
variety of factors that have been associated with an early (versus a later)
coming-out experience, including one’s age or, more accurately, the era
into which one was born. Younger cohorts of gays and lesbians come out
sooner than older cohorts, at least in Western society (Floyd & Bakeman,
2006). This trend may say something about the changing state of Western
society, particularly the increasing degree of acceptance of sexual minor-
ities relative to past eras.
My colleague Carolyn Hafer and I discovered that beliefs about the
world are also important in the timing of coming out (Bogaert & Hafer,
2009). When gay men believe that the world is just—that people get what
they deserve and deserve what they get (Lerner, 1980)—they are more
likely to come out sooner, as opposed to those who don’t hold these
beliefs. In contrast, gay men who believe that the world is unjust, relative

Forging an (A)sexual Identity
87
to those who believe that the world is just, are more likely to stay in the
closet until later in life (or not come out at all).1 We speculated that beliefs
about the justice of the world are important in gay men’s coming-out
experience because gay men are often the subjects of discrimination (He-
rek, 2000; Herek, 2002). Thus, believing that the world that awaits you is
full of injustices, and that those injustices will be directed at you in the
form of discrimination—sometimes an accurate perception—can make
one shy away from making a grand entrance onto the world’s stage.
There is a saying that “justice delayed is justice denied.” This research
suggests a modified version of this maxim: “an entrance delayed is an
injustice denied” (or so some gay people may perceive the situation).
Do asexual people also delay their coming-out experiences for fear of
public reprisals, believing that the world will be unjust to them? It is hard
to know at this point, because there is no research on the issue. I expect,
however, that some probably do, given that most asexual people likely
believe that they will be perceived with some level of public disdain
when they come out. In fact, I expect that a portion of the public do
perceive asexual people to be very unusual and bizarre—in short,
“freaks.” For example, although some of the heterosexual majority may
have ambivalence toward gays and lesbians, gays and lesbians are, like
heterosexual people, interested in sex. In contrast, asexual people may
seem especially foreign to average (heterosexual) people. It is clear from
some of my media appearances (e.g., on talk or radio phone-in shows)
that some members of the general public do indeed hold these views and
are not afraid to espouse them publicly. There is also some recent evi-
dence that asexual people may, in fact, be viewed more negatively than
gays, bisexuals, and lesbians—specifically, as “less than human” (see
more in chapter 4) (MacInnis & Hodson, in press).
However, some asexual people may not fear public reprisals with the
same intensity as gays and lesbians, because they sense that the discrimi-
nation against them may be less virulent than what can occur against
gays and lesbians. For example, homosexual men are sometimes the vic-
tims of “gay bashing” (Berrill, 1992; Federal Bureau of Investigation,
2002). Indeed, the vitriol directed against asexual people may never reach
the same intensity as that which has historically been directed against
gay men, partially because asexual people probably do not challenge the
gender-role expectations of heterosexual men in the same way that gay
men do. Some heterosexual men view the effeminacy of some gay men

88
Chapter 7
with particular disdain, yet there is no direct evidence of elevated effemi-
nacy in asexual men (but see more on gender in chapter 6). Gender non-
conformity likely plays a role in some gay men’s fears of coming out, as
we discovered that effeminate gay men who believe that the world is
unjust are especially likely to delay the coming-out process (Bogaert &
Hafer, 2009).
Let’s consider some other unique features of asexual development
that may contribute to differences in coming-out experiences between
asexual people and gays/lesbians. One is the degree of newness of the
“asexual” label/identity; after all, asexual identities are likely very recent
phenomena (see also chapter 3). A related one is the diffuse nature of the
asexual community; recall that asexual people comprise a diverse bunch
(see, for example, chapter 5). These features may delay the coming-out
experience in asexual people. For example, one asexual woman I met did
not come out until her twenties because she just didn’t know “what” she
was until recently. This makes sense: How can one go through the iden-
tity process (including coming out) when there is no obvious group with
whom to identify? Recall that labeling oneself (e.g., as “gay”) usually
comes before, and is arguably a necessary precursor to, coming out (Cass,
1979; Coleman, 1982; Troiden, 1989). After all, one needs a recognizable
group, with a label, with whom to identify and of which to come out as a
member. Until very recently, there has been no organized and publicly
identifiable asexual group. In contrast, gays and lesbians have had a vis-
ible and identifiable presence in the Western world for many years, argu-
ably for at least thirty years or more (e.g., Terry, 1999). Of course, despite
this fact, some gays and lesbians also may not know their sexual iden-
tities until later in life. However, I expect that young people with emerg-
ing same-sex attractions have much better access to information on gay
and lesbian identities and cultures than young people without any sexual
attractions have on asexual identities and cultures.
There is support for the reasoning that asexual people may come out
later (or not at all) because there has not been, until recently, a visible
group with whom to identify. Bisexuals have more identity confusion
and come out later than gays and lesbians, and it has been argued that
this difference occurs because there is a less visible and organized bisexu-
al community relative to the gay and lesbian community (Fox, 1995).
Another unique feature of asexual development that may affect public
disclosures and coming out in asexual people, relative to gays and les-

Forging an (A)sexual Identity
89
bians, was mentioned earlier: lack of sexual behavior does not need legiti-
mizing in the same way as same-sex behavior (e.g., fellatio among men).
After all, no one was ever caught not engaging in sex and then put in
prison for it. Asexual people, then, may have a reduced need to come out,
or at least a reduced need for public displays of their sexual orientation,
as there is less of a need to defend their behavior. Indeed, one might
argue that the emergence of the gay/lesbian community as a social force
occurred, at least partly, to secure this legitimacy from the heterosexual
majority and the politicians who serve them. Relatedly, one might also
argue that a coherent and integrated sexual identity in gays and lesbians
was also born of this necessity, in order to allow the group to fight for
their rights as unique sexual beings and to engage freely in sex in the
manner of their choosing. In short, it is important to recognize that (sexu-
al) identities may also emerge out of and serve political and social goals.
Note that I am not implying that a gay/lesbian identity was consciously
created by gay and lesbian political activists, although such activism may
have contributed to this identity; broad social forces also might have
acted to bring these identities to the fore (Terry, 1999). Interestingly, the
military understands these processes and political/social forces. They use
young people’s search for an identity and their need to belong (e.g., You
are a Marine!) to achieve similar but more extreme social/political effects
during basic training: to motivate and ready soldiers for battle (Dyer,
1985).
If asexual people have less need for battle against oppressive forces in
society (relative to gays and lesbians), this may also partly explain why
they have been unrecognized as a social group, and why a coherent asex-
ual identity and culture has not emerged until recently. Asexual iden-
tities and group cohesion among asexual people are not necessities for
many asexual people, as asexual behavior is not at stake if they don’t rail
against “the man.” In contrast, historically, gay and lesbian people
needed to—and often still need to—rail against the (heterosexual) man to
ensure that they could engage in the sexual behavior of their choosing.
It is also true that sexuality, by definition, is a nonissue—off the radar,
so to speak—for many asexual people (Scherrer, 2008). Thus, an asexual
person’s need to assert an identity, particularly a public one, may have
little “sexual” slant to it. This is in contrast to gays and lesbians, whose
identity may be more sexualized. After all, sexuality is anything but a
nonissue for them. Indeed, it is relevant and salient to their identities in

90
Chapter 7
two basic ways. First, gay people’s sexuality contrasts starkly with the
heterosexual majority. Second, like heterosexual people, gays and les-
bians are sexual beings, strongly influenced by their desires and attrac-
tions. Thus, their sexuality is doubly relevant and likely acts as a creative
force in forging their identities. Of course, asexual people share with gays
and lesbians their status as a sexual minority, and thus they also stand in
contrast to a sexual majority. So, sexuality is potentially important to
their identity also, as it makes them stand apart from the majority group.
But unlike gays and lesbians, asexual people are not sexual beings (e.g.,
lacking in sexual attraction), and so sexuality, given that it is a nonissue, is
not as likely to invade their psychic space and to take front and center
position when their identities are being formed.
Consider this quote from an asexual person: “Outside of AVEN or
conversations specifically about sexuality, I don’t really consciously think
of myself as asexual. Like being an atheist or non-Hispanic or a non-
driver (all apply), asexuality is something I’m not and never was, rather
than something I am. The label is mostly a useful marker. So, my asexual
identity is important in certain contexts, and I can’t imagine my life if I
weren’t asexual, but it is not specifically important to me” (Scherrer, 2008,
p. 630).
The famous psychologist George Kelly and his personal construct the-
ory are relevant to the two points made above. According to Kelly (1955),
the way we see the world, other people, and ourselves is based on our
personal constructs. We are construct “constructors.” These constructs
(or ideas about the way things work) almost always are perceived to have
extreme points. Thus, we tend to think about people as occupying an
extreme of say, a “happy-sad” dimension: Sally is happy; Frank is sad.
Thus, the happy-sad construct is defined for us in large part by its ex-
tremes. It is not surprising, then, that sexual minorities use extremes, or
contrasts, of sexuality (e.g., hetero-homo) to define themselves as people,
or that heterosexual people would use these extremes/contrasts in defin-
ing sexual minorities. But it is also true that some constructs are just not
as relevant for people as other constructs. So, if sexuality is completely
removed from one’s life (and one barely gives it a second thought), it may
not be a personally relevant construct in defining oneself, or in forging
one’s identity. Some asexual people, then, may have little to no incentive
to form an asexual identity and come out, or at least no incentive to make
public displays of their nonsexuality.

Forging an (A)sexual Identity
91
Consider an example to illustrate this point further: Do non-golfers—
agolfers?—go to golf courses and march on the eighteenth green to assert
their non-golfing identity? It would be rather strange, of course, for non-
golfers to do so, because golfing, as an activity and as a construct, is not
personally relevant to most of them, nor is it part of their identity. Thus,
as a golfer, as I am finishing up my round and heading to the clubhouse, I
rarely see such displays and marches from non-golfers.2
From the above, it may seem like there are only modest reasons for
asexual people to forge and fiercely defend a sexual identity. But we
must not discount the importance of the other identity-relevant forces in
asexual people’s lives, such as general identity needs, not wanting to be
alone and isolated, and perceiving oneself on the extreme end of an often
very salient construct in society—sexuality. Moreover, there is another
reason why forging an identity, developing an asexual culture, and be-
coming part of a cohesive group is of importance to asexual people: to
defend their lives against modern medicalization and the perception that
they have a disorder or are unhappy.
But before we address the issue of medicalization, let’s consider a little
background. Asexuality, broadly defined, has often not been viewed
across cultures and historically as a disorder or an illness. In fact, from a
religious perspective, asexuality (or at least abstinence) has often been
viewed as a virtue. For example, most religions across the world pro-
scribe liberal sexuality, and some (e.g., Buddhism, Roman Catholicism)
still view abstinence as a virtue. Moreover, non-religiously based institu-
tions, including the Western medical establishment, historically would
not likely have labeled asexuality a disorder, particularly in women. In
the 1950s and 1960s, this started to change. Sexuality became decoupled
from reproduction, and sex was viewed on its own merits; that is, as a
source of physical pleasure, recreation, and so forth (Sigusch, 1998).
Given this decoupling of sex from reproduction, it is perhaps under-
standable that the absence of sexuality started to be seen as a potential
problem and eventually found its way into important medical texts and
manuals, like the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders
(DSM-III)
(American
Psychiatric
Association,
1980).
(Most
North
American clinicians diagnose mental health problems based on criteria
found in the DSM.) For example, “inhibited sexual desire,” a name later
changed to “hypoactive sexual desire disorder,” first appeared in this
manual in 1980. About ten years later, “lack or loss of sexual desire” first

92
Chapter 7
appeared in another important medical manual, the International Statisti-
cal Classification of Diseases and Related Health Problems (ICD-10) (World
Health Organization, 1992). Some social critics, particularly feminists,
have also argued that the medicalization of many aspects of sexuality,
including asexuality—again, broadly defined—has occurred because
there are profits to be had from creating disorders where, arguably, none
existed before (Drew, 2003; Fishman, 2004; Fishman, 2007; Tiefer, 2002).
In the wake of this medicalization of asexuality, the modern asexual-
ity movement began. David Jay, the founding member of the most popu-
lar asexuality website, AVEN, has explained at various times why he
began the site. His reasons seem to reflect a number of the identity issues
mentioned above. For example, one reason was personal: “He was driven
by memories of feeling alone. As a teenager in St. Louis, he searched the
Web for asexual and found only research on amoebas” (Bulwa, 2009, Au-
gust 24). Another reason was educational—to help other asexual people
understand more about themselves (Bulwa, 2009, August 24). Indeed,
there are various stories of asexual people “discovering themselves”
through AVEN. For example, one young woman recalls that AVEN “de-
scribed her so accurately . . . that she cried over her keyboard” (Bulwa,
2009, August 24).
It is also clear that, over time, Jay wanted to build a community that
would enable asexual people to change the way the world (especially the
medical world) views them. Thus, this last reason for developing AVEN
is in line with (public) identities being a means of social and political
change. He has said, “When I was younger, the message I would always
hear is that you need sex to be happy” (Childs, 2009, January 16). He has
also said, “We need to know we’re not broken” (Bulwa, 2009, August 24),
and “We need to have more discussion about how people can not have
sex and still be happy” (Childs, 2009, January 16). This last reason for
founding and expanding AVEN has led to an active movement to do just
that: Some AVEN members have become a vocal group lobbying to
change the way the latest DSM edition labels asexual people, particularly
if they are not distressed about their lack of sexual interest/attraction.
One media report stated this directly: “AVEN members have one con-
crete goal: changing the authoritative Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of
Mental Disorders to make explicit that asexuality is not a hypoactive sexu-
al desire disorder” (Bulwa, 2009, August 24). However, such change be-
gins with, or at least is facilitated by, a cohesive group rallying around a

Forging an (A)sexual Identity
93
relevant identity or common label. After all, having an identity as an
“asexual” person has its benefits, both personally and politically. In the
recent scientific and clinical literature, the words most widely used to
describe asexual people have intimated, if not actively embraced, the
language of illness and disease (e.g., “hypoactive sexual desire disor-
der”). In contrast, the word “asexual” is merely descriptive of the phe-
nomenon and not laden with values; it does not imply that a specific level
of sexual interest or attraction is correct and healthy. Thus, people who
embrace the identity of an “asexual” are likely more positive about their
self-image than those who are asexual but do not identify as such, and
particularly relative to those who use medical or clinical language to
describe themselves. People who embrace an identity as “asexual” are
also, I expect, more likely to form a cohesive political group than those
who do not identify as such and/or those who choose more medical or
clinical language to describe themselves. Embracing an asexual identity
also, in turn, potentially enables asexual people to change the medical
establishment, or at least its rules for what is and what is not a mental
illness. And they may succeed in doing so.
SUMMARY
Identities allow us to know who we are and to stake our claim as unique
and worthy of recognition. They also allow us to seek solace and comfort
with, and forge ties to, those with whom we share commonalities. Iden-
tities also often emerge out of and serve social and political ends, allow-
ing us to rally our group in defense of our interests.
Sexual identities are especially powerful components of the broader
human identity process. That many asexual people still want, or are com-
pelled, to forge a sexual identity (i.e., as an asexual) attests to the rele-
vance and power of sex in our society. They are, like the potoroo, seem-
ingly alone in a very large and different (sexual) world. Sexuality is also
likely to be, at least for some, a very relevant personal construct, even if
they do not engage in sex at all. It is as if these asexuals know that, on
some very deep level, sex really matters in society, and therefore their
own identities must also be defined by it, even if that identification takes
on meaning because it is the polar opposite of sex. An asexual identity is
also clearly relevant from a political standpoint, providing the ground
support and a rallying point needed to change public perceptions and

94
Chapter 7
institutions that claim (or at least imply) that asexual people are ill or
broken. That (public) identities are often political, and can serve as a way
of gaining or defending psychic and other territory, is illustrated by the
fact that groups often tend to lose their (unique) identity when the “war”
is over and won (Associated Press, 2007; Scarr, 1987). For example, some
recent stories on the gay and lesbian community illustrate how tradition-
al elements of a gay/lesbian identity are being lost in the wake of increas-
ing public acceptance. For asexual people, however, their war—and their
need for a common identity to help fight it—has probably just begun.
NOTES
1.
We are currently collecting data on the coming-out process in lesbians and
bisexual women, and it will be interesting to see if we can replicate these findings in
women. In our first study (Bogaert and Hafer, 2009), there was not a sufficiently large
sample to test this issue in women.
2. As mentioned, I have a thing for golf; thus, golfing examples clearly have a
special resonance for me.

EIGHT
The Madness of Sex
One day in the locker room I overheard a conversation between a gregar-
ious old man and his younger male friend. The conversation flitted
among seemingly unrelated topics, but eventually landed on one that
seemed to pique the old man’s interest more than others. He described,
with some curiosity, how his interests in sex had changed: It no longer
appealed. As an example, he noted that, these days, the famous and
staggeringly popular Sports Illustrated swimsuit issue, sent to him as part
of his regular subscription to this magazine, was “wasted.” The bathing
beauties (meant to remind avid sports fans that there was, after all, one
additional, equally important reason to live) were just a bit of an oddity
to him. They “did nothing” for him. He concluded, to his own amuse-
ment, that perhaps if these women were carrying a steaming-hot peppe-
roni pizza, then maybe they would pique his interest!
Most sexual people have an understanding of this old man’s feelings.
Sexual people can go through periods in their lives when sex holds little
interest for them. Perhaps a stressful job, a tough bit of schooling, or a
family tragedy is the cause of these relatively transitory bouts of sexual
disinterest. And, of course, on a shorter time scale, in any given day,
people have periods when sex—even if the opportunity presents itself to
have sex with an attractive partner—is not appealing, or at least not
uppermost in one’s thoughts. We are routinely occupied by the day-to-
day realities of life, and sex may seem very unappealing (or even a bit
alien) at any given moment. Even average adolescent males or young
95

96
Chapter 8
men, whose sex drives are said to be like an endless well, have a “refrac-
tory period,” which refers to a state of disinterest (or no arousal) after sex.
In such relatively sexless states, one’s higher-order, analytical think-
ing may hold sway, and thus one may wonder what all the fuss is about
(see also chapter 1): Why is sex such an important and powerful influence
in one’s life? One may even have a curious feeling—an aha! moment—
that sex, if the truth be told, is a curious, even peculiar, activity and
preoccupation. At such times, one has caught a glimpse of what I call the
madness of sex. You could also call it, perhaps, an asexual’s perspective on
human sexuality.
Incidentally, I knew a college professor who called adolescence the
state of “testosterone poisoning.” He was trying to be funny, of course,
but his description of adolescence also captures the same underlying idea
here: that the activities of, and preoccupation with, sex (along with the
hormone that provides some of the motivation for it, testosterone) can be
seen as a kind of odd—even mad—state of mind. And certainly, as men-
tioned in chapter 1, if one views sex from a distance (“deconstructs” it, if
you will), it can be seen as comprising a host of symptom-like behav-
iors—obsessive thoughts, odd vocalizations, repetitive movements, and
so on—reminiscent of a mental disorder.
Most, if not all, sexual people, then, may have some understanding of
what it would be like to be asexual all the time. They might even wonder
whether asexual people have a special knowledge, seeing sex for what it
truly is: a rather strange preoccupation partly induced by a brain poison
(i.e., hormones). Prepubescent children (i.e., before their hormonal surge)
often have this view of sex, wondering why in heaven’s name would
someone want to do that, as if it were as sensible and pleasurable as
repeatedly sticking one’s finger in another’s ear. Perhaps prepubescence
can be construed as a form of asexuality or, more accurately, as a related
phenomenon: presexuality.
On the AVEN website, comments at times appear about the strange,
nonsensical activities of sexual people. I hear that AVEN webmasters
sometimes have to rein in some of the more extreme and disparaging
comments on these strange activities of sexual people. It reminds me of
the disparaging rant that some gay people hurl at heterosexuals: Breeders!
I suppose this comment is meant to suggest that the heterosexual habit of
overpopulating a fragile planet with their offspring is, well, a bit self-

The Madness of Sex
97
centered and gauche. Both views have merit perhaps, and maybe there
are webmasters reining in breeder rants on gay/lesbian sites as well.
The view that sex is odd is sometimes afforded to people when ex-
posed to sexual activities that they don’t find stimulating. Heterosexual
men, for example, may find gay porn to be curious, even amusing, rather
than titillating or deeply arousing. When they watch it, they may feel like
an observer watching someone sticking a probe into a friend’s ear, and
although it is clear that both the prober and the one being probed find (or
feign) this activity deeply interesting and satisfying (e.g., by their vocal-
izations or other telltale signs), the heterosexual viewer may feel that
there is no apparent reason for this activity. Thus, they are left with a
largely curious, even amused reaction. There is a scene in the movie The
Kids Are Alright in which a lesbian couple is turned on by gay (male) porn
and incorporates it into their lovemaking (Gilbert et al., 2010). The movie
shows snippets of a gay porn movie, but the sex scenes are played up in
such a way as to seem amusing. I think the filmmakers were playfully
suggesting, perhaps in line with the themes of the movie, that any sex is a
bit odd (regardless of the players) and can be viewed with curious
amusement when seen from the outsider’s perspective. It just so happens
that the viewers (in the audience) are likely predominantly heterosexual,
as they are the majority in society, but it could be the other way around:
gay people viewing heterosexual porn—or, more to the point, asexual
people viewing any porn (but see chapter 10).
Even while in the throes of sexual acts themselves, sexual people may
have some understanding of the feverish madness of sex. Thus, if a
heterosexual woman has an exciting new sexual partner and he is nearly
all-consuming for her, she may still have, in moments of reflection, some
knowledge of how her recent life has turned upside down because of
him. An even more extreme example is a married heterosexual man who
spends an inordinate amount of time and money on prostitutes. Yet on
some level he “knows” that his behavior is irrational. He may even know
that he is on the verge of ruining his life, as his job and family life are at
stake. Some clinicians, of course, call this kind of sexual behavior an
addiction.
Sometimes the madness of sex has little to do with actual behaviors,
and more to do with a fantasy that never gets lived out because the object
of desire is unattainable. Thus a classmate or colleague at work becomes
an obsession; a carefully managed fantasy, perhaps, but at weaker mo-

98
Chapter 8
ments the fantasy may leak into, and even disrupt, an otherwise tranquil
home life.
I have a very vivid memory of an incident like this on a beach in
Australia. I was nestled on a blanket watching the surf, the sand, and the
people, when I noted this man, his wife, and their three children making
their way onto the beach. They seemed like an average family (if such a
thing exists), looking to secure for themselves a bit of beach real estate.
Aside from this preoccupation, the man was caught up by the details of
his family life, which, it seemed, was not going well this morning and
was spilling over, rather noisily, onto the beach. His wife was imploring
him to tend to a nagging child complaining about an older sibling, who
was, it seemed, a bit of a hitter. The man looked frazzled, haggard, even
old, although I bet he wasn’t a day over thirty. Just then, as if he had been
doused by cold water, he stopped, and his jaw dropped like a lead
weight, because he noticed a topless sunbathing woman—in fact, he al-
most stepped on her. Evidently, in his eyes, she was gorgeous. His stare
was of a man completely taken in—lost, in fact. And you could see that,
at that moment, if she got up from her towel and went up to him and
asked him if he wanted to spend the night together, he would have
chosen to do so eagerly, whatever the consequences to his marriage and
family. Clearly, so much of the power—and the madness—of sex are in
its possibility, not its actuality. Of course, people often try to keep the
madness of sex in check, relegating it to their fantasies, but it is still
madness. The Australian story is, of course, a testament to the agony of
the wanted but unattainable.
Aside from these anecdotal examples, there is scientific research to
support my view on the madness of sex. Indeed, research evidence sug-
gests that people’s cognitive functioning is impaired significantly when
preoccupied with sex, even if they are not in the heat of a sexual moment.
Heterosexual men primed to think of potential sexual activities (via pic-
tures of beautiful women, fully clothed) have a diminished capacity for a
type of rational thought—the ability to plan well for the future (Wilson &
Daly, 2004). That is, they “discount” the future. It is as if the future be-
comes a less-than-plausible reality in the wake of the sexually charged
moment. The researchers speculate that the possibility of mating (even if
it is an unrealistic prospect, as the men knew they were never going to
meet the women) makes men’s minds become too focused on the “mat-
ing moment,” as if the future does not matter. The researchers argue that

The Madness of Sex
99
the images of attractive women affect the brain—exciting nerve centers
associated with mating, and shutting down more rational, planning-
oriented centers—in a similar way as the prospect of real mating. When
human brains evolved hundreds of thousands of years ago, there were, of
course, no photographs. So, these modern two-dimensional images trick
men’s Stone Age minds into responding as if there were actually beauti-
ful women smiling in front of them. The men’s response, then, is doubly
irrational: first, they are responding to pictures as if they were reality (no,
boys, a real woman has not just beamed into your bedrooms!), and second,
they are discounting the future at the prospect of sex.
One could argue that, from a gene-based view of life, the second irra-
tionality—discounting the future at the prospect of sex—does make some
“sense,” as the future doesn’t amount to a hill of beans if there is great
potential right now to mate and replicate one’s genes. After all, the future
is only important if the genetic payoff down the road is plausibly greater
than the genetic payoff in the here and now. From this perspective, the
“future” (i.e., a long life with plans, schemes, and delays of gratification)
only exists as a concept in our minds because it often leads to genetic
payoffs. Even so, let’s not forget the main point here: Isn’t it bizarre (and
mad!) that the prospect of sex—and a mere image, no less—has the ca-
pacity to derail the best laid plans of mice and (particularly) men?1
There are other studies showing that sex is linked to various “un-
healthy” behaviors (taking physical risks, exposure to infectious diseases,
etc.). One study showed that adolescent boys and young men were more
likely to take physical risks (e.g., doing crazy tricks) when skateboarding
in the presence of an attractive woman, and this effect was caused by
elevated testosterone (Ronay & von Hippel, 2010), the hormonal “poi-
son” mentioned earlier. There is also a recent study showing that when
women are primed (e.g., given very brief glimpses or reminders) with
romantic and sexual themes, they have an increased willingness to en-
gage in unhealthy and risky behaviors, like using risky dieting pills and
going to cancer-causing tanning salons (Hill & Durante, 2011). The au-
thors of the study also found that the women felt a diminished sense of
vulnerability when mating goals are uppermost in their minds.
People think that our attitudes are rationally formed, the result of
well-thought-out arguments and an astute and sensitive scaling of the
pros and cons of the issues, along with, of course, accumulated wisdom
from years of experience. Yet our attitudes are frequently governed by

100
Chapter 8
irrational, emotional states including—yes, you guessed it!—sexual de-
sires. An example: One of the reasons that heterosexual men have nega-
tive attitudes toward male homosexuality but not female homosexuality
is sexual in nature. Heterosexual men are often turned on by lesbian sex
(Louderback & Whitley, 1997), and if one takes this arousal away, hetero-
sexual men’s positive attitude toward lesbianism no longer exists. So, a
little sexual desire/arousal toward lesbianism, and presto: positive (or at
least neutral) attitudes toward it! After all, how could lesbian sex be
wrong, immoral, and disgusting, if I am turned on by it? Impossible!
Ever flown into a jealous rage—just “lost it”—over a partner’s flirta-
tion or outright sexual indiscretion with another? Most adults have expe-
rienced sexual jealousy, along with the torturous effects this emotion has
on one’s thoughts and plans, even if the emotion itself doesn’t disinte-
grate into extreme behavior. But sometimes it does: sexual jealousy is
considered one of the main motives in killings that occur in domestic
disputes within the United States (Daly & Wilson, 1988; Daly, Wilson, &
Weghorst, 1982). When a jealous rage does descend into violence, the
resulting act is sometimes called a crime of passion. In civil courts in the
United States, crimes of passion can be defensible if one pleads “tempo-
rary insanity,” making the defendant (at least theoretically) no longer
criminally liable. Similarly, in nineteenth-century France, a crime passion-
nel (or crime of passion), including murder, was defensible in the same
way. The fact that the courts in various societies at various time periods
recognize that sex, at least under certain circumstances, causes “insanity”
illustrates my main point: sex, in many manifestations, and perhaps even
at its core, is mad.
When liberal-minded observers hear about the sex scandal of a celeb-
rity (e.g., David Letterman) or a sports personality (e.g., Tiger Woods) or
a politician (e.g., Bill Clinton, Arnold Schwarzenegger, Dominique
Strauss-Kahn), they typically do not decry what might be perceived by
more conservative observers to be the shocking immorality of the acts,
but rather the shocking stupidity of the perpetrator’s behavior in getting
caught. And it is clear that there is at times an almost wanton disregard
for any kind of careful planning or thoughtful execution in relation to
behaviors that, if discovered, could do serious damage to their reputa-
tions and careers. Even more telling is that many of the people caught in
such scandals are incredibly bright, savvy, and highly functioning in the
social sphere.

The Madness of Sex
101
One might argue that this wanton behavior has less to do with the
maddening effects of sex, and more to do with a sense of entitlement and
disregard for others that seems to go hand in hand with power, status,
and narcissism. Partly true, I expect, but this is likely not the whole story.
For example, it does not explain the often careful and thoughtful behav-
ior these men routinely display in other areas of their lives. If behavior in
these other domains were chosen carelessly, it could be almost as damag-
ing to their careers as an awkwardly planned sexual liaison. In addition,
if one prefers a “power explanation” over a “sex explanation” to account
for this wanton behavior of men of celebrity and status, one would still
have to account for the tricky interplay of power and sex, particularly in
men. For example, there is a surge of testosterone (potentially affecting
both sex drive and feelings of power) in men after they win at competi-
tions (Carré, Putnam, & McCormick, 2009). In short, it is very difficult to
disentangle power from many men’s sexual motives (and vice versa). It is
also hard to argue that sex is not at least partly the culprit underlying the
seeming irrationality of the behavior leading to these scandals.
There is an antidrug ad showing an egg sizzling in a frying pan. The
caption reads, “This is your brain on drugs.” Perhaps an equivalent one
should be reserved for sex (“This is your brain on sex”), since brains on
sex, including the brains of celebrities, politicians, and sports figures, do
irrational things.
Three months after his bizarre car crash and a myriad of rumors, Tiger
Woods2 emerged on February 19, 2010, from his public hibernation to
offer a mea culpa for his extramarital affairs and their impact on his fami-
ly, friends, fellow players, fans, and sponsors. One of the more interesting
elements of all this was the astonishing degree of interest in this story,
relative to all the other issues of the day. One newspaper headline as-
serted boldly, “The world stops for 13 minutes” (Broad, 2010, February
28). Not literally true, of course, but almost: the New York Stock Ex-
change did stop trading for the thirteen minutes to watch the spectacle of
Woods’s carefully crafted news conference. “Tiger Woods News Confer-
ence” was also the highest-rated Google search term by midday. The
level of interest in this story, as with the scandals before and after it, was
driven by sexual curiosity. This is not to say that there weren’t other
angles that made people curious to watch or to hear or to read about it
(e.g., the business/sponsorship impact), but the only angle that drove it to
this level of fury was clearly the sexual one.

102
Chapter 8
Also, consider this: the fact that a relatively conservative, business-
oriented newspaper—Canada’s The Globe and Mail—would say that the
“world stopped” (Broad, 2010, February 28) illustrates a main point of
this book, that one’s view of the world—including the perception of
whether it seems to stop or seems to run at a breakneck pace—is filtered
through the different lenses that we have for seeing it. Most people see
the world through sexual lenses, just as business-oriented people often
see the world through business-oriented lenses; the lenses we wear—
sexual or otherwise—are often no longer obvious to us, just as a long-
worn set of spectacles over the years becomes imperceptible to the wearer
and may even feel like part of his or her own face.
What much of the public and the media did not realize was that
Woods’s apology was borne out of his need to complete a number of
essential “steps” in his “sexual addiction” treatment, similar to the thera-
peutic steps required in Alcoholics Anonymous. These steps include an
apology to all those whom his sexually addictive behavior (and its seque-
lae) has wronged in one way or another. It is perhaps fitting that it came
in the form of a highly rated press conference, which was meant to reach
not just family and friends but also fellow golfers, his fans, and sponsors,
because the scandal and fallout probably affected—rightly or wrongly—
many millions of people.3
One of the interesting elements of this episode, however, was the fact
that part of the public and much of the press wanted Woods to have a
public shaming. They seemed to want him to admit that his sense of
entitlement led to arguably excessive sexual behavior—including, evi-
dently, threesomes with prostitutes. But why was this sexual shaming
necessary, or at least interesting to us? Is it because sex is embedded,
even pathologically so, in our culture and in the way we think?
But let’s push the point further by turning it on its head. Why is it that
Tiger Woods’s sense of entitlement should not have spurred a public
apology, a shaming, over his other excesses, ones that are arguably much
more harmful to the planet and humanity than his sexual ones? Why isn’t
he apologizing for his egregious and excessive consumption of the
world’s resources and pollution of the planet? Why isn’t he apologizing
for his private jet, his gas-guzzling vehicles, and the energy consumption
in his houses, which could otherwise run a small country? (That is also an
interesting “threesome,” by the way.) More importantly, why aren’t we
more interested in that apology, rather than the one we got? Why

The Madness of Sex
103
wouldn’t the world stop for thirteen minutes for that? I think you know
the answer: Because it is not about sex, and people are mad about sex.4
SUMMARY
Sex is the great story of life (see chapter 1), but it is also truly and utterly
mad. Some might argue that, yes, it is mad, but it does not have to be so.
It is our culture that makes it mad, and if we were to strip away the
neuroticism and hypocrisy from it and “raise the children right,” it
would not be so. Whether this is true or not, it is an interesting argument
to consider. What definitely is true is that the current state of sex should
make us cautious about assuming that the absence of sex in one form or
another—asexuality—is pathological. I discuss this subject—whether
asexuality is indeed a disorder—more fully in my next chapter.
NOTES
1. Yes, I am taking liberties with John Steinbeck’s famous book title.
2. This section on Tiger Woods reopened a wound for me and was a bit difficult to
write. Ever since I turned forty, I have been obsessed with golf, a game I played in my
childhood, let slide in my twenties and thirties, and then recently returned to. So, since
midlife, I have played a lot of golf and watched a ton of it on TV. My obsession
reflects, perhaps, a bit of the energy of a midlife crisis channeled into this (harmless?)
indulgence. Thus, I think I have used golf as an escape from my regular work life as a
sexologist, which, of course, was filled with sex. Basically, I needed an escape, and golf
was a good one, as it was totally removed from sex. Is there anything less sexy than
golf? (Maybe a few things, but not many.) However, after the Tiger Woods sex scan-
dal, my two worlds—sex and golf—collided, and now I can’t play golf, or watch it on
TV, in the same way. Alas.
3. The paragraph above is not meant to imply that I believe such a public apology
was necessary, either from a therapeutic perspective or because it was morally right to
do so given his behavior. It is also not meant to imply that I believe that Tiger Woods
has an “addiction,” which, by the way, many sexologists believe is not an appropriate
name for sexual problems. I am also not necessarily implying he had a “sexual prob-
lem.” (Given his cover-up of his affairs to his wife and her reaction to them when they
were revealed, however, it is clear to me that he had a relationship problem.) Rather,
this story is merely meant to give a context for why this event occurred.
4. I am picking on Tiger Woods about his excessive use of the world’s resources,
but I could have chosen countless examples of excessive resource use in people, in-
cluding myself, whose middle-class Western lifestyle (including my golf) is also open
to criticism.


NINE
Do You Have Hypoactive Skydiving
Disorder?
Is there only one right way to live a human life? Must people have certain
experiences to make their lives worthwhile and healthy? Most of us grap-
ple with these kinds of questions, as they help us to understand our
goals, setbacks, and achievements in life. I’ve also grappled with these
questions from an academic perspective, because I was (and still am)
trying to understand whether asexuality should be considered a disorder
(Bogaert, 2006b). This is the subject of the present chapter. I examine
whether asexuality should be seen as unhealthy, and I do so from a
number of different perspectives; in other words, I try to put on a number
of different lenses and see what I can see.
From one perspective, we might argue that asexuality is a disorder
because it goes against life’s natural order of things; after all, sex is a
natural process, and the desire to “do it” with others is what all (sexual)
life strives to do in one form or another. This view of asexuality as disor-
der uses a lens crafted by evolutionary biology. Thus, asexuality (i.e., a
lack of sexual attraction) may seem to contradict an important biological
imperative: sex is the means by which humans reproduce, and thus to
eschew this aspect of life may seem to fail at a basic goal of life—to
reproduce.
When an organism reproduces, its genes are passed on to future gen-
erations. The “winners,” or the best-adapted organisms, are the ones that
pass on the most genes to future generations. The most maladapted are
the ones that don’t pass on genes (or that pass on the fewest genes) to
105

106
Chapter 9
future generations. Most human beings do the replication game, or at-
tempt to do this, through sexual reproduction. Thus a sexual interest in
the opposite sex—as the means of reproduction—should be considered a
normal and healthy preoccupation. So, for instance, let’s consider a fic-
tional person—we’ll call her “Sally”—who lived between 1920 and 2000.
She married and had three children, two of whom also had children.
Thus, her genes have been passed on to future generations through her
children (and grandchildren), conceived through a traditional heterosex-
ual relationship. The psychological mechanisms that allowed her to ac-
complish this were fairly traditional: she was sexually and romantically
attracted to men, and had a desire and ability to nurture children. Thus,
her tendencies to adopt a traditional heterosexual relationship, along
with her nurturance and intelligence as a parent, allowed her to conceive,
give birth to, and ultimately raise three vehicles to her genetic posterity
(i.e., three kids). Way to go, Sally! Or, perhaps more accurately, way to
go, Sally’s genes!
From this perspective, individuals having these tendencies to replicate
their genes through sexual reproduction are perhaps “healthy,” the rea-
soning goes, because they conform to a natural process that all successful
(sexual) life forms follow.
But let’s consider some complications with this perspective. First,
many sexual people (even a few heterosexual biologists I know) do not
have children—including many who do not forgo the mechanism of re-
production itself, sex—and thus fail miserably on this ultimate of biologi-
cal imperatives. So, do they have a disorder or are they unhealthy?
Second, there is more than one way to skin a cat, evolutionarily speak-
ing. As suggested in chapter 3, the replication of DNA does occur via
asexual reproduction in a host of organisms. So, sexual reproduction is
not the only natural process of reproduction. Moreover, aside from asexu-
al reproduction occurring in simpler or phylogenetically older species,
sexual reproduction is not the only game in town in other, more complex
or recently evolved species—even in human beings! Individuals can po-
tentially replicate their genes through other means than sexual reproduc-
tion—in particular, via kin-selection processes. In these processes, the rep-
lication of one’s genes occurs through kin or closely related relatives. Our
relatives share our genes, and the closer the blood relation (e.g., brother
or sister as compared to third cousin), the more genes in common. Thus,
if our relatives replicate their genes (through, for example, sexual repro-

Do You Have Hypoactive Skydiving Disorder?
107
duction), we replicate ours, because a portion of their genes is, in fact, a
portion of our genes. Kin-selection mechanisms are also adaptive
(“healthy,” if you will) alternative strategies to replicate genes. So, even
though sexual reproduction is probably the primary method by which
human beings replicate their genes, it is not the only way gene replication
can occur.
This kin-selection model of gene replication may provide an impor-
tant answer to why homosexuality exists in humans. On the surface,
homosexuality is a challenge to evolutionary types (e.g., biologists, evo-
lutionary psychologists): Gay people don’t do sexual reproduction—or at
least not to the extent that heterosexual people do—yet homosexuality
has existed over time and across cultures and seems to have, at least
partially, a genetic basis (Bailey, Dunne, & Martin, 2000; Hamer, Hu,
Magnuson, Hu, & Pattatucci, 1993). So, how could “gay genes” ever com-
pete with “straight genes,” if the latter find themselves in a group (i.e.,
breeders) that engages in sexual reproduction, whereas the former find
themselves in a group that, on average, doesn’t?1
The answer may have to do with the kin of gay people. If a gay gene
confers some kind of reproductive advantage when expressed in the rela-
tives of gay people, then the gay gene could survive, even flourish,
throughout evolutionary history. Recently, researchers have found evi-
dence that gay men have female relatives who are especially fecund,
tending to have a lot of children (Iemmola & Camperio-Ciani, 2009). Aha!
So, even though gay men don’t breed like their heterosexual male
counterparts do, their sisters may do so, and at a high rate relative to the
sisters of heterosexual men, thus compensating for any loss to the gene
pool from gay men. This suggests that there is indeed a gay gene (or
genes) conferring some type of reproductive advantage in the female
relatives of gay men. Some researchers have speculated that it may be a
“man-loving” gene, which, when found in men, makes them gay, but
which, when found in women, makes them particularly likely to be at-
tracted to (and thus form heterosexual relationships with) men, leading
to lots of offspring and hence lots of gay (or “man-loving”) genes. Even if
there is a no “man-loving” gene making sisters reproduce more, a “gay”
gene may still be of some advantage to an individual who carries this
gene if it is associated with helping relatives’ children survive and repro-
duce. So, for example, a gay man may help raise his sister’s or brother’s
children, and thus his genes are replicated through helping kin, even if

108
Chapter 9
his genes aren’t replicated sexually. Interestingly, there is some evidence
for this mechanism in Samoan men with same-sex attraction, a group
called the Fa’afafine (Vasey & VanderLaan, 2010). Samoan society is of
some importance because it is likely closer than modern Western soci-
eties to the social and family relations that would have occurred when
humans evolved.
As these examples attest, nature has myriad ways of creating and
sustaining diversity, and what may seem like a genetic dead end, and
thus biologically “unhealthy,” may not be. So, that someone simply does
not reproduce through a traditional heterosexual process does not mean
that they are maladapted from an evolutionary perspective. It may just
mean that there is another evolutionary mechanism at work beyond sex-
ual reproduction that replicates the individual’s genes.
There is also a broader point here: To say that something is adaptive is
merely to say that it has evolutionary consequences in favor of gene
replication. It is a description of a natural process of change over time.
But as a description, should it bleed into moral reasoning? Evidence of an
adaptation is not evidence of a moral (or even a “health”) imperative. To
think otherwise is in a certain sense to fall victim to the naturalistic falla-
cy, a reasoning error that assumes that what is natural must also be good
or right. There are, of course, many examples of natural processes that
most people would not consider to be at all good or right or healthy. HIV/
AIDS and murder are two examples. But there is also no inherent moral
superiority in one set of genes over another merely on the basis that one
set replicates itself more frequently than another. They are merely chemi-
cals, after all, whether they replicate themselves or not.
The brain might deceive us into thinking there is some inherent
“rightness” in the replication of our genes. If so, however, this is a con
job. Our genes create brain structures that give us emotions and tenden-
cies that in turn tell us that certain things are more right than others. But
is this so? Can we truly have an “objective” sense of rightness and
wrongness related to reproduction that is independent of the whisper-
ings of our genes?
We can also frame moral and health questions in different ways to
show that their relevance and their answers are specific to context, time,
and culture. For example, in modern society, one might pose this moral
and health question: Is it right and healthy to add more humans to a planet
already suffering from overpopulation? I imagine that this question would

Do You Have Hypoactive Skydiving Disorder?
109
not have been posed, say, one hundred years ago, or, if it were, it prob-
ably would have prompted a different answer. In short, is there any
ultimate truth, significance, or rightness to the replication of human
DNA?
To summarize, an evolutionary perspective does not necessarily im-
ply that asexuality is a disorder. But would asexuality be considered
“pathological” from any other perspectives? Let’s consider a number of
these other perspectives (Bogaert, 2006b).
First, should asexual people be considered disordered and/or abnor-
mal because they constitute a small minority and thus are statistically
rare in the population? After all, to be abnormal is to deviate from the
norm. If you think about it, I expect you will see that this is a poor
criterion for pathology, because being a statistical rarity can be easily
construed as positive and life enhancing in certain domains (e.g., excep-
tional musical talent, as mentioned earlier).
In modern medicine and psychology, individuals are not typically
diagnosed with a (mental) pathology or dysfunction unless they experi-
ence
“marked
distress
or
interpersonal
difficulty”
(DSM-IV-TR)
(American Psychiatric Association, 2000, p. 539).2 For example, the most
common type of disorder that asexual people may be diagnosed with is
hypoactive sexual desire disorder, which is characterized by a marked
lack of desire for sex, accompanied by, as mentioned, distress or interper-
sonal difficulty.
Currently, we have only a modest amount of data on the mental
health of asexual people, so definitive conclusions about distress or other
psychological disturbance issues in this group await future research.
However, the research to date does not suggest that asexual people, as a
whole, are distressed by their lack of sexual interest. Psychologists Nicole
Prause and Cynthia Graham, and Lori Brotto and colleagues, found no
evidence that self-identified asexuals were distressed by their asexuality
(Prause & Graham, 2007; Brotto, Knudson, Inskip, Rhodes, & Erskine,
2010). For example, one participant in the Prause and Graham (2007)
study reported, “I’m not worried about it or I’m not concerned about
it. . . . My life is interesting enough and it’s not really, um, a necessity” (p.
346).
Related research suggests that a high percentage of people (as many
as 40 percent) in the United States report being very or extremely happy
even if they have not had sex in the last year (Laumann, Gagnon, Mi-

110
Chapter 9
chael, & Michaels, 1994). Of course, many of these people would not
define themselves as asexuals or be defined as asexual using a common
definition (i.e., enduring lack of sexual attraction). However, these results
do indicate that a lack of sexuality, at least broadly defined, is not neces-
sarily a reliable indicator of mental health or happiness. In addition, even
if new research finds that some asexual people do have, on average,
elevated rates of distress or other mental health issues, what would this
actually mean? Well, let’s consider some related research on other sexual
minorities.
Elevated distress and mental health issues have been found in some
gays and lesbians (Meyer, 2003). Does this mean that being gay or lesbian
is a disorder? No. There is, for example, other evidence that many gays
and lesbians are also happy, content, and free from serious mental health
issues (Busseri, Willoughby, Chalmers, & Bogaert, 2006; Diamond,
2003a). Moreover, from a modern medical or psychological perspective
(e.g., in the DSM), homosexuality is not viewed as pathological. So, even
if some gays and lesbians do have an elevated level of distress or other
mental health issues, this fact should not be used to pathologize all gays
and lesbians or homosexuality in general. Similarly, if future research
shows that asexual people do have an elevated level of distress or other
mental health issue, this fact should not be used to pathologize all asexu-
als or asexuality in general.
Another important issue to consider is the source of the distress.
Should we pathologize someone for feeling distressed because they do
not fit in with the larger group or because the majority of people do not
like them? Or, alternatively, should we pathologize the society itself for
not tolerating minorities and diversity? In sum, there are several argu-
ments against using distress (e.g., lack of evidence of increased distress,
questions about the source of any distress that does exist) as a basis for
pathologizing asexuality.
The second criterion often used to diagnose a mental disorder is inter-
personal difficulty. Thus, should we consider asexual people disordered
because they lack an important interpersonal dimension—sexuality?
Again, not necessarily. Interpersonal relations do not only include sex.
There are many aspects of social relations beyond sexuality, in which
asexual people may function normally; that is, similarly to the majority of
other people. Indeed, a sexual dysfunction is only diagnosed in modern
medicine and psychology (e.g., in the DSM) if it has an effect on interper-

Do You Have Hypoactive Skydiving Disorder?
111
sonal relations beyond the specific sexual domain that is of issue. So, for
asexual people, a lack of sexual interest is not per se a criterion for having
a disorder, unless it causes other interpersonal issues. And, of course,
celibates (e.g., nuns), by choice, never have sex with others and are not
considered to have a pathology by modern medicine and psychology.
Similarly, it does not make sense to pathologize asexual people, who by
their natures lack sexual interest and attraction, for not engaging in sex
with others.
But how about other (nonsexual) aspects of interpersonal relations—
do asexual people have a broad level of interpersonal impairment be-
yond sexuality?3 There is evidence that some asexual people may have
an elevated level of atypical interpersonal functioning, such as increased
social withdrawal (Brotto et al., 2010), but even if additional research
bears this out, this, again, does not necessarily mean that we should
pathologize all asexual people or asexuality in general.
An additional consideration is this: If an atypical biological process or
physical health condition underlies asexuality, does this mean that asexu-
ality is a disorder? For example, there is some evidence that health issues
and atypical prenatal development may underlie the development of
asexuality in some people (Bogaert, 2004). This research is important
when we consider the origins of asexuality (see chapter 13), but, for two
reasons, it should not guide our thinking on whether asexuality is a dis-
order. First, it is unlikely that physical health issues and atypical prenatal
development underlie all instances of asexuality (Bogaert, 2004). Thus,
even if many asexual people do have health issues (and/or atypical pre-
natal development), we cannot use this evidence to conclude that all asex-
ual people are disordered or that asexuality per se is pathological. Sec-
ond, using atypical sexual development as an indicator of a current men-
tal health problem is a dubious approach. If so, we should also patholo-
gize gays and lesbians as having a (current) mental disorder, as atypical
prenatal development probably underlies, at least to some degree, the
development of same-sex attraction (LeVay, 2010). If so, perhaps we
should diagnose individuals with great musical talent as having a disor-
der, for atypical prenatal development (e.g., exposure to high prenatal
hormones) may predispose one to having this talent (Manning, 2002). It is
important, then, not to confuse the cause of a human psychological varia-
tion with a determination of whether that variation is currently constru-
able as a mental illness.

112
Chapter 9
It is also notable that the historical record does not show consistent
evidence of asexuality as pathology; indeed, the opposite may be the
case. For example, a lack of sexuality has been not seen as a disorder
throughout the much of the history of Western medicine (Sigusch, 1998).
Even today, some religions and cultures would not pathologize an ab-
sence of sexuality; instead, a lack of sexuality (or at least abstinence) is
often considered a virtue. Thus, an absence of sexuality has not been
considered a disorder consistently across time or across current cultural
contexts.
Another issue relates to stigmatization. When we label someone as
having a disorder, we often stigmatize them, and stigmatization itself can
be a source of distress and mental health concerns. After all, who would
not be stressed by being labeled “disordered”? The impact of stigmatiza-
tion has been raised in the context of other sexual minorities (e.g., gays
and lesbians) (Meyer, 2003). In short, why go down the road of labeling
something as a disorder when there is evidence that it is not a disorder,
and when we know that such labels themselves have negative conse-
quences?
Aside from these arguments against pathologizing asexuality, there is
lab research on arousal that may support the idea that asexuality is not a
disorder. As mentioned in chapter 6, research has demonstrated that
asexual women, like sexual women, show non-category-specific respond-
ing to sexual stimuli; that is, asexual women show some level of genital
arousal to both male- and female-oriented sexual stimuli, very similar to
heterosexual women and lesbians (Brotto & Yule, 2011). Thus asexual
women do not show low arousal (i.e., abnormally low vaginal responses)
to sexual activity, as women diagnosed as “dysfunctional” often do.4
Indeed, the authors of the study argue that this work gives additional
support to the idea that asexuality is a sexual orientation, like being gay
or straight, because asexual women respond physically in ways that are
very similar to their (non-dysfunctional) homosexual and heterosexual
counterparts.
Let’s return to the issue of distress, but from the flip side. There are
often hidden benefits to asexuality that need to be considered when mak-
ing a final determination about the question of whether asexuality is a
sexual “disorder.” In fact, psychologists Nicole Prause and Cynthia Gra-
ham found that asexuals report significant advantages to their asexuality.
The top four were as follows: (1) avoiding the common problems of inti-

Do You Have Hypoactive Skydiving Disorder?
113
mate relationships, (2) decreasing risks to physical health or unwanted
pregnancy, (3) experiencing less social pressure to find suitable partners,
and (4) having more free time (Prause & Graham, 2007, p. 351). Perhaps
we can add to these the issue raised in chapter 8: Asexuality avoids the
madness of sex. Let’s call these point the big five benefits of asexuality.
At this point, you may be thinking: Yes, the author is right that these
arguments show that asexuality is not necessarily a disorder. And yet, if you
are a sexual person, you may also have a vague notion, a feeling you can’t
shake, that regardless of these arguments, asexual people still must be
missing something. After all, doesn’t (partnered) sex entail a special pas-
sion, excitement, and thrill, which asexuals must be missing out on?
Maybe. But who am I to say—and who are you to say—what passion
is right for a given individual? Have you ever skydived before? Of
course, most people haven’t and have no interest in it. I have, and for me,
it was a thrill. But do those who have not had, and do not want to have,
this experience have a disorder? So, if you don’t want this experience,
should we diagnose you with, say, hypoactive skydiving disorder because
you eschew this thrilling life activity?
I was recently invited to give a talk on asexuality to the Society for Sex
Therapy and Research, or SSTAR. (Such organizations often try to find a
catchy acronym to make their group memorable. I like theirs: “STAR”
with a stutter.) SSTAR is the main conference for the world’s sex thera-
pists. Attendees come from a variety of backgrounds, including medi-
cine, psychology, and social work, and all are trained (or in training) to
help people with sexual problems.
Frankly, I was nervous to give a talk to SSTAR. Although trained in
sexology, I’m an academic, and like most academics, my work primarily
relates to teaching and research. Thus, unlike SSTAR members, I am not a
sex therapist or even a clinician. These folks work in the trenches, even if
those trenches sometimes lie on (or near) Madison Avenue and can be
mined for gold. Thus, I did not know if I was a lone sheep set loose
among two hundred battle-ready and hungry (clinical) wolves.
Another reason I was nervous was because a past surgeon general of
the United States was in attendance. She was in one of the front rows
looking at me, and I was looking at her.
However, the most important reason I felt nervous was because I was
arguing that asexuality should not (necessarily) be construed as a disor-
der. Years before, I had gotten into fights—no, not fistfights—with some

114
Chapter 9
clinicians who I felt were putting inappropriate pressure on some asexu-
als to become sexual beings. Moreover, the majority of the attendees at
SSTAR have spent their professional careers trying to increase (healthy)
sexual behavior in their clients. Thus, I felt that they, like the few clini-
cians I had interacted with, would consider asexuality a disorder that
needs fixing. So, my expectation was that I would be either coolly re-
ceived or hotly dismissed.
In my talk—a bit shakily delivered, I have to admit—I unpacked
many of the issues above, including various arguments against asexuality
per se being viewed as a disorder, the contention that sex itself is a very
odd activity that often causes mental lapses (see chapter 8 on the mad-
ness of sex), and the argument that, of course, passions differ among
people. I also ended with the skydiving analogy mentioned above, com-
plete with a picture of someone soaring through the air.
To my surprise (shock, in fact), there was hearty applause when I
showed my skydiving picture and said my punch line: “If not interested
in this activity, should you be diagnosed with hypoactive skydiving disor-
der?” Evidently, a significant number of clinicians, perhaps a majority of
these modern therapists, recognized that sex is only one of many possible
passions that people can have, and felt that we shouldn’t impose our
valued passions on others. In this applause, there may also have been
recognition that some of their colleagues have possibly been overdiag-
nosing sexual problems and imposing, perhaps if only implicitly, their
own values on others.
So, is there only one right way to live a human life?
NOTES
1. My language here (e.g., gay genes compete) is teleological; it suggests that genes
have intentions, motives, or a purpose. Evolutionary types would be mad at me, as
genes don’t have these characteristics; that is, genes themselves don’t “compete” for
anything. So, to all you evolutionary types, please excuse my loose language, as I am
using it in this way to help illustrate a point.
2. Note that the most important reference/source for understanding and diagnos-
ing mental disorders in North America is the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental
Disorders (DSM). Clinicians view it as their “bible.”
3. This is assuming, of course, that we can agree on the definition of an interper-
sonal impairment.
4.
Whether someone with low arousal should be construed as having a disorder
(especially if he or she has no distress about it) is, of course, another issue to consider.

TEN
A Monster in All of Our Lives
John Money, perhaps the most famous twentieth-century sexologist after
Alfred Kinsey, William Masters, and Virginia Johnson, was inspired once
by a poem he read outside a cottage on Fire Island (an island retreat just
outside of New York). The first line read, “There is a monster in all of our
lives.” Money amended the line, adding the adjective “unspeakable” to
the word “monster,” and used it to frame the main idea of one of his
many books on sexology (Money, 1994). He believed that this phrase—
unspeakable monster—was an apt description of the sexual and other se-
crets that often plague people. Thus, a monster is often lurking, although
the person does not (or cannot) speak directly about it. However, an
astute observer can discover it by some telltale signs, particularly irra-
tional behaviors, as the person tries to cope with life’s challenges.
There is a famous painting by seventeenth-century artist Henry Fuseli
called The Nightmare, in which a sleeping woman is seductively draped
over her bed, and a monster—in this particular case, an incubus—sits on
her belly. An incubus is a legendary demonic creature that has inter-
course with sleeping women. From a psychological perspective, the male
incubus and its female equivalent (succubus) are creations of the mind
that symbolize humans’ powerful and uncontrollable sexual nature,
along with, perhaps, our desire to abdicate to supernatural forces our
personal responsibility for any disturbing sexual inclinations; hence, art-
ful characters to represent Money’s notion of an unspeakable monster.
Unspeakable monsters are specific to the time and the culture in
which one grows up and lives; thus, they are partially socially con-
115

116
Chapter 10
structed. Average adolescent boys from a strict Catholic upbringing in
the 1950s in the Western world probably had masturbation as their un-
speakable monster, whereas the masturbation monster of today for aver-
age adolescent American boys, Catholic and otherwise, may be less fero-
cious than it once was.
It is probably true that, if you accept Money’s description, many sexu-
al people have unspeakable (sexual) monsters. The chapter on the mad-
ness of sex attests to this fact: untold numbers of people have sexual
secrets that plague them. But do some asexual people also have monsters,
unspeakable and otherwise? Although not attracted to others in a tradi-
tional sense, asexual people may be sexual in other ways, and some may
be reluctant to reveal this (Bogaert, 2008). For example, some asexual
people may have odd paraphilias that they do not want to discuss with
the world, and that perhaps they are even reluctant to admit to them-
selves. So, are some asexual people truly and utterly mad, just like the
rest of the sexual planet?
At one point in my first paper on asexuality (Bogaert, 2004), I posed
the following question: “How might people with atypical sexual procliv-
ities respond to the statement, I have never felt sexually attracted to anyone at
all?” This led me to ask whether some asexual people might have unusual
sexual interests (i.e., paraphilias). After all, if someone is not attracted to
people, they still might be attracted to something else. In a number of
papers (Bogaert, 2004; Bogaert, 2006b; Bogaert, 2008), I suggested that
this is an interesting possibility, but I also suggested that it is unlikely
that a majority of asexual people have paraphilias, because “never having
felt sexual attraction to anyone at all” implies no level of human partner
involvement/interest. In short, it would exclude people who are gay, bi-
sexual, or straight, as well as most people with an unusual sexual attrac-
tion (e.g., fetishists). This is because some level of sexual attraction to
human beings remains within those with paraphilias, even if their pri-
mary interest is in a paraphilic object—for example, a fetishist’s interest
in women’s high-heeled shoes. I also suggested that it is unlikely that
most asexual people have an extreme paraphilia, because, first, they are
quite rare, and second, most asexual people are women. Women are
much less likely than men to have a paraphilia (Cantor, Blanchard, &
Barbaree, 2009).
So, no (secret) sexual attractions in asexuals? Well, not necessarily. My
contact with self-identified asexuals has suggested that some do indeed

A Monster in All of Our Lives
117
have very unusual sexual attractions, even if they have reported little or
no sexual attraction to human beings (Bogaert, 2008). For example, some
masturbating asexuals have indicated to me that there is a persistent
theme, often very unusual, in their sexual fantasies. In other words, some
people who lack attraction to others, some of whom identify as asexuals,
do indeed have a paraphilia.1
Also, the issue raised in chapter 5 of the “disconnect” between fantasy
and masturbation for some asexuals is relevant here. In particular, the
fantasies of asexual people, when they do occur in a consistent or system-
atic way, often are constructed in such a way that they themselves are not
part of the sexual acts they are fantasizing about or viewing (e.g., as in
viewing a porn film)—in other words, they are not connected to anything
or anyone sexual. It is as if their bodies, or (more correctly) aspects of
their mind related to sexual arousal but not fully connected to their iden-
tity, need sexual stimulation to receive sexual release/pleasure. This is
true even if their own identities, or who they are as individuals, are not
sexual (i.e., not sexually attracted to others).
One asexual person on the AVEN website describes it this way: “I
almost invariably think of fictional characters. My thoughts have never
involved people I know, and they have never involved myself” (Vicious
Trollop, 2005, July 25). Another on AVEN writes, “It’s scenes in 3rd per-
son; I may have a generic male character which is kind of me, but it’s still
separate from me, mentally watched rather than participated in” (Teddy
Miller, 2005, July 25).
Still another AVEN participant writes, “The point isn’t voyeurism,
either: the scene doesn’t turn me on because I’m watching it, it turns me
on because it’s sexually charged (and I’m acting as an emotional leech). I
may have a character that I identify more with . . . but it’s not a stand-in
for me; it acts like a viewpoint character in fiction” (Eta Carinae, 2005,
July 25).
These quotes suggest that some asexual people’s fantasies, when they
do have them, do not involve their own identities. Instead, their fantasies
more often involve people they do not know or, more specifically, fiction-
al characters or no one that could be connected to their identity in real
life. These themes reinforce the idea that many masturbating asexuals
may need sexual stimulation to receive sexual release/pleasure, but this
stimulation is disconnected from their identities.

118
Chapter 10
One question that emerges is this: Do these people have a “sexual
orientation”—that is, a persistent erotic inclination toward others—given
that they seek out and respond to consistent forms of sexual stimuli that
contain people? This is an interesting question, at least to me. It might be
argued that their bodies (or, more accurately, aspects of their brains relat-
ed to arousal) do have a “sexual orientation” of sorts, but that they them-
selves, or their identities, do not.
A related question is whether these people are still truly “asexual,”
using a common definition of asexuals: a lack of sexual attraction (Bo-
gaert, 2006b; Bogaert, 2008). After all, they are responding sexually, at
least on a bodily level, to sexual content in their fantasies or in pornogra-
phy; hence, a part of them must be sexually attracted to something if they
are seeking out and responding to a specific sexual stimulus, rather than
responding, say, to nothing at all or randomly.2 Thus, on some level,
sexual attraction occurs to something, including to others (e.g., in por-
nography or to/as fictional characters).
Even so, my answer is “yes,” they are still asexual, at least in one
sense: they have an absence of subjective sexual attraction. Subjective re-
fers to the I or me in one’s identity as a person, and if the person’s I or me
is not connected to something sexual, then they are asexual; they lack
subjective attraction (Bogaert, 2006b). They—as individuals—are discon-
nected from their sexual responses to others or to sexual stimulation. In
other words, they don’t “own” those sexual attractions. Their bodies (or
aspects of their brain regulating arousal) are responding to sexual stimu-
lation on some level. The missing piece for them is the I or me, or an
identity as an individual, in subjective sexual attraction. In other words,
the I is missing in the statement “I am attracted to . . .”
A similar phenomenon may occur in some forms of transgenderism.
A transgendered person who was born as a biological male, for example,
may not “own” his masculine responses. This individual may behave in a
traditional masculine way, he may appear masculine, and his body may
respond to stimulation in a traditionally masculine way, even sexually.
But if this person does not “own” her responses, and in fact is completely
disconnected from them because of an internal sense of self as female,
these masculine responses are not part of her identity, or her I or me.
Similar forms of disconnected sexuality have been discussed in the
clinical literature on paraphilias. Indeed, this phenomenon may be con-
strued as a rather exotic paraphilia, which literally means “beyond love,”

A Monster in All of Our Lives
119
or “love beyond the usual.” Thus, a paraphilia can mean that an individ-
ual has a sexual attraction to something unusual. It could also imply
something broader: any kind of unusual sexual phenomenon associated
with a person, and not merely a sexual attraction to something unusual.
As a consequence, if you are keeping score, the label of “asexuality”
could still apply to masturbating asexuals with “disconnected” fantasies,
because their paraphilia is an unusual sexual phenomenon: there is no
subjective sexual attraction to anything. Complicated indeed!
But back to the clinical literature on paraphilias: Ray Blanchard (1991)
argues that some of these unusual sexual phenomena reflect alterations
in the typical “targeting” process in human sexual attraction and sexual-
ity in general. Our sexual attractions might occur when we connect our
sexual feelings to others, as when we see or fantasize about someone, or
perhaps our attractions are more responsive in nature, occurring when
another person sees us and that incites or engages our sexual attractions
to him or her. This “responsive” targeting system includes receptivity
and object-of-desire mechanisms, and is more likely to occur in women
(see also chapter 6 on gender). Both the more male-oriented and female-
oriented target processes may ultimately relate to basic “mate-recogni-
tion” mechanisms (Bakker, 2003). In other words, these target processes
are part of a larger mate-recognition system that humans use to seek out
and choose reproductive partners.
But what if an individual’s targeting system does not operate in this
way? What if, for example, the “I” in “I am attracted to him or her” in a
typical targeting sequence does not operate in a traditional way? In some
asexual people, the disconnect between identity/self (the “I”) and a sexu-
al object seems to be this kind of target alteration: the identity or self is
not connected to or “targeted” to a sexual object.
I am not aware of a specific name for this paraphilia. However, using
a traditional Greek nomenclature, I have named it autochorissexualism: the
quality of having sex without (choris) one’s self/identity (auto), or “iden-
tity-less” sexuality (see also Bogaert, in press-b).
People without sexual attraction to others may also have other target-
oriented paraphilias. For example, my experience is that some self-iden-
tified asexual people may have automonosexualism, in which the person is
attracted to him- or herself sexually (Rohleder, 1907).3 Blanchard argues
that these paraphilias also reflect directional/target issues because, in-
stead of directing one’s sexual interests outward, one targets his or her

120
Chapter 10
sexual interests inward. Automonosexualism is rare and has sometimes
been associated with transgendered individuals (Hirschfeld, 1948; Blan-
chard, 1991; Blanchard, 1989; Freund & Blanchard, 1993). For example,
the phenomenon of autogynephilia (in which a man is sexually attracted
to himself, but as a woman) is a type of automonosexualism (Blanchard,
1989; Lawrence, 2011).
But aren’t these paraphilias—specifically, autochorissexualism and auto-
monosexualism—disorders? So, one might agree that asexuality per se is
not a disorder (see chapter 9), but surely these exotic paraphilias imply a
disorder? Perhaps, but paraphilias are tricky mental health issues. Sexol-
ogists Charles Moser and Peggy Kleinplatz (2005), for example, have
argued that paraphilias, or at least the original definition of them (as
unusual sexual phenomena), should not necessarily be construed as dis-
orders, partly because there is murkiness as to what construes a healthy
sexuality in the first place. I agree. In fact, one might be so bold as to turn
this issue on its head, expanding the definition of disorder to include not
just atypical sexual fare but also sex in general, as it all may be construed
as a form of madness (see also chapter 8).
To test more formally some of these ideas on autochorissexualism and
automonosexualism, more research needs to be done on the sexual fanta-
sies of masturbating asexuals. Some interesting studies examining the
arousal responses of asexuals in the laboratory to various images, with
narrations of the individual as a fictional character, and/or with images of
the individual himself or herself (to assess for automonosexualism),
could be conducted. In this way, we could find out more about any
sexual proclivities, even secret ones, in asexual people.
Speaking of secrets, let’s end with a bit more discussion on this issue:
Are there any secrets left? Modern technology and communications have
created the potential to expose one’s inner life to probing and wide dis-
semination. Hence, even if one is highly motivated to keep one’s life
private, this may be hard to do, or at least harder to do than it once was,
especially if the details of that private life are juicy. This is particularly
true for sex, and other people’s motivation to expose sexual details, espe-
cially if they are embarrassing or run counter to one’s public profession,
is often as strong as the individual’s motivation to keep these details a
secret. Even if others’ motivation is not as strong as one’s own motivation
to maintain a private life, it is notable that we, as single individuals, are
outnumbered by the throng, and thus there are lots of chances of expo-

A Monster in All of Our Lives
121
sure by one of the many people in the throng. The Internet, and Facebook
in particular, are good examples of how quickly secrets are revealed in
the modern world.
Interestingly, sex still makes good content as a juicy secret, but I ex-
pect that it is not as juicy as it once was. I think this is in part because
modern communication has exposed so many “private” lives; thus, few
sexual secrets shock anymore. Indeed, it is part of postmodern culture to
be jaded and unfazed by sexual secrets. Sex is less of a big deal, and not to
be hidden away in the same way as it used to be. So, it is still a monster,
but one with less ferocity.
Why am I telling you all this? And what does it have to do with
asexuality? Because the two points I have made here—there are no more
secrets, and sexuality is less of a taboo to keep hidden than it once was—
are both relevant to the issues of paraphilias and asexuality. First, people
are less motivated to keep their sexual lives, or the lack thereof, hidden.
So, do I believe people when they tell me that they are asexual? Well, yes,
even if it is a bit of a qualified “yes.” Moreover, self-identified asexuals
may not hide unusual sexual interests, if they do have them. Second, if
people have a secret sex life (e.g., a paraphilia that they don’t want to
reveal), this can still be found out. With their secrets revealed, these peo-
ple will join the throng of others displaying sexual monsters on their
backs, even if these monsters are less ferocious and less unspeakable than
they once were.
NOTES
1. It is important to remember that many asexuals do not masturbate and/or have
no fantasies (or at least no consistent theme in them), and hence do not have a para-
philia (see chapter 5 on masturbation).
2. Although I think this discussion on paraphilias is important, it must always be
remembered that some masturbating asexuals do not direct their sexual responses to
anything, or they direct their masturbation to situations or objects in a more or less
random way, and still others do not masturbate at all (see more in chapter 5 on
masturbation).
3. Automonosexualism might still retain the characteristic of a lack of sexual at-
traction to others, but, technically, there would still be a sexual attraction to someone,
even if it were only to oneself. Thus, automonosexualism is not a case of asexuality
using the strict definition of “lacking a subjective sexual attraction.”


ELEVEN
Art and Food on Planet Sex
In chapter 8, I introduced an old man who said that, nowadays, the
bathing beauties in the famous Sports Illustrated swimsuit issue “did
nothing” for him. I suggested that his newfound sexless world had some-
thing in common with a lifelong asexual person’s world. I also suggested
that average sexual people may also have glimpses of this world when
their normally sexed brains are turned off for brief periods.
Though sexual people may have temporary glimpses of what asexual
people experience, this is not to say that sexual people’s brushes with
sexual disinterest capture perfectly the true “phenomenology” of the
asexuality. Recall that asexual people are likely a diverse bunch, so one
type of lens on the world of sexuality (or asexuality) does not fit all. In
addition, for many asexual people, an even deeper level of disconnection
to the sexual world occurs than what is suggested by, for example, the
old man’s current take on sex, or other sexual people’s bouts of sexual
disinterest. This is because many asexual people have a complete (or
nearly complete) lack of sexual attraction, not just a lack of current sexual
interest. Thus, returning to our example of the old man, he did recognize
that these swimsuit models were sexually attractive. Perhaps he could
have mustered some level of sexual interest if one of these bathing beau-
ties magically appeared in his apartment, ready for some action. Or per-
haps he would have been titillated by these images if he were given a
booster shot of testosterone, as there is evidence that this hormone is
linked to sex drive and declines with age (Lamberts, van den Beld, & van
der Lely, 1997).
123

124
Chapter 11
For many asexual people, such inducements (e.g., swimsuit models
appearing fantasy-like in one’s bedroom; a shot of testosterone) would
likely have little effect. For many asexual people, there is likely no under-
lying sexual attraction at all; that is, there is no sexual connection that can
be pulled to the surface, and perhaps even no real recognition that these
models are “sexually attractive,” except perhaps on an abstract level,
having taken in our culture’s norms and standards of sexual beauty.
Thus, asexual people probably experience the sexual world, inducements
notwithstanding, differently than the rest of the planet.
In this chapter, I explore the phenomenology (or lived experience) of
asexuality; more specifically, this chapter is an exploration of a hypotheti-
cal lived experience, as I ask what life would be like if all people were
asexual. I do this to give insight into the lives of asexual people, but also
to see how embedded sex is within many human cultures, both past and
present. So, what would a sexless planet (or, more specifically, a sexless
culture) truly be like? To answer this question, let us speed by the glar-
ingly and often numbingly obvious aspects of our oversexed pop cul-
ture—including pornography, TV shows’ titillation, or, yes, the swimsuit
edition of Sports Illustrated—and head into the subtle and deeper recesses
of our sex-infused culture. Thus, let’s touch on those areas of our culture
that seem immune to its influence, yet may not be. To begin, let’s venture
into one of the more refined areas of our culture on Planet Sex: art.
I have no talent for it, but I have a fondness for fine art, especially
painting. My interest derives partly from exposure to painting through
some of my family and friends, some of whom do in fact have a talent for
it. While wandering through galleries, eyeing renderings from various
classical and modern eras, it is hard to avoid the conclusion that sexual
interest and attraction has always driven, at least partly, aesthetic sen-
sibilities. The nude in particular—especially the female nude—has been
standard content for years, and it is difficult not to conclude that the
sexuality of the primarily male, heterosexual artists who created these
images, in both Western and non-Western societies, has had a major im-
pact on these works.
Indeed, I sometimes wonder as I stroll around galleries what the his-
tory of art would be like without sex—broadly defined—as a subject
matter. This extends into subject matters and content in art beyond the
depictions of (female) nudes, although I am using this example to illus-
trate my point. I’ve even imagined, with tongue in cheek, whether cura-

Art and Food on Planet Sex
125
tors might close down their galleries if for some reason a woman’s body
was not allowed to be shown, as there would be no be art left to display!
I’ve imagined big, flashing neon signs outside of galleries announcing,
Gallery closed due to shortage of nudes. . . . Gallery closed due to shortage of
nudes. . . . Gallery closed due to shortage of nudes. . . .
Of course I am exaggerating the point, as there is a myriad of themes
in art beyond women’s bodies. I am also not arguing that nudity and the
human body are found in art only because of people’s sexual attraction to
them. After all, nudity and the human body itself have been portrayed in
art to illustrate various “nonsexual” themes—for example, the creation
story in Albrecht Dürer’s Adam and Eve could be construed as such. In-
deed, there is a tradition in art of distinguishing “the nude” from “the
naked.” “The nude” shows the unclothed body because it is integral to or
part of the natural condition of the subject or the scene (e.g., Greek gods
were often depicted without clothes) (Clark, 1956). In contrast, with “the
naked,” a sexual intent is often presumed if the unclothed state is not a
natural condition of the subject or the scene (e.g., a nurse still wearing
part of her uniform).
Yet there is ambiguity here, as the meaning of “natural” is dubious, as
is the distinction between nudity and nakedness. Isn’t being out of one’s
clothes, even partially, more natural than, say, wearing a uniform? Art
critic Charles Darwent (2008) also points out that the distinction between
nude and naked is often blurred and slippery. He uses a painting by
Philip Wilson Steer called Seated Nude: The Black Hat to illustrate his point.
In this painting, an attractive woman is seated without clothes, but she
does have on her head an elaborate black hat. Steer evidently never al-
lowed this painting to be viewed. He was influenced by some of his
friends, who argued that the woman’s “nudity” (and of course the title
indicates that this is a “nude”) was in fact an instance of “nakedness,” in
part because the affectation on her head implies, presumably, an unnatu-
ral and sexualized context.
One might also argue that the “nude” body, even when not portrayed
to illustrate directly sexual themes, is affected, at least indirectly, by the
artist’s sexuality and/or sexual elements that are embedded in his or her
culture. For example, are the nudity and temptation themes in the crea-
tion story of Adam and Eve truly without sexual connections? Of course
not: this biblical creation story is itself, partially, about sex. Thus, Dürer’s
sexual attractions likely inspired him, if only on an unconscious level, to

126
Chapter 11
create a painting that included these themes. In other words, this story
was, arguably, aesthetically interesting and pleasing to him because of
his sexual attractions. That members of the public (or the patrons who
commissioned this work) also wanted and/or were drawn to such por-
trayals also speaks to the power of sexuality in the production of this and
related art. Note, too, that the two main figures—Adam and Eve—in this
famous painting have fig leaves covering their genitals. This depiction is
true to the events in the biblical creation story itself, as both Adam and
Eve covered themselves with fig leaves after eating from the tree of
knowledge. However, sexual mores probably influenced why this por-
tion of the creation story—and not the innocent, completely nude period
of this story—was depicted in this and in so many other versions of it. For
example, it can be argued that Dürer was affected by his and society’s
(e.g., the Catholic Church’s) view that public nudity was shameful, or at
least sexually immodest, not just in reality but also in artistic depictions.
This social construction of sex as “shameful” also derives from the power
of sexual attractions, along with a (neurotic) desire to control them.
You may be thinking that the female nude in art and popular culture
must only have a special resonance, aesthetic and otherwise, for hetero-
sexual men (i.e., male artists and male patrons), and thus heterosexual
women wandering the great galleries must have a disconnected experi-
ence, similar perhaps to the non sequitur experienced by average asexual
people. After all, shouldn’t the portrayal of only men’s bodies have a
special resonance, aesthetic and otherwise, for heterosexual women? I
think this is partially true, but a straightforward conclusion of this kind
does not capture some of the subtlety and complexity of female sexuality.
As mentioned in chapter 6 on gender, women’s sexuality is also affected
by “object-of-desire” concerns, and there may be a strong aesthetic appre-
ciation of the female body as an object of desire, sexually and romantical-
ly, in the eyes of men (Bogaert & Brotto, in progress; Bogaert, Visser,
Pozzebon, & Wanless, 2011). Thus, heterosexual women’s sexual inter-
ests, attractions, and desires at times may still resonate, perhaps very
strongly, with the depiction of the female nude form. That many hetero-
sexual women are strongly interested in viewing beautiful women in
fashion forums (e.g., fashion magazines) and in the general media (e.g.,
on TV, on the Internet) supports this view (Bogaert & Brotto, in progress).
Some of these points are arguable, perhaps, but what is likely not
arguable is that our cultural products are strongly influenced in ways

Art and Food on Planet Sex
127
beyond our realization by human sexual attractions and how these play
themselves out in the society in which the artist lives. If so—to return to
our original question—what would our art galleries be like if all the
artists were completely asexual? Before I answer this question, however,
let me address a caveat: There may exist now or in the past asexual artists
who, in their art, give commentary on being asexual in a sexual world.
Thus, asexual people might still produce “sexual” art as a form of social
or personal commentary. But I am more curious about what kind of art
asexual artists would produce if they ruled the art world and their asexu-
al brethren ruled the rest of the world. In other words, what would it be
like if art had no aesthetic linkage to sexuality whatsoever?1 Would de-
picting a nude (and the genitals in particular) have the same fascination,
and garner the same attention, as depicting, say, the middle toe does for
sexual artists? I expect that in a completely asexual world, art would be
very different indeed. Thus, the current bevy of nude paintings—even
those that on the surface seem not to have a sexual connection, but un-
doubtedly do, such as Dürer’s Adam and Eve—would turn into a scattered
few. Moreover, all of this to-do about what is “nude” and what is
“naked” deeply reflects our sexual natures, along with our personal and
cultural neuroticism about them. Thus, if we were all truly asexual, such
distinctions would not arise in the first place; they would be nonissues.
My analysis here suggests that culture (or at least the meanings we
derive from it) is not randomly generated but instead reflects, at least
partly, our basic wishes, desires, and preferences—in short, our individu-
al and our collective human natures. And, of course, for most people, that
nature is sexual. Humans are also very visual animals, and thus it is not
surprising that our sexualized pop culture and art reflects this visual
acuity and fascination. So human art is particularly likely to be a visual
reflection of our basic wishes, desires, and preferences, including our
sexual ones. If dogs ruled the world—and, of course, some dog owners
believe that this is already so—then there might be equally elaborate
smell-oriented pop culture and art that reflected canines’ basics wishes,
desires, and preferences, including sexual ones. Of course, the idea that
culture partially maps onto human nature is not new, as there are many
theories of culture that include as a tenet that human inclinations create,
select, and give meaning to cultural products.2
Would an asexual person’s presumed lack of sexual aesthetics extend
to a lack of appreciation for all aspects of beauty in the human form? I

128
Chapter 11
noted in chapter 3 (on history) that one asexual man, the famous mathe-
matician Paul Erdos, was preoccupied, including aesthetically, by mathe-
matics: “If numbers aren’t beautiful, I don’t know what is” (Schechter,
1998, p. 7).
Yet there is complexity here. Some asexual people may have an appre-
ciation of faces and the body on an abstract level, having taken in our
culture’s norms and standards of beauty. In addition, some asexual peo-
ple may still have a deep recognition and lure for “romantic” beauty in
others of their preferred sex if they are romantically inclined. Third, hu-
mans may have an innate recognition of beauty, independent of both
romantic and sexual attraction to others. Indeed, innate “beauty” and
“ugliness” sensors may exist in the human brain, and this may have to do
with tendencies to approach or avoid others in the evolutionary past. For
example, our ancestors may have avoided unattractive people because
their unappealing features could have been a sign of a potentially contag-
ious disease processes, and thus they would have been important to
avoid. Interestingly, research has shown that infants prefer to gaze at
beautiful faces more than average or unattractive faces (Langlois, Rogg-
man, Casey, & Ritter, 1987). Thus, the mind’s beauty-recognition mecha-
nisms may be partially decoupled from the mechanisms associated with
both romantic and sexual attraction, and an asexual person may still
retain some level of this appreciation for beauty.
Here is a quote suggesting that an aesthetic appreciation of others can
occur in asexual people: “I could be attracted to someone. I can . . . you
know, think they’re good looking and think they’re interesting and want
to spend time with them and get to know them better. But to me it’s
never, oh, yeah, I hope we end up in bed” (Brotto, Knudson, Inskip,
Rhodes, & Erskine, 2010, p. 610).
Another asexual person felt similarly: “I love the human form and
regard individuals as works of art . . . but I don’t ever want to come into
sexual contact with even the most beautiful of people” (Scherrer, 2008, p.
626).
That having been said, much of the nudity and sex in popular culture
and art must be a “disconnect” for many asexual people. A woman I
know, when confronting the fact that she does not conform to many
aspects of a traditional feminine gender role, utters the phrase, “I must
have missed that day at girl school . . .” Painterly-minded asexual people

Art and Food on Planet Sex
129
wandering around galleries with a bevy of nudes at eye level might simi-
larly utter the phrase, “I must have missed that day at art school . . .”
I must admit that I have cheated in my discussion of art and sexuality.
Art is a relatively easy subject matter to deconstruct from a sex point of
view, and indeed, I have thought about the sex/art connection for a num-
ber of years. As a more difficult challenge, I played a game—a kind of
thought experiment—to see if I could find an aspect of modern life and
culture untouched by human sexuality. One day at lunch over a bowl of
soup, I thought I had, true to my task, thrown myself a curveball and
succeeded. I said out loud, “Aha, food!”
On the surface, it seems that the world of food and the world of sex
are far removed from one another. They are related to different desires
and thus, presumably, occupy very different “psychological spaces” in
people’s heads and exist in very different domains of our lifestyles and
cultures.
However, I quickly realized that this was not true. It did not take long
before the sexual connections to food started coming to mind—and I
don’t just mean “cheesy” ones, such as the Food Network sexing up its
shows with an attractive chef/host or two (no, I don’t mean replaying old
episodes of Julia Child).
Here are the four sexual connections that came to mind relatively
quickly: First, food intake and its control are major life concerns for many
people—particularly young women—in their attempts to achieve a maxi-
mally attractive body. Achieving an ideal or optimal object-of-desire level
through a beautiful/sexy body allows a woman to have great advantages
in choosing the man (or the men) with whom she mates. This is because
men place a greater value on women’s physical attractiveness than wom-
en place on men’s, so women’s bodies are of greater value and demand a
higher price in the sexual marketplace. But women are not necessarily
trying to satisfy only their current partner (if they have one); they are also
trying to satisfy an “ideal,” which, from an evolutionary perspective,
allows them much greater opportunities to mate successfully, even be-
yond their current mate. The current ideals are often influenced by the
images shown in modern media of (arguably distorted) extremely attrac-
tive people, the likes of whom would have been rarely seen for most of
our evolutionary history; however, they are readily seen now and have
been taken on as modern “ideals” nevertheless. Unfortunately, these
“ideals” are so high (and often so unrealistic) (Wolf, 1991) that they are

130
Chapter 11
unlikely to be met by the vast majority of women, even if women impli-
citly perceive them as a way to reproductive success. As a consequence,
women are more prone to body dissatisfaction than men, and this is a
relatively consistent trend across time (Cash, Morrow, Hrabosky, &
Perry, 2004; Mazur, 1986). Women compare their bodies to these “ideal”
object-of-desire forms, as represented by supermodels and movie stars,
even if the images of bodies portrayed are unrealistically thin or beauti-
ful. But the vast majority of women cannot live up to these ideals. They
ultimately put pressure on many women to make themselves beautiful
and sexy—to become an ideal object of desire (see also chapter 6 on
gender). Controlling food intake—through dieting—is a method women
use to live up to this ideal and be maximally attractive to potential mates.
Somewhat in contrast, consider a second food/sex connection: Freud
and other psychodynamically minded theorists have argued that overeat-
ing can result from defensive processes, including sublimation, or chan-
neling ungratified sexual energy into another activity (in this particular
case, eating).3 If this is true, one might wonder whether the current obes-
ity epidemic is partly the result of such a process. Is there something
about the modern Western world that is creating a slew of sexually un-
satisfied humans channeling their hunger for sex into an appetite for
potato chips and candy bars? I also have wondered whether the “middle-
aged spread” of so many male suburbanites results from sublimation,
when the harem-like pursuits of their teenage and twenty-something
years are replaced by a thirty-something domestication: a less sexually
stimulating, but more calming certainty of a one-woman marriage. How-
ever, one might argue that this reasoning is off base and that one should
expect the exact opposite, as our sexual desires are presumably being met
more in the modern Western world than they ever have been before (e.g.,
compare today with, say, the presumed innocence of the 1950s). Actually,
I don’t think so. I think—again, perhaps in line with a quasi-Freudian
interpretation—that our sexual desires are being met less than they ever
have been. This is in part because the modern Western media are raising
our sexual expectations, which seems to suggest that hyper-sexed ath-
letes are the societal norm. Thus, even though the reality of people’s sex
lives is staying the same, relative to our raised expectations, we are com-
ing up short, sexually speaking.
Another food connection is this: Dietary practices are influenced by
sex hormones. There is, for example, evidence that men and women dif-

Art and Food on Planet Sex
131
fer in their taste preferences—men being more focused on meat and
women being more focused on sweets and fats, a difference that occurs
even in children (Caine-Bish & Scheule, 2009). This gender difference is
related, at least indirectly, to sex hormones, because these hormones part-
ly underlie sexual differentiation, the process whereby male and female
fetuses differentiate before birth. There is also evidence that sex hor-
mones play a role in women’s salt preferences across the menstrual cycle
(Curtis & Contreras, 2006). Similar differences have been found in other
species (e.g., salt preference over the estrus cycle in female rats). One
reason women, relative to men, may have more of a craving for sweets
and fats is to build up fat for their curvy bodies. Relative to women, men
may crave meat more because their bodies require more protein to build
muscle mass.4
Here is one final food example: Humans have long searched for the
perfect aphrodisiac to drive their lovers wild and to increase their sex
drive/potency. In fact, countless animals have been slaughtered and oth-
ers driven to near extinction so that humans could extract and then ingest
their body parts in the name of better sex. The Chinese seem especially
susceptible to the (often misguided) notion that sexual powers reside in
food, sometimes with dire ecological consequences. For example, the Chi-
nese belief that the scales of the pangolin, or scaly anteater, have aphrodi-
siac qualities has led to the near extinction of this animal in Southeast
Asia. Similarly, the Chinese belief in the aphrodisiac qualities of the rhi-
no’s horn, with its suggestive phallic shape and angle, has also been this
animal’s undoing, with it likewise being driven to near extinction. Of
course, the fact that humans believe that sex and what we ingest are
related, even if they are not (and thus foods have no true aphrodisiac
qualities), is also testament to the fact that humans imbue nearly every-
thing around us with special sexual meanings.
In short, it does not take long to find sexual connections to what seems
like, on the surface at least, an aspect of our culture and lifestyle—food—
that has no sexual relevance. For closure’s sake, let’s explore how these
food examples might impact asexuality. In the first example, if dieting
and related body-image issues are often driven by mating concerns,
might asexual people never or rarely have dieting problems? Perhaps
even a bolder prediction could be made: there may be no asexual bulim-
ics (or at least no asexual people who have become bulimic). This is not to
say that asexual women may not be concerned about their body image

132
Chapter 11
for reasons other than sex/mating (i.e., finding a romantic partner if ro-
mantically inclined) but I expect their body-image issues and control of
food consumption to differ from those of sexual women.
Let’s return to the second example, and take, for the sake of argument,
a skeptical view of asexuality, along with a Freudian bent. Some might
argue that so-called asexual people are extremely repressed sexual peo-
ple, and thus the level of sublimation in them should be even higher than
in average sexual people. Hence, one might pose the following question,
perhaps somewhat tongue-in-cheek: Should all asexual people be fat?
However, if there is no “sexual” psyche to operate on in asexual people,
then sublimation should not occur (i.e., overeating or any other defensive
behaviors to deal with this bottled-up sexual energy; see chapter 12 on
humor and sex). Thus, should they be thin, or at least not overeat? There
are some interesting studies that suggest that sexual energy in repressed
men, after being stimulated by an attractive woman, is defensively dis-
charged (e.g., by unknowingly creating sexual double entendres or
“Freudian slips”; see chapter 12 on humor). If so, there may be future
research studies examining how asexual people respond to such sexual
cues. Also, if one disregards the quasi-Freudian analysis altogether (and
some would certainly think it is bunk!), perhaps one should expect asexu-
als to become pleasantly plump, as their appetitive drives should be more
focused on food (and not sex) in a culture that offers caloric abundance.
In the third example on taste preferences, should asexual people, if
not only sexless but also somewhat genderless (see chapter 6), be im-
mune to the influence of sexual hormones, not just in their sexual prefer-
ences, but also indirectly in food preferences? There could be some inter-
esting studies waiting in the wings related to menstrual cycle fluctuations
in asexual women, and the degree to which their food preferences are
affected by such fluctuations.
Is there any research on food-related behavior and/or weight in asexu-
al people? Not much. In one study, I found that asexuals were slightly
lighter than sexual people (Bogaert, 2004). Does this mean, then, that they
are less inclined to “sublimate” with food, because there is no sexual
energy to sublimate? Not necessarily. These were average differences, and
so there was certainly a range of weights for asexual people in that study.
Moreover, the asexual people were slightly shorter, so the decreased
weight might have been partly a function of the slightly smaller stature of
asexual people relative to sexual people (see more on this in chapter 13).

Art and Food on Planet Sex
133
Third, in a follow-up study, I found no difference in weight between
asexuals and sexual people (Bogaert, in press-a). Fourth, weight is, of
course, a bit of a crude marker of food-related habits, some of which may
still differ significantly between sexual and asexual people. Thus, more
research needs to be conducted on food-related behaviors in asexual peo-
ple. One thing is for sure, though, regarding eating habits and asexuality:
Our planet would likely be a better place, ecologically speaking, if more
people were asexual, because asexual people are not likely to hunt down
animals to consume them for their real or imagined effect on increasing
libido and potency.
SUMMARY
In this chapter, I attempted to reveal how deeply embedded sex is in our
lifestyle and culture, and to argue that it should give us pause when we
think sex is removed from our day-to-day activities and even our loftiest
of cultural practices. For example, our aesthetic sense is undoubtedly
affected by our attractions, and our sexual attractions are particularly
potent ones when artists apply paint to canvas (or create work in any
other medium). Even food and its consumption—the example I chose
because I felt, at least initially, that it is immune to the powers of sex—are
in reality often influenced by sexual issues. Finally, the analysis in this
chapter may offer a glimpse into the sometimes alien and disconnected
reality of an asexual person as he or she resides on Planet Sex.
NOTES
1. Of course, if we were an asexual species, our bodies would be radically differ-
ent, particularly the genitals and secondary sex characteristics (see chapter 3). Thus the
depiction of the nude human body in art would also necessarily be different. But
indulge me here and assume that our bodies would be the same as they are now, as
this exercise partly concerns how a sexual species with an elaborate culture, like ours,
creates products infused with sex.
2. Therefore, my view would be similar to those of numerous (and even more
biologically oriented) theorists who have written on the intermingling of biological
tendencies and culture. These theorists often do not pull punches and are upfront
about biology, or at least biological processes, taking the reins of the cultural horse, by
offering such titles as Genes, Mind and Culture: The Coevolutionary Process (Lumsden &
Wilson, 1981) and Culture and the Evolutionary Process (Boyd & Richerson, 1985). Rich-
ard Dawkins has also argued (e.g., in The Selfish Gene, 1976) that cultural ideas, like

134
Chapter 11
genes, are “selected for” (like Darwin’s natural selection) if they have a special reso-
nance with people in a given time or place. He calls them “memes,” and, yes, it is
probably no coincidence that this word sort of rhymes with “genes.” Note, however,
that by suggesting a similarity between my view and these biologically oriented theo-
ries of culture, I don’t mean to imply that all of our wishes, desires, and preferences
are fully biologically determined. They are not.
3.
There is some evidence that defensive processes can be involved with eating
habits and disorders (Poikolainen, Kanerva, Marttunen, & Lönnqvist, 2001).
4. Even if one agrees that taste preferences are influenced by “sex” hormones, does
this mean that “sexuality” causes these food preferences? For example, one could
argue that the true sexual connection here is indirect at best, because these sex hor-
mones influence food preferences through their effect on biological sex/gender, and
not through their impact on “sexuality” per se. Thus, am I conflating sexuality influ-
ences with prenatal hormonal influences on biological sex and gender? Perhaps. As
mentioned in chapter 6, however, sex and gender are so intertwined with sexuality,
and vice versa, that to argue that only sex/gender (completely independently of sexu-
ality) is a significant influence here is misleading. Also, given that these hormones
vary across the menstrual cycle and evidently have an impact on food preferences,
they are not just acting to cause “prenatal” sex/gender differences but also likely relate
to day-to-day adult activities, including sexuality.

TWELVE
(A)sexuality and Humor
My aunt told me a joke or, as she called it, “a little story.” A man is at the
dentist with an impacted wisdom tooth. Needing oral surgery, the man is
advised by the dentist that a Novocain injection is necessary. Unfortu-
nately, for some reason, the injection does not seem to numb the man’s
mouth. So, the dentist advises another injection of Novocain. This second
attempt at numbing the man’s mouth also does not seem to work. Some-
what perplexed, the dentist next advises that a general anesthetic will be
necessary to put the man under. However, even this approach is not
effective, as the man remains awake and alert. A bit desperate now, the
dentist reaches into the back of the medicine cabinet, and pulls out a
bottle of blue pills.
The man asks, “So, what’s that?”
“Viagra,” the dentist answers.
The man exclaims, “Viagra! But why?”
“Well,” the dentist replies, “because you’re going to need something to
hold on to when I pull that damn tooth!”
The content of humor is often sexual in nature. Why? It may partly
have to do with our tendency to experience tension in relation to sexual
matters, and this tension may serve as a readably accessible psychic
“fuel” for driving the mechanics of laughter and humor. The philoso-
pher/poet Herbert Spencer (1860) and the psychoanalyst Sigmund Freud
(1960), along with more recent theorists (Zillmann & Bryant, 1980), have
championed variations on “tension relief” models of humor, partly to
135

136
Chapter 12
help explain the sex/humor association, although these models can be
applied to other tension-related content in humor too.
Sexual tension can come in two forms. First, there is what might be
called a “natural” kind of sexual tension, as human sexual response is
associated with a buildup of both physical arousal (e.g., vaginal lubrica-
tion, erections) and psychic arousal (feeling “turned on”). Yet even catch-
ing a glimpse of a hot-bodied passerby has the ability to arouse some
titillating psychic tension. Thus sex is naturally associated with tension,
both when actually engaging in it and when we are briefly reminded of
it. Some sexual tension, however, is often more neurotic in nature. This is
the kind of tension to which Freud and others largely referred. Neurotic
sexual tension is created by most cultures in their tendency to limit and
control sexual expression. Parents, teachers, lawmakers, police, and oth-
ers are the primary agents of this control, as they act as socializers and
enforcers of the rules and regulations of sex. In short, people have bot-
tled-up neurotic sexual tension because they can’t always do what they
want sexually. This is a fact of civilized life, at least if you believe Freud
and similarly minded scholars. Moreover, even the most sexually liberat-
ed among us cannot entirely escape these repressive clutches of the
agents of civilized society, and thus even the most sexually liberated
people still retain some residual neurotic sexual tension. Some people,
though, have more pent-up neurotic sexual tension than others, perhaps
because of their sensitive dispositions or perhaps because of a particular-
ly rigid and repressive childhood.
This tension or “psychic energy”—natural or neurotic in origin—may
be diverted and used as the fuel that helps drive laughter and humor.
When the best comedians, amateur and professional alike, tell a joke or
an amusing story, they provide rich detail and aptly time their punch
lines, because these devices aid in building and releasing tension for full
comic effect. Sex is an easy subject matter through which comedians ply
their trade. This is in part because the tension necessary for full comic
effect is already there; it just needs the right details and some good timing
to harness and release it in the right way.
Laughter is pleasurable for most people, and part of the pleasure has
to do with a release of tension. The release of tension, whichever way it is
achieved, is pleasurable. Interestingly, the physical mechanisms of ten-
sion relief involved with laughter are similar to that of an orgasm—
spasmodic muscle contractions (myotonia). Perhaps it is not surprising,

(A)sexuality and Humor
137
then, that energy created in one domain—sexuality—may be harnessed
and effectively released through another—laughter/humor—with similar
physical mechanisms. Or at least that is the theory behind tension-reduc-
tion models of humor. Indeed, some theorists have speculated that one of
the adaptive functions of laughter in humans, the only species that
laughs,1 is that it allows for the release of all kinds of psychic tension,
which may be unhealthy if pent up too long. If we weren’t able to laugh,
so the theory goes, we would all eventually explode, at least psychically.2
A corollary of this type of tension-release theory of humor, at least of
the classical Freudian version, is that once we laugh and tension is re-
leased, we should not only feel relieved but also have less of a need to
release this energy in other ways, because the tension is, presumably,
gone. Thus, a “catharsis” should occur, a temporary reduction of pent-up
psychic energy and, importantly, a decreased tendency to engage in the
tension-causing behavior. For example, if sex caused our tension, which
has now been released in the form of a sexual joke, we should have a
decreased need to have sex or a sexual outlet.
Is there modern scientific support for this tension-reduction model of
humor, given that it is associated with some relatively ancient and oft-
criticized theorists, such as Freud? There is, at least for some basic ele-
ments of the theory. Several relatively modern theorists of humor argue
that some kind of tension is often important for and can enhance humor,
particularly in humorous situations that evoke the act of laughter or other
overtly mirthful reactions. For example, in a study by psychologists Dolf
Zillmann and Jennings Bryant (1980), the authors found that when ten-
sion is high, people laugh and express more mirth. More specific to sexu-
ality, though, there is also evidence that people who report a high degree
of sexual desire (sexual tension) seem to enjoy sexual humor more than
those who report lower sexual desire (Prerost, 1995).
But is there evidence that sexual tension can be unconsciously chan-
neled into sexual humor, or what might be construed as “humor-like”
behavior? The evidence here is indirect. Two studies in the 1980s sug-
gested that sexual titillation makes men susceptible to creating inadver-
tent sexual puns or double entendres (Motley & Camden, 1985). In both
of these studies, men thought they were in a fairly mundane “language
and dialect” research experiment. This was a guise to hide the true goal
of the studies: the investigation of Freudian humor-like behavior. In the
first study, the researchers found that men more likely to complete sen-

138
Chapter 12
tences with sexual charged-meanings if they had a sexy female experi-
menter conduct the study than men who had a male (and thus presum-
ably not so sexy) experimenter. For example, in the presence of a sexy
female experimenter, men often completed the sentence “The lid won’t
stay on regardless of how much I” with the words screw it. This phrase
has, of course, more sexual meaning than other ways of completing this
sentence (e.g., tighten it, turn it). In a second, related study, the men who
had the most “repressed” sexual personalities were the most likely to be
susceptible to these types of inadvertent sexual puns. Presumably, the
erotic tension created by the sexy female experimenter was unconscious-
ly channeled into a subtle form of sexual expression and hence partially
released in the form of these sexual puns and double entendres.
So, in short, sexual tension (whether recognized by the person or not)
may relate to the production and appreciation of sexual humor.3 But why
is any of this—interesting though it may be—relevant to asexuality? It is
relevant because sexual humor and the way it functions may reveal
something about asexuality and vice versa; that is, asexuality may reveal
how sexual humor functions. For example, are asexual people immune to
sexual humor, because they, presumably, have so little sexual tension?
Or, to put it in another way, do asexual people “get” sexual humor on a
deep level, or on any level? And does this present a sneaky way of find-
ing out whether asexual people are truly sexual (deep down)—to see if
they laugh at a sexual joke? If they do laugh, does this not imply that
there is some sexual energy/motive being discharged or released? Got
you! You laughed. You must be sexual!
Did you laugh at the Viagra joke at the beginning of this chapter? (Or,
if you had heard it before, did you laugh the first time you read it, or the
first time someone told it to you?) Let’s analyze the reasons why someone
might or might not laugh at this joke. Of course, there are differences
among people in how much they laugh in general, and so, of course,
some of the individual differences in humor appreciation have to do with
basic variations in personality and temperament (e.g., happiness, gregari-
ousness, jolliness). But let’s take this out of the equation for now, and
concentrate on the account of humor appreciation and susceptibility put
forward by Freud and company—namely, that it often has to do with the
release of, or is at least facilitated by, sexual tension. Given the sexual
content of this joke, a straightforward interpretation driven by this theory

(A)sexuality and Humor
139
would say that those who have tension about their sexuality are more
likely to laugh at this joke.
However, even if we accept the tension-reduction model of humor,
we also need to realize that other elements are important for this joke to
be effective. In particular, besides tension, a person also must cognitively
“get” the joke. So, the individual must understand how the detail and the
punch line create and then resolve (even in a bizarre way) the conflict
posed by the story. Thus, in addition to an effective use and release of
tension, the humorist must provide a satisfactory and meaningful resolu-
tion to the puzzle or situation raised in the joke. To accomplish this, the
information in the joke or story must be relevant (i.e., “meaningful”) on
some level to the individual, or at least have some connection to activities
that the individual is familiar with, so that he or she ultimately can “get”
the joke.
Interestingly, the satisfactory resolution provided by the punch line (if
a person does “get it”) usually involves some kind of incongruity. In
other words, it may involve holding two seemingly contradictory ideas
together simultaneously, or some unexpected twist—thus, a bit of a sur-
prise ending or a clever reversal of fortune. Yet this incongruity or twist
usually still resolves the conflict or drama in some meaningful way, even
if bizarrely so. And the person who appreciates this humor must get (on
some level) that a resolution, incongruous as it may be, has occurred.
Incongruity forms the basis of a number of theories of humor. One
modern theory of humor that incorporates incongruity as a main concept
is the “benign violation” model (McGraw & Warren, 2010). In this view,
for something to be funny, it must break a norm or a rule, but it must do
so benignly. The incongruity lies in the fact that we must hold two contra-
dictory ideas in mind simultaneously: first, that a norm is being violated
(which is bad), but, second, that this violation is only a gentle or benign
one (which is not so bad). There is a saying in comedy, attributed to the
Irish novelist Kate O’Brien, that captures the essence of this theory: “If it
bends, it’s funny; if it breaks, it is not funny” (1-Love-Quotes.com, n.d.).
The appeal of the benign-violation theory comes in part from its con-
sistency with the proposed evolutionary origins of humor in benign
physical violations such as play fighting, which can also be seen in ani-
mals (Gervais & Wilson, 2005). The proponents of this theory argue that
humor has a positive personal and social function in daily life; specifical-
ly, humor “provides a healthy and socially beneficial way to react to

140
Chapter 12
hypothetical threats, remote concerns, minor setbacks, social faux pas,
cultural misunderstandings, and other benign violations people encoun-
ter on a regular basis” (McGraw & Warren, 2010, p. 1148). These theorists
also argue that humor (e.g., laughter) is an important form of social com-
munication, signaling that (benign) violations of social rules are often
acceptable. In short, humor allows us to know that bending the social
rules may be okay.
Another appeal of the benign-violation theory in the present context is
that it suggests an additional reason why sexuality so often provides the
content of humor: because it is fraught with rules, norms, and taboos.
Thus, engaging in sex, regardless of the circumstances, will likely violate
a social and moral guideline somewhere!
The importance of incongruity models of humor, such as benign-vio-
lation theory, cannot be overstated. Indeed, the ubiquity of some form of
incongruous resolution in jokes makes benign-violation theory an ap-
pealing theory of humor in and of itself, even independent of tension
theories; in fact, it is sometimes seen as a competing theory to tension-
reduction models of humor (Smuts, 2009, April 12). However, these two
theories of humor are perhaps more appropriately considered comple-
mentary, as they concentrate on two different elements of our mental/
psychological life—cognitive and emotional, both of which are usually
brought to bear by psychologists in explaining complex human behavior
(see also the discussion in chapter 2 on the A, B, C, and Ds of sex).
Incongruity models are “cognitive,” dealing primarily with how we pro-
cess information and knowledge. Thus, these theories concern our
thoughts and their organization in the mind; how, for example, one bit of
information is linked to another and how readily accessible it is to our
consciousness. In contrast, tension-reduction models are more emotional
in nature. They deal with our emotions and arousal. Sometimes these two
elements are called the “cold” (cognitive) versus “hot” (emotional) ele-
ments of psychological life. So, let us assume that both elements—some
level of hot (i.e., tension) and some level of cold (i.e., incongruity of
ideas)—are important in humor.4
Okay, back to the Viagra joke and a more “cognitive” analysis: On a
simple cognitive level, if you did not know that a penis becomes stiff and
erect, that an erection is aided by Viagra, and that erections are often
grasped (as in manual stimulation by a partner or in masturbation by
boys and men themselves), then you would not “get” the joke. Since the

(A)sexuality and Humor
141
man needs to grasp his own penis in this situation, knowledge of (and
perhaps particularly the experience of) masturbation is also likely rele-
vant. Now, if something is personally relevant, it is also likely to have
some psychic tension associated with it. After all, most people—if not
all—are a bit tense about and/or embarrassed by their masturbation expe-
rience, or at least were at one time in their lives. This raises an important
point about how cognitive and emotional elements of mental processing
operate in real life: they typically relate to and reinforce one another.
Thus, if one has a cognitive “understanding” of the key elements of this
joke (e.g., public masturbation), then one is also likely to have an emo-
tional connection to these same elements.
From an incongruity perspective, understanding this joke needs to go
beyond the mechanics of masturbation. Indeed, a rather sophisticated
level of cognitive processing needs to occur in order for someone “to get”
the joke. For example, a benign-violation humor theorist would likely
argue that the Viagra joke is funny because we understand that two
contradictory events have co-occurred: first, that grasping an erect penis
in public is a violation of an important social code of conduct, and sec-
ond, that this act in the present instance is only a benign violation, be-
cause it has been sanctioned by the dentist, presumably in the service of
oral health. Someone who did not understand these two events, or who
could not hold them in mind relatively simultaneously, would not “get”
the joke.
Now let’s consider an asexual person, who has no sexual attraction for
others, and also perhaps no masturbation experience (in fact, no sexual
interest whatsoever).5 Would he or she laugh at the Viagra joke? Let’s
consider both emotional-tension and incongruity perspectives on humor.
From a straightforward emotional-tension perspective, I expect that
an asexual person would not laugh, or at least would laugh less than an
average sexual person. This is so because the asexual person can be as-
sumed to have little or no tension about sexual matters generally, includ-
ing about masturbation (e.g., no unused sexual arousal floating around,
no masturbation guilt); after all, the asexual person has never had sex
before and has no interest in it. Thus, there should be no emotional con-
nection to this sexual activity and thus little psychic energy available to
be discharged.
From a cognitive (i.e., incongruity) perspective, I expect that the asex-
ual person would also have little self-relevant imagery of grasping an

142
Chapter 12
erect penis—either his own (if a man) or a partner’s. So, this informa-
tion—an image of a man grasping a penis—should not be particularly
personally relevant and would not readily come to mind; thus, it is not
readily “cognitively accessible.” Of course, the asexual person may have
imagined a scene such as this out of mild curiosity, or seen an image
before (e.g., on the Internet), but it should be less readily accessible to an
asexual person, relative to, say, a sexual man with a fair bit of masturba-
tion experience.
However, using an analysis based on the benign-violation model, an
asexual person without masturbation experience may still understand
that grasping one’s penis in public is a violation of an important social
rule. They would also understand that the dentist has sanctioned it, and
hence it is a benign violation. Thus, if knowledge of these two contradic-
tory ideas occurs simultaneously, an asexual person may still appreciate
this joke.6
However, it is important to consider whether mere knowledge of
these two contradictory ideas is sufficient in this case to cause humor
appreciation, including laughter. As mentioned, perhaps this joke works
best, if at all, for those who very easily conjure up an image of a man
holding his erect penis (e.g., a man with a fair bit of masturbation experi-
ence).7 Relative to a sexual person, an asexual person without such expe-
rience may be less cognitively “ready” to conjure up this image. Keep in
mind that jokes often work very quickly and require proper timing in
order for them to evoke appreciation (e.g., laughter). So, if the key ele-
ments of this joke—knowledge that public masturbation is occurring but
that it is a benign instance—are not brought into consciousness very
quickly, this joke is not likely to work. Moreover, people with sexual
experience (and masturbation experience, specifically) have likely rumi-
nated about what is and what is not “proper” sexual behavior (including
their own sexual behavior), and thus the idea or image of public mastur-
bation may be readily known and hence readily accessible as a “viola-
tion.” Thus, the likelihood of being able to access this information quickly
and hold it in mind simultaneously with the other key element of this
joke—that this instance is merely a benign violation—is probably in-
creased by sexual experience.
Let us inject even more complexity into this analysis. As mentioned,
humor may be facilitated by a variety of tensions and motives, not just
sexual ones. Additional tensions are based on anger or fear. Freud and

(A)sexuality and Humor
143
others have argued that sarcastic humor, for example, utilizes the release
of these more aggressive and fear-based tensions and motives. Thus, if
someone is angry or resentful toward others (or perhaps just a bit scared
of them), he or she may discharge this anger- or fear-based psychic ten-
sion by belittling them through sarcasm or other forms of aggressive
humor. This type of humor puts enemies “in their place,” or at least
makes them less scary because they look silly, and not threatening. There
is often anger- and fear-based tension associated with “out-groups,”
groups to which we do not belong or that are different from us. Related-
ly, some theorists have championed “superiority” theories of humor,
usually first associated with Thomas Hobbes (1840), who argued that
self-esteem is often enhanced when experiencing the misfortunes of oth-
ers. Thus, by a downward social comparison, we achieve a loftier place
because someone else is belittled. More recently, social psychologists
have co-opted elements of superiority theory to help explain some of the
processes involved with the formation and defense of the social identity
of a group. Humorous put-downs of an “out-group”—the group to
which we do not belong—are sometimes enjoyable because they allow
our group to achieve “positive distinctiveness,” a sense of superiority
that we, as a group, have a special distinction that sets us apart, and even
above, other groups (Ferguson & Ford, 2008; Ruscher, 2001). Ethnic and
gender-based (“sexist”) jokes and put-downs are partially explained in
this way (Ferguson & Ford, 2008).
How might this type of humor relate to asexuality? Some asexual
people may have resentment toward and fear of the (majority) out-
group—sexual people—just as some sexual people may have anger or
resentment toward asexual people. Relatedly, our very sexualized society
often places pressure on asexual people to have sex, perhaps causing
tension in some asexual people, if not outright resentment of sexual peo-
ple. If so, and if the Viagra joke somehow evokes an effective, belittling,
and embarrassing image of a sexual person—a man being forced to grasp
his erect penis in a dentist’s office—one might argue that this joke could
make an asexual person laugh.
SUMMARY
The ability of the Viagra joke, as in many sexual jokes, to create humor
appreciation (i.e., laughter) may involve the use and release of sexual

144
Chapter 12
tension. The effectiveness of this joke may also involve the quick access-
ibility of imagery related to a hand grasping an erect penis, along with,
perhaps, this act being viewed as a benign violation of a social rule. As
sexual people (particularly men with masturbation experience) should
have the most sexual energy and tension, and the most experience asso-
ciated with these images and ideas, this joke is especially relevant to and
likely to be appreciated by them (compared to asexual people). However,
there are many unknowns and complexities when it comes to under-
standing humor, and it is possible that some circumstances (e.g., resent-
ment of sexual people) may evoke humor appreciation for sexual jokes in
asexual people.
My reasoning on asexuality and sexual humor in this chapter has been
very speculative. The relationship between asexuality and sexual humor
might be best described as an “empirical question”—that is, something
that is unknown and needs to be studied.
Finally, I think a broad conclusion that should be drawn from this
chapter is that sexuality is a pervasive part of most people’s lives and is
associated with considerable tensions and odd, even twisted, social rules,
so much so that sexual content pervades one of the most important tools
we use to negotiate social life: humor. Interestingly, if it turns out that
asexual people do appreciate, even laugh at, sexual jokes (and I expect
that many do), this may say more about our sexualized society and how
everyone—sexual or not—is caught in its web of influence than it does
about any hidden sexual motives of (self-identified) asexual people.
Thus, the answer to the question posed earlier in this chapter—if a person
who identifies as asexual laughs at a sexual joke, does this mean that he
or she is sexual?—is not necessarily. It may just mean that he or she is also
part of a sociocultural experience partially driven by sex. To end with, let
me pose a related thought question that I took on and tried to answer in
the context of art in chapter 11: What would our humor be like if we were
an asexual species? With a domain of life so fraught with tension and
social rules—sex—eliminated, would we be less funny?
NOTES
1. Some animals may have a form of rudimentary laughter (e.g., “proto-laughter”
of chimps), or at least show some of the evolutionary physical precursors to laughter,
such as excited and rhythmic physical behaviors (e.g., tail-wagging in dogs) (Eastman,

(A)sexuality and Humor
145
1936). There may also be some precursors of the often “rule-bending” element of
humor in the play fighting of animals (Gervais & Wilson, 2005; see also later in this
chapter).
2. It is popularly believed and has often been stated—in the Bible, in the popular
media, and so on—that laughter is “good medicine.” The implication of this wide-
spread belief is that it must have evolved because of its physical health benefits.
However, some theorists suggest that laughter’s direct health benefits are minimal, or
at least not yet sufficiently demonstrated. Instead, humor evolved because it had
“social” benefits, easing social tension and allowing for smooth navigation among our
fellow humans (Provine, 2000), and any health benefits are indirect and work through
these social benefits (e.g., social support).
3. However, most modern theorists do not buy all of the elements of a classic
tension-release model. Humor is not necessarily “cathartic” in the therapeutic sense;
that is, it does not necessarily reduce the tendency to engage in future behaviors
related to the tension (Ferguson & Ford, 2008; Martin, 2007). For example, research
shows that sexist humor does not decrease the tendency to engage in sexist behavior
soon afterward; sometimes the opposite occurs, and sexist humor may even lead to
complex domineering behaviors (Hodson, Rush, & MacInnis, 2010). Thus, a straight-
forward catharsis model of humor based on sexual or other tension may not be cor-
rect. One alternative but related explanation for this kind of humor is that there may
be a pleasantness associated with being able to release the tension of a repressed or
suppressed impulse or motive, but such humor does not reduce our tendencies to
engage in this impulse; it just releases us from the unpleasantness of not being able to
express it. For example, modern social psychologists talk about disparagement humor
of groups as releasing “negative intergroup motives” (Hodson, Rush, & MacInnis,
2010, p. 661).
4. Indeed, many modern theorists argue that humor is complex and multifaceted,
and one usually needs both elements, especially when actual laughter occurs. Humor,
broadly defined, does not always make us laugh; perhaps tension release is even
required for actual laughter to occur. We may receive a rather pleasant feeling and
perhaps a smile from, for example, a clever witticism, twist, or incongruity; yet it is
still humor, even though it does not evoke the deep release of a joke that causes a belly
laugh. But when humor does make us laugh, there is usually some level of tension
involved and released.
5. Recall from the discussion of masturbation (chapter 5) that many asexual people
do masturbate, but at a lower rate and less frequently than sexual people. If so, this
analysis is, of course, most applicable to the non-masturbating asexuals.
6. If humor that causes laughter is more associated with emotional tension than
other forms of humor (e.g., puns and other incongruities), then this joke may elicit
only mild appreciation in asexual people. It may evoke a pleasant cognitive shift, a
recognition of a strange incongruity being somewhat resolved. Thus, sexual people
may laugh; asexual people may just smile?
7. So, yes, women (particularly those without much experience grasping a penis)
may also not appreciate this joke.


THIRTEEN
Just Because
Have you been patiently reading along, but also wondering when I was
going to address directly what you perceive to be the heart of the matter:
the cause(s) of asexuality? If certain chapters touching on causes (e.g.,
chapter 6) only whetted your appetite for a more direct discussion of
etiology, I can’t blame you. Causes are important to people. They are not
merely the preserve of adults—children are also fascinated by them.
Sometimes children are so obsessed and unsatisfied when an adult an-
swers their “why” question that it sets off a spiraling series of additional
“but why” queries. So, finding out about the “cause” of an event merely
prompts their curiosity about the cause behind this cause, and the cause
behind that cause, and so on. After being beaten into submission by the
barrage of questions, realizing that the child has a point and that the
mysteries of the universe are often unknowable to children and adults
alike, a parent may resort to the ambiguous, end-all answer: “Well, just
because, dear. . . .”
Subdisciplines of philosophy and psychology are devoted to how we
determine causes—how we know what we know in epistemology (philoso-
phy), and how we attribute causes, including laying blame, in attribution
theory (psychology). Indeed, social psychologists suggest that we are not
only obsessed with causes but also prone to bias in our thinking about
them. I raise this issue because even we scientists may forward a cause
that reflects bias. Keep that in mind as you read along!
What is a cause? We may think of a cause as something that gives rise
to an event or phenomenon. In other words, causes deal with the hows
147

148
Chapter 13
and whys of events. But causes are complicated, and not just because, as
social psychologists suggest, humans have bias in the way they make
attributions. Often phenomena have multiple causes. So, for example,
asexuality may be caused by both a biological event (e.g., prenatal hor-
mones permanently organizing a site in the lower brain) and an environ-
mental one (e.g., no exposure to sexualizing social forces, such as randy
peers).1 Sometimes causes are interactive or conditional; that is, they only
occur in one circumstance but not others. So, perhaps a lack of sexualiz-
ing social forces has a profound effect on one individual because he or
she is predisposed to these forces, but a lack of sexualizing social forces in
another individual has no impact, because he or she does not have a
susceptible predisposition; in the latter case, the individual would be
sexual regardless of these sexualizing social forces or the lack of them.
Causes can also be distinguished by their level of analysis: micro ver-
sus macro. Micro refers to causes within an individual, including at the
very basic cellular level (e.g., the organization of brain cells). Biological
and some psychological causes are focused on the micro level. Macro
refers to causes that are broader or more societally focused (e.g., socioeco-
nomic status as a determinant of one’s social environment). Some
psychological, sociological, and historical causes are macro focused. Of
course, an academic usually prefers one type of cause over the other—be
it either micro or macro—because one type of cause usually fits more
comfortably within his or her own discipline than the other. However, it
is very important to remember that macro and micro causes are not nec-
essarily in competition with one another for understanding reality. A
macro cause may be compatible with or related to a micro one. For exam-
ple, socioeconomic status (macro cause) may influence the environmental
conditions to which a mother is exposed, which may, in turn, raise or
lower hormone levels in her womb, affecting a fetus’s brain development
(micro cause) and its propensity to asexuality.
Also, we can focus on causes at different spots along a very long
timeline. Some causes are more immediate or proximal in nature; that is,
closer in time to the event itself. Most causes offered up by biologists,
psychologists, and sociologists are of this nature. Some causes are distal
in nature—that is, further away in time from the event itself. Causes from
a historical or evolutionary perspective can be distal in nature. Historical
causes can be considered distal because they occurred in the distant past,
perhaps many centuries ago. Evolutionary explanations are distal be-

Just Because
149
cause they concentrate on why a phenomenon, such as asexuality within
humans, may have evolved during a time in the natural history of the
species, and/or why this phenomenon may have conferred an adaptive
advantage (or at least not a disadvantage) across time. Some causes are so
distal as to be construable as “ultimate.” Thus, one might argue that the
Big Bang or God is the ultimate or first cause of everything, including
human asexuality. Such ultimate causes may be correct in a broad sense,
but they are often not particularly useful in the science of understanding
current events or in understanding differences between people in the
here and now.2
I have already mentioned two distal causes of asexuality. In chapter 3,
I suggested that some historical eras—for example, the Victorian era in
Britain—may have caused elevated rates of asexuality in certain individ-
uals (e.g., upper-class women). One could expand on such distal explana-
tions, if one were a historian (which I am not), and do an in-depth analy-
sis of different eras and their roles in causing different prevalence rates of
asexuality.3
Another relatively distal cause of asexuality is the evolutionary pro-
cess. One of the great evolutionary puzzles of sexology, aside from why
sex exists (see chapter 3), is why homosexuality exists, given that it is
partly genetically based and has existed over time and across cultures. As
I discussed in chapter 11, the answer may have to do with kin selection.
If, for example, a “man-loving” gene is expressed not only in a gay man
but also in his female relatives, it may confer a reproductive advantage
on the latter, making his sisters particularly fertile and thus increasing the
replication of the family’s genes. Alternatively, a gay gene (i.e., a genetic
predisposition to same-sex attraction) may be of some advantage to an
individual because, under certain environmental circumstances, it may
be associated with helping relatives’ children (e.g., nephews and nieces)
survive and reproduce. In both cases, then, “gay genes” may exist be-
cause they serve to replicate one’s broader gene pool (i.e., kin).
Asexuality may also be an evolutionary puzzle in need of a solution,
assuming it also has a genetic basis across time. Perhaps asexuality
“genes” are also conserved throughout evolutionary time because of kin-
selection mechanisms. Thus, it would be interesting to examine in a re-
search study if asexual people give, on average, elevated care for their
siblings’ children, thus potentially offsetting their reduced sexual repro-
duction by such kin-enhancement strategies.4

150
Chapter 13
Speaking of genetics and asexuality, no studies thus far have tested
for this linkage directly. Indirect evidence is all we can rely on at this
point: no studies have ever examined asexuality as a trait and its “concor-
dance” or similarity between identical (as compared to fraternal) twins, a
common methodology used to determine if variation in a trait is partly
genetically based. Moreover, no one has ever isolated a specific gene
directly associated with asexuality.
But let’s discuss some plausible genetic candidates affecting asexual-
ity. In chapter 6, we discussed the role of certain X-linked (female) or Y-
linked (male) genes in sexual differentiation. Some of these genes may
play a key role in the prenatal development of the brain. Some of these
gene effects on prenatal development are also independent of hormonal
effects. In other words, they may directly affect the structure or organiza-
tion of brain cells associated with sexual attraction. These genes, howev-
er, are not well studied. Some other sex-linked genes are well studied and
have been clearly shown to affect hormones and their impact on sexual
differentiation. For example, the SRY gene allows for the development of
the testes, which produce hormones during prenatal and postnatal devel-
opment. There are also other “hormone-related” genes. For example, the
androgen receptor (AR) gene is important in determining how hormones
affect the body and the brain. As you may recall, receptors are specialized
parts of the cell that receive and activate a hormone molecule, and andro-
gens (testosterone in particular) affect sex drive and prenatally organize
sites in the lower brain related to gender, sexuality, and attraction. Varia-
tion in the AR gene likely affects the person’s level of sensitivity to testos-
terone. Interestingly, variation in the AR gene has been implicated in
male-to-female transsexualism (Hare et al., 2009), and there is evidence
that asexuality is associated with elevated rates of atypical gender iden-
tity (see also chapter 6). There is also evidence that variation in the AR
gene might influence the age at which puberty begins (Comings, Muhle-
man, Johnson, & MacMurray, 2002), and there is evidence that the age of
first menstruation (menarche) is, on average, later in asexual women than
in sexual women (Bogaert, 2004). Finally, one of the explanations for
asexuality in animals is an alteration in the receptors for testosterone (see
also chapter 3). In sum, this research suggests that variations in the AR
gene may underlie (or least predispose someone to) asexuality.
Genes underlying receptors for other hormones, including estrogens
(e.g., estradiol), may also be involved in the causes of asexuality. Estro-

Just Because
151
gens, among other functions, help regulate women’s menstrual cycle,5
but also likely play some role in the sexual differentiation of both male
and female fetuses. There is also some evidence that male-to-female
transsexuals have an atypical variation in the estrogen receptor (ER) gene
(Henningsson et al., 2005).
Recall from chapter 6 that sexual differentiation involves the develop-
ment of female features (feminization) and male features (masculiniza-
tion), as well as processes that prevent or remove female features in male
fetuses (de-feminization) and prevent or remove male features in female
fetuses (de-masculinization). Exploration of the possible role of androgen
and/or estrogen receptors in the sexual differentiation process raises the
possibility that some asexual people are, partially, neither masculinized
nor feminized (see also chapter 6). In other words, instead of an inversion
of masculinization and feminization that, at times, may occur in gays and
lesbians during prenatal development (Ellis & Ames, 1987), some asexual
people may be de-gendered during prenatal development. That asexual
people report a high level of atypical gender identity, along with the role
of these hormone receptor genes in transsexualism, adds support for this
possibility.
Genes are chemicals that provide the codes for proteins, the building
blocks of life, which in turn produce parts of the body (e.g., hormones,
receptors, and/or brain sites); thus, variations in certain genes may alter
typical brain development and affect asexuality. But aside from genes,
are there other factors that could cause alterations in typical development
of the brain? There are, and these factors have broad applicability to
sexual orientation development, including the development of an asexual
orientation. Let’s first consider these factors in the context of traditional
sexual orientation—that is, in the development of a homosexual versus a
heterosexual orientation.
One biological theory of sexual orientation is that homosexuality re-
sults when atypical events during pregnancy expose fetuses to variations
in prenatal hormones (e.g., Ellis & Ames, 1987). These atypical events
may include unusual pregnancies (e.g., carrying twins), a maternal expo-
sure to certain drugs, or stress during pregnancy. Such events may alter
the typical hormonal milieu (e.g., raise or lower testosterone levels) of the
womb during pregnancy, and consequently alter the course of fetal brain
development.

152
Chapter 13
Another biological theory of male homosexuality is that atypical
events during pregnancy expose male fetuses to a maternal immune re-
sponse. In this theory, some pregnant mothers have an immune reaction
to a substance important in male fetal development (Blanchard & Bo-
gaert, 1996; Bogaert & Skorska, 2011). For example, male fetuses, because
of genes on their Y-chromosome, produce certain male-specific proteins
that may be seen as “foreign” to the mother. Thus, the target of a moth-
er’s immune response may be these proteins, some of which are ex-
pressed on the surface of male fetal brain cells. Products of a mother’s
immune system (e.g., antibodies) might alter the typical function of these
proteins and thus alter their role in typical sexual differentiation, leading
some males later in life to be attracted to men as opposed to women.
What could cause such an immune reaction, and what factors affect
the degree to which such an immune reaction alters the typical develop-
ment of the fetus? The events mentioned above—unusual pregnancies—
may be relevant. For example, some unusual pregnancies may lead to a
higher likelihood of products of the mother’s immune system (e.g., anti-
bodies) crossing the placental barrier that separates the fetus and the
mother, ultimately affecting fetal development.
In summary, two biological theories of sexual orientation develop-
ment—variations in prenatal hormones and a maternal immune re-
sponse—have as a central theme that an atypical womb environment can
predispose fetuses to homosexuality. Yet there is often no direct informa-
tion about atypical events that occurred while a fetus developed in its
mother’s womb. A mother may know this about her pregnancy history,
but her sons and daughters, when asked in research studies, may not be
privy to this information. Moreover, even if there is information about
such atypical events, very often little direct evidence exists that these
events sufficiently altered the womb environment—such as by producing
atypical hormone levels or a maternal immune response—to affect fetal
development.
Because direct evidence of such changes is rarely available, research-
ers often seek indirect “markers” of biological development, particularly
those markers that are determined before birth and that are sensitive to
atypical womb conditions. One of the most important and well-studied
biological markers of prenatal development is handedness.
Did you know that fetuses often suck their thumbs? They do, and
ultrasound studies show that the rate of right-handed thumb sucking in

Just Because
153
fetuses matches relatively closely the rate of right-handedness in adults
(Hepper, Shabidullah, & White, 1991). This rather intriguing correspon-
dence in bodily characteristics between fetal and adult life suggests that
handedness is determined before birth.
Handedness is linked to genes (and what isn’t?), including the andro-
gen receptor (AR) gene mentioned above (Medland et al., 2005). Elevated
non-right-handedness is also associated with atypical pregnancy/birth
conditions (e.g., birth stress) (Coren, 1993). Handedness is additionally
linked to variations in prenatal hormone levels (Witelson & Nowakow-
ski, 1991). Thus, if a group has a rate of non-right-handedness that differs
statistically from, say, 10 percent—the rate seen in many adult popula-
tions—it suggests that this group has elevated variations in relevant
genes and/or atypical prenatal development (e.g., altered hormone lev-
els). For example, non-right-handedness is elevated in gay men and les-
bians (Lalumière, Blanchard, & Zucker, 2000) and other groups with
atypical sexual attractions (Bogaert, 2001).6 This research suggests that
atypical womb events (e.g., variations in prenatal hormones) can alter
brain mechanisms affecting both handedness and patterns of sexual at-
traction in these groups. As such, handedness is also an important biolog-
ical marker to examine in the context of a possible biological underpin-
ning of asexuality.
Is there any evidence that asexuals have atypical handedness pat-
terns? There is. Perhaps the most intriguing finding related to the etiolo-
gy of asexuality is that 26 percent of (self-identified) asexual people have
been found to be non-right-handed (Yule, 2011). This is a very high per-
centage in comparison to population norms or to the control group of
heterosexual participants (12 percent) in the study itself. The elevated
non-right-handedness occurred in both asexual men and asexual women,
and is consistent with elevated rates of non-right-handedness in both gay
men and lesbians (Lalumière et al., 2000).
Another potential biological marker of atypical prenatal development
is a high number of older brothers. Such a marker is relevant to the
biology of men’s sexual orientation and the theory of maternal immune
response contributing to male homosexuality mentioned above. An im-
portant corollary of this theory is that the immune effect should have a
higher likelihood of occurring with each son that a mother gestates. This
is because a mother has increased opportunities to develop an immune
response against male-specific substances with each male gestation. Each

154
Chapter 13
male fetus gestated increases the likelihood that eventually a mother will
be exposed to and ultimately react against such a substance as a male-
specific protein. So, in other words, we should observe an “older brother
effect”—a greater number of older brothers in gay men versus heterosex-
ual men—if a maternal immune effect underlies male homosexuality.
There should also be no sibling (e.g., older sister) effect in female homo-
sexuality, because a mother should not develop an immune response
against a female-specific substance, given that she herself is female.
Is there an older brother effect in gay men? Yes! On average, gay men
have a higher number of older brothers than do heterosexual men. In
1996, psychologist Ray Blanchard and I first demonstrated this effect us-
ing a Canadian sample (Blanchard & Bogaert, 1996). However, there is
now a large body of research, including cross-cultural studies, showing
this effect, but only in men’s sexual orientation (Blanchard, 2004; Bogaert
& Skorska, 2011). The fact that this “older brother effect” is indeed a
biological phenomenon is further demonstrated by research showing that
gay men have an elevated number of older biological brothers, even ones
with whom they were not reared; yet they do not have an elevated num-
ber of older stepbrothers or adopted brothers (Bogaert, 2006a). Thus,
these findings point to the importance of the biological mother, whom
biological siblings share, and not the childhood or rearing environment,
which step- or adopted siblings share when they were raised together.
Interestingly, there is recent evidence of an “older brother effect” in
asexual men: Morag Yule (2011), in her master’s thesis under the supervi-
sion of psychologist Lori Brotto at the University of British Columbia,
found that asexual men have a higher number of older brothers than a
comparison sample of heterosexual men. No one yet has conducted a
study on whether the older brother effect in asexual men is restricted to
biological (versus non-biological) older brothers, but the pattern of sib-
ling effects in the Yule study is very similar to those observed in many
similar studies of male homosexuality.
The discussion above places a heavy emphasis on prenatal mecha-
nisms, such as hormones organizing brain structures during fetal devel-
opment.7 What about current or circulating hormones affecting asexual-
ity? Do asexual people have low circulating hormones that reduce sex
drive, and minimize their sexual attractions?
As mentioned in chapter 2, prior to the 1970s, gay men were some-
times administered high levels of testosterone. This was done because

Just Because
155
“reparative-oriented” clinicians felt that this hormone treatment could
change gay men’s orientation. Yet it did not make them attracted to wom-
en; it just made them horny for more sex with men! The problem with
this approach, aside from the ethics of it, was that gay men’s orientation
was already determined, perhaps even before birth, and thus administer-
ing testosterone in adolescence and adulthood just “activated” or stimu-
lated their sex drives. So the testosterone worked like fuel on the fire of
whatever disposition (i.e., brain organization) was already there in the
first place.
By the same token, it is unlikely that we can change many asexual
people’s orientation by administering sex hormones. Thus, like gay men,
asexual people’s underlying attractions (to no one, in this case) are un-
likely to be changed by such interventions, although they may make the
masturbating asexuals masturbate even more (see chapter 5)! Indeed, the
fact that some asexual people are masturbating already (and some do so
frequently) means that, at least for these asexual people, their asexuality
is not a sex-drive issue, and thus their underlying sexual connection to
others is unlikely to change with added hormones. Finally, as mentioned
in chapter 3, there is little evidence that asexuality in animals (the so-
called duds in rodents or NORs in rams) is the result of low levels of
circulating or activating hormones (Adkins-Reagan, 2005; Perkins, Fitz-
gerald, & Price, 1992).8
People often suggest to me that there must be a childhood event—such
as sexual abuse or other trauma—that causes asexuality. Given my hefty
list of possible biological explanations reviewed above, perhaps you as-
sume that I dismiss these suggestions, if only in a polite, Canadian kind
of way? Well, no, I don’t. I believe that at times asexuality is affected by,
or at least predisposed to occur because of, atypical childhood events.
Research suggests that some atypical sexual attractions partly result
from atypical rearing events, including sexual abuse (Seto, 2008). This
fact raises the possibility that asexuality—as it is also an unusual form of
sexual attraction—may be caused by such events. These traumatic events
may be experienced very negatively and disrupt any sexual interest or
attraction that normally arises in an individual. Thus, traumatic events
could shut down an emerging sexuality. These events may also be cou-
pled with (or interact with) other predisposing factors—such as prenatal
influences—that could seal the deal on an individual’s asexuality.

156
Chapter 13
However, there is no direct evidence that sexual abuse causes asexual-
ity. We must also be cautious about overstating the role of sexual abuse in
the etiology of atypical sexual attractions, as many people exposed to
such abuse—traumatic as it may be at the time—will not develop an
unusual sexuality or other long-term consequences (Rellini & Meston,
2007; Rind, Tromovitch, & Bauserman, 1998).
Recall that one of the themes of this book is that asexuality is a diverse
phenomenon. The diverse patterns of asexuality are often gender related,
with men likely to show one pattern, and women to show another. Mas-
turbation experience is a good example of how the diversity in asexuality
people is often gender related: Only some asexual people masturbate,
and they tend to be men. Women may thus be more likely than men to be
asexual, because the former are less likely to masturbate (see chapter 6).
Masturbation may act as “conditioning” trials leading to the develop-
ment of strong, enduring attractions to others, particularly if the mastur-
bation is paired with images of others. Thus, another environmental in-
fluence affecting the development of asexuality may be a lack of early
sexual experimentation (i.e., childhood/adolescent masturbation with
fantasy). Consistent with this view, some theorists have argued that sexu-
al attraction to others results from arousal experiences—including mas-
turbation—directed at or with others (Storms, 1981).
Sexual attraction may also emerge from exposure to and familiarity
with same-sex or opposite-sex peers (Bem, 1996). If, for example, a boy’s
gender identity and role are traditional—for instance, engaging in tradi-
tional “masculine” behaviors, such as rough-and-tumble play and sports
with other boys—girls may become “exotic” and hence, ultimately, sexu-
ally arousing. Thus, the boy may develop permanent attractions to the
erotically charged opposite sex.
But what if this boy has little contact with and no identification with
peers? Would this boy’s dis-identification with both sexes create, at least
in some, an ambivalence to both and, hence, a sexual disinterest in all
people later on life—that is, asexuality?
At this point, the role of the environment in asexual development,
including childhood events (e.g., trauma), masturbation, and peers—re-
main a mystery. Research on asexual people has collected only basic
information on their social environments: education, ethnicity, and social
class (Bogaert, 2004; Bogaert, in press-a). Yet this information, limited as
it may be, suggests that some asexual people have been exposed to an

Just Because
157
atypical environment relative to a standard, white, middle- or upper-
class environment occurring in most Western societies. Asexual people
are, on average, more likely to come from lower-class homes than sexual
people. They are also somewhat lower in education, relative to sexual
people. Finally, asexual people are, on average, more likely to have a
nonwhite ethnicity than sexual people. Are these circumstances a proxy
for unusual social circumstances during childhood and adolescence?
Could they have an impact on sexual development through, say, in-
creased exposure to some traumatic events that occur disproportionately
in some lower-class homes, or perhaps through fewer peer interactions as
a result of less school-based education? Could ethnic differences between
asexual and sexual people indicate that some asexual people have been
not been “acculturated” to a sexualized Western society (Brotto, Chik,
Ryder, Gorzalka, & Seal, 2005)? These questions are intriguing but re-
main unanswered and await further research.
SUMMARY
One of the themes of this book is that the study of asexuality informs our
understanding of sexuality. This is also true in the case of etiology. Prena-
tal mechanisms (e.g., genes, hormones, maternal immune response) po-
tentially underlying asexuality may be the same ones that underlie tradi-
tional sexual orientations (gay, straight, and bisexual), and sexual vari-
ability generally. Thus, to have some understanding of one is to have
some understanding of the other. This also holds true for nonbiological
influences on sexuality. For example, peers and masturbation (and the
role of conditioning) may play some role in sexualizing or de-sexualizing
a person, depending on how these influences play themselves out in the
individual.
You could say that I am an expert on sexual orientation development,
as my research work in this area is well published and some of it is well
known (e.g., on the older brother effect in men’s sexual orientation). So,
as an expert (ahem!), I guess I am permitted some bold, concluding state-
ments about the causes of sexual attractions, including the origins of
asexuality. But I won’t make such a bold statement about causes, because,
as mentioned at the beginning of this chapter, I know that causes are
tricky and complex things. For example, the etiology of asexuality may
reflect multiple and interactive influences, both biological and environ-

158
Chapter 13
mental in origin. This etiology may also be best understood by resorting
to both distal and proximal causes and both macro and micro influences.
In addition, I hesitate to be bold because I know that the research on
asexuality is just beginning. Thus, although there is tantalizing research
(mostly of a proximate, micro nature), along with some intriguing specu-
lations, regarding the origins of asexuality, we do not know what causes
someone to develop as an asexual person. So, if you are asked why asexu-
ality exists, and you reply, “Well, just because,” I suppose I would not
blame you.
NOTES
1. Of course, when a phenomenon has multiple causes—say, two, for this exam-
ple—they could be two discrete biological causes, or two discrete environmental ones,
and not necessarily one of each.
2.
Like micro and macro causes, distal and proximate causes are not necessarily
incompatible, as they can also coexist at different points along a (potentially very long)
causal stream or pathway for a given phenomenon. For example, an evolutionary
cause of gender differences in sexuality is that during human evolution, men and
women developed different mating strategies. Women developed a more cautious
mating strategy to maximize their large parental/reproductive investment (relatively
few eggs, nine months of gestation). Men developed a more risky and indiscriminate
mating strategy to maximize their small parental/reproductive investment (cheap, re-
placeable sperm). A compatible proximate explanation is that these different mating
strategies are caused by hormone levels affecting sex drive, with women exhibiting
lower levels of testosterone and a lower sex drive than men. Sometimes evolutionary
causes are construed as the whys, and proximate causes as the hows, of events and
phenomena.
3. As mentioned, historical causes would also constitute more of a macro- than a
microanalysis.
4. This is not to imply that this would be a “conscious” strategy.
5. Estrogens (e.g., estradiol) are sometimes referred to as “female hormones,” but
this is a bit simplistic, just as suggesting that testosterone is a male hormone (see the
complexity of sex and gender in chapter 6). For example, testosterone itself can be
converted to estradiol under the influence of an enzyme (aromatase) and both testoste-
rone and estrogen (e.g., estradiol) are produced in both males and females.
6. One of these groups is pedophiles. This fact should not be taken to mean that
homosexuality (or asexuality) and thus pedophilia should be seen as linked in a be-
havioral way—that is, to mean that gay men, lesbians, or asexuals are more likely to
abuse children. This is not the case. Instead, this fact should be taken as evidence that
sexual attraction, atypical and otherwise, is very likely influenced by prenatal events.
7. We can add to this evidence the research mentioned in chapter 6 showing that
asexual women have atypical menarche onset (Bogaert, 2004). There is also evidence
that asexual people may be somewhat shorter than sexual people (Bogaert, 2004).
Atypical menarche and stature are both potential markers of altered biological devel-

Just Because
159
opment, including an altered prenatal development. Interestingly, there is evidence of
atypical height patterns in gays and lesbians, although this research is not consistent
and may be subject to non-biological interpretations (Bogaert & McCreary, 2011).
8. Does this mean that no asexual person would ever become sexual (e.g., develop
sexual attractions) by taking testosterone? Not necessarily. Although the majority of
asexual people likely do not have a “hormone deficiency,” there is always a possibility
that some asexual people have lower-than-average testosterone or other hormones
relative to sexual people. For example, low hormone levels in some asexual people
may occur because of a health condition (for some evidence of this, see my original
article published in 2004). Also, it is possible that some asexual people with average
hormone levels who take abnormally high testosterone could raise their sex drive and,
perhaps, develop some level of sexual attraction for others. There are at least two
issues here, though: First, as mentioned, there is currently little evidence that asexual
people, as a whole, have lower testosterone levels than average sexual people. Second,
is it ethical to administer abnormally high hormones to an asexual person if asexuality,
arguably, is not a disorder (see also chapters 8 and 9)?


FOURTEEN
The Beginning
We have reached the end of this book. Have I converted you from a
sexual person to an asexual one, or from an asexual person to a sexual
one? You may be laughing at this point, as I expect you know that I asked
this question tongue-in-cheek. After all, our sexual attractions, or lack of
them, are not easily swayed. Thus, whatever mysteries give rise to them
(see chapter 13), once they are laid down, they don’t change easily.
This book was intended for a broad audience: anyone interested in
understanding asexuality, and anyone interested in taking a view of hu-
man sexuality through a new lens. Toward that end, in chapter 2 I ex-
plored the constructs underlying the psychology of sexuality, which al-
lowed us to define asexuality as a lack of sexual attraction. Exploring
these constructs also provided insight into the nature of sexuality by
defining its borders and revealing how related constructs such as ro-
mance and love can be decoupled from it. I also explored the biological
and cultural history of asexuality in chapter 3. What do an amoeba, a
famous mathematician, and Jughead Jones have in common? In chapter
4, I presented information on the prevalence of asexuality. The concern
about the number of humans in various sexual groups reveals the fasci-
nation with our place on the sexual spectrum. In chapter 5, I discussed
the rather delicate subject of masturbation and how it is important to
understanding variation in asexuality. Later, in chapter 10, I presented
evidence that some forms of asexuality in which masturbation co-occurs
with persistent fantasy may constitute a paraphilia, or an unusual form of
sexual attraction. I even named a new paraphilia! In chapter 6, I probed
161

162
Chapter 14
that mystery of mysteries, female sexual desire, and explored how men
and women differ in their expression of sexuality, including asexuality.
The forging of an asexual identity, and how it relates to the development
of all identities (sexual and otherwise), was presented in chapter 7. In
chapters 8 and 9, I asked the question “Is there one right way to live a
human life?” My answer, after surveying the scene and trundling out a
few arguments, was “no”; thus, if one is content as an asexual person,
then one is probably better off than many people (if not the majority) who
live in the sexualized modern Western world. Asexuality is a complex
phenomenon and not easily framed as a mental problem; indeed, the case
could be made that sexuality, not asexuality, is a form of madness! In
chapters 11 and 12, I explored our sexual planet, and how sex is a perva-
sive, even insidious, influence on our lives. The examples I chose to illus-
trate this point were art, food, and humor, but other domains of human
life are equally open to sexual analysis.
I hope that you have seen sexuality in a new light by reading this
book. I have by writing it. This book has distilled for me much of the
knowledge I have gained in my career as a sex educator and researcher,
and I now see sexuality through a new lens because of my research on
asexuality.
Finally, a few words on the title of this brief, concluding chapter: Is it
truly a beginning? Not really, as there is already a small but important
body of literature on asexuality, along with a plethora of literature that
allows us to view sexuality for what I believe it is: the great, but utterly
mad, story of human life. But the conclusion of this book is still more of a
beginning than an end, because the thought and work devoted to under-
standing asexuality and its strange counterpart, sexuality, is in its early
stages. Take this book and its concluding chapter as an invitation—the
party hasn’t yet started.

Bibliography
1-Love-Quotes.com. (n.d.). Kate O’Brien quotes. Retrieved May 19, 2011, from www.1-
love-quotes.com/quote/927500
10percent.com. (n.d.). Retrieved from www.10percent.com
Abbott, E. (2001). The history of celibacy. New York: Da Capo Press.
Adkins-Reagan, E. (2005). Hormones and animal social behavior. Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press.
Allport, G. W. (1954). The nature of prejudice. Cambridge, MA: Perseus Books.
American Psychiatric Association. (1980). Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental
disorders (3rd ed.). Washington, DC: Author.
American Psychiatric Association. (2000). Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental
disorders (4th ed., text rev.). Washington, DC: Author.
AnyOtherName. (2010, August 22). But . . . I don’t WANT to masturbate . . . [Online
forum post]. Retrieved from www.asexuality.org/en/index.php?/topic/53785-but-i-
dont-want-to-masturbate
Arnold, A. P. (2004). Sex chromosomes and brain gender. Nature Reviews Neuroscience,
5, 701–708. doi:10.1038/nrn1494
Associated Press. (2007, December 3). Gay neighborhoods worry about losing identity.
Life
on
MSNBC.com.
Retrieved
from
www.msnbc.msn.com/id/17583200/ns/
us_news-life/t/gay-neighborhoods-worry-about-losing-identity#.TjtNF3O4IXw
Bailey, J. M., Dunne, M. P., & Martin, N. G. (2000). Genetic and environmental influ-
ences on sexual orientation and its correlates in an Australian twin sample. Journal
of Personality and Social Psychology, 78, 524–536. doi:10.1037/0022-3514.78.3.524
Bakker, J. (2003). Sexual differentiation of the neuroendocrine mechanisms regulating
mate
recognition
in
mammals.
Journal
of
Neuroendocrinology,
15,
615–621.
doi:10.1046/j.1365-2826.2003.01036.x
Baumeister, R. F. (2000). Gender differences in erotic plasticity: The female sex drive as
socially flexible and responsive. Psychological Bulletin, 126, 347–374. doi:10.1037/
0033-2909.126.3.347
Baumeister, R. F., Catanese, K. R., & Vohs, K. D. (2001). Is there a gender difference in
strength of sex drive? Theoretical views, conceptual distinctions, and a review of
relevant evidence. Personality and Social Psychology Review, 5, 242–273. doi:10.1207/
S15327957PSPR0503_5
Baumle, A. (Ed.). (in press). International handbook on the demography of sexuality. New
York: Springer Press.
Bell, G. (1982). The masterpiece of nature: The evolution and genetics of sexuality. Berkeley:
University of California Press.
Bem, D. J. (1996). Exotic becomes erotic: A developmental theory of sexual orientation.
Psychological Review, 103(2), 320–335. doi:10.1037//0033-295X.103.2.320
Benjamin, H. (1966). The transsexual phenomenon. New York: Julian Press.
163

164
Bibliography
Berrill, K. T. (1992). Anti-gay violence and victimization in the United States: An
overview. In G. M. Herek & K. T. Berrill (Eds.), Hate crimes: Confronting violence
against lesbians and gay men (pp. 19–45). Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
Billy, J. O. G., Tanfer, K., Grady, W. R., & Klepinger, D. H. (1993). The sexual behavior
of men in the United States. Family Planning Perspectives, 25, 52–60. Retrieved from
www.jstor.org/stable/2136206
Blanchard, R. (1989). The concept of autogynephilia and the typology of male gender
dysphoria. Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease, 177, 616–623. doi:10.1097/00005053-
198910000-00004
Blanchard, R. (1991). Clinical observations and systematic studies of autogynephilia.
Journal of Sex & Marital Therapy, 17, 235–251. Retrieved from www.tandf.co.uk/
journals/titles/0092623X.asp
Blanchard, R. (1993). The she-male phenomenon and the concept of partial autogyne-
philia. Journal of Sex & Marital Therapy, 19, 69–76. Retrieved from www.tandf.co.uk/
journals/titles/0092623X.asp
Blanchard, R. (2004). Quantitative and theoretical analyses of the relation between
older brothers and homosexuality in men. Journal of Theoretical Biology, 230, 173–187.
Blanchard, R., & Bogaert, A. F. (1996). Homosexuality in men and number of older
brothers. American Journal of Psychiatry, 153, 27–31.
Bogaert, A. F. (1996). Volunteer bias in males: Evidence for both personality and sexu-
ality differences. Archives of Sexual Behavior, 25, 125–140. doi:10.1007/BF02437932
Bogaert, A. F. (2001). Handedness, criminality, and sexual offending. Neuropsychologia,
39, 465–469.
Bogaert, A. F. (2003). Number of older brothers and sexual orientation: New tests and
the attractive/behavior distinction in two national probability samples. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 84, 644–652. doi:10.1037/0022-3514.84.3.644
Bogaert, A. F. (2004). Asexuality: Prevalence and associated factors in a national prob-
ability
sample.
Journal
of
Sex
Research,
41(3),
279–287.
doi:10.1080/
00224490409552235
Bogaert, A. F. (2006a). Biological versus nonbiological older brothers and men’s sexual
orientation. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences (PNAS), 103, 10771–10774.
Bogaert, A. F. (2006b). Toward a conceptual understanding of asexuality. Review of
General Psychology, 10, 241–250. doi:10.1037/1089-2680.10.3.241
Bogaert, A. F. (2008). Asexuality: Dysfunction or variation. In J. M. Caroll & M. K.
Alena (Eds.), Psychological sexual dysfunctions (pp. 9–13). New York: Nova Biomedi-
cal Books.
Bogaert, A. F. (in press-a). Asexuality: Prevalence and associated factors in NATSAL-
II. In A. Baumle (Ed.), International handbook on the demography of sexuality. New
York: Springer Press.
Bogaert, A. F. (in press-b). Asexuality and autochorissexualism (identity-less sexual-
ity). Archives of Sexual Behavior.
Bogaert, A. F., & Brotto, L. (in progress). Object of desire self-consciousness theory.
Bogaert, A. F., & Hafer, C. L. (2009). Predicting the timing of coming out in gay and
bisexual men from world beliefs, physical attractiveness, and childhood gender
identity/role. Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 39, 1991–2019. doi:10.1111/j.1559-
1816.2009.00513.x
Bogaert, A. F., & McCreary, D. (2011). Self-reported height and masculine sex roles.
Sex Roles, 65, 548–556.

Bibliography
165
Bogaert, A. F., & Skorska, M. (2011). Sexual orientation, fraternal birth order, and the
maternal immune hypothesis: A review. Frontiers in Neuroendocrinology, 32,
247–254.
Bogaert, A. F., Visser, B. A., Pozzebon, J., & Wanless, J. (2011). Women’s fantasies and
their language of love: The role of object of desire self-consciousness. Poster pre-
sented at SSSS (Western Division), San Francisco, California.
Boyd, R., & Richerson, P. J. (1985). Culture and the evolutionary process. Chicago: Univer-
sity of Chicago Press.
Broad, G. (2010, February 28). Athletes [Web log post]. Retrieved from http://measure-
ofdoubt.blogspot.com/2010/02/athletes.html
Brotto, L., Chik, H., Ryder, A. G., Gorzalka, B., & Seal, B. N. (2005). Acculturation and
sexual function in Asian women. Archives of Sexual Behavior, 34, 613–626.
Brotto, L. A., Knudson, G., Inskip, J., Rhodes, K., & Erskine, Y. (2010). Asexuality: A
mixed methods approach. Archives of Sexual Behavior, 39, 599–618. doi:10.1007/
s10508-008-9434-x
Brotto, L. A., & Yule, M. A. (2011). Physiological and subjective sexual arousal in self-
identified asexual women. Archives of Sexual Behavior, 40, 699–712. doi:10.1007/
s10508-010-9671-7
Bulwa, D. (2009, August 24). Asexuals leave the closet, find community. SF Gate.
Retrieved
from
www.sfgate.com/cgi-bin/article.cgi?f=/c/a/2009/08/24/
MNC6194GN4.DTL
Buss, D. M., & Schmitt, D. P. (1993). Sexual strategies theory: An evolutionary perspec-
tive on human mating. Psychological Review, 100, 204–232. doi:10.1037//0033-
295X.100.2.204
Busseri, M., Willoughby, T., Chalmers, H., & Bogaert, A. F. (2006). Same-sex attraction
and successful adolescent development. Journal of Youth and Adolescence, 35,
563–575. doi:10.1007/s10964-006-9071-4
Byrne, D. (1977). Social psychology and the study of sexual behavior. Personality and
Social Psychology Bulletin, 3, 3–30. doi:10.1177/014616727600300102
Caine-Bish, N., & Scheule, B. (2009). Gender differences in food preferences of school-
aged children and adolescents. Journal of School Health, 79, 532–540. doi:10.1111/
j.1746-1561.2009.00445.x
Cameron, L., & Rutland, A. (2006). Extended contact through story reading in school:
Reducing children’s prejudice toward the disabled. Journal of Social Issues, 62,
469–488. doi:10.1111/j.1540-4560.2006.00469.x
Cantor, J., Blanchard, R., & Barbaree, H. (2009). Sexual disorders. In P. H. Blaney & T.
Millon (Eds.), Oxford textbook of psychopathology (pp. 527–548). New York: Oxford
University Press.
Cantor, J. M. (2011). New MRI studies support the Blanchard typology of male-to-
female transsexualism. Archives of Sexual Behavior. Advance online publication.
doi:10.1007/s10508-011-9805-6
Carré, J. M., Putnam, S. K., & McCormick, C. M. (2009). Testosterone responses to
competition predict future aggressive behaviour at a cost to reward in men. Psycho-
neuroendocrinology, 34, 561–570. doi:10.1016/j.psyneuen.2008.10.018
Carroll, L., & Tenniel, J. (1960). Alice’s adventures in wonderland, and Through the looking-
glass. New York: New American Library.
Cash, T. F., Morrow, J. A., Hrabosky, J. I., & Perry, A. A. (2004). How has body image
changed? A cross-sectional investigation of college women and men from 1983 to

166
Bibliography
2001. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 72, 1081–1089. doi:10.1037/0022-
006X.72.6.1081
Cass, V. C. (1979). Homosexual identity formation: A theoretical model. Journal of
Homosexuality, 4, 219–235. Retrieved from www.tandf.co.uk/journals/wjhm
Cass, V. C. (1996). Sexual orientation identity formation: A Western phenomenon. In
R. P. Cabaj & T. S. Stein (Eds.), Textbook of homosexuality and mental health (pp.
227–251). Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Press.
Chapman, D. D., Shivji, M. S., Louis, E., Sommer, J., Fletcher, H., Prodöhl, P. A. (2007).
Virgin birth in a hammerhead shark. Biology Letters, 3, 425–427. doi:10.1098/
rsbl.2007.0189
Chasin, C. J. D. (2011). Theoretical issues in the study of asexuality. Archives of Sexual
Behavior, 40, 713–723. doi:10.1007/s10508-011-9757-x
Chevigny, K., Davenport, B., Pinder, J. (Producers), & Tucker, A. (Director). (2011).
(A)sexual [Documentary]. United States: Arts Engine.
Childs, D. (2009, January 16). Asexuals push for greater recognition. ABC News. Re-
trieved from http://abcnews.go.com/Health/MindMoodNews/asexuals-push-great-
er-recognition/story?id=6656358
Chivers, M. L. (2010). A brief review and discussion of sex differences in the specificity
of sexual arousal. Sexual and Relationship Therapy, 25, 415–428. doi:10.1080/
14681994.2010.518727
Chivers, M. L., Rieger, G., Latty, E., & Bailey, J. M. (2004). A sex difference in the
specificity of sexual arousal. Psychological Science, 11, 736–744. doi:10.1111/j.0956-
7976.2004.00750.x
Chivers, M. L., Seto, M. C., & Blanchard, R. (2007). Gender and sexual orientation
differences in sexual response to sexual activities versus gender in sexual films.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 93, 1108–1121. doi:10.1037/0022-
3514.93.6.1108
Christianson, G. E. (1984). In the presence of the creator: Isaac Newton and his times. New
York: Free Press.
Clark, K. (1956). The nude: A study in ideal form. New York: Pantheon Books.
CNN.com. (2004, October 14). Study: One in 100 adults asexual. Retrieved from
www.cnn.com/2004/TECH/science/10/14/asexual.study/index.html?iref=allsearch
Code of Canon Law. (n.d.). Chapter III: The obligations and rights of clerics. IntraText
CT. Retrieved from www.intratext.com/IXT/ENG0017/_PX.HTM
Coleman, E. (1982). Developmental stages of the coming out process. Journal of Homo-
sexuality, 7, 31–43. doi:10.1300/J082v07n02_06
Comings, D. E., Muhleman, D., Johnson, J. P., & MacMurray, J. P. (2002). Parent-
daughter transmission of the androgen receptor gene as an explanation of the effect
of father absence on age of menarche. Child Development, 73, 1046–1051.
Copas, A. J., Wellings, K., Erens, B., Mercer, C. H., McManus, S., Fenton, K. A. C.,
Korovessis, C., Macdowall, W., Nanchahal, K., & Johnson, A. M. (2002). The accura-
cy of reported sensitive sexual behaviour in Britain: Exploring the extent of change
1990–2000. Sexually Transmitted Infections, 78, 26–30. doi:10.1136/sti.78.1.26\
Coren, S. (1993). The left-hander syndrome. New York: Vintage.
Cowen, R. (2005). History of life (4th ed.). Malden, MA: Blackwell.
Csicsery, G. P. (Producer, Director). (1993). N is a number: A portrait of Paul Erdos
[Motion picture]. United States: Zala Films.

Bibliography
167
Curtis, K. S., & Contreras, R. J. (2006). Sex differences in electrophysiological and
behavioral
responses
to
NaCl
taste.
Behavioral
Neuroscience,
120,
917–924.
doi:10.1037/0735-7044.120.4.917
Daly, M., & Wilson, M. (1988). Homicide. New York: Aldine de Grugter.
Daly, M., Wilson, M., & Weghorst, S. J. (1982). Male sexual jealousy. Ethology and
Sociobiology, 3(1), 11–27. doi:10.1016/0162-3095(82)90027-9
Darwent, C. (2008). The naked and the nude, Middlesbrough Institute of Modern Art
[Review of art exhibition The Naked and the Nude at the Middlesbrough Institute of
Modern Art]. www.independent.co.uk/arts-entertainment/art/reviews/the-naked-
and-the-nude-middlesbrough-institute-of-modern-art-middlesbrough-913650.html
D’Augelli, A. R. (1991). Gay men and college: Identity processes and adaptations.
Journal
of
College
School
Development,
32,
140–146.
Retrieved
from
www.jcsdonline.org
Davey, S. G., Frankel, S., & Yarnell, J. (1997). Sex and death: Are they related? Findings
from
the
Caerphilly
Cohort
Study.
BMJ,
315,
1641–1644.
Retrieved
from
www.jstor.org/stable/25176559
Davies, S. (2004). Emily Bronte: Heretic. London: Women’s Press.
Dawkins, R. (1976). The selfish gene. New York: Oxford University Press.
Diamond, L. (2006). What we got wrong about sexual identity development: Unex-
pected findings from a longitudinal study of young women. In A. M. Omoto & H. S.
Kurtzman (Eds.), Sexual orientation and mental health: Examining identity and develop-
ment in lesbian, gay, and bisexual people. Contemporary perspectives on lesbian, gay, and
bisexual psychology (pp. 73–94). Washington, DC: American Psychological Associa-
tion.
Diamond, L. M. (2003a). New paradigms for research on heterosexual and sexual-
minority development. Journal of Clinical Child and Adolescent Psychology, 32,
490–498. doi:10.1207/S15374424JCCP3204_1
Diamond, L. M. (2003b). What does sexual orientation orient? A biobehavioral model
distinguishing romantic love and sexual desire. Psychological Review, 110, 173–192.
doi:10.1037//0033-295X.110.1.173
Dimitropoulou, P., Lophatananon, A., Easton, D., Pocock, R., Dearnaley, D. P., Guy,
M., Edwards, S., O’Brien, L., Hall, A., Wilkinson, R., Eeles, R., Muir, K. R. (2009).
Sexual activity and prostate cancer risk in men diagnosed at a younger age. BJU
International, 103, 178–185. doi:10.1111/j.1464-410X.2008.08030.x
Doyle, A. C. (2003). The complete Sherlock Holmes. Vol. 2. New York: Barnes and Noble
Classics.
Drew, J. (2003). The myth of female sexual dysfunction and its medicalization. Sexual-
ities, Evolution & Gender, 5, 89–96. doi:10.1080/14616660310001632563
Droser, M. L., & Gehling, J. G. (2008). Synchronous aggregate growth in an abundant
new
ediacaran
tubular
organism.
Science,
319,
1660–1662.
doi:10.1126/sci-
ence.1152595
Dyer, G. (1985). War: Past, present, and future. New York: Crown.
Eastman, M. (1936). Enjoyment of laughter. New York: Halcyon House.
ED Pills. (2010, March 30). Buy discount Cialis and enjoy a romantic weekend. Retrieved
March 24, 2011, from www.edpills.org/Cialis/buy-discount-cialis-and-enjoy-a-ro-
mantic-weekend.html
Eilperin, J. (2007, May 23). Female sharks can reproduce alone, researchers find. Wash-
ington Post. Retrieved on April 27, 2008, from www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/
content/article/2007/05/22/AR2007052201405.html

168
Bibliography
Ekins, R., & King, D. (2004). Rethinking “Who put the ‘Trans’ in Transgender?” Sym-
posium contribution at the Eighth International Gender Dysphoria Conference,
Manchester, England.
Ellis, L., & Ames, M. A. (1987). Neurohormonal functioning and sexual orientation: A
theory of homosexuality-heterosexuality. Psychological Bulletin, 101, 233–258.
Eta Carinae. (2005, July 25). Masturbating A’s: What do you think about when mastur-
bating? [Online forum post]. Retrieved from www.asexuality.org/en/index.php?/
topic/9980-masturbating-as-what-do-you-think-about-when-masturbating
Fahs, B. (2010). Radical refusals: On the anarchist politics of women choosing asexual-
ity. Sexualities, 13, 445–461. doi:10.1177/1363460710370650
Fausto-Sterling, A. (1993, March/April). The five sexes: Why male and female are not
enough. The Sciences, 20–24.
Fausto-Sterling, A. (2000). The five sexes, revisited—The emerging recognition that
people come in bewildering sexual varieties is testing medical values and social
norms. Sciences (New York), 40(4), 18–23.
Federal Bureau of Investigation. (2002). Uniform crime reports. Retrieved January 29,
2007, from www.fbi.gov/about-us/cjis/ucr/ucr
Feinberg, L. (1992). Transgender liberation: A movement whose time has come. New York:
World View Forum.
Ferguson, M. A., & Ford, T. E. (2008). Disparagement humor: A theoretical and empiri-
cal review of psychoanalytic, superiority, and social identity theories. Humor, 21,
283–312. doi:10.1515/HUMOR.2008.014
Fisher, H. (2004). Why we love: The nature and chemistry of romantic love. New York:
Henry Holt.
Fisher, S. (1973). The female orgasm: Psychology, physiology, fantasy. New York: Basic
Books.
Fishman, J. R. (2004). Manufacturing desire: The commodification of female sexual
dysfunction. Social Studies of Science, 34, 187–218. doi:10.1177/0306312704043028
Fishman, J. R. (2007). Making Viagra: From impotence to erectile function. In A. Tone
& E. S. Watkins (Eds.), Medicating modern America: Prescription drugs in history (pp.
229–252). New York: New York University Press.
Floyd, F. J., & Bakeman, R. (2006). Coming-out across the life course: Implications and
historical context. Archives of Sexual Behavior, 35(3), 287–296. doi:10.1007/s10508-006-
9022-x
Floyd, F. J., & Stein, T. S. (2002). Sexual orientation identity formation among gay,
lesbian, and bisexual youths: Multiple patterns of milestone experiences. Journal of
Research on Adolescence, 12, 167–191. doi:10.1111/1532-7795.00030
Fox, R. C. (1995). Bisexual identities. In A. R. D’Augelli & C. J. Patterson (Eds.), Lesbian,
gay, and bisexual identities over the lifespan: Psychological perspectives (pp. 48–86). New
York: Oxford University Press.
Freud, S. (1960). Jokes and their relation to the unconscious. J. Strachey, trans. New York:
W. W. Norton. (Original work published 1905).
Freund, K., & Blanchard, R. (1993). Erotic target location errors in male gender dys-
phorics, pedophiles, and fetishists. British Journal of Psychiatry, 162, 558–563.
doi:10.1192/bjp.162.4.558
Fulbright, Y. (2009, January 12). FOXSexpert: Asexuality—Is it even real? Fox
News.com. Retrieved from www.foxnews.com/story/0,2933,479524,00.html

Bibliography
169
Gerressu, M., Mercer, C. H., Graham, C. A., Wellings, K., & Johnson, A. M. (2008).
Prevalence of masturbation and associated factors in a British national probability
survey. Archives of Sexual Behavior, 37, 266–278. doi:10.1007/s10508-006-9123-6
Gervais, M., & Wilson, D. S. (2005). The evolution and functions of laughter and
humor: A synthetic approach. Quarterly Review of Biology, 80, 395–430. doi:10.1086/
498281
Ghose, T. (2011, July 18). Asexual ants have sex. The Scientist. Retrieved from http://
the-scientist.com/2011/07/18/asexual-ants-have-sex
Gilbert, G., Levy-Hinte, J., Rattray, C., Horowitz, J., Lundberg, D. T., Hellmann, P.
(Producers), & Cholodenko, L. (Director). (2010). The kids are alright [Motion pic-
ture]. United States: Focus Features.
Grimbos, T., Dawood, K., Burriss, R. P., Zucker, K. J., & Puts, D. A. (2010). Sexual
orientation and the second to fourth finger length ratio: A meta-analysis in men and
women. Behavioral Neuroscience, 124, 278–287. doi:10.1037/a0018764
Grunt, J. A., & Young, W. C. (1952). Psychological modification of fatigue following
orgasm (ejaculation) in the male guinea pig. Journal of Comparative & Physiological
Psychology, 45, 508–510. doi:10.1037/h0063596
Hamer, D. H., Hu, S., Magnuson, V. L., Hu, N., & Pattatucci, A. M. L. (1993). A linkage
between DNA markers on the X-chromosome and male sexual orientation. Science,
261(5119), 321–327. doi:10.1126/science.8332896
Hare, L., Bernard, P., Sánchez, F. J., Baird, P. N., Vilain, E., Kennedy, T., & Harley, V.
R. (2009). Androgen receptor repeat length polymorphism associated with male-to-
female transsexualism. Biological Psychiatry, 65, 93–96.
Hazan, C., & Shaver, P. (1987). Romantic love conceptualized as an attachment pro-
cess. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 52, 511–524. Retrieved from
www.apa.org/pubs/journals/psp/index.aspx
Hecox, M. J. (n.d.). Interview: Ten percent society celebrates 25 years [Web log post].
Retrieved from http://trueendeavorsblog.com/2008/11/11/interview-ten-percent-so-
ciety-celebrates-25-years
Heiman, J. R. (1977). A psychophysiological exploration of sexual arousal patterns in
females
and
males.
Psychophysiology,
14,
266–274.
doi:10.1111/j.1469-
8986.1977.tb01173.x
Henningsson, S., Westberg, L., Nilsson, S., Lundström, B., Ekselius, L., Bodlund, O.,
Lindstrom, E., Hellstrand, M., Rosmond, R., & Eriksson, E. (2005). Sex steroid-
related genes and male-to-female transsexualism. Psychoneuroendocrinology, 30,
657–664.
Hepper, P. G., Shabidullah, S., & White, R. (1991). Handedness in human fetus. Neuro-
psychologia, 36, 531–534.
Herek, G. M. (2000). The psychology of sexual prejudice. Current Directions in Psycho-
logical Science, 9, 19–22. doi:10.1111/1467-8721.00051
Herek, G. M. (2002). Gender gaps in public opinion about lesbians and gay men. Public
Opinion Quarterly, 66, 40–66. doi:10.1086/338409
Heriot, A. (1956). The castrati in opera. London: Da Capo Press.
Hill, S. E., & Durante, K. M. (2011). Courtship, competition, and the pursuit of attrac-
tiveness: Mating goals facilitate health-related risk taking and strategic risk sup-
pression in women. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin,
37, 383–394.
doi:10.1177/0146167210395603
Hirschfeld, M. (1948). Sexual anomalies. New York: Emerson Books.

170
Bibliography
Hobbes, T. (1840). Human nature. In W. Molesworth (Ed.), The English works of Thomas
Hobbes of Malmesbury (Vol. 4). London: Bohn.
Hodson, G., Rush, J., & MacInnis, C. C. (2010). A joke is just a joke (except when it
isn’t): Cavalier humor beliefs facilitate the expression of group dominance motives.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 99(4), 660–682. doi:10.1037/a0019627
Hoffman, P. (1998). The man who loved only numbers: The story of Paul Erdos and the search
for mathematical truth. New York: Hyperion.
Hyde, J. S., DeLamater, J. D., & Byers, E. S. (2009). Understanding human sexuality (4th
Canadian ed.). Toronto: McGraw-Hill.
IBNLive.com. (2011, April 2). Archie comics plans for 1st gay character. Retrieved
from
http://ibnlive.in.com/news/archie-comics-plans-series-for-1st-gay-character/
148026-40-100.html
Iemmola, F., & Camperio-Ciani, A. (2009). New evidence of genetic factors influencing
sexual orientation in men: Female fecundity increase in the maternal line. Archives of
Sexual Behavior, 38, 393–399. doi:10.1007/s10508-008-9381-6
Johnson, A. M., Mercer, C. H., Erens, B., Copas, A. J., McManus, S., Wellings, K.,
Fenton, K. A., Korovessis, C., Macdowall, W., Nanchahal, K., Purdon, S., & Field, H.
(2001). Sexual behavior in Britain: Partnerships, practices, and HIV risk behaviors.
Lancet, 358, 1835–1842. doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(01)06883-0
Johnson, A. M., Wadsworth, J., Wellings, K., & Field, J. (1994). Sexual attitudes and
lifestyles. Oxford, UK: Blackwell Scientific Publications.
Joloza, T., Evans, J., & O’Brien, R. (2010, September). Measuring sexual identity: An
evaluation report. UK Office of National Statistics.
Kelly, G. A. (1955). The psychology of personal constructs. New York: Norton.
Kinsey, A. C., Pomeroy, W. B., & Martin, C. E. (1948). Sexual behavior in the human male.
Philadelphia: W. B. Saunders.
Kinsey, A. C., Pomeroy, W. B., Martin, C. E., & Gebhard, P. H. (1953). Sexual behavior in
the human female. Philadelphia: W. B. Saunders.
Kopsida, E., Stergiakouli, E., Lynn, P. M., Wilkinson, L. S., & Davies, W. (2009). The
role of Y chromosome in brain function. Open Neuroendocrinology Journal, 2, 20–30.
Retrieved from www.benthamscience.com/open/toneuroej/index.htm
Kotula, D. (2002). A conversation with Dr. Milton Diamond. In The phallus palace: The
female to male transsexual (pp. 35–56). Los Angeles: Alyson Publications.
Lalumière, M. L., Blanchard, R., & Zucker, K. J. (2000). Sexual orientation and handed-
ness in men and women: A meta-analysis. Psychological Bulletin, 126, 575–592.
Lamberts, S. W. J., van den Beld, A. W., & van der Lely, A. J. (1997). The endocrinology
of aging. Science, 278(5337), 419–424. doi:10.1126/science.278.5337.419
Langlois, J. H., Roggman, L. A., Casey, R. J., & Ritter, J. M. (1987). Infant preferences
for attractive faces: Rudiments of a stereotype? Developmental Psychology, 23,
363–369. doi:10.1037//0012-1649.23.3.363
Laumann, E. O., Gagnon, J. H., Michael, R. T., & Michaels, S. (1994). The social organiza-
tion of sexuality. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Laumann, E. O., Paik, A., & Rosen, R. C. (1999). Sexual dysfunction in the United
States: Prevalence and predictors. Journal of the American Medical Association, 281,
537–544. doi:10.1001/jama.281.6.537
Lawler, S. (2008). Identity: Sociological perspectives. Cambridge, UK: Polity Press.
Lawrence, A. A. (2011). Autogynephilia: An underappreciated paraphilia. Advances in
Psychosomatic Medicine, 31, 135–148. doi:10.1159/000328921

Bibliography
171
Leary, M. R., & Tangney, J. P. (Eds.). (2003). Handbook of self and identity. New York:
Guilford Press.
Lerner, M. J. (1980). The belief in a just world: A fundamental delusion. New York: Plenum.
LeVay, S. (1991). A difference in hypothalamic structure between heterosexual and
homosexual men. Science, 253, 1034–1037. doi:10.1126/science.1887219
LeVay, S. (2010). Gay, straight, and the reason why: The science of sexual orientation. New
York: Oxford University Press.
Long, J. A., Trinajstic, K., & Johanson, Z. (2009). Devonian arthrodire embryos and the
origin of internal fertilization in vertebrates. Nature, 457, 1124–1127. doi:10.1038/
nature07732
Longley, R. (n.d.). On an “average” American day: BLS reports latest American time
use survey. Retrieved from http://usgovinfo.about.com/od/censusandstatistics/a/
averageday.htm
Louderback, L. A., & Whitley, B. E. (1997). Perceived erotic value of homosexuality
and sex-role attitudes as mediators of sex differences in heterosexual college stu-
dents’ attitudes toward lesbians and gay men. Journal of Sex Research, 34, 175–182.
Retrieved from www.tandfonline.com/toc/hjsr20/current
Lumsden, C., & Wilson, E. (1981). Genes, mind and culture: The coevolutionary process.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
MacInnis, C. C., & Hodson, G. (in press). Dehumanization and prejudice toward
homosexuals, bisexuals, and asexuals. Poster presented at the Annual Meeting of
the Canadian Psychological Association, Toronto, Canada.
Manning, J. T. (2002). Digit ratio: A pointer to fertility, behavior, and health. New Bruns-
wick, NJ: Rutgers University Press.
Marmor, J. (1980). The multiple roots of homosexual behavior. In J. Marmor (Ed.),
Homosexual behavior: A modern reappraisal (pp. 3–22). New York: Basic Books.
Martin, R. A. (2007). The psychology of humor: An integrative approach. Burlington, MA:
Elsevier Academic Press.
Masters, W. H., & Johnson, V. (1966). Human sexual response. Boston: Little Brown.
Mathews, D. J. H., Bok, H., & Rabins, P. V. (2009). Personal identity and fractured selves:
Perspectives from philosophy, ethics, and neuroscience. Baltimore: John Hopkins Univer-
sity Press.
Mazur, A. (1986). U.S. trends in feminine beauty and over-adaptation. Journal of Sex
Research, 22, 281–303. doi:10.1080/00224498609551309
McGraw, A. P., & Warren, C. (2010). Benign violations: Making immoral behavior
funny. Psychological Science, 21, 1141–1149. doi:10.1177/0956797610376073
Medland, S. E., Duffy, D., Spurdle, A., Wright, M., Geffen, G., Montgomery, G., &
Martin, N. (2005). Opposite effects of androgen receptor CAG repeat length on
increased risk of left-handedness in males and females. Behavior Genetics, 35,
735–744.
Meyer, I. H. (2003). Prejudice, social stress, and mental health in lesbian, gay, and
bisexual populations: Conceptual and research evidence. Psychological Bulletin, 129,
674–697. doi:10.1037/0033-2909.129.5.674
Meyer-Bahlburg, H. F. (1977). Sex hormones and male homosexuality in comparative
perspective. Archives of Sexual Behavior, 6, 297–325.
Money, J. (1988). Gay, straight, and in-between. New York: Oxford University Press.
Money, J. (1994). Reinterpreting the unspeakable: Human sexuality 2000: The complete inter-
viewer and clinical biographer, exigency theory, and sexology for the third millennium.
New York: Continuum.

172
Bibliography
Money, J., Hampson, J. G., & Hampson, J. L. (1957). Imprinting and the establishment
of gender role. Archives of Neurology and Psychiatry, 77, 333–336. Retrieved from
http://archneurpsyc.ama-assn.org
Morokoff, P. J. (1986). Volunteer bias in the psychophysiological study of female sexu-
ality. Journal of Sex Research, 22, 35–51. Retrieved from www.jstor.org/stable/3812110
Morrell, J. P. (2006). Between the lines: Master the subtle elements of fiction writing. Cincin-
nati, OH: Writer’s Digest Books.
Moser, C., & Kleinplatz, P. J. (2005). DSM-IV-TR and the paraphilias: An argument for
removal. Journal of Psychology and Human Sexuality, 17, 91–109. Retrieved from
www.tandfonline.com/toc/wzph20/current
Mosher, W. D., Chandra, A., & Jones, J. (2005). Sexual behavior and selected health meas-
ures: Men and women 15-44 years of age, United States, 2002 [Advance Data From Vital
and Health Statistics No. 362]. Hyattsville, MD: National Center for Health Statis-
tics.
Motley, M. T., & Camden, C. T. (1985). Nonlinguistic influences on lexical selection:
Evidence from double entendres. Communication Monographs, 52(2), 124–135. Re-
trieved from www.tandf.co.uk/journals/rcmm
National Centre for Social Research, Johnson, A., Fenton, K. A., Copas, A., Mercer, C.,
McCadden, A., Carder, C., Ridgway, G., Wellings, K., Macdowall, W., & Nancha-
hal, K. (2005). National Survey of Sexual Attitudes and Lifestyles II, 2000–2001 [data
file]. Colchester, Essex: UK Data Archive.
NNDB.com. Paul Erdos profile page. (2011). Retrieved from www.nndb.com/people/
401/000032305
Nurius, P. S. (1983). Mental health implications of sexual orientation. Journal of Sex
Research, 19, 119–136. Retrieved from www.jstor.org/stable/3812493
Parish, W. L., Das, A., & Laumann, E. O. (2006). Sexual harassment of women in urban
China. Archives of Sexual Behavior, 35, 411–425. doi:10.1007/s10508-006-9079-6
Parish, W. L., Laumann, E. O., Cohen, M. S., Pan, S. M., Zheng, H. Y., Hoffman, I.,
Wang, T. F., & Ng, K. H. (2003). Population-based study of chlamydial infection in
China—A hidden epidemic. Journal of the American Medical Association, 289,
1265–1273. doi:10.1001/jama.289.10.1265
Parish, W. L., Luo, Y., Laumann, E. O., Kew, M., & Yu, Z. Y. (2007). Unwanted sexual
activity among married women in urban China. Journal of Sex Research, 44, 158–171.
Retrieved from www.tandfonline.com/toc/hjsr20/current
Perkins, A., Fitzgerald, J. A., & Price, E. O. (1992). Luteinizing hormone and testoste-
rone response of sexually active and inactive rams. Journal of Animal Science, 70,
2086–2093. Retrieved from http://jas.fass.org
Poikolainen, K., Kanerva, R., Marttunen, M., & Lönnqvist, J. (2001). Defence styles and
other risk factors for eating disorders among female adolescents: A case-control
study. European Eating Disorders Review, 9(5), 325–334. doi:10.1002/erv.407
Poston, D. L., Jr., & Baumle, A. K. (2010). Patterns of asexuality in the United States.
Demographic Research, 23, 509–530. doi:10.4054/DemRes.2010.23.18
Prause, N., & Graham, C. A. (2007). Asexuality: Classification and categorization.
Archives of Sexual Behavior, 36, 341–356. doi:10.1007/s10508-006-9142-3
Prerost, F. J. (1995). Sexual desire and the dissipation of anger through humor appreci-
ation—gender and content issues. Social Behavior and Personality, 23, 45–52. Re-
trieved from www.sbp-journal.com
Provine, R. R. (2000). Laughter: A scientific investigation. New York: Viking.

Bibliography
173
Rabeling, C., Gonzales, O., Schultz, T. R., Bacci, M., Garcia, M. V. B., Verhaagh, M.,
Ishak, H. D., & Mueller, U. G. (2011). Cryptic sexual populations account for genetic
diversity and ecological success in a widely distributed, asexual fungus-growing
ant. PNAS, 108, 12366–12371. doi:10.1073/pnas.1105467108
Rellini, A., & Meston, C. (2007). Sexual function and satisfaction in adults based on the
definition of child sexual abuse. Journal of Sexual Medicine, 4, 1312–1321.
Ridley, M. (1995). The red queen: Sex and the evolution of human nature. London: Penguin
Books.
Rieger, G., Linsenmeier, J. A. W., Gygax, L., & Bailey, J. M. (2008). Sexual orientation
and childhood gender nonconformity: Evidence from home videos. Developmental
Psychology, 44, 46–58. doi:10.1037/0012-1649.44.1.46
Rind, B., Tromovitch, P., & Bauserman, R. (1998). A meta-analytic examination of
assumed properties of child sexual abuse using college samples. Psychological Bulle-
tin, 124, 22–53. doi:10.1037/0033-2909.124.1.22
Rohleder, H. (1907). Vorlesungen über geschlechstrieb und gesamtes geschlechsleben des
menschen (Lectures on sexual drive and the complete sexual life of man). Vol. 2.
Berlin: Fishers medizinsiche Buchhandlug/H. Kornfield.
Ronay, R., & von Hippel, W. (2010). The presence of an attractive woman elevates
testosterone and physical risk taking in young men. Social Psychological and Personal-
ity Science, 1, 57–64. doi:10.1177/1948550609352807
Roselli, C. E., Larkin, K., Resko, J. A., Stellflug, J. N., & Stormshak, F. (2004). The
volume of a sexually dimorphic nucleus in the ovine medial preoptic area/anterior
hypothalamus varies with sexual partner preference. Endocrinology, 145, 478–483.
doi:10.1210/en.2003-1098
Roselli, C. E., Larkin, K., Schrunk, J. M., & Stormshak, F. (2004). Sexual partner prefer-
ence, hypothalamic morphology and aromatase in rams. Physiology & Behavior, 83,
233–245. doi:10.1016/j.physbeh.2004.08.017
Roselli, C. E., Stormshak, F., Stellflug, J. N., & Resko, J. A. (2002). Relationship of
serum testosterone concentrations to mate preferences in rams. Biology of Reproduc-
tion, 67(1), 263–268. doi:10.1095/biolreprod67.1.263
Rosen, R., Brown, C., Heiman, J., Leiblum, S., Meston, C., Shabsigh, R., Ferguson, D., &
D’Agostino, R. (2000). The Female Sexual Function Index (FSFI): A multidimension-
al self-report instrument for the assessment of female sexual function. Journal of Sex
& Marital Therapy, 26, 191–208. doi:10.1080/009262300278597
Ross, L., Greene, D., & House, P. (1977). The false consensus effect—Egocentric bias in
social-perception and attribution processes. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology,
13, 279–301. doi:10.1016/0022-1031(77)90049-X
Rothblum, E. D., & Brehony, K. A. (Eds.). (1993). Boston marriages: Romantic asexual
relationships among contemporary lesbians. Amherst, MA: University of Massachusetts
Press.
Roughgarden, J. (2004). Evolution’s rainbow: Diversity, gender, and sexuality in nature and
people. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Rubin, Z. (1973). Liking and loving: An invitation to social psychology. New York: Holt,
Rinehart & Winston.
Ruscher, J. B. (2001). The culture of prejudice. In J. B. Ruscher (Ed.), Prejudiced commu-
nication: A social psychological perspective (pp. 173–201). New York: Guilford Press.
Rust, P. (1993). Coming out in the age of social constructionism: Sexual identity forma-
tion among lesbians and bisexual women. Gender and Society, 7, 50–77. doi:10.1177/
089124393007001004

174
Bibliography
Saunders, D. M., Fisher, W. A., Hewitt, E. C., & Clayton, J. P. (1985). A method for
empirically assessing volunteer selection effects: Recruitment procedures and re-
sponses to erotica. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 49, 1703–1712. Re-
trieved from www.apa.org/pubs/journals/psp/index.aspx
Scarr, S. (1987). Three cheers for behavior genetics: Winning the war and losing our
identity: A presidential address to the Behavior Genetics Association. Behavior Ge-
netics, 17, 219–228. doi:10.1007/BF01065502
Schank, R. C., & Abelson, R. P. (1977). Scripts, plans, goals, and understanding. Hillsdale,
NJ: Erlbaum.
Schechter, B. (1998). My brain is open: The mathematical journeys of Paul Erdos. New York:
Simon & Schuster.
Scherrer, K. S. (2008). Coming to an asexual identity: Negotiating identity, negotiating
desire. Sexualities, 11, 621–641.
Sell, R. L., Wells, J. A., & Wypij, D. (1995). The prevalence of homosexual behavior and
attraction in the United States, the United Kingdom and France—Results of nation-
al population-based samples. Archives of Sexual Behavior, 24, 235–248. doi:10.1007/
BF01541598
Seto, M. C. (2008). Understanding pedophilia and sexual offending against children: Theory,
assessment, and intervention. Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.
Seto, M. C., Cantor, J. M., & Blanchard, R. (2006). Child pornography offenses are a
valid diagnostic indicator of pedophilia. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 115,
610–615. doi:10.1037/0021-843X.115.3.610
Sigusch, V. (1998). The neosexual revolution. Archives of Sexual Behavior, 27, 339–351.
doi:10.1023/A:1018715525493
Smith, A. M., Rissel, C. E., Richters, J., Grulich, A. E., & de Visser, R. O. (2003). Sex in
Australia: Sexual identity, sexual attraction and sexual experience among a repre-
sentative sample of adults. Australian and New Zealand Journal of Public Health, 27,
138–145.
Smuts, A. (2009, April 12). Humor. Retrieved April 12, 2011, from www.iep.utm.edu/
humor
Spencer, H. (1860). The physiology of laughter. Macmillan’s Magazine, 1, 395–402.
Sports Illustrated Media Kit for Advertisers: Swimsuit. (n.d.). Sports Illustrated. Re-
trieved April 16, 2011, from www.simediakit.com/property-single.xhtml?property_
id=36
Stevens, R. (1983). Erik Erikson: An introduction. New York: St. Martin’s.
Storms, M. D. (1980). Theories of sexual orientation. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 38, 783–792. doi:10.1037/0022-3514.38.5.783
Storms, M. D. (1981). A theory of erotic orientation development. Psychological Review,
88, 340–353. doi:10.1037/0033-295X.88.4.340
Symons, D. (1979). The evolution of human sexuality. New York: Oxford University
Press.
Teddy Miller. (2005, July 25). Masturbating A’s: What do you think about when mas-
turbating? [Online forum post]. Retrieved from www.asexuality.org/en/index.php?
/topic/9980-masturbating-as-what-do-you-think-about-when-masturbating
Terry, J. (1999). An American obsession: Science, medicine, and homosexuality in
modern society. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Tiefer, L. (2002). Beyond the medical model of women’s sexual problems: A campaign
to resist the promotion of “female sexual dysfunction.” Sexual and Relationship Ther-
apy, 17, 127–135. doi:10.1080/14681990220121248

Bibliography
175
Trivers, R. L. (1972). Parental investment and sexual selection. In B. Campbell (Ed.),
Sexual selection and the descent of man (pp. 136–179). Chicago: Aldine Atherton.
Troiden, R. R. (1989). The formation of homosexual identities. Journal of Homosexuality,
17, 43–73. Retrieved from www.tandf.co.uk/journals/wjhm
Udry, J. R., Billy, J. O. G., Morris, N. M., Groff, T. R., & Raj, M. H. (1985). Serum
androgenic hormones motivate sexual behavior in adolescent boys. Fertility and
Sterility, 43, 90–94. Retrieved from www.fertstert.org
Van Valen, L. (1973). A new evolutionary law. Evolutionary Theory, 1, 1–30. Retrieved
from http://leighvanvalen.com/evolutionary-theory
Vasey, P. L., & VanderLaan, D. P. (2010). An adaptive cognitive dissociation between
willingness to help kin and nonkin in Samoan Fa’afafine. Psychological Science, 21,
292–297.
Veale, J. F. (2008). Prevalence of transsexualism among New Zealand passport hold-
ers. Australian and New Zealand Journal of Psychiatry, 42(10), 887–889. doi:10.1080/
00048670802345490
Ventegodt, S. (1998). Sex and quality of life in Denmark. Archives of Sexual Behavior, 28,
295–307. Retrieved from www.springer.com/psychology/personality+%26+social+
psychology/journal/10508
Vicious Trollop. (2005, July 25). Masturbating A’s: What do you think about when
masturbating? [Online forum post]. Retrieved from www.asexuality.org/en/index.
php?/topic/9980-masturbating-as-what-do-you-think-about-when-masturbating/
page__p__237288#entry237288
Voeller, B. R. (1990). Some uses and abuses of the Kinsey scale. In D. P. McWhirter, S.
Saunders, & J. Reinisch (Eds.), Homosexuality-heterosexuality: Concepts of sexual orien-
tation (pp. 32–38). New York: Oxford University Press.
The Waitresses. (n.d.). I know what boys like. Lyrics007. www.lyrics007.com/
Waitresses%20Lyrics/I%20Know%20What%20Boys%20Like%20Lyrics.html
Walsh, P. C. (2004). Ejaculation frequency and subsequent risk of prostate cancer.
Journal of Urology, 172, 1552–1552. Retrieved from www.jurology.com
Westphal, S. P. (2004, October). Glad to be A. New Scientist, 184, 40–43.
White, M. (1999). Isaac Newton: The last sorcerer. Reading, MA: Helix Books.
Wild, M., & Argent, K. (1998). Miss Lily’s fabulous pink feather boa. New York: Viking
Wilson, G., & Rahman, Q. (2005). Born gay: The psychobiology of sex orientation. London:
Peter Owen Publishers.
Wilson, M., & Daly, M. (2004). Do pretty women inspire men to discount the future?
Proceedings of the Royal Society of London Series B—Biological Sciences, 271, S177–S179.
doi:10.1098/rsbl.2003.0134
Witelson, S. F., & Nowakowski, R. S. (1991). Left out axons make men right: A hypoth-
esis for the origin of handedness and functional asymmetry. Neuropsychologia, 29,
327–333.
Wolf, N. (1991). Beauty myth: How images of beauty are used against women. New York:
William Morrow.
World Health Organization. (n.d.). Sexual and reproductive health: Gender and human
rights. Retrieved March 20, 2011, from www.who.int/reproductivehealth/topics/
gender_rights/sexual_health/en
World Health Organization. (1992). International statistical classifications of diseases and
related health problems, 1989 revision. Geneva: Author.

176
Bibliography
Yule, M. A. (2011). Furthering our understanding of asexuality: An investigation into biolog-
ical markers of asexuality, and the development of the asexuality identification scale (Un-
published master’s thesis). University of British Columbia, Vancouver.
Zillmann, D., & Bryant, J. (1980). Misattribution theory of tendentious humor. Journal
of Experimental Social Psychology, 16(2), 146–160. doi:10.1016/0022-1031(80)90005-0
Zucker, K. J., & Bradley, S. J. (1995). Gender identity disorder and psychosexual problems in
children and adolescents. New York: Guilford Press.

Index
Abbott, E., 33
Bell, G., 28
Abelson, R. P., 20
Bem, D. J., 79–80, 156
Adam and Eve, 125–126, 127
benign violation model, 139–140, 141,
Adkins-Reagan, E., 31, 155
142, 144
adolescence, 1–2, 21, 35, 52, 56, 57,
Benjamin, H., 68
65n4, 65n5, 96, 155, 157
Berrill, K. T., 87
adulthood, 1, 21, 56, 57, 155
The Big Bang Theory, 37
AIDS, 42, 49, 108
Billy, J. O. G., 52
Allport, Gordon, 6
black box analogy, 67, 70
American Psychiatric Association, 91,
Blanchard, R., 62, 73, 75, 116, 119, 153,
109
154
Ames, M. A., 79, 151
Bok, H., 84
androgen receptor (AR) gene, 150, 153
Boyd, R., 133n2
Argent, K., 83
Bradley, S. J., 18, 44
Arnold, A. P., 78
brain architecture, 7
aromantic, 7, 13, 34, 38
Brehony, K. A., 71
arousal, 15–16, 21, 23
Brontë, Emily, 34–35
Asexuality Visibility and Education
Brotto, L., 16, 22, 24, 58, 59, 61, 63, 71,
Network (AVEN), 13, 14, 38, 58, 61,
74, 76, 77, 109, 111, 112, 128, 154, 156
63, 85, 92, 96, 117
Bryant, J., 135, 137
attachment, 7, 12
Bulwa, D., 92–93
attraction, 11–14, 15–16, 17–18, 21, 22,
Burriss, R. P., 79
23, 24, 25n2, 25n4, 25n8
Buss, D. M., 57
attribution theory, 147
Busseri, M., 110
AVEN. See Asexuality Visibility and
Byers, E. S., 14
Education Network
Byrne, D., 3, 9n2
Australia, 24n1, 27, 46, 83, 98
autochorissexualism, 119, 120
Caine-Bish, N., 131
autogynephilia, 120
Camden, C. T., 137
automonosexualism, 119–120, 121n3
Cameron, L., 6
Camperio-Ciani, A., 107
Bailey, J. M., 18, 44, 73, 75, 83, 107
Cantanese, K. R., 54n6, 70
Bakeman, R., 86
Cantor, J. M., 62, 75, 116
Bakker, J., 119
Carinae, E., 117
Barbaree, H., 75, 116
Carre, J. M., 101
Baumeister, R. F., 54n6, 70, 72
Carroll, Lewis, 28
Baumle, A. K., 4, 25n4, 47, 48
Casey, R. J., 128
Bauserman, R., 156
Cash, T. F., 130
beauty, 2, 9n1, 35, 128
Cass, V. C., 86, 88
behavior, 16–19, 21
castrati/castrate/castrated, 33
177

178
Index
causal inference, 65n5
desire, 21–22, 23, 25n8
celibates/celibacy, 18–19, 33–34, 110
De Visser, R. O., 46
Chalmers, H., 110
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of
Chandra, A., 47
Mental Disorders (DSM), 91, 92, 109,
Chapman, D. D., 29
110, 114n2
Chasin, C. J. D., 14
Diamond, L., 11, 12, 25n8, 72, 86, 110
Chevigny, K., 84
Dimitropoulou, P., 57
Chik, H., 156
Doyle, A. C., 36
Child, Julia, 129
Drew, J., 92
Childs, D., 84, 92
Droser, M. L., 27
China/Chinese, 4, 33, 35, 44, 47, 131
the drunk test, 17, 25n3, 31
Chivers, M. L., 72–73
DSM. See Diagnostic and Statistical
Christianson, G. E., 34
Manual of Mental Disorders
Clark, K., 125
duds, 30–31, 155
Clayton, J. P., 48
Dunne, M. P., 18, 44, 107
clerics, 19
Durante, K. M., 99
Clinton, Bill, 100
Dürer, Albrecht, 125, 125–126, 127
CNN.com, 38, 41, 53n3
Dyer, G., 88
cognition, 19–21
Coleman, E., 86, 88
Eastman, M., 144n1
Colombia, 13
Eilperin, J., 29
coming out, 23, 37, 52, 83, 86–87, 88
Ekins, R., 69
Comings, D. E., 150
Ellis, L., 79, 151
conditioning/learning, 71, 156
epistemology, 147
contact hypothesis, 6
Erdos, Paul, 35–36, 127
Contreras, R. J., 131
Erikson, E., 2
convenience sample, 43, 53n3
Erskine, Y., 16, 58, 71, 109, 128
Coren, S., 153
estrogen receptor (ER) gene, 151
Cowen, R., 27
eukaryotes, 27
crime passionnel, 100
European Christian art, 36
Csicsery, G. P., 36
Culture and the Evolutionary Process
Fa’afafine, 108
(Boyd & Richerson), 133n2
Facebook, 120
Curtis, K. S., 131
Fahs, B., 71
false consensus effect, 51–52
Daly, M., 98, 100
Fausto-Sterling, A., 68, 77
Darwent, C., 125
Feinberg, L., 69
Das, A., 44
The Female Orgasm (Fisher), 3
Davenport, B., 84
female-oriented rams (FORs), 31–32
Davey, S. G., 58
Ferguson, M. A., 143, 145n3
Davies, S., 35, 78
fertilization, 28
Dawkins, R., 133n2
Field, J., 45
Dawood, K., 79
Fisher, H., 7, 12, 48
decoupling/decoupleable, 12, 13–14,
Fisher, S., 3
16, 19, 21, 74, 91, 128
Fisher, W., 9n2
de-gendered, 151
Fishman, J. R., 92
Delamater, J. D., 14
Fitzgerald, J. A., 32, 155
dependent variable, 17
Floyd, F. J., 86
de-sexualized, 2, 76, 157
Food Network, 129

Index
179
Ford, T. E., 143, 145n3
Hellstrand, M., 150
FORs. See female-oriented rams
Henningson, S., 150
Fox, R. C., 88
Hepper, P. G., 153
Frankel, S., 58
Herek, G. M., 87
Freud, S., 4, 67, 80, 135–136, 137, 138,
Heriot, A., 33
142; Freudian humor, 137–138;
Hernandez, Keith, 12
Freudian slips, 132; quasi-Freudian
heteroeroticism, 19
analysis, 130, 132
heteroromantic, 14
Freund, K., 15
Hewitt, E. C., 48
fuck buddies, 14
hidden: attraction, 22; sex time, 2–3;
Fulbright, Y., 41
sexual lives, 121; sexual motives,
Funisia, 27
144
Fuseli, H., 115
Hill, S. E., 99
The History of Celibacy (Abbott), 33
Gagnon, J. H., 43, 56, 70, 109
Hobbes, T., 143
gay bashing, 87
Hodson, G., 87, 145n3
Gehling, J. G., 27
Hoffman, P., 35
gender difference, 69–71, 74, 80
homoeroticism, 19
gender identity, 68, 77–79
horniness, 21, 155
genderlessness, 79
House, P., 51
generativity, 2
Hrabosky, J. I., 130
Genes, Mind and Culture: The
Hu, N., 107
Coevolutionary Process (Lumsden &
Hu, S., 107
Wilson), 133n2
human psyche, 8, 41
Gerressu, M., 70
Hyde, J. S., 14
Gervais, M., 139, 144n1
hypoactive skydiving disorder, 113,
Ghose, T., 29–30
114
Gilligan’s Island, 37
The Globe and Mail, 102
Iemmola, F., 107
Google, 3, 101
Inskip, J., 16, 58, 71, 109, 128
Gorzalka, B., 156
International Statistical Classification of
Graham, C. A., 22, 47, 70, 109, 112
Diseases and Related Health Problems
gray-a, 85
(ICD-10), 92
Great Britain, 6, 43, 45–46, 58, 70, 149
intersexuality, 68, 69, 77, 78
Greene, D., 51
Grimbos, T., 79
Jay, D., 38, 92
Groff, T. R., 52
Johanson, Z., 27
Grulich, A. E., 46
Johnson, A. M., 45, 70
Grunt, J. A., 31
Johnson, J. P., 150
Gygax, L., 75, 83
Johnson, V., 57, 115
Jones, J., 47
Hafer, C., 86, 94n1
Joloza, T., 43
Hamer, D. H., 107
Jughead Jones, 37–38, 161
Hampson, J. G., 68
Hampson, J. L., 68
Kanerva, R., 134n3
Hare, L., 150
Kelly, G., 90
Hazan, C., 7, 12
Kew, M., 44
Hecox, M. J., 42
The Kids Are Alright (movie), 97
Heiman, J. R., 15, 73
King, D., 69

180
Index
kin selection, 106–108, 149
McCreary, D., 158n7
Kinsey, A., 17, 19, 42, 45, 53n2, 56, 70,
McGraw, A. P., 139, 140
115
media, 3, 6, 13, 37, 38, 41, 51, 64n3, 92,
Kleinplatz, P., 120
101–102, 126, 129–130
Knudson, G., 16, 58, 71, 109, 128
Medland, S. E., 153
Kopsida, E., 78
meiosis, 28
Kotula, D., 69
mental health, 8, 91–92, 96, 109–112,
113
Lady Gaga, 3, 35
Mercer, C. H., 70
Lalumière, M. L., 153
Meston, C., 156
Lamberts, S. W. J., 123
Meyer, I. H., 110, 112
Langlois, J. H., 128
Meyer-Bahlburg, H. F., 21
Larkin, K., 32
Michael, R. T., 43, 56, 70, 109
Latty, E., 73
Michaels, S., 43, 56, 70, 109
Laumann, E. O., 43, 44, 47, 56, 70, 109
micro, 148, 158n2
Lawler, S., 84
middle age, 2, 3, 5, 9n1
Leary, M. R., 84
Miller, T., 117
Lerner, M. J., 87
Miss Lily’s Fabulous Pink Feather Boa
Letterman, David, 100
(Wild & Argent), 83
LeVay, S., 32, 43, 111
Money, J., 18, 44, 68, 115, 116
life trajectories, 4, 6
MORs. See male-oriented rams
Linsemeier, J. A., 75, 83
Morokoff, P. J., 48
Long, J. A., 27
Morrell, J. P., 36
Longley, R., 2
Morris, N. M., 52
Lönnqvist, J., 134n3
Morrow, J. A., 130
Louderback, L. A., 100
Moser, C., 120
Lumsden, C., 133n2
Mosher, W. D., 47, 48
Luo, Y., 44
Motley, M. T., 137
lust lure, 11–12, 13
Muhleman, D., 150
the lust system, 7–8, 11–12
Lynn, P. M., 78
National Health and Social Life Survey
(NHSLS), 43, 47, 49, 56
MacInnis, C. C., 87, 145n3
National Survey of Family Growth
MacMurray, J. P., 150
(NSFG), 4, 47, 48, 49
macro, 148, 158n2, 158n3
National Survey of Sexual Attitudes
madness of sex, 95–103, 112
and Lifestyles (NATSAL-I)
Magnuson, V. L., 107
(NATSAL-II), 45–46, 47, 49, 58, 71
male-oriented rams (MORs), 31–32
Newton, Isaac, 34, 35
man-loving gene, 107–108, 149
New York Stock Exchange, 101
Manning, J. T., 111
NHSLS. See National Health and Social
The Man Who Loved Only Numbers
Life Survey
(Hoffman), 35
The Nightmare (Fuseli), 115
Marmor, J., 42
nondirected masturbation, 61
Martin, R. A., 18, 44, 70, 107, 145n3
NORs (no-oriented rams), 32, 155
Marttunen, M., 134n3
Nowakowski, R. S., 153
Masters, W. H., 57, 115
NSFG. See National Survey of Family
Matthews, D. J. H., 84
Growth
Mazur, A., 130
nude/nudity, 61, 124–126, 127, 128–129,
McCormick, C. M., 101
133n1

Index
181
Nurius, P. S., 53n3
Richerson, P. J., 133n2
Richters, J., 46
object-of-desire mechanisms, 76–77, 80,
Ridley, M., 28
119, 126, 129
Rieger, G., 73, 75, 83
O’Brien, K., 139
Rind, B., 156
Rissel, C. E., 46
Paik, A., 47
Ritter, J. M., 128
paraphilias, 63, 75, 116, 117, 118–120,
Roggman, L. A., 128
121n1–121n2
Rohleder, H., 119
Parish, W. L., 44, 47
Roman Catholic, 19, 91, 112, 115, 126
parthenogenesis, 29
romance/romantic, 7–8, 11, 12–13,
Pattatucci, A. M. L., 107
14–15, 18, 20, 22, 25n8, 34, 57, 61, 70,
Perkins, A., 32, 155
76, 79, 99, 106, 126, 128
Perry, A. A., 129
romantic attraction system, 7–8
phenomenon/phenomena/
Ronay, R., 99
phenomenology, 8, 13, 23, 30, 38, 59,
Roselli, C. E., 32
60, 86, 118–119, 120, 123, 124,
Rosen, R., 21, 47
147–148, 149, 156, 158n1–158n2
Ross, L., 51
Pinder, J., 84
Rothblum, E. D., 71
Pitt, Brad, 57, 61
Roughgarden, J., 29
Poikolainen, K., 134n3
Rubin, Z., 3, 9n2
pornography, 62, 63, 65n5, 71, 97, 117,
Ruscher, J. B., 142
118
Rust, P., 86
Poston, D. L., 25n4, 47
Rutland, A., 6
potoroo, 83
Ryder, A. G., 156
Pozzebon, J., 76
Prause, N., 22, 47, 109, 112
same-sex identity/attraction/behavior,
Prerost, F. J., 137
43–44, 45–47
presexuality, 37, 96
Saunders, D. M., 48
Price, E. O., 32, 155
Savage, D., 84
proceptive desire, 72, 73
Scarr, S., 93
Provine, R. R., 145n2
Schank, R. C., 20
proto-laughter, 144n1
Schecter, B., 35–36, 127
psychological core, 23, 43
schemas/knowledge structures, 20
Putnam, S. K., 101
Scherrer, K. S., 85, 89, 90, 128
Puts, D. A., 79
Scheule, B., 131
Schmitt, D. P., 57
Rabins, P. V., 84
Schrunk, J. M., 32
Raj, M. H., 52
Schwarzenegger, Arnold, 100
receptive desire, 72
scripts/sexual scripts, 20, 56–57, 58, 59,
Red Queen hypothesis, 28
61, 64n3–65n4, 76
refractory period, 96
SDN-POA. See sexually dimorphic
refusal rate, 49
nucleus of the preoptic area
rehearsal, 20, 56–57, 58, 59
Seal, B. N., 156
religion, 18–19, 33, 38, 91, 112
Seated Nude: The Black Hat (Steer), 125
Rellini, A., 156
Seinfeld, 12
reparative therapy, 21
The Selfish Gene (Dawkins), 133n2
Resko, J. A., 32
Seto, M. C., 62, 73, 155
Rhodes, K., 16, 58, 71, 109, 128

182
Index
sexologist/sexology, 15, 17, 23, 25n8,
transgender, 69, 77, 78–79, 118, 119–120
75, 68, 103n3, 115, 120, 149
Trinajstic, K., 27
Sexual Behavior in the Human Male
Trivers, R. L., 57
(Kinsey et al.), 17
Troiden, R. R., 86, 88
Sexual Behavior in the Human Female
Tromovitch, P., 156
(Kinsey et al.), 17
Tucker, A., 84
sexual fantasizing, 12, 17, 20–21, 25n6,
56–57, 61–63, 64n2–65n4, 70, 71, 75,
Udry, J. R., 52
76, 97–98, 117, 118, 119, 120, 121n1,
Understanding Human Sexuality (Hyde,
156
DeLamater, & Byers), 14
sexual identity formation, 83–84,
United States, 42, 43, 47, 53n3, 56, 58,
84–86, 88, 92
70, 100, 109
sexually dimorphic nucleus of the
United States Sheep Experiment
preoptic area (SDN-POA), 32
Station, 31–32
sexual revolution, 3
unspeakable monster, 115–116
sexual self, 84
sexual variability, 30–32, 36, 49, 55
van den Beld, A. W., 123
Shabidullah, S., 153
VanderLaan, D. P., 108
Shaver, P., 7, 12
van der Lely, A. J., 123
Sherlock Holmes, 36
Van Valen, L., 28
Sigusch, V., 91, 112
Vasey, P. L., 108
Smith, A. M., 46
Veal, J. F., 77
Smuts, A., 140
Ventegodt, S., 47
Society for Sex Therapy and Research
Viagra, 135, 138, 140–141, 143
(SSTAR), 113–114
Victorian era, 35, 149
Spencer, H., 135
Virgin Mary, 36, 38
Sports Illustrated, 95, 123, 124
Visser, B. A., 76
SRY gene, 150
Voeller, B. R., 42
SSTAR. See Society for Sex Therapy
Vohs, K. D., 54n6, 70
and Research
volunteer bias, 48–49
Steer, Philip Wilson, 125
von Hippel, W., 99
Stein, T. S., 86
voyeurism, 117
Steinbeck, John, 103n1
Stellflug, J. N., 32
Wadsworth, J., 45
Stergiakouli, E., 78
Walsh, P. C., 57
Stevens, R., 2
Wanless, J., 76
Storms, M. D., 18, 19, 25n6, 156
Warren, C., 139, 140
Stormshak, F., 32
Weghorst, S. J., 100
Strauss-Kahn, Dominique, 100
Wellings, K., 45, 70
studs, 30–31
Western: medicine, 91, 112; society, 35,
44, 49, 52, 86, 88, 107, 116, 124, 130,
Tangney, J. P., 84
156; trends/phenomena, 13–14, 38
Tenniel, J., 28
Westphal, S. P., 38
“Ten Percent” club, 42
White, M., 34, 153
tension-reduction model, 139, 140
Whitley, B. E., 100
Terry, J., 88
WHO. See World Health Organization
“testosterone poisoning”, 96
Wild, M., 83
Through the Looking Glass (Carroll), 28
Wilkinson, L. S., 78
Tiefer, L., 92
Willoughby, T., 110

Index
183
Wilson, D. S., 139, 144n1
Yarnell, J., 58
Wilson, E., 125, 133n2
Young, W. C., 31
Wilson, M., 98, 100, 139, 144n1
Yu, Z. Y., 44
Witelson, S. F., 153
Yule, M. A., 74, 112, 153, 154
Wolf, N., 129
Woods, Tiger, 100, 101–102,
Zillmann, D., 135, 137
103n2–103n4
Zucker, K. J., 18, 44, 79, 153
World Health Organization (WHO), 5
Wuthering Heights (Brönte), 34

