In-­‐Video	  Quiz	  Unit	  8	  
• Section	  1	  
o Where	  do	  you	  generate	  the	  power	  out	  on	  a	  Brayton	  Cycle?	  
a) Between	  step	  1	  and	  2	  (	  the	  Compressor)	  
b) Between	  step	  2	  and	  3	  (the	  burner)	  
c) Between	  step	  4	  and	  1	  (the	  heat	  exchanger)	  
d) Between	  step	  3	  and	  4	  (the	  Turbine)	  
o True	  or	  False.	  Decreasing	  the	  burner	  operating	  pressure	  increases	  the	  
efficiency.	  
• Section	  2	  
o In	  a	  combined	  cycle,	  where	  is	  there	  positive	  heat	  transfer?	  
a) In	  the	  combustor	  of	  the	  Brayton	  Cycle	  
b) In	  the	  condenser	  of	  the	  Rankine	  Cycle	  
c) In	  the	  gas	  turbine	  of	  the	  Brayton	  Cycle	  
d) In	  the	  steam	  turbine	  of	  the	  Rankine	  Cycle	  
o Is	  there	  mixing	  between	  the	  fluids	  in	  a	  combined	  cycle?	  
a) Yes	  there	  is	  mixing	  between	  air	  and	  water.	  
b) Yes	  there	  is	  mixing	  between	  the	  water	  from	  both	  cycles.	  
c) Yes	  there	  is	  mixing	  between	  the	  air	  from	  both	  cycles.	  
d) No.	  There	  is	  no	  mixing	  between	  the	  working	  fluids	  of	  the	  cycles.	  
• Section	  3	  
o Even	  though	  fossil	  fuels	  are	  not	  scarce,	  what	  keeps	  us	  from	  using	  
them?	  
a) Ecological	  Cost	  
b) Monetary	  Cost	  
c) Lack	  of	  Technology	  
d) All	  of	  the	  Above	  
o Which	  of	  the	  following	  is	  the	  formula	  for	  the	  efficiency	  of	  a	  combined	  
heat	  and	  power	  plant?	  
a) (W_cycle+Q_out)/Q_in	  
b) (W_cycle+Q_in)/Q_out	  
c) Q_out/Q_in	  
d) Q_in/Q_out	  
• Section	  4	  
o Which	  statement	  is	  false?	  
a) Atmospheric	  CO2	  emissions	  are	  at	  a	  historical	  high.	  
b) Electricity,	  Transportation	  and	  Industry	  are	  all	  ways	  we	  as	  
human	  add	  to	  CO2	  emissions.	  
c) Methane	  does	  not	  contribute	  to	  CO2	  emissions.	  
d) All	  the	  above	  are	  true.	  
• Section	  5	  
o What	  are	  some	  unconventional	  fossil	  fuels?	  
a) Oil	  Shale	  
b) Coal	  
c) Petroleum	  

d) Natural	  Gas	  
o Which	  of	  the	  following	  can	  you	  do	  to	  have	  an	  impact	  on	  the	  future	  of	  
global	  energy?	  
a) Turn	  down	  the	  thermosat	  
b) Carpool	  to	  Work	  
c) Turn	  off	  the	  lights	  when	  you	  leave	  a	  room	  
d) All	  of	  the	  above	  and	  encourage	  friends	  to	  do	  the	  same.	  
	  

