Unlimited Stealth Paypal Accounts and How to Withdraw Guide
----------------------------------------------------------------------------
This guide is to teach you how to be "stealth" on paypal and how to
actually get the money out. 
I have been through it all, funds held, funds lost, chargebacks/dispustes
and suspended accounts. 
I currently have 3 paypal accounts that I use, and 2 backup accounts just
in case. None are in my name or anyone related to me.
It is always a good idea to have one paypal account that is legit, meaning
you don't do any BS with it. This is your main account that you don't
want to compromise. If you are already banned from paypal, this is OK,
you just need to create a new paypal with a different name. The purpose
of this main account is to use to withdraw your money.
You can have as many stealth accounts as you want. You NEVER want to link
any of your stealth accounts to your main account, i.e., send money
directly from one to the other. Paypal will ban accounts that they link
to a suspended account,
should one of your stealh accounts get banned. They will see that the
banned account received x amount of dollars, and every time sends same
amount to the other account. Its really not that difficult.
How to create a new account:
If you've never had paypal before, this is good, as you have a fresh
start. It is OK to have a paypal account that has your real info on it,
as long as you just use it for innocent purposes, like selling or buying
online. I will not go in to detail about opening a genuine PP account, as
it is pretty self explanatory.
If you are banned, or just want another legit/main account for back up
reasons, you basically make this new account the same way as you would
create a stealth account. The only difference is how you use it.
It is best to use you main paypal account on a separate browser than your
stealth accounts. This just prevents accidents, like forgetting to log
out, forgetting to clear cookies, and IP address/proxy issues.
Whenever you are done doing whatever it is you are doing, log and and
clear your cookies and cache. I suggest using the same firefox portable
as in the TOR browser bundle. All this is cleared automatically when you
close the browser.
Use sock5 proxy always 
You need to first find a region-specific IP address to use as a proxy.
There are many paid proxy services who do this, Don't use VPNs or TOR,
paypal can detect these and will limit/ban your new account.
To buy  SOCK5 proxies + software + username and password easy to use, contact safetor@tormail.org
You get a software + username and password then you install it on your windows
computer.
After that you can just point and click to use sock5 proxies 130 countries to
choose. Very easy!
but if you need to be super anonymous you wil chain a sock 5 after tor, with this guide;
http://clsvtzwzdgzkjda7.onion/wiki/index.php/Chaining_a_Socks5_With_Tor
One thing I like to do is to use a free webhost and set up a basically

useless site/page. Once they manually review the site, I put in a php
proxy script to use so that I get a US IP address. If you implement this
method, you must use a different host or at least create a new website
within that host to get on a different server, or the IP address can be
the same. It's just one of the things I like to do. A sourceforge link
for the proxy will be located at the end of this guide.
Now that you have your proxy, check it on ip-adress.com or other site and
make sure it is working.
Next you need a new email account (new for every paypal account you
create). I prefer yahoo since they never ask for phone verification and I
can create yahoo accounts through TOR.
Using a new email and IP address for every paypal account is MANDATORY!
If you use the same IP for 2 accounts, it may as well be one account, it
will only be a matter of time before they link them and ban them both.
You are going to want to get verified on at least one account, your main
account. Your spending and withdraw limits will be lifted once verified,
and this is the main reason to do this. Unverified accounts can only
withdraw 500USD per month, but there is no online spending limit.
The only way to verify a paypal account in the US is by attaching it to a
bank account. Fortunately, BY LAW, paypal cannot see the name attached to
the bank account. This is why they send 2 small deposits to it. You
seeing the deposits and entering them in to paypal "verifies" that you are
the owner of the account. This is good to know just in case you lose your
main account, all you need to do is open a new bank account and start a
new, verified paypal account. Just make sure that you use a new bank
account with every account you wish to get verified. Having an account
linked to a real bank account is ideal, since to get your money out, all you
have to do is send it to the bank or use the debit card at an ATM.
Use anonymous visa
If for any reason you don't want to use your own bank account, or want to
verify other stealth accounts but not withdraw straight to your own bank you can
buy an anonymous Visa Debit Card with IBAN bank account, To withdraw from any website that pays
to IBAN bank account (e.g. Paypal).
Buy it from safetor@tormail.org
Then withdraw from any ATM worldwide.
the cards are completely anonymous. It is issued by a large Polish bank.
they comes with the original accompanying letters, including a PIN-code for ATM
withdrawals.
The card has an associated online account that can be reloaded via bank-transfer
(IBAN/BIC provided). Thus you can for example cash out BTCs, LR, or PayPal (via
MTGox, intersango, etc...)
The bank also offers a Web-Interface to manage your card(s), change PIN, see
current balance and more.
This guide wil teach how to make a fully verified polish paypal account
https://anonfiles.com/file/8ccd0910daa227a0333e7198aa698a8e
you can have fake ID scans and utility bills scans , and photoshop it with the details you need,
and you can use these scans to upgrade your paypal's limits, you can buy all from safetor@tormail.org

if you can't do this by yourself he can create a new verified paypal account for
you! with the fake name and adress you want..100% anonymous!
Ways to getting the money out.
The easiest way is to use re-seller sites and freelance sites.
Fiverr.com, freelancer.com and others that offer an escrow service. This
method should also be used to transfer from any paypal to paypal accounts
that you own. Never link your accounts!
Just like with paypal, set up accounts both as seller and buyer on however
many sites you want to use. You really only need one seller account on
each, and as many buyer accounts as you with. Again, use new IPs and
emails for every account. It is not only fine, but recommended to pair
each account with the same IP/Email combo as the stealth paypal account it
corresponds to. It's just easier to keep track of the combo this way.
Paypal will only see the escrow transaction, and the link between the
stealth and main account is broken. Fiverr is good for small amounts like
this, since every transaction on fiver is....$5.
Now just create jobs with the seller account, and bid on the jobs with
your buyer accounts. Give the winning bid to yourself. On fiver, create
gigs, and buy the gigs with your other accounts.
Once you follow the site you chose procedure to withdraw to your main
paypal account, you are free to withdraw to your bank.
One thing to keep in mind is that whatever site you use, you will have to
pay them a fee as well.
here you can find many reputable virtual bank account and vcc dealers
http://www.talkgold.com/forum/f505-.html
now here you can download the Paypal toolkit mega guide for free:
https://anonfiles.com/file/811bdc8ec33febb0cdf3c4954f3031a4
i suggest you to buy this guide too:The PayPal Official Insider 
Guide to Growing Your Business  from my listings or the
 the paypal fraud filters guide 

