Lecture Notes in Educational Technology
Elena Aurel Railean
User Interface 
Design 
of Digital 
Textbooks
How Screens Affect Learning

Lecture Notes in Educational Technology
Series editors
Ronghuai Huang
Kinshuk
Mohamed Jemni
Nian-Shing Chen
J. Michael Spector

Lecture Notes in Educational Technology
The series Lecture Notes in Educational Technology (LNET), has established itself
as a medium for the publication of new developments in the research and practice of
educational policy, pedagogy, learning science, learning environment, learning
resources etc. in information and knowledge age, – quickly, informally, and at a
high level.
More information about this series at http://www.springer.com/series/11777

Elena Aurel Railean
User Interface Design
of Digital Textbooks
How Screens Affect Learning
123

Elena Aurel Railean
Institute for Advanced Study at Moscow
State Pedagogical University
Moscow
Russia
and
European University of Moldova
Chişinău
Moldova
and
Tiraspol State University
Chişinău
Moldova
ISSN 2196-4963
ISSN 2196-4971
(electronic)
Lecture Notes in Educational Technology
ISBN 978-981-10-2455-9
ISBN 978-981-10-2456-6
(eBook)
DOI 10.1007/978-981-10-2456-6
Library of Congress Control Number: 2016948807
© Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2017
This work is subject to copyright. All rights are reserved by the Publisher, whether the whole or part
of the material is concerned, speciﬁcally the rights of translation, reprinting, reuse of illustrations,
recitation, broadcasting, reproduction on microﬁlms or in any other physical way, and transmission
or information storage and retrieval, electronic adaptation, computer software, or by similar or dissimilar
methodology now known or hereafter developed.
The use of general descriptive names, registered names, trademarks, service marks, etc. in this
publication does not imply, even in the absence of a speciﬁc statement, that such names are exempt from
the relevant protective laws and regulations and therefore free for general use.
The publisher, the authors and the editors are safe to assume that the advice and information in this
book are believed to be true and accurate at the date of publication. Neither the publisher nor the
authors or the editors give a warranty, express or implied, with respect to the material contained herein or
for any errors or omissions that may have been made.
Printed on acid-free paper
This Springer imprint is published by Springer Nature
The registered company is Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd.
The registered company address is: 152 Beach Road, #22-06/08 Gateway East, Singapore 189721, Singapore

This book is dedicated to my children and my
parents that provides advances, life tools and
values necessary to be their where I am
today. The inspiration for doing the research
in frontier area of pedagogy come from the
post-doctoral program aims to investigate
correlations between digital learning theory
and design. This post-doctoral program was
one of the most important and formative in
my life, enabling to do research in various
countries.
My thanks and appreciation to all Professors
and specialists in pedagogy, psychology,
knowledge management, informatics,
instructional and learning design from USA,
Romania, Russian Federation, Germany,
Switzerland, Finland, Greece, Republic of
Moldova, Turkey and Canada who shared
their meticulous research experiences,
methodologies and insights that supported
and expanded my own work in pedagogy
of the digital textbook use and development.
I must acknowledge also colleagues, friends,
teachers, and students from different

universities and schools around the world
who listed, assisted, advised, and supported
my writing efforts over this three years long
project. Especially, I need to express my
gratitude and deep appreciation to Professor
George Rudic, Centre of Modern Pedagogy
whose understanding of the philosophy of
globalisation, postmodernism, and education
challenges on learning has enlightened me to
keep motivation in research for many years.

Preface
What interface design of digital textbooks do we need for twenty-ﬁrst century
students? Should printed textbooks digitized or digitalized? How important is to
identify issues before the design of affordable digital textbooks? How should digital
textbooks be designed and developed? Who and why should develop digital text-
books? In order to understand how to respond to these questions it is important to
accept that metasystems learning design of digital textbooks is a trend for sus-
tainable education and innovative decision-making processes, activities, and
actions. These questions inspired the ideas presented in this book.
The initiative to replace printed textbooks with digital textbooks provides
unrivalled functional content that allow discovering new ways of learning, but also
inhibit learning. Nevertheless, most of the learning designers and educational policy
makers believe that digital textbooks are only the digitalised version of the printed
textbooks and they do not want to think about the learner and learning. This causes
a misunderstanding of the pedagogy as a frontier science and leads on many pro-
jects without any impact on successful learning.
But digital textbooks theory and practice is a hot area of frontier research
between pedagogy, psychology, philosophy, cybernetics, and knowledge man-
agement. User interface design is the main topic in this area. The research question
of the proposed author book: How screens affect learning? is focused on investi-
gation the correlations between learning theory and practice in using and devel-
opment of digital textbooks in order to synthesis the main theoretical questions for
applied research.
What the proposed research question is so important? First, because data,
information and knowledge on digital screens mainly appears as abstract information
and not as a (meta)cognitive tool for sense-making, decision, and communication.
Thus, in many cases digital textbooks are designed for reading and not for devel-
opment of the practical skills. Second, the most acclaimed feature of the digital
textbooks is in affordability. This issue is common for digital reading because it
takes longer time and requires more efforts to reach the same level of understanding
than on printed version, even in a controlled digital learning environment. It was
observed, for example, that transferring the printed page of textbooks into PDF is a
vii

more convenient access to distractions than for learning. The scanning pattern from
reading on digital screens is less intensive and takes longer time than when the
student reads a printed paragraph. These and many other facts allow to establish the
importance of research in user interface design of digital textbooks in accordance
with the real problems of learning and not only with a digital fashion.
Students prefer digital textbooks for its lower price they are less heavy instead of
printed textbooks. But, digital content may embody, also, the immediate feedback,
animation, simulations, networking, extension of provided content and other
interactive features. In the same way, digital reading on screen is harder when
designers ignore norms, provided by paradigm. Maybe, design science should ﬁnd
a new way to make digital screen affordable for learning.
According to scientiﬁc research, opinions of students regarding the efﬁciency
of the digital textbooks are contradictory. Thus, the survey taken in USA shows that
57.8 % of students prefer digital textbooks over the printed versions. The other
survey, reported by Schaub (2016) provides the evidence that 92 % of college
students prefer print books instead of e-books because printed textbooks are less
distractive. Therefore, user interfaces of digital textbooks require an ecological way
that allow a new understanding of educational technology.
Changing the way in which digital textbooks interfaces will be designed is a
FRONTIER PEDAGOGY theme, especially because it is applied MetaSystems
Learning Design principles for solving real issues in a practical way. The aim of the
book is to synthesize correlations between theory and practice, especially those
related of changing paradigms. Subject line relies on digital textbooks effectiveness
for sustainable education, as an attempt to validate the MetaSystems Learning
Design principles for guaranteed learning outcomes.
User interface design of digital textbooks are presented from the perspectives
of the linear, systems, and holistic (metasystems) approaches. The readers will gain
understanding of the terminology, overall user interface design phases, the design
of speciﬁc mechanisms, processes, and pedagogical scenarios. It provides guide-
lines regarding how to identify and design learning objects, how to develop ped-
agogical scenarios, how to embody students in instructional design process and how
to develop an open digital textbook.
The central focus of the author book is on how digital screens affect learning.
Five chapters of the book discuss the following: impacts of digital revolution on
learning; a paradigm shift and user interface design models; digital screens and
issues of multiliteracies learning; teacher-centered versus learner-centered design of
screen; knowledge ecology and sustainable development. The book was written to
provide a single reference point for all interested in user interface design. Beginners
and the experienced users of digital textbooks alike will ﬁnd information they need
to cover nearly transdisciplinary theories, models of learning, principles, and norms
required to use and to develop digital textbooks in and for a sustainable education.
Chişinău, Moldova
Elena Aurel Railean
2016
viii
Preface

Contents
1
Impacts of Digital Revolution on Learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Challenges of the Digital Revolution on Learning . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.2.1
Data Processing Technologies and Personal
Computing for Extrinsic Motivation Issues . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.2.2
Multimedia, Social Media and Network Computing . . . . . .
6
1.2.3
Internet, Evolution of the Web for 1.0, 2.0 and 3.0
Education . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
1.3
Fourth Industrial Revolution and Education . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
1.4
Open Educational System Versus Closed Pedagogical Systems . . .
15
1.5
Toward Understanding the Terminology and Diversity
of Digital Textbooks. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
References. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
2
A Paradigm Shifths and User Interface Design Models . . . . . . . . . . .
23
2.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
2.2
User Interfaces Issues in Digital Textbooks Use
and Development . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
2.3
Linear Thinking: Direct and Branching Styles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
2.4
Systems Thinking and Systems Dynamics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
2.5
Metasystems Thinking . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
References. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
3
Digital Screens and Issues of Multiliteracies’ Learning . . . . . . . . . . .
43
3.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
3.2
Multiliteracies and Online Textbooks, Systems, Platforms,
Screens, Channels, and Apps . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
3.3
The Main Features of a Learning Society. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
3.4
Regarding the Issue of Outcomes in a Learning Society. . . . . . . . .
52
3.5
Reﬂecting on User Interface Design, Learning
and ADD/ADHD . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
References. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
ix

4
Teacher-Centered Versus Learner-Centered Design of Screen . . . . .
59
4.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
4.2
A New Context for Learning and Design Principles. . . . . . . . . . . .
62
4.3
Essential Elements in Teacher-Centered User Interface Design. . . .
67
4.4
Information Is Information, not Matter or Energy. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
73
4.5
Essential Elements in Learner-Centered Interface Design . . . . . . . .
76
References. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
79
5
Knowledge Ecology and Sustainable Development . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
81
5.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
81
5.2
One-to-One or/and Personalised Learning?. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
85
5.3
Blended, Flipped or ‘Scaffolding’ Interfaces for Learning?. . . . . . .
87
5.4
Interactive or Adaptive Interfaces for Learning?. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
88
5.5
Immersive Interfaces or/and Collaborative Assessment? . . . . . . . . .
91
References. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
92
Glossary. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
95
x
Contents

Chapter 1
Impacts of Digital Revolution on Learning
Design is the action of bringing something new and desired into
existence—a proactive stance that resolves or dissolves
problematic situations by design. It is a compound of routine,
adaptive and design expertise brought to bear on complex
dynamic situations.
Harold Nelson
Abstract Digital revolution changes mechanical to digital technologies and
establishes new requirements for instruction, assessment and learning mechanisms
and processes, which can be deﬁned under the umbrella of education 3.0 on
challenges coming from the expected new industrial revolution. Although education
system become more open and ﬂexible, there are many confusion issues during the
interface design process. One of this is size, diversity and availability of digital
screens. How screens affect learning and, therefore, the interface design process of
the digital textbooks? This scientiﬁc question inspired the ideas presented in this
chapter. The chapter describes the speciﬁc features of the digital revolution’ phases
and their impacts on literacy, competence development and didactic triangle.
Keywords Digital revolution  Literacy  Didaktik triangle
1.1
Introduction
Since the late of 1950 until the late of 1970s in many places of the world has started
the Digital Revolution. This revolution changes the mechanical and electronic
technology to digital technology and cyber physical systems and starts the complex
renovation of schools, adding computers in special classrooms. Now, adoption and
proliferation of digital computers to schools are everywhere in the world. Many
projects aims to develop and to use digital textbooks. These cause a deep interest in
digital textbooks. However, some projects are not successful as was expected
according to project proposal. What are the reasons?
© Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2017
E.A. Railean, User Interface Design of Digital Textbooks,
Lecture Notes in Educational Technology, DOI 10.1007/978-981-10-2456-6_1
1

Digital revolution is one of the greatest revolution, which changes not only the
technology, but also the model of human thinking of how to design learning envi-
ronments and learning. In this context, new communication patterns have developed
for formal, informal and non-formal education. Digital or/and digitized textbooks are
developed and disseminated globally. In addition, digital screens are everywhere,
including our hands and unexpected places. However; user interface design of
widely disseminated screens is more universal and less adapted to users’ needs, even
if it is focusing on user. What are the users’ needs: to learn something new, to be
informed about some news or/and to develop the competence? Does these screens
affect learning with traditional printed textbooks? If yes, in which way?
Digital revolution affects education and, therefore, learning. This issue could be
investigated using ‘ideal type’ methodology of the qualitative research. In our case
was studied the ‘custom level’ of theory and practice, allowing us to identify three
phases of the digital revolution impacts for education 1.0, education 2.0 and edu-
cation 3.0, respectively.
At the level of education 1.0 the theory was investigated instructional design of
programmed textbooks and automatized systems, but the practice—development of
the digitised versions of printed textbooks and educational software. Moreover,
theory and practice of the programmed textbooks and educational software within
East and West countries was based on two different models: problem-solving and
tutorial-learning.
The problem is that in a very short time, static education of 1.0 was changed
rapidly through interactivity, adaptive and ﬂexible systems with Artiﬁcial
Intelligence mechanism and social media (education 2.0) with the shared educa-
tional economy and networking (education 3.0). An inevitable way was changing
the user-interface design principles of digital textbooks from universal design
through instructional systems design to metasystems learning design. The
MetaSystems Learning Design argues that ‘meta X’ is more than a sum of X in
terms of organisation, logics and analysing of data. Why instructional system
design is so applicable?
To understand the essence of the metasystems learning design approach it is
important to identify the state-of-art in all areas that are or/and may be connected to
solve a practical issue. In our case this issue is: How screens affect learning?, which
is transformed into the research question. To best way to identify the state-of-art in
is the historical method. First, accounts have identiﬁed through synthesis of data
provided by the primary sources of philosophy, psychology, learning theory and
instructional design and its correlation with digital revolution phases. This allow to
identify cross-principles and new functions of digital textbooks.
Second, only digital revolution discovers new and ‘an emerging ﬁeld of study,
combining the philosophy of technology and information theory, with critical
pedagogy and educational philosophy’ (Lewin and Lundie 2016). The French
philosopher of contemporary technology, Stiegler (2016, p. 157) notes that digital
marks an immense transformations, those impact explodes all frames of thinking.
Computerisation is very different from digitalisation. Therefore, the emergence of
digitalisation printed textbooks in comparison with the computerisation and
2
1
Impacts of Digital Revolution on Learning

networking of society is only one factor of the global challenges that affect learning.
While most teachers and practitioners designers look at the learning process
roughly the same as their colleagues did in XVI–XIX century; informational,
communicational and learning environments outside them ‘has been exploding
every day’ taking away students from reading pictorial textbooks in order to place
them in a digital environment.
Our students today have, at least one digital device. The philosophes have traced
a connection between of the transformative power of technology in education and
digital literacy development among young people. Plowman (2016, pp. 96–103)
has argued that learning technology is not a term associated with the early years of
childhood. In addition, in the ﬁeld of research on technology-enhanced learning the
emphases is more often of the technology than on learning. However, some of the
special features of textbooks on e-readers or touchscreen tablets could motivate
children to read include animation, read about narration, an easier accessible dic-
tionary with spoken pronunciation, and the faculty to highlight, annotate and
enlarge text, although both books and e-reading devices can be sharable, mobile
and portable.
Can the designed screen so that to affect didactic process? From one hand, the
promise that digital screen will revolutionise teaching, assessment and learning
through, for example, the interactive or open content, passed away without any
comments. From the other hand, the multimodal texts with image, music, and
speech are everywhere. Frequent, but short length multimodal text that can be
messaging/associated everywhere and anytime. This is a more cost-effective and
time-consuming than developing of traditional textbooks. If so, what principles and
norms are? According to metasystems approach, digital screen for learning should
be designed according to state-of-art in design and all domains that investigate the
issue, expected to be solved at the level of design and its practical application.
One more question, which is related to sustainable development of the world. All
peoples are different in terms of openness, communication, mobility, IQ and so on.
However, Kaplan (2015, p. 2) has argued that the “hereditarian” hypothesis with
respect to differences in average IQ between population is not supported with
empirical research. How could be these differences ‘be included’ in user interface
design of digital textbooks? Are this an example of adaptive education? If yes, how
these principles correlate with sustainable education?
Rejecting the traditional pedagogy models on reading instructional objectives
and delivering the content via voice, text or video, contemporary pedagogy con-
tends their adepts that is better to learn metacognitive strategies and to apply them
in solving real problems than read or view video about their importance. However,
metacognitive strategies is a complex issue. Being a part of sustainable education in
learning with/without digital textbooks metacognitive strategies are part of the
solution in contemporary education.
This chapter reﬂects on user interface design of digital textbooks for sustainable
education through correlation of issues and solutions regarding how digital screen
impacts learning. It examines digital revolution phases in accordance with educa-
tional technologies. The range of topics to cover the proposed subject of the book is
1.1
Introduction
3

nearly limited, so of course it has been impossible to include everything there is to
say on all examined concepts. Therefore, it was tried the cover the most important
and common ones.
1.2
Challenges of the Digital Revolution on Learning
Digital revolution has passed three signiﬁcant phases:
– data processing technologies and personal computing (1950–1971)
– multimedia, Social Media and network computing (1982–1990)
– cloud computing and global connection with Internet (2007–2011).
1.2.1
Data Processing Technologies and Personal
Computing for Extrinsic Motivation Issues
Data processing technologies and personal computers changes the world of edu-
cation and methods of learning in 1950. In the 1960s, J. Bruner helped spearhead a
revolution in psychology, emphasizing learning through interpersonal interactions
and exploring such topics as how we gain meaning through those interactions as
well as how the mind deals with the information it is given. In the same years were
proposed various Cognitive Taxonomies, instructional design models, teaching
machines, computer-based assessment.
However, these ideas were developed only by technical (e.g. informational and
communicational technologies, automatized systems of instruction and others)
implementation in educational technology. There are some examples: the ﬁrst
computer-assisted learning system ‘PLATO’ (1960) and the ﬁrst adoption of
microcomputers in public education (1970). Moreover, if the pedagogy proposed
the idea of personalised learning (F. Keller), the technology developed only the
experimental model of individual learning in a computer environment.
Theory slowly moves from behavioural to cognitive science. It was written many
interesting books: ‘The Science of Learning and the Art of Teaching’ (Skinner
1954), Taxonomy of Educational Objectives (Bloom 1956), System of instruction
(Glaser 1962); and The conditions of learning (Gagne 1985) and others. As was
noted by Coulson and Cogswell (1965, p. 59): ‘in programed instruction the
learning pace is set by the individual student; moreover, if the program provides
‘branching’ capabilities, the sequence also is individualised’. All these innovations
are based on immediate feedback and systems approach. Thus, development of
systems for instruction and the individual testing procedures could be considered
the main impact of the ﬁrst phase of the digital revolution on learning.
4
1
Impacts of Digital Revolution on Learning

How screen had been affected learning in the ﬁrst phase of the digital revolution?
A type recorder or motion picture can act as a standard instruction stimulus. The
practical solution was motion pictures. Zinn (1967, p. 618) notes that typically the
users converse with the computers through direct connections of electric type-
writers, ﬁlm projectors, audio devices, electronic display screens, and pointers.
Therefore, at the earliest stage of revolution using projectors for pictures or/and
motion pictures has been the centrepiece to integrate technology into classroom,
helping students to be extremely motivated to learn with motion pictures.
It was expected that the digital screen would attract and maintain the students’
attention, increasing motivation and contributing to knowledge. There are contra-
dictive data regarding how learning outcomes correlate with patterns. What is true,
screens allow using impressive features, such as zoom and high-deﬁnition imagery
of pictures allowing data to be stored and transmitted, for teaching/learning music
and foreign languages.
Nonetheless, while digital devices have been embedded in school life, the
learning theory are struggling to keep up instruction within of the Comenius tra-
dition. This fact cause misunderstandings of results can be obtained, while learning
with technology is in the adequate way for guaranteed outcomes. Comenius wrote
about the importance of mathetics as a solution for learning: Mathetics is not
didactics, but a science about how to learn in the most effective way. This fact could
be considered the ﬁrst attempt to theoretically separate instruction from learning.
This indicated to the ﬁrst discrepancy between design models, systems and tools for
learning and mathetics, as a theory of learning issues and its practical solutions.
Starting the rapid challenges of the electronic display screens it is another of the
big challenges of the ﬁrst digital revolution on learning. Thus, a key advance in
electronic display screens comes from rapid changes in cathode ray tube from
monochrome to direct-view bistable storage tube, ﬂip-disk display, monochrome
plasma display, light-emitting diode, vacuum ﬂuorescent display, twisted nematic
effects LCD and pin screen. All of these innovations in formal schooling were used,
but the most important thing is everybody could buy personal computers. Peoples
were interested to learn in a computer environment because it was more motivated.
The provided simulations, animations and feedback capture attention. This means
that at the end of the ﬁrst phase of the digital revolution, the learning become as
formal as informal.
One more invention has challenged the world of education: Nicholas K.
Sheridon from Xerox PARC, of the Gyricon proposed the ﬁrst model of the
electronic paper. With the speciﬁc feature of monochrome, the electronic paper
‘opens’ the door for new learning patterns and objects which changed the traditional
methods of reading, writing and studying chemistry, physics, biology, mathematics
and
foreign
languages.
However,
the
electronic
paper
together
with
information-communication technologies open one more way, known as adapta-
tion. There are many examples, e.g. MINERVA—an adaptive computing system
with learning networks, which provides feedback to switch network regarding the
information gaited on a different set of terminals (Aleksander 1975). The second
1.2
Challenges of the Digital Revolution on Learning
5

example is zero adaptation, because user interface design was minimalized to
digitized patterns of books and archive cultural works, but the most important here
is the open format of digitised books, which discover the way of open access.
1.2.2
Multimedia, Social Media and Network Computing
Multimedia and network computing deﬁnes the second phase of digital revolution.
Staring from the 1975 a personal relatively inexpensive computer could be buy for
the individual use. Immediately the primary focus on personal computers was
intuitive learning. Thus, ﬁrst computers have already used the graphical user
interface with windows, icons, and a mouse. Moreover, they had the speciﬁc fea-
tures that allows connections via local networks, sharing ﬁles and printing out
documents. At the end of the second phase, the graphical user interface, proposed
by Microsoft Windows and the Apple Macintosh, was widely accepted.
Projectors’ technology moved to a data projector model, which allows taking
signals from a computer or television, and projects an image on a projection screen.
Through the main results of this phase can be identiﬁed the oral communication of
teacher’s speech which has been reinforced by technology. Therefore, students not
only can read, write and recall information from memory, but also received a new
tool helping to understand phenomenon, mechanisms, processes and abstract things
in a deepest way.
Nevertheless, by the end of twenty century, written computer-assisted testing
were developed in all countries, especially for vocational education. If we believed
data of empirical research, the oral communication in testing has been on a
downward spiral in favour of writing examination. Moreover, research thematic
moves from programed instruction to learning algorithms and multimedia education
in all others, based on behaviourism and cognitivism. In addition, were developed:
psychological properties of digital learning nets (Aleksander 1970); pattern
recognition using random-access memories (Aleksander and Stonham 1979),
developing of instructional objectives and multimedia cognitive load theory and
many others.
It is not surprised for us that most of the research is focused on understanding
digital learning nets and on processing the complex multimedia information at the
level of human brain. First, digital learning nets relies on pattern recognition as ‘a
relationship between the data and the deﬁned classiﬁcation categories’ (Stonham
and Shaw 1975). Second, in analysing digital learning nets was used new terms:
visual perception, system, artiﬁcial intelligence, stochastic processes, dynamic
programing, pattern recognition, feedback, and reinforcement learning.
However, theoretically computers in education relies on reinforcement learning.
But, the reinforcement learning is the area of the investigation the learning algo-
rithms. The learning algorithms is not only the cause-effect. Although specialists in
experimental psychology have extended Skinner’s theory, disputing the presumed
signiﬁcant advantage of only the computer environment for learning (Lubow et al.
6
1
Impacts of Digital Revolution on Learning

1976; Elio and Anderson 1984); some variables on the computer screens remains
commonplace, e.g. density of displayed text, scrolling, upper-case versus upper-
and lower-case lettering, letter size, and graphics. According to Hathaway (1984),
the speciﬁc variables on the screen mostly affect learning.
Does these variables provide an informational or/and emotional load at the
students’ learning capacity? Developments in the experimental psychology at that
time demonstrated ‘how affect may bias the processing of self-relevant information
and help to clarify the links between affect and person variables in the cognitive
social learning framework’ (Wright and Mischel 1982). This vision was for
everyone on the globe to be with the limited capacity of proceeding the complex
information on screen and to work at computer. However, for the ﬁrst time
researchers have begun to acknowledge the importance of the emotional variables
at the design level, although the practical application of these ﬁnding to learning
design remains nascent.
The second phase of the digital revolution materialised when the importance of
the self-directed learning issues were highlighted. Knowles (1975) deﬁned
self-directed learning within teacher-directed learning, showing that human being
grows in capacity (and need) to be self-directed as an essential component of
maturing self-directed learning and that this capacity should be nurtured in order to
be developed as rapidly as possible. The idea of using the learners’ experiences as
an increasingly rich resource for learning is the most interesting. But, what this
means in reality: knowledge about own knowledge, processing information pre-
sented on screen or the energy to get the presented information? According to
Knowles (1975, p. 18):
in its broadest meaning, ‘self-directed learning’ describes a process by which individuals
take the initiative, with our without the assistance of others, in diagnosing their learning
needs, formulating learning goals, identify human and material resources for learning,
choosing and implement appropriate learning strategies, and evaluating learning outcomes.
The ideas to connect computers in a local networking for reinforcement and
self-directed learning are the main premise in development of the Social Learning
Theory (Bandura 1977, p. 2). According to this theory, the humans’ capacity of
learning by observation enables them to acquire large, integrated units of behaviour
by example, without having to build up the patterns gradually through trial and
errors. The superior cognitive capacity determines the future actions. Moreover, the
human is capable of creating self-regulative inﬂuences by effective managing the
stimulus. Instead of reinforcement theories, assuming that imitative responses must
be reinforced in order to be learning, social learning theory distinguishing between
learning and performances (Fig. 1.1).
Anticipated S reinf
Attention 
Smodeling 
Symbolic coding/Cognitive 
organisation/Rehearsal 
R
Fig. 1.1 Social learning theory (According to Bandura 1977, p. 9)
1.2
Challenges of the Digital Revolution on Learning
7

In Social Learning Theory, reinforcement is facultative rather than a necessary
condition. Hence, when children intently watching modelled actions on a television
screen in a darkened room displayed the same amount of imitative learning
regardless of what they were previously informed. Behaviour is regulated both by
directly experienced consequences from external sources and by vicarious rein-
forcement and self-reinforcement. The major function of modelling stimuli is to
transmit information into new patterns of behaviour, which can be conveyed
through physical demonstration, pictorial representation or verbal description.
But, what means the new patterns of behaviour? According to Social Learning
Theory, the human functioning relies on three regulatory processes, which are
stimulus control, cognitive control and reinforcement control. The stimulus control
relies on human’s capacity to gain information from the environmental stimulus in
order to anticipate and to regulate his/her behaviour according to the probable
consequences of various events and courses of action. The cognitive control is
about the thinking modelling. With the framework of Social Learning Theory, the
reinforcement is not either responsible for learning.
There are many external inﬂuences like television, ﬁlms and pictorial displays.
All external informational-communicational sources affect learning, enabling chil-
dren and adults to acquire new attitudes, emotional responses and a copy-behaviour,
based on new behavioural patterns. Indeed, new patterns of behaviour may results
because of perceptual learning. From the psychological point of view, ‘the con-
trolled search is highly demanding of attentional capacity serial in nature with a
limited comparison rate, is easily established, altered and even reversal by the
subject, and is strongly dependent of load. Automatic detection is relatively well
learned in long-term memory, is demanding of attention only when a target is
presented, is parallel in nature, is difﬁcult to alter, to ignore, or to suppress once
learned, and is virtually unaffected by load’ (Shiffrin and Schneider 1977, p. 127).
A recent application of the Social Learning Theory to may be considered Social
Adaptive Interfacing, which is ‘a multi-dimensional interface for repository col-
lections which brings forward information pertaining to previous navigation trials
from various starting points on the users current location’ (Coyle et al. 2016).
In addition, multimedia and network computing re-focused research in psy-
chology from behavioural to cognitive science. It was developed multimedia
applications, as well as interrelated tools and applications, multimedia information
system, multimedia conferencing systems and others. Many of multimedia eleme-
nents were important to multimedia textbooks, a type of digital textbook, when
content is presented to learners visually or an equivalent to educational software
that present the content for learning through multimodal text, e.g. as a combination
of text, hypertext, sound, pictures, graphics, videos and animations. All systems and
theirs interfaces could be analysed on the base on SAMR Model (where S—
Substitution; A—Augmentation; M—Modiﬁcation and R—Redeﬁnition), devel-
oped by Dr. Ruben Puentedura (Table 1.1).
Of course, even that multimedia textbooks widely adoption for school learning,
acknowledge that there may be problems with the positive impact of certain speciﬁc
techniques for deeper learning. Here it is an assumed fact, which proved that during
8
1
Impacts of Digital Revolution on Learning

learning with digitized textbooks there is no evidence concerning affordance of
digital reading in principle, but only in speciﬁc contexts. Maybe, from these reasons
were developed the Dale’ Cone of Learning. This, according to Dale, after two
weeks the students will remember only 10 % from what read, 20 % of what was
listened, 30 % of what viewed, 50 % of what was listened and viewed, 70 % of
what said and 90 % of what said and done (Howard 2013; Greenﬁeld 2013;
Morrarty 2013).
1.2.3
Internet, Evolution of the Web for 1.0, 2.0 and 3.0
Education
There is, also, an intermediary period, known as global networking, when the Earth
has linked with computers in order to share data or resources, even educational.
First, society receives the possibility to widely use the web in various aims.
Digitalisation is adopted technology of converting text, sound, photos, and video
into data that can be processes by digital devices. Second, digitalisation opens the
question regarding the future of the digitised textbooks and open education or/and
to disseminate information regarding developed CD/DVD. However, to do this is
important to have clear and intuitive interfaces.
There are many innovations in user interface design, which deﬁnitely change the
world of education. Three of them: digital light processing, full-color plasma dis-
play and reinvention of the electronic paper have marked the evolution of web and
graphical design. Over the next two decades, a great progress in user interfaces
design has observed. First, it was coined new terms, like user interface design
progress, interface designers, user experience design, prototyping, engaging and
usable interfaces, visual hierarchy, navigational distance, user interface patterns, the
use of colors, multi-touch screen, multi-use content, mobile interfaces and others.
Second, it was developed many practical applications of these terms and it was
developed some design principles, based on textual-communicational, mobile and
gestural interactions.
Table 1.1 Digitized learning versus digital learning
SAMR
Digitized learning
Digital learning
S, A
M, R
Assessment
Students read from an online
textbook rather than write answers to
the chapter Questions on paper
Students are engaged in interactive
assessment or they are asked to reﬂect
on the provided information, to
develop an opinion or to create a
product that defence their opinions
based on evidence
Learning
No creativity or critical thinking
To design and to share an authentic
project for feedback, even global
1.2
Challenges of the Digital Revolution on Learning
9

Internet, website and multimedia systems were widely adopted. They allows, at
least, developing a special type of digital textbooks, known as interactive textbooks
(Fisher and Koryllos 1998) or online interactive textbooks (Smith 2000; Schwarz
et al. 2005). The interactive textbooks were beyond conventional printed textbooks
in delivering information and in active engagement of all students in the learning
process. However, as was noted by Smith (2000), textbooks reﬂect the bias and
approach of the author(s), and limit in some matter every instructor who adopts it to
the particular approach and organisation of the didactic material. That is why digital
textbooks are used as supplements to lectures and often the relationships between
what the students read and hear in class is not clear.
On the web 1.0 the digital textbooks represents, mainly, the static hypertext
(Brusilovsky et al. 2003), which immediately opens many questions:
– Will the digital textbook become more than a CD-ROM of the print version?
– How might the concept of the textbook change, if it becomes digital?
– How can digital textbooks to be developed as online digital textbooks?
– Are students mere consumers of digital content?
User interface design of digital textbooks exposes a wide variety of new pos-
sibilities, like interactive communication. A generalised suspension is an as
unhelpful thing as the through assumption that universal design principles for all
digital textbooks’ interfaces are unequivocally good. To reﬂect on this issue let us
analyse the evolution of web affordability for education.
A settled range of binaries reinforces this kind of assumption:
– Web 1.0 and education 1.0;
– Web 2.0 and education 2.0;
– Web 3.0 and education 3.0.
User interface design of textbook is repeatedly re-invented. Thus, if the web 1.0
is for web pages connected by hyperlinks, digital textbooks content are only static
with hyperlinks; if the web 2.0 is for usability and interoperability, digital textbooks
are embodied social media. In comparison with education 1.0 and education 2.0,
user interface design of textbooks is for teacher-centered learning environment or
learner-centered learning environment.
Education 2.0, known as ‘social participatory web’ enables students to partici-
pate actively in knowledge construction and dissemination. For the ﬁrst time user
interfaces were open for group and collaborative assessment and international
projects. Instead of polarisation between web technology and learning theory, the
educational methodology restricts sustained reﬂection on the complex nature of the
user interface design in regard of innovation. Therefore, core principles of educa-
tion 2.0 is active production, collaboration, sharing, publishing and social book-
marking. Even teachers and textbooks, both print or digital/digitized, are the main
sources of knowledge, only the pioneers’ teachers starting to adopt new functions
and roles, like guides, mentors and coaches.
10
1
Impacts of Digital Revolution on Learning

The actual phase of the digital revolution, characterised by cloud computing and
3.0 education, contributes on internationalisation of education for a sustainable
development of each student in a globalised world. This is a fast-evolving phe-
nomenon affecting all systems, environments, learning theory, strategies, and
user-interface design of digital textbooks and, not in the last, the students’ prefer-
ences for learning. Firstly, cloud computing creates on demand self-service, broad
network access, resource pooling, rapid elasticity and measured service, which a
common for an open digital world. Secondly, in a digital world the educational
system with a learning environment is a holistic one, because the amount of the
digital information increases tenfold every ﬁve years. Thirdly, education 3.0 is an
umbrella term for many innovative technologies affordable for learning.
Living a life immersed in an open digital world has become part of the everyday
human’s activities. Technologies for education 3.0 are very different: from the
philosophy of learning in a digital world to 3D Projector, educational ecosystems
and interactive whiteboards implemented widely in schools since 2010. Thus,
according to Texas Instruments (2016), using projectors make any surface in the
classroom interactive, allowing an immersive experience that helps teachers teach
and students learn. Project onto existing projector screens or whiteboards or directly
anywhere the wall. By using a special pen, the teacher and/or the students can draw,
can point and can click by touching the screen directly or from many feet away
from the screen. These special features allow to interact with the entire screen no
matter how large because the pen interacts from a distance or by touching the
screen, as well as to control the students’ activity in the classroom.
Education 3.0 will be impossible withhold the rapid development in e-paper and
e-ink technologies. Heikenfeld (2011) has emphasized the rapid evolution of the
e-paper technology with a ﬂexible structure in the following abstract: ‘the com-
mercial success of monochrome electronic paper (e-paper) is now propelling the
development of next-generation ﬂexible, video, and color e-paper products. Unlike
the early battles in the 1980s and 1990s between transmissive and emissive display
technologies, there is an extraordinary diversity of technologies vying to become
the next generation of e-paper.’
Now, more than ever, is needed a sustained reﬂection on the open digital world
affordability for education. There are two distinctive feature of the digital world:
(a) mobile learning and (b) education 3.0. In general, the mobile learning refers on
ability to obtain or provide educational content on personal pocket devices such as
PDAs, smartphones and mobile phones. According to Keats and Schmidt (2007),
education 3.0 refers on rich, cross-institutional, cross-cultural opportunities within
which the learners themselves play a key role as creator of knowledge artifacts that
are shared, the distinction between artifacts, process and process becomes blurred as
do distinction of space and time. In the 3.0 education, boundaries between teachers
and students are breakdown and the social networking and social beneﬁts outside
the immediate scope of activity play a strong role.
At the current stage of the digital revolution, 50 % of knowledge occurs via
apps. The most popular photo and video through WhatsApp or Social Media have
shared, instead of the meeting in person. An evident fact is shifting the
1.2
Challenges of the Digital Revolution on Learning
11

communication model from transmission to participative and self-directed learning.
However, critical thinking regarding education 3.0 movement shows an evidence
for a new frontier pedagogy, even some teachers advocate the classical approach in
teaching, when textbooks is just a content for reading.
Education 3.0 is an indicator of living in a digital society, in, which 90 % of
peoples said that smartphones never live their sides. Smartphones have a big
potential for learning, e.g. it can be used to provide content just at the right time and
just at the right place. Digital textbooks are in online education because of lower
cost and ﬂexibility. However, user generated content caused the knowledge sharing
—skills based education. Thus, double model proposed for Education 3.0 is a proof
to a movement toward viable competence pedagogy.
Three other important technologies, which may be included in the content of
digital textbooks, are gamiﬁcation, internet of things (IoT) and Big Data. Daggett
(2015) notes that gamiﬁcation is an important thing for learning. Incorporating
gamiﬁcation in a digital textbook allows developing an adoptive learning experi-
ence and skills. The most relevant gamiﬁcation elements, which may be included in
the content of the digital textbook, are rewards, feedback, rankings and exchanges.
Indeed, their application for learning may motivate students through engagement,
adaptively and interactivity. On the other side, IoT and Big Data are two of the
most-talked-about technology topics in recent years.
However, according to Gartner’s 2014 Hype Cycle for Emerging Technologies,
the digital society is at the stage of digital marketing and sees the emergence of the
Nexus of Forces (mobile, social, cloud and information). The next post-Nexus stage
will be Digital Business, focused on the convergence of people, business and
things. The IoT and the concept the physical and virtual worlds are strong concepts
in this stage. The ﬁnal post-Nexus paradigm name is Antonomous. For this stage is
characterised an enterprise’s ability to leverage technologies that provide humanlike
or human-replacing capabilities.
Digital textbooks need an affordable user-interface design. In recent years, the
theme of user interface design for digital textbooks have gathered signiﬁcant
attention by the scientiﬁc community, once it aims to solve one of the biggest
problems that arises when using digital devices to reason knowledge provided by
curriculum. Stansbury (2016) observed that the open courseware, open educational
resources and adaptive/personalised learning are challenging the traditional model
of
course
content
creation
and
distribution
(faculty-authored
and
publisher-produced textbooks). Personalisation and analytics are features in digital
textbooks. However, less than half (45 percent) of the faculty surveyed in the ICBA
and CCS report agreed/strongly agreed that digital course materials provide sig-
niﬁcant added value content not available in print.
In order to solve the issues of the signiﬁcant added value of the digital textbooks,
the most appropriate way is to facilitate the students’ motivation to learn, explaining
ﬁrst of all, in which society they willlive, what competence (e.g. knowledge, skills,
attitudes) is required for this society and why is important to contribute in a per-
sonal way for sustainable world.
12
1
Impacts of Digital Revolution on Learning

Digital textbooks interfaces are designed both for knowledge (e.g. pedagogical
resource) and skills development (e.g. learning tool). How important is to integrate
digital textbooks in a knowledge management systems, distance education or is
massive open online courses (MOOC)? It is important, if focus is learning, which in
terms of ‘education 3.0’ deﬁnes a metasystem of independent, collaborative,
dynamic and ﬂexible self-regulated processes.
What is the impact of digital screens on self-regulated learning? Education 3.0 is
a paradigm of thinking in complexity. Indeed, instructional systems, knowledge
management systems or MOOC are complex systems and theirs functionality
depends on the vitality of all elements ‘working’ together in linear or/and non-linear
ways. However, as was written in the Ciller’s book ‘Complexity and postmod-
ernism’, the complex systems are constructed by a large number of elements,
interacting richly, locally and non-linearly, containing feedback loops and being far
from equilibrium. And learning is not only about the mechanical systems, but also
about the changing in human’s behaviour. This means that learning occurs, at least
between two metasystems with a big entropy. However, the interface design of
knowledge management systems is focused only on developing the ergonomic
interfaces, and not on ecological learning. In the ecological learning students’
cognitive systems should have developed the ecological features to ‘connect’ to
various complex systems via vital (active) nodes.
1.3
Fourth Industrial Revolution and Education
The fourth industrial revolution is on the way: digital devices and software serves
the teacher(s) and students activities to be networking engaged in various learning
environments. The rationality for paradigm shift in the education was set out in the
UNESCO Agenda, particularly in the goals for the sustainable development.
Effectively, the objective of education has been redeﬁned from development of
knowledge to sustainable development of competence, as well as from the open and
distributive environments to innovative application of technology to achieve sus-
tainable development. These objectives have been endorsed as a competence
development objective and, since that moment, this aim refers on the vital integrity
of the knowledge, skills and attitudes for sustainable development.
However, only the education methodology is not in a position to deliver on these
new objectives, having fallen behind social expectations since the educational crises
of eighties-nineties. Next twenty years with some expectations to improve the
education at the global level were affected, from the one hand, by the climate
changes and, from the other hand, by major and observable trends toward ‘intel-
lectual’ games, discovery of ‘changing’ synapses and others; most university
teaching is still about the theories of antiquity philosophers, not about the current
philosophical paradigms.
One of the core inventions of the fourth industrial revolution for education is
transhumanism. According to Sorgner (2009), the transhumanism is in favour of
1.2
Challenges of the Digital Revolution on Learning
13

technologies and other means, which could be used for enhancement of human
intellectual, physical and emotional capacities. Thus, the philosophy has failed to
acknowledge that the human society are practicing a sustainable strategy to adap-
tation in dynamic, not static circumstances, driven by Education 2030 agenda,
adopted at the 70th Session of the United Nations General Assembly.
Educational philosophy is familiar with lead time, but this applies in regard to
transhumanism; embodied cognition and energy saving educational technologies.
Thus, the educational philosophy at the level of 4th industrial revolution integrates
transhumanism with the knowledge of B-formatted representation in the brain,
body’s anatomy, higher order cognition and thinking, the extended mind hypothesis
and the sensory-motor contingencies (Fig. 1.2).
This time digital textbooks interface design is at the level of the graphical design.
However, from the philosophical point of view there is a signiﬁcant impact of
technological and scientiﬁc developments on the evolution of human species. But,
these is only fresh berries in the old wine. According to Aksenov and Acsenov
(2016), the aim of the philosophical concept of transhumanism is to liberate the
human race from the inherent biological limitations. Education today depleting the
cognition to be phased out, and the global challenges debate regarding the sus-
tainable education with large implications for educational policy.
Learning designers would be insisting that the digital textbooks, as a peda-
gogical resource and as learning tool, are fully investigated and, will look critically
at the potential of the digital textbook to develop the students’ self-regulated
learning strategies. By that time the generating costs of non-affective technologies
for digital learning will be competitive with the generating costs of older tech-
nologies. The design of ecological user interfaces will be required by the open
educational system as a matter of openness. Re-use of learning objects, even in
open textbooks and eTextbooks, will be moved into more applications that are
practical. Teacher(s) and students will routinely use metadata from databases,
scientific 
trans-
humanism
body anatomy
B-formatted 
representation
 in brain 
embodied
cognition
sensor 
representation
energy 
saving
Fig. 1.2 The lead time of the
educational philosophy
14
1
Impacts of Digital Revolution on Learning

clouds and networks, which are accessible worldwide. Therefore, the fourth
industrial revolution has accelerated the self-regulated strategy, but, also, re-opened
the issue of metacognition and metacognitive strategies.
1.4
Open Educational System Versus Closed Pedagogical
Systems
One of the impacts of digital revolution on learning refers on educational systems
movement toward “much more open and ﬂexible” (Frick 1991). Openness affects
the content of school textbook and, therefore, changes standards for learning
environment, tools and outcomes. In an open system, the learning process is less
instructive, but more dynamic and ﬂexible. Student become a life-long learner and,
as a result, his/her capacity and motivation depends on many external factors, like
social, technological, emotional and others. An example of the external techno-
logical factor is the possibility to read textbooks via Internet. Therefore, education
3.0 is an innovative model of a distributed learning.
An open educational system is a holistic whole with its environment or/and
surroundings in forms of sharing information (data, knowledge), energy (skills,
efforts and competences of life-long learners) and intellect (teachers, students,
administrative and academic staff). Generally, the environment serves as the
medium to convey the information from one source to other, but additional pro-
cesses carry out the process of conveying the information. One of these complex
processes is learning. However, learning requires energy. The energy conversion
during digital learning is an issue that need urgent investigation.
During learning process the information and communication ﬂows may take up a
material form or/and a digital (quantum) form. Therefore, an important task for the
learning designers is to understand the complex mechanism of perception the data
from the screen. In plus, the data, information and knowledge is transferring in a
dynamic and ﬂexible way, ‘changing’ nature of competence pedagogy, in particular
when data is transferred from digital to child’s eyes/ears and vice versa, through
touch screen, haptic and other technologies.
An open educational system manages complex mechanisms of data based on
information/communication processes, cognitive activity processes and assessment
processes. All these mechanisms and processes interconnect with the human body
energy and power, stored and proving in the performance to learn and to make
relevant decisions. Thus, taking into account that human body is also an open
system, it can be understood why is learning is important to “holds” a real learning
environment of open/closed systems with all multi-dimensional and multi-tasking
mechanisms and processes. This means that learning with textbooks, instead of
comprehensive reading, requires self-planning, self-regulation, self-directed and
self-assessment techniques as a holistic strategy within lifelong learning.
1.3
Fourth Industrial Revolution and Education
15

Many countries promote the concept of lifelong learning. However, any strategy
for the lifelong learning is affecting by some perturbation effects, which may
inﬂuence memorization, attention, thinking, problem solving and decision-making.
An example of the perturbation effects for learning is planning ‘wrong’ activities.
To avoid this, is important to understand differences between open and closed, as
well as between all components involved in learning. This is to say that before
education 3.0 learning was planning as activities in a didactic system, which is part
of the pedagogical systems (e.g. an artiﬁcial designed system with the scope of
education or/and instruction). In such system, the instructional process has
linear/systematic mechanisms within an instructional design model, incorporated
into curricula. The teacher uses screen for teaching.
Vice Versa, learning in an open educational system is self-regulated. In such
environment, the digital screen is for teaching, learning and assessment. This mode
may be affordable, if in is designed an open system with an ecological (sustainable)
environment and toward a sustainable development of a lifelong learner. For
example, an open source textbook may have a content available for reading on
screen, but only the student(s) can manage the accessibility for them. Thus,
understanding and solving of user interface issues in digital textbooks use and
development will make learning more controllable and adaptable.
The
most
important
distinctions
are
between
teacher-cantered
and
student-cantered learning environments. In teacher-cantered learning environments,
digital textbooks are pedagogical resources, but in learner-cantered environments—
learning tools. However, only an open source textbook provides the continuous
supply of the potential energy that with the summative assessment tests not
depleted. In plus, this energy by self-assessment may be increased. Therefore, the
student learns when is motivated enough and has sufﬁcient energy to avoid the
negative feedback. The mechanism of own learning strategy depends of student’s
capacity to apply the metacognitive strategies for sustainable learning outcomes.
1.5
Toward Understanding the Terminology and Diversity
of Digital Textbooks
Didactic revolution leads also to needs of experimentation a big diversity of digital
textbooks, much more than for the printed textbooks. Some digital textbooks are
still stored on CD-DVD or on computer. The cloud computing is a another way,
which allow storing digital/digitised textbooks in cloud, as well as accessing digital
textbooks via computer(s) and/or digital devices and reading them on digital screen
or/and in a printed version. In a similar fashion, each textbook may be stored in a
cloud digital library. Thus, everybody can develop own library of the digital
textbooks and keep in three ways.
16
1
Impacts of Digital Revolution on Learning

The personal library with digital textbooks anytime and anywhere is open. We
can bring the cloud library with us, if use a digital device connected to Internet. In
this library, textbooks can be digital/digitalized and include special learning algo-
rithms. Compared with printed textbooks, digital textbooks have additional fea-
tures, which allow users to take notes, highlight words, search words or topics, send
or update information etc. Therefore, digital textbooks provides an increasing
usability for achievement learning objectives.
Nevertheless, the most studied are monographic textbooks, which are developed
through
– digitizing the existing printed textbooks;
– programing the content or instructional and/or assessment frameworks;
– personalisation of the open source content;
– development of own digital textbooks using authoring tools etc.
In the broadest sense, monographic digital textbooks can be classiﬁed in the
following categories: (a) eTextbooks, which represents a subset of e-books;
(b) Open Source Textbooks—open content and no restrictions on copying or
printing and (c) Cognitive Tutors—intelligent solutions for understanding chem-
istry, biology, physics or foreign languages.
Open digital textbooks are developed under the terms of the GNU Free
Documentation License. Such textbooks can be purchased or rented at a cost,
or/and read online. eTextbooks have a variety of forms and models, even in an open
or cloud format. Thus, as generic term, eTextbook (variously, electronic textbook,
digital textbooks, e-book, iBook, Active Textbook, Interactive Textbook, Dynamic
Book, a digital book, e-edition etc.) is an innovative textbook publication consisting
of text, images, animation and multimedia, readable on computers, dedicated
e-readers or other digital devices like tablets or smartphones. eTextbooks may have
or not any printed equivalent. Instead, Open Source Textbooks (variously: Open
Textbook, Free Online Textbook etc.) are online downloaded on to Personal Digital
Assistance (PDA) or in a printed version at a low cost.
Modern digital technology, stored in the Internet, offers textbook delivery 24 h a
day to any place in the world with Internet access. Once digital textbooks is
accessed, the users can use a variety of opportunities to search information into the
content by keywords; to understand the meaning of some words, to change text size
in order to suit reader needs; to access hyperlinks to relevant external web pages, as
required in content.
A Cognitive Tutor (variously: Intelligent Tutor, Adaptive Tutor etc.) is a par-
ticular kind of intelligent tutoring systems that utilizes a cognitive model to provide
feedback to students as they are working through problems. Cognitive Tutor
Authoring Tools are the special designed software for learning science, designers,
and online course developers.
1.5
Toward Understanding the Terminology and Diversity of Digital Textbooks
17

Digital textbooks in different formats are developed. The most used are PDF and
open-source formats. The standard open-source format is ePub, more superior then
PDF because ePub allows the text to be reﬂowed or resided according to size of
digital device, giving a “side to side” digital reading experience. However, the ePub
format requires using special eReading device or have downloaded and installed
eReader software on the digital device. Users of Amazon Kindle or Amazon Kindle
software use the MOBI format or download the special designed apps. The app is
the abbreviation of world “application”—a special software program designed to
fulﬁl a speciﬁc purpose, in particular, when is downloaded by a user to a mobile
device. It can run on Internet, or on a mobile device.
Digital textbooks are available via a standard web browser. In the most cases
teachers uses a HTML web site to distribute the textbook to students. The open
format of HTML may allow users to edit or customize the textbook’s content. In
addition, can be created a zip ﬁle of textbook and make this ﬁle available for other
instructors to download, edit or to host of other websites. When digital textbook is
in a PDF format, the user should have a PDF reader, like Adobe Reader, Foxit and
Nitro. Usually teachers distributes academic textbooks in PDF format for reading.
Students can read the content online or print the provided content. However, in a
collaborative project a teacher can make the content available for comments.
The other, less used formats are doc., docx and .html. These formats require a
Microsoft Word are a source compatible with Word, such as OpenOfﬁce or Google
Text. These formats as a source ﬁle for those who want to edit or to add content,
usually in a collaborative project are used. In some special cases, for a complex
scientiﬁc equations and notations, are required LaTeX. Therefore, in the tradition of
Herbard, a Didaktik triangle is a key tool for analysing the complex relations
between teacher T, student S and content C. The complex relations between T, S
and C should be treated as a whole, in case when the starting point is the peda-
gogical communication between the teacher T and the student(s) S. The pedagogical
communication is a term common in teacher-cantered learning environments, used
to deﬁne the ability of teacher to communicate knowledge and to facilitate
understanding.
After digital revolution, the teachers’ functions “to teach” has changed.
Individual pedagogical approach is moved to Participatory Learning and Action
(PLA) approach, i.e. learning “about and engaging with communities” (Thomas
2016, p. 1). This approach, used in identiﬁed needs, planning, monitoring or
evaluating projects and programmes, combines an ever-growing toolkit of partici-
patory and visual methods with natural interviewing techniques and is intended to
facilitate a process of collective analysis and learning.
As part of the global technological challenges, the need of getting diploma in a
“local” University is not important. The diversity of digital learning environments
with the emerging e-books, digital textbooks, open sources, social media, MOOC
and mobile technologies have forever changed the local landscape of the formal
schooling with a two-directed pedagogical communications model. We now live in
a real and virtual, local and global learning environment in which knowledge twice
18
1
Impacts of Digital Revolution on Learning

every days is increased. Icons in their mobile devices drive the students outside of
their digital screens. So what this mean for Didactic triangle?
“Combining” learning theory, learning strategies, textbook theory and partici-
patory approach to self-regulated learning in a digital world opens the door to
powerful new successful educational methodologies that may result in documented
beneﬁts for students. Instead, to realize these strategies teachers need support in
understanding how digital screen affects learning. On the one hand, a participative
approach involves solving real problems based on the active participation in the
self-regulated learning process; on the other hand, this require an innovative ped-
agogical relation between the student and the teacher(s). Therefore, in considering
the interdependencies between both the teacher and student the preferred term is
“learning”. One can observe that this is a new didactic relation, which include
technology as a norm. The teacher’s key task in this new didactic relation is to
guide the learning process of the student from start to success in life.
The goal of user interface design is to anticipate the moment of positive
responses on tasks provided according to provided content. Students construct
knowledge through gathering and synthesizing information and integrating it with
the general skills of inquiry, communication, critical thinking, problem solving and
so on. Learning design norms require cognitive ergonomics, learning needs,
self-regulated strategies, dynamics, analytics and styles. In such environments
students work alone or in pairs and small groups on theirs papers, projects, port-
folios and other. Teaching and assessing is intertwined. Therefore, the goal of the
user interface design is to involve students in learning process. There are speciﬁc
principles and norms for learning design in a Global Age. Professor and students
learn together. The common feature of learning is metacognitive strategies.
When considering their teaching and assessment approaches, class development
strategy or method to instruction, teachers are always looking for the way that is
most beneﬁcial for all of their students. Teachers want their students to understand
the topic, to communicate and to collaborate on provided tasks. As a result, the
debate of teacher-cantered vs. learner-cantered learning environment has been in the
forefront of learning designers’ minds.
Regarding the user interface design there are controversial opinions, too. These
controversies, indeed, comes from the contradictions between learning theory and
design of the learning objects toward developing a learning construct, from one
part, and chaos theory and proactivity of open system learning environments, from
the other. This means that a classical didactic triangle has been changing (Fig. 1.3).
The diversity of the learning environments, which, as was pointed by (Midoro
2005, p. 42) are global and local, real and virtual, directly affect the didactic triangle.
This means that students are not only receiver the content and learn not only in
school. The open content for learning can be taking into consideration as an inde-
pendent point, as well as the context of learning. By context for learn we understand
the ability for a learning object to interconnect various, similar events or statements
(Downes 2004). Therefore, this global reality of the globalised educational systems
1.5
Toward Understanding the Terminology and Diversity of Digital Textbooks
19

with/and
various
environments
evidence
many
uncertainties
embedded
in
ill-structured problems, related on student, teacher, content and context for learning.
These problems are the heart of the contemporary learning science.
References
Aksenov, I. V., & Аксёнов, И. В. (2016). Trans-humanism as an anthropological problem.
Journal of Siberian Federal University, Humanities and Social Sciences, 3(9), 678–686.
Aleksander, I. (1970). Some psychological properties of digital learning nets. International
Journal of Man-Machine Studies, 2(2), 189–212.
Aleksander, I. (1975). Action-oriented learning networks. Kybernetes, 4(1), 39–44.
Aleksander, I., & Stonham, T. J. (1979). Guide to pattern recognition using random-access
memories. IEE Journal on Computers and Digital Techniques, 2(1), 29–40.
Bandura, A. (1977). Social learning theory. http://www.esludwig.com/uploads/2/6/1/0/26105457/
bandura_sociallearningtheory.pdf
Bloom, B. S. (1956). Taxonomy of educational objectives: The classiﬁcation of educational goals.
Harlow, Essex, England: Longman Group.
Brusilovsky, P., Schwarz, E., & Weber, G. (2003). Electronic textbooks on WWW: From static
hypertext to interactivity and adaptivity. In B. H. Khan (Ed.), Web-based instruction (pp. 255–
261). Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey: Educational Technology Publications. http://www.pitt.
edu/*peterb/papers/Badrul.html
Coulson, J. E., & Cogswell, J. F. (1965). Effects of individualized instruction on testing. Journal of
Educational Measurement, 2(1), 59–64.
Coyle et al. (2016). Reducing click distance through social adaptive interfacing. https://www.
researchgate.net/publication/230875702_Reducing_Click-Distance_through_Social_
Adaptive_Interfacing
Daggett, W. R. (2015). Preparing students for their future. International Center for Leadership in
Education. http://www.leadered.com/PP/Midway,%20UT%209.10.2015.pdf
Digital vs Digitized Learning. https://byotnetwork.com/2015/09/08/digital-vs-digitized-learning/
Downes, S. (2004). What is a learning context? http://www.downes.ca/post/18
Elio, R., & Anderson, J. R. (1984). The effects of information order and learning mode on schema
abstraction. Memory & Cognition, 12(1), 20–30.
Fisher, R. B., & Koryllos, K. (1998). Interactive textbooks; embedding image processing operator
demonstrations in text. International Journal of Pattern Recognition and Artiﬁcial Intelligence,
12(08), 1095–1123.
Frick, T. W. (1991). Restructuring education through technology. Bloomington, Indiana: Phi
Delta
Kappa
Educational
Foundation.
https://www.indiana.edu/*tedfrick/fastback/
fastback326.html/ Accessed April 05, 2016
S
C
P
P
S
C
openness
C
T
P
S
learning environment:
global and local, 
real and virtual
Fig. 1.3 Transforming the didactic triangle into the didactic tetrahedron (where P-professor,
S-student, C-content, T-digital textbook as a context for learning)
20
1
Impacts of Digital Revolution on Learning

Gagne, R. (1985). The conditions of learning, 4th. edn. New York: Holt, Rinehart & Winston.
Gartner, J. (2016). Gartner’s 2014 hype cycle for emerging technologies maps the journey to
digital business. http://www.gartner.com/newsroom/id/2819918
Glaser, R. (1962). Psychology and Instructional Technology. Training Research and Education.
In R. Glaser, (Ed.), Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press.
Greenﬁeld, J. (2013). Students, professors still not yet ready for digital textbooks. Digital Book
World.
http://www.digitalbookworld.com/2013/students-professors-still-not-yet-ready-for-
digital-textbooks/
Hathaway, M. D. (1984). Variables of computer screen display and how they affect learning.
Educational Technology, 24(1), 7–11.
Heikenfeld, J. (2011). A critical review of the present and future prospects for electronic paper.
Journal of the Society for Information Display, 19, 129. doi:10.1889/JSID19.2.129
Howard, J. (2013). For many students, print is still king. Chronicle of Higher Education. http://
chronicle.com/article/For-Many-Students-Print-Is/136829/
Kaplan, J. M. (2015). Race, IQ, and the search for statistical signals associated with so-called “X”-
factors: environments, racism, and the “hereditarian hypothesis”. Biology & Philosophy, 30(1),
1–17. doi:10.1007/s10539-014-9428-0
Keats, D., & Schmidt, J. P. (2007). Three generations of education. 12(3). http://ﬁrstmonday.org/
ojs/index.php/fm/article/view/1625/1540#k2
Knowles, M. S. (1975). Self-directed learning. Cambridge Adult Education. http://www.
strategiesforabetterway.com/documents/augustbookreview.pdf
Lewin, D., & Lundie, D. (2016). Philosophies of digital pedagogy. Studies in Philosophy and
Education, 35(3), 235–240. 10.1007/s11217-016-9514-7, http://link.springer.com/article/10.
1007/s11217-016-9514-7/fulltext.html
Lubow, R. E., Rifkin, B., & Alek, M. (1976). The context effect: The relationship between
stimulus preexposure and environmental preexposure determines subsequent learning. Journal
of
Experimental
Psychology:
Animal
Behavior
Processes,
2(1),
38–47.
https://www.
researchgate.net/proﬁle/Robert_Lubow/publication/232430122_The_context_effect_The_relation-
ship_between_stimulus_preexposure_and_environmental_preexposure_determines_subsequent_
learning/links/004635379a8c8af01b000000.pdf
Midoro, W. (2005). A common European framework for teachers’ professional proﬁle in ICT for
education. Ortona, Italy: Edizioni Menabo Didactica.
Morrarty, E. (2013). Webcast: The digital revolution in higher education: Attitudes on e-textbooks
and
more.
http://www.digitalbookworld.com/2013/webcast-the-digital-revolution-in-higher-
education-attitudes-on-e-textbooks-and-more/
Plowman, L. (2016). Learning technology at home and preschool. The Wiley Handbook of
Learning Technology, 96–112.
Project Gutenberg Mission Statement by Michael Hart. http://www.gutenberg.org/wiki/Gutenberg:
Project_Gutenberg_Mission_Statement_by_Michael_Hart
Schwarz, E., Brusilovsky, P., & Weber, G. (2005). World-wide intelligent textbooks. i-Manager’s
Journal of Educational Technology, 1(4), 23.
Shiffrin, R. M., & Schneider, W. (1977). Controlled and automatic human information processing:
II. Perceptual learning, automatic attending and a general theory. Psychological Review, 84(2),
127–139.
Skinner, B. F. (1954). The science of learning and the art of teaching (pp. 99–113). Cambridge,
Mass, USA.
Smith, R. (2000). The purpose, design, and evolution of online interactive textbooks: the digital
learning interactive model. History Computer Review, 16(2), 43.
Sorgner, S. L. (2009). Nietzsche, the overhuman, and transhumanism. Journal of Evolution and
Technology, 20(1), 29–42.
Stansbury, M. (2016). The future of textbooks look like this. http://www.ecampusnews.com/top-
news/digital-textbooks-faculty-177/
Stiegler, B. (2016). The digital, education, and cosmopolitanism. Representations, 134(1),
157–164.
References
21

Stonham, T. J., & Shaw, M. A. (1975). Automatic classiﬁcation of mass spectra by means of
digital learning nets-existence of characteristic features of chemical class in mass spectra.
Pattern Recognition, 7(4), 235–241.
Texas
Instruments
(2016).
Interactive
projectors.
http://www.ti.com/lsds/ti/dlp-technology/
products/dlp-projectors/interactive-projector.page
The future of the electronic paper. http://thefutureofthings.com/3081-the-future-of-electronic-
paper/
Thomas, S. (2016). What is Participatory Learning and Action (PLA): An Introduction. http://idp-
key-resources.org/documents/0000/d04267/000.pdf
Wright, J., & Mischel, W. (1982). Inﬂuence of affect on cognitive social learning person variables.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 43(5), 901.
Zinn, K. L. (1967). Computer technology for teaching and research on instruction. Review of
Educational Research, 37(5), 618–634.
Клир Д. (1990). Системология. Автоматизация решения системных задач. Москва: Радио и
связь. 538 c.
22
1
Impacts of Digital Revolution on Learning

Chapter 2
A Paradigm Shifths and User Interface
Design Models
A new type of thinking is essential if mankind to survive
and move toward higher levels.
Albert Einstein
Abstract A paradigm shifts, according to Thomas Kuhn, is a fundamental change
in the basic concepts and experimental practices of a scientiﬁc discipline. Do
paradigm shifts change the design models according to changes in education? The
goal of this chapter is to present a comprehensive description of linear, systems and
meta-systems thinking approaches. Its scope is limited to the instructional design
models and principles of user interface design. The chapter deeply explores the
contrasts, connections, and inﬂuences from the realm of thinking to the real.
Keywords Linear thinking  Systemic thinking  Metasystem thinking
2.1
Introduction
The term ‘design’ may be associated with the thinking’ patterns. According to
Visser (2006), design thinking is the design-speciﬁc cognitive activities that
designers apply during the process of designing. But, can be only the cognitive
activities important for instructional design? Let us analyse this idea starting from
the paradigm shifts in education. The term ‘paradigm shift’, coined by the Thomas
Kuhn, deﬁnes a fundamental change in the basic concepts and experimental
practice of a scientiﬁc discipline. In the case of the digital textbook theory and
design, the paradigm shifts could be associated with education 1.0, education 2.0
and education 3.0 and, therefore, with changes in the intellectual inquiry noted in
the educational technology as well as in philosophy, psychology, cybernetics, and
neuroscience and knowledge management.
Hairston (1982, pp. 78–80) notes that to understand the nature of the paradigm
shift in textbooks’ development is important to look at the principal features of that
educational paradigm that has been the basis of the composition teaching for several
decades or hundreds of years, taking into account that textbooks’ police and content
© Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2017
E.A. Railean, User Interface Design of Digital Textbooks,
Lecture Notes in Educational Technology, DOI 10.1007/978-981-10-2456-6_2
23

change slowly. Publishers want to keep what sells, and they tend to direct the
appeals of their books to what they believe the average composition teacher wants,
not to what those in the vanguard of the profession would like to have. In turn, for
them is better to accept the digitalised version of printed textbook that to implement
a new interactive technology, even this technology is better for learning.
Nevertheless, the big changes in textbook theory and design are under way.
Following the patterns that Kuhn describes in his theory, the ﬁrst response to crisis
in education has been to improvise the individualised learning through programmed
instruction. Among the ﬁrst response were teaching machine and programed text-
book, which sprang up about 50–70 years ago to give ﬁrst aid to teachers who
seemed unable to teach students within the traditional paradigm.
However, the ﬁrst attempt has not solved the problem. Another ad hoc ‘problem
solving’ within self-directed learning and local networking in classroom, but, as
was it noted by Hairston (1982, p. 82), it has faded from the scene along with the
computer-assisted instruction. In plus, network and cloud computing, nano-
education and big data, common for education 3.0, are the actual ad hoc measure
that paradigm is only a temporally palliative for problems related on sustainable
education. Not all have solved the crisis of education. What are the reasons?
In our point of view, any paradigm is only the background for solving common
controversies, problems or issue. More important is to develop and to implement a
theory with well-deﬁned principles that will correlate with the paradigm. What we
have today in user interface design of digital textbooks is inexplicable, on the one
hand, education 3.0 and on the other hand, design principles based on learning
theories for XV–XIX century.
Among the solutions of reconceptualisation the user interface design of digital
textbooks, one of them is design thinking—a mindset as the strategy of innovation
in learning. However, in this case the user interface design must be updated at the
level of accepted paradigm. What we have today? As was noted by Teal (2010,
p. 295), most students appear to undertake the process of design in a more or less
linear fashion. This practice is exempliﬁed in the oft heard phrase, ‘I would have
done “X” if I’d only had enough time …’, which is frequently employed to explain
why site development, detailing, materials—in short, things associated with a
‘ﬁnished’ building—are left unattended. Could be the linear design thinking so
problematic for learning?
Systems thinking is, according to Richmond (1994) ‘the art and science of
making reliable inferences about behavior by developing an increasingly deep
understanding of underlying structure’. The author ﬁnd many differences which
allow to say that system thinking is not similar with General Systems Theory, not it
is System analyses, Chaos Theory, Dissipative Structures, Operations Research,
Decision Analysis, or Systems’ Dynamics. Thus, systems thinking enable to
develop special thinking skills, characterised by the term ‘bi-focal’. People
embracing systems thinking ﬁlters can see both the forest and the tree in three ways:
system as cause thinking, closed-loop thinking and operational thinking. The most
important thing of this theory is that operational thinking viewed with the frame-
work of system dynamics.
24
2
A Paradigm Shifths and User Interface Design Models

There is a widespread though controversial belief about the fact that digital
textbooks design is shaped according to the humans’ thinking paradigms regarding
the artiﬁcial systems. Perhaps more importantly, the pre-eminence of the work
perpetuates the criteria, which asserts that world produced only a limited number of
thinking patterns—hence a competition for an affordable digital textbook user
interface design really exists. Does is it mean that design thinking models are most at
the philosophical or theoretical stakes, therefore, the instructional designers are not
able to use them? Or, maybe, the digital textbooks are only the youngest brothers of
the printed textbooks and, therefore, the user interface design is not an issue?
2.2
User Interfaces Issues in Digital Textbooks Use
and Development
Human thinking paradigm is a common way to understand user interfaces patterns
in digital textbooks use and development. Once we believe that competence is the
power of the adaptive living in the actual world, the user interface design should
allow developing digital skills, like digital reading, listening online or sharing
content. Does these ways are the best to replace printed textbooks with digital
versions? From the one hand, research has shown that students understand text less
whey they read on computers.
When reading on screens, for example, people seem to reﬂexively skim the surface of texts
in search of speciﬁc information, rather than dive in deeply in order to draw inferences,
construct complex arguments, or make connections to their own experiences. Research has
also found that students, when reading digitally, tend to discard familiar print-based
strategies for boosting comprehension (Montuori 2012).
Listening online is a good way to learn, for example, a foreign language. Instead
of the printed textbooks, digital textbooks may offer digital listening, reading and
vocabulary practice. Audio textbooks for music education may include audio
recording of famous artists as well as practical exercises. However, user interfaces
of digital textbooks could allow students to assessable own textbooks, including
own audio recordings or video. These are two different approaches: teacher cen-
tered and learner—centered. In is more than rationale to combine both approaches
within learning, but there are two ways: reproductive learning and productive
learning. Thus,
Reproductive Learning is an umbrella term for a form of education based on rote memo-
rization and reproduction of existing knowledge. It reproduces the content, process, social
structures, power relations, and individuals that conform to what are perceived to be societal
needs and norms, mostly derived from the need to train workers at various levels of expertise.
It is often the result if not the actual goal of educational approaches centered on assessment,
and where the acquisition of existing information and conceptual frameworks is central. The
learner and his/her values, experience, affect, and ultimately identity are not included in the
learning process. Creativity and, therefore, the original generation and application of
information and conceptual frameworks are not valued (Montuori 2012, p. 2838)
2.1
Introduction
25

Reproductive learning is about memorization. Therefore, both those who use
teacher-centered approached with different levels of achievement and those who do
not go beyond simple instructions like memorise this (in a teacher-centered learning
environment), are right. That is not to claim that students who are attain classrooms
only use simple instructions. They may memorise some things involuntary or
voluntary within computer-based assessment environment.
Productive learning is about solving problem with insight. Therefore,
Productive Learning is learning on the basis of productive activity in social “serious sit-
uations”, learning on the basis of experience, of being able to achieve something important,
both for oneself and one’s environment. Thus, young people feel themselves to be
important and valuable members of society and not simply reduced to the status of a school
pupil. Productive Learning begins with activity i.e. learning is itself a product gained by
experience of productive activity and young people acquire this with the assistance of
educationalists (INNEPS 2016, p. 1)
For decades, educational research indicates that learning is equal to memorisa-
tion. Education 3.0 changes this vision in favour of productive learning. Which
models: productive or reproductive learning, are required for an affordable user
interfaces of digital textbooks? Recently, the validity of the dichotomy between
reproductive and productive learning has been questioned by the results of both
qualitative and quantitative research, which demonstrated that successful learning
depends on problem that students have or on issue that is proposed to be solved as
well as what IQ is required or how many information and energy is required.
‘User interface design of digital textbook means display mode and pattern of
digital textbook’s content and multimedia resource. The user interface design will
not facilitate better easy operation if it does not meet users’ needs’ (Liu et al. 2014,
p. 130). But, recently research demonstrated that designers could think about digital
communication in qualitatively new way. For instance, following the idea of
Pandea Communications, billions of peoples around the world will be connected
online using a voice call. Therefore, soon everybody will be connected to Internet
via a future phone or Android device, even they don’t have a digital device. In sum,
there are ﬁve communications patterns in design of user interfaces: text (message),
picture (graphic), audio (voice), video (TV, multimedia), and touch (multi-touch).
The perception of affordance in user interface design for learning has been
questioned by a phenomenon, which is generally referred to the paradox of the
design thinking as a solution for innovation. This paradox introduces two stereo-
types: universal design for learning and personalised design for learning (Karsvall
2002). The universal design aims to improve and optimize teaching and learning for
all peoples based on representation (e.g. present information and content in dif-
ferent ways); engagement (e.g. stimulate interest and motivation for learning);
action and representation (e.g. differentiate the ways that students can express what
they know). This is a case of ﬂexible curriculum and setting up the aims, objectives
and methods, which work for everyone so that each student can progress.
The second stereotype introduces the term ‘personalised design’ and is princi-
pally based on the study how learning parts can be adapted to students’ progress.
However, in practice, it was developed some prototypes patterns, deﬁned by
26
2
A Paradigm Shifths and User Interface Design Models

Karsvall (2002, p. 1), as neutral, extrovert and introvert design. The neutral design
is equivalent to the original prototype: it display variations of saturated hues in
greens, blues, reds, black and white and users both rounded and squared shapes.
The extrovert prototype provides higher contrast between interactive elements and
even more saturated red, yellow and blue hues as well as darken inactive areas. The
introvert design was accordingly given lower contrasts and de-saturated colours in
white, green and blue. These two stereotypes are incompatible as taken together
they seem to suggest that only rote learning or active learning based on
psycho-physiological characteristics of students leads to academic success.
The concept of user interface design is central to behavioural, cognitivist and
constructivist approaches. Behavioural approach is more related on designing
programmed textbooks, but cognitivist—on designing multimedia and interactive
textbooks. Almost, the user interfaces designing multimedia interactive textbooks
for learning is Instructional Systems Design models. Usually these models describe
the principles either Merrill or Gagne theories, or provide an individual model, like
ADDIE, Dick and Carey, Morrison, Ross and Kemp and others. This is why the
requirements of how to generate data on screen are very different.
Moreover, required processing, analysing, synthesis and communication actions
by students, as well as planning and development of instructional objectives by
teachers on the base on provided information on screen presents a variety of
challenges for designers of the digital textbooks. There are one big issue: abstract
data. Thus, abstract data could be presented as metadata, structured information,
multimedia, audio or graphic representation, or/and knowledge for feedback. There
are multiple ways. One way is a user interface in which the immediate feedback
‘follows’ the content within tasks designed for individualised learning in order to
make the provided content more understandable. The other way is user interface in
which information presented on the screen serve only as metadata for personalised
learning. The third way is the user interface, which present strictly individualised
content, adapted to user’s progress.
Consider, for example, that user interface design models evolves according to
human thinking paradigms. Thus, Dick and Carey model was developed in 1990,
during the second phase of the digital revolution. The model describes the design
process in ten steps: identiﬁcation the instructional aim, analysing the instructional
aim, analysing the learner and the content, writing performance objectives, devel-
opment of assessment methods, development of instructional strategy, development
of instructional methods, design and development of formative assessment, control
of programme’ content and summative assessment.
The model of Morrison, Ross and Kemp was developed in 2004 (during the
intermediary period between second and third phase!). This model describes the
user interface design according to ADDIE scheme. Instead of the instructional aim,
it is proposed to identify the instructional problem through evaluation of needs,
analysing of aim, and evaluation of performance. The phase of analysing the
instructional aim is changing with analysing of students and required tasks (general
characteristics, competence, learning style, analysing of context). Moreover, writing
the performance objectives, according to previous model, were changes in favour of
2.2
User Interfaces Issues in Digital Textbooks Use and Development
27

instructional objectives and performance matrix. The stage ‘development of
instructional objectives’ in completed with the dimension, succession, frequences of
frames and instructional strategies. Assessment and control is completed with
testing of knowledge, abilities, behavior and attitude.
In sum, all ADDIE instructional design models neglect the differences between
the author vision of design’ elements and the reader’s perception. This subject has
been discussed all times particularly because of the concerns that it raises as teacher,
student and content, on one hand, are often wrongly used interchangeably. On other
hand, it is neglected the changing context for learning. Thus, in the concept of
education 3.0 students prefer to share knowledge instead of getting knowledge; to
access the on-line courses in order to explore new subjects instead of listening
lessons in classroom; ‘external control’ instead of formative/summative assessment.
Does above-mentioned features indicate at evolution of user interface design? In
the classic model of education, text and picture communicates clearly the infor-
mation to student through printed interfaces. Numerous design thinkers note that
user interfaces of the student’s textbook should differs from the user interface of
teacher’s textbook. Only teacher is able to establish connection between textbook
and students’ needs in learning.
An ideal visualisation should not only communicate clearly, but also stimulate
viewer’s engagement and gain attention to some elements (Viegas and Wattenberg
2011). What is threatening about emerging technologies are potential scenarios of
life, according to scientiﬁc transhumanism, taking over the world, and bringing
both humanism and trans-humanim approached into design of interfaces for the
un-existed world. This approach displays abstract instead of real knowledge and
without to develop any skills and attitudes.
In theory and practice, there are multiple ways how to design user interface
design for better engagement in learning. However, all this ways are suitable within
one speciﬁc period, and there are not only one unique way for all periods. That is
why, for instructional designers and publishers of the ﬁrst digital textbooks to
believe that learning is both reproductive and productive is ﬁne as long as they
don’t need to develop textbooks’ models beyond parameters of the digitised version
of traditional school textbooks for sustainable education. This is more than
learner-centered learning environments and relate on learning philosophy.
The postmodernism philosophy requires that learners will explore artifacts and
patterns from the real world and, therefore, that learner to be motivated enough to
think about own thinking and how to develop own abilities. On the other hand, the
rapid digitalisation of the educational systems requires that learner to become a
lifelong learner in order to be able to explore different cultures and diversity of
learning environments for the best decisions regarding the sustainable development.
Therefore, understanding the speciﬁc characteristic of the period in which user
interface will be used is the best way in design affordable textbooks.
Each paradigm of design has had its day. The paradigm of digital textbook
changed the understanding of learning forever in three steps: linear, systems and
metasystems. Thus, now learning can be understood well starting from the mindset
of the human paradigm. For example, the humanistic paradigm has been the
28
2
A Paradigm Shifths and User Interface Design Models

common belief for ages, but now Newtonian physics is at a loss when it needs to
explain the quantum energy of thinking. Moreover, learner is not only human, but
also a (meta)cognitive and affective system. Humans are “connected” through
(meta)patterns bridges with all objects and subjects of real and virtual world. In
brief, the user interface design of digital textbooks should be a real project aims to
develop a well-deﬁned learning mechanism.
2.3
Linear Thinking: Direct and Branching Styles
From the perspectives of changing paradigm of learning within digital revolution,
‘linear thinking’ is related to step-by-step progression when knowledge is assimi-
lated in small steps. The learner must follow the ‘path’ presented by the pro-
grammer, however the learner using a programmed text may deviate from the path
set down by the programmer by looking back in the program or looking ahead. One
of the ﬁrst example of linear thinking refers on user interface design of teaching
machines. As was noted by Eigen (1962, p. 453):
a teaching machine presents an ordered sequence of instruction to the learner one frame at a
time. After responding to a stimulus frame, the learner’s answer is immediately conﬁrmed
or corrected. The learner then proceed to the next frame; he is prevented from changing his
previous answer or going back in the program. In a horizontal programmed text, succeeding
frames appear on alternative pages. The learner write his answer to the frame either in the
program booklet or on a separate answer sheet. He then turns the page, and the correct
response is revealed along with the next stimulus frame. A horizontal text is read from the
front of the book to the back, across the page, at one level. After completing the top level,
the learner read across the text at the next lower level. This procedure is continued until the
either text has been read. <…> Vertical programmed text are read from the top of the page
to the bottom. The number of pages appeared on one page may vary from one to ten or
twelve. A mask or slider is used with this mode of presentation.
For over 50 years, linear design of digital textbooks has embarked on numerous
educational projects, but the obtained results are controversial. In brief, the linear
designers
prefer
to
understand
learning
as
a
stimulus-response
or
as
a
stimulus-response-reinforced associations, which allow developing a new behavior.
During learning it is involved the dependent and independent variables. Thus, the
dependent variable is a change in behavior that are observable and tangible. Instead,
the independent variable is the consequence of behavior.
Smith and Smith (1966) have wrote, that learning is more than the open loop
forming of new stimulus-response associations. Learning is a process of reorga-
nization of sensory activity within a closed loop, or pattern, which is a process of
reorganization of sensory feedback within a closed loop, or pattern, which increases
the learner’s level of control over his own behavior and the stimuli in his envi-
ronment. Therefore, for these authors the learning is space-organized rather than
time-organized activity, organised from simple to complex and it is dependent on
2.2
User Interfaces Issues in Digital Textbooks Use and Development
29

the behavioural objectives and on design principles of the learning situation,
especially the techniques and the instruments of education.
When learning is a space—organized activity, the school textbooks should
follow curricula based on instructional (or behavioural) objectives. The objectives
are realisable through individualized instruction with active practice and frequent
feedback to students. For these objectives, in school textbooks should be included a
simple-to-complex sequencing of content, criterion-referencing testing, self-pacing,
mastery learning and much more. However, the linear designed content of text-
books is the fashion for Skinner’s programmed textbooks.
Let us analyse deeper the linear thinking design of the programed textbook.
A programmed textbook is a special designed program in the form of a textbook,
which in addition to instructional material provides schemas of learning including
reading/listening and control of knowledge assimilation. The principles of pro-
gramed textbooks are clear learning objectives, small steps, logical sequence, active
responding, and immediate feedback, drill and practice and stimulus fading.
However, instead of the well-deﬁned principals of reinforced learning, the lessons
in computer classrooms were bored. What are the reasons?
Linear thinking is related to instructional design approach. The term ‘instruc-
tional design’ deﬁnes a technology for the development of learning experiences and
environment, which promote the acquisition of speciﬁc knowledge and skills by
students. On the other hand, the term ‘instructional design’ deﬁnes the process of
planning instruction, delivering instruction and assessing student in the classroom
and a form of complex problem solving (Handani et al. 2011, pp. 1–2). However,
this approach is described by a behavior-oriented model which insists that students
have ﬁxed abilities be learned.
There are two possible ways: direct style and branching style. Philosophically,
according to Skinner’s theory, the people learn better through direct observation
using own senses and learning is based on tangible, observable and repeatable
factors. The learning outcomes can be observed and recorded. After the instruction
period (e.g. a semester), the learner should demonstrates a new behavior. How to do
this with so various unconnected concepts proposed through curriculum, and var-
ious textbooks’ design for one level students? The fact that students cannot
learn science only in a computer class is an issue, which can be solved by
re-conceptualisation of curricula, as well as of the setup of the textbook design.
From other point of view, linear thinking is a way of linear programing and,
therefore, correlates with the ﬁrst phase of the digital revolution. This phase relates
both on visual thinking, e.g. idea-sketching, seeing, and imagining and audiovisual
thinking (Schlesinger and Waelde 2011; Tchulkina and Garbar 2016; Flynn 2016).
On other hand, linear thinking is associated with classical instructional design
models with teacher-centered learning environment, even it was started the research
in mathetics.
In the context of these ideas, the main concepts methodology within user
interface design have shown to be lacking. Researchers and practitioners, working
in interdisciplinary area of pedagogy, rethink digital textbook design on an
expanded basic in line with sustainable education (Hjorth and Bagheri 2006;
30
2
A Paradigm Shifths and User Interface Design Models

Bosch and Nguyen 2016; Ha et al. 2016). Thus, as was noted by Ha et al.
(2016, p. 1), development efforts through the traditional approach of linear thinking
with tends to solve immediate (visible) problems in isolation without an under-
standing of the local contexts and participation of direct beneﬁciaries and related
stakeholders that have posed many ﬂaws, leading to failures and counterproductive
outcomes.
The methodology of learning is simple: students read the content on screen and
answer questions. However, the content should be read from beginning to end and
all students should follows the same objectives. It is expected that all students are
‘linear thinkers’, i.e. have the capacity to proceed information in a sequential
manner. The didactic process is predicable by instructional objectives, small frames
on screen, questions, answers and guidelines. This model is not the best for the
actual students who understand media in other way, no as a text or image in book or
textbook but as the bound screens up with in complex ways and patterns.
In linear design the content “takes” the learner in a positive progress, which
starts only with positive feedback, and then works through problem solving,
understanding the concepts and reinforcement the results. This means that the event
A (cause) leads to event B (effect), which leads to C, then leads to D etc., and when
each step is guided by well-deﬁned objectives. On a user interface can be seen the
Stimulus 1 (S1) that offer all conditions for Stimulus 2 (S2) etc.
Various learning scenarios prove the efﬁciency of linear thinking. The ﬁrst
beneﬁts are memory improvement and second language acquisition. However,
these beneﬁts cannot be archived through simple mechanisation of education. The
“mechanization of education”, as was observed by Skinner (1965), leads only to
development of the computer-based teaching machine and of the mechanical
teachers. But, “to automate education with mechanical teachers is like automating
banking with mechanical tellers and bookkeepers” (p. 5).
Furthermore, Skinner (1965) observed that students might learn without teach-
ing, but also, that only a teacher arranges conditions under which students learn
more rapidly and effectively. The teacher begins with whatever behavior the student
brings to the instructional situation; by selective reinforcement, he changes that
behavior so that a given terminal performance is more and more closely approxi-
mated. The experimental analysis of behavior has more to contribute to a tech-
nology of education. This model describes instrumental conditioning. It was
expected that the students’ behavior can conveniently be mediated by mechanical
devices when machines present material and differentially reinforce his responses.
Any practical application of knowledge about learning theory is, of course,
pedagogy. However, according to linear thinking approach the pedagogy describes
only a technique of processing a stimulus S and getting answer R within the
provided content. Therefore, learning is distancing from the real performance of the
learner. That is why; the linear thinking in design of digital textbook was changed
through time by multiple ideas:
– to ﬁnd better teachers;
– to set up model schools, staffed by model teachers;
2.3
Linear Thinking: Direct and Branching Styles
31

– to simplify what is to be learned; to reorganize what is to be learned;
– to improve presentation techniques;
– to establish multiply contacts between teacher and students;
– to expand the educational system from local system to global network of school
– to raise educational standards.
It is the time to re-think user interface design of digital textbooks. The task of the
teacher is to improve the students’ skills. Nevertheless, whose of the thinking
models is attributed this task? Skinner (1965, p. 15) wrote that mostly programmed
instruction has been called “Socratic”, because of small steps and leading through
an argument with verbal prompts. The second way is Comenius who advocated
breaking material into a large number of small steps, arranged in a plausible genetic
order. However, these are not enough because the student should not proceed until
will fully motivated to learn at a given stage.
Advocates of linear thinking (e.g. Benjamin 1988, p. 708) prove that student’s
success could be maximized and that errors could be kept to a near zero level. To
ensure this kind of learning, the material had to be organized in a coherent fashion,
building a response repertoire, step by tiny step. One of the example on digital
screen is programmed English, presented by Joyce et al. (2000, p. 333).
1. Words are divided into classes. We
call the largest class nouns. Nouns are
a class of ________________________. words
2. In English the class of words called
nouns is larger than all the other
__________________ of words combined classes
The problem is that until recently the most people had learn in a linear fashion,
and, therefore, follows yet the linear patterns for own living. A linear pattern
learning is said to exist when the initial and ﬁnal points examined form a straight
line. Thus, for them the learning starts with positive results from primary school and
proceeds straight across to the high school to University. During teaching, the
teacher fellows the curricula, starting from beginning and moving in a straight line
to the end. He/she uses the textbook and presentation on screen. Screen is used for
reading core ideas of content, writing in a logical manner, from simple to complex.
In a linear fashion, a didaktik problem is easy to be solved. All of the didaktik
‘things’, like the context for learning, content, environment, and instructional
objectives are together. Nevertheless, this is not a holistic approach of learning, but
only a linear thinking about how to design learning. People understand dimensions,
consistence and hierarchy of instructional frames differently. In fact, linear thinking
designers believe that they know how to solve problems of today learning, but in
reality do not know how to design user interface design. There are many reasons.
32
2
A Paradigm Shifths and User Interface Design Models

Some students have good memory, and some not. Some students are be able to
‘mentally divide’ problems in frames, and some not. Other students need to write all
frames on a digital screen in a copybook to understand the order of solving the
provided tasks. They may need a tool able ‘to translate’ information into his/her
mode of perception. Explaining problem solving on digital screen in a linear fashion
does not help with this issue.
Branching programing or branching style of the linear thinking is a technique of
learning with computer. On screen, each frame presents more text than the average
linear frame. After reading, the user responds to a question, usually in a
multiple-option format and may receive corrective feedback in order to remediate
the learner’s misconceptions or gaps in understanding. There are multiple
approaches of branching programing. One of them is simple branching or intrinsic
programing. The intrinsic program ‘build’ the necessary alternatives into the pro-
gram itself. Gilman (1972, p. 65) with reference to Crowder (1963), summarise the
process of intrinsic programing as follows:
The student is given a sort description of the material to be learned, following by a
multiply- choice question designed to test the point just discussed. The basic intrinsic
programing technique, then, amounts to nothing more than the inclusion of multiply-choice
questions in relatively conventional expository test and the use of these questions to
continually check the students’ progress through the material and to ﬁnish speciﬁc remedial
material as it is required.
Unlike Skinner, Crowder’s user interfaces includes the frame for communication
between user and author through immediate feedback. The linear sequence includes
frames with more text for reading and require response to an adjunct question,
provided usually is a multiple-option format. The feedback corrective. Thus, if the
student makes a correct response, the program asserts the reasons why the response
is correct and moves on to new material. However, if the response is incorrect, the
program inform the user that an error was made and then branches the user back to
the previous frame for another attempt. One version of Crowder’s schema is pre-
sented in Fig. 2.1.
Differences between Skinner’s and Crowder’s approach of linear thinking are in
Table 2.1.
The model of full branching is adaptive programming. Gilman (1972, p. 65) with
reference to Crowder (1963) note that adaptive programing is extrinsic, because
some external device assists in the control of the program. These programs permit
analyse of a student response and the arrangement of the future learning contingent
Fig. 2.1 Crowder’s schema
to design the branching
program
2.3
Linear Thinking: Direct and Branching Styles
33

in the light of students’ characteristics and student’s response. In our day, when
personal computers and Internet have reshaped media, the educational technology
is changing also. There are multiple examples of adaptive textbooks with person-
alised content, whiteboards and projection screens. One of this way is using of the
logical—structural schemas, as it is presented in Fig. 2.2.
Indeed, the technology promises to offer a new way for learning, but until now
didn’t solve the problem how to engage all students in adaptive learning. As was
written in New Scientist (2014), adaptive learning is struggling to provide under-
standing of subjects for middle students, while faster learners can surge ahead
without getting the bored learning at computer.
Develop the design principles for interactive content. In their opinion, the psy-
chological principles involves the nature of memory and mental structures, the
nature of conscious and unconscious attention, response time and time to learn, the
nature of errors, learning and problem solving strategies, the role of language in
cognition, encoding processes and gulfs of understanding. However, the graphic
design
principles
focus
on
issues
of
composition:
layout,
weight,
color,
positive/negative space and balance; color: color combinations, colored type and
the psychology of color; type: typeface, type styles, legibility and the psychology of
type; and graphics: graphic elements, color, placement, and integration into an
overall design.
Table 2.1 Skinner’s instead of Crowder’s approach of linear thinking
Skinner
Crowder
Content
Small frames
Large frames
Feedback
Positive/negative learning
Corrective learning
Level of abilities
Lower-ability user
Higher-ability user
Graphical representation of structures
The name of structures
simple structure
simple structure with output
complex structure
complex structure with 
outcomes
1
2
3
y
X2
X1
X3
4
1
2
n
y
X2
X1
X3
1
2
3
x
y
n
1
2
n
x
y
Fig. 2.2 The graphical representation of logical—structural scgemas
34
2
A Paradigm Shifths and User Interface Design Models

2.4
Systems Thinking and Systems Dynamics
Since 1970 schools began acquiring computers and use them for instruction, drill
and practice, record keeping and other things. Since 1900 textbooks have migrated
to digital and tablets. However, in both cases educational software programs were
developed on the base on linear and systems thinking. According to systems
thinking approach, the learning, on the bases of instructional system design, fol-
lows a well-established algorithmic model. The core model is ADDIE (where
A-analyses,
D-design,
D-development,
I-Implementation,
and
E-evaluation).
Therefore, instructional design model based on systems thinking helps designers to
make sense of abstract learning theory and enable real applications for instruction
and assessment.
Until now, it was developed many instructional systems, including educational
software, eBook/iBook, digital textbooks and others. Instead these systems embody
the instructional objectives and are developed on the base on ADDIE model, theirs
effectiveness for learning is not proved with the empirical research. Moreover, the
holistic approach in the systems thinking means to derive understanding of parts
from the behavior and proprieties of wholes rather that derive the behavior and
proprieties of wholes from those of their parts. When holistic approach is integrated
within the ADDIE model, the results are not better. What are the reasons?
First, in rapidly changing paradigms. Second, in the development of new con-
cepts related on systems theory, like feedback, system, learning process, learning
objects etc. Thus, the design patterns of the multimedia/interactive/adaptive text-
books come from the systems theory. However, with the extensive application of
artiﬁcial intelligence and cognitive theory it was developed new tools, like cognitive
tutor. But, those seeking to understand the meaning and the importance of the
cognitive tutor for learning in a diversity of environments, ﬁrst is confused by a
diverse
of
the
terminological
terms
associated
with
other
terms,
e.g.
computer-assisted instruction, computer based education, computer based instruc-
tion, computer-enriched instruction, computer managed instruction, organisational
learning and others.
In the actual textbook theory, ‘systems thinking’ is connected with thinking in
complexity, in which the systems’ parts have interrelated and worked over time
within the dynamic and ﬂexible context. In brief, all elements are working together
to enhance the instructional/learning/assessment processes as well as all students in
the learning process. All processes are managed at the level of metasystems. In a
certain sense, it can be said that systems thinking is as old as educational philos-
ophy if this is an equivalent to controllable activities and rational actions. In all
other cases, when the student learns to grow (as a child, as a specialist, as a
professional etc.).
Systems thinking has used in education and, therefore, in user interface design of
school textbook before the concept of system was described in the General System
Theory (Von Bertalanffy 1972a, b) and it was formalised the notions of feedback
(Wiener 1948). For example, the Orbis textbook, originally published by Comenius
2.4
Systems Thinking and Systems Dynamics
35

in 1648, includes table of context and content according to a program, including
150 pictures. Such textbook attempts youngs in learning more effectively than
grammatical handbooks. Indeed, the pictorial mode within the system thinking
‘holds’ together table of contents and content. This is the simplest and the most
effective model of systems thinking, used until today.
Nevertheless, systems can be closed or/and open. The closed system is an iso-
lated system, not interacting with an environment. The equivalent of the closed
system for education is the pedagogical system. Each of the pedagogical systems is
an artiﬁcial designed system, which provide the abstracted content for learning not
related with an environment issues, e.g. sustainable development. Frick (1991)
observes that telecommunication technologies make the educational system much
more open and ﬂexible and estimates that a variety of “virtual teachers” and edu-
cational resources can be used every time and everywhere. Thus, the actual edu-
cational system archives new features, which are more or less focused on openness.
But, according to theory an open system changes its behavior in response to
conditions outside its boundaries. Therefore, in on open educational system,
learning occurs in more complex and changeable learning environments than in all
artiﬁcially designed pedagogical closed systems. One attempt to understand the
complexity of learning, and therefore, the design of real learning environment is the
Bronfenbrenner’s Ecological System Theory (Bronfenbrenner 1994, p. 38), based
on two postulates:
–
human development takes places through processes of progressively more complex
reciprocal interaction between an active, evolving biopsychological human organism
and the persons, objects, and symbols in its immediate environment;
–
the form, power, content and direction of the proximal processes effecting development
vary systematically as a join function of the characteristic of the developing person; of
the environment – both immediate and more remote in which the processes are taking
places, and the nature of the development outcomes under consideration.
The other attempt is to use the concept of systems dynamics (Angerhofer and
Angelide 2016) to solve real problems through understanding the nonlinear
behavior of complex systems over time using stocks, ﬂows, internal feedback loops,
and time delays. However, in reality systems thinkers are more comfortable when
can integrate new and old knowledge in a systematic way. They are impatient with
step-by-step instructions, but prefer to divide learning blocks into ‘bigger steps’, to
follows instructional objectives and, for understanding, to add formative assessment
during each steps (Sadler 1989). At the ﬁnal stage, they prefer summative assess-
ment or testing. In many cases, systems thinkers require linear thinking method-
ologies for problem-solving, especially algorithms.
In user interface design of digital textbook the system(s) approach is valued
through Instructional System Design or System Design, deﬁning the process of
designing and developing efﬁcient instructional courses or instructional materials to
acquiring knowledge or skills. Instructional designers, trained to use a systematic
approach to designing new instructional systems or to improving already existing
systems, use Instructional System Design approach. Therefore, there are many
instructional systems models.
36
2
A Paradigm Shifths and User Interface Design Models

According to Dick et al. (2001, p. 18), the basic components of systematically
designed instruction are learning activities packages and modules. Thus,
A module is usually a self-instructional printed unit of instruction that has an integrated
theme, provides students with information needed to acquire and assess speciﬁed knowl-
edge and skills, and serves as one component of a total curriculum.<…>. Systematically
designed instruction require learner to interact with the instructional material rather than
simply allowing them to read the material passively. The learners are asked to perform
various types of learning tasks and receive feedback on that performance. Some type of
testing strategy informs the learners whether they achieved mastery of the content and what
they should do, if not.
The most important elements are language, layout, and design of content. The
size, color, and placement of each element ‘work together’, forming a holistic
whole for perception. Instead of printed content, the digital content may include
variables, like text, audio, and video messages. ‘System variables such as inter-
activity and clear audio and video transmission positively inﬂuenced perceived
learning and satisfaction’ (Hackman and Walker 1990). For this record, the user
interfaces of digital textbooks should be appropriate to those design styles and user
interfaces that students prefer. A consistent content with a clear hierarchy enables
students to focus on the most important things. Therefore, the good interfaces of
digital textbook speak to the student; even his/her actions are right, wrong or
misunderstood.
Moreover, visual, audio cues or simple messaging informs show the user
whether his or her actions have led to the expected results. In case of the mistakes,
the instructional system informs the student by showing what was wrong and how
the prevent the error from occurring again. It is important to reward students within
teaching situations with positive feedback or, at least, writing in a positive way. All
user interfaces require copywriting. The information is provided in conversational
form with clear and concise labels for actions. User interfaces require some level of
copywriting. Keep things conversational, not sensational. Provide clear and concise
labels for actions and keep your messaging simple. Your users will appreciate it,
because they won’t hear you—they will hear themselves and/or their peers.
While “linear thinking forces use to see one thing at a time, and to progress to
whatever is next, which will in turn lead to more” (Risku and Harding 2013),
systems thinking for centuries was overlooked. As was noted by Lazanski (2010)
systems thinking emphases looking at wholes rather than parts, and addresses the
role of interconnections. It is a circular and focused on closed interdependences. It
has precise set of rules that reduced the ambiguities and miscommunications that
can crop up when we talk with others about complex issues. It offers causal loop
diagrams, which are rich in implications and insight. The modern systems thinking
principles are:
– the big picture.
– long term, short term perspectives.
2.4
Systems Thinking and Systems Dynamics
37

– measurable and no measurable data.
– dynamic, complex and interdependent.
– we are a part of system.
In the opinion of Lazanski (2010, pp. 293–295), the systems thinking offer an
entirely different ways of communications and of working together more productive
on understanding and solving complex problem. Regarding the methodology of
systems thinking, the system thinking is usually investigated by questionnaires,
video analysis, or interviews and concept-mapping technique. The answer could be
yes/true, a number, a word or a sentence. As result, through the user interface
design the system will communicate the answer to student or will engage student in
a pedagogical dialogue. For example, on display is provided a statement 2 + 2 = □
and the learner will write Is this an example of linear or systems thinking? Could
these examples be used for problem-solving skills? Each of the systems works
step-by-steps. This means that in case of problem solving the issue can be broken in
small steps and the student needs to pass one step in order to perform the next step.
For example, if the student passes step I the current value of his/her input for
next step will be Xi and the internal cognitive state will be Si which could be
transformed into the output value Yi+1 with state Si+1 and so on, according to the
corresponding functions. Is this possible using knowledge management systems, for
example Moodle or ATutor? If yes, what is Data Visualization Criteria and how the
user interfaces need to be designed?
Is this useful to apply systems theory in user interface design of digital textbook?
In time when modelling aims to obtain the core structure of competence during
learning with/without digital textbooks the design and development of the students’
cognitive and behavioural actions are the main issue of systems thinking. The
proposed assumption is that correct or incorrect answers need to be proved by
feedback from real environments.
2.5
Metasystems Thinking
The postmodernism theory emphases the impact of metacognition on learning. Let
us analyse principles of user interface design starting from the postmodernism
philosophy. According to the deﬁnition, the postmodernism philosophy is associ-
ated with the deconstruction and post-structuralism. In our point of view,
metacognition may be modelled on the base on MetaSystems Learning Design.
Learning is valid when metacognitive strategies are used effectively. Therefore,
discrete parameter stochastic processes, changes in probability of occurrence of a
response in a small time is more about requirements for effective learning and not
about the effective learning processes through digital textbooks.
That is the big difference between our artiﬁcially developed skills to project
linearly and real world. It’s what’s really causing disruptive behaviour of the best
students because they hardly learn how to solve artiﬁcial designed tasks in a linear
38
2
A Paradigm Shifths and User Interface Design Models

way, but the world’s tasks are more complex and the knowledge is changing
exponentially. So a best student that was trained in a linear way doesn’t see the
exponential digital technology coming out of right ﬁeld and can put them out of
business. Meanwhile, the student who weren’t so good in formal schooling may
found a company going from zero to billions that are growing in exponential
curves.
The modern digital textbook design is assumed to be the coherent product of an
author and users of content. The MetaSystems thinking approach involve design
and development of the cognitive, affective and psychomotor frameworks. This
means that author of the digital textbooks need to think not only about the content,
but also about the interfaces, learning styles, how the users will access graphics,
assessment tasks etc. Moreover, it is important to estimate the consistencies of
screen design, changing colours, font sizes, etc. on different digital devices, as well
as to estimate the learning outcomes.
The user interface design needs to be more than an instructional or assessment
design.
According to Klir (1990, p. 325), meta X are used as the name of things or
systems, which are more than X in sense than it is more organised, have higher
logical type of organisation and it is analysed in more general case. Our hypothesis
is:
if a digital content contains hypertext or multimodal text, it can be
personalised. However, this content should be integrated in a feedback
loop with immediate and delayed feedback and will contain a concept
mapping tool that will assure a powerful learning environment.
Metasystems approach to learning design relies on post-modernism philosophy
of learning, architecture of integrative structure of competence, user interface
design principles and learner-centered learning environments. Moreover, concep-
tual modelling is based on the following principles:
– principle of self-regulation (the automatic regulation of learning processes
through activation of metacognition using didactical and psychological meth-
ods, cybernetics techniques and management systems);
– principle of personalisation (the individualization of learning objects through
increased formation of the individual as a self and as a member of global
learning community);
– principles of feedback diversity (electronic educational context needs to be
evaluated through immediate and delayed feedback);
– principle of clarity (the formation of structural skeleton content with powerful
interconnected concepts);
– principle of dynamism and ﬂexibility (the learner’ active inclusion in elaboration
of the content in order to provide the competence development skills)
– principle of ergonomics (computer based learning and computer based assess-
ment is guided by ergonomic interfaces and ergonomic places of work).
2.5
Metasystems Thinking
39

Analysing the metasystems approach to learning design as educational outcomes
of learning, we realised that the evolution of informational technologies conduct to
metasystems thinking as an output in learning with electronic textbook. This result
is achieved when user interface design criteria provide the evidence of the inter-
dependences
between information/communication, cognitive
and assessment
processes.
If so, the students should know not only cognitive strategies to complete a
variety of academic tasks, but also to effectively apply the metacognitive strategies.
The metacognitively sophisticated learners invoke both metacognitive strategies
(designed to monitor cognitive progress) and cognitive strategies (designed to make
cognitive progress). The problem is that some strategies have reliable behavioural
indicators, and others do not. However, both readily observed and not readily
observed are worthy objects of scientiﬁc investigation.
In plus, development of the cognitive and metacognitive strategies requires
attentional resources, can be examined, reported and modiﬁed by an external
‘technological system’, and is needed for ﬂexible use. According to Carner (1988,
p. 64) the knowing when to use a strategy is as important as knowing how to use it.
Therefore, the metacognitively sophisticated learners know whether or not the
criterion the criterion task to be completed warrants the costly expenditure of time
and effort involved in strategic processing. The values of metacognitive strategies
are: creative thinking, critical thinking, design thinking (ecological/sustainable/
regenerative design), ﬂexible thinking, futures thinking/anticipatory thinking,
ﬂexible thinking, lateral thinking, reﬂective thinking, and strategic thinking.
References
Angerhofer, B. J., & Angelides, M. C. (2000). System dynamics modelling in supply chain
management: research review. In Proceedings of Simulation Conference, 2000, Winter (Vol.
1, pp. 342–351). IEEE.
B. F. Skinner’s Theory. http://www.theoryfundamentals.com/skinner.htm
Benjamin, L. T. (1988). A history of teaching machines. American Psychologist, 43(9), 703–712.
Bosch, O., & Nguyen, N. (2016). Capacity Building and Think2Impact. In Proceedings of the 59th
Annual Meeting of the ISSS-2015 Berlin, Germany (Vol. 1, No. 1).
Bronfenbrenner, U. (1994). Ecological Models of Human Development. http://www.psy.cmu.edu/
*siegler/35bronfebrenner94.pdf
Crowder, N. A. (1963). On the differences between linear and intrinsic programing. The Phi Delta
Kappan, 44(6), 250–254.
Dick, W., Carey, L., & Carey, J. O. (2001). The systematic design of instruction. New York:
Longman.
Eigen, L. D. (1962). A comparison of three modes of presenting a programmed instruction
sequence. The Journal of Educational Research, 55(9), 453–460.
Flynn, N. (2016). Performativity and Metaphor in New Materialist Media theory. networking
knowledge. Journal of the MeCCSA Postgraduate Network, 9(1).
Frick, T. W. (1991). Restructuring Education through Technology. Phi Delta Kappa Educational
Foundation. Bloomington: Indiana. https://www.indiana.edu/*tedfrick/fastback/fastback326.
html/. Accessed 05.04.16
40
2
A Paradigm Shifths and User Interface Design Models

Gilman, D. A. (1972). The origins and development of intrinsic and adaptive programing.
Educational Technology Research and Development, 20(1), 64–76.
Ha, T. M., Bosch, O. J., & Nguyen, N. C. (2016). Practical Value of the systems-based
evolutionary learning laboratory in solving complex community problems in Vietnam. In
Proceedings of the 59th Annual Meeting of the ISSS-2015 Berlin, Germany (Vol. 1, No. 1).
Hackman, M. Z., & Walker, K. B. (1990). Instructional communication in the televised classroom:
The effects of system design and teacher immediacy on student learning and satisfaction.
Communication Education, 39(3), 196–206.
Hairston, M. (1982). The winds of change: Thomas Kuhn and the revolution in the teaching of
writing. College composition and communication, 33(1): 76–88. http://www.reiffad.com/genre/
Hairston.pdf
Handani, M., Charbaghi, A., & Sharifuddin, R. S. (2011). Instructional design approaches, types
and trends. A foundation for postmodernism instructional design. Australian Journal of Basic
and Applied Sciences, 5(8), 1–7.
Hjorth, P., & Bagheri, A. (2006). Navigating towards sustainable development: A system
dynamics approach. Futures, 38(1), 74–92.
INNEPS.
(2016). Productive
learning. What
is it? http://www.ineps.org/pdf/Productive%
20Learning.pdf
Joyce, B., Weil, M., & Calhoun, E. (2000). Models of teaching, 6th edn. Allyn & Bacon.
Karsvall, A. (2002). Personality preferences in graphical interface design. In Proceedings of the
second Nordic conference on Human-computer interaction (pp. 217–218). ACM.
Klir, G. (1990). Architecture of systems problem solving. New York and Longon: Plenum Press.
(In Russian).
Lazanski, T. J. (2010). Systems thinking: ancient Maya’s evolution of consciousness and
contemporary systems thinking. AIP Conference Proceedings, 1303(1), 289–296.
Liu, Y., Wu, M., & Sun, Z. (2014). Extending the TAM model to explore the factors that affect
intention to use digital textbooks in primary teachers’ views. Intelligent Environments.
Workshop Proceeding of 10th International Conference on Intelligent Environments, 127–136.
Merrill. D. First Principles of Instruction. http://mdavidmerrill.com/Papers/ﬁrstprinciplesbymerrill.
pdf
Montuori, A. (2012). Reproductive learning. In Encyclopedia of the Sciences of Learning
(pp. 2838–2840). Springer, US.
New scientist (2014). Digital textbooks adapt to your level as you learn. https://www.newscientist.
com/article/mg22329832-600-digital-textbooks-adapt-to-your-level-as-you-learn/
Richmon, B. (1994) System Dynamics/Systems Thinking: Let’s Just Get On With It, International
Systems Dynamics Conference, Sterling, Scotland http://www.iseesystems.com/resources/
Articles/SDSTletsjustgetonwithit.pdf
Risku, M., Harding, L. (2013). A uniﬁed theory. In: M. Risku & L. Harding (Eds.), Education for
tomorrow: A Biocen A Biocentric, student-focused model for reconstructing education
(pp. 113–134). SensePublishers.
Sadler, D. R. (1989). Formative assessment and the design of instructional systems. Instructional
science,
18(2),
119–144,
http://pdf.truni.sk/e-ucebnice/iktv/data/media/iktvv/Symposium_
LTML_Royce%20Sadler_BFormative_Assessment_and_the_design_of_instructional_
systems.pdf
Schlesinger, P., & Waelde, C. (2011). Performers on the edge [video]. Audiovisual thinking, 2011
(3).
Skinner, B. F. (1965). Reﬂection on a decade of teaching machines. Perspectives and Technology.
Teaching machine and programed learning. In Glaser, R (Ed.), ERIC: National Education
Association, Washington, D.C.
Smith, K. U., & Smith, M. F. (1966). Cybernetic principles of learning and educational design.
Holt, Rinehart and Winston.
Tchulkina, N. L., & Garbar, O. V. (2016). Secondary Linguocultural Consciousness in the
“Instaworld”: Modern Teenager’s World Outlook Forming by Means of the “Picture Creative
Thinking” Technology. Mediterranean Journal of Social Sciences, 7(1), 449–459.
References
41

Teal, R. (2010). Developing a (non-linear) practice of design thinking. International Journal of Art
& Design Education., 29(3), 294–302.
Universal Design of Learning. http://www.cast.org/our-work/about-udl.html#.V2ZSnqKPVKA
Viegas, F., Wattenberg, M. (2011), How To Make Data Look Sexy. http://articles.cnn.com/2011-
04-19/opinion/sexy.data_1_visualization-21st-century-engagement?_s=PM:OPINION
Visser, W. (2006). The cognitive artifacts of designing. Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Von Bertalanffy, L. (1972a). The history and status of general systems theory. Academy of
Management Journal, 15(4), 407–426.
Von Bertalanffy, L. (1972b). The meaning of general system theory. General system theory:
Foundations, development, applications, 30–53.
Wiener, N. (1948). Cybernetics: Or control and communication in the animal and the machine.
Paris, Cambridge & Massachusetts: Hermann & Cie, MIT Press.
42
2
A Paradigm Shifths and User Interface Design Models

Chapter 3
Digital Screens and Issues
of Multiliteracies’ Learning
I cannot teach anybody anything,
I can only make them think.
Socrates
Abstract Digital screen is the main pattern of the digital revolution. Around the
world schools and universities, changes printed pages in favour of digital screens,
creating innovative platforms for learning and assessment methodologies, however
many others keep the traditional approaches of teaching and printed textbooks. The
new paradigm of learning is focused on development the vital competence for
sustainability. Although educational system has been opened by the globalisation,
the diversity of digital screens is a big challenge for this process. How digital affects
the opening process of the educational system and, therefore, changes the beha-
viour? This scientiﬁc question inspired the ideas presented in this chapter. The aim
of this chapter is to compare the features of digital screen with the intention of
multiliteracies’ learning.
Keywords Digital screen  Digital natives  Behaviour  Multiliteracies
3.1
Introduction
Openness, nano-learning and networking of the pedagogical systems form the
conceptual framework of the modern education. Books, textbooks, television, radio
and classrooms are ‘converging’ into new patterns for learning. The foregoing
scenario is only for a short period because of rapidly changing paradigms. The
question it raises it ‘Will the actual students of law, medicine and economics in ten
years’ time be equipped to enhance the contribution of the profession in the cir-
cumstances described above?’. To make a judgement of this, it is necessary to
© Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2017
E.A. Railean, User Interface Design of Digital Textbooks,
Lecture Notes in Educational Technology, DOI 10.1007/978-981-10-2456-6_3
43

consider not only technological, but also the philosophical, psychological, peda-
gogical and other paradigms that command the complex process.
Digital screens has used to display and shared data for the most effective dis-
semination of information. In reality, we see many students using digital for gaming
or social media. They don’t want to read or to learn something new. If it is expected
that digital textbooks is a tool enabling to engage students for active participation in
the learning process, we should understand that students should be motivated
enough for this.
According to ﬁnding of MacArthur Foundation project, the way in which young
people learn, play, socialize, and participated in civic life is changing considerable.
However, there are direct and indirect impacts on learning. On one hand, using
digital media allows freedom and authonomy or youth that is less apparent in a
classroom setting (e.g. direct impact). On the other hand, digital communication
have altered: picking up the basic and technological skills in curriculum and/or
extra-curriculum activities; increasing various kinds of social connotations within
friendship-driven and interest-driven online participation; and learning from peers
and not from teachers and adults, which framed negatively development of
behavior.
Youths’ participation in networked world suggests new ways of thinking about
user interface design (e.g. indirect impact). Furthermore, digital screens can be an
ideal place for collaborative assessment, as a context for learning. The problem is
that printed textbooks cannot be used within social media and education 3.0
paradigm. The paradigm changes the way in theory and practice of design thinking
and, therefore, should propose a new learning theory.
Education 3.0 is a connectionist and heutagogical approach of user-generated
content. Digital content of the textbooks are displayed as: (a) text—scrolling text—
interactive text—adaptive text etc.; (b) images—scrolling images—interactive
images—adaptive images; (c) videos—interactive videos—adaptive streaming—
3D ﬁlm; or a (d) multimodal text, which combines two or more semiotic systems,
like linguistic, visual, audio, gestural and spatial. Moreover, instead of printed text
that allow only one communication, digital textbooks allow two-way communi-
cation (e.g. hypertext) or three-way communication (e.g. hermeneutic dialogue)
with the users In all cases the content of the digital textbooks should be responsive.
The term ‘literacy’ deﬁnes the ability to read, to write and to use arithmetic
(Barton 2007). More recently this term appears to be a synonym of tangible skills
for writing, reading, oral communication and calculus. Cope and Kalantzis (2000,
p. 9) consider that literacy pedagogy is restricted to formalised, monolingual,
monocultural and rule governed forms of language and that it is important to have a
broaden understanding of this term, taking into account not only the content, but
also the context for learning. Thus, pedagogy must account for the burgeoning
variety of text forms associated with information and multimedia technologies.
44
3
Digital Screens and Issues of Multiliteracies’ Learning

3.2
Multiliteracies and Online Textbooks, Systems,
Platforms, Screens, Channels, and Apps
The term ‘multiliteracies’ is used to focus pedagogy on ﬁnding adequate solutions
for the problems of linguistic diversity, and multimodal forms of linguistic
expression and representation. However, although academic institutions are
developed the technological infrastructure and support this investment, in fact, these
investments are not related only on multiliteracies. The most of the students are
using special languages, both for reading and writing, ‘developed’ in virtual
environment. These languages are more attractive for them; although in schools are
thousands of lessons every year. What is the reason?
There are many reasons, but one of the most important is that education is more
focused on direct or systemic consequences of instruction and assessment that on
identiﬁcation the issues and developing the adequate solutions. The grammar is no
longer needed for students and the cognitive ﬁlters are blocked all information
regarding the rules? Or, maybe the strategy or methods used by teachers is so old,
that students are trying to ﬁnd other, more innovative way for learning like
self-regulated learning, as was observed by De Corte (2016). Maybe, from this
reason they are looking for some other textbooks, those content is more compact,
have a higher level of organization and is presented in a more logical way.
On the other hand, technology has proposed various knowledge management
systems, platforms, screens, apps and other innovations that are more attractive than
the bored lessons in schools and universities. However, if the knowledge man-
agement systems are mainly used by teachers to disseminate the content in a virtual
environment. Both teacher and students use all others because it is more available,
visually attractive, and in some cases, it is easier. In plus, same teachers use plat-
forms to develop own textbooks, e.g. Khan Academy, Ridero etc.
Developing own textbooks on the base on available on-line platforms is a global
phenomenon. As was noted by Blaschke (2012), education proposed a special form
of self-determined learning ‘heutagogy’, with practices and principles rooted in
andragogy, learners are highly autonomous and self-determined and emphasis is
placed on development of learner capacity and capability with the goal of producing
learners who are well-prepared for the complexities of today’s workplace. A key
concept is heutagogy is of double loop learning and self-reﬂection. In double loop
learning, the learner consider the problem and the resulting action and outcomes, in
addition to reﬂecting out the problem-solving process and how it inﬂuences the
learner own beliefs and actions. Heutagogy is a bridge between self-directed and
self-regulated learning. However, if the traditional pedagogical model is ‘tea-
cher!learner directed’, the heutagogical model is learner directed. However, the
capacity to self-direct learning is not genetic and, therefore, getting students to
know how to learn is not enough. First, they need to be engaged in a powerful
learning environment in order to motivate and, second, they need to keep this
motivation for learning. Third, it is very important to develop such ‘structure’ of
competence that will keep the motivation for all life (e.g. life-long learning).
3.2
Multiliteracies and Online Textbooks, Systems, Platforms …
45

Education textbook market is stuck between several countervailing trends. On
one hand, the professors and their students are still use printed textbooks as the core
reading resource, but also interactive whiteboard for teaching and assessment. At
the same time, they use digital and digitalized textbooks for self-directed learning.
Moreover, some of professors customize the digital content according to students’
needs or learning styles. In addition, teachers and students have much more ways to
get the needed content via digital libraries, repositories or/and open source text-
books, that were not available a decade ago.
Dispute the widespread assumption that digital media are changing the ways in
how student’s brains are learning in various learning environments, screen, chan-
nels; there is a hot area of research related on changing behavior that indicate
toward a new pedagogy for multiliteracies (The New London Group 1996; Luke
2000; Cope and Kalantzis 2000, 2009; Selber 2004; Anstey and Bull 2006). Rapid
evolution of the digital revolution require changing the terms ‘literacy’ and ‘literacy
pedagogy’ taking into account that the term ‘multiliteracies’ deﬁning skills to gain
knowledge through technology, as well as the capacity of the lifelong learners to
learn for well-being in a digital society.
As was noted by Cope and Kalantzis (2000, p. 19) the metalanguage of the
multiliteracies is based on the concept of ‘Design’, meaning that teachers and
managers are seen as designers of the learning processes and environments. This
means that the pedagogy should interrelate with the domain of design science,
taking into account the differences between cultural, pedagogical and classroom
designs models and patterns. Therefore, the increasing multiplicity and the inte-
gration of the various models of meaning for lifelong learners indicate that students’
patterns for learning already have integrated in a holistic whole the visual, the
audio, the spatial, and the behavioural patterns.
Anderson (2011) notes that digital displays are essential tools for supporting
students learning and making the classroom feel welcoming and engaging. The best
way to archive these results is to include everyone in a digital learning environ-
ment, in which interactive whiteboard and digital textbooks form a holistic whole.
For this, digital screen allows displaying work from every children as well as drafts
and ﬁnishing work side by side, giving students a say about what you highlights
makes displays more interesting to them, reinforces their efforts, and fosters a
feeling of community as they see that the classroom is something they create
together. Moreover, putting pieces at the student’s eye level. It is very important to
choose the right space, to control clutter and to keep displays fresh. Therefore,
overdoing displays, even those of students’ work, can overstimulate children and
interfere with your efforts to create a calm classroom environment.
Today, in many countries of the world, leaders have discussed the challenges of
making the transition from paper to digital in very short time. Digital means, among
others, using of the digital devices in all schools and universities. Instead of the
learning with printed textbooks, that is only an object for reading; a digital textbook
on digital device has the potential to establish a digital learning environment, which
may be an indicator of active learning in an environment with interactive white-
board, educational software, digital textbooks and active learners. The active
46
3
Digital Screens and Issues of Multiliteracies’ Learning

learners are those that are able to initiate, to plan, to implement, to control, to
evaluate and to apply their learning themselves. For this, as was noted by Peters
(2000), not only factual knowledge is important, but also competence in using the
methods of obtaining it as well as competence of co-operating with others.
Therefore, in a digital learning environment, several presentation methods can be
combined and integrated; multi-sensory instruction can be strengthened; interac-
tivity can be extended quantitatively and qualitatively and support system can be
extended and improved.
Moreover, in a digital learning environment is used many digital objects for
learning. However, when a physical unit of equipment (e.g. a device or a white-
board) has integrated with an educational software the teacher/learner has more than
a physical object for learning. Indeed, such a unit has a digital screen, which is a
special area on which media, images, text and data has displayed. Different screens
have various sizes, features, and functionalities. In the most of cases, the user, even
teacher or student, can easy manipulate the items by using his/her ﬁnger or a mouse
directly on the screen for dragged, clicked, copied, deleted and sent through
Internet. Thus, digital screens have used for interactive activities, and some—only
for reading. How affordance of the digital screen affects learning?
The content of the digital screen is stored in various forms: PDF, HTML, and
others. The problem of how these formats for active learning can be used in digital
learning environment is now of considerable pedagogical importance. There are
many possibilities. However, if on digital screen of students’ devices is uploaded the
PDF version of the printed textbooks, but on interactive whiteboard—presentation of
concepts in an interactive, adaptive or ﬂexible manner, during lesson the teacher will
have the priority of interactive whiteboard.
Ideally, the digital features of the interactive whiteboard screen has repeated on
students’ displays. One of these features is Apps, which allows adding annotations,
highlighting text, adding notes and drawing, labelling parts or highlighting elements
of an image in a teacher-directed activity, even in learning with pdf versions of the
digital textbooks. What effect do interactive features has on students’ brains? For
example, if it is used the tandem of Mobi View™and students’ tablets, a functional
large LCD touch screen has the priority because allow teachers to control the lesson
from everywhere in the classroom. On the other hand, with an effective method this
tandem motivates students not only to absorb information, but also to create new
knowledge at the level of understanding.
The other example has presented by Cinganotto et al. (2016, pp. 117–120).
TEAL (e.g. Technology Enabled Active Learning), as an innovative teaching model
to address several of educational problems: (a) in a lecture based courses in which
lectures ‘delivered’ content with additional smaller recitation sections, the failure
rates were high, as result of very low retention rates of core physical concepts,
working in teams and developing communicative skills. This competence is needed
to be developed in a more adaptive and ﬂexible instructional environment.
Therefore, the TEAL methodology employs the interactive group structure, as well
3.2
Multiliteracies and Online Textbooks, Systems, Platforms …
47

as two and three-dimensional visualisation, animations and simulations that allow
students to explore and understand better the phenomenon, reactions and events.
The best teaching/learning strategies in a TEAL environment are problem
posing/solving to develop critical thinking skills; cooperative learning and dis-
covery learning in small groups or in pairs; peer tutoring and peer learning and
learning by hand-on experiments to develop active involvement in the learning
process. Moreover, TEAL methodology refers on inductive methods from the
observation and the practice to the conceptual frame; concept questions with
individual reﬂection, peer discussion, corrective feedback from the teacher; chal-
lenges based learning, launching challenges to the students through a gamiﬁcation
process; project based learning working with the aim to produce a project through
artefacts (e.g. video, tutorials etc.). In plus, there are very important to use exper-
imentations, visualisations, simulations, task-based learning activities according to
speciﬁc tasks and interactive presentations and Open Educational Resources.
Furthermore, in an university learning environment may be used learning
analytics. As was written in Educause, with reference to 2016 Horizon Report the
learning analytics is an educational application of web analytics aimed at learner
proﬁling, a process of gathering and analysing details of individual student inter-
actions in online learning activities. Following the review of the scientiﬁc literature,
it has to say that the learning analytics reveal patterns aims to improve learning for
individual students as well as across institutions, predicting what will happen in the
future and what methods is better to develop competence for future jobs.
In a digital society, learning is a part of the metasystems functionality for sus-
tainability. In such a conceptualisation, the learner cannot be more view only as an
empirical observer and experimenter, as was deﬁned by Locke, or as a reader of the
pictorial textbooks, as was identiﬁed by Comenius. Learner, today, has new aims,
strategies, visions, and knows how and where is better for him to learn to be agile,
adaptive and inventive. However, a diversity of digital screens, from interactive
whiteboards to smartphones, used in formal and informal learning environments are
giving rise to a new pedagogy of learning.
Nevertheless, what is the subject line of new pedagogy? It is a widely accepted
that education is a key driving force for sustainable development of the world.
Noguchi et al. (2015, p. 12) observe the emergence of the ﬁeld called Education for
Sustainable Development (ESD), characterised by active participation of the people
in the development of a world for everyone and for social transformation of
activities, knowledge, skills and values related on how learning takes place and how
should be in the future.
As the digital revolution has increased the number of bits and challenges in
education, many pedagogical questions aroused, also. Learning from a personal
acquisition of knowledge in one domain to has transformed toward lifelong com-
petency. Therefore, on one hand, the lifelong learning is important for sustainable
learning environment and on other hand, the lifelong learning needs new (meta)
cognitive self-development strategies.
48
3
Digital Screens and Issues of Multiliteracies’ Learning

3.3
The Main Features of a Learning Society
The term “learning society”, coined by Hutchins (1969), refers on part-time edu-
cation available to everyone throughout his life. Today UNESCO that positions
education in the centre of formal, non-formal and informal movements toward a
learning society quote this term. Building a learning society encompasses learning
at all ages and in all possible formats. The proposed by UNESCO strategy
‘Building a Learning Strategy’ is driven by the principles of lifelong learning.
Computers and digital devices are the fact of life in a learning society.
Textbooks with the previously established instructional objectives will continue
to deplete in favour of digital textbooks. The learning society is a part of the
sustainable world that face digital textbooks to provide the self-regulated potential
in the next future. As was noted by Scheunpﬂug et al. (2016, p. 6) the global
learning aims to change behaviour and attitudes toward learning for sustainability.
Thus, ﬁrst, encourages dialogue among businesses and organisation of the need to
create living organizations in harmony with the natural and social world. In a
sustainable world, human and natural systems can thrive together. In spite of these
notes, provided by Laur et al. (2006, p. 3) many of the basic assumptions of
pedagogy are scientiﬁc questions: What kind of information for students should be
presented? How to transform information in sustainable knowledge and skills?
What is the impact of technology on educational outcomes?
Now, we are living in the complexity of environments, challenges, technologies.
Updating pedagogy for a sustainable development is the main condition in a
learning society. How to ensure this condition? In practice, the design of learning
environment remains only an individual or/and collaborative activity, which is a
teacher-cantered or learner-cantered. Such conceptualisation cannot guarantee
development of competency for a sustainable world.
Let us analyse the diversity of learning environments available in the last years.
With the comparative methods could be easy observe that the thirty-two most inno-
vative online educational tools to use in 2015 can be classiﬁed, as follows (Fig. 3.1):
Fig. 3.1 Eight categories
of tools for learning
3.3
The Main Features of a Learning Society
49

The categories of online innovative educational tools are:
1. Classroom connections—students, teachers and parents are login into all tools
with a single set of credentials and do same activities (e.g. Clever, Edmodo,
Kahoot!; Schoology, Skype etc.);
2. Interactive Information Providers—teacher(s) and students are get information
that are better explained through videos, diagrams, explanations, sketches (e.g.
BetterExplained; Desmos, etc.);
3. Knowledge Graph—teacher(s) and/with students are ﬁnd information (e.g. text,
videos, free video tutorials) in order to understand the meaning and for
assignment through Voice Search, Carousel, instaGrok, Khan Academy;
PatrickJMT, Wolfram Alpha;
4. Language Learning Tools—an intuitive, step-by-step learning progression that
leads speakers through the basics of the language while gently challenging them
and explaining key grammatical concepts like Duolingo, Pleco, SpanishDict and
others;
5. Online courses—free access to free online courses of the best universities through
digital platforms, like Coursera and Crash Course or free access to custom-design
courses with assignments, materials, and study notes like iTunes U;
6. Presentation Makers—creation and sharing graphs through Plotly, make inter-
active presentation through Prezi; user-created ﬂashcards like StudyBlue;
creation of study materials like Quizlet;
7. Productivity Boosters—stay focused on same information or task with Cold
Turkey; helps create an environment conducive to sleeping with f.lux; analyse
the productivity of work on computer through RescueTime; enable to provide
help like a friend or a family member with Unstuck;
8. Reading and Writing Enhancers—educational reading tools like LightSail, read
free audio books with Books should be free; free online speed reading with
Speeder; write poetry and other creative forms with Poetry Idea Engine and
others.
The learning society in the digital age has characterized by the number of data
and metadata, language and metalanguage skills, memory and metamemory fea-
tures, cognition and metacognition skills as well as the ability to apply relevant
competence for solving real tasks. In all these cases may be used various tools,
resource, including digital textbooks. Therefore, if the content of the digital text-
books is open, the learners’ minds have connected with the global learning rules,
values and ethics. In a learning society, the content is ﬂexible, interactive, and
adaptive. The global environment is rich in (meta)cognitive activities and actions.
Across the globe, can be seen progresses in expanding open access for reading
textbooks. However, the aspiration of students for comprehensive digital reading in
an open environment requires to solving current-future pedagogical issues related
on interdependencies between context, content, teacher and students. While
development of textbooks contributes to greater interconnectedness between tea-
cher, student, content and context for learning, pedagogy must ﬁnd non-standard
50
3
Digital Screens and Issues of Multiliteracies’ Learning

ways of responding to such challenges, taking into account advances in contem-
porary science.
In a learning society is very important to ﬁnd a new methodology of teacher
training. As was noted by Lyashenko (2016, p. 244) the role of a teacher is more
complicated because he/she takes not only the role to teach, but also the respon-
sibility to create, to develop, to incorporate, to coordinate, to consult, and to share
expertise with the learners. This means that teaching nowadays would require
understanding of philosophical trends, students’ characteristics, textbooks innova-
tive features as well as the competence ‘to combine’ new technologies with the
traditional ones. Therefore, pedagogy alone cannot solve all global challenges and
provide updated solutions for sustainability.
Nevertheless, the learning society is moving toward a digital society (Hayes
et al. 2016). The digital society is a progressive society that adopt the concept of
sustainable development for living in a ‘global village’, composed by digital citizen
thinking globally, but acting locally. These citizens have the capacity to learn how
to access information through an online gateway that works 24/7, and boast the
highly advanced telecommunications and wireless connectivity systems and solu-
tions for living. Therefore, citizen of digital society are wellbeing because are
adaptive on all challenges.
Digital citizen should have new and more affordable competence. What effect do
digital text have on students’ brains? Since at least the 2000s researchers in many
different ﬁelds, including education, psychology, mathetics, and library and infor-
mation science, and others have investigated this question in more than one hundred
published studies (Cull 2011; Jabr 2013; Wollscheid et al. 2016). Thus, all pub-
lished studies evidence the issue of the exhaustive reading, pointing that people
understand what they read on printed-paper more thoroughly than what they read
on screens.
Now, it is a well-known fact that the brain responds differently to onscreen text
than to words on paper. Thus, reading is not a natural act and online digital text
represents a revolution in human learning and communication that we are only
beginning to understand. Students prefer to get textbook in a digital form, but to
print them or, at least, some pages, to read. What is the reason? Deﬁnitely, digital
technology changes the way of reading/writing the content. As was pointed by Jabr
(2013), people are not born with brain circuits dedicated to reading. While an open
paperback presents a reader with the left and right pages, and everybody can see
where the textbook begins and ends, feeling the thickness of the pages read is in
relation to that border, meaning has anchored to whole structure of the textbook. In
contrast, digital reading allows searching meaning through highlighting and ques-
tioning, which is very different comparative with the printed version.
In addition, digital screen supports children’s understanding more effectively, if
the teacher direct the pupil’s attention to speciﬁc points that have to be listening
or/and watching, to speciﬁc parts of the spoken text or image and/or to develop
activities that support understanding. The role of the digital screen is ‘to make’ as
much as possible the effective connections between theory (e.g. scientiﬁc concepts
from textbooks) and practice for deepen understanding through searching patterns
3.3
The Main Features of a Learning Society
51

in the real world. One of this connections may be the production of transformed
texts, a challenge that, according to Lenters (2016, p. 1) prove the practice to move
away from literacy by design and toward literacy as emergence.
Indeed, everywhere it is expected a digital revolution with profound techno-
logical, societal, behavioural and even neurological facets. As was noted by Cull
(2011) with reference on cognitive neuroscientist Maryanne Wolf (2008) it is
expected a shift from the reading brain, which has been a hallmark of the human
species for millennia, to the digital brain. Thus, the digital brain, while reading or
writing a digital content, tries to minimalize the required cognitive efforts of
multitasking, paratextual elements, and deep sustainable thought and, maybe, the
culture of reading and writing. In order to do this it was used different ‘technolo-
gies’, the most important of them was changing the students’ behavior.
3.4
Regarding the Issue of Outcomes in a Learning Society
Digital television, social media, social networking, knowledge sharing, online
games, video-shared sites and using of various gadgets for messaging are now
ﬁxtures of youth. They have so much permeated the human lives, which it is hard to
believe that digital technologies barely appears only six decades ago. The actual
generation of students, who are born between 1980 and 1994 and claimed to be
innovative and prone to changes, is ‘Generation Y, Nexters, Echo Boomers, Net
Generation and Generation Me’ (Majid et al. 2016, p. 685). This generation doing
so amid activities for digital networking that want to learn only with technology and
Internet. What is the impact of textbooks on learning?
The availability of the digital devises technologies and Internet allows global
news changing the ways in which students think and process information, making
difﬁcult to excel academically tasks and outdated teaching/assessment methodolo-
gies. Who are the students? Tapscott (1998) has observed that most of children of
0–20 years can be called “Net Generation”, because they are extremely curious,
self-relevant, contrarian, smart, focused, able to adapt, high in self-esteem, and
have a global orientation. Students who grow up in a high-tech age and global
economy will face a more complex world. For the “Net Generation” working and
communicating in an interactive learning environment, both local and global is the
best way to explore his/her potential in the world. Therefore, in an interactive
learning environments students receive real feedback, which allow competence
development.
Prensky (2000) wrote that these are digital natives, arguing that actual students
have been interacting with digital devices from a very early age, raised in a digital
world, gaming in a virtual environment and, the most important they do not like to
read. For Howe and Strauss (2000) actual students is millennials who need a
different type of educational experience. They are more numerous, more social
educated, more ethnically diverse; but the most important fact is that, as a group
they have an enormous potential power. This generation likes to use digital devices
52
3
Digital Screens and Issues of Multiliteracies’ Learning

for networking and to be mobile. They do not want to listen the teacher’s speech
repeatedly about scientiﬁc concepts, but intend to understand how theories work in
reality.
Ramakrishna (2016) notes that Net generation students want to be unicorn in
entrepreneurship, innovation and sustainability; they seeks personal fulﬁlment
instead of mere job to care family; they are interested in travel and experience and
they are plugged into global digital brain. In plus, Net generation students aspire to
develop communication skills, multi-cultural skills, ethnic and social responsibility,
interdisciplinary skills. This means, in our point of view, that for the “Net
Generation” the printed content of classical textbooks soon will be obsolete. To
avoid the failure of the learning in formal schooling, it is already proposed new
ways, like a new format of courses: ‘each course is broken into short segments
of *11 min that stretch over seven weeks online learning’ (Philanthropy
University) and digital platforms for global collaborations among different students
around a single idea.
However, there are many research regarding psychological learning character-
istics of the contemporary students. In order to thrive in/for the sustainable world,
students need to understand how to work both individually with own IQ and
collaboratively with collective intelligence. As was noted on ISTE (2016), solutions
require tenacity, creativity, and critical thinking. While students need to possess
core knowledge and skills, they must be adroit with technology and prepared for the
demands of the Innovation Age.
How about user interface design of digital textbooks? According to Oviatt
(2016, p. 19), computer input capabilities, like a keyboard or pen, substantially
inﬂuence basic cognitive abilities, including the ability to produce appropriate
ideas, solve problems correctly, and make accurate interfaces about information. If
it is used for developing representations, modalities, and linguistic codes, this can
stimulate human though and performance. This and other facts indicate that
instructional designers should be focused not on how to use scanned or digitalised
content for learning, but also how to develop critical thinking for sustainable
development both of students and of environment, where they live. Thus, drill and
practice or multimedia programs are long and bored for the actual students instead
of, for example, voice-controlled technology.
There are plenty of ways to incorporate technology into teaching, learning and
assessment of actual students. One of this is ‘instructional scaffolding’, designed to
promote a deeper learning, when ‘the learning process is tailored to the needs of the
student with the intention of helping the student achieve his/her learning goals’
(Sawyer 2006). For the instructional scaffolding is important to bring students in an
ergonomic digital learning environment; to explain students ergonomics norms; to
help students develop speciﬁc strategies for listening and/watching information on
digital screen; to set speciﬁc listening and/watching tasks, emplacing key words; to
limit the time for teacher talk, excluding repeating and paraphrasing the student’s
words.
3.4
Regarding the Issue of Outcomes in a Learning Society
53

Today’s students have unlimited access to data, information and knowledge.
They already live in a highly technological world and to a sustainable development,
they should have the generative form of own competence, including relevant
knowledge, as well as skills to observe, to plan and to prioritize etc. and attitudes
expressed in capacity to communicate and to network for sustainable development.
Thus, thinking and wisdom, in the Prensky’s words, is a symbiosis of the human
brain, challenges and environment.
One more issue has important on this way should be understood. Since digital
textbooks are globally and/or locally developed, the learning object for under-
standing is more important than even. Conversely, when the students have freedom
to use open textbooks, this may cause a controversy in provided content and
availability of content for learning. The chapter will summarise the impact of digital
revolution on literacy through analysing the features of learning society, differences
between open educational systems and closed pedagogical systems, terminology of
digital textbooks and the issues related no correlation between the digitalisation of
didactic triangle and the new meaning of literacy.
3.5
Reﬂecting on User Interface Design, Learning
and ADD/ADHD
Many of the actual students have diagnosed with Attention Deﬁcit Disorder
(ADD) and Attention Deﬁcit Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD). ‘Attention-deﬁcit/
hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) or hyperkinetic disorder (HKD) is a common
neurodevelopment disorder characterized by developmentally inappropriate levels
of inattentive and/or hyperactive-impulsive symptoms that are manifested in mul-
tiple setting. <…>. ADHD is associated with impairment in social, academic, and
occupational functioning, leading to adverse consequences for affecting individuals,
their family and society at large’ (Chen 2016). The problem is that the number of
children diagnosed with ADD and ADHD are staggering and continue to increase.
However, according to Nexus magazine, there are not organic or physiological
ﬁndings to substantiate the existence of any ‘diseases’. Children have diagnosed
with ADD when he/she stand when told to sit, ﬁdgeting, and not being happy about
doing chores or homework.
The most replicated factors point to deﬁne ADD/ADHD are deﬁcits in working
memory, response inhibition, vigilance and, planning as well ad time variability,
language and speech, and motor control. The full range of ADD/ADHD symptoms
may be inﬂuences by genetic factors and non-genetic factors. There are no con-
ﬁrmation regarding the correlation between using digital screen for learning and
ADD/ADHD symptoms. However, in some cases ADD/ADHD has been associated
with overweight and obesity because these children tend to spend more time in
watching screen and less time in physical activities.
54
3
Digital Screens and Issues of Multiliteracies’ Learning

To avoid increasing ADD/ADHD issues children are treated with stimulant
drugs. Pharmacotherapy remains a cornerstone of complex treatment. The most
used are Ritalin (methylphenidata and dexamphetamine). But, stimulant drugs pose
a long-term risk, could affect the processes of growth and development of child as a
social individuum and, the most important thing, may led to depression or other
serious diseases. Thus, even these children become more docile and get into ‘less
trouble’, they are not stimulated to learn how to learn. For pedagogy, the scientiﬁc
knowledge of ADD/ADHD treatment can be view as a body of a complex
hypothesis that will lead to a new design approach for learning process.
Indeed, the attention disorder is a big issue of education in a Digital World. In
the Ph.D. thesis, Chen (2016) wrote that ADHD is a highly prevalent and clinically
heterogeneous neurodevelopment disorder affecting approximatively 3.4–7.3 %
children and adolescents and 2.5–3.4 % adults worldwide. It was emphasis the
needs to investigate the impact of generic and environmental factors that may lead
to these disorders.
Montagni et al. investigated the association of screen time and ADHD. These
authors prove well-known facts that students spend increasingly more time
watching a screen on TV or on digital devices, including surﬁng the Internet.
Excessive exposure to screen time is associated with unfavourable and unhealthy
lifestyle habits, ﬁrstly because of low levels of physical activity. However, as for
mental health, pathologically excessive screen time exposure may lead to sub-
stantial consequences, like a risk marker for anxiety, depression, suicide ideation,
which can result in addictive behaviour. In plus, increasing levels of screen time
exposure is associated with risk of self-perceived attention problems and hyper-
activity levels.
In turn, many of the actual students have issues related with the span attention,
memory and thinking (Visser 2014; Koenig et al. 2016). Visser (2014) has indi-
cated toward a temporal attention span, as the ability to rapidly and accurately
process sequences of consecutive target items, which may be limited. Koenig et al.
2016) noted that selective visual attention is the property of visual systems to elicit
a behavior while at the same time equally salient stimuli in other parts do not with a
visual stimulus at a particular location of the visual ﬁeld. These and other studies
have indicated to the issue of investigation the conditions of the learning envi-
ronments in which students will better focus the visual attention for learning, in
particular involving the attention span.
The memory span and the thinking span is other two issues related on how actual
students learn. These issues must be investigated from the interdisciplinary points
of view, to understand the real problems of learning actual students and to help
them for better educational outcomes. The research questions are: (1) What are the
interdependencies between user interface design and educational outcomes?
(2) What techniques, methods or strategies are better to span attention, memory and
thinking?
3.5
Reﬂecting on User Interface Design, Learning and ADD/ADHD
55

References
Anderson, M. (2011). ASCD Express, 6(13). http://www.ascd.org/ascd-express/vol6/613-anderson.
aspx
Anstey, M., & Bull, G. (2006). Teaching and learning multiliteracies: Changing times, changing
literacies. International Reading Association. 800 Barksdale Road, PO Box 8139, Newark, DE
19714-8139.
Barton, D. (2007). Literacy: An introduction to the ecology of written language (2nd ed.).
Wiley-Blackwell.
Blaschke, L. M. (2012). Heutagogy and lifelong learning: A review of heutagogical practice and
self-determined learning. http://www.irrodl.org/index.php/irrodl/article/view/1076/2113
Chen, Q. (2016). What can genetically informative designs add to the understanding of ADHD?
https://openarchive.ki.se/xmlui/bitstream/handle/10616/45027/Thesis_Qi_Chen.pdf?
sequence=1&isAllowed=y/. Accessed April 14, 2016.
Cinganotto, L., Panzavolta, S., Garista, P., Guasti, L., & Dourmashkin, P. (2016). TEAL as an
innovative teaching model Insights from “Educational Avant-Garde” Movement in Italy.
Journal of e-Learning and Teaching Society. http://www.je-lks.org/ojs/index.php/Je-LKS_EN/
article/view/1130/1001
Cope, B., & Kalantzis, M. (2000). Multiliteracies: Literacy learning and the design of social
futures. Psychology Press.
Cope, B., & Kalantzis, M. (2009). “Multiliteracies”: New literacies, new learning. Pedagogies: An
International Journal, 4(3), 164–195.
Cull, B. W. (2011). Reading revolutions: Online digital text and implications for reading in
academe. First Monday, 16(6). http://pear.accc.uic.edu/ojs/index.php/fm/article/view/3340/
2985
De Corte, E. (2016). Improving higher education students’ learning proﬁciency by fostering their
self-regulation skills. European Review, 24(02), 264–276.
Education world. (2016). Broadcast learning: The power of network learning. http://www.
educationworld.com/a_tech/columnists/guhlin/guhlin003.shtml#sthash.GBQUyx3J.dpuf
Educause. (2016). Learning analytics. https://library.educause.edu/topics/teaching-and-learning/
learning-analytics
Guhlin,
M.
(2012).
Broadcast
learning:
The
power
of
network
learning.
http://www.
educationworld.com/a_tech/columnists/guhlin/guhlin003.shtml#sthash.GBQUyx3J.dpuf
Hayes, J. F., Maughan, D. L., & Grant-Peterkin, H. (2016). Interconnected or disconnected?
Promotion of mental health and prevention of mental disorder in the digital age. The British
Journal of Psychiatry, 208(3), 205–207.
Horizon reports. (2016). 2016 higher educational edition. https://library.educause.edu/*/media/
ﬁles/library/2016/2/hr2016.pdf
Howe, N., & Strauss, W. (2000). Millennials rising: The next great generation. New York:
Vintage Books.
Hutchins, R. M. (1969). The learning society. New York: New American Library.
ISTE. (2016). Here’s how you teach innovative thinking. https://www.iste.org/explore/articleDetail?
articleid=651&category=ISTE-Connects-blog&article=&utm_source=Twitter&utm_medium=
Social&utm_campaign=MIXMEX
Ito, M., Horst, H. A., Bittanti, M., Stephenson, B. H., Lange, P. G., Pascoe, C. J., et al. (2009).
Living and learning with new media: Summary of ﬁndings from the Digital Youth Project. MIT
Press. http://ﬁles.eric.ed.gov/fulltext/ED536072.pdf
Jabr, F. (2013). The reading brain in the digital age: The science of paper versus screens. Scientiﬁc
American. http://blogs.ethz.ch/wp-content/blogs.dir/976/ﬁles/2013/09/The-Reading-Brain-in-the-
Digital-Age-The-Science-of-Paper-versus-Screens-Scientiﬁc-American.pdf
Koenig, S., Wolf, R., & Heisenberg, M. (2016). Vision in ﬂies: Measuring the attention span.
PLoS ONE, 11(2), 1–16. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0148208
56
3
Digital Screens and Issues of Multiliteracies’ Learning

Laur, J., Schley, S., & Smith, B. (2006). Learning for sustainability. The Society for
Organizational Learning (SoL) Inc.
Lenters, K. (2016). Telling “a story of somebody” through digital scrapbooking: A fourth grade
multiliteracies project takes an affective turn. Literacy Research and Instruction, 1–22.
Luke, C. (2000). Cyberschooling and technological change: Multiliteracies for new times.
Lyashenko, M. S. (2016). Implementation of web-based technologies into teaching and learning
practices in the university. International Journal of Information and Education Technology,
6(3), 243–246.
Majid, F. A., Mustafa, S. M. S., Jais, I. R. M., Shahril, W. N. E. H., Subramaniam, K., & Halim,
M. A. A. (2016). A preliminary study on selected Malaysian millennials: Their characteristics
and its implications on teaching innovation. In Proceedings of the 7th International Conference
on University Learning and Teaching (InCULT 2014) (pp. 685–697). Singapore: Springer.
Noguchi, F., Guevara, J. R., & Yorozu, R. (2015). Lifelong learning for sustainable development.
UNESCO Institute for lifelong learning. http://pie.pascalobservatory.org/sites/default/ﬁles/
communities_in_action_-_lifelong_learning_for_sustainable_development.pdf/. Accessed April
01, 2016.
Oviatt, S. (2016). Computer interfaces can stimulate or undermine students’ ability to think. In
Revolutionizing education with digital ink (pp. 19–26). Springer.
Peters, O. (2000). Digital learning environments: New possibilities and opportunities. http://www.
irrodl.org/index.php/irrodl/article/view/3/336
Prensky, M. (2000). Digital natives, digital immigrates. On the Horizon, 9(5), 1–6.
Prensky, M. (2001). Digital natives, digital immigrants do they really think differently? On the
Horizon, 9(6), 1–6.
Ramakrishna, S. (2016). Strategies to be globally visible and locally engaged. Drying Technology,
34(3), 255–257. http://www.shanghairanking.com/wcu/wcu6/22.pdf
Sawyer, R. K. (2006). The Cambridge handbook of the learning sciences. New York: Cambridge
University Press.
Scheunpﬂug, A., Krogull, S., & Franz, J. (2016). Understanding learning in world society:
Qualitative reconstructive research in global learning and learning for sustainability.
International Journal of Development Education and Global Learning, 7(3), 6–23.
Selber, S. (2004). Multiliteracies for a digital age. SIU Press.
Tapscott, D. (1998). Growing up digital: The rise of the net generation. New York: McGraw-Hill.
The New London Group. (1996). A pedagogy of multiliteracies: Designing social futures. Harvard
Educational Review, 66(1), 60–93.
Visser, T. A. W. (2014). Evidence for deﬁcits in the temporal attention span of poor readers. PLoS
ONE, 9(3), 1–7. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0091278
What is digital screen media? https://segd.org/what-digital-screen-media
What is the difference between an LCD and An LED backlit LCD display? http://www.makeuseof.
com/tag/what-is-the-difference-between-an-lcd-and-an-led-backlit-lcd-display/
Wollscheid, S., Sjaastad, J., & Tømte, C. (2016). The impact of digital devices vs. Pen (cil) and
paper on primary school students’ writing skills—A research review. Computers & Education,
95, 19–35.
References
57

Chapter 4
Teacher-Centered Versus
Learner-Centered Design of Screen
Content precedes design.
Design in the absence of content is not design, it’s decoration.
Jeffrey Zeldman
Abstract In context of the Metasystems Learning Design Theory there are eight
didactical systems. Each of these systems includes some elements of the
teacher-centered and/or learner-centered learning environments. In plus, for the
effective learning outcomes should be taking into account the speciﬁc features of
that didactical system that may solve the previous identiﬁed issue. Thus, the speciﬁc
features of the teacher-centered environments are: visibility, accessibility, language,
readability, learnability, usability and legibility. Instead of this, the learner-centered
are focused on developing knowledge, competence or/and self-regulated skills. The
goal of this chapter is to describe the speciﬁc features of user interface design for
the teacher-centered versus learner-centered learning environments.
Keywords Teacher-centered learning environment  Learner-centered learning
environment
4.1
Introduction
User interface, by deﬁnition, is the aggregate of means by which users interact with
a particular machine, device, computer program, or other thing. Generally, this is a
widely term used to deﬁne the design principles of user interfaces for machines and
software, such as computers, home appliances, mobile devices, and other digital
devices. In the paradigm of Internet of Things and services there are a diversity of
digital the screens and effects everywhere. Thus, the main focus of digital devices is
on maximizing the user experience.
However, a speciﬁc feedback-feedward mechanism ‘controls’ the efﬁciency of
all interfaces, allowing or blocking the capacity of human to proceed data,
© Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2017
E.A. Railean, User Interface Design of Digital Textbooks,
Lecture Notes in Educational Technology, DOI 10.1007/978-981-10-2456-6_4
59

information and knowledge. First, this mechanism was managed by various inter-
face elements, viewed on displaying component as:
– input control (buttons, text ﬁeld, dropdown lists, toggles and others);
– navigational components (e.g. search ﬁeld, pagination, tags and others);
– informational-communication
(progress
bar,
notiﬁcation,
message
boxes,
windows).
All these elements are managered by mouse. However, when the user use
portable devices and multi-touch screens add the value of the human’s ﬁnger or/and
voice for input, some principles of the interface design were changed. The problem
is that new user interfaces become less intuitive. The mouse and touch input are so
different. For example, the roll-over effects, that have a good impact on desktop
computers, are less important on touchscreens. Further arguments to think about the
user interface design is the vast difference in screen sizes.
Each time a user does not understand content presented on a screen, he/she can
look around at the other information displayed in front or besider of him/her.
Obviously, the size of the screen limits how can information can be read at once,
before narrowing or enlarging the screen or scrolling down or up. Thus, the
humans’ capacity for information-communication, (meta)cognitive and assessment
processes is determined by the dimensions of the screen. In plus, the attention span
are also affected. It was observer, the bigger the screen size, the larger the capacity
of the communication channel between the human and the screen. Maybe from this
effect on actual learning through reading some children are trying to ‘enlarge’ the
printed page. They cannot more proceed the information on the printed page
because of text’ size, graphic design and so on.
On the other hand, once students have to take action and navigate to a different
view that their teachers (either by scrolling, enlarging, switching pages altogether
etc.), they will incur an extra memory load. They must apply not all the techniques
for reading, but also must remember the speciﬁc actions (e.g. how to open or close
the screen/program, how to ﬁnd/disseminate information that they need), as well as
the speciﬁc Apps or/and tasks’s combinations.
Third, the smaller screen size of the tablets or/and smartphones make the pro-
vided content more difﬁcult that desktop content. People usually ‘use’ working
memory to keep information that may be available in future, but than, they doesn’t
authomatize knowledge to transform into a skill. However, the students may use the
mobile devices not only for reading, but also to capture the image, to take a video,
to download information or to send a message.
Fourth, the information that exists on digital screen are ‘hyperlinked’ with the
information on other pages or/and environments. The simplest pattern is text plus
animation or video games. If in the user interface design is used hyperlinks, the users
should remember how to return back. This cause an extra load of the working memory
and may be the reason of the distributive processing, and, therefore, to cause the
attention’ problem. As was noted by Harenberg et al. (2016), recent research
demonstrate that video gaming can increase selective and distributive attention.
60
4
Teacher-Centered Versus Learner-Centered Design of Screen

In a recent book Basar (2016, p. 159) describes about the plasticity of oscillatory
behavior during the transition from the semantic memory to the episodic memory
state. The preliminary results of transition between memory states emphases the fact
that the reciprocal activation of the attention, perception, memory and remembering
alliance is essential from the transition between two memory states. The problem is
that digital screen easier activate the episodic memory that printed page, even it is
displayed photos, animations, videos.
Fifth, the amount of information that actual students denote to a digital device is
more than on printed pages. The attention capacity with a portable device is more
different that on printed books/textbooks or computer display. In fact, the students
are more interesting in a special device as a technological innovation, which on
what Apps are installed and may be used for learning. They are more interested in
looking on device, use as a phone or camera or, at least, to play a video game than
to read a book or textbook. Does the digital content is important for learning, yet? If
yes, how long is the average session duration on portable devices?
More speciﬁcally, for digital textbooks user interface design is the contact point
of the author and his/her users. Nevertheless, who is the actual users and what
design they need? In order to answer this question, we looked at the following
deﬁnitions: (1) user interface design is the sum of information architecture; inter-
action design and visual design communications (Dragilev 2013) and (2) user
interface design is a process that requires analyses of human performance and
preferences, in particular the emotional and trust aspects of interaction (Dillon
2003, p. 457). In brief, the ﬁrst deﬁnition views user interface design as a
teacher-centered or goal-oriented approach. The second deﬁnition is focused on
(meta)cognitive, affective, social and emotional aspects of self-regulated learning,
e.g. this is the student-centered framework.
The student-centered interface design framework is a particular case of
‘user-centered design’, used to deﬁne a framework of processes (not restricted to
interfaces or technologies) in which the needs, wants, and limitations of end users
as a product, services or processes are given extensive attention at each stage of the
design process. Therefore, the goal of student-centered interface design of digital
textbooks is to anticipate what students might need to do for better results during
learning or/and how to design interface elements that are easier to access, under-
stand, and use in an affordable way for self-regulated learning.
Since 1970 a variety of tools, methodologies, models and instructions were
proposed to make user interface design more easier and efﬁcient. One of these is
graphic design, which is communication design on the base on visual and textual
content, focused on physical or/and virtual environments. Graphic design may
include concepts and/or patterns from web design, interaction design, visual design,
information architecture, instructional design of learning objects and learning
design. However, this is not enough. The lack of transdisciplinary research focused
on understanding how human’ brain has been accommodated to the diversity of the
learning environments for learning and what ﬁlters use for this, provide the situation
when digital screens are everywhere, but their effects is more less than is expected.
4.1
Introduction
61

The big diversity of concepts and/or patterns may be associated with design of
teacher-centered and/or student-centered learning environment, and, therefore with
user interface design of teacher-centered or student-centered functions of digital
textbooks. Thus, the main functions of the school textbook with reference to teacher
are: information, communication on the base on immediate/delayed feedback and
reference (as a storage of data, information and knowledge). In addition, the main
functions textbook with reference to student are: (meta)cognitive, affective, emo-
tional and social purchases as well as consolidation and evaluation of purchases.
What we see now is a big divergence with above-mentioned ideas. In practice,
user interfaces design, ranging from early requirements of educational software
obsolescence to adaptive textbooks, has become a time-consuming and costly
process. Most used is Graphic User Interface (GUI), which allows only exploring
provided content through icons and other visual indicators. However, this is not
enough because technology allow developing digital textbooks as text, audio or
video; the text can be embodied also by the use in various formats, like graphic,
animation, virtual reality and others. In addition, digital textbooks can be developed
easier developed collaboratively and/or be disseminated through various user
interfaces of digital devices like text-based, graphical, voice, kinetic, tangible,
multimedia, multi-touch interfaces. To understand these challenges, more research
is needed to investigate correlations between user interfaces design of digital
textbooks and user interfaces design of digital devices.
User interface design is one of the most important and one of the most difﬁcult
issues in designing of the affordable digital textbooks. First, it is the ‘contact point’
between the user and the digital screen. Second, this contact point has a more large
extent regarding to diversity of the learning environments, both real and virtual.
Third, the users’ capacity to proceed information is rapidly changing. There is no
doubt that all these challenges will generate new research questions and demand
decisions regarding what user interface design is better for learning.
This chapter is confronted with fundamental questions in user interface design of
textbooks for teacher-centered and student-centered learning environments. The
following models were considered: affordance based design (aims to analyse the
users’ needs, consider the affordance requirements of learning tasks, and identify
the affordances of artefact components) and ecological interface design (aims to
create advanced user interfaces for complex socio-technical system). In plus,
common features of the instructional design and learning design aim to strength the
application of paradigm for affordable user interface design of digital textbooks.
4.2
A New Context for Learning and Design Principles
In context of MetaSystems Learning Design Theory the context of learning cor-
respond to the actual paradigm. Thus, the modelled context for learning must be
placed in the learners’ context (e.g. the knowledge, skills, and attitude). However,
there are, at least, two different approaches for understanding the learning context.
62
4
Teacher-Centered Versus Learner-Centered Design of Screen

One refers on conscious learning in schooling and the second is the unconscious or
the hidden context for learning, which are every time and everywhere. But, how to
understand the data used to generate the content for interfaces?
There are two controversial concepts: instructional design, building on the
system theory and on the work of Dewey, Pappert, Bruner, Anderson and
Thorndike etc., used to describe the potential use of machines in the classroom and
learning design, used to describe a method of instruction for a particular peda-
gogical session. As was noted by Scott et al. (2007) from the middle of 1990, the
term learning design is associated with the design of learning utilised to facilitate
learning. Does the learning design solved the issue of designing the hidden content
for interfaces? If yes, why so many digital textbooks interfaces are so ineffective?
Designing of textbooks needs, also, to take into account the diversity of the
digital screens and the human’s capacity to work with information. In addition,
designing a user interface for mobile devices is hard to do because some user
interfaces are tiny, and some are larger. Today the learning designers are in the
situation to design the textbook that should be affordable for reading on all devices.
Different approaches to mobile design attempt to solve the problem of affordability
in various ways. For example, if they are starting from the 4th industrial revolution
principle of interoperability, then it is developed the idea of responsive design based
on the relative priorities of the cells to be rearranged through a narrower
communication.
Same content is available on various screens. However, the diversity of digital
screens may affect the functionality of working memory. From one hand, the stu-
dents have to work harder to keep more items in the memory, and from others—to
understand how to work with the information provided on the screen. In the tra-
ditional way, the students only read the content of textbooks (text and exercise).
They used notebooks to solve the proposed tasks by the teacher. Digital textbooks,
however, integrate informational-communication, (meta)cognitive and assessment
processes and are, mainly for self-regulated learning. Some students may be willing
to spend the time and effort within the learning environment with interactive
assessment, adaptive content or pedagogical agents, others will simply give up (or
be forced to give up) if they do not ﬁnd what they need after a reasonable amount of
time.
If the digital textbooks are not integrated with the curricula or some learning
standards the learning outcomes will be very different. Therefore, the difﬁculties we
face when learning with digital textbooks can ﬂuctuate dramatically. Digital
learning can vary from very easy to impossible hard. Reasons are variations in
purchasing of knowledge, skills or competence; developing of skills; differences in
required time and effort to understand the content. For examples, two or more
frames or patterns may appear to have roughly similar amounts of information, but
differ in the effort required to achieve performance for different learners.
Learning requires a dynamic and functional mechanism. Two learning mecha-
nisms, described by Sweller (1994, p. 296) as the schema acquisition and the
transfer of learning procedures from controlled to automatic processing are only a
small component of the complex structure of the generative competence, where the
4.2
A New Context for Learning and Design Principles
63

schema is only the cognitive construct that could be been extended and automa-
tized. In addition, information-communication, (meta)cognitive and assessment
processes may be also taking into account.
According to ISO standard 52075, the design is based upon an explicit under-
standing of users, tasks and environments; users are involved throughout design and
development; the design is driven and reﬁned by user-centered evaluation; the
process is iterative; the design addresses the whole user experience and the design
team includes multidisciplinary skills and perspectives.
In use and development of digital textbooks, however, there are two main trends:
teacher-centered and learner centered. If teacher directs the learning mechanism,
that this is the teacher-centered mechanism, otherwise—this is learner-centered
mechanism. The applicability of the user interface design principles for digital
textbook design, ﬁrst, depends on focus: teacher-centered interface design or
user-centered interface design. Thus, teacher-centered interface design may be
considered a framework of stages restricted to technologies in which it is important
to follow the instructional objectives through stimulus, response and reinforcement.
In contrast, in the learner-centered design a framework of activities or/and actions
are not restricted to stimulus-response-reinforcement, but engage all students in a
self-regulated learning process. The student may complete the provided content
with own text, sketch, audio, video or animation.
Only one task is important for both cases: assessment, but this previous phase
should be designed until the development or using digital textbooks, including open
textbooks. There are some examples of questions for previous phase, as follows:
– What is the level of users’ digital competence?
– What is (are) the user(s)’ knowledge or skills level(s)?
– What difﬁculty of items are required?
– In which forms (open or/and closed) will be the students’ answers?
– Which content does to be provided?
Therefore,
these
and
other
related
questions
are
essential
both
for
teacher-centered and learner-centered interface design. In designing is important to
focus on a priori knowledge and skills, and to foster communication skills, taking
into account the changing contexts for learning.
What is wrong with teacher-centered interface design? On the positive side, this
approach has a long history in education and until it is a dominant vehicle for
delivering knowledge on the base on curricula and instructional objectives.
Practically, through the interface design of content is presented only the knowledge
with details how to solve problems and, maybe, some interactive or adaptive tasks.
On the negative side, however, the stimulus-response mode is the inadequate
models of how students, with theoretical fundamentals based on theories of
antiquity. This is inconsistent with current challenges of industrial revolution; e.g.
nano-education, shifted communication methods, interoperability of contents, user
generated content and others.
64
4
Teacher-Centered Versus Learner-Centered Design of Screen

There is not empirical evidence that all teacher-centered interface design works
well in all cases. There are, at least, eighth didactic models. If in the design is
considered the criteria of communication, assimilation of knowledge and man-
agement of the learning process, than can be described eighth didactic models, as
follows (Fig. 4.1).
Thus, the communication mode can be direct or indirect. In a direct communi-
cation style the truthfulness of knowledge are highly valued and to some extend are
a higher priority that personal opinions or emotions. Saying I don’t know the
answer is considered a mistake since it goes to misunderstanding of the provided
content. Problems are felt to be solved when the students know how to solve the
academic problems or tasks. Open discussions are less encouraged, but are possible
in an environment managed by the teacher. Instead, in the indirect communication
style, negative information should be changed with the positive, and all tasks—with
the solutions. In these situation, run away from the problem, which both parties
usually knows the rules and recognize as such, are given, and in extreme cases are
used a common strategy for learning (in our case it was the instructional dynamic
and ﬂexible strategy). All problems are felt to be solved more productively and, at
the ﬁnal stage, there are only solutions.
Moreover, either direct or indirect communication can be ensured through one
(Ud and Ui) or more channels (Md and Mi). However, the example of one channel
can be printed text or audio text. Digital text refers to multi-channels or multimodal
mode of communication. Digital ‘extend’ the features of the direct unimodal
communication in favour of the multimodal communication. Thus, for example, a
tablet for young children, encoded with the augmented reality drawings app, allow
children to colour the characters that pop out of their books in real time. 3D printer
has the potential to print the use interface in a new mode, used ‘to synthesize’ a
three-dimensional object, previously modelled with the student(s). 3D glasses can
be used to vision capacity of children through creating or enhancing the illusion of
Fig. 4.1 Eight didactical
systems
4.2
A New Context for Learning and Design Principles
65

depth in an image. Does these technologies contribute to development of creativity
or/and creative thinking?
Some ideas may come from the third criteria: management of provided
knowledge. Thus, in the simplest mode the knowledge is communicated within a
closed system (Cd and Ci) or in the open system (Fd or Fi). Digital textbooks within
the closed system are developed on the base on educational system or state’s
conception, standards or/and methodology. In the open system there are only open
standards, some tools and, maybe, design principles.
One more criteria will add other eight didactic schemas. Indeed, in the scientiﬁc
literature could be found the Bespaliko (2002) description of the textbooks’
diversity based on: aim, forms of learning environments, patterns and technology. If
these four criteria are analysed on the bimodal diversity yes/no, than can be
identiﬁed 16 types of the digital textbooks. Only on the aim level there are didactic,
dogmatic, and declarative and monograph textbooks. The problem is that digital
textbooks are developed as: monographs (e.g. eTextbooks, interactive textbooks,
digital textbooks, adaptive textbooks etc.) and dogmatic textbooks (e.g. Cognitive
Algebra).
However, only didactic textbooks (with or without the intelligent technological
support) have the potential to improve self-regulated skills of the learner. A small
remarks should be added for guaranteed result: instead of the didactic process
should be considered the mathetics solutions for the previously identiﬁed tasks.
Thus, user interface design of didactic digital textbooks are based on the didactic
model that embodies information-communication, (meta)cognitive and assessment
processes. The mechanism that ensure the functionality of the didactic model is the
instructional
interactive
and
dynamic
strategy.
Therefore,
according
to
Metasystems Learning Design Theory, the instructional/learning/assessment strat-
egy should allow students to develop self-regulated skills and teacher(s), to observe
the synergetic effect within the dynamic development of the learning environment.
The results of the international survey prove, on average, that students view in
digital textbooks the potential to develop and to increase the ability for self-regulate
learning. This idea is based on acceptance the massive open online courses
(MOOC), in which students are intrinsic motivated to learn new things in an
individual way, in special when the computer based environment is extended at the
global level. This means that students are interested to view on their digital screens
only the short videos, but also the interactive tasks with immediate feedback and
peer-to-peer assessment projects. They are less interesting to read digital text on the
screen.
Let us consider a learning scenario that goes beyond the delivery method of
knowledge. For example, a student sits at a digital screen on which new material is
presented dynamically. The other student receive only one module, e.g. the
Introductory module. The ﬁrst student reads and take notes, highlighting the most
important concepts/passages or ﬁnding the meaning of some concepts. The second
student receives the module ‘divided’ into small frames following by tasks,
developed on the base on Bloom, Simpson or other taxonomies. This student
should complete the provided content at the level of synthesis (according to Bloom’
66
4
Teacher-Centered Versus Learner-Centered Design of Screen

taxonomy). Displayed content includes also a hidden content developed within the
core concepts techniques (a case of concept mapping method). During the learning
process she/he will receive multiple tasks, will exercise in a computer-based
assessment environment; will complete the content with animation, 3D simulation
etc., build own sketch or add photo/video/audio registration, and will ask teacher
for some help. Which of these two models are better for learning?
Indeed, the delivered model of knowledge with teacher speech, or digital text,
pictorial, adaptive or dynamic content does not improve learning substantially.
Some improvement is possible, when students have the good capacity of short-term
memory or working memory, and he/she is motivated enough to learn in a tradi-
tional way. Usually teachers indicate these students to use, also, a special form of
assessment&assignments for better results during formative or/and summative
assessment. However, when learning is an analysed only as a dynamic system, it is
easy to observe that the number of students who are motivated to learn decrease
considerable.
Many external inﬂuences cause the improvement or rejection the presented
information on screen. Moreover, multiple digital screens distributed everywhere;
maybe, affect students’ perception. Thus, students unconsciously opens/close the
‘cognitive ﬁlters’ to protect the brain from the irrelevant, non-useful and
non-interesting information. The other, not less important reason for accepted the
virtual context for learning may be considered design norms that require less
thinking effort, personalisation, messaging, self-directed activities in a more
coloured and more attractive instead of bored activities with the printed textbooks
environment.
4.3
Essential Elements in Teacher-Centered User
Interface Design
Teacher-centered design is more a didactic process than a product. However, in the
traditional way the process consists of some methods or techniques for constructing
the instructional process within the practical application of one model. Where there
are effective principles or/standards that guide effective design, there is a certain
amount of innovation and creativity in teaching/assessment processes. Whether or
not the teacher-centered design is effective depends on the criteria used to deﬁne
effectiveness.
By deﬁnition teacher-centered design focuses on teaching the knowledge. Theirs
essential elements are visibility, accessibility, language, readability, learnability,
usability and legibility.
Visibility is for setting up the instructional objectives and developing content to
archive objectives through measurable outcomes. The most important indicator is
what the student sees in the interface and how intuits the using of the interface.
Therefore, good visibility is related on the things, objects, processes where
4.2
A New Context for Learning and Design Principles
67

everything is positioning in a way that can be easily found, used or intuit. The
visibility property allows the author to show or to hide the text, rows or columns of
a table while leaving the space. Thus, visibility is the property to see or to be seen.
Wang et al. (2004) describe that objective methods for assessing perceptual
image quality traditionally attempt to quantify the visibility of errors (differences)
between a distorted image and a reference image using a variety of known prop-
erties of the human visual system. Tan adds that poor visibility in due to the
presence of some particles that have signiﬁcant size and distribution in the par-
ticipating medium. If the following is not taking into account, students involuntary
will ‘open’ the cognitive ﬁlters to protect themselves. Thus, more research is needed
to understand the functions, norms and correlations of design elements for
visibility.
Korving et al. (2016) identify the relation between visibility and attention in
weblectures. It was reported that students prefer weblectures with a visible lecturer
to weblectures consisting of audio and slides only. Such preference is thought to be
explained by the fact that selective attention is focused on relevant pieces of
information in the process of understanding. Therefore, the visibility could be
considered the degree in which a lecturer is visible in a weblecture. Focusing
attention on an object, or thought, is considered to require attentional resources
within the mind. More research is needed to understand the role of Gestalt prin-
ciples and time.
Accessibility refers access to easy access to data, information and knowledge;
intelligent tools or resource to ﬁnd meaning of concepts. Some designers ‘broke’
the content into small pieces and offer students the possibility to interconnect pieces
into a holistic whole. Others—design the interfaces that allow teacher to summarize
various distributed contents into one. Lewthwaite and Sloan (2016) put the sign of
equivalence between accessibility and permission, the interplay between operating
systems and assistive technologies, browsing and other applications, the digital
content and multimodal, ﬂexible interactions. Accessibility requires a unique
combination of theoretical understanding, as well as procedural and technical skills.
It also draws from human-computer interactions, taking aspects of ergonomics and
psychology to understand human characteristics and behavior, and disability
studies, especially the factors that inﬂuence discrimination against people with
disabilities and how discriminatory activity by individuals and organisations can be
addressed.
According to Kumar and Owston (2016) there is a stringent need for innovative
and assessable methods to ensure that students do not encounter any barriers in
e-learning. Moore (2016) proposed to design inclusive features for simulations in
chemistry in order to increase the accessibility of simulations both for teachers and
for students, with and without disabilities. van Rooij and Zirkle (2016, p. 4) observe
that in United States accessibility is governed by federal law, and, therefore, in all
educational public institutions should be used the principles of the Universal
Design, as follows: multiple modes of representation, multiple means of expression,
and multiple means of engagement. The Universal Design norms enables creation
of the accessible learning content for learners in all disability categories. Thus, the
68
4
Teacher-Centered Versus Learner-Centered Design of Screen

inclusive nature of the Universal Design and accessibility can enhance the learning
experience of all learners.
Language of the digital textbooks interfaces is based on well-written texts in an
academic way. However, there are not unique requirements of what language (e.g.
teacher(s) or student(s)) to use. What is clear is that is not possible to opt out of
using the technologic language instead of the academic language. On the other
hand, it is impossible to ignore the technology for summarisation and dissemination
of the content. First, the sentences should be simple, but with the possible ‘ex-
tensions’. For example, student(s) receive the content and can complete this content
with own text, video, video at the level of his/her understanding. From the other
hand, the last know-how needed to deal with technologized forms of language is
multiliteracies, since digital technologies. Therefore, rather that attempting to dis-
tinguish common features between printed and digital content and how to imple-
ment emotions in digital content, more important is to identify some conventions
from earlier technologies.
The other issue is that digital screens, instead of printed, allow multiple forms of
communications: direct and indirect, synchronic and asynchronic. These challenges
change the nature of context for learning. Now, using digital devices it is easier to
ﬁnd any information. Thus, if student will have the option to choose between
knowledge or skills, he/she will choose the second option. The worst thing is that in
teacher-centered learning environment, the interfaces is not designed for learning,
but for teaching and assessment.
The last, but not less important thing is that with digital interfaces may operate
simultaneously in physical and symbolic spaces, learning or working simultane-
ously in different time zones, using typing and instant messaging instead of writing;
swiping a screen or trackpad instead of turn the pages, speaking in a videocon-
ference instead of presenting the portfolios. These actions require other meaning of
language for design, because in the ﬁrst case this is the language of activities, and in
the second—the language of actions.
Usability deﬁnes how effective and satisfying it is for user to interact with the
information presented on the screen. Challenges the way in which digital textbooks
were situated as “supplementary” to an printed textbook can be considered a sig-
niﬁcant step toward the study of the learning design affordability. How quick and
efﬁcient can learner performs the assigned activities within the digital textbook
environment? Is their same requirements for designing digital textbooks for a
sustainable learning environment?
Many researchers note about the changing behaviours and perceptions of
information during digital learning, like learner’s culture, behavior patterns,
learning styles, and motivation to learn. Some others proposed to use feedback in
order to keep the communication patterns; to design relevant and consistent tasks
and the efﬁcient space for answer; to provide intuitive interfaces and to prevent
errors by informing students of the speciﬁc features; to facilitate communication
with the author of the content; to provide adaptive interfaces used for all in an
efﬁcient way. In plus, is important to keep the minimalist design in order to answer
the question: What issues will be solved? Thus, the usability norms is when the
4.3
Essential Elements in Teacher-Centered User Interface Design
69

designed interface is equivalent to perceiving interface. The term ‘usability’ deﬁnes
the degree of which the system can be used and with which it promotes learning and
can be associate with the learnability, e.g. its efﬁciency, functionalities and others.
Learnability in teacher-centered learning environments refers on how well the
designed activities enable obtaining guaranteed learning outcomes. To objective of
learnability is to learn. Thus, the context with ambiguity of data provided by
diversity of learning environments and the content, both in printed and digital
forms, causes a contradictions regarding what to learn and how to learn for better
memorisation, understanding and others. The differences between usability and
learnability, according to international standards are, as follows (Table 4.1).
Some experts have classiﬁed learnability as an active component of usability
(Cino and James 2016). According to ISO 9126-1 and 4 learnability is a subsystem
of usability, along with understandability, operability, attractiveness and usability
compliance. The learnability is a matter of how the possible futures making dif-
ferent hypotheses correct branch off from one another through time. The more
complex the temporal entanglement of the futures satisfying incompatible
hypotheses, the more difﬁcult learning will be. Learnability is governed by the
topological complexity of the possible hypotheses and computable learnability
depends on their computational complexity.
Reliability is another concept that indicate to disposition to acquire new
knowledge or skills over a broad range of relevantly possible environments.
Reliability studiers are very diverse. For example, Topaloglu et al. (2016, p. 350)
have equated software applications developed for web 2.0 with readable and wri-
table web as well as with the possibility to develop information in a digital form and
to share information around the world. Thus, the question comes up: To what
purpose and why do teachers use digital textbooks? If the answer is: for teaching in
Table 4.1 Usability versus learnability within digital textbooks use and development
Usability
Learnability
Deﬁnition
Extend on which a digital textbook
can be developed and used to achieve
the speciﬁc goals: efﬁciency,
operability, attractive, memorability
and untestable by the user, helpful to
avoid errors, designed to safeguard the
health
Intuitive interfaces, comprehensive
input and output, as well as
instructions readiness and messages
readiness (when it is applicable). But,
a learnable user interface can be very
cumbersome for experienced users
Aim
To make possible for users to archive
their goals when using the digital
textbook as a pedagogical resource or
tool for learning. Can the users
accomplish their goal?
How easy is it for a user to learn how
to use digital textbooks? How intuitive
is interfaces to learn or to self-evaluate
the knowledge?
Effect on
the user
The more usable is the digital
textbook, the more possible it is for a
user to continue using the
resourse/tool efﬁciently over long
periods
The more learnable the digital
textbook is, the less time the user
takes in order to understood how to do
a speciﬁc task withoud previous
training and using any documentation
70
4
Teacher-Centered Versus Learner-Centered Design of Screen

an innovative way in a teacher-centered learning environment, than the reliability
could be considered an equivalent of composing some distributed contents in a
holistic one.
Solvability in a teacher-centered learning environment refers on an opportunity
to develop an adequate strategy and prove that this strategy succeeds/not succeeds
in the relevant sense. However, if the issue of solvability will be investigated from
the cybernetic point of view, then it is used the algorithmic way. According to
Gadouleau et al. (2016), the solvability problem asks whether the demands of all the
destinations can be simultaneously satisﬁed by using linear network coding. The
guessing number approach converts this problem to determining the number of
ﬁxed points of coding functions f: An ! An over a ﬁnite alphabet A (usually
referred to as Boolean networks if A = {0, 1}) with a given interaction graph, that
describes which local functions depend on which variables.
Readibility refers on the quality of writing that makes text easy or difﬁcult to
read and understand. The readability of text can be measured and improved. There
are many tools and tests that can analysed the readability of the text. If the text is
written in MS Word, the simplest way is to use the tool embodied in this program.
For testing the readability it is used Flesh Reading Ease, Flesch-Kincaid Grade
Level, Gunning-Fog Index and others. Therefore,
(1) Fresh Reading Ease test rates text on a 100-point scale, so that the higher the
score, the easier it is to understand the document. The good readable text is
when the score is between 60 and 70. The formula for the Flesch Reading Ease
score is:
206:835  1:015  ASL
ð
Þ  84:6  ASW
ð
Þ; where:
ASL = average sentence length (the number of words divided by the number
of sentences) and ASW = average number of syllables per word (the number
of syllables divided by the number of words).
(2) Flesch-Kincaid Grade Level test aims to identify the readability of content at
the school level. The formula for the Flesch-Kincaid Grade Level score is:
0:39  ASL
ð
Þ þ 11:8  ASW
ð
Þ  15:59; where:
ASL = ave sentence length (the number of words divided by the number of
sentences) and ASW = ave number of syllables per word (the number of
syllables divided by the number of words).
In addition, many online tools allow testing the readability of the digital content.
For example, using ‘Readability Test’ can be calculated and interpreted the read-
ability of digital textbooks, providing the website address.
Legibility is for quality of screen being clear enough to read. Ornamental fonts
and text in all capital letters are hard to read, but italics and bolding can be helpful
when used correctly. Large or small body text is also hard to read. Screen size of
10–12 pixel sans serif and 12–16 pixel serif is recommended. High ﬁgure-ground
4.3
Essential Elements in Teacher-Centered User Interface Design
71

contrast between text and background increases legibility. Dark text against a light
background is most legible (Table 4.2).
Affordability is the extent to which digital screen is affordable. Some digital
screens is for presenting data, information or knowledge, others is for learning. In
the ﬁrst case, the students read the information, but in the second—need to spend
time and effort to go through the content linearly or sequentially before they read
any particular piece of information. Sometimes students may willing to spend the
time and effort, but sometimes—not. How to facilitate the affordability of the digital
screens for learning?
If one believes is important to offer direct access to content, making sure that
navigation is easier. But, according to Barab and Squire (2004, p. 3), design-based
research suggests a pragmatic philosophical underpinning, one in which the value
of a theory lies in its ability to produce changes in the world. If so, we, as teachers,
are in the core of global challenges for the sustainable development of students for
better accommodation and relevant decision-making regarding the future of local
and global world environment. In plus, textbooks designed for mobiles do take into
account the limited channel capacity and make sure that students will learn. Mobile
apps could add affordability of these textbooks, as apps around special tasks have
built.
Alternatively, simply offering the indirect access through observing the student’s
behavior and helping them to develop own potential during learning. For this issue,
some designers recommend to take into accord the interdependencies between
Table 4.2 Topographic readability versus legibility
Readibility
Legibility
Deﬁnition
The way in which words and groups
of words is arranged in a way that
allows the readers eye to access the
content easily and in a way that makes
sense
The way of how a typeface is
designed and how well one individual
character can be distinguished from
another
Speciﬁc
features
Spacing Height (e.g. additional
spacing placed before or after a
paragraph)
Line Height (e.g. if the line height of
one paragraph is set to 2em and a
paragraph is 1.5em, the ﬁrst paragraph
will require more paragraph spacing
and probably more margins around it)
Size (e.g. 13px or 0.813em at smallest)
Measure (e.g. around 70 characters)
Letter spacing (e.g. add generous
letter spacing to subheads or phrases
of uppercase text)
Good type contrast
Successful hierarchy of contents
digestible parts
Naturally open counters (e.g. more
words with o, e, c etc. help to deﬁne
character is the most easiest way)
Individual letter shapes:
– large x-height can improve
legibility
– character shapes affect legibility
Serif typefaces: lighter typefaces are
usually more legible than heavier
weights
Transparent type:
– content to be more important
than the container
72
4
Teacher-Centered Versus Learner-Centered Design of Screen

learner’s needs to learn and medium features that makes learning easier, as follows
(Table 4.3).
There are many ideas how to develop rapid and intuitive user interfaces for
learning. Google develops one of these apps, known as Primer. Nam (2015) has
observed that only 3 % of people want to learn something new and spend own time
during learning. Learning has several barriers to entry: you need to ﬁgure out what,
where, how you want to learn, and then you need the time, money, and energy to
follow through. In her opinion, digital screens designed for learning needed to be
intuitive and inviting in order to overcome all factors that keep people from
learning. Initially, the focus group has divided into three categories: passive (those
who are looking around and browsing), active (that have more that an idea about
what they want to learn) and curious (looking to learn something new, but not sure
what). Then it was designed prototypes. There are three of the most important
elements:
(1) Dashboard, e.g. lesson parks, letting users pick from three random lessons and
others.
(2) Lessons with the rhythmically guide the user through the content.
(3) Activities with the three types of interactions that appears at different types, e.g.
Quick Starts appear early in each lesson; Mid-Lesson Activities appear during
the lesson; and Do This Nows come at the end.
This is an affordable model of the teacher-centered interfaces for learning.
4.4
Information Is Information, not Matter or Energy
‘Information is information, not matter or energy’. This famous words of Wiener,
written in 1948 for ‘Cybernetics: Or the control and communication in the animal
and the machine’ today is more important than even. We found this quote important
for understanding challenges of the actual living and learning design. Does infor-
mation, mater and energy are connected or not? This is the question of this
paragraph.
Table 4.3 Interdependencies between learner’s need to learn and medium for learning
Learner’s need to learn
Medium
1.
Remembering a small amount of verbal information
Auditory medium
2.
Retaining information over longer periods of time
Textual information
3.
Learn information more effectively
Pictorial mode
4.
Recall and recognitize spatial relations in a story
Concept mapping
5.
Understanding motion-based information
Animation/video
6.
Difﬁcult information, i.e. abstract concepts
Tool for exercising concepts
7.
Communicating verbal information
Textual information
4.3
Essential Elements in Teacher-Centered User Interface Design
73

We live in a globalized world in which ‘reversing global climate change, pro-
tecting biodiversity, restoring the health of our oceans, developing sustainable food
systems, accelerating the shift toward clean, renewable energy—require funda-
mentally new ways of thinking and acting’. In such a word, teaching, assessment
and learning practice are ‘integrated’ with context, content, core competencies, and
habits of mind. Some of these practices could be extended on the base on inno-
vative instructional strategies.
Can anybody learn something if he/she doesn’t have a vital energy?
Can anybody learn something if he/she doesn’t have a vital energy? Does the
human has a potential energy? What are the correlation between potential and
kinetic energy? How important is to use multisensory cues for changing potential
into kinetic energy? Is this process reversible or irreversible? What interface design
is the most important for deeper learning: those that organize information into
memorable ‘chunks’ or those that enable students in a dynamic self-directed
learning process? Some of the answers to these questions could be found in the
following article signed by Li et al. (2016, p. 65), as follows:
Human beings’ brains are one kind of high energy storage battery. Life is one procedure of
studying. In the times of big data, the social network is incredibly growing, intelligence is
increasingly increased, update periods of knowledge are becoming shorter and shorter, and
new ideas and new knowledge are coming endlessly. Virtual learning, due to its advantages
of quickly recharging brains, is being loved by people of all ages and levels. Nevertheless,
community resident virtual learning autonomy requires cultivation.
It is a veriﬁed fact that everything is energy in motion, even the children
growing, reading, writing, recalling, emotions, memorisation, running, thoughts
and decision-making. All learning activities require energy. How about physio-
logical actions or/and unconscious physiological functions, especially the role of
the unconscious affective reactions to deeper learning? Indeed, there are various
forms of energy important for learning: potential, mechanic, quantic and others.
But, not only the energy is important for learning (Fig. 4.2).
Therefore, energy is the condition for all the mechanic activities/actions, like
focusing attention on digital reading, walking during self-regulated learning, run-
ning away from classrooms and many others that students use to learn or to avoid
learning something new. Does these activities are initiated or activated by data,
metadata, information or knowledge provided or rapidly disseminated on/with
digital screens? Maybe yes, because digital screen instead of printed page are
working on/with energy. More research is needed to understand all these complex
and interconnected mechanisms, processes and stored data on the base on digital
screen.
The energy is at the head of the ancient medicine and cosmology. From the one
hand, the energy is vital for maintain all physical, mental and emotional activities
and actions of human body. Everybody ‘vibrates’ at some energetic frequencies
during his/her life. The brain’s potential energy of processing data, metadata,
information and knowledge characterise the learning style (Keefe 1987; Reid 1987;
Riding and Sadler-Smith 1997), which associated with intellectual ability,
74
4
Teacher-Centered Versus Learner-Centered Design of Screen

personality and achievement motivation, as was observed by Busato et al. (2000,
p. 1057).
On other hand, digital interfaces attract people by ‘default’ rather than by
deliberate choice. This is a kind of a new energy with the potential to motivate for
sustainable understanding of the world, either real or virtual. What are the corre-
lations between the brain and body’ energy? Does the body energy is so important
for identiﬁcation, sorting, summarising things or patterns of the real world for
decision-making? How important is the physical activity immediately after learning
activity? Does sleeping improve deeper learning? These and many other questions
should be answered before the scientists will be able to provide the adequate
deﬁnition of what learning is?
Over the years, numerous studies of learning style and its multiple correlations
with intellectual ability and educational outcomes show that learning style is a
distinctive feature of learning preferences. Thus, according to Neuhauser (2010),
the person who need people as a source for regenerating his/her energy is extro-
verted, whereas those who prefer solitude to recover energy may tend toward
introversion. In plus, extroverts ﬁnd their energy is sapped when they spend too
much time along. Introverted people loss energy from being around people for long
periods of time, particularly large crown. However, as was noted by Carl Jung,
there is no such thing as a pure introvert or extrovert. According to Hans Eysenck,
the differences between introverts and extroverts is a result of the extent (e.g.
arousal) to which minds and bodies are alert and responsive to stimulus. In sum,
several studies indicate difference between introverts and extroverts as correlations
between arousal, learning, and memory (Eysenck 1976; Eysenck 2012; Swickert
and Gilliland 1998).
Research has actually found that there is a difference in the human potential and
capacity to learn in terms of how the information is processed and how the genetic
Fig. 4.2 The human body during learning
4.4
Information Is Information, not Matter or Energy
75

makeup differs for extroverts and introverts. In turn, people learn from one another
via feeling (e.g. learning through feeling); recognizing (e.g. patterns and
meta-patterns); memorization, (e.g. artefacts). Learning achievements have rein-
forced within digital learning environment, thanks to availability of the immediate
feedback. The drill and practice techniques is not yet a fashion in learning, even in
learning mathematics, chemistry, physics. The affordance of learning through
repetitive practice, when students receive small tasks for memorisation, should be
investigated in an innovative manner. The learning, as repetitive actions, is char-
acterized by time, effort, energy and intellect.
It is true that in a digital society, learning become more and more complex.
Initially, it was observed that learning is effective when students are engaged in
process and that active engagement in the learnings process promotes mental
activity. The mental activity helps students retain new information and develop
some thinking capacities. Therefore, it was proved that an effective learning process
is individual, group based or collaborative. However, this is not enough for success
in a digital society. In a powerful real-digital learning environment is required a
mechanical-quantum energy for learning. The quantum energy is a result of deeper
thinking.
The postmodern paradigm of learning should penetrate life deeper enough to
answer essential questions of humanity and offer solutions for sustainable learning.
Complicated problems cannot be solved at the same level as easy problems. For
example, if the speciﬁc objective of learning is recalling the adding of numbers,
then it is used immediate feedback. Thinking about learning from the paradigm of
the human well-being is bound to give as a scare from the perspective of the
understanding user interface design for a dynamic equilibrium of human life with
the patterns of the UNIVERSE. To address an innovative learning paradigm it is
required a new level of thinking about learning in general.
From the standpoint of the sustainable development, digital textbook is not
digitalised/digitised version of printed textbook. Thus, there are no ultimate answer
of what is the most effective methods for learning with textbooks. This mean that
learning designers should move beyond the paradigm or develop instructional,
assessment of learning model according to this paradigm. The provided 0model
should be focused on solving the special task(s).
4.5
Essential Elements in Learner-Centered
Interface Design
Learner-centered
interface
design
refers
on
decide
upon
the
look
of
a
learner-centred learning environment that is vital for sustainable development and
in which student(s) is central or became the central of own lifelong activities and/or
actions for better adaptation in the local/global, or/and real/virtual challenges.
He/she contribute to everyday decisions in the most rational way. Therefore, the
76
4
Teacher-Centered Versus Learner-Centered Design of Screen

learner-centered interfaces are developed together with the teacher during the
learning process. Two remarks are important here, as follows:
– By teacher, we understand not only a person who teach, but also each of the
resources, tools, phenomena, events, emotions, experience abroad into a
on-formal or informal environments, which make learning possible.
– By learning process, we understood not only a component of a well-deﬁned
didactic process, but also the conscious and/or unconscious activities or/and
actions of the brain which inﬂuence the behavior, during the assessment and
thinking processes.
The most essential elements of the learner-centered learning environments are
core concepts and interconnections between core concepts. The idea to use core
concepts for learning design is proved by many transdisciplinary studies, including
Fermi–Pasta–Ulam recurrence problem of non-linear systems; Pappert description
of mathetics and so on.
Learning is both conscious and non-conscious, linear and non-linear. During
learning is changed non only the synapses in the brain, but also the human body, the
information, both mechanical and in forms of quantum waves that provide signals
for learning and leaving. Maybe, digital screens form a special energetic cloud that
‘make harder’ for them learning in a traditional classroom or/with classical
blackboard?
Theoretically, the formula for student’s learning strategy can be described as
Y = D (X), where Y represent either a pedagogical or didactic goal; X—personal
goal and D indicates the own strategy for learning used to transfer the
pedagogical/didactic goal into a personalized goal. The limitation of formula is in
formative self-assessment methodology. This idea is based on the assumption that
computerised assessment exploits the feature of the digital content to be automa-
tized through including into an interactive feedback and/or feedward loops and to
be managed through a knowledge management model. From this perspectives, the
nucleus of generative structure of competence operates as follows:
(1) The knowledge structure provided in the digital or multimodal content acts
upon the human cognitive system at the level of goal-oriented inﬂuences and
based on intellect, emotion, and energy at integrated (meta)cognitive, affective
and psychomotor levels of competence.
(2) The incorporated tasks initiate the processes that are involved in acquiring the
learning
outcomes
in
transitory
processes
from
the
most
current
psycho-pedagogical state to the potential psycho-pedagogical state. The tran-
sition is equal to initial and ﬁnal levels.
All psych pedagogical mechanisms of each learner are involved in these
processes.
Into the dynamic and ﬂexible instructional strategy all teaching, learning and
assessment processes that lead to learning outcomes represent a hierarchical
dynamic and ﬂexible construct, developed by each student that are guided by a
4.5
Essential Elements in Learner-Centered Interface Design
77

professional teacher. This is possible because the structure of content is generated
from an initial knowledge graph structure, which includes only interdependent
concepts. Each author of digital textbook can build the structure with interdepended
concepts, if he/she will use concept mapping as a technique for representing
concepts in knowledge graphs.
The methodological dimension is represented by the way, in which the didactic
process is integrated into functional structures that assure the efﬁciency of
communication/information, cognitive activity and assessment processes. The
proposed model is to consider the ﬁrst phase equivalent to the ﬁrst module, the
second phase-to the second module etc. Therefore, the digital content of the ﬁrst
module incorporated from the reproductive (the content is recalled from the
memory) to productive tasks (the learner synthesis a new deﬁnition, concept etc. or
construct own content following concept mapping). The number of modules
depends on complexity or difﬁculty of concepts, but, in any case, it will serve as a
fundament for designing learning tasks and solving it in powerful learning envi-
ronments. The graphic representation of “transfer” from pedagogical/didactic aim
into a personalized aim is reﬂected into an instructional dynamic and ﬂexible
strategy, that reﬂect also the system of presentation the instructional content into
electronic textbook (Fig. 4.3).
The instructional dynamic and ﬂexible structure shows an example of strategy that
ideally follows the principles of learner-centered learning environments. The content
of digital textbook is divided into modules. There are two possible models to present
digital content: inductive and deductive. Students learn effectively with either
inductive or deductive methods. The content of each module is structured around
information framework with formative assessment tasks and concept mapping tool.
In time the number of algorithmic activities tasks, focused on reproductive skills,
decrease in favour of heuristic activities. In an algorithmic method, the student is
presented with all data for problem-solving, context and procedures are described.
The learner’s decision is based on understanding and reproduction of presented
algorithm. However, during heuristic activities step-by-step procedures of learning
are not provided or explained explicitly.
Fig. 4.3 The instructional
dynamic and ﬂexible structure
78
4
Teacher-Centered Versus Learner-Centered Design of Screen

References
Barab, S., & Squire, K. (2004). Design-based research: Putting a stake in the ground. The Journal
of the Learning Sciences, 13(1), 1–14.
Basar, E. (2016). Memory and brain dynamics: Oscillations integrating attention, perception,
learning, and memory. CRC Press
Busato, V. V., Prins, F. J., Elshout, J. J., & Hamaker, C. (2000). Intellectual ability, learning style,
personality, achievement motivation and academic success of psychology students in higher
education. Personality and Individual Differences, 29(6), 1057–1068.
Cino, D., & James, T. (2016). A Usability and Learnability Case Study of Glass Flight Deck
Interfaces and Pilot Interactions through Scenario-based Training.
Dillon, A. (2003). User interface design. Encyclopedia of Cognitive Science (Vol. 4, pp. 453–458).
London: MacMillan.
Dragilev, D. (2013). What is User Interface Design? http://www.freshtilledsoil.com/what-is-user-
interface-design/
Education for a Sustainable Future. Benchmarks for Individual and Social Learning. http://www.
susted.com/wordpress/wp-content/uploads/2016/04/Benchmarks-Draft-Final-5.pdf
Elias, T. (2011). Universal instructional design principles for mobile learning. The International
Review of Research in Open and Distributed Learning, 12(2), 143–156. http://www.irrodl.org/
index.php/irrodl/article/view/965/1675
Eysenck, M. W. (1976). Arousal, learning, and memory. Psychological Bulletin, 83(3), 389–404.
Eysenck, M. (2012). Attention and arousal: Cognition and performance. Springer Science &
Business Media.
Gadouleau, M., Richard, A., & Fanchon, E. (2016). Reduction and ﬁxed points of boolean
networks and linear network coding solvability. IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, 62
(5), 2504–2519.
Haley, A. (2016). It’s about legibility. https://www.fonts.com/content/learning/fontology/level-4/
ﬁne-typography/legibility
Harenberg, S., McCaffrey, R., Butz, M., Post, D., Howlett, J., Dorsch, K. D., et al. (2016). Can
multiple object tracking predict laparoscopic surgical skills? Journal of surgical education, 73
(3), 386–390.
Human-centred design for interactive systems (ISO 9241-210, 2010). http://www.iso.org/iso/
catalogue_detail.htm?csnumber=52075
Keefe, J. W. (1987). Learning Style Theory and Practice. National Association of Secondary
School Principals, 1904 Association Dr., Reston, VA 22091.
Kelly, K. T. (2016). Learning theory and epistemology. In Readings in Formal Epistemology
(pp. 695–716). Springer International Publishing. http://repository.cmu.edu/cgi/viewcontent.
cgi?article=1383&context=philosophy.
Korving, H., Hernández, M., & De Groot, E. (2016). Look at me and pay attention! A study on the
relation between visibility and attention in weblectures. Computers & Education, 94, 151–161.
Kumar, K. L., & Owston, R. (2016). Evaluating e-learning accessibility by automated and
student-centered methods. Educational Technology Research and Development, 64(2),
263–283.
Lee, A., & Lochovsky, F. H. (1985). User interface design. Ofﬁce automation (pp. 3–20). Berlin:
Springer.
Lewthwaite, S., & Sloan, D. (2016). Exploring pedagogical culture for accessibility education in
Computing Science. http://eprints.soton.ac.uk/388799/3/Lewthwaite-Sloan-w4a2016-camera-
ready.pdf
Li, F., Xue, Q., Zhang, H., & Deng, E. (2016). How to Improve Community Resident
Autonomous Learning Based on Virtual Learning. International Management Review, 12(1).
http://scholarspress.us/journals/IMR/pdf/IMR-1-2016/IMR-v12n1art7.pdf
Lindemann, P. (2016). A Short Report on Multi-Touch User Interfaces. https://www.medien.iﬁ.
lmu.de/lehre/ws1011/mmi2/mmi2_uebungsblatt1_loesung_lindemann.pdf
References
79

Moore, E. B. (2016). ConfChem conference on interactive visualizations for chemistry teaching
and learning: Accessibility for PhET interactive simulations progress, challenges, and potential.
Journal of Chemical Education.
Multimedia User Interface Content. http://www-i4.informatik.rwth-aachen.de/content/teaching/
lectures/sub/mms/mmsSS02/slides/13.pdf
Nam, S. (2015). Making learning easy by design. https://medium.com/google-design/designing-a-
ux-for-learning-ebed4fa0a798#.9suxjluob
Neuhauser, C. (2010). Learning style and effectiveness of online and face-to-face instruction. The
American Journal of Distance Education, 99–113. http://web.cerritos.edu/nbueno/SitePages/
Pepperdine/Learning%20Style%20and%20effectiveness%20and%20online.pdf.
Oppermann, R. (2002). User-interface design. In Handbook on information technologies for
education and training (pp. 233–248). Berlin: Springer.
Pallotta, V., Bruegger, P. Hirsbrunner, B. (2008). Kinetic user interfaces: Physical embodied
interaction with mobile pervasive computing systems. In Advances in Ubiquitous Computing:
Future Paradigms and Directions, IGI Publishing, February, 2008. http://www.igi-global.com/
books/additional.asp?id=7314&title=Preface&col=preface
Readability Test. http://juicystudio.com/services/readability.php
Reid, J. M. (1987). The learning style preferences of ESL students. TESOL Quarterly, 21(1),
87–111.
Riding, R. J., & Sadler-Smith, E. (1997). Cognitive style and learning strategies: Some
implications for training design. International Journal of Training and Development, 1(3),
199–208.
Scott, B., Shurville, S., Maclean, P., Cong, C. (2007). Cybernetic principles for learning design.
http://www.univie.ac.at/constructivism/archive/fulltexts/1796.pdf
Sweller, J. (1994). Cognitive load theory, learning difﬁculty, and instructional design. Learning
and instruction, 4(4), 295–312.
Swickert, R. J., & Gilliland, K. (1998). Relationship between the brainstem auditory evoked
response and extraversion, impulsivity, and sociability. Journal of Research in Personality, 32
(3), 314–330.
Tidwell, J. (2010). Designing interfaces. O’Reilly Media, Inc.
Topaloglu, M., Caldibi, E., & Oge, G. (2016). The scale for the individual and social impact of
students’ social network use: The validity and reliability studies. Computers in Human
Behavior, 61, 350–356.
Typographic
Readability
and
Legibility.
http://webdesign.tutsplus.com/articles/typographic-
readability-and-legibility–webdesign-12211
van Rooij, S. W., & Zirkle, K. (2016). Balancing pedagogy, student readiness and accessibility: A
case study in collaborative online course development. The Internet and Higher Education, 28,
1–7.
Wang, Z., Bovik, A. C., Sheikh, H. R., & Simoncelli, E. P. (2004). Image quality assessment:
From error visibility to structural similarity. IEEE Transactions on Image Processing, 13(4),
600–612.
80
4
Teacher-Centered Versus Learner-Centered Design of Screen

Chapter 5
Knowledge Ecology and Sustainable
Development
You can’t teach people everything they need to know.
The best you can do is position them where they can ﬁnd
what they need to know when they need to know it.
Seymour Papert
Abstract Knowledge ecology refer on the investigation and epistemological the-
orizing various ways of knowing and sustainable development. Although fourth
industrial revolution is coming, the pedagogy is seeking to maintain old theoretical
concepts and methods. This cause a dialectical contradiction between requirements
of living in a real world for sustainability, philosophy of scientiﬁc transhumanism
and current education. It is not so important for pedagogy to be the art of teaching.
It is a stringent need for pedagogy to become the science that deals with identiﬁ-
cation and solving controversies, problems and issues, related on sustainable
development. The goal of this chapter is to describe the user interface design
principles of digital textbooks from the perspective of knowledge ecology and
scientiﬁc transhumanism.
Keywords Knowledge ecology  Scientiﬁc transhumanism  Principles
5.1
Introduction
The term ‘knowledge ecology’ refers on investigation and epistemological theo-
rizing the various ways of knowing for sustainable development. In concept of
Metasystems Learning Design Theory, the knowledge ecology is an equivalent to
application of the ergonomic principles. On one hand, it denotes the interconnec-
tions of fundamental principles from philosophy, psychology, pedagogy, neuro-
science, management, cybernetics and educational technology at the level of 4th
industrial revolution. And on the others that ‘research at and beyond the frontier of
understanding is an intrinsically risky venture, progressing in new and the most
exiting research areas and is characterised by the absence of disciplinary bound-
aries’ (ERC 2016). Therefore, if we intent to develop affordable solutions for
© Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2017
E.A. Railean, User Interface Design of Digital Textbooks,
Lecture Notes in Educational Technology, DOI 10.1007/978-981-10-2456-6_5
81

learning with digital textbooks, only the frontier research in pedagogy is effective to
understand user-interface design.
What are these principles? In order to understand this question let us to analyse
certain principles of the fourth industrial revolution and theirs affect education.
According to Gandhi (2015) 4th industrial revolution is guided by: interoperability;
virtualization; decentralization; real-time capability, service orientation and mod-
ularity. But, from the MetaSystems Learning Design Theory approach, that it is
focused on learning, the results indicate to self-regulation, personalisation, clarity,
dynamicity and ﬂexibility, ergonomics and feedback.
In both cases, the principles of 4th industrial revolution indicate to the need of an
innovative structure of competence, which is generative enough to be ‘extended’
during all life. From the pedagogical point of view, this means developing the
student’s strategy on the base on developing/extended knowledge, skills and atti-
tudes. What does this combination of the principles from various domains and the
direction of movement of informational-communicational technologies for educa-
tion mean for learning designer?
The reorientation of educational technology toward the knowledge ecology is a
key link between each human individuality and required generative structure of
competence for future rapid adaptation to all challenges during the life. Fourth
industrial revolution is on the way. Schwab (2016) notes that it is already created
radically new approaches that revolutionized the way in which individuals and
institutions engage and collaborate. On-demand economy within technology based
platforms makes possible to manage many things using a smart phone, e.g. convene
people, assists and data and create a new ways of goods and services like 3D
printing or using the voice on the Google app or Chrome to search, get directions,
and create reminders.
For the actual pedagogy, digitization and on-demand economy enables to use
educational platforms for learning or platforms for downloading, reading, dissem-
inating or/and collaborative development of the online textbooks. The common
thing of the most technology platforms is the descriptive power of openness and
accessibility (e.g. lost cost, the courses provided by the best universities etc.).
However, these platforms function in other way, seeding trust for innovation in
order to changes traditional conceptualisation of didactics. This is also a new call
for mathetics, as sciences of the problems in/for learning and its practical solutions.
Fourth industrial revolution is forcing all educational systems to re-examine the
way they provide learning. Major impacts of the actual phase are dealing with
expectations on education 3.0 paradigm to value nano-learning, networking, sus-
tainable development and lifelong learning. But, how to develop skills with a chaotic
distributive knowledge and without own attitude for learning? Major impacts—
teacher expectations of environment for learning are shifting—classrooms are being
enhanced by interactive whiteboards, which improves digital competence both of
students and teachers—new methods of learning are being formed as teachers learn
the importance of new forms of teaching, learning and assessment and—digital
textbooks are being transformed into new digital models.
82
5
Knowledge Ecology and Sustainable Development

Diversity of screens are increasingly at the centre of the digital revolution, which
now are everywhere. However, students expect to gain practical experience and
that, looking for new opportunities (knowledge, skills, attitudes), they entered in the
virtual world. There, they are more extrinsic motivated and self-regulated in order
to develop some practical skills for lifelong learning. These students can be iden-
tiﬁed based on their willingness and digital skills to ﬁnd new information, to share
digital data and interact. They don’t want to learn when teachers use the classic
methodology for teaching. From the technological point of view, the educational
system is moving much more to peer-to-peer sharing and personalised content than
on personalised nano-education. We are living in a world, which requires pedagogy
to respond in real time wherever it is or their teachers or/and students may be.
In sum, students who used digital devices for learning could have obtained better
educational outcomes, if they a good memory and same digital skills. In other cases,
skills should be developed with adequate pedagogy. However, many schools
around the world is seeking to maintain old theoretical concepts and methods. This
cause a dialectical contradiction between requirements of living in a real world,
philosophy of scientiﬁc transhumanism and pedagogy. In the simplest form of this
thinking, we can hear everywhere that pedagogy is not a science. In a more
complicated form, teacher training is neglected at all or, at least is very formal,
especially in the ﬁeld of trans-disciplinary frontier research.
Critics of digital learning suggest, that screens don’t allow children learn.
Indeed, if at the front of the class is an old-fashioned blackboard, but in the hands of
are digital devices and outside off school—a diversity of digital screens, these cause
a confusion for processing information. Brand cannot identify the right way, and
therefore, makes a lot of investigations and copies. But, what is the correlation
between real world and the virtual reality? How to make a difference and/or how to
integrate them in a holistic whole for an adequate decision? How to think in a new
environment using/without using a digital device?
Now, the investigation of the learning mechanisms, decision-making strategies
and other more complex issues is more important than even, but such investigations
should be focused on developing the metasystems thinking. There are many pro-
jects everywhere, showing that learning is both conscious and unconscious. The
brain chooses the decision for one or other situation in dependence on available
schemas and networking. Many decisions requires time. In this context, the
knowledge ecology, based on MetaSystems Learning Design Theory, aims to
identify the right strategy (or methodology, methods, procedure, and technique) to
learn from the availability plethora of ways for knowing, like resources, tools,
patterns etc.
All environments, either real or virtual, local or global, open or closed are the
learning environments. We learn everytime and everywhere, even during sleeping.
In brief, the diversity of learning environments could be classiﬁed in two categories:
teacher-centered learning environments and learner-centered learning environ-
ments, including all possible combinations ranging from 100 to 0 % implications of
teacher (Fig. 5.1).
5.1
Introduction
83

Instead of the traditional classroom, when learning is only the equivalent of
reading, writing and problem-solving, in the actual society there are many other
environments. These distributed environments are real or virtual, and the problem
for education is that there are more creative that those proposed by the actual
teachers. Therefore, screens with attractive user interfaces are located everywhere
and are available everytime. What are the students’ activities and/or actions on
these screens that provided various and, usually irrelevant for required data,
metadata, information and knowledge for learning?
In concept of the MetaSystems Learning Design Theory learning is a complex
mechanism than embody various resources and processes, (meta)cognitive, emo-
tional and affective reactions, conscious and un-conscious activities and decisions,
as well as psychological, physiological, psychic and other behavioural actions. The
learning occurs both in real and virtual, local and global environments. Instead of
pedagogical system, that is a closed system, the learning environments in the Age of
both fourth industrial and cognitive revolutions are more open and ﬂexible. The
most important outcomes is generative structure of competence.
The generative structure of competence is on the fundaments of the ‘ﬂexible,
dynamic and instructional strategy’ (Railean 2008). This strategy indicates on
powerful learning environment; in which learning is focused on competence
development through developing own digital textbooks. A strategic procedure is
required to grown perfect crystals. One can observe that “crystal” is similar to the
learning outcomes and the process of growing the crystal could be associated with
learning. This similarity allows predicting that powerful learning environment is
like a saturated solution needed at the beginning of crystal growing process. This
solution needs to pour over a substrate, which in our case, corresponds to context
for learning.
Immersive interfaces and collaborative assessment  
formal learning 
Interactive environments 
Adaptive interacies 
social, informal and mobile learning 
Flipped classroom 
Scaffoling learning
One-to-one learning 
Personalised learning
Teacher-centered versus learner-centered environments
Fig. 5.1 The diversity of the user interfaces for learning
84
5
Knowledge Ecology and Sustainable Development

First, it is important to obtain a “seed crystal”. In our case we will “concentrate”
the main concepts in module I and, at the ﬁnal phase, will add a quiz. After student
wills successful pass the quiz, he/she will be engaged in active personalized
learning with formative assessment and peer evaluation of project. Our “crystal”
will grow! At the end of the learning process we can keep our crystal in a closed
container or will “cover with a protective solution” (in our case, this is a certiﬁcate)
for future exploration.
What norms and methods are better in order to achieve the estimated outcomes
for learning? What interfaces should be designed for learning “crystal” how to
grow? In order to understand the answer on these questions let us ‘divide’ the
methods into three plus one category. Thus, the ﬁrst module is for one-to-one and
personalised learning; the second module—is for scaffolding and blended learning
and the third module—is for immersive learning and collaborative assessment.
5.2
One-to-One or/and Personalised Learning?
One-to-one learning refers to one of the following metaphors: ‘one computer for
every student’; ‘one-to-one tutoring’; ‘one-to-one initiative’, ‘one-to-one instruc-
tion’, ‘one-to-one laptop programs’ and many others programs, methods or tech-
niques. Personalised learning refers on student’s strategy that is focused on solving
the real issues during the learning in an optimized way. Both, on-to-one and per-
sonalised learning is an alternative to traditional approaches to teaching in which
teacher with/without textbooks provide all students in a given lesson or course the
same type of instruction, assessment, recommendations for better learning.
Both one-to-one learning and personalised learning interfaces can be designed
for learner-centered environments. However, the general goal of personalisation is
to make individual learning needs the primary consideration of teacher, instead of
one-to-one learning, when is more important the learning styles. The problem is that
in the literature is described many examples of successful personalised learning
environments in real/virtual, but without any theoretical argumentations. For
example, Salmon et al. (2016, p. 208) notes, as follows.
In order to provide a personalised, engaging experience, <…> have maintained
an active online presence, often setting up discussion threads with provocations,
encouragement and questions. The timing and distribution of forum posts was
critical also. Regular personalised emails were also sent to touch base with indi-
viduals, to build a relationship, and to respond to their individual needs.
What are the speciﬁc features of one-to-one and personalised learning? Are there
any differences in the evolution of one-to-one and personalised learning concepts?
One-to-one learning is considered the ﬁrst special teaching method when a pas-
sionate student comes to a teacher and asked to be learn in an individual way. This
seems to be a challenging situation for programmed textbooks to be the right
resources both for one-to-one and personalised learning. Apart from the Skinner’s
book: The Science of Learning and the Art of Teaching, on looking through
5.1
Introduction
85

instructional design of the digital textbooks interfaces only sometimes can be
identiﬁed any sections on teaching one-to-one learning and/or those that are per-
sonalised as a mechanic assembling of the digital pages. It was somehow assumed
that one-to-one learning with a digital interfaces means organising programmed
instruction, while the reality is that one-to-one is a signiﬁcant part of the didactic
process may improve learning, and, therefore, should be identiﬁed the suitable
conditions to achieve this result.
According to Lockee et al. (2016, p. 546), the school did not pay attention to the
contingencies of reinforcement; for those students who did get answers correct,
many minutes to several days may elapse before papers are corrected. This is a
particular problem for children in the early stages of learning who depend on the
teacher for the reinforcement of being right as opposed to older learners who are
able to check their own work. In plus, starting from the actual educational paradigm
could be observed that digital assessment norms differ by paper-pencil assessment
norms. Controversial topics such as students’ learning pattern versus environmental
multi-patterning, reproductive versus productive tasking, digital assessment timing
and scheduling have often been misunderstood. Usually, in a learner-centered
environment the student is asked not to reproduce, but to produce and share
knowledge. Can be digital interfaces used to automatize core concepts?
All above-mentioned questions have solutions, if user interfaces for learning will
be understood not only as for listening, recalling, writing processes or making
calculus, but also be planned at the level of the paradigm and technological
achievements at which learning is required. For example, listening in a digital
learning environment is a more active learning process then in a classroom, if in the
second case is used traditional methodologies. The other example is broadcast
learning. The broadcast learning, as was noted by Guhlin (2002), aims to built-in
video camera directly at the speaker, announce the availability of the presentation
on the e-mail list and chat about what was going on or broadcasting a spotlight
speaking presentation with colleague to a worldwide audience that share their
knowledge on the topic.
The listening skills may be increased through broadcast learning. There are two
way: unidirectional and multi-directional. There are a variety of tools that may be
embodied in interface design of digital textbooks and used for multi-directional
broadcast, for example in learning foreign language, most of them involving access
to a computer that has built-in video camera and a microphone. In minutes, the
content of the digital textbooks can be broadcasting, even via wireless connection,
to a worldwide audience. For these propose are available two types of solutions,
(a) those hosted by third party providers and (b) those that user host yourself on
own server. Some of them related on free hosted solutions, like UStream.tv, E2BN
FlashMeeting, Blip.tv and Kyte.tv, but some are commercial, such as Persony.com
and Yugma.com.
One practical example was describes in the literature. For interactive broad-
casting learning were used UStream.tv and Moodle with DimDim installed. The
UStream.tv was used for conference been considered the easiest way to engage
students in learning, while Moodle with DimDim was the solution that allows
86
5
Knowledge Ecology and Sustainable Development

control over the content, hold meetings online with a chat component. It is rec-
ommended, that the speaker will actively use built-in chat technologies or Twitter
as a way of keeping in touch with the audience; to assign a moderator who will
serve as the liaison from the audience at-large to the presenter/speaker.
5.3
Blended, Flipped or ‘Scaffolding’ Interfaces
for Learning?
While no standardized approach exists for the design of user interface design of
digital textbooks, some commonalities across ﬂipped and scaffolding interfaces can
be identiﬁed. Therefore, according to Network (2014), the ﬂipped learning is a
pedagogical approach in which direct instruction moves from the group learning
space to the individual learning space, and the resulting group space is transformed
into a dynamic, interactive learning environment where the educator guides stu-
dents as they apply concepts and engage creatively in the subject matter. There are
four pillars of ﬂipped learning (Fig. 5.2).
What interfaces are required for ﬂipped learning? The problem is in transfor-
mative changing from the group learning space (e.g. classic didactic model) to
direct instruction (e.g. one-to-one learning, personalised learning etc.) that requires
knowing what is and how to apply knowledge, (meta)cognitive skills and attitudes.
Next successful steps in learning requires practical application of actional and
behavioural skills. Does scaffolding be a solution? According to the Glossary of the
Educational Reform, scaffolding refers to a variety of instructional techniques used
to move students progressively toward stronger understanding and, ultimately,
greater independence in the learning process. During scaffolding, teacher provides
flexible 
environment  
learning 
culture 
intentional 
content  
Professional 
educator  
Fig. 5.2 Four pillars of
ﬂipped learning. Adapted
from Network (2014)
5.2
One-to-One or/and Personalised Learning?
87

successive levels of temporary support that helps students reach higher levels of
comprehension and skill acquisition that they will not archive without assistance.
Sedig et al. (2001) guide even expresses reluctance to deﬁne the role of interface
manipulation style on reﬂective cognition and concept mapping, stating the role of
three interfaces: (a) Direct Object Manipulation interface; (b) Reﬂective Direct
Concept Manipulation (RDCM) interface and (c) Direct Concept Manipulation
interface that is extended with scaffolding. All these interfaces to design for students
to process information consciously were used. But, dispute the relative difﬁculty
when using the interface studies it was proved that interface designed for scaf-
folding are more focused on reﬂective cognition and deep learning.
From one hand, the practical application of the scaffolding to learning is to
‘scaffold’ students’ reading, writing or making calculus experiences by letting
teachers embed annotations, multimedia, ‘checkpoint’ questions, and formal
assessments that can prompt students to consider key points, offer alternative way
of interacting with the text and prove for understanding. From the other hand,
scaffolding could be designed as an interactive, dynamic and ﬂexible model of
learning, in which learner gains knowledge, develop/increases skills and obtain own
attitudes regarding phenomena, mechanisms, processes and learning objects around
them.
Now, within the digital learning environment, the scaffolding techniques may be
associated with a blended learning techniques, which offer multiple yields when
delivery the right content for learning. Usually, blended interfaces are used in the
ﬂipped classroom in order to archive an active learning component. There are two
more design questions needed to be solved before decide what model is better:
blended, ﬂipped or ‘scaffolding’ interfaces for learning. The ﬁrst question relies on
identiﬁcation the right techniques for optimization the content that will be delivered
for learning, because it is not so important what type of technology will be used to
deliver the content, most important what and for what reason will be delivered.
5.4
Interactive or Adaptive Interfaces for Learning?
Digital interfaces are more interactive and/or adaptive. The interactive interfaces is
the concern of interaction design—a blended endeavor of process, methodology,
and attitude regarding how to design the interactive environments. Analysing the
multidimensional area of the interaction design language, Silver (2007) identiﬁed
ﬁve dimensions, e.g.
– 1D is for words as interactions;
– 2D is for visual representations, which include typography, diagrams, icons, and
other graphics with which users interact;
– 3D is for physical objects or space with which or within which users interact;
– 4D is for time within which users interact—for example, content that changes
over time such as sound, video, or animation;
88
5
Knowledge Ecology and Sustainable Development

– 5D is for designing a behavior, including action, or operation, and presentation,
or reaction;
This list could be continued, as follows. Therefore,
– 6D is for designing adaptive behavior, including adaptive learning environ-
ments, systems, cognitive mechanisms and/or (meta)cognitive and adaptive
processes;
– 7D is for sustainable education, including designing learning environments for
sustainability; metasystems, special learning tools and open resources.
These interaction design languages impact development the interactive and/or
adaptive interfaces for learning, which is important for some speciﬁc learning
outcomes. Sceptics believe adaptive digital interfaces are not so important for
learning. They embody Apps into traditional designed content and hope that this is
more important than adaptive interfaces.
However, advocates of adaptive interfaces found that compared to traditional or
video versions of traditional lectures, blended and ﬂipped courses with the adaptive
software produced higher scores on summative evaluation. In plus, as was indicated
by Browne et al. (2016, p. 8) describes the results of the Adaptive Intelligent
Dialogues project aims to research and develop techniques for designing and
building adaptive computer interfaces note that the term adaptive refers both to
self-adaptive and user tailored systems. It was recognized that adaptiveness is
required in the interface because no single ﬁxed solution is suitable for all users or
even one user over the period or range of applications. In plus, the interfaces need
to adapt to the users’ changing skills and requirements and the assistance provided
by the system needs to be relevant to the task the user is performed. However, these
requirements were important until the second digital revolution. Regarding the
self-adaptive interface, it was identiﬁed three types, as follows (Fig. 5.3).
The main feature in adaptive interface design is the dialogue on immediate
feedback. There are multiple patterns used to achieve adaptively with or without
Artiﬁcial Intelligence techniques. But, if we intent to understand what types of
adaptive interfaces are important for learning, initially we should understand why is
colect information 
about the user and 
tailor content
identify the user's 
category and set the 
interface parameters 
modife by expert what 
to monitor& present  
Fig. 5.3 Interconnections of self-adaptive interfaces
5.4
Interactive or Adaptive Interfaces for Learning?
89

important to develop adaptive systems and what systems are more affordable:
interactive or adaptive.
Most computer adaptive systems intend to teach the heterogeneous end-users.
However, in proposed design models the content is only tailored to students’
knowledge, preferences, learning styles and so on. This is the industrial case when
various sizes of one model increase its potential market. Nevertheless, there is a
limitation of how much individuality and ﬂexibility can be incorporated into one
educational software.
Weber and Brusilovsky (2016) described the system ELM-ART aims to support
new students in their ﬁrst steps of learning in a new domain within a more valuable
way through carrying novice learners for mastering the next steps with a good
textbooks and well selected examples. In the authors point of view, ELM-ART
opened the way for future generations of open adaptive and intelligent textbooks
that could be gradually expanded integrating new content and new learning
activities produced by a broad community of practice.
The situation is not similar in design and development of the adaptive textbooks,
described by other authors. As was noted by Kostolányová and Šarmanová (2016),
the creation of adaptive textbooks is more demanding than the production of classic
e-learning textbooks and that to have a classic textbook, as a source for production
adaptive textbooks is desirable. More important is streamlining of the education
process through individualisation that will allow acquiring the knowledge in a more
natural way (personally tailored for each student).
For solving the question, regarding what types of learning dynamicity is better:
interactive or adaptive, it is important to understand that we are living in a new
world which faces the 4st industrial revolution rules in terms of metacognition,
innovation, creativity, competence, experience, intuition and other transdisciplinary
knowledge, skills and attitudes, so important for sustainable world. Therefore, for
sustainable living it is important to design digital textbook on the base on new
didactic model instead on using the instructional design model.
Global challenges impact on design digital textbooks interfaces is, ﬁrst of all,
about networking and new models of information, communication, cognition and
assessment. The world is already hyperconnected. Everywhere is presented various
forms of ubiquitous communication, in which learners are involuntary ‘connected’
through channels and networks in real—virtual learning environments, where they
are more exalted to learn how to plan, model, create knowledge, establish con-
nections then to hear bored lessons about old things and theories.
On the other hand, globalization in education refers to “cognitive shift, new
relevancy spaces and new forms of subjectivities” (Macgilchrist and Christophe
2011, p. 155). This means that knowledge is not ﬁxed, cut up in pieces and handed
over, but rather (co)created by transacting with prior tacit knowledge, the cur-
riculum, and other learners. It is a time to think about fundamental challengers
regard a new educational ideal. There are some indicators: learning in/within local
and/or global, real and/and virtual networks, where all resource and tools are
available in order to offer students opportunity to learn anytime and anywhere.
90
5
Knowledge Ecology and Sustainable Development

For ﬁnal decision regarding the interactivity or/and additivity in design of
textbooks’ interfaces let us analyses the applicability of a new educational ideal:
“Professionalism, planetary thinking and cultural pluralism”. Thus, the actual
teachers and students are focused on a new strategy for learning the best methods
and techniques in order to solve tasks in an professional competitive way. They are
looking for innovative and creative solutions to protect the planet through ‘ab-
sorbing’ the global changes in culture, technology, ergonomics and ecology of
learning and to propose adequate methodologies and educational technologies for
sustainable education and development. The last, but not the least thing in interface
design refers on cultural pluralism focusing on keeping cultural identity and
autonomy of teacher and student.
5.5
Immersive Interfaces or/and Collaborative
Assessment?
The 4th industrial revolution has accelerated the high technology acceptance on
education. According to Passut (2016) with reference to Michio Kaku presentation
at ISTE 2016, educators are going to have to stress concepts and principles, rather
than the drudgery of memorization. The interface design for learning will take into
account biotechnology, nanotechnology and artiﬁcial intelligence that will drive the
economy in next future. For the driving of own live in a new economy, the actual
students should be more creative, innovative, and intelligent.
Since now, psychological and behavioral actions of the actual students are
shaping design for seeking a new intellect, energy, and emotion within various
learner-centered learning environments. Such environments are immersive both for
teacher(s) and for students. Thus, according to Dede (2009, p. 66), the immersion
can enhance education by enabling multiple perspectives, situated learning and
transfer. Typically, this is done by shifting between an exocentric and an egocentric
frame of reference. Thus, the exocentric frame provides a view of an object, space,
or phenomenon from the outside. Therefore, immersive learning is a form of
learning in which teacher can control what experiences learners have, the feedback
they receive, the opportunities they have to see both short-term and long-term
consequences.
In designing for the immersive learning, it is combined actional, symbolic and
sensory factors. According to Pagano (2013), the immersive learning environment
is a framework of interactive learning environment, either physically or virtually. If
this model is designed on the base of instructional systems design model, the
learning scenarios are replicable. Does learning outcomes are replicable? The issue
of replicability can be analysed on the base on concept “immersive digital learning
tool”. Such a tool, proposed by Pearson, aims to reimagine the textbook as a
multimedia experience replete with videos, interactive exercises, and animated
infographics. But, how to design such textbook in the most affordable way?
5.4
Interactive or Adaptive Interfaces for Learning?
91

In concept of MetaSystems Learning Design, the most affordable model of
design aim to increase the vitality of the generative structure of competence. Oddly
enough, the ability to self-regulate own learning, as well as the most useful
knowledge, skills and attitudes are not depend on what instructional approach or
standards schools adopts. More important is with which (meta)cognitive thesaurus
students come in life and how it was developed during lifelong learning. Therefore,
digital learning can inﬂuence genotype and phenotype development in the positive
or/and negative way, ﬁrst, because use digital interfaces and learning environments.
Digital immersive interfaces allows students to develop own strategy for
learning. If teachers accept other models instead of classical teaching, the students
will only read, write or make calculus, but also, will develop own textbooks. In
plus, there are multiple innovative ways to develop digital content for under-
standing, like comics. The importance of educational comics for design of text-
books is proved by Kim et al. (2016), Kußmann (2016), Sarada (2016), McGeown
et al. (2016) and others.
The immersive interface design is not only about the principles and about norms
of digital learning, but also about the possibility to develop new skills. One of such
thing is using of hashtag. Thus, according to Echeveste (2014), the “hashtag” (“#”)
has become the go-to hot key for trending topics and Twitter discussions. They’re
prevalent on Twitter (where they got their start), but they have also seeped into
Instagram, Google+, Vine, Tumblr, Pinterest, Facebook, Tagboard and even come
up in Google searches and Google alert. For example, some of the hashtags may be
used to ﬁnd new digital textbooks.
References
Dede, C. (2009). Immersive interfaces for engagement and learning. Science, 323(5910), 66–69.
Browne, D., Totterdell, P., & Norman, M. (Ed.). (2016). Adaptive user interfaces. Elsevier.
Echeveste, S. (2014). 24 Examples of Using Hashtags for Teaching and Learning. http://www.
emergingedtech.com/2014/11/ways-to-use-hashtags-for-teaching-and-learning/
ERC. (2016). Frontier research. https://erc.europa.eu/glossary/term/267
Frick, T. W. (1991). Restructuring Education through Technology. Phi Delta Kappa Educational
Foundation. Bloomington: Indiana. https://www.indiana.edu/*tedfrick/fastback/fastback326.
html
Gandhi, N. (2015). Industry 4.0—Fourth industrial revolution. http://scn.sap.com/community/
manufacturing/blog/2015/06/30/industry-40–fourth-industrial-revolution
Guhlin, M. (2002). Methods That Work: Educator Competencies for Technology in Public
Schools. http://ﬁles.eric.ed.gov/fulltext/ED466798.pdf
Kim, J., Chung, M. S., Jang, H. G., & Chung, B. S. (2016). The use of educational comics in
learning anatomy among multiple student groups. Anatomical Sciences Education.
Kostolányová,
K.,
&
Šarmanová,
J.
(2016).
Individualisation
and
personalisation
of
education-modern trend of eLearning. International Journal of Continuing Engineering
Education and Life Long Learning, 26(1), 90–104.
Kußmann, J. (2016). Comics in the Bavarian Academic High School. Novel Perspectives on
German-Language Comics Studies: History, Pedagogy, Theory, 67.
92
5
Knowledge Ecology and Sustainable Development

Lockee, B., Moore, D., & Burton, J. (2016). Foundations of programmed instruction. http://www.
aect.org/edtech/20.pdf
Macgilchrist, F., & Christophe, B. (2011). Translating globalization theories into educational
research: Thoughts on recent shifts in Holocaust education. Discourse: Studies in the Cultural
Politics of Education., 32(1), 145–158.
McGeown, S. P., Osborne, C., Warhurst, A., Norgate, R., & Duncan, L. G. (2016). Understanding
children’s reading activities: Reading motivation, skill and child characteristics as predictors.
Journal of Research in Reading, 39(1), 109–125.
Midoro, V. (2005). A Common European Framework for teachers’ professional proﬁle in ICT for
education. Ortona, Italy. Edizony Menabo Didactica.
Network, F. L. (2014). The four pillars of FLIP™. http://www.ﬂippedlearning.org/cms/lib07/
VA01923112/Centricity/Domain/46/FLIP_handout_FNL_Web.pdf
Pagano, K. O. (2013). Immersive learning. Designing for authetic practice. USA: American
Society for Training and Development.
Passut, J. (2016). ISTE 2016: Michio Kaku Says Education Needs a Revolution. http://www.
edtechmagazine.com/k12/article/2016/06/iste-2016-michio-kaku-says-education-needs-
revolution
Railean, E. (2008). Electronic textbooks in electronic portfolio: a new approach for the
self-regulated learning. Proceedings of 9th International Conference on Development and
Application Systems DAS 2008 (pp. 138–141). Suceava: Stefan cel Mare University of
Suceava.
Salmon, R., Priestley, R., Mitchell, D., Carter, A., & Dohaney, J. (2016). Science in Society
spreads its wings: An online course suite and integrative MOOC approach. In Charting
Flexible Pathways in Open and Distance Education (pp. 208–210). http://conference.deanz.
org.nz/wp-content/uploads/2014/07/DEANZ16-Conference-proceedingsFINAL.pdf#page=208
Sarada, P. A. (2016). Comics as a powerful tool to enhance English language usage. IUP Journal
of English Studies, 11(1), 60.
Schwab, K. (2016). The fourth industrial revolution. Geneva: World Economic Forum. http://
cormolenaar.nl/wp-content/uploads/2016/04/The-fourth-industrial-revolution.pdf
Sedig, K., Klawe, M., & Westrom, M. (2001). Role of interface manipulation style and scaffolding
on cognition and concept learning in learnware. ACM Transactions on Computer-Human
Interaction (TOCHI), 8(1), 34–59.
Silver, K. (2007). What Puts the Design in Interaction Design. http://www.uxmatters.com/mt/
archives/2007/07/what-puts-the-design-in-interaction-design.php
The Glossary of Educational Reform. (2015). Scaffolding. http://edglossary.org/scaffolding/
The On-Demand Economy. (2016). Powering the future of the on-demand economy. https://
theondemandeconomy.org/
Weber, G., & Brusilovsky, P. (2016). ELM-ART–An interactive and intelligent web-based
electronic textbook. International Journal of Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Education, 26(1), 72–81.
http://gdac.uqam.ca/inf7470/Articles/EL-MART%20etc.pdf
References
93

Glossary
Adaptive textbook A system, a textbook or an educational software in which
content is tailored to students’ knowledge, skills, preferences, learning styles etc.
through capturing the answer and presenting a personalized learning path for
reading and re-reading
Apps Is a self-contained program or piece of software designed to fulﬁl a particular
purpose; an application, especially as downloaded by a user to a mobile device
Artefact Is a something observed in a scientiﬁc investigation or experiment that is
not naturally present but occurs as result of the preparative or investigative
procedure
Blended learning Deﬁnes a mix of face-to-face methodology (e.g. lecture,
drill-and-practice etc.), instructional technology (e.g. videotape, CD-ROM,
web-based training, ﬁlm) and web-based multimedia instruction (e.g. live virtual
classroom, self-paced instruction, collaborative learning, streaming video, audio,
and text) in order to create a harmonious effect of learning
Cloud computing Is a model for enabling ubiquitous, convenient, on-demand
network access to a shared pool of conﬁgurable computing resources (e.g.,
networks, servers, storage, applications, and services) that can be rapidly pro-
visioned and released with minimal management effort or service provider
interaction (NST Deﬁnition)
Comics Is a medium used in education to express ideas by images often combined
with text or other visual information and presented to students in the form of
juxtaposed sequence of panels of images in order to indicate a dialogue, nar-
ration, or other information
Crystal A piece of a homogeneous solid substance having a natural geometrically
regular form with symmetrically arranged plane faces
© Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2017
E.A. Railean, User Interface Design of Digital Textbooks,
Lecture Notes in Educational Technology, DOI 10.1007/978-981-10-2456-6
95

Digital brain Is a term used to deﬁne a bran that can effectively process infor-
mation through ﬁltering irrelevant data, storing things for reference, writing
down ideas and much more actions and activities, but not use binary logic or
binary addressable memory, and it does not perform binary arithmetic, like a
computer
Digital device Is a term used to deﬁne a physical unit of equipment (i.e. computer,
tablet, smartphone and others), which may be used for learning
Digital learning environment Is a subset of a learning environment in which
learning is has facilitated by technology
Digital library Is a special collection of documents in organized electronic form
with a focused collection of digital objects, artefacts, patterns and meta-patterns,
which is available on the Internet or on CD/DVD disks
Digital Revolution Is the global big change from mechanical and analogue elec-
tronic technology to digital electronics for mass production and widespread use
of digital logic circuits and its derived technologies, including computers,
Internet, digital textbooks etc.
Digital screen media Is the visual content specially designed and formatted to be
delivered from digital screen such as LED, LCD, and projector screens either
indoors or outdoors in corporate and public spaces
Distributed learning Is a model of instructional delivery the content that includes
a mix of web instruction, streaming video conferencing, television, video, audio,
face-to-face classroom time in all possible combinations of traditional and digital
activities
Educational software Refers to a software that has be used for teaching, learning
and assessment in order to maximise the power of the computer
Electronic paper or e-paper Is the ‘paper’ of computers, laptops and smart-
phones, which is made of ﬂexible material, requiring ultra-low power con-
sumption, cheap to manufacture, easy and convenient to read
Episodic memory A portion of long-term memory that includes the human’s
collection of past experience, single, collective or associated emotions, that
occurred at a particular time and place
Formal learning Is a form of learning delivered by trained teachers within a
school, academy, college, institute or university
Formative assessment Is a type of assessment concerned with how judgments
about the quality of students response can be used to shape and improve the
students’ competence by short circuiting the randomness and inefﬁcacy of
trial-and-error learning
96
Glossary

Gamiﬁcation Deﬁnes the practical ‘application of elements used in the develop-
ment of video games, such as mechanics and dynamics in other contexts
unrelated to games, to generate more enjoyable and positive attitudes from the
students (de Santana et al. 2016, p. 911)
Genotype Is complete heritable generic identity or a genetic makeup of a speciﬁc
organism, which produce different effects regarding different situations and,
therefore, results in some of the physical characteristics or behavioural reactions
of the human’ body during learning
Global network Is a technology-based communication network, which spans the
Earth
Global society Is a term used to describe the contemporary society, aroused as a
result of the digital globalisation within ﬂows of data and competence devel-
opment, in which all people have a good deal in common with one another
Hashtag Is a type of label, symbol or metadata tag used to ﬁnd messages within a
speciﬁc theme or content more easily. For this, the hashtag character is placed in
front of a world or unspaced phrase, either in the main text of a message or at the
end
Immersion A subjective impression that one is participating in a comprehensive
and realistic experience
Independent learning A form of learning when an individual is able to think, act
and pursue their own studies autonomously, without the same levels of support
you receive from a teacher
Informal learning Is a form of learning, which typically takes place naturally as
part of some other activity
Interactive textbook A subset of a digital textbook in which students interact with
content in reading, writing, exercising, playing simulations, educational games,
direct virtual labs, animate art, get extra help and other activities
Intrinsic programing Or branching programing is a model of design electronic
training devices without assumption about the nature of the learning process
Intuitive learning Form of learning based on own student or/and teacher intuition
that allow discovering some possibilities and relationships
LCD screen Or Liquid Crystal Display, is a panel of liquid crystal molecules to
take certain patters, which block light or allow it through. Color LCD displays
have green, blue and red sub-pixels in each pixel. The teacher can control the
intensity of light in order to display images in millions of colors
Learning algorithm Is a term used in programed learning to deﬁne a machine
code able ‘to sort problems’ and provide relevant solutions
Glossary
97

Learning analytics Is the measurement, collection, analysis and reporting of data
about learners and their contexts, for purposes of understanding and optimizing
learning and the environments in which it occurs. A related ﬁeld is educational
data mining
Learning object According to Hodgins (1994), is a collection of content items,
practice items, and assessment items that are combined based on a single
learning objective
LED screen Is a ﬂat panel display, a small display, or a component of a larger
display or screen, which uses an array of light-emitting diodes as pixels for a
video display. LEDs can be quickly switched on or off, allows control of light
and do not consume as much energy
Lifelong learner is a term Used to deﬁne a person that have the capacity to learn
and actively learn throughout adult life in various learning environments across
disciplines and subjects, and beyond traditional schooling and education
Literacy Is a term used to deﬁne a ﬂexible and sustainable command of a set of
capabilities in the use and production of traditional text and new communication
technologies with spoken language, print and multimedia
Medium for teaching and learning A particular form, method or a system of
communication (such as play, portfolio, digital textbook, ibook, ebook) that are
used for teaching and learning. The best medium is considered adaptive and
interactive, and the worst—video and podcasts
Monographic textbook A subset of an digital or digitalised academic monograph
for reading the primary research and original scholar view, presented at length
the synthesized patterns during research of a subject
Multimodal text Is a digital text that includes two or more of the following
semiotics systems: linguistic, visual, audio, gestural and spatial. In a multimodal
text, the effects of the semiotic systems combination represents a holistic whole
Nexus Is a series of smartphones and tablets manufactured by Google and its
hardware partners, which run the native Android operating system
Non-formal learning Is a form of learning which includes instructional activities
provided by non-trained educators and without a formal curriculum
On-demand economy Economic activity created by digital marketplaces that fulﬁl
consumer demand via immediate access to and convenient provisioning of goods
and services
Perceptual learning The process of learning improved skills of perception,
ranging from simple sensory discriminations, cognitive processes to complex
categorizations of spatial and temporal patterns relevant to real-world expertise
98
Glossary

Phenotype Is the visible actual physical expression, or characteristics, or trait of
each individual, which could be changed or modiﬁed during lifelong learning or
some unique circumstances or environments in which the person life or/and
study
Podcasts A digital audio ﬁle made available on the Internet for downloading to a
computer or portable media player, typically available as a series, new instal-
ments of which can be received by subscribers automatically
Productive learning Is an approach of learning focused on creating something
new and innovative; it is based on insight and innovation
Reproductive learning Is an approach of learning reﬂecting in memorisation of
the information needed for assessment and focusing on discrete element without
integration
Responsive Text is a term used to deﬁne the possibility of digital technology to
reside the text’s container and to have the text reﬂow inside it through dynamic
updating
Self-directed learning Is the process of learning in which learner takes the ini-
tiative to choice, e.g. to take one or more courses from a curriculum or to choose
the pre-designed modules like a video tape, workbook, special reading, etc.
Semantic memory A portion of long-term memory that includes facts acquired
over a lifetime and processes ideas and concepts that are not drawn from the
personal experience (e.g. names of colors, the sounds of letters, the capital of
countries etc.)
Summative assessment Is concerning with summing up or summarizing the status
of a student and is geared toward reporting at the end of a course especially for
purposes of certiﬁcation
Web Is a collection of linked documents, graphics, and sounds accessed over the
Internet
Glossary
99

