
Using Social Media 
in Libraries
Best Practices
Edited by
Charles Harmon
Michael Messina
T H E  S C A R E C R O W  P R E S S ,  I N C .
Lanham • Toronto • Plymouth, UK
2013

Published by Scarecrow Press, Inc.
A wholly owned subsidiary of The Rowman & Littlefield Publishing Group, Inc.
4501 Forbes Boulevard, Suite 200, Lanham, Maryland 20706
www.rowman.com
10 Thornbury Road, Plymouth PL6 7PP, United Kingdom
Copyright © 2013 by Scarecrow Press, Inc.
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced in any form or by any 
electronic or mechanical means, including information storage and retrieval systems, 
without written permission from the publisher, except by a reviewer who may quote 
passages in a review.
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Information Available
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Using social media in libraries : best practices / edited by Charles Harmon, 
Michael Messina.
       pages cm
  Includes bibliographical references and index.
  ISBN 978-0-8108-8754-1 (pbk.) — ISBN 978-0-8108-8755-8 (ebook)  1.  Online 
social networks—Library applications. 2.  Social media. 3.  Libraries and community.  
I. Harmon, Charles, 1960- editor of compilation. II. Messina, Michael, editor of 
compilation. 
  Z674.75.S63U85 2013
  025.04—dc23
                                                                                                          2012044728
™ The paper used in this publication meets the minimum requirements of American 
National Standard for Information Sciences—Permanence of Paper for Printed Library 
Materials, ANSI/NISO Z39.48-1992. Printed in the United States of America

iii
Contents
Foreword 
v
Laura Solomon 
Introduction  
ix
Walt Crawford
1 
Blogging for Readers 
1
Robin Hastings 
2 
The United Nations Library Is Seriously Social  
13
Angelinah C. Boniface 
3 
Visualizing Information with Pinterest 
23
Cynthia Dudenhoffer 
4  Navigating the Virtual Horizon: Finding Our Way Using 
Social Media in Hospital Libraries 
37
Yongtao Lin and Kathryn M. E. Ranjit
5 
Beyond the Teen Space: Reaching Teens through Social Media 
53
Laura A. Horn 
6  The Library in the Social Network: Twitter at the Vancouver 
Public Library 
65
Kay Cahill 

iv 
Contents
7 
Successful Blogging Strategy and Design 
77
Jason Paul Michel 
8  Social Catalogs: Implementing an Online Social Community 
as an Extension to Our Physical Libraries 
87
Laurel Tarulli
Index 
99
About the Editors and Contributors 
101

v
Foreword
LAURA SOLOMON
The Ohio Public Library Information Network
If your library is on Twitter, chances are good that I have unfollowed it.
Perhaps your library was the one that spammed me with multiple program 
announcements, first thing every weekday morning. Maybe your library 
posted links to an online photo album, with no context other than “Here’s 
some photos.” Possibly, your library commanded me to do things like “check 
it out.” More than likely, your library was one of the many that simply put 
out boring, irrelevant tweets on a regular basis.
Most libraries fall short of my expectations on Facebook as well: yet more 
broadcasts of program announcements that fail to make themselves relevant 
to virtually anyone; walls that remain empty of content, except for the occa-
sional bookmobile schedule; instances where the library doesn’t even respond 
to commentary, and one is left to wonder if the library monitors the account 
at all. I might still “like” your library on Facebook, but I can guarantee that 
I am not reading its posts. Quite honestly, I’d bet that lots of other people 
probably aren’t, either.
One of my favorite quotes about social media is from Avinash Kaushik, an 
analytics evangelist for Google. He says, “Social media is like teen sex. Ev-
eryone wants to do it. No one actually knows how. When finally done, there 
is surprise it’s not better.” When I show this quote to workshop audiences, 
they inevitably giggle; then, the laughter is usually followed by a thoughtful 
silence as they realize the truth of what Kaushik said. Most libraries have 
jumped on the oversold bandwagon that social media has become, bringing 
vaguely defined ideas and usually no clue about what should happen once 
they’ve arrived. The reality of doing social media work rarely compares to 
the hype and hopes with which libraries begin.

vi 
Laura Solomon
Social media can be a Trojan horse for libraries. It has the allure of seeming 
simplicity, the hype of popularity, and the element of having little or no cost. 
Many libraries willingly begin using social media, only to discover that there 
truly is no such thing as a free lunch: The ease of use doesn’t compensate for 
having to learn the hidden rules for an organization attempting to engage pa-
trons online. The novelty of social media can quickly wear off, leaving library 
staff unpleasantly surprised by the reality of actually managing one or more 
social networking accounts for their libraries. The task that initially seemed 
“fun” can rapidly become a time sink, and dealing with the occasional cranky 
patron in a public forum can leave staff feeling even more worn.
To make matters even more complex, using social media is much akin to 
building on a foundation of sand. Many librarians put a great deal of effort 
into MySpace, only to see millions abandon that network and move to Face-
book. New networks come into being constantly, and it’s seemingly difficult 
for many libraries to stop and evaluate before chasing the next, newest thing. 
Some libraries have created accounts on every major social network, hoping 
that one will somehow be the right one with which to engage their patrons. 
As soon as a new social tool hits the mainstream, a large number of libraries 
seem to hope that the extensive publicity associated with the new network 
will carry over to their own use of it.
An additional concern is that many libraries have not defined social media 
success for themselves. Most libraries haven’t set any goals for their use 
of social media, other than ambiguous phrases such as “awareness of the 
library.” This is problematic when nearly every librarian is stretched to the 
limit, trying to do more things in less time. Effective social media work is 
time intensive. For libraries to be effective in the social media sphere, they 
have to have clear goals and definitive ways to measure progress. Otherwise, 
precious staff time is wasted.
The pitfalls of social media are plentiful, but there are prizes to be won. 
Social media presents libraries with unequaled opportunities to reach out to 
patrons. In turn, it also gives those same opportunities to patrons—to reach 
out and engage directly with their libraries. This can be unnerving, espe-
cially to library staff that are unused to the many facets of Internet culture. 
Yet, it is this very two-way interchange that makes social media so exciting 
and full of possibilities. No other medium gives us such a direct way to get 
feedback and responses from our patrons, outside of face-to-face contact. It 
is vital that libraries not squander this chance to create stronger connections 
with their patrons.
Sometimes, when we work to create those connections, there can be ob-
stacles. When I talk to librarians about using social media, one of the most 
common questions I get is “What happens if we get a negative comment?” 

 
Foreword 
vii
Even though I’ve probably fielded this question dozens of times, I’m still 
bewildered by it. Don’t we hear negative comments in the library? How 
many times have we heard patrons grumble and complain? Of the hundreds 
of librarians I follow on Twitter, I’d lay money down on the fact that at least 
half or more of them have tweeted about complaining patrons. People be-
ing unhappy with the library is hardly a new phenomenon. Why should we 
believe that online interactions will somehow be different? It’s still human 
beings making the comments; it’s only the medium that has changed. Online 
interaction is still human interaction. Those staff that are comfortable dealing 
with unhappy patrons offline will likely be competent to do it online.
Librarians and libraries have so much to offer their online patrons—way 
more than mere programming announcements. Social media forces libraries 
to act as if they exist as an individual, rather than as an institution. This is 
actually ideal because it encourages our libraries to use a more human voice. 
When patrons connect to us online, they often want to know more about the 
unique facets of our organization and the people who make them up. People 
might see the same staff at their library all the time, but how much do they 
know about those individuals? How much do our patrons know about what 
goes on behind the scenes? Libraries can convey this kind of information and 
much more with social media. Is it possible for an institution to have a collec-
tive sense of humor? Or to be entertaining? Absolutely. Libraries are so much 
more than story times and answered reference questions: They are made up 
of incredible, resourceful people who want to serve the library’s users. Social 
media gives us so many ways to highlight what makes libraries special. Shar-
ing more about ourselves enables us to not only be more transparent to our 
patrons but forge stronger bonds with them as well.
Social media, when done well, is much more about relationship building 
than it is about promoting anything. It is this concept that is perhaps the hard-
est to grasp: It is so much easier to simply pull out the proverbial bullhorn 
and shout constantly about programs and services than to craft messages and 
campaigns that intrigue and interest online fans. But, to do well in social me-
dia, libraries must change how they view it. Social media is much more than 
just another advertising medium, and only using it this way will often cause 
followers to eventually tune out such messages and even disconnect entirely. 
Ultimately, this is the most important lesson that libraries must learn.
Despite my cynicism, there are libraries out there doing social media right. 
Libraries have spent significant time to compose interesting campaigns and 
fine-tune their social media work so it is appealing to fans and followers. 
Many of these libraries have put effort into planning and measuring, and they 
know where they’re going and how they can get there. Along the way, they 
are picking up followers and conversing directly with them. These libraries 

viii 
Laura Solomon
are not frightened by the incidental bad apple in their online communities, 
and they recognize the value that can be had from engaging openly with them. 
Quite often, these libraries make social media work look easy and fun, despite 
the tremendous amount of energy they put into it.
In the following chapters, you’ll be introduced to libraries that don’t dis-
appoint in social media. Take the time to learn how they have approached 
online exchanges and posting to the mutual benefit of both their patrons and 
themselves. Especially, work to discover how they have gotten beyond the 
promotional aspects of social media to make relationships with their patrons 
more meaningful. Once you’ve mastered this, chances are, I might start fol-
lowing your library again.

ix
Introduction
WALT CRAWFORD
Author of Successful Social Networking in Public Libraries
Every library is part of a community. That’s as true for Lake Minchumina 
Community Library in Alaska (with a community of 13) as it is for Los An-
geles Public Library in California (with a community of 4 million). It’s as true 
for the Library of Congress as it is for the smallest special library.
There’s a corollary that’s always been true but is now more evident than 
ever: Every library should converse with its community—there should be 
ongoing, multiway communication among the library, its patrons, and its 
supporters. The community needs to know what the library’s doing and why. 
The library needs to know how it can serve the community most effectively. 
The library and community both need to understand changing times and 
changing needs.
But there’s another issue here. One reason why America’s public library 
system is the most robust in the world is sheer diversity and locality—the fact 
that public libraries are distinctly local institutions. “America’s public library 
system” is almost a misnomer: The libraries cooperate but can scarcely be 
labeled a single system. Nor should they: One great public library could not 
serve local needs as effectively as America’s 9,200-odd local public libraries.
I think the same is true for academic and other libraries. There’s no single 
template for a successful special library—no reason to believe that a virtual 
library with embedded librarians will work as well for a law firm as it does for 
a technology company. There’s certainly no template for academic libraries: 
Even the libraries of the Association of Research Libraries are wildly diverse, 
to say nothing of the 3,500 or so smaller academic libraries in the United States. 
I doubt that you could even make a case for consistency among school libraries.
Each library is distinct. Each community is different. Each set of conversa-
tions will be different and lead in slightly different directions.

x 
Walt Crawford
SOCIAL MEDIA AND THE LIBRARY COMMUNITY
I have mixed feelings about “social media” as a term and concept: I think of so-
cial networks and online publishing as two distinct areas. But I’m in the minor-
ity, and grouping the two makes sense for this book, so I’ll use the term here.
Libraries and librarians have been using social media for nearly as long as 
there has been social media. That’s scarcely surprising: Libraries and librarians 
have long been early adopters, especially for technologies that are affordable.
Librarian blogs date back to at least 1998, as do academic library blogs. 
Public library blogs date back at least to 2000. Dozens and probably hundreds 
of libraries were on Facebook as soon as it was feasible—and before Face-
book pages made institutional presences really workable. That continues with 
newer options: Libraries began using Google+ early on, and the same is true 
for Twitter and most other services.
Thousands of libraries now use Facebook. I’m certain that hundreds (if 
not thousands) have used MySpace and some still do. There are almost 
certainly more than 1,000 libraries using Twitter. (More than 800 library 
people are on Friendfeed in a single library-oriented group, the Library 
Society of the World, a remarkable number given Friendfeed’s relatively 
small user population.)
Libraries on social networks reach into their communities, talking to 
patrons where they spend their time and ideally carrying out actual conver-
sations, not just tossing out announcements. Both strategies—publishing 
and conversing—appear to work well for some libraries. Conversational ap-
proaches work especially well for smaller libraries, where patrons may know 
the people by name.
Online publishing doesn’t reach out in quite the same manner, except to the 
extent that patrons add RSS feeds or other intake mechanisms to the places 
where they spend their time. Online publishing can yield great conversations 
and serve libraries well, but it’s a somewhat different kind of outreach than 
social networks. (The lines always get fuzzy, as blog posts can result in auto-
matic social network entries.)
AVOIDING THE SHINY WHILE RECOGNIZING CHANGE
Many libraries use social media successfully—but that’s not an automatic 
assumption. “Build it and they will come” misquotes the movie and doesn’t 
represent reality. There are doubtlessly hundreds of cases where librarians 
have wasted time and energy on social media, whether through lack of plan-

 
Introduction 
xi
ning, choosing the wrong outlet, or failing to understand the needs of the 
local community.
For a while, there was a movement of sorts that encouraged libraries—all 
libraries, seemingly—to jump headfirst into every new social network and 
online publishing method. That never made much sense. What I’ve said of 
blogs is probably true for most other social media: They can be useful for 
almost any library, but they’re not going to be worthwhile for every library.
One issue is what I call “avoiding the shiny”: not adopting new social me-
dia just because they are new. Starting a Pinterest presence for your library 
may be a great idea if your community is receptive to Pinterest, if you have 
people who know what they want to do with it, and if you’re reasonably cer-
tain that you can connect to the community. But starting a Pinterest presence 
because it’s the hot new tool and you’ve heard how great it is for libraries—
that’s falling for the shiny.
How many libraries have spent significant amounts of time, energy, and 
possibly even money building Second Life presences when it was hot stuff? 
How many are still there—and find that they’re reaching more than a hand-
ful of people within their own communities? Second Life was the subject 
of more conference programs than I can remember, with extravagant praise 
for this sure-fire wave of the future. It was the shiny . . . and then it wasn’t. 
MySpace—except for the music community and maybe some other com-
munities—has similarly gone from the shiny to, well, a second-rate social 
network. Was your North American library on Orkut? Is it now?
Things do change. New social networks will emerge, and ways that librar-
ies can effectively (and properly) use such networks and online media will 
continue to change. In very few cases does change happen so rapidly and 
universally that your library needs to respond right now, without looking at 
the situation and planning its presence.
For that matter, even as every library is different, so is every community. 
As I write this, it’s probably true that Facebook has users in nearly every 
community. I’m less convinced that every community has a large number 
of users who want their library to be on Facebook and will interact with it 
there. That may be true in most places; it may not be true in all. Once you 
get past Facebook, the odds of reaching the people in your community drop 
fairly rapidly.
Don’t stop looking for new possibilities. Do try to see what your com-
munity actually uses—and where they’d most likely want the library to be.
And, of course, do check your library’s existing social media activities 
from time to time: Are they still serving the library and the community? If 
not, should they be refreshed or abandoned?

xii 
Walt Crawford
SUCCESSFUL SOCIAL NETWORKING IN PUBLIC LIBRARIES
I’ve tended to be a late personal adopter for social networks and social media 
in general—I didn’t start a blog until April 2005, for example. But I’ve been 
interested in how librarians and libraries actually use social media—as op-
posed to claims for such use—for quite a while. So, for example, I’ve done 
a number of studies of blogging by librarians and by libraries, published 
either in Cites & Insights, my e-journal at http://citesandinsights.info, or in 
self-published books.
Most recently, I looked at the use of Facebook and Twitter in 38 of the 50 
states in fall 2011—looking at each library system and independent library 
to see whether it was using one or both networks and, if so, how it was using 
them and how well it was reaching people. The results of that study, with hun-
dreds of examples and commentary on the situation, are published by ALA 
Editions as Successful Social Networking in Public Libraries. I recommend 
the book, naturally: It shows the overall scene in some detail.
FROM THE OVERALL PICTURE TO INDIVIDUAL CASE STUDIES
Successful Social Networking in Public Libraries shows the overall picture 
for public libraries on Twitter and Facebook but strictly from an external 
perspective.
This book is broader and narrower but also deeper. It offers commentaries 
by librarians from public, academic, special, and governmental libraries on 
how their own libraries have taken advantage of social media tools. That set 
of examples should be useful background as you consider your library’s use 
of online publishing and social networks.
Many libraries use social media well. Many could use it better. The tools to 
touch your community in a variety of ways have never been so widely used, so 
available, and so inexpensive. Your library should be at the heart of your com-
munity. Effective use of social networks and online publishing can put you in 
closer touch with that community and make your library more effective.

1
1
Blogging for Readers
ROBIN HASTINGS
Missouri River Regional Library
As both a fun activity for library staff and a way to get a database of readers’ 
advisory matchups that is specific to the participating public library, the state 
of Missouri has a “Reading Challenge” (http://mobookchallenge.blogspot
.com), which is open to each library in the state. The general challenge is to 
read the most books over the course of a year, as a staff. The benefit to doing 
this—besides the fun of discovering what your coworkers are reading and 
getting some new book suggestions—is that the staff now have a readers’ 
advisory database of sorts, right there at their fingertips—all coming from 
readers at the library. When a patron says that he or she liked a particular 
book, we can see if that book was reviewed by staff and, if so, what other 
books that person enjoyed as well. Those books can form the basis of our 
recommendations to our patrons.
Not only did the library get to create an extensive readers’ advisory da-
tabase over the course of the year, but the staff also got to compete against 
one another and other libraries while doing something that most librarians do 
naturally—read. There are statewide challenges that involve number of books 
read per month and pages read per month, and each library can do internal 
challenges as well. The Missouri River Regional Library (MRRL) chose 
internal challenges for the staff team (the River Readers), which consisted of 
the following:
•  Read a book a month on a particular theme (e.g., in February, read a 
romance; in March, read a story by a female author).
•  Upload the most posts (monthly).
•  Read the most pages (by the end of the year).
•  Read 500 books by July.

2 
Robin Hastings
With these challenges in mind, I was asked to create a blog that would be 
easy for staff to use while giving the people running the program—Claudia 
Schoonover and Angie Bayne—a way to keep track of statistics and met goals.
We first met about this program in January 2012 and decided to do it im-
mediately. The WordPress blog was set up and ready to go within a week, and 
the first reviews were posted on January 15. The official blog launch was done 
that next week on the library’s main blog—by then, we had 10 reviews already 
posted, and reviews were being added at the rate of 3 or 4 a day. Some of the 
books first posted were read earlier than the date they were actually posted, so 
the “date read” ranges from January 2, 2012, all the way through the year.
THE BLOG
We chose a WordPress blog because of the staff’s familiarity with the plat-
form, both as users and as developers. We had a WordPress blog before we 
switched to Drupal 7 as our content management system for our library, and 
several staff had experience in posting to and managing the blogs for the 
library. I, as the developer, also had extensive experience with WordPress 
both personally and professionally and knew that it would fulfill all the re-
quirements laid out in our first River Readers meeting. Because of the ease 
of customization that WordPress affords, it was our first choice. MRRL uses 
Drupal as the content management system for both internal and external 
websites, but the learning curve on Drupal is so much steeper that WordPress 
was chosen instead.
The blog itself would consist of multiple authors logging in as a single 
entity. All blog posts are posted from the MRRL staff account, rather than 
from individual accounts, again for ease of use by the staff and the developer 
of the blog—remembering a single password was easier for me to support, 
and I could easily help someone who was having trouble logging in because 
there were only two log-ins—the admin log-in and the MRRL staff log-in. 
This did give staff members the ability to edit one another’s posts, though, so 
this solution to our password issues might not work for everyone.
Each reader, after logging in as MRRL staff, started a new post and began 
the review (Figure 1.1). After filling in all the various text fields (many cus-
tomized by a plug-in; described in the next section) and uploading a copy of 
the book’s jacket image (which came from our account with Syndetics; http://
www.bowker.com/en-US/products/syndetics/), the reviewer then hit the sub-
mit button, and the review went live.
This particular workflow works because our staff is small and we trust one 
another not to either mess with our reviews without cause or upload and post 

 
Blogging for Readers 
3
something really inappropriate. Again, if your staff situation is different, you 
can give each reviewer his or her own log-in and make each an author (one 
of WordPress’s built-in roles), with no ability to edit anyone else’s work; 
then, if necessary, you can set authors to require approval before the post 
goes live. These kinds of flexible options make WordPress a great choice for 
this multiuser blog.
What we wanted from the blog was the ability to make certain bits of in-
formation about the book and the reviewer modular so that it could be used in 
many different ways in the blog. One of the custom fields that I implemented 
was the “date read” field. Breaking out that information into a separate field 
Figure 1.1. The new post page.

4 
Robin Hastings
that could be manipulated in a couple of ways was a huge help to the Reading 
Challenge blog team. We wanted the ability to sort and manipulate the informa-
tion that staff were putting in, as well as to display that information in custom-
ized ways. To do all of this, I made use of one particular plug-in extensively.
THE PLUG-IN
The only plug-ins used on the Reading Challenge blog site are the Aksimet 
(http://akismet.com) spam-fighting plug-in that I add to every WordPress 
blog I start and the Advanced Custom Fields (ACF; http://www.advanced
customfields.com) plug-in. This latter plug-in is what gave me the power to 
really customize the blog to do what I wanted it to do. I could create fields 
that were then added to the “new post” page. The fields that I added to the 
standard WordPress fields were
•  Title
•  Author
•  Page number (number of pages in the book—some of our challenges 
involved number of pages read in a particular amount of time)
•  Date read
•  Reviewer
•  Catalog URL (the URL of the book in our catalog so that I could create 
direct links to the book on each post)
The plug-in interface makes creating new fields very easy (Figure 1.2). 
You can add fields as you need them with little fuss. Each field added also 
has a number of options that let me make sure that the data being entered 
by the staff are what we wanted. For that “date read” field, I set it as a date 
field, which automatically created a pop-up calendar on the “new post” page 
whenever the author put the cursor in that field. There is no doubt about how 
the date should be entered (text, “Feb 3, 2012”; numerically, “2/3/12”; or 
whatever style of numeric format, “2/3/2012”), and the dates are all standard-
ized in the database, making use of them in future pages considerably easier 
than if they were all added in whatever format the author chose at the time.
THE CUSTOMIZATIONS
Once you have the plug-in in place, you have access to the fields via code, 
too. The plug-in page has many examples of how you can access the code 

 
Blogging for Readers 
5
yourself (http://www.advancedcustomfields.com/docs/code-examples/). You 
can also take those examples and modify them (if you have some PHP talent 
in your library) to get the custom fields to display as you would like.
The big thing that Angie Bayne, our children’s department manager and 
volunteer statistician of the Reading Challenge at MRRL, wanted was a way 
to see what books were read in what month in a quick glance. To do this, I 
created a new page on the WordPress blog and, using the code examples from 
the ACF page, made a query to the WordPress database that pulled all of the 
posts in reverse-date-read order and printed them to the page in order. The 
Figure 1.2. The plug-in create page.

6 
Robin Hastings
“books read by date” page lists the reviews with the title of the book, the date 
it was read, the number of pages it contained, and the name of the reviewer, 
in an easy-to-read table format.
This gives Angie both the number of books read in a particular month and 
the number of pages those books contained so that she can create the statis-
tics that get posted to the official Missouri Reading Challenge blog and sent 
out via e-mail to all staff, letting them know how the reading team is doing 
(see Figure 1.3).
The query to get the information from the WordPress database was pretty 
simple—the code is all set up for use in the site. All I had to do was put a 
code block in that looked like:
Figure 1.3. The “books by month” list.

 
Blogging for Readers 
7
$my_query = get_posts(array(
'numberposts' => -1,
'orderby' => date_read,
'order' => DESC
));
That code block sent a question to the WordPress database, asking it to 
send all the posts (numberposts =>-1 means “all of them”) in order of the 
“date read” field in descending order (most recent to oldest). Displaying the 
page was just about as easy. After I set up the table in plain HTML, I added 
this code block to run through the results of the above query and print a line 
of the table per result:
if ($my_query)
{
foreach ($my_query as $post) {
$booktitle = get_field('title');
$bookpages = get_field('page_number');
$bookread = get_field('date_read');
$reviewer = get_field('reviewer');
echo "<tr><td>" . $booktitle . "</td><td>" . $bookread . "</td><td>" . 
$bookpages . "</td><td>" . $reviewer . "</td></tr>";
}
}
That little block of code prints out the entire page at (http://www.mrrl.
org/read/index.php/books-read-by-date/). The first line checks that there are 
results from the query. If there are, each result is put into the “post” variable, 
which is a native WordPress construct. Then, for each result, the variables 
booktitle, bookpages, bookread, and reviewer are set to the appropriate fields 
from the database. After that is done, the table row for that result is printed, 
and the process starts all over until there are no more results from the query; 
then, the whole thing stops.
With those few lines of code, using built-in WordPress functions and code 
samples and the ACF code examples, I created the page that listed just what 
Angie needed in only a couple of hours. More complicated pages—a page 
that grouped the results by month and changed the background color of the 
rows accordingly or a page that allowed Angie to choose to see only the 
month that she picked from a drop-down list—would be perfectly possible 
but more than what we really needed. This is the simplest page that does the 
job, and both of us were happy with it.

8 
Robin Hastings
CATEGORIES
We also used a lot of categories to make the blog work the way we wanted it 
to—63 categories, in fact. We made the genre of the book a category under 
the main category types of fiction and nonfiction, and we made the reviewer a 
category under the main category type of reviewer. The hierarchical structure 
of our categories made it easy for us as reviewers to find the particular cat-
egory we wanted to use and made it easy for staff and patrons to find books 
in a particular genre or by a particular reviewer. The categories were arranged 
something like this in the “new post” page:
Fiction
•  Romance
•  Paranormal
•  Historical
Nonfiction
•  Self-help
•  Business
•  Biography
Reviewer
•  Robin
•  Angie
•  Claudia
This meant that each book could be labeled as fiction or nonfiction and then 
further labeled with a more specific genre, such as paranormal or romance. 
All reviewers were made a subcategory of reviewer for ease of finding our 
names in the mess of 63 categories.
Tags were used, though not as extensively as categories. Categories 
were an imposed taxonomy, top-down, and somewhat difficult to change 
(it required an e-mail or call to me, asking me to add a new category—not 
terribly difficult but not an instant process most of the time, either). Those 
tags, however, make a nice tag cloud of “extra” descriptors of books re-
viewed in the blog.
RESOURCES
The resources required to pull this off were minimal. We had server space for 
our website, so we just added the free WordPress software to it. No money 
was needed for software or hardware. Staff time needed is pretty extensive—

 
Blogging for Readers 
9
while the reading that we do is off the clock, the blog posts can be written 
and posted on work time. Developer time, at least for the first week or two, 
can be extensive as well. The blog customizations, as detailed earlier, had to 
be determined, planned, executed, and then tested—each step of this process 
takes some time to accomplish.
In the case of the River Readers book challenge team, the resources used 
were zero dollars and a few hours of staff time a week, with the most being 
used at the beginning of the project. Another library—with fewer hardware, 
software, and developer resources—could easily have created the blog us-
ing the free WordPress or Blogspot services online, though the ability to 
customize would have been curtailed and the amount of work required to put 
together the statistics each month for submission to the Missouri Reading 
Challenge blog would have been considerably more.
THE RESULT
Blog Posts
Each blog post is customized so that the information about that book is 
clearly visible in the review. This is for both patrons and staff. I used a few 
of the custom fields to set up the custom info block at the top of the post. In 
the post pictured here, the custom info block consists of the title of the book 
(linked to the book’s record in our catalog), the author of the book, and the 
reviewer. Information such as date read and number of pages was left off 
for simplicity’s sake. The code to pull the custom fields and display them is 
very similar to the code listed earlier. On the single.php page in WordPress, 
the database query is done automatically; all I had to do was grab the custom 
fields that WordPress didn’t know anything about:
$catalogurl = get_field('url');
$booktitle = get_field('title');
$bookauthor = get_field('author');
$bookreviewer = get_field('reviewer');
Now that I had that information stored in those variables, I could very 
easily place the information where I wanted it in the post page with an echo 
statement:
echo "<a href=" . $catalogurl . ">" . $booktitle . "</a> by " . $bookauthor 
. ", reviewed by " . $bookreviewer . "< /br>";

10 
Robin Hastings
That statement puts the custom info into the post and makes it very easy 
for patrons who are reviewing our blog to find the book in our catalog (Figure 
1.4). It also makes it easy for patrons who find a review of a book that they 
like to see immediately who reviewed it and, if the reviewer liked it as well, 
to find other books reviewed by that person. All this is made possible by the 
use of the categories as described earlier.
Lists by Month and Challenges (Stats)
July: 69 books, 20,435 pages, and 8 readers—28 of those books were 
historical fiction (our July challenge book); Tammy (circulation depart-
ment) won the month by reading 9 historical fiction books.
June: 66 books, 18, 671 pages, 8 readers—8 of those books were travel 
themed; Tracy (circulation department) won the month by reading 3 
travel-themed books.
May: 69 books, 23,885 pages, 12 readers—5 of those books were animal 
themed; Janet (circulation department) won the month by reading 2 
animal-themed books.
Figure 1.4. The single post.

 
Blogging for Readers 
11
These statistics are the type of thing that Angie, our statistical whiz, sends 
out to the staff each month to let them know what is going on with their River 
Readers challenge team. The statistics are easy for regular reviewers to enter 
and for Angie to compile because we used the ACF plug-in for WordPress. 
There may have been other solutions that would have worked, but for our 
staff, the combination of WordPress’s ease of use and the flexibility of the 
ACF plug-in made doing what we needed to do simple.
THE RESPONSE
The response from the community has been positive. Members have left com-
ments on individual posts letting us know that they appreciate the reviews. 
Authors of the books we’ve reviewed have also stopped by to leave com-
ments on their books, occasionally illuminating the review and answering 
questions the reviewer may have had. This just improves the quality of our 
blog and makes it even more useful to both staff and patrons.
Staff have been very positive about the new blog as well. Not only is it a use-
ful tool for them professionally, but it’s been a helpful tool for them personally 
as well. We are discovering what our fellow staff members’ reading tastes are 
and who to go to for recommendations for new reads when we run low.
Because the service is so new and because we are still in the thick of 
competition for the year, no formal assessments have been done. You can 
see from the statistics, however, that the service is still going strong as of 
August 2012 and books are being added at the rate of two a day or more. 
This is slower than in January, when the enthusiasm was strongest, but it’s 
still a very respectable showing for 8 months into the project that we are still 
reading, posting, and sharing on a regular basis.
Since this has been such a successful service so far, we do plan to continue 
it through the end of the year and, quite probably, do it again next year. It has 
been a fun activity for staff and a useful tool for staff and patrons.
LESSONS LEARNED
The biggest lesson learned has been that doing this Reading Challenge was 
fun. We enjoyed the process of challenging ourselves and our coworkers to 
read more, read more widely, and read more deliberately to provide the blog 
with reviews that will be of great help to future readers’ advisory sessions at 
the reference desk. One thing that we might have done differently, if we had the 
chance, was to decide on what exactly would be needed by reviewers, statistics 

12 
Robin Hastings
gatherers, readers, and the developer before opening the blog to reviewers. The 
interface was simple enough that little to no training was needed, though we 
did manage to confuse people by making fairly major changes to the blog and 
the posting interface after people had started posting stuff. Other than that, this 
project has been a resounding success for the MRRL’s River Readers Missouri 
Reading Challenge team!

13
2
The United Nations Library Is Seriously Social
ANGELINAH C. BONIFACE
The Dag Hammarskjöld Library
Social media enables people and organizations to quickly and easily publish 
their own material as well as engage, connect, network, and share ideas and 
knowledge with others. Because social media creates dynamic new opportuni-
ties for communicators, enabling direct and real-time interactivity with United 
Nations (UN) audiences, the Dag Hammarskjöld Library welcomes and rec-
ognizes the benefits of these tools while acknowledging associated risks and 
challenges. We use social media to create awareness that can help staff generate 
creative ideas and expedite transfer and sharing of knowledge between working 
groups or teams. We follow and blog on thematic issues that involve the work 
of the UN and then alert our worldwide audience to the new resources as they 
become available. The themes include but are not limited to peace and security, 
international law, human rights, and humanitarian affairs.
BACKGROUND
The Dag Hammarskjöld Library is the information and knowledge center for 
the UN’s work and activities. Librarians highlight resources and find infor-
mation on a daily basis for clients around the world. However, this knowl-
edge is not broadly shared. Therefore, the impact of what is often a long 
searching task is not maximized. Social media provides additional platforms 
for dissemination of information and knowledge. With the explosion of mo-
bile devices and on-demand electronic applications, there is a great need for 
the library to be where its users are, allowing the library to be relevant in this 
day and age. A coherent approach on how we should use social media to cre-
ate, share, connect, and disseminate information and knowledge and interact 

14 
Angelinah C. Boniface
with our clients was proposed to maximize the library’s outreach impact. The 
policy also addressed the issue of monitoring and managing by librarians to 
ensure efficiency and quality control.
The library serves, in priority, delegates, staff members, researchers, stu-
dents, and the general public interested in the work of the UN. The UN is 
the parliament of the world; thus, the UN library is basically a parliamentary 
library. Its primary function is to enable the delegations, the secretariat, and 
other official groups of the organization to obtain, with the greatest possible 
speed, convenience, and economy, UN information resources and informa-
tion needed in the execution of their duties. The purpose is to provide high-
quality library services for use by delegates, missions, and UN staff members, 
as well as by specialized researchers, while enabling all libraries of the UN 
system to function as a user-oriented network. The UN library is to establish 
depository libraries worldwide for dissemination of UN information. This is 
a complex clientele with complex information needs, and social media tools 
will assist in addressing these needs.
The environment for providing research services to parliaments has changed. 
This becomes even more complex for the UN library since it is a diverse or-
ganization. The UN library is an environment where delegates need informa-
tion in a rapid and spontaneous way. More often, agendas are set with outside 
control of our clients. The value that the library therefore brings is to respond 
to these queries within the most convenient time possible and to be able to 
deal with changing requests and demand. This new environment means that 
delegates expect the library and research services to support them in new ways 
and assist them to adopt new technology. The UN library is centuries beyond 
dusty book covers and now has a pioneering presence on social media.
STEPS WE TOOK BEFORE ADOPTING SOCIAL MEDIA TOOLS
Managing social media is time-consuming. Clearly defined goals and objec-
tives on what role social media will play in the library are essential. For the 
UN library, all librarians are social media stakeholders. This is done through 
collaboration and assigning of roles and tasks accordingly. Identifying the 
goals and objectives was clearly a tedious and critical process. The goals had 
to be measurable, and they had to have an action plan, an achievement, and a 
desirable result. Our strategy and policy needed to guide social media activi-
ties without compromising the organization’s image. Consistency, integrity, 
and coherence were the main words that guided the policy. The UN values 
social media, and it is important to add value to people’s lives using social 
media. Before adopting a social medium, consider how the tool will affect 

 
The United Nations Library Is Seriously Social 
15
clients—specifically, how will the content shared add value for both them and 
the parent organization?
The policy took a user-oriented approach. The UN library is mandated by 
the UN General Assembly on the “forefront of the use of information tech-
nology to meet the increasing demand for reliable information resources that 
support global problem-solving.” The only way to make this goal a reality is 
to embrace new technology and adapt to the needs and expectations of our 
clients. Our social media activities focus on our client’s information needs 
while balancing the needs, challenges, and role of the library. The idea is to 
involve our clients at all times. We listen to them in all the social platforms 
and provide resources as per their requirements and needs. We provide infor-
mation resources at the most convenient time, and social media allows instant 
sharing. The UN library has a global clientele, and it has a distinct role. Its 
unique role is that it is the library of the world and holds the richest content 
in the whole world. The information resource that the UN library holds can 
be found in only this library and not anywhere else. The idea is to distribute 
this information resources as widely as possible to all those who need this 
information. It is our role to make this information accessible to those who 
need it; hence, social media provides a platform for sharing.
We created guidelines for all librarians (see http://un.libguides.com/
socialmedia). They pertain to all the social media tools that the library is 
implementing. The most important thing about these guidelines is that there 
is sustainability. This allows for continuity in case one has to leave the orga-
nization. There is also information sharing among librarians pertaining to the 
activities that we are doing on social media.
The UN library tracks its social media use. We have adopted Google ana-
lytics, tweet counter, and HootSuite for tracking social media activities on all 
the tools. For Facebook, the Insights page is very useful. HootSuite brings 
together all these tools such that they can communicate and share easily 
with one another. It also allows for listening to our clients. HootSuite is an 
evaluation tool. We keep monthly statistics of the activities on our platforms. 
Measuring the impact of social media in the library is important. There is a 
growing consensus that it is the targeted behavioral change that should be 
measured and not the activity on the social media platforms.
THE UN LIBRARY’S SOCIAL MEDIA AGENDA
Communication
Communication is a key function for libraries. Communication technolo-
gies have revolutionized the way that libraries disseminate information. The 

16 
Angelinah C. Boniface
new generation believes that e-mailing is dead. Thus, we need to shift to 
instant messaging, Facebook, or SMS—because that is where users are and 
because social media allows immediate real-time dialogue. As the library of 
the world, the UN library is indebted to provide access to information to all. 
Social media is providing a platform to share the work of the organization and 
engage and network with our clients.
The library follows RSS feeds of all UN family websites to get the most 
recent information on documents and recently published reports and publica-
tions. We blog on official records, supplements, meetings, major conferences, 
major issues, commemorations, international days, and international years. 
The essence is to provide resources rather than just an alert service.
Access to UN Information Resources
The library’s primary function is to enable the 193 member states of the UN, 
the UN secretariat, nongovernmental organizations, intergovernmental organi-
zations, researchers, students, and the general public to obtain—with the great-
est possible speed, convenience, and economy—UN information needed for 
their daily duties. Researching for UN information can be a tedious and frus-
trating process. Issues arise spontaneously, and information pertaining to those 
events is needed. The organization has been dealing with issues dating back to 
1945 and even beyond the League of Nations. Therefore, researching the his-
tory of agenda can be a tedious and challenging process. Our clients are also 
diverse. The other challenge in providing access to information is that delegates 
change. Member states bring in new diplomats as the need arises. This makes 
it a difficult process since sometimes our clients have only a vague idea of how 
the UN works. The most important thing about this is that we do the research 
for our clients and provide access to full-text resources of the issues, whenever 
available. This is making the life of our clients easier since, more often than not, 
they are required to quote the documents of past events in their current reports. 
It is our role to educate and equip delegates with tools and resources necessary 
for them to understand the organization. We blog, among other things, on new 
reports, publications, meetings, major events, and major conference and com-
memorations. We blog on issues that are happening currently at the UN. We 
provide historical information resources to issues since many a times, delegates 
are required to reference these documents.
Provide Education
There is a saying that in our organization: “In order to understand the UN, 
you need to understand its documentation.” The UN library shares knowledge 
on UN documentation on social media. We provide training and coaching 

 
The United Nations Library Is Seriously Social 
17
on a number of courses. We create online courses and videos on how to find 
UN information and post online, for those who cannot take in-house training 
(since it is available to delegates only in New York). This is a critical service 
since you are taking the library to where people are. They feel that they are 
part of this global community. Our clients also feel empowered. They are 
able to do research for themselves with the help of the online tutorials that 
we create and post online.
Respond to Positive/Negative Feedback
People are talking about your library on the web and in different social me-
dia channels. One of the most important tenets of customer service is to be 
responsive to your users’ concerns or praise. Recognize them, and show that 
you are interested in and care about their opinions. There is no controlling 
what is said about your library anymore, but you can influence the message 
that comes across.
The UN library is seeking to improve its services across the board in line 
with the goals, objectives, and mission of the UN. The only way to do this is 
to listen to our clients and respond accordingly. Libraries need to learn that 
they are at the center of communication. Clients need to receive information 
from us so that they can pass it on. Responding to the feedback that we re-
ceive from our clients is good for not only the library but for our clients too, 
since we will be able to tailor our services to their needs.
Marketing/Advertising
Your library likely already markets its services or events using traditional 
media: fliers, bookmarks, announcements in calendars of events, newspaper 
ads, press releases, and so on. Social media is simply another form of media 
that you can use to get your message out there. Millions of people use social 
networks, and likely, a large percentage of the population you serve does too. 
The UN library has a lot of products that need to be pushed to clients. The 
library does training on how to effectively search for UN information. This 
is a unique product from the UN library for those who are not able to attend 
in-house training, which is mainly restricted to delegates. Social media plays 
a part by creating pathfinders or LibGuides and posting them on YouTube. 
The UN has activities that we also need to make our clients aware of. Our 
clients will be forced to follow us since they know that we are marketing not 
only books and trainings but a whole range of activities happening at the UN. 
This marketing is not an alert process. We market ourselves by providing 
information resources to the event that is going on. This is a unique service 
that the library offers. We do the research, find the resources about the event, 
and share the event, with the resources to our clients.

18 
Angelinah C. Boniface
Understanding Users Better
Often people assume that they know their clientele. However, most of the time, 
I am very surprised at the things that I overhear or the questions that patrons 
ask. There is always something new to learn. As a reference librarian, I have 
learned more from my clients than I have from my colleagues. Social media 
allows conversations with other users, and these conversations reveal important 
insights. Simply talking with people allows you to get to know them better 
and, more important serve them better. Have conversations with patrons both 
in person and through social media. You will be surprised at what you learn.
The clients that I serve on a daily basis are new. Their questions are 
vague, and we sometimes have to figure it out what exactly they are looking 
for. This is made even more difficult by the fact that the UN is a unique or-
ganization and has its own way of doing things. A number of our clients do 
not understand how the UN works. We therefore equip them with the tools 
and resources necessary for them to do their work, and ultimately, they may 
understand the UN. For example, Figure 2.1 illustrates a conversation with 
one of our clients.
Figure 2.1. A conversation between the library and a client.

 
The United Nations Library Is Seriously Social 
19
UN LIBRARY SOCIAL MEDIA PRESENCE
The library is now present on five social media platforms: Tumblr, Twitter, 
Facebook, YouTube, and SlideShare. It takes a lot of courage and dedication to 
adopt social media tools. It can be frustrating at times because of the amount of 
time spent to create a blog. For us, quality control is very critical. A lot of work 
and research goes into every blog that we create. There are challenges, but there 
is more to social media than mourning about the challenges.
Tumblr
We use Tumblr as our blog as well as an interactive platform where we post 
new resources from across the UN system, the main organs, specialized agen-
cies, the UN secretariat, and offices all over the world. New publications, 
reports, meetings and conferences, special events, international commemora-
tions, and so on are blogged, and relevant full text of resources are linked to 
cater to the information needs of followers.
We blog on Security Council meetings, General Assembly major meetings, 
commemorations, major conferences, international days, and international 
years. The main idea is to provide current awareness service while providing 
resources that can assist researchers with their information needs pertaining 
to a particular issue. Not only do we provide resources, but we also provide 
links to the relevant material, where possible. These blogs take a tremendous 
amount of time to do, depending on the research topic. Some issues of the UN 
are historical, dating to when the organization started, with some dating all 
the way back to the League of Nations. It is our responsibility as the library 
to make the user aware of all the resources relevant to the blog created.
Twitter
We launched Twitter in February 2010. The library started to use Twitter to 
disseminate UN Pulse entries. Not surprising, the number of monthly tweets 
is similar to the number of UN Pulse posts in 2010. At the end of 2010, the 
library account was followed by 1,500 users. In May, reference librarians de-
cided to work more with Twitter and began to tweet not only on flagship UN 
publications that are posted in UN Pulse but also on other UN and non-UN 
reports. As a result, the account followers increased exponentially, and at the 
end of July, it had reached 4,000 followers.
We also started to tweet presearches in UNBISnet (aka library catalogue) 
on hot Security Council or other bodies’ topics. However, the topics are 
recurring, and information posted on Twitter is short-lived. As a result, 

20 
Angelinah C. Boniface
instead of putting every UNBISnet presearches over and over again, librar-
ians started to blog resource pages in Tumblr, which can be reused anytime 
the agenda item recurs.
The library began producing screencasts on how to search for UN docu-
ments in September 2010. These screencasts are primarily incorporated in 
the library website through the development of online tutorials. While we use 
Twitter to post links and interact quickly and briefly with users, the character 
limitation prohibits content creation.
YouTube
We disseminate the screencasts on YouTube. The online tutorials on how 
to use UN research tools to search for UN documents and publications are 
important to our worldwide audience and to staff in peacekeeping missions, 
who have no other access to the library’s training program. These videos al-
low staff to learn important skills in using online databases such as ODS and 
UNBISnet, the library’s online catalogue to search for information.
Facebook
Facebook is the most used social media in the world. Sharing links to the 
blog on Facebook will ensure the broadest dissemination possible. Besides, 
Facebook is a great tool to interact with users, as it is possible for them to 
post questions and comments. Like Twitter, Facebook is a sharing tool for all 
the blogs. The library also uses Facebook to connect and interact with clients 
and other libraries.
The use of Tumblr, Twitter, Facebook, and YouTube is therefore comple-
mentary and will give the library the right platforms to create content, dissemi-
nate it, and interact more with its users. It will also complement the content of 
the website and ensure a coherent online presence by the Dag Hammarskjöld 
Library. Using several platforms will ensure that the efforts in developing so-
cial media network are not compromised when one is discontinued.
SlideShare
The library conducts training and workshops on UN documentation and other 
thematic areas, including the Security Council, the General Assembly, Eco-
nomic and Social Council documentation, human rights, international law, 
RSS feeds, and commercial electronic resources. To outreach these presenta-
tions through social media, some have been uploaded to SlideShare, a Web 
2.0 tool for education and information.

 
The United Nations Library Is Seriously Social 
21
THE FUTURE
These are very exciting times. Libraries build communities. Libraries need to 
leverage these new technologies if they are to be relevant, while at the same 
time understanding the role that the library plays in society. Technology is 
advancing, and the environment is changing. Libraries should find strategies 
of remaining relevant without changing the role of the library. There will be 
challenges: shortages of staff, funding (since social media is not free), and 
fear. Libraries have come a long way, and nothing should stop us from doing 
what we know best: building communities.


23
3
Visualizing Information with Pinterest
CYNTHIA DUDENHOFFER
Central Methodist University
Central Methodist University (CMU) is a small liberal arts college in rural 
Missouri, with around 1,200 students enrolled on the traditional campus and 
with another 1,500 or so enrolled in online and distance education courses. 
As our enrollment shifts from face-to-face contact with students to a virtual 
environment, the library is continually seeking ways to reach out to not only 
the on-campus faculty and students but also these nontraditional learners, in 
an accessible and appealing way. How can a library market collections to 
students who will never set foot in the brick-and-mortar library? How can 
we make our on-campus students and faculty aware of new acquisition? How 
can we present visualized information to make services such as research as-
sistance more appealing? One of the most recent attempts to meet these goals 
has been through the use of the social media tool Pinterest. Pinterest allows 
members to “pin” items or images found on the Internet to a “pinboard,” 
which can then be easily shared through an e-mail link or by following the 
creator. The boards are publicly viewable through the link, so no log-in is re-
quired, and the boards can be constantly updated. This type of tool lends itself 
very well to sharing information to visual learners and traditionalists alike, 
and it can be maintained by library staff quickly and easily. Library faculty 
can also use Pinterest to create “research portals,” or visual representations of 
ideas used to kick off the research and writing process.
CHIEF AIMS AND OBJECTIVES
As the staff of Smiley Library searched for a tool to assist in the visualiza-
tion of information, we set a few guidelines for the product or tool. First, we 

24 
Cynthia Dudenhoffer
wanted a tool that could present images in an accessible way. We wanted 
something that could be multipurpose. We also looked for a product that was 
low in cost. Name recognition and popularity became a factor as well. We 
needed a tool that would allow us to visually display information for students 
performing research, that could push out information to online students, and 
that could be used by the students and sent to library faculty. But first and 
foremost, we wanted a tool that could help us effectively market our collec-
tions to the entire CMU community.
MARKETING NEW BOOKS AND VIDEOS
Like many small private colleges, CMU follows a subject area acquisitions 
model based on faculty allocations. In other words, to help the two library 
faculty collect materials relevant to the curriculum, a portion of the acquisi-
tions budget is given to each academic division. The divisions then select 
materials they think are relevant, and they send these recommendations to the 
library director for possible purchase. The model works pretty well overall, 
especially since CMU has no subject area reference librarians. All purchas-
ing is done by the library director, so these faculty recommendations are an 
essential part of the acquisitions process. One of the problems, though, is the 
fact that faculty want to know who is purchasing what and when it has been 
added to the collection.
In the past, after acquisitions have been added, we have used the integrated 
library system to generate a report of the newly added items and send it 
over e-mail. The report is a massive, unappealing list of titles and publica-
tion information, sorted by Library of Congress call number, so it is roughly 
grouped into subject areas. The list clogs in-boxes and is not highly utilized. 
Smiley Library marketed new books to on-campus students through the use 
of a “New Books” area within the library but had no other way to push or 
market these materials to the campus community. Likewise, our online stu-
dents were receiving no information about new acquisitions to the collection. 
Library staff searched for a way to present this information to the relevant 
parties quickly and easily. Several products exist that can create these kind of 
reports, but we desired a product that was low in cost, that was easy to popu-
late and share, and that created a stable URL that could be added to library 
marketing materials. After evaluating several products, we found Pinterest, 
a relatively new option. Pinterest met our selection criteria. It is a free social 
media service tied to a single log-in. It produces stable URLs that can be 
easily maintained. It required little or no training for use, since many staff, 
faculty, and students were already familiar with the site.

 
Visualizing Information with Pinterest 
25
To use Pinterest, an account must be set up with an e-mail address and 
password, or an account can be tied to an existing Facebook account. We 
chose to set up the account with an existing Facebook page, since this made 
it easier to publicize new content. After setting up the account, we created 
a new pinboard titled “Smiley Library New Books.” Now, as each new ac-
quisition is cataloged, processed, and added to our new book collection, a 
picture can be snapped of the item, which can then be added to the pinboard 
(Figure 3.1). An annotation about the item can also be added. We have used 
annotations to attribute items to alumni authors, to tag them as the recom-
mendations of particular faculty, to designate books in a series, to list award 
winners or nominees, and to make quirky comments that might appeal to our 
student community. Faculty can add content notes or class information to the 
“pins” as well. Using Pinterest in this way is especially helpful, considering 
our acquisitions model. The visual representation allows faculty to quickly 
locate their own recommendations, while seeing what other departments have 
selected as well. None of these options was available using the integrated 
library system–generated new book list.
Marketing our new books through Pinterest has implications for students 
as well. In fact, the majority of “followers” we have gathered for our pin-
boards are students. Once “followed,” students will receive updates when 
Figure 3.1. A sample of the Smiley Library new books pinboard.

26 
Cynthia Dudenhoffer
new items are added. Smiley Library’s Facebook page is updated when 
new items are pinned, so those subscribers will see the information as well. 
Links to the library webpage are embedded in our course management 
software, so distance learning students have access to the boards whenever 
they log-in to courses.
CMU also maintains a popular DVD collection, funded by the student gov-
ernment association on campus. This collection is constantly changing, and it 
used very heavily by students. Student requests for new releases are constant, 
so the ability to quickly and easily push out available titles is a great help. 
Creating a new pinboard for this collection became the logical way to market 
the new movies and reinforce to the students that their fees were being put to 
good use. This additional marketing outlet cuts down on repetitive questions 
asked of staff, and it provides an excellent visual representation of what is 
in the collection. We have also annotated this collection with tags for award 
winners, student requests, movies used in coursework, staff recommenda-
tions, and many others. The link to the new videos pinboard is also available 
on the library’s home page (Figure 3.2).
Figure 3.2. A sample of the Smiley Library new videos pinboard.

 
Visualizing Information with Pinterest 
27
MANAGING THE TOOL
There are many reasons why we chose Pinterest to market our collections. 
One of the features that adds to the value of this tool is that once a new 
pinboard is created, the link for that particular board remains static. In other 
words, we created the library’s Pinterest account, then created the related 
boards. The URL for the board never changes, regardless of how much con-
tent is added to it. The URL can be added to the library webpage (as ours is), 
and it can be left alone. Members of the CMU community can add browser 
bookmarks for the Pinterest boards without having to update them. There is 
also no need for updating on the staff side: We no longer spend time running 
new lists or configuring PDFs of titles to e-mail out to faculty. The Pinterest 
site also hosts all content, so no updating is needed on that end, nor do we 
need server storage to hold the files. These advantages are definitely a boon 
for a library with limited staff.
Another advantage is that users can view the boards without creating an 
account. Many social media tools require users to create a basic account, 
providing a log-in and password, even for freely accessible versions of a tool. 
Pinterest boards can be viewed by anyone with access to the Internet and the 
URL to the boards. This fact makes the tool more appealing to faculty and 
nontraditional students, who are more wary of giving personal information 
to Internet sites.
Daily management of our Pinterest boards is a relatively simple process. Pin-
terest boards can be managed either through the website itself or by using the 
smartphone applications available for iPhones and Android products (Figure 
3.3). After looking at several options, we chose to use the Pinterest iPhone app 
to manage content for the new book and new video pinboards. As each item 
is cataloged, processed, and readied for a final check before it is available for 
patron checkout, the technical services assistant or a work study student takes 
a picture of the item using the app and the smartphone’s built-in camera. The 
picture can be cropped or altered if needed, and an annotation can be added at 
this point. The staff member chooses which board to add the new picture to (if 
multiple boards are available); then the item is automatically added to the ap-
propriate pinboard. Initially, we utilized the website itself for adding content, 
searching for images of the items we were adding, and then importing them 
into Pinterest. However, pictures of some scholarly titles are not readily avail-
able, and the process was unwieldy. Using the smartphone application allows 
for pictures to be directly uploaded and annotated, therefore making it a more 
streamlined process. The only difficulty in using this method is that whoever is 
pinning the items to the board must use the iPhone associated with the library’s 

28 
Cynthia Dudenhoffer
Pinterest account, which happens to be the director’s iPhone. But since our 
library is small and all the staff are in regular communication, this has not been 
a problem. The entire process of adding newly acquired items to the pinboards 
requires about 30 minutes a week on average for roughly 30 to 80 items. Larger 
libraries with a set acquisitions staff would need to examine which methods 
work best for their situation.
Pinterest allows for many types of “pins,” so libraries not wishing to take 
their own pictures can pull images from Amazon or any other source that 
provides cover photos. When creating a Pinterest account, a “pin it” button 
can be added to the bookmarks toolbar in the Mozilla Firefox browser, al-
lowing for easing pinning of book covers or other materials. Larger libraries 
for whom sharing a staff member’s phone might not be practical will have 
better luck utilizing this method. The “pin it” button is also extremely use-
ful when using Pinterest in other library applications (as discussed later; 
see Figure 3.4).
Though marketing these collections with Pinterest boards is new to our 
library, it has been well received, especially by students. The accessibility 
and rapid updating of the boards is popular, and as previously mentioned, 
we have seen a decrease in routine questions regarding what has just been 
added. Students were enthusiastic about the visual format and the imme-
Figure 3.3. The Pinterest OS application.

 
Visualizing Information with Pinterest 
29
diate access to new titles. As we begin new student orientation and visit 
students through the freshmen experience program, library staff will have 
more opportunities to share this new form of marketing with our students. 
So far, efforts to promote the library pinboards have been informal, through 
events such as new faculty orientations, day-to-day reference questions, and 
committee meetings. Smiley Library will soon be entering the next round 
of faculty allocations and requests, so we are hopeful that this new method 
of marketing and outreach will be embraced by faculty, as they will now 
have the ability to immediately see new additions to the collections. As of 
the end of August 2012, “Smiley Library New Books” has 85 followers, 
and the new videos board has 74 followers, which is a strong number since 
the boards have existed for only a little over 12 weeks, with much of this 
time taking place during the summer intersession. The links on the website 
log significant traffic as well, so the campus community is taking time to 
view the boards, even if those patrons do not “follow” the activity through 
personal Pinterest accounts. We hope to steadily increase this number; the 
library plans to aggressively market the boards at both library and campus 
orientation events in the fall semester.
Figure 3.4. The Smiley Library website, with “pin it” button and links to pinboards.

30 
Cynthia Dudenhoffer
PINTEREST AND INFORMATION LITERACY
Like many universities, Central Methodist has created an information literacy 
program embedded within beginning composition classes and writing semi-
nars. Information literacy (or fluency, as we call it) was also included as a 
curricular core competency in a redesign of general education course work 
about 3 years ago. Since the inclusion of this competency, the library faculty, 
working closely with the English department, continually endeavors to make 
information literacy interesting and applicable to all students. Incorporating 
activities utilizing Pinterest have not only afforded opportunity to create 
engaging assignments but also provided opportunities for student to develop 
transliteracy skills. The activities are also easily translated into online assign-
ments for our distance learning students, adding the extra benefit of a stable 
curriculum in both traditional and online settings.
RESEARCH PORTALS
At its most basic level, Pinterest is a collection of visual images. After creat-
ing an account, users collect images from across the Internet and group them 
under a title of their choosing. Images can be annotated with supplemental 
information. The idea of grouping visual information around a topic led to 
the creation of some unique assignments in CMU’s beginning composition 
classes. We dubbed these assignments “Research Portals,” since they serve as 
a jumping-off place for students to begin the research process. For example, 
students were asked to create a Pinterest account and then select images that 
related to the term satire (Figure 3.5). Each student is responsible for his or 
her own pinboard and was asked to share the permanent link to the board via 
the course management software. Because a term such as satire has a broad 
definition and can be interpreted differently by different people, this topic 
was a perfect test run for the application. Students gathered images from a 
huge range of sources, from Jonathan Swift to The Colbert Report, using the 
“pin it” function built into the Internet browser. Annotations were added to 
explain why the images were related to the term satire. Students were then 
asked to explain why they chose these images to represent satire, either as 
an in-class presentation or, in the online class environment, as a discussion 
board post. In the next step, students crafted their own definition of satire 
based on the images collected on both the personal board and those shared by 
the class. This student-generated definition then became the focus of the first 
assignment in a scaffolded set of papers completed throughout the semester. 
At the conclusion of the assignments, students were asked to revisit the pin-

 
Visualizing Information with Pinterest 
31
boards and see if the images chosen still applied or if their perceptions had 
changed. Upon completion of this collection of assignments, students have 
developed both traditional information literacy skills, such as finding sources 
to support ideas, and visual literacy skills by using images to build an argu-
ment. Similar processes have been used on topics such as American culture 
by decade and rethinking perceptions of college life. Collecting visual images 
via Pinterest allows the easy juxtaposition of ideas based on what students 
perceive through popular culture versus what is found in reality. This juxta-
position and the ease of accessing Pinterest as a visual aid provide excellent 
opportunities for critical thinking and discussion. Feedback from students 
completing the assignments was generally positive; most found collecting 
images and annotating them a less daunting task than creating a traditional 
annotated bibliography. Most were familiar with Pinterest before using it in 
class, which created the helpful side effect of an increased comfort level with 
beginning the research process in this manner.
Smiley Library also uses Pinterest to connect students with resources in a 
few other ways. One is a board titled “Books Worth Reading.” This pinboard 
is populated with books chosen by CMU faculty and staff that we believe 
will appeal to students. These books are annotated with short summaries and 
Figure 3.5. A research portal example for the topic satire.

32 
Cynthia Dudenhoffer
“read-a-like” information to guide students’ leisure reading. We have also 
used the board to connect students from campus book clubs to other titles 
they might enjoy or subsequent books in a series. We also hope to encour-
age the use of Pinterest for visual bookmarking and the creation of reading 
lists and supplemental information for more CMU courses, since it is easily 
embedded into the course management system.
EDUCATIONAL TECHNOLOGY
Pinterest is also being utilized in the campus educational technology course. 
This course is designed to introduce future teachers and education majors 
to a range of technological options that can be used in the K–12 classroom. 
Taught as a hybrid online/traditional course, students must use technology 
independently to create lesson plans in their subject area. There is a focus 
on using tools that are freely available and require no download or hosting, 
since many public schools lack the resources to manage complex or costly 
software. Students are not only responsible for incorporating technology 
but also asked to consider different kinds of learners and learning styles 
(visual, auditory, etc.). In one assignment, students were asked to create a 
fully formed lesson plan that would appeal to visual learners. The content 
could be for any age group and any subject area, but it had to have a strong 
visual element and incorporate technology in a meaningful way. Pinterest 
has a strong appeal for visual learners, and several students chose it as the 
curricular tool for this assignment. For instance, a history education ma-
jor created a pinboard of generals active during the American Civil War. 
Portraits of generals, as well as battle maps and images of troop locations, 
were included in the pinboard, illustrating the impact that each general had 
on the war. Another student in the course focused on elementary students 
and taught a lesson on ethnic foods. This lesson asked the students to cre-
ate a “food passport” (Figure 3.6): Images of dishes and recipes from all 
over the world were collected via the pinboard. Students earned “stamps” 
in their passports by finding dishes from a variety of countries or by try-
ing dishes from different regions, which exposed them to diverse cultures. 
Students were then asked to think critically about why the food cultures of 
these countries differed so wildly from place to place. The visual nature of 
Pinterest and the ease with which images can be found and freely shared 
make it an excellent tool for this kind of assignment. In previous iterations 
of this assignment, students printed images and assembled poster boards or 
displayed sets of images via PowerPoint. Now, our potential K–12 teach-
ers can save and share URLs safely with future students, since no log-in is 

 
Visualizing Information with Pinterest 
33
required to access the boards. Pinterest allows students to capture images 
digitally, share them easily, and retain materials for future use. 
Pinterest is thus promoted to the education majors on campus as a resource 
to gather ideas for future classrooms. The site has a specific area dedicated 
to education, which contains a huge variety of boards with everything from 
syllabi to ideas for classroom decorations to reading lists and resource guides. 
Pinterest is also completely collaborative, which makes it a great tool for 
group projects, especially with distance learning students located in disparate 
locations. Group members can share a board and pin items to it from any-
where, so creating a poster or presentation online is a simple task.
COPYRIGHT ISSUES AND THE FUTURE
The library staff at CMU knows that it can be a risky move to integrate 
social media into services or curriculum. Since these tools and sites change 
so rapidly and popularity can wax and wane, it can be difficult to create 
stable activities based on social media. Pinterest has also been attacked 
by artists and photographers worried that the image-sharing site violates 
Figure 3.6. Educational technology “food passport.”

34 
Cynthia Dudenhoffer
copyright laws. Pinterest recently changed its terms of service and accept-
able use policies to address some of these issues. Cold Brew Labs (2012), 
the company that owns Pinterest released a statement affirming, “Our goal 
at Pinterest is to help people discover the things they love. Driving traf-
fic to original content sources is fundamental to that goal” (Tsukayama, 
2012). Starting June 2012, Pinterest began adding automatic citations and 
credits to items pinned from popular sites such as Etsy, SlideShare, Flikr, 
and Kickstarter. These citations cannot be edited by end users. In February 
2012, Pinterest provided code to artists who wish to “opt out” of the pinning 
process. Adding the provided code to a website will block the ability to pin 
images contained on the site (Kessler, 2012). While the future of Pinterest 
might be somewhat uncertain, perhaps the problems that the site is facing 
can be used as yet other teachable moment: “Class, let’s discuss the ethical 
use of information and images found on the Internet.” The concerns over 
copyright did not hinder use of Pinterest in the library or in classroom set-
tings at Central Methodist, but it did provide the opportunity for discussion. 
This issue, along with information about creative commons licensing and 
the proper way to credit or cite Internet sources and images, is now included 
in the curriculum of our educational technology course. Likewise, copyright 
issues are a component of the information fluency competency.
CONCLUSION
While Pinterest has been a part of coursework and marketing at CMU for 
only one semester, students and faculty were quick to embrace its use. The 
number of followers viewing the library pinboards has already outpaced us-
age of the text-based lists. Students in educational technology used Pinterest 
to put a new spin on a visual literacy assignment. After a successful test run 
in one course, the library staff hopes to further integrate the use of Pinterest 
into information literacy activities, building on the satire assignments used 
this year. Assessment of these activities is merely anecdotal at this time, but 
students at CMU take part in a formalized information literacy test, Project 
SAILS, so we will have concrete assessment data to analyze after the fall 
2012 semester. The library pinboards will be included in orientation activities 
for new students in the fall semester, which should drive even more traffic to 
the boards and create a new cohort of students that recognize Pinterest as the 
prime location for new materials.
The next steps for incorporating Pinterest into library services include 
adding cataloging information to the boards for new books and new videos. 
Currently, the campus community can access the visual images of library 

 
Visualizing Information with Pinterest 
35
items, but it must then access the library’s catalog separately. It is our 
hope to incorporate the catalog links directly into the annotations for titles, 
providing our patrons one-click access to locate the materials. This step is 
more time intensive, so use of the Pinterest boards and staff time will be 
carefully monitored before this step is enacted. Our other significant plan 
for Pinterest will be a part of our campus book clubs. While the boards 
have been used informally, we hope to standardize the process and provide 
a community board for each book club to provide a set area to share titles, 
related materials, and read-alikes, as well as an opportunity for virtual par-
ticipation in the book club.
Pinterest is a tool that suits the small level of acquisitions, closely con-
nected staff, and modes of communication between the library and the cam-
pus community that we maintain at CMU. Before implementing this type of 
tool, a library would need to examine these factors and see if Pinterest is a 
good fit. The process of creating boards to market materials would quickly 
become a time-consuming trial if too many items are added on a regular ba-
sis. Likewise, Pinterest is an informal way to communicate with patrons; it 
might not fit the culture of a traditional or more formal campus. I would en-
courage libraries interested in this tool to examine their needs with a critical 
eye before committing to the tool. But for Central Methodist and the Smiley 
Library, Pinterest has provided an excellent resource for marketing of collec-
tions, information fluency activities, and educational technology classes. As 
long as interest in Pinterest remains high, this tool will remain a valuable way 
to present information in a visually appealing and easily accessible format. Its 
ease of use, functionality, and low cost make it an excellent tool for small li-
braries who wish to visually present information to their campus community.
REFERENCES
Cold Brew Labs. (2012). Pinterest terms of service. San Francisco: Author.
Kessler, S. (2012, June 20). Mashable social media. Retrieved from http://mashable
.com/2012/06/20/pinterest-attribution/
Tsukayama, H. (2012, March 15). Pinterest address copyright concerns. Washing-
ton Post.


37
4
Navigating the Virtual Horizon: Finding Our 
Way Using Social Media in Hospital Libraries
YONGTAO LIN AND KATHRYN M. E. RANJIT
University of Calgary Libraries
Hospital libraries hold a unique position in health care systems. We are a 
center for health care professionals to gather the information they need to 
support their practice and a space for professional development and explo-
ration for adult learners. To fulfill this mandate, hospital libraries need to 
stay at the cutting edge in learning practices and education technologies. In 
this chapter, we explore the use of social media in health care, the unique 
placement of the hospital library in health care systems, and how some 
hospital libraries are exploring social media. Next, we look at the impact 
of social media on adult learning. We then reflect on a project that we con-
ducted in a hospital library system, describing how we used social media 
in creating virtual interest groups for professional development to increase 
knowledge sharing among librarians, clients, and colleagues and to build a 
community of practice.
SOCIAL MEDIA AND HEALTH CARE
The recent literature has been inundated with publications about health care 
and social media. There are numerous examples that include how to imple-
ment social media, successful projects, best practices in health care environ-
ments, how to interact with the public, and mediating risks. Social media 
has successfully entered the medical field and has the potential to positively 
influence health information exchange.

38 
Yongtao Lin and Kathryn M. E. Ranjit
While there are many ways to use social media tools in health care, five 
clear purposes for social media use by health care professionals and organiza-
tions to communicate with the public (Bennett, 2009) have emerged:
•  to serve the public better,
•  to increase the reach of the message,
•  to educate the patient,
•  to act as a vehicle for public relations, and
•  to communicate in times of crisis.
The specific risks involved when health care organizations or profession-
als engage in social media can be a deterrent to many. Mitigating the risks 
may include protecting patient privacy, protecting professional privacy, 
guarding against miscommunication, and making referrals to traditional 
communication channels so that messages aren’t lost (Bennett, 2009). As 
long as health care groups navigate with caution and proceed with a plan, 
risks should not become restraints. Developing a social media policy is 
recommended as one of the most effective risk mediation techniques. These 
policies provide guidelines for the use of social media in the organization 
and define acceptable use of the tools. Examples of well-developed social 
media policies are available in the Social Media Policy Database, at http://
socialmediagovernance.com/policies.php.
SOCIAL MEDIA AND HOSPITAL LIBRARIES
Hospital libraries are slowly adopting social media for many of the same 
purposes as health care systems when connecting with the public. Libraries 
engage with clients and offer more effective information service using so-
cial platforms, answer questions as a virtual reference service, reach clients 
through new communication channels, promote services and resources, and 
communicate notices online (Gebb, 2010). Our placement as a learning cen-
ter within health care institutions allows for natural synergies in professional 
development and learning.
Currently, the most popular tools used by hospital libraries include Twitter, 
blogs, chat, Delicious, and social networking sites. Twitter has been used for 
reference, as a current awareness vehicle, and for service promotion. Blogs 
are a common platform for information alert services, for reference services, 
and as a way for virtual groups to connect (Rethlefsen & Engard, 2007; Ten-
nant et al., 2012). As a result of the information technology restrictions gov-
erning many hospital sites, Facebook has not been widely adopted as a social 

 
Navigating the Virtual Horizon 
39
networking platform. However, some libraries are implementing private sites, 
such as Yammer, or internally developed programs.
SOCIAL MEDIA AND ADULT SOCIAL LEARNING
Online technology has had an enormous impact on society and adult learning. 
It has been instrumental in setting off the information society, by increasing 
information mediums, reach, and encouraging information collaboration 
across disciplines. Adult learning arises from sense making in the informa-
tion and technology overload, both experientially and socially (Merriam, 
Caffarella, & Baumgartner, 2007).
Health professionals use the hospital library for professional develop-
ment or work-based learning. As Williams (2010) emphasizes, learning 
in this environment needs to be responsive to the skills and knowledge 
required by the workforce. Courses with a work-based learning philosophy 
were more useful to the learners and had the potential to change practice 
and patient care. This learning is context based and requires learners to pay 
attention to interaction and intersection among people; therefore, knowl-
edge creation and utilization become a collective activity, often referred to 
as collective learning. Collectively, the individuals can discuss, explore, 
and develop educational content and answer one another’s questions. This 
enhances the engagement of learners with content, as well as their capabil-
ity to actively learn and collaborate (Bolhuis, 1996).
In many health care settings, staff are expected to explore, experience, 
and teach themselves new technologies without formal training. The primary 
characteristics of social media—including accessibility of most social me-
dia sites, flexibility in changes, currency of content, and usability of these 
technologies—help in supporting collective learning–based environments. 
Even the social media categories (i.e., wikis, blogs, microblogging, media 
sharing, social bookmarking, social friendship networks, and social news 
sites; Agarwal, 2011, p. 40) align well with the collective learning model’s 
goals of interactivity and proactivity. While new technology, including social 
media, reshapes how and what adults learn, adult learning affects the use of 
technology developments in teaching and learning. More and more learning 
groups are formed in workplaces using new technologies. Communities of 
practice and virtual research environments via social media platforms are 
created to facilitate and support the work-based learning. In the context of a 
virtual research environment, social networking sites such as Facebook pro-
vide an easy means of finding research partners and keeping them in touch 
with changing interests.

40 
Yongtao Lin and Kathryn M. E. Ranjit
One form of virtual community, the virtual interest group (VIG), is a type 
of online community that uses social networking sites to allow collabora-
tion among users who are logically grouped with common shared interests 
(Kallurkar, 2008; Myhill, Shoebridge, & Snook, 2009). Research has shown 
that the VIGs that were developed and facilitated via social media platforms 
provide an integrated environment that supports the work of a community or 
group of collaborating researchers (Voss & Procter, 2009).
OUR STUDY ON USING SOCIAL MEDIA IN CREATING VIGS
Background and Project Objective
Social media may play an integral part in health education and health pro-
motion—however, will it potentially change how health care professionals 
enhance their learning, seek information, and share knowledge? We decided 
to conduct a pilot project in two tertiary hospitals in Calgary to examine how 
Web 2.0 tools enhance interaction between health researchers and librarians 
and among researchers themselves in an online interest group environment. 
In addition, we explored whether these tools create a synergistic adult learn-
ing experience and increase efficiency in obtaining information or improve 
quality and quantity of research evidence.
Calgary is the fourth-largest municipality in Canada and the largest in 
Alberta (Statistics Canada, 2012). The Health Information Network Calgary, 
a network of hospital libraries located at six major Calgary sites, provides 
information and library services to patients, the public, and health care pro-
fessionals working in the Calgary Zone and in cancer care. Promoting col-
laboration across geographical distances and disciplinary boundaries is one 
of our primary goals of service.
Clinical practice guidelines and patient safety are two key areas of inter-
est for health researchers. Tailored information services are already in place 
contributing to the knowledge creation of the groups, including subject-based 
e-resource guides and current awareness services. These VIGs were made to 
utilize and improve these existing services. By utilizing social media plat-
forms, our study also chose to look at how content is codeveloped, assessed, 
and further improved by users.
Research Method
An e-mail invitation was distributed in early June 2011 to the library users 
in the two sites that were interested in one of the two topics or had requested 
in-depth literature search support in these areas. A preliminary online survey 

 
Navigating the Virtual Horizon 
41
(Appendix A) was administered to understand the participants’ experience 
using social media tools, how they used the technologies, and the possible 
barriers to using these tools for online research purposes. The survey was also 
intended to help the librarian facilitators identify training needs for the social 
media tools selected for this study.
Three social media tools were explored in this project:
•  A user blog was created using Blogger (http://www.blogspot.com) for 
each VIG where information about resources that pertained to the topic 
was posted by both librarians and group members. It also served as a 
gateway platform for the other two tools integrated into our research 
group activities.
•  Chat rooms were embedded in our blogs, where we connected our group 
members virtually in real time for subject-related knowledge sharing, 
information literacy training, and consultation via a browser-based chat 
service. Two platforms were explored: Meebo (https://www.meebo
.com) and Chatroll (http://chatroll.com).
•  Delicious bookmarking guides on the interest topics were created and 
shared via http://www.delicious.com, another tool we linked from the 
two blogs. Subject tags from those guides allowed researchers to form a 
number of networks by subscribing to and following the other members.
We also offered three in-person onsite training sessions with interest group 
members to address any technical issues/concerns about general use of social 
media and the three tools introduced. A postsurvey (Appendix B) was dis-
tributed 3 months later via e-mail to understand their experience using social 
media in VIGs, gather feedback about the pilot project, assess comfort level 
with social media tools for research purposes, determine barriers to uptake 
during the pilot, and seek recommendations for the future services in VIGs.
RESULTS
Presurvey
Twenty-five health care professionals filled out our presurvey, and they indi-
cated interest in participating in our VIG pilot project and learning more about 
using social media for collaborative learning in one or both of our preselected 
topics. Most participants had experience with at least one social media tool 
prior to participation in the VIGs, primarily for communication and informa-
tion-sharing purposes. Only two participants self-reported discomfort from lack 
of experience with social media. Self-reported barriers to using social media 

42 
Yongtao Lin and Kathryn M. E. Ranjit
tools included limited workplace access, time constraints, discomfort with the 
medium, and privacy issues. Training was requested for creating good online 
content and for directions to use the tools proposed for the VIGs.
Blog
Twenty-one participants registered for an account with one or both blogs. 
Twenty posts were published during the 3-month period. Types of informa-
tion shared in the blog posts included an introduction to each piloted social 
media tool and “how to” directions, two reviews of articles pertinent to the 
subject areas, information sharing about tools used in the field, and favorite 
free resources, including websites and resources created by our participants 
(e.g., one participant’s departmental newsletter).
Chat
Four live chat sessions were held, scheduled approximately every 3 weeks. 
Eight people participated in one or more the chat sessions. Sessions were an 
open forum, but each session was prefaced with questions to the group to 
foster discussions.
Session 1: Troubleshooting issues with signing up for the blogs, why par-
ticipants were interested in joining the VIGs, social media in health care, 
and previous experience with the VIG topic.
Session 2: Social media in health care, social media use in parent organiza-
tion, troubleshooting issues with Delicious.
Session 3: Reflecting on recent posts, using guideline appraisal tools, 
exploring the use of other social media tools for research and learning 
purposes.
Session 4: Favorite resources in the VIG topic—websites, medical jour-
nals/databases, consultation with colleagues, and so on, and why these 
are good resources.
Types of information shared in chat sessions included recent developments re-
lated to the interest group topic, reflections and discussions about recent posts, 
interest group resource sharing, discussions about the use of social media for 
specific information sharing purposes, and new social media tools to explore.
Delicious
The librarian facilitators created three initial bookmark lists (tags) to share 
with the VIGs: Clinical Practice Guidelines, Patient Safety, and Social Media 

 
Navigating the Virtual Horizon 
43
in Health Care. Twelve participants signed up for Delicious accounts. Partici-
pants bookmarked favorite websites during in-person training sessions. Users 
were encouraged to follow one another’s networks. Types of information 
collected in tag lists included government websites, alert websites, online 
reports, statistical reports, online appraisal tools, popular reviews, and videos 
pertaining to the interest group topics.
Postsurvey
Eight participants responded to the postsurvey. These health care profession-
als reported that having exposure to a tool during the pilot led to more con-
fidence in using these social media tools. Five out of eight respondents were 
unable to interact with one or more of the social media tools during the pilot. 
The greatest reported barrier to participation was time constraints.
The blog content was viewed as useful to most participants who read them. 
Chat sessions were reported as the most useful tool for sharing and discussing 
interest group resources, as well as for connecting with VIG collaborators and 
troubleshooting issues. Delicious bookmarking was the most difficult tool to 
use of those introduced in this pilot. Participants reported that they had dif-
ficulty creating accounts for this tool and using it to find useful resources, 
even after in-person and online training.
Participants joined the VIGs for a variety of reasons (Table 4.1). Most 
indicated the motivation to learn more about the VIG topics and to connect 
with their colleagues over these topics. Overall, participants characterized the 
experience as positive and reported an increased awareness of social media 
tools for information sharing. Negative experiences noted were due to lack of 
time available to participate fully.
Table 4.1. Participants’ Motivations for Joining the Virtual Interest Group Pilot Study
Motivation
Percentage of 
Participants (n = 8)
I didn’t have any experience in social media so I wanted to learn 
some basics.
37.5
I had some previous experience with social media and wanted to 
learn how social media is used for work-related purposes.
25.0
I wanted to be involved in the discussions of the topic(s): patient 
safety and/or clinical practice guidelines.
62.5
I wanted to be part of the groups to make more connections 
to people with interest in patient safety and clinical practice 
guidelines.
50.0
I signed up because the librarian recommended the interest 
groups and potential benefits to me.
25.0

44 
Yongtao Lin and Kathryn M. E. Ranjit
DISCUSSION
Optimized Information Creation and Knowledge Sharing
While this pilot was social media based, increased information sharing and 
creation were observed in the VIGs through each social media tool. Some 
resources that were deemed valuable by this interest group were shared in 
each tool used in this pilot, such as government websites, online reports, and 
freely available research tools on the Internet. Information gathering took 
place when exploring all the different tools but may have been most evident 
in the chat sessions where questions were addressed in real time. A more 
stable form of information sharing could be followed later by a blog post or 
by tagging into Delicious.
Enhanced Relationship Building
The VIG project was designed to introduce the use of social media for creating 
a collaborative virtual research community, and it was an effort to improve the 
practice through technology. Participants from different departments and roles 
at three separate sites came together to participate in the VIGs. The collabora-
tive online environment allowed these professionals to share and learn from 
others in their organization whom they did not usually have the chance to col-
laborate with in person. The interactive platforms offered new opportunities for 
librarians to foster deeper reflection and collaboration from participants and for 
participants to easily develop networks, relationships, and their identity through 
information sharing and gathering. As information professionals, we see the 
potential of social media as a platform for relationship building through col-
laborative working in which end users and librarians develop services together.
Social Media Training
Social media is gaining an ever-increasing role in health care (Squazzo, 
2010). While this pilot was designed to introduce the use of social media for 
learning and knowledge sharing in health care topics, it was not originally 
intended to address the prevalence and best practice of social media use in 
the health care environment. This topic, however, became a recurring theme 
throughout the pilot. Therefore, through this social learning model, the group 
adapted the VIGs to address questions in this topic as needed.
Increased Level of Social Media Sophistication for Service Delivery
The firsthand experience and lessons learned from the pilot study have pre-
pared us to use other social media applications that are relevant to libraries to 
support our integrated information services. For example,

 
Navigating the Virtual Horizon 
45
•  information discovery and access can be facilitated through the use of 
bookmarking and blogging;
•  reference services extend beyond the physical information desk, where 
chat is offered as an additional channel;
•  teaching and instruction activities can benefit greatly through the inclu-
sion of other types of media and online training sessions; and
•  current awareness services have an instant reach through Twitter and 
blogs.
The following highlights some other social media projects we conducted after 
the VIG pilot project.
Virtual Reference Service in a Hospital Library Network
Although there is an increase in articles written about the implementation of 
virtual reference services by chat, most of these are related to university com-
munities, and there is little exploration of what these services look like in the 
hospital library environment. Exercising what we have learned from online 
communication through the VIG pilot and incorporating research from online 
reference studies, we developed a chat reference service for our hospital library 
network. A recent presentation at the Canadian Health Libraries Association 
2012 Conference outlines our implementation strategy for this service, includ-
ing staff training, usage, and service evaluation (Ranjit, Vaska, & Lin, 2012).
We have also started to explore the use of Twitter for communication 
updates and reference (http://twitter.com/hinyyc), as well as YouTube for 
disseminating library tutorials and recommended health information videos 
(http://www.youtube.com/user/hinyyc), with promising results.
Extending Library Instruction to Collaborate and Connect
An increased understanding of social adult learning theories has provided us 
with a successful framework for extending library instruction beyond the tra-
ditional instruction model to the end users. This framework is meant to focus 
on learners’ self-directed, active learning through exploring and experiment-
ing meaningful education content in social context.
A laddered education curriculum, which consisted of a series of brief 
courses on various information resources and topics, was developed on the 
basis of learners’ education needs. Although most sessions took place during 
lunch hours in face-to-face settings, connections were also made through the 
introduction to follow-up resources available from virtual subject guides to 
increase the learners’ exposure to library resources, to self-paced interactive 
online modules to enhance learning outcomes, and to more in-person learning 

46 
Yongtao Lin and Kathryn M. E. Ranjit
sessions to sustain professional development. The program was presented at a 
national Workshop for Instruction in Library Use in 2012, where the concept 
of instructing through collaboration and creating social context learning was 
very well received (Lin & Ranjit, 2012).
Alert Service Using a Blog to Satisfy Researchers’ Current 
Awareness Needs
In April 2012, librarians implemented a current awareness project in cancer 
care facilities by creating and maintaining a subject-based project to dis-
seminate the latest cancer information in grey literature to the specific research 
community. The Grey Horizon Blog (http://grey-horizon.blogspot.com) was 
created in April 2012 using Blogger. The selection and reaggregation of infor-
mation involves ongoing assessment of user needs and continuous work on the 
blog. A weekly global e-mail digest listing of the postings was introduced to 
all staff in July. Since our launch on April 30, 2012, until the end of July 2012, 
nearly 2,000 page views have been logged for the almost 200 posts that com-
pose our blog thus far. We are planning to evaluate the effectiveness of using a 
blog for the alert service in October and presented findings at the 14th Interna-
tional Conference in Grey Literature in November 2012 (Lin & Vaska, 2012).
RECOMMENDATIONS
In-Person Training for Online Learning
The intent of the VIG pilot was to facilitate learning in the online environment 
as much as possible, including training in applying these social media tools. 
Online learning is increasingly becoming the best practice model for continu-
ing education in health care environment for researchers. However, some 
participants were unable to take part as desired, perhaps due to the limited 
time invested in online learning as each tool was introduced. It was observed 
that facilitated in-person training increased the comfort level and motivation to 
participate in the VIGs. The introduction of an in-person training session at the 
outset for learners who prefer this learning style should be considered for con-
ducting similar projects. This also aligns with adult social learning principles in 
creating interactive, flexible, and multiple learning opportunities.
Training How to Use Social Media Applications
An appreciation is definitely not lacking for end users that there is great 
potential to the integration of social media in collaborative work and profes-
sional development. However, the level of sophistication in the use of these 

 
Navigating the Virtual Horizon 
47
new applications is evidently low, especially for the users whose work is not 
heavily dependent on information tools, such as health care practitioners. The 
challenge needs to be addressed by providing continuous couching, training, 
and troubleshooting on the use of social media tools.
Engaging Organizations and Larger Communities in the 
Adoption of Social Media
Social media is now contributing to the infrastructure of our everyday activi-
ties, not just at home but also at work. Our project has convinced us of the 
importance of workplace buy-in and stakeholder involvement. This impact 
was also shown in the results of an Edinburgh Naperi-TFPL study (Hall, Gol-
zari, Blaswick, & Goody, 2008). The study findings revealed that the greatest 
risks associated with social media applications related to their integration 
within organizations. They were regarded as “more important than risks to 
the smooth running and maintenance of information management processes, 
security, productivity and online citizenship” (Hall, 2011, p. 425).
Another major challenge in workplace settings is the introduction of a tool 
that has a “social” component as it adds to the perceptions of risks in data 
security and waste of staff time, especially for librarians working in health 
services or other public sectors. When access to a social media platform is 
blocked in a work environment, advocating the value of social media may not 
be an immediate option. Therefore, rather than taking a tool and considering 
how it can be implemented, plan the service and identify its value and what is 
needed to make it work before identifying social media tools that may work 
within the existing organization infrastructure.
Finally, the service should always involve end users in the development 
process, whether it is an actual design of a new service or is simply offering 
additional channels for service delivery. A successful strategy in social media 
innovation will see end users transformed from consumers to collaborators in 
building user-generated services with librarians, instead of being part of the 
traditional information provider-consumer model.
CONCLUSION
Health care providers are quickly adopting social media into their practice. 
Hospital libraries are in a position where they are both applying these tools 
for service as well as orienting their clients to use these tools for practice and 
professional development. The best way to learn is by doing. Find your own 
way to explore the virtual horizon and provide a good context for collabora-
tive learning and service improvement in your environment.

48 
Yongtao Lin and Kathryn M. E. Ranjit
APPENDIX A: SAMPLE PRESURVEY QUESTIONS 
FOR THE VIRTUAL INTEREST GROUP PROJECT
1.  Have you had any experience with any Social Media tools, either per-
sonally or for work-related purposes?
2. What Social Media tools do you use?
Flickr
Twitter
Delicious
Facebook
MySpace
YouTube
Ning
Blogger
Other
3. How comfortable do you feel while using these Social Media tools?
Not comfortable at all
Comfortable
Very comfortable
4. What do you use these tools for?
Communication
Information sharing
Accessing information
Creating interest groups or networking
Marketing or promotion
Customer service
Community involvement
Other
5. How long have you been using these Social Media tools (any tool)?
Less than a year
Between a year and three years
Longer than three years
6.  If you haven’t been using Social Media tools, please share with us why, 
either at work or in your personal life.
7.  Do you have any concerns about using Social Media tools for work-
related purposes?
No concerns
Lack of time
Not supported by the organization
Can’t access these tools from the work computer
Not sure how to create good content
Concern about information privacy

 
Navigating the Virtual Horizon 
49
Legal risks
Other
 8.  What type(s) of learning opportunities can we provide to help you feel 
comfortable participating in this project?
Online class
Online tutorials
In-person training
Handouts
No training needed
Other
 9. In what topic(s) would training be useful?
Blogging
Creating good content
Using bookmarks
Other
10.  Do you have any other questions or comments about Social Media?
APPENDIX B: SAMPLE POSTSURVEY QUESTIONS 
FOR THE VIRTUAL INTEREST GROUP PROJECT
1.  Can you share with us why you were interested in participating in our 
interest groups?
I didn’t have any experience with Social Media and wanted to learn the 
basics
I had some previous experience and want to learn how Social Media is 
used for work-related purposes
I wanted to be involved in the discussions of the topic(s): patient safety 
and/or clinical practice guidelines
I wanted to be part of the groups to make more connections to people 
with interest in patient safety and clinical practice guidelines
I signed up because the librarian recommended the interest groups and 
potential benefits to me
Other
Blogs
2. Did you create an account for any of the two blogs?
3. Have you read any of the blog posts in VIG blogs?
4.  Did you find information from the blogs useful?
5.  If you did not create an account for the blogs, can you share with us why?
6.  Other comments

50 
Yongtao Lin and Kathryn M. E. Ranjit
Delicious
 7. Did you create an account for Delicious?
 8. Did you find any useful website from Delicious?
 9.  If you did not create an account in Delicious, can you share with us 
why?
10. Other comments
Chat
11. Did you attend any of the chat room sessions?
12. What characteristics of the chat session(s) did you find useful?
Connecting with other members of the VIG
Sharing and discussing a useful interest group resource
Troubleshooting an issue with interest group Social Media tools
I didn’t find the chat session useful
Other
13. If you did not attend a chat session, can you share with us why?
14.  How comfortable do you feel now while using these Social Media 
tools, compared to before participating in our project?
More comfortable
Still not comfortable
No change
15. What would you use these tools for in the future?
Communication
Information sharing
Accessing information
Creating interest groups or networking
Marketing or promotion
Customer service
Community involvement
Other
16. Other comments
REFERENCES
Agarwal, N. (2011). Collective learning: An integrated use of social media in learn-
ing environment. In B. White, I. King, & P. Tsang (Eds.), Social media tools and 
platforms in learning environments (pp. 37–51). New York: Springer.
Bennett, E. (2009). Hospitals and social media: A survey of best practices. Retrieved 
from http://www.slideshare.net/edbennett/hospitals-social-media
Bolhuis, S. (1996). Towards active and selfdirected learning: Preparing for lifelong 
learning, with reference to Dutch secondary education. Retrieved from http://

 
Navigating the Virtual Horizon 
51
ezproxy.lib.ucalgary.ca:2048/login?url=http://search.ebscohost.com/login.aspx
?direct=true&db=eric&AN=ED396141&site=ehost-live
Gebb, B. A. (2010). Social media for medical librarians. Retrieved from http://www
.slideshare.net/FrontierLibrary/social-media-for-medical-librarians.
Hall, H. (2011). Relationship and role transformations in social media environments. 
Electronic Library, 29, 421–428.
Hall, H., Golzari, S., Blaswick, B., & Goody, M. (2008). Opportunity and risk in so-
cial computing environments. Retrieved from http://www.soc.napier.ac.uk/~hazelh/
esis/soc_comp_proj_rep_public.pdf
Kallurkar, S. (2008). Targeted information dissemination. DTIC Online. Retrieved 
from http://www.dtic.mil/cgi-bin/GetTRDoc?AD=ADA480150&Location=U2
&doc=GetTRDoc.pdf
Lin, Y., & Ranjit, K. M. E. (2012). Designing a sustainable information literacy 
curriculum for health care professionals in a hospital library network. In Forty-
first Annual Workshop for Instruction in Library Use. Retrieved from http://sites
.macewan.ca/wilu2012/files/2012/06/May23_1600_LinRanjit_DesigningSustain
ableInformation.pdf
Lin, Y., & Vaska, M. (2012). Creating and assessing a subject-based blog for current 
awareness within a cancer care environment. In Fourteenth International Confer-
ence on Grey Literature. Retrieved from http://www.textrelease.com/gl14program/
session3.html
Merriam, S. B., Caffarella, L. M., & Baumgartner, R. S. (2007). Learning in Adult-
hood: A Comprehensive Guide (3rd ed.). San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Myhill, M., Shoebridge, M., & Snook, L. (2009). Virtual research environments—
A Web 2.0 cookbook?” Library Hi Tech, 27(2), 228–238.
Ranjit, K. M. E., Vaska, M., & Lin, Y. (2012, June). Evaluating a chat reference 
service in a hospital library network. Paper presented at the Thirty-Sixth Annual 
Canadian Health Libraries Association/Association Des Bibliothèques De La 
Santé Du Canada Conference, Hamilton, ON. Retrieved from http://www.chla
-absc.ca/2012/images/slides/chla2012_paper_presentation_ranjit.pdf
Rethlefsen, M. L., & Engard, N. C. (2007). Social software for libraries and librar-
ians. Journal of Hospital Librarianship. Retrieved from http://www.tandfonline
.com/doi/abs/10.1300/J186v06n04_03
Squazzo, J. D. (2010). Best practices for applying social media in healthcare. Health-
care Executive, 25(3), 34–36, 38–39.
Statistics Canada. (2012). Table 5: Most populous municipalities (census subdivi-
sions) by province and territory, 2011. Retrieved from http://www12.statcan.gc.ca/
census-recensement/2011/as-sa/98-310-x/2011001/tbl/tbl5-eng.cfm
Tennant, M. R., Auten, B., Botero, C. E., Butson, L. C., Edwards, M. E., Garcia-
Milian, R., et al. (2012). Changing the face of reference: Adapting biomedical and 
health information services for the classroom, clinic, and beyond. Medical Refer-
ence Services Quarterly, 31, 280–301.
Voss, A., & Procter, R. (2009). Virtual research environments in scholarly work and 
communications. Library Hi Tech, 27(2), 174–190.
Williams, C. (2010). Understanding the essential elements of work-based learning 
and its relevance to everyday clinical practice. Journal of Nursing Management, 
18, 624–632.


53
5
Beyond the Teen Space: 
Reaching Teens through Social Media
LAURA A. HORN
The Farmington Public Libraries
THE FARMINGTON LIBRARIES TEEN SPACE: 
A BRIEF INTRODUCTION
The Farmington Library is located directly in front of the Farmington High 
School, which serves all of Farmington, Connecticut. On any given after-
noon during the academic year, approximately 30 teens use the Teen Space 
to browse the shelves, use the iMacs, play Wii games, or just hang out with 
their friends. These teens are usually in the space from 2:30 PM until 4:00 PM 
or 5:30 PM, depending on which late bus they take or when their friends leave. 
There are eight iMacs in the Teen Space, a Wii console with a large flatscreen 
mounted on the wall, comfy chairs for hanging out, and café-style tables and 
chairs for teens who wish to do homework or play games with their friends. 
There is also a computer lab with 10 Dell computers adjacent to the Teen 
Space, which I open for teens when it isn’t already being used for a library 
program. The majority of teens who come to the Teen Space in the afternoons 
are high school students. I have been told that there used to be a bus that 
dropped the middle school students off at the library in the afternoons, but 
that hasn’t happened since I have worked at the library.
GETTING STARTED
In July 2010, just 2 months after graduating from Simmons with my master’s 
degree, I was offered a paid internship at 25 hours per week at the main 
branch of the Farmington Libraries. I was going to be filling in for the teen 
librarian while she was out on leave. Over the course of the next 6 months or 

54 
Laura A. Horn
so, I was to staff the Teen Space in the afternoons from about 2:30 until 5:00 
(when I left for the day), maintain the teen collections, plan programs, and up-
date the teen department’s various social media outlets as necessary. In addi-
tion to my responsibilities to the teen department, I staffed the reference desk 
between 8 and 15 hours per week, which fluctuated depending on whether I 
was working on a Saturday. Between the time that I spent staffing the Teen 
Space and my time spent staffing the reference desk, I had approximately 4.5 
hours per week to devote to collection development and maintenance, plan-
ning programs, and updating the various social media platforms that the teen 
librarian usually used. With so little time, I knew that I needed to prioritize, 
but I wasn’t sure where to begin. Where should I focus my attention? What 
does this library value, and how can I contribute to those values? I turned to 
the libraries’ mission statement:
The Farmington Library is a comfortable, dynamic environment where cur-
rent technology, friendly, professional service, equal access to a wide variety 
of materials, and cultural, educational and recreational programs encourage 
the exchange of ideas, kindle the pleasure of reading and life-long learning, 
preserve the memories and history of Farmington and its neighbors, and foster 
community spirit. We are Farmington’s Living Room.
Okay, so we are Farmington’s living room, but if we aren’t close to 
people’s homes and they can’t drive (like most teens), then how do they 
know what the library has to offer? My job was to make sure that teens and 
their parents knew what programs were happening and when, as well as what 
materials the library had to offer teens. Since only a small portion of the teen 
population was actually coming to the Teen Space to hang out on a regular 
basis, I knew that I needed to go to them, and I knew that the best way to do 
this was to reach out to them online.
According to the Pew Research Center’s Internet & American Life 
Project’s 2011 Teen/Parent Survey (2012), 80% of American teens use an 
online social networking site, such as MySpace or Facebook, and an addi-
tional 16% use Twitter. This means that there is a wonderful opportunity to 
build relationships with teens in the community and market library services 
to them for free.
MARKETING IS NOT A DIRTY WORD
For many, marketing is a dirty word. They think of sales people and those 
annoying Internet advertisements that pop up trying to sell you things you 
don’t want or need. Marketing, however, is quite necessary for any entity that 

 
Beyond the Teen Space 
55
offers goods or services of any kind. Being a nonprofit does not make you ex-
empt from marketing. Sure, there will always be the regulars that come to the 
library for the latest Patterson book or to use the computers, but what about 
the rest of the population that doesn’t come to the library regularly? In most 
towns, there are far more people who don’t come to the library regularly than 
there are people who do. If the Farmington Library and, specifically, the Teen 
Space were to become a center of learning and community, then I needed to 
show the community what the library had to offer its teens. This included 
marketing the space, the collection, and the programs.
Anyone who has ever marketed a product or service before knows that 
you need to meet your target audience where they are, on their terms. Thanks 
to my predecessors, a teen librarian Facebook account was already in place 
when I began, and we had a healthy number of friends, over 200 if I remem-
ber correctly. There was also a teen department blog hosted by Blogger and 
a teen review blog hosted by WordPress. The Facebook account was used 
primarily to interact with teens through status updates about the library and 
by sharing photos of teens hanging out at the library or attending library pro-
grams. The teen department blog was used mostly to inform the Farmington 
community as a whole about teen programs taking place at the library, and 
the WordPress blog was used exclusively to post teen-authored book reviews. 
We have also allowed teens to post reviews of movies and music, but it is 
mainly used for sharing book reviews.
I had great tools to use but little time to actually devote to them, and I knew 
from the hours that I spent in graduate classes that the keys to making any 
social media outlet successful were consistency, frequency, and relevancy. 
With my schedule being as busy as it was, I decided to choose one social 
media outlet at a time. After I felt comfortable with one, I would move on to 
the next. When I finally had a handle on managing all three of the three tools 
already in place, I would look to new outlets for marketing.
To get started, one does need to have at the very least a basic knowledge 
of the tools one is going to use, and one needs to be comfortable with work-
ing in a tech environment that is constantly changing. Fortunately for me, I 
had used blogs and microblogs while in graduate school, and I had my own 
Facebook account, so I didn’t need any formal training before I got started. 
I had enough basic knowledge to get by, and everything else I learned by 
experience. If you or a member of your staff is going to begin outreach ef-
forts to the community via social media tools, make sure to have some basic 
knowledge of how things work, or seek advice from those around you. There 
are many wonderful librarians on listservs that would be more than happy to 
help a fellow librarian, not to mention the wealth of information that can be 
found online and in print about using social media sites as marketing tools.

56 
Laura A. Horn
BEGINNING WITH FACEBOOK
I decided to start with Facebook for one simple reason: more than half of 
American teens are using social networking sites such as Facebook and 
MySpace (Pew Research Center’s Internet & American Life Project, 2012). I 
know the Pew report included MySpace, but I haven’t met one teen in Farm-
ington who uses MySpace, at least not exclusively.
I began my Facebook campaign by trying to post my status updates in the 
mornings while I had time at my desk, before the teens got to the library. 
However, I quickly realized that there were very few teens online at that time 
since they were in school. You’d think this would have been obvious right 
from the start, but it had been nearly a decade since I was in high school, and 
I had happily forgotten that being in high school meant sitting in classrooms 
from about 7:30 in the morning until about 2:30 in the afternoon. With Face-
book and most other social media outlets, timing is everything. If you are 
posting when no one is around to read your posts, then you might as well quit. 
It’s akin to giving a speech to an empty room. I had to make time to reach out 
to the teens when they were available.
I noticed that most of the teens who came to the library after school left 
by about 4:00 PM and I worked until 5:00 PM. I figured that I had 1 hour of 
prime Facebook time with these teens. During that time, I would make my-
self available to chat; I would create events, send out invites, and post status 
updates about items newly added to the collection. Almost immediately after 
shifting the time of day that I posted my status updates, I started getting com-
ments and responses to my event invites. I also tracked the click-throughs on 
the links that I posted on Facebook. I did this by using bitly.com to generate 
shortened links, which then enabled me to look at those links and see how 
many times they had been clicked on. If I noticed that teens weren’t clicking 
the links to online writing contests, I would stop posting links to online writ-
ing contests. My momentum was building, and ensuring that my content was 
relevant to the teens was integral in maintaining this momentum.
In addition to increased interaction with my current friends, I started re-
ceiving more friend requests from Farmington teens. Not only was Facebook 
enabling me to connect with teens online whom I had never interacted with 
before, but it was also facilitating introductions in person. On numerous oc-
casions I have been approached by teens in the Teen Space who say, “You’re 
that library lady on Facebook aren’t you?” “Yes I am, and you are?” Instant 
introduction—thank you very much, Facebook.
At this point, I was happy with how things were progressing with the Face-
book account, and I was ready to move on to the blogs.

 
Beyond the Teen Space 
57
IMPLEMENTING YOUR OWN FACEBOOK PROGRAM
Facebook is an ever-changing environment, so in addition to keeping your ac-
count up-to-date with posts and events, you need to read articles online about 
Facebook and what changes may be coming or what changes have recently 
taken place. Other things that you should know about Facebook follow (these 
are some general guidelines, not hard-and-fast rules):
1.  You will need to decide if you will create a page, group, or personal 
account or some combination of the three. Do a little research before 
you choose which type of account you will use. See what other libraries 
or businesses have done, and determine which aspects will or will not 
work for your purposes.
2.  Don’t use an avatar or gimmicky photo of yourself as your profile pic-
ture. Teens like to know whom they are interacting with, especially if 
you are an adult.
3.  Don’t post on teens’ walls—not even if you see them every day and 
think they like you a lot.
4.  Do use Facebook as a way to communicate with teens through status 
updates, event invites, or private messages. I have found that many 
teens prefer messaging on Facebook to sending e-mail. If you have any 
library clubs or groups, create a Facebook group. This is how I connect 
with my Teen Advisory Group members between meetings. I am able 
to remind them of meetings and ask them for input on the next meet-
ing’s agenda.
5.  Choose your friends wisely, and create lists. If you create a page, this 
isn’t really a concern, but if you choose to use a personal account or 
a group, this is important. I try to keep my teen space, both physical 
and virtual, adult-free, with the few exceptions being coworkers, fel-
low librarians, and teens who have graduated. I then create lists in 
Facebook, which enable me to target specific subsets of my friends 
when posting updates.
MOVING BEYOND FACEBOOK: THE BLOGOSPHERE
Blogger and WordPress
Facebook is wonderful, but there are tasks that are better accomplished using 
other tools, such as blogs. Since I have chosen to use a personal Facebook 
account, which enables me to select my friends strategically, I am purposely 

58 
Laura A. Horn
leaving out large segments of the population that I don’t necessarily want to 
ignore altogether. For instance, it is important for the Friends of the Library, 
the Library Board, local media outlets, and the nonteen portion of the town of 
Farmington to know what the library has to offer local teens.
The teen page of the libraries’ website is a great tool for telling people what 
the library has to offer. Here I can post dates and times of upcoming events and 
offer an overview of what the physical Teen Space has to offer. What I cannot 
is post updates to the website as fast as I can update a blog or microblog.
Blogs offer the unique opportunity to easily post photos, videos, and text. 
The teen department has two separate blogs with very separate purposes. The 
first is the teen department’s blog, which is hosted by Blogger (http://farm
ingtonlibctteen.blogspot.com). The purpose of the teen department’s blog is to 
show the community what the Teen Space has to offer. Sometimes this means 
that we post pictures of teens at programs; sometimes, the pictures are of teens 
volunteering; and other times, the pictures are of teens just hanging out in the 
Teen Space. This blog also acts as a living visual history of the teen department. 
People who visit the blog are able to see pictures from a program that happened 
yesterday, as well as pictures of a program that happened 1 year ago.
In the past, the teen department blog was also used to post book trailers 
and highlight books in the teen collection. However, since I could and often 
did post book trailers on Facebook, I felt like I was duplicating my efforts. 
What value was I adding if all of my social media outlets were sharing the 
same information? This was when I decided to only use the Blogger blog 
for posting photos. I then enabled the “Share It” widget, which allowed blog 
readers to share posts on Facebook and Twitter. Now when I post photos from 
programs on the blog, I can share them on Facebook for teens to see and on 
the @FarmLibTeen Twitter account.
The teen review blog (http://farmingtonlibraryteenreviews.wordpress
.com), which is hosted by WordPress, is an important tool for marketing the 
collection, as well as empowering teens. During the academic year, a teen 
volunteer comes in once a week after school and writes reviews of books she 
has recently read. During the summer, the reviews published are submitted by 
Farmington teens as part of our Summer Reading Challenge. This summer, 
teens earned one raffle ticket for our grand prize drawing for each review they 
wrote or book trailer they created using any medium they chose. The reviews 
were then posted to the blog by teen volunteers who added book cover images 
for the item being reviewed and a link to the item in the libraries’ catalog. 
I linked this blog to the @FarmLibTeen Twitter account so that each time 
a new review was published, a Tweet would be sent out and then posted to 
Facebook. This enabled me to reach people who read blogs as well the people 
who follow us on Twitter and all of our teen friends on Facebook.

 
Beyond the Teen Space 
59
Things to keep in mind when blogging:
1.  Know your audience. Who are you trying to reach? If you are trying 
to reach teens, how are you going to get them to your blog? You may 
want to add a widget such as “Share It” or post a link to your blog 
on your website. Maybe you want to post flyers in your library with 
a link or a QR code that will take people to your blog. I see teens on 
Facebook far more often than I see them reading blogs, so if you are 
using this as your only marketing tool, you will really need to get the 
word out in your community.
2.  Update, update, update. We all fall into a rut every now and then where 
we don’t post nearly as often as we should. With blogs, it is especially 
important to update them frequently. The worst thing is visiting a blog 
only to find that the last post was published a year ago. The owner 
might publish a new exciting article tomorrow, but you will probably 
never go back to see it. And why would you? There are so many blogs 
that stay current; there is no need to spend time with those that do not.
3.  Make sure that you make your blog visible to everyone and indexable 
by search engines. If you turn these features off, people won’t be able 
to find your blog.
Microblogging with Twitter
I set up a Twitter account early in 2011. My reason for doing this was that 
I knew it was an easy way to get small bits of information to large groups 
of people quickly. I also knew that I could follow young adult authors and 
publishers and retweet news that I thought would interest local teens, such as 
book giveaways, writing contests, and author appearances. I decided to start 
by connecting my new Twitter account with my Facebook account so that 
teens would see that I was on Twitter. This way, I could post on Twitter, and 
my tweets would appear on my Facebook wall and in the timelines of my fol-
lowers, thereby alerting teens to the fact that I was on Twitter. The reaction I 
hoped for was “That’s awesome! The teen librarian is on Twitter. I’m going 
to follow her.” This was not, however, the reaction I received. After months 
of tweeting, I had over 30 followers, but none of them were teens. Most of my 
followers were authors, other libraries and librarians or local media. This led 
me to believe that perhaps teens weren’t using Twitter yet. I knew that when 
I started using Twitter a couple years ago, most teens had no idea what it was; 
maybe this was still the case. I would soon realize that this was not the case. 
Teens, specifically Farmington teens, were absolutely using Twitter—they 
just weren’t following me.

60 
Laura A. Horn
One afternoon, I asked one of my regular teens about Twitter. Would he 
ever follow the teen librarian? His answer, “no.” Not “maybe” or “let me 
think about it” but flat-out “no.” According to him, teens feel that they can 
be truly anonymous on Twitter. They used to feel this way on Facebook, 
but then their parents, aunts, uncles, librarians, and everyone else jumped on 
the bandwagon and ruined their little piece of heaven. Now they are migrat-
ing to Twitter in droves. I asked him if he would consider following me if I 
promised not to follow him back. This seemed like a simple and reasonable 
solution. That way, he would be able to see my posts, but I wouldn’t see his. 
Again, the answer was “no.” His reason: the number of people you follow 
needs to be almost the same as the number of people who follow you. If you 
follow more people than follow you, you aren’t cool. What could I say to 
that? I don’t want anyone losing his popularity status for me.
Twitter may not be the next-best thing for marketing to teens, but it might, 
and I won’t know if I don’t stick with it for at least a little while longer. While 
it hasn’t enabled me to reach more teens directly, I have found it to be a great 
tool for getting news about upcoming teen programs out into the community, 
so for now, I will continue to post updates on Twitter. Maybe some parents 
will see a tweet about an event coming up for teens and pass the message on 
to their children. This may not have been my initial goal, but it does work 
well. You can’t be afraid to try new things and adapt your strategies as neces-
sary. It is, however, important to stick with these initiatives once you begin, 
even if your initial results aren’t what you hoped for. We didn’t make over 
260 friends on Facebook overnight—why should Twitter be any different?
HOW MUCH IS THIS GOING TO COST?
The online tools themselves are free, which is wonderful, but the technology 
you need to use those tools is not. Anyone who has access to a computer with 
an Internet connection can start connecting online with teens (or any other 
target population). I have, however, included a list of tools similar to those 
that I use on a daily basis. These items will enable you to successfully start 
and maintain a social media program. There are, of course, more and less 
expensive options in all categories—what you purchase will depend on your 
budget and your specific needs.
•  The New iPad, 16gb, wi-fi model ($499)
•  InCase iPad case ($60)
•  Zagg Invisible SHIELD Smudge-Proof for Apple iPad2—it works with 
the New iPad as well ($40)

 
Beyond the Teen Space 
61
•  AppleCare+ for iPad ($99)
•  Dell Optiplex 790 (starting at $529; Dell, 2012)
•  Canon Powershot A2300 from B&H Photo ($119; B&H Foto & Elec-
tronics Corp, 2012)
My favorite gadget that I absolutely would not want to live without is my 
iPad. Of course, it isn’t a necessity, but it does make my job a lot easier. 
If I am occupied in the Teen Space all afternoon with no time to get to my 
computer, I simply log-in to my Facebook app and do what I need to do. 
The built-in camera allows me to take pictures of programs while they are 
taking place, and if an altercation arises in the Teen Space, I am easily able 
to photograph the teens involved to alert other staff members. The Pages 
app allows me to create documents and then e-mail them to myself in Word 
format to be opened on my PC. If a teen is looking for a particular book, 
I can connect to the catalog and find the item for him or her without ever 
having to leave the Teen Space. While the iPad is certainly a luxury item, 
it is extremely useful.
ASSESSING THE EFFICACY OF YOUR SOCIAL MEDIA TOOLS
Most of the tools you will use have their own programs for tracking statistics. 
Blogger and WordPress both show you how many visits your blog has had 
on specific dates. This enables you to see if certain days or weeks are more 
popular. With Blogger you can also see which posts received the most traffic, 
and you can see where your readers are being referred from. WordPress also 
shows you what sites are referring readers to your blog.
Twitter and Facebook are a bit trickier. You never know if someone reads 
one of your posts unless he or she comments on it or clicks on a link that you 
have created using a site such as bitly.com. If, however, you have a Facebook 
page instead of a personal account, you will receive e-mail with your weekly 
statistics, and you can check your statistics anytime by logging in to your 
account. This option is not offered to personal accounts, since individuals 
who are not marketing a product or service are not typically concerned with 
statistical data. This is another thing to take into consideration when deciding 
what type of Facebook account to create.
In addition to gathering information from the statistics given to you by the 
tools, you can gain a great deal of insight by surveying your target population. 
A great way to do this with teens is to visit the schools in your town. Ask if 
you can come and introduce yourself to the teens and do a book talk. Dur-
ing your introduction, tell the teens a little about your Facebook or Twitter 

62 
Laura A. Horn
account, and how they might benefit from friending or following you. Then 
hand out a short survey. On the survey you could ask teens the following:
1.  Before today did you know that the teen librarian had a Facebook ac-
count?
a. Yes
b. No
2. Are you already friends with the teen librarian? If yes, skip to number 4.
a. Yes
b. No
3. Now that you know that the teen librarian has a Facebook account would 
you friend her?
a. Yes
b. No. If no, why?
4. What type of information should the teen librarian post on her Facebook 
account to make it interesting to teens? Circle any that apply.
a. Library programs for teens
b. New books for teens
c. Community events that may interest teens
d. New media such as video games, CDs and DVDs
e. Other:
It is always good to check with your target audience every once in a while, 
just like it is important to review the statistics from your blogs or Facebook. 
You may learn that something that was once very popular is now growing 
out of fashion and something that gained little momentum early on is now 
becoming the most popular tool. The web and all things on it are fluid. New 
technologies and websites come and go, and it is up to you to follow the 
trends. This means knowing when to adopt a new tool or when to pass on 
something that will be a fleeting fad. It also means not being afraid to try 
something new when you know that it may not work.
GOING FORWARD
My goals for this coming year are to attract more teen followers on both 
Twitter and Facebook and to enlist another regular blogger for the teen 
review blog. To do this, I will employ a few different techniques. I would 
like to start by visiting classes at the high school and the middle school to 
conduct book-talks and spread the word about my Facebook and Twitter 
accounts. At this time, I will also host random giveaways on both Facebook 
and Twitter to give teens an additional incentive to friend or follow me. 

 
Beyond the Teen Space 
63
There are some great, highly anticipated books coming out this fall that 
would make wonderful prizes.
To find another blogger, I will do some old-fashioned asking around. I 
found my current blogger by approaching a teen who regularly stopped by 
the Teen Space to grab a pile of books. I asked her if she would like to write 
reviews and, in turn, she would receive credit for community service, which 
looks great on college applications. I also offered to write recommendation 
letters or serve as a professional reference when necessary. This brings me to 
my final and most important point.
Whatever you are trying to accomplish, it can’t be all about you and fur-
thering your cause. It has to be about your audience, and in my case, that 
audience is Farmington’s teens. I’m not just marketing the library to them. 
I’m interacting with them and learning about what they enjoy and what 
they want and need. I am offering them opportunities to learn more about 
themselves and the community they live in. The teens in turn are letting 
me into their lives, and that is not something that I take lightly. Teens need 
responsible adults in their lives who respect them, not just in person, but in 
the virtual world as well.
REFERENCES
B&H Foto & Electronics Corp. (2012). Canon PowerShot A2300 digital camera 
(black). Retrieved from http://www.bhphotovideo.com/bnh/controller/home?O=&
sku=842870&Q=&is=REG&A=details
Dell. (2012). OptiPlex 790 desktop. Retrieved from http://www.dell.com/us/slgov/p/
optiplex-790/pd
Pew Research Center’s Internet & American Life Project. (2012). 2011 Teen/Parent 
Survey. Retrieved from http://pewinternet.org/Trend-Data-(Teens)/Online-Activites
-Total.aspx 


65
6
The Library in the Social Network: 
Twitter at the Vancouver Public Library
KAY CAHILL
The Vancouver Public Library
As the web becomes a more social and porous medium, remember that 
interaction and community are going to happen with or without your in-
volvement. You can watch the conversation take place, or you can own 
and guide it.
—Adam Weinroth
In 2004, Harvard student Mark Zuckerberg and a handful of his friends 
and roommates created a simple social networking tool called Facebook. 
Initially restricted to college students, the site opened its doors to the world 
in 2006. During the same year, Jack Dorsey created and launched the micro-
blogging site Twitter. In 2012, the sites had a combined total of 1.4 billion 
active users: 900 million on Facebook and 500 million on Twitter. Photo-
sharing site Flickr has developed a user base of 51 million members and 
more than 6 billion unique images since its inception in 2007. YouTube, 
which launched in 2005, now contains more than 1.3 billion videos that 
were viewed over 1 trillion times in 2011.
Of course, social media was around before Facebook, Twitter, Flickr, 
and YouTube. Friendster, MySpace, Orkut, Livejournal, and others rose, 
fell, were swallowed up by competitors, or settled for small but stable niche 
audiences. But Facebook was the site that really changed the game, pushing 
social media into the mainstream and blurring the lines between traditional 
marketing and the online spaces where individuals connected with friends 
and shared content with one another. The shifts in user behavior happened 
rapidly, posing interesting questions for libraries as they kept a watchful 
professional eye on the changing technological landscape. Was there a 
place for the public library as an organization in these online spaces? Could 

66 
Kay Cahill
libraries really add value to their services by creating social media ac-
counts? And how could institutions, not traditionally known for their ability 
to move quickly, establish themselves in an environment that was evolving 
at such a tremendous pace?
At the Vancouver Public Library (VPL), we believed that the answer to the 
first and second questions was a definite yes and that the third was something 
we could address with the right approach. In early 2008, the first VPL social 
networking accounts were created on Facebook and Twitter, and we began 
exploring the potential of these new tools for promoting our services and 
building connections with our patrons.
ABOUT VPL
VPL is the largest library system in the province of British Columbia and 
the third-largest system in Canada. It has 22 branches and 275,000 registered 
cardholders; it contains over 2 million items in its print collections; and in 
2011, it answered more than 900,000 reference questions. Patrons came to 
our branches more than 6.5 million times last year and visited http://www.
vpl.ca just under 5 million times. The City of Vancouver and its residents 
continue to provide strong support for library services.
VPL’s website underwent a full-scale redesign and relaunch in 2008, 
with the goal of becoming a true virtual branch rather than a static col-
lection of pages. A brand new teen site followed in 2009, and in 2011 the 
library’s collection of online subject guides was moved into a new content 
platform, LibGuides, which allowed for flexible, web-friendly presentation 
of content. An ongoing goal for the site is to create opportunities not just 
to present content but to create opportunities for dialogue, interaction, and 
connection with the community.
FROM PILOT TO PRACTICE
The 2008 website redesign gave a small nod to the increasing prominence 
of social media sites. An Events Archive provided the option of linking to 
YouTube footage and Flickr photographs from library programs, and Deli-
cious was used as a repository for the library’s extensive collections of an-
notated links. However, these efforts were still firmly focused on sharing 
the library’s content with virtual visitors, not with engaging those visitors in 
dialogue about that content. Social networking sites—specifically, Twitter 
and Facebook—provided a means of bridging this gap, but these were not 

 
The Library in the Social Network 
67
the communication vehicles that had been intended for the new website. The 
tools that were recommended for creating discussion space were much more 
traditional: four branch blogs hosted on our own web servers and embedded 
into branch pages, with the option for users to comment on posts.
The ah-ha moment that led us away from the blogs and into social network-
ing sites was a preliminary investigation into Twitter hashtags. From this, we 
learned that VPL was already a hot topic on Twitter. Patrons were tweeting 
about the treasures they had discovered on the shelves at our book sale, having 
animated discussions about library programs while sitting in the audience at 
events, and grumbling about the speed of the wi-fi connection at the Central Li-
brary. Out there, on the web, we were already the subject of conversation—but 
at this point, it was not a conversation in which we were participating.
The branch blogs had proved more problematic to implement than we ex-
pected, with firewall security issues affecting the ability for users to submit 
comments. Now we had another option and one that came with significant 
benefits. The social networking community was already established in its 
chosen venues and showing an active interest in our services. There would 
be no need to try to drive traffic to our own site, and we would be able to 
respond to questions and give the library an opportunity to participate in 
conversations on which it could currently only eavesdrop. At the same time, 
this represented a shift from our traditional focus on a single library website 
where we owned and controlled both the content and the hardware used to 
host it. Organizationally, we had a way to go before we would be ready to 
accept that social media was not just a useful addition to the virtual toolbox 
but a primary means of communication in and of itself.
Twitter and Facebook virtually self-selected themselves as the best plat-
forms for an initial foray into social networking. Our goals were to find tools 
that we believed had the potential to assist us in engaging both current users 
and nonusers of the library, to identify spaces where there was already a 
community connection or interest in the library and its services, and to keep 
the workload involved in running pilot accounts to a manageable level since 
at this point no additional resources were available. Two members of staff, 
the assistant manager for website and community development and the web 
services librarian, were initially the only administrators for these accounts 
and were responsible for creating 100% of the content.
In early 2008, libraries were only just beginning to enter the social net-
working space, and those that did so were, for the most part, out on their own. 
At the beginning of a phenomenon, there are no best practices to follow, no 
recommended path, no guidelines for success or failure. This was slightly 
daunting in that we couldn’t be certain that our approach would work, but 
it was also very exciting because it meant that our options were wide open.

68 
Kay Cahill
Our two greatest concerns were that we create an accessible, friendly on-
line presence that would encourage interaction and dialogue and that we use 
social media tools to bring real value to our patrons and our services rather 
than just jumping on the bandwagon because it was the “in thing” for libraries 
to be doing. To achieve the former, we focused on creating a very distinctive 
voice for the organization. The librarians behind the posts never self-identi-
fied but took care to use the first-person plural; they also made a conscious 
effort to intersperse funny or quirky facts about the library with the posts, 
relaying important service information or promoting new library resources. 
Laughing at our own (occasional) typos also proved to be a winning formula: 
“Who knew librarians could be so funny!” said one poster after a brief ex-
change when a URL shortener botched the link we were trying to share.
Right from the start, the chosen communities reacted with enthusiasm. 
“I’m very happy to see you on Twitter Vancouver Public Library,” com-
mented one Twitter user shortly after the account was set up. “I wish you the 
best moving forward into the new. Respect.” “Loving the way you’re using 
Twitter,” added another. With the number of Twitter followers and Facebook 
fans growing daily, the power of the connections we were establishing with 
social networks soon became apparent. Early successes included a petition 
in support of provincial library funding, which was retweeted in less than an 
hour by @VPL followers with a combined total of more than 9,000 followers 
of their own; a comment about the lack of recycling bins at the Kensington 
Branch, which was acted on immediately after being forwarded to the branch 
head; and the use of Twitter (via a cell phone) for emergency communica-
tions when an explosion in a BC Hydro substation left downtown Vancouver 
without power and temporarily knocked out the library’s web servers.
As well as being a great platform for broadcasting information about the 
library, the new social networking tools quickly proved both a powerful means 
of creating community connections and an excellent venue for establishing 
dialogue and engaging with patrons. When a patron who had been living abroad 
returned to Vancouver and tweeted about how much she had missed the library, 
@VPL tweeted back that the library had missed her too. The delighted patron 
responded, “If this had been my childhood, it’d be like Santa writing back!” 
This informal, welcoming human face of the organization brought practical 
benefits, too: After a concerned patron was assisted with some outstanding 
fines via Twitter, the person sent a grateful message expressing being too afraid 
to approach staff in person because of the amount of money involved but felt 
able to enquire on Twitter because @VPL seemed “so friendly.”
Another valuable and unexpected outcome was the realization that, 
through Twitter, we were reaching current nonlibrary users, particularly 
among the technology savvy in their twenties and thirties. A common theme 

 
The Library in the Social Network 
69
raised by these users was that they had previously held the traditional view 
of the library as very printcentric, without much to offer their demographic. 
Seeing the library on Twitter caused them to rethink this view and begin 
exploring some of the new digital services, such as the BiblioCommons cata-
logue interface and the online subscription databases. “Had no idea the library 
offered something like this—thanks!!!” posted one user after following a link 
in a library tweet to the Naxos streaming music database.
The importance of our involvement in the online conversations about the 
library was emphasized not just by our increased ability to promote both new 
and existing services but our ability to step in swiftly to correct mistakes 
and misinformation. In the aftermath of the 2011 Stanley Cup riot, a Twitter 
user who claimed to be a friend of a relative of a librarian reported that the 
Children’s Library had been completely destroyed during the night of vio-
lence. As the false rumor spread, the web team was able to respond quickly, 
stemming the tide by using the @VPL account to clarify that the Children’s 
Library had experienced a single broken window and was just fine after a 
cleanup by maintenance staff.
The staff working on the Twitter account reported creating content and 
responding to patrons’ tweets to be both rewarding and fun (Figure 6.1). Dur-
ing this early phase, the work was still done in the odd minutes between other 
tasks, highlighting another benefit of Twitter: the workload is scalable. An 
initial presence can be established and maintained even when time is limited. 
However, as the popularity of the @VPL account increased, it became clear 
that it was going to need more time, more effort, and a more structured and 
strategic administrative approach to reach its full potential.
Figure 6.1. Vancouver Public Library Twitter feed with custom background.

70 
Kay Cahill
MOVING TO CENTER STAGE
At the time of writing, the VPL Twitter account recently passed the 9,000 
mark, representing around 3% of VPL’s cardholders. A rotating team of 
four staff members monitors the account daily, posting responses to patron 
queries, updating the account with new tweets, and using the HootSuite ad-
ministrative tool (http://www.hootesuite.com) to schedule posts at times or 
dates when the library isn’t open or no web team members are available. Top-
ics include library and community events, library news, information about 
library resources (e.g., guides, databases, and apps), related news from the 
wider publishing and technology worlds, and, of course, the odd funny post or 
picture (like the cucumber that mysteriously showed up in the lost-and-found 
one afternoon). The web team also updates VPL’s main Facebook account 
several times daily and provides support and guidance for the administrators 
of the seven branch Facebook pages.
So how did VPL move from two staff running pilot Twitter and Facebook 
accounts off the side of their desks to this much more structured and com-
mitted approach to social media? At the time when the account was created, 
libraries were very new to social networks. There were no statistics to share to 
show the effectiveness of tweets or Facebook posts as a means of community 
engagement, because these services hadn’t been established for long enough 
to evaluate (though this would soon change). In the library world in general, 
the early adopters were busy climbing on board while the majority wondered 
whether this was just another passing bandwagon and whether it was appro-
priate or worthwhile for libraries to be on social networks at all.
As the pilot progressed through 2008, the VPL account quickly accumu-
lated the greatest number of followers of any Canadian public library on Twit-
ter and entered the overall “Twitter Library League” top 10. The number of 
followers regularly doubled from month to month as the account’s popularity 
grew and enthusiastic fans retweeted library posts or urged their followers 
to add @VPL as part of the weekly Follow Friday (#FF) recommendations.
As awareness of the account’s popularity spread through the library, other 
departments and branches began to submit requests to have specific services 
and events promoted via Twitter. The web team and the marketing and com-
munications department also began posting press releases and other important 
organizational updates on social media as well as through standard commu-
nication channels.
The effect of the increase in followers and content was twofold. First, it 
highlighted the need for proper tools to assist with account management to 
assign the incoming requests, spread out the posting rate to avoid flooding 
the account, and reduce the risk of duplicate tweets; second, it became ap-

 
The Library in the Social Network 
71
parent that a number of the patrons who were following us on Twitter had 
come to see this venue as their primary source of information on library ser-
vices. Traditionally, notifications about items such as unexpected catalogue 
downtime would be broadcast as a banner across the top of every page of the 
library website. However, when server issues caused a weeklong series of 
interruptions to catalogue availability, Twitter users clamored for informa-
tion about why they couldn’t log-in—even though the banner had been up on 
the website since the problems began. We had created an expectation among 
these users that we would share important news and updates on Twitter in a 
timely manner, and now we needed to ensure that we were living up to this 
expectation. Twitter was no longer just an addition but one of our primary 
communication channels.
One of the advantages of using established social networking sites is 
that, as these have become an increasingly important part of the marketing 
and promotional landscape, a number of tools have been developed to help 
organizations manage them more effectively. We tested a few of these tools 
before settling on HootSuite as the best match for our needs. HootSuite pro-
vided us with the ability to post to multiple social networking accounts at the 
same time, meaning that we could share critical service updates across Twit-
ter, Facebook, and other channels with one click; it allowed the assigning of 
incoming tweets to individual staff for follow-up; it eliminated the risk of du-
plicate tweets being submitted by different staff members; and it enabled us 
to schedule tweets, which proved a particular benefit in that we could space 
out the day’s tweets evenly and avoid large gaps when the library was closed 
or no web team members were available.
The other advantage that HootSuite gave us was significantly improved 
metrics on how our Twitter feed was being used. We knew that our follower 
numbers held up impressively against other public libraries, but as a metric, 
follower count alone is a pretty blunt instrument; Twitter is full of spam ac-
counts that automatically follow other accounts in an effort to boost their own 
numbers. An in-depth analysis of followers would provide more meaningful 
data about who is subscribed to the @VPL account, but this would be a con-
siderably more time-consuming task. (While we have not yet conducted a full 
analysis, smaller-scale reviews of sample sets of followers indicate that @
VPL is doing well in this regard: followers are mainly individual Vancouveri-
tes, then local organizations and other libraries.) One of the most important 
metrics provided by HootSuite is the tracking of traffic to links that are shared 
using the ow.ly link shortener, which allows us to measure Twitter’s ability 
to drive traffic back to the main VPL website.
Measuring the success of the account in a meaningful way is paramount, 
as it supports the work effort that we put into creating content and main-

72 
Kay Cahill
taining social networking accounts. We began by moving beyond follower 
count to examine retweets and feedback, monitoring the number of times 
that our followers forwarded our posts or submitted questions or direct 
responses to @VPL. As the tools have improved, our ability to probe and 
analyze the level of engagement that the account is achieving continues to 
grow. The excellent new Social-Biblio site (http://www.social-biblio.ca) 
allows us to measure the sentiment of tweets that mention @VPL, breaking 
user feedback into positive, negative, and neutral. Social-Biblio also allows 
us to track all the major metrics—followers, number of tweets, @VPL men-
tions, retweets—against 116 other Canadian public libraries that also use 
Twitter to communicate with their patrons.
Another new tool that is generating considerable interest among libraries 
is SocialFlow (http://www.socialflow.com), which analyzes the Twitter fan 
base for individual accounts and identifies topics that are of particular inter-
est at certain times. Tweets that are entered ahead of time are then posted 
according to the topic that is most likely to resonate with the audience, not 
by a predetermined schedule. Organizations using SocialFlow, including the 
New York Public Library, report measurably increased engagement, and we 
look forward to exploring this and other possibilities as we continue to build 
our social media presence and reach more of our patrons with this content.
Formal acknowledgment of Twitter’s importance as a communication 
channel for the library came in August 2010. A small-scale refresh of the 
home page (http://www.vpl.ca) was carried out, the first since the full-site 
redesign in 2008. Home page real estate is always the most hotly contested 
web property for any library, and VPL is no exception. As part of the refresh, 
a Twitter widget was placed on the home page so that @VPL’s latest tweets 
would appear here as well as on the Twitter timeline (Figure 6.2).
POLICY AND GUIDELINES
With Twitter,  Facebook, and other social media accounts firmly established 
as communication and content-sharing platforms for the library, the other im-
portant administrative piece that needed to be developed was a formal social 
media policy and guidelines for the organization. This meant treading a fine 
line between an undoubted need for structure and guidance and not putting 
in place so rigid a set of rules that the accounts would lose the spontaneity 
and freedom that make them such an effective and means of communicating 
news and engaging users.
As awareness of the VPL pilot accounts grew among staff and conferences 
and the professional literature began enthusiastically exploring the potential 

Figure 6.2. Vancouver Public Library home page; Twitter feed, center left.

74 
Kay Cahill
of these tools for libraries, individual librarians began taking the initiative to 
create accounts for their work areas. This led to variance in naming conven-
tions, URL choice, and look and feel, unintentionally diminishing the impact 
of the VPL brand. The time and effort required to keep accounts refreshed 
with regular content was sometimes challenging, especially for smaller loca-
tions with fewer staff. It became clear that a central policy was needed to 
ensure consistency across accounts and provide clarity around posting expec-
tations for account administrators.
As the policy took shape, we established that we needed to address three 
distinct areas:
•  Guidelines for the setup, administration, and use of organizational 
accounts
•  Terms of use for patron-generated content on VPL’s web properties
•  Policy for personal use of social media when self-identifying as a VPL 
employee
For the public terms of use, we largely followed the broader City of Vancou-
ver policy, which was under development at the same time. The terms of use 
specify the types of content that the library considers inappropriate and that 
may be subject to removal if posted on a library account (these can be viewed 
online at https://www.vpl.ca/about/details/social_media_terms_of_use).
The policy for personal use of social media when self-identifying as a VPL 
employee was perhaps the hardest section to craft. VPL has more than 800 
staff, many of whom use professional social networking sites such as Linke-
dIn or are actively involved in professional dialogue through personal blogs, 
listservs, or discussion groups. Many more have Facebook accounts where 
VPL is publicly listed as their employer. A delicate balance exists between 
protecting the organizational name and not discouraging or constraining 
staff from participating in professional dialogue. The policy makes it clear 
that such participation is not only welcome but encouraged, and it provides 
instruction on when staff should indicate that their views are their own and 
not necessarily representative of VPL.
For the web team, the section of the policy with the most impact on day-to-
day work is the guidelines. These cover the following topics:
•  Considerations for creating and managing a social media account
•  Process for creating a new organizational account
•  Central administration of accounts by the web team
•  Naming conventions for accounts
•  Content creation

 
The Library in the Social Network 
75
Before beginning the process of setting up an account, staff are asked to 
consider the purpose and goals of the account and the workload that will 
be involved in making it successful. General standards are provided so that 
they can see exactly how often they would need to update a Twitter feed 
or Facebook page for the account to generate sufficient interest to get off 
the ground. Where staff feel there is a genuine need to establish a social 
media presence but insufficient time to support it, they are encouraged to 
submit their content requests to the web team to be broadcast on the main 
VPL accounts. This approach ensures that all branches and departments at 
the library can participate in VPL’s social media activity, even if they do 
not have a separate account.
New account requests are approved by the manager or head of a particular 
department or branch and then submitted to the web team to set up. This 
ensures that naming conventions are followed, that web team members have 
administrative access to all accounts, and that all local administrators have 
been shown the guidelines and policy prior to taking the account over. This 
has streamlined the account creation process considerably and eliminated 
problems such as rogue naming conventions and orphan accounts being left 
inaccessible if the administrator leaves the library.
The last piece of the guidelines explains how to act as the voice of the 
library on its various social media accounts, including recommendations 
around the voice and tone of posts.
A number of branches have established very successful Facebook pages 
with a strong community focus but have not typically pursued Twitter as a 
communications platform. The Facebook pages can also be linked under the 
umbrella of the main VPL Facebook page, whereas Twitter accounts stand 
alone and run a higher risk of brand dilution if they become too diversified. 
A central e-mail account has been created where branches and work units can 
submit requests for posts on the main Twitter account, and web team mem-
bers take turns monitoring this account and crafting and uploading the tweets. 
All social media account administrators are also added to a central listserv 
and strongly encouraged to share ideas with one another.
NEXT STEPS
With the creation of a new digital services department and an overarching 
digital services strategy imminent, it’s an exciting time for social media at 
VPL. While our approach to these tools has evolved from side-of-the-desk 
pilots to organized, strategic, and measured management over the past few 
years, opportunities still exist to tie our use of social media more closely to 

76 
Kay Cahill
our overall organizational priorities and integrate them more closely with 
existing marketing workflows.
New analysis tools will allow us to examine the nature of our audience 
more closely and better determine the effectiveness and resonance of the con-
tent we post. VPL has 275,000 registered cardholders, and the 13,000 users of 
our various social media accounts (Twitter, Facebook, Flickr, YouTube, and 
Pinterest) represent approximately 5% of this number. While our follower 
numbers have increased rapidly over time and compare well to other libraries 
of a similar size, considerable scope exists to grow our existing audience and 
increase our reach to patrons through social media.
One of the challenges of working with third-party tools and websites is that 
it is hard to be certain how long the existing services of the moment will last 
(remember when MySpace was the hottest thing on the web?) or what new 
killer apps might rise up to replace or stand alongside them (see the current 
wave of Pinterest pilots). For a long time, our social media mantra was “re-
sponsive, not reactive”; our goal was to position ourselves in such a way that 
we were able to pilot and evaluate new tools quickly without wasting valu-
able time and resources by simply jumping on every passing bandwagon. Ide-
ally, the future will see us moving from responsive to proactive, identifying 
potential even earlier in the game and targeting our efforts more effectively. 
We also need to remain mindful that many of these tools do have a limited 
shelf life, and when the community moves on, we must be prepared to let go 
and move along with it.
The most important lesson that we have learned in the past 4 years is that 
there absolutely is a place for the library on the social network. The key word 
here is social; these online gathering spaces are ones that the community 
has chosen, and in them we can find an active, vocal group of users who are 
keen to hear what we have to say and give us their feedback. With a strategic 
approach that combines the right amounts of structure and flexibility, these 
tools create powerful engagement opportunities and a very different image of 
the library in the eyes of those who use them.

77
7
Successful Blogging Strategy and Design
JASON PAUL MICHEL
Miami University Libraries
Blogging is certainly nothing new. Done right, however, a blog can serve as a 
rich medium through which users can continually discover new materials, new 
services, and new reasons to maintain their relationship with your library.
This chapter considers the Miami University Libraries’ News and Notes 
blog as a springboard to discuss how to implement and maintain a successful 
blog strategy as a conduit of information and library discovery. Specifically, 
it discusses content and content creators (having an abundance of both is 
key), technological considerations (including feeding blog content to several 
social medias for maximum reach and efficient use of staff time), resource 
considerations, user response and assessment tools, and future possibilities.
WHEN AND WHY
In late 2007, the Miami University Libraries convened a Social Networking 
Working Group. The group’s charge was to discover and examine emerging 
social web technologies and trends and work to create new library services 
and tools to take advantage of those technologies as well as understand 
these new communication and information-seeking methods to shape ser-
vices to fit those methods. One of the many projects that came out of this 
group’s work was to initiate a library blog, as many libraries were begin-
ning to do at the time.
Before implementing the blog idea, we needed to convince our col-
leagues of the importance of blogging in addition to the other social media 
ideas that we believed it necessary to explore. No social media or blogging 
endeavor will succeed without buy-in from a critical mass of librarians. To 

78 
Jason Paul Michel
have a rich and dynamic social media platform, many people need to con-
tribute on a consistent basis.
So to persuade our colleagues, we asked ourselves “Why?” The reasons 
that follow encapsulate our thinking and provide a philosophical foundation 
for our proposals. First, the library’s greatest strength is its people. These 
tools will better highlight, utilize, and optimize this strength. They will put a 
face on library services. Second, our users are interacting and communicating 
in new ways. We must understand and use these new communication medi-
ums. The popularity of social networking is rising at an extremely rapid rate. 
We believe that, though individual applications may come and go, the idea of 
social software is here to stay.
The experimental SOLR-ized catalog will feature all of the classic social 
software features, such as tagging and bookmarking. If our catalog is experi-
menting with these ideas, it only makes sense that our public services do as 
well. Learning models are evolving. Collaboration and active learning are 
gaining in importance, as opposed to passive learning styles. Librarians can 
serve as facilitators of collaboration and communication. One of the predomi-
nant ideas of these tools is one of play, experimentation, and perpetual beta. 
We can’t be afraid of trying these tools. Finally, perception is critical. Nearly 
all of the most highly used websites feature social software aspects: RSS, 
ratings, reviews, tagging (folksonomies), comments, friends or contacts, 
profiles, and so on. Users who view our site may be less inclined to use it 
merely because it lacks these qualities. On the flip side, users that see that we 
are using these tools may be more inclined to use our resources and approach 
librarians with questions.
We were able to convince enough librarians to form an active pool of blog 
contributors, and throughout the next year, we worked diligently to expand on 
the blog idea as an outreach tool and develop it into a medium to actively pro-
mote the library. We put this idea into place by crafting a loose set of subject 
ideas intended to guide and inspire the bloggers, designing the blog template, 
workflow procedures, and the interface design on the library’s home page. The 
chief objectives of the library blog were to promote and unearth library materi-
als and collections, highlight and market our varied services, celebrate staff and 
library achievements, and develop a personal relationship with our users.
BLOG CONTRIBUTORS AND CONTENT
From the inception, it was determined that it should be a multicontributor 
blog. Laying responsibility of producing a rich and dynamic blog on the 
shoulders of one person is inefficient and will ultimately lead to a paucity of 

 
Successful Blogging Strategy and Design 
79
content. We decided to invite all of our public service librarians to contribute 
to the blog. To ensure quality and appropriateness of the blog content, we 
did put some editorial control mechanisms in place. Essentially, any public 
service librarian had the freedom to blog, but the ultimate publication of the 
post was up to the discretion of the user experience librarian in charge of the 
overall blog project.
Knowing that we would need several people contributing to the blog, we 
knew that we must grease the wheels, so to speak, in terms of content. Ask-
ing colleagues to just blog about “whatever” doesn’t help and can lead to 
blog posts that miss our strategic mark. So, we devised a set of subjects and 
themes that contributors could blog about. This took the burden off of them 
to come up with ideas.
The initial set of subjects came about through a thorough brainstorming 
session and was later added to by interested bloggers. The current list of 
subjects is the following:
New materials: Bloggers write blog posts about new materials under their 
purview. New books, videos, reference materials, and so on that are 
within their subject areas are easy targets for valuable blog posts.
Digital videos: Occasionally, the library produces video tutorials or other 
video-based content. These blog posts direct users to this material.
Branch and department news: There is always something happening in 
individual departments: whether it is new materials arriving, new data-
bases added, departmental changes, or new initiatives. Share this infor-
mation with your users. Social media is all about parting the curtain on 
previously hidden information.
Current events: This is one of the most popular blogging subjects. What 
we encourage our bloggers to do is take a look at what is happening in 
the world at large or in your area of expertise and write a blog post about 
it. We also encourage bloggers to tie our resources with those current 
events. One of our bloggers writes posts about the annual writing awards 
and long write-ups of authors who have passed away. This allows us 
to celebrate the lives and achievements of writers and give our readers 
direct access to their works.
Campus and community events: This subject gives us another opportunity 
to showcase our services and resources. Let’s say, for example, there 
is an LGBT (lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender) parade occurring on 
campus. A blogger can write about the upcoming parade and suggest 
some books, videos, and other resources to further enlighten our readers.
Digital collections: Unique collections in every library are usually very 
rich with interesting content. Handpicking individual images or a set of 

80 
Jason Paul Michel
images and writing a blog post about the content of the images is an easy 
post to write and interesting for readers.
Library events: Write rich blog posts about upcoming library events. Each 
year, our library hosts the African American Read-In and the Women’s 
Read-In. This gives us the opportunity to not only inform our users of 
these great events but also write about great writers and some of their 
works that we have in our collections.
Miami history: Our library, like most libraries, has a very rich institutional 
archive. Material from this archive can be blogged about extensively. 
The most fruitful time to write these types of posts is around notable 
institutional anniversaries.
Multimedia picks: One resource that often gets overlooked is our library’s 
multimedia resources. Many users don’t realize the breadth of a library’s 
multimedia collection. Writing blog posts that highlight these collec-
tions is a good way to get the word out. One example would be to write 
a post about the horror films in your collection during Halloween.
Staff: The heart of any organization is the staff. These are the people that 
make everything happen. One of the primary aspects of social media is 
that it gives users a behind-the-scenes look at things and personalizes 
what were once faceless entities. Write blog posts about your staff mem-
bers’ achievements, publications, and the like. Or just write a bio of each 
staff member, listing his or her expertise, interests, and more.
Technology: Whenever your library embarks on a new technology or offers 
a new digital service, write a blog post about it.
It is very important to create a set of subjects as in the aforementioned 
list. While some categories may not prove as rich as others, it really helps 
guide and inspire the blog contributors. Without a loose set of categories, 
contributors may feel indecisive about what to write about. Whatever subject 
categories you decide on for your blog, make sure that it is devised with as 
much input from the staff as possible.
TECHNICAL SETUP—BLOG AND SOCIAL MEDIA LINKAGE
We utilize the Drupal content management system for our website. Drupal 
is an open-source web development infrastructure made up of various “mod-
ules.” Drupal comes with a handful of core modules. Designers build on these 
core modules with additional, community-designed modules.
The News and Notes blog is designed using the Blog, Taxonomy, and User 
core modules. These modules come with the default installation of Drupal. 

 
Successful Blogging Strategy and Design 
81
We also installed the Views module, a noncore module that helped with the 
construction of the blog infrastructure. I discuss the role of each module in-
dividually and delineate how they all fit together.
The Blog module is a core Drupal module that comes standard out of the 
box. While it is a core module, it is technically optional and thus must be 
enabled prior to using. To enable the Blog module on your Drupal installa-
tion, go to sitename/admin/build/modules/list and check the “Enabled” box 
next to “Blog.”
The initial setup for the Blog module allows users with the proper per-
missions to give a blog post a title and the body of the post. The blogging 
interface does by default not come with a WYSIWYG editor, so any links or 
images must be added via HTML tags. Any further additions, such as tags or 
categories, must be added with further modules which I will discuss below.
As the administrator of a Drupal site, you have control over what your us-
ers can and cannot do on the site. This is achieved through the User module, 
specifically the Permissions and Roles functionalities. When managing a 
website that is used by multiple constituencies, it is important to be able to set 
up varying levels of permissions based on the users’ role on the site. For our 
blog, we identified public service librarians who were interested in writing 
blog posts. For these users, we created a role of “Blogger.” To create and edit 
roles on your Drupal site, go to sitename/admin/user/roles.
For each role in your Drupal site, you can bestow certain permissions to 
interact with each module in very finely controlled ways. To allow the people 
that we recognized as Bloggers to write and edit blog posts, we needed to 
give them the proper permissions. This can be done at sitename/admin/user/
permissions. For the Blog module, the choices for permissions are as follows: 
create blog entries; delete any blog entry; delete own blog entries; edit any 
blog entry; and edit own blog entries. To bestow each permission, admins 
must merely check them off.
Another element in the blog construction is the use of Drupal taxonomies. 
Taxonomy is an optional core Drupal module like the Blog module. We used 
taxonomy to achieve two things: first, to give bloggers a controlled vocabu-
lary of tags to apply to each blog post and, second, to control which blog posts 
get published to the main blog, viewable from the home page of the website. 
Drupal admin users have the ability to create taxonomies and taxonomy terms 
under each. For the blog, we created a taxonomy called “NN Categories,” 
with NN being short for News and Notes. This taxonomy contained several 
terms, such as “Current Events,” “New Materials,” and “Digital Collections,” 
from which the bloggers can choose to apply to their blog posts.
The final module that ties everything together is Views. This is not a core 
module, but it can be added to your Drupal installation. Views can be found 

82 
Jason Paul Michel
at http://drupal.org/project/views. The Views module allows you to create 
dynamic custom webpages within your primary site. The page for our blog, 
http://www.lib.muohio.edu/news_and_notes, is achieved through the use of 
the Views module, which gives you full control over what is displayed on the 
page. This is the editorial control that is needed to ensure that erroneous, mis-
leading, or inappropriate blog content is not posted to the primary blog view.
The two primary elements in Views are Content and Filters. Essentially us-
ing these two elements, we can build from the bottom up a webpage with the 
exact content we want, in the exact order we want, with the proper filters and 
sort order. So, in the case of the News and Notes view, we chose blog title, 
blog author, taxonomy terms, and blog text. If you wanted to build a view 
that just listed the blog titles and not the actual text of the blog, you could 
do that, too. The Views module allows you to be extremely detailed in the 
content you pick to display.
So we have the content that we want to display, but we need to put some 
filters on it. To get an idea of what is meant by filters, we chose the following 
filters for the News and Notes view. The first filter is that the type of content 
must be a blog entry; the second is that it be published; and the final filter is 
that the taxonomy term “News and Notes” be applied. This final filter here is 
what gives us control over what is finally published.
Before being posted to the News and Notes page, the content must go 
through these filters. If a blog entry is written but not published, it won’t get 
through to the main page. If a blog entry is written and published but does 
not contain the taxonomy term “News and Notes,” it won’t get through to 
the main page. We have one editor on staff who has final say over what gets 
pushed to the main site, and that person is the only one with permission to 
apply the taxonomy term “News and Notes.” So, that person reads the poten-
tial blog posts and, if everything is okay, applies the taxonomy term, which 
passes through all the filters and is published to the main site.
SOCIAL MEDIA SYNDICATION
Once you have settled on the type of content that your bloggers will write 
about and have set up the technical infrastructure of the blog, you may think 
that you’ve finished the job. But you haven’t quite yet. Of critical importance 
is to disseminate your blog content as widely as possible. You cannot assume 
that users are going to come to your site to view your content. In fact, you can 
assume they won’t. You must get your content out via social media channels. 
Fortunately, this can be done in an automated way, further maximizing both 
blog content reach and staff time.

 
Successful Blogging Strategy and Design 
83
All blogging platforms will have RSS options, and Drupal is no exception. 
To syndicate your blog content, you must have access to its RSS feed. We 
used a web service called dlvr.it to automatically post the News and Notes 
content to both our Twitter and Facebook accounts. Dlvr.it is a great syndica-
tion tool, as it gives you a great deal of control over how your content is fed 
out to different sites. Dlvr.it refers to each syndication as a route. The first 
element you’ll need to set up a route via dlvr.it is the RSS feed URL for your 
blog. Once you’ve entered the RSS URL and dlvr.it has verified its authentic-
ity, then you can edit some of the finer details of the route.
The first detail that you can control is how often dlvr.it checks your feed for 
new updates. If you have a very active blog, you can have dlvr.it check your 
feed every 15 minutes or less, or you can check it once a day for a less active 
blog. Dlvr.it refers to this as a “feed update period.” Having decided on this 
time, you can then indicate how many items are posted during that time. Again, 
if you have a very active blog, you could indicate that you’d like dlvr.it to send 
only two blog posts every 15 minutes. This level of control will help you ensure 
that you’re not inundating your Twitter or Facebook followers with blog posts 
all at once. Rather, you can space out your content over a wider period.
In addition to determining how often your feed is checked for content, you 
can set up a scheduled time or window that your content is sent along to your 
social media accounts. The URL-shortening service bit.ly released data about 
the best times to post social media content.  The results of its research can 
be found at http://bit.ly/PGMWKZ. It is a good idea to configure your dlvr.
it account to send your blog content during these times for maximal impact. 
Further configuration is available, including advanced filtering options and 
the ability to apply prefixed text to your tweets and Facebook posts.
The next step is to set up your destinations. Dlvr.it gives you the ability 
to send content to Twitter, Facebook, LinkedIn, Tumblr, and Del.icio.us. All 
that you need to do is enter your account detail, and you are all set up and 
ready to go. Keep in mind that the more access points to your content, the 
higher the probability that it will be seen. Getting into and remaining in our 
users’ consciousness should be a goal of all libraries.
STAFF BUY-IN AND OTHER RESOURCES
For any blog to have a chance at success, it must be dynamic and continually 
updated. Your content is competing for the mindspace of a user base who 
is consuming content from dozens, hundreds, or even thousands of other 
content providers. If your blog is updated a couple of times a week, chances 
are high that it will be missed or buried by the constant flood of information.

84 
Jason Paul Michel
Because of this reality, it is critical that as many librarians and suitable 
staff personnel as possible are contributing to the content of the blog. Any 
developer of a blogging program must stress this to achieve as much staff 
buy-in as possible. Barring including blog writing in the job description of all 
librarians, the only way to achieve staff buy-in is through spirited enthusiasm. 
We were able to sell the importance of the blog to enough of our librarians to 
form a core group of bloggers who write interesting posts and help us main-
tain our visibility to our users.
The first significant outlay of time dedicated to this blog project was the 
development of the Drupal blog infrastructure as previously delineated. This 
took the lead developer roughly 20 hours of time to set up. This does not in-
clude the time spent to set up the Drupal content management system, which 
was a wholly separate project involving many staff members. It is certainly 
not necessary to develop a custom blog in Drupal or any other content man-
agement system. The most efficient use of time would be to set up a blog 
using a blogging platform such as WordPress or Blogger. Developing a blog 
with this strategy will take less time and less web programming expertise.
In addition to the initial outlay of time by the lead developer, bloggers typi-
cally spend an average of 20 to 30 minutes per week writing their posts. This 
is a minimal investment in time. Coupling this small amount of time with the 
wide dissemination of the content via the dlvr.it system makes it clear that 
this is an efficient use of staff time.
Our web team utilizes Google analytics to analyze the traffic on our site. 
Since its inception, our blog averages around 500 views per month, thanks 
in large part to traffic coming to it via our Facebook and Twitter accounts. 
In addition to that number, it seems that the blog has an effect on book cir-
culation as well. A limited examination of some of our popular blog posts, 
such as the post about Downton Abbey and the Hunger Games, indicates that 
the majority of the books mentioned in the blog had checkout dates after the 
blog posting. We cannot claim causation here, but it is interesting and worth 
a detailed study.
We intend on further strengthening our blogging platform by pursuing the 
following initiatives. First, we will assign a lead blogger for each depart-
ment or branch library. This person will seek out blog stories and serve as 
the primary proofreader for his or her department’s content. Second, we will 
automate our statistical tracking workflow so that bloggers are continually 
updated about the reach and popularity of their posts, serving as an ongoing 
motivator. Finally, we will continually work to change the work culture to 
one that views sharing content and behind-the-scenes information as an in-
tegral part of our mission. Blogging will then not be seen as something that 

 
Successful Blogging Strategy and Design 
85
we should probably do after everything else is done; rather, it will be seen as 
something that is done as an integral part of our work.
Based on several years of this blog program, there are a few things that we 
should have implemented from the start. Here are a few pieces of advice that 
will help with the success of your blog project.
1.  Strongly advocate for the codification of blog writing as a core respon-
sibility of all librarians. It need not be an unwieldy amount of work, 
maybe a blog post a week or month. This will guarantee that the blog 
has the amount of content it needs to remain fresh and relevant. If this 
is not possible, it is critical that you strongly encourage as many people 
in your organization as possible to contribute to the success of the blog.
2.  Assign the role of blog editor to one staff person. This person will be 
responsible for seeking out potential stories and coming up with the 
ideas for blog postings. In addition to that, she or he could ask other 
staff members to write certain blog posts about topics they know. This 
blog editor would also proofread and judge each blog post for suitability 
and appropriateness prior to publication.
3.  Choose software that is simple to use. The goal of the blog is to have 
high-quality content on a consistent basis, and any technological bar-
riers that may stand in the way of this goal should be avoided. The 
simpler the blogging platform, the better.
4.  Make weekly or monthly goals and stick to them. At the bare minimum, 
your blog should have at least one posting per day, and the ideal blog 
would have several. Again, your content is competing for the mind-
space of users who are consuming content from dozens or hundreds of 
other blogs and information providers, so the more content, the better.
5.  Utilize an analytics or statistics tracker. This will allow you to see how 
many hits your blog posts are getting, which will help you determine 
the type of post that is appealing to your readers, allowing you to further 
hone the voice of your blog. Inform the blog writers of the number of 
page views to encourage them to write more.


87
8
Social Catalogs: Implementing an 
Online Social Community as an 
Extension to Our Physical Libraries
LAUREL TARULLI
Dalhousie University
It’s exciting news when we finally get the go-ahead from our management 
team or library board to explore the development of a new service or the 
acquisition of new software. For many of us, it may be a once-in-a-career op-
portunity to develop or implement an innovative service that changes the path 
of our libraries. Most often, this is the result of sharing resources and attempts 
by management to allow each area of library service a “kick at the can” op-
portunity, and when our time comes to take charge and work on an exciting 
project, we want to be prepared and armed with as much knowledge as pos-
sible to make it a success. In fact, the opportunity to implement a project or 
lead a team in creating a new service often begins months, if not years, before 
the opportunity actually presents itself. While we prepare for our “kick at the 
can,” we can start visualizing the service we’d like to enhance or the tools 
we’d like to implement, recognizing the need in our library for this enhance-
ment. With the rise of social media and social tools in an “I want it now” so-
ciety, many of the projects that we are developing and implementing revolve 
around the need to reach users whenever and wherever they are—in essence, 
extending the library beyond its physical walls and into a social space where 
connections, interactions, and information are limitless. With that idea in 
mind, one naturally has to consider the library catalog as a potential platform 
for creating an online community of users, with their interactions revolving 
around readers’ services, the collection, and programming.
This chapter examines how one library implemented an overlay on top of 
its existing library catalog. While the technical term for an overlay is often 
called a discovery tool overlay, many professionals simply use the generic 
term social catalog. Social catalogs are seen as interactive and dynamic 
catalogs that are more user friendly and intuitive while offering features that 

88 
Laurel Tarulli
existing (classic) catalogs don’t. These social features include tagging, rating, 
reviewing, interacting with staff or other users, creating user lists, and shar-
ing items from within the catalog. Ideally, it’s a social online community that 
provides a gateway to information and people. In this case, the social catalog 
implemented is AquaBrowser.
BACKGROUND AND PREPARATION
Well over a year before the soft launch of the new social catalog occurred, 
Halifax Public Libraries in Halifax, Nova Scotia, decided to explore the idea 
of implementing an overlay on top of their existing online public access 
catalog. While not ready to replace the entire integrated library system (ILS) 
due to the many components that are interlinked with the catalog, including 
circulation and collection development, management recognized the need to 
address the shortcomings of the outdated interface and lack of features in the 
library catalog that patrons expected and, in fact, were taking for granted on 
almost every commercial site, online bookstore, and social networking site. 
But how do you go about deciding what catalog overlay is right for your 
library, and how do you sell the idea to staff and patrons?
A team of librarians and managers was created to act as liaisons and 
representatives for staff in the decision-making and purchasing process. 
This was an essential element that resulted in identifying key members 
of the system who had an interest in social technology or an expertise of 
a strong service within the library that would likely benefit greatly from 
the implementation of a social catalog. Once this team was created, it had 
to learn about the various vendors who provided social catalogs and their 
features. This was an interesting time, as many of the team members were 
not familiar with social catalogs.
Let’s start with examining how Halifax Public Libraries went about decid-
ing which catalog overlay would best meet their needs, including staff and 
patron expectations as well as budgetary restrictions. There were five key 
steps taken in the selection process and purchase of a social catalog:
Step 1: Identifying what other libraries are doing.
Step 2: Research.
Step 3: Consideration of the following factors:
•  Proprietary versus open-source software
•  Solution requirements
•  Identifying user needs and groups
•  Budget, staff resources, and timeline for implementation

 
Social Catalogs 
89
Step 4: Vendor presentations.
Step 5: Speaking with colleagues at other libraries about their experiences 
and opinions.
Even a team well acquainted with social catalogs and their features 
should take the opportunity to examine and experience what other libraries 
have successfully (or not so successfully) implemented. Each team mem-
ber was charged with exploring other libraries’ catalogs. These included 
catalogs that were both overlays and full replacements of existing ILSs. 
The reason was to experience and gather knowledge of the wide variety of 
elements, layouts, and features that are possible. It was also an opportunity 
to familiarize the team with the many vendors providing these catalogs and 
the features that were unique to each vendor or were common among all 
vendors’ products.
While the team was familiarizing itself with various catalog platforms, 
the cataloging librarian—a position I held at the time—was charged with 
researching these products and finding out about their strengths and weak-
nesses. In essence, I was looking for reviews of these catalogs, product 
comparisons, professional opinions, and research articles that may have ex-
amined these catalogs in further depth. For example, had any research been 
conducted examining the success of social features in library catalogs?
The research provided an interesting glimpse into these new library cata-
logs. While vendors promised an “if you build it, they will come” outcome, 
there is no research supporting this claim. And if vendors’ assessments of 
their products were conducted, they remain unavailable to libraries. How-
ever, blog posts and professional journals did provide an interesting and 
realistic glimpse into the implementation of social catalogs and reflections 
on the process.
Armed with the information that we gleaned from research and our famil-
iarity with various products available to libraries, the team at Halifax Public 
Libraries was able to move forward in discussing the issues of proprietary 
software versus open-source software, creating wish lists and must-have 
lists for features and functions, identifying the various new and existing user 
groups who will benefit as well as struggle with these features, and defining 
the limitations of budget, staff resources, and timelines for accomplishing the 
implementation and bringing the catalog into fruition. This phase allowed the 
team to pinpoint elements that were required for the purchase of a catalog 
overlay and identify vendors whose social catalogs appeared to be a good fit 
with these requirements.
Once vendors were identified, they were asked to provide a presentation 
of their product for the team. This allowed the team to bring in additional 

90 
Laurel Tarulli
colleagues to view the products as well as ask questions about features and 
glimpse some additional behind-the-scenes functionality and interoperabil-
ity. After the presentation, it was requested that the vendors provide sample 
responses to a request for proposal (RFP). This provided the team with an 
understanding of what the RFPs would look like when received “formally” 
and what type of information they can ask for, wish for, demand, or change. 
The various vendors were also asked about special customization features, 
including features unique to their product, and questioned on outstanding 
concerns from the team, such as a response to a negative review by another 
library using their product.
The final step in this process was to contact other libraries for their candid 
opinions on the implementation and overall success of their social catalogs. 
For example, it was helpful having discussions with libraries using the same 
ILS or with the same amount of resources. In addition, learning firsthand 
about the implementation process, problems that arose, and lessons learned 
was extremely enlightening from someone who wasn’t selling the product.
As these steps were slowly traveled through, the local expertise grew, and 
the team at Halifax Public Libraries felt as though it were finally in a position 
to extend RFPs to several social catalog vendors.
OBJECTIVES
What is the purpose of implementing a social catalog? It’s easy to rattle off 
the common excuses for any new service. “Patrons expect it.” “We’ll attract 
more users.” “Our catalog will be able to compete with commercial sites.” 
Whatever the typical response, the objectives need to be clear and grounded 
in a firm foundation. Understanding the various products is essential to ad-
dressing concrete objectives that go beyond providing a lipstick and makeup 
enhancement to the library catalog.
The main objective of this project was to provide enhanced user access to 
library collections and provide a single access point for library information. 
In essence, creating a localized Google that brings together library collec-
tions, programs, local interests, and the community by giving users a more 
intuitive interface and a means of interacting with the library through social 
features. One can think of it as a gateway used to access information, rather 
than a destination spot.
When Halifax Public Libraries were exploring the possibility of purchasing 
a social catalog, various key managers within the library system were asked 
to compile a wish list of functions and features, as well as a must-have list. 
The cataloging department was asked to do the same.

 
Social Catalogs 
91
Compiling these lists is not a simple task. While it’s easy to list all of the 
features we’d like, many professionals not familiar with social catalogs listed 
features found on commercial websites, features found on library websites 
with custom-made ILSs, or functions that are unavailable or not possible 
when implementing an overlay that pulls information from existing content 
sources within the catalog component of the ILS or from identified sources 
from external websites. However, every idea and item listed by staff were 
considered. Some were extremely helpful, some obvious, and yet others 
enlightening and creative. All of the librarians and managers who submitted 
these “need and wants” lists contributed to the process and ultimately to the 
three lists that were created: must-haves, must-have in the future, and wish 
list. All of the vendors invited to respond to the RFP were provided with these 
lists to address. A list of the key mandatory requirements was as follows:
•  Faceted navigation
•  Library-defined relevancy ranking
•  Sing search research screen that included a Google-like search box, set 
of related terms, relevancy-ranked results, and a faceted browsing capa-
bility for further refinement based on library-selected criteria
•  Close to real-time synchronization with ILS database
•  Indexing that is unattended and automated
•  Single sign-on
•  Ability to display enriched content, such as cover art, table of contents, 
and reviews
•  In-house ability to customize, define, and make changes to interface and 
design components
There were also social elements that were vital to the adoption and implemen-
tation of a social catalog:
• The ability to add and search tags
•  Creation of personal and public lists
•  Searchable lists and users
•  Creation of reviews
•  Contribution of ratings
The final lists were based on the goals and objectives set forth by the library. 
If an item was desirable but didn’t necessarily meet the present objectives, it 
was put on a wish list.
In the end, Halifax Public Libraries decided to purchase AquaBrowser, a 
social discovery tool provided by SerialSolutions.

92 
Laurel Tarulli
IMPLEMENTATION AND RESOURCES
Many would think that placing an overlay over an existing catalog rather than 
replacing the entire software/database (ILS) would be easier. It may be. But 
implementing an overlay is not simple. Our traditional ILSs are bulky and full 
of components and content that differ from one vendor’s ILS to another’s. As 
a result, taking on the project of implementing a social catalog (in this case, 
a catalog overlay) requires in-house expertise in cataloging—in particular, 
at least one professional who is well versed in MARC coding and fields that 
dictate or display specific sources of information. A strong cataloging depart-
ment also helps but is not critical. Also needed is an information technology 
team that understands the library’s ILS intimately and a vendor support team 
that is available and willing to work with the library implementing the soft-
ware on an almost-daily basis during installation.
There are two key elements to this implementation phase that make this 
clear. The first was in providing configuration sheets for every database, 
which required information extraction from within our existing ILS for dis-
play in the social catalog interface. As an overlay, AquaBrowser “fishes” 
information out of databases such as the catalog, extracting and organizing 
this information for display on its interface. As a result, every data source that 
needed to be displayed in AquaBrowser had to be reviewed. Pouring over the 
structure of MARC records within Halifax Public Libraries’ ILS system Hori-
zon, the cataloging team was required to determine which MARC fields were 
standard and used in every record, which fields varied, which fields were 
more important than others, and if there were unique fields to each record that 
would help extract and sort them in the overlay. Other configuration details 
included identifying the specific codes for every collection, every library 
branch, and media format. Once that was done, there were MARC subfields 
to be addressed. It would not be an exaggeration to say that even the examples 
just provided didn’t scratch the service to the types of minute details required 
to be analyzed prior to being able to move forward with implementation.
With a strong information technology team, other technology issues can be 
addressed, such as security and privacy issues, compatibility, and memory/
storage within the library server. For example, AquaBrowser needs to access 
a library’s ILS remotely to export and then import all of the existing records. 
It does this to capture any changes made to records, add new cataloged re-
cords, and delete any old records. For this to happen, the information tech-
nology team needs to allow an outside source access past the firewall and 
provide enough memory so that the catalog continues to work for users while 
this extraction and importation occur.

 
Social Catalogs 
93
There are several key factors that make implementation success. They 
include the accuracy and quality of the library’s bibliographic records, 
knowledge of the existing ILS and how it works, and developing an excellent 
working relationship with your social catalog vendor implementation contact. 
While the last two points may seem obvious, the first point must be explored 
in case you’re asking yourself why the quality of cataloging records is so im-
portant. The simple fact is that an overlay extracts identified information from 
existing library sources—specifically, the library catalog. With more results 
returned and organized, errors in records or a lack of uniformity becomes 
glaringly obvious. For example, if an author’s name is not uniform and some 
have been entered with birth dates, birth and death dates, or no dates, the 
faceted navigation feature pulls up three sets of results for the same author. In 
other cases, if a subject heading is spelled incorrectly, the title attached to that 
record may not be included in results. One of the most obvious errors is in-
correctly providing the correct format indicator. DVDs were being displayed 
as books formats, and kits were showing up as movies! As you can imagine, 
a significant amount of time within the cataloging department is required to 
clean up these records.
While the “backroom” work of implementing the new social catalog was 
underway, a lengthy “marketing” campaign began within the library to “sell” 
the idea of a social catalog to staff and to educate them on the many ways that 
a social catalog can be used (to enhance readers’ services, collection develop-
ment, young adult services, as well as promote library events such as author 
readings and book clubs). A tutorial was developed for this purpose, and the 
cataloging librarian and manager attended various meetings throughout the 
system to promote the idea of a new catalog and its key features.
THE LAUNCH
Prior to the staff beta launch in the early winter of 2009–2010, a tutorial 
(http://laureltarulli.wordpress.com/2010/12/07/online-aquabrowser-tutorial/) 
of the implemented social catalog AquaBrowser was created for all staff and 
for use as a resource manual in the coming months. Created in-house, this 
tutorial provides an overview of AquaBrowser, its basic use (how most us-
ers will want to use it), and a variety of ways to use the social features from 
a staff-side perspective—in essence, answering the question “How will this 
catalog benefit or enhance my area of service to patrons?” While met with 
varying degrees of success, it did provide many staff with their first glimpse 
at the new social catalog and how it works.

94 
Laurel Tarulli
Approximately 6 months after the tutorial was first provided to staff, Hali-
fax Public Libraries beta-launched AquaBrowser to the public on April 20, 
2010. Rather than calling the social catalog by its vendor name AquaBrowser, 
the communications and marketing team branded the new catalog “Dis-
cover.” A play on the fact that it’s a discovery tool, it ties into Halifax Public 
Libraries’ mission statement, which includes “Connecting people, enriching 
communities, inspiring discovery.” Accordingly, the library viewed this new 
catalog not just as a static inventory that allows users to rate and write reviews 
but as a discovery tool. The discovery experience provides users with the 
opportunity to find what they are looking for, as well as to navigate through 
various tools to “discover” new items within the catalog and within the com-
munity. One of the most exciting features is the ability to search a topic and 
be provided with community group information and volunteer information 
around the city. These results sit side by side with books and DVDs within 
the library collection. Being able to pull the resources together and provide 
results that extend beyond the physical walls of the library and its collection 
excited all of our users—patrons and staff. The implementation team hoped 
that this branding and the enhanced features it provided not only met the 
original objectives but would exceed staff and patrons’ expectations.
This beta launch provided an option for staff and patrons to continue to 
use the old catalog or choose to try out the new catalog. This allowed all of 
our users to ease into the idea of a social catalog and become accustomed to 
the new look and feel of an interactive and dynamic interface. Within days, 
the implementation team at the library were receiving feedback, both posi-
tive and negative. However, one patron’s comments certainly let the staff 
know that social catalogs were on the right path to answering the needs and 
expectations of users:
If one enjoys books, it can only be described as a positive addiction. I found the 
new catalogue very user friendly and easy on the eyes—i.e., not too busy. It is 
fun to use and easy to navigate and find search items. I particularly enjoyed the 
“Discovery” area on the left side of the screen.
Just under a year after the beta launch, the official launch of Discover at 
Halifax Public Libraries took place on March 1, 2011. Before the launch, 
public service staff were provided with professional training sessions by the 
implementation project leader at AquaBrowser. This allowed staff to become 
even more familiar with the catalog, and it provided yet another opportunity 
to ask questions or dig deeper into the functions of the catalog while being 
guided by an expert. By the time of the official launch, the new catalog had 
been improved on and customized to reflect a year’s worth of feedback and 
branding. And staff were comfortable and familiar with the functions and fea-

 
Social Catalogs 
95
tures of the catalog. The communications and marketing department played a 
large role in the official launch of the catalog, promoting the idea of Discover, 
creating buttons, flyers, ad campaigns, T-shirts, lanyards, and so on. Staff 
were encouraged to promote the new catalog and provide assistance and tips 
for patrons on how to use it in ways that best fit their needs or wants. While 
the campaign slowly died a natural death as patrons and staff become more 
familiar and comfortable with Discover, staff still wear lanyards identifying 
themselves as staff that use and promote the Discover brand.
ASSESSMENT
When the beta version of Discover was launched to the public, it was pro-
vided with an opportunity to voice its opinions on the new catalog. A survey 
was provided online, offering patrons an invitation to provide feedback to 
management. For most of the questions, there were three choices for a re-
sponse: useful, not useful, didn’t notice. The questions were broken down into 
the following categories:
•  What patrons thought of each feature (the feature was listed, asking for 
one of the three responses)
•  If the features were hard or easy to use
•  Catalog preference (new social catalog or existing classic catalog)
•  Additional comments for the features and ease of use
•  Request for e-mail, gender, and age group and if the patron would be 
willing to provide follow-up feedback if contacted
The feedback received from this survey, while self-selecting by nature, was 
helpful to staff. It allowed staff to identify patron groups who were most 
likely going to be resistant to the new catalog, as well as concerns or com-
pliments that allowed for improvement or reinforced existing opinions. The 
survey was available throughout the beta phase.
Also important to the development of the catalog were the focus groups that 
were held. Interestingly, the purpose of these focus groups was not only to 
invite existing users but to reach nonlibrary users. These focus groups invited 
comment and discussion after a live demonstration. This allowed staff to roll 
out the Discover brand, introduce the key functions and features, and market 
the objectives for implementing a social catalog. After the presentation, focus 
group attendees were asked to fill out a short form for additional information.
The majority of formal and informal assessments took place at the front end 
of implementation. From asking staff for their must-have lists and wish lists to 

96 
Laurel Tarulli
holding focus groups and providing an online survey, the strongest focus for 
assessing the new catalog was front-heavy. It is to be expected in a lengthy and 
expensive project that a significant amount of resources are used to provide 
enough evidence and feedback to support a new and successful initiative.
After the official launch, staff and patrons alike were encouraged to con-
tinue to provide feedback. In fact, they continue to do so, which allows staff 
to address or enhance the new catalog. However, there are no plans to for-
mally assess the new catalog or create benchmark assessments.
During the year that Discover was in its public beta phase, there was an 
additional, external resource examining the use of social catalogs. With the 
assistance of an OCLC research grant, Dr. Louise Spiteri and I conducted a 
transaction log analysis of two libraries in Canada: Edmonton Public Library 
and Halifax Public Libraries. Transaction log analysis is a way of collecting 
data unobtrusively without directly interfacing with the catalog users, and it 
allows researchers to observe and analyze user behaviors. After a preliminary 
review of the literature, we noted that while the social catalog had been in use 
for over 5 years in Canada and the United States, the actual value of social 
features of these catalogs, such as tags, reviews, and ratings to the end user, 
had not been examined.
Transaction log analysis was used to answer the following research 
questions:
•  How do public library users interact with social discovery systems? 
Specifically, which enhanced catalog features do they use (e.g., faceted 
navigation, user-contributed content such as tagging, reviews, and rat-
ings, and with which frequency)?
•  How does usage between the two social discovery systems compare? 
Specifically, are there commonalities or differences between how public 
library users use the enhanced catalog features of the two social discov-
ery systems?
Most existing usability studies provide important insight into how people 
interact with online catalogs and how these experiences can be improved; 
what becomes evident from these studies is that catalogs should reflect the 
information needs and terminology of users, rather than library staff. With 
one exception, these usability studies focus on only the traditional model of 
the catalog or library website, where content is controlled by library staff.
The results of our analysis suggest that the patrons and staff at both 
Edmonton and Halifax are making limited use of the social features found 
in social catalogs that allow them to interact with the catalog records and 
with one another. An important question to consider is the extent to which 

 
Social Catalogs 
97
people are motivated to add tags, reviews, or ratings to an item after they 
have read, seen, or listened to it. Since the implementation and maintenance 
of social catalogs are costly, it is important for library management to make 
informed decisions about which system features are the most cost-effective 
and how these features may be better tailored to meet user needs. A notice-
able limitation of transaction log analysis is that it does not tell us why 
patrons use these features and, perhaps more important, why they do not. 
As a result, even if public libraries are unable due to lack of resources or 
unwilling to conduct a formal analysis of the implementation of their social 
catalogs, future research needs to focus on users’ motivations for engaging 
with the social features of social catalogs and their perceptions of and sat-
isfaction with the benefits of these features.
ADVICE TO OTHER PROFESSIONALS
Halifax Public Libraries continue to implement additional features in Dis-
cover and continually attempt to address the informal feedback received from 
public service staff with ongoing enhancements. Discover is not viewed as an 
implemented piece of technology with a completion date but as an ongoing, 
living organism that is always evolving. Understanding that these new cata-
logs are not static but require ongoing assessments enhancements will aid in 
the success that the catalog enjoys among staff and patrons.
While the overall implementation of Discover was lengthy and required a 
significant amount of buy-in and expertise, it is viewed as a success. Indeed, 
AquaBrowser uses Halifax Public Libraries’ catalog as an example on its 
website. But with all projects, those who participated in its implementation 
experienced many emotions, including frustration, excitement, uncertainty, 
and curiosity (to name just a few!).
For any library wishing to implement a social catalog, there are several 
key points that should be explored before moving forward. While many have 
already been discussed in this chapter, there are several additional areas that 
should be identified:
•  Think outside the box. Social tools within the libraries will not be used 
the same way that they are on Amazon or LibraryThing. What motivates 
patrons to use these tools? Consideration needs to be given to how and 
why we want these tools. Perhaps we are just using the tools the wrong 
way and for the wrong purposes.
•  Understand that poor cataloging and inconsistencies within cataloging 
practices will become obvious with the implementation of these catalogs. 

98 
Laurel Tarulli
Be prepared to defend the amount of time it will take to correct these 
shortcomings (and why they exist).
•  Become familiar with all of the social catalogs available and delve into 
their shortcomings.
•  Explore the option of smartphone platforms and other handheld devices 
immediately. What options are available? Are different vendors compat-
ible with the product? While the vendor of a catalog overlay may provide 
a mobile option, many underlying ILSs continue to retain a monopoly 
on software that’s compatible with their own. Often, the only software 
compatible is that put out by the vendor who provides the ILS.
•  Read the contract carefully, and determine who owns the usage data of 
the catalog, where it resides, and how you can use the information. For 
example, can you access your usage statistics immediately and extract 
information to analyze specific data, or do you have to request that infor-
mation from your vendor? If so, can you use the information for in-house 
purposes as well as external (e.g., research and publications). While not 
an issue that we’ve had to consider in the past, this is becoming an in-
creasingly important area to address.
Social catalogs may very well be the solution to libraries’ attempts to 
extend the services of the library outside its physical walls into an online, 
socially connected community. The idea that we can connect our users to 
one another through books, movies, community events, or programs in a 
virtual environment is exciting and rewarding. While the potential that social 
catalogs have hasn’t even begun to be explored fully, properly evaluating the 
new catalogs available to us and how we want to use the social technologies 
available in these catalogs should be explored prior to purchasing any catalog. 
If you firmly understand what you want today and are aware of what that soft-
ware can do tomorrow, the entire process will go more smoothly and allow 
your library team to maintain strong objectives and benchmarks for assessing 
the success of the catalog. How do we want to connect our users? How does 
the library view its role in the online social environment? These are all big 
questions and require serious consideration. Although it’s a big commitment, 
social catalogs may indeed become the primary interface for interaction with 
our communities, exceeding the use of our physical branches. So the last bit 
of advice for any those interested in social catalogs—expect challenges and 
rewards, but overall have fun! That’s what social technology is all about.

99
Index
adult social learning, 39–40, 46
advertising, vii, 17. See also marketing
Aksimet, 4
alert service, 46
AquaBrowser, 88, 91–94, 97
assessment, 11, 34, 46, 77, 89, 95–97
blog: editor, 85; microblogging, 39, 
59–60, 65; post, x, 2, 9–10, 42, 44, 
49, 79–85, 89
Blogger, 41, 46, 48, 55, 57–58, 61, 84
Central Methodist University, 23–35
chat, 38, 41–45, 50–51, 56
Cites & Insights, xii
collective learning, 39, 50
content creation, 20, 74
copyright, 33–35
cost, vi, 24, 32, 35, 60–61, 97
customization, 2, 4–7, 9, 90
Dag Hammarskjöld Library, 13–21
Dalhousie University, 87–98
Delicious, 38, 41–44, 48, 50, 66
Drupal, 2, 80–84
Facebook, v–vi, x–xii, 15–16, 19–20, 
25–26, 38–39, 48, 54–62, 65–68, 70–
72, 74, 76, 83–84; page, x, 25–26, 
70, 75
Farmington Public Libraries, 53–63
feedback, vi, 17, 31, 41, 72, 76, 94–97
Flickr, 48, 65–66, 76
guideline, 15, 23, 38, 40, 42, 43, 49, 57, 
67, 72, 74–75
Halifax Public Libraries, 88–98
Health Information Network Calgary, 40
hospital library, 37–51
integrated library system (ILS), 88–93, 
98
library instruction, 45–46
marketing, 17, 24–26, 28–29, 34–35, 48, 
50, 54–55, 58–61, 63, 65, 70–71, 76, 
93–95. See also advertising
Miami University Libraries, 77–85
microblogging. See blog
Missouri River Regional Library 
(MRRL), 1–12
MySpace, vi, x–xi, 48, 54, 56, 65, 76
navigation, 91, 93, 96
Ning, 48

100 
Index
objective, 14, 17, 23, 40, 78, 90–91, 
94–95, 98
Ohio Public Library, v, 102
Peter Lougheed Knowledge Centre, 
102
Pinterest, xi, 23–35, 76; pinboard, 23, 
25–32, 34; pinning, 27–28, 34
plug-in, 2, 4, 5, 11
policy, 14–15, 38, 72, 74–75
reference services, virtual, 38, 45
research portal, 23, 30–32
SlideShare, 19–20, 34, 50–51
Smiley Library, 23–35
social catalog, 87–98; AquaBrowser, 88, 
91–94, 97
SocialFlow, 72
staff buy-in, 83–85
Successful Social Networking in Public 
Libraries, xii
survey, 40–41, 43, 48–50, 54, 61–63, 
95–96
syndication, 82–83
teenage users, 53–63
Tom Baker Cancer Knowledge Centre, 
101
training, 12, 16–17, 20, 24, 39, 41–42, 
43–47, 49, 55, 74, 94
Tumblr, 19–20, 83
tutorial, 17, 20, 45, 49, 79, 93–94
Twitter, v–vii, x, xii, 19–20, 38, 45, 48, 
54, 58–62, 65–76, 83–84; feed, 69, 
71, 73, 75
UN (United Nations) library, 13–21
University of Calgary Libraries, 37–51
Vancouver Public Library (VPL), 65–76
Virtual Interest Group (VIG), 40–46, 
49–50
Weinroth, Adam, 65
WordPress, 2–9, 11, 55, 57–58, 61, 84, 
93
YouTube, 17, 19–20, 45, 48, 65–66, 76
Zuckerberg, Mark, 65

101
About the Editors and Contributors
Angelinah C. Boniface is the associate reference librarian at the Dag Ham-
marskjöld Library at the United Nations in New York City.
Kay Cahill is the assistant manager of website and community development 
at the Vancouver Public Library in Canada.
Walt Crawford is the author of Successful Social Networking in Public 
Libraries.
Cynthia Dudenhoffer is the director of information resources at Central 
Methodist University in Fayette, Missouri.
Charles Harmon is an executive editor for the Rowman & Littlefield Pub-
lishing Group. His background includes work in special, public, and school 
libraries.
Robin Hastings is the information tech coordinator at the Missouri River 
Regional Library in Jefferson City, Missouri.
Laura A. Horn is the media and teen services librarian at the Farmington 
Public Libraries in Connecticut.
Yongtao Lin is a librarian at the Tom Baker Cancer Knowledge Centre at the 
University of Calgary Libraries in Canada.
Michael Messina is a reference librarian at the State University of New 
York’s Maritime College. He has also worked as a researcher at the Brooklyn 

102 
About the Editors and Contributors
Academy of Music Archives. The former publisher of Applause Theatre & 
Cinema Books/Limelight Editions, he is a coeditor of Acts of War: Iraq and 
Afghanistan in Seven Plays.
Jason Paul Michel is the user experience librarian at the Miami University 
Libraries in Oxford, Ohio.
Kathryn M. E. Ranjit is the librarian manager of the Peter Lougheed 
Knowledge Centre at the University of Calgary Libraries in Canada.
Laura Solomon is the library services manager of the Ohio Public Library 
Information Network.
Laurel Tarulli is part-time faculty at the School of Information Management 
at Dalhousie University in Halifax, Nova Scotia.

