Using Internet Primary
Sources to Teach
Critical Thinking Skills
in Government,
Economics, and
Contemporary World
Issues
JAMES M. SHIVELEY
PHILLIP J. VANFOSSEN
GREENWOOD PRESS


Using Internet Primary
Sources to Teach
Critical Thinking Skills
in Government,
Economics, and
Contemporary World Issues


Recent Titles in
Greenwood Professional Guides in School Librarianship
Creating a Local Area Network in the School Library Media Center
Becky R. Mather
Collection Assessment and Management for School Libraries: Preparing for
Cooperative Collection Development
Debra E. Kachel
Using Educational Technology with At-Risk Students: A Guide for Library
Media Specialists and Teachers
Roxanne Baxter Mendrinos
Teaching Electronic Literacy: A Concepts-Based Approach for School Library
Media Specialists
Kathleen W. Craver
Block Scheduling and Its Impact on the School Library Media Center
Marie Keen Shaw
Using Internet Primary Sources to Teach Critical Thinking Skills in History
Kathleen W. Craver
100 More Research Topic Guides for Students
Dana McDougald
Curriculum Partner: Redeﬁning the Role of the Library Media Specialist
Carol A. Kearney
Using Internet Primary Sources to Teach Critical Thinking Skills in Geography
Martha B. Sharma and Gary S. Elbow
Using Internet Primary Sources to Teach Critical Thinking Skills in World
Languages
Grete Pasch and Kent Norsworthy
Leadership for Today’s School Library: A Handbook for the Library Media
Specialist and the School Principal
Patricia Potter Wilson and Josette Anne Lyders
Using Internet Primary Sources to Teach Critical Thinking Skills in
Mathematics
Evan Glazer


Using Internet Primary
Sources to Teach
Critical Thinking Skills
in Government,
Economics, and
Contemporary World Issues

JAMES M. SHIVELEY
AND PHILLIP J. VANFOSSEN
Greenwood Professional Guides in School Librarianship
Harriet Selverstone, Series Adviser
GREENWOOD PRESS
Westport, Connecticut • London

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Shiveley, James M.
Using Internet primary sources to teach critical thinking skills in government,
economics, and contemporary world issues / James M. Shiveley and Phillip J.
VanFossen.
p.
cm.—(Greenwood professional guides in school librarianship, ISSN 1074-150X)
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 0–313–31283–4 (alk. paper)
1. Social sciences—Computer network resources.
2. United States—Politics and
government—Computer network resources.
3. Economics—Computer network
resources.
4. World politics—Computer network resources.
5. Social sciences—
Study and teaching.
6. Internet in education.
I. VanFossen, Phillip J., 1964–
II. Title.
III. Series.
H61.95.S49
2001
025.06'3—dc21
00–052147
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data is available.
Copyright  2001 by James M. Shiveley and Phillip J. VanFossen
All rights reserved. No portion of this book may be
reproduced, by any process or technique, without
the express written consent of the publisher.
Library of Congress Catalog Card Number: 00–052147
ISBN: 0–313–31283–4
ISSN: 1074–150X
First published in 2001
Greenwood Press, 88 Post Road West, Westport, CT 06881
An imprint of Greenwood Publishing Group, Inc.
www.greenwood.com
Printed in the United States of America
TM
The paper used in this book complies with the
Permanent Paper Standard issued by the National
Information Standards Organization (Z39.48–1984).
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1

Contents
Acknowledgments
xi
Introduction: The Internet and the World Wide Web—Potential
for Education
xiii
PART I
USING CRITICAL THINKING IN POLITICAL
SCIENCE, ECONOMICS, AND CONTEMPORARY
WORLD ISSUES
1
PART II
USING PRIMARY SOURCES
17
PART III
PRIMARY SOURCE SITES
37
Political Science
39
Early America
39
How to Read a 200-year-old Document
39
Mayﬂower Compact
40
Fundamental Orders of Connecticut
42
Peter Zenger and Freedom of the Press
43
Bacon’s Rebellion
45
Iroquois Constitution
46
Albany Plan of Union
48
Stamp Act
49
Give Me Liberty or Give Me Death
51

Contents
vi
Revolutionary Period and Early U.S. Documents
53
Declaration of Independence
53
Articles of Confederation
54
Northwest Ordinance
56
Constitution of the United States
57
Virginia Declaration of Rights
59
Federalist Papers, Number 10
61
Proclamation of Neutrality
62
The Alien and Sedition Acts of 1798
64
The Nineteenth Century
66
War of 1812
66
Monroe Doctrine
67
Declaration of Sentiments
69
Fugitive Slave Act
70
Emancipation Proclamation
72
Fourteenth Amendment
74
Fort Laramie Treaty
75
Thomas Nast Homepage
77
Sherman Anti-Trust Act of 1890
79
The Twentieth Century
81
Child Labor
81
Jim Crow Laws
82
Prohibition
84
Red Scare
85
First Hundred Days of the New Deal
87
World War II Posters
89
Truman and the Decision to Drop the Bomb
90
Nixon-Kennedy Debate
92
Martin Luther King, Jr.—“I Have a Dream”
94
Watergate and Nixon’s Resignation
95
The Judiciary Branch
97
John Marshall
97
Dred Scott
98
Plessy v. Ferguson
100

Contents
vii
Scopes Monkey Trial
101
Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, Kansas
103
Thurgood Marshall
105
Roe v. Wade
106
Miranda v. Arizona
108
Today’s Supreme Court
110
The Presidency and the Executive Branch
112
Presidents—In Their Own Words
112
Letters of Thomas Jefferson
113
Abraham Lincoln’s Second Inaugural Address
115
Impeachment of Andrew Johnson
116
Theodore Roosevelt
118
Franklin Delano Roosevelt’s First Inaugural Speech
120
Other Inaugural Speeches
121
John F. Kennedy’s Berlin Speech
122
Presidential Succession Act
123
Executive Orders
125
Presidential Libraries
127
Legislative Branch
129
About the U.S. Congress
129
Tour of the Capitol Building
130
Congressional Record
132
House of Representatives
134
Senate’s Ofﬁcial Homepage
136
Rules of the House and Senate
138
Seventeenth Amendment
139
Committees
141
Elections and the Voting Process
143
Presidential Elections and Voter Turnout
143
The Electoral College
144
National Party Committees
146
Prohibition Party
148
Learning Page Library of Congress and the Election
of 1920
150
Election of 1860
151

Contents
viii
Election of 1948
153
American Indian Movement
155
International Politics
157
Magna Carta
157
John Locke’s Second Treatise on Government
158
Edmund Burke’s Speech on Conciliation with America
159
Paris Peace Treaty of 1783
161
Democracy in America by Alexis de Tocqueville
162
Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen
163
Woodrow Wilson and the League of Nations
165
Universal Declaration of Human Rights
167
Truman Doctrine
168
Elections around the World
169
Economics
173
General Economic Data
173
The Dismal Scientist
173
About.Com: Economics
174
Economagic
175
GeoStat
176
Global Population and Economic Statistics
178
EconData.Net
179
International Economics
181
Foreign Currency Converter
181
International Trade Data
182
Economic History
184
U.S. Currency Exhibit
184
What Is (Was) a Dollar Worth?
185
Adam Smith’s Writings on Economic Theory
186
The Leslie Brock Center for the Study of Colonial
Currency
188
David Hume’s Economic Writings
189
David Ricardo’s Writings
190
Factory Life circa 1900
192

Contents
ix
Internet Modern History Sourcebook: The Industrial
Revolution
193
Historical Census Data
194
Macroeconomic Data
196
Unemployment and Productivity
196
Gross Domestic Product
197
Budget of the U.S. Government
199
Income and Poverty
200
Other Economics Sites
203
Contemporary Economic and Business Cartoons
203
The Stock Market Indexes
204
The Department of Commerce
205
State and County Demographic and Economic Proﬁles
206
WOODROW
208
Dr. Yardeni’s Economic History Page
209
Contemporary World Issues
211
China and Taiwan
211
Cuba and the United States
212
HIV and Africa
213
Human Rights in China
214
North Korea
215
Refugee Crisis
217
Drugs in Colombia
218
India and Pakistan
219
Newspapers around the World
220
Comprehensive Nuclear Test Ban Treaty
222
Terrorism
223
World Trade Organization
225
Organization for Petroleum Exporting Countries
227
Middle East Conﬂict
228
World Hunger
230
Third World Debt
231
The Rights of Children
233

Contents
x
Selected Primary Source Databases
235
Index
239

Acknowledgments
We would like to thank our families for their continued patience and
understanding throughout this project, especially our wives, Mindy and
Bethany, who have always been our chief supporters and our best
friends. We are grateful to Debby Adams at Greenwood Press for her
editorial support and advice and for her belief in us and our abilities to
carry out this project. Finally, we wish to thank each other for the years
of fruitful collaboration that have led to, and culminated in, this book.


Introduction: The Internet and
the World Wide Web—
Potential for Education
From the use of electronic mail to the transmission of multimedia such
as digital audio and video, the Internet/WWW has become pervasive in
many of our daily lives. Whether buying a book at Amazon.com (e-
commerce) or ﬁnding out the latest college football scores (information
gathering) or listening to a classical radio station in Cleveland from your
living room in Denver (entertainment), many Americans consume Inter-
net/WWW services on a daily basis. Estimates place the number of In-
ternet/WWW users in the United States at between 88 and 92 million
(Information Please, 1999).
Why has Internet/WWW use become such a widespread phenome-
non? First, access to both computers and Internet service providers (ISPs)
has been steadily increasing since 1990; by 1998, nearly half of American
households had a home computer (Wall Street Journal). Second, the In-
ternet/WWW provides heretofore unobtainable access to nearly unlim-
ited information in a staggering variety of formats from myriad sources.
The very nature of a digital information network—such as the Internet—
implies that once information, or any type of media, has been digitized,
access to that information is no longer bound by time or space. People
can now access much of the Library of Congress on-line, take a “virtual
tour” of the Louvre, or buy stocks from the New York Stock Exchange—
all unthinkable for ordinary Americans even a few years ago. Even more
important, perhaps, is that access to this information, via the Internet/
WWW, is possible at a very low cost. Because it is no longer necessary
to bear the transportation costs associated with traveling to Paris to see
the Louvre, for example, more Americans (and other people around the
globe) have access to such experiences than ever before.

Introduction
xiv
Perhaps the best measure of the pervasiveness of the Internet/WWW
in our society is the degree to which “the web” has entered the American
lexicon. During the last few years of the decade of the 1990s, for example,
such words and phrases as “e-mail,” “surﬁng,” “downloading,” and
“dot.com” became commonplace in news broadcasts and everyday con-
versations. Certainly such language is prevalent in the many recent tele-
vision commercials that extol the virtues of e-commerce for both
businesses and consumers.
Citing many of the same reasons noted above, experts and pundits
have recently extolled the potential of the Internet/WWW for educa-
tional applications as well. Because of its interactive and multimedia na-
ture, the Internet/WWW has been highly touted as an increasingly
important aspect of both elementary and secondary education. For ex-
ample, in a nationwide study of Internet/WWW use by teachers, Henry
J. Becker concluded that “along with word processing, the Internet may
be the most valuable of the many computer technologies available to
teachers and students” (Becker 1999, 32).
Experts point to several powerful beneﬁts for using the Internet/
WWW in the classroom and library media center. Jeri Wilson (1995) has
argued that the Internet/WWW has the ability to break down the class-
room’s physical limitations and to allow students access to experiences
well beyond the limited resources available in classrooms and media
centers. Such experiences might include having students e-mail an expert
scientist with questions about a chemistry problem, students listen to
digital audio ﬁles of 1930s folk music archived at the Library of Con-
gress, or take a virtual ﬁeldtrip to the Amazon rain forest. All of these
experiences are well beyond the capabilities of nearly any school or
teacher.
Joseph Braun, Phyllis Fernlund, and Charles White (1998) believed that
the use of the Internet/WWW could develop students’ inquiry and an-
alytical skills. Indeed, the nature of the Internet/WWW as a wide-open
information superhighway provides a perfect backdrop for developing
and honing research and critical thinking skills. Unlike traditional infor-
mation sources (e.g., libraries, encyclopedias), the Internet/WWW is “un-
ﬁltered” in the sense that information is not reviewed for accuracy before
publication on-line. Indeed, the only “ﬁlter” on the Internet is whether
one has a computer and access to a server at an Internet node for posting
web pages. We have described this lack of information ﬁltering as an
opportunity to develop critical thinking skills in students:
For some (teachers), the commitment of teaching their students critical-thinking
skills and having them apply these skills to the Internet is simply an extension
of the central task that they are already engaged in, namely, the effort to foster
a critical citizenry able to make reasoned decisions. (Engle and Ochoa 1988)

Introduction
xv
Teachers do this whenever they have their students apply critical thinking to
their textbooks, some current event in the news, a recent television commercial,
or a political campaign speech. For others, this represents perhaps the latest best
reason for teaching critical-thinking and reading skills directly. In either case, for
the classroom teacher to assume the role as the exclusive ﬁlter for Internet ma-
terial in their classroom is to deny students the opportunity to learn the
information-gathering skills needed in a democracy, skills they will need to apply
daily once they have left the classroom. (Shiveley and VanFossen, 1999, 43)
Charles White (1997) has also argued that the use of the Internet/
WWW in classrooms can expand students’ experience with visual tech-
nologies. These visual technologies include digital resources—increas-
ingly available on the Internet/WWW—such as graphics interchange
format (GIF) images, QuickTime VR (virtual reality) ﬁles, and on-
demand streaming video. These media allow students to go beyond not
only their own classrooms and media centers but also beyond the me-
dium of print or text. In an increasingly multimedia society, these can
be valuable experiences.
Access to the Internet/WWW is growing among the nation’s schools.
National data have suggested that approximately 90 percent of the na-
tion’s schools have access to the Internet in some location within the
school building (Becker 1999). Results from recent state-level studies
have indicated that in some states this percentage may be even higher.
VanFossen (2000) reported that more than 95 percent of the respondents
in a study of secondary teachers in Indiana had access to the Internet/
WWW somewhere in their school building.
How does the tremendous potential of the Internet/WWW—along
with this increased access—affect students in the social studies class-
room? To better examine this question, one needs to ﬁrst take a brief
look at the nature of social studies, its traditional role in public educa-
tion, and the logical “ﬁt” between social studies and the Internet/WWW.
THE NATURE OF SOCIAL STUDIES
Ever since the inception of social studies as a ﬁeld of study, debate
and criticism have enveloped the ﬁeld in regard to its deﬁnition, scope
and sequence, and purpose. One way of helping teachers and students
better understand the nature of social studies is to focus on some of the
widely accepted goals in this ﬁeld. Social studies, particularly that aspect
that focuses on political science, economics, and world issues, is often
broadly deﬁned as “that part of the elementary and high school curric-
ulum which has the primary responsibility for helping students to de-
velop the knowledge, skills, attitudes, and values needed to participate
in the civic life of their local communities, the nation, and the world”

Introduction
xvi
(Banks and Clegg 1990). To achieve this, social studies teachers are urged
to use an interdisciplinary approach and multiple perspectives to pro-
mote the skills of participatory citizenship, decision making, and critical
thinking (Adler 1991; National Council for the Social Studies 1992).
Participatory citizenship has always been an important part of the so-
cial studies curriculum. According to W. Parker, “This is where, if any-
where, the core knowledge base of citizenship will be debated and
developed. Social studies is the only place in the school curriculum
where focused inquiry on democratic ideals and practices might be lo-
cated” (1990, 17). Participatory citizenship is often best emphasized in
political science and world issues courses, and, in recent decades it has
been infused throughout many history and geography courses (Butts
1993). Economics also has been a content area closely associated with the
goals of citizenship education. The case for economic literacy as it is
connected to democratic citizenship is built on the premise that Ameri-
cans think and talk about economic issues, that these issues affect us as
citizens, and that economic issues are primarily concerned with making
decisions, a primary attribute of democratic citizenship (Schug and Wal-
stad 1991). According to S.L. Miller, “Economics is for everyone in part
because we live in an economic world. Most of the major decisions that
confront us are fundamentally economic. Effective decision making and
participation in a democratic republic requires citizens to have at least a
minimum of competency in economics” (1987, 162).
Students beneﬁt from certain skills that assist them in making deci-
sions. Some of these skills include collecting, analyzing, and organizing
information, and then determining how best to use this information
when reaching conclusions. One of the best strategies utilized by teachers
to help students develop these skills is teaching through inquiry or dis-
covery. In inquiry-oriented instruction, students are challenged with a
problem, or a “point of perplexity,” from which they proceed through a
series of steps to solve the problem. These steps include deﬁning the
problem, developing a tentative solution to the problem (hypothesis),
gathering any analyzing relevant data, testing the hypothesis, accepting
or rejecting the hypothesis, and—after reaching a conclusion—testing
this conclusion in new situations (Dewey 1933). An inquiry or discovery-
oriented approach to instruction promotes reﬂection, decision making,
and participation more than a didactic expository approach, and it is
therefore very consistent with the goals of social studies (Ferguson 1991).
Critical thinking is also seen as “essential to citizenship in a democratic
society where citizens are confronted by persistent and complex social
problems” (Stanley 1991, 255). Critical thinking has been deﬁned as the
rules of logical inquiry or argument analysis (Newmann 1975) or as “a
collection of discrete skills or operations each of which to some degree
or other combines analysis and evaluation” (Beyer 1985, 272). More on

Introduction
xvii
how critical thinking applies speciﬁcally to the social studies will be cov-
ered in Chapter 1; however, most would agree that the teaching of crit-
ical thinking skills is considered a fundamental component of citizenship
education at every grade level.
Citizenship education also needs to promote understanding and ap-
preciation of the multiple perspectives vital to a democratic society. A
pluralistic democratic society can work only when its diverse groups
really believe that they and those around them are an important part of
the institutions and social structure in which they are immersed (Banks
and Banks 1993). When multiple perspectives are infused throughout a
school’s curriculum, classrooms become more consistent with key dem-
ocratic principles. Such a curriculum encourages students to view people
from a pluralistic perspective—one that is inclusive, non-stereotypical,
and unprejudiced which helps prepare them to “build authentic, dem-
ocratic communities” (Alter 1995, 355)
Finally, teachers of social studies believe that the approach most con-
sistent with the goals and skills of democratic citizenship as stressed
above is best achieved through an interdisciplinary approach. This is
apparent in the deﬁnition provided by the National Council for the Social
Studies which, in part, states that social studies is
the integrated study of the social sciences and humanities to promote civic com-
petence. Within the school program, social studies provides coordinated, system-
atic study drawing upon such disciplines as anthropology, archaeology,
economics, geography, history, law, philosophy, political science, psychology, re-
ligion, and sociology, as well as appropriate content from the humanities, mathe-
matics, and natural sciences. (National Council for the Social Studies 1992, 3)
After reviewing the purpose and nature of the social studies and re-
ﬂecting on many of the characteristics associated with the Internet, one
could conclude that the recent increased access that social studies stu-
dents and teachers have to the Internet/WWW is fortuitous indeed.
USE OF THE INTERNET/WWW BY SOCIAL STUDIES
TEACHERS
Internet/WWW resources abound for teachers of all subject areas and
all grade levels, but such resources seem particularly well-suited to the
social studies (Braun, Fernlund, and White 1998). The social studies are
interdisciplinary by their very nature, and the content disciplines (e.g.,
political science and economics) that make up the social studies draw
heavily on all types of information and media. Because the Internet/
WWW structure provides wide access to rich sources of just this kind of

Introduction
xviii
information and media, it would seem to correspond very well with the
ﬁeld of social studies and the disciplines that undergird the ﬁeld.
Indeed, typing in the term “social studies” at the search engine Yahoo!
generates 158 site matches and more than 1,200 web pages devoted, in
some shape or form, to social studies education. What are some examples
of these social studies resources? Teachers and students might choose to
log on to National Geographic On-Line (www.nationalgeographic.com)
and view a web cast of a presentation on life in Ancient Egypt or in
modern Havana, or develop and print out maps of any country in the
world, or take a trip on the Underground Railroad. Teachers and stu-
dents might also log on to the National Archives and Records Admin-
istration (www.nara.gov) and download a copy of the Declaration of
Independence, photographs of slave life in the antebellum south, or
propaganda posters from World War II. Teachers and students could
also use the Intercultural E-mail Classroom Connection www.stolaf.
edu/network/iecc/ to exchange e-mail messages with students in a
classroom in Japan or Russia or Canada about life in those countries.
Even this short list demonstrates the powerful potential of this medium.
Indeed, some social studies teachers have already seen the beneﬁts to
classroom use of the Internet/WWW. In a study of secondary social stud-
ies teachers’ Internet/WWW use, VanFossen asked teachers to describe
why they thought the Internet/WWW was important or valuable in the
classroom. One enthusiastic teacher responded, “Teachers would have
to be crazy not to use the Internet!” (1999, 5). A second teacher outlined
the reasons why:
Many people say exploratory learning is important. There is no better way for
kids to explore a subject than to do it on the ‘net. I have students getting excited
about what they ﬁnd. Often they feel they get info I don’t know. Sometimes they
do. Often times [sic] people think math and science are the only subjects that use
computers. Social studies teachers need to use the Internet. We already have a
bad reputation of being boring teachers of a boring subject! (VanFossen 1999, 1)
In spite of the Internet/WWW’s perceived ﬁt with education (and with
social studies in particular), and enthusiasm of teachers like those above,
research has indicated that few teachers are actually integrating this me-
dium into their lesson plans in any meaningful way. Becker found that
nearly a third of the teachers surveyed (from grade 4 to grade 12) were
not using the Internet/WWW at all in their classrooms; another 40 per-
cent admitted to only “occasional” use (1999, 5). Data suggest that In-
ternet/WWW use among social studies teachers is no better. VanFossen
(1999) found that, although more than 85 percent of respondents were
employing the Internet/WWW in some way for their own professional

Introduction
xix
use (e.g., planning or research), few were using the medium in their
classrooms. For example, two-thirds of the respondents had never used
the Internet/WWW to take students on a virtual ﬁeldtrip of a museum
site, and slightly less than half had never developed an interactive lesson
that required students to use the Internet/WWW to complete some task
or assignment. Additionally, VanFossen discovered that more than 80
percent of the social studies teachers who responded wished they were
using the Internet/WWW more than they currently were.
These ﬁndings seem to beg the question: if social studies teachers have
access to the Internet/WWW, have myriad interesting and useful web
sites to access, and want to use the Internet/WWW more than they cur-
rently are—why aren’t they? Two factors seem to explain this lack of
use. First, social studies teachers, like most other teachers, suffer from a
lack of formal training in the classroom use of the Internet/WWW. R.
Coley (1997) found that 85 percent of teachers had less than nine clock
hours in general training—one would assume that Internet/WWW train-
ing was some subset of these nine hours—in using the computer in the
classroom. VanFossen found similar results among social studies teach-
ers. This lack of training was summarized by one teacher in VanFossen’s
study: “I would like to attend a workshop where an actual lesson is
taught and authentic (alternative) assessments are given. We need hands-
on, not just what web sites to access. We need to see it done, then practice
it” (1999, 15).
A second explanation for the low degree of classroom use of the In-
ternet/WWW is a perception among social studies teachers that using
the medium takes too much time and is not worth the investment. Many
social studies teachers believe that resources on the Internet/WWW are
“an inch deep and a mile wide”—except for a few ﬂashy bells and whis-
tles, very little meaningful social studies content can be found on the
Internet/WWW. One teacher summarized this view:
I’m not convinced the Internet is great progress over the school or public library.
It can be an enormous waste of time, a migraine frustration, a panacea that
doesn’t “pan” out, a way to spend a lot of time learning technology with a
disproportionately small return in learning of subject matter. Too often the means
becomes the end. (VanFossen 1999, 14)
We hope that this book will address this very sentiment and the barrier
to Internet/WWW use in classrooms represented by it by providing a
wide range of resources appropriate for use in social studies classrooms.
PURPOSE OF THIS BOOK
The purpose of this book is to discuss and demonstrate how primary
sources found on the Internet can be used to teach critical thinking skills

Introduction
xx
in social studies generally and in political science, economics, and world
problems speciﬁcally. This book will also provide teachers, students, and
school library media specialists with a wide range of strategies for using
Internet/WWW primary sources.
Many educators who do not actively embrace the use of the Internet
in their classrooms perceive that the costs of its use outweigh the bene-
ﬁts. These teachers want to take advantage of the Internet—and indeed
may feel guilty and left behind if they don’t—but they ﬁnd themselves
in a predicament. How do they use this great new tool, teach in a manner
that retains the integrity of their curriculum and content area, and do
both effectively? Also, as stated earlier, many teachers believe that min-
ing the Internet/WWW for meaningful material takes too much time, or
they feel incapable of judging good sites from bad ones and are reluctant
to take a chance on employing a bad site in class. Other teachers point
out that the WWW is replete with on-line lessons that present style (tech-
nological bells and whistles) over substance (teacher-developed, ﬁeld-
tested, easily implemented lessons). The book hopes to address some of
these concerns.
Social studies teachers are not always pleased with the classroom text-
books they have been given to use as their primary source. Research into
the methods and materials used to teach political science, economics, and
world issues reveal surprisingly similar, and unfavorable, results. Stu-
dents tend to like these subjects less than any other topic in school, in
large part due to the materials and methods that stultify students’ inter-
ests (Goodlad 1984). Often these textbooks are described as dry, redun-
dant, supportive of the status quo, and designed for passive learning
and the transmission of facts rather than active involvement in the pur-
suit of knowledge (Carroll et al. 1987; Larkins, Hawkins, and Gilmore
1987). These studies seem to describe a ﬁeld—social studies—that is ripe
with potential to utilize new content resources such as those increasingly
available on the Internet/WWW.
USER POPULATION
This book is designed to assist teachers and school library media spe-
cialists who wish to create lessons and units that integrate critical think-
ing and primary source documents in political science, economics, and
world issues. Students will ﬁnd this text helpful as a resource for re-
search into topics or time periods that would beneﬁt from the critical
examination of the related primary source documents. Teachers (as well
as preservice teachers) will be able to use this book as a reference that
provides examples of the infusion of technology into the classroom re-
lated to political science, economics, and world issues. This book is in-

Introduction
xxi
tended as a supplement for many of the resources currently used by
classroom teachers and library specialists in these subject areas. The au-
thors’ intent is that this text be used to support secondary sources such
as class texts and additional readings such as biographies, ﬁctional read-
ings, and multimedia presentations associated with these subjects.
TECHNICAL NOTES: HARDWARE AND SOFTWARE
REQUIREMENTS
In order to take advantage of the Internet/WWW primary sources
outlined in this book, a user need only have a relatively basic set of
hardware and software resources. In addition to a Windows-compatible
(with 486 processor or above preferred) or Macintosh (PowerPC proces-
sor or above preferred) computer, users must have access to the Internet
via a service provider or, preferably, their school. The computer should
be equipped with either Netscape Navigator, version 4.1 or above (this
is preferred), or Microsoft’s Internet Explorer installed in order to
“browse” the Internet. Some of the primary sources described in this
book require additional, readily available (without price cost) Internet/
WWW software. For example, in order to listen to Internet audio ﬁles (.au,
.wav, etc.), readers will need to download RealPlayer http://www.
real.com/. In order to view Internet video ﬁles (.mpeg, .mov, .asp),
Windows users are encouraged to download Windows MediaPlayer
http://www.microsoft.com/windows/mediaplayer/en/default.asp
and Macintosh users are encouraged to download Apple QuickTime
http://www.apple.com/quicktime/.
Teachers with only one computer in the classroom (or one computer
in the school building) may be able to make a single computer screen
accessible to an entire class by using an LCD palette that can project a
computer screen onto the wall using an overhead projector. Some school
media centers may have a digital video projector that can be used in the
same manner. Teachers without these resources can still make many of
the primary sources described in this book available to students by print-
ing out various primary sources and making photocopied classroom sets.
FAIR USE ISSUES
As noted previously, one use of primary source materials accessed
over the Internet/WWW is to print out representative examples or class-
room sets for distribution to students in class. This brings classroom
teachers into the debate over the fair use of Internet/WWW materials.
Generally, materials produced by federal agencies are in the public do-
main and may be reproduced without permission for fair use (National

Introduction
xxii
Archives 1999). The fair use statute refers to Section 107 of the Copyright
Act of 1976:
Limitations on exclusive rights: Fair use
Notwithstanding the provisions of sections 106 and 106A, the fair use of a copy-
righted work, including such use by reproduction in copies or phonorecords or
by any other means speciﬁed in that section, for purposes such as criticism,
comment, news reporting, teaching (including multiple copies for classroom use),
scholarship, or research, is not an infringement of copyright. In determining
whether the use made of a work in any particular case is a fair use the factors
to be considered shall include—
1. the purpose and character of the use, including whether such use is of a com-
mercial nature or is for nonproﬁt educational purposes;
2. the nature of the copyrighted work;
3. the amount and substantiality of the portion used in relation to the copyrighted
work as a whole; and
4. the effect of the use upon the potential market for or value of the copyrighted
work. (statute downloaded from Consortium for Educational Technology in Uni-
versity Systems http://www.cetus.org/fair5.html)
Among the examples that fall under these fair use criteria are “repro-
duction by a teacher or a student . . . to illustrate a lesson” (Library of
Congress 1999, 1). For example, the Library of Congress’ copyright re-
strictions indicate that access to materials in the public domain for “non-
commercial, educational and research purposes” requires no written
permission (Library of Congress 1999). We are of the opinion that nearly
all of the materials described in this book fall under public domain, fair
use criteria.
The Digital Millennium Copyright Act (DMCA) of 1998 describes the
nature and use of copyrighted materials and digital technology that did
not exist, or were in limited use, when the 1976 Copyright Act was
passed. One result of the DMCA was to assign copyright—without the
creator having to apply for a copyright—to every single document or
piece of media that appears on the Internet/WWW. While this is an
important change to the 1976 act—among other things, this change rec-
ognizes the instantaneous nature of publishing on the WWW—the
DMCA did not change the basic elements of the fair use doctrine. When
making a decision about fair use of Internet/WWW resources, then, the
same criteria should be used. If the work or resource found on the WWW
is in the public domain, teachers should feel conﬁdent they are adhering
to the fair use doctrine.
However, we also feel obliged to warn readers that the line between
fair use and copyright infringement is a ﬁne one. In its pamphlet on fair
use, the Copyright Ofﬁce stated that there “is no speciﬁc number of

Introduction
xxiii
words or lines that may be taken without permission” and that the safest
course is seek “permission from the copyright owner before using copy-
righted material” (Library of Congress 1999, 1). Therefore we offer two
suggestions for the classroom teacher intent on using primary source
material from the Internet/WWW. First, when in doubt about whether
a primary source document requires permission to reproduce, e-mail the
web master of the site you are downloading the material from and in-
quire about the permissions needed. Second, it is always a good idea to
provide credits for images or other primary source material used. Simply
typing a line across the bottom of the printed document is usually
enough (e.g., “image downloaded from the Library of Congress Ameri-
can Memory site http://memory.loc.gov/”).
BOOK ARRANGEMENT
This book is arranged in three parts. Part I presents an overview of
critical thinking. It discusses what critical thinking is (and what it is
commonly misunderstood to be) as it pertains to the social science areas
of political science, economics, and world issues. Part I also discusses
research ﬁndings related to, and suggested practices designed for, as-
sisting the teaching of critical thinking. Part II deﬁnes and gives char-
acteristics of primary sources and distinguishes these from secondary
and tertiary sources. Instructional strategies are provided for using pri-
mary source documents in the classroom or media center. Part III pres-
ents 118 Internet/WWW sites containing primary source documents in
the areas of political science (82), economics (27), and contemporary
world issues (17). Each site description contains an abstract of the web
site and a set of questions and activities designed to promote the appli-
cation of critical thinking skills to the primary sources found at that site.
Where applicable, web sites are followed by the listing and brief abstracts
of subject-related web sites. The book concludes with a listing of selected
primary source databases for future reference.
REFERENCES
Adler, S. “The Education of Social Studies Teachers.” In Handbook of Research of
Social Studies Teaching and Learning, edited by J. Shaver. New York: Mac-
millan, 1991.
Alter, G. “Transforming Elementary Social Studies: The Emergence of a Curric-
ulum Focused on Diverse, Caring Communities.” Theory and Research in
Social Studies 23, no. 4 (1995): 355–74.
Banks, C., and J. Banks. “Social Studies Teacher Education, Ethnic Diversity, and
Academic Achievement.” International Journal of Social Education 7, no. 3
(1993): 24–38.

Introduction
xxiv
Banks, J., and A. Clegg. Teaching Strategies for the Social Studies. New York: Long-
man, 1990.
Becker, Henry J. “Internet Use By Teachers: Conditions of Professional Use and
Student-Directed Use.” Irvine, CA: Center for Research on Information
Technology and Organizations, 1999. Accessed at http://www.crito.uci.
edu/TLC/ﬁndings/Internet-Use/startpage.htm on September 7, 1999.
Beyer, B. “Critical Thinking: What Is It?” Social Education 49, no. 3 (1985): 270–
76.
Braun, Joseph, Phyllis Fernlund, and Charles White. Technology Tools in the Social
Studies Classroom. Wilsonville, OR: Franklin, Beedle and Associates, 1998.
Butts, F. “National Standards and Civic Education in the United States.” Inter-
national Journal of Social Education 7, no. 3 (1993): 86–94.
Carroll, J.D., W.D. Broadnax, G. Contreras, T.E. Mann, N.J. Ornstein, and J.
Stiehm. We the People: A Review of U.S. Government and Civics Textbooks.
Washington, D.C.: People for the American Way, 1987.
Coley, R., J. Cradler, and P.K. Engel. “Computers and Classrooms: The Status of
Technology in U.S. Schools.” Princeton, NJ: Educational Testing Service
Policy Information Report, 1997. Eric Document 412893.
Dewey, J. How We Think. 1909. Reprint, Boston: Heath, 1933.
Engle, S., and A. Ochoa. Education for Democratic Citizenship. New York: Teachers
College Press, 1988.
Ferguson, P. “Impacts on Social and Political Participation.” In Handbook of Re-
search on Social Studies Teaching and Learning, edited by P. Shaver, 385–99.
New York: Macmillan, 1991.
Goodlad, J. A Place Called School. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1984.
Information Please. http://www.infoplease.com/ipa/A0761069.html (1999).
Larkins, A. Guy, Michael Hawkins, and Allison Gilmore. “Textbook Review.
Trivial and Noninformative Content of Elementary Social Studies: A Re-
view of Primary Texts in Four Series.” Theory and Research in Social Edu-
cation 15, no. 4 (1987): 299–311.
Library of Congress. “Fair Use: FL 102.” Washington, D.C.: Copyright Ofﬁce.
Downloaded at http://lcweb.loc.gov/copyright/ﬂs/ﬂ102.pdf on Decem-
ber 20, 1999.
Miller, S.L. “This Issue.” Theory into Practice 26, no. 3 (1987): 162.
National Archives and Records Administration. Copyright, Restrictions, and Per-
mission Notice. Downloaded from http://www.nara.gov/nara/terms.html
on November 6, 1999.
National Council for the Social Studies. “Standards for the Preparation of Social
Studies Teachers.” Social Education 56, no. 5 (1992): 271–73.
Newmann, F.M. Education for Citizen Action: Challenge for Secondary Curriculum.
Berkeley, CA: McCutchan Publishing, 1975.
Parker, W. “Assessing Citizenship.” Educational Leadership 48, no. 8 (1990): 17–
22.
Schug, M.C., and W.B. Walstad. “Teaching and Learning Economics.” In Hand-
book of Research on Social Studies Teaching and Learning, edited by J. Shaver,
411–19. New York: Macmillan, 1991.
Shiveley, J.M., and P.J. VanFossen. “Critical Thinking and the Internet: Oppor-

Introduction
xxv
tunities for the Social Studies Classroom.” Social Studies 90, no. 1 (1999):
42–46.
Stanley, W. “Teacher Competence for Social Studies.” In Handbook of Research on
Social Studies Teaching and Learning, edited by J. Shaver. New York: Mac-
millan, 1991.
VanFossen, P.J. “An Analysis of the Use of the Internet and World Wide Web
by Secondary Social Studies Teachers in Indiana.” International Journal of
Social Education 14, no. 2 (2000): 87–109.
VanFossen, P.J. “ ‘Teachers Would Have to be Crazy Not to Use the Internet!’:
A Preliminary Analysis of the Use of the Internet/WWW by Secondary
Social Studies Teachers in Indiana.” Paper presented at the annual meeting
of the College and University Faculty Assembly of the National Council
for the Social Studies, Orlando, FL. November 19, 1999.
Wall Street Journal. “Over 45% of U.S. Homes Had Computers Last Year,” March
10, 1998, B8.
White, Charles. “Technology and Social Studies: An Introduction.” Social Educa-
tion 61, no. 3 (1997): 147–49.
Wilson, Jeri, ed. “Social Studies Online Resources. Media Corner.” Social Studies
and the Young Learner 7, no. 3 (January-February 1995): 24–26.


USING CRITICAL THINKING IN
POLITICAL SCIENCE,
ECONOMICS,
AND CONTEMPORARY
WORLD ISSUES
I
INTRODUCTION
One would be hard pressed to generate a case against the need for critical
thinking in a democratic society. It is widely understood that critical
thinking skills are vital to an educated citizenry. This, however, may be
where agreement stops on this subject. How critical thinking is deﬁned,
how it is applied, and how and when it should be taught (indeed,
whether it can be taught at all) are all topics of debate within the social
studies. In an effort to clarify some of the issues surrounding critical
thinking as it applies to political science, economics, and contemporary
world issues, this chapter reviews problems associated with deﬁning crit-
ical thinking in general, deﬁnes critical thinking as it applies to the social
studies, describes characteristics and skills commonly associated with
critical thinking in social studies, reviews the research conducted on crit-
ical thinking in social studies, and examines how critical thinking may
be applied speciﬁcally to political science, economics, and world issues.
CRITICAL THINKING DEFINED
The term “critical thinking” is so commonly used that consensus on
the meaning of the term remains elusive. Deﬁnitions of critical thinking
that do have broad support, however, tend to be too vague to be useful
to educators. For example, if it is deﬁned as “reasonable, reﬂective think-
ing that is focused on deciding what to believe or do” (Ennis 1991, 1) or
“the art of thinking about your thinking while you’re thinking, in order

Political Science, Economics, and World Issues
2
to make your thinking better” (Paul 1992, 2), one is uncertain how to
improve students’ ability to think critically.
In spite of these difﬁculties, efforts have been made to create a deﬁ-
nition that captures most of what people have in mind when they refer
to critical thinking and, at the same time, develops a deﬁnition that is
concise and unique to the skills associated with the term. S. Bailin, R.
Case, J. Coombs, and L. Daniels determined that three features are typ-
ically understood by educators to embody critical thinking:
• Critical thinking is done for the purpose of making up one’s mind about what
to believe or do.
• The person engaged in the thinking is trying to fulﬁll standards of adequacy
and accuracy appropriate to the thinking.
• It involves an effort to fulﬁll some relevant standards for critical thinking, at
least at a threshold level. (Bailin et al. 1999, 287)
The authors went on to note that fulﬁlling these “relevant standards” is
by no means an all or nothing proposition and that, because of this, “the
basic concept of critical thinking possesses several kinds of vagueness”
(1999, 287). Herein lies the major concern with deﬁning critical thinking.
J. McPeck (1981) also addresses the problem of vagueness related to
critical thinking. He believes that this ambiguity is a result of the broad
scope in which the term is deﬁned.
The problem has not been a dearth of literature on critical thinking: on the con-
trary, journal discussions and pre-packaged curricula are legion. The problem is
that there is no precise way of assessing this material in the absence of an un-
derstanding of what the concept entails and what it precludes. At the moment,
the persistent vagueness of the concept supports curriculum proposals ranging
from courses in Latin to logic and clever puzzle games. All such proposals have
claimed to promote critical thinking. (McPeck cited in Wright 1995a)
Such broad deﬁnitions of critical thinking lead to many terms being
used interchangeably when the concept is discussed. Examples of such
terms include problem solving, higher-order thinking, decision making,
reﬂective thinking, inquiry, applying Bloom’s taxonomy, metacognition,
or simply searching for the truth (Beyer 1985; Dhand 1994). Not only
does this lead to deﬁnitions that are too broad and vague to be of much
use, it also causes some to reach the conclusion that critical thinking is
an umbrella term for any type of thinking that can be taught. Until a
more precise deﬁnition is agreed upon, teachers, curriculum directors,
library media specialists, curriculum directors, and test developers will
be unable to assist students in learning this skill (Beyer 1985).
One means of better understanding what critical thinking is, and

Political Science, Economics, and World Issues
3
therefore, understanding how to help students become more proﬁcient
in it, is to examine what critical thinking means in a particular ﬁeld of
study. For this we can examine critical thinking as it applies to the social
studies.
CRITICAL THINKING IN THE SOCIAL STUDIES
As stated in the introduction, the primary purpose of social studies is
to promote democratic citizenship. Because of the importance of critical
thinking in a democracy and to democratic citizens, critical thinking has
been an area of central focus for social studies educators for most of the
twentieth century. Critical thinking is understood to be “essential to cit-
izenship in a democratic society where citizens are confronted by per-
sistent and complex social problems” (Stanley 1991, 255). Indeed, one of
the most cherished goals of social studies has been to teach students to
think, evaluate, and make decisions on their own (Leming 1998). Teach-
ing the skills of critical thinking is considered a fundamental component
of citizenship education at every grade level. While social studies edu-
cators recognize that enhancing students’ abilities to think critically is by
no means unique to the social studies, most believe that social studies
has a special place in the curriculum for promoting these skills.
Most curriculum areas would claim that they contribute to the development of
critical thinking skills. But, given the nature of the subject, it is the social studies
which must carry the main responsibility for encouraging students to think crit-
ically about public, social, and personal issues and other concerns of the society.
Indeed, critical thinking skills in the social studies are important because these
skills enable citizens to cope with the barrage of information they encounter in
contemporary life. (Dhand 1994, 149)
This goal of creating a democratic citizenry helps one to narrow the focus
of critical thinking. Critical thinking now becomes more focused on “as-
sessing the accuracy, authenticity, validity, reliability, and worth of data”
(Beyer 1985, 276).
Scholars and researchers of critical thinking in the social studies point
out that critical thinking has two important dimensions—behaviors as-
sociated with critical thinking and speciﬁc critical thinking skills.
Behaviors associated with critical thinking include a frame of mind
that possesses “an alertness to the need to evaluate information, a will-
ingness to test opinions, and a desire to consider all viewpoints” (Mc-
Clure, Fraser, and West 1961, as cited in Beyer 1985, 272). Such a
questioning attitude is vital because critical thinking strategies require
one to question constantly the ideas he or she encounters (Cornbleth
1985). Stated differently, critical thinking involves not only knowing

Political Science, Economics, and World Issues
4
when and how to question something, but also possessing an inclination
to do so. According to this line of thought, one can identify a set of
behaviors that are helpful for critical thinking. A critical thinker
• Is open-minded
• Does not argue about something he or she knows little about
• Recognizes when more information is needed
• Realizes that different people interpret meanings in different ways
• Questions everything that doesn’t make sense to him or her
• Attempts to separate emotional thinking from logical thinking
• Determines and maintains a focus on the questions or conclusion
• Takes into account the total situation under question. (Paul et al. 1987)
Behaviors such as these become second nature to a critical thinker; they
become how he or she naturally thinks.
A critical thinker also routinely applies this frame of mind to certain
mental skills necessary to critical thinking. After conducting a review of
the literature, B. Beyer identiﬁed a set of ten “core operations” associated
with critical thinking skills in the social studies:
• Distinguishing between veriﬁable facts and value claims
• Determining the reliability of a source
• Determining the factual accuracy of a statement
• Distinguishing relevant from irrelevant information, claims, or reasons
• Detecting bias
• Identifying unstated assumptions
• Identifying ambiguous or equivocal claims or arguments
• Recognizing logical inconsistencies or fallacies in a line of reasoning
• Distinguishing between warranted and unwarranted claims
• Determining the strength of an argument. (1985, 272)
Beyer is quick to explain that these skills are probably not the only
operations that might be labeled as critical thinking skills, but they were
included because they represented those that were most commonly re-
ferred to in the social studies literature on this topic.
Given the varying deﬁnitions of critical thinking that are often given,
an important ﬁrst step toward improving the teaching of critical thinking
is to establish some widely accepted skills and behaviors associated with
it. This alone, however, is not enough. If one examines the research on
critical thinking, it is evident that there remains additional disagreement
on the degree to which it has been determined that critical thinking can

Political Science, Economics, and World Issues
5
be taught. Assuming that critical thinking can be taught, what does the
research say are the best methods for teaching it? It is to these questions
that we now turn.
RESEARCH INTO CRITICAL THINKING
Research describing the current practice of critical thinking in Ameri-
can schools provides results that are clear but often unfavorable. The
weight of this research indicates that the goal of having students think
critically remains elusive and, to date, unrealized (Leming 1998; Parker
1991). There is little evidence that critical thinking among students occurs
to any large extent at any grade level. Even college-bound students with
SAT scores well above the national average often fail to engage in critical
reasoning (Wright 1995b).
After studying over one thousand U.S. classrooms, J. Goodlad (1984)
found that less than 1 percent of teachers actively encouraged their stu-
dents to think critically in a manner outlined in this chapter. Similar
studies have reinforced this conclusion stating that, even though many
public schoolteachers as well as university instructors claim to support
and value critical thinking as a goal, very little class time is devoted to
its practice (Paul 1992; Su 1990). Perhaps this is because many teachers
do not have a clear conceptualization of critical thinking themselves and
often fail to practice it. One study found that “51.8% of his sample of
293 social studies teachers could not distinguish between facts and opin-
ions” (Unks 1985, as cited in Wright 1995a, 66).
Some would question whether, even when a concerted effort is made,
critical thinking can be taught successfully at all. Citing three “notewor-
thy controlled studies” devoted to higher-order thinking programs, Lem-
ing (1998) concluded that time and again researchers were not able to
identify any substantial relationships between the presence of classroom
critical thinking and logical soundness of argument and critical thinking
on the part of students. Instead, students continued to rely primarily on
their own unsubstantiated positions and were able to convince others of
the correctness of these positions not on logic or expertise, but rather by
their verbal and interpersonal skills. Concerned with these ﬁndings,
Leming went on to challenge the reader, asking
If decision making is at the heart of the social studies, if the development of an
informed citizenry is our most cherished goal, and if we have no evidence, de-
spite intelligently conceived and carefully implemented programs, to indicate
achievement of these objectives, what does that mean for the future of the social
studies? (1998, 62)

Political Science, Economics, and World Issues
6
Fortunately, other studies offer some hope and provide some evidence
that critical thinking can be successfully taught in the classroom. For
example, in her study of the research on controversial issues in the social
studies, C.L. Hahn (1991) concluded that students who had the oppor-
tunity to study controversial issues were better able to apply certain crit-
ical thinking skills (e.g., analyzing arguments) when compared to
students who did not study these issues. Similarly, after reviewing the
research literature on achieving thinking and decision-making objectives
in social studies, W.C. Parker concluded that “direct instruction on crit-
ical thinking is more likely to improve critical thinking than is instruction
on regular course content (1991, 352). Questions remain, however, on the
best approach for fostering critical thought among students.
Most agree that one of the ﬁrst steps to enhancing critical thinking
instruction is to remove some of the barriers that are currently found in
many schools, including the following six barriers:
• Teaching as knowledge transmission
• Broad, superﬁcial coverage of content
• Teachers’ low expectations of students
• Large numbers of students in a class
• Lack of teacher planning time
• A culture of teacher isolation. (Onosko 1991, as cited in Leming 1998)
Leming argues that until such barriers are removed, or at least greatly
reduced, teachers will not be able to focus on methods that are designed
to promote critical thinking.
The removal of barriers does not necessarily ensure that critical think-
ing will occur. A curriculum that actively teaches critical thinking is also
needed. On this point there are two schools of thought about how this
curriculum should be structured—through the direct teaching of critical
thinking skills or by immersing students deeply into more limited con-
tent.
Direct Teaching of Strategies to Assist in Critical
Thinking Skills
Researchers supporting this approach argue that learning to think crit-
ically is like learning any other skill—it takes repeated practice over a
series of increasingly complicated tasks. Critical thinking can be mas-
tered with the practice of speciﬁcally designed activities and exercises in
an atmosphere of questioning and acceptance. Strategies for enhancing
critical thinking skills include

Political Science, Economics, and World Issues
7
• Aiding students in learning information-processing skills
• Maintaining a classroom atmosphere conducive to questioning and reﬂection
• Improving instructional coherence and continuity
• Modeling thoughtfulness in problem solving
• Allowing sufﬁcient time for students to think and respond to questions
• Accepting original and unconventional views
• Examining open-ended social problems
• Using analogies and case studies
• Studying controversial issues
• Engaging in student debates
• Using materials containing contradictory statements
• Analyzing propaganda techniques
• Engaging in activities that require students to look for bias and judge the re-
liability, validity, and authenticity of sources. (Dhand 1994; Newmann 1988;
Stanley 1991)
The direct approach also argues that, in an age of increasing access to
vast amounts of new knowledge and of extraordinary information-
processing demands, the particular information that will be needed in
the future cannot be predicted. Therefore, an emphasis on skills rather
than on speciﬁc content is more useful and transferable (Parker 1991).
In a society facing the twenty-ﬁrst century, where change may be the only con-
stant, the ability to formulate problems, resolve issues, determine the most ef-
fective decisions, and create new solutions is a prerequisite of success—for life
as well as schooling. The time has come to seriously consider thinking as a major
goal for teaching and learning at all levels of instruction. (Presseisen 1986, 5)
This direct approach to teaching speciﬁc critical thinking skills argues
that, without deﬁning and preparing students to use critical thinking skills,
we cannot expect students to engage in critical thinking in daily life.
The Argument for Content Immersion to Develop
Critical Thinking
The content immersion approach argues that, for students to think
critically, they must be thinking critically about something. This cannot be
done without a ﬁrm content base in the topic under study. Stated dif-
ferently, the knowledge of content is vital to developing a student’s crit-
ical thinking abilities. In fact, any effort to teach some form of generic
thinking skills to students without giving adequate attention to content
will have very little impact (Cornbleth 1985; Stanley 1991; Perkins 1986).

Political Science, Economics, and World Issues
8
On this analysis, steeping oneself in the facts, concepts, history, and methods
necessary to comprehend and reﬂect well on public policy issues (or whatever
the subject matter) delivers more analytic power and brings one closer to a thor-
ough understanding of the issue than does isolated training in general thinking
skills. Most helpful for the cultivation of thoughtfulness is not skills training
alone—not pedantry on the syntax of thought—but the struggle to understand-
ing issues and problems in all their complicated dimensions. Such understanding
does not come easily, of course, but it is made all but impossible when too many
topics are covered and when concentrated study is dissipated by general skills
training. (Parker 1991, 353)
This requires teachers to teach more in depth about fewer topics and
then make efforts to show how these topics are related. There is evidence
that programs designed to help increase the critical thinking and
decision-making skills of students seem to work best when they have
students practice critical thinking skills in concert with the learning of
speciﬁc content matter (Cornbleth 1985). One of the strategies suggested
involves having teachers work to combine subject matter, skills, and
thinking strategies into single lessons and then encouraging students to
apply the content they have recently learned toward the solving of some
problem.
A Proposed Compromise
We believe that these two approaches are not incompatible and that
the direct teaching of critical thinking skills is best accomplished when
the student is immersed in learning discipline-speciﬁc content. One of the
best means of combining both of these approaches to fostering critical
thinking may be to have students apply critical thinking skills to the
study of primary source documents found on the Internet/WWW. Many
of the suggested activities connected to the web sites in Part III of this
book incorporate direct critical thinking instruction methods; other ques-
tions and activities use techniques that are best associated with the dis-
cipline under investigation. To better understand how some critical
thinking strategies are related to a particular content area, we will now
take a brief look at the content areas of political science, economics, and
contemporary world issues and view some examples of how critical
thinking might be applied in each case.
CRITICAL THINKING IN POLITICAL SCIENCE
Political science may be deﬁned as “the discipline associated with the
study of society’s attempts to maintain order by establishing governing
institutions and processes” (Maxim 1995, 15). The curriculum often fo-

Political Science, Economics, and World Issues
9
cuses on the structure and functions of government—who has power,
how this power is achieved, and what duties and responsibilities are
associated with various ofﬁces and branches in government.
Politics in a democracy is the art of diverse people coming together
representing multiple interests for the purpose of making choices in the
public domain. A citizen in a democracy, therefore, must possess not
only a working knowledge of how government works, but must also
have the ability to sort through vast amounts of information presented
from multiple perspectives in order to reach conclusions that make sense
for the individual and for society. Citizens are asked to engage in open
and critical discourse about public affairs, drawing on historical and po-
litical knowledge to reach a defensible position on issues of public con-
cern (Leming 1998). Critical thinking then becomes an important
attribute of a democratic citizen—one who must be an informed, auton-
omous thinker, while being resistant to manipulation, able to recognize
logical inconsistencies in an argument, and communicate one’s own po-
sition clearly.
How is political science currently taught in the schools? In elementary
schools, one rarely ﬁnds speciﬁc courses devoted to civics. Instead, many
of the principles of government are infused throughout the curriculum,
embedded in courses such as American history, state history, and ge-
ography or in projects done within the context of a larger interdiscipli-
nary theme. In contrast, in the secondary schools, the content of political
science is most often delivered in a discrete government or civics course,
often containing 30 or more students. The predominant means of teacher
instruction for these courses remains traditional lecture, recitation, home-
work from the textbook, and an occasional use of an audiovisual aid or
ﬁeld trip with the focus on respect for rules, laws, and authorities. Un-
fortunately, regardless of grade level, little effort is given to include time
for reﬂective or critical thinking (Harrington 1980).
The good news is that there is evidence that instruction in critical
thinking as it applies to political science can render favorable results.
Several studies indicate that students’ abilities to think critically are en-
hanced when these skills are taught in concert with the learning of spe-
ciﬁc content in government (Patrick and Hoge 1991). For example,
students given appropriately related facts and concepts are capable of
sorting through the criteria needed to justify a particular political posi-
tion (Cornbleth 1985). Other studies indicate that, when students are en-
gaged in analyzing political documents or arguments in multiple short
exercises, critical thinking skills may be improved (Atwater 1991; Bradley
1997). Teachers have also been able to increase their students’ potential
for critical thinking about public matters when they have created class-
room conditions conducive to the free and open exchange of viewpoints
(Guyton 1988; Hahn 1988). Hahn (1991) also related that too much one-

Political Science, Economics, and World Issues
10
sided teaching or an authoritative classroom environment (as well as the
overuse of controversy) led to such negative results as passivity, disin-
terest, and civic intolerance (Hahn 1988, as cited in Patrick and Hoge
1991).
Clearly, the nature of political science in a democracy society and the
positive results of critical thinking instruction in civics classes cause one
to be optimistic about the potential for applying critical thinking skills
to this content area.
CRITICAL THINKING IN ECONOMICS
Economics is commonly deﬁned as the social science that examines
how people choose to allocate scarce productive resources to meet their
relatively unlimited wants. More simply put, economics is often referred
to as “the science of decision making.” Critical thinking (regardless of
how this construct is deﬁned) is a large part of the discipline of econom-
ics, in part because the discipline focuses on how people make choices
and the consequences of those choices.
Economists describe the particular brand of critical thinking that goes
into this analysis of choice as an economic way of thinking. W.D. Rohlf
has described this economic way of thinking as “a way of reasoning
about problems” which allows us to “make sense out of the real world
and devise policy solutions to (economic) problems” (1999, vii). Econo-
mists have built this notion of economic thinking or reasoning around
four basic assumptions about human behavior as it relates to decision
making.
The ﬁrst of these assumptions is that we have to make choices be-
cause—to paraphrase the words of that famous London School of Eco-
nomics student turned rock star Mick Jagger—we can’t always get what
we want. Because productive resources are scarce, we are forced to make
choices. Second, these choices are constrained in that our options (or
alternatives, as economists call them) are always limited by time and
space or other such limited resources. Again, because resources are
scarce, we are forced to make trade-offs from among limited alternatives.
The third assumption is that people choose “at the margin.” This as-
sumption recognizes that we are rarely confronted with all or nothing
alternatives. Rather, our choices are often incremental in nature—“a little
bit more of this, a little bit less of that.” Economists call these decisions
marginal decisions. Choosing at the margin then is choosing one more
(or one less) increment of some good or service. Consider, for example,
the student who receives her schedule for the fall semester and realizes
that one of the courses she has scheduled meets at the wrong time. In-

Political Science, Economics, and World Issues
11
stead of scrapping the entire schedule, she makes a marginal change (one
course) to her schedule for the semester.
The ﬁnal assumption that undergirds an economic way of thinking is
that people choose rationally. In economic terms, rational decisions are
those that bring maximum beneﬁt for minimum cost. People try to max-
imize their happiness while trying to minimize their unhappiness (which
may correspond directly to what they have to pay for their happiness).
Take, for example, the case of two 2000 Ford Explorers being sold by
different car dealers in one’s hometown. The vehicles are identical in
every way but price. One dealer is selling the Explorer for $5,000 more
than his competitor. Economists would say that the rational choice is to
take the same vehicle at the lower price. Conversely, economists would
say that it is irrational to pay more for an identical vehicle.
These four assumptions serve as the foundation for the six most com-
monly accepted tenets of an economic way of thinking. David Dahl, a
public affairs economist with the Minneapolis Federal Reserve Bank, lists
these tenets as follows:
1. There is no such thing as a free lunch. All choices have costs (trade-offs)
associated with them.
2. We think incrementally. We weigh additional beneﬁts of a choice against its
additional costs.
3. Markets coordinate consumption and production. Competitive markets deter-
mine prices and signal buyers and sellers.
4. Relative price changes guide decision making. We weigh price changes rela-
tive to income changes.
5. Trade makes the traders better off. All trade, by deﬁnition, is mutually ben-
eﬁcial. (Dahl 1999, 5–7)
These basic economic assumptions and tenets constitute a reasoned
approach to making and analyzing decisions, all decisions. Indeed, most,
if not all of the decisions we make, on a daily basis, can be analyzed by
using these assumptions and tenets. As Steven Miller has argued, an
economic way of thinking helps students “analyze new and unique prob-
lems” and arrive at “reasoned decision or judgements” about them (1988,
4). Given all of this, then, an economic way of thinking seems very
closely related to, and draws heavily on, the deﬁnitions for critical think-
ing outlined earlier.
CRITICAL THINKING AND CONTEMPORARY WORLD
ISSUES
For the purpose of this book, world issues include those contemporary
issues that are shared by all people, regardless of nationality, gender,

Political Science, Economics, and World Issues
12
ethnicity, religion, or economic status. World issues are typically global
in nature and may include such concerns as the deforestation of the rain
forest, the worldwide AIDS epidemic, population growth, nuclear pro-
liferation, or political instability in some part of the world. Students with
a world or global perspective are often required to “understand inter-
dependence, value diversity, and identify not only with their own cul-
ture group and nation-state but with the world community as well”
(Parker and Jarolimek 1984, 2). Such a perspective hopes to “better pre-
pare students for citizenship in a global age” (Anderson 1979, 15).
In the schools, world issues often fall under the umbrella heading of
global education (Maxim 1995). Global education is deﬁned by the Na-
tional Council for the Social Studies as curriculum efforts intended to
cultivate in young people a perspective of the world which emphasizes the in-
terconnections among cultures, species, and the planet. The purpose of global
education is to develop in youth the knowledge, skills, and attitudes needed to
live effectively in a world possessing limited natural resources and charac-
terized by ethnic diversity, cultural pluralism, and increasing interdependence.
(1982, 1)
Children often seem more receptive than adults to learning about other
cultures and peoples, which makes the time spent in school on world
issues optimal for learning political, economic, and social systems from
a global and multicultural perspective. Robert Hanvey has clariﬁed this
global perspective by identifying ﬁve key dimensions associated with it:
• Perspectives Consciousness—the recognition or awareness on the part of the
individual that he or she has a view of the world that is not universally shared.
• State of the Planet Awareness—the awareness of prevailing world conditions
and developments and how to use such information to make decisions.
• Cross-Cultural Awareness—the awareness of the diversity of ideas and prac-
tices to be found in human societies around the world.
• Knowledge of Global Dynamics—some modest comprehension of key traits
and mechanisms of the world system and the interconnected parts of this sys-
tem.
• Awareness of Human Choices—some awareness of the problems of choice con-
fronting individuals and nations and recognition that these choices have short-
and long-term consequences. (Hanvey 1986, 20–21)
As these dimensions imply, critical thinking skills become imperative
for an individual studying world issues. To examine any world issue
requires one to collect information from multiple perspectives (e.g., state-
ments from opposing governments or editorials from newspapers from
around the world). For example, if a class chose to study the political

Political Science, Economics, and World Issues
13
tensions surrounding the British and Northern Ireland peace process, it
would be helpful to collect information and perspectives from sources
close to those political arenas as well as from the United States and other
interested nations. Much of this information could be gleaned from the
mass media. Students would then need to engage in the primary step of
using this mass media as a “text” to be read and critically analyzed. In
so doing, the students could apply critical thinking skills to uncover
hidden assumptions, to distinguish between relevant and irrelevant
information, to recognize biases, to separate fact from opinion, and,
ultimately, to determine the strength of the mass medium’s message.
Teachers would then engage students in a critical dialogue concerning
the message of the mass medium under consideration. One goal of the
lesson would be to engage the class in dialectical reasoning through dis-
cussion and to generate critical reﬂection by the students as they decon-
struct the medium’s message (Splaine and Splaine 1992; Duncan 1989).
CRITICAL THINKING AND THE INTERNET/WWW
Information is vital to making sound decisions. It comes as no surprise
that today many individuals are increasingly relying on the Internet/
WWW as a valuable source of readily available information. The Inter-
net/WWW has therefore become a powerful tool affecting the decision-
making processes essential to our lives as citizens in a democratic society.
Due to the position of citizenship development as a core element of social
studies education, understanding the inﬂuence of mass media, including
the Internet/WWW, on our increasingly complex lives has long been
central to the social studies teacher’s mission (e.g., Engle and Ochoa 1988;
Grifﬁn 1992; Remy 1980).
Our ability to consume information from the Internet/WWW, with a
discriminating appetite for relevance and accuracy, is an essential part
of citizenship. Viewing the Internet/WWW with a critical eye requires
one to “focus on underlying root interests, root assumptions, and root
approaches” (Hlynka 1991, 514). This approach assumes that the Inter-
net/WWW (indeed, all mass media) is “involved in a process of con-
structing or representing reality rather than simply transmitting or
reﬂecting it” (Masterman 1993, 5). Entertainment and marketing are at
the heart of mass media, including the Internet/WWW, when viewed
through a critical lens (Melamed 1989).
Applying critical thinking skills to the Internet/WWW requires a
slightly different set of skills than critically studying primary source doc-
uments. More on these critical thinking skills, as well as much more
detail on the nature of primary source documents in political science,
economics, and world issues, will be discussed in the following chapter.

Political Science, Economics, and World Issues
14
REFERENCES
Anderson, L. Schooling and Citizenship in a Global Age: An Exploration of the Mean-
ing and Signiﬁcance of Global Education. Bloomington: Social Studies Devel-
opment Center of Indiana University, 1979.
Atwater, T. “Critical Thinking in Basic U.S. Government Classes.” PS: Political
Science and Politics 24, no. 2 (1991): 209–11.
Bailin, S., R. Case, J. Coombs, and L. Daniels. “Conceptualizing Critical Think-
ing.” Journal of Curriculum Studies 31, no. 3 (1999): 285–302.
Beyer, B. “Critical Thinking: What Is It?” Social Education 49, no. 4 (1985): 270–
76.
Bradley, R.C. “Citizens and Governance: An Alternative Approach to American
Government.” PS: Political Science and Politics 30, no. 3 (1997): 553–57.
Cornbleth, C. “Critical Thinking and Cognitive Processes.” In Review of Research
in Social Studies Education: 1976–1983, edited by W. Stanley. Washington,
D.C.: National Council for the Social Studies, 1985.
Dahl, D. “Why Johnny Can’t Choose.” The Region 12, no. 4 (1999): 5–7.
Dhand, H. “Critical Thinking: Research Perspective for Social Studies Teachers.”
Canadian Social Studies 28 (1994): 149–54.
Duncan, B. “Media Literacy at the Crossroads: Some Issues, Probes, and Ques-
tions.” The History and Social Science Teacher 24 (1989): 205–10.
Engle, S., and A. Ochoa. Education for Democratic Citizenship. New York: Teachers
College Press, 1988.
Ennis, R.H. “Critical Thinking: A Streamlined Conception.” Paper presented at
the American Educational Research Associaton, Chicago, April 3–7, 1991.
Goodlad, J. A Place Called School. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1984.
Grifﬁn, A.F. Alan Grifﬁn on Reﬂective Teaching: Philosophical Approach to the Subject
Matter Preparation of Teachers of History. Washington, D.C.: National Coun-
cil for the Social Studies, 1992.
Guyton, E.M. “Critical Thinking and Political Participation: Development and
Assessment of a Causal Model.” Theory and Research in Social Education 16,
no. 1 (1988): 23–49.
Hahn, C.L. “Controversial Issues in Social Studies.” In Handbook of Research on
Social Studies Teaching and Learning, edited by J. Shaver. New York: Mac-
millan, 1991.
Hahn, C.L. “The Effects of the School: Media and Family on the Civic Values
and Behaviors of Youth.” Paper presented for the International Conference
on the Development of Civic Responsibility Among Youth, University of
Urbino, Italy, October 8–15, 1988. ERIC Document 314291.
Hanvey, R. An Attainable Global Perspective. New York: Global Perspectives in
Education, 1986.
Harrington, C. “Textbooks and Political Socialization.” Teaching Political Science
7, no. 2 (1980): 481–500.
Hlynka, D. “Glossary.” In Paradigms Regained: The Uses of Illuminative, Semiotic,
and Post-modern Criticism as Modes of Inquiry in Education Technology: A Book
of Readings, edited by J.C. Belland and D. Hlynke. Englewood Cliffs, N.J.:
Prentice-Hall, 1991.

Political Science, Economics, and World Issues
15
Leming, J. “Some Critical Thoughts about the Teaching of Critical Thinking.”
Social Studies 89, no. 2 (1998): 61–66.
Masterman, L. “Media Education: What Should Be Taught? From Fragmentation
to Coherence.” English Quarterly 25, nos. 2–3 (1993): 5–7.
Maxim, G.W. Social Studies and the Elementary School Child. Englewood Cliffs, N.J.:
Prentice-Hall, 1995.
McPeck, J. Critical Thinking and Education. Toronto: Oxford University Press, 1981.
Melamed, L. “Sleuthing Media ‘Truths’: Becoming Media Literate.” History and
Social Science Teacher 24, no. 4 (1989): 189–93.
Miller, S.L. Economic Education for Citizenship. Bloomington, Ind.: ERIC CHESS/
Foundation for Teaching Economics, 1988.
National Council for the Social Studies. “Position Statement on Global Educa-
tion.” Social Education 46, no. 1 (1982).
Newmann, F.M. “The Curriculum of Thoughtful Classes.” In Higher Order Think-
ing in High School Social Studies: An Analysis of Classrooms, Teachers, Stu-
dents, and Leadership, edited by F.M. Newmann, vol. 1, part 2. Madison:
University of Wisconsin, National Center on Effective Secondary Schools,
1988.
Onosko, J. “Barriers to the Promotion of Higher-Order Thinking.” Theory and
Research in Higher Education 19, no. 4 (1991): 341–66.
Parker, W., and J. Jarolimek. Citizenship and the Critical Role of the Social Studies.
Vol. 72. Washington, D.C.: National Council for the Social Studies, 1984.
Parker, W.C. “Achieving Thinking and Decision-making Objectives in Social
Studies.” In Handbook of Research on Social Studies Teaching and Learning,
edited by J. Shaver, 345–56. New York: Macmillan, 1991.
Patrick, J.J., and J.D. Hoge. “Teaching Government, Civics, and Law.” In Hand-
book of Research on Social Studies Teaching and Learning, edited by J. Shaver,
427–36. New York: Macmillan, 1991.
Paul, R. “Critical Thinking Skills Are Key.” Saskatchewan Bulletin 58, no. 12 (1992):
2.
Paul, R., A.J.A. Binker, K. Jensen, and H. Kreklau. Critical Thinking Handbook: 4th–
6th Grades. Rohnert Park, Calif.: Center for Critical Thinking and Moral
Critique, Sonoma State University, 1987.
Perkins, D. Knowledge as Design. Hillsdale, N.J.: Erlbaum, 1986.
Presseisen, B.Z. Thinking Skills: Research and Practice. Washington, D.C.: National
Education Association, 1986.
Remy, R.C. Handbook of Basic Citizenship Competencies. Alexandria, Va.: Associa-
tion for Supervision and Curriculum Development, 1980.
Rohlf, W.D. Introduction to Economic Reasoning. Reading, Mass.: Addison-Wesley,
1999.
Splaine, J.E., and P. Splaine. Educating the Consumer of Television: An Interactive
Approach. Paciﬁc Grove, CA: Critical Thinking Press and Software, 1992.
Stanley, W. “Teacher Competence for Social Studies.” In Handbook of Research on
Social Studies Teaching and Learning, edited by J. Shaver. New York: Mac-
millan, 1991.
Su, Z. “Exploring the Moral Socialization of Teacher Candidates.” Oxford Review
of Education 16, no. 3 (1990): 367–91.

Political Science, Economics, and World Issues
16
Wright, I. “Critical Thinking in Social Studies: Beliefs, Commitments, and Imple-
mentation.” Canadian Social Studies 29, no. 2 (1995a): 66–68.
Wright, I. “Using the Social Studies Textbook to Teach Critical Thinking.” Ca-
nadian Social Studies 30, no. 2 (1995b): 68–71.

USING PRIMARY SOURCES
II
WHAT IS A PRIMARY SOURCE?
K. Craver has stated that “just as there are multiple deﬁnitions of critical
thinking, so there are multiple answers to the question What constitutes
a primary source?” (Craver 1999, 15). While this statement may be true
in a technical sense, we have found broad consensus on both the deﬁ-
nition of primary source material and what types of resources can be
called primary sources.
We have deﬁned primary sources as “documentary records or materials
that have survived from a particular historical era; that are contemporary
or nearly contemporary with the period being studied” (VanFossen and
Shiveley 2000, 1). We are supported in this deﬁnition by the Library of
Congress: “Primary sources are actual records that have survived from
the past, such as letters, photographs, (or) articles of clothing” (Library
of Congress 2000, 1).
In contrast, secondary sources are often drawn from time periods sig-
niﬁcantly later than the era being studied and are often commentaries
about, or analyses of, the earlier era. “Secondary sources are accounts of
the past created by people writing about events sometime after they
happened” (Library of Congress 2000, 1). Thus, primary sources are re-
sources that have some contemporaneous connection to historical, eco-
nomic, or political events: they were produced during the era being
studied. Examples of primary source materials may include text sources
(e.g., letters to the editor), photographs, etchings, paintings, maps, dia-
ries, speeches, cartoons, broadsides, newspaper or other ﬁrst-hand ac-
counts of events, as well as audio and video footage.

Using Primary Sources
18
Secondary sources are interpretations of historical, economic, or polit-
ical events produced, quite literally, after the fact. Examples of secondary
source materials include textbooks, books written by historians about an
earlier era, documentary ﬁlms (which may have primary source material
in them), and interpretive art.
Several examples may help illustrate the difference between primary
and secondary sources. One of the great political speeches from U.S.
history is Abraham Lincoln’s Gettysburg Address. A primary source in
an examination of the speech would be the speech itself, as Lincoln wrote
it. We can ﬁnd an image of the original speech at the Library of Congress’
American
Memory
(http://lcweb.loc.gov/exhibits/gadd/ga.html).
A
secondary source would be the description of the speech and of Lincoln’s
composition of it in Russell Freedman’s award-winning photobiography
of Lincoln (Freedman 1987). Freedman refers to the speech and the text
of the speech in his book, but he is writing about the speech more than
one hundred years after it was delivered. Thus, Freedman’s book is not
directly connected to Lincoln’s time.
A Note about Economic Data
The historian, and even the political scientist, can easily deﬁne and
explain primary sources, provide illustrative examples of these sources,
and describe clearly how these sources might be used. However, in the
ﬁeld of economics, these historical (and to some degree, political) notions
of primary and secondary sources are less prevalent. Most economists
do not deal with primary sources in the same sense that a historian
might, and thus the economist’s concept of a primary source differs
slightly from a historian’s. Indeed, economists collect information about
a wide range of economic activities in our economy as the activities are
occurring, and much (if not most) of the economic data economists col-
lect might accurately be called primary source material. For example,
economists at the Bureau of Economic Analysis in Washington, D.C.,
have been collecting data on national income and gross national (now
domestic) product for more than sixty years. Each year of these types of
data might be thought of as a primary source in that these data are linked
to a particular time period (the year or quarter they were collected) and
are a product of that time period. Thus, raw data that economists collect
(e.g., unemployment rates, inﬂation rates, trade deﬁcits, and size of the
money supply) constitute most of the primary sources for the ﬁeld of
economics. Secondary sources in economics would include any analysis
of these raw data made in an attempt to draw conclusions about past
economic events, for example, journal articles, economic textbooks, and
policy analysis by private and government economists. For purposes of

Using Primary Sources
19
this book, then, when we discuss primary source materials in economics,
we will often be dealing with these kinds of economic data.
TYPES OF PRIMARY SOURCE MATERIALS
K. Craver concluded that “the range of primary sources (in history) is
so broad that classifying them is the only way to impose order on such
a chaotic assortment of historical materials” (1999, 18). Craver further
classiﬁed primary sources by their modes of transmission: written, oral,
visual, or electronic transmission. This typology appears useful for pri-
mary sources in social studies as well. Indeed, each mode of transmission
brings with it particular issues related to the veracity of the primary
source material as well as issues related to the analysis (by students) of
the materials.
Teachers should help students to see that not all primary sources are
equally valid when it comes to documenting an event; for example, pop-
ular music. Music from an era before sound recordings were made was
often passed from generation to generation by word of mouth. A partic-
ular song might therefore be shaped as much by subsequent generations
as by the one who originated the song, and thus, with each passing
generation, may sound less and less like the original song. The well-
known spiritual “Amazing Grace” is an example.
According to Craver (1999), primary sources transmitted primarily by
writing include such documents as books, journals, letters, eyewitness
accounts, laws, and newspaper articles. Craver divided these types of
written transmissions into public and private writings and stressed that
public writings may reﬂect societal, organizational, or governmental ob-
jectives or values, whereas private writings may reveal more personal
interpretations of events. Therefore, ascertaining whether a source is a
public or private writing is an important step in interpreting that source.
Oral transmissions may consist of speeches, ballads, myths and leg-
ends, and anecdotes. Craver cautions that oral transmissions often con-
tain inaccuracies and embellishments, and that while “facts may be
passed on orally for long periods of time, there is great potential for
distortion of truth as details are dropped from an orally transmitted story
to appeal to listeners” (Craver 1999, 22). The reader must be aware of
this possibility with these orally transmitted sources and must take these
sources with the necessary caveats.
Visual transmissions include videotapes, ﬁlms, photographs, wood-
cuts, cartoons, and other forms of artwork. Often these media were pro-
duced to evoke an emotional response from the viewer, and thus visual
transmissions must be interpreted as cautiously as those sources that are
primarily oral in nature. However, some of these types of primary

Using Primary Sources
20
sources were also developed for educational purposes. Craver cites the
example of stained glass windows from medieval churches. Because few
people in this historical era were literate, these windows were used “for
both decorative and educational purposes . . . the Biblical stories in the
windows were used to provide religious and ethical instruction” (Craver
1999, 23).
Finally, Craver described electronically transmitted primary sources as
electronic mail, facsimile transmissions, and other machine-readable data
ﬁles. Because these sources are similar to written transmissions in nature,
Craver applied the same public/private differentiation to this type of
primary source material. Craver cited the use of Microsoft executives’ e-
mail as evidence in the recent U.S. Department of Justice monopoly trial
as an example of this type of primary source.
INFORMATION AND THE INTERNET: SEPARATING THE
WHEAT FROM THE CHAFF
Craver’s typology of primary source transmission types is useful be-
cause each mode of transmission brings with it particular issues related
to the veracity of the primary source material as well as issues related
to the analysis of those materials. However, because of the nature of the
Internet/WWW, and the ways in which primary sources can be accessed
via the Internet/WWW, a strong warning of caveat lector (reader beware)
is particularly important concerning all information sources found on the
Internet/WWW.1
Accessing information on the Internet/WWW is always a double-
edged sword. The Internet/WWW can provide nearly instantaneous ac-
cess to almost unlimited quantities of information—which is also the
medium’s primary drawback. Legitimate sources of information reside
alongside the questionable. Elizabeth Kirk notes that “there are no ﬁlters
between you and the Internet” and warns readers to be prepared to
uncover “information of the widest range of quality, written by authors
of the widest range of authority, available on an ‘even playing ﬁeld’ ”
(Kirk 1997, 1). Literally, anyone with the necessary hardware, and access
to an Internet service provider, can develop and post a web page that
contains misleading, or downright spurious, information.
Exacerbating this problem is the fact that, unlike traditional informa-
tion sources (e.g., the library and archives), information sources on the
Internet/WWW do not go through a rigorous validation process (either
formal or informal). Lisa Hinchliffe has noted that “over time, librarians
and other information professionals have developed a set of criteria
which can be used to evaluate whether to include a particular item in
the collection of a given library or institution” (Hinchliffe 1997, 1). Li-

Using Primary Sources
21
brarians, archivists, and other information professionals act as informed
ﬁlters of information, and while these professionals are not perfect and
can make errors of judgment, their reviews of information sources are
relatively informed. This is not the case on the Internet/WWW.
In an effort to help classroom teachers and school media personnel
guide students (and themselves) through the labyrinth of information
sources on the Internet/WWW, we conducted an ERIC and Internet
search for articles that outlined criteria for evaluating information found
on the Internet/WWW. Using an informal content analysis, we discov-
ered that six key criteria were emphasized. These criteria are described
in the section following and Table 1 provides a list of guiding questions
that might be used by someone questioning the veracity and validity of
a primary source accessed over the Internet/WWW.
Authorship/Source
When validating an information site or a primary source found on the
Internet/WWW, one must begin with the author and his or her credi-
bility and credentials. According to Kirk, “Authorship is perhaps the
major criterion used in evaluating information” (1997, 1). Obviously, in
the case of true primary sources, questioning the credentials of the author
of a document is an essential part of understanding and interpreting the
primary source. In the case of materials accessed over the Internet/
WWW, however, this question takes a slightly different form, especially
if the primary source in question is being used to advance a political
agenda.
For example, John Ball is the web master of an Internet/WWW site
called Air Photo Evidence http://www.air-photo.com/. This site
claims to have “photographic evidence” that contradicts eyewitness ac-
counts of survivors of the Holocaust, and thus (claims Ball) calls into
question whether the Holocaust ever occurred. Because the site offers
access to photographs of various concentration camps taken by Allied
aircrews at the end of World War II, a less-than-cautious reader might
take these as valid primary sources.
However, a few questions about Ball as the author of this web site
calls the validity of these primary sources into question. For example,
what is Ball’s authority to write on this subject? We are told that his
background and training are in the geological sciences, not in aerial pho-
tography or its interpretation. What is Ball’s expertise? We are told that
in 1992 he acquired air photos from the National Archives, in Washing-
ton, D.C., USA, examined them with stereo magnifying equipment, and
then wrote and published ‘Air Photo Evidence’ with hundreds of ﬁrst
time prints of WW2 air photos taken by Allied and German planes over

22
Table 1
Evaluating Information on the Internet: Some “Filters” to Consider

23
Source: Shiveley and VanFossen 1999.

Using Primary Sources
24
Auschwitz, Birkenau, Treblinka, Bergen Belsen, Sobibor, and Belzec
camps (Ball 2000, 3). Again, no description of Ball’s training, experience,
or credentials is given. Ball fails to include any detailed background in-
formation (including links to other sites that support his conclusions)
that led him to his conclusions nor does he describe the scholarly review
process to which his thesis was subjected. All in all, Ball’s authority is
questionable here, and the “evidence” he provides should be interpreted
cautiously. Without the use of this authorship ﬁlter, however, Ball’s pho-
tographic evidence might be considered completely valid.
Objectivity/Bias
The “popularity of the Internet makes it a perfect venue for commer-
cial and sociopolitical publishing” in areas that are “open to highly ‘in-
terpretive’ uses of data” (Kirk 1997, 2). Thus, we should know not only
who is providing the information (the author) at a particular site but also
what biases might color the way in which some primary sources are
displayed and used. Furthermore, evidence of information bias “includes
such things as obviously misleading statements or outrageous unsup-
ported claims made by the author(s), sponsorship by individuals and
groups with vested interest in the topic, or one-sided arguments about
controversial issues” (Wilkinson, Bennett, and Oliver 1997, 6). Again,
Ball’s Air Photo Evidence site could serve as an example of such infor-
mation bias.
Validity of Content
While an information site that provides access to primary source ma-
terials may have no overt biases, such an information site might contain
inaccurate data or evidence. Gene Wilkinson, Lisa Bennett, and Kevin
Oliver call this review criteria related to information accuracy “validity
of content” and state that such validity “deals with the conﬁdence one
can place in the information in a document” (1997, 6). In other words,
how certain is the reader that the information he or she is reading—or
the document or photograph he or she is accessing—is, in fact, accurate
or true? Conﬁdence in the validity of content is particularly important
when “reading the work of an unfamiliar author presented by an unfamil-
iar organization, or presented in a non-traditional way” (Kirk 1997, 3).
Bibliographic/Reference Links
Primary or other information sources found on the Internet/WWW
should be situated within a larger body of scholarship and ideas. The

Using Primary Sources
25
use of a bibliography or set of reference links “reveals what the author
knows about his or her discipline and its practices,” and the presence of
such a list allows the reader “to evaluate the author’s scholarship or
knowledge of trends in the area under discussion” (Kirk 1997, 3). In fact,
because of the format of the Internet/WWW—in particular, the use of
hypertext links—it becomes even easier for authors to send readers to
additional information sites. These reference links might take a reader to
sites that provide further information on a topic or might offer a reader
a link to an alternative point of view.
Currency
How timely is the information being presented? For certain types of
primary sources, currency is not an issue at all. For others, currency is
crucial. In printed documents, the date of publication and the copyright
date are the key indicators of currency. For Internet documents, however,
currency is not so easily determined. Often currency can be determined
by using two similar indicators: the date when information at the site
was ﬁrst gathered and published, and the date the site was last updated.
Quality of Writing
For many primary source materials, the question of writing quality, as
with the question of currency, is unimportant. What can be important is
the quality of the writing found at the Internet/WWW site that provides
a reader access to the primary source materials. Indeed, as is true of all
information sources, if the reader cannot interpret the message of the
author, has difﬁculty accessing data or evidence, or cannot employ the
presented information in a useful way, the information source—no mat-
ter what its origin—has questionable utility.
Ball’s Air Photo Evidence page can be used as an example here also.
The format of the page is not a version of any recognizable manual of
style (e.g., APA, MLA, Chicago), but rather is an example of “web style”
publishing. Web style writing is characterized by the frequent use of
garish and distractingly bright backgrounds, an overreliance on graphic
images that often seem unrelated to the topic, and very little actual text.
The Air Photo Evidence page is not “written” at all in the sense that it
is presented as a series of points, and no central thesis is provided in
this paper, nor is one supported. The “text” appears hurriedly and
poorly written, and the page relies almost wholly on images to convey
its central thesis. The quality of writing is poor.
Because the Internet/WWW provides nearly unlimited access to a vast
array of information and primary source sites and web pages, it is more

Using Primary Sources
26
important than ever that consumers of this information be critical con-
sumers. We do not claim that these simple ﬁlters will enable the user to
ascertain the veracity of all information or primary source sites. The crit-
ical reader—and the critical student—will, however, ﬁnd these ﬁlters an
important tool in developing a critical eye and in developing a sense of
caveat lector.
INSTRUCTION STRATEGIES FOR PRIMARY SOURCES
Clearly, primary sources can be used in a wide variety of ways in the
classroom. Indeed, the use of documents and artifacts in the social stud-
ies classroom helps create an environment where investigation, analysis,
and critical thinking can ﬂourish. Having said this, however, we also
recognize that effective teaching using primary sources involves more
than just simply placing primary source documents in front of students
and leaving them to their own devices. In fact, the effective use of pri-
mary source materials takes just as much planning and preparation as
the use of any other teaching resource. The following section brieﬂy out-
lines several suggested instructional strategies for using primary sources
such as those described in Part III of this book.
Document Analysis
According to the National Archives and Records Administration
(NARA) interpreting and analyzing primary source documents and ar-
tifacts help students gain skills in “recognizing how a point of view and
a bias affect evidence, what contradictions exist within a given source
and to what extent sources are reliable” (1989, viii). In an effort to help
students engage in just this kind of systematic primary source analy-
sis, the NARA has developed a series of document analysis worksheets
that can be printed from the NARA web site http://www.nara.gov/
education/teaching/analysis/analysis.html. These sheets provide a
systematic framework for students to employ when beginning their anal-
ysis.
For example, students can use the cartoon analysis worksheet (see Fig-
ure 1) to examine, critically and systematically, a Thomas Nast cartoon
from the Tammany Hall era (c. 1865–1880). This worksheet provides a
structure for students’ analysis and, as they repeat this type of cartoon
analysis, students become more and more comfortable with the process
of critically analyzing a wide range of primary sources such as these.
The NARA has developed a number of analysis worksheets for primary
sources such as photographs, maps, posters, sound recordings, motion
pictures, and other artifacts.

Figure 1
National Archives Cartoon Analysis Worksheet
Source: URL: http://www.nara.gov/education/teaching/analysis/cartoon.html
webmaster@nara.gov
Last updated: May 29, 1998

Using Primary Sources
28
Think-Pair-Share
Often it is advantageous to divide primary source materials among
the students in your classroom. One strategy for doing so is the think-
pair-share (TPS) model. In this simple cooperative grouping model, stu-
dents analyze, by themselves, a primary source (often with a document
analysis worksheet such as those described above or key questions) and
then develop an initial response to the document or artifact. Once stu-
dents have done this, they are paired together with another student who
has examined the same primary source. These inquiry pairs then discuss
and debate their initial individual responses to the source and come to
a consensus. After each pair shares its consensus with the whole group,
similarities and differences among the pairs are noted, and a class con-
sensus is reached. A variation on this theme would be to have half the
class (individually and then in pairs) examine one document or artifact,
while the other half examines a different, but related, primary source.
R. Lesh (1999) provides an example of this last technique in a lesson
he designed around documents describing the Baltimore and Ohio
(B&O) rail strike of 1877. Half the student pairs were given a letter from
John Garret, the president of the B&O, announcing the decision to cut
the salaries of all employees because of poor company revenues. The
other student pairs received a copy of the B&O balance sheet, which
showed strong company revenue. Student pairs presented their ﬁndings
and tried to determine the relationship between these two documents
and what each document conveyed about the strike and the strikers.
Jigsaw (Division of Labor) Cooperative Grouping
A second strategy involving cooperative learning is the jigsaw strat-
egy. In this approach, small groups of students systematically examine
a range of primary sources related to a particular theme or historical era.
Students are ﬁrst placed in an “expert group” where they examine and
analyze a particular document or artifact. Students then assemble in
“home groups” which consist of one member from each of the expert
groups. Each member shares his or her expertise (i.e., what they learned
from their document or artifact) with the other members of the home
group. Guiding questions help home groups develop deeper under-
standing of the materials analyzed by each group.
For example, if students were studying about the development of the
Tammany Hall political machine and the Boss Tweed ring in New York
City in the 1860s and 1870s, they might examine a wide range of primary
sources. Expert groups might each examine one of the following: Thomas
Nast political cartoons, political pamphlets from Samuel Tilden’s 1876

Using Primary Sources
29
presidential bid, an excerpt from William T. Riordon’s Plunkitt of Tam-
many Hall, and newspaper editorials of the time from New York City
papers and papers outside New York. Once the expert groups had com-
pleted their analysis, a member of each group would form a home group
and share what they had learned from each primary source. Here an
overarching question (e.g., who would have supported the Tammany
Hall machine and why?) can serve to guide all discussion and analysis
of the primary source materials. This approach has the added advantage
of allowing a large number of primary sources to be examined efﬁciently
and effectively.
Document-Based Questions
Document-based questions (DBQs) are often used in advanced place-
ment examinations to evaluate students’ ability to understand and ana-
lyze primary source documents. One strategy for employing DBQs in
social studies classrooms is to have students generate their own DBQs
based on a set of primary source documents. One such activity was car-
ried out in an advanced placement history class in New Jersey (Chimes
et al. 1998). Students were asked to develop a DBQ around the growing
involvement of the United States in world affairs during the period from
1865 to 1914. The following guidelines were given for developing well-
constructed DBQs:
1. Use from seven to ten documents
2. Keep documents brief by editing long sources
3. Label documents as Document A, Document B, and so on
4. Make sure that each document has a source/author
5. Make sure that each document includes a bibliographic citation
6. Make sure that each DBQ asks students to use the Internet/WWW to ﬁnd at
least one source
7. Allow students to spend time in the library. (Chimes et al. 1998, 55).
It was recommended that each member of the class answer the DBQs of
another group and that grades for these written essays be assigned
jointly by the classroom teacher and the student team who created the
DBQ.
Primary Source Packets
Another effective strategy for using primary source materials is to de-
velop a packet of primary source documents or artifacts that revolve

Using Primary Sources
30
around a single theme, topic, or historical era. In other words, the teacher
would assemble a wide range of primary sources concerning, for ex-
ample, the Federalist Papers. Students would then compare and contrast
documents in this packet to understand more fully the historical and
political context and repercussions of the Federalist Papers (the jigsaw
strategy also works well with these primary source packets).
Several commercial ﬁrms specialize in reproducing packets of primary
documents. Perhaps the best known of these are the Jackdaws, produced
by Jackdaw Publications. The term “jackdaw” comes from the British
relative of the crow that picks up brightly colored objects and carries
them off to its nest. In the process, the bird collects a wide variety of
objects (Dowd 1990). Thus, these commercial Jackdaws are collections of
a wide variety of reproductions of historical primary source documents
used for teaching about a time period or a historical event.
A typical Jackdaw packet might include reproductions of maps, pho-
tographs, political speeches, broadsides, and political cartoons—all from
the time period or theme under study. These primary source packets are
accompanied by teacher-friendly study guides that provide suggestions
for introducing and teaching with the document reproductions. More
information on these helpful packets may be found at the Jackdaws
Publications web site (http://www.jackdaw.com).
Because of the vast quantities of primary course materials available
over the Internet/WWW, classroom teachers themselves can begin to
develop on-demand, personalized classroom primary source packets. In-
deed, Part III of this book is dedicated to outlining Internet/WWW sites
that can provide just such materials. Many social studies teachers are
recognizing the Internet/WWW’s potential for bringing multiple sources
and perspectives into the classroom while simultaneously helping stu-
dents become more technologically literate and sophisticated. Only a few
years ago, this option remained unavailable for many social studies
teachers due to limited computer availability, classroom wiring, and
training. This is no longer the case. Most teachers now have relatively
easy access to the Internet/WWW in their classrooms (Becker 1999;
VanFossen 1999) and, once connected, have an enormous amount of free
public domain primary source links at their ﬁngertips. We have devel-
oped a web site that provides some examples of on-line primary source
packets that can be produced using the Internet/WWW and some help-
ful hints for developing these resources http://www.soe.purdue.edu/
vanfoss/primary/primary_packets.html.
Web Quests
Web quests are another Internet/WWW-based strategy for using pri-
mary sources in the social studies classroom. Bernie Dodge (2000) has

Using Primary Sources
31
deﬁned web quests as inquiry-oriented activities in which some or all of
the information that learners interact with comes from resources on the
Internet/WWW. Because Dodge questioned the beneﬁt of having stu-
dents (or teachers) engage in activities that require exhaustive surﬁng on
the Internet, web quests were designed to be entirely self-contained in-
structional modules: the assignments and the resources needed to com-
plete the task are all to be located at the WWW site accessed by students.
Dodge outlined six key elements that must be included in any web quest:
1. An introduction that sets the stage and provides some background information.
2. A task that is doable and interesting.
3. A set of information sources needed to complete the task. Many (though not nec-
essarily all) of the resources are embedded in the WebQuest document itself
as anchors pointing to information on the World Wide Web. Information
sources might include web documents, experts available via e-mail or real-
time conferencing, searchable databases on the net, and books and other doc-
uments physically available in the learner’s setting. Because pointers to
resources are included, the learner is not left to wander through webspace
completely adrift.
4. A description of the process the learners should go through in accomplishing the
task. The process should be broken out into clearly described steps.
5. Some guidance on how to organize the information acquired. This can take the
form of guiding questions, or directions to complete organizational frame-
works such as timelines, concept maps, or cause-and-effect diagrams as de-
scribed by Marzano (1988, 1992) and Clarke (1990).
6. A conclusion that brings closure to the quest, reminds the learners about what
they’ve learned, and perhaps encourages them to extend the experience into
other domains. (Dodge 2000, 2)
An example of an economics web quest can be found at the National
Council on Economic Education’s Economics Minute site (http://
www.econedlink.org/minute/archive/minute_991113.html). “Economic
Forecasting: An Internet WebQuest” (VanFossen, 1999) asks students to
use up-to-date key economic statistics to make predictions about the state
of the future economy. Students—in small groups—begin by reading a
ﬁctional letter from a businesswoman in Australia who is interested in
moving her guava jelly business to the United States and has asked the
student group to prepare a report on the expected economic health of
the U.S. economy for the next year. Students analyze primary source data
such as real gross domestic product statistics, unemployment rates, and
the current rate of inﬂation in order to prepare their report.
From this example, it is easy to see that the real beneﬁt of web quests
lies in their ability to provide a sound instructional framework for stu-
dent analysis of primary sources found on the Internet/WWW. By fo-

Using Primary Sources
32
cusing on the process of analysis and critical thought, and not on the
process of searching out resources (surﬁng), the web quest model brings
out the real power of this medium.
Other Instructional Strategies
Craver (1999) outlined several instructional strategies for using pri-
mary sources for teaching history which can be used in other social stud-
ies areas as well. For example, Craver described a “database approach”
in which students would draw on data sources (especially statistical
data) available on the Internet/WWW that would allow students to “for-
mulate (and test) their own thesis statements” (1999, 26). Such an ap-
proach seems well-suited to using primary sources in the ﬁeld of
economics especially since these types of primary sources are frequently
statistical data.
Craver also describes a “counter-factual approach” that “requires stu-
dents to ask themselves, ‘what if?’ with primary sources” and then re-
search the possible implications of such a question (1999, 27). This
technique is often used by economic historians. For example, some eco-
nomic historians have made a counterfactual analysis of the development
of the U.S. transcontinental railroad: What if it had never been built? By
using data from the time period and other primary sources, economic
historians have attempted to explain the impact of the railroad on life in
America at that time and what would be different if the railroads had
not replaced the canal system at that time.
Finally, Craver describes a simulation approach that employs “pri-
mary sources to re-create past historical events such as military encoun-
ters” (27). This approach, however, is probably better described as role
playing than as social simulation. Social simulations model complex so-
cial phenomena in the classroom and thus can be open-ended with out-
comes that cannot be predicted. Role plays, on the other hand, have
clearly deﬁned (often historically based) roles and characters and might
be thought of as informal theater. Certainly using primary sources to
develop these characters and roles is beneﬁcial. For example, a role play
in a world history class that involved students playing representatives
from Pakistan and India trying to negotiate a peaceful settlement to the
Kashmir question would have to be based on historical documents and
other primary sources. To develop such a role play, a teacher might use
information from the Pakistani government’s ofﬁcial web site on the his-
tory of the crisis http://www.pak.gov.pk/public/kashmir/kashmir.
htm, the Human Rights Watch report from 1994 http://www.hrw.
org/campaigns/kashmir/1994/, and other key documents available
on the Internet/WWW to enable students to develop a sense of the na-
ture of the crisis from both perspectives.

Using Primary Sources
33
PLANNING TO IMPLEMENT PRIMARY SOURCES IN
THE SOCIAL STUDIES CLASSROOM
Social studies teachers have never questioned the value of using pri-
mary sources in their classroom. Yet, squeezed by a crowded curriculum,
limited ﬁnancial resources, and multiple demands on their time, these
same teachers often ﬁnd it difﬁcult to create or buy topic-speciﬁc primary
source packets. As a result, too few social studies teachers incorporate
this strategy into their curriculum.
The advantages of using primary sources in the classroom are never-
theless numerous and are consistent with what we know about how
students learn in general and should learn about social studies in par-
ticular. Therefore, planning to use primary sources in social studies class-
rooms should take a greater priority for teachers than it does. Luckily,
the Internet/WWW provides access to primary sources in ways that
classroom teachers could have only dreamed of even a few years ago.
The Internet/WWW holds tremendous potential for bringing multiple
sources and perspectives into the social studies classroom while simul-
taneously helping students become more technologically literate and so-
phisticated.
Craver offers several concrete suggestions for taking advantage of this
“electronic primary source banquet” (1999, 28). Her ﬁrst suggestion is
one that we echo heartily: Teachers and media specialists need to become
more sophisticated surfers and searchers on the Internet/WWW. Anyone
who has ever taken a trip on the “information superhighway” has found
it difﬁcult to ﬁnd exactly what he or she wants without wading through
site after site of what is not wanted. Search engines (e.g., Yahoo! or Dog-
pile) can help sort through this seemingly unending stream of informa-
tion, but they operate as little more than key word searches. We employ
several simple techniques in order to be more efﬁcient when using search
engines.
For example, it is very inefﬁcient simply to type in a set of key words
at the Yahoo! main search page (http://www.yahoo.com). When we used
this strategy to search for audio ﬁles of famous Franklin Delano Roose-
velt speeches, we typed “FDR audio speeches” and found one Yahoo!
category match and 1,465 web pages (few of which had anything to do
with FDR). A better approach was to use Yahoo!’s “advanced search”
page (http://www.yahoo.com/r/so) and select “exact phrase match” or
“matches on all words” and enter the search terms. By using this strat-
egy, our search for “FDR audio speeches” netted two web pages, both
with several audio ﬁles.
In addition to being able to ﬁnd primary sources, Craver suggested
that social studies teachers must work to make the use of primary
sources second nature in their teaching. Further, teachers must work to

Using Primary Sources
34
make using primary sources second nature for students as well. Finally,
Craver stressed that we, as teachers, librarians, and media specialists,
must be creative in employing primary sources in the classroom or media
center. She stresses that teachers need to keep six key points in mind
when developing activities that employ primary sources: (1) the activities
must present a puzzle, or (2) the activities must challenge stereotypes or
conventional wisdom, or (3) present a contradiction, or (4) offer insight
or an aha! experience, or (5) activities must promote human interest sto-
ries or (6) present explanations that other explanations can be compared
with (Craver 1999, 28–29). If teachers, librarians, and media specialists
are painstaking about this phase of activity development, students not
only will beneﬁt from the use of primary sources, but also look forward
to participating in the lessons that employ them. However, as with all
worthwhile learning activities, the use of primary sources in the social
studies classroom does not occur without both planning and diligence.
We hope that these introductory chapters, and the Internet/WWW sites
and activities that follow, will provide a beginning step for teachers who
wish to employ primary sources—found on the Internet/WWW—in
their classrooms.
NOTE
1. This section summarizes J.M. Shiveley and P.J. VanFossen (1999). Readers
who wish to study this topic in greater depth are encouraged to read this article.
REFERENCES
Ball, J. “Air-photo Evidence: Maps Drawn from World War 2 Photos.” Accessed
at http://www.air-photo.com/ on June 14, 2000.
Becker, Henry J. “Internet Use by Teachers: Conditions of Professional Use and
Student-directed Use.” Irvine, Calif.: Center for Research on Information
Technology and Organizations, 1999. Accessed at http://www.crito.
uci.edu/TLC/ﬁndings/Internet-Use/startpage.htmon September 7, 1999.
Chimes, M., J. Ripton, F. Delfer, A. Gedrich, T. McCall, S. Ripton, and M. Manner.
“Document-based Questions: An Example for the War of 1898.” OAH
Magazine of History (Spring 1998): 55–62.
Craver, K. Using Internet Primary Sources to Teach Critical Thinking Skills in History.
Westport, CT: Greenwood Press, 1999.
Dodge, B. “The Webquest Page. San Diego State University.” Accessed at
http://edweb.sdsu.edu/webquest/webquest.html on June 14, 2000.
Dowd, F.S. “What’s a Jackdaw Doing in Our Classroom?” Childhood Education
(Summer 1990): 228–231.
Freedman, R. Lincoln: A Photobiography. Boston: Houghton Mifﬂin, 1987.
Hinchliffe, Lisa. “Evaluation of Information.” University of Illinois at Urbana-
Champaign. 2 pages. Retrieved from the WWW:http://alexia.lis.uiuc.
edu/~janicke.Eval.html on November 24, 1997.

Using Primary Sources
35
Kirk, Elizabeth. “Evaluating Information Found on the Internet.” Johns Hopkins
University. 2 pages. Retrieved from the WWW:http://milton.mse.jhu.
edu:8001/research/education/retrieval.html on November 24, 1997.
Lesh, R. “Using Primary Sources to Teach the Rail Strike of 1877.” OAH Magazine
of History (Summer 1999): 38–44.
Library of Congress. “Lesson One. The Historian’s Sources.” Accessed at http://
memory.loc.gov/ammem/ndlpedu/lessons/psources/source.html
on
May 18, 2000.
National Archives and Records Administration. Teaching with Documents: Using
Primary Sources from the National Archives. Washington, D.C.: Author and
the National Council for the Social Studies, 1989.
Shiveley, J.M., and P.J. VanFossen. “Critical Thinking and the Internet: Oppor-
tunities for the Social Studies Classroom.” Social Studies 89, no. 2 (1999).
VanFossen, P.J. “Economic Forecasting: An Internet Webquest. National Council
on Economic Education’s EconomicMinute.” Retrieved from the WWW:
http://www.econedlink.org/lessons/index.cfm?lessonEM49 on De-
cember 10, 1999.
VanFossen, P.J. “Internet/WWW Use by Secondary Social Studies Teachers in
Indiana.” Paper presented at the College and University Faculty Assembly
of the National Council for the Social Studies, November 19, 1999, Or-
lando, Florida.
VanFossen, P.J., and J.M. Shiveley, “Using the Internet/WWW to Create Primary
Source Teaching Packets.” Social Studies 91, no. 6 (2000): 244–52.
Wilkinson, Gene, Lisa Bennett, and Kevin Oliver. “Consolidated Listing of Eval-
uation Criteria and Quality Indicators.” University of Georgia. Retrieved
from the WWW:http://itech1.coe.uga.edu/Faculty/gwilkinson/criteria.
html on November 24, 1997.


PRIMARY SOURCE SITES
III


Political Science
EARLY AMERICA
1. HOW TO READ A 200-YEAR-OLD DOCUMENT
URL: http://earlyamerica.com/earlyamerica/howto.html
This site, a good web site to begin this section, provides a fascinating
account of the history of printing in our country. Tips are provided on
reading a 200-year-old document and how these documents compare to
newer documents. This page also explains the differences of writing that
is 200 years old and shows the reader how to decipher these documents.
Examples of older documents are given so that students can apply the
tips to real documents. This site also contains answers to “frequently
asked questions” pertaining to old primary source documents (e.g., How
can documents printed 200 years ago still be in good condition? How
did printers set the type in those days? What is meant by “browning”
or “toning” in a document?). Such information is not only interesting to
those examining primary source documents but also helpful in under-
standing these documents.
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS AND ACTIVITIES
1. Go
to
(1a)
http://earlyamerica.com/earlyamerica/bookmarks/
franklin/index.html. Select the original version of the letter by Ben-
jamin Franklin to John Alleyne as it appeared in the October 30, 1789,
issue of the Pennsylvania Packet. Rewrite the ﬁrst four sentences using
the same words in a style that would be commonly accepted today.

Primary Source Sites
40
To check your transcription, select the text version of the same letter
to compare.
2. Rewrite the same letter (Franklin’s to Alleyne) as you think Dear Abby
might write it today.
3. Go back to the original sites on how to read a 200-year-old document.
Scroll down to the question, “How do original documents differ from
Early American History 101?” In that section, an old city editor is
quoted as saying, “Newspapers are history written in a hurry.” What
do you think he meant by that statement and to what extent do you
believe that it may still be true, if at all?
4. Farther down on this site there is a response to the question, “What
is the historical relevance of maps from the Revolutionary War?” In
this section, there is a quote claiming that early maps “were the ear-
liest and, sometimes the only, pictorial portrayals of the engagements
of battle. In another context they might be likened to CNN’s on-the-
spot coverage of the military action during the Gulf War, the ﬁghting
in Bosnia and Somalia.” What do you think this means?
5. After reviewing some of the information found on this page, answer
the following questions. Why were so few copies of newspapers
printed then as compared to now? What are some of the ways in
which an old newspaper might compare, for example, to USA Today?
6. Go to (1b) http://earlyamerica.com/earlyamerica/past/past.html.
This site shows a copy of the January 2, 1750, issue of the Pennsylvania
Gazette published by Benjamin Franklin. Select one of the articles or
advertisements and rewrite it using language more typical of today.
RELATED INTERNET SITE
Newspapers around the World
(1c) http://www.middlebury.edu/~gferguso/news.html
This site accesses many of the world’s major newspapers.
2. MAYFLOWER COMPACT
URL: http://members.aol.com/calebj/mayﬂower.html
The voyage of the Mayﬂower from Plymouth, England to the New World
in 1620 was historic in the shaping of our country. After being blown
off course by a storm and landing near Cape Cod in present-day Mas-
sachusetts, the Pilgrims decided to remain in the area rather than reset-
ting sail for the Virginia Colony. Before disembarking however, the
leaders drafted an agreement of laws to help govern the new colony.

Political Science
41
This document, the Mayﬂower Compact, recognized as the beginning of
self-government by the Pilgrims, helped form our country into a de-
mocracy. This extensive site contains aspects of the ship and its crew.
Students can explore the physical features of the boat as well as the
people that would be called Pilgrims. The primary source documents
describing the assets in the ship help shed light on these early explorers.
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS AND ACTIVITIES
1. The Mayﬂower Compact is a relatively short document. Use two ad-
jectives to describe each of the following: (a) the document’s content,
(b) its language, and (c) its style. Compare and discuss these adjectives
with other class members.
2. Imagine that you have just landed your spaceship on a distant planet.
Before you disembark from the ship, you want to make sure all mem-
bers of the crew have a common understanding of some rules and
guidelines for governance. Write a modern-day Mayﬂower Compact
in language that would be better understood by you and your crew.
3. Assign one or two signers of the Mayﬂower Compact to each student.
Have the students read the short biographies of these signers and
present a short summary to the rest of the class. What similarities can
you ﬁnd among the signers? Are there signiﬁcant differences among
the signers? Compare the signers to the rest of the crew. To do this,
you may wish to click on the link entitled “Passenger Lists—May-
ﬂower, 1620.” In your opinion, who is best represented by the signers
of the Compact and who is not represented very well, if at all? Why
might that be the case?
4. Look again at the Mayﬂower Compact and note the many religious
references. Research the religious background of the Pilgrims and dis-
cuss the inﬂuence this background had on why they came to America
and on the content of the Mayﬂower Compact itself.
5. The Compact refers to the “raigne of our soueraigne Lord king
James of England, France, & Ireland ye eighteenth and of Scotland ye
ﬁftie fourth.” Research who King James was and why he was given
so many titles. See, for example, (2a) http://encyclopedia.com/
articles/06563.html and (2b) http://www.camelotintl.com/bin/
cgi/person?p264.
6. The plight of the Pilgrims during their early years has become an
important part of our American heritage, which is celebrated yearly
with the national holiday of Thanksgiving. Go to the link entitled
“Thanksgiving Proclamation” and read the address given by Abra-
ham Lincoln to establish this holiday. What is the context in which

Primary Source Sites
42
this address was given? Why do you think this address was given at
this time?
RELATED INTERNET SITES
First Thanksgiving Proclamation
(2c) http://www.law.ou.edu/hist/thanksgiv.html
This site provides a copy of the proclamation issued on June 20, 1676.
Thanksgiving Traditions
(2d) http://www.night.net/thanksgiving/ﬁrst.html-ssi
The stories and traditions of Thanksgiving are neatly organized in this site.
Legislation concerning the national holiday is shown here. The terms of the peace
treaty with the Massasoit are also shown. Various Thanksgiving proclamations
from George Washington and Lincoln are also available.
3. FUNDAMENTAL ORDERS OF CONNECTICUT
URL: http://odur.let.rug.nl/~usa/D/1601-1650/connecticut/
orders.htm
The British colonies in America believed in and attempted to follow the
long-established English tradition of limited government. This was re-
ﬂected in many of the Colonial constitutions that were written during
the Colonial period. This site provides the full text of what is considered
to be the ﬁrst written constitution of democratic government in the New
World—the Fundamental Orders of Connecticut. As signiﬁcant as this
document may be, few government students would claim any knowl-
edge of it. The Fundamental Orders set up a detailed scheme of govern-
ment in which the sovereign power rested with the freemen. Written in
January 1639, it set up the colony as a “confederation of townships” (the
“Orders” were adopted by a popular convention of the three towns of
Windsor, Hartford, and Wethersﬁeld) and established many of the rights
and freedoms that would be taken for granted by later generations. This
document is important in American political history because it served as
a guideline for the democratic documents that followed.
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS AND ACTIVITIES
1. What is meant in the opening paragraph by a “combination and con-
federation”? To whom do you think this refers? What are the princi-
ples of a confederation? How is the term confederation, as used in the
Articles of Confederation and the Confederacy of the Civil War, re-
lated to how it is used in this document?

Political Science
43
2. The term “freemen” is used throughout the document. What is the
meaning of this term? Who did this include and who did this leave
out? What changes have come about in constitutions to replace this
term?
3. It is signiﬁcant that no mention is made of the king in this document.
Do you think this was an oversight? If not, why do you suppose the
ﬁrst Colonial constitution failed to give speciﬁc power to the king of
England?
4. According to this document, a governor was to be elected yearly.
What was the process by which this was done and what were the
limits on how long one could serve in ofﬁce? What other qualiﬁcations
were established for who could be governor?
5. Section 10 of the Fundamental Orders lists some of the powers given
to a general court. What were some of the powers granted?
6. The Fundamental Orders are often referred to as America’s ﬁrst con-
stitution. What aspects of the Fundamental Orders do you believe to
be consistent with later constitutions and what elements do you ﬁnd
absent that became part of later constitutions?
RELATED INTERNET SITE
The Iroquois Confederation
(3a) http://www.axess.com/mohawk/constitution.html
This site contains information on the Iroquois Confederation, which was re-
ferred to by our nation’s founders in their construction of the U.S. Constitution.
4. PETER ZENGER AND FREEDOM OF THE PRESS
URL: http://earlyamerica.com/earlyamerica/bookmarks/
zenger/index.html
This site includes an editorial from a New York City colonial newspaper
called the New-York Weekly Journal. This newspaper was often critical of
the policies of newly appointed colonial governor William Cosby. Edi-
torials such as these led to the arrest and subsequent trial of the publisher
of the newspaper, Peter Zenger, in 1734. After being held in jail for eight
months, Zenger’s case went to trial. Alexander Hamilton defended
Zenger in what has become one of the benchmark cases in American
history for freedom of the press. In addition to the excerpts from the
New-York Weekly Journal presenting Zenger’s case, there are photocopies
of the original newspaper, and an artist’s rendering of the Zenger trial.

Primary Source Sites
44
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS AND ACTIVITIES
1. What was the impetus for the arrest of Peter Zenger? Identify indi-
viduals in the newspapers today and on television who could be ar-
rested for the same “crime” if similar laws were still allowed. Should
newspapers today be permitted to take stances based on political in-
clination, or should newspapers just report the news as it happens?
2. Deﬁne libel. What is the difference between libel and slander? Why
was Peter Zenger not found guilty of his offense? What is meant by
the statement, “The truth is an absolute defense against libel”?
3. Page one of the New-York Weekly Journal is presented on this site. It is
written by a gentleman who calls himself “Cato.” Who was Cato, and
why did he not use his real name? What examples can you ﬁnd today
of individuals in journalism and entertainment who use pseudonyms?
What reasons are there for using pseudonyms today?
4. Why is this such an important case in American political history?
What protections do Americans have today that are a direct result of
this court case?
5. Refer to the case made by Cato presented on the web site (refer to the
excerpt presented on the main page or to the primary source link
entitled “Page One of the New-York Weekly JOURNAL”). What is the
main defense being made in this editorial? What does Cato mean
when he writes, “The expoﬁng therefore of Publick Wickedness, as it
is a Duty which every Man owes to the Truth and his Country, can
never be a Libel in the Nature of Things”? Also, what is meant by
“Libels against the People”?
6. Note who the trial lawyer was who represented Peter Zenger in 1734.
Construct a timeline of the career of Hamilton. How old was Hamilton
when he undertook this case? What other important positions did this
man hold during the colonial, revolutionary, and early U.S. periods?
RELATED INTERNET SITES
More on the Zenger Trial
(4a) http://www.law.umkc.edu/faculty/projects/ftrials/Zengerlinks.htm
Links to sites concerning the John Peter Zenger trial are found at this site.
Biography of Peter Zenger
(4b) http://www.printersmarketplace.com/btfree.html
In addition to the biography, this site chronicles the battle for the freedom of
the press.

Political Science
45
5. BACON’S REBELLION
URL: http://odur.let.rug.nl/~usa/D/1651–1700/bacon rebel/
bacon.htm
Life in the American colonies during the seventeenth century was not
easy for the common worker and small farmer. However, some earlier
settlers had adjusted to the new climate and geography and became
wealthy and dominant landowners growing vast amounts of tobacco.
Smaller farmers were continually pushed west toward poorer land and
the Native American population by these dominant farmers and slave
owners. In the 1670s, a new governor, William Berkeley, had been ap-
pointed to Virginia by Charles II, the king of England. It was felt that
this new governor was serving only the wealthy upper class and was
largely unresponsive to the needs of the less powerful. In 1676 Nathaniel
Bacon, a planter frustrated by the lack of good tobacco land, raised a
makeshift army of disgruntled farmers and indentured servants to force
Native Americans off their land. When the new governor gathered an
army to stop Bacon’s force, Bacon changed his plans and attacked James-
town instead, burning much of it to the ground. Afterward, Bacon’s
forces retreated to Surry County and occupied the estate of Arthur Allen,
a supporter of Governor Berkeley and the Colonial government. The
rebellion ended when Bacon died, probably of dysentery.
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS AND ACTIVITIES
1. Go to the site listed above. This is a declaration of protest against the
English-appointed governor and his army. In your own words, what
are the grievances of the “people,” what are their demands, and what
do they claim will happen if the demands are not met?
2. Go to (5a) http://odur.let.rug.nl/~usa/D/1651–1700/bacon_rebel/
bever.htm. This represents a perspective of the rebellion as written
by one who supported the governor’s position. Read and compare
this to the demands put forth by Bacon. What language is present in
this document that gives clues about the author’s biases?
3. Conduct a mock trial of Nathaniel Bacon. Select a team to represent
Bacon’s position and one to represent the government’s position.
What might your concluding remarks sound like? What “witnesses”
could you call on and what might they contribute to your team’s
position?
4. Bacon’s Rebellion is considered by some to be one of America’s ear-
liest protest movements. What are some other violent protests and

Primary Source Sites
46
rebellions that occurred later in this country? What characteristics
does this rebellion have in common with some of these? What gen-
eralization might be drawn as to the causes of such rebellions?
5. Critique the actions taken by Nathaniel Bacon and his followers. What
actions, if any, were justiﬁed? What actions, if any, were not? What
alternative methods might you suggest for Bacon’s rebels if you were
the leader? Are there times and circumstances that justify violent re-
bellion? If so, what might these be?
6. The position of the Native Americans is not represented in the above
documents. What do you think their position was? With which side
do you think they would have been more closely aligned? Why?
RELATED INTERNET SITES
The Bacon Rebellion House
(5b) http://www.apva.org/apva/bacreb.html
This shows the site of a house that Bacon’s men took over during the rebellion.
Whiskey Rebellion
(5c) http://capo.org/opeds/whiskey.html
(5d) http://www.earlyamerica.com/review/fall96/whiskey.html
This uprising by Pennsylvania farmers came after a severe tax was levied on
the whisky they produced.
John Brown’s Raid
(5e) http://www.norfacad.pvt.k12.va.us/project/brown/raid.htm
(5f) http://jefferson.village.virginia.edu/jbrown/story.html
John Brown was an abolitionist who tried to end slavery by creating an up-
rising with freedmen and slaves.
Watt’s Riot
(5g) http://www.ldﬂa.org/time_line.html
The Watt’s Riot occurred in 1965 amid the struggle for civil rights.
6. IROQUOIS CONSTITUTION
URL: http://www.law.ou.edu/hist/iroquois.html
About the time Christopher Columbus was preparing to sail on his
maiden voyage of discovery, the Iroquois League of Nations were for-
malizing their constitution in what is now the state of New York. There
is strong evidence that a number of the U.S. founding fathers, most no-
tably Benjamin Franklin and John Rutledge, were strongly inﬂuenced by
this confederate and democratic form of government which had been
successfully functioning for hundreds of years. In fact, some believe the
Iroquois Constitution represents the oldest participatory democracy in

Political Science
47
the world. This site, maintained by the University of Oklahoma Law
Center, has the complete constitution of the Iroquois tribe organized un-
der a table of contents into twelve sections.
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS AND ACTIVITIES
1. Look at the headings listed under the Table of Contents on this site.
What types of subjects covered in this constitution would be similar
to those covered in the U.S. Constitution?
2. The Iroquois Constitution held together what is often referred to as
the Iroquois Confederacy. What nations made up this confederacy?
What are the characteristics of a confederate type of government? Af-
ter reviewing the Iroquois Constitution, try to determine how this
constitution sets up some of these characteristics?
3. How are power and responsibility divided and delegated in this con-
stitution? What areas of concern help hold the Five Nations together?
Where is a good amount of independence allowed between nations?
What elements of this constitution do you think the drafters of both
the Articles of Confederation and the U.S. Constitution would ﬁnd
appealing?
4. Go to the link titled “Ofﬁcial Symbolism” and read this section again.
What symbolism is used in this constitution? Why is symbolism im-
portant in this, or in any, culture? What symbols are currently used
by our government?
5. Review again the section “Rights of Foreign Nations.” Under what
conditions can a foreign nation be admitted to the confederacy? What
would be the advantages of joining the confederacy? What are the
restrictions or limitations of a new nation’s joining the confederacy?
6. What is the overall purpose of the constitution? How is the consti-
tution set up to ensure this purpose?
RELATED INTERNET SITES
The Forgotten Founders (an on-line book)
(6a) http://www.ratical.org/many_worlds/6Nations/FF.html
This site contains the complete book written by Bruce E. Johansen on Benjamin
Franklin, the Iroquois, and the rationale for the American Revolution. It was ﬁrst
published in 1982.
Iroquois History
(6b) http://www.iroquois.net/history.html
This site contains links to many of the nations making up the Iroquois Con-
federacy.

Primary Source Sites
48
Native Web
(6c) http://www.nativeweb.org/resources/
This resource database contains information about indigenous cultures around
the world.
7. ALBANY PLAN OF UNION
URL: http://www.save-a-patriot.org/ﬁles/view/albplan.html
Before the French and Indian War many English and Colonial leaders
realized that some sort of unity between the colonies was needed. In
June 1754 delegates from most of the northern colonies and representa-
tives from the Six Iroquois Nations met in Albany, New York, where
they adopted a “plan of union” that was drafted by Benjamin Franklin
of Pennsylvania. Under this plan each Colonial legislature would elect
delegates to an American continental assembly presided over by a royal
governor. The Albany Plan essentially was an appeal to the English Par-
liament to establish some form of governing body speciﬁcally for the
needs of the American colonies. While the Albany Plan of Union was
never implemented, it did initiate the idea of a union among the colonies.
The plan was used to strengthen the pact between the Iroquois and the
colonies.
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS AND ACTIVITIES
1. What factors, both in America and in Europe, may have contributed
to the concept of creating a political union of the American colonies
at this time?
2. The Albany Plan called for a “President-General, to be appointed and
supported by the crown; and a Grand Council, to be chosen by the
representatives of the people of the several Colonies.” What important
democratic political concepts are being set up here? In what ways was
this structure similar to what then existed in England and how was
it different? In what ways was this structure similar to and different
from what would be later established by the U.S. Constitution?
3. The Albany Plan called for each colony to choose members for the
Grand Council in a proportional manner. Look at the proportional
representation ﬁrst proposed. What conclusions could one draw from
these early proportions? Who is not represented here and why might
that have been? Which colonies might not be as enthusiastic about
this union and why?
4. Point number ﬁve in the plan attempts to address some of the rep-
resentation issues. How might the proposals found in this paragraph

Political Science
49
be considered an attempt at compromise on the representation issue?
The debate over how colonies should best be represented came up
again several more times in the next half century. How was this issue
ultimately resolved in our political structure today?
5. How does the Albany Plan of Union deal with issues that later became
central to a young ﬂedgling country: ﬁnances, dealing with the Native
American tribes, commerce, and defense? Which of the ideas pro-
posed by this plan were brought up again and this time adopted in
Philadelphia thirty-three years later?
6. Once the Albany Plan of Union was written and proposed, it received
a lukewarm reception in the English Parliament. The plan was largely
ignored and allowed to die. Why do you think the English had second
thoughts about granting the American colonies a form of uniﬁed gov-
ernment, particularly after many originally thought it might be a good
idea? Similarly, many colonists were not ready for such a plan of
union. What reasons might many colonists have given for not sup-
porting the plan?
RELATED INTERNET SITE
The Articles of Confederation
(7a) http://www.yale.edu/lawweb/avalon/art1613.htm
This site gives the text version of the Articles of Confederation which derived
much of its structure from the Albany Plan.
8. STAMP ACT
URL: http://www.constitution.org/bcp/dor sac.htm
The Stamp Act, a tax requiring all American colonists to pay a tax on
every piece of printed paper they used, was passed by the British Par-
liament in March 1765. The money collected by the Stamp Act was sup-
posedly earmarked to help defray the costs of defending and protecting
the American frontier. What most colonists objected to was not the cost,
which was relatively small to the average colonist, but to the precedent
established by the tax. Rather than the prior taxes on the colonies, which
had been used as a means of regulating commerce, the Stamp Act was
a direct tax for the purpose of raising revenue and was being levied
without the approval of the colonial legislatures. Many colonists felt that
such “taxation without representation” should not go unchallenged. The
Stamp Act led to the formation of the Stamp Act Congress, a group
formed to protest this tax. This site contains the Stamp Act resolutions

Primary Source Sites
50
asking for the repeal of this act and that other basic rights be recognized
by Parliament.
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS AND ACTIVITIES
1. Read the opening paragraph of the Declaration of Rights and the ﬁrst
article. What is the opening mood of this declaration? Why do you
think the delegates to the Stamp Act Congress began their petition
this way?
2. What are the main points of this declaration? Rewrite these in your
own words and connect each point you make with an article from the
declaration. At what point in the declaration are points made which
are particularly relevant to the Stamp Act? How many of the fourteen
declarations and requests speciﬁcally concern the Stamp Act? What
other issues raised in this declaration could be unconnected to the
Stamp Act? Why do you think this congress, which convened as a
direct result of the Stamp Act, chose to address these other issues at
this time?
3. Compare the point made in article nine to the abstract stated above.
Why do you think that the colonists claimed the tax was “extremely
burthensome and grievous”? What evidence is provided to support
this claim?
4. Speaking earlier in the House of Burgesses in Virginia on the Stamp
Act, Patrick Henry fervently denounced the act causing some of his
peers to accuse him of treason. To this Henry replied, “If this be trea-
son, make the most of it.” Why was there such division on this new
tax? Take the position of those who were not opposed to it. What
might their argument sound like?
5. This Declaration of Rights would ultimately be signed by members of
only six of the thirteen colonies. What might be some reasons for this?
If you were a member of English Parliament, what signal might this
have sent you?
6. Research the colonies’ response to the Stamp Act. What action taken
by the colonists do you give credit for having the most inﬂuence on
the repealing of the Stamp Act?
RELATED INTERNET SITES
Patrick Henry Speeches
(8a) http://www.inmind.com/schools/lessons/PatrickHenry/index.html
This site has excerpts from speeches made by Patrick Henry including his
speech condemning the Stamp Act. It includes an audio clip.

Political Science
51
The Intolerable Acts
(8b) http://www.dell.homestead.com/revwar/ﬁles/INTOLER.HTM
Information is given on this series of bills which helped lead to the American
Revolution.
9. GIVE ME LIBERTY OR GIVE ME DEATH
URL: http://www.law.ou.edu/hist/henry.html
After the passage of the Intolerable Acts, a few colonists believed that it
might be necessary to ﬁght a brief war to show the British the seriousness
of the American grievances. One member who believed that such a war
was necessary was Patrick Henry. In a speech given on March 23, 1775,
only a few weeks before the “shot heard around the world” was ﬁred
at Lexington and Concord, Henry delivered a passionate address to the
Virginia Convention of Delegates. This, his most famous speech, became
a symbolic call for many patriots in the years to follow. This site, part
of a database of U.S. Historical Documents from the University of
Oklahoma Law Center, contains the speech in its entirety.
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS AND ACTIVITIES
1. Give a brief overview of the context of this speech. What was going
on at this time? What events had happened only a short time earlier
and what events would occur soon after this speech? Why were some
colonists made nervous by the words of Patrick Henry?
2. In the opening paragraph, Henry states, “Should I keep back my opin-
ions at such a time, through fear of giving offense, I should consider
myself as guilty of treason towards my country, and of an act of dis-
loyalty toward the Majesty of Heaven, which I revere above all earthly
kings.” What does he mean by this? Why are the words “treason,”
“disloyalty,” “Majesty,” and “kings” particularly relevant in this pas-
sage?
3. In the third paragraph of Henry’s oration, he stated that he had only
one way to guide his decisions, that of the “lamp of experience.” What
did he mean by this? Create a timeline of the events Henry might
have been referring to when he mentions “the conduct of the British
ministry for the last ten years.”
4. Imagine you are a debate teacher and have been asked to critique
Henry’s speech. How would you grade it in the following areas: per-
suasiveness, consistency of logic, and overall strength of argument?
5. Take two different colored highlighters. Highlight each sentence you
believe to be a fact in one color. Highlight each sentence you believe

Primary Source Sites
52
to be an opinion in another color. Those sentences you are unsure of
leave unmarked. Discuss and compare how this text is marked with
your class and attempt to reach some consensus on how it is marked.
Compare the percentages of each category. Many eloquent speeches
of passion are on issues that are deeply and personally felt by the
speaker. One result is that these speeches often rely heavily on state-
ments of opinion. How does this speech compare?
6. A dozen years later, Patrick Henry, along with several other promi-
nent patriots, refused to support the U.S. Constitution drafted at the
Constitutional Convention in Philadelphia. Research the reasons he
had for opposing this new, stronger federal constitution.
RELATED INTERNET SITE
Continental Congress Documents
(9a) http://elsinore.cis.yale.edu/lawweb/avalon/contcong/contcong.htm
This site contains all the correspondence from the Continental Congress to a
variety of people from King George VIII to prominent colonists. There is also a
search engine that allows you to ﬁnd a particular event or person associated with
the Continental Congress. The grievances that the colonists had toward Britain
are laid out in a variety of letters and ofﬁcial documents. The Stamp Act, Quar-
tering Act, and Intolerable Acts were among the laws imposed on the colonists
that led to the formation of the Continental Congress and their action.

REVOLUTIONARY PERIOD AND EARLY U.S.
DOCUMENTS
1. DECLARATION OF INDEPENDENCE
URL: http://www.founding.com/
By June 1776 the colonies had been at war with Britain for a little over
a year, and the Continental Congress determined it was time to sever
ties ofﬁcially with the mother country by issuing a proclamation of in-
dependence. A committee was formed comprising John Adams of Mas-
sachusetts, Roger Sherman of Connecticut, R.R. Livingston of New York,
Thomas Jefferson of Virginia, and Benjamin Franklin of Pennsylvania.
This Committee of Five was responsible for the ﬁrst draft of what became
the Declaration of Independence. Jefferson, however, was the principal
author. This site listed here is very valuable in helping students better
comprehend the Declaration of Independence. The document is broken
down step by step to help students better understand each component.
Experts are available to answer questions.
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS AND ACTIVITIES
1. After clicking on the homepage banner, click on the Declaration of
Independence. Take a few minutes and read the text through com-
pletely. Stop and click on any underlined phrase to gain additional
information on that phrase in the box on the right. What is your im-
pression of the language used in the document? Is it easily under-
stood? Where it is not, what language would you substitute to make
it clearer to you, without altering the meaning?
2. Review again the ﬁrst paragraph, or the preamble. What is meant by
“one people” here and why is this term signiﬁcant?
3. Perhaps the most famous quote in American history is “WE hold these
Truths to be self-evident, that all Men are created equal, that they are
endowed by their Creator with certain unalienable Rights, that among
these are Life, Liberty, and the Pursuit of Happiness.” Break down
this statement. What is meant by self-evident, by “all Men are created
equal,” by unalienable rights? What does “life, liberty, and the pursuit
of happiness” mean to you? Refer to the guide link at the top of the
web site page to give additional help on any of these questions.

Primary Source Sites
54
4. The Declaration of Independence refers to “repeated Injuries and
Usurpations” and then submits these injuries to “a candid World.”
Candid here means unbiased. Read the injuries that follow. Imagine
you are part of this “candid world” in 1776. Do you believe these
grievances are fairly presented? Do you believe a strong argument
has been made for the case of independence? In your opinion, which
grievances do you believe to be the most serious?
5. Click on the link at the top of the page labeled “issues.” Divide the
class into ﬁve groups and assign an issue to each class for them to
research. Have each group present their ﬁndings on this issue to the
rest of the class.
6. Think of a question you would like to know about the Declaration of
Independence. Click on “Ask an Expert” and submit your question.
RELATED INTERNET SITES
John Hancock
(1a) http://www.norfacad.pvt.k12.va.us/project/hancock/hancock.htm
Background and information on the chair of the Second Continental Congress
is found at this site.
John Adams
(1b) http://odur.let.rug.nl/~usa/P/ja2/about/bio/adamsxx.htm
John Adams, another signer of the Declaration of Independence, became our
second president. His biography is found at this site.
2. ARTICLES OF CONFEDERATION
URL: http://www.yale.edu/lawweb/avalon/artconf.htm
The Articles of Confederation were written and adopted by the Second
Continental Congress in 1777. This is the same body that had written the
Declaration of Independence one year earlier. Written during the early
years of the Revolutionary War, the Articles of Confederation did not
became operative until March 1, 1781, when the last of the thirteen states
signed the document. The articles established a “ﬁrm league of friend-
ship” among the states and continued the tradition of allowing these
states to retain the largest share of power, reﬂecting the newly estab-
lished nation’s distrust of a strong centralized government. The articles
established an executive branch and a legislative branch of government.
The duties of a legislative branch were left to the individual states to
handle. The Articles of Confederation constituted the ﬁrst national U.S.
governing document and took us through the remainder of the Revo-
lutionary War and the early years of the struggling emergent nation,
until the U.S. Constitution was adopted in 1789.

Political Science
55
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS AND ACTIVITIES
1. What is a confederation? What other times in American history has
this term been used? What rationale is given for the establishment of
such a confederacy, which the articles term a “ﬁrm league of friend-
ship”? Which of these reasons may still be relevant today?
2. Article V establishes a legislative branch in the form of a congress.
What is the structure and nature of this congress? How is each state
represented and how many votes would each state get? What might
be some advantages and disadvantages to this system? Which states
might favor this system more than others and why?
3. What restrictions are placed on the states in Article VI? Why do you
think these restrictions were established? Are these restrictions still in
place today?
4. What powers did the Articles of Confederation give the central gov-
ernment in the areas of foreign affairs, the creation of an army and
navy, and other areas of national defense? What do the articles say
about taxes and regulating commerce?
5. According to the Articles of Confederation, how many states were
required to agree in order for the articles to be amended or for new
action to be taken that affected the United States? What percentage
of the states does this represent? Review some of the issues that
separated the various states. What might be the consequences of
not reaching agreement on key issues by the allotted number of
states?
6. Although the Articles of Confederation provided a framework for
government which allowed states with widely diverse interests to re-
main united during its formative years, the articles ultimately failed
to lead the country into the next century. What do you believe are
some of the key reasons for its failure? If you were a delegate to a
conference charged with changing or rewriting the Articles of Con-
federation, what is the single most important change you would make
in the document?
RELATED INTERNET SITES
The Articles of Confederation Draft
(2a) http://www.yale.edu/lawweb/avalon/contcong/07–21–75.htm
This site provides Benjamin Franklin’s draft of the articles.
Thomas Jefferson and the Articles of Confederation
(2b) http://www.yale.edu/lawweb/avalon/jeffauto.htm#artconfdebate
Thomas Jefferson’s discussion of the Articles of Confederation in his autobi-
ography is presented.

Primary Source Sites
56
Text Version of the Articles of Confederation
(2c) http://www.yale.edu/lawweb/avalon/art1613.htm
This site gives the text version of the Articles of Confederation. It also explains
the document brieﬂy.
3. NORTHWEST ORDINANCE
URL: http://www.ohiokids.org/ohc/history/h indian/treaties/
nword.html
Following the Land Ordinance of 1785, which provided for the survey
and sale of Native American land northwest of the Ohio River (the
Northwest Territories), the Northwest Ordinance of 1787 established the
process by which these territories could become states in the union.
Eventually, the states of Ohio, Indiana, Illinois, Michigan, Wisconsin, and
Minnesota emerged as a direct result of this ordinance. The Northwest
Ordinance is an important piece of legislation in American history for
several reasons. It provided the mechanism by which new states could
enter the union “on an equal footing with the original states,” supported
public education in these territories, and addressed the issue of slavery
by stating that “neither slavery nor involuntary servitude” was to be
allowed.
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS AND ACTIVITIES
1. How many inhabitants must one of the counties or townships in the
“northwest” have before it can elect a representative to the general
assembly? What characteristics must these inhabitants have? What ad-
ditional requirements must be fulﬁlled before one could be one of the
elected representatives?
2. The Northwest Ordinance sets forth a number of conditions in Article
5 by which a territory “northwest of the River Ohio” may become a
state. What were these conditions? How does this compare to the
process of being admitted into the union as a state today?
3. One reason the Northwest Ordinance is considered such an important
political document in the history of the United States is that it pro-
vided a framework for how states could enter the union on an equal
footing with the original thirteen colonies. Why was this such an im-
portant issue for a nation such as the United States in the last part of
the eighteenth century? Can you imagine the arguments put forth by
some against allowing states to enter as equal partners? Who might
not have wanted this and why? What might have been some of the

Political Science
57
repercussions if the Northwest Ordinance had not been set up this
way?
4. Make a list of the civil rights and liberties guaranteed in the North-
west Ordinance. Compare these to those that would later be guaran-
teed in the U.S. Constitution and the Bill of Rights, which would be
written just a few years later.
5. The Northwest Ordinance provided that all states from these territo-
ries were to be admitted to the union as free states. It was believed
by many in the south that this would upset the delicate balance of
free and slave states in Congress. Go to the website (3a) http://
infoplease.lycos.com/ipa/A0763770.html and study the dates of ad-
mission to the union of all the states from 1787 to 1850. What pattern
do you notice of the states that got admitted to the union during this
time? What conclusions could you make about the implications this
had for the coming Civil War?
6. Many early territorial governors of the Northwest Territories would
later become prominent political ﬁgures. Select one of the states that
was carved out of the Northwest Ordinance and research its early
governors.
RELATED INTERNET SITES
“Chronicle of the Revolution”
(3b) http://www.pbs.org/ktca/liberty/chronicle/northwest.html
Part of the PBS television series on the “Chronicle of the Revolution,” this site
contains a brief description of the Northwest Ordinance.
Northwest Ordinance Day in Indiana
(3c) http://www.statelib.lib.in.us/WWW/IHB/NWORD.HTML
This Indiana historical site about the Northwest Ordinance is contained in a
“Northwest Ordinance Day” press release in 1988.
4. CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES
URL: http://www.nara.gov/exhall/charters/constitution/
constitution.html
Drawn up at the Federal Constitutional Convention in Philadelphia in
1787, the U.S. Constitution was in large part a response to the discontent
many had experienced with the original constitution of the United States,
the Articles of Confederation. It was hoped that this new constitution
would address the need for a stronger centralized government while
maintaining a balance of sovereignty between the central government

Primary Source Sites
58
and the states. To offset this more powerful central government, the
founders established the U.S. Constitution as the supreme law of the
land, making it clear that no other law, state constitution or statute,
federal legislation, or executive order could operate in conﬂict with it,
and they created a simple, but effective, checks and balances system
among three distinct branches of government. The Constitution was
adopted by the convention delegates on September 17, 1787, and, after a
national debate, was subsequently ratiﬁed by June 1788. This link con-
nects to a page maintained by the National Archives and Records Ad-
ministration. It not only contains the full text of the document in its
original form, but has highlighted hypertext sections which link to later
amendments which are related to that portion of the document. The site
also has links to biographies of each of the original signers of the Con-
stitution.
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS AND ACTIVITIES
1. What are the reasons given in the Preamble for the writing of the U.S.
Constitution? Knowing what you do about the background leading
up to the Constitutional Convention, why is it signiﬁcant that the
Constitution begins with “We the People” as opposed to “We the
States” as was originally suggested by one early draft?
2. Article I establishes the legislative branch and creates a two-house
legislature: the Senate and the House of Representatives. Why are
representatives to these two chambers elected differently? What ar-
guments led to this type of compromise? Today almost every state
legislature also has a Senate and a House of Representatives. Why is
the rationale for a two-house legislature at the state level not the same
as the rationale for the original structure of the two-house legislature
at the national level?
3. Assign each branch of government to a different group of students.
Have each group brainstorm on the duties, responsibilities, and re-
strictions they believe are associated with the branch they are as-
signed. Then have each group study the article of the Constitution
associated with their assigned branch. Have students compare what
the Constitution says with their list. What is similar and what is dif-
ferent and why?
4. The Constitution is a concise document. View a copy of your state’s
constitution and compare its size to the U.S. Constitution. Most likely
you will ﬁnd that the states’ constitutions contain much more detail.
What characteristics does the federal constitution have that have al-
lowed it to govern a nation effectively through extraordinarily chang-
ing times for over 200 years with very few amendments?

Political Science
59
5. Go to (4a) http://www.usconstitution.net/constfaq_sub.html or
(4b) http://www.nara.gov/exhall/charters/constitution/conqa.html.
Both of these sites contain frequently asked questions relating to the
Constitution. Assign some of these questions to different class groups
to research and present to the class. Think of additional questions you
might want to ﬁnd answers to and post these questions to the e-mail
addresses given.
6. Go to (4c) http://www.usconstitution.net/constframe.htm. This
site contains character sketches written by William Pierce, a delegate
to the Constitutional Convention from Georgia. Divide the delegates
among class members and have students research their delegate (from
information on this site as well as from other links and resources).
Have students give a short presentation of their character that would
give some insight into their personality and views.
RELATED INTERNET SITES
More on the Constitution
(4d) http://odur.let.rug.nl/~usa/GOV/chap1.htm
This site details the historical signiﬁcance of the Constitution.
Constitutional Convention Documents
(4e) http://memory.loc.gov/ammem/bdsquery.html
The Constitutional Convention was set up to ﬁx the Articles of Confederation.
This site has every major piece of writing from the convention.
5. VIRGINIA DECLARATION OF RIGHTS
URL: http://www.nara.gov/exhall/charters/billrights/
virginia.html
After the U.S. Constitution was written, it had to be ratiﬁed by the states.
Such ratiﬁcation was by no means a foregone conclusion. Indeed, the
creation of this new and powerful central government was highly con-
troversial. It was believed that, to gain the approval of several key states
such as Massachusetts, Virginia, and New York, the Federalists had to
agree immediately to adopt a series of amendments to be added to the
Constitution. Thomas Jefferson was one of the Federalists who urged
others, including James Madison, to draft such a document. The Virginia
Declaration of Rights, written by George Mason in 1776, was the docu-
ment referred to by Thomas Jefferson when he wrote the Declaration of
Independence. It was one of the models used by our founding fathers to
construct the Bill of Rights.

Primary Source Sites
60
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS AND ACTIVITIES
1. The top of this web site states that “Virginia’s Declaration of Rights
was drawn upon by Thomas Jefferson for the opening paragraphs of
the Declaration of Independence.” What sections of the Virginia Dec-
laration do you believe Jefferson drew on most heavily? Support your
conclusions with similar quotes from each document.
2. Read the Virginia Declaration of Rights and compare it to the Bill of
Rights. What sections can you connect with speciﬁc amendments in
the Bill of Rights?
3. The American Revolution had profound effects on other nations seek-
ing a more democratic way of life. In 1789 the French Revolution, com-
mitted to “liberty, fraternity, and equality,” began. In August 1789 the
French Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen was ap-
proved by the National Assembly of France. Go to (5a) http://www.
civnet.org/resources/document/historic/french.htm and compare
this document to the Virginia Declaration of Rights written twelve
years earlier. What similarities do you ﬁnd?
4. Reread section 5 from the Virginia Declaration. What similar state-
ments are made in the Constitution of the United States?
5. After drafting the Constitution, many Federalists held the view that
a separate Bill of Rights was not necessary because the Constitution
established a government of, for, and by the people. There was,
therefore, no need for a Bill of Rights to protect the people from them-
selves. Others, of course, disagreed believing that the new federal gov-
ernment was a potentially tyrannical force from which the people
needed protection. Where do you believe George Mason and other
supporters of the Virginia Declaration would have fallen on this issue?
6. George Mason is given credit for writing most of the Virginia Decla-
ration of Rights. Mason, a wealthy Virginia planter and a leader at
the Constitutional Convention in 1787, refused to sign the Constitu-
tion drafted at that convention and argued against its ratiﬁcation dur-
ing the Virginia Convention of 1788. Research his reasons for not
supporting the federal constitution after being such an inﬂuence on
its creation, even after a Bill of Rights was promised to be forthcom-
ing.
RELATED INTERNET SITE
Photocopy of the Declaration of Rights
(5b) http://www.loc.gov/exhibits/treasures/trt006.html
This site has photocopies of the original text.

Political Science
61
6. FEDERALIST PAPERS, NUMBER 10
URL: http://lcweb2.loc.gov/const/fedquery.html
The Federalist Papers, eighty-ﬁve essays published between October
1787 and August 1788, argued for the ratiﬁcation of the U.S. Constitution
to replace the Articles of Confederation. The essays discussed the weak-
ness of the confederation, presented the structure of the federal govern-
ment in the new constitution, and presented the numerous safeguards
in the new constitution designed to prevent tyranny. These papers were
originally published anonymously, but it is now known that Alexander
Hamilton, John Jay, and James Madison wrote them. The Federalist Pa-
pers are important because they show the intentions of the U.S. Consti-
tution from the perspective of those who supported its adoption and
who were crucial in its conception and drafting. Thomas Jefferson, while
reading the Federalist Papers in Paris while he was the minister to
France, called them “the best commentary on the principles of govern-
ment which was ever written.” Federalist Paper number 10, written by
James Madison, is perhaps the best known of the essays.
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS AND ACTIVITIES
1. Click on “A list of titles” and then scroll down to number 10, “The
Same Subject Continued: The Union as a Safeguard Against Domestic
Faction and Insurrection.” Construct an outline of the argument put
forth by Madison in this essay writing one line for each main point
presented. What points stand out regarding the organization and ﬂow
of the case presented here?
2. How does Madison deﬁne faction in this essay? Of the two ways he
notes to prevent factions, why is neither a viable choice?
3. Madison posits that, if what causes factions cannot, or should not, be
eliminated, then one must work to control the effects of factions. Of
the two types of factions, majority and minority, Madison seems to
fear the majority more. Why is that? One of the great principles of the
Constitution is “majority rule with minority rights.” What does this
mean and how is it consistent with Madison’s argument?
4. Why does Madison favor a republic government, as set up in the
Constitution, over a pure democracy? How does it distinguish be-
tween the two?
5. Divide the class into
three
groups—the Federalists, the Anti-
Federalists, and the jury. Have the Federalists and Anti-Federalists
research their position and present “closing arguments” to the jury on

Primary Source Sites
62
why the new Constitution should be ratiﬁed or rejected. Allow the
jury to decide.
6. What is in a name? Sometimes a good deal. One of the disadvantages
the Anti-Federalists had is that their name implied they were against
something rather than for something. Think of groups today that are on
different sides of an ideological debate. Often, both sides label them-
selves as “pro” something (for example, pro-life versus pro-choice; who
would want to be labeled anti-life?). Create a list of other political and
ideological organizations’ names that follow a similar pattern.
RELATED INTERNET SITES
John Jay
(6a) http://www.leftjustiﬁed.com/leftjust/lib/sc/ht/fed/jbio.html
Information about John Jay may be found at this web site.
Alexander Hamilton
(6b) http://odur.let.rug.nl/~usa/B/hamilton/hamilxx.htm
Biographical information on Alexander Hamilton is included at this site.
James Madison
(6c) http://www.jmu.edu/madison/
This site contains pertinent information about James Madison.
7. PROCLAMATION OF NEUTRALITY
URL: http://www.federalist.com/proc.htm
The declaration of war that was declared on England by France in 1793
placed the United States in a sticky political situation. Many Americans
were sympathetic to France because of their support to the American
cause only a few years earlier. Yet, the United States had many strong
economic ties to England. After consulting with his cabinet, which con-
tained members sympathetic to both sides, George Washington decided
to present this proclamation, warning Americans to avoid any partici-
pation in the hostilities and regard it strictly as a European war. The
proclamation was signed on April 22, 1793, in Philadelphia by Washing-
ton, less than two months after war was declared. Washington’s decision
that it was in the best interests of the United States to remain neutral in
European affairs was a stance that he reiterated in his Farewell Address
three and a half years later.
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS AND ACTIVITIES
1. The proclamation begins by noting “that a state of war exists between
Austria, Prussia, Sardinia, Great Britain, and the United Netherlands,

Political Science
63
of the one part, and France on the other.” Look at a European map
of the time period and locate these countries. Where were Prussia and
Sardinia? In what modern-day countries would these territories be
located today? Why were all of these countries aligned against France?
2. In what ways did Washington envision citizens aiding one side of the
war or the other? What reasons might some people have for assisting
one side or the other? Would there be some who would work to assist
both sides and, if so, what reasons would they have for that? What
repercussions were put in place for those who did not follow this
proclamation?
3. Within
Washington’s
cabinet,
Thomas Jefferson and Alexander
Hamilton both ofﬁcially supported neutrality; however, it was well
known that Jefferson favored supporting France and Hamilton fa-
vored supporting England. Look into the government positions each
of these men held and attempt to explain why each man sided as
he did.
4. Another member of Washington’s cabinet, James Madison, questioned
the authority of the president to make any proclamation at all without
the consent of Congress. What constitutional grounds did Washington
have to make this statement? What similar actions in the arena of
foreign policy have some later presidents taken, perhaps acting on
Washington’s precedent-setting proclamation?
5. Notice that nowhere in his proclamation does Washington use the
word “neutrality.” Why do you suppose Washington avoided using
that term?
6. Before the advent of World War I, many people cited Washington’s
proclamation as a clever reason to remain isolated from the rest of the
world’s troubles. When else in American history has this proclamation
been called on to support neutrality? Why do you suppose this proc-
lamation (along with Washington’s Farewell Address) are the ones
most often cited?
RELATED INTERNET SITES
Washington’s Farewell Address
(7a) http://earlyamerica.com/earlyamerica/milestones/farewell/index.html
George Washington’s “Farewell Address To the People of the United States,”
published in the Independent Chronicle, September 26, 1796, is located here.
President Woodrow Wilson’s Neutrality Speech before WWI
(7b) http://www.lib.byu.edu/~rdh/wwi/1914/wilsonneut.html
President Wilson, in this famous speech, said, “The United States must be
neutral in fact, as well as in name.”

Primary Source Sites
64
8. THE ALIEN AND SEDITION ACTS OF 1798
URL: http://earlyamerica.com/earlyamerica/milestones/
sedition/index.html
Relations between France and America were not good during the early
years of the John Adams presidency. By 1798 tensions between America
and France were very high. Both nations were ﬁring on and seizing each
other’s ships when the opportunity presented itself, and the United
States was concerned that this undeclared war would soon become an
ofﬁcial all-out war. Political tensions were also high during this period.
The bitter rivalry between Alexander Hamilton and Thomas Jefferson
had led to the ﬁrst competitive party system with Hamilton leading the
Federalists and Jefferson leading the Republican party. Under President
John Adams, the Federalists were clearly in control and tried to intimi-
date the Republicans, many of whom were newly arrived immigrants,
by passing the Alien Acts. In a reaction to the foreign affairs and do-
mestic political crisis, the Federalists increased the size of the army,
raised taxes to support national defense, and passed the Alien and Se-
dition Acts. These acts allowed for the deportation of or imprisonment
of political dissenters who were not yet legal citizens. Jefferson and James
Madison reacted to these laws with the Kentucky and Virginia resolu-
tions, which argued that the people of individual states had the right to
determine whether federal laws agreed with the U.S. Constitution and,
in the process, brought up the issue of states’ rights. When Jefferson
became president during the next administration, the acts were repealed.
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS AND ACTIVITIES
1. Review the background of the Alien and Sedition Acts provided on
the initial page of this site. This brief description of the context for
the Alien and Sedition Acts implies that, although the threat of war
with France was real, the Federalists used this crisis as an excuse to
pass legislation which would “quell any political opposition from the
Republicans, led by Thomas Jefferson.” Consider other times of crisis
in America’s history (e.g., foreign and civil wars, economic depres-
sion, the Cold War) and think of other examples of how the ruling
political party has used an event to minimize opposition from another
political party.
2. Click on the text version of the Alien Enemies Act located at the bot-
tom of this web site. Read each section slowly. Note how the language
makes each passage difﬁcult to comprehend. Rewrite and simplify
each section into one or two sentences.

Political Science
65
3. Note that the Alien Enemies Act allowed for the restraint or removal
of any aliens who could be regarded as “dangerous to the peace and
safety of the United States.” Compare the deﬁnition of an alien ac-
cording to this law to that of today’s deﬁnition. Discuss the intern-
ment of Japanese Americans during World War II and compare these
actions to the Alien and Sedition Acts.
4. Click on the text version of the Sedition Act and read this document.
Pay particular attention to the language in section 2. Review the case
of Peter Zenger and his trial earlier in the eighteenth century. Review
the language contained in the First Amendment to the Constitution.
On what grounds would you consider the Sedition Act to be uncon-
stitutional?
5. Examine the penalties that could be levied against one found guilty
of actions deemed illegal in the Sedition Acts. Research the cost of
everyday items during the eighteenth century and compare this cost
to today’s. Approximate the amount of possible ﬁnes in today’s cur-
rency, if adjusted for inﬂation. How severe would these ﬁnes be if
they were still in effect today, and would this seem reasonable for the
offense?
6. Select a time period in American history when there was a large
amount of public protest regarding ofﬁcial American foreign policy
(e.g., the late 1960s and the Vietnam War). How might these protests
have been handled differently if the Alien and Sedition Acts were still
in effect? Compare how these protests were handled by the U.S. gov-
ernment operating in a democratic society to how the Tiananmen
Square protests of April–June 1989 were handled by the Chinese gov-
ernment operating in a nondemocratic society.
RELATED INTERNET SITES
XYZ Affair
(8a) http://odur.let.rug.nl/~usa/P/ja2/speeches/jaxyz.htm
This site contains John Adams’ account of the XYZ Affair.
Kentucky Resolution
(8b) http://libertyonline.hypermall.com/KentuckyRes.html
This protest to the Alien and Sedition Acts, written by Thomas Jefferson, is
regarded as a major document for states’ rights.
Japanese-American Internment
(8c) http://www.geocities.com/Athens/8420/main.html
The Japanese American internment during World War II was one of the
darkest acts against our democracy. This site highlights many aspects of it.

THE NINETEENTH CENTURY
1. WAR OF 1812
URL: http://www.hillsdale.edu/dept/History/Documents/War/
FR1812.htm
The struggle for the control of America did not end with the Revolu-
tionary War. It would not be until after the War of 1812 that the United
States could be comfortable with itself as a sovereign nation. The ideal
of America as a united front during the War of 1812 is not correct. The
United States felt it was suffering at the hands of both Britain and France
as these two nations engaged in a prolonged European war—a conﬂict
which often left the United States in the middle. The political arena in
America at that time was hot in debate about the issue of how to address
these grievances, and the foreign policy decisions that were made, such
as the Embargo Act, further divided the nation. Indeed, when Congress
did declare war in June 1812, urged by President James Madison, it was
quickly labeled by some as “Madison’s War.” At one point during the
war, New England even threatened to secede from the union. This site
contains a plethora of primary documents pertaining to each armed cam-
paign. It also contains the major documents of the political issues sur-
rounding the war.
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS AND ACTIVITIES
1. Click on “The American Debate on Neutrality (1807–1809)” and on
the links under “Naval Actions” related to the Chesapeake. Review the
newspaper excerpts and personal accounts related to the Chesapeake
and Leopard. What was this event? Why did it cause such outrage
among American citizens? What was happening in Europe to cause
these events to happen?
2. It is not unusual for neutral nations to be caught in the middle of
other nations at war. Prior to the War of 1812, the United States was
trying to avoid getting involved in what they regarded as yet another
European conﬂict. A similar situation existed prior to World War I.
Research the sinking of the Lusitania in 1915 [you may go to (1a)
http://members.aol.com/~bry1976/lusi.htm for some information
on this]. Compare and contrast this event to the Chesapeake affair.

Political Science
67
3. Remain on the site entitled “The American Debate on Neutrality
(1807–1809)” and read those excerpts related to the Embargo Act.
What was the purpose of the embargo? What was the message of the
“Farmers’ story”? What were the reactions of Americans to the em-
bargo? Many called the Embargo Act the “O grab me” act (embargo
spelled backwards). Why was that name given to it?
4. Numerous times in American history different types of embargoes or
boycotts have been levied against a country as a foreign policy action
designed to hurt a nation while falling short of declaring war. The em-
bargo on Cuba, the boycott of the 1980 Olympics, the restrictions on
purchasing Iraqi oil are all examples of different types of “economic
warfare.” Often these types of actions affect one group of people more
than others. Research some of these other embargoes in American his-
tory and take a stand on how effective they were and whether a few
should suffer for the overall beneﬁt to national foreign policy.
5. Click on the link entitled “The New England Threat of Secession
(1813).” What is the case being made by those who wrote this declara-
tion? What reasons are given by the New Englanders as a reason to
“separate” from the rest of the union? What aspects of this argument
foreshadow later secession arguments made by the Southern states?
6. Review the case made by Quebec to secede from Canada. What points
are similar to and what points are different from the New England
argument? In your opinion, does a state or province have the right to
create its own country? If so, under what circumstances should that
be allowed? What other conﬂicts around the world have resulted
when former territories have broken off and set up their own nations?
RELATED INTERNET SITES
The Treaty of Ghent
(1b) http://members.tripod.com/~war1812/
This site includes the Treaty of Ghent, which ended the war, and the Hartford
Convention, a convention of New England states discussing possible secession.
Johnny Bull and the Alexandrians
(1c) http://www.boondocksnet.com/cartoons/mcc035.html
This political cartoon from 1814 comes from a series entitled, “History of the
19th Century in Political Cartoons.”
2. MONROE DOCTRINE
URL: http://www.law.ou.edu/hist/monrodoc.html
What would become known as the Monroe Doctrine began as part of an
annual message to Congress made by President James Monroe on De-

Primary Source Sites
68
cember 2, 1823. Written with the idea of making a statement about Amer-
ican policy stressing the separateness of the Old World from the New
World, the Monroe Doctrine was responsible for three major ideas in
U.S. foreign policy. First, the United States would not allow Europe to
colonize further any parts of the American continents, while simultane-
ously “recognizing existing colonies or dependencies” in the Western
Hemisphere. Second, any attempt by Europe to force their own system
on any Western state whose independence the United States had rec-
ognized, was to be considered a threat to the United States. Finally, the
United States would not interfere in European affairs in return. The Mon-
roe Document, written primarily by John Quincy Adams and Monroe,
represented many elements of a foreign policy position evolving in the
United States since the Revolutionary War. This site contains the excerpt
from the annual address which became the Monroe Doctrine document.
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS AND ACTIVITIES
1. Review the excerpt of Monroe’s annual message to Congress that be-
came known as the Monroe Doctrine. What are the main points of
this speech, and what is the rationale given for these points?
2. What is the context of this speech? What are the “late events in Spain
and Portugal” referred to by Monroe? Why were these events of con-
cern to the United States?
3. Monroe refers to a European political system on several occasions.
What does he mean by this?
4. Toward the end of the speech, Monroe refers to much of Latin Amer-
ica as our “southern brethren.” Go to (2a) http://www.smplanet.
com/imperialism/toc.html and review some of the foreign policy
relations the United States have had with Latin America during the
past several centuries. What might be the response of Latin Americans
to the effects of the Monroe Doctrine?
5. Study the manner in which the nation of Panama became indepen-
dent. How was the Monroe Doctrine used to assist this process? What
beneﬁts did the United States gain as a result of this independence?
When else has the Monroe Doctrine been called upon to justify actions
for which the United States would possibly beneﬁt? Can you think of
a time when the Monroe Doctrine was ignored?
6. The United States was still a relatively young and emergent nation at
the time of this proclamation. What do you suppose the European
response was to these statements? Why was Europe not in a very good
position to do much to dispute the Monroe Doctrine at the time this
speech was delivered?

Political Science
69
RELATED INTERNET SITES
Latin American Timeline
(2b) http://www.courses.ncsu.edu/classes/hi300001/hi216time.htm
This timeline of Latin America since 1826 allows one to view the context of
some of the events in which the United States played a role.
Speeches of James Monroe
(2c) http://odur.let.rug.nl/~usa/P/jm5/jm5.htm
The State of the Union addresses as well as both of Monroe’s inaugural
speeches are provided here.
3. DECLARATION OF SENTIMENTS
URL: http://aurora.wells.edu/~sfalls98/dos48rev.htm
In the years prior to the Civil War, many women were involved in the
antislavery movement. Yet often these same women were denied the
right to participate in abolitionist conventions, causing them to conclude
that they had much in common with the enslaved African Americans for
whose freedom they worked. In July 1848, the ﬁrst Women’s Rights Con-
vention was held in Seneca Falls, New York, and was attended by such
leaders as Elizabeth Cady Stanton, Lucretia Mott, and Frederick Doug-
lass. The Declaration of Sentiments, written at this convention and signed
by its sixty-eight female and thirty-two male delegates, followed the
form of the Declaration of Independence as it highlighted the double
standard present in American society for men and women and called for
increased political and legal rights for women. The Seneca Falls conven-
tion is commonly referred to as the starting point for the organized
women’s rights movement in America—a struggle that continues today.
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS AND ACTIVITIES
1. Compare the Declaration of Sentiments to the Declaration of Indepen-
dence. What passages have been borrowed word for word? Where
were passages changed to suit the need of the Declaration of Senti-
ments? Why was the Declaration of Independence selected as the for-
mat to be followed by those attending the Seneca Falls convention?
2. Review the grievances listed in the Declaration of Sentiments. How
many deal with the right to vote? When were women ﬁnally awarded
this right on a national level? Note that the Declaration of Sentiments
calls for an “immediate admission” for the grievances listed. Why do
you think women were disenfranchised so long in this country?

Primary Source Sites
70
3. Review some of the other grievances listed by the Declaration of Sen-
timents. Do any listed here surprise you? How have many of these
conditions changed? Do some of these grievances continue today to
some extent? Which ones and why?
4. Study the logic of the argument put forth in the Declaration of Sen-
timents. How did Elizabeth Cady Stanton, the primary author of this
document, and the other delegates to the convention structure their
case? Is it convincing? What speciﬁc aspects of the declaration do you
consider the strongest? Are there parts that you do not support? What
type of rhetoric is used to persuade the reader to support their side?
5. The women’s movement of the 1840s was closely aligned with the
abolitionist movement at that time. Similarly, the women’s movement
of the 1960s was energized by the civil rights movement of that same
time period. Why do you think there were connections between these
two movements?
6. Study the history of the Equal Rights Amendment [one place to begin
would
be
(3a)
http://equalrightsamendment.org/history.htm].
Why was this proposed amendment written right after the passage of
the Nineteenth Amendment? In your opinion, what might be some
reasons why this amendment did not gain passage? Review some of
the rationale given in favor of its passage. Do you agree or disagree
and why?
RELATED INTERNET SITES
The Signers of the Declaration of Sentiments
http://www.rootsweb.com/~nyseneca/signers.htm
The complete list of those who signed the document may be studied at this
site.
Documents Concerning Women
http://www.huntington.org/vfw/artgal/index.html
This site holds seventy-eight primary documents, including pictures and var-
ious governmental and private documents concerning women.
The Equal Rights Amendment
http://equalrightsamendment.org/history.htm
The history of the Equal Rights Amendment may be found here.
4. FUGITIVE SLAVE ACT
URL: http://www.yale.edu/lawweb/avalon/fugitive.htm
In 1850 Congress engineered a deal between the North and the South in
an effort to keep the Union together. The temporary solution agreed

Political Science
71
upon was known as the Compromise of 1850. As part of the Compromise
of 1850 the Fugitive Slave Act was passed. This section of the compro-
mise became the most controversial in the North. The Fugitive Slave Act
required all citizens to assist in the return of any runaway slaves to their
owners and made the harboring of fugitive slaves in free states a crime.
The act also denied a jury trial to any slaves who had escaped. The
Fugitive Slave Act had several unintended results for the South. It gal-
vanized the abolitionist movement, increased the activity and resolve of
the Underground Railroad, and caused many Northern citizens who pre-
viously had been ambivalent to the “peculiar institution” of slavery to
take a strong position against it.
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS AND ACTIVITIES
1. Study some of the events that led up to the Compromise of 1850.
Among the chief concerns of both the North and South was the re-
curring issue of whether newly established states admitted into the
union were free or slave. The Missouri Compromise of 1820 had sup-
posedly put an end to those questions. What events occurred between
1820 and 1850 that caused this concern to continue to emerge?
2. In Section 5 of the Fugitive Slave Act, all “good citizens” are com-
manded to aid and assist in the return of runaway slaves. What is
your deﬁnition of a good citizen? How might some believe that the
role of a good citizen is to resist this law? Are there ever conditions
when a good citizen is required to disobey a law? If so, what might
those conditions be? Can you think of times in history when famous
citizens of a nation voluntarily resisted certain laws and were pun-
ished for doing so?
3. The Underground Railroad had been in effect for years prior to the
passage of the Fugitive Slave Act. Why after its passage did the Un-
derground Railroad reach its peak of activity in the north? Why was
the Underground Railroad in full effect all the way to Canada? What
do you suppose was the reaction of many free blacks who lived in
the North after the passage of this law?
4. Prior to the Fugitive Slave Act provisions in the Constitution and laws
passed by Congress required the return of runaway slaves to their
masters. Why did the South feel compelled to pass this additional
law? Eric Foner, a professor of history at Columbia University, makes
the point that the South claimed to be ﬁghting for states’ rights, and
yet, the Fugitive Slave Act called for federal agents to go into
Northern states and conduct business contrary to the wishes of those
states. How does the Fugitive Slave Act make a point contradictory
to the South’s case?

Primary Source Sites
72
5. Examine Section 8 of the Fugitive Slave Act. What business did this
essentially set up?
6. What penalty could be levied against one who did not obey the Fu-
gitive Slave Law? What would be your estimate of a modern-day
equivalent to the ﬁne? If you were a poor farmer with a family in the
North, what factors would you have to consider before deciding to
disobey this law? How does this impact your opinion of those who
did so?
RELATED INTERNET SITES
Africans in America
(4a) http://www.pbs.org/wgbh/aia/
This site, hosted by PBS, highlights America’s journey through slavery.
Harriet Tubman
(4b) http://www.nyhistory.com/harriettubman/life.htm
This site gives a biography of Harriet Tubman and relates her role in the
Underground Railroad.
Underground Railroad Rap
(4c) http://www.ushistory.com/ugrrfull.ram
This opens up a real player link to an underground railroad rap.
5. EMANCIPATION PROCLAMATION
URL: http://odur.let.rug.nl/~usa/P/a116/writings/emancip.htm
Shortly after the battle of Antietam in September 1862, President Abra-
ham Lincoln released the Emancipation Proclamation, which declared
free any slaves in the states still in rebellion against the Union as of
January 1, 1863. It was hoped by the Lincoln administration that the
Emancipation Proclamation would help gain foreign support for the
Union cause while simultaneously inspiring the Northern populace and
weakening the Southern war effort. Most historians agree that the proc-
lamation changed the whole meaning of the war. Until this point the
Civil War, from the Northern perspective, was about maintaining the
union. The proclamation made ofﬁcial the issue of ending slavery a ma-
jor component and transformed the Union Army into an army of liber-
ation. This site contains the text of the proclamation and has links to sites
which provide additional context to the speech.

Political Science
73
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS AND ACTIVITIES
1. The Emancipation Proclamation points out the speciﬁc states to which
the proclamation applies (and, therefore, where it does not apply).
Why were these states mentioned and other slave states not men-
tioned?
2. After the Emancipation Proclamation was released, William Seward,
Lincoln’s secretary of state, was said to have commented, “We show
our sympathy with slavery by emancipating slaves where we cannot
reach them and holding them in bondage where we can set them
free.” What was meant by this statement and why did the Union
follow this course of action?
3. Why was the proclamation released when it was? Why was the issue
of freeing slaves not mentioned until almost two years of the war had
passed?
4. Research Abraham Lincoln’s position on slavery throughout his po-
litical career. How does the proclamation represent a shift in his of-
ﬁcial position, and why do you believe this shift occurred at this time?
5. Study the political positions of the Copperheads and the Radical Re-
publicans, two prominent political parties in the North during the
civil war. Why did Lincoln often feel that he could satisfy neither of
these political factions regardless of what action he took? In what
ways do political parties today follow similar compromising positions
on controversial issues in order to keep their political party together?
6. The Emancipation Proclamation had practical effects as well as a
moral effect. In what way did the proclamation inﬂuence the actions
of African Americans, in both the North and the South, that was ben-
eﬁcial to the North’s cause?
RELATED INTERNET SITES
Emancipation Proclamation Document
(5a) http://www.pbs.org/wgbh/aia/part4/4h1549b.html
This site contains a photocopy copy of the original document.
Thirteenth Amendment
(5b) http://www.law.cornell.edu/constitution/constitution.amendmentxiii. html
Civil War Primary Sources
(5c) http://scrtec.org/track/tracks/f02004.html
This site contains an amazing amount of primary source documentation con-
cerning the Civil War. It has photo originals of documents concerning the war,
as well as transcripts of these documents.

Primary Source Sites
74
6. FOURTEENTH AMENDMENT
URL: http://www.nara.gov/exhall/charters/constitution/14th/
14th.html
As in war, the nation was split over the peace following the Civil War.
The South was resistant to the Reconstructionist policies of the Northern
Congress, and the federal government had a conﬂict between Congress,
controlled by the Radical Republicans and President Andrew Johnson,
from the Southern state of Tennessee. After Johnson vetoed the Civil
Rights Act in 1866, a law that attempted to ensure equal rights for blacks
despite black codes, Congress overrode his veto and proposed the Four-
teenth Amendment. This amendment, among other things, had the effect
of making the contents of the Civil Rights Act of 1866 part of the U.S.
Constitution. Although initially not accepted, due to the Southern states’
failure to ratify, this amendment did become part of the Constitution in
1868.
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS AND ACTIVITIES
1. How does Section 1 of the Fourteenth Amendment deﬁne citizen?
What is guaranteed and protected to citizens of the United States?
Note that the Fourteenth Amendment still does not guarantee the
right to vote to all citizens. Who is left out? Also notice that, for the
ﬁrst time, the term citizen is not capitalized in the Constitution. Some
argue that the Fourteenth Amendment established a new form of cit-
izen, a federal citizen, that had not existed before. On what grounds
can such an argument be made?
2. The Thirteenth Amendment abolished slavery. Why was the Four-
teenth Amendment still needed?
3. The Fourteenth Amendment, for the ﬁrst time, places restrictions on
states. How is this a signiﬁcant shift from the original Constitution?
Why was this done, how has this affected the relationship between
the federal government and the state governments, and what have
remained some of the implications of this?
4. Section 2 discusses how representatives should be numbered and ap-
portioned. Compare this to Section 2 of Article I of the Constitution
(the sentence beginning with “Representatives and direct Taxes shall
be apportioned”). Why has this changed and why was it originally
set up the way it was?
5. What do Sections 3 and 4 say about the Fourteenth Amendment? Why
were these added to the amendment, and what do you think the im-
pact of their addition was?

Political Science
75
6. Examine the numbers of African Americans who were congressmen
in the 1870s. View this as a percentage of Congress. Compare that
number to the late 1800s, the mid-1900s, and today. What trends and
cycles do you see, and what reasons might be attributed to these
changes? Go to (6a) http://ea.grolier.com/ea-online/wsja/text/
ch02/tables/pp019.htm and view recent trends. How do you inter-
pret these data, and what reasons might be given to support your
interpretations?
RELATED INTERNET SITES
Reconstruction
(6b) http://odur.let.rug.nl/~usa/H/1990/ch5_p11.htm
This site provides opposing views on Reconstruction from a project on Amer-
ican History containing outlines of American history and culture.
Civil Rights Act of 1866
(6c) http://www.americana.ru/cra1866.htm
This site provides a transcript of the Civil Rights Act of 1866.
Civil Rights Act of 1964
(6d) http://www.usbr.gov/laws/civil.html
This site provides a link to the Civil Rights Act of 1964 and other civil rights
legislation.
7. FORT LARAMIE TREATY
URL: http://www.pbs.org/weta/thewest/wpages/wpgs640/
ftlaram.htm
Fort Laramie, established as a military post along the Oregon Trail in
1849, served as an outpost for patrolling and protecting a long section
of that trail as well as maintaining and protecting telegraph and railroad
lines in later years. During times of trouble, it was a military command
post and staging area for troops. The fort also was the site of two im-
portant treaties between the United States and the Plains Indians. This
web site contains the second of these treaties, the Fort Laramie Treaty of
1868. For two years prior to this treaty, Red Cloud had conducted the
most successful military campaign ever against the United States by a
Native American people. His success on the ﬁeld of battle over a sus-
tained period of time was the main reason the United States agreed to
the Fort Laramie Treaty. This treaty essentially gave the Lakota Sioux
much of the western half of North and South Dakota (including the
sacred Black Hills territory). Unfortunately, the terms of the Fort Laramie
treaty were not honored for long. By the early 1870s, military campaigns

Primary Source Sites
76
were once again being waged against the Plains Indians. When gold was
discovered in the Black Hills in 1874, followed by the inevitable swarm
of miners, it became apparent that any hope of maintaining the original
integrity of the treaty was lost.
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS AND ACTIVITIES
1. Divide the class into pairs and assign each team an article of the treaty.
Have each team read their article, put it in their own words, and
present their ﬁndings to the rest of the class (some teams could be
assigned several of the shorter articles to summarize). Once the terms
of the treaty have been understood, hold a class discussion to deter-
mine how each side beneﬁted from the treaty. In what ways could
this be considered a fair agreement for both sides?
2. Study Article 2 in some detail with a map. Draw borders around the
territory designated for Indian settlement [you may wish to view
maps provided at (7a) http://helenamontana.com/LBH/FtLarTre.
htm]. Compare this map to a modern-day map of the territory show-
ing Sioux reservation lands. What happened?
3. Review Article 11. What terms did the Sioux agree to in order to make
this peace? Why was this an important aspect of the treaty for Amer-
ica at this time?
4. Study the history of this part of the nation during the decade that
followed the signing of this treaty. Even though the opening statement
of the treaty declares that “from this day forward all war between the
parties to this agreement shall for ever cease,” the peace was actually
short-lived. What major events led to the disregard of this treaty?
Hold a debate in which each side presents its case for the other side
being responsible for violating the treaty. Which side has the strongest
argument? Go to (7b) http://www.usd.edu/~ttroxel/tom.doc.htm
for a site entitled “Government Violations of the Fort Laramie Treaty
of 1868” for some additional information from a Native American
perspective.
5. Study the names of the signers of the treaty. Study how Native Amer-
icans received their names. What name would you be called if you
were named in a similar way in our culture? Note that Crazy Horse,
a major Sioux leader, was present but did not sign this treaty. Follow
the course of this leader in the years following the Fort Laramie
Treaty. When does his name most notably show up again in the his-
tory books?
6. The terms of the Fort Laramie Treaty remain an issue of hot debate
even today, especially in regard to the Black Hills area. Research the

Political Science
77
claims and demands put forth by present Native American people
over this territory [see (7c) http://www.prop1.org/caravan/coj06.
htm]. When Bill Bradley was a senator from New Jersey, he pro-
posed the return of a large portion of the Black Hills to the native
peoples, along with monetary compensation. What would be the pros
and cons of his proposal? Research your position on this argument
and present it to the class.
RELATED INTERNET SITES
Bureau of Indian Affairs
(7a) http://www.doi.gov/bureau-indian-affairs.html
This ofﬁcial web site for the U.S. Department of the Interior’s Bureau of Indian
Affairs contains dozens of related links.
U.S. and Native American Treaties
(7e) http://www.yale.edu/lawweb/avalon/ntreaty/ntreaty.htm
This site provides links to other treaties between the United States and Native
Americans.
National Park Service—Fort Laramie
(7f) http://www.nps.gov/fola/laramie.htm
The National Park service has a web site providing history, photos, and a
virtual tour of Fort Laramie.
Fort Laramie Treaty Document
(7g) http://www.nara.gov/exhall/originals/sioux.html
This site, from the National Archives and Records Administration, contains
pictures of the original Fort Laramie Treaty document.
8. THOMAS NAST HOMEPAGE
URL: http://www.buffnet.net/~starmist/nast/nast.htm
Thomas Nast is considered by many to be the father of American polit-
ical cartooning, and he remains to this day one of America’s best-known
political cartoonists. Although political cartoons had existed in America
and abroad for hundreds of years, no one had ever taken the art form
to the level of political savvy and effectiveness of Nast nor had anyone
ever become such a dominant inﬂuence in the ﬁeld. Nast used his pic-
tures to ﬁght vigorously against slavery during the Civil War, and then
he turned his pen toward the corruption of city bosses, most notably
Boss Tweed of New York City. He is also credited with inventing the
concept of the elephant as depicting the Republican party, the donkey
as the symbol for the Democratic party, and Uncle Sam and John Bull
as easily recognizable caricatures. Even our notion of Santa Claus, as

Primary Source Sites
78
depicted in Clement Clarke Moore’s The Night Before Christmas, comes
from Thomas Nast.
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS AND ACTIVITIES
1. Read some of the history of Thomas Nast and his times as provided
on this Internet web site. Note the impact that this one political car-
toonist had on public opinion (for example, the election of 1871 or on
every presidential election of the day). How do you account for such
inﬂuence? Can you think of any comparable political cartoonist or
political pundit today?
2. Discuss the importance of a free press for Nast to have had the impact
he did. What documents and events had paved the way for such free-
doms in this country up to the time Nast published his work? What
ﬁgures today use politics as their main arena to poke fun at or to
lambaste, and what mass media do they typically use?
3. Click on several of the political cartoons presented at this site. What
made these pictures so powerful? What techniques are used by Nast
to gather and mold public opinion? Why were these political cartoons
more inﬂuential on public opinion than other commonly used means
of the day such as public speeches?
4. Most political cartoons, also referred to as “editorial cartoons,” have
four questions that can be answered when interpreting them. One is,
“What is the news event that prompted this cartoon or why is this
cartoon being drawn now?” A second question is, “What is literally
going on in this picture?” In other words, describe what you see hap-
pening in the picture. A third question is, “What caricatures are being
used in the cartoon to represent who or what?” Finally, one should
ask, “What is the editorial comment being made by the cartoonist?”
Apply these four questions to one or more of Nast’s cartoons.
5. Select several political cartoons from your local newspaper and an-
swer the questions posed in the previous activity.
6. Choose a current event, political topic, or controversial issue that you
feel strongly about. Draw your own political cartoon. As class mem-
bers share their cartoons, discuss each of the four questions posed
about the editorial cartoons you have drawn.
RELATED INTERNET SITES
Other Political Cartoonists
(8a) http://cagle.slate.msn.com/politicalcartoons/

Political Science
79
A database of the work of over sixty current political cartoonists is contained
on this site.
Samuel Tilden
(8b) http://www.bozosoft.com/mike/writings/tilden.html
Information on New York Democrat Samuel J. Tilden, a self-proclaimed “op-
ponent of Tammany Hall,” is provided here.
Thomas Nast Biography
(8c) http://www.boondocksnet.com/cartoons/cartoons_nast03.html
9. SHERMAN ANTI-TRUST ACT OF 1890
URL: http://www.stolaf.edu/people/becker/antitrust/statutes/
sherman.html
The Sherman Anti-Trust Act was the ﬁrst legislation enacted by the U.S.
Congress to curb concentrations of power that interfere with trade and
reduce economic competition. Introduced by Senator John Sherman from
Ohio and passed in 1890, the act’s main provisions outlawed combina-
tions that restrain trade between states or with foreign nations and made
illegal all attempts to monopolize any part of trade or commerce in the
United States. The Sherman Act, however, remained difﬁcult to enforce,
in part due to the vague language used in the law. This law represented,
however, one of the ﬁrst major steps made to regulate big business dur-
ing this period of industrial growth and labor unrest in our nation. In
the early 1900s, Congress was able to use the act to break up two large
monopolies: Standard Oil Company and the American Tobacco Com-
pany.
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS AND ACTIVITIES
1. Read over Sections 1 and 2 of the Sherman Anti-Trust Act. Put these
sections into your own words. Pay particular attention to deﬁning
clearly the following concepts: trust, conspiracy, monopolize, and fel-
ony.
2. Review Sections 6 and 7. What is the ruling of monopolies as they
apply toward foreign nations? Why do you think a distinction is made
here? How are “persons” deﬁned in this law and why?
3. Click on the link at the top of the page labeled “Statutes.” Go to the
link “the Clayton Antitrust Act (1914).” Compare this legislation to
the Sherman Anti-Trust Act. How are these two acts similar? Differ-
ent? What does this legislation add that was not part of the Sherman

Primary Source Sites
80
Act? Why do you believe the Clayton Act was necessary to pass this
additional legislation at this time?
4. Go to (9a) http://k7moa.gsia.cmu.edu/antitrst.htm. This site con-
tains excerpts from the Sherman Anti-Trust Act as well as a brief
history of the law and some commentary related to it. After reading
the historical background, summarize this author’s thoughts on why
the Sherman Anti-Trust Act was important legislation for this time in
American history. Compare and contrast the economic conditions of
the late nineteenth century to those of today.
5. Go to the site (9b) http://www.history.ohio-state.edu/projects/coal/
1902AnthraciteStrike/. This will lead to a series of pictures and
drawings of the coal mining conditions of the time. Also included is
a text from Frank Leslie’s Popular Monthly of November 1900. Have
the students read portions of the text to determine the working con-
ditions of the mines at that time and the arguments put forth by the
miners for the strike. Students could also try to link some pictures
with the supporting text (for example, the picture of “an unsatisfac-
tory paycheck” could be supported by the risks involved with the job
and the salary paid).
6. Discuss in class the current status of monopolies in this country. Re-
view the Microsoft rulings which were handed down in the year 2000.
What connections can you make between how the court viewed Mi-
crosoft and the Sherman Anti-Trust Act?
RELATED INTERNET SITES
History of the Labor Movement
(9c) http://members.tripod.com/~RedRobin2/index-25.html
This site has numerous links related to the history of the labor movement in
this country. Included is an archive of the Haymarket Riot. It also includes
women in the labor movement and child labor laws.
The Molly McGuires
(9d) http://www.history.ohio-state.edu/projects/Coal/MollyMaguire/mollyma-
guires.htm
The Molly McGuires were a band of Irish immigrant coal miners who fought
for better working conditions in the coal ﬁelds of Pennsylvania. This is an article
from an 1894 McClure’s Magazine on the Molly McGuires, as told from the per-
spective of an undercover Pinkerton detective.

THE TWENTIETH CENTURY
1. CHILD LABOR
URL: http://www.historyplace.com/unitedstates/childlabor/
Child labor remains an important international issue because a multitude
of children continue to work in horrendous conditions around the world.
The United States has not been immune to the abuse of children in the
labor process. The beginning of the twentieth century in America saw
widespread use of children working long hours in unsafe conditions.
However, it was also at this time that the progressive era began to initiate
some reform measures into multiple areas, including child labor. The
ﬁrst substantial inroad against child labor occurred with the passage of
the Child Labor Act in 1916 under President Woodrow Wilson and the
newly elected progressive Democrats. Until that time, child labor was so
widely accepted a practice that even Wilson had previously blocked leg-
islation outlawing child labor for fear of going against what he believed
to be the mainstream political thought in America. This site contains
pictures by Lewis Hine of children (some as young as three years old)
working in mines, ﬁelds, docks, farms, and factories across America from
1908 through 1912.
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS AND ACTIVITIES
1. Examine the pictures of these children. What common features do you
see in their expressions and features? Think back to what you were
doing when you were seven or eight years old and compare your
typical day with what you believe was their typical day. If children
were working as they did then, what were they not doing?
2. Why were children so prevalent in the workforce 100 years ago? What
conditions existed (and what conditions did not exist) that allowed
and promoted this practice? Why did employers often hire children
instead of adults to do the same work?
3. Click on the pictures and read the passages under the heading of “the
Mill.” React to the safety conditions that existed at that time and to
the logic put forth by the overseer on why certain children were hired.

Primary Source Sites
82
4. Review the pictures and quotes under the heading of the “Newsies.”
Children today have paper routes and, therefore, work for newspaper
companies. What are the differences, however, between having a
newspaper route and the work and hours done by these “newsies”?
5. Divide the class into groups and have each group study one of the
following categories: miners, factory workers, seafood workers, fruit
pickers, and struggling families. Have each group report and, as a
class, develop a composite of the working hours, conditions, and pay
of the time period.
6. Have the class go to (1a) http://www.nclnet.org/child%20labor/
fact1.htm and read some of the current laws and restrictions on child
labor. Compare this to what the conditions were 100 years ago. Dis-
cuss these laws and determine if they seem fair today or if more or
less restrictions on child labor should be implemented.
RELATED INTERNET SITES
Child Labor Coalition
(1b) http://www.nclnet.org/child%20labor/clc2.htm
This site is the web page of the Child Labor coalition which is determined to
ﬁght for children’s rights in labor. It gives the history of child labor along with
federal regulations and helpful hints for teenagers looking for jobs.
Current Labor Issues
(1c) http://www.summersault.com/~agj/clr/index.html
This site has up-to-date listings of labor problems in the United States as well
as in the rest of the world. It includes sites on such companies as Nike, Guess,
and Disney. The plight of various laborers is discussed on these pages.
2. JIM CROW LAWS
URL: http://www.nps.gov/malu/documents/jim crow
laws.htm
Following the Civil War, the passage of the Thirteenth and Fourteenth
Amendments, and Reconstruction, many states throughout America
passed laws to maintain and enforce segregation and to disenfranchise
African Americans. These laws were reinforced with the landmark U.S.
Supreme Court decision Plessy v. Ferguson, which upheld the legality of
the principle of “separate but equal.” Such laws, commonly called “Jim
Crow” laws, were enacted to keep blacks separate from whites in public
places like restaurants, restrooms, transportation vehicles, and schools.
It was only through the persistent courageous acts of many individuals
that these laws were overturned. However, the legacy of the Jim Crow
laws remains an important part of our country as the nation battles for

Political Science
83
fair treatment for all. This site, created by the Martin Luther King, Jr.,
National Historic Site staff, has a sampling of Jim Crow laws.
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS AND ACTIVITIES
1. Review the laws found on these pages. Notice the wide scope of the
laws. If you were an African American living during this period in
these states, what aspects of your life would be affected? Which areas,
if any, would not be affected by these laws? Which categories of laws
are found in multiple states? Which laws strike you as being the most
unusual?
2. This represents only a partial list of Jim Crow laws, and it should be
remembered that states in all regions of the country had some form
of discriminatory legislation. However, reviewing this list, in which
parts of the country would the Jim Crow laws have been most prev-
alent and inclusive? Why was this? Are there any states listed here
that surprise you? Research your own state to ﬁnd out the history of
Jim Crow laws in your area.
3. This site lists the dates 1880 through 1960 as the era in which many
American states enforced Jim Crow laws. Although this may seem
long ago, many current American citizens were raised and lived
through part of this time period. Locate an individual in your com-
munity who might have been affected by such laws, and ask him or
her to talk to your class about the impact of these laws on one person.
4. What do you think were the social effects of these laws? What mes-
sages did these laws send to generations of children, of every ethnic-
ity, raised where these laws were enforced?
5. What do you think were the ﬁnancial impacts of these laws? Where
duplicate facilities were required for almost every aspect of public life,
and since resources were limited, what do you think often resulted?
6. Although Jim Crow laws have been declared unconstitutional, dis-
crimination and segregation continue. Why is this and how can it
happen? What is the difference, both technically and realistically, be-
tween legal segregation and de facto segregation? What are the pros
and cons of segregation by choice?
RELATED INTERNET SITES
Newspaper Articles on Jim Crow Laws
(2a) http://www.nilevalley.net/history/jimcrow_art1.html
Each site gives a short newspaper article related to Jim Crow legislation be-
ginning in the 1880s.

Primary Source Sites
84
An Analysis of Jim Crow Laws and Their Effects on Race Relations
(2b) http://www.cis.yale.edu/ynhti/curriculum/units/1996/1/96.01.01.x.html
From the Yale-New Haven Teachers Institute, this site gives lesson plans,
teacher materials, and bibliographies to help teach elementary children about this
topic.
Sit-ins
(2c) http://www.si.edu/i%2bd/sitins.arc.html
Sit-ins were a reliable tactic used to help combat the Jim Crow laws. This site
has signs, pictures, and real audio songs of the sit-ins.
3. PROHIBITION
URL: http://www.cohums.ohio-state.edu/history/projects/
prohibition/Contents.htm
Another example of the social legislation being enacted during the pro-
gressive era of the early twentieth century was the Eighteenth Amend-
ment. This amendment outlawed the manufacturing, selling, and
importing of liquor by Americans (although, oddly enough, not its con-
sumption). This amendment was passed in 1919, but it is important to
remember that the outlawing of alcohol took an extraordinary amount
of political perseverance and maneuvering by many groups since the
latter half of the nineteenth century. By the time the Eighteenth Amend-
ment became the law of the land, many states had been pressured by
groups such as the Prohibition party, the Woman’s Christian Temper-
ance Union, and the Anti-Saloon League to pass some form of prohibi-
tion—at least for a short time. Immediately after the ratiﬁcation of the
Eighteenth Amendment, debate began over the wisdom of its passage.
Even many Progressives did not necessarily favor prohibition but be-
lieved it might help protect society from the vices associated with alcohol
abuse. This great social experiment lasted only fourteen years until the
passage of the Twenty-ﬁrst Amendment in 1933. This site looks at the
argument being waged over Prohibition during the 1920s.
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS AND ACTIVITIES
1. Click on the Federal Council of Churches 1926 statement. This rep-
resents this council’s position of support for national prohibition.
What are the arguments this organization puts forth? Do they make
sense to you? What language does this statement contain that reveals
the biases against alcohol of the organization? Can you ﬁnd any log-
ical inconsistencies in the statement?

Political Science
85
2. The Federal Council of Churches statement also compares prohibition
to the trade of narcotics. Where is this analogy helpful and where
does this analogy break down? What are some of the differences be-
tween Prohibition and the selling and consumption of illegal drugs?
3. The Federal Council of Churches statement makes a good point in
that the policy of Prohibition was not “foisted upon the country by a
puritanical minority” but, instead, went through all legal channels and
was formally adopted as part of the U.S. Constitution. Does it not
seem odd that, after such a lengthy process, so many people would
still oppose it, and, in fact, ignore it? What might be some reasons for
the dualistic behavior of the nation during this time?
4. Click on “Fiorella LaGuardia testiﬁes against prohibition.” Who was
LaGuardia and what is his case against prohibition? What are the
strong points and weak points of his case?
5. Can you think of any situations today that might be comparable to
Prohibition? What issues today cause individuals to take sides on one
side or the other? One of the points of contention against Prohibition
was the inability to enforce it. Do you agree with this criticism? Do
some of the issues that arise today have a similar case against outlaw-
ing them?
6. Summarize what you think or hope America learned about the Pro-
hibition experiment.
RELATED INTERNET SITES
Anti-Saloon League
(3a) http://www.wpl.lib.oh.us/AntiSaloon/
This site gives a history of the Anti-Saloon League, including the documents
that the league used to promote their cause. In addition, classroom activities are
available which promote the temperance movement.
Prohibition Party
(3b) http://www.prohibition.org/
This site gives the history of the Prohibition party. Portraits of the founders of
the party are presented. Quotes and historical documents are included as well.
4. RED SCARE
URL: http://newman.baruch.cuny.edu/digital/redscare/
HTMLCODE/CHRON/C13_24.HTM
The years immediately following World War I and continuing through
the early 1920s were a time of great uncertainty and upheaval in Amer-

Primary Source Sites
86
ica. Many of the ideals held in high regard during the progressive era
seemed naı¨ve and irrelevant to a world devastated by the ﬁrst world
war. During these few years, Americans witnessed a national inﬂuenza
epidemic, labor unrest and riots, an incapacitated president, high inﬂa-
tion, Prohibition, and women’s suffrage. The Communist seizure of
power during the Bolshevik Revolution in Russia in 1917, combined with
a high immigration rate from Eastern Europe to America following
World War I, added to a feeling many Americans had of “losing control”
of their country. The Red Scare was one result of the social and political
uncertainty of the period—an almost hysterical fear of “Red” threats
within the United States from Bolsheviks, anarchists, and “subversive”
aliens. The web site listed here contains political cartoons from 1918 to
1921, many of which deal with the Red Scare.
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS AND ACTIVITIES
1. Click on picture 14 (enlarge it again if necessary by scrolling down
and clicking on “larger image”). Interpret this editorial cartoon. What
message is the illustrator sending here?
2. Click on 15, 16, 17, and 22 and respond as you did to activity 1 above.
Against which different groups are these editorial cartoons speaking
out?
3. Based on these cartoons, how would you characterize the mood of
the country following World War I? America emerged from this war
as a reluctant world leader. What evidence of this reluctance can be
seen in some of these political cartoons?
4. Look at editorial cartoon 18 (enlarge as needed). What are some of
the issues addressed in this cartoon? The world is clearly represented
in this picture by a globe, but who do you think the globe more ac-
curately portrays? According to Walter Lippmann, a political com-
mentator of the day, this was a time during which “right-thinking
men” were “scared out of their wits.” How is this cartoon represen-
tative of this feeling?
5. At the top of the page, there are links to the “previous 12” and the
“next 12” political cartoons. Skim these cartoons (as well as others this
site is linked to—you can keep linking to the next 12 and so on) and
discuss some of the pressing issues of the day other than the Red Scare
that were on Americans’ minds during 1919 and 1920. President War-
ren G. Harding was elected to the presidency with a slogan of “Return
to Normalcy.” How do these cartoons help you understand the appeal
of this slogan to the general public in 1920?

Political Science
87
6. There was another Red Scare in America during the twentieth century.
Research when this scare occurred and draw comparisons between
the causes, targets, degree of hysteria, and length of the two Red
Scares. What generalizations may be drawn from studying these two
events?
RELATED INTERNET SITES
McCarthyism
(4a) http://www.wms-arl.org/mccarthy.htm
This web site contains information on McCarthyism and the Red Scare of the
1950s.
Presidential Election of 1920
(4b) http://rs6.loc.gov/ammem/nfexpe.html
This site contains information on the presidential election of 1920 and Har-
ding’s call to a “Return to Normalcy.”
5. FIRST HUNDRED DAYS OF THE NEW DEAL
URL: http://newdeal.feri.org/index.htm
A new era of government was born with the presidency of Franklin D.
Roosevelt and the Great Depression, which led to Roosevelt’s famous
program, the New Deal. Originally designed to help combat the De-
pression, it led to a whole system of governmental works. A vast amount
of governmental agencies resulted from the New Deal programs. By 1939
Roosevelt was nearing the end of his second term, World War II had
begun in Europe, and over ﬁve million persons previously unemployed
were back at work. Still, the recovery remained only partially complete
(over eight million workers remained unemployed); it would take Amer-
ica’s involvement in World War II to achieve full economic recovery.
This site has over 4,000 photographs, seventeen interviews with Works
Progress Administration with (WPA) workers, and a research database,
all related to the New Deal of the 1930s. It also contains a very good
classroom site with lesson plans and web projects. The discussion ques-
tions and activities below focus on the ﬁrst hundred days of the Roo-
sevelt administration.
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS AND ACTIVITIES
1. Click on “document library” and then on “subject.” Scroll down and
click on “ﬁreside chats.” Click on “the bank crisis” and then, again,
on “Title: On the Bank Crisis:” This will bring up the text of one of

Primary Source Sites
88
Roosevelt’s ﬁrst ﬁreside chats. Read this text. What is the “crisis” that
brought about this ﬁreside chat? Why were his talks called ﬁreside
chats?
2. Look at the language used in this speech. How would you character-
ize it? What is Roosevelt trying to do here? What was the mood of
the country at this time, and what techniques did Roosevelt use to try
to offset this mood?
3. Radio, which had become a household item by the early 1930s, was
still a relatively new mass medium. How did Roosevelt recognize and
take advantage of its power to inﬂuence? Click on (5a) http://
www.old-time.com/fdr39.ram or (5b) http://www.old-time.com/
fdr39.ram to hear excerpts from later ﬁreside chats. What additional
information can you pick up about Roosevelt’s style and purpose from
listening to his speeches?
4. Click on “Outlining the New Deal Program” under the heading of
“ﬁreside chats.” Review this text. What rationale does Roosevelt use
to explain to the American people what steps he has taken so far and
why? What future programs and legislation does Roosevelt outline in
this speech? Research the history of some of these programs and dis-
cuss the impact, both short term and long term, they had on the na-
tion.
5. What techniques did Roosevelt use to explain the New Deal—a pro-
gram many conservatives at the time blasted as radical—so that it
seems simple, straightforward, and logical? How did he appeal to
both ends of the political spectrum?
6. Go to (5c) http://www.nisk.k12.ny.us/fdr and click on cartoons.
Then click on “The First One-Hundred Days.” View the editorial car-
toons labeled “Of Course The Operation Will Be Serious But So Is The
Disease” and “Conﬁdence In Your Doctor Is Half The Battle.” Com-
pare these two cartoons. In what ways are the messages of these car-
toons similar and in what ways are they different? How is the
“Conﬁdence” cartoon similar to what Roosevelt was doing with the
ﬁreside chats?
RELATED INTERNET SITES
New Deal Timeline
(5d) http://www.libarts.sfasu.edu/history/134_Unit%207B.html
This site contains a timeline of the Roosevelt administration’s New Deal pol-
icies.
FDR Presidential Library and Museum
(5e) http://www.fdrlibrary.marist.edu/

Political Science
89
The homepage of the FDR Presidential Library and Museum, this site contains
over 10,000 digitized documents from this time period.
6. WORLD WAR II POSTERS
URL: http://americanhistory.si.edu/victory/index.htm
Posters were the primary means of rallying public support during World
War I. Following World War I, much of this responsibility was taken on
by newer communication media such as radio, movies, billboards, and,
eventually, television. Still, posters remained an important mass medium
communicator because of their advantages in cost, mobility, and the ca-
pacity for quick-hitting propaganda techniques. Posters therefore re-
mained an important contributor to the mobilization effort throughout
World War II. Public support during times of national crisis was, and is,
essential for success. Posters from World War II, such as the ones shown
here, helped galvanize the public war effort providing money, morale
support, industrial support, and conservation of vital war materials.
They were considered invaluable. This site was organized by the Na-
tional Museum of American History, the Smithsonian Institution, and
the Smithsonian Institution Traveling Exhibition Service (SITES). World
War II posters are organized into six American home front categories.
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS AND ACTIVITIES
1. Click on the link to “Every Citizen a Soldier.” The top of this web
page states that “wartime posters united the power of art with the
power of advertising techniques.” Look at the posters on this page as
well as others. Give examples of how the posters unite the power of
art with the power of advertising techniques.
2. Discuss forms of advertising used today. Why are posters not a com-
mon medium for advertising today? In what way are posters used
today (where do you commonly see them)? How are the advertising
techniques used today similar to those used in these World War II
posters?
3. Divide the class into groups and assign each group one of the cate-
gories listed (Every Citizen a Soldier, the Poster’s Place in War Time,
Retooling for Victory: The Factory Front, Efﬁcient Workers, War Aims
Through Art: The U.S. Ofﬁce of War Information, and Fighting an
Ideal America). Have each group study the messages and techniques
used for their category. Have each group also look for propaganda
techniques used by the posters. For more information on common
propaganda
techniques,
refer
to
(6a)
http://carmen.artsci.

Primary Source Sites
90
washington.edu/propaganda/contents.htm. Discuss the question,
“Why is it so important to have a uniﬁed home front during a time
of national crisis?” When was the home front not united?
4. Under the heading “The Poster’s Place in Wartime” ﬁnd the poster
entitled “Remember Pearl Harbor/Purl Harder.” What is the double
meaning in this poster? What emotion is the poster evoking? Who
speciﬁcally and who generally was this poster designed to motivate?
5. Look at the following posters: “Battle Stations,” “It’s a Two Fisted
Fight,” “Killing Time Is Killing Men,” “Thanks for Loaﬁng Pal!,”
“Strong Is the Strength of the Lord,” and “Give ‘em Both Barrels.”
What is the similar message in all of these posters? How is a double
meaning used in each?
6. Select an issue or current event with which you or your group asso-
ciates. Conceive and design a poster, such as the ones demonstrated
on these sites, that states your position and attempts to persuade oth-
ers to your position.
RELATED INTERNET SITES
It’s a Woman’s War Too!
(6b) http://www.nara.gov/exhall/powers/women.html
This site encourages women to join the war effort by working in the factory
and supporting the men in the war.
War Bond Support
(6c) http://www.nara.gov/exhall/powers/bond.wav
A downloadable war bond song is available here.
7. TRUMAN AND THE DECISION TO DROP THE BOMB
URL: http://www.mtholyoke.edu/acad/intrel/hiroshim.htm
The horriﬁc power that was displayed to the world in the bombing of
Japan by the United States left an indelible mark. The use of the atomic
bomb showed the world the power of such a tool and the responsibility
needed by those who control such a weapon. The decision to use nuclear
weapons to shorten the length of World War II was, ultimately, in the
hands of President Harry S. Truman. Truman had taken over the job of
the presidency only a few months earlier following the death of President
Franklin D. Roosevelt. Since the bombing, there has been much debate
surrounding this controversial and difﬁcult decision. Although initial re-
actions in America to the bombings, and the subsequent surrender of
Japan (following the second nuclear attack), were overwhelmingly pos-

Political Science
91
itive, organizations sprang up almost overnight to protest the use of
nuclear weapons. Many of these organizations remain active and con-
tinue to act as watchdogs over our government’s nuclear policy. This site
has an enormous amount of resources pertaining to the bombing of Hi-
roshima, Japan. It includes a list of documents showing some the infor-
mation used by ofﬁcials to determine whether to drop the bomb. It also
includes articles that voice different views on the debate.
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS AND ACTIVITIES
1. Click on the link “HIROSHIMA: HARRY TRUMAN’S DIARY AND
PAPERS.” Review the ﬁrst three journal entries (4/12/45, 5/17/45,
and 3/3/48). What position did Truman feel he was put in after Roo-
sevelt’s death? The importance of a president and a vice president
working closely together seems imperative, especially during a time
of crisis. Given the phrase “the vice president is only a heartbeat away
from the presidency,” why do you think Truman and Roosevelt did
not have more of a working relationship? What are some of the rea-
sons for selecting vice presidential candidates?
2. Review the timeline during which Truman learned more about the
atomic bomb, its existence, its availability, and its potential for de-
struction. Where was Truman when he gathered much of this infor-
mation, and how was this information used during the negotiations
he was engaged in? Why was more information not shared during
these negotiations? Why was more information shared with Winston
Churchill than with Joseph Stalin?
3. Review the entries in Truman’s diary and papers. What was the ra-
tionale he used for dropping the atomic bomb? In his explanation for
the bombing to the American public, and later in his defense of the
bombing to some who opposed the use of atomic weapons, how did
Truman characterize the Japanese? In your opinion, was he justiﬁed
in making these characterizations? What reasons do people have for
describing their enemies, either in words or in pictures, in terms that
are less than human?
4. What might have been some alternatives to bombing Hiroshima (and
Nagasaki a few days later)? Make a case in favor of the bombing of
Hiroshima and against the bombing. For additional information you
may wish to go to the links “Hiroshima: Was It Necessary?” and “Hi-
roshima: Ralph Bard’s Alternative to A-bombing Japan.”
5. What evidence is there that Truman may have had second thoughts
about his decision to drop the bomb, and what were the reasons for
these second thoughts? In several places in the diaries and papers,

Primary Source Sites
92
Truman indicates that the atomic bomb was to be used on a military
base and that all efforts would be made to avoid the killing of civil-
ians. How could such an important decision be made without more
accurate information? In your opinion, based on reading the diary,
did Truman really believe that Hiroshima was primarily a military
base? What lessons could citizens learn about the use of such misin-
formation? Have there been other times (less dramatic to be sure)
when errors have been made regarding the location or characteristics
of an intended bombing target?
6. One of the arguments put forth for the dropping of the atomic bomb
is that the United States was fearful that the Soviet Union would enter
the war in the Paciﬁc and, after having a favorable impact on the
victory, would want to negotiate a large sphere of inﬂuence in Asia.
Refer to the last sections of the diaries and papers and respond to this
argument. From Truman’s point of view, to what extent did the So-
viets’ timing for entering the war in the Paciﬁc inﬂuence his decision?
RELATED INTERNET SITES
Hiroshima and Nagasaki
(7a) http://www.fas.org/nuke/hew/Japan/Hirosh.html
This site contains pictures of the Hiroshima and Nagasaki bombings as well
as some pictures of the victims.
Harry S. Truman Library and Museum
(7b) http://www.trumanlibrary.org/
This site of the Harry S. Truman Library and Museum has links to almost
every aspect of the Truman presidency and also has classroom activities and a
kids’ page.
8. NIXON-KENNEDY DEBATE
URL: http://www.historychannel.com/cgi-bin/framed.cgi
The 1960 presidential campaign between John F. Kennedy and Richard
M. Nixon is one of the most discussed elections ever. The modern era of
campaigning is said to have started with the Nixon-Kennedy “debates”
that occurred during this election campaign. These ﬁrst televised debates,
viewed by over 80 million Americans, demonstrated the power of tele-
vision in inﬂuencing voters. A young, vibrant Kennedy, wearing makeup
and a blue suit, beat Nixon, who looked worn and pale without makeup
and dressed in a darker suit, in polls of people who watched the debate
on television. Yet, a majority of radio listeners believed that Nixon had
won the debate. This site has an audio version of a portion of the fourth
debate between Kennedy and Nixon (speciﬁcally, parts of the closing

Political Science
93
statements of each candidate are included here). The fourth debate fo-
cused primarily on the candidates’ positions on foreign policy. To get to
the debate, proceed with the following sequence. Click on “Great
Speeches” and then on the link “politics and government.” Scroll to the
bottom of that link and click on “speech archive.” When the speech ar-
chive link comes up, click on the letters “F-K” at the top of the page,
and then scroll down and click on the “John F. Kennedy, U.S. senator of
Massachusetts; Richard M. Nixon, U.S. vice president, Fourth Presiden-
tial Debate.”
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS AND ACTIVITIES
1. Listen to the audio of the presidential debate. Remember that this is
the end of the fourth debate between the two candidates. How would
you describe their individual styles and demeanor toward each other?
With only this short audio excerpt to go by, what descriptors would
you use to describe each man and his position on foreign policy?
2. In 1960 Kennedy was a relatively young senator from Massachusetts,
and Nixon was just ﬁnishing his eighth year as vice president. What
do you think each candidate hoped to demonstrate to the American
people by participating in these televised debates?
3. During this campaign, it is important to remember that Nixon rep-
resented the incumbent political party (Republican), and Kennedy
represented the challenging political party (Democratic). With this
context in mind, what language did each candidate use to describe
how America had fared during the last eight years (or, in Kennedy’s
words, the last twenty-ﬁve years)?
4. Summarize what each candidate believes should be done during the
next few years.
5. In these closing statements, what techniques does each candidate use
to promote his own accomplishments and positions while downplay-
ing those of his political opponent?
6. Go to (8a) http://v1.cs.umb.edu/jfklibrary/60–4th.htm. This site
has the full text of the fourth Kennedy/Nixon debate. Review this text
in its entirety and determine, based on the strength of each candidate’s
arguments and positions, as well as your own political dispositions,
who you believe “won” this debate. Be prepared to back up your
opinion with speciﬁcs.
RELATED INTERNET SITES
Audio Links of the 1960 Campaign
(8b) http://www.si.edu/id/debate.arc.html

Primary Source Sites
94
This Smithsonian Institution site has audio links related to the 1960 presidential
campaign.
Television versus Radio on the Debates
(8c) http://www.sas.upenn.edu/~kristen2/second.html
This site contains pictures, statistics, and opinions related to the famous de-
bates. The site also has links to other famous political sound bites and quotes.
9. MARTIN LUTHER KING, JR.—“I HAVE A DREAM”
URL: http://odur.let.rug.nl/~usa/D/1951–1975/mlk/dream.htm
During the summer of 1963, over 200,000 individuals from around the
country merged on Washington, D.C., to demand civil rights legislation
and greater economic and political opportunities for African Americans.
The culmination of this protest march was a speech given by Martin
Luther King, Jr., on the steps of the Lincoln Memorial. Regarded by
many as the key political ﬁgure in the civil rights movement, King
helped shaped America in the 1950s and 1960s. His unparalleled oration
skills remain part of his legacy. His “I Have a Dream” speech is shown
at this site.
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS AND ACTIVITIES
1. Study the timing, location, and opening language of this speech. How
are all three related? When have other marches occurred in Washing-
ton and at the Lincoln Memorial and for what causes? Why does this
march on Washington, almost forty years later, remain the most fa-
mous?
2. Early in this speech, King refers to three important American docu-
ments. What were these and why did King reference them? Review
these documents and ﬁnd speciﬁc passages in each that support
King’s case in his speech.
3. King was a master of the rhythm and sound of language. Review this
document and look for examples of where rhythm and poetic lan-
guage are used to help make his points in a powerful way.
4. King often used analogies and metaphors to help clarify his points.
Review the document and ﬁnd as many of these as you can. Why
were these useful in helping people across America better understand
the purpose and the passion of the March on Washington?
5. King stressed urgency of action early in the speech and cautioned
against the “tranquilizing drug of gradualism.” What did he mean by
that?

Political Science
95
6. Review the history of the civil rights movement since King’s famous
speech. What progress has been made in what areas? In what ways
does the dream remain unrealized? If King were alive today, how do
you think he would assess this progress?
RELATED INTERNET SITES
Martin Luther King, Jr., Papers Project
(9a) http://www.stanford.edu/group/King/
The Martin Luther King, Jr., Papers Project is housed at Stanford University,
which has done an excellent job of chronicling all of King’s papers made public.
Writings include “I’ve Been to the Mountaintop,” “Letters from Birmingham
Jail,” and an address during the March on Washington for Jobs and Freedom.
Sermons and other speeches are also available.
More on Martin Luther King, Jr.
(9b) http://www.seattletimes.com/mlk/
This comprehensive web site includes a teachers’ guide and many classroom
activities.
10. WATERGATE AND NIXON’S RESIGNATION
URL: http://cnn.com/ALLPOLITICS/1997/gen/resources/
watergate/
Richard M. Nixon was overwhelmingly reelected to the presidency in
1972, carrying forty-nine of the ﬁfty states. His second term, however,
was overshadowed by the Watergate scandal. Watergate, so named for
the apartments in which Republican partisans were arrested when they
attempted to “bug” the ofﬁces of the Democratic headquarters, was a
prolonged ordeal of investigations, attempted cover-ups, court actions,
and impeachment proceedings. Nixon’s resignation from the ofﬁce of the
presidency on August 9, 1974, ﬁnally put an end the two-year scandal
that had tested the rule of law in the United States as well as the U.S.
Constitution. He was the ﬁrst president to resign from the presidency.
This site provides the reader with an overview of what Watergate was,
transcripts of Nixon’s resignation and farewell speeches, and some audio
clips of Nixon denying the cover-up.
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS AND ACTIVITIES
1. Scroll down until you see, on the left side of the page, “Transcripts.”
Click on “Nixon’s resignation speech.” Read this speech. What lan-

Primary Source Sites
96
guage does Nixon use to characterize himself, particularly in the be-
ginning and at the end of this speech?
2. Look at paragraphs three through eight of this speech. What reasons
does Nixon give for his resigning the presidency? What does it mean
to not have a “strong enough political base in the Congress”? Is a
strong political base in Congress a necessary condition for a president?
Review the times that both houses of Congress have been controlled
by the political party opposite from the president. Did those presi-
dents have a strong political base in Congress? What did Nixon fear
from not having this political base?
3. In his resignation speech, Nixon refers to Vice President Gerald Ford’s
taking over the duties and responsibilities of the presidency. Who was
Nixon’s vice president when he was reelected in 1972? How and why
did Ford become vice president? When Ford became president, in
what unique position was he placed?
4. About halfway through the speech, Nixon acknowledged that some
of his judgments were wrong, but he justiﬁed these judgments by
stating that “they were made in what I believed at the time to be the
best interest of the Nation.” Nixon also spent about one-third of his
speech reviewing the accomplishments of his administration. This ar-
gument is similar to a belief that “the ends justify the means.” What
does that mean and, in your opinion, is that a fair statement to make?
Do the ends ever justify the means and, if so, under what circum-
stances?
5. Review the sequence of the main events that occurred during the Wa-
tergate investigations (look at “What was Watergate?” on the main
Watergate page as well as the headlines under “TIME’s Watergate
Coverage”). Discuss these events in light of Nixon’s resignation
speech. How do the two compare?
6. It is widely accepted that, had Nixon not resigned, he would have
been impeached. During President Bill Clinton’s second term, he was
impeached by the House of Representatives. Compare the reasons and
rationale for Clinton’s impeachment to the reasons and rationale for
Nixon’s impending impeachment prior to his resignation. How are
the two similar and different?
RELATED INTERNET SITE
Nixon’s Resignation
(10a) http://www.nara.gov/exhall/originals/nixon.html
The one-sentence resignation letter is shown on this page.

THE JUDICIARY BRANCH
1. JOHN MARSHALL
URL: http://odur.let.rug.nl/~usa/B/jmarshall/marsh.htm
During his long career, John Marshall was a captain in the Revolutionary
War, a commissioner to France, a congressman from Virginia, a U.S.
secretary of state, and, ﬁnally, the fourth chief justice of the U.S. Supreme
Court. During his thirty-four-year tenure as chief justice, Marshall clearly
established the judiciary branch of government as a vital and equal part-
ner in the federal system of checks and balances. He is principally re-
sponsible for developing the U.S. Supreme Court as the body ultimately
responsible for the interpretation of the U.S. Constitution with the estab-
lishment of the principle of “judicial review” in the case of Marbury v.
Madison. While this case may be Marshall’s best-known decision, he re-
sided over numerous precedent-setting decisions, including McCulloch v.
Maryland, Gibbons v. Ogden, Brown v. Maryland, and Ogden v. Saunders.
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS AND ACTIVITIES
1. Review the biography of John Marshall. Pay particular attention to
the sections entitled “1782 to March 4, 1801 (Jefferson becomes Pres-
ident)” and “Chief Justice of the United States.” How did Marshall
become the chief justice of the Supreme Court? What were the con-
ditions and timing of his appointment? Why were these called “mid-
night appointments” and why were they so signiﬁcant? What do you
suppose Marshall’s relationship with newly elected President Thomas
Jefferson was and why?
2. Click on the link “Marbury v. Madison” and review the background
for this case (you may wish to refer to your textbook for a condensed
version of this case). In this case, the Judiciary Act of 1789 was ruled
unconstitutional. Why is this considered a landmark decision?
3. In this document you will ﬁnd the following quote:
Certainly all those who have framed written constitutions contemplate them
as forming the fundamental and paramount law of the nation, and, conse-
quently, the theory of every such government must be, that an act of the
legislature, repugnant to the constitution, is void. This theory is essentially
attached to a written constitution, and, is consequently, to be considered, by

Primary Source Sites
98
this court, as one of the fundamental principles of our society. It is not
therefore to be lost sight of in the further consideration of this subject. If an
act of the legislature, repugnant to the constitution, is void, does it, notwith-
standing its invalidity, bind the courts, and oblige them to give it effect? Or,
in other words, though it be not law, does it constitute a rule as operative as
if it were a law? This would be to overthrow in fact what was established in
theory; and would seem, at ﬁrst view, an absurdity too gross to be insisted
on. It shall, however, receive a more attentive consideration. It is emphatically
the province and duty of the judicial department to say what the law is. Those
who apply the rule to particular cases, must of necessity expound and inter-
pret that rule. If two laws conﬂict with each other the courts must decide on
the operation of each. So if a law be in opposition to the constitution; if both
the law and the constitution apply to a particular case, so that the court must
either decide that case conformably to the law, disregarding the constitution;
or conformably to the constitution, disregarding the law; the court must de-
termine which of these conﬂicting rules governs the case. This is of the very
essence of judicial duty.
State in your own words Marshall’s opinion.
4. Go to (1a) http://stanley.feldberg.brandeis.edu/~pwoll/14b99lec2.
htm. Review the information contained on the case of McCulloch v.
Maryland (1819). What is meant by the “necessary and proper clause”?
5. How long is the term of ofﬁce of a Supreme Court justice? What are
the pros and cons of this? Given the length of service of Marshall and
the number of important decisions his Court ruled on, reﬂect on how
important Supreme Court appointments can be.
6. Review the decision of the Cherokee Nation v. State of Georgia [found at
(1b) http://odur.let.rug.nl/~usa/B/jmarshall/marsh.htm]. How
does this decision answer the question, “Do the Cherokees constitute
a foreign state in the sense of the Constitution?”
RELATED INTERNET SITE
Marbury v. Madison
(1c) http://www.jmu.edu/madison/marbury/index.htm
This site is dedicated to the debates and proceedings surrounding the Marbury
v. Madison decision.
2. DRED SCOTT
URL: http://odur.let.rug.nl/~usa/D/1851–1875/dredscott/
dredxx.htm
Dred Scott, a slave, moved with his master between Illinois, a free state;
the free territory of Wisconsin; and Missouri, a slave state. When his

Political Science
99
master died in 1846, abolitionists, in hopes of creating a test case, en-
couraged Scott to sue for his freedom on the grounds that he had lived
in a state and territory where slavery was illegal and was, therefore, a
free man. This case was ruled on by the Supreme Court in March 1857
under the leadership of Chief Justice Roger Taney. In his majority opin-
ion, Taney ruled ﬁrst that blacks, whether free or slaves, were not citizens
and so had no rights. Second and third, the Court ruled that Scott was
the property of his owner and that property was protected by the Fifth
Amendment in the Bill of Rights. This meant that property, even a slave,
was protected anywhere in the United States, regardless of laws passed
by Congress outlawing slavery in some states. This decision, applauded
in the South and detested in the North would have far-reaching impli-
cations. It has remained one of the Court’s most controversial decisions.
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS AND ACTIVITIES
1. Read the opening paragraphs of this ruling which review the points
made in the previous case from the Circuit Court of the district of
Missouri. What was the ruling given by the lower court and what was
the rationale given for that ruling? What are the facts agreed to by
both sides?
2. Justice Taney concluded that Scott, as the plaintiff, did not have the
right to sue. Why?
3. In his argument, Taney makes the point, “No word can be found in
the Constitution, which gives Congress a greater power over slave
property, or which entitles property of that kind to less protection
than property of any other description. The only power conferred is
the power coupled with the duty of guarding and protecting the
owner of his rights.” What does this mean that Congress was obli-
gated to do throughout the Union? According to this ruling, what did
Congress not have the power to do?
4. Notice as you look through this lengthy argument the number of pre-
vious court cases that are cited. What is the name given to the process
of reviewing previous, related court cases to base one’s decision on
and what is the reason for doing this?
5. Although Justice Taney was a Southerner, he was reported to have
hated the institution of slavery. This point he made evident by freeing
his own slaves. Yet, Taney was also fearful of the backlash and far-
reaching results a ruling to free Scott might have in the South. What
do you believe those fears were? On what basis might you have ar-
gued for a different decision?

Primary Source Sites
100
6. What was the ultimate statement made by this decision regarding
slavery and the numerous fragile compromises that had been con-
structed over the years to hold the Union together? What alternatives
did antislavery contingents now believe were available to them to stop
the spread of slavery?
RELATED INTERNET SITE
More on the Decision
http://www.tourolaw.edu/patch/Scott/
This is the full case and decision of the Court. It has the concurring and dis-
senting opinion of the Court.
3. PLESSY V. FERGUSON
URL: http://www.virtualscholar.com/cr/cr2.htm
In 1892 Homer Plessy, a black man, was jailed for sitting in the white
section of a railroad car. Many states had long had a formal, legalized
system of segregation, commonly known as Jim Crow laws, but Plessy
argued that the law he was arrested under violated the Thirteenth and
Fourteenth Amendments. After several years of lost court cases and ap-
peals, Plessy’s case eventually found its way to the U.S. Supreme Court.
Again, this Court upheld the lower rulings arguing that the separation
of races was legal if the facilities were “equal.” This, in effect, legitimized
Jim Crow and led the way for restaurants, schools, and theaters to re-
main or become openly segregated across the country. This “separate
but equal” doctrine remained dominant for another ﬁfty-eight years until
it was overturned by Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, Kansas (1954),
which held that separate is inherently unequal. The site listed here does
not have the entire Supreme Court transcript, but it contains excerpts
from both the majority and minority opinions as well as related links
and commentary on the Court ruling’s impact.
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS AND ACTIVITIES
1. Read the excerpt from the majority opinion. Read again the Thirteenth
and Fourteenth Amendments to the Constitution. Summarize in a few
sentences the logic used to support this position of the Court.
2. Look at the history of this case before it reached the Supreme Court
and notice that the Judge (Ferguson) made a distinction between rail-
cars that crossed state lines and those that did not. The railcar that
Plessy was arrested on did not cross any state lines and, according to

Political Science
101
Ferguson, this made a difference in how he ruled on the case. What
was his logic in that decision?
3. What were the result and implications of the decision Plessy v. Fer-
guson not only in the South, but in the entire country?
4. Read and study the logic of the minority opinion in this case. Why
did the words of the lone dissenting judge prove to be prophetic?
What is the value of the minority opinion in all Supreme Court de-
cisions?
5. In 1954 this decision was overturned in the court case of Brown v.
Board of Education of Topeka, Kansas. How can something that is ruled
constitutional in one time period be ruled unconstitutional in another
(assuming that there are no further amendments to the Constitution
relevant to the case)? Even though the Constitution had not changed
during the interceding years in regard to the Plessy case, what had
changed during that time? What does this tell you about the deﬁnition
of “constitutional”?
6. Study the process regarding the appointment of Supreme Court
judges and the length of their term. Why are the political views of the
president considered so important when it comes time to appoint a
(or several) Supreme Court judge(s)?
RELATED INTERNET SITE
Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, Kansas
http://brownvboard.org/
This site has information and links related to the Brown v. Board of Education
of Topeka, Kansas decision including a link to the National Park Service’s Brown
v. Board of Education National Historic Site.
4. SCOPES MONKEY TRIAL
URL: http://www.law.umkc.edu/faculty/projects/ftrials/
scopes/scopes.htm
In 1925 John Scopes, a high school biology teacher in Dayton, Tennessee,
was arrested and charged with illegally teaching the theory of evolution.
By the time the case went to the U.S. Supreme Court that summer, it
became the most closely followed court case of the decade and was la-
beled the trial of the century by some. Both sides were represented by
nationally known lawyers—Clarence Darrow for the defense and three-
time presidential candidate William Jennings Bryan for the prosecution.
The court case, which was later made into a movie starring Spencer
Tracy and Gene Kelley, came to represent the developing conﬂict of so-

Primary Source Sites
102
cial and theological differences reﬂecting the changing nation. Some of
the issues of this trial remain points of contention for many even today.
This site contains testimony, photographs, and background information
related to this case as well as links to other “famous American trials.”
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS AND ACTIVITIES
1. Click on the link at the bottom of the page titled “Introduction.” Read
this to gain some background information about the trial. Click also
on the link to the side titled “year 1925.” Summarize the nature of
this trial and explain why it was an important event at this time in
our nation’s history. What similar arguments continue today on this
topic? Click also on the “biographies of the trial participants.” Who
were Clarence Darrow and William Jennings Bryan and why would
they be interested in being the main trial lawyers in a case in a small
town in Tennessee?
2. From the Scopes trial homepage, click on the link “Tennessee’s Anti-
Evolution Statute.” Study this law. Comment on the law’s purpose,
penalties, and language. What arguments were used in the trial in
favor of and against this law?
3. Click on “Excerpts from Scopes Transcript.” Divide the class into
groups and have each group research one of the eight-day excerpts.
Each group should be prepared to summarize the key points of their
trial transcripts. Then put all the pieces together to gain a better un-
derstanding of the ﬂow of the trial as presented from these excerpts.
4. From the site “Excerpts from Scopes Transcript,” click on the link
titled “H. L. Mencken’s Reports from the Trial.” This contains the
description of the trial from the viewpoint of an out-of-town reporter
covering the trial. What is the perspective of this reporter? What clues
can you ﬁnd about the type of town he came from? What language
is used in his writings that gives insight into his opinions and/or
biases? Review sections of his writings and place statements into cat-
egories of fact or opinion.
5. Go to the link “Trial Pictures and Cartoons.” At the bottom of this
page, click on the two links that go to the political cartoons of this
trial. Study each of these and give your interpretation of the cartoon
as well as the political opinion of the cartoonist on this issue.
6. Rent the movie Inherit the Wind starring Spencer Tracy and Gene
Kelly. After viewing the movie, compare the Hollywood version of
this trial to what you believe happened based on your viewing of the
primary sources. Where are there similarities and where are there dif-
ferences? What techniques were used in the movie to heighten the

Political Science
103
drama of the event? Which individuals were played by Tracy and
Kelly in the movie?
RELATED INTERNET SITE
Other Famous American Trials
http://www.law.umkc.edu/faculty/projects/ftrials/ftrials.htm
This site contains links to a number of inﬂuential trials that have helped to
shape our country’s history.
5. BROWN V. BOARD OF EDUCATION OF TOPEKA,
KANSAS
URL: http://coursesa.matrix.msu.edu/~hst306/documents/
brown.html
This landmark decision, handed down by the U.S. Supreme Court in
May 1954, overturned Plessy v. Ferguson’s “separate but equal” doctrine
established ﬁfty-eight years earlier. Linda Brown, a third grade black
student, in Topeka, Kansas, had to walk over a mile to school when there
was an all-white school down the block. The Browns ﬁled suit and Thur-
good Marshall successfully argued the case before the Earl Warren–led
Supreme Court claiming that state-sanctioned public education was in
violation of the fourteenth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution. The Su-
preme Court unanimously agreed by declaring that “separate” was in-
herently “unequal.” The Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, Kansas
decision led directly to desegregation in the public school system. The
following year, the Supreme Court called on all school authorities to
submit plans for desegregation “with all deliberate speed” and gave local
federal courts the authority to determine whether these plans were in
compliance with the Brown decision. This Supreme Court decision was
also used to help desegregate restaurants and other public venues. This
site gives Chief Justice Earl Warren’s opinion for the Court.
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS AND ACTIVITIES
1. Review the opening paragraphs of the opinion of Earl Warren. What
is the history of the case as provided here and what reasons does the
Supreme Court give for hearing this case? What are the positions of
the plaintiffs and defendants in this case?
2. Warren refers to the Fourteenth Amendment, which was adopted in
1868. Review this amendment and determine the reasons why this
amendment is critical to the ruling of this case.

Primary Source Sites
104
3. Referring to the Fourteenth Amendment, Warren states, “The incon-
clusive nature of the Amendment’s history, with respect to segregated
schools, is the status of public education at that time.” What does he
mean by this statement, and on what does he base his conclusion?
4. Later in the opinion Warren states that, in making this decision, the
Court had to “look instead to the effect of segregation itself on public
education.” Summarize this argument as it is made in points 1–3.
Which points here do you believe are the most convincing? Are there
any points here with which you do not agree?
5. Go
to
(5a)
http://www.nara.gov/education/teaching/analysis/
write.html This helpful “Written Document Analysis Worksheet,”
created by the National Archives and Records Administration, can be
used to help analyze many primary source documents. Apply the
questions on this sheet to the Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka,
Kansas opinion issued by Warren for the Supreme Court.
6. Go to (5b) http://media.nara.gov/media/images/14/18/14–1735a.
gif. This is a letter written on October 23, 1954, by President Dwight
D. Eisenhower to a friend, an E.E. “Swede” Hazlett. Toward the end
of this letter, Eisenhower discusses the qualiﬁcations that a Supreme
Court chief justice should have (Eisenhower had just appointed Earl
Warren). What are the qualities that Eisenhower believed were im-
portant? Are those same characteristics important today? Are there
any that you would add? Why was age an important consideration
for Eisenhower? Based on Eisenhower’s political views and the last
paragraph of this letter, what do you suppose Eisenhower’s reaction
was to the Brown decision?
RELATED INTERNET SITES
“With All Deliberate Speed”
(5c) http://www.loc.gov/exhibits/treasures/trr007.html
This web site brieﬂy examines the history of the phrase “with all deliberate
speed” used by Earl Warren in this case.
More on the Decision
(5d) http://www.worldbook.com/fun/aajourny/html/bh082.html
This site gives some additional historical context to this decision.
Central High School Remembered
(5e) http://www.msnbc.com/news/112301.asp?cp11
This web site is dedicated to remembering the desegregation of Central High
School in Little Rock, Arkansas, in 1957.

Political Science
105
6. THURGOOD MARSHALL
URL: http://www.thurgoodmarshall.com/speeches/
speeches.htm
Thurgood Marshall became nationally known ﬁrst as the lawyer for the
National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP)
who prosecuted the Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, Kansas case
before the U.S. Supreme Court. Fourteen years later he became the ﬁrst
African American justice to that Court when President Lyndon B. John-
son appointed him in 1968. From this position of legal authority, Mar-
shall inﬂuenced the interpretation of the law of the land for nearly a
quarter of a century. While this site was established primarily to dissem-
inate information on a new biography on Marshall entitled Thurgood
Marshall: American Revolutionary, it houses many useful primary source
documents that help shed light on the background and views of this
great civil rights leader and judicial scholar. Included at this location are
some of Marshall’s best-known speeches and articles. There are also links
to interviews on numerous topics of interest as well as pictures of him
in his early years.
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS AND ACTIVITIES
1. Click on and read Marshall’s “The Bicentennial Speech.” What was
the occasion for this speech? What is Marshall’s interpretation of the
evolving nature of the U.S. Constitution as well as the reasons the
founding fathers set it up that way? Why does Marshall later refer to
the Constitutional Convention as the “Miracle in Philadelphia”?
2. Divide the class into groups and have each group read one of the
remaining speeches or articles on this page written by or about Thur-
good Marshall. Have each group summarize the assigned reading fo-
cusing on those passages that give some insight into the character and
beliefs of Justice Marshall.
3. Click on the link titled “Interviews.” Click on “Miscellaneous.” What
are Marshall’s views on dissenting opinions, the death penalty, and
gun control? Compare these views to your own. Compare these views
to the views of your classmates. Compare Marshall’s views to the
positions held on these topics by your congressman and the current
president of the United States.
4. Click on the interview link “Marshall on the Politics of Race and the
Court.” What are the reasons given for Marshall’s working in the
court system to try to change discriminatory practice? What was his

Primary Source Sites
106
strategy? What is Marshall’s rationale for afﬁrmative action? What
does Marshall believe the Supreme Court can do to further eradicate
racism?
5. Imagine you are the president of the United States and an opening
for the Supreme Court has suddenly become available for appoint-
ment. What qualities would you look for in a justice? How many of
the qualities of Thurgood Marshall would you look for? What other
factors would you consider for your appointment? In your opinion,
and based on the testimony of Marshall, how much inﬂuence can one
justice have on the Court and on the decisions that are rendered?
6. Click on the link titled “Gallery.” Available here is a collection of
photographs, each with a brief descriptive sentence, from Thurgood
Marshall’s personal and professional life. View these pictures and
write several paragraphs that tell what insights into Marshall’s char-
acter are provided by these pictures.
RELATED INTERNET SITES
Thurgood Marshall Biography
(6a) http://members.tripod.com/~kabba/aatmarshall.html
This web site features a biography and photos of Thurgood Marshall.
Thurgood Marshall Remembered
(6b) http://lcweb.loc.gov/exhibits/treasures/tlc0240.jpg
This site contains an editorial cartoon that ran after the death of Thurgood
Marshall in 1998.
7. ROE V. WADE
URL: http://members.aol.com/abtrbng/roeins.htm
Roe v. Wade is the controversial U.S. Supreme Court decision that made
abortions legal in the United States in 1973. Argued before the Court in
1971 and in 1972, the case of Roe v. Wade was handed down as a split
7–2 decision in which six opinions were written (four majority, three
concurring, and two dissenting) covering almost eighty pages of text.
Justice Harry A. Blackmun, speaking for the Court, ruled that a woman
had a right to obtain an abortion during the ﬁrst six months of pregnancy
and that a fetus, until that point, was not protected by the Fourteenth
Amendment. Roe v. Wade remains a hotly debated topic today as groups
opposed to abortions and groups supporting choice continue to battle.
This site contains both edited and full-text versions of each of the opin-
ions written.

Political Science
107
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS AND ACTIVITIES
1. Click on “Justice Harry A. Blackmun” to bring up excerpts from the
majority opinion on this case. Pay particular attention to the red-faced
type. What are the main arguments given for the decision to legalize
abortion? What also are the restrictions placed on a woman’s right to
an abortion? This decision also left some leeway for individual states
to place some restrictions on abortions. Under what conditions may
additional restrictions be considered by the states?
2. In the beginning of this majority opinion, Blackmun refers to the “sen-
sitive and emotional nature” of this case and states that the task of
the Court was to “resolve the issue by constitutional measurement,
free of emotion and of predilection.” Why do you think Blackmun
makes this statement? Why would many argue that this is an impor-
tant point to make not only in this case, but in all cases of law? Do
you think it is possible to make decisions at this level without emotion
being involved?
3. At the beginning of the second page of this decision, Blackmun refers
to the “right of privacy” as a reason for a woman’s right to terminate
her pregnancy. What Constitutional connections and precedents are
given to uphold this argument?
4. Later in this argument, the majority opinion attempts to deﬁne the
term “person” according to the Constitution. What qualiﬁcations are
made in the Constitution according to Blackmun? Are these still le-
gitimate ways to deﬁne a person? Why or why not?
5. This case produced, not unusually, a majority opinion, a concurring
opinion, and a dissenting opinion. What is the relationship of these
three types of opinions? Why are all three important?
6. Refer back to the ﬁrst page and click on the link “Justice William H.
Rehnquist.” This provides a one-page edited version of the dissenting
opinion. In your opinion, what are the strengths of this argument?
Hearing both sides of the case, which opinion do you believe to be
the best interpretation for yourself and for the nation today?
RELATED INTERNET SITES
Twenty-ﬁve Years Later
(7a) http://www.cnn.com/SPECIALS/1998/roe.wade
This site comes from a CNN special report on the Court’s decision on its
twenty-ﬁfth anniversary. Interviews with original “Jane Roe” are included as
well as audio versions of the oral arguments for each side.

Primary Source Sites
108
A Pro-Choice Perspective
(7b) http://www.choice.org/roevwade/TLpgRoe.html
The perspective of Roe v. Wade is presented in a web site dedicated to pro-
choice issues.
A Pro-Life Perspective
(7c) http://www.roevwade.org/ed.html
The perspective of Roe v. Wade is presented in a web site dedicated to pro-life
issues.
8. MIRANDA V. ARIZONA
URL: http://www.aclumontana.org/rights/
miranda.html#amend
Miranda v. Arizona is one of Chief Justice Earl Warren’s most remembered
cases. In 1966 the Warren-led Supreme Court case ruled in a 5–4 decision
that police must inform a suspect of his or her rights to remain silent
and to have a legal counsel present during questioning. Police must also
notify the suspect that anything he or she says may be used against him
or her in a court of law, and the police must do all of this in a manner
that ensures that the suspect understands these rights. This ruling actu-
ally expanded a similar decision handed down two years earlier by the
Supreme Court against self-incrimination and the right to counsel (Es-
cobedo v. Illinois). Since the case of Miranda v. Arizona, largely as a result
of the power of television and movies, the phrase “Miranda rights” has
become part of our culture. Even elementary-age children playing “cops
and robbers” know that they must begin an arrest procedure with “you
have the right to remain silent.” This site brieﬂy summarizes the case
and gives links to the full text of the decision and real audio of the oral
argument.
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS AND ACTIVITIES
1. In the short abstract about the case located on this page, the point is
made that the Court decided that Miranda’s Fifth Amendment rights
were violated. Review the Fifth Amendment (also located on this
page) and explain in what way the action taken against Miranda vi-
olated his constitutional right of due process.
2. Click on the link under the “Find Law” titled “full text” of the deci-
sion. Because this decision may be too long to read in its entirety,
scroll down to the beginning of Warren’s opinion (this section begins
with “MR. CHIEF JUSTICE WARREN delivered the opinion of the
Court”). Read the ﬁrst two paragraphs of this opinion. What are the

Political Science
109
facts of the case as determined, and what does Warren mean by “the
restraints society must observe consistent with the Federal Constitu-
tion in prosecuting individuals for crime”?
3. Go to (8a) http://lcweb.loc.gov/exhibits/treasures/uc005077.jpg.
This typed note from Justice William J. Brennan, Jr., to Earl Warren
was written a month before the ﬁnal opinion of the Court was handed
down. What is Brennan’s view on the position taken by Warren, as
discussed in question 2 above? What type of opinion would you ex-
pect Justice Brennan might write on this case? To ﬁnd out how Justice
Bennan voted, go to (8b) http://oyez.nwu.edu/cases/cases.cgi?
commandshow&case_id251&pagevoting for a picture that tells
how each justice voted on this case.
4. This landmark decision, the result of a 5–4 vote of the Court, is con-
troversial to this day. Why are so many important Court decisions
decided by split votes? Is this a sign of strength or of weakness? Give
reasons to support your answer.
5. Go back to the website identiﬁed at the top of this case (http://www.
aclumontana.org/rights/miranda.html#amend) and click on the link
titled “Miranda Info.” The beginning of this web page addresses sev-
eral relevant questions concerning Miranda, such as whether an arrest
is illegal if the police neglect to read the Miranda rights to a suspect
and what is meant by the term “harmless error” in regard to the
reading of Miranda rights. Review these and write a statement in
favor of and against each position.
6. Near the bottom of the page of this same link there is some infor-
mation on how this case relates to the right of teachers or schools to
conduct school searches. What is your position on school searches?
Construct an argument, which invokes the Fifth and Fourteenth
Amendments, in favor of school searches and an argument against
school searches.
RELATED INTERNET SITES
Miranda in Audio
(8c) http://oyez.nwu.edu/dynaram.cgi?case_id251&resourceargument.ra
This site provides full audio of the oral argument of the Miranda decision.
Escobedo v. Illinois
(8d) http://law.touro.edu/patch/Escobedo/
The transcript of the Escobedo v. Illinois Supreme Court decision may be found
here.
Amendments of the Constitution
(8e) http://www.house.gov/Constitution/Amend.html
This link can be used to review relevant amendments of the Constitution.

Primary Source Sites
110
9. TODAY’S SUPREME COURT
URL: http://supct.law.cornell.edu/supct/justices/fullcourt.html
The U.S. Constitution provides for one Supreme Court. This Court rep-
resents the highest judicial authority in America, and since the Supreme
Court ruling of Marbury v. Madison in 1803, the Court has maintained its
position as the ﬁnal interpreter on all issues involving the Constitution.
Although this Court has appellate jurisdiction over cases from lower
federal courts, it is not required to hear all them. In fact, it considers
only a small number of these cases and usually selects only those be-
lieved to involve important legal issues. Of the three branches of the
federal government, only the judicial branch has ofﬁcials—federal
judges—who are free of the obligation of election to public ofﬁce. The
term of a Supreme Court justice is for life. This site contains photographs
of the current court as well as biographical information on each justice.
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS AND ACTIVITIES
1. Study the picture of the Supreme Court justices. What statements of
fact can you make about the composition of the current Court? What
similarities are there among the justices? What differences do you see?
How might these similarities and differences inﬂuence Court deci-
sions?
2. Divide the class into nine groups and have each group study the bi-
ographical information about one justice. Summarize this information
on a chart and make further comparisons about the ages, sex, ethnic-
ity, place of birth, education, length of service, and any other relevant
information you can glean from the biographical data sheet. Discuss
how each justice’s background experiences might contribute to his or
her philosophical position when rendering Court opinions.
3. Discuss Justice Sandra Day O’Conner in some background. Why was
her appointment to the Court signiﬁcant in American history? What
factors may have contributed to her appointment to the Court? What
special perspectives does Justice O’Conner bring to the Supreme
Court?
4. Review the picture and background of the justices. Who, in America,
is not represented on this Court? Is that an important issue? In ad-
dition to a Supreme Court justice nominee’s legal ability, should one
consider a candidate’s personal background, culture, ethnicity, and
age? Are there other factors that should be considered as well?

Political Science
111
5. Compare the composition of today’s current Court to the one pictured
from the early 1960s [found at (9a) http://oyez.nwu.edu/cases/
cases.cgi?commandshow&case_id251&pagevoting]. How has
the makeup of the Court changed over the years? Why do you believe
it took so long to have women and minorities present on the Supreme
Court? In your opinion, is the 1960s Supreme Court equally qualiﬁed
to rule on issues concerning women and minorities? Why or why not?
6. Review the procedure for appointing a Supreme Court justice (indeed,
any federal judge). Why is the appointment of a Supreme Court justice
so important for a president and the Senate to make? Why are the
political afﬁliations of the president, the Senate, and the Supreme
Court nominee all important variables in the procedure? Under what
conditions may a Supreme Court justice be removed? Has this ever
happened?

THE PRESIDENCY AND THE EXECUTIVE
BRANCH
1. PRESIDENTS—IN THEIR OWN WORDS
URL: http://www.pbs.org/wgbh/amex/presidents/nf/words/
words.html
This site, connected to the PBS series The American Experience, has inter-
esting quotes from various American presidents of the last century or-
ganized by topics ranging from taxes, to foreign affairs, to the presidency
itself. This site also features links to more detailed information related
to each of the presidents of the twentieth century as well as a teachers’
guide for each president.
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS AND ACTIVITIES
1. Read the presidential quotes found on this site. Select two that are
profound and meaningful to you. Discuss these with the class. Select
one quote you do not understand or you believe is not appealing.
Discuss this quote with the class as well.
2. Select one of the headings at this web site and study the collection of
quotes found there. Can you ﬁnd any two quotes that seem to be at
odds with one another? If so, research the two individuals associated
with these quotes, along with the time period in which they lived and
the political party with which they were afﬁliated. Which of these
factors might have contributed to their differing views on the same
subject?
3. Review the quotes dealing with “the Presidency.” What common
themes are found in this section? Why do you believe many American
presidents, regardless of the time period, have similar feelings on this
topic? Do you believe this feeling is unique to American leadership?
Why or why not?
4. Review the quotes on peace and war. Research which of the presidents
quoted in these sections were in ofﬁce during a major war. Did the
quote associated with them here occur during a war? Which presi-
dents made these quotes at a time in which the United States was
trying to avoid going to war? Which of these quotes were made the

Political Science
113
year prior to a presidential election? How might these conditions in-
ﬂuence what is being said?
5. Go to the link connected with this page located at (1a) http://
www.pbs.org/wgbh/amex/presidents/nf/teach/teach.html. Scroll
down to the presidents featured on this page. Under each president’s
name, there is a link labeled “In Quotes.” Click on this. This gives a
series of quotes attributed to each president along with discussion
questions for each quote. Study these quotes and address each ques-
tion in order to gain a better understanding of each president high-
lighted here.
6. Click on the link at the bottom of this page titled “Resources.” This
will take you to a page containing additional information on several
twentieth-century presidents. Have student groups choose a presi-
dent, research a document of their choosing from the page labeled
“primary source material,” and report their ﬁndings to the class.
RELATED INTERNET SITE
The American Experience
(1b) http://www.pbs.org/wgbh/amex/index.html
This homepage of The American Experience runs features on different U.S. pres-
idents.
2. LETTERS OF THOMAS JEFFERSON
URL: http://odur.let.rug.nl/~usa/P/tj3/writings/brf/jeﬂxx.htm
Following a hard-fought campaign against John Adams and the Feder-
alists in 1800, Thomas Jefferson become our nation’s third president in
March 1801. Jefferson, a man of high education and culture, disliked the
ceremony and pomp of government. He believed that democracy was
the ideal form of government and that democracy ﬂourished best in a
society of small, independent farmers. His presidential agenda included
working to limit the role of the national government in the lives of the
people, expanding the role of popular education in America, and en-
suring that the civil liberties of the common citizen remained protected.
Although Jefferson believed in limited government and in a strict in-
terpretation of the U.S. Constitution, he justiﬁed the purchase of the
vast Louisiana Territory from Napole´on Bonaparte and France in 1803.
This site contains transcripts of almost 300 letters written by Jefferson
between 1760 and 1826, which shed light on the diverse thoughts of
this complex thinker. This activity, however, concentrates on one letter,
written during his presidency, to Captain Meriwether Lewis, just prior

Primary Source Sites
114
to undertaking his expedition to explore the Louisiana Territory with
William Clark.
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS AND ACTIVITIES
1. Scroll down and click on letter 155, under the heading of 1803. After
reading this letter, make a list of the multiple purposes charged to
this expedition. Place these purposes in the order you believe were
considered to be the most important at that time. If you, as president
of the United States, were to send an exploration party out to a newly
discovered territory today, what objectives would you charge your
exploration party with? How would they be similar and different
from the objectives Jefferson wanted accomplished?
2. Examine the instruments and arms that were provided for the Lewis
and Clark expedition (click on these links for more details on this).
What do you think these items were used for? Compile a list, of ap-
proximately the same size, of items that you would take today if you
were going on a similar expedition.
3. Note the size of the party of men and supplies Jefferson expected to
travel with Lewis and Clark. Why do you think it was not larger?
Smaller? What would be the advantages and disadvantages of trav-
eling so far in unknown territory with a group of this size?
4. Jefferson mentions in his letter to Lewis that the mission and its “ob-
jects” have been communicated to the “Ministers from France, Spain,
and Great Britain, and through them to their governments.” What
does he mean by this? Why do you think this was done? What would
be the reasons for communicating with these three countries?
5. What are the instructions given to Lewis regarding the treatment of
the native people? What are the practical reasons, both short term and
long term, for these instructions? What valuable information do you
believe Lewis and Clark could gain from the natives encountered on
their trip? Click on the link “intercourse with the natives” to gain
more information about some of the objects they found on their trip.
6. Study the conditions that led up to the purchase of Louisiana by Jef-
ferson. What factors contributed to its hasty purchase? Why do you
believe Jefferson was able to rationalize his use of a loose interpreta-
tion of the Constitution (something he had always maintained he was
opposed to) in order to buy the Louisiana Territory? What are meant
by “strict interpretation” and “loose interpretation” of the Constitu-
tion?

Political Science
115
RELATED INTERNET SITES
Louisiana Purchase
(2a) http://www.nara.gov/exhall/originals/louistxt.html
This site from the National Archives contains a copy of the Louisiana Purchase.
More on Jefferson
(2b) http://www.pbs.org/jefferson/
This PBS site concerns Thomas Jefferson.
Lewis and Clark
(2c) http://www.pbs.org/lewisandclark/
This very interesting PBS site covers the Lewis and Clark expedition.
3. ABRAHAM LINCOLN’S SECOND INAUGURAL
ADDRESS
URL: http://odur.let.rug.nl/~usa/P/a116/speeches/
lincoln2.htm
The better known of Abraham Lincoln’s two inaugural addresses, Lin-
coln’s second inaugural address is one of the speeches engraved inside
the Lincoln Memorial. By the time this address was given, on March 4,
1865, a Union victory in the Civil War ﬁnally seemed assured (Robert E.
Lee’s surrender at Appomattox occurred one month later). Lincoln was
assassinated on April 14, 1865, less than six weeks after taking the oath
of ofﬁce for a second time. This site contains Lincoln’s second inaugural
address, links to other Lincoln speeches, and links to all other presiden-
tial inaugural addresses.
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS AND ACTIVITIES
1. Read this speech in its entirety. What attributes make this such a pow-
erful speech? What is the context of this speech? What events were
taking place when Lincoln gave this address? How did these events
affect what was said?
2. Note the brevity of this speech. What reasons does Lincoln give for
not speaking longer on this occasion? This speech and the Gettysburg
Address, another very short speech, are perhaps Lincoln’s best-known
speeches. What lessons can one learn from them regarding clear writ-
ing, thinking, and communication? Compare this address to the
length of most political speeches heard today.
3. At the time this speech was given, the Union was rapidly approaching
victory in a long, hard-fought war. During the entire four-year war,

Primary Source Sites
116
Lincoln had been the commander in chief. Given that this speech was
delivered at a time of great military, personal, and political triumph
for Lincoln, what strikes you as remarkable about the tone of this
address?
4. How does Lincoln sum up the four years of war prior to this address?
At the time of this speech, the war is not yet over and Lincoln does
not seem content to assume that it will be. What message does he
send to the nation and, perhaps more important, to the Confederate
States about the course the Union will follow until the war’s end?
5. What is meant by the phrase “with malice toward none, with charity
for all”? What other powerful messages are being sent in Lincoln’s
last sentence of this speech? Why was this such an important state-
ment at this time?
6. In a little more than a month from the date of this speech, Lincoln
will be dead from the bullet of John Wilkes Booth. The job of rebuild-
ing the country would fall to the vice president from Tennessee, An-
drew Johnson. Johnson was not successful in his attempts to carry out
Lincoln’s reconstructionist policies. Speculate on how the years fol-
lowing the Civil War might have been very different if Lincoln had
not been assassinated. Do you think Lincoln could have been more
successful in reuniting the country? Why or why not?
RELATED INTERNET SITES
Lincoln’s First Inaugural Address
(3a) http://odur.let.rug.nl/~usa/P/a116/speeches/lincoln1.htm
POTUS
(3b) http://www.ipl.org/ref/POTUS/alincoln.html
Information on Lincoln from the Presidents of the United States web site
(POTUS) may be found here.
4. IMPEACHMENT OF ANDREW JOHNSON
URL: http://www.law.umkc.edu/faculty/projects/FTrials/
impeach/impeachmt.htm
Although once in American history the threat of a probable successful
impeachment caused the resignation of a president (Richard M. Nixon),
never has a president of the United States been removed from ofﬁce by
this process. On two occasions, however, impeachment proceedings have
been carried out in both houses of Congress. The ﬁrst of these occurred

Political Science
117
in May 1868 when the House of Representatives, led by Thaddeus Ste-
vens, impeached Andrew Johnson. Johnson, who had taken over the
presidency after the assassination of Abraham Lincoln, was from Ten-
nessee and refused to go along with the recently elected Radical Repub-
licans’ harsh treatment of the South following the Civil War. According
to Constitutional procedure, Johnson was tried in the Senate. After hear-
ing the evidence, the Senate failed by one vote to reach the two-thirds
majority necessary for conviction. This site contains background infor-
mation on the trial, the Articles of Impeachment, political cartoons on
the trial, opinions of various senators involved, and much more.
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS AND ACTIVITIES
1. Connect on the link titled “A trial account.” Read this to gain some
background and context to the trial. In the opening paragraph, the
author states that “although the impeachment trial of Andrew John-
son was ostensibly about a violation of the Tenure of Ofﬁce Act, it
was about much more than that. Also on trial in 1868 were Johnson’s
lenient policies towards Reconstruction and his vetoes of the Freed-
men’s Bureau Act and the Civil Rights Act. The trial was, above all
else, a political trial.” After reading this account, do you agree with
this statement? What evidence can you give to support your position?
2. From the “Andrew Johnson Impeachment Trial” homepage, click on
the link “Constitution and Impeachment.” This will connect you to a
page which gives the relevant sections in the Constitution associated
with impeachment and a transcript of some of the discussions and
debates held among the framers on this topic. Read the framer’s de-
bate from the notes of James Madison taken at the Constitutional Con-
vention in Philadelphia 1787 and summarize the main points pro and
con that some of the framers had on this subject. Are some of these
points still valid today? On which side of the argument would you
fall?
3. From the “Andrew Johnson Impeachment Trial” homepage, click on
the link “Articles of Impeachment.” Review these articles in order to
get the main points being brought against President Johnson. What
phrases are used throughout the document to paint a portrait of John-
son as one who has committed “high crimes and treason”? Paying
particular attention to article XI, of what crimes is Johnson accused?
4. From the “Andrew Johnson Impeachment Trial” homepage, click on
the link “Opinions of Senators.” From here select and read the opinion
of Charles Sumner. What is Sumner’s rationale for voting to convict
Johnson? What are the tone and nature of the language used in this

Primary Source Sites
118
opinion? Go over the document line by line and categorize each sen-
tence as either a statement of fact or of opinion. What results do you
ﬁnd? Repeat this process for Senator Trumbull. Which of the two ar-
guments do you ﬁnd more convincing and why? Select other opinions
and review those. Discuss any that might have swayed your own
opinion had you been a senator at the time.
5. From the “Andrew Johnson Impeachment Trial” homepage, click on
the link “Photos, Sketches, Cartoons” and then click on the ﬁrst two
links under the “cartoons” heading. What editorial statement is being
made in the cartoon entitled “President as Samson”? Do you think
the cartoonist is a supporter of Johnson or not? Of Reconstruction? In
the second cartoon, what is being said by the cartoonist? What do you
think his position toward Johnson is in this drawing?
6. Compare Andrew Johnson’s impeachment to the more recent im-
peachment of Bill Clinton. What aspects of the two proceedings are
similar? What aspects are different? Which of the two impeachments
and trials was more justiﬁed in your opinion? Under what circum-
stances do you believe a president should be removed from ofﬁce by
impeachment?
RELATED INTERNET SITES
More on the Impeachment
(4a) http://www.impeachment-johnson.com/default.htm
This web site, dedicated to the impeachment topic, contains many good photo-
graphs and political cartoons.
Andrew Johnson National Historic Site
(4b) http://www.nps.gov/anjo/ajnhs.htm
This is the web site from the National Park Service on the Andrew Johnson
National Historic Site.
5. THEODORE ROOSEVELT
URL: http://www.theodoreroosevelt.org/life/quotes.htm
Theodore Roosevelt became our twenty-sixth, and youngest ever, pres-
ident when President William McKinley was assassinated in 1901, six
months after his second inauguration. Roosevelt served the remainder
of McKinley’s term and then was elected to ofﬁce in his own right in
1904—a position he held until 1909. Roosevelt later made an unsuccess-
ful bid for a third term as president when he ran as the Bull Moose party
candidate in 1912 against an incumbent Republican, President William
H. Taft, and a Democratic candidate, Woodrow Wilson. Known for his
tremendous energy and progressive ideology of moderate reform, Teddy

Political Science
119
Roosevelt remains one of America’s most fascinating and respected lead-
ers of the twentieth century. This site contains famous quotes from
throughout his political career as well as numerous links to sites con-
taining biographical information, a timeline of his achievements, stories
and myths surrounding his life, and much more.
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS AND ACTIVITIES
1. Read the quotes found on this ﬁrst link. List the characteristics of
Roosevelt illuminated by these quotes. Write a paragraph that sum-
marizes Roosevelt’s “philosophy of life.”
2. Before becoming vice president, Roosevelt served in a variety of of-
ﬁces in New York State. Eventually elected to the governorship of
New York in 1898, Roosevelt achieved a number of civil and tax re-
forms and displayed an independence that irritated many state Re-
publican leaders. It is claimed that his nomination to the vice
presidency in 1900 was a tactic used by party leaders to “kick him
upstairs” where he could do no harm. What is meant by that and how
did this strategy obviously backﬁre?
3. Roosevelt was a member of the Republican political party for most of
his adult life. Yet, many of his views were considered somewhat lib-
eral for that party at that time period. Which quotes do you believe
identify Roosevelt as a bit out of step with many of his conservative
political colleagues of that day?
4. One of Roosevelt’s quotes is, “It is no use to preach to [children] if
you do not act decently yourself.” In some ways, this may be consid-
ered true of his administration as well. What actions did Roosevelt
take during his term as president that were consistent with, or rein-
forced, some of the comments found on this page?
5. Select your favorite quote on this page and write a paragraph about
what it says to you and why you selected it.
6. It is important to remember that Roosevelt, like all presidents, was
not loved by all. Go to the web site (5a) http://www.boondocksnet.
com/gallery/tr_080400.html and view this political cartoon. What
is the topic inspiring this cartoon? What do each of the caricatures
represent? What is the editorial comment being made here?
RELATED INTERNET SITES
More on Theodore Roosevelt
(5b) http://www.npg.si.edu/exh/roosevelt/

Primary Source Sites
120
This informative web site on Teddy Roosevelt comes from the Smithsonian
Institution, organized by the National Portrait Gallery.
Theodore Roosevelt National Park
(5c) http://www.theodore.roosevelt.national-park.com/sights.htm
The Theodore Roosevelt National Park Page is “dedicated to providing infor-
mation on Theodore Roosevelt National Park,” located in the badlands of west-
ern North Dakota.
Political Cartoons
(5d) http://www.boondocksnet.com/gallery/tr_intro.html
This web site contains political cartoons about Theodore Roosevelt.
6. FRANKLIN DELANO ROOSEVELT’S FIRST
INAUGURAL SPEECH
URL: http://odur.let.rug.nl/~usa/P/fr32/speeches/fdr1.htm
By November 1932, the country had suffered through three years of the
Great Depression. One political result of the economic downturn was
that the incumbent president, Herbert Hoover, suffered an over-
whelming loss in the presidential election to then New York Governor
Franklin D. Roosevelt. On March 4, 1933, Roosevelt was sworn into ofﬁce
by Chief Justice Charles Evans Hughes for what would be the ﬁrst of an
unprecedented four times. While most agree that the style with which
he delivered this address was as important as the words, the message
put forth to an anxious American public has long been considered in-
spiring as well. Roosevelt’s speech did not disappoint those who were
looking for new leadership. This speech also helped established his style
of straightforward conﬁdence which characterized his leadership for the
next dozen years.
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS AND ACTIVITIES
1. What does Roosevelt do in the opening paragraph of this speech to
establish himself as a credible leader during a time of crisis?
2. Roosevelt’s phrase, “that the only thing we have to fear is fear itself,”
is one of his most often quoted statements. What did he mean by this?
What are some factors that cause some phrases from presidential ad-
dresses to be remembered long after the speech? What other famous
quotes from presidential speeches can you remember?
3. Roosevelt came from a background of wealth and political promi-
nence. Why might this cause some Americans to be skeptical of what
he would do for the many unemployed laborers during the Depres-
sion years?

Political Science
121
4. Identify the places throughout this speech where Roosevelt makes ref-
erences to the current economic situation as if the nation were at war.
What would be his reasons for doing this? What do you believe he
hoped to gain from this tactic?
5. Identify in this speech Roosevelt’s plan of action for dealing with the
nation’s problems. Although the phrase “New Deal” is never used in
this speech, what aspects of the New Deal are clearly spelled out in
advance?
6. Find speciﬁc phrases in this speech that are used by Roosevelt to
establish Americans’ conﬁdence in himself as a leader and to dem-
onstrate his conﬁdence in the American people. Why are both of these
important?
RELATED INTERNET SITES
Life Portraits
(6a)
http://www.americanpresidents.org/presidents/president.asp?President
Number31
This site complements C-SPAN’s 20th Anniversary Television Series, American
Presidents: Life Portraits.
The Speech in Audio
(6b) http://www.historychannel.com/cgi-bin/framed.cgi
This site lets you hear an audio version of this speech. Go to “speech archives,”
“L-R.”
7. OTHER INAUGURAL SPEECHES
URL: http://odur.let.rug.nl/~usa/P/index.htm
Every president who is elected to ofﬁce is sworn into ofﬁce by the Chief
Justice of the United States during an inauguration ceremony. At this
time the newly elected president afﬁrms to “preserve, protect, and de-
fend the Constitution of the United States.” This is also an opportunity
for the president to address the American people on his thoughts and
plans for the upcoming years. This site contains the inaugural speeches
of every president who had the opportunity to give one. Many of the
links to the individual presidents also provide State of the Union ad-
dresses and other important speeches given during their tenure in ofﬁce.
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS AND ACTIVITIES
1. This section has already highlighted Abraham Lincoln’s second and
Franklin D. Roosevelt’s ﬁrst inaugural speeches. Select an inaugural

Primary Source Sites
122
address of another president of and summarize the main points for
the class. In your opinion, was this a good speech or not? Why or
why not? What were its strong points and weak points?
2. Select and read any three inaugural addresses by presidents about
whom you know very little. What common traits do you ﬁnd in these
speeches? What common purposes do these speeches serve? In your
opinion, why are some speeches remembered throughout history and
others forgotten shortly after they are given?
3. Some of the most often quoted inaugural addresses are those given
during a time of crisis. Select a time in American history during which
tensions were high and review the inaugural address given nearest
that time. What references do you ﬁnd in the speech to the high-
proﬁle event(s) of the day?
4. Note that some presidents never gave an inaugural address. Identify
who these were and investigate the reasons for their not giving such
a speech.
5. Many presidents have given more than one inaugural speech (one
gave four). Select a president who gave multiple inaugural addresses
and compare the speeches given. What similarities in style do you
see? What, other than current events, may lead to differences in style?
6. Select and copy an inaugural address without revealing the president
who gave it or the date on which it was delivered. White out other
obvious clues in the speech. Give the speech to a classmate to read
and then try and guess the president associated with it.
RELATED INTERNET SITE
Inaugural Excerpts
http://commersel.com/Rhetoric/SpeechSearch.asp
This web site is dedicated to helping you ﬁnd excerpts from inaugural ad-
dresses speciﬁc to a particular topic. Many of the links have audio broadcasts of
the speech as well.
8. JOHN F. KENNEDY’S BERLIN SPEECH
URL: http://www.historyplace.com/speeches/berliner.htm
The Cold War was in full force during the three years of the Kennedy ad-
ministration, and much of Kennedy’s foreign policy revolved around
tense Soviet-American relations. Shortly after Kennedy took the oath of of-
ﬁce, work began on the construction of the Berlin Wall. Built by the Soviets
to stop the mass emigration of Germans from Communist-controlled East
Berlin to non-Communist West Berlin, the wall quickly became a symbol

Political Science
123
of the differences that existed between countries on opposite sides of the
Iron Curtain. In June 1963, Kennedy visited the Berlin Wall and delivered
a brief, yet powerful, speech to a large, enthusiastic crowd of Berliners.
This site contains some helpful background information, the entire tran-
script of the speech, several photographs taken at the time, and a link to an
audio version of an excerpt of the speech.
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS AND ACTIVITIES
1. In the fourth paragraph of this speech, Kennedy repeatedly uses the
statement, “Let them come to Berlin.” What does he mean by this and
why does he evoke this phrase so often?
2. Several times during the speech, Kennedy speaks in German, rather
than having it translated. Why do you believe he did this?
3. Why was the Berlin Wall, according to Kennedy, a symbol of the
failure of the Communist system?
4. Click on and study the photographs located at this site. Compare the
two pictures and describe the different moods each picture conveys.
Look at the picture with the crowd. Why do you believe such a large
gathering of people was on hand to hear this speech? Do you believe
that they supported what he had to say? Why or why not?
5. Click on the link that allows you to listen to the last part of the
speech—the audio clip also lets you hear the enthusiasm of the crowd
toward his last line. What does Kennedy mean by this statement?
6. This speech was delivered to a group of West Berliners. For what
other audiences was this speech intended? Give a reason why you
believe Kennedy wanted each group to hear what he had to say.
RELATED INTERNET SITE
More on the Kennedy Speech
(8a) http://www.nara.gov/exhall/originals/kennedy.html
This site, from the National Archives and Records Administration, has more
on this historic day.
9. PRESIDENTIAL SUCCESSION ACT
URL: http://www.nara.gov/exhall/charters/constitution/
constitution.html
Presidential succession is an important issue. Nine times in our nation’s
history a vice president has become president as a result of the death or

Primary Source Sites
124
resignation of the president. This transition of power has always oc-
curred smoothly and without question. What would happen if both the
president and the vice president were unable to assume the duties of the
ofﬁce? Who would become president if there was no vice president in
ofﬁce at the time of death of the president? In fact, the ofﬁce of vice
president has been vacant for more than thirty-seven years during our
nation’s history. The answer is that the line of presidential succession is
clearly spelled out in three sections of the U.S. Constitution and in the
Presidential Succession Act passed by Congress in 1947, which places the
speaker of the House and the president pro tempore of the Senate in
direct line of succession of the vice president. This was further reﬁned
with the ratiﬁcation of the Twenty-ﬁfth Amendment. This site connects
to a transcript of the Constitution to allow further study of the relevant
sections.
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS AND ACTIVITIES
1. Read the following sections of the Constitution: Article II, Section 1,
Clause 6; the Twentieth Amendment; and the Twenty-ﬁfth Amend-
ment. Remembering that later amendments modify previously written
sections and amendments, create a list of the current ofﬁces in line
for presidential succession. Now study the list of individuals who
would be in line to assume the presidency. Who from this list would
not be eligible and why? Who else from this list might you have con-
cerns about being president and why?
2. Study the history of presidential succession. Create a list of presidents
who became president by succession. Who was the ﬁrst vice president
to take the ofﬁce? Which presidents were never elected? Which pres-
idents had no vice president? Who was the only president not elected
to either the presidency or vice presidency? You can check your an-
swers at (9a) http://www.about.com/culture/usgovinfo/library/
weekly/aa010298.htm?oncetrue&.
3. Study the Twentieth and Twenty-ﬁfth Amendments to determine the
procedures to follow if a president becomes incapacitated in some
way during his tenure (e.g., becomes comatose or suffers severely
from an illness). Has this ever happened? What scenarios could you
think of in which this might be needed?
4. Under President Harry S. Truman, a law was passed that changed the
order of succession to insert the speaker of the House and the presi-
dent pro tempore of the Senate before the members of the Cabinet.
What do you believe his reasoning was for this, and do you think this
was a good idea or not?

Political Science
125
5. Several times during a presidential tenure, events occur which place
most of the individuals in line for presidential succession at the same
place at the same time. When might this occur, and what provisions
are made to avoid a “doomsday scenario”?
6. Why is the question of succession such an important one to have
spelled out so clearly? Why has this question become more important
in the last century?
RELATED INTERNET SITES
More on Presidential Succession
(9b) http://gi.grolier.com/presidents/ea/side/succsion.html
This site from the Grolier on-line encyclopedia contains information on pres-
idential succession, vice presidential vacancies, and proposals for changing the
current system.
Who’s Next in Line?
(9c) http://www.home.inreach.com/usm/presuccession.html
This simple list contains the posts and current individuals in line for presi-
dential succession.
10. EXECUTIVE ORDERS
URL: http://www.about.com/culture/usgovinfo/library/weekly/
aa121897.htm
Article II, section 1 of the U.S. Constitution states, “The executive power
shall be vested in a president of the United States of America.” Article
II, section 3 informs us, “The President shall take care that the laws be
faithfully executed.” These clauses have been used by almost every pres-
ident since George Washington to issue executive orders. These orders
carry the weight of law, so long as they are not determined to be un-
constitutional, and they bypass the traditional legislative process of cre-
ating laws. Executive orders are routinely issued by presidents as they
exercise their right as chief executive to administer the various executive
agencies, further the public interest, and carry out the “laws of the land.”
Executive orders may be revoked by any president at any time, or a
president may simply issue new orders that supercede previous ones.
After 1907 executive orders were codiﬁed and given numbers in order
of their issuance. Since this system began, over 13,000 executive orders
have become law. This site further deﬁnes executive orders, gives rea-
sons for issuing an executive order, and connects you to a number of
archives containing executive orders.

Primary Source Sites
126
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS AND ACTIVITIES
1. Beginning with the section “Executive Orders Deﬁned,” review the
sections down to “Online Executive Orders, Lists, and Archives.”
What are some reasons cited for giving executive orders? Do these
seem reasonable to you? What are the limitations, if any, on executive
orders?
2. What is the difference between an executive order and a proclama-
tion? Give an example of why an executive proclamation might be
issued. Why might the lines between these two sometimes become
blurred?
3. Click on the link on this page entitled “President Nixon used this 398
word Executive Order establishing NOAA” and read this executive
order. What was the purpose of this order? In which branch of the
government is the Commerce Department? How do executive orders
help presidents administer their ofﬁce?
4. Go to (10a) http://www.lib.umich.edu/libhome/Documents.center/
jfkeo/exodates.htm. This will take you to the executive orders is-
sued by John F. Kennedy in order of the date they were given. Notice
how many there are. Do you believe this many executive orders is
normal procedure or not? How did you determine your answer? Se-
lect a number of these orders and read them. What types of subjects
do they cover? How is the language at the beginning of each one
similar? How does the reading of executive orders give you a better
understanding of the nature of the responsibilities of the presidency?
5. Click
on
(10b)
http://www.nara.gov/fedreg/eos/e08809.html.
Who issued this executive order originally and when was it amended?
What is the purpose of this order? What constitutional authority does
the president have to issue orders dealing with this subject?
6. The issue of whether a president has the authority to declare executive
orders has long been debated. Some believe that any proclamation
that carries the weight of law without going through a legislative
branch is, on its face, unconstitutional. What is your position on this?
Research the use of executive orders and have a class debate in which
both sides of this topic are presented.
RELATED INTERNET SITES
Presidential Proclamations and Executive Orders
(10c) http://www.nara.gov/fedreg/cod_chps.html
This web site of the National Archives and Records Administration contains a
codiﬁcation of presidential proclamations and executive orders.

Political Science
127
Clinton’s Executive Orders
(10d) http://www.pub.whitehouse.gov/search/executive-orders.html
This site allows you to search for any of the executive orders issued by the
Clinton administration.
Anti-executive Orders Argument
(10e) http://www.thewinds.org/archive/government/eobf6%2D97.html
This web site argues that the use of executive orders is unconstitutional.
11. PRESIDENTIAL LIBRARIES
URL: http://www.nara.gov/nara/president/overview.html
The Presidential Library system is maintained by a division of the Na-
tional Archives and Records Administration. Since the library system
was founded in 1939, every president since Franklin D. Roosevelt has
contributed materials to the Presidential Library system. The system also
maintains a library for President Herbert Hoover. A series of laws passed
since the inception of the libraries has increased the types and amounts
of materials available to the presidential libraries in recent years. Each
library, and often connecting museum, contains a rich assortment of of-
ﬁcial documents, photographs, interviews, diaries, and memorabilia as-
sociated with that particular president. Many times tapes and documents
not revealed during the life of the former president are released after his
death (the Lyndon Johnson Library recently released more tapes con-
cerning his presidency). Many library sites contain links to multimedia
presentations, information about the ﬁrst family, and educational activ-
ities as well. This web site listed above contains links and contact infor-
mation to each of the ten presidential libraries, Nixon’s presidential
materials, and the National Archives and Records Administration.
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS AND ACTIVITIES
1. Read the opening paragraphs of this site, which serves as an overview
of the Presidential Library system. What seems to be the purpose of
the presidential libraries?
2. A president now knows that, following his term in ofﬁce, a presiden-
tial library will be established containing important information and
documents from his administration. How might this affect what pa-
pers are made available to the library? If you were the president, why
would you like, or not like, to have a presidential library chronicling
your administration, and what types of items would you like to see
housed in it?

Primary Source Sites
128
3. In the section “A Brief History,” it is mentioned that “many (previous
presidents’) materials have been lost or deliberately destroyed.” Why
might some of these materials have been destroyed?
4. Several laws have been passed in recent decades affecting what might
or is required to go into the Presidential Library system. How have
these laws changed the library system? If you were president, would
you consider these laws a change for the good or for the worse?
5. Click on the link “Presidential Libraries” and go to the Jimmy Carter
Library. Click on the link titled “Documents/Photosdiary on the web”
and then click on the link that contains the “President’s Daily Diary,
1977–1981.” Read parts of this diary to get a sense of what the daily
routine of this president was. Select a time during his presidency that
coincides with an important event during his administration (e.g., the
Iran hostage crisis, the decision to boycott the 1980 Olympics) and see
if writings in his diary shed light on what he was going through as
the nation’s leader.
6. Returning to the Presidential Libraries page, click on Lyndon John-
son’s Library and then click on the link containing “The President’s
Daily Diary.” Look at Johnson’s diary on the day of November 22,
and review the events of that day. How would you characterize the
description found in this diary of this fateful day?
7. Compare the setup of different presidential libraries. How are they
similar and how are they different? Should there be a standardized
structure to the library system? Why or why not?
RELATED INTERNET SITE
Center for the Ofﬁce of the Presidency
(11a) http://www.cspresidency.org/
This is the site of the Center for the Ofﬁce of the Presidency. It contains links
to the presidential libraries of a dozen presidents.

LEGISLATIVE BRANCH
1. ABOUT THE U.S. CONGRESS
URL: http://lcweb.loc.gov/global/legislative/abtcong.html
This web site, sponsored by the Library of Congress, has background
information about the structure and history of Congress, the leadership
of both Houses, the standing committees of the House of Representatives
and the Senate, an overview of the process by which a bill becomes a
law, and information about the Congressional Record. This page also con-
tains Internet links to applicable sections of Article I of the U.S. Consti-
tution dealing with the establishment and powers of the legislative
branch, including those powers unique to each House. This page is well
organized and easy to understand, making it a good ﬁrst site to visit
when beginning a study of the legislative branch.
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS AND ACTIVITIES
1. Review the information found on this web site. What determines how
many members each state sends to Congress? How have the numbers
of representatives and senators grown for your state over the years?
If an increase in population justiﬁes an increase in members from that
state to the House of Representatives, how can the size of the House
be constant at 435? Is it possible for a state to grow in population and
lose representatives to the House? Explain. Review the latest Census
information for the United States [one place to ﬁnd information would
be at (1a) http://www.census.gov/]. Approximately how many
people does each representative currently represent? Which states
have more senators than representatives?
2. Review the leadership positions of both the House and the Senate.
Which positions are the same for both Houses? Which ones are unique
to each House? What is the responsibility of the majority and minority
leaders? Of the whip? Of the sergeant at arms?
3. What is the role of the committees of both Houses? Why are there so
many? What committees are the same for both Houses? Which are
different? Review the names of the committees. Can you determine
the primary duties of some committees? Which ones? Do you need

Primary Source Sites
130
more information to determine the primary duties of others? Which
ones?
4. Review Sections 1–4 of Article I of the Constitution (any of the Article
I links on this site will take you to a transcript of the entire Consti-
tution). What times were originally set up for Congress to meet? How
has this been changed? How, and why, has the job of a congressman
changed from a part-time job to a full-time job over the years?
5. Review Sections 8 and 9 of Article I of the Constitution. What powers
are granted to Congress by the Constitution? What powers are unique
to each House? What prohibitions are placed upon Congress and
why?
6. Review Section 7 of Article I of the Constitution. Rewrite this section
in your own words. Why do you think the founding fathers wanted
revenue bills to originate in the House of Representatives? What hap-
pens to a bill after it passes both Houses of Congress? What options
does a president have with a bill once it reaches his desk? What op-
tions might Congress have after a bill leaves the president’s desk?
RELATED INTERNET SITES
How a Bill Becomes a Law
(1b) http://members.tripod.com/us_constitution/bill.htm
This link takes you through the entire process of how a bill becomes a law.
The Library of Congress
(1c) http://www.loc.gov/
This site, the ofﬁcial site of the Library of Congress, includes numerous sources
of information concerning Congress.
2. TOUR OF THE CAPITOL BUILDING
URL: http://www.aoc.gov/
When one thinks of the legislative branch and Washington, D.C., one of
the ﬁrst images that comes to mind is the Capitol building. The Capitol,
which has come to represent American democracy at work, is visited by
millions of tourists each year from the United States and around the
world. More than just a building to house the Senate and the House of
Representatives, the Capitol is one of the rich architectural treasures of
our nation. Indeed, one way to study the history of America is to study
the pictures, sculptures, reliefs, and artifacts preserved in the Capitol.
This web site, developed and maintained by the architect of the Capitol,
allows one, among other things, to take a virtual tour of many of the

Political Science
131
areas in and around the great building. This site contains links to infor-
mation related to the Capitol including construction history, architectural
features and historic spaces, renovation projects, the works of art found
in the Capitol, the Capitol grounds and botanic gardens, and the con-
gressional ofﬁce buildings.
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS AND ACTIVITIES
1. Click on “Architectural Features and Historic Spaces in the U.S. Cap-
itol” and then on “The Capitol Dome.” After reading the history of
the dome, click on the “photographs of the dome.” From here, study
several of the links that give you photographs and original drawings
of the Capitol dome. Throughout history domes have been considered
architectural wonders as well as great architectural challenges (other
great domes in history include the Pantheon, Florence Cathedral, and
Saint Peter’s Cathedral). What is appealing about a great domed
building and why are they hard to build? Why do you think Thomas
Jefferson and other early American leaders favored a Roman and
Greek style in many of the early government buildings?
2. Click on the link “Works of Art,” and go to the link “The Statue of
Freedom.” This statue is located on the top of the Capitol dome. Read
the text on the statue and click on “A photograph of the statue.” What
symbolism is presented in the statue?
3. Under the category of “Works of Art,” click on the link “The Apoth-
eosis of Washington.” Read the text and study the photograph of this
rotunda canopy painting in the U.S. Capitol. What is happening in
this painting? What symbols are used in this painting?
4. Go to (2a) http://www.aoc.gov/pages/art_page.htm to see a pic-
ture of the Capitol rotunda. Scroll down and click on the “Rotunda
Frieze” and then on “A 360-degree panoramic photograph of the en-
tire frieze.” Scroll around this freize and study the history represented
in this work of art. What history is well represented in this frieze?
What history not included would you include if you could? If you
were to separate the pictures from the descriptive titles, for which
scenes would you be able to guess the historical event?
5. Take a virtual tour of some of the more historic rooms located inside
the Capitol. From the link “Architectural Features and Historic Spaces
in the U.S. Capitol,” click on “Introduction to Historic Rooms in the
Capitol.” Scroll down and study a number of these rooms. Each room
has a descriptive paragraph and a photograph (if you click on any of
the pictures of the various rooms they will enlarge for better study)
as well as a link to more detailed information about that room. Select

Primary Source Sites
132
one room to be an “expert” on and be prepared to present your in-
formation to the rest of the class.
6. Click on “List of the statues arranged by states” (located from the link
“Architectural Features and Historic Spaces in the U.S.” and then “Art
in the U.S. Capitol”). This link provides a listing of all of the statues
located in the National Statuary Hall Collection arranged alphabeti-
cally by states. Find your state and research each of the statues located
in the hall representing your state. How many of these individuals do
you know? Why are these statues representative of your state? If you
could decide who would be included in this gallery from your state,
who would it be?
RELATED INTERNET SITES
Building the Capitol
(2b) http://lcweb.loc.gov/exhibits/us.capitol/s2.html
Here you can ﬁnd information on the competition for the design of the Capitol.
Congressional Ofﬁce Buildings
(2c) http://www.aoc.gov/pages/currpage.htm
This link contains information about the Congressional Ofﬁce Buildings in-
cluding current and recent projects at the U.S. Capitol.
3. CONGRESSIONAL RECORD
URL: http://thomas.loc.gov/
Since 1873 the Congressional Record has been the written daily account of
all of the ﬂoor proceedings of the U.S. Congress. For the past ﬁfty plus
years, there has also been the Daily Digest, which summarizes that day’s
activities (number of bills introduced, ﬂoor actions, and committee meet-
ing abstracts). The Congressional Record is considered the more complete
and reliable record of what occurs on the chamber ﬂoors because every-
thing is printed exactly as it was said or read—it is essentially a verbatim
account of what happened in Congress that day. This site, maintained
by the Library of Congress, is an excellent search engine for the Con-
gressional Record as well as the other ofﬁcial records of Congress. It is
organized by Congressional sessions, committee, and the different
Houses. The site also has links to Internet resource pages on the judicial
and executive branches and the state and local governments.
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS AND ACTIVITIES
1. Click on the most recent issue of the Congressional Record. This will
take you to the current month of the Congressional Record. Click on

Political Science
133
the House version and review the schedule of events by looking at
the table of contents. Compare this to several other days’ table of
contents for the House. What is similar in the regular routine that is
followed? How are the days’ activities different?
2. Click on some of the events that occurred during the day you selected.
What are some of the activities that happened? Click on the Senate
accounting of the same day. Compare the table of contents with that
of the House. How are they similar and different?
3. Click on the Daily Digest for several of the days in the current month.
Why might this be considered a helpful document? What is the value
in having this information available to the general public at no cost
and little effort? Click on the link for the same day titled “Extension
of Remarks.” Review some of these. What is the purpose of the “Ex-
tension of Remarks”? Why might the senators and representatives
want these included?
4. Back on the main Thomas page (http://thomas.loc.gov/), click on the
link “Bills in the News.” What are some current bills being considered
by Congress? Choose one of these that you consider interesting or
important and review it. Write or e-mail your senator or representa-
tive about your position on this bill.
5. Go to (3a) http://thomas.loc.gov/home/r106query.html. Go to
number 2, Member of Congress, and locate one or more of your rep-
resentatives in Congress. This will bring up a list of times and topics
on which your congressional representative has spoken (and is
therefore in the Congressional Record). Review some of the comments
made by your representative(s) and determine whether you agree or
disagree with these positions. If you have representatives from op-
posing political parties, compare each one’s comments on similar is-
sues.
6. Back again on the main Thomas page (http://thomas.loc.gov/), click
on the link “Historical Documents” and then on the link “Early Con-
gressional Documents.” Either type in a phrase to search for or browse
from the list of early congressional documents from the Constitutional
Convention and the Continental Congress. Compare these documents
to some of today’s congressional documents. Are some of the topics
the same? How does the language compare? Do you recognize some
of the names of those speaking in the early documents?
RELATED INTERNET SITES
Parliamentary Procedure
(3b) http://www.robertsrules.com/

Primary Source Sites
134
This web page gives the history and proper procedure for Robert’s Rules of
Order.
Contacting Your Representatives
(3c) http://www.aclu.org/cgi-bin/congress.pl?cfaclu/congress.cf
This site of the American Civil Liberties Union (ACLU) gives you the necessary
information to write, call, or e-mail anyone in Congress.
4. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
URL: http://www.house.gov/
This is the ofﬁcial site of the House of Representatives. Do you want to
know how your congressman voted on an issue or what committees they
belong to? What do the committees actually do? This site gives you any
bit of information concerning the House of Representatives that you
want. From this web page you can view the records of the roll call votes
of many recent congressional sessions, view House documents and ar-
chival information related to the House of Representatives, and connect
to many links to other sites that provide information on the daily actions
of this chamber.
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS AND ACTIVITIES
1. The title of this site is “U.S. House of Representatives—106th Con-
gress, 2nd Session.” What is meant by the 106th Congress, 2nd Ses-
sion? Why is this only the 106th Congress even though Congress has
been in session for well over 200 years? How many sessions make up
a “Congress”?
2. From this site, click on “Roll Call Votes.” Click on the most recent
session of Congress (or any other session you wish). This will take
you to a page listing of all the roll call votes, along with the appro-
priate dates and bill numbers, that have occurred during this session.
Click on any bill that looks interesting to you and read what it is
about (you can click on links that give you a general summary of the
bill, tell you more about the bill’s status and its committee history,
information on any related bills, what amendments, if any, were
added, and the names of the sponsors and cosponsors). Imagine that
you are a representative from your congressional district. How would
you vote on this issue?
3. Go back to the roll call page [(4a) http://clerkweb.house.gov/evs/
2000/index.asp] and click on “roll” for that bill. Look up how the
bill fared in the House. Did the vote go the way you would have
wanted it to? Now look up how your representative voted. Repeat

Political Science
135
this process for several bills over several sessions of Congress. About
what percentage of the time are you in agreement with your repre-
sentative?
4. From the main page (http://www.house.gov/) click on the link “Me-
dia Galleries” and then on the link “Daily Press Gallery.” The right-
hand side of this page will tell you the events scheduled for that day
and week. The left-hand side frames have a number of additional
links. Review the links labeled “Party Breakdown” and “Casualty
List.” What does this data tell you about the current makeup of the
House of Representatives? Which party is in the majority and by how
much? What would it take to reverse this trend? After reviewing the
casualty list, discuss what opportunities exist for the minority party
to retake the majority in the next election.
5. Staying on the same page (http://www.house.gov/daily/hpg.htm),
determine how many female, African American, Asian American, and
Hispanic American members are in the House. What percentage of
the House is in each category? Compare this to the demographic
makeup of the country. Which compare favorably and which do not?
What reasons can you give for any discrepancies?
6. Go to the web site (4b) http://clerkweb.house.gov/histrecs/history/
elections/elections.htm. This site will give you the statistics of pres-
idential and congressional elections. Select the most recent congres-
sional election year and go to the statistics for your state. Find your
representative’s election ﬁgures. By how large of a margin did he or
she win? Review the table at the end of your state’s statistics labeled
“Recapitulation of Votes Cast.” How many representatives does your
state have? How many are Republican? Democrat? Independent?
Which candidates ran unopposed and why might that be? Note that
every representative to the House must run for election every two
years. What are the advantages and disadvantages to this require-
ment?
RELATED INTERNET SITES
Ofﬁce of the Clerk
(4c) http://clerkweb.house.gov/
This site connects you to the Ofﬁce of the Clerk On-line Information Center
for the House of Representatives.
Legislative Resources
(4d) http://www.house.gov/house/Educat.html
This web site provides links to educational resources related to the legislative
process.

Primary Source Sites
136
5. SENATE’S OFFICIAL HOMEPAGE
URL: http://www.senate.gov/
This is the ofﬁcial site of the Senate and, just as the House page does,
this site gives you a great deal of information concerning this chamber
of Congress in a very user-friendly way. From this site you can contact
your senator, view the committee hearing schedule, examine the sched-
ule before the Senate for the upcoming week, learn about the Senate art
collection, study Senate history, and much more. You can also search for
and collect information on any bill currently before the Senate.
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS AND ACTIVITIES
1. Click on “This Week in History” from the main page. What are some
of the signiﬁcant events that occurred in Senate history this week?
Rate them in order of importance and be prepared to justify your
ranking. Look at the events that are on the calendar for the Senate
this week. Which ones, if any, might be on a list of history-making
events, say, twenty years from now and why?
2. From the main page, click on “Senate History.” This will take you to
a page that “provides biographical, institutional, and statistical infor-
mation and analysis to help you explore and understand Senate his-
tory.” Read the information provided on the “Senate Historical
Ofﬁce.” On this page there is a link to the Senate’s “Famous Five.”
This interesting study, done by the Senate in the mid-1950s, charged
a committee with selecting the ﬁve most inﬂuential Senators in Amer-
ican history—a sort of Senators Hall of Fame. Before reading about
these ﬁve men, try to guess who they might be. After seeing who was
chosen by committee, read some of the biographical information pro-
vided. Finally, have your class form a “committee of the whole” to
decide the three most famous senators since 1950 who, you think,
should be added to this list. What criteria did you use to determine
your nominees?
3. Back on “The Senate Historical Ofﬁce” page, click on “Historical Pho-
tos.” Study the pictures and captions provided here. What features do
these pictures have in common? Why are they included on this web
site? Which pictures require further explanation and which are self-
explanatory?
4. Back on the Senate homepage (http://www.senate.gov/), click on the
link to “Nominations.” The Senate is given special responsibility by
the Constitution to conﬁrm presidential nominees for a host of job

Political Science
137
responsibilities in the federal government. While Supreme Court nom-
inations receive the most attention, most nominations and conﬁrma-
tions go unnoticed by the general public. Click on the link that will
give you the document of “civilian conﬁrmed” that identiﬁes civilian
nominations conﬁrmed by the Senate during the current Congress.
Which types of duties and responsibilities on this list did you expect
to see? Which ones surprise you or were jobs you were unaware of?
How do you suppose the president and the Senate keep track of all
those positions that need to be ﬁlled and of all the individuals capable
of ﬁlling the openings? Review how many federal judge positions are
currently unﬁlled. What might be some of the consequences of these
vacancies?
5. From the main page (http://www.senate.gov/), click on the link
“Nominations.” From this next page, select from the menu on the left
side the link “Treaties.” The ratiﬁcation of treaties is another power
speciﬁcally granted to the Senate by the Constitution. Select “This
Document” from the heading “Treaties Approved” to view a list of
treaties approved by the Senate during the current Congress (if the
current session has just begun, view the list of “Treaties on the Ex-
ecutive Calendar”). How many treaties are on the current list? What
range of topics do they cover? Why does the general public rarely
hear of such treaties? Should this information be more widely dissem-
inated? What types of treaties are usually fully covered by the media?
What are some famous treaty ratiﬁcations or non-ratiﬁcations that
have occurred in America’s history?
6. Back on the main page (http://www.senate.gov/), click on the link
“Roll Call Vote.” What is a roll call vote and when is it used? Click
on the link “Roll Call Tables” for the current session of Congress and
check out how your senators voted on a number of bills (if you do
not know who your senators are, you can access this information on
the main page by selecting your state on “Connect With Your Sena-
tors”). Read about a particular bill by clicking on the link to it and
then determine if your vote would be the same as your senators’.
What factors may inﬂuence how your senator votes on a particular
issue? What information on this issue has he or she had access to that
you perhaps have not had?
RELATED INTERNET SITES
Treaties of the United States
(5a) http://www2.lib.udel.edu/subj/godc/resguide/ustreat.htm
This site is a research guide to U.S. treaties.

Primary Source Sites
138
Congressional News
(5b) http://www.loc.gov/global/legislative/news.html
This Library of Congress Internet resource page has congressional news and
analysis links.
6. RULES OF THE HOUSE AND SENATE
URL: http://lcweb.loc.gov/global/legislative/rules.html
There are 535 members of Congress (435 representatives to the House
and 100 senators). Between these two Houses of Congress, legislation is
acted on pertaining to every imaginable area of domestic and foreign
life. To help regulate the daily activities, the House and the Senate have
created a set of rules, relevant to their particular chamber, to indicate
clearly the processes and responsibilities by which each should go about
its business. These have been compiled and made available to the public
by the Senate and House clerks. This site, a Library of Congress Internet
resource page, has the rules of each House broken down into categories
(twenty-seven for the House and forty-three for the Senate) ranging from
the duties of ofﬁcers, to various committee responsibilities, to codes of
ofﬁcial conduct.
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS AND ACTIVITIES
1. From the main page, click on “House Rules: 106th Congress” and on
“Standing Rules of the U.S. Senate.” Compare the categories of rules
for the House and Senate. What categories are the same? Which ones
are unique to each House?
2. Under the House Rules, review the duties of the various ofﬁcers. What
are the responsibilities of the speaker of the House? How long may
he or she serve? Go to (6a) http://clerkweb.house.gov/histrecs/
history/members/biotoc.htm to view a list of past speakers along
with their biographical information. Review the history of how long
some speakers have served in the past. Has anyone served more than
the current maximum terms? Who has served the most years as
speaker altogether?
3. What is a quorum and how is it determined for each House of Con-
gress? What is the purpose of a quorum? What happens if a quorum
is not present?
4. Go to the link for the “House of RULE XXIV—Code of Ofﬁcial Con-
duct.” Review these rules on the conduct of House representatives.
Which ones seem obvious to you? Are there any that you did not
expect? Are there any rules that you believe need further clariﬁcation?

Political Science
139
What is the reason for having such a code of conduct and what, if
anything, is the penalty for violating articles of this code?
5. Review the rules for each House on the limitations on outside income
and the acceptance of gifts. What is the purpose of such limitations?
Do you think these are too strict or too lenient? How are the two
Houses different in these areas of rules? Go to (6b) http://
www.house.gov/daily/salary.htm for a listing of the salaries of
members of Congress. With the rules placed on each House regarding
gifts and outside income, how much can a member of Congress ac-
tually make? Is this enough? Too much? Just right? Why do you think
so?
6. After reviewing the categories and some of the rules of both chambers
of Congress, create your own set of rules that you would like to see
included in either House’s list.
RELATED INTERNET SITE
Standards of Ofﬁcial Conduct
http://www.house.gov/ethics/
This is the web site for the Committee on Standards of Ofﬁcial Conduct of the
U.S. House of Representatives.
7. SEVENTEENTH AMENDMENT
URL: http://www.house.gov/house/Constitution/Amend.html
The Seventeenth Amendment was passed by Congress on May 13, 1912,
and ratiﬁed on April 8, 1913, to become part of the U.S. Constitution.
This amendment, which requires the popular election of senators to the
Senate every six years, was the result of a growing dissatisfaction with
the established manner by which senators were appointed. With this
amendment, senators were elected to their ofﬁces in the same manner as
representatives. However, rather than campaigning in only one congres-
sional district, senators had to gain the popular approval of their entire
state. Those in favor of the amendment made the case that this amend-
ment helped the democratization of the Constitution by bringing the
control of government closer to the people. Those against this amend-
ment averred that this took yet more control away from the states and
created additional problems in the area of campaign ﬁnance. This site
links you to the amendments of the Constitution and provides a link to
the main body of the Constitution.

Primary Source Sites
140
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS AND ACTIVITIES
1. In the abstract above, it states that “the Seventeenth Amendment was
passed by Congress on May 13, 1912, and ratiﬁed on April 8, 1913, to
become part of the U.S. Constitution.” Review the process by which
an amendment may be added to the Constitution. Why, for this par-
ticular amendment, might some consider the method of initiating the
process a “conﬂict of interests” with regard to the Senate?
2. Review what the Seventeenth Amendment says and compare this
with the original method established under Article I, Section 3 of the
Constitution. What do you believe would be some of the advantages
and disadvantages to each method of selecting senators?
3. The manner by which senators were appointed to ofﬁce in the original
Constitution was but one example by which the founding fathers
demonstrated a reluctance to give the common voter too much power
in early America. What are some other examples in the Constitution
of such an indirect democracy? What were some of the reasons the
founders may have had for this hesitancy?
4. The Seventeenth Amendment was ratiﬁed in 1913. This time period
in American history is referred to as the Progressive Era. How is this
amendment consistent with this time period? What other legislation
and amendments were passed during this era that are consistent with
some of the goals of this era?
5. Go
to
(7a)
http://www.nara.gov/exhall/treasuresofcongress/
Images/page_17/57b.html to view a political cartoon on the Sev-
enteenth Amendment that appeared in the Omaha World Herald in
1912. What is going on in these two pictures? What editorial comment
is being made?
6. There are factions today that believe the Seventeenth Amendment
should be repealed. To gain a perspective on some of these arguments,
visit the following sites: (7b) http://acclaimedmedia.com/voafa/
letters/28e.htm, (7c) http://www.issues.reformparty.org/sat_506.
html, (7d) http://www.nhumanities.org/Hoebeke.htm, and (7e)
http://www.bizjournals.com/denver/stories/1997/03/03/editorial
3.html. What reasons are given for its repeal and how strong are
these arguments? What is your position on the value of the Seven-
teenth Amendment?
RELATED INTERNET SITES
The Gilded Age
(7f) http://www.emayzine.com/lectures/Gilded~1.htm

Political Science
141
This web site has information on the time period known as the Gilded Age
(1890 to World War I).
The Progressive Era
(7g) http://www.swarthmore.edu/SocSci/rbannis1/Progs/
This web site contains information on America during the Progressive Era.
8. COMMITTEES
URL: http://www.access.gpo.gov/congress/
Both the Senate and the House have such a volume of work that each
chamber depends heavily on the committee system, and this is where
the bulk of the work of Congress is done. Each House has a number of
standing committees, select committees, and joint committees to which
all bills are delegated according to the subject matter of the bill. This
allows for a degree of division of labor and a certain specialization of
knowledge on the part of the representatives and senators. Most bills
never make it out of committee, and those that do are often voted on in
accordance with the recommendations of the committee reporting on
them. Committees vary in size and in importance, and many congres-
sional careers have beneﬁted or suffered as a result of assignment to
committees. The committee chairpersons of certain standing committees
are considered to be among the most powerful individuals in Congress.
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS AND ACTIVITIES
1. Click on the links “House Committees” and “Senate Committees” and
study the types of committees found in each chamber. Why do you
believe so many committees are needed? What is the main purpose
of the committee structure? To read more about the committee system,
go to (8a) http://www.senate.gov/committees/comm_about.html.
Why do you think the roles of committees would be specially critical
to the House of Representatives? Which committees are joint com-
mittees? Why do you believe these committees are set up this way?
2. Study the names of different committees and guess the range of re-
sponsibility of each. The names will be an obvious indicator of the
general topic, but many have a wider range of jurisdiction than one
might imagine. To check the types of topics each committee deals
with, click on a speciﬁc committee, and then click on the heading
“JURISDICTION.” (You may wish to assign individuals to research
the jurisdiction of different committees and report their ﬁndings to
the class.) Have each member of your class create a topic for a bill
that they would like to see considered by Congress (by either House)
and then determine to which committee each bill would be assigned.

Primary Source Sites
142
3. Compare the topics of committees for each House. What committees
are the same in both and which are unique to one chamber or another?
4. Look at the membership makeup of several committees. Regarding
party membership to committees, what will you consistently ﬁnd?
Look also at the size of different committees (by committee member-
ship numbers and the number of subcommittees). Why are some com-
mittees so much larger than others?
5. If you were an up-and-coming young member of Congress, which
committees (in either House) would you hope to get assigned to
and why? Go to (8b) http://clerkweb.house.gov/106/mbrcmtee/
members/cmteeassign/mcaframe.htm to ﬁnd out to which commit-
tees your representatives are assigned.
6. Committees must do the bulk of the research on each bill assigned to
them and then report their ﬁndings to the Senate or the House of
Representatives. Much of the data collection of a bill is done in con-
gressional hearings, and ﬁnal recommendations, if any, are presented
in “reports.” Many of the committees on this site allow you to connect
to links that present the transcripts of the committee’s hearings and/
or reports. Go to the web site of a committee of your choice and click
on either the hearings or report related to a bill assigned to it. What
is the value of providing all of this information to the general public
over the Internet, just as the members of Congress have access to it?
RELATED INTERNET SITES
Committee Structure
(8c) http://www.house.gov/rules/95–608.htm
This is an additional site with helpful information regarding the committee
structure of both Houses of Congress.
Hearing Schedules and Oversight Plans
(8d) http://thomas.loc.gov/home/hcomso.html
This link provides a chart of all hearing schedules and oversight plans for each
committee in the House of Representatives.

ELECTIONS AND THE VOTING PROCESS
1. PRESIDENTIAL ELECTIONS AND VOTER TURNOUT
URL: http://infoplease.lycos.com/ipa/A0764586.html
This interesting site provides information on the election process and
contains statistical information related to presidential, congressional, and
gubernatorial elections. The election returns for every presidential elec-
tion are provided as well as a state-by-state breakdown of popular and
electoral votes for each candidate in the most recent presidential election.
Other links allow the reader to examine voter turnout statistics for fed-
eral elections, review the process by which a president is nominated and
elected, and learn more about presidential elections that yielded unusual
voting results. There are also links to Article II, Section I of the Consti-
tution, which explains the powers of the president, and the Twelfth and
Twentieth Amendments to the U.S. Constitution explaining the current
method of electing the president and vice president by electors and the
process of presidential succession.
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS AND ACTIVITIES
1. From the main elections page, click on the link “Presidential Elections,
1789–1996.” This gives the election results (candidate, party, and elec-
toral votes) for every presidential election. Note that the structure of
the table changes with the election of 1804. How does it change and
why? Study the election results provided here for the election of 1800
and refer to the Twelfth Amendment (there is a link provided to this
on this site) for additional insight to this question.
2. Look at the electoral results for the presidential elections. Which elec-
tions would you classify as landslides? What would you consider a
“close” election? How many close elections have there been in the
twentieth century and in which years did these close elections occur?
3. Note the election of 1824. Which candidate had the most electoral
votes? Which candidate became president? How did this happen?
Study the procedure that is followed in such a case. Study more
closely this election in particular. When have similar events happened

Primary Source Sites
144
in presidential elections? What circumstances could occur to cause
such an event to happen today?
4. Back on the main page (http://infoplease.lycos.com/ipa/A0764586.
html), click on the link “National Voter Turnout in Federal Elections:
1960–1998.” Study the voter turnout statistics from 1960 to 1998. What
pattern do you see in the rate of voter turnout? Why are some years
consistently higher than others? What suggestions would you have to
improve voter turnout during nonpresidential years?
5. Determine the number of voters registered as a percentage of voting
age population for every presidential election year and graph the re-
sults by dividing the number of the voting age population into the
number given for voter registration. What overall trend do you see?
Compare this to the trend in percentage of voting age turnout. How
might you account for the ﬁrst trend, and why are these trends not
consistent?
6. The low percentage of voter turnout at elections (particularly for off-
year elections) has been the subject of debate for years. What argu-
ments could be made as to the perils of low voter turnout and, con-
versely, what rationale could be made for the argument that low voter
turnout in America is not a problem?
RELATED INTERNET SITES
Project Vote Smart
(1a) http://www.vote-smart.org/
This site from Project Vote Smart allows the viewer to research the voting and
ﬁnance records of government ofﬁcials. It also has amusing surveys for teenagers.
The site includes classroom lesson plans as well as a catalog of quotes from
presidential candidates.
Kids Voting
(1b) http://www.activedayton.com/community/groups/kidsvoting/
This site from Kids Voting has a sample ballot and important facts about the
election process.
2. THE ELECTORAL COLLEGE
URL: http://www.nara.gov/fedreg/elctcoll/
The delegates at the Constitutional Convention were wary of the presi-
dent of the United States being elected directly by popular vote or by
the Congress. Instead they created a new system called the Electoral
College whereby each state was given as many electors as they had mem-

Political Science
145
bers to Congress and were given freedom to determine the method by
which these electors would be selected. The original idea of the founding
fathers was that each state would choose electors who were educated,
informed, reﬂective citizens and that these electors would meet every
four years to select the individual best suited to serve as president. This
is precisely what did happen for the ﬁrst two elections when George
Washington was elected unanimously. Since that time, however, al-
though the Electoral College has continued to operate, it has remained
controversial as to its merit and functionality. This site is the Electoral
College homepage from the National Archives and Records Administra-
tion, and it contains Electoral College statistical data on all presidential
elections, links to “relevant provisions of the U.S. Constitution and fed-
eral law” related to the Electoral College, and a state-by-state breakdown
of Electoral College votes.
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS AND ACTIVITIES
1. Click on the link labeled “Relevant Provisions of the U.S. Constitution
and Federal Law” and read Section 1 of Article II of the Constitution,
which establishes the Electoral College. Why do you believe the
founding fathers established this system of electing a president? Why
were they afraid of direct popular vote? What would be the disad-
vantages of allowing Congress to elect the president?
2. From the main page, click on the link “Procedural Guide to the Elec-
toral College” and review the information found here under the head-
ing “The Electoral College in Brief.” This section, among other points,
refers to the process to follow set up by the Twelfth Amendment if
no candidate receives a majority of electoral votes (go back to the link
“Relevant Provisions of the U.S. Constitution and Federal Law” to
study the provisions of the Twelfth Amendment). What is this process
and what conditions might exist today to cause this to happen? When
has this happened in the past and what were the results?
3. How are electors generally selected by the states today? What deter-
mines how they vote in December of an election year? Are they legally
bound to vote any particular way? In your opinion, should they be?
4. The Twelfth Amendment was passed in 1804. What events led to the
need for this amendment? Review also the Twenty-third Amendment,
passed in 1961. How is it relevant to the Electoral College process and
what was the argument for its adoption? How is the number of elec-
tors for the District of Columbia determined? What was the status of
those individuals living in the District of Columbia before this amend-
ment was passed?

Primary Source Sites
146
5. How many electors does it take to become president, and how is that
number determined? How many votes does it take in each state for a
candidate to earn all of the electoral votes of that state? With both of
these factors in mind, click on the link “List of States and Votes” and
determine the minimum number of states that it would take for a
candidate to win a majority of votes in and become president. Theo-
retically, approximate how badly a presidential candidate could lose
the popular vote and still become president.
6. Divide the class into two groups and have each group take a position
either in favor of or against the continued use of the Electoral College.
Have each side research its position and argue its case in a class de-
bate.
RELATED INTERNET SITES
More on the Electoral College
(2a) http://www.fec.gov/pages/ecmenu2.htm
This web site, maintained by the Federal Election Commission, has information
on how the Electoral College works and gives a brief history and the distribution
of votes.
Mapping the Electoral Votes
(2b) http://www.jump.net/~jnhtx/ec/ec.html
This site provides an Electoral College calculator and a color-coded map of the
electoral votes for the past ﬁve elections.
3. NATIONAL PARTY COMMITTEES
URL: http://www.rnc.org/
URL: http://www.democrats.org/index.html
While a multitude of political parties ofﬁcially exist in the United States
and Independents do successfully get elected into national ofﬁce, the
bulk of the political power is shared between two major groups, the
Republican and Democratic parties. Listed here are the sites for the of-
ﬁcial pages of both. Each site provides a partisan view of the ideology
of the party. Included are major platform issues, a directory of ofﬁce-
holders, news about upcoming party events, and up-to-date news on all
political issues affecting the nation (presented from that party’s perspec-
tive). Each web page is also used as a tool to spotlight the triumphs of
the party and to illuminate the failures of the rival party. Links provide
information about how to donate money to the party cause.

Political Science
147
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS AND ACTIVITIES
1. Examine and compare both sites. What information can you connect
to on each site which may be classiﬁed as a primary source? Which
information is clearly a secondary or tertiary source? What criteria are
you using to distinguish between the different types of sources?
For a review of information related to primary sources, you can refer
back to Chapter 2 of this text or visit (3a) http://memory.loc.gov/
ammem/ndlpedu/primary.html.
2. Both sites provide links to their party platform from the previous
presidential election. Click on the party platform for each political
party (these are both relatively lengthy documents). What are the ma-
jor headings for each platform? What topics are discussed by both
parties? How are the two platforms organized differently? Are there
any issues, which you consider important on a national level, that are
not included in one or both of the party platforms? What would some
of these issues be and why might they not be included here?
3. What is the purpose of the party platform? Why do you think it is
called a “party platform”? How is it helpful for someone who wants
to know more about a particular political party? In what way is it not
that helpful? Study some of the language used in each platform. What
tactics are used to present that party in the best possible light?
4. Select a topic addressed by both political party platforms (e.g., taxes,
education, economic growth, the environment) and summarize each
party’s position on that issue. How, according to the platform, are the
ofﬁcial positions clearly different? In what ways are they similar?
5. If possible, select a transcript of a recent speech from one of the po-
litical party sites. Read the speech and give a short abstract on its
purpose. Select an important part of the speech and categorize each
sentence as either a statement of fact or a statement of opinion. Which
category contains more sentences?
6. Study the homepage of each political party. What propaganda tech-
niques are used on each site [for more information on common prop-
aganda techniques, refer to (3b) http://carmen.artsci.washington.
edu/propaganda/contents.htm]. How much space on each site is
devoted to positive issues regarding one’s own political party, and
how much is devoted to negative information regarding the rival po-
litical party?
RELATED INTERNET SITES
Democratic Socialist Party of America
(3c) http://www.dsausa.org/dsa.html

Primary Source Sites
148
This site has a summary of the Democratic Socialist Party of America. The
party platform is included here as well as resources for researchers.
Libertarian Party
(3d) http://www.lp.org/
This is the Libertarian party homepage, which gives the party platform, his-
tory, and a list of candidates for upcoming elections. It includes a quiz to help
the reader decide whether he or she is a Libertarian.
Green Party
(3e) http://www.greens.org/gpusa/
This is the web site of the Green party, an environmental party organized after
the success of the German Greens. This web page gives the principles of the
party, the history of the party, and current campaigns and endorsements.
4. PROHIBITION PARTY
URL: http://www.prohibition.org/
Although the American political scene has been dominated by two major
political parties since the beginning of the 1800s, alternative political par-
ties continue to compete for votes. Often referred to as “third parties,”
these organizations frequently organize around a speciﬁc issue or can-
didate of the day. An example of one such party is the Prohibition party.
Begun in 1869, this party, along with several other groups such as the
Anti-Saloon League and the Women’s Temperance Movement, carried
enough clout to change the political landscape of the early 1900s, cul-
minating with the passage of the Eighteenth Amendment. Like many
third parties, the Prohibition party remains active, if not widely known,
today. This site gives the history of their organization and the political
movement. Portraits of the founders of the party, quotes, and historical
documents are also present.
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS AND ACTIVITIES
1. Scroll down and click on the link “history” and read about the begin-
nings of this political party. Note the two different pledges taken by
different members of this party. What issue today is similar in its
debate over limited use for medicinal purposes? How did the term
“teetotaler” get started in reference to one who does not drink?
2. This essay on the history of the Prohibition party acknowledges that
the party has never won a national election, but it has been an effec-
tive political contributor. What were the two major issues on which
the Prohibition party was founded? What events occurred in the ﬁrst
quarter of this century to address these issues? Based on this history

Political Science
149
would you agree with the Prohibition party’s claim that the “move-
ment stands as a classic example of the value and effectiveness of 3rd
parties in effecting social reform in America”?
3. The Prohibition party remains an active political party today. Since
the two most important political issues of the original party have been
addressed in some way on the national level, why is this party still
active? Study some of the issues located on the main page and deter-
mine what issues are most important to it today and how these issues
are different from the issues that helped start the party.
4. Scroll down and click on the link “Platform” and review the ofﬁcial
party platform. How do these compare to the original party platform?
What does the platform say about the namesake topic of prohibition
today? How is this different from its original position? Based on the
positions taken on the topics in this platform, where on the political
spectrum (running from very conservative to very liberal) would you
place this party today?
5. Look at types of related links on the homepage of the Prohibition
party. Visit some of these links for additional information. Based on
the history of this party, why do some of these organizations share
common opinions on certain issues?
6. What roles do alternative political parties play in today’s politics?
What alternative political parties are active today and, of these, which
do you believe have the most inﬂuence? Study some major presiden-
tial elections in America’s past that involved major third party con-
tenders. What was the impact of these parties?
7. Visit the web site of the Reform Party at (4a) http://www.
reformparty.org/. This is, arguably, the third most popular political
party in America today. What positions does it take, and how does it
differ from the Democratic and Republican parties?
RELATED INTERNET SITES
Women’s Christian Temperance Union
(4b) http://wctu.org/
The Women’s Christian Temperance Union was founded in 1836. It was one
of the leaders in the temperance movement.
Bull Moose Party
(4c) http://www.backgroundbrieﬁng.com/thdpty.html
This includes the historical context and origins of this famous third party in
the presidential election of 1912.

Primary Source Sites
150
5. LEARNING PAGE LIBRARY OF CONGRESS AND THE
ELECTION OF 1920
URL: http://memory.loc.gov/ammem/ndlpedu/features/
election/election.html
The American Memory Historical Collections National Digital Library
from the Library of Congress has put together this selection of resources
on “Elections in American History.” This site features primary sources
about various aspects of the voting process in America including a short
history on how the election system grew out of the debate at the
Constitutional Convention, links to some early campaign speeches, per-
spectives of American voters throughout history, and some early pho-
tographs of presidential candidates. An extensive search engine is
provided to enable individuals to access a vast amount of primary source
materials available on this topic. There are also links to activities that
students can use to improve their understanding of the election process.
One of the features on this page focuses on the presidential election of
1920 and includes a number of real audio clips from the presidential and
vice presidential candidates.
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS AND ACTIVITIES
1. The initial page that this link will take you to contains a transcript from
the Constitutional Convention of 1787–1788. Among the many issues
decided at that convention was the process by which early Americans
would elect the president. Read this selection from the proceedings
of the Constitutional Convention, or go to (5a) http://lcweb2.loc.gov
/ cgi-bin / query / r?ammem / bds:@ﬁeld(FLD00190898171):@@@$
REF$ for a more complete transcript. What does this proposal es-
tablish? What is this system known as today? Why is there such a
time delay between the three dates in this quote?
2. From the main page, click on the link “the Debate.” This will take
you to a page featuring the presidential election of 1920. Click on this
link. Of names listed on this page, which do you recognize as indi-
viduals who will eventually become president? Click on some of the
links of the individuals to see pictures of the candidates and to learn
more about their backgrounds at the time of this election. What traits
do you believe these men had that led their respective parties to nom-
inate them for ofﬁce? What did each vice presidential candidate con-
tribute to the ticket of their party?
3. From the presidential election of 1920 page, click on the link titled
“Introduction.” Read the text and view the pictures provided on this

Political Science
151
page. According to the information provided here, what was the over-
all mood of the country going into this election?
4. Notice at the bottom of this page that the campaign was made acces-
sible to the American public via phonograph. This would soon be
replaced by radio. What eventually replaced the radio as the chief
campaign medium and when did this occur? What is the primary
means of dispensing campaign information now, and how do you
think that might change in the future?
5. Go back to the page titled “The Presidential Election of 1920” and
click on the link to Warren G. Harding. Listen to the brief audio se-
lection entitled “Readjustment” at the bottom of this page. The mes-
sage found in this clip would be the theme of his campaign. What is
the main point being made here? What administration is being at-
tacked indirectly and how? What speaking technique is Harding using
to make his point more memorable?
6. Return to the main page http://memory.loc.gov/ammem/ndlpedu/
features/election/election.html and click on the link “The Voters.”
Scroll down to the bottom of this page and read the quote that begins,
“[I]t is doubtful if my enthusiasm ever run higher.” Who is this quote
from and why is he so enthusiastic? What do you think the context
is for this quote? Why are most individuals today not nearly as en-
thusiastic about casting a vote, and what might be done to recapture
some of this enthusiasm?
RELATED INTERNET SITES
American Memory
http://lcweb2.loc.gov/
This is the opening page for the American Memory of the Library of Congress.
This ﬁrst page contains a different set of photographs each time you access the
page. You can click on them to receive a full description.
More on the Election of 1920
http://www.multieducator.com/elections/1920.html
This site provides additional information on the presidential election of 1920.
6. ELECTION OF 1860
URL: http://jefferson.village.virginia.edu/vshadow2/
newspapers.html
Every presidential election brings with it debates over topics voters con-
sider fundamental to the day. Both political parties assert that, if the rival
party should win the forthcoming election, disaster will closely follow
regarding a particular program or issue. While these claims may at times

Primary Source Sites
152
be exaggerated, there has been no presidential election in this nation’s
history in which the stakes were as clear or as high as in 1860. This was
a four-candidate race. The Democratic party had split in two with John
Breckinridge being nominated from the South and Stephen Douglas from
the North. The Republicans had nominated Abraham Lincoln, and a
third party, the Constitutional Union party, nominated John Bell. It was
well known that Lincoln was opposed to the expansion of slavery
and his election would more than likely result in some Southern states
attempting to secede from the union. This site examines the issues
being discussed immediately before and after the hotly debated 1860
presidential election through the editorial pages of several national news-
papers. Included here are excerpts from pro-Northern, pro-Southern, and
border-state major metropolitan newspapers dating from September
1860, several months before the election, to the summer of 1861, at which
time the Civil War had begun.
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS AND ACTIVITIES
1. Scroll down and click on the link “Major Metropolitan Newspapers”
and from there click on the link for “The New York Tribune.” On this
page scroll down and click on the articles for the dates of October 24
and October 29. These are excerpts from the paper just days before
the presidential election. Read these excerpts and comment on the
mood of the authors right before the election. What is the purpose of
these editorials? What language or phrases are used here that you
might ﬁnd unusual?
2. Back on the page for “The New York Tribune,” scroll down and click
on the articles for the dates of “January 24, 1861 Untitled, re: Virginia”
and read this short editorial. Why does the author ﬁnd what is about
to occur in Virginia “curious, not to say comical”? What assumptions
does the author make about the general populace of Virginia?
3. Scroll down a little farther on the same page to the link for “February
27, 1861 What Secession Actually Has Done.” Read and summarize
this editorial. How many states had seceded by the time this was
written? How many Southern states had not yet seceded? What is the
attitude of the farmer as recounted by the author of this article?
4. Return to the top of the page and click on the link for the “Richmond
Enquirer articles.” Then go to the article dated November 6, 1860, titled
“The Day of Battle Has Arrived.” Read this article and summarize its
position. How is the attitude of the editorials in this newspaper dif-
ferent from those of the Tribune?

Political Science
153
5. Now go to the two articles dated Friday, December 21, 1860, titled
“The First Act” and “Where the Shoe Pinches.” Again, place these
articles in historical context—what had and had not happened as of
late December 1860? What do these articles seem to be saying about
the long-suffering grievances of the South? On what basis do these
articles rationalize the possibility of secession? Explain what is meant
by the last phrase, “It is, we fear, a gordian knot—very difﬁcult to
untie; but, if not soon untied, it must be cut.”
6. Review articles from the Baltimore American and try to determine the
political position of this paper. Why would the Baltimore paper not
be as clear cut? What was the role of Maryland in the Civil War?
Collect a number of editorials from several local newspapers (this is
especially useful close to a state or national election) and try to de-
termine if a paper has a bias toward one political party or another.
RELATED INTERNET SITES
Divided by War
(6a) http://jefferson.village.virginia.edu/vshadow2/choosepart.html
This is the homepage of the Valley of the Shadow Project which “takes two
communities, one Northern and one Southern, through the experience of the
American Civil War.”
More on the 1860 Election
(6b) http://jefferson.village.virginia.edu/vshadow2/outlines/election.html
This site on the election of 1860 contains a huge amount of primary documents
about the election process. It has all of the voting totals and recounts how each
candidate did. This is a good site to learn about the election and the eventual
secession of the South from the Union.
7. ELECTION OF 1948
URL: http://www.whistlestop.org/study collections/
1948campaign/large/docs/1948campaign base.htm
The presidential election of 1948 had one of the most surprising ﬁnishes
of this century. Even through the campaign’s waning days, almost every
political expert had marked Harry S. Truman’s opponent, Thomas E.
Dewey, as the certain winner. Many Democrats, Truman’s own political
party, had been dissatisﬁed with Truman during his ﬁrst term—a term
he inherited as vice president after the death of Franklin D. Roosevelt in
1945. Yet, despite not having the full support of his own party, Truman
waged one of the more vigorous barnstorming campaigns in American

Primary Source Sites
154
history and, in the end, shocked the experts and pollsters alike with an
upset victory. This site is one of the “Project Whistlestop” pages, spon-
sored by the U.S. Department of Education.
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS AND ACTIVITIES
1. Click on the link “Brief Summary of the 1948 Campaign” and read an
overview of this election. What evidence do you ﬁnd of the mood of
defeat surrounding Truman and the contrasting mood of over-
conﬁdence in the Dewey camp? What are some factors that might
have contributed to these moods?
2. Truman’s victory is often attributed to the hectic and determined cam-
paign schedule he maintained during the months leading up to elec-
tion day. Click on the links under the heading “Speech Schedule” and
examine the daily routine of Truman during this time. What insights
does this schedule give you regarding Truman and his character at
this time? Find the time in which he came closest to your hometown.
See if you can ﬁnd someone in your community who heard Truman
speak during his “whistlestop” campaign.
3. Back on the main page, click on the link that compares the 1948 party
platforms for the two major parties. On what issues are the two parties
clearly different? On what issues do they seem the most similar? How
do these party platforms compare with current political party plat-
forms for the same two parties?
4. Back on the main page, click on the names of the “challengers” to
Truman during this campaign, and then click on and read some back-
ground information on each. What party was Henry A. Wallace orig-
inally from and what issue mainly set him apart from Truman? What
surprises you about seeing Strom Thurmond’s name? What was Thur-
mond’s main campaign issue? What are some of the issues that Dewey
seems most concerned about and how would you characterize his
campaign?
5. Go to the link (7a) http://www.whistlestop.org/archive/photos/
images/58–777.htm. This picture of Truman shows him holding up
the famous “Dewey Defeats Truman” headline from the Chicago Daily
Tribune. Why is Truman holding up the inaccurate headline? Why is
this such a well-known picture? Go also to the link (7b) http://
www.whistlestop.org/qq/dsdewey.htm and view this picture. Why
do you think Truman had this paperweight made?
6. How could the pollsters have been so wrong in this case? What les-
sons were learned about campaign polling and predictions from this

Political Science
155
event? What has been the record of campaign predictions in recent
years?
RELATED INTERNET SITES
1948 Election Overview
(7c) http://www.multied.com/elections/1948.html
This provides an overview of the 1948 election including a map of how each
of the forty-eight states voted.
The Harry Truman Library and Museum
(7d) http://www.trumanlibrary.org/
8. AMERICAN INDIAN MOVEMENT
URL: http://www.aimovement.org/
In a democracy, one powerful way to increase one’s access to the election
process is to join a special interest group. In this way, individuals at-
tempt to get the government to respond to their opinions and needs by
joining forces with others who share similar political goals. Special in-
terest groups can wield much more political clout in their attempt to
inﬂuence public policy than individuals working alone. An example of
one of many such groups in America is the American Indian Movement,
or AIM. AIM began as a political entity in the late 1960s and early
1970s—a time when many other groups were organizing to raise political
awareness of their condition and to strengthen their political bargaining
position. This site has links to the background of AIM, information on
other AIM chapters throughout the country, and interviews with AIM
leaders.
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS AND ACTIVITIES
1. Read the introductory paragraph on this page and also click on and
read the information found on the “brief history link.” What is the
purpose of AIM, why was it founded, and what are some of the things
it has accomplished in the past thirty years?
2. Click on the link “AIMGGC Proﬁle.” This contains a 1973 quote from
Birgil Kills Straight of the Oglala Lakota Nation regarding the purpose
of the American Indian Movement. According to this author, why was
this movement founded and what are some of the characteristics of
this movement? Explain what you think he means when he states,
“The American Indian Movement is then, the Warriors Class of this

Primary Source Sites
156
century, who are bound to the bond of the Drum, who vote with their
bodies instead of their mouths.”
3. Go to the link (8a) http://www.dickshovel.com/aim101.html. Re-
view the principles associated with AIM. What is meant by Principle
One and why do you think it is included? Why do you think Princi-
ple/Rule Four is included? In Principle Six it is mentioned that “AIM
is not supportive of the so called American Way.” What do you think
this means and why is this statement included here? What other as-
pects of these principles do you ﬁnd interesting?
4. At the top of this page you will ﬁnd the seal of the American Indian
Movement. Study this seal. What does the symbolism in the head of
the Indian mean? What is the signiﬁcance of the dates found in the
seal? Explain what is meant by the statement, “Remember Wounded
Knee.”
5. Viewing AIM as an example of a special interest group, in what ways
do some of the goals of AIM and some of the methods of AIM seem
paradoxical? How do they use the current political system to work to
gain greater autonomy from the system? In what ways is this really
a good example of people working together to change the things with
which they disagree?
6. What do you see as the value of special interest groups? What might
be the downside of such groups? Why are special interest groups
often presented in a negative light by the media and politicians? Why
are these groups often called pressure groups? What other special
interest groups can you think of with powerful voices in American
society?
RELATED INTERNET SITES
An Interview of a Chippewa Member and Activist
(8b) http://www.hartford-hwp.com/archives/41/027.html
This site is an interview of Vernon Bellecourt, an activist for Native Americans.
Native American Links
(8c) http://www.pride-net.com/native_indians/
This site contains a directory of links to Native American web sites.
Native American Alcatraz Occupation
http://www.nps.gov/alcatraz/indian.html
The lore of Alcatraz has occupied the minds of people throughout the century.
Yet, little is said about the Native American occupation of Alcatraz, which can
be regarded as a protest against the U.S. government by all Native Americans.
It also has many excellent pictures documenting the event.

INTERNATIONAL POLITICS
1. MAGNA CARTA
URL: http://odur.let.rug.nl/~usa/D/1400/magna.htm
In 1215 King John of England was compelled by a group of about sixty
rebelling nobles to sign a document, known as the Great Charter or
Magna Carta, which restricts the king’s authority as an absolute ruler.
This was the ﬁrst step in the process of placing limits on the power of
rulers which, eventually, established the concept of limited government.
While the Magna Carta had little real effect on the common citizen of
the day, its symbol as a document of freedom continued to grow far
beyond its original intent. This landmark in English history was one of
the documents used by early Colonists to form their views of the rights
and privileges they believed they had as Englishmen. This site contains
the full text of the Magna Carta as translated from the original Latin.
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS AND ACTIVITIES
1. Read through the Preamble and the sixty-three clauses of the Magna
Carta (also spelled Magna Charta). Which demands and concessions
could be similar to those made at any age, and what are some ex-
amples of demands that are very speciﬁc to the feudal times in which
they were written?
2. The Magna Carta was coerced from the king of England by a group
of barons who were concerned with his disregard for their status and
privilege. Yet, one remarkable trait about this document is that many
of the demands deal with rights of the common freedman. Categorize
some of the clauses of the Magna Carta into those that were speciﬁc
to the needs of the noble class and those that beneﬁted all freedmen.
3. Previous kings of England had issued charters which granted some
general concessions to barons. This charter was considered different,
primarily because rather it extracted concessions more or less by force.
Why is this considered a signiﬁcant distinction?
4. Look at clauses 17, 20, and 21. What might have been the previous
circumstances that caused these demands to be included? What parts
of the U.S. Bill of Rights are related to these demands? Similarly, re-

Primary Source Sites
158
view clauses 30–32 and 38–39. To which clauses in our own Bill of
Rights are these clauses similar?
5. The Magna Carta was not a one-way peace document. What conces-
sions did the barons agree to in order to restore the peace? Why was
reaching an agreement with the king important to them?
6. The Magna Carta is not as radical a document as its place in history
makes many believe. Why do you believe the writers of this document
did not go farther in their attempts to limit the rule of the king or to
guarantee the rights of the citizen of that day?
RELATED INTERNET SITES
More on the Magna Carta
(1a) http://www.nara.gov/exhall/charters/magnacarta/magcart.jpg
This site, part of the National Archives and Record Administration, contains
a picture of the actual document.
Background on the Magna Carta
(1b) http://www.encyclopedia.com/articles/07862.html
This encyclopedia site provides background to the Magna Carta and links to
related topics such as King John and the right of habeas corpus.
2. JOHN LOCKE’S SECOND TREATISE ON
GOVERNMENT
URL: http://odur.let.rug.nl/~usa/D/1651-1700/locke/ECCG/
governxx.htm
John Locke is considered one of the great philosophers of the late sev-
enteenth and early eighteenth centuries as well as one of the most inﬂu-
ential thinkers on government of that time period. In his Two Treatises of
Civil Government, written earlier but published in 1690, Locke distin-
guished between legitimate and illegitimate civil governments. Believing
that governments should be responsible to the people they are govern-
ing, Locke supported democracy as a form of government and even
made the case that a revolt against a government that does not have the
people’s consent is justiﬁed. His writings have been credited with inﬂu-
encing the American founders as a source for their own writing. Because
of this, Locke is claimed by some to be the intellectual father of our
country. Included here is Locke’s Second Treatise on Government. Since
this is a very lengthy and complex piece of writing, the questions and
activities below focus on one part of this paper, “An Essay concerning
the true original, extent and end of civil Government,” “Chapter 8, Of
the Beginning of Political Societies.”

Political Science
159
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS AND ACTIVITIES
1. From the table of contents located on this page, click on “Chapter 8,
Of the Beginning of Political Societies” and read sections 95 to 99.
According to Locke, what is the natural state of “man,” and what is
the basis for the formation of a government?
2. Once individuals have consented to form a government, under what
obligations does this place the individual?
3. In section 99 of this essay, Locke writes, “That which begins and ac-
tually constitutes any political society is nothing but the consent of
any number of freemen capable of majority, to unite and incorporate
into such a society. And this is that, and that only, which did or could
give beginning to any lawful government in the world.” This was
written in England in 1690. Why might this be considered a dangerous
way to think and write publicly at that time?
4. Reviewing Locke’s writing here (and in other sections and chapters
in this essay), why do you think some of the political leaders in co-
lonial America would look at John Locke as an inspiration for their
own political cause? Why would it be signiﬁcant that Locke was an
Englishman who lived almost 100 years before the American Revo-
lution?
5. How was Locke’s argument on the nature of man and the deﬁnition of
a political society as “nothing but the consent of any number of freemen
capable of majority, to unite and incorporate into such a society” used
later by Southern states in their rationale for forming the Confederacy?
Why are states not allowed to leave the Union at will today? Under
what conditions could you see future states wishing to do so?
RELATED INTERNET SITE
Additional Background on John Locke
http://landow.stg.brown.edu/victorian/religion/locke1.html
This site contains bibliographic information on Locke as well as links to related
historical topics and some of his writings.
3. EDMUND BURKE’S SPEECH ON CONCILIATION
WITH AMERICA
URL: http://odur.let.rug.nl/~usa/D/1751-1775/libertydebate/
burk.htm
Edmund Burke, a British statesman and philosopher, was a member of
Parliament during the years leading up to the American Revolutionary

Primary Source Sites
160
War. Burke believed in liberty as an essential right of man, if this liberty
was accompanied by order and if this liberty was gained gradually.
Hence, as a member of the opposition Whig party, Burke argued for a
liberal treatment of the colonies and viewed the coercive treatment of
the American colonies by England as the end result of misgovernment
and corruption at home. He, along with another notable statesman of
the time, William Pitt, publicly defended the Colonial position of resis-
tance to England by claiming that the colonists were only ﬁghting for
their rights as Englishmen. This site contains one of his more famous
opposition speeches, “The Speech on Conciliation with America,” which
he delivered in Parliament on March 22, 1775, just days before the “shot
heard around the world” at Lexington and Concord.
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS AND ACTIVITIES
1. While reading this speech, remember that Burke is speaking as a
member of the opposition Whig party. That is to say, his political
party did not at this critical time hold a majority of seats in Parlia-
ment, and Prime Minister North was also from the other political
party. What words and phrases used in this speech indicate that Burke
is not a member of the “government” party at this time?
2. Reread the third paragraph of this speech. What does Burke mean by
his ﬁrst sentence? What argument is Burke making in the ﬁrst half of
this paragraph?
3. Later in that same paragraph Burke uses the term slavery. In what
context is the term used here, and what does he mean when he says
that “freedom they can have from none but you”?
4. In the last few sentences of this speech, Burke calls for his colleagues
in government to “elevate our minds to the greatness of that trust to
which the order of Providence has called us” and states also that, by
doing so, “our ancestors have turned a savage wilderness in to a glo-
rious empire . . . not by destroying, but by promoting the wealth, the
number, the happiness of the human race.” What case does Burke
seem to be presenting here so that all can beneﬁt?
5. What are some of the possible effects that arguments such as Burke’s
would have on the English public opinion of foreign policy toward
the colonies? Is the role of an opposition party in a democracy a good
thing during times of crisis? Why or why not?
RELATED INTERNET SITE
Edmund Burke Quotes
(3a) http://www.chesco.com/~artman/burke.html

Political Science
161
4. PARIS PEACE TREATY OF 1783
URL: http://www.law.ou.edu/hist/paris.html
Soon after General George Washington defeated General Charles Corn-
wallis at the battle of Yorktown in the fall of 1781, public opposition in
England toward the war rose to new heights, and negotiations for ending
the conﬂict began in earnest. America sent Benjamin Franklin, John Jay,
and John Adams to France to arrange the terms of the peace and, in
September 1783, the Treaty of Paris was signed. In this treaty, Britain
ofﬁcially recognized thirteen American states as independent and estab-
lished the boundaries of the new nation. This site contains the entire text
of the treaty and has links to other historical documents maintained by
the University of Oklahoma Law Center.
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS AND ACTIVITIES
1. What might be some reasons for the almost two-year gap between the
ﬁnal major battle of the war and the conclusion of this treaty? Com-
pare this time delay with other major peace treaties the United States
has signed. Are there any wars that the United States has been in-
volved in that have no peace treaty to end them ofﬁcially?
2. Read the preamble to the treaty (focus on the ﬁrst ﬁve lines as the
entire preamble is one very long sentence). What do you ﬁnd inter-
esting in these opening lines? What seems to be the position of both
sides at the beginning of this treaty?
3. Note in Article 1 that each of the thirteen states are named as inde-
pendent states. Why was this done and what was the signiﬁcance of
this in terms of how the United States viewed itself at that time?
4. Why was Article 3 considered an important issue to include in this
treaty at that time, and how has it remained important even today?
5. Get a map of the United States and outline the territory that was
conceded by Britain as the boundaries for the United States at that
time. What areas are clearly delineated and which areas are described
in more general terms? What nations laid claim to the territories just
beyond those described as the U.S. boundaries in this treaty? What
treaties in later years would have the most impact in expanding the
U.S. territories to what we know it as today?
6. This treaty most notably gave America its independence from Great
Britain; however, concessions were made by the United States as well.
What did Britain gain as a result of signing this treaty?

Primary Source Sites
162
RELATED INTERNET SITES
Preliminary Articles of Peace: November 30, 1782
(4a) http://www.yale.edu/lawweb/avalon/diplomacy/prel1782.htm
Several times in the Treaty of Paris, these articles are mentioned. This site
contains the text of this document.
Battle of Yorktown
(4b) http://hobart.k12.in.us/gemedia/amrev/revwar/yorktown.htm
This site has a brief explanation of the ﬁnal major battle of the American Rev-
olution including a letter written by English General Cornwallis.
Yale Avalon Project
(4c) http://www.yale.edu/lawweb/avalon/amerdip1.htm
This site has most of the major U.S. treaties with other nations.
5. DEMOCRACY IN AMERICA BY ALEXIS DE
TOCQUEVILLE
URL: http://xroads.virginia.edu/~HYPER/DETOC/home.html
Alexis de Tocqueville, a French politician and writer, came to America
in 1831–1832 at the age of twenty-ﬁve. He came on the premise of study-
ing the U.S. penal system, but what resulted from his tour of the United
States was his book Democracy in America, considered one of the classics
on political democracy and one of the most insightful books ever written
on the American democratic character. Although de Tocqueville came
from an aristocratic family in France, he was a liberal who believed in
democracy and social equality. His book examines how early Americans
struggled to balance these principles in everyday practical terms. Many
of the issues covered by de Tocqueville in his book, such as race, class
structure, and the role of government, are still relevant topics for dis-
cussion today. This site, maintained by the American Studies Depart-
ment of the University of Virginia, contains a full text version of
Democracy in America organized by a comprehensive table of contents as
well as links to commentary and analysis of the book and statistical in-
formation on America during the time of de Tocqueville’s visit.
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS AND ACTIVITIES
1. From the main page, click on the link “The Text” and then click on
and read the “The Author’s Preface.” Here de Tocqueville wrote,
“Nothing struck me more forcibly than the general equality of con-
dition among the people.” How did he see this equality permeating
society as a whole? How did he think this condition of equality com-
pared to his home continent?

Political Science
163
2. Toward the end of his introduction, de Tocqueville begins a paragraph
with the sentence, “There is one country in the world where the great
social revolution that I am speaking of seems to have nearly reached its
natural limits.” Read this and the next paragraph again. Why did de
Tocqueville believe that the shores of America were ideally suited for
the spread of democracy? Do you agree or disagree and why?
3. Divide the class into groups and have each group read and report on
one of the following topics covered at this site: race relations in 1831,
everyday life in 1831, American religion in 1831, or American women
in 1831. On each subject summarize de Tocqueville’s major points and
comment on what you ﬁnd most interesting about his observations.
4. Go to the link (5a) http://xroads.virginia.edu/~HYPER/DETOC/
TOUR/usx4.html and view a map of de Tocqueville’s tour of Amer-
ica. The link (5b) http://xroads.virginia.edu/~HYPER/DETOC/
TOUR/itin.html gives the itinerary of the tour that allows you to
follow his progress on the map. Considering the length of time that
de Tocqueville stayed, and the modes of transportation available at
the time, what is your opinion of the comprehensive nature of his
visit? If you were to try and capture the essence of the American
democratic character today, what route would you take and how
much time would you need?
5. From the main page (http://xroads.virginia.edu/~HYPER/DETOC/
home.html), click on the link “Tour de Tocqueville’s America in 1831”
and then click on “Virtual Tour—Travel with de Tocqueville.” Follow
the links to take the tour of America as de Tocqueville did.
6. Go to the site http://www.tocqueville.org/chap5.htm and read se-
lected quotes from the book Democracy in America. Which quotes strike
you as true even today? Which appear outdated? Which quotes ap-
pear prophetic?
RELATED INTERNET SITE
The Alexis de Tocqueville Tour—Exploring Democracy in America
(5c) http://www.tocqueville.org/
This site has links to de Tocqueville’s writings, background, and journal en-
tries. Teaching modules are also included here.
6. DECLARATION OF THE RIGHTS OF MAN AND OF
THE CITIZEN
URL: http://www.library.csi.cuny.edu/dept/americanstudies/
lavender/decman2.html
In July 1789, just as America was beginning its great experiment in de-
mocracy, the French Revolution began in France based on many of the

Primary Source Sites
164
same principles. Within one month of the outbreak of the revolution, the
traditional parliament of France under King Louis the XVI, the Estates
General, now a General Assembly, wrote a new constitution which over-
threw the absolute power of the king. Unlike the American version in
which the Bill of Rights was written after the Constitution and added to
the end, in the French version, the bill of rights was written ﬁrst and
later, in 1791, included as the preamble to the new French constitution.
This bill of rights was called the “Declaration of the Rights of Man and
of the Citizen,” and it became the fundamental document of French con-
stitutional history. Inﬂuenced in part by the American Constitution and
Bill of Rights, this document served as an inspiration for future French
Republics as well as many later European democracies.
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS AND ACTIVITIES
1. Read the ﬁrst sentence of the declaration. This makes a strong state-
ment about the causes for the “public calamities” occurring in France.
What were these calamities, both occurring in the streets at the time
and those leading up to the revolution? Where do the writers of this
declaration squarely place the responsibility for these events?
2. Article 1 states, “Men are born and remain free and equal in rights.”
What are these rights? Would you add any to the list of rights given
in the declaration? Why are the rights of women not mentioned? Do
you believe the term “men” was meant to be inclusive of all people?
Why or why not?
3. Read Article 3 again and compare this logic to the argument put forth
by John Locke in his Second Treatise on Government (see the second
entry in this section). Is it reasonable to assume that Locke’s writings,
completed in England 100 years before, also inﬂuenced the work of
the writers of the Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen?
4. How does Article 5 deﬁne liberty? To what degree may an individual
exercise his or her liberty? In today’s society, there exist numerous
laws that prohibit one from taking action (or not taking action) that
might be detrimental to one’s well being. Can you think of examples
of such laws? Would such laws be a violation of liberty according to
this declaration? In what ways might you harm others when you
harm yourself?
5. Review Articles 9 to 13 and compare these to the U.S. Bill of Rights.
Where in our Bill of Rights can very similar statements be found for
each of these articles?
6. The French King, Louis XVI, signed this document, but he did so
under duress. Why was he opposed to such a declaration? What hap-

Political Science
165
pened to Louis XVI shortly after the French Revolution began? Review
the course of French history from the revolution through the time of
Napoleo´n I. Although no group ever denounced the Declaration of
the Rights of Man and of the Citizen, few followed its principles. Why
do you believe it was honored in name, but not followed in practice
during the years immediately following the revolution?
RELATED INTERNET SITE
French Revolution
(6a) http://www.newadvent.org/cathen/13009a.htm
This site provides an overview of the French Revolution up to the rule of
Napoleo´n Bonaparte and includes links to key ﬁgures of this time period.
7. WOODROW WILSON AND THE LEAGUE OF
NATIONS
URL: http://www.mtholyoke.edu/acad/intrel/ww40.htm
In January 1919, an international peace conference met at Versailles, out-
side Paris, to negotiate the terms of peace following World War I. The
U.S. delegation was headed by President Woodrow Wilson. One of the
proposals to emerge from the Paris Peace Conference was the concept of
a League of Nations, an organization of nations that would join together
for the purpose of maintaining international peace. The concept of the
league came from the ﬁnal “point” of Wilson’s Fourteen Points—a pro-
gram Wilson had conceived and delivered to Congress before the war’s
end. However, the U.S. Senate still had to accept the conditions of the
treaty that admitted the United States into the league—an alliance they
hesitated, and eventually failed, to accept. This site contains a speech
delivered by Wilson appealing for the support of the League of Nations
after it had met initial criticism in the Senate and from the media after
his return to the United States.
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS AND ACTIVITIES
1. In the fourth paragraph of Wilson’s speech, Wilson refers to unsettled
land titles. Why was this such a concern at the peace conference after
World War I? How does Wilson propose to solve the issue? What
analogy does he give his audience to help them better understand the
volatility of the situation?
2. Who were the Big Four referred to by Wilson and the newspapermen?
Who was the ﬁfth person that sometimes joined this group? What key
nations were notably missing from this group?

Primary Source Sites
166
3. According to the arrangements the members of the League of Nations
agreed to, an absolute boycott would be imposed on any country that
disregarded the terms of the covenant. What would be the extent of
this boycott? When in history have boycotts been used? How would
you determine the degree of success of these boycotts? What often
happens to break down the effectiveness of economic boycotts? When
Germany violated the terms of the treaty in the 1930s, what was the
reaction of the League of Nations?
4. Review the paragraphs that begin with Wilson’s statement, “The point
is this.” What case is Wilson making here? Compare his views on the
position the United States needs to take following the war to the po-
sition of isolationism of many others. Why did many Americans not
want any further connections to European affairs at this time?
5. It does not say here who the audience was that Wilson was address-
ing. However, several times in the speech Wilson makes it clear that
he is not happy with the U.S. Senate and others who have not sup-
ported the ideas of the League of Nations. Point out where Wilson
shows impatience or displays sarcasm toward those critical of the
League of Nations in this speech. Do you think these tactics are help-
ful or harmful to his gaining support? Why or why not?
6. How would you summarize Wilson’s appeal? Knowing the path that
the United States followed after World War I, and knowing the events
that led up to World War II, do you believe that active support by
the United States in the League of Nations could have made a differ-
ence in world affairs?
RELATED INTERNET SITES
More on the League of Nations
(7a) http://www.library.miami.edu/gov/League.html
This site contains a vast amount of information on the League of Nations in-
cluding how it functioned, what its membership was, and comments on its fail-
ures and accomplishments.
Wilson on the League of Nations
(7b) http://www.mtholyoke.edu/acad/intrel/ww38.htm
This contains the transcript of the explanatory speech of the League of Nations
given by Woodrow Wilson to the delegates of the Paris Convention in February
1919, shortly after the Covenant of the League had been drafted and read.

Political Science
167
8. UNIVERSAL DECLARATION OF HUMAN RIGHTS
URL: http://www.un.org/Overview/rights.html
The United States failed to support the League of Nations after World
War I, but it was the ﬁrst nation to ratify the Charter of the United
Nations. This charter was written in San Francisco in April and May
1945, shortly after the death of Franklin D. Roosevelt and before the
actual conclusion of World War II. In 1948 the General Assembly of the
United Nations overwhelmingly approved the “Universal Declaration of
Human Rights,” which worked to establish commonly accepted legal,
social, and economic rights among people throughout the world. This
site, maintained by the United Nations, was set up to celebrate the ﬁftieth
anniversary of the adoption of this declaration in 1998.
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS AND ACTIVITIES
1. Take a poll of the class to decide how many students have ever read
all or even part of the “Universal Declaration of Human Rights.” Very
few Americans are actually familiar with this document. If this is a
“universal declaration” and the United States was a charter member
of this organization, why do you suppose so few Americans know
about it?
2. Read the statements made in Articles 1 and 3. How are these state-
ments similar to and different from those of the U.S. Constitution?
Why, after reading Articles 1 and 3, is Article 2 necessary? Why do
you believe it was added at this time in history?
3. Read the following articles. Which ones line up with our Bill of Rights
or seem second nature to us? Which articles do you consider more
unusual or you think are added as a result of transgressions against
people in other parts of the world?
4. What is the key difference, in the area of enforcement, between a
declaration such as this and the Constitution of the United States?
Compare the process of what happens if an article is ignored or vio-
lated in the “Universal Declaration of Human Rights” to the process
if an article of the Constitution or its amendments are violated in the
United States.
5. What parts of this declaration do you believe the United States does
well in honoring? Are there any sections that you believe the United
States does not do well in upholding? Are there any articles with
which, you believe, a majority of Americans may not even agree?

Primary Source Sites
168
6. The “Universal Declaration of Human Rights” was written over ﬁfty
years ago. Much has changed in the world since then, and many
things remain unchanged. If you were to rewrite the declaration to-
day, with a belief that it could be enforced, what would you add and
what, if anything, would you take out?
RELATED INTERNET SITE
United Nations Homepage
(8a) http://www.un.org/
The ofﬁcial homepage of the United Nations has a large database for research.
9. TRUMAN DOCTRINE
URL: http://w3.one.net/~mweiler/ushda/trudoct.htm
In 1947 Greece, under great economic duress as a result of the Axis oc-
cupation of that country during World War II, was being attacked by
Communist guerrillas in the countryside. Similarly, Turkey was feeling
pressure from the Soviet Union to give up the straits of the Dardanelles
connecting the Black Sea to the Mediterranean. The United States felt as
though it had to act to stop the Soviet Union from expanding its sphere
of inﬂuence beyond what it had already ﬁrmly established in Eastern
Europe. One policy that was key to “containing” the spread of com-
munism was the Truman Doctrine. This site presents the address given
by President Harry S. Truman on March 12, 1947, outlining the program
of aid to be given to Greece and Turkey for the purpose of strengthening
their resistance to communism. The speech was delivered to Congress
to gain their support, but it was also intended to sell the American peo-
ple on the need to have a foreign policy program that supported free
people around the world who wanted to resist communism.
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS AND ACTIVITIES
1. Truman, a Democrat, wanted and needed the support of the Repub-
lican party for his plan of massive foreign aid set forth in this speech.
Before delivering this address, Truman discussed his ideas with rank-
ing Republican leaders and was told that, to get the program passed,
he needed to garner public support. The best way to do that, he was
advised, was to give a speech that would “scare” the country. What
language does Truman use in this speech to accomplish this?
2. According to Truman, what were the threats to Greek and Turkish
freedom and security? How were these threats different in each coun-

Political Science
169
try and how were they similar? Why did Truman believe that the
United States was the only nation in a position to help at this time?
3. Why were Greece and Turkey considered such important nations to
save from communism? What geographic, historical, and political sig-
niﬁcance did these countries have?
4. The Truman Doctrine was a signiﬁcant part of our foreign policy pro-
gram for decades, and many of the concepts initiated by this program
remain important in U.S. foreign policy today. How would you sum-
marize the principles imbedded in this policy? Where in the world
today do we give economic and other types of aid for reasons similar
to those promoted in this speech?
5. In this speech Truman makes reference to the leading part taken by
the United States in establishing and supporting the newly founded
United Nations. How is this position taken by the United States vastly
different from the one taken at the end of World War I, and what
reasons do you attribute to this turnaround in foreign policy?
6. Toward the end of this speech, Truman makes the case that World
War II represented an investment of $341 billion toward world free-
dom and that what he asked for now was but a small portion of that
to safeguard that investment. Is that argument still a valid one today
for the use of foreign aid? Create a list of the pros and cons you
associate with foreign aid. What reasons and conditions would you
consider as sound for the use of foreign aid? How might the discon-
tinuance of foreign aid actually be more expensive to the United States
in the long run?
RELATED INTERNET SITES
George Marshall and the Marshall Plan
(9a) http://www.npg.si.edu/exh/marshall/index.htm
This is the web site from the John Marshall Foundation. It has excellent por-
traits of Marshall and links to information on the Marshall Plan.
Foreign Aid
(9b) http://inst.santafe.cc.ﬂ.us/~cah/speech/forenaid.html
This site provides arguments for and against the use of American money for
aid to other nations.
10. ELECTIONS AROUND THE WORLD
URL: http://www.ifes.org/eguide/1999.htm
A very well-organized database of elections held around the world can
be found at this site. Sponsored by the International Foundation for Elec-

Primary Source Sites
170
tion Systems (IFES), it includes an election watch guide from CNN, a
map and fact ﬁnder, the dates of each country’s election, type of election,
election results, deﬁnitions of terms used in an election, and other infor-
mation regarding world elections.
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS AND ACTIVITIES
1. Take some time to study the chart of elections provided on this page.
Click on and explore some of the information found under the head-
ings. The link “About Election Guide” on the top left-hand side of
this page provides additional information in helping one interpret the
chart’s different categories. Select a few countries and click on the
“Cambridge factﬁnder” link to learn more about a particular country.
How are these nations similar and different?
2. Under the heading of “election type” a number of categories are listed.
What are the different types of elections that nations have, and what
are some of the characteristics of each type of election? For additional
help on this you may wish to click on the link on the top left of this
page labeled “election terms.”
3. Divide the class into groups and assign several countries to each
group (make sure that the countries assigned have had an election
recently to which there are results in the “results summary” category).
Study the “results summary” category for each country. What is the
percentage of votes cast to eligible voters? How does this compare to
the United States? What are the percentages of “valid” and “invalid”
votes? Why are these categories present and what do they mean? Be
prepared to report your ﬁnding to the class as a whole and to compare
your group’s results with those of other groups. What generalizations,
if any, can you make from your ﬁndings?
4. Click on one of the links labeled “voter turnout.” This will provide a
table that summarizes election information, including the percentage
of registered voters. What is the highest percentage of turnout you
can ﬁnd on this chart? What is the lowest? How does the United States
compare on this chart? What types of election provide a higher per-
centage of voter turnout than other types of elections? What might be
some reasons for low (or high) voter turnout? Note the asterisks on
some countries. What does this asterisk mean and how does it affect
voter turnout?
5. The main page also provides information on elections over a four-
year period. Select a country and investigate the different types of
elections it has had during the past few years. How have the results
of these elections been similar or different? In what ways might the

Political Science
171
results of past elections help you predict future results? What factors
might exist that cause past results to not to be a good indicator of
future election results? What techniques are used to help predict elec-
tion results today?
6. Click on the link “Election Home Guide” on the table at the top left
of the main page. This page provides information on current elections.
Study some of the countries that have elections coming up soon and
make a prediction as to what you believe the results might be (the
CNN.com election watch link provides useful information in this re-
gard). Follow up on the results in the paper or Internet after the elec-
tion is over.
RELATED INTERNET SITES
Worldwide Election Results
(10a) http://www.agora.stm.it/elections/election/cal3.htm
This web page gives up-to-date election results from around the world.
Federal Election Commission
(10b) http://www.fec.gov/
This site links you to the Federal Election Commission for the United States.
The FEC, an independent regulatory agency, administers and enforces the ﬁ-
nancing of federal elections in the United States.


Economics
GENERAL ECONOMIC DATA
1. THE DISMAL SCIENTIST
URL: http://www.dismal.com/
Economics has long been known as “the dismal science.” Many mistak-
enly believe this is based on the perception that economics is boring and
lifeless, but this belief is incorrect. In fact, the label comes from Thomas
Malthus’ bleak outlook (in 1798) that population growth would always
outpace economic growth, a “dismal” prospect indeed. The Dismal Sci-
entist attempts to overcome its bleak moniker by providing a bright,
easy-to-access site that is one of the leading providers of economic
information on the Internet. It offers comprehensive and timely analysis,
data, tools, and other features designed to keep the user fully informed
on the state of the world economy. By far the best feature of this site is
the interactive calendar of economic data release dates. This feature al-
lows the user to browse the most up-to-the-minute economic data.
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS AND ACTIVITIES
1. Under “Economic Releases” select “view by subject.” Before proceed-
ing, construct a chart (a spreadsheet such as Excel works well here)
with the following countries along the vertical: United States of Amer-
ica, Japan, Germany, Brazil, and China. Along the top of the chart,
create rows for “GDP” and “employment.” Use the four most recent
data points available from the Dismal Scientist reports to complete the

Primary Source Sites
174
chart. What are the trends for these countries compared to the United
States? Which of these countries (based on the limited data) seem to
have the healthiest economies?
2. Go to “toolkit.” Scroll down to “Mortgage Calculator.” Using the cur-
rent average rate for a thirty-year ﬁxed-rate mortgage [ﬁnd this at (1a)
www.Mortgage101.com], enter your state to ﬁnd the average rate.
What would the monthly payments be on a $150,000 home? If the
interest rate increased by one percentage point, what impact would
this have on your monthly payments? What if you decided to take
out a ﬁfteen-year mortgage?
3. Under “Browse,” Go to “Federal Reserve.” Open up the most recent
speeches made by Federal Reserve Board Chairman Alan Greenspan.
What are the topics? What does Greenspan have to say? What is the
Federal Reserve chairman’s role in the economy? See (1b) http://
woodrow.mpls.frb.fed.us/info/sys/index.html for details.
RELATED INTERNET SITE
FreeLunch.Com
(1c) http://www.freelunch.com
FreeLunch claims to be the web’s most accessible free database of economic,
industrial, ﬁnancial, and demographic data with over 1,000,000 time series avail-
able for download.
2. ABOUT.COM: ECONOMICS
http://economics.about.com/money/economics/
This site is a collection of interesting links and original analysis of eco-
nomic news and history. The site is part of the About.com network of
over 700 subject area guides to the Internet. Each site is run by a person
with experience in his or her individual topic area, in this case, John S.
Irons, a professor of economics at Amherst College. About.Com’s eco-
nomics site provides a user-friendly format for ﬁnding a wide range of
economic data and analysis including an economic chart room, a news-
stand with current articles about economics, and a glossary of economic
terms. Users can ﬁnd data on domestic and international economic per-
formance, including historical time series such as exchange rates over
the last century and macroeconomic performance of various nations.
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS AND ACTIVITIES
1. Go to “Data Sources.” Select “Chart Room.” Print out the following:
GDP, CPI, unemployment rate, and productivity. Using the economic

Economics
175
glossary and the recent articles on economics written by Professor
Irons, develop a presentation that incorporates each of the charts you
printed. Imagine that you are trying to convince a group of foreign
businessmen to move their business to the United States. What do the
charts show? What do the numbers say?
2. Go to the “Who wants to be an economist” on-line quiz. Take the quiz
and remember, you have the economics glossary to use as a “lifeline.”
3. Select “Current Data.” Click on “Currencies and currency exchange
rates history graphs.” Select “custom table.” Choose U.S. dollars. Print
out the table. Over the next few weeks, read the international eco-
nomic news brieﬁngs available at this site. Based on your readings,
predict whether a certain country’s currency will appreciate or depre-
ciate relative to the U.S. dollar. Go back to “Currencies and currency
exchange rates history graphs.” Select “custom table.” Choose U.S.
dollars. Print out the table. Were your predictions correct?
RELATED INTERNET SITE
Bill Goffe’s Internet Resources for Economics
(2a) http://rfe.org/Intro/index.html
This guide is sponsored by the American Economic Association. It lists 1,164
resources in sixty-eight sections and subsections available on the Internet of in-
terest to academic and practicing economists, and those interested in economics.
Almost all resources listed here are also described in some detail. This is an
excellent portal for the more sophisticated economics students or teachers.
3. ECONOMAGIC
URL: http://www.economagic.com/
The word economagic comes from the word economagician, which is a
pun on the word econometrician. An econometrician is an economic stat-
istician. This is a comprehensive site of free, easily available economic
time series data useful for economic research—economic forecasting, in
particular. Students are given easy access to large amounts of data and
can get charts of that data. The nice thing about this site is that students
can transform the data into charts that meet their individual inquiries.
For example, a student might like to know the real GDP growth for the
United States for the years 1981–1988 (the Reagan years).
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS AND ACTIVITIES
1. Go to “most requested series.” Choose the “chart” for “Gross Domes-
tic Product in Current Dollars.” Scroll down to the options for the

Primary Source Sites
176
chart and enter the years 1981 and 1988. Make the chart and print it
out. Now enter the years 1993 and 2000. Make the chart and print it.
Do the two charts have the same increments along the Y-axis (verti-
cal)? If so, we can compare the two. Which line has a steeper slope?
The steeper the slope of this line, the more quickly the GDP grew
relative to the other chart.
2. Go to “Discount Rate.” Click on the chart. Print it out. The discount
rate is used by banks to calculate the rate for home and auto loans.
When was the highest discount rate in the 1990s? The lowest? Go to
“Bank Prime Rates.” Click on the chart. Print it out. Make a prediction:
If the prime rate (the rate banks charge you and me) is based on the
discount rate, when did the lowest prime rate occur? The highest?
3. Go back to the home page. Click on “maps.” Select “Monthly, by State,
from 1978.” This is an animated .gif ﬁle that shows the state of un-
employment in each state from 1978 to 1999. When the nation is closer
to all yellow than all black, unemployment is low. When the nation
is closer to dark red than to yellow, unemployment is high. What do
the colors tell you? In 1981? In 1990? Today? Find your state and
follow the patterns. Print out your state’s unemployment rates from
1987 to 1999; see (3a) http://www.economagic.com/blssta.htm.
Predict the colors based on the data from your state. For example, if
your state’s unemployment rate for 1982 was 12.3 percent, this would
be shown as dark red on the animated map.
4. GEOSTAT
URL: http://ﬁsher.lib.virginia.edu/
Because it supports a wide range of academic and scholarly activities
through access to extensive collections of numeric and geospatial data
ﬁles, GeoStat may not seem to be a site for primary economic data re-
sources. Closer inspection reveals that GeoStat provides access to inter-
esting data collections that are economic in nature (e.g., domestic
economic data and international trade data) and can be manipulated and
researched using a suite of Internet-accessible tools. The most exciting
thing about GeoStat is that students can access and manipulate data sets
to analyze and compare and contrast particular economic events or is-
sues. For example, GeoStat allows students to access data on per capita
income for their particular state and to compare per capita income from
various years (1958–1997).

Economics
177
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS AND ACTIVITIES
1. Go to “Interactive Data Resources.” Select “Regional Economic Infor-
mation System.” Go to “Metropolitan Statistical Area level variables.”
Find your city (or one close by) and, under Table CA05, select “per
capita personal income.” Scroll to the bottom of the page and enter
the years 1960, 1965, 1970, 1975, 1980, 1985, 1990, and 1995. Enter these
ﬁgures into a spreadsheet chart.
2. Go to “Interactive Data Resources.” Select “Regional Economic Infor-
mation System.” Go to “Metropolitan Statistical Area level variables.”
Find your city (or one close by) and, under Table CA25, choose “Full
and part-time employment” for the years 1960, 1965, 1970, 1975, 1980,
1985, 1990, and 1995. Enter these ﬁgures into the same spreadsheet
chart you produced in activity no. 1.
3. Go to “Interactive Data Resources.” Select “Regional Economic Infor-
mation System.” Go to “Metropolitan Statistical Area level variables.”
Find your city (or one close by) and, under Table CA35, choose “Un-
employment beneﬁts” for the years 1960, 1965, 1970, 1975, 1980, 1985,
1990, and 1995. Enter these ﬁgures into the same spreadsheet chart
you produced in activity no. 1. You now have a very simple economic
proﬁle of your city (or region) over the last forty years. What were
the best economic times? The worst? What do you base your judge-
ment on? What criteria did you use?
4. Go to “Interactive Data Resources.” Select “U.S. Imports and Exports
of Merchandise.” Select “Cuba” and “Mexico” from the country list.
Select “General Import Value ($),” “General Export Value ($),” and
“Gross Trade Activity (General Exports plus General Imports) ($).”
Which country has the largest gross trade activity with the United
States? Which country has the largest level of exports (import value)
to the United States? What do you notice about our trade with Cuba?
Why is this the case?
5. Go to “Interactive Data Resources.” Select “U.S. Imports and Exports
of Merchandise.” Select “Canada,” “Japan,” and “Mexico” from the
country list. Predict which country will have the highest “Gross Trade
Activity (General Exports plus General Imports) ($).” Were you cor-
rect?

Primary Source Sites
178
RELATED INTERNET SITE
Statistical Universe
(4a) http://web.lexis-nexis.com/statuniv
CIS Statistical Universe is the world’s most comprehensive access to statistical
information from Congressional Information Service, Inc. The service allows
users to search summaries of statistical publications, then link to the full text of
selected publications on Statistical Universe and government web sites.
5. GLOBAL POPULATION AND ECONOMIC
STATISTICS
URL: http://www.xist.org/
This site provides statistics on the human population. The data available
here include population of regions, countries, provinces, and cities but
also statistics on wealth, manmade objects, nature’s extremities, and
more. One of the nicest features of this site is the ease of navigation
between global statistics and country statistics made possible via the left-
hand frame. For example, this site provides comparative national data
on economic development and the same kinds of data for regions and
continents. In addition, this site provides comprehensive geographical
statistics on global population and demographics.
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS AND ACTIVITIES
1. Under “Global” go to “charts.” Select “Human Development Index.”
Print this page. Which country is rated the highest? Where does the
United States rank? What three factors are used to calculate the Hu-
man Development Index (HDI)?
2. Under “Global” go to “charts.” Select “GDP 2.” This is a measure of
GDP (in US$) per capita. Print this page. How do the rankings in the
HDI compare with this table? Why isn’t this surprising?
3. Go to “Countries.” Select “Africa.” Open “General” and go to “econ-
omy.” What statistics are given for African countries? What country
has the lowest GDP per capita? The highest? By this measure, which
region is the poorest in Africa?
4. Go to “Countries.” Select “Europe.” Open “General” and go to “econ-
omy.” Which are the ten poorest nations (as measured by GDP per
capita) in Europe? What do almost all of these countries have in com-
mon?

Economics
179
RELATED INTERNET SITES
World Bank Development Site
(5a) http://www.worldbank.org/data/countrydata/countrydata.html
The country tables available here are drawn from the World Development
Indicators 2000. The tables, intended as quick reference, cover the 206 nations
reported on in the World Development Indicators and the World Bank Atlas.
Vast numbers of comparative statistics are available at this page.
World Resource Indicators
(5b) http://ﬁsher.lib.Virginia.EDU/wri/
The World Resources report is a deﬁnitive reference on the global environment
with the latest information on essential economic, population, and natural re-
source conditions and trends for nearly every country in the world.
Census Bureau World Data
(5c) http://www.census.gov/ipc/www/idbnew.html
The International Data Base (IDB) is a computerized data bank containing sta-
tistical tables of demographic and socioeconomic data for 227 countries and areas
of the world.
6. ECONDATA.NET
URL: http://www.econdata.net/
This site claims to be “your guide to regional economic activity on the
Web.” EconData.Net has more than 400 links to socioeconomic data
sources, arranged by subject and provider, links to many of the best
economic data collections on the WWW, and a list of the ten best sites
for ﬁnding regional economic data. Some of the data on this site provide
access to quality of life indicators, housing indicators, and labor force
issues, including wages by occupations. This is a nice “one-stop-
shopping” portal for economic data.
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS AND ACTIVITIES
1. Under “links by subject” select “Quality of life.” Click on “general”
and go to Money Magazine’s rating of the best 300 places to live. Find
your city (or the closest large city). How does your city rank? What
factors were considered? How important was the economic health of
the city in determining its ranking? What is the best place to live? The
worst (number 300)?
2. Under “links by subject” select “Occupations.” Scroll down and select
“occupational projections.” Once in the site, select “Teachers, Second-
ary.” How many secondary teachers will be needed between now and

Primary Source Sites
180
2006? Now select “Teachers, elementary.” Will more elementary
teachers be needed than secondary? Why might this be the case?
3. Under “links by subject” select “Quality of Life.” Click on “Housing.”
Go to “Census of Housing.” Select “HOUSING: THEN AND NOW:
50 YEARS OF DECENNIAL CENSUSES.” Click on “Homeowner-
ship.” Read the overview and then ﬁnd your state. Has home own-
ership been increasing or decreasing in your state? Do more people
in your state own their homes than the United States’ average? Has
the percentage of home ownership increased or decreased since 1900?
What does this imply for the quality of life in the United States over
this time period? Click on the “graph” of home ownership. Print this
out. Plot your state’s trend on the same graph.

INTERNATIONAL ECONOMICS
1. FOREIGN CURRENCY CONVERTER
URL: http://www.oanda.com/converter/classic
All Americans’ daily lives are impacted by international trade and in-
ternational economic activity. One of the most interesting aspects of this
international activity is the fact that in order for trade between nations
to occur, one nation must trade its currency for another’s. This foreign
exchange takes place—as do all trades—in a market where prices are
set. Thus, the foreign exchange rate is simply the price of one nation’s
currency expressed in terms of another’s. Exchange rates, as with all
prices, can ﬂuctuate. The currency converter located at this site provides
up-to-the-minute foreign exchange rates, a map of the world with the
names of various countries’ currencies, and historical data on changes in
the price of one nation’s currency compared to others. Students can
choose, for example, the U.S. dollar and determine how many Bulgarian
leva or English pounds that dollar would buy.
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS AND ACTIVITIES
1. You are planning a trip to Brazil. What is the name of the Brazilian
currency? What is the current exchange rate (in US$) for this currency?
You know that your hotel room in Rio will cost 275 real per night and
you will be staying for ﬁve nights. How many U.S. dollars should you
budget for the hotel?
2. Use the “FXHistory” link to ﬁnd out the trend for the real over the
last few years. Can your U.S. dollar buy more reals or less than it
could last year? Would your hotel bill have been higher last year? Use
the “FXGraph” feature to print out a one-year trend graph for the U.S.
dollar/Brazilian real exchange rate.
3. When the U.S. dollar can buy more of Brazil’s currency today than it
could yesterday, economists say that the U.S. dollar has appreciated
compared to the Brazilian currency. If the U.S. dollar can buy fewer
reals today, economists say the U.S. dollar has depreciated. Is the U.S.
dollar appreciating or depreciating compared to the Brazilian real?
Write down the current exchange rate. Next week, log onto the “Cur-

Primary Source Sites
182
rency Converter” and get the latest exchange rate. Has the U.S. dollar
appreciated over the week? Depreciated? Stayed the same?
4. Log onto Allders Department Store at (1a) http://www.allders.co
.uk/. Find an item you like. Once you have determined the price,
ﬁnd the exchange rate for British pounds and calculate the price of
this item in U.S. dollars. What would you expect to pay in the United
States? Is the converter price higher than you would expect to pay in
the United States?
RELATED INTERNET SITES
“Do You Have a Yen to Go to College?”
(1b) http://www.econedlink.org/minute/archive/minute_000225.html
This site uses the Japanese yen/U.S. dollar exchange rate to compare the cost
of college in Tokyo with a typical technical school in the United States. This
lesson provides excellent practice in calculating exchange rates.
Collecting Paper Money: Currency Links
(1c) http://www.collectpapermoney.com/links.html
This site contains links to pictures of foreign banknotes, and students can com-
pare the features of foreign bills to U.S. dollars past and present. What features
of currencies are similar? Different?
2. INTERNATIONAL TRADE DATA
URL: http://www.bea.doc.gov/bea/di1.htm
The Department of Commerce collects a wide variety of data on U.S.
economic activity, including the nation’s trade with foreign countries.
Foreign trade continues to make up larger and larger proportions of our
economic activity, particularly in certain sectors such as automobiles and
petroleum products. Some politicians and pundits have expressed alarm
because our balance of trade (the difference between our imports and
our exports) has been negative (more imports than exports) for most of
the 1980s and 1990s. Others have expressed concern over the fact that
foreign investment in the United States (capital ﬂows from outside the
United States) seems to be increasing, and many are worried that this is
a dangerous trend. This site provides up-to-the-month data on our pat-
terns of trade, our trading partners, the balance of trade in various sec-
tors, and the levels of direct foreign investment in the United States.
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS AND ACTIVITIES
1. Scroll down to “exports and imports” and click on “charts” under
“exports and imports, monthly (1998–2000).” Once there, scroll down

Economics
183
to “Exports and Imports of Goods and Services.” Are we importing
more than we are exporting? By a large amount? Is this a trend? What
other trends do you notice here? For example, is our level of inter-
national trade increasing or decreasing?
2. Scroll down to “Exports and Imports of Services.” What is the trend
here? Are we importing more services than we are exporting? Why
is this the case? (Hint: Some of it has to do with places like Disney
World.)
3. The United States was a very attractive place to invest in during the
1990s, and many foreign businesses and governments took advantage
of the booming U.S. economy by buying stocks and other securities
in the United States. This resulted in capital ﬂows (money from for-
eign countries) into the United States. Click on “Direct Foreign In-
vestment in the United States.” Once there, ﬁnd “Total Capital Flows”
and click on the chart for 1998. What was the total direct foreign
investment in the United States in 1998? The size of the U.S. economy
in 1998 was approximately $8.5 trillion. What percentage of our econ-
omy was based on direct foreign investment?
4. Americans and American businesses invest in foreign countries as
well. Go to “US Direct Investment Abroad.” Click on “Total Capital”
for 1998. What was the total investment in foreign countries held by
Americans in 1998? Is this more or less than the total investments held
in the United States by foreigners?
RELATED INTERNET SITES
“NAFTA: Are Jobs Being Sucked Out of the United States?”
(2a) http://www.econedlink.org/minute/archive/minute_991128.html
This lesson looks at the impact of the North American Free Trade Agreement
(with Canada and Mexico) on the U.S. economy. Students examine data on Amer-
ica’s top trading partners, the level of trade with Canada and Mexico, and the
impact of NAFTA on the U.S. labor market.
International Trade (The Dismal Scientist)
(2b) http://www.dismal.com/economy/releases/dyn_release.asp?rusa_trade
This site gives access to the latest international trade data as it is released. It
also provides deﬁnitions of key terms, a summary of recent trends, and links to
other helpful data. Dismal Scientist economists also provide pithy and witty ar-
ticles, based on economic data, that explain changes in international trade to
laymen.
U.S. International Trade in Goods and Services
(2c) http://www.census.gov/foreign-trade/www/press.html
This site provides press releases and data about international trade. Especially
interesting are the exhibits that break out trade data by sector and by region. It
is an excellent source of data tables that students can manipulate and answer
questions about.

ECONOMIC HISTORY
1. U.S. CURRENCY EXHIBIT
URL: http://www.frbsf.org/currency/
This site, maintained by the Federal Reserve Board of San Francisco,
provides an on-line tour of hundreds of banknotes and examples of U.S.
currency from the Colonial era to the present day. Students can see our
nation’s history portrayed in the examples of our currency displayed
here and discover how our nation’s rich history is closely tied with our
currency. The virtual exhibit begins with the earliest examples of bank-
notes from the Colonial era, including state notes from the 1770s, and
concludes with notes from the twentieth century no longer in service
(counterfeiting laws make it illegal to post an image of a currently cir-
culating Federal Reserve note). The site also provides a concise history
of the development of U.S. currency over the years. Especially interesting
is the gallery of artistry and imagery used on banknotes throughout our
history. Students can learn about the mottoes, images, and borders used
on various notes over time and begin to see similarities in the features
of banknotes from the 1700s, 1800s, and 1900s. Using browser plug-in
available at the site, students can also take a virtual tour of the actual
exhibit in San Francisco.
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS AND ACTIVITIES
1. Examine the earliest notes in the exhibit, those of the “Independence”
era; see (1a) http://www.frbsf.org/currency/independence/index.
html. Are all the currency names the same? Why not? What prob-
lems might this cause if you were a farmer in Georgia trying to sell
your cotton to a dressmaker in Massachusetts? What do these notes
have in common with modern Federal Reserve notes?
2. Go to the Independence-era “Showcase of Bills” at (1b) http://
www.frbsf.org/currency/independence/show.html and ﬁnd the
Pennsylvania $4 bill. Why would the bill state “to counterfeit is death”
on its face? What would happen if people believed that counterfeit
bills were widely circulated today? What measures does the Bureau
of Engraving and Printing use to prevent counterfeiting? See (1c)
http://moneyfactory.com/cd042500/start.html.

Economics
185
3. Find the “World Standard” section of the exhibit. Click on the “Notes
No Longer In General Circulation” link. What is the largest bill? Why
do you think this bill is no longer in circulation? What might it have
been used for?
4. Look at several of the bills from the “National Stability” era. Are these
similar to modern bills? For example, ﬁnd the $5 bill from 1914. Look
at a $5 bill from the 1990s. What are the similarities and differences
between the two bills?
RELATED INTERNET SITES
Bureau of Engraving and Printing
(1d) http://www.bep.treas.gov/
Learn about the way paper money is printed, how much is printed, and the
new faces of U.S. currency. Learn how the Secret Service (housed in the Treasury
Department) is working to prevent counterfeiting in the United States.
“Bill, Are You Bogus?”
(1e) http://www.econedlink.org/minute/archive/minute_991221.html
This lesson introduces students to the wide range of information and history
that can be gleaned from the $100 bill. It also introduces new changes in the $100
bill designed to prevent counterfeiting.
2. WHAT IS (WAS) A DOLLAR WORTH?
URL: http://woodrow.mpls.frb.fed.us/economy/calc/
cpihome.html
This site, maintained by the Wilson Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis
(the site is nicknamed “Woodrow”), presents historical data on inﬂation
and inﬂation rates in the United States from 1913 to 2000 (the federal
government has been collecting such data only since 1913). The site also
provides estimates of the consumer price index (CPI) and inﬂation rates
as far back as 1800. Students can ﬁnd the CPI—the primary macroeco-
nomic indicator of inﬂation—for each year from 1913 on. Students can
also use the “CPI Inﬂation Calculator” to compare the inﬂation-adjusted
price of a good or service in any one year to the inﬂation-adjusted price
of that same good in any other year.
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS AND ACTIVITIES
1. What is the deﬁnition of inﬂation? What is the CPI? Use the economic
glossary at the “Amos’ World” economic site [at (2a) http://www.
amosweb.com/] to develop the deﬁnition found at Woodrow. What

Primary Source Sites
186
might be some of the goods and services included in the “basket of
goods” used to calculate the CPI? If the inﬂation rate in the United
States is rising, what impact would this have on you?
2. A new car purchased in 2000 might cost approximately $20,000. Using
the “CPI Inﬂation Calculator” pick a year in the 1960s, the 1940s, and
the 1920s and calculate the inﬂation-adjusted price of a similar new
car in those years. Were cars really cheaper in those years? (Hint: think
about the deﬁnition of inﬂation.)
3. The average price of a new house in the United States today is
$150,000. What was the average house cost (adjusted for inﬂation) in
1950? In 1930?
4. What is the current rate of inﬂation in the United States? Consider the
deﬁnition of inﬂation. What does increasing inﬂation mean for con-
sumers? Who is likely to be hurt by inﬂation? Why? Who is likely to
be helped?
RELATED INTERNET SITES
“Let’s Talk Turkey: The Price of a Thanksgiving Day Dinner”
(2b)
http://www.economicsamerica.org/econedlink/minute/archive/minute_
991107.html
This lesson calculates a crude consumer price index using a “basket” of
Thanksgiving favorites. Students can use these familiar items to track the long-
term rise in prices of turkey, mashed potatoes, and all the trimmings.
Economic Statistics Brieﬁng Room
(2c) http://www.whitehouse.gov/fsrb/prices.html
This site has current CPI data, including time-series graphs and charts and
other data related to inﬂation and prices.
3. ADAM SMITH’S WRITINGS ON ECONOMIC THEORY
URL: http://socserv2.socsci.mcmaster.ca/~econ/ugcm/3113/
smith/index.html
Adam Smith has been called the father of classical economic thought and
theory for good reason. His An Inquiry into the Wealth of Nations (1776)
is a seminal text in how markets work and why nations should specialize
and trade rather than remain isolated. Smith, a Scottish professor of po-
litical economy (the early precursor to the modern discipline of econom-
ics), also wrote widely (as did many philosophers of the day) on religion,
society, and politics. Smith’s lesser known work A Theory of Moral Sen-
timents (1759) also contains important elements of classical political econ-
omy and the modern role of governments in the economy. Smith
believed the enlightened pursuit of self-interest was the driving force of

Economics
187
a successful economy, but in the context of societal norms about reason-
able behavior. For Smith, an important role of the state was to assume
powers extending to the system of justice, and even to legal provisions
for the state to deal with monopoly powers. Smith is arguably the most
inﬂuential of the early classical economists, and his writings clearly in-
ﬂuenced the founders of the United States. Indeed, it seems more than
just coincidence that Wealth of Nations was published in the same year
the Declaration of Independence was signed.
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS AND ACTIVITIES
1. Read the ﬁrst section of an “Account of the Life and Writings of Adam
Smith LL.D.,” read by Dugald Stewart on March 18, 1793. This ac-
count served as a form of academic eulogy for Smith before his Royal
Society peers. What was Smith’s early life like? What experiences
shaped his later writings? How was he viewed by Mr. Stewart?
2. Smith is often characterized as the founder of a ﬁeld of study (eco-
nomics) that celebrates (or at least acknowledges) self-interested be-
havior—that humans all act in their own self-interest alone. Open
Smith’s Theory of Moral Sentiments and read the ﬁrst ten pages. What
is Smith’s view on the selﬁsh nature of humans? How does Smith’s
view in Theory of Moral Sentiments reconcile with the popular view of
Smith?
3. Open the ﬁrst book of Wealth of Nations, “Improvement in the Pro-
ductive Powers of Labor.” Smith says clearly that the wealth of a
nation is a function of two circumstances. What are these? Imagine
that Smith were a presidential candidate running for election and he
had made a speech stating these two simple ideas. How might his
speech be received? Does he sound more like a Republican candidate
or a Democratic candidate?
4. Open the fourth book, “Of Systems of Political Economy.” In the ﬁrst
few pages, Smith talks about the goals of individuals and nations
being the same: to get rich. In Smith’s time wealth was measured in
precious metals (like silver), and Smith describes the nature of these
metals as “money.” What characterizes money according to Smith?
What served as money for the Tartars? What does Smith criticize
about John Locke’s view of money? Reading further, why does Smith
say that the pursuit of gold or silver alone by nations is not a wise
strategy?
RELATED INTERNET SITES
Adam Smith Page
http://www.utdallas.edu/~harpham/adam.htm

Primary Source Sites
188
This page was developed to promote the study of the moral, political, and
economic ideas of Adam Smith. The web site “provides scholars, students, and
other interested readers with an entry into the vast scholarship on Smith.”
The Adam Smith Campﬁre Chat
http://www.killdevilhill.com/adamsmithchat/wwwboard.html
This chat room is devoted entirely to the life and works of Adam Smith. Users
can log on, read old postings, and start new lines of discussion.
4. THE LESLIE BROCK CENTER FOR THE STUDY OF
COLONIAL CURRENCY
URL: http://www.virginia.edu/~econ/brock.html
This site is devoted to the history of America’s colonial currencies. Ac-
cording to the author of this site, decades before the American Revolu-
tion, the colonies all issued their own paper money. These monetary
experiments embroiled the colonies in controversy, fueling political dis-
putes both within the colonies and between the colonies and England.
These experiments also raised fundamental economic questions, such as
how paper money inﬂuences prices, exchange rates, economic growth,
and the balance of trade. This site contains such primary sources as Ben-
jamin Franklin’s pamphlet on the necessity of currency, the Currency
Acts of 1751 and 1764, and links to examples of every Colonial currency
in use in the 1750s and 1760s.
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS AND ACTIVITIES
1. Read Franklin’s pamphlet “A Modest Enquiry into the Nature and
Necessity of a Paper Currency.” What does Franklin mean when he
writes, “There is a certain proportionate Quantity of Money requisite
to carry on the Trade of a Country freely and currently; More than
which would be of no Advantage in Trade, and Less, if much less,
exceedingly detrimental to it”? Can you think of a modern example
of this tenet in action?
2. Read the Currency Act of 1764. What problem was it designed to
address? As the supply of money (in this case, Colonial currency)
increases, what happens to the price of goods and services? Hint: Look
up “money supply” at Amos’ World at (4a) http://www.amosweb.
com.
3. Under “Articles on the Web,” go to “Canada’s Playing Card Money.”
How does this example from history illustrate the nature of money as
a medium of exchange? How is this a classic example of “ﬁat” money?
Hint: Look up “money supply” at Amos’ World at (4a) http://www.
amosweb.com.

Economics
189
4. Go to “miscellaneous” and click on “examples of Colonial coins.”
How many different examples of coins were circulating in the colonies
around 1750? What problems might this have incurred? Did every
state have its own currency? What problems might this have led to?
RELATED INTERNET SITE
Money—Past, Present, and Future
(4b) http://www.ex.ac.uk/~RDavies/arian/money.html
This is a wonderful portal to sites that highlight the development and use of
money throughout recorded history. Links include forms of money, politics of
money, alternative monetary systems, and even novels set in ﬁnancial institu-
tions.
5. DAVID HUME’S ECONOMIC WRITINGS
URL: http://socserv2.socsci.mcmaster.ca/~econ/ugcm/3113/
hume/index.html
David Hume is perhaps best known as a philosopher and as the author
of the Treatise of Human Nature (1739). However, Hume, along with con-
temporaries Adam Smith and Frances Hutcheson, also produced writ-
ings that shaped early classical economic theory, and still inﬂuence
modern economic thought. For example, in 1752, Hume published Polit-
ical Discourses, which contains more than a dozen short essays on the
basic principles of economics, including taxation, money, and trade. For
more information about Hume’s life, please see the Hume Archives listed
under Related Internet Sites. Perhaps most interesting was the long
friendship and correspondence between Hume and Adam Smith. Hume
and Smith did not always agree on their economic theories (Hume crit-
icized much of Smith’s Wealth of Nations (1776), even on his deathbed),
but many of their shared ideas became the foundation for modern eco-
nomic thinking.
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS AND ACTIVITIES
1. Read On Taxes. What kinds of taxes does Hume argue are the best?
Which are the worst? What does Hume think of poll taxes? At the
time of this writing, a U.S. presidential election was under way. What
are the candidates’ views on taxes (hint, use a search engine such as
Yahoo! to ﬁnd out; e.g., use “issues” and “Gore” to search)? Which
would Hume support according to his views?
2. Read On the Balance of Trade. Hume presages future economic thinkers
like David Ricardo with his view of foreign trade. Indeed, Hume ar-

Primary Source Sites
190
gues for nations to seek out comparative advantages in their trade
and describes the impact of inﬂation on trade. What does Hume say
about the price of goods in one nation and its impact on trade?
3. Read On Money. What does Hume describe as the most important
function of money? Compare Hume’s views on money with Adam
Smith’s. Are they similar? Hume argues for the elimination of private
banks. Why? What beneﬁts does he see?
RELATED INTERNET SITES
Ty’s Hume Homepage
(5a) http://www.geocities.com/Athens/3067/hume/h_index.html
Excellent portal of very helpful Hume links including links to other on-line
texts, criticism of Hume’s work by contemporaries (including Smith), and other
bibliographies.
The Hume Archives
(5b) http://www.utm.edu:80/research/hume/hume.html
This site focuses more on Hume’s philosophical works (including his work in
skepticism), but it does contain some interesting biographical material and a
unique sample of contemporary reviews of Hume’s works that appeared in the
newspapers and periodicals of his time.
6. DAVID RICARDO’S WRITINGS
URL: http://cepa.newschool.edu/het/proﬁles/ricardo.htm
After Adam Smith, perhaps no classical economic thinker has had more
impact on the ﬁeld of economics than David Ricardo. Ricardo (1772–
1823) was a businessman from the age of fourteen. In ﬁnance, he made
a large fortune and retired from business at the age of forty-two. [Learn
more about Ricardo at (6a) http://www.britannica.com/bcom/eb/
article/idxref/4/0,5716,423669,00.html]. From about 1799, Ricardo en-
tered into controversy with the major British economists in a series of
books and pamphlets and in his book The Principles of Political Economy
and Taxation (1817). Ricardo’s writings about diminishing marginal re-
turns to capital and comparative advantage in international trade are
regarded as bedrock principles in economic theory. This site provides
access to several of Ricardo’s major works and a series of critiques and
analyses of his work that appeared during or shortly after his lifetime.

Economics
191
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS AND ACTIVITIES
1. Open The Principles of Political Economy and Taxation. Go to Chapter 1,
“On Value.” How does Ricardo deﬁne value? In section 1.4, Ricardo
says that the value a good holds is dependent upon what?
2. Using the “Table of Contents,” go to Chapter 7, “On Foreign Trade.”
In Ricardo’s day, as in the current era, critics warned against engaging
in too much foreign trade, should the domestic nation become reliant
on the foreign nation. Read section 7.11. What are Ricardo’s views on
trade? Read sections 7.13–7.17. Develop a chart using the examples
Ricardo provides to illustrate how nations would be better off trading
for some goods.
3. This last idea, known as the law of comparative advantage, is one of
the economic theories for which Ricardo is best known. How would
you explain comparative advantage? Check your response with the
deﬁnition
found
in
the
Amos’
World
[at
(6b)
http://www.
amosweb.com] glossary. How close were you?
4. Read Patrick J. Buchanan’s speech “Political Rat Poison—NAFTA Expan-
sion” at (6c) http://www.theamericancause.org/pjb-97-0915.html.
Develop a “letter to the editor” from Ricardo that responds to Buch-
anan’s position. What would Ricardo say?
RELATED INTERNET SITES
The Iron Law of Wages
(6d) http://www.fordham.edu/halsall/mod/ricardo-wages.html
One of Ricardo’s less quoted, but no less important, works, this short essay
invokes a wide range of key economic ideas including the market structure and
the value of productive resources.
BOLA: David Ricardo
(6e) http://sol.brunel.ac.uk/~jarvis/gallery/ricardo.html
This site explains, with examples, Ricardo’s theory of comparative advantage.
It has links to other WWW resources for Ricardo.
Victorian Web: David Ricardo
(6f) http://landow.stg.brown.edu/victorian/economics/ric.html
Victorian Web is a site that catalogues a wide range of web-based resources
related to the Victorian age including arts, culture, politics, and economics. The
classical economics section describes Ricardo in relation to other classical econ-
omists and critics of the times.

Primary Source Sites
192
7. FACTORY LIFE CIRCA 1900
URL: http://memory.loc.gov/ammem/papr/west/
westhome.html
This site is part of the Library of Congress’s American Memory on-line
collection. Entitled “Inside an American Factory: Films of the Westing-
house Works, 1904,” this site contains one- to two-minute digital video
clips of factory life in several Westinghouse plants around the turn of
the century. The Library of Congress describes the site, “The Westing-
house Works Collection contains 21 actuality ﬁlms showing various
views of Westinghouse companies. The ﬁlms were intended to showcase
the company’s operations. Exterior and interior shots of the factories are
shown along with scenes of male and female workers performing their
duties at the plants.” In order to view these ﬁlms, you must have access
to RealPlayer Basic (version 7.0 or above) or Apple QuickTime (version
2.5.2 or above).
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS AND ACTIVITIES
1. After reading the overview of the site, go to “The Westinghouse World:
The Companies, the People, and the Places.” Read about the “Working
Conditions at the Westinghouse Works.” How do these conditions
compare to modern-day working conditions? What has changed?
2. Go back to “The Westinghouse World: The Companies, the People,
and the Places.” Read the account of “Life in Wilmerding.” How is
this a typical factory town? What are the “chief complaints” among
the citizens?
3. Go back to “Inside an American Factory: Films of the Westinghouse
Works, 1904.” List the ﬁlms in this collection. Load the ﬁlm “Girls
winding armatures.” What are these workers doing? What is their
task? What is the woman who is standing and walking among the
workers doing? Does this look like an exciting job? Who took these
kinds of jobs?
4. Load the ﬁlm “Coil winding section E, Westinghouse works.” What
are these workers doing? What is their task? What are the woman and
the man who are standing and walking among the workers doing?
Does this look like an exciting job?
5. Load the ﬁlm “Tapping coils, Westinghouse works.” What are these
workers doing? What is their task? After viewing three ﬁlms of work-
ers in this plant, what can you conclude? What do the workers seem
to have in common? Generally, what are their tasks?

Economics
193
RELATED INTERNET SITES
Factories Change the Way America Works
(7a) http://157.182.12.132/omdp/marge/html/student/st_12.htm#bottom
This site, developed by students, documents some of the historical and eco-
nomic impact of the rise of the factory system in the United States. It contains
some nice photos and ﬁrst-hand accounts of factory life.
Industrial Revolution Portal
(7b) http://members.aol.com/TeacherNet/Industrial.html
This is a comprehensive listing of a wide range of links dealing with the In-
dustrial Revolution including some on factories and mills and the working con-
ditions associated with them.
8. INTERNET MODERN HISTORY SOURCEBOOK: THE
INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION
URL: http://www.fordham.edu/halsall/mod/modsbook2.html
The Industrial Revolution began in England in the eighteenth century
and from there spread to other parts of the world. The main features of
the Industrial Revolution included the following: the use of new basic
materials, such as iron and steel; the use of new energy sources (e.g.,
coal,
the
steam
engine,
electricity,
petroleum,
and
the
internal-
combustion engine); the invention of new machines, (e.g., the power
loom); a new organization of work known as the factory system; and the
increasing application of science to industry. These technological changes
made possible a tremendously increased use of natural resources and the
mass production of manufactured goods.
The Internet Modern History Sourcebook is one of a series of history
primary sourcebooks developed to serve the needs of teachers and stu-
dents in college survey courses in modern European history and Amer-
ican history, as well as in modern Western civilization and world
cultures. As part of the Internet History Sourcebooks Project, this site
began as a way to access texts that were already available on the Internet.
It now contains hundreds of texts made available locally. This site pro-
vides links to dozens of primary source materials (available on-line) that
help illustrate the complex historical phenomenon known as the Indus-
trial Revolution.
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS AND ACTIVITIES
1. Read Cowley’s “Of Agriculture.” Imagine that you are the owner of
a factory in London in the late 1790s and have just read a reprint of

Primary Source Sites
194
Cowley’s essay in the London Times. What would your reaction be?
Draft a letter to the editor that explains your position.
2. Read the “Leeds Woollen Workers’ Petition, 1786.” What is the chief
complaint of these workers? Do they support the Industrial Revolu-
tion? Why or why not? Read “Letter from Leeds Cloth Merchants,
1791.” What is the chief reason merchants support the use of ma-
chines? Using your background knowledge of the Industrial Revolu-
tion, make a chart listing groups that would be in favor of the changes
brought about by it. What groups would be opposed to the Industrial
Revolution?
3. Read “William Radcliffe: On Power Looms, 1828.” What is the main
beneﬁt Radcliffe sees in the use of power looms in textile manufac-
turing? Are people better off now, according to Radcliffe, than before
the Industrial Revolution?
4. Read “Observations on the Loss of Woollen Spinning, 1794.” Who,
according to this author, will suffer the greatest loss? How many girls
and women are replaced by the work of twenty on the new carding
machines and spinning Jennies? What other unanticipated conse-
quences does the author ascribe to the development of the spinning
machines?
5. Read “Observations on the Filth of the Thames” by famous scientist
Michael Faraday. What is Faraday’s concern? Does it sound familiar?
What are some other consequences of the Industrial Revolution?
RELATED INTERNET SITES
The Life of the Industrial Worker in England
(8a) http://applebutter.freeservers.com/worker/
This site has links to several primary sources describing the lives of those who
made the transition from farm to factory in early nineteenth-century England.
Table on the Spread of Industrialization in Europe
(8b) http://www.fordham.edu/halsall/mod/indrevtabs1.html
This site contains excellent data on population increases, the number of in-
dustrial workers, and so on. It is perfect for use in a primary source lesson that
analyzes data on the Industrial Revolution.
9. HISTORICAL CENSUS DATA
URL: http://ﬁsher.lib.Virginia.EDU/census/
A nationwide population census dates from the establishment of the
United States. The U.S. Constitution (Article I, Section 2) outlines a num-

Economics
195
ber of categories to be covered by the census. Among these are a number
of economic categories including manufacturing, agricultural participa-
tion, and some rather arcane categories such as “persons not taxed.” The
data presented here describe the people and the economy of the United
States for each state and county from 1790 to 1970. This site allows easy
searching by category and state, but in order to compare results across
each census, you are required to open up a new database. Still, this
primary source data provides a unique picture of the growth of the
United States and of the economic expansion over the ﬁrst 190 years of
the nation.
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS AND ACTIVITIES
1. Choose 1850. Select “number of farms,” “number of persons employed
in manufacturing sectors,” and “aggregate population.” Print out the
results. Create a chart with these headings and “percent of total pop-
ulation” for the years 1850, 1900, 1950. Enter the data for 1850. What
percentage of the population were engaged in farming? What per-
centage were engaged in manufacturing? Choose 1900. Select the same
categories and enter the results in your chart. Do the percentages in-
crease? Decrease? Before gathering the data for 1950, predict what will
happen to the number of farms and the percentage of people em-
ployed in manufacturing. Were your predictions accurate?
2. Choose 1940. Under employment select “number of females under 14
in the workforce.” How many women were working in 1940? What
percentage of women over 14 were working outside the home?
Choose 1950. Predict what the percentage of women over 14 working
outside the home will be. Will it be higher?
3. Choose 1900. Under manufacturing/labor select “average number
children under 14 employed.” Choose 1940. Try to ﬁnd “average num-
ber children under 14 employed.” This category no longer exists in
1940. Why not? What do you think happened between 1900 and 1940
with respect to child labor laws?
4. Choose 1850. Select “total number of farms.” Using the graphing fea-
ture at this site, create a bar graph from highest to lowest. What state
had the most farms in 1850? The least? Choose 1950. Select “total
number of farms.” Using the graphing feature at this site, create a bar
graph from highest to lowest. What state had the most farms in 1950?
The least? Why did the changes occur?

MACROECONOMIC DATA
1. UNEMPLOYMENT AND PRODUCTIVITY
URL: http://www.whitehouse.gov/fsbr/employment.html
Another of the three most important indicators of our nation’s economic
health is the number of people who are working. This makes sense be-
cause if people are not working, they are not producing and the nation’s
output (as measured by gross domestic product) falls. This site provides
up-to-the-month data on the status of employment in the United States.
The Bureau of Labor Statistics has provided easy access to data on the
number of persons employed in a given month, the unemployment rate,
average hourly wage rates, and the size of the civilian labor force. The
site also provides easy-to-reproduce charts and graphs that illustrate
trends in these key economic indicators.
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS AND ACTIVITIES
1. What is the economic deﬁnition of unemployment? What is the un-
employment rate and how is it calculated? Use the economic glossary
at Amos’ World at (1a) http://www.amosweb.com to develop a
working deﬁnition of these terms. Why aren’t all people who do not
have a job considered unemployed? Is a rising unemployment rate
good for the economy? Why or why not?
2. What is the current unemployment rate for the United States? Click
on “CHART: Unemployment Rate.” What has been the highest un-
employment rate in the last ten years? The lowest? What is the trend?
Is this trend a good sign for the U.S. economy? Why?
3. At the top of the page, click on “CHART: Civilian Labor Force.” Are
more people working today than ten years ago? Than ﬁve years ago?
Why aren’t people in the military used when calculating unemploy-
ment rates?
4. Many politicians and labor leaders argue that while unemployment
has fallen and more people are working, these jobs are not “good jobs
with high pay” but rather are minimum wage jobs in industries like
fast foods. Click on the “CHART: Average Hourly Earnings.” What
is the trend in wages paid to hourly workers? Approximately how
much more in real wages (adjusted for inﬂation) are hourly workers

Economics
197
earning—on average—in 2000 versus 1990? Based on these data, what
would you say to these politicians and labor leaders?
5. Another argument used by some business leaders is that U.S. em-
ployees are not competitive with workers in foreign countries because
U.S. workers are not as productive. Productivity is deﬁned as some
level of output (e.g., cars assembled) per some unit of input (e.g.,
hours worked). Click on “CHART: Productivity.” The red line indi-
cates the productivity of U.S. workers (output/hours worked). What
is the trend for U.S. workers’ productivity rates? Are workers more
productive now than ﬁve years ago? Ten years ago?
RELATED INTERNET SITES
Economic Indicators
(1b) http://www.econedlink.org/minute/archive/minute_990312.html
In this lesson you can retrieve up-to-date, key economic statistics (including
unemployment and productivity data) which provide valuable hints about the
state of the future economy.
Economic Report of the President
(1c) http://w3.access.gpo.gov/usbudget/fy2001/pdf/2000_erp.pdf
Perhaps the most comprehensive report of leading economic data issued each
year, the Economic Report of the President provides time-series data making it
easy to compare one year to the next. Appendix B contains statistical tables for
unemployment, productivity, and wages.
2. GROSS DOMESTIC PRODUCT
URL: http://www.whitehouse.gov/fsbr/output.html
This site provides statistics and graphs that contain information on the
U.S. gross domestic product (GDP). GDP is one of the most important
measures of our economic health because it is an indication of the
amount of goods and services (the product) our economy is producing.
GDP is made up of four components: (1) total consumption spending on
such things as tacos and CDs, (2) total investment expenditures, such as
stock and mutual fund purchases, (3) total government expenditures on
such things as tanks and roads, and (4) net international trade with for-
eign countries. If our GDP is increasing from year to year, then our
economy is healthy; a falling GDP may imply a recession or even, in
severe cases, a depression. This site breaks the U.S. GDP down into its
component parts and provides several charts that plot U.S. GDP trends
over the past few years.

Primary Source Sites
198
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS AND ACTIVITIES
1. Click on “Gross Domestic Product.” What is the GDP for the United
States in 1999 (the ﬁrst column)?
2. What is the largest component of U.S. GDP: consumer spending, in-
vestment spending, government spending, or net trade?
3. What was the “net export of goods and services” in 1999? What does
this imply? Are we exporting more than we import?
4. Click on the GDP chart at (2a) http://www.bea.doc.gov/briefrm/
gdp.htm. What quarter saw the largest GDP growth? The smallest?
Did GDP grow in every quarter pictured here?
5. When GDP growth falls for two consecutive quarters, economists say
we are experiencing a recession [see (2b) http://www.amosweb.
com/cgi-bin/gls_dsp.pl?termrecession], and if GDP growth falls
for three or more years, we are experiencing a depression. Go to the
table of U.S. GDP over the last forty years at (2c) http://www.
neatideas.com/data/data/GDP.htm. In what years has the United
States been in a recession? Depression?
RELATED INTERNET SITES
DataLinks
(2d) http://www.econedlink.org/datalinks/index.html
This site gives the latest macroeconomic data including GDP. Find out how
GDP is calculated and link to the original source.
“What Does the Nation Consume?”
(2e) http://www.econedlink.org/minute/archive/minute_991220.html
“This lesson will focus on what the nation consumes and how that is measured
by Gross Domestic Product (GDP). In the United States, the goods and services
produced for household consumption account for about two-thirds of total out-
put measured by GDP.”
“Economic Forecasting: A WebQuest”
(2f) http://www.econedlink.org/minute/archive/minute_991113.html
This lesson uses the web to retrieve up-to-date key economic statistics which
provide valuable hints about the state of the future economy. When the lesson
is complete, students will have a better understanding of how economists predict
our economic future using indicators such as GDP.
“Gross Domestic Pizza”
(2g) http://www.economicsintl.org/pubs/lessons/nov99/nov99.html
This lesson “explores how gross domestic product (GDP) is determined. The
major components of GDP are described.” In this lesson, students create and
compare GDP pie charts for the countries of Pepperonia and Anchovia.

Economics
199
3. BUDGET OF THE U.S. GOVERNMENT
URL: http://w3.access.gpo.gov/usbudget/fy1999/
maindown.html
This very informative site, maintained by the U.S. Government Printing
Ofﬁce, contains a complete copy of the 1999 federal budget, “A Citizen’s
Guide to the Federal Budget,” and various data tables and charts that
can be downloaded and imported to a spreadsheet for analysis. Over the
last decade, one of the talked-about economic issues has been the size of
the federal budget. Politicians and citizen-activists decry “big govern-
ment” often without getting down to particulars. Economic reasoning
tells us that we cannot get everything we want and thus must choose
between alternatives. If we want the federal budget reduced, some pro-
grams must be eliminated. Which ones? It might help us to see ﬁrst what
the federal budget looks like, discover what categories of spending exist,
and determine historical trends in spending. This site is a wonderful
place to begin that investigation.
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS AND ACTIVITIES
1. Click on “Budget System and Concepts.” Find “Receipts, Outlays and
Surplus or Deﬁcit.” Where does the majority of revenue for the federal
government come from? What percentage of revenue comes from ex-
cise taxes (on gasoline, cigarettes, and so on)?
2. What percentage of government expenditures goes directly to indi-
viduals? What percentage is spent on the military?
3. Is the government getting bigger? Look at Table II-1. One way to mea-
sure how big government is to look at government spending as a per-
centage of our GDP. A higher percentage means government is bigger
than a lower percentage. What is the trend for the projected size of gov-
ernment in Table II-1? Is the percentage increasing or decreasing?
4. Go back to the “Budget of the United States Government” page. Open
“A Citizens’ Guide to the Federal Budget.” Click on the “Glossary.”
What is the difference between a debt and a deﬁcit? Click on “Deﬁcits
and Debt.” Since the end of World War II, has the U.S. government
more often been in surplus or deﬁcit? When was the last time (prior
to 1999) that the government ran a surplus?
5. Go back to the “Budget of the United States Government” page. Open
“The Budget of the United States Government” link. Critics of the
federal government often point to the large, unwieldy nature of the
budget. Just how many pages long is the 1999 budget?

Primary Source Sites
200
6. Go to “The Budget Message of the President.” President Bill Clinton
claimed to offer Congress the ﬁrst balanced budget in how long?
7. Go to “Summary Tables.” Open Table S-1. What is the size of the
proposed federal budget for 1999? Do receipts exceed outlays for this
proposed budget? Is the budget in deﬁcit or surplus?
RELATED INTERNET SITES
National Budget Simulator
(3a) http://socrates.berkeley.edu:6997/shortbudget.html
This site allows users to make adjustments to allocations for various budget
categories and see the results. Ideal for use with a cooperative group activity
where students role-play the budget drafting process because this page gives
immediate feedback on changes in the federal budget.
National Debt Clock
(3b) http://www.brillig.com:80/debt_clock/
This site gives up-to-the-second data on the national debt. Caution: the author
of the page uses government data but his own formula and calculations to arrive
at his ﬁgures. Still, this is an interesting look at the growth of the debt over time.
The Public Debt On-Line
(3c) http://www.publicdebt.treas.gov/opd/opd.htm
Operated by the Treasury Department, this site provides not only a time-series
of data on the debt, but also links to other helpful sites and data.
4. INCOME AND POVERTY
URL: http://www.whitehouse.gov/fsbr/income.html
Questions about the poverty rate and personal income levels in the
United States are central to analyzing our nation’s economic health. In
particular, political candidates often seem to make reference to per capita
income level or the level of poverty in the United States, depending, of
course, on the audience being addressed and the point being made. In-
deed, the United States is often referred to as the richest nation on earth.
What is the average income in the richest nation and how many people
live in poverty here? How is poverty deﬁned? Answers to these ques-
tions can be found here. Among the data that can be uncovered at this
site are personal income, average household income, houshold wealth,
and statistics on poverty in the United States.

Economics
201
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS AND ACTIVITIES
1. One of the simplest measures of a nation’s wealth is called per capita
income. Simply put, economists divide the annual national income by
the population of the United States. What was the per capita income
for the United States in 1999? Is per capita income rising? What might
this mean for the economic health of the United States?
2. Many economists believe that a better measure for income levels is
personal disposable income. Use the Amos’ World glossary at (4a)
http://www.amosweb.com/ to ﬁnd the deﬁnition of personal dis-
posable income. Why might this be a better measure of income?
3. Go back to the income and poverty data page http://www.white
house.gov/fsbr/income.html. What is happening to personal dis-
posable income in the United States? Is it rising? What was the per-
centage change in personal disposable income for 1999? How might
this positive change affect the economy?
4. Another measure of income is median household income. The term
median implies the middle and is determined by ranking all family
incomes from the top to the bottom and (quite literally) assigning the
very middle family the status of median. What is the current median
household income in the United States? Open “CHART: Median
Household Income by Race and Hispanic Origin: 1972 to 1998.” Which
racial or ethnic group has the highest median household income?
Which has the lowest?
5. Poverty is often a very subjective measurement. However, the federal
government has developed a so-called poverty line which is used as
an ofﬁcial measure of who is in poverty and who is not. Most im-
portant, this poverty line is used to determine who is eligible to re-
ceive welfare and other forms of public assistance. Click on “Poverty.”
You will enter the U.S. Census Bureau’s “Poverty 1998” page. Click
on “Poverty Thresholds.” Poverty thresholds are the lines the govern-
ment draws to determine who is and who is not in poverty. What is
the poverty threshold for a family of four with two children? What is
the threshold for a family of four with three children? Why does the
threshold go down with more children? What percentage of the U.S.
population currently lives in poverty?
RELATED INTERNET SITES
“Income: It Ain’t Where You Start, It’s What You Got, and Where You End”
(4b) http://www.econedlink.org/minute/archive/minute_000411.html
This lesson asks students to examine data regarding the distribution of income

Primary Source Sites
202
in the United States. Students examine more closely the poverty threshold notion
and use congressional data to examine the “income distribution fallacy.”
The Myth of Widespread American Poverty
(4c) http://heritage.org/library/backgrounder/bg1221.html
This site, maintained by the conservative think tank Heritage Foundation, pro-
vides extensive data from Congress and the Census Bureau on the question of
poverty and income distribution.

OTHER ECONOMICS SITES
1. CONTEMPORARY ECONOMIC AND BUSINESS
CARTOONS
URL: http://www.cartoonwork.com/Archive.html
This site contains several dozen editorial cartoons drawn and published
by Carol Simpson. The subjects include labor-management relationships,
wages, health beneﬁts, global trade, and other union issues. The site (and
the cartoons) reﬂect a very heavy pro-union, anti-industry bias, and read-
ers should be aware of this before reviewing the cartoons. However,
many of the cartoons depict very contemporary issues and do reﬂect the
feelings of one group of stakeholders in the American economy; namely,
union workers. Moreover, the cartoons provide an opportunity to use a
different sort of primary source media in the study of economic issues.
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS AND ACTIVITIES
1. Open the cartoon entitled “Corporate Culture.” Describe the action
taking place in the cartoon. What are the symbols (e.g., clothing and
props) used to convey the cartoonist’s message? In your own words,
what is the cartoonist’s message?
2. Open the cartoon entitled “Productivity Up.” What does the foreman
mean when she says “our productivity is up 23%”? For help, go to
the deﬁnition of productivity at Amos’ World at (1a) http://
www.amosweb.com. What is the cartoonist’s message here?
3. Open the cartoon entitled “Global Economy.” Describe the action tak-
ing place in the cartoon. What symbols are used to convey the car-
toonist’s message? What historical event is the cartoonist drawing on
here? In your own words, what is the cartoonist’s message?
4. Open the cartoon entitled “GI Joe.” Describe the action taking place
in the cartoon. What symbols are used to convey the cartoonist’s mes-
sage? In your own words, what is the cartoonist’s message? Is this
message consistent with that expressed in “Global Economy”?

Primary Source Sites
204
2. THE STOCK MARKET INDEXES
URL: http://indexes.dowjones.com/home.html
This is the homepage of the Dow Jones Indexes. The indexes (along with
the Standard and Poor’s 500 and the Nasdaq) are the main source of data
concerning the performance of the New York Stock Exchange. The Dow
Industrial Index is merely an average of the prices of the stocks of which it
is composed. Originally, there were two indexes: the Dow Jones Railroad
Average and the Dow Jones Industrial Average. The railroad average was
made up of twenty railroad stocks, and it has been renamed the Dow Jones
Transportation Index. The industrial average comprised twelve stocks of
other businesses. The industrial average was increased to twenty stocks in
1916; and in 1928, the industrial average was increased to thirty stocks. In
1929 the Dow Jones Utility Index was created. It initially comprised
twenty utility stocks. It was subsequently lowered to ﬁfteen utility stocks.
When you hear about the “Dow” on the news, however, it is the Dow
Jones Industrial Average (DJIA) that is being reported.
As with all indexes, the Dow Industrial Average when originally cre-
ated had a base of 100. That is, on the day it was created, the Dow
Industrial Average was set equal to 100. Today, the average is more than
100 times this original level. While many economists debate the impor-
tance of the stock market in our overall economic health, one thing is for
certain: when most people think of economic data, the DJIA is one of
the ﬁrst things that comes to mind. This site provides answers to fre-
quently asked questions, current data on the DJIA and other indexes,
charts of historical time-series data, and an interesting database that lets
you search out the DJIA for a particular day and year.
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS AND ACTIVITIES
1. What is the current Dow Jones Industrial Average? Go to “About the
Averages.” Find “Frequently Asked Questions.” What is the DJIA?
How many stocks does it comprise? What does a DJIA of 10,000 mean?
2. Go to “About the Averages.” Select “Dow Jones Industrial Average
Facts.” What were the original twelve stocks in the DJIA? Which of the
original companies are in the current DJIA? Go to “DJIA Milestones.”
In what years did the Dow ﬁrst pass 1000, 5000, 7500, and 10,000?
3. Go to “Dow Data.” Select “Charts.” Pick 1990–1999. What was the
Dow in at the beginning of the 1990s? At the end? What happened to
the Dow during the recession of 1990? When did the single biggest
fall of the Dow occur during the 1990s?

Economics
205
4. Go to “Dow Data.” Select “Historical Queries.” Enter October 25, 1929
(the Friday before the infamous Black Monday crash). What was the
DJIA? Now enter October 29, 1929 (the Tuesday after). What was the
DJIA? What percentage did the DJIA fall in two days? Now enter
October 16, 1987. What was the DJIA on this Friday? Now enter Oc-
tober 19, 1987. What was the DJIA? What was the percentage change?
Which was larger, the crash leading to the Great Depression or the
one in 1987? Why didn’t the nation plunge into a depression after the
1987 fall?
RELATED INTERNET SITES
NASDAQ
(2a) http://www.nasdaq.com/about/about_nasdaq.stm
This site describes the NASDAQ (National Association of Securities Dealers
Automated Quotation) stock market, its history, and indices. Links to charts com-
paring NASDAQ and DJIA are most interesting.
Standard and Poor’s 500
(2b) http://www.spglobal.com
This site describes the S and P 500, explains how the index is calculated, and
gives historical data. It also provides data on all 500 of the stocks in the S and
P 500 along with data on their performance.
3. THE DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE
URL: http://www.doc.gov/
The U.S. Department of Commerce (DOC) is charged with a wide range
of economic responsibilities. For example, the DOC maintains the Bureau
of Economic Analysis (responsible for much of the economic data that
comes from the federal government), the International Trade Adminis-
tration (responsible for data on U.S. foreign trade), and the Census Bu-
reau (responsible for the economic census of the United States). The DOC
also runs the U.S. Trademark and Patent Ofﬁce, and it provides statistics
and data for this ofﬁce as well. The Department of Commerce site pro-
vides access to a wide range of statistics and press releases about the
state of the economy in a variety of sectors.
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS AND ACTIVITIES
1. The DOC displays its press releases on its homepage. Pick one that is
economic in nature (i.e., that deals with foreign trade, or the health
of the U.S. economy) and read it. What is the DOC’s role in this issue?
Draft a letter of response to the secretary of commerce that asks some

Primary Source Sites
206
questions about the press release and e-mail it to him or her. Compare
responses with your classmates.
2. Go to “Economics and Statistics Administration.” Click on “US Econ-
omy.” Select “Overview of the US Economy.” What is the trend for
the GDP over the last two years? Scroll down to “personal income”
and ﬁnd your region. Has income in your region been increasing? Is
this a trend across the country?
3. Go to “Economics and Statistics Administration” again. Click on “ESA
Analysis.” Find “Our Analysis of Recent Leading Indicators.” Go to
“Durable Goods.” What is the trend here? What is a durable good?
[Hint: Go to Amos’ World at (3a) www.amosweb.com and use the
glossary.] Is this a good indicator for the U.S. economy?
RELATED INTERNET SITES
USATRADE
(3b) http://www1.usatrade.gov/website/website.nsf
This site supports the international trade efforts of U.S. businesses. It gives
links to various reports on the economic status of nations around the globe.
European Union (EU) Home Page
(3c) http://www.europa.eu.int/index-en.htm
This site is similar for the European Union. It contains data on trade with the
United States and general EU trade issues and links to EuroStat, the EU coun-
terpart to the DOC’s STAT-USA.
4. STATE AND COUNTY DEMOGRAPHIC AND
ECONOMIC PROFILES
URL: http://www.census.gov/datamap/www/
As one division of the Commerce Department, the Census Bureau is not
only responsible for counting the population, but also for developing an
economic picture of the population of the United States. The Census
Bureau publishes a wide range of economic reports, including the Eco-
nomic Census of the United States; see (4a) http://www.census.gov/
epcd/www/econ97.html. One of the most interesting sources of data
at the Economic Census of the U.S. homepage is the “State and County
Demographic and Economic Proﬁles.” Through this image map of the
United States, one can select a state economic proﬁle that includes re-
ports on income and poverty, state population, a breakdown of indus-
tries in that state, and population and housing ﬁgures. In addition, one
can go to the county level in each state and ﬁnd the same type of infor-
mation.

Economics
207
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS AND ACTIVITIES
1. Find your state on the image map. Once your state map loads, look
at the links across the bottom of the page. Select “State proﬁle.” What
is the 1999 population estimate for your state? Select “Population,
demographic, and housing information from the 1990 Census: Sum-
mary Tape File 1A.” Under “select the tables you wish to receive,”
indicate “Sex” and “Race.” Submit. Are there more women than men
in your state? What is the largest racial or ethnic group in your state?
The smallest?
2. Using a spreadsheet program (e.g., Excel), enter the race data from
your state and use the spreadsheet commands to calculate the per-
centage for each racial group. Now select New York and California
(if you live in one of these states, use Florida). Go through the same
process outlined in activity no. 1 above and enter the racial/ethnic
breakdowns for each of these states in your spreadsheet. How does
your state compare with the others?
3. Go to “Income and poverty.” What is the percentage of all persons in
your state living in poverty, of persons under eighteen, of children
under ﬁve?
4. Go to “Economic Census, 1992” for your state. What is the largest
economic sector in your state? What is the smallest? What is the larg-
est sector in the United States? What is the smallest? How does this
compare to your state?
5. Go to your county. Select “Population, demographic, and housing in-
formation from the 1990 Census: Summary Tape File 1A.” Under “se-
lect the tables you wish to receive,” indicate “Sex” and “Race.”
Submit. Are there more women than men in your county? What is
the largest racial or ethnic group in your county? The smallest? Enter
your county’s race data in the spreadsheet you created earlier. How
does your county compare to the state?
6. Go to “Income and poverty” for your county. What is the percentage
of all persons in your county living in poverty, of persons under eigh-
teen, of children under ﬁve?
RELATED INTERNET SITE
Economic Census Report (1997)
(4b) http://www.census.gov/epcd/www/econ97.html
This site is the most comprehensive collection of Census Bureau economic data
available. Users can ﬁnd the latest press releases, hypertext tables of data in-
cluding geographic breakdowns, and an “Ask Dr. Census” feature.

Primary Source Sites
208
5. WOODROW
URL: http://woodrow.mpls.frb.fed.us/
This is the site of the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, named after
Woodrow Wilson who signed the Federal Reserve Act into law in 1913.
The site provides access to economic and banking information pertinent
to the Ninth Federal Reserve District and the nation including full texts
of publications, speeches, reports, and other research produced by the
Minneapolis Fed and provides links to the Federal Reserve Board and
each Federal Reserve Bank. Features also include an inﬂation calculator,
curriculum resources for teachers and business, and agriculture and
banking statistics on the Ninth Federal Reserve District.
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS AND ACTIVITIES
1. Find out a little bit about the Federal Reserve by clicking on “The Fed:
Our Central Bank.” What are the four primary roles of the FED? What
is meant by a central bank? Could you open an account there? Read
about the FED’s role in monetary policy at (5a) http://www.
frbsf.org/system/fedsystem/monpol/tofc.html.
2. Go to “US Economy.” Open the chart that tracks the “Short Term
Interest Rates.” What is the Federal Funds Rate? What is the Discount
Rate? Go to Amos’ World at (5b) http://www.amosweb.com to
look up these terms. What is the trend for the Fed Funds rate and for
the Discount Rate? Do they seem to move together? If the FED raises
these rates, how might it impact housing sales or new car sales? Why?
3. Under “US Economy” go to “Beige Book.” The Beige Book reports the
economic health of each of the FED’s twelve districts. Find the FED
district in which you live. Choose the most current report for your
district. Pretend that you are a newspaper reporter doing a story on
your region. Summarize the FED Beige Book report in three or four
paragraphs. What are the strongest sectors of the regional economy?
What are the weakest?
RELATED INTERNET SITE
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
(5c) http://federalreserve.gov/
The ofﬁcial homepage for the FED, this site provides links to FED monetary
policy, banking regulations, and each of the twelve regional banks. Of particular

Economics
209
note is the “Consumer information” section which provides advice on buying a
house, leasing a car, and getting a credit card.
6. DR. YARDENI’S ECONOMIC HISTORY PAGE
URL: http://www.yardeni.com/history.asp
Ed Yardeni, the chief global economist and investment strategist of Deut-
sche Bank Securities in New York, has compiled an impressive list of
links to historical economic data and general economic history. The page
is nicely broken down into U.S. economic history, ﬁnancial history, mac-
roeconomic history, census bureau history, and other economic data-
bases and charts.
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS AND ACTIVITIES
1. One measure of personal wealth is whether your family owns a tele-
vision set. Perhaps we assume that every family owns a television set
of some sort, but this may be a false assumption. Go to “Consumers.”
Print out the “Total TV Households as a Percent of Total Population.”
In 1997 what percentage of U.S. households owned television sets? By
what year did nearly all families own a television set?
2. Go to “Industrial Production.” Print out the charts here. With a high-
lighter, indicate all the periods in which industrial production fell.
Based on your knowledge of U.S. history, what major events occurred
during these periods? Find a timeline of key events in U.S. history
(e.g., the launch of Sputnik) and lay it out next to the chart of indus-
trial production. Were your predictions correct? What impact do his-
torical events have on the economy?
3. Go to “Land, Labor and Capital.” Print out the charts on “Railroad
Mileage” and “Total Road and Street Mileage.” Compare the two
charts. What conclusions can you support based on the economic his-
tory presented by these two charts? What was the preferred mode of
transportation in 1925, autos or trains? In 1995?
RELATED INTERNET SITE
Yardeni’s E-conomy Site
(6a) http://www.yardeni.com/cyber.asp
Here you’ll ﬁnd Dr. Yardeni’s latest research on the impact of technology on
the economy. Numerous resources related to e-commerce are also available.


Contemporary World Issues
1. CHINA AND TAIWAN
One of the most pressing political battles that is encompassing the world
today is between Taiwan and China. Following the victory of Mao Ze-
dong’s Communist party in 1949, Chiang Kai-shek (the leader of the
Republic of China) and almost a million Nationalists ﬂed the mainland
of China for Taiwan and set up the Republic of China’s government
there. Mao Zedong’s Communist party, which still controls the entire
mainland under the mantle of the People’s Republic of China (PRC),
considers Taiwan a runaway province.
In February 2000, China renewed military threats against Taiwan
straining tensions across the Taiwan Strait and provoking strong reac-
tions from the U.S. government. China issued a white paper warning the
Taiwanese that they must open talks on reuniﬁcation or risk an invasion.
Taiwan wants to maintain its independence and has received military
aid from the United States to defend itself. The situation is an explosive
one because of the ﬁrepower of both China and the United States if the
United States were drawn into the battle.
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS AND ACTIVITIES
1. Ask students to develop a short timeline of the history of the China-
Taiwan issue. A good place to start is at the FoxNews page at (1a)
http://www.foxnews.com/national/spying/timeline_chinataiwan.
sml. What is the primary claim that China has on Taiwan? When
was Taiwan ordered returned to (Nationalist) China?

Primary Source Sites
212
2. Read the Chinese government’s white paper on the question of “one
China” at (1b) http://www.china-embassy.org/issues/taiwan.htm
and compare the views of the Taiwanese government with those of
the white paper at (1c) http://www.taiwaninformation.org/policy/
china/china_ra.html. Construct a data retrieval chart with three col-
umns (“issue,” “China,” “Taiwan”) and use the chart to compare the
two nations’ views on the following issues: Taiwan’s independence,
representation in the United Nations, military aid from the United
States, and membership in the World Trade Organization.
3. Compare how these issues are presented in each country. Log on to
the Taipei Times at (1d) http://www.taipeitimes.com/news and
ﬁnd an article that deals in some way with China-Taiwan relations.
Now log on to the English-language version of The People’s Daily, the
ofﬁcial newspaper of the Chinese Communist party, at (1e) http://
english.peopledaily.com.cn/home.html. How do the stories differ?
How are they the same?
2. CUBA AND THE UNITED STATES
The animosity between the United States and Cuba goes back to the
Cuban Revolution led by Fidel Castro in the 1950s. From a botched at-
tempt to overthrow Castro, called the Bay of Pigs, to the Cuban missile
crisis, to the recent Elia´n Gonza´lez case, the turmoil between these two
countries continues. Many Cuban Americans continue to press the U.S.
government for stricter policies of isolation directed toward Castro and
his government. However, the recent visit of Pope John II to Cuba illus-
trates the desire of most of the rest of the world to enjoy open relations
with Cuba. From travel and tourism to its famous cigars, Cuba holds a
great interest for much of the world. Because Cuba can no longer rely
on aid from the former Soviet Union and it is one of only three nations
left (China and North Korea are the others) with long-standing Com-
munist central governments, Cuba is also increasingly isolated from the
modern world.
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS AND ACTIVITIES
1. Begin by completing the on-line activity outlining the history of U.S.–
Cuban relations developed by the Close-Up foundation at (2a) http:
//www.closeup.org/tv-act-7.htm.
2. One of the most visible consequences of the U.S. policy toward Cuba
has been a ban on trade with and travel to Cuba by American citizens.
Go to the U.S. State Department’s Cuba policy site at (2b) http://

Contemporary World Issues
213
www.state.gov/www/regions/wha/cuba.
What
is
the
current
travel policy? Could you vacation in Cuba if you so desired?
3. Another key issue in the relationship between Cuba and the United
States is the immigration of Cubans (labeled refugees) to the United
States. Consider the recent Elia´n Gonza´lez case. Go to the U.S. State
Department’s Cuba policy site. If you had relatives living in Cuba,
could they immigrate to the United States? What criteria would they
have to meet?
4. Go to the U.S. State Department’s Cuba policy site. What is the ofﬁcial
U.S. policy toward Cuba?
5. Go to the Washington Post’s “Scenes of Cuba” at (2c) http://
washingtonpost.com/wp-srv/inatl/galleries/cuba/splash.htm. Se-
lect the “La Vida” gallery. Use the following chart to compare and
contrast daily life in Cuba with daily life in your community.
Cuba
Your Community
Housing
Transportation
Entertainment
Food
Family life
3. HIV AND AFRICA
A potentially devastating epidemic has gripped Africa for the last ﬁfteen
years, and little has been said about its effect on Africa. AIDS now affects
every country in the world, but it is sub-Saharan Africa that today is the
most affected. Estimates on the number AIDS cases in Africa vary from
22 million to an estimated one-quarter of the population of Africa, 150
million people. The nine most heavily affected countries in the world are
all in Africa. Increasingly, children are being left orphans because their
parents have died from AIDS-related illnesses. The effects of this disease
could cripple the continent in the next ten years.
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS AND ACTIVITIES
1. Go to MSNBC’s “Fast Facts” on AIDS/HIV at (3a) http://www.
msnbc.com/news/AIDS_front.asp. What does the acronym AIDS
mean? Go to “Tracking the Epidemic” and select “AIDS in Africa.”
Pick several north African countries and several in southern Africa.
Which region seems to have a higher percentage of AIDS cases? What
is the percentage of adults in South Africa infected with AIDS?

Primary Source Sites
214
2. Read the speech made by Peter Piot, the executive director of
UNAIDS, given at (3b) http://www.africapolicy.org/docs99/hiv
9906.htm. What four areas of African society are most heavily im-
pacted by the AIDS epidemic? Why does Piot say that AIDS is more
than a “health-related problem?”
3. Go to MSNBC’s “Aids in Africa” slideshow at (3c) http://www.
msnbc.com/modules/Aids_In_Africa/LO.asp (WARNING: this site
contains graphic photographs). Go through “2000: The Epidemic Ma-
tures.” What are some of the problems experienced by the families of
people with AIDS?
4. Read Nelson Mandela’s speech made at the conference on AIDS held
in Durban, South Africa. What does he call for? What else is being
done to combat this devastating illness? Go to the UNAIDS homepage
at (3d) http://www.unaids.org. Go to the “press release” section.
What are some of UNAIDS’ strategies for ﬁghting AIDS? Who are the
United Nation’s partners in this venture?
5. Go to the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention’s “HIV/
AIDS
Prevention
Division”
at
(3e)
http://www.cdc.gov/hiv/
dhap.htm. Go to “The XIII International AIDS Conference” and
open the U.S. surgeon general’s press release. What is the U.S. position
on the African AIDS epidemic?
4. HUMAN RIGHTS IN CHINA
URL: http://www.hrw.org/campaigns/china-99/china-
june99.htm
Violations to basic human rights in China have been a subject of intense
debate for the world and the United States in particular. Many claim it
is well-documented fact that China is currently committing the most bla-
tant human rights violations since the Tienamen Massacre on June 4,
1989. Human rights organizations believe that, given the gross and sys-
tematic pattern of human rights violations in China during the last two
years, the United States should rethink its policy toward China generally
and its trade policy speciﬁcally. The recent debate over “most favored
nation” status for China is illustrative of this point. Human rights groups
have long sought to punish the Chinese for their alleged abuses. Among
the abuses that are chronicled are religious persecution, child labor,
prison labor, and denial of freedom of speech. In addition, China’s con-
tinued occupation of Tibet has brought charges of human rights viola-
tions. What is the policy of the United States toward China? What
violations have been documented? How is the world reacting to these
charges?

Contemporary World Issues
215
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS AND ACTIVITIES
1. What human rights violations is China accused of, and what evidence
is there for these charges? Create a data retrieval chart with two col-
umns: “charges” and “evidence.” Go to Human Rights in China’s
“Current Situation” link at (4a) http://www.hrichina.org/topics/
cursit.html. Choose “Children’s Rights,” “Religious Freedom,” “Ti-
bet,” and “Worker’s Rights.” Brieﬂy record the charges and evidence
in your data chart. Go to the Human Rights Watch (HRW) World
Report for China and Tibet at (4b) http://www.hrw.org/hrw/
worldreport99/asia/china.html. How does this report compare to
your chart thus far? Finally, go to the Amnesty International (AI) 1999
report on China at (4c) http://www.amnesty.org/ailib/aireport/
ar99/asa17.htm. Are the same charges made? What evidence is sim-
ilar?
2. What is the ofﬁcial U.S. policy toward China and human rights vio-
lations in China? First read the U.S. State Department’s report on hu-
man rights in China at (4d) http://www.state.gov/www/global/
human_rights/1999_hrp_report/china.html. Does it differ markedly
from the HRW and AI reports? Find out about the normalization of
trade with China at (4e) http://www.chinapntr.gov/. Are human
rights an issue? Read Secretary of State Madeline Albright’s interview
with Sam Donaldson at (4f) http://www.chinapntr.gov/speeches/
albright0521.htm. Does the United States hold conﬂicting views?
3. What is the Chinese government’s perspective? Read the “White
Paper on Human Rights in 1998” at the Chinese Embassy home-
page at (4g) http://www.china-embassy.org/Cgi-Bin/Press.pl?wp_
humanrights. What is the Chinese government’s view? Have human
rights increased in China, according to their view? Can all three per-
spectives (AI and HRW, the U.S. government, and the Chinese gov-
ernment) be valid?
5. NORTH KOREA
At the end of World War II, the United States and the Soviet Union
agreed that U.S. troops would accept the surrender of Japanese forces
south of the 38th parallel in Korea and the Soviet Union would accept
the surrender of Japanese forces north of the 38th parallel. In 1948 the
United Nations proposed nationwide elections be held in Korea. Elec-
tions were held in the south and the Republic of Korea was established.
The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea was established the following
month in the north. Communist North Korean forces invaded South Ko-

Primary Source Sites
216
rea in 1950. The United Nations (led by the United States) subsequently
came to the aid of the south. The Korean War lasted until 1953. North
Korea and South Korea have had a rocky relationship ever since.
According to the latest annual reports issued by such international
human rights organizations as Amnesty International and Freedom
House, the worst human rights violations in the world are being com-
mitted in North Korea. This along with North Korea’s threat of devel-
oping nuclear weapons capable of reaching other nations has made it a
hotspot in world politics. Because of its shared history and the fact that
the Korean peninsula is a vital security region, the United States has kept
its presence in South Korea, which has contributed to making the area
one of the most volatile areas in the world.
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS AND ACTIVITIES
1. Read some background on the Korean War and the formation of the
People’s Republic of Korea. See (5a) http://www.odci.gov/cia/
publications/factbook/kn.html.
2. Go to “KoreaScape” at (5b) http://www.koreascope.org/english/
sub/2/ks2.htm. What is the South Korean perspective on human
rights and “political prisoners” in North Korea?
3. One of the major concerns of the United States is the development of
North Korean missiles. Go to (5c) http://secretary.state.gov/www/
brieﬁngs/statements/2000/ps000628a.html.
Read
the
following
newspaper accounts and describe the key issues involved in this ques-
tion.
See
(5d)
http://www.nytimes.com/library/world/asia/
080500korea-missile.html and (5e) http://www.washingtonpost.
com/wp-dyn/articles/A31918–2000Aug3.html.
4. What is the ofﬁcial U.S. policy toward North Korea? Read the U.S.
State Department brieﬁng at (5f) http://www.state.gov/www/
regions/eap/991012_northkorea_rpt.html. What does the fact sheet
“Further Easing of Sanctions Against North Korea” at (5g) http://
www.state.gov/www/regions/eap/fs-nkorea_sancs_990917.html
give as the reasons for the easing of U.S. policy toward North Korea?
5. Recently, for the ﬁrst time in decades, North and South Korea have
met to discuss trade and other political issues. What has been the
result of these meetings? Read the following newspaper articles and
describe the goals and outcomes of these talks. See (5h) http://
www.koreaherald.co.kr/t_news/2000/08/_02/20000801_0209.html,
(5i) http://dailynews.yahoo.com/h/ap/20000805/wl/koreas_media
_4.html,
and
(5j)
http://www.asiasource.org/news/at_mp_02.
cfm?newsid22063].

Contemporary World Issues
217
6. The Olympic Games have become political opportunities for boycott
(e.g., the Moscow summer games, 1980), terrorism (Munich, 1972), or
other protests (U.S. athletes protesting during the 1968 Mexico City
games). The Sydney Olympics, however, signal a new trend in the
way the world views North Korea. Read the following report and dis-
cuss how these changes are reﬂected in Olympic policy: (5k) http://
dailynews.yahoo.com/h/ap/20000804/sp/oly_samaranch_koreas_
1.html.
6. REFUGEE CRISIS
In 431 B.C. Greek dramatist Euripides stated, “There is no greater sorrow
on earth than the loss of one’s native land.” There have been refugees
for as long as man has fought wars and engaged in persecution, but the
world refugee crisis has been increasing over the last ﬁfty years. The
United Nation’s High Commission on Refugees at (6a) http://
www.unhcr.ch/un&ref/un&ref.htm deﬁnes refugees as people who
have ﬂed their own countries because of a well-founded fear of perse-
cution for reasons of their race, religion, nationality, political opinion, or
membership in a particular social group. These people cannot or do not
want to return.
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS AND ACTIVITIES
1. Go to “United Nation’s High Commission for Refugees (UNHCR) By
the
Numbers”
at
(6b)
http://www.unhcr.ch/un&ref/numbers/
numbers.htm. Go to “Tables.” How many refugees exist? What re-
gion has the most refugees? Did the number of refugees increase in
1999? Where does the largest group of refugees come from? Are the
Palestinians considered refugees? Go to Table 5. What country repa-
triated (“took back”) the most refugees last year?
2. Read the United Nations’s “Convention relating to the status of ref-
ugees of 28 July 1951” at (6c) http://www.unhcr.ch/refworld/
refworld/legal/instrume/asylum/1951eng.htm. What rights do ref-
ugees have? If refugees have no home country, what laws should they
follow, according to the United Nations? Do refugees have the right
to attend school in the country in which they are taking refuge?
3. Go to the UNHCR slide show on refugees at (6d) http://www.
unhcr.ch/images/images.htm. What are some of the circumstances
that force people to leave their homes? What are the conditions
in refugee camps? What are the conditions in some of the largest
camps?

Primary Source Sites
218
4. What is the U.S. policy toward refugees? Go to the State Department’s
Bureau of Population, Refugees and Migration (PRM) at (6e) http://
www.state.gov/www/global/prm/index.html. What is the PRM’s
primary task? Go to the PRM’s “Proposed Refugees Admissions” at
(6f)
http://www.state.gov/www/global/prm/fy2001_rpt_refugee.
pdf. How many refugees were admitted to the United States in 2000
and what was their origin? Using the total world population of ref-
ugees and the number admitted to the United States, calculate what
percentage of the world’s refugees were taken in by the United States.
Read PRM Director Julia Taft’s statement on the treatment of refugees
at (6g) http://www.state.gov/www/global/prm/refugee_protect_
9807.html. How does U.S. policy reconcile with the United Nations’s
policy?
7. DRUGS IN COLOMBIA
The so-called war on drugs has been a gigantic effort on the part of many
areas of government in the United States. Indeed, the U.S. government
has a “drug czar” named Barry McCaffrey (Full title: director of the
Ofﬁce of National Drug Control Policy). Billions of dollars have been
allocated by Congress to ﬁght this so-called war. Much of this allocation
has gone to keeping drugs out of the United States and eradicating drug
production in such places as Colombia. Colombia has been a hot spot in
recent years for governmental action. Colombia, a poor country ripe for
an explosion of the drug trade, has abundant land good for growing
coca (raw materials for cocaine) and poppy plants (raw materials for
heroin). The money derived from the drug trade over the last ﬁfteen
years has enabled the drug producers in Colombia to assemble a cadre
of soldiers that control the mountains in northern Colombia. The most
infamous of these cartels is the one located in Cali, Colombia. The issue
of continuing the drug war has been a volatile one, which has propo-
nents for both sides. The Colombian government has made pleas to the
United States for more aid to ﬁght the war, but Congress has been re-
luctant to give them more. What is the current U.S. policy toward this
increasingly worldwide problem? What results have been achieved by
the Ofﬁce of National Drug Control Policy (ONDCP)?
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS AND ACTIVITIES
1. Log on to the ONDCP homepage at (7a) http://www.whitehouse
drugpolicy.gov/index.html. When was the ofﬁce founded? What is
its chief function? Go to “International.” What is the chief focus of
ONDCP on the international scene?

Contemporary World Issues
219
2. Go to “International Drug Policy.” Read Director McCaffrey’s state-
ment “Rescuing Colombia” at (7b) http://www.whitehousedrug
policy.gov/news/commentary/oped/2000/030200.html.
What
is
the United States doing to prevent drug trafﬁcking from Colombia?
What aid has the United States committed? Why does McCaffrey
stress the need to “return to the rule of law” in Colombia? How many
Colombians have died as a result of the internal conﬂicts in Colombia?
3. Go to the Department of State’s “International Narcotics Control Strat-
egy Report on Colombia” at (7c) http://www.state.gov/www/
global/narcotics_law/1999_narc_report/samer99_part3.html. Scroll
down to the “Cultivation and Production” section. Has the war on
drugs been successful in Colombia? Has coca production increased?
Poppy production? What percentage of the world’s illegal cocaine and
heroin are produced in Colombia? What speciﬁc policies has the
United States instituted to eradicate coca production in Colombia?
4. Read the Peter Reuter editorial from the New York Times at (7d)
http://www.arcata.org/reuter.columbia.html. What does Reuter
think of the latest attempts to eradicate coca growing in Colombia?
What does he advocate instead?
8. INDIA AND PAKISTAN
In 1947 India received independence from the British Empire. Part of the
terms of that agreement involved the creation of two states, a Hindu
state (India) and a Muslim state (Pakistan). Bloody confrontations be-
tween the two groups occurred almost immediately as each migrated to
their new homeland. Barely two months after independence, war broke
out between India and Pakistan over the disputed region of Kashmir.
See the chronology of events at (8a) http://www.napf.org/asia/india
pakchron.html.
A second, bloodier conﬂict occurred in 1971, again over land disputes.
Since the Indian and Pakistan War in 1971, both sides have been engaged
in a tremendous arms race. Indeed, both India and Pakistan now have
the potential to wage a nuclear war, making an already tense regional
situation of much greater concern to the rest of the world.
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS AND ACTIVITIES
1. In 1998 India conducted tests of several nuclear weapons. Critics claim
this was done only to intimidate the Pakistani government over the
question of Kashmir. Read the interview with India’s Prime Minister
Atal Bihari Vajpayee (8b) http://www.indianembassy.org/pic/pm-

Primary Source Sites
220
interview.htm. What reasons does he give for the tests? Why does
India refuse to sign the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty (CTBT)?
2. What is the ofﬁcial policy of the United States toward these nuclear
tests and the escalation of nuclear tensions in the region? Read the
U.S. State Department’s ofﬁcial press release at (8c) http://www.
state.gov/www/regions/sa/980516_wh_threat.html as well as that
of the Central Intelligence Agency at (8d) http://www.odci.gov/
cia/public_affairs/press_release/archives/1998/pr051298.html.
3. Many experts believe the tensions between Pakistan and India will
continue as long as the region of Kashmir is in dispute. What started
this dispute? Go to the Virtual Library on Kashmir at (8e) http://
www.clas.uﬂ.edu/users/gthursby/kashmir. Why is Kashmir a “dis-
puted territory”?
4. What is each side’s position on Kashmir? Go to the the ofﬁcial web
page of the Pakistani government at (8f) http://www.pak.gov.
pk/ and the Ministry of External Affairs of the Indian government.
5. Kashmir has endured many human rights violations. Read the Human
Rights Watch 1999 report on the disputed region of Kashmir at (8g)
http://www.hrw.org/reports/1999/kashmir/.
9. NEWSPAPERS AROUND THE WORLD
URL: http://www.middlebury.edu/~gferguso/news.html
This is a wonderful site to access hundreds of major newspapers from
around the world, outside of the United States and Canada. From the
Afghan Online Press to the Zimbabwe Independent, this site allows one to
view what is news from the perspective of others around the globe and
to compare these perspectives to those in the local or national newspa-
pers. The newspapers located on this site are organized alphabetically
by the country in which they are published. A surprising number of
these are published in English or have English translations.
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS AND ACTIVITIES
1. Browse through many of the newspapers listed on this site and locate
a number of newspapers from multiple regions of the world that are
published in English text. What do many of the newspapers you have
identiﬁed, or the countries in which they are published, have in com-
mon? Also note that some countries have dozens of newspapers avail-
able on-line while other countries have very few. Why might this be?

Contemporary World Issues
221
2. Look over some of the newspapers you can access in English. How
do you compare the topics covered, and not covered, to those topics
typically found in a U.S. newspaper?
3. Select a speciﬁc current major world news item found in a local or
national newspaper. Go to some of the newspaper sites you found in
activity no. 1 and ﬁnd a story on that same topic. What are some of
the different perspectives these newspapers bring to the same topic?
4. Identify an ongoing news event that is particularly relevant to another
part of the world (e.g., the Middle East Peace talks, conﬂicts in
Northern Ireland, a World Cup soccer victory for a particular country)
and go to the newspapers from the countries most affected by these
events. How is the coverage of these events different from the cov-
erage found in U.S. newspapers?
5. For those newspapers that have editorial sections you can access, read
what topics are of interest in these sections. What are the topics being
addressed in these editorials? What are the topics being discussed in
the local papers’ editorial section? What is the value of this section in
each paper? Select a sample editorial and go though it line by line
and categorize each statement as a fact or an opinion.
6. Go to the sports section of those papers that have this section available
on-line. What sports are covered more completely than those in U.S.
newspapers? What sports, that you know little about, popular in that
part of the world, are represented by this newspaper? What sports
that are popular in the United States are also covered in the news-
paper you have downloaded, and to what extent?
RELATED INTERNET SITES
New York Times
(9a) http://www.nytimes.com/
The online version of today’s issue of this newspaper can be found at this site.
Chicago Tribune
(9b) http://www.chicago.tribune.com
The online version of today’s issue of this newspaper can be found at this site.
USA Today
(9c) http://www.usatoday.com/
The online version of today’s issue of this newspaper can be found at this site.

Primary Source Sites
222
10. COMPREHENSIVE NUCLEAR TEST BAN TREATY
URL: http://www.ctbto.org/
Many organizations have been formed to end the production of nuclear
weapons and even to disarm all remaining nuclear weapons. One of
these organizations is the Comprehensive Nuclear Test Ban Treaty Or-
ganization (CTBTO). This organization authored the Comprehensive Nu-
clear Test Ban Treaty (CTBT), which prohibits any nuclear weapon test
explosion or any other nuclear explosion anywhere on earth. Drafted at
the Conference on Disarmament in Geneva, Switzerland, the treaty was
adopted by the General Assembly of the United Nations in September
1996. The treaty is still undergoing the ratiﬁcation process of the major
nations around the world. As obvious as the good intentions of this
treaty may appear at ﬁrst, many nations hesitate to ratify a treaty that
may inhibit their options toward nuclear weapons development. This site
contains a summary along with a complete text of the treaty. It also has
a list of nations that have agreed to the treaty and a table that displays
the current status of each of the nations which must ﬁrst ratify the treaty
for it to take effect.
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS AND ACTIVITIES
1. Go to the link (10a) http://www.ctbto.org/ctbto/treaty/treatytext.
tt.html, which contains the full text of the treaty, and read the pre-
amble. What does the treaty mean when it states that the “present
international situation provides an opportunity to take further effec-
tive measures towards nuclear disarmament”? How has the interna-
tional situation changed since earlier decades?
2. What are the overall goals of this treaty and what steps does it pro-
pose to help reach this goal?
3. How will the following of the terms of this treaty be veriﬁed? This
can be found under Article IV of the treaty or in the summary section.
Does this seem to be an effective means of veriﬁcation?
4. Read Article XIV of the treaty, titled “Entry Into Force.” This section,
in part, discusses the need for all countries listed in Annex 2 to ratify
the treaty before it can take effect. Scroll down to look at this section
[or
go
to
(10b)
http://www.ctbto.org/ctbto/treaty/treatytext.tt.
html#ANNEX_2-TREATY]. What nations must still approve the
treaty? Why do you think these are the nations included here? Why
do you think there is a provision in this treaty for all of these nations
to agree to the terms of the treaty for it to take effect? What are the
pros and cons of this approach? Overall, is this a good idea?

Contemporary World Issues
223
5. Back on the main page of this site (http://www.ctbto.org/), click on
the link titled “signature and ratiﬁcation.” This will take you to a site
that has information on the status of the treaty. Click on the link
“Status of the 44 States whose ratiﬁcation is required for the Treaty
to enter into force.” What is the current status of the treaty? What
percentage of the required countries have ratiﬁed the treaty? How
many nations have signed or ratiﬁed the treaty that are not states
whose ratiﬁcation is required? In total (as of this writing), 155 states
have signed the treaty. What does this say about the support world-
wide from nations not included in the required forty-four?
6. Note the status of the United States on this treaty. Why would the
United States be one of the original signers of the treaty and delay so
long in ratifying it? What process must all treaties go through in the
United States? What rationale can you come up with for the current
U.S. position on this treaty? What is your position?
RELATED INTERNET SITES
Nuclear Nonproliferation
(10c) http://www.soton.ac.uk/~ppnn/
This British web site is dedicated to promoting nuclear nonproliferation world-
wide.
Comprehensive Nuclear Test Ban Treaty Editorial
(10d) http://jinx.sistm.unsw.edu.au/~greenlft/1996/243/243p21.htm
This editorial article gives India’s position on the CTBT and argues that the
United States must share much of the blame for the continued proliferation of
nuclear weapons.
11. TERRORISM
URL: http://nsi.org
Terrorism has existed as long as government. With the breakdown of
the Cold War balance of powers, many believe that the next major bat-
tles, in the twenty-ﬁrst century, will not be between countries, but in-
stead between countries and terrorists. Such terrorist groups have
become more successful as a result of the increasingly sophisticated and
accessible technology that has allowed such groups to impart more dam-
age. In recent years the United States has felt a growing need to become
more informed and active in ﬁghting this increasing threat to national
security. This site, sponsored and maintained by an organization called
the National Security Institute, contains links to many security topics,

Primary Source Sites
224
including recent antiterrorist legislation and executive orders. Other links
provide information on personal security and travel advisories around
the world.
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS AND ACTIVITIES
1. From the main page click on the link to the left titled “Terrorism.”
This will take you to a series of links related to antiterrorist legislation
and terrorist facts. Click on the link under the heading of Terrorist
Facts labeled “Effective Counterterrorism Act of 1996.” Scroll down
on this legislation until you ﬁnd the section on Terrorist Organization
Deﬁned (Sec. 2339B). What is the deﬁnition of a terrorist organization?
How does this differ from what you thought it was? What are some
examples of action taken by such groups that would ﬁt under this
deﬁnition? Can you think of any examples of terrorist acts in recent
years, as deﬁned by this legislation?
2. Back on the “Terrorism” page, click on the link “Recent Trends in
Domestic and International Terrorism.” Read this short article and
summarize its main point. Midway through the article are some sta-
tistics compiled from the FBI on domestic acts of terrorism that oc-
curred, were prevented, and were suspected for the years from 1989
to 1994. What do these statistics reveal, if anything? In your opinion,
and according to these statistics, how serious is the threat of terrorist
action in the United States?
3. On the “Terrorism” page, click on the link “Highlights of President
Clinton’s Anti-Terrorism Legislation.” According to this report, what
actions have been taken by the Clinton administration to combat ter-
rorism? What other suggestions would you have to combat this
threat?
4. Click on the link “FBI Domestic Counter-Terrorism Program” and
read and summarize this article. According to this article, what con-
stitutes enough evidence for the FBI to initiate an investigation? What
does the Center for National Security Studies believe to be one of the
greatest growing threats related to national security today?
5. In this article the Fifth Amendment is mentioned. In another article
on this site, it is mentioned that “a counter-terrorism bill drafted by
the Clinton Administration was introduced in the Senate as S. 390 and
in the House of Representatives as H.R. 896. The legislation poses
serious threats to constitutional rights.” In your opinion, where is the
line between protecting individual rights and protecting the national
security against terrorism? How far are you willing to go in sacriﬁcing
your constitutional rights for added protection? Give examples of

Contemporary World Issues
225
when a threat to national security, perceived or real, has caused the
infringement of an individual’s constitutional rights.
6. What event led to the 1995 Anti-Terrorist Legislation discussed on
these pages? According to the deﬁnition of terrorism discussed earlier,
why did this event not ﬁt under this category?
RELATED INTERNET SITES
1995 Anti-Terrorist Legislation
(11a) http://www.lectlaw.com/ﬁles/leg07.htm
This site contains the transcript on the press conference held in April 1995 on
this proposed legislation by Deputy Attorney General Jamie Gorelick, Deputy
Assistant to the President for Domestic Policy Bruce Reed, and Under Secretary
of the Treasury for Enforcement Ron Noble.
Cyber Attack Protection
(11b) http://usinfo.state.gov/journals/itps/1198/ijpe/pj48min.htm
This site includes an article written by Lieutenant General Kenneth A. Minihan,
director of the National Security Agency, titled “Defending the Nations against
Cyber Attack: Information Assurance in the Global Environment.”
12. WORLD TRADE ORGANIZATION
URL: http://www.wto.org/english/thewto e/whatis e/inbrief
e/inbr00 e.htm
URL: http://news.bbc.co.uk/hi/english/special report/1999/
11/99/battle for free trade/newsid 533000/533220.stm
The World Trade Organization (WTO) came into being in 1995 as the
successor to the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) estab-
lished in the wake of World War II. The WTO has been heralded as the
most efﬁcient mechanism to help the economies of developing and de-
veloped nations alike, as the most efﬁcient way to bring about fair trade
to all, as the best means to settle trade disputes, and as an effective
agency to protect the environment. Many groups believe that the WTO
is doing exactly what it set out to do and, in the process, has helped
expand the world’s economy. Yet, there is a growing number of diver-
gent groups that believe that the WTO has not only failed to reach these
goals but has, instead, hurt the development of poorer nations and con-
tributed to the destruction of the environment. The sites listed here in-
clude the ofﬁcial web site of the WTO, which provides some history, an
explanation of purpose, and access to WTO trade agreements. As a con-
trast are perspectives from news reports protesting the WTO and argu-
ments from opposing organizations.

Primary Source Sites
226
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS AND ACTIVITIES
1. Review the information on the WTO and review each of the “10 ben-
eﬁts” provided by the link on this page. Based on the information
presented here, which points do you see as the most important con-
tributions of the WTO? Are there any arguments put forth here with
which you do not agree? Why or why not?
2. Go to the second link listed above, which provides coverage of some
of the protests that occurred in 1999 against the WTO. What different
groups joined together in their protests against the WTO? What were
some of the criticisms levied against the World Trade Organization?
Which of these criticisms most concerns you?
3. Go back to the WTO site and click on the link “10 Common Misun-
derstandings about the WTO.” What are some of the counterargu-
ments presented here against the WTO criticisms? Which side do you
believe is correct? Is it possible that both sides are partially right (and
partially wrong)? Explain your answer.
4. Go to the link (12a) http://www.cagle.com/news/WTO/ which
provides editorial cartoons on the World Trade Organization. Study
a number of the cartoons provided here. For the most part, which
side, the WTO or the protestors, are made to look foolish? Select at
least one editorial cartoon that presents each side in this debate and
explain the meaning of each cartoon.
5. Make your own editorial cartoon either in favor of or against the
WTO.
6. Some have made the point that the argument on this issue is not
whether one is in favor of or against increasing world trade, but rather
how it is done and at what cost to whom. Explain this statement.
RELATED INTERNET SITES
Uruguay Round Trade Talks
(12b) http://www.ces.ncsu.edu/depts/agecon/trade/seven.html
This contains an article titled “The GATT Uruguay Round and the World
Trade Organization: Opportunities and Impacts for U.S. Agriculture.”
GATT Agreements
(12c) http://www.wto.org/english/docs_e/docs_e.htm
Provided on this site are the WTO documents including the GATT agreements
of 1947 and 1994.

Contemporary World Issues
227
13. ORGANIZATION FOR PETROLEUM EXPORTING
COUNTRIES
URL: http://www.opec.org/
The Organization for Petroleum Exporting Countries, or OPEC, is a
group of eleven countries which are major producers and exporters of
crude petroleum. This organization, founded in 1960, is used by its mem-
bers to set prices and production quotas to maintain those prices. OPEC
is responsible for about 40 percent of world exports in petroleum. Some
groups are unhappy with OPEC because they believe that it unfairly
determines prices in the world market. This price determination they
claim can cause recessions in other economies that are affected by the
increase in oil prices. Increases of gasoline prices at the pump in America
have often been attributed to OPEC’s raising their rates. OPEC claims
that many other factors contribute to the sometimes volatile pricing
found in the petroleum market.
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS AND ACTIVITIES
1. Before beginning, name as many OPEC member countries as you can.
Also guess from which part(s) of the world OPEC nations come. Then,
from the OPEC homepage, click on the button named “member coun-
tries.” Compare the names and locations of the member nations. Are
there any that surprise you? Which nations (and continents) were you
surprised to see represented on this list?
2. Click on map location or name below each of the member nations and
study the statistics provided. What is the percentage of petroleum-
related exports for each country? What does this say about the
strength of many of these nations without the demand for petroleum?
Which country has the largest reserves and the largest production of
petroleum per day? Why are Iraq’s numbers relatively low in the ar-
eas of exports and production?
3. Go to the link titled “FAQS” and click on the question, “Who are the
OPEC Member Countries?” What conditions determine whether a na-
tion can join OPEC? Which of these conditions do you believe keeps
the United States from being a member? When was the last time a
new member joined OPEC? Do you expect any to be joining soon?
4. Stay on the “FAQS” page and click on the link “Why does OPEC set
oil production quotas?” and read the brief explanation. If OPEC keeps
its oil production at lower levels, what are the short-term and long-

Primary Source Sites
228
term beneﬁts to OPEC nations? What does OPEC say are the beneﬁts
of doing this for non-OPEC nations?
5. What are the beneﬁts to an OPEC nation that decides it does not want
to stay within the set production limits but rather export substantial
amounts of oil above the quota allowed? What keeps all the OPEC
nations from doing this?
6. Back on the main page, click on the link, “Why you pay so much for
gasoline and other oil products.” According to OPEC what are the
main contributors to the perceived high cost of gasoline? Click on the
graphs provided to compare the percentage of cost for different parts
of the world and the reasons given here for those differences.
7. Go to the link (13a) http://www.energy.ca.gov/fuels/gasoline/us_
gasoilprices_1918–1999.html. This provides a graph of crude oil
prices from 1918 to 1999 (in constant 1995 prices). According to this
graph, provided by the U.S. Department of Energy Ofﬁce of Trans-
portation Technologies, what has the overall cost of oil really done
during the past eighty years? During what years did the price of gas-
oline, and the crude oil price, rise the most drastically? Why do you
think this was? What has happened to the difference in cost between
a barrel of crude oil and a barrel of gasoline during the past century?
What might be some reasons for this?
RELATED INTERNET SITE
Energy Web Directory
(13b) http://www.energy.ca.gov/links/oil.html
This web site has more than seventy links to petroleum-related companies and
topics.
14. MIDDLE EAST CONFLICT
URL: http://abcnews.go.com/sections/world/DailyNews/
israel maps.html
Even before nation status was granted to Israel after World War II in
1947, the struggle between Israeli citizens, who are mostly Jewish, and
Palestinians, who are mostly Muslim, has been wrought with violence
and upheaval. Religious differences, land rights, and ethnicity have all
played a part in the creation of the conﬂict between Israel and Palestine.
Talks and peace agreements have been tried and implemented in the
past, but with little lasting success. This site provides a series of maps
related to the changing boundaries of the State of Israel and links to the

Contemporary World Issues
229
latest press releases on any ongoing peace talks. Other links to historical
documents are provided in the questions and activities section.
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS AND ACTIVITIES
1. Click on the dated links at the top of the map on this page. View the
changes in the borders of Israel since its inception. When did the size
of Israel reach its greatest extent and what were the causes of that
growth? What changes in the size of Israel have occurred since then?
When territory is exchanged between competing governments, what
might be some of the issues of most concern for the people living in
those areas?
2. Who occupied this territory before the creation of the State of Israel?
Why was this land chosen to create a new nation? What options do
you suppose were given to those already living in the area when they
were told that they would now be living in the State of Israel?
3. The ﬁrst world power nation to support the idea of creating a Jewish
home in Palestine was Great Britain. Go to the link (14a) http://
www.israel.org/mfa/go.asp?MFAH00pp0 to read the famous letter
from Lord Balfour to Lord Rothschild, written in 1917, publicly de-
claring England’s sympathy for a “national home for the Jewish peo-
ple” in Palestine. What does this letter say about the conditions for
such a home? Nothing was done at that time to establish this state.
What occurred since that letter, and before the creation of Israel in
1947, that provided additional global support for a national Jewish
state?
4. Go to the link (14b) http://user.cs.tu-berlin.de/~ishaq/pal/peace
talks/washington-dec-jor-isr which contains a joint declaration
made among Jordan, Israel, and the United States in 1994 and review
this declaration. What are the ﬁve principles of understanding found
here? Why is Jordan an important player in the peace of the Middle
East? Why is the United States often a facilitator of peace talks in this
region? Why is the United States interested in creating and maintain-
ing peace in this region? What historical, political, and economic ties
does the United States have with both sides of this conﬂict?
5. Back on the original link, click on the link on the right labeled “Com-
plete Middle East Coverage.” Read a number of the latest news items
on the peace process. What are the current sticking points in any on-
going negotiations? How have these changed and evolved in recent
years?

Primary Source Sites
230
RELATED INTERNET SITES
Middle East Resources
(14c) http://www.columbia.edu/cu/libraries/indiv/area/MiddleEast/
This is a good site for access to Middle Eastern studies.
Documents Related to the Middle East Peace Talks
(14d) http://user.cs.tu-berlin.de/~ishaq/pal/palestine/node33.html
A number of documents relating to the peace process between the two groups
are housed at this site.
Hamas Links
(14e) http://www.hamas.org/links.htm
This is a web site of an anti-Israeli extremist group.
15. WORLD HUNGER
URL: http://www.brown.edu/Departments/
World_Hunger_Program/hungerweb/intro.html
Even as the world develops new technology and better methods of
producing food, and even as some nations continue to harvest a
surplus of food, there remain millions of people who are hungry and
malnourished each day. Civil wars, corrupt leaders, droughts, discrimi-
nation, and an inadequate economic distribution system are but a few
of the reasons given for the lack of adequate nutritional resources
worldwide. This site has statistical information related to hunger in the
United States and throughout the world, and it provides links to the
1993 Hunger Report, facts and myths about hunger, information on
what individuals can do to help reduce hunger in the community and
around the world, and various manifestos published on the subject of
world hunger.
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS AND ACTIVITIES
1. Click on the link “The Nobel Manifesto Against Hunger” and read
the excerpt of this manifesto found here. According to this, what is
the cause of much of the world’s hunger? To what do they compare
this situation? What does this manifesto call for readers to do? What
is signiﬁcant about the list of individuals who have signed this state-
ment?
2. Click on the link titled “Six Myths About Hunger.” Which of these, if
any, surprise you? Which of these, if any, did you believe before read-
ing this?

Contemporary World Issues
231
3. Click on the link “Fifty Facts About Poverty” and review these statis-
tics. What part of the world do most of these statistics concern? Re-
view these statistics and discuss the ones that you were most unaware
of or that amazed you the most.
4. Note the sources of these statistics. Would you consider these to be
trustworthy sources? Why or why not? Which of these sources would
you consider the most reliable and which, if any, the least reliable?
5. Go to the link (15a) http://www.worldhungeryear.org/hpinfo-us.
htm and read additional statistics on hunger, poverty, and home-
lessness in the United States. Again, note the sources of the data pro-
vided here. Select one of these categories to study further and come
up with some steps that could be taken, either locally or nationally,
to help reduce the extent of this problem.
RELATED INTERNET SITES
The Hunger Site
(15b) http://www.thehungersite.com/cgi-bin/WebObjects/HungerSite
In addition to providing information about worldwide hunger, this site allows
one to donate free food simply by clicking on a link.
World Hunger Year
(15c) http://www.worldhungeryear.org/
World Hunger Year (WHY) is an organization dedicated to exploring solutions
to world hunger and poverty. This is their web site.
16. THIRD WORLD DEBT
URL: http://www.worldbank.org/html/extpb/WDT95ENG/wdt-
home.htm
URL: http://www.mcgill.pvt.k12.al.us/jerryd/cm/debt.htm
Jubilee 2000 is a movement working to cancel the international debt
owed by some of the poorest countries in the world. This organization
is made up of many groups worldwide who believe that the burden of
paying the interest and principal on debt owed to nations such as the
United States by these countries (usually through the World Bank) sig-
niﬁcantly hurts the populations of these debtor countries by diverting
much needed resources from the more pressing needs of health care,
education, and infrastructure. Additionally, these groups contend that
since these debts are not likely to be ever paid back in full, the debt
should be canceled to enable the poorer countries to rebuild and better
provide for their citizens. Some countries to which such money is owed,
such as Norway, have already unilaterally canceled their Third World

Primary Source Sites
232
debt. Is this a policy the United States should follow as well? The ﬁrst
site above allows one to view the world debt tables issued by the World
Bank and the second URL connects to a site with over two dozen links
to world debt–related issues.
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS AND ACTIVITIES
1. Click on the ﬁrst URL above. This will connect you to “World Debt
Tables 1996: Extracts.” Click on each of the six links located below the
heading “Regional Trends in Debt Flows.” For each region, scroll
down to the graphs under the heading “Debt and Indicators” and
click on the ﬁrst graph. This will indicate the “total debt outstanding”
for this region of the world. Which region of the world owes the most
money to the World Bank? Is this the region you would have ex-
pected? What reasons are given in the text to indicate why this debt
is so high for this region?
2. Viewing these same statistics, study the trend in the amount owed for
1985, 1994, and 1995. What is happening to the amount of debt?
Which region of the world has seen the most increase in debt, both
in terms of real amounts and in terms of percentage increase?
3. Click on the second URL above. Click on and read the link located
toward the bottom of this page titled “The International Debt Crisis.”
According to the brief background information section, what is the
current situation regarding worldwide debt and what factors have
helped create this situation? Does the argument made here seem bal-
anced? Why or why not?
4. How do the suggestions for reform presented here address the con-
cerns of world debt? What is the U.S. position on world debt?
5. Click on the link at the bottom of this page titled “See NETWORK’s
update on debt forgiveness” and view what the U.S. House and Sen-
ate have currently done on this topic. How do the two Houses differ
in what they have proposed so far? In your opinion, what course of
action should be followed from here?
6. Create a chart showing the argued pros and cons for the forgiveness
of Third World debt. Based on this data, where do you stand on this
issue? Be prepared to argue your position in class.
RELATED INTERNET SITES
Cancel Third-World Debt: Wall Street Journal
(16a) http://www.ﬂora.org/ﬂora.mai-not/18190
This article on this topic from a March 2000 Wall Street Journal was written by

Contemporary World Issues
233
Allan Meltzer, a professor of political economy at Carnegie Mellon University,
and Jeffrey D. Sachs, the director of Harvard’s Center for International Devel-
opment.
Bread for the World
(16b) www.bread.org
This is the site of a “nationwide Christian citizens movement seeking justice
for the world’s hungry people by lobbying our nation’s decision makers.” Infor-
mation about how to support debt relief may be found here as well.
17. THE RIGHTS OF CHILDREN
URL: http://www.unicef.org/crc/crc.htm
The human rights of children are perhaps best represented in the Con-
vention on the Rights of the Child, an international treaty ratiﬁed by
every country in the world except two, which according to UNICEF,
“places children centre-stage in the quest for the universal application of
human rights.” This document attempts to spell out a set of universally
accepted principles of basic human rights that children everywhere
should have. With this document the civic, political, social, economic,
and cultural rights of children have been established as benchmarks by
which each nation can judge its own progress.
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS AND ACTIVITIES
1. Read the introduction to the Convention on the Rights of the Child
and then click on the link titled “The Convention” located at the bot-
tom of the page. From this link, click on the “preamble” under the
heading “Highlights and defends the family’s role in children’s lives.”
This will take you to the full text of the convention. Read the pre-
amble. What is the purpose of the preamble? Are there any sections
that you ﬁnd especially convincing or are there any with which you
disagree?
2. Review the articles to this document. Which articles would you as-
sume would be a part of this document? Which articles did you not
expect to ﬁnd here? Rewrite the main points of the articles in your
own words. Of these, which are most important to you?
3. What are some of the issues addressed by this document concerning
the rights of children? Which articles discuss issues that you do not
believe are concerns in the United States? Which issues do you believe
are still a problem to be addressed in the United States?
4. Click on the link on the left titled “Setbacks and Successes” and re-
view the information found here. What are some of the major achieve-

Primary Source Sites
234
ments and challenges of this document? Of these which do you
believe to be the most signiﬁcant in each category?
5. Create your own document on the “Rights of Children” for your
school, community, country, or the world. Which articles would you
include from this document? Which, if any, would you leave out?
What new articles would you add that you do not believe are ad-
dressed in this document?
RELATED INTERNET SITES
State of the World of Children
(17a) http://www.unicef.org/sowc96/
This site is maintained by UNICEF for the ﬁftieth anniversary of the United
Nations. It discusses the current status of children around the world.
UNICEF Statistical Data
(17b) http://www.unicef.org/statis/
This site provides statistics on mortality, immunization, nutrition and sanita-
tion, education, and more for virtually every country in the world. This provides
a good research base to compare certain conditions for children around the
world.

Selected Primary Source
Databases
American Memory
http://memory.loc.gov/
This Library of Congress site contains over seventy collections of primary
sources from the “Historical Collections of the National Digital Library.”
Avalon Project at the Yale Law School
http://www.yale.edu/lawweb/avalon/avalon.htm
This site contains primary source sites from throughout the world; its specialty
is American primary source documents.
Bill Goffe’s Internet Resources for Economics
http://rfe.org/Intro/index.html
This guide is sponsored by the American Economic Association. It lists 1,164
resources in sixty-eight sections and subsections available on the Internet of in-
terest to academic and practicing economists, and those interested in economics.
Census Bureau Economics Page
http://www.census.gov/econ/www/index.html
The U.S. Census Bureau collects and reports on a wide range of economic data
on trade, housing, income, and manufacturing. This site has a nice searchable
index that can assist in locating particular types of data.
EcEdWeb
http://ecedweb.unomaha.edu/
The EcEdWeb is an excellent clearinghouse for economic education resources.
There is a wide variety of K-12 materials, links to numerous other sites, and
lesson and unit plans.
EconomicsAmerica
http://www.economicsamerica.org

Selected Primary Source Databases
236
This site is part of the MCIWorld.com-sponsored “Marco Polo” network. There
are links to a wide range of economic data, lesson plans, and interactive, on-line
teaching strategies.
Economic Census Report (1997)
http://www.census.gov/epcd/www/econ97.html
This site is the most comprehensive collection of Census Bureau economic data
available. Users can ﬁnd the latest press releases, hypertext tables of data in-
cluding geographical breakdowns, and an “Ask Dr. Census” feature.
Economic Report of the President
http://w3.access.gpo.gov/usbudget/fy2001/pdf/2000_erp.pdf
Perhaps the most comprehensive report of leading economic data issued each
year, the Economic Report of the President provides time-series data making it
easy to compare one year to the next. Appendix B contains statistical tables for
unemployment, productivity, and wages.
FreeLunch.Com
http://www.freelunch.com
FreeLunch claims to be the web’s most accessible free database of economic,
industry, ﬁnancial, and demographic data with over 1,000,000 time series avail-
able for download.
From Revolution to Reconstruction (The WWW Project)
http://odur.let.rug.nl/~usa/usa.htm
Hundreds of primary sources from the Department of American Studies of the
University of Groningen in the Netherlands are presented here.
History Buff
http://historybuff.com
This site has documents of news coverage from the sixteenth century to the
twentieth century. It also includes a section that has real audio of famous news-
makers.
The History Guy
http://www.historyguy.com/#polgov1
This site is rich in documents from around the world. The site is broken down
by categories for easy searching.
Library of Congress
http://www.loc.gov/help/about.html
This is the nation’s library containing over 119 million items. It also gives
access to several other on-line databases.
National Archives and Records Administration
http://www.nara.gov/
This site contains almost everything you would want to ﬁnd about the federal
government from the independent federal agency charged with preserving
America’s past.
National Council on Economic Education
http://www.nationalcouncil.org

Selected Primary Source Databases
237
This homepage of the preeminent organization in economics education pro-
vides access to national and state standards, legislation, and the Campaign for
Economic Literacy.
Ohio State History Project
http://www.history.ohio-state.edu/projects/
This site is full of rich primary source documents chronicling the history of
the United States.
Thomas
http://thomas.loc.gov/
This site, part of the Library of Congress and named after Thomas Jefferson,
is a database of all congressional records, from past to present.
United Nation’s Publications Database
http://www.un.org/Pubs/
This contains a comprehensive listing of nearly all United Nations publications.
The University of Oklahoma Law Center: A Chronology of U.S. Historical
Documents
http://www.law.ou.edu/hist/
This well-organized site makes it easy to ﬁnd primary sources from speciﬁc
time periods.
USA Today’s Economy Track
http://www.usatoday.com/money/economy/econ0001.htm
This site provides students and teachers with practical articles and statistics
on all aspects of the U.S. economy. Charts and graphs can be printed or down-
loaded and used in lesson plans.
The White House Economic Statistics Brieﬁng Room
http://www.whitehouse.gov/fsrb/prices.html
This site provides access to the most current economic data supplied by the
federal government. More than a dozen categories of data are presented includ-
ing CPI, GDP, and employment data. It provides access to a complete selection
of charts to illustrate trends in each of these categories.
World Constitutions
http://www.gn.apc.org/charter88/politics/links/link_cons_af.html
This site houses almost every known constitution from countries around the
world. Countries are listed in alphabetical order.


Index
Abolitionist movement, 71
Acquired Immune Deﬁciency
Syndrome (AIDS), 213–214
Africa, 213–214
Air Photo Evidence web site, 21, 25
Albany Plan of Union, 48
Alien and Sedition Acts of 1798, 64,
65
“Amazing Grace,” 19
Amazon.com, xiii
Amendments to the Constitution:
Fifth Amendment, 224; Twelfth
Amendment, 143; Thirteenth
Amendment, 73, 82; Fourteenth
Amendment, 74, 82; Seventeenth
Amendment, 139; Eighteenth
Amendment, 148; Nineteenth
Amendment, 70; Twentieth
Amendment, 143; Twenty-third
Amendment, 145. See also Equal
Rights Amendment
American Economic Association
(AEA), 175
American Memory web site, 192
Anthracite Strike, 80
Anti-Federalists, 62
Articles of Confederation, 47, 49, 54,
61
Bacon’s Rebellion (Bacon, Nathaniel),
45
Ball, John, 21, 25
Baltimore and Ohio rail strike (1877),
28
Battle of Yorktown, 162
Bay of Pigs, 212
Becker, Henry J., xiv
Bell, John, 152
Bill of Rights, 57, 59, 60, 157, 164, 167
Boss Tweed Ring, 28, 77
Breckinridge, John 152
Buchanan, Patrick, 191
Bull, Johnny, and the Alexandrians,
67
Bureau of Economic Analysis, 18
Bureau of Engraving and Printing,
U.S., 184
Burke, Edmund, 159–160
Cartoon Analysis Worksheet, 27
Castro, Fidel, 212
Caveat lector, 20
Census Bureau, U.S., 179, 206
Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention, U.S., 214
Central Intelligence Agency (CIA),
220

Index
240
Chesapeake, 66
Chiang Kai-shek, 211
China, People’s Republic of, 211–212,
215
Citizenship education, xvi–xvii
Civilian labor force, 196
Civil Rights Act of 1866, 74, 75
Civil Rights Act of 1964, 75
Civil Rights Movement, 70
Clayton Antitrust Act (1914), 79
Close-Up foundation, 212
Colombia, 218–219
Comprehensive Nuclear Test Ban
Treaty (CTBT), 222–223
Compromise of 1850, 71
Conference on Disarmament
(Geneva), 222
Constitutional Convention, 57, 144,
150
Consumer price index (CPI), 174, 185
Continental Congress, 52, 53
Convention on the Rights of the
Child, 233
Copperheads, 73
Copyrighted material: Copyright Act
of 1976, xxii; Digital Millennium
Copyright Act of 1998, xxii; fair use
doctrine, xxii; suggestions for fair
use, xxii
“Counter-factual approach,” 32
Counterfeiting, 184
“CPI Inﬂation Calculator.” See
Inﬂation calculator
Craver, K., 17, 19, 20, 32, 33, 34
Critical thinking: barriers, 6;
behaviors, 3–4; content immersion
to develop, 7–8; deﬁned, 1–3; direct
teaching strategies, 6–7; and the
Internet/WWW, 13; research into, 5–
8; in the social studies, 3–5;
strategies for enhancing, 6–7
Cuban missile crisis, 212
Currency exchange rates, 175
Debt, Third World, 231–232
Declaration of Independence, xviii, 53,
60, 69
Declaration of Sentiments, 69
Declaration of the Rights of Man and
of the Citizen, 163–165
Democracy in America, 162
Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea (North Korea), 214–216
Department of Commerce, U.S., 182,
205–206
Department of State, U.S., 213, 215,
218
Dewey, Thomas E., 153
Discount rate, 176
Dismal science, 173
Document-based questions, 29
Dodge, Bernie, 30–31
Douglas, Stephen, 152
Douglass, Frederick, 69
Dow Jones Indexes, 204–205
Drug czar (Director). See Ofﬁce of
National Drug Control Policy
E-commerce, xiv
Economic cartoons, 203
Economic data and indices: global
population and, 178; historical
census and, 194–195; Human
Development Index, 178; industrial
production, 209; international trade,
176; quality of life index, 180;
regional, 177; state and county
demographic proﬁles, 206–207; time-
series, 175
Economic data deﬁned, 18–19
Economic education, xvi–xvii
Economic history, 208–209
Economic Report of the President, 197
Economics: basic assumptions, 10–11;
tenets of an economic way of
thinking, 11
Economics Minute site (National
Council on Economic Education),
31
Effective Counterterrorism Act of
1996, 224
Egypt, xviii
Elections around the world, 169–171
Electoral College, 144–146

Index
241
Emancipation Proclamation, 72
Embargo Act, 66, 67
Equal Rights Amendment, 70
Euripides, 217
Factory life, 192
Fair use. See Copyrighted material
Faraday, Michael, 194
Federal budget, U.S., 199–200
Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis,
185, 208
Federal Reserve Board of San
Francisco, 184
Federalist Papers, 30
Federalist Papers, 61
Federalists, 59, 60, 64
Foreign investment in the U.S., 183
Franklin, Benjamin, 39–40, 48, 53, 161,
188
French Declaration of the Rights of
Man and of the Citizen, 60
French Revolution, 60, 164, 165
Fugitive Slave Act, 70
Fundamental Orders of Connecticut,
42–43
General Agreement on Tariffs and
Trade (GATT), 225–226
Global education, 12
Goffe, Bill, 175
Gonza´lez, Elia´n, 212
Greenspan, Alan, 174
Gross Domestic Product (GDP), 174–
175, 197–199
Hamilton, Alexander, 43, 44, 61–64
Hancock, John, 54
Havana, xviii
Henry, Patrick, 50
Hinchliffe, Lisa, 20
House of Representatives, 58
Human Immunodeﬁciency Virus
(HIV), 213–214
Human rights, 214–16
Human Rights Watch, 32
Hume, David, 189
Hunger, 230–231
Imports/Exports, U.S., 177, 183
Income: median household, 201; per
capita, 176, 201
India, 32, 219–220
Indian and Pakistan War (1971), 219
Industrial revolution, 193–194
Inﬂation calculator, 185, 186
Information ﬁlters: authorship/source,
21; bibliographic/reference links,
25; currency, 25; need for on
Internet, 20; objectivity/bias, 24;
quality of writing, 25; validity of
content, 24
An Inquiry into the Wealth of Nations
(Adam Smith, 1776), 186
Inquiry oriented instruction, xvi
Intercultural E-mail Classroom
Connection, xviii
International trade, with U.S., 183
Internet: access to, xiv; browsers, xxi;
correspondence with social studies,
xvii; educational impact, xv;
information ﬁlters, xiv; number of
users, xv; teachers’ view of, xviii
Internet Service Providers (ISPs), xiii
Internet use: barriers to, xviii; costs
and beneﬁts of, xx; degree of, xix;
skepticism of, xix; social studies
teachers and, xix;; teacher training
and, xix
Intolerable Acts, 51
Irons, John, 174
Israel, 229
Jackdaws, 30
Japanese-American Internment, 65
Jay, John, 61–62, 161
John Brown’s Raid, 46
Jordan, 229
Jubilee 2000, 231
Kashmir, 32
Kentucky and Virginia resolutions, 64–
65
Kids Voting, 144
King John of England, 157
King Louis the XVI, 164, 165

Index
242
Kirk, Elizabeth, 20
Korean War, 214–216
Labor Movement, 80
Land Ordinance of 1785, 56
League of Nations, 165–167
Leopard, 66
Library of Congress, xiii, xiv, 17
Locke, John, 158, 164, 187
Louvre, xiii
Lusitania, 66
Magna Carta, 157
Malthus, Thomas, 173
Mandela, Nelson, 214
Mao Zedong, 211
Marshall, George, 169
Marshall Plan, 169
Mason, George, 59–60
Mayﬂower Compact, 40–41
Middle East, 228–230
Miller, S.L., xvi
Missouri Compromise of 1820, 71
Molly McGuires, 80
Money: appreciation/depreciation,
181; Canada’s playing card money,
188; foreign currency, 181; history,
189; paper money, 182
Money Magazine, 179
Monopolies, 79–80
Monroe Doctrine, 67
Mortgage calculator, 174
Mott, Lucretia, 69
Nast, Thomas, and political cartoons,
28, 77–78
National Archives and Records
Administration (NARA), xviii, 21
National Assembly of France, 60
National Association of Security
Dealers Automated Quotation
(NASDAQ), 205
National Budget Simulator, 200
National Council for the Social
Studies, xvi, xvii
National Geographic On-Line, xviii
National Security Institute, U.S., 223
Native Americans: Alcatraz
occupation, 156; American Indian
Movement (AIM), 155; Bureau of
Indian Affairs, 77; Crazy Horse, 76;
Fort Laramie Treaty, 75; Iroquois
Confederation, 43, 48; Iroquois
League of Nations, 46; Lakota
Sioux, 75; Oregon Trail, 75; Plains
Indians, 75, 76; Red Cloud, 75;
treaties, 77; Wounded Knee, 156
Neutrality Speech before WWI
(President Wilson), 63
New England Threat of Secession
(1813), 67
Newspapers: 220–222; Baltimore
American, 153; Chicago Daily Tribune,
154; The New York Tribune, 152; New
York Weekly Journal, 43, 44;
Richmond Enquirer, 152
New York Stock Exchange, xiii, 204
North American Free Trade
Agreement (NAFTA), 183
North Korea. See Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea
Northwest Ordinance, 56
Ofﬁce of National Drug Control
Policy, 218
Oil prices, 228
Organization for Petroleum Exporting
Countries (OPEC), 227–228
Pakistan, 30, 219–220
Palestine, 229
Paris Peace Treaty of 1783, 161
Parker, W., xvi
Plunkitt of Tammany Hall, 29
Political economy, 187
Political parties: Anti-Saloon League,
84, 85, 148; Bull Moose Party, 149;
Democratic Socialist Party of
America, 147; Green Party, 148;
Libertarian Party, 148; political
party platforms, 147, 149, 154;
Prohibition Party, 148; Radical
Republicans, 73, 74; Reform Party,
149; “third parties,” 148
Political Science: deﬁned, 8–9;

Index
243
research on, 9; taught in the
schools, 9
Poverty, 200–201
Presidential Elections: of 1804, 143; of
1824, 143; of 1860, 151; of 1871, 78;
of 1920, 150; of 1948, 153; unusual
results, 143
Primary source packets, 29
Primary sources: cartoon analysis, 27;
deﬁned, 17; document analysis, 26;
electronically transmitted, 20;
examples, 18; instructional
strategies for, 26–32; jigsaw
grouping with, 28; modes of
transmission, 19–20; planning
instruction with, 33; think-pair-
share (TPS), 28
Proclamation of Neutrality, 62–63
Productivity, 174, 196–197
Project Vote Smart, 144
QuickTime VR, xv
Reconstruction, 75
Ricardo, David, 190–191
Riordon, William T., 29
Roosevelt, Franklin Delano
(President), 33
Search engines, 33
Search strategies, Internet/WWW, 33–
34
Secondary sources, 17–18
Second Continental Congress, 54
Second Treatise on Government (John
Locke), 158, 164; Senate, 58
Seneca Falls, 69
Seward, William, 73
Sherman, Roger, 53
Sherman Anti-Trust Act of 1890, 79
Slavery, 56
Smith, Adam, 186–188
Social studies, xv–xvii
South Korea (Republic of Korea), 216
“Speech on Conciliation with
America” (Edmund Burke), 160
Stamp Act, 49
Stamp Act Congress, 49–50
Stanton, Elizabeth Cady, 69, 70
Stock market indexes, 204–205
Surgeon General, U.S., 214
Taiwan, 211–212
Tammany Hall, 28
Terrorism, 223–225
Thanksgiving Proclamation, 41–42
Thanksgiving traditions, 42
Third World Debt. See Debt, Third
World
Thurmond, Strom, 154
Tibet, 215
Tienamen Square Massacre (China),
214
Tilden, Samuel J., 79
Tocqueville, Alexis de, 162
“Total Capital Flows,” 183
Treaty of Ghent, 67
Treaty of Paris, 161
Truman Doctrine, 168
Tubman, Harriet, 72
Underground Railroad, xviii, 71–72
Unemployment rate, 174, 176, 196–198
United Nations, 167
United Nations Children’s Fund
(UNICEF), 233
United Nation’s High Commission on
Refugees (UNHCR), 217
“Universal Declaration of Human
Rights,” 167
Uruguay Round Table Trade Talks,
226
U.S. Constitution, 47–48, 57, 60–61, 74,
143, 145, 164
U.S. Presidents: John Adams, 53–54,
64; John Quincy Adams, 68, 161;
Thomas Jefferson, 53, 59, 63–64;
Andrew Johnson, 74; Abraham
Lincoln, 72–73, 152; James Madison,
59, 61–64, 66; James Monroe, 67–69;
Franklin D. Roosevelt, 153, 167;
Harry S. Truman, 153–154; George
Washington, 62, 161; Woodrow
Wilson, 165–166

Index
244
Versailles, 165
Virginia Declaration of Rights, 59
War of 1812, 66
Washington’s Farewell Address, 63
Watt’s Riot, 46
Web quests, 30–32
“The Westinghouse World,” 192
Whiskey Rebellion, 46
White, Charles, xv
Wilson, Jeri, xiv
Wilson’s Fourteen Points, 165
Woman’s movements, 70
Women’s Rights Convention, 69
Women’s Temperance Movement, 148–
149
WOODROW (Minneapolis Federal
Reserve Bank web site), 208
World Bank, 179, 232
World issues, 11–13
World Trade Organization (WTO),
212, 225–226
World War I, 165, 167
World War II, 21
XYZ Affair, 65
Yahoo!, 33
Zenger, Peter, 43–44, 65

About the Authors
JAMES M. SHIVELEY is an Associate Professor in the Department of
Teacher Education at Miami University where he teaches courses in so-
cial studies methods and supervises student teachers.
PHILLIP J. VANFOSSEN is an Associate Professor of Social Studies Ed-
ucation in the School of Education at Purdue University. He is also the
Director of the James F. Ackerman Center for Democratic Citizenship
and Assistant Director of the Center for Economic Education, both at
Purdue University. His teaching and research concentrate on the use of
the Internet in the social studies classroom.

