CHANDOS
INFORMATION PROFESSIONAL SERIES
Chandos’ new series of books are aimed at the busy information professional. They have
been specially commissioned to provide the reader with an authoritative view of current
thinking. They are designed to provide easy-to-read and (most importantly) practical
coverage of topics that are of interest to librarians and other information professionals. If
you would like a full listing of current and forthcoming titles, please visit our web site
www.library-chandospublishing.com or contact Hannah Grace-Williams on email
info@chandospublishing.com or telephone number +44 (0) 1865 884447.
New authors: we are always pleased to receive ideas for new titles; if you would like to write
a book for Chandos, please contact Dr Glyn Jones on email gjones@chandospublishing.com
or telephone number +44 (0) 1865 884447.
Bulk orders: some organisations buy a number of copies of our books. If you are 
interested in doing this, we would be pleased to discuss a discount. Please contact 
Hannah Grace-Williams on email info@chandospublishing.com or telephone number
+44 (0) 1865 884447.

Using the Internet for
Political Research
Practical tips and hints
HEATHER DAWSON
CP
Chandos Publishing
Oxford
• England

Chandos Publishing (Oxford) Limited
Chandos House
5 & 6 Steadys Lane
Stanton Harcourt
Oxford OX29 5RL
UK
Tel: +44 (0) 1865 884447 Fax: +44 (0) 1865 884448
Email: info@chandospublishing.com
www.library-chandospublishing.com
Chandos Publishing USA
3 Front Street, Suite 331
PO Box 338
Rollinsford, NH 03869
USA
Tel: 603 749 9171 Fax: 603 749 6155
Email: BizBks@aol.com
First published in Great Britain in 2003
ISBN:
1 84334 049 6 (paperback)
1 84334 050 X (hardback)
© H. Dawson, 2003
British Library Cataloguing-in-Publication Data.
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library.
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in or introduced into
a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form, or by any means (electronic, mechanical,
photocopying, recording or otherwise) without the prior written permission of the Publishers.
This publication may not be lent, resold, hired out or otherwise disposed of by way of trade in
any form of binding or cover other than that in which it is published without the prior consent
of the Publishers. Any person who does any unauthorised act in relation to this publication may
be liable to criminal prosecution and civil claims for damages.
The Publishers make no representation, express or implied, with regard to the accuracy of the
information contained in this publication and cannot accept any legal responsibility or liability
for any errors or omissions.
The material contained in this publication constitutes general guidelines only and does not
represent to be advice on any particular matter. No reader or purchaser should act on the basis
of material contained in this publication without first taking professional advice appropriate to
their particular circumstances.
Typeset by Monolith – www.monolith.uk.com
Printed in the UK by 4edge Limited - www.4edge.co.uk

Preface
This book is intended to serve as an introduction to using
the Internet for political science research. It is suitable for
use by politics undergraduates, library and information
workers and researchers. As the Internet is continuously
developing, it cannot cover all the sites that are available;
however, it is hoped that this book will offer a useful
introduction to the key sites along with guidance on how
you can search the Internet effectively and stay up to date
with new developments. The main emphasis of the guide is
on British politics; however, reference is made to sites and
resources where you can find information on other areas of
the world. It is subdivided into a number of chapters which
concentrate on key areas of research including elections and
parliamentary information. Each chapter is structured in
terms of typical research questions, with descriptions of
major Internet resources and advice on research strategies.
The final section contains a bibliography of further readings
on Internet and political science research. The book was
completed in April 2003 and all information and Internet
addresses were checked and correct at this date.
ix

About the author
Heather Dawson is an Assistant Librarian at the Library of the
London School of Economics and Political Science (LSE). Since
1997 she has also been the Government and Politics subject
editor for SOSIG, the Social Science Information Gateway
(http://www.sosig.ac.uk). This role involves the location,
evaluation and indexing of political science Internet resources
on a daily basis. She has also been involved in the development
of Internet tutorials for government and politics for the RDN
Virtual Training Suite, regularly writes social science Internet
columns for ASSIGNation, the quarterly journal of ASLIB
Social Science Information Group and Network, and manages
the e-mail discussion list LIS_Socialscience which is designed to
support social science information workers in their use of 
the Internet.
The author can be contacted at the following address:
Heather Dawson
Assistant Librarian
LSE Library
10 Portugal Street
London
WC2A 2HD
E-mail: h.dawson@lse.ac.uk
xi

Getting started in using 
the Internet
What can I find on the Internet?
The Internet is an international network of computer networks
which can be used to access a wealth of different types of
information. Since the 1980s it has been growing continuously
and its development is in the process of revolutionising
academic research. This is due to a number of reasons:
■It enables rapid communication. E-mails can be sent
worldwide almost instantly, offering the possibility of the
creation of a global network of researchers exchanging
information and debate.
■Material can be continuously updated. News services can
exist in real time and materials can be posted on
government websites on the day of release. In contrast
paper publication can take weeks and sometimes even
months or years!
■In theory materials are constantly available 24 hours a
day from any location. Unlike the paper-based library
there are no restrictions on opening hours and items
cannot be missing from the shelf!
1
1

Using the Internet for Political Research
■The Internet is a global network. It is possible to easily
access materials published by organisations in other parts
of the world. Many of these previously took many
days/weeks to arrive by post and a large number were not
accessible at all as some small pressure groups could only
afford to print limited paper copies for the local market.
■It can provide access to resources in a growing number
of different formats, including text, image and sound
files. For instance, users can hear a speech, watch a video
clip and read the transcript. This enhances understanding
of events.
However, despite these advantages the Internet will not
provide the answers to all your research questions. Currently
the main problems with using the Internet are as follows:
■The lack of a central index. As the Internet does not have
a single governing body there is not a unified place where
you can go to find all the information available on a
topic. This is particularly problematic when you consider
the sheer amount of material available and the fact that it
is continuously growing.
■The lack of quality control. There is no central authority
which checks the validity and standard of material being
made available. Therefore it is possible for unqualified
individuals to distribute inaccurate or out-of-date resources.
■Not all material is available in full text. Publishers often
decide to offer certain items to subscribers only. They
may also provide access to materials for limited time
spans only. It is not uncommon for websites to contain
2

Getting started in using the Internet
only the most recent press releases and papers as older
materials are routinely removed, often without warning.
It is also the case that many older publications have not
been converted to an online format as it would be
uneconomic to do so.
■A digital divide continues to exist. At the current time, the
Internet remains dominated by the English language
Western world. Many developing nations in Africa/Asia
have limited access to Internet technology therefore their
publications will not be found online.
As a result, while the Internet is a valuable tool for research,
it is necessary to choose your research methods carefully
and to evaluate the materials that you find. This book will
help you to do this. This first chapter focuses on general
Internet searching skills; succeeding chapters move on to
look in more depth at finding political information.
What is an Internet address and how
can I use it?
All pages on the Internet have their own individual
addresses or URLs (universal resource locators). The URL
can be seen in the location bar when the resource is
displayed on the screen (see Figure 1.1). In this example the
address is http://www.lse.ac.uk/. If you are given a URL you
can go directly to the resource by entering the address in the
location bar.
3

Using the Internet for Political Research
Most Internet addresses follow a standard format:
<Method of access> <Address> <Path>
It is worth having some basic understanding of this as it can
provide you with information about who created the
resource. In this example:
http://www.lse.ac.uk/collections/government/Default.htm
http:// signifies the technical method used to retrieve the
document.
Of more importance to the average user is the composition
of the address element – www.lse.ac.uk. The address usually
includes either the name or an abbreviation of the name of
4
Figure 1.1
Universal resource locator (URL)

Getting started in using the Internet
the institution which owns the website. Often it is possible to
guess who it is from this. In the example LSE refers to the
London School of Economics. The ac element of the address
is also significant as it indicates that the institution is an
academic body. Other common abbreviations are edu (used
to indicate an educational institution in some parts of the
world, notably the USA), gov (a government site), com or co
(a company or commercial site) and org (an organisation,
pressure group or charity). Finally the address ends with uk.
This indicates the place where the institution is located.
American websites do not include this element but all other
addresses use country abbreviations such as au for Australia
and ie for Ireland.
The final element of the URL is the file name
collections/government/Default.htm. This indicates where
on the LSE website this individual page is stored. Other
pages on the website will have slightly different file
locations but they will all share the main root address
http://www.lse.ac.uk/.
Key points to remember
■Always enter an Internet address exactly. Include the
correct punctuation and capital letters.
■Record any useful Internet addresses that you find. You
can write them down but as many are long and
complicated it is often easier to save them electronically.
Internet Explorer has a ‘Favorites’ option, which enables
you to save URLs onto your individual PC.
5

Using the Internet for Political Research
■Be aware that at the present time addresses are not
permanent. Resources can be moved to new locations or
disappear entirely.
Common error messages and how to
overcome them
■Server timed out. The Internet site is probably too busy to
enable you to connect. You could reload the page or try
again later. Times which are generally less busy include
early mornings and weekends.
■Error 404 document not found. This is a common
problem. Check that you have entered the URL exactly. If
the address is long it is possible that the page you want
may have been moved to a new location on the same site.
Reduce the address to its root URL and then look for an
index or sitemap on the home page to find its new
location. For example, if the address you wanted was
http://www.lse.ac.uk/collections/government/Default.htm
you would reduce the address to http://www.lse.ac.uk
where you would find a central site index which would
take you to the resource.
How can I search the Internet?
The main problem is that the Internet does not have a central
index where all the information available is listed. However,
there are a number of different search tools which you can use.
The main types are search engines and information gateways.
6

Getting started in using the Internet
Search engines
Search engines are machines which mechanically index
many millions of Internet sites. Well known examples
include Google (http://www.google.co.uk) and AltaVista
(http://www.altavista.com). You can enter a search term and
retrieve those sites which match it.
Advantages of search engine use
■Because so many sites are indexed you are likely to
retrieve lots of hits – sometimes many thousands!
■Hits can include the most up-to-date information from
any region of the world.
Disadvantages of search engine use
■Because the catalogues are machine generated there is no
quality control. Links may be broken. Information may be
out of date or low quality. You will also retrieve lots of
advertising sites and will need to allow time to sort through
them and identify the most relevant materials.
As a result of these problems a number of organisations
have sponsored the creation of information gateways as
alternatives to search engines.
Information gateways
Information gateways are created by human editors. They
are searchable catalogues of resources covering specific
subject areas which have been individually selected and
7

Using the Internet for Political Research
indexed by subject specialists. In the UK, the government
has created the Resource Discovery Network (RDN)
(http://www.rdn.ac.uk/) to coordinate and provide access to
a number of information gateways covering a wide range of
academic subject areas. These include SOSIG, the Social
Science Information Gateway (http://www.sosig.ac.uk), that
covers the social sciences in general and includes specialist
subsections for government and politics. Like a search
engine it can be browsed or searched by subject keyword.
Advantages of information gateways
■Information gateways focus on high-quality academic-
related materials. They can take you directly to the key
sites. They exclude the advertising and low-quality
personal home pages often found by search engines.
■There are often added descriptions of content which
enable you to judge the value of a site before you spend
time visiting it.
Disadvantages of information gateways
■As their creation depends on human effort the number of
resources indexed is far smaller than you would find via
a search engine. However, those that are included are
often the most important and can provide a useful
starting point for your research.
■Coverage depends upon the individual effort of the
editors. If they work hard it will be good. If they fail to
keep up to date or favour one subject area rather than the
topic as a whole then coverage may be unbalanced.
8

Getting started in using the Internet
Before using an information gateway it is a good idea to
assess its quality. The best examples, such as those
maintained by the RDN, will have established collection
development policies and cataloguing rules which ensure
the maintenance of standards.
The fact that search engines and information gateways
contain both strengths and weaknesses means that in order
to search the Internet effectively you may need to use a
combination of both. However, ultimately, to get relevant
search results you must learn how to construct an effective
search strategy.
How do I construct an effective search?
Stage 1: Analyse your research topic
You need to be clear about the type of information that you
want as otherwise you will waste time browsing aimlessly.
Often you will have a question that you need to answer. The
key to constructing an effective search term is to break this
down into a series of relevant words or phrases that you can
search for. For example, you may have the question:
Discuss recent changes in British Labour Party 
policy under ‘New Labour’.
A first step is to highlight the key terms. Eliminate general
terms such as discuss, recent and policy which will generate
too many hits and focus on the concepts. Here they are
Labour Party and policy. Remember that as Internet search
9

Using the Internet for Political Research
tools are machines they will look for exact matches in
spelling to the search terms which you enter. They will not
interpret your search or find any material which is on a
relevant topic but indexed under a differently spelled term.
As a result you need to consider the following:
■Does your subject have any synonyms?
■Do the search terms have alternative spellings? For instance,
if you want material on the American Labour Party it may
be spelled Labor.
■Are there any key phrases associated with the subject area
which you might use? In this example you could try third
way politics.
■Are there any key figures or organisations writing on the
subject? They may have relevant materials posted on their
websites. Useful examples here would be the British
Labour Party website, key think tanks such as Catalyst
and the Fabian Society or a search for Tony Blair who is
closely associated with these policies.
■Avoid using terms which are either too general or vague
such as policy, theory or politics as these will generate too
many hits. Try to be more specific about the type of
information that you want. For example, in this question
you could focus on specific aspects of policy such as
health, education or the welfare state.
Stage 2: Choose your search tool
At the present time there does not exist a tool which indexes
the whole of the Internet. Therefore you must allow enough
10

Getting started in using the Internet
time to conduct several searches. A good strategy is to try out
your search on an information gateway and then explore the
results. Often these include the most important websites for
the subject area. If you check the news items and links pages
from these you can usually find other important resources.
You can then expand your research by using a search engine
such as Google (http://www.google.co.uk). The Google search
engine is highly recommended as it has wide coverage and
ranks results by number of sites that link to a resource (i.e.
user popularity) rather than word occurrences. This is
significant as it overcomes the problem with some other search
engines that website designers may try to manipulate rankings.
Once you have selected your tools consult their help pages
for advice on how to construct search terms. This is not time
wasted as to search effectively you must enter your search
terms in the format they require.
Stage 3: Construct your search terms
If you have several search terms use the help screen to find
out how to combine them. A common method is using
Boolean operators. Boolean searching is named after the
British mathematician George Boole (1815–64) who wrote
about logical ways to construct queries using ‘operators’ to
connect search terms. The main Boolean operators are and,
or and and not (see Table 1.1). They may appear
complicated at first sight but remember that you only need
to know enough about them to construct your search. Some
searches may not require them at all.
11

Using the Internet for Political Research
Table 1.1
Boolean operators
and
■Requires all the search terms to appear somewhere in
the document, not necessarily in the same order. For
instance, a search for Blair and labour party will
retrieve all those documents which contain both terms.
Any that contain just one of them will not be retrieved.
■It is useful for narrowing a search by making it more
specific. The more ands you add the fewer hits you
should get.
or
■Requires any of the search terms to be found
somewhere in the document. For instance, the search
for Blair or labour party will retrieve any documents,
which contain either of the terms or both of them.
■It is useful for broadening a search, searching for
synonyms and alternative word endings.
and not
■This excludes any documents containing the word
following and not in your search term. For example, if
you entered Labour Party and not Australia you would
retrieve all those documents containing Labour Party
but those also containing the word Australia would be
excluded.
■It is useful for narrowing a search especially where a
word has several different meanings but should be used
with caution as it is easy to exclude relevant results.
Other useful methods of searching
Not all search engines/information gateways offer the features
listed in Table 1.2. Consult their individual help screens for
details and precise instructions on the format you must use.
12

Getting started in using the Internet
Table 1.2
Other useful methods of searching
Truncation
■Enables a single search to take account of alternative
word endings. Usually you abbreviate the word to its
root and add a symbol, which allows the search to
look for all documents, which contain that word root.
For example, a search for Marx* will retrieve resources
containing Marxist, Marxism and Marx.
■This is a useful way of broadening your search to take
account of synonyms. However, you must remember not
to shorten your search term too far as this could result
in a large number of irrelevant terms being retrieved.
Use of 
■This is a more complicated form of searching. It 
parentheses 
requires that terms placed inside a bracket are 
or nesting
searched first. When more than one term is placed
inside they are searched in order from left to right. For
example, in the search (Blair or Blunkett) and Labour
Party. The search first looks for either of the two
search terms in the parentheses, then looks for these
in conjunction with Labour Party.
■This method can narrow results but if more than one
parenthesis is used it can get confusing. It is often easier
to conduct several searches, review the results and
gradually make them more specific rather than doing one
complicated search and getting no results at all.
Proximity 
■Some search engines/information gateways enable you 
searching
to be more specific about where you want a search
term to appear. Sometimes you can restrict it to title
only or state that you want the words to appear within
a certain proximity, i.e. within ten words of each other.
13

Using the Internet for Political Research
Table 1.2
Contd.
■This method can usefully narrow down results as it
means that the search terms are appearing in the
same sentence rather than anywhere in the document.
Phrase 
■It is often possible to search for a phrase such as 
searching
Single European Currency by enclosing it in quotation
marks. This requires that the words appear next to
each other in the documents retrieved.
■This method can be used to narrow a search, as
documents where the terms do not appear together
will be excluded.
Stage 4: Run your search and evaluate it
Do not assume that all the hits you retrieve will be relevant.
You must allow time to evaluate the results to identify the
most relevant. Some tips on how to do this are given in the
next section. Be prepared to re-run a search. If you get too
many results try to narrow down your search to a more
specific subject area or timespan or try to restrict it to title
searches only. If you do not retrieve enough hits you must
try to broaden the search by using more general terms or
synonyms. For instance, if a search on Tony Blair and third
way politics did not retrieve any documents you could
broaden it by searching more generally for Labour Party.
14

Getting started in using the Internet
How can I evaluate my search results?
There are some basic questions that you should ask when
evaluating your ‘hit’ list. They are very similar to the types
of questions you should be asking when you consider
whether a printed resource is of relevance to your work.
Who created the resource?
Do not use any website which does not have a clearly named
author. Reputable resources will always credit individual or
corporate authors. If you are using an organisational
website you should also try to find out more information
about the objectives/political stance of the body as this can
influence the type of material it publishes. In order to do this
look for sections on the site labelled ‘About us’, ‘Our
sponsors’ or ‘Mission and copyright statements’. It may also
be useful to look at the composition of the web address, as
a URL containing gov is likely to be maintained by a
government and so contain official information.
Was it created for a specific purpose?
You need to ask yourself is this resource advertising a
particular product or political belief or is it objective? It is not
wrong to use a resource which has a political bias; it is just
advisable to be aware of it so that if necessary you can balance
your viewpoint by using other resources which take a different
15

Using the Internet for Political Research
stance. For instance, the Centre for Policy Reform was created
by Margaret Thatcher and actively supports Conservativism.
It is therefore more likely to be critical of British Labour Party
policy than the official Labour Party website!
When was the site created?
Try to identify the date when the source was created. This is
often given on individual documents or can be found in
copyright statements or on ‘last updated’ messages at the
foot or head of individual web pages. It is important, as of
course events occurring after the date of publication will not
be included. For instance, a paper on terrorism produced
before September 11, 2001 is likely to be very different from
one produced after that date.
Where was the resource created?
In certain circumstances the geographical location of the
author/publisher may be significant as some nations operate
strict censorship laws. Information on location should be
displayed somewhere on the site. Try looking for sections
labelled ‘Contact addresses’ or ‘About us’.
Where can I find out more?
A good starting point is the Tonic Tutorial (http://www
.netskills.ac.uk/). This is a free online course, which has
been created by the Netskills team at the University of
Newcastle. It is designed to help beginners learn about the
16

Getting started in using the Internet
structure of the Internet and how to search it. The contents
include sections on search engines and information
gateways.
You may also find it useful to look at the RDN Virtual
Training Suite (http://www.vts.rdn.ac.uk/). This is a collection
of over 50 online tutorials, which were created by librarians
and lecturers to help staff and students in UK further and
higher education institutions develop Internet research skills
in specific subject areas. They include specialist tutorials for
Politics, Government and European Studies which will be of
value to you. Each tutorial contains:
■a tour of the key websites for the subject which you can
download to disk;
■a ‘Discover the Internet’ section which highlights the best
search tools and offers advice on how to use them
effectively;
■a ‘Review and Judge’ the websites section which provides
information on how to critically evaluate the resources
that you find;
■a ‘Reflect and Plan’ section, which gives ideas and case
studies on how you can use the Internet in your day-to-
day research.
Each tutorial takes an average of 1–2 hours to complete.
They also contain a ‘Resources for Teachers and Trainers’
section which provides free access to PowerPoint slides,
handouts and suggested lesson plans that may be used to
teach Internet searching skills.
Finally, if you want to learn more about evaluating Internet
sites another useful resource is the Internet Detective
17

Using the Internet for Political Research
(http://www.sosig.ac.uk/desire/internet-detective.html). This
is a free tutorial which teaches critical evaluation skills. It
was developed by the University of Bristol and takes about
2–3 hours to work through. It includes plenty of practical
quizzes and exercises to try!
18

Political science and 
the Internet
What type of political information can I
find on the Internet?
At the present time it is not possible to rely entirely upon the
Internet for all your research. In general, it has very good
coverage of current events, but it is not comprehensive
therefore you need to continue to use it in conjunction with
paper resources. This chapter will explore the range of
different types of resources on offer, offering guidance on
how to combine print and e-based research and indicating
some of the best general politics Internet sites currently
available. However, a key thing to remember, whatever type
of resource you use, is to concentrate your research on
recognised academic resources. Never rely upon materials
with questionable or unestablished authorship. You should
also be aware that not all information on the Internet is free.
It is worth checking whether your local library has any
subscriptions to databases that you might use.
2
19

Using the Internet for Political Research
What books can I find?
Monographs and textbooks remain the staple of political
science research at undergraduate level. Full-text electronic
textbooks are not usually available free of charge. However,
you may have access to a college library which has a
subscription. Classic texts whose copyright has expired are,
however, freely accessible. Project Gutenberg (http://promo
.net/pg/) is one of the most well known sites. It has made
available a list of several hundred full-text books, including
classical literary and political theory texts. It is possible to
download entire books from the site, although you may find
that they are not very comfortable to read on the screen.
In terms of political science, the most widely available
books are the classics by Marx and Engels. The Marxist
Writers Archive (http://www.marxists.org/archive/) contains
a library of books from key theorists of the nineteenth and
twentieth centuries. In addition to well known figures such
as Marx, Engels, Lenin and Trotsky it also includes more
recent Marxist writers such as Tony Cliff and Erich Fromm.
The site is arranged into collections by date and author.
Brief political biographies are also provided.
Although you may not be able to use the Internet to read
all your textbooks online you can use it to purchase copies
of them. Most major publishers have websites with secure
ordering facilities. They can easily be traced by conducting
a name search on a search engine. Amazon (http://www
.amazon.co.uk) stocks a large range of political science
books. Politicos Book Shop (http://www.politicos.co.uk/) is
a useful specialist supplier of political texts and pamphlets.
20

Political science and the Internet
Its website is divided into subsections which focus upon
specific political issues ranging from conservatism to
elections and recent think-tank publications. You can also
sign up to an e-mail alerting service to learn about the most
recent publications. However, before you order materials
online remember to check that the site has secure ordering
facilities, check the help screens for information about
delivery times and charges, and note down any order
numbers and contact addresses available.
You may also use the Internet to consult library catalogues
online. This is particularly useful in locating books and
journals held in other libraries and can save you time as you
do not need to travel to the institution personally. It is quite
simple to locate catalogues by searching for the name of the
institution using a search engine. The British Library
catalogue is also accessible at http://blpc.bl.uk/. However,
some key points to remember are:
■Not all the material in the library may be indexed on the
online catalogue. Older books or certain types of material
are sometimes excluded. Check the website of the library
for details. Note that most libraries do not index
individual journal articles on their catalogues. To locate
these you usually need to use a journal indexing service
such as those described later in this chapter. Entries for
government publications can also be problematic as many
libraries hold materials on microfilm and do not index
each item individually. If you are unsure it is advisable to
contact the library directly.
21

Using the Internet for Political Research
■Remember that not all libraries allow visitors. Always
check access arrangements before making a journey.
In addition to the catalogues of individual libraries, there are
also some interesting projects which are developing union
catalogues which will enable you to cross search a number of
catalogues simultaneously. Currently one of the most useful is
Copac (http://www.copac.ac.uk/) which provides free access
to the merged catalogues of over 20 UK university and
research libraries who are members of the Consortium of
Research Libraries (CURL) They include some of the largest
and most respected institutions such as the British Library,
Oxford and Cambridge University Libraries and the British
Library of Political and Economic Science, the Library of the
London School of Economics. The catalogue is of particular
value to postgraduate researchers and individuals working on
long dissertations as it enables the rapid identification of
books and journals. It is especially good for tracking down
foreign language materials which are not widely available.
However, do remember that records for some older materials
and government publications may not be included so in those
cases it is advisable to contact individual libraries directly.
What reports and working papers 
can I find?
Conference, working and discussion papers can often be
useful sources of information on new research or experimental
theory. An increasing number of series can be found in full text
on the Internet. Often you will find a wider selection here than
22

Political science and the Internet
is available in paper in your local library. The most respected
are those produced by well known university departments,
political associations and think tanks.
Currently one of the most useful databases of conference
papers is the Contemporary Political Studies site (http://www
.psa.ac.uk/cps/). This provides free access to a large number
of the papers given at the annual conference of the Political
Studies Association (UK) from 1994 onwards. The database
is fully searchable by keyword, enabling you to rapidly
locate materials by particular authors or on particular
subject areas.
A similar service is provided by the American Political
Science Association. This is called PROceedings: Political
Research Online (http://pro.harvard.edu/). It provides access
to a wealth of materials from specialist subsections of the
Association, although unfortunately access is presently
restricted to papers from the current year only.
Lists of links to other working paper series can be readily
found in the ‘best politics sites’ section later in this chapter.
You might also want to take a look at the Working Papers
in Political Science site (http://workingpapers.org/) which is
maintained by political science graduate Patrick Fagan. This
offers a useful directory of working paper sites worldwide.
These include sections for sites from individual political
science departments and subject-based series. Coverage is
broad encompassing a wide range of topics from public
administration, comparative politics and political theory to
international relations and political economy. All entries
have some annotations on content.
23

Using the Internet for Political Research
In addition to departmental series, you may also find
papers and pre-prints on the personal home pages of
lecturers and researchers. However, be aware that with the
development of the Internet it has become possible for
anyone to post materials online some of which may be of an
inferior quality. If you discover any full-text papers on a
personal home site use the evaluation skills covered in
Chapter 1 to judge their quality. You should try to find out
if the author is affiliated to an accredited academic
institution by looking for biographies or CVs on the website
and verifying them with staff lists of the university. You
could also check online journal indexes and catalogues such
as Copac or the British Library catalogue to see if the author
has published anything else on the subject.
What journals can I find?
Journals can be useful sources of information offering
access to book reviews, theoretical essays and debates on
new research. A good starting point to find information on
the most highly regarded titles are the websites of the main
political science associations. You will often find that they
publish their own titles and provide listings of links to other
useful sources. For instance, the Political Studies
Association website (http://www.psa.ac.uk), the leading
professional body of the UK, has a specialist section for its
journal Political Studies where you can access the latest
book reviews, even before they appear in the printed
journal! The American Political Studies Association website
24

Political science and the Internet
(http://www.apsanet.org/) includes a publications section
where you can locate publication details and some online
articles from its titles such as PS Online. If your library has
a subscription to the ISI Journal Citation Reports Service
(http://wos.mimas.ac.uk/jcrweb) it is also possible to consult
rankings of the most widely cited titles across a wide range
of academic disciplines. This is a useful source which
enables you to evaluate their worth.
However, there are a few things to note about accessing
journals via the Internet.
■Although many journal titles have their own web pages
where you can view contents pages and editorial
information, at the moment very few full-text articles are
offered free of charge. However, many libraries have
subscriptions to databases containing titles so it is worth
checking what is available locally.
■If you are able to access any of these e-journal databases
they can be invaluable as they often allow cross searching
of hundreds of titles simultaneously enabling the rapid
location of articles by particular authors or on particular
subjects. Individual articles can often be downloaded to
disk or e-mailed to individual e-mail accounts. Remember
to follow any copyright statements posted on the site.
Generally these restrict use to private study and limit
copying to one article per issue.
■A particularly useful database which is widely available in
many UK higher and further education institutions is
JSTOR (http://uk.jstor.org/). This contains large back files
of political and social science titles, in some cases dating
25

Using the Internet for Political Research
back to before 1900! However, current licensing
restrictions mean that the most recent issues are not
available. It includes the American Journal of Political
Science, Comparative Politics and the British Journal of
Political Science so it is certainly worth investigating
whether you have access to it.
■Note that due to current licensing arrangements, it is
quite common for British libraries to subscribe to more
than one electronic journal database. Therefore you must
be prepared to search a number of systems to find all the
material.
■You should also note that at the current time not all journals
are available in electronic format. You will also find that the
coverage of those which are available is often stronger in
terms of current rather than historical material. Very few
databases offer articles published earlier than the mid-
1990s. These limitations mean that in order to conduct a
comprehensive search you should not confine yourself to
full-text electronic journals alone; you should also consult
the key journal indexing services, as they will include
references to additional articles only available in paper.
What journal indexing services 
can I find?
Journal indexing services are useful tools for tracing articles
by specific authors or covering particular subject areas. They
can also be used to trace articles which cite other articles and
book reviews. They supplement the references to books and
26

Political science and the Internet
pamphlets that you will find on most library catalogues. At
the present moment very few are available free of charge on
the Internet. However, many libraries do have subscriptions
to the leading databases.
One of the best resources which is widely available in UK
universities and colleges is the International Bibliography of
the Social Sciences (IBSS) (http://www.lse.ac.uk/collections/
IBSS/). This provides references and abstracts of articles and
book chapters dating back to the 1950s with new material
being added every fortnight. Politics is one of its main subject
specialisms, alongside economics, anthropology and
sociology. It is particularly strong in its coverage of European
language materials. It is possible to conduct author, title or
subject searches and to e-mail the search results.
A second subject indexing service is the Social Sciences
Citation Index published by ISI (http://www.isiwebof
knowledge.com/) which is widely available to UK HE
institutions via Web of Science (http://wos.mimas.ac.uk/).
This provides references to articles covering a similar period.
While there is some overlap between the Social Sciences
Citation Index and IBSS, it is advisable to use both services
if they are available, as generally IBSS has a wider coverage
of European language materials while the Social Sciences
Citation Index offers more references to North American
published materials.
These are just two examples of types of subscription
databases. You may find that your local library has other
CD-Rom, paper or online databases on offer so it is always
a good idea to check locally.
27

Using the Internet for Political Research
What news services can I find?
The fact that the Internet can be easily updated means that
coverage of current news stories is particularly strong. All
the major newspapers worldwide have Internet websites and
frequently headlines are updated throughout the day. They
may also include added features such as audiofiles, video
clips and online discussion forums.
One of the most useful examples is the BBC News site
(http://news.bbc.co.uk/). This has a specialist UK Politics
subsection (http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/uk_politics/default
.stm) which takes you directly to the most recent stories
from the main political parties. It also includes links to BBC
political programme sites, live broadcasts from Parliament
and a database with a current list of MPs. Another feature
of the site are the in-depth reports which focus on particular
issues of public concern such as elections, political crises
and new legislation. They can often act as a useful
introduction to the subject area, highlighting the key issues
and offering timelines of events and links to related web-
sites where you can find further information. They also
contain archived news stories, political analysis and
audio/video files which are retained indefinitely.
Newspaper websites can easily be traced by conducting a
name search on a major search engine such as Google. You
might also like to use the Ultimate Collection of News Links
site (http://pppp.net/links/news/) which provides over 10,000
links to newspapers worldwide. It can be browsed by country
of publication.
28

Political science and the Internet
However, there are some important points to note about
access to newspapers on the Internet.
■Not all newspapers are full text. Some may offer access to
headlines only. Check any help screens available on the
site to find out if particular sections are excluded.
■Many of the services do not provide free access to
backfiles. You often need to pay to search or access older
materials. Before doing this it is always advisable to check
if any newspaper subscription databases are available in
your local library as many academic institutions have
access to online services where you can search across
large numbers of newspaper titles simultaneously.
A specialist newspaper library which is open to the public is
the British Library Newspaper Library at Colindale,
London. It provides access to a wealth of resources
including some electronic databases of current newspapers
and paper and microfilm copies of older editions of UK
national, local and foreign newspapers. Some of these even
date back to the eighteenth century! Its catalogue of
holdings can be accessed online via the library’s website at
http://www.bl.uk/collections/newspapers.html. This also
provides information on the library’s opening hours and a
useful collection of guides on what is available there.
What are the best politics sites?
The increasing amount of political information being made
available on the Internet means that it can sometimes seem
29

Using the Internet for Political Research
an overwhelming task to keep up to date and identify the
most useful resources. However, there are a number of large
politics ‘megasites’ which can help you. These offer links to
the most useful politics sites and highlight important new
resources. It can often save time if you check these sites first
before using a search engine.
The Social Science Information Gateway (SOSIG)
(http://www.sosig.ac.uk) is a leading catalogue of Internet
resources for the social sciences (see Figure 2.1). In Chapter 1
we highlighted its importance as an Information Gateway,
offering a qualitative alternative to the commercial search
engines. SOSIG maintains specialist sections for government
and politics which will be of value to you. These contain over
50 sub-categories of politics. These are based on the Dewey
Decimal classification scheme commonly used in UK public
libraries and cover the full range of political science topics
including specialist sections for election materials, political
parties, parliaments, political theory and electronic
government. All resources are selected and indexed by subject
specialists based at the British Library of Political and
Economic Science, the Library of the London School of
Economics and Political Science. They include websites of
political 
organisations, 
full-text 
conference 
papers,
government reports, statistical data, library catalogues and
indexes. Each section contains highlighted ‘editor’s choices’
which have been selected by the editor as the most useful sites
in that subject area. It is possible to browse the politics
subsections or to search the entire database using keywords.
If you have a specific enquiry it will be quicker to search
directly. There is also an advanced search form which enables
30

Political science and the Internet
you to combine search terms using Boolean operators or to
restrict your search to title fields only or to particular types of
material such as full-text papers. These advanced options can
be useful if you have a very general topic or one in which you
are likely to get a lot of hits.
Figure 2.1
SOSIG home page
Each entry on the database has an added description of
content which has been compiled by the subject editor and
can be of value in helping you evaluate the relevancy of a
resource. Figure 2.2 shows a typical example.
Information files usually include publication details, dates
of coverage, some summary of the subject content including
subject keywords, information on the type of resource, the
31

Using the Internet for Political Research
full URL and details of any specialist software needed to
access it. The information files and Internet addresses are
regularly checked to ensure accuracy.
An additional feature of SOSIG, which may be of particular
value to you, is the facility to set up your own account. It is
very easy to do this and completely free – just select the ‘My
account’ option from the left-hand side of the SOSIG home
page (see Figure 2.1) and follow the stages step by step. The
advantage of having a personal account is that you can
receive weekly e-mail updates of new additions to the
politics section. It is possible to be quite specific and opt to
receive information on closely defined political topics such
32
Figure 2.2
SOSIG database entry

Political science and the Internet
as elections, devolution or communism. Other features of
‘My account’ include the ability to post your CV or
conference publicity onto the website and to receive news
updates from selected social science e-mail lists and national
newspapers such as the Guardian. Sometimes you can get
discounts on books from leading publishers too!
Other useful sites are those maintained by the leading
political science professional organisations. These have the
knowledge of the subject area to identify the most
important resources and are often closely involved with the
latest research.
The leading body in the UK is the Political Studies
Association (PSA) (http://www.psa.ac.uk/). The PSA website
is a useful source of information on politics teaching and
research. It includes a notice board of information on
forthcoming conferences, jobs and research posts and links
to all the UK politics departments. The specialist sub-groups
section provides information on a number of special interest
groups of the PSA. These cover a wide range of areas
including Marxism, feminist politics, radical politics and
information technology and politics. Many of these groups
publish their own newsletters and conference papers online
and their web pages can be a useful source of information
on current research, especially as information on some of
the smaller ones is not widely available elsewhere. The
publications section includes information on PSA journals.
It also offers free access to a large number of PSA conference
papers from 1994 to the present day and a link to the
website of its Political Studies journal where you will be
able to access up-to-date book reviews and contents pages.
33

Using the Internet for Political Research
Finally, the site also maintains a useful WWW Gateway,
which has links to hundreds of politics websites arranged by
topic. All aspects of political science are covered including
elections, political parties and constitutions. It is regularly
updated and the ‘What’s new’ section often contains links to
websites relating to current news events.
The American Political Science Association (http://www
.apsanet.org/) is the main professional body for the USA.
Again its website is a useful starting point for research and
teaching initiatives relating to North America, including
access to lists of forthcoming conferences and political
science departments. You will also find a long list of
specialist subsections of the APSA, the websites of which
can be used to trace information on recent research. An
additional feature of the site is its specialist teaching section
where you can find links to online political science courses,
syllabi and some full-text articles from its journals. The
latter can be a very useful source of information on the use
of IT and the Internet in politics teaching.
The University of Michigan Documents Center (http://
www.lib.umich.edu/govdocs/) is another excellent starting
point. It is maintained by specialist librarians at the University
of Michigan and offers access to a directory of academic
websites relating to politics and international relations.
Although there is an emphasis upon North American
material, coverage of other areas of the world is also very
good. The lists of resources can be accessed by country or
subject indexes. Currently there is no search facility.
Important topics, which are covered in some detail, include
elections, foreign policy, constitutions and political parties
34

Political science and the Internet
worldwide. The ‘What’s new’ section is a particularly good
place to look for sites relating to recent news topics. Examples
of issues covered in 2002 include ‘the war on terrorism’, the
Arab–Israeli conflict and the US federal budget.
Finally if you are particularly interested in international
politics and security issues another site that is worth checking
regularly is the International Relations and Security Network
(http://www.isn.ethz.ch/) maintained by the Center for
Security Studies and Conflict Research at the ETH Zurich.
The site provides access to daily headlines relating to
international conflict and security issues and an extensive
searchable library of links. This indexes individual documents
and news articles as well as organisational home pages. The
‘What’s new’ section is updated almost daily. You will find
that often it provides more references to military science and
technical information on logistics than that offered by SOSIG
or the political science associations.
35

Elections
What election information can I find on
the Internet?
The Internet can offer access to effective sources of
information on parliamentary, presidential and local elections
worldwide. This chapter will direct you to some of the most
useful sites and provide you with some tips on the best search
tactics to use.
Strengths of coverage
The strengths of Internet election coverage include:
■up-to-date information on current campaigns including
access to news headlines, opinion polls and manifestos.
News stories are often updated throughout the day and
are therefore far more up to date than those available in
paper sources;
■Internet sites often contain audio and video features such
as speeches, campaign broadcasts and political interviews.
3
37

Using the Internet for Political Research
Weaknesses of coverage
However, there are some drawbacks, and the weaknesses of
Internet election coverage include:
■material may not be retained indefinitely – it is quite
common for news services to create excellent campaign
sites for the duration of the election but then to delete
them several months later, while historical materials are
often limited to election results only;
■many sites established during election campaigns are of low
quality. Watch out for unmonitored discussion forums run
by individuals with no expertise in the subject area.
Remember to check the origin and authorship of all
materials you access using the guidelines given in Chapter 1
of this book. Preference should be given to those resources
maintained by established newspapers, news companies,
government departments and reputable organisations such
as political science associations, university departments and
think tanks.
How can I find out information about
forthcoming elections?
There are several good sites which offer access to calendars
of forthcoming presidential and parliamentary elections
worldwide.
IFES (the International Foundation for Election Systems),
a non-profit organisation that monitors and provides
technical assistance on election administration, maintains
38

Elections
an excellent site entitled ElectionGuide.Org (http://www.ifes
.org/eguide/elecguide.htm). This offers free access to a
calendar of all forthcoming national, presidential and
legislative elections for the next five to six years! It also
includes listings of elections which have taken place in the
last couple of years and some entries for local elections and
referendums. The individual calendar entries contain a
number of useful details, which include links to national
electoral bodies, statistics on voter turnout and background
country information. The latter includes data on the
national economy, political system and religious and social
structure taken from the most recent edition of the
Cambridge Factfinder published by Cambridge University
Press. Links are also provided to CNN/IFES Election Watch
information where this is available. The CNN/IFES Election
Watch section contains current information on the country’s
government structure, electoral system, major political
parties and/or candidates standing for election and results of
previous elections. It can be a useful starting point for
tracing the names of the main political parties and electoral
bodies if you have little knowledge of a country.
If you are particularly interested in European nations another
excellent site is the European Elections Monitor, maintained 
by the Robert Schumann Foundation (http://www.robert
-schuman.org/anglais/oee/calendrierelections/default.htm).
This provides a listing of recent and forthcoming parliamentary
and presidential elections in Europe. Date coverage is more
restricted than the IFES guide and entry content is briefer.
However, it usually includes recent election results and a precise
summary of any key political issues at stake. It is currently
39

Using the Internet for Political Research
possible to sign up to receive e-mail alerts of forthcoming
elections.
Once you have located the date of an election it is then
possible to begin the process of tracking it online.
How can I use the Internet to 
track elections?
It is easy to waste time browsing through the masses of
information published on the Internet during elections. One
of the best tactics to try to overcome this is to direct your
research to a number of key resources.
■Try to identify the official government body responsible
for administering elections in the region. The name of this
varies in different countries. Often it is an election
commission or election authority, or part of the home
office or ministry of the interior. If you are unsure of the
name of the organisation you can often trace it using the
IFES ElectionGuide or the main national news services.
These sites are often key sources of official information on
the election. Their main strengths are in terms of factual
information relating to election administration. This
frequently includes: detailed election calendars with key
dates, background information on the operation of the
electoral system and access to full-text electoral legislation
and regulations, including those relating to the political
funding of campaigns and voter registration procedures.
They may also include listings of officially registered
political parties, results from previous elections and access
40

Elections
to papers and reports relating to electoral reforms under
consideration. However, these sites do not often contain
critical discussion of the political issues at stake in the
election. In order to trace this information try using major
news services, think tanks and political party sites.
■Check the websites of international election monitoring
organisations. Not all national elections are monitored by
these bodies. They are of most value for reports of elections
in developing countries or areas where there may be
concerns about democratic standards. Key organisations
involved in this type of work are IFES (the International
Foundation for Election Systems) which covers nations
worldwide (http://www.ifes.org/), the OSCE Office for
Democratic Institutions and Human Rights (http://www
.osce.org/odihr/elections/) which covers member nations of
the OSCE in Europe with a particularly strong focus on the
nations of Eastern and Central Europe and former areas 
of the Soviet Union, and the Commonwealth Secretariat
(http://www.thecommonwealth.org/) which regularly
reviews elections taking place in Commonwealth nations.
It may also be worth checking the websites of leading
human rights organisations such as Amnesty International
(http://www.amnesty.org/), Human Rights Watch (http://
www.hrw.org/) and the International Crisis Group (http://
www.crisisweb.org/) for updates from regions where there
are concerns about human rights violations during election
campaigns. These sites often provide access to news
updates and full text reports of election monitoring
missions which assess the performance and standards of
electoral administration in the nation concerned. This may
41

Using the Internet for Political Research
include analysis of the operation of the electoral laws, voter
registration procedures and the highlighting of any
instances of political repression or censorship.
■Identify the websites of the key political parties. The main
ones can usually be traced using the IFES ElectionGuide.
Alternatively you could use electoral authority or news
service sites which often provide links to them during
election campaigns. Since the mid-1990s an increasing
amount of party election information has become
available online. Some of this is never made available in
paper and so it is becoming increasingly important to
regularly monitor party sites throughout campaigns.
Common features of political party sites include free
access to full-text manifestos and party policy statements.
These can be particularly useful as they are often updated
throughout the campaign to reflect responses to current
news stories. You may also find that they contain opinion
polls, links to audiofiles of political speeches, video clips
of campaign adverts and other examples of political
advertising. However, do remember that as the purpose of
these sites is to promote the party, coverage will not be
impartial. The polls selected will be those which present
the party in a favourable light. It is also common to find
that coverage is limited to current issues. Historical
materials may be removed from a site if a party would
rather forget its former policies! Even during the course of
individual election campaigns comments and statements
may disappear at short notice. The best policy is to save
useful materials as soon as you see them. Also, to obtain
a critical viewpoint on specific party policies, you should
42

Elections
consult a range of different sources including the sites of
other parties, news services and think tanks.
■Check the websites of news services regularly. At the start
of a campaign it is a good idea to find out if it is being
covered by the BBC News site (http://news.bbc.co.uk/) or
CNN (http://www.cnn.com/ALLPOLITICS/). Both these
sites offer excellent coverage of international events. They
frequently create special reports for individual elections.
These can be particularly useful starting points as they
often contain concise summaries of the issues at stake,
lists of the main parties and helpful links to local websites
monitoring the progress of the campaigns. Coverage can
also include added features such as audio and visual files
of key events.
National news services are also key places to check for
access to the latest headlines and opinion polls. Their local
knowledge of the issues can give added insight. If you are
unsure of the titles, try looking at the main government
websites of the region, in particular any information
offices or government portals as these usually have links to
the quality titles. Alternatively a useful site is the Ultimate
Collection of New Links (http://pppp.net/links/news/).
This maintains a listing of over 10,000 links to
newspapers worldwide, although not all are free or full
text. You can browse the list of titles by country. However,
remember that not all news services are neutral; some have
a particular political bias that influences the way news
stories are presented. Try to find out about these and
balance any partiality by checking a range of sources. Also
be aware that during election campaigns many unqualified
43

Using the Internet for Political Research
people and companies establish news and chat sites. While
it may be useful to consult these occasionally, preference
should always be given to the established newspapers and
broadcasting companies.
■Look at the websites of the leading market research
agencies. It is usually worth finding out if there are any
web pages maintained by market research institutions.
While opinion polls are often widely quoted by
newspapers and political parties it is quite common for
these to be presented in such a way as to reinforce the
political policies of a particular party or interest group.
As a result the home pages of market research bodies,
such as MORI and NOP, may contain more authoritative
sources of information. This can include full lists of all the
polls they have conducted and further information about
the survey methodology. However, be aware that detailed
information may not be available free of charge.
■Try to locate the websites of other special interest groups.
These can include the home pages of political science
associations, trade unions, professional bodies and
political science think tanks. They often provide critical
analysis of particular policies of the main political parties.
For instance, in the UK the Institute of Fiscal Studies often
conducts analysis of the financial promises made by the
Conservative, Labour and Liberal Democrat parties.
Other bodies can cover education, health or social policy.
Again remember that not all these institutions are
politically neutral. They may have particular interests in
promoting one party rather than another. Try checking
44

Elections
their websites for information on sponsorship or
organisational mission statements to find details of this.
Finding information on British elections
In order to get you thinking about the issues the following
sections go into some detail about finding information on
UK parliamentary elections.
Consult the relevant government
departmental sites
In the UK the Electoral Commission (http://www
.electoralcommission.gov.uk/) is particularly important. It is
an independent body, which was established by Parliament
in 2000 and has statutory authority to review the
administration of elections. As such its website can be used
to find authoritative information on electoral legislation and
conduct. Information that you may find useful includes the
calendar of key dates, statistics on donors and campaign
expenditure of the main political parties and the online
register of political parties. The latter is a database which
can be searched by party name or geographical area. It
offers you contact names and addresses for the head offices
of registered parties and images of any official emblems
used. The publications section of the website may also serve
as a useful source of information on recent and proposed
electoral reforms as it includes research reports and surveys
on the operation of the electoral system covering such issues
45

Using the Internet for Political Research
as levels of voter turnout and the effectiveness of different
voting methods.
The site also directs you to government departments
which have electoral responsibilities. These currently
include the Department for Constitutional Affairs and the
Office of the Deputy Prime Minister, although in the past
other departments have performed these roles. If any
changes are made in the future it is likely that you will be
able to trace them via the Electoral Commission site.
The Department for Constitutional Affairs (known before
June 2003 as the Lord Chancellor’s Department) (http://www
.lcd.gov.uk/elections/) is the UK government department
responsible for electoral law and regulation. Its website
provides access to the full text of all legislation relating to the
conduct of national and European parliamentary elections in
the UK. This includes recent consultation papers which
contain proposals to change the electoral system. It also
maintains some useful links to the websites of leading political
think tanks.
The Office of the Deputy Prime Minister (http://www
.local-regions.odpm.gov.uk/elections/index.htm) currently
has responsibility for local election policy and administration.
Its website can be used to trace full-text reports, legislation
and statistics relating to all aspects of the conduct and
performance of recent local authority elections.
Check the news sites regularly
Throughout the election campaign you should aim to check
the BBC website daily. This has a specialist section for UK
46

Elections
politics (http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/uk_politics/default.stm).
Usually a special section will be created for UK election
campaigns where you will be able to find the latest news
stories and political debate. For an example of the type of
coverage available look at the archived report for 2001
(http://news.bbc.co.uk/vote2001/). Another benefit of this
site is the fact that it often provides lists of links to specialist
election sites. This can save you time as the hard work in
tracing them has already been done for you!
Most UK broadsheet newspapers also create sections on their
sites covering election issues. The Guardian newspaper (http://
politics.guardian.co.uk/) is an example of a site which has a
specialist political section with useful critical commentary,
political satire and review articles. It is also usually worth
looking at the Financial Times (http://news.ft.com/home/uk/)
for analysis of economic and business policy issues and the
Times Higher Educational Supplement (http://www.thesis.co
.uk/) for commentary on educational policy.
Look at the political party websites regularly
The Labour Party (http://www.labour.org.uk/), Conservative
Party (http://www.conservatives.com/) and Liberal Democrat
Party (http://www.libdems.org.uk/) websites are usually
updated frequently during campaigns and it is worth
checking them on a daily basis. You can use the BBC News
service to trace relevant headlines and then check the party
sites for the official responses and authorised transcripts of
speeches. If you are interested in issues relating to a particular
geographical area of the UK it is also useful to look at these
47

Using the Internet for Political Research
sites for links to local constituency party sites or the sites of
local MPs where you may find coverage of specific policies
and campaigns relevant to that locality. Links to other
political parties participating in the election can usually be
traced via the BBC website.
Check the market research 
organisations’ websites
MORI has a political trends and surveys section on its
website (http://www.mori.com/polls/trends/index.shtml)
which is particularly useful. It enables you to track levels of
political support for the individual parties during campaigns
and the 12 months prior to them. They usually include
voting intention polls, party image, party leader image and
popularity on specific policy issues such as defence and the
environment. As the site also includes methodological details
about the conduct of the survey, including the numbers
polled and techniques used, it enables you to make informed
decisions about the representativeness of individual polls.
Consult the websites of the major think tanks
It is worth doing this, as although you will probably find that
the information is not updated as frequently as that of the
news services, they often provide access to detailed critical
commentary on the policies of the individual parties. This
can complement the statements made on the party websites
which emphasise their positive features. However, do
remember that as some think tanks are linked to particular
48

Elections
political parties they are likely to support their viewpoints.
Check the mission statements and ‘About us’ sections of the
websites to find details of this. Significant UK think tanks
include the following:
■the Fabian Society (http://www.fabian-society.org.uk/),
which provides a forum for left of centre political debate.
It is particularly useful for discussions of socialism and
Labour Party policy;
■the Institute for Public Policy Research (http://www.ippr
.org.uk), an independent left-wing think tank which
discusses all areas of social and economic policy;
■Demos (http://www.demos.co.uk/), an independent
organisation that focuses research on democracy,
enterprise and quality of life in the UK;
■Catalyst (http://www.catalystforum.org.uk/), another
left-wing body which is useful for critical examination of
Labour Party policy;
■the Centre for Policy Studies (http://www.cps.org.uk),
founded by Sir Keith Joseph and Margaret Thatcher in
1974, a leading think tank which discusses policy from a
Conservative perspective;
■the Adam Smith Institute (http://www.adamsmith.org/),
another useful Conservative free-market think tank.
Particular focuses of interest include economic policy, the
management of the welfare state and funding of public
services;
■Civitas: Institute for the Study of Civil Society (http://
www.civitas.org.uk/), a think tank which was created in
49

Using the Internet for Political Research
2000 and focuses specifically on issues relating to the
division of responsibilities between government and civil
society. Generally it promotes a free-market stance and is
of particular importance for tracing materials relating to
the debate about the funding of public services such as the
welfare state and social security benefits.
There are also a number of political research bodies which
concentrate on issues specifically relating to the conduct and
administration of elections. The Hansard Society (http://www
.hansardsociety.org.uk/) promotes discussion of issues
surrounding parliamentary democracy in the UK. You may
find its website useful for locating materials relating to
electoral reform including the implementation of electronic
voting and voter turnout. It also includes a collection of links
to other organisations which run voter education
programmes. This can be useful during election campaigns as
many organisations run temporary campaigns to encourage
the public to vote.
The Electoral Reform Society (ERS) (http://www
.electoral-reform.org.uk/) also focuses on issues relating to
electoral 
administration. 
It 
actively 
supports 
the
implementation of a proportional representation electoral
system, therefore its website often contains papers and
statistics which offer criticisms of results from the first-past-
the-post system.
Professional bodies, trade unions and trade associations
will also create temporary web pages which represent their
viewpoint on the main party policies. These can usually be
traced via the larger politics websites such as SOSIG
(http://www.sosig.ac.uk/) and the Internet gateway
50

Elections
maintained by the Political Studies Association (UK)
(http://www.psa.ac.uk/) which actively seek to catalogue as
many as possible! It is also a good idea to monitor news
services, such as those on Radio 4, and note down the
names of any organisations/professional bodies which they
report as having published surveys or opinion polls on the
issues. You can then search for their website to see if it has
been posted there. You may not always be lucky, but it is
certainly worth trying!
Where can I find information on 
past elections?
In general the Internet provides access to more detailed
information about recent and ongoing election campaigns
than those which occurred in the past. For access to
accurate statistical data you should begin by consulting the
official national electoral bodies or commissions as these
often store election results. If you cannot locate any
information there, try the national parliament website or
the central ministry of information. Be aware that the
amount of information available differs considerably
between nations. Some may provide little more than a list of
the most recent results. Another source of information is the
IFES Election Guide (http://www.ifes.org/eguide/elecguide
.htm), which offers summaries of recent results along with
statistics on voter turnout.
Also useful is the Lijphart Elections Archive (http://
dodgson.ucsd.edu/lij/), which is housed at the University of
51

Using the Internet for Political Research
California, San Diego and provides access to election
statistics for a growing number of nations worldwide.
Currently coverage is not universal and dates differ between
nations. However, it does offer access to official figures on
seats gained and a useful collection of links to national
electoral authority websites.
In terms of the UK, the Electoral Commission website
(http://www.electoralcommission.gov.uk/) offers free access
to official statistics and results from all national, local and
European parliament elections from 2000 to date. It also
contains a number of research reports which discuss issues
relating to the conduct of these elections and their funding.
The House of Commons Library also regularly produces
research papers (http://www.parliament.uk/commons/lib/
research/rpintro.htm) which provide statistical summaries
of general election results. The example from 2000 included
information on the number of seats won and lost by the
main political parties, voter turnout levels and some
historical comparison with previous voting trends.
Examples from 1998 onwards can be downloaded free of
charge from the website. They are usually published in a
draft form several weeks after the election date.
The UK Data Archive, which is based at the University of
Essex, maintains the archive of British Election Studies. This
survey has been conducted after every general election since
1964 and is designed to promote understanding of voting
patterns among the British general public, including coverage
of issues relating to the popularity of particular political
parties, political awareness and levels of political
participation. An increasing number of these datasets are
52

Elections
being made available through the Data Archive website
(http://www.data-archive.ac.uk/findingData/besAbstract.asp).
The site also provides information on current registration
procedures. In 2003 it became part of the Economic and Social
Data Service (ESDS) (http://www .esds.ac.uk/), a new national
system for the dissemination and registration of social science
data. Therefore future developments may be found on the
ESDS site.
Finally, another useful site for historical information
relating to British elections is Richard Kimber’s Political
Science Resources, which provides access to party election
manifestos for the main parties from 1945 to the present
day. Information for elections from 2001 is more detailed
and links to materials from the minority parties as well as
those of the Conservative, Labour and Liberal Democrat
Parties. It can be consulted at http://www.psr.keele.ac.uk/
area/uk/man.htm. The site also offers a wealth of links to
other political science Internet resources worldwide.
53

Political parties
What information about political
parties can I find on the Internet?
A high percentage of political parties worldwide now have
their own Internet sites where you can gain free access to
full-text materials. In fact a growing amount of literature
from political parties is now only being made available
electronically so it is becoming increasingly important that
you familiarise yourself with party websites. Of course the
depth of coverage offered differs between different party
sites. However, this chapter aims to provide some general
guidelines on how to trace what is available.
Strengths of coverage
The strengths of Internet coverage include the following:
■Political party sites often include full-text manifestos,
policy statements and election campaign ephemera such as
posters and pamphlets. They frequently contain press
releases about ongoing parliamentary activity. The websites
of ruling parties can be used to gain insight into the
development of government policy. However, you should
4
55

Using the Internet for Political Research
also remember to consult the main government
departmental sites for further information on this. The
websites of opposition parties are useful sources of critique
of government policy. Additionally, minority parties from
the left and right wings are particularly well covered. Many
of these small groups do not have the resources to
undertake paper publishing so the rise of the Internet has
made their work more accessible than ever before.
■Party websites can also include added features such as
audio and video clips of recent speeches and party
election broadcasts.
■There is often up-to-date coverage of election campaigns
and conferences. This can include audiofiles and press
releases which are unavailable in paper.
■Party sites often have lists of current MPs with links to
their individual websites and those of local party branches.
These can contain valuable information on grassroots
activity, local policy initiatives and local election
campaigns. Prior to the advent of the Internet much of this
information was not widely available.
■There can also be links to special interest groups or pressure
groups within the party as well as think tanks and research
groups which support its aims. Common examples are
groups for gay and lesbian members and bodies supporting
the development of information technology. These can be
particularly useful sources of information on new policy
developments within the party and often contain some
critical comment on current policy. However, do remember
56

Political parties
that if they are being officially endorsed by the leadership, it
is unlikely that they will be extremely critical.
Weaknesses of coverage
Despite these advantages, there are some common problems
with party political websites. The weaknesses of Internet
coverage include the following:
■The emphasis is usually on current rather than historical
information. It can be difficult, if not impossible, to find
older policy statements, especially if these do not fit in
with current policy! Likewise materials relating to specific
election campaigns and conferences are often posted on
sites for a limited period of time. It is certainly advisable
to download or save any you need in case they disappear!
■Remember that as the sites serve to promote the parties
they will tend to use those opinion polls and articles that
support their cause. To obtain a balanced viewpoint you
must consult a range of resources, including those prepared
by opposing political parties and independent institutions.
How can I locate information about the
main political parties of a foreign nation?
If you are unsure which are the main political parties of a
particular nation a good starting point is the website of the
main national electoral authority as these often maintain
57

Using the Internet for Political Research
lists of authorised parties. In the UK the Electoral
Commission (http://www.electoralcommission.gov.uk/) is
responsible for the official register of political parties. This
provides contact addresses and images of their political
symbols. The Commission’s website also includes statistical
data on individual party income and expenditure. Other
useful sources, which often contain links to main political
parties, are parliamentary websites and the home pages of
government information offices or the main national news
services. A basic listing of main parties for a large number
of nations worldwide can also be obtained from the IFES
ElectionGuide (http://www.ifes.org/eguide/elecguide.htm).
However, do be aware that the listings on some of these
sources may not be totally comprehensive. Some smaller
minority parties which do not have any parliamentary seats
may be excluded. Likewise some authoritarian political
regimes may seek to repress political opposition, therefore
they will omit any mention of them from their official web
pages. It may be possible to trace the existence of these using
the BBC or CNN news services or the websites of leading
human rights organisations such as Amnesty International.
Where can I find information about
British political parties?
There is a large quantity of information available relating to
the policies and activities of British political parties. There
are a number of key sites which provide high-quality
information about all the main political parties. In addition
58

Political parties
there are also some sources which specialise in coverage of
individual parties. This section will highlight those covering
the Conservative, Labour or Liberal Democrat parties. The
lists are not intended to be exhaustive as new sources often
appear and disappear rapidly! Instead it aims to provide you
with a number of key starting points. In order to keep up to
date with new developments you should monitor the news
sources from the general section as these often highlight the
release of new political policies and the formation of new
political groups. If you see the name of an interesting one it
is often worth searching SOSIG or a commercial search
engine to see if they have their own website.
Useful general sources
Political news services
An excellent starting point is the BBC News site which has a
specialist UK politics section (http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/
uk_politics/default.stm). It also has separate sections for
news from Wales and Scotland where details of regional
political party activity can be found. The site is particularly
good at highlighting current policy issues. It can include
audio and video files of key events and speeches. Special in-
depth reports which contain political analysis, discussion
and audio features are regularly created. Examples include
leadership contests, political scandals and election
campaigns. The site also archives reports relating to party
annual conferences. These are available from 1997 to date.
Consult the in-depth report section of the site for examples
59

Using the Internet for Political Research
(http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/shared/bsp/hi/in_depth/html/
default.stm). Generally they include independent analysis of
party policy, political interviews, speeches and lists of
decisions taken. In some cases this information is unavailable
elsewhere as it has been wiped from the official party site.
The BBC website also includes links to its leading current
affairs programmes, many of which regularly feature
interviews with leading politicians. If you go to the home
pages of these you often find transcripts or video and/or
audiofiles of recent broadcasts. Useful examples include: the
BBC Radio 4 Today programme (http://www.bbc.co.uk/
radio4/today/) and Breakfast with Frost (http://news.bbc.co
.uk/1/hi/programmes/breakfast_with_frost/).
Most national newspapers also contain good coverage of
current political issues. The Guardian Unlimited site has a
politics section (http://politics.guardian.co.uk/) which, in
addition to the news headlines, regularly creates special
reports on Labour, Conservative and Liberal Democrat party
policy issues. It also has a searchable database of information
about MPs which enables you to locate basic biographical
information plus archived political cartoons and interviews.
However, when using newspaper resources do remember that
not all are impartial – some daily newspapers have an
acknowledged bias towards the policies of a particular party.
Also not all information will be available indefinitely. Consult
any help pages on the site for details of archiving policy. In
many cases more comprehensive news coverage can only be
obtained from subscription databases which may be available
in your local library.
60

Political parties
Government department websites
The most useful site to consult is that of the Electoral
Commission (http://www.electoralcommission.gov.uk/). It
has a political party section which contains the register of
recognised political parties and the register of donations to
political parties. The latter provides statistical information
on donations given to UK political parties since 2001. It
includes the names of individual and business donors and
the amount given. The database is fully searchable and
enables you to trace the identities of the largest donors to
the Labour, Conservative and Liberal Democrat parties.
You may also find that the Electoral Commission website
contains other full-text reports and discussion papers which
are relevant. Topics covered in the past include the funding
of political parties in the UK and statistical data on the
amount of money spent during election campaigns.
Parliamentary websites
The website of the UK Houses of Parliament (http://www
.parliament.uk/) will provide you with official information
about the activities of the main political parties within the
House of Commons and the House of Lords. It is possible 
to view live broadcasts from Parliament (http://www
.parliamentlive.tv/). This includes the House of Commons,
House of Lords, Westminster Hall and key Select Committee
debates. Broadcasting schedules can be obtained from the
website. You can also check the online version of Hansard
(http://www.parliament.uk/hansard/hansard.cfm) to locate
speeches, debates and answers to written questions. Material
61

Using the Internet for Political Research
is available from 1988 onwards and is updated daily at 8.00
am. It is possible to search the database to find information
on specific votes in the House, references to individual MPs
or subject areas. It may also be useful to look at the
Parliamentary Committees section (http://www.parliament
.uk/parliamentary_committees/parliamentary_committees16
.cfm). Many of these committees investigate particular subject
areas or scrutinise new legislative proposals so they can be
useful sources of information on political developments.
Their web pages generally include minutes from meetings and
the full text of all reports from 1988 to date.
Political science associations
The websites of national professional bodies can be useful
as they may have specialist sub-groups that cover British
politics or individual political parties. The Political Studies
Association (UK) has a number of such groupings
(http://www.psa.ac.uk). You will also find its Contemporary
Political Studies (http://www.psa.ac.uk/cps/) section relevant
as many of the full-text conference papers which it contains
cover party political issues.
Don’t forget SOSIG!
This has a specialist UK political parties section
(http://www.sosig.ac.uk/roads/subject-listing/World-cat/
poluk.html) where you can find links to a wide range of
political party websites, including organisational homepages
and full-text reports and working papers. All resources have
annotated descriptions of content.
62

Political parties
Labour Party resources
The official Labour Party Website
The official Labour Party website (http://www.labour.org.uk/)
should be your main starting point. This will provide you
with access to the latest party press releases, policy
statements, manifestos and lists of MPs. It also contains a
useful list of links to local branch websites. Be aware that
since the general election of 1997 a significant amount of
policy material has also been posted on the 10 Downing
Street website (http://www.number-10.gov.uk/). Notably this
includes transcripts and audiofiles of key speeches by Tony
Blair, Prime Minister’s Questions from the House of
Commons and televised press conferences. Likewise speeches
by key ministers can also be traced via the sites for the
relevant government departments. It is uncertain where or if
this information will be stored when the government changes.
If you are searching for historical materials a good starting
place is the Historical Manuscripts Commission which
maintains the National Register of Archives (http://www.hmc
.gov.uk/nra/nra2.htm). This can provide you with useful
information about the existence and location of archival
papers relating to the British Labour Party.
Reform groups within the Labour Party
These websites are useful for locating critical commentary on
current British Labour Party policy. A major focus of
concern is issues relating to the development of ‘New
Labour’ and the ‘Third Way’ and the ways in which it differs
63

Using the Internet for Political Research
from traditional Labour policy. Leading examples include
the following:
■The Campaign for Labour Democracy (http://home
.freeuk.net/clpd/) was established in 1973 and has a long
history of campaigning for reforms to the Labour Party
structure to give backbenchers and minority group MPs a
greater say in central party policy. It also supports public
ownership and management of the welfare state.
■Progress (http://progressives.org.uk/) is a newer organisation
which acts as a forum for critical policy debate within the
Labour Party and trade union movement.
The websites of these organisations regularly include
information on recent activities and access to the full text of
some of their publications.
Leading left-wing think tanks
These organisations are also useful sources of critical
analysis of British social policy and the British Labour Party.
Currently most of their websites do not provide access to
full-text pamphlets; however, they do offer useful summaries
of recent research, lists of forthcoming events and press
releases. Key examples include the following:
■The Fabian Society (http://www.fabian-society.org.uk).
This is one of the most well established socialist think
tanks. It is affiliated to the Labour Party but is editorially
independent and for over a century has acted as a major
forum for debate about socialist political theory. Its
website is a particularly useful place for looking for
64

Political parties
writings about Labour Party policy and the future
development of socialism. The site supports academic
discussion forums and posts extracts from some of its
papers online. It also provides access to information about
the Young Fabians. These are Fabian Society members
under the age of 35 and are renowned for developing new
areas of critical thinking.
■Demos (http://www.demos.co.uk/) is an independent body
which was established in 1993. It covers all areas of social
and economic policy aiming to offer radical policy solutions.
■Catalyst (http://www.catalystforum.org.uk/) is a democratic
socialist think tank which was created in 1998. Its website
includes free access to some of its papers and conference
reports. Key topics of interest include the funding of the
welfare state.
■The Institute of Public Policy Research (IPPR) (http://
www.ippr.org.uk/about/) is a leading independent centre-
left organisation which covers a wide range of policy.
Recent issues include the funding of public services,
education, citizenship and governance, and public-private
partnerships policy.
■The Social Market Foundation (http://www.smf.co.uk/) is
a think tank established in 1989 and covers all areas of
economic and social policy. Recent topics include health,
pensions policy and social welfare.
■The New Politics Network (http://www.new-politics.net/)
is particularly concerned with enhancing democracy in
the UK. Major topics of interest include political party
funding and measures to increase political participation.
65

Using the Internet for Political Research
This list is not exhaustive. Research bodies allied to other
political parties may also offer useful critiques. Also it is not
uncommon for other small charities or trade associations to
publish one-off research reports which focus on specific
areas of political policy. Usually the existence of these can be
traced from the BBC News site or the Guardian newspaper.
Trade union websites
The British Labour Party has a history of close involvement
with the trade union movement. As a result the website of
the central trade union body in the UK, the TUC (Trades
Union Congress) (http://www.tuc.org.uk/), can be a good
source of critical commentary on current policy. Key topics
of interest are economic policy, the management of the
public sector and workers’ rights. The site contains press
releases, briefings and reports. It frequently includes
coverage of Labour Party conferences. It also has a directory
of affiliated unions covering individual industries/sectors
where more information can be found.
Left-wing newspapers and current affairs magazines
A large number of socialist newspapers now have websites
and most include access to at least some free articles. Their
content is often not as ‘academic’ in nature as that found in
the scholarly journals but they can be particularly useful for
locating critical articles on ‘New Labour and the Third Way’
and often include coverage of current events, plus examples
of political cartoons and satire. Some of the most useful
examples are:
66

Political parties
■The Tribune (http://www.tribune.atfreeweb.com/) is a
long-established socialist weekly. Its website provides free
access to a selection of its articles published from 1937 to
the present day!
■Labour Left Briefing (http://www.labourleftbriefing.org
.uk/) is an independent forum for socialist ideas within
the British Labour Party and trade union movement. Its
website includes regular selected articles on Labour Party
policy and conferences.
■Red Pepper (http://www.redpepper.org.uk/) is a monthly
magazine of the green and radical left. It includes an
archive of selected articles on British politics from 1994
to the present day.
■Renewal (http://www.renewal.org.uk/) is a journal of New
Labour politics. It often includes articles on policy reform
from leading Labour Party members. Its website can
include discussion forums and articles not available in the
paper version.
■The New Statesman (http://www.newstatesman.co.uk/)
was originally founded in 1913 to promote Fabian socialist
politics. It remains a leading weekly current affairs journal.
Selected articles from the 1980s onwards are available
online. Recent issues are offered free of charge.
Conservative Party resources
The Conservative Party website
The Conservative Party website (http://www.conservatives
.com/) includes access to recent official documents, manifestos
67

Using the Internet for Political Research
and campaign materials. It also contains transcripts of
speeches from the party leader and links to the individual
home pages of British Conservative MPs. Like the Labour
Party website, its coverage of party history is not currently
strong. There are, however, a number of foundations
associated with ex-Conservative prime ministers where you
can find political quotations and papers online. A notable
example is the Margaret Thatcher Foundation (http://www.
margaretthatcher.org/) which includes free access to hundreds
of her public statements from 1945 to the present day as well
as quotations, interviews and articles. Other examples can be
traced via the SOSIG catalogue (http://www.sosig.ac.uk/). You
should also use the National Register of Archives (http://www
.hmc.gov.uk/nra/nra2.htm). to search for the location of
archival collections.
Reform/special-interest groups within the
Conservative Party
Like the Labour Party, the British Conservative Party has a
number of very well established pressure groups which
campaign for party reform. Their websites can highlight
topics of current concern and policy divisions within the
party. Some of the most important examples are as follows:
■The 
Conservative 
Monday 
Group 
(http://www.
conservativeuk.com/) campaigns for a return to the
traditional values of Conservatism. It is generally
regarded as a right-wing faction of the party and is noted
for opposing British integration into Europe and the
Single European Currency (euro).
68

Political parties
■Conservative Way Forward (http://www.conwayfor.org/)
is an interest group within the UK Conservative Party
which was founded in 1991 to develop and defend the
ideals of Thatcherism within the party. Its website
includes access to recent articles and press releases.
■The Tory Reform Group (http://www.trg.org.uk/) seeks
to encourage a return to one-nation ‘traditional’
conservatism. Its website provides information on the
political beliefs and aims of the organisation, its
membership and current events. It also provides access to
a selection of articles on British Conservative politics
from its journal the Reformer Magazine, and the full text
of selected policy papers and speeches by its members.
In addition to these, the official Conservative Party website
also has a directory of links to specialist sub-groups which
focus on policy development in specific areas. Examples
include gay and lesbian policy issues, urban renewal, transport
and defence. As new groups arise they are usually indexed by
SOSIG and the Political Science Association website.
Leading Conservative think tanks
There are a number of important examples which have
websites that are worth checking. Remember that, like the
examples given for the Labour Party, this list is not
comprehensive and you should regularly monitor established
news services for reports of other organisations publishing
relevant materials.
■The Bow Group (http://www.bowgroup.org) is the oldest
centre-right think tank in the UK and is actively involved
69

Using the Internet for Political Research
in developing Conservative economic and social policy.
Its website provides access to the full text of recent policy
papers and reports as well as articles from its journal
Crossbow. Topics covered by these include examinations
of Conservative Party policy, the funding of the National
Health Service and the welfare state and economic policy.
■The Centre for Policy Studies (CPS) (http://www.cps
.org.uk/) was founded in 1974 by Margaret Thatcher and
Keith Joseph. It is an independent centre-right think tank
which develops and publishes public policy proposals on
topical issues. Its website enables free access to some of its
recent pamphlets along with transcripts of lectures and
statements by leading Conservative politicians. It also
maintains a useful calendar of forthcoming events.
■The Adam Smith Institute (http://www.adamsmith.org.uk/)
seeks to promote free-market economic policies. Its website
can be useful for locating full-text pamphlets and reports
containing critiques of Labour Party economic policy from
a Conservative perspective. Key areas of concern include
the funding of public services and state regulation of the
economy.
■The Bruges Group (http://www.brugesgroup.com/) is a
well established ‘eurosceptic group’ which campaigns
against greater UK involvement with the European Union.
It members have included leading Conservative Party
politicians such as Margaret Thatcher and John Redwood.
There is also support from members of other political
parties. The website is a rich source of information on
political attitudes towards the EU as it regularly contains
70

Political parties
full-text speeches and pamphlets on the issues. It also
maintains a useful directory of links to the websites of
other ‘eurosceptic’ campaign groups and organisations.
Conservative current affairs magazines
The Spectator (http://www.spectator.co.uk/) is the oldest
established political and current affairs weekly, containing
topical articles, political commentary and book reviews from
a right-of-centre perspective. Its website provides access to a
collection of recent articles and political cartoons.
Other useful newsletters and publications are published by
the organisations listed in the think tank section. They
include Crossbow, the magazine published by the Bow
Group. You should also spend time exploring the links
directories from the think-tank home pages as these often
highlight other valuable resources.
Liberal Democrat resources
The Liberal Democrat website
The Liberal Democrat website (http://www.libdems.org.uk/)
is of course the key resource for access to current policy
statements, press releases and transcripts of speeches. This
includes coverage of ongoing election campaigns and party
conferences. There are also links to the home pages of
individual MPs where biographical information and online
speeches and articles may be found. Like those of the other
political parties, it tends to focus on current issues so it is
advisable to refer to the National Register of Archives for
71

Using the Internet for Political Research
possible sources of information on older policies. You might
also like to check the website of the Liberal Democrat
History Group which is listed below.
Special-interest groups within the 
Liberal Democrat Party
There are a number of groups that exist within the party to
promote particular policy aspects. Lists of these can be
obtained from the British Liberal Democrat Party website.
To trace smaller and more controversial examples it is also
worth checking the links directories of Liberal Party MPs
and liberal think tanks. Two of the most important are as
follows:
■DELGA (Liberal Democrats for Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual
and Transgender Action) (http://www.delga.libdems.org/)
offers information on recent policy developments relating
to the civil rights of the gay and lesbian community.
■The Liberal Democrat History Group (http://www.
liberalhistory.org.uk/) is a key source of information on
the historical development of the Liberal, SDP and Liberal
Democrat parties. Its website includes information on
recent publications, lists of ongoing PhD and postgraduate
research projects and a calendar of forthcoming events. It
also maintains a useful directory of links to other
historical resources.
Liberal think tanks
The most important example is the Centre for Reform
(http://www.cfr.org.uk/) which was established in 1998 and is
72

Political parties
concerned with all areas of current social and economic
policy. Its website provides access to information about recent
publications and ongoing research. It also includes access to
its press releases and a calendar of forthcoming events.
Liberal magazines
One of the most important titles is the Liberator (http://
www.liberator.org.uk/). This was established in 1970 and
acts as a forum for radical Liberal debate. Its website
provides free access to a selection of current and historical
articles covering world events from a Liberal perspective.
They include examples of political satire and cartoons. The
full text is currently accessible by subscribers only.
Other examples of useful newsletters can be found on the
websites of the Liberal think tanks. Also don’t forget to
monitor the SOSIG and Political Studies websites to keep up
to date with any new resources.
73

Prime ministers and 
heads of state
What information can I find about
political leaders?
An increasing amount of resources about political leaders is
now being made freely available on the Internet.
Strengths of coverage
The strengths of Internet coverage include the following:
■Information is available on the role of the head of state/
president or prime minister. This usually includes general
details about the structure of government in the nation
concerned, information on the legislative function of the
leader and access to the full text of the national constitution.
■Biographies of current and historical leaders may be
provided.
■The home pages of current leaders often provide access to
press releases, interviews and transcripts of key speeches.
Many include audio or video files too. These frequently
cover the full range of economic and social policy. They are
5
75

Using the Internet for Political Research
also particularly strong on foreign policy, often including
information on diplomatic missions and international
conferences.
■‘Virtual tours’ of official residences may also be accessible.
These can include images of particular architectural features
and histories of the buildings.
Weaknesses of coverage
The weaknesses of Internet coverage include the following:
■The emphasis is usually on current rather than historical
information. It can be difficult to find official documents
about ex-prime ministers. However, this situation is likely
to improve as there are increasing numbers of projects to
digitise the papers of famous leaders such as Churchill
and Roosevelt.
■There are large numbers of unofficial sites so it can be
easy to waste time wading through them. In order to
avoid this, this chapter will help you identify important
reference sources and sites of particular value for the
study of British and American political leaders.
Where can I find information about
current heads of state?
An excellent starting point is Zarate’s Political Collections
(http://www.terra.es/personal2/monolith/). This is maintained
by Roberto Ortiz de Zarate and includes a regularly updated
76

Prime ministers and heads of state
listing of all world leaders from 1945 to the present day with
photographs. It also contains separate sections for women
and African leaders, political biographies and a chronological
listing of deaths from 1990 onwards.
The CIA also maintains an online directory of current
heads of state and cabinet members of foreign governments
(http://www.cia.gov/cia/publications/chiefs/index.html)
which is updated weekly.
You may also find it useful to consult any of the major
encyclopaedias, such as the Encyclopaedia Britannica
(http://www.britannica.com/). The online versions sometimes
offer chronological listings of the dates of leaders and basic
biographical information free of charge, although longer
articles may be accessible to subscribers only.
The other most obvious place to start your research is the
main government site for the nation concerned, as this will
usually contain information about current activities, plus a
link to any official home pages. It is also worth looking at
the websites of any national record offices, archives or
national libraries to see if any state papers are being made
available digitally. These can usually be traced from
directories of links on the main national government web
pages. For critical commentary on current activities you
should also try consulting the websites of the national
newspapers or news agencies.
In order to formulate your Internet searches, it can also be
useful to ask yourself the following questions:
■Does the head of state have a particular official title, such
as president or king, or a named residence? This can be
77

Using the Internet for Political Research
especially useful for locating non-English language
resources.
■Is he or she associated with or the leader of a particular
political party? If so their main website may include
further details.
■Does he or she deliver any particular speeches? Examples
here could be the State of the Union speech or the Queen’s
Speech at the opening of Parliament. If you can enter the
exact name it may enable you to narrow down your
search results.
■Are any particular political theories or concepts
associated with him or her? For instance, if you want to
find information about the political beliefs of Tony Blair
you could use the terms ‘Third Way’ or ‘New Labour’.
■Have they participated in any recent international
conferences or events? Many international meetings and
summits, particularly those of intergovernmental
organisations such as the United Nations and the World
Trade Organisation, have their own websites which
contain full-text speeches from world leaders. Sometimes
information can be located here when it is not available
on the national home page.
Where can I find information about the
British prime minister?
■The 10 Downing Street website (http://www.number-10
.gov.uk/). This is the official source of information about
78

Prime ministers and heads of state
the current British prime minister. This will provide you
with access to the latest headlines, recent press briefings,
transcripts and multimedia files of important speeches. It
also contains an archive of Prime Minister’s Question
Time from the House of Commons. This can be useful for
tracing parliamentary debate about political issues. It is
currently available in both transcript and audio files.
Other features of the site include a listing of all Cabinet
members, a virtual tour of the building and news and
speeches from other UK government departments.
Currently historical material is limited to brief biographies
of earlier prime ministers.
■Political party websites. These can also include valuable
information. Those of opposition parties often include
critical commentary on the performance and policies of
the prime minister. That of the prime minister’s own party
can offer supplementary materials on his/her own
involvement with internal party reforms.
■House of Commons website (http://www.parliament.uk/
about_commons/about_commons.cfm). Official records of
Prime Minister’s Question Time and contributions to
parliamentary debates can be obtained from the website.
These can be used to supplement reports from national
newspapers or the BBC, which often use extracts from
parliamentary materials. A searchable database of Hansard,
the official record of parliamentary debates, is available on
the website from 1996 onwards with daily updates.
■Other useful sources. You will find that many of the most
useful sources for critical commentary are the same as
79

Using the Internet for Political Research
those which cover political parties. Lists of the key sources
are provided in Chapter 4 of this book under the heading
for British political parties on pp. 58–73. They include
political newspapers, political associations and think tanks.
Where can I find historical information
about British prime ministers?
Basic chronological listings of all British prime ministers 
with their dates of office and key achievements can be
obtained from the 10 Downing Street website and general
online encyclopaedias. The Encyclopaedia Britannica
(http://britannica.com/gov/primes/) has such a basic listing.
The Spartacus Internet Encyclopaedia (http://www.spartacus
.schoolnet.co.uk/pm.htm) also has a British prime ministers
section which is designed for school pupils and includes
some introductory information on historical events during
their periods of office.
At present it can be difficult to locate any more detailed
material. However, you might want to take a look at the
website of the National Archives (http://www.national
archives.gov.uk/). Note that prior to April 2003 it was
previously known as the Public Record Office so some
materials may also be listed under this heading or at its
previous website at (http://www.pro.gov.uk/). The National
Archives is responsible for providing access to declassified
UK government documents. These can include papers from
Cabinet meetings, government departments and letters
written by prime ministers on all aspects of policy. A small
80

Prime ministers and heads of state
but growing number are being digitised; they are currently
from the early 1970s but are likely to include wider
coverage in the future. They offer a fascinating insight into
the workings of the British government at the time. For
instance, it is possible to find out about Edward Heath’s
policy towards EU membership and the future of Northern
Ireland. However, you should always remember that not all
government materials are declassified – there is usually a
time delay of 30 years before items are released and in some
cases they may remain secret for much longer. Consult the
‘What’s New’ section of the site for up-to-date lists of the
releases made each month.
Other archives of material relating to prime ministers can be
identified via the National Register of Archives (http://www
.hmc.gov.uk/nra/nra2.htm). At the moment very little primary
source material is available online although it is usually
possible to search a catalogue of the collections. In the future,
it is likely that this situation will improve as more institutions
undertake digitisation projects. An interesting example, which
is available, is the Churchill: the Evidence website (http://www
.churchill.nls.ac.uk/). This was created by the National
Library of Scotland in conjunction with the Churchill Archives
to provide access to information and educational materials
about the life and political career of Winston Churchill. It is
divided into chronological periods covering his role as an MP,
wartime career and private life. Each section includes access to
original letters, speeches and photographs.
Other valuable sources of information are the societies and
foundations associated with prime ministers. For instance,
the Margaret Thatcher Foundation (http://www.margaret
81

Using the Internet for Political Research
thatcher.org/) website provides access to a database of all her
public statements from 1945 to 1990 and a selection of key
speeches and statements made after that date. Also accessible
are a large number of articles and papers as well as
bibliographies of further readings. SOSIG has a specialist
Head of State/Prime Ministers section (http://www.sosig.ac
.uk/roads/subject-listing/World-cat/heads.html) where you
will find further examples of society and project sites.
Where can I find information about the
current American president?
There are numerous Internet sites which cover topics
relating to the American presidency. In fact there are so
many that it is easy to become lost in the large number of
low-quality unofficial pages. In order to avoid this, the best
approach is give priority to official government sites and
recognised academic institutions. You must also remember
to evaluate the quality of all the resources you find using the
techniques outlined in Chapter 1.
■The White House website (http://www.whitehouse.gov/).
This is the key resource. Aside from biographical
information on the current incumbent and First Lady, it
has a large press briefings section which provides free
access to the latest news releases, video news conferences
and radio broadcasts. It also includes archived recordings
and transcripts of State of the Union speeches from the
current President, official proclamations and executive
82

Prime ministers and heads of state
orders. However, do remember that, as it is promoting the
work of the President, it is unlikely to contain critical
commentary on his/her policies. For a more objective
analysis of these you should also consult news agency and
think-tank websites.
■Presidential documents. The Weekly Compilation of
Presidential Documents is published every Monday by
the Office of the Federal Register, National Archives and
Records Administration. It records all statements,
messages and other presidential documents released by
the White House. Its website (http://www.access.gpo.gov/
nara/nara003.html) provides access to a searchable
database of all issues from 1993 to the present day.
■News agencies. The main US news services usually
include coverage of recent presidential activities. CNN
Inside Politics (http://www.cnn.com/ALLPOLITICS/) is a
specialist political news service maintained by CNN and
Time Magazine. It includes video footage and political
analysis of recent events. You might also like to consult
some of the newspapers, which cover Congressional
activities as these often include analyses of the work of
the President. Key examples are The Hill (http://www
.hillnews.com/) which is a weekly newspaper covering
recent House activities, Capitol Spotlight (http://www
.c-span.org/capitolspotlight/) which is an educational
service maintained by C-SPAN and Congressional
Quarterly which aims to educate the public about current
political events. Both contain news stories and interviews
on recent events.
83

Using the Internet for Political Research
■Think tanks and organisational websites. These can be
important for tracing ongoing research projects about
American presidential government. Their websites can
include access to press releases and full-text reports. Key
examples include the Brookings Institution (http://www
.brookings.edu) which is renowned for its Presidential
Appointee Initiative (http://www.appointee.brookings
.org/). This has been investigating the nomination and
election of US presidents. Its website includes free access
to papers and reports containing its findings. The
American Political Science Association (http://www
.apsanet.org/) also has a specialist section which covers
issues relating to the American presidency. Information
on recent academic research and conferences may be
obtained from there. In addition the APSA PROceedings
website (http://apsaproceedings.cup.org/) provides free
access to the text of recent annual conference papers. You
may find that some of these cover relevant topics
although it should be noted that the papers are not 
stored indefinitely and access is currently limited to recent
years only.
A useful site for tracing other publications and projects is
the Moving Ideas Network (http://www.movingideas.org/)
that posts information on the latest social, economic and
political policy news from over 100 organisations. You
might also like to check the American presidency website
(http://www.presidency.ucsb.edu/index.php). This was
originally created by Professor John Woolley and Gerhard
Peters of the University of California and aims to create an
84

Prime ministers and heads of state
online collection of materials relating to all American
presidents from George Washington to the present day. In
addition to links to primary source documents and papers,
it includes a directory of links to research centres and
organisations currently studying the American presidency.
What historical information can I find
about the American presidency?
The USA has a number of large well-established programmes
which are in the process of making a wealth of historical
information available via the Internet. A basic reference
source is POTUS: Presidents of the United States (http://
www.ipl.org/div/potus/). This forms part of the Internet
Public Library maintained by the University of Michigan and
is intended to provide access to basic factual information on
all the presidents from George Washington to the current
day. Each entry includes a basic biography, election results
and links to related Internet sites.
It is also possible to trace and access full-text historical
documents. The Public Papers of the Presidents of the
United States (http://www.access.gpo.gov/nara/pubpaps/
srchpaps.html) series is now available online. It is an official
publication from the National Archives and Records
Administration, which contains the papers and speeches of
the President. Coverage currently includes volumes covering
the presidencies of George Bush and Bill Clinton.
A key source for historical information is the American
Memory Project (http://memory.loc.gov/) of the Library of
85

Using the Internet for Political Research
Congress which is in the process of creating a national
digital library providing free public access to United States
historical heritage documents. Here you will find a wealth
of full-text primary resource documents including letters,
reports and legislation. Important collections which are
currently available include I Do Solemnly Swear (http://
memory.loc.gov/ammem/pihtml/), a collection of several
hundred items relating to presidential inaugurations from
George Washington to the present day. It contains audiofiles
of inaugural speeches, newspaper reports and letters.
There is also a special collection of portraits of the Presidents
of the United States and First Ladies (http://memory.loc
.gov/ammem/odmdhtml/preshome.html) which contains
photographic and print images from 1789 onwards and a
number of collections which concentrate on the life and work
of individual American presidents. An interesting example of
the latter is Theodore Roosevelt: His Life and Times on Film
(http://memory.loc.gov/ammem/trfhtml/trfhome.html). This
provides access to over a 100 films of events from Roosevelt’s
life and period of office. They provide a fascinating insight
into world events including his involvement in the Spanish
American War of 1898. Like all the American Memory
Collections, the pages provide some background information
on the history of the era and suggestions for further reading.
They can be browsed by subject or searched by keyword. As
the American Memory Project is ongoing, it is certainly worth
checking the site regularly to see if any new collections have
been added recently!
Another rich source of information is the Presidential
Libraries. Many of these have created online exhibits
86

Prime ministers and heads of state
providing information about individual presidents and some
are in the process of digitising primary source documents
such as letters and photographs. A good example is the
Truman Library (http://www.trumanlibrary.org) that
includes an extensive online collection of speeches,
photographs and political cartoons. Key topics covered by
these include Truman’s presidential election campaigns from
the 1940s and his involvement in the Korean War. The site
also contains a large educational section with interactive
quizzes for children and suggested lesson plans for teachers.
A central directory of all the Presidential Libraries is
maintained by the National Archives and Records
Administration 
(http://www.archives.gov/presidential_
libraries/index.html). This includes access to a central news
release service which summarises news from all the
collections and contains a set of links to their websites. It
also offers some background information on the function
and services of the Presidential Library system and guidance
on how to begin researching the presidency.
87

Parliaments
What parliamentary information can I
find on the Internet?
This chapter aims to guide you to some of the most reliable
sources on information about national parliaments. It
includes separate more detailed sections on the British
Parliament and the devolved assemblies of Scotland, Wales
and Northern Ireland.
Strengths of coverage
A large number of national parliaments worldwide now
have Internet sites. While these differ in the level of detail
which they offer, typical features include the following:
■Information on parliamentary structure and functions.
This can be useful as often the organisation can be quite
complicated. It is common for parliaments to have several
chambers which have different responsibilities and
functions. Each of these chambers in turn usually has a
number of specialist committees that are responsible for
overseeing specific areas. Parliamentary websites often
6
89

Using the Internet for Political Research
have educational sections providing access to fact sheets
which will tell you how the system operates.
■Information on the legislative role of the parliament.
Most national chambers perform some type of role with
regard to the passing of legislation. Again the educational
section of their website often spells out clearly exactly
what this is. It is also common for parliamentary sites to
provide detailed information on current bills passing
through the parliament. This can include their full text
and access to parliamentary debates and committee
reports that critically discuss the issues at stake.
■Full-text parliamentary debates. These are frequently
available free of charge from the website and offer a rich
source of information on current political issues, including
foreign policy and new legislation. Many parliaments are
also providing live video footage of debates as they happen!
■Lists of current members of parliament. Most websites
contain directories of current MPs and lists of government
and committee members. Usually these offer contact
details and information on party allegiance. However, for
more in-depth biographies it is wise to consult the website
of their political party as this is often more detailed.
■Parliamentary library web pages. Many national
parliaments have specialist research libraries which
produce briefing papers for MPs. These can provide useful
introductions to current topics of interest and new acts of
parliament.
In addition to the parliament websites you will also find a large
number of commercial sources. National news services and
90

Parliaments
newspapers often have parliamentary sections which include
summarised accounts of the debates and critical commentary
on them. You may also find it helpful to check the websites of
national political science associations to see if there are any
special interest groups which cover parliamentary procedure.
Large Internet gateways such as SOSIG (http://www.sosig
.ac.uk) will guide you to the most appropriate sources.
Difficulties you may encounter
■Restricted historical coverage. While the standard of
current coverage is often excellent, older materials may
not be available online. However, you should check the
websites of any national libraries or archives to see if
there are any digitisation projects underway.
■The complexity of the parliamentary system. The
multiplicity of committees within parliaments and their
frequent name changes can make it difficult to locate
individual materials. Most parliamentary websites offer
some sort of search engine, but to save time the best advice
is to find out as much information as you can. For
instance, if you are trying to locate a specific report useful
information includes the approximate date of publication
and the name of the committee which issued the report.
Often secondary sources such as newspapers do not quote
these accurately, so if you do not have this it can be helpful
to know which parliamentary chamber it originated from
and/or the name of the committee chairperson. These can
be used as search terms as often a famous report becomes
commonly known by the name of its chairperson.
91

Using the Internet for Political Research
How can I trace parliamentary websites?
One of the best sources available is the website of the
Inter-Parliamentary Union (IPU) (http://www.ipu.org/
english/home.htm). The IPU is an international organisation
that represents the interests of parliaments of sovereign
states. It provides free access to the PARLine database that
is a directory of national parliaments worldwide. It is
possible to search the database by keyword or browse by
geographical area. Each entry provides access to factual
information about the structure and organisation of the
parliament. This commonly includes the names of the
parliamentary chambers, the number of members of
parliament and method of their election, the length of the
parliamentary term and the date of the last elections. Some
direct links to the individual parliamentary websites are 
also offered.
The IPU also maintains PARLit, which is a database of
bibliographic references to books, articles and papers
relating to the role, structure and working methods of a
large number of national parliaments. This can be a useful
source for tracing supplementary readings. Information is
currently available from 1992 to date, although there are
plans to try to extend this. In addition, there is also a
specialist ‘Women in Politics’ database on the site which
provides bibliographic references to articles and books that
focus specifically on issues relating to women’s participation
in public life. These are international in scope and cover
such subjects as female suffrage and barriers to women’s
political involvement.
92

Parliaments
Other directories of links to parliamentary websites can 
be traced via SOSIG. This has a specialist parliaments
section at http://www.sosig.ac.uk/roads/subject-listing/
World-cat/parliament.htm. This contains a general section
and specialist subdivisions for upper chambers, lower
chambers and members of parliament.
What information can I find on the
British Parliament website?
The official Parliament website (http://www.parliament.uk/)
offers free access to a wealth of information about the
activities of the House of Commons and the House of Lords.
The House of Commons website
The House of Commons website provides a number of
different services.
■For recent news stories you can consult the
ParliamentLive TV section (http://www.parliamentlive
.tv/) which offers live webcasting from the main chambers
and committee meetings. Schedules of forthcoming
broadcasts are available from the site. There is also a
‘What’s new’ section where you will find listings of
current and future business. The House of Commons
Weekly Information Bulletin can be found there and
contains timetables of recent and forthcoming activity.
The full text of recent debates can be located in Hansard
(http://www.parliament.uk/hansard/hansard.cfm). This is
93

Using the Internet for Political Research
a verbatim report of proceedings in the house, which also
includes answers to written questions and reports of
standing committee debates. The web version is updated
daily and there is a searchable archive of all debates from
1988 to the present day. If you are only interested in the
results of particular parliamentary votes, it may be worth
going directly to the Votes and Proceedings database
(http://www.publications.parliament.uk/pa/cm/cmvote/
cmvote.htm), which is a formal recording of the business
of each individual parliamentary day.
■Reports of parliamentary activity are contained within
Hansard. You might also like to consult the Select Com-
mittee pages (http://www.parliament.uk/parliamentary_
committees/parliamentary_committees16.cfm). These are
cross party groups of MPs who focus on particular areas of
government activity such as transport, defence, education or
health provision. They offer critical comment on recent
policy and scrutiny of new legislation. The minutes of their
meetings frequently contain critical questioning of
government ministers. The website provides a full listing of
all committees that have existed from 1996 to date. Note
that some committees have changed their names and remits
since this date so you should check the main index of
committee names for any cross references. Each committee
has an individual home page with a listing of members 
and access to press releases, minutes of evidence and full-
text reports.
■Information on legislative activity is readily available.
There is a separate section on the status of bills before
Parliament 
(http://www.parliament.uk/bills/bills.cfm)
94

Parliaments
which provides a listing of all public and private
legislation currently under consideration. There are also
links to the web pages of standing committees debating
specific bills. These offer useful sources of critical
commentary on the legislation. Introductory fact sheets,
which clearly explain British legislative procedure, can
also be downloaded.
■Information about MPs can be obtained from the official
Directory of MPs, Peers and their Offices (http://www
.parliament.uk/directories/directories.cfm). This lists all
current MPs, members of the government and
committees. It includes links to their e-mails and websites
where available. Also offered are statistics on the number
of current women MPs and the number of members for
each political party. Another useful source is the Register
of Members’ Interests (http://www.parliament.uk/about_
commons/register_of_members_interests.cfm), 
which
records sources of external income for individual MPs for
the current parliamentary session. The rules relating to
this and all previous editions of the register from 1997 to
date are available from the website.
■Further information on MPs, ethics and the text of codes of
conduct can be obtained from the Office of the
Parliamentary Commissioner for Standards (http://www
.parliament.uk/about_commons/pcfs.cfmb) who provides
guidance to the government on matters of ethics relating to
Members of Parliament and leads investigations into
complaints made against individual MPs as part of the
Select Committee on Standards and Privileges. The
committee also has its own home page where you can
95

Using the Internet for Political Research
consult the full text of all press releases and papers from
1996 to date (http://www.parliament.uk/parliamentary_
committees/standards_and_privileges.cfm).
■POLIS (the Parliamentary Online Indexing Service)
(http://www.polis.parliament.uk/) is an official index of the
proceedings and publications of the British Parliament. It is
maintained by the House of Commons Library and includes
all publications of the House of Commons and House of
Lords from 1997 to date. These include entries in Hansard
as well as select committee reports, standing committee
reports and House of Commons research papers. MP’s
name, subject keyword or title can be used to search the
database. There are an increasing number of links to full-
text documents where these are available on the Internet.
■Another useful source is the Early Day Motions Database
(http://edm.ais.co.uk/). An Early Day Motion is used to
describe notices of motions that are tabled by members but
are not expected to be debated in Parliament. Their main
purpose is to draw attention to a specific issue. They can be
used as a source of information about topical subjects at a
particular period of time. It is possible to search the
database to find motions tabled by individual MPs.
■Finally the House of Commons Library produces a 
useful set of research papers (http://www.parliament.uk/
parliamentary_publications_and_archives/research_papers
.cfm). Although these are really intended to brief MPs they
can be used by students as a background source of
information. They are especially useful for summarising the
content of new bills and Acts of Parliament, providing
96

Parliaments
statistics on recent elections, summarising new public policy
developments and offering chronologies of key inter-
national events such as European Union developments and
wars. All papers published since 1998 can be accessed free
of charge.
The House of Lords website
The House of Lords website contains similar information
relating specifically to the function and work of the upper
chamber.
■News coverage of daily events in the House of Lords can
also be obtained from the Parliament Live website and the
House of Commons Weekly Information Bulletin.
■Reports of debates can be obtained from the Lords version
of Hansard (http://www.parliament.uk/hansard/hansard2
.cfm) which is updated daily and includes proceedings and
answers to written questions from 1996 to the present day.
There are also separate sections for Lords select committees
(http://www.parliament.uk/parliamentary_committees/
parliamentary_committees26.cfm) where you will be able
to trace investigations of current policy areas and proposed
legislation. Some of these cover the same themes as their
Commons counterparts; however, it is often interesting to
compare the differences in their outlook! Again committees
may change names so remember to check the main index
for any cross-references.
■Additionally the House of Lords has a major role within
the UK judicial system, acting as the final court of appeal
97

Using the Internet for Political Research
on points of law in civil cases in the United Kingdom and
criminal law cases in England, Wales and Northern
Ireland. The Judicial Work section of the site (http://www
.parliament.uk/judicial_work/judicial_work.cfm)
provides an overview of this function and includes access
to the full text of all judgments made by the Law Lords
since November 1996. It also links to information on the
ongoing work of the appeal committees.
■There are also directories of peers and a registry of their
external financial interests. These contain the same
information as their counterparts for the Commons and
can be found at http://www.parliament.uk/about_lords/
register_of_lords_interests.cfm.
The future function and membership of the House of Lords is
currently under debate. Information on recent parliamentary
debates and reports relating to this can usually be located
from the news section of the House of Lord’s website. It is
also useful to consult the website of the Joint Committee 
on House of Lords Reform (http://www.parliament.uk/
parliamentary_committees/joint_committee_on_house_of_
lords_reform.cfm) which is the specialist joint committee of
the House of Commons and House of Lords overseeing the
reform process. In addition to the full text of its own press
releases and reports, it also offers a useful collection of links
to other UK government documents relating to the debate.
Further critical commentary on issues relating to
parliamentary reform can be traced using the websites listed
in the next section of this chapter.
98

Parliaments
What other sources are available for
information on the British Parliament?
News services
These can be particularly useful for locating critical
commentary on parliamentary activity as they often include
editorials from political commentators and political interviews
with MPs. In addition to the national daily newspapers there
are two major sources:
■The BBC News site (http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/uk_
politics/default.stm) has consistently good coverage of
parliamentary activity. It also includes links to its main
radio and TV parliamentary programmes where you can
locate transcripts and video files. The site also contains a
searchable database of MP profiles.
■Another useful news site is ePolitix.com (http://www
.epolitix.com/) which aims to improve communication
between MPs and the public. The site includes political
interviews and a ‘Legislation watch’ section, which
highlights recent activity relating to the progress of bills
through Parliament. There are also links to MPs’ political
magazines such as The House which offer insider viewpoints
and unofficial discussion of current political issues.
Research bodies
The websites of leading political think tanks often include
discussion of parliamentary procedure and organisation.
99

Using the Internet for Political Research
Lists of useful examples have already been given in Chapter
5. In addition you should also look at the following:
■The Hansard Society (http://www.hansardsociety.org.uk/
default.htm) is a major forum for research and debate on
parliamentary democracy. Key areas of concern include
the development of electronic government, devolution
and citizenship. Some publications are available in full
text from the website.
■Charter88 (http://www.charter88.org.uk) is an independent
organisation that campaigns for political reform in the UK.
Areas on which it regularly publishes include the reform of
the House of Lords, political devolution and parliamentary
democracy. Briefings and news releases can be read online.
■Based at University College London, the Constitution
Unit (http://www.ucl.ac.uk/ constitution-unit/) specialises
in issues relating to constitutional reform in the UK. 
This includes coverage of parliamentary reform, political
devolution, the role of the House of Lords and human
rights issues.
■Other specialist research centres are listed on SOSIG where
there is a general section for parliaments (http://www.sosig
.ac.uk/roads/subject-listing/World-cat/parliament.html).
Where can I find general information
on the devolved parliamentary bodies?
As a result of the British government’s policy of political
devolution, the parliamentary bodies of Wales, Scotland and
100

Parliaments
Northern Ireland are all becoming increasingly important.
Before moving on to highlight sources which focus
specifically on each of these areas, it is worth mentioning a
number of sources that cover devolution and regional
government in general.
A good starting point is the UK Parliament website which
contains a specialist section on devolved bodies (http://www
.parliament.uk/devolved/devolved.cfm). This provides links
to their websites. It also highlights those UK government
departments which are responsible for regional and
devolution policy. This is particularly useful as in the past
responsibilities have shifted and more are likely to do so with
the establishment of the Department for Constitutional
Affairs in July 2003. The Office of the Deputy Prime Minister
is currently responsible. Its website has a special devolution
section (http://www.devolution.odpm.gov.uk/) where you
will find copies of all the key government legislation and
documents relating to Scotland, Northern Ireland and Wales.
There is also a separate regional policy covering moves
towards devolved government within the English regions
(http://www.regions.odpm.gov.uk/index.htm).
You might also want to consult the website of the
Electoral Commission (http://www.electoralcommission
.gov.uk/) which is concerned with electoral arrangements
relating to the bodies and provides access to full-text papers
analysing the conduct of their elections.
A leading research body is the UCL Constitution Unit
(http://www.ucl.ac.uk/constitution-unit/). Coverage focuses
upon the changes to the machinery of government and its
impact. There are a number of useful surveys and bulletins
101

Using the Internet for Political Research
available free of charge from the website. A particular focus is
the impact of devolution on healthcare policy and provision.
Also useful is the ESRC Devolution and Social Change
Project (http://www.devolution.ac.uk/) which is being funded
by the UK Economic and Social Research Council. It is
developing a portal of links to quality Internet resources
covering all aspects of political devolution. These include
individual papers, research projects and other useful resources.
Useful sites for information on the
Scottish Parliament
The Scottish Parliament has its own official website
(http://www.scottish.parliament.uk/). This contains all the
features that we noted on the Westminster site, namely lists
of current MPs, access to full-text parliamentary debates
(Hansard), official reports and consultation papers and a
link to live coverage of the action. Remember to check the
‘What’s happening’ section for the latest information. A
particularly useful publication is WHISP
(What’s
Happening in the Scottish Parliament), which provides a
weekly update of bills before the parliament, issues debated,
lists of new publications and statistics on the current state of
the parties. There is also a research section where you will
find briefing papers prepared by the Information Service of
the Scottish Parliament. These perform a role similar to
those of the House of Commons Research Papers in offering
an excellent factual introduction to current political policy
and new legislation. Issues are available from 1999 to date.
102

Parliaments
In addition to this site there are a number of other specialist
resources. To aid your searching you might want to note that
the Scottish Parliament is sometimes known as Holyrood
House so searches using this term may also retrieve useful
information.
Government sites
For information on the relationship between the English and
Scottish Parliaments an excellent site is the Scottish Affairs
Select Committee (http://www.parliament.uk/parliamentary_
committees/scottish_affairs_committee.cfm) 
which 
is
appointed by Westminster to oversee the finances,
administration and operation of the Scottish Parliament and
other Scottish government bodies. Its website provides access
to press releases, minutes of evidence and official reports
from 1996 onwards. It also includes links to related Scottish
government websites. Note that the main focus of these is
upon the constitutional role of the Scottish Parliament and
its procedures rather than accounts of daily business.
News services
The BBC News site has a specialist section for Scotland
(http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/scotland/default.stm). This includes
the latest parliamentary headlines and news stories. It also has
a useful section for BBC Scotland political programmes which
contains links to coverage of the Scottish Parliament, Scottish
business being debated in the English Parliament at
Westminster and other current affairs programmes.
103

Using the Internet for Political Research
The leading Scottish newspaper The Scotsman (http://www
.thescotsman.co.uk/politics.cfm) also has a specific section
for politics, which includes news coverage and commentary
on Scottish issues. This is often more detailed than that
offered in the English daily newspapers, although it is always
useful to check them as well. However, you should note that
materials are not archived on this site indefinitely. It is good
practice to record references as soon as possible.
In addition to these established resources there are also a
number of commercial online-only services. These should be
treated with caution. Investigate the ownership and origin
of these to establish their authority before using them as a
basis of research. However, one of the most well established
is HolyroodNews (http://www.holyroodnews.com/welcome
.htm). Here you will find daily coverage of events, articles
and a live feed to coverage from the Chamber.
Historical materials
As the Scottish Parliament only came into being in 1999, it
is fortunate in that all records of its debates and publications
are accessible online from the official Parliament site. If you
are searching for materials on the introduction of devolution
and the campaigns that preceded it some full-text resources
can be located on the websites of the think tanks and
research bodies listed in the general devolution section. You
might also wish to take a look at the ASPECT: Access to
Scottish Parliamentary Election Candidate Materials site
(http://gdl.cdlr.strath.ac.uk/aspect/). This is a fascinating
digital archive of ephemera relating to the first elections to
104

Parliaments
the assembly in 1999. It includes examples of candidate
manifestos, leaflets and flyers from all the parties involved.
The SOSIG Scottish devolution section also has links to
House of Commons research papers and campaign websites
which you will find useful (http://www.sosig.ac.uk/roads/
subject-listing/World-cat/devscot.html).
Research groups
All the research groups listed in the general devolution
section provide access to materials relating to the
development and operation of the Scottish Parliament. In
addition the Scottish Council Foundation (http://www
.scottishcouncilfoundation.org/index.php), an independent
think tank that specialises in economic and public policy
issues relating to Scotland, offers coverage of governance and
the Scottish Parliament. Not all materials are free, but you
are able to view information about recent research studies.
Useful sites for information on the
Welsh Assembly
The official title of the parliamentary body for Wales is the
National Assembly for Wales; however, it can sometimes be
referred to as the Welsh Assembly or Parliament. When looking
for information it is certainly worth using all variant spellings
of the title in order to retrieve all the relevant information.
The National Assembly for Wales website (http://www
.wales.gov.uk/) is extremely comprehensive. It includes
105

Using the Internet for Political Research
full-text Hansard parliamentary debates from 1999 to date,
an extensive section of national statistics, legislative reports
and details of its relationship with Westminster. In addition,
there are also the following.
Government sites
The Welsh Affairs Committee (http://www.parliament.uk/
parliamentary_committees/welsh_affairs_committee.cfm)
handles relations between Westminster and the National
Assembly for Wales. Its website can be used to locate recent
press releases, committee meetings and reports on the
constitutional and procedural implications of political
devolution.
News sites
These will offer you commentary on current events. The
BBC News site has a section for Wales (http://news.bbc.co
.uk/1/hi/wales/default.stm) where you will find coverage of
Assembly proceedings and links to BBC Welsh language
broadcasts.
Historical materials
The National Assembly for Wales website has a complete
online archive of its proceedings and papers. In addition, some
resources relating to the campaign for a separate Welsh
Assembly can be traced via the ‘Ymgyrchu! A Century of Social
and Political Campaigning in Wales Project’ site (http://www
.llgc.org.uk/ymgyrchu/index-e.htm). This is maintained by the
106

Parliaments
National Library of Wales and contains digital images of
original documents, photographs and video files relating to
political and social campaign movements in twentieth-century
Wales. One section of the site deals specifically with devolution,
offering access to a number of original primary source
documents such as campaign posters and literature.
There is also a Welsh Political Archive (http://www.llgc
.org.uk/lc/awg_s_awg.htm) which was established in 1983
to coordinate the collection of Welsh political materials. Its
website provides information on important collections held
by libraries and archives in Wales. From here you can trace
what is available, although at present only a tiny percentage
of the material is offered online.
Research groups
In addition to the general organisations noted in the general
devolution section, there are a number of organisations that
focus specifically on Wales. The Institute of Welsh Politics
(http://www.aber.ac.uk/interpol/IWP/) is based at the
University of Aberystwyth and specialises in research on
devolution in Wales. Its website provides access to
information about its ongoing research, with access to a
limited number of full-text publications.
The Welsh Governance Centre (http://www.cf.ac.uk/euros/
welsh-governance/) is a similar body based at the University
of Cardiff. Again the quantity of full-text information
available online is currently limited. However, it is possible
to use the site to trace information about research on the
procedures and constitutional role of the Welsh Assembly.
107

Using the Internet for Political Research
The Institute of Welsh Affairs (http://www.iwa.org.uk/) is
an independent think tank which critically assesses the
impact and policies of the National Assembly. It is possible
to download detailed monitoring reports from its website.
Topics covered by these include the impact of political
devolution on the economy and healthcare services of Wales.
Useful sites for information on
parliamentary bodies in Northern Ireland
Regional government in Northern Ireland has a long and
complicated history. Probably the best site to provide
coverage of this history and Anglo-Irish relations is CAIN
(the Conflict Archive on the Internet) (http://cain.ulst
.ac.uk/). This superb site is maintained by the University of
Ulster and provides coverage of political and social issues
from 1968 to the present day. It forms part of ARK: The
Social and Political Archive of Northern Ireland (http://
www.ark.ac.uk/). CAIN is subdivided into a number of
specialist subsections. These include a background history of
the ‘troubles’, information on key events and resources
relating to themes such as parades, religious discrimination
and elections. The site also has a specialist section with links
to online bibliographies that can be used to guide further
reading. Other features include photographic archives and
links to other related online databases. One of the strengths
of the site is the fact that it is able to get permission to digitise
the full text of government reports, speeches and books
relating to the history and current political situation in the
108

Parliaments
province. As a result it often offers more detailed coverage
than any other resource. It is particularly useful to check the
new additions list for links to the latest political speeches and
news releases from all the parties.
The other key site is of course that of the Northern Ireland
Executive (http://www.northernireland.gov.uk/). This provides
access to up-to-date information on the current state of
government in the region. At certain periods, such as during
2002, the operation of the Northern Ireland Assembly was
suspended; this site highlights any such change in the situation.
It also includes links to other government bodies in Northern
Ireland. The Office of the First Minister can be useful for press
releases and statements involving relations with the UK.
Other government bodies
In addition to regular monitoring of the CAIN website, it is
also useful to look at the home page of the Northern Ireland
Office (http://www.nio.gov.uk/) which has continuing
responsibility for constitutional and security issues relating
to Northern Ireland. Its website includes recent press
releases, statistics and reports covering these aspects of
government in the region.
Alongside this site, there is also the Northern Ireland Select
Affairs Committee of the UK House of Commons (http://
www.parliament.uk/parliamentary_committees/northern_
ireland_affairs.cfm) where you will find critical assessments
of the policy, finance and administration of the Northern
Ireland Office and cross-border relations in general.
109

Using the Internet for Political Research
News services
The BBC News site has a section for Northern Ireland news
(http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/northern_ireland/default.stm)
which is consistently reliable. It also includes links to the
main Irish newspapers online all of which cover political
and parliamentary issues.
Also well regarded is the News Hound Service
(http://www.nuzhound.com/about.php) which is an index of
links to recent articles from the online versions of Irish
newspapers. It can be especially useful in highlighting the
key political issues. It also includes recent book reviews. The
site is politically independent. It is currently updated daily.
Research groups
One of the easiest ways to locate organisations which conduct
research into Northern Ireland politics is to look at the CAIN
website which has a useful guide to websites that cover
Northern Ireland politics (http://cain.ulst.ac.uk/bibdbs/
newlinks.htm). This includes government departments,
university research centres and pressure groups. Brief
descriptions on the main subject coverage of each are
included. Check the top of the guide for information on when
it was last updated.
A good example of a relevant think tank is Democratic
Dialogue (http://www.democraticdialogue.org/) which was
established in 1995 to stimulate debate about the political
problems of Northern Ireland. Some of its briefing papers
may be read online. These include in-depth coverage of
political devolution.
110

Parliaments
SOSIG also has a section on Northern Ireland government
(http://www.sosig.ac.uk/roads/subject-listing/World-cat/
devni.html) where further examples of think tanks, academic
research bodies and individual documents may be located.
111

Government departments 
and publications
What sort of information can I find on
the Internet?
Strengths of coverage
One of the strengths of the Internet is its ability to provide free
access to official information from governments worldwide.
Although coverage varies from country to country, information
which is commonly available includes:
■organisational charts and details on the function and
responsibility of individual departments;
■press releases that provide details of new policy, highlight
new reports and legislation and offer commentary on
current news stories;
■statistical data, including information about censuses and
budgets (note, however, that more detailed figures may
not be offered free of charge);
■full-text reports and consultation papers – consultation
papers are often used to develop ideas about government
7
113

Using the Internet for Political Research
policy and can therefore be an excellent source of
information on future trends and issues of concern;
■legislation – it is often possible to access full-text legal
documents such as Acts of Parliament and proposals for
law reform. Legal research can be complicated by the
complexity of the subject area and its difficult
terminology so if you are particularly interested in this
aspect it is a good idea to consult the free tutorial
‘Internet for Lawyers’ (http://www.vts.rdn.ac.uk/tutorial/
lawyers) which offers useful starting points for research.
You might also want to take a look at the ‘Law Gateway’
on SOSIG (http://www.sosig.ac.uk/law/);
■speeches from government ministers;
■official government journals and newsletters – these can
describe recent political activity and provide details of
current policy programmes. They may also list new
government publications and legislation.
Common problems
In fact there is often so much government information on
the Internet that it can sometimes be difficult to find what
you need! Common problems include:
■difficulties in tracing individual documents due to the fact
that national governments are often divided into a
multiplicity of departments, which frequently merge, alter
their responsibilities, change their names or disappear
entirely!
114

Government departments and publications
■problems in finding historical materials online as older
documents may not be archived on websites;
■a lack of detailed information about governments from
the developing countries in Asia and Africa.
However, here are some good general tips that will help you:
■Note that many national governments have information
gateways or portals to their information. Locating these can
save you time as they act as central entry points which
provide access to the latest news releases from all the
different departments and directories of links to their
websites. If you are searching for a recent government report
and are unsure from which department it originated you can
often find it listed in a ‘news’ or ‘new releases’ section.
Information on useful sites for tracing portals is given in the
next section of this chapter. If a country does not have such
a service, other useful sources can include government news
agencies or information offices or the websites of prime
ministers as these often highlight new developments.
■If you are looking for statistical information use the central
government portals to try to locate the website of a central
statistical office or bureau as these often act as collection
agencies for all the government departments, gathering
together a large amount of data in one place. It is quite
common to find basic census and trade information online,
although more detailed information may not be freely
available. Other potential sources for statistics, particularly
for developing countries which may have limited Internet
sites, include international organisations such as the World
115

Using the Internet for Political Research
Bank (http://www.worldbank.org/), the IMF (http://www
.imf.org/) or the United Nations (http:// www.un.org).
■If you are searching for government documents it is worth
finding out if the national government produces a regular
listing of official publications as this will then provide you
with the official classification, document numbers and
publication details. Once you know this you can go to the
website of the appropriate department and search for it
there. Such lists can usually be located via the main
government portals. They are often contained within
official journals or located on the sites of national stationery
offices or government publishers. Note that sometimes they
may not list everything that has been published by a
government; some exclude internal documents and press
releases, so check any help screens for details of omissions.
■Finally remember to target your searching effectively by
following the tips on Internet searching outlined in
Chapter 1. In particular it is important to note down the
correct names of any government departments or
individual documents that you need. Be prepared to search
for any foreign language resources in both their original
language and English versions. It is also a good idea to
find out if they are commonly known by any acronyms or
unofficial titles as you may also find related materials
when searching for these. For instance, resources can be
found listed under both DTI and the Department of Trade
and Industry.
116

Government departments and publications
What are the best sites for tracing
government Internet gateways?
Unfortunately a single authoritative list of all national
government department websites does not exist. The large
amount of information on offer, and the fact that it is
constantly changing, means that you are likely to come
across broken links and omissions. The best advice is to use
the resources below to trace the main government site of the
nation and then look for directories within them to find the
most up-to-date links to individual departments.
Governments on the WWW (http://www.gksoft.com/govt/)
is a well known directory. It is maintained by Gunnar
Anzinger and provides listings of government departments,
agencies and official bodies arranged by country. It is
particularly useful for tracing sites of Asian and African
governments, as information about these can often be
difficult to find. Remember to check the information about
when the site was last updated, as occasionally links are out
of date.
Another potentially useful source is the University of
Michigan Foreign Documents Center (http://www.lib.umich
.edu/govdocs/). This site maintains an excellent directory of
links to political web resources worldwide. The Foreign
Governments section includes sections for Asian, African
and European governments. It also contains a listing of
comprehensive directories, constitutions and statistics. Each
list provides brief annotations on the contents of the sites.
117

Using the Internet for Political Research
Where can I find information about UK
government activity?
Central gateways
UKonline.gov.uk (http://www.ukonline.gov.uk/) is the
official entry point for public information about current UK
government activity. It was designed for use by members of
the public so includes some chat forums and descriptions of
government work which are quite basic. However, it does
contain useful A–Z directories of the websites of central and
local government agencies, departments and bodies. These
are quite comprehensive and provide helpful one- or two-
line summaries of the main responsibilities of the bodies.
The ‘news section’ of the site can also be relied upon to
highlight up-to-date headlines relating to government policy
and new publications.
A central listing of UK official agencies is also maintained
by the Cabinet Office. This is hosted on its Agencies and
Public Bodies website (http://www.cabinet-office.gov.uk/
agencies-publicbodies/). It is particularly useful for
understanding the interrelationships between official bodies
such as quangos (non-departmental public bodies) and
advisory agencies which can be difficult to trace elsewhere.
This information can be found on the Public Bodies
Directory, which covers the many hundreds of executive and
advisory non-departmental public bodies, nationalised
industries, public corporations, NHS bodies and tribunals.
Each entry provides basic facts on responsibilities, details
about affiliations to central government departments and a
118

Government departments and publications
link to the website. It includes agencies based in the devolved
regions of Scotland, Northern Ireland and Wales. However,
you should note that the information is based on an annual
directory and as such is not updated on such a regular basis
as the UKonline.gov.uk listing. This can mean that it does
not take account of departmental mergers, name changes or
alterations in responsibility. Information on these name
changes can often be obtained from general news sites.
News sites
In addition to UKonline.gov.uk, which provides a basic
starting point for highlighting the major stories, many of the
individual UK government departmental websites also
contain press release sections which provide more detailed
coverage of current events. A growing number of them also
offer you the ability to sign up to receive e-mail alerts when
new material is added. However, you can save time by
consulting the specialised GNN Government News
Network (http://www.gnn.gov.uk/). This offers access to a
central archive of official press releases from a large number
of the major UK government departments and their
affiliated bodies from 1998 to date. Note that not all
agencies are currently covered by the service; therefore it is
important that you check the listing of departments before
relying solely upon it. Press releases usually include details
of government statements, appointments, new publications
and research findings.
In addition the 10 Downing Street website (http://www
.number-10.gov.uk) is also a good starting point. It includes
119

Using the Internet for Political Research
access to the most recent news stories relating to the Prime
Minister as well as summaries of developments from all the
main central government agencies. Particularly useful is the
media centre where you will find transcripts of the Prime
Minister’s latest press conferences and speeches, many of
which cover changes in government strategy.
Another specialist service is Info4local (http://www.info
4local.gov.uk/). This is a site designed by the UK government
to alert local authority officials to central developments
which could impact on their work. However, it can fruitfully
be used by general researchers as a current awareness service
as it lists and provides Internet links to the most recent
central government publications and press releases available
on the web. It is also currently possible to register your
research interests and receive immediate e-mail notifications
as soon as items are published in your subject area.
In addition to these official services offered by the UK
government, you will find coverage of all the latest
developments on the normal news services and newspaper
websites. An added advantage of these is that they often
include critical commentary on the content and motivation
of policy changes. Again the BBC News site politics section
(http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/uk_politics/default.stm) is a
good standard resource which you can rely upon to alert
you to the latest information, even offering the links to the
web version so you save time!
If you are particularly interested in developments relating to
electronic government and the digital delivery of public
services an excellent free newsletter is the E-Government
120

Government departments and publications
Bulletin (http://www.headstar.com/egb/) which is currently
published monthly by Headstar and can be viewed on the
web (along with its archives from 1999 to date) or delivered
direct to your desktop. It covers all aspects of ‘teledemocracy’
including technological innovations, information access,
security and the practical implementation of projects. Each
issue summarises recent government initiatives, pointing out
key new developments and providing links to their websites.
In addition it also highlights any examples of research
findings and published reports by think tanks, institutes and
university departments.
How can I trace UK official publications?
The most common problems encountered when searching
for government reports and papers on the web relate to the
sheer number available, the fact that many are often filed
under official document numbers or titles which are not
necessarily the names by which they are commonly known
and the fact that newspaper reports often refer to them
imprecisely failing to give details of the full official title or
department/committee responsible. In order to overcome
these problems you can regularly check the Info4Local
government site (http://www.info4local.gov.uk/) as this
usually offers precise listings of the most recent offerings.
The other key site for up-to-date listings of the most recent
official publications is the Stationery Office (TSO) (http://
www.tso.co.uk/). This is a commercial company which is
121

Using the Internet for Political Research
responsible for publishing on behalf of the UK parliaments
and a large number of other regulatory and official bodies.
Prior to its privatisation in 1996 it was known as HMSO and
was the government-owned Stationery Office. HMSO still
continues to exist as the official publisher of UK legislation but
many of the other publications and reports are now handled
by the TSO. The TSO website contains an online book store
where you will find listings of its most recent additions. Of
particular value is the Daily List, which announces all new
publications received by the TSO each day. They include Acts
of Parliament, legal materials and publications from UK
government departments. Each entry gives a summary of
content and full bibliographic details. Also listed are
publications issued by international organisations for which
the TSO is an agent. These commonly include bodies of the
European Union and the United Nations.
However, you should note that while the Daily List is an
excellent source of bibliographic information about published
reports, this listing is not comprehensive as there are often
other sources of information such as press releases, circulars
and internal reports which do not appear. These are often
referred to as ‘grey literature’ and can be far more difficult to
locate. One site which can help you with this is Inforoute
(http://www.inforoute.hmso.gov.uk/). This is maintained by
HMSO and provides direct access to the British government’s
Information Asset Register which was set up to provide a
record of information resources held by individual
departments, focusing specifically on unpublished sources
which can include statistics and research reports. As such it
complements the service offered by the Daily List. The
122

Government departments and publications
database can be searched by keyword or department or
browsed by subject. Entries often include URLs for items
available on the Internet.
The second point that needs to be made is that as TSO is
a commercial site it frequently offers you the chance to
purchase materials online. While this can be convenient, it
is worth remembering that some of them may be available
free of charge from the individual departmental websites so
it is often a good idea to note down the details and check.
It is also worth noting that there is a central store of the
most important government documents. This is the Official
Documents website (http://www.official-documents.co.uk/).
It provides free access to all House of Commons Papers and
Command papers from 2001 to date and a selective archive
of these from 1994–2001.
■Command papers derive their name from the fact that they
are presented to Parliament on the command of the Queen.
They are all allocated an official command paper number
which usually appears on the front page of the document.
This currently takes the form CM but in the past it has also
appeared as cmnd and cm. Some libraries store their
government documents in sequence by this numbering
system so if you come across such a number it is usually
advisable to note it down. They usually include White and
Green Papers. While there is no definitive definition of
these two terms, White Papers are usually statements of
proposed government policy on topics of current concern
containing outlines of proposed legislation, whereas Green
Papers are generally consultative documents at a more
123

Using the Internet for Political Research
formative stage which invite public response to policy
options. Green Papers usually precede White Papers.
■House of Commons Papers include publications, annual
reports and documents from government departments.
They all have an official number HCP designated to them
and a session year. These numbers are also located on the
front cover of the document and are often used by
libraries as a filing system. So again remember to make a
note of any you find.
■The site also has a section for departmental reports which
provides free access to some documents published by
individual government departments. You should note that
these are not comprehensive, often only the most important
publications are available and there may be a time delay
before they appear. If you are trying to locate departmental
reports it is far easier and effective to go directly to the
website of the individual department concerned.
In addition to these it is also possible to trace government
documents using a number of commercial services. These
are usually offered to subscribers only so it is a good idea to
check with your local library to see if any are available.
UKOP (http://www.ukop.co.uk) is a comprehensive
catalogue of UK official publications, which covers 1980 to
the present day with daily updates of new material. It
encompasses all items published by HMSO and the Stationery
Office during this period as well as a catalogue of official
government departmental publications not published by the
TSO. The latter tends to include some of the ‘grey literature’
items such as research reports as well as some categories of
124

Government departments and publications
material which have been published directly by the
departments rather than through the official publishers. In
recent years it has also started to index resources available on
the Internet so in a growing number of cases it can take you
directly to the full-text documents. Other entries include
bibliographic details only. There is a latest additions section,
which you can use for current awareness. The service is offered
to subscribers only, although it is widely available in UK
academic libraries.
A competitor service to this is BOPCAS (http://www
.bopcas.soton.ac.uk/), the British Official Publications Current
Awareness Service. It provides access to records of British
official publications published from 1995 to the present day.
Updates are made weekly. These include Acts of Parliament,
parliamentary papers, command papers and reports. Like
UKOP links are being added to the full-text web versions of
the reports where they are available. The service is based on
the holdings of the Ford Collection of Official Publications
which is located at the University of Southampton. The service
is currently offered to subscribers only.
If you are interested in historic publications, it is worth
noting the BOPCRIS site (http://www.bopcris.ac.uk/). This
is the home page of the British Official Publications
Collaborative Reader Information Service which is also
based on the Ford Collection. It is a publicly funded project
which provides free access to a database of information
about UK government publications from 1688 to 1995. You
can use the website to search and browse references to all
types of publications including Acts of Parliament, royal
commission reports, statistics and many other types of
125

Using the Internet for Political Research
documents covering all aspects of social, economic, foreign
and political policy. Records frequently include abstracts of
the contents and a small but growing number have links
through to the full text. Remember that the records are
based on the holdings of Southampton University Library.
These are extremely extensive, but there may be some
omissions. Your library may have paper copies of other
official indexes which you can use to supplement this.
An exciting development related to BOPCRIS is EPPI
(http://www.eppi.ac.uk/), the Enhanced British Parliamentary
Papers on Ireland Project. It was started in 2002 and aims to
provide free access to the full text of over 13,000 British
Parliamentary papers relating to Ireland from 1801 to 1922
by the time it is completed in 2005. These include significant
treaties, committee reports and royal commissions relating to
the government of Ireland, Irish home rule and Anglo-Irish
relations during the period as well as some fascinating
documents on Irish social and economic history. Many of
them are difficult to trace as the original paper indexes are
often unwieldy and the indexing system quite eccentric! The
database can be searched by subject keyword or browsed. It
is possible to sign up to receive regular e-mail updates on the
full-text materials being added to the site.
You should also consult the website of the National
Archives (http://www.nationalarchives.gov.uk/). This was
formerly known as the Public Record Office and some
references may refer to its old website at http://www.pro
.gov.uk. Its role is to preserve records from central
government and make them available to the public. Normally
records are declassified (or opened to the public) after 30
126

Government departments and publications
years. The website includes access to catalogues of the
documents. It also has a monthly listing of new releases. It is
engaging in an increasing number of digitisation projects, and
while at the moment these only cover a tiny proportion of the
materials which it holds, they are likely to increase in the
future. Full details can be obtained from the site.
How can I trace UK legislation?
The main problems that students face when attempting to
trace legislation on the Internet are similar to those
encountered when looking for other forms of official
Publication: namely the fact that often Acts of Parliament
have official titles which are different from those by which
they are commonly known. There is also the added problem
of the currency of information. Legislation may be repealed
or updated. It is essential that you know what type of
information you need for your purpose and check the date
of publication of all the materials that you use, noting
whether any amendments have been included or not.
The main starting point for tracing up-to-date legislation is
the HMSO website (http://www.legislation.hmso.gov.uk/).
Her Majesty’s Stationery Office remains the official
publisher of this type of material. It currently provides free
access to the following:
■All Acts of Parliament passed by the UK Parliament from
1988 to the present day. They are usually available on the
website within 24 hours of the paper publication.
127

Using the Internet for Political Research
■The Explanatory Notes to all the Acts published since
1999. These are produced by the government department
responsible for the subject matter of the Act. They serve
as particularly useful introductions to the Acts as they
include background information on their purpose,
summaries of the content of each of the sections and lists
of references to Hansard for each stage of the bill’s
progress through Parliament.
■Statutory Instruments (SIs) from 1987 to the present day.
Usually available on the website within 24 hours of the
publication of the paper version, SIs are often known as
Regulations, Orders or secondary legislation. Their
purpose is to allow the government or other authorities to
regulate administrative details relating to a particular Act
of Parliament. They include Commencement Orders,
which are used to bring sections of new Acts of Parliament
into force. Note that since July 1999 the National
Assembly for Wales and the Scottish Parliament have been
able to issue their own Statutory Instruments which are
stored in separate sections on the site.
■Scottish legislation (http://www.scotland-legislation.hmso
.gov.uk/). This section of the HMSO site provides free
access to all Acts of the Scottish Parliament, Explanatory
Notes and Statutory Instruments from its establishment in
1999. Materials are usually available simultaneously or
within 24 hours of printed publications. There are also links
to those Acts of Parliament which set out the legislative
powers of the Scottish Parliament under the devolution.
128

Government departments and publications
■Welsh legislation
(http://www.wales-legislation.hmso
.gov.uk/). Likewise the Welsh legislation pages also provide
information on the legislative powers of the National
Assembly for Wales, plus access to all Acts, Explanatory
Notes and Statutory Instruments from 1999 onwards.
■Northern Ireland legislation
(http://www.northern
ireland-legislation.hmso.gov.uk/). In addition to the SIs
(known in Northern Ireland as Statutory Rules), Acts and
their Explanatory Notes which are available for 1987 to
date, the site also includes Northern Ireland Orders in
Council (United Kingdom Statutory Instruments for which
powers were not devolved to the Northern Ireland
Assembly and legislation made during periods of
suspension of the Assembly), the full text of delegated
legislation and an index of the Statutes of Northern
Ireland from 1921 to 2001.
If you are trying to locate information on proposed legislation
in the form of bills which have not yet passed into law, you
will need to look at the website of the UK Parliament. This
has a dedicated section for bills (http://www.parliament.uk/
bills/bills.cfm) which provides a useful introduction to the
stages in the British legislative process by which a bill
becomes law as well as access to the full text of all public and
private bills currently before Parliament. There are also links
to the Standing Committee Debates on particular bills. These
are cross-party committees that are convened to debate the
clauses, coverage and possible amendments of individual
Acts. They form useful sources of information about
129

Using the Internet for Political Research
discussion on the content and contentious issues surrounding
individual pieces of legislation. There are fact sheets on the
bills homepage, which explain in some detail the history,
purpose and current operation of the legislative system.
A complete listing of all bills introduced in Parliament in the
current session along with details of their progress can also be
traced using the House of Commons Weekly Information
Bulletin (http://www.publications.parliament.uk/pa/cm/cmwib.
htm) which is also available free of charge from the website.
Each issue contains sections for public and private legislation,
the week’s business and new documents received.
Another useful source of information is House of Commons
Research Papers (http://www.parliament.uk/parliamentary_
publications_and_archives/research_papers.cfm). These are
compiled by the House of Commons Library for Members of
Parliament. Although they cover a variety of topics they also
regularly include information on new bills and Acts of
Parliament. They are very useful as introductions to individual
pieces of legislation as they usually summarise the content in
terms which are understandable to the layperson and offer clear
analyses of the issues at stake. All papers published since 1998
are freely available.
If you are particularly interested in tracing legislation, it is
also worth consulting the Law Gateway of SOSIG (the Social
Science Information Gateway) (http://www.sosig.ac.uk/law/).
This is compiled by law specialists based at the Institute of
Advanced Legal Studies, University of London and includes a
section specifically for English, Scottish and Welsh law. It
offers links to a variety of legal newsletters and teaching
materials which cover new legislation. Look out for the law
130

Government departments and publications
Internet tutorial on the site http://www.vts.rdn.ac.uk/
tutorial/lawyers which offers advice to beginners on starting
legal research.
How can I trace UK official statistics?
The UK government is making an increasing number of its
basic statistics available via the Internet. The main Internet
gateway to these is the National Statistics Online website
(http://www.statistics.gov.uk/). 
This 
draws 
together
information from a number of UK government departments
and makes it possible to search them centrally. It includes a
news section, which lists the latest releases and an index of
themed topics which you can browse. These include census
data, economic facts, labour market trends, health and social
welfare. For more detailed information, you can also consult
the time-series data section of the site. This is currently a free-
of-charge service which enables you to download complete
sets of data in spreadsheet format from key UK social and
economic statistical publications. These cover a wide range of
topics including gross domestic product, trade figures,
consumer indexes and the United Kingdom Economic
Accounts. Technical information on formats and how to
download and use the materials is available from the website.
In order to use this site effectively you will need to
overcome a number of common problems.
■First of all it is necessary to check the date coverage of the
statistics which you use. It is common for novices to
download materials and then not be able to understand what
131

Using the Internet for Political Research
the figures relate to or how they were generated. Help in
understanding this can be obtained from the methodology
section of the website. Try to locate information about the
samples and questions used in order to judge whether they
are appropriate to your purpose. These pages also often give
contact addresses for the statisticians involved which you
can use for further information.
■A second common problem relates to the interpretation
and evaluation of the data found. Remember to consult
the help screens and glossary for guidance. You might
also wish to take a look at TimeWeb (http://timeweb
.mimas.ac.uk/). This is a free package of learning
materials which will introduce you to the basic skills
associated with locating, understanding and using data. It
has been produced by MIMAS, a national UK data centre
that is based at Manchester University. Topics covered
include economic output, prices and unemployment. It
includes some access to full datasets.
■A final problem relates to access to historical statistical
data. While basic and current materials are often offered
free of charge via the Internet, it is common for some
materials to be offered to subscribers only. It is worth
checking whether your local library has access to any
commercial databases which you may use. A key point of
reference is the Economic and Social Data Service (ESDS)
(http://www.esds.ac.uk/). This was created in January
2003 as a national data archiving and dissemination
service for the UK. Its purpose is to offer centralised
information and access to data using sources taken from
four existing national data centres: the UK Data Archive
132

Government departments and publications
(at the University of Essex), the Institute for Social and
Economic Research at the University of Essex, MIMAS
(Manchester Information and Associated Services –
University of Manchester) and the Cathie Marsh Centre
for Census and Survey Research, University of
Manchester. It will include coverage of qualitative and
quantative data as well as UK government data and data
from international organisations. It is hoped that
eventually this will offer single information and
registration points for data access as at present users are
often obliged to register separately with each of the four
centres. The website currently provides information
about the project and its partners. If you are interested in
accessing data then you should check this site regularly
for updates. It also offers you links to the home pages of
the main data centres. On these you will usually find
catalogues of the materials they hold and some basic
information on access policies. Note that many large
organisations may already organise access for their
students through libraries or academic departments so try
to check in advance before contacting the data centres
directly.
Also of interest is the UK National Digital Archive of Datasets
(NDAD) (http://ndad.ulcc.ac.uk/). This is a store of archived
digital data from UK government departments and agencies. It
has been in operation since 1988 and provides access to a full
catalogue of its holdings. It is possible to register to use many
of the datasets free of charge. They cover a wide range of
social and economic topics including statistics and reports
relating to government decision-making processes. Although
133

Using the Internet for Political Research
the archive was established in the 1980s, it does have holdings
of government materials produced prior to this date. You
should, however, note that not all government statistics/papers
are archived electronically. Decisions on what to preserve are
made by the National Archives (formerly known as the Public
Record Office). Entries for the materials are detailed and
include descriptions of subject and year coverage. The site also
includes some useful guidance and aids on how to locate and
use the materials.
What other secondary sources of
information are available?
The earlier sections in this chapter have highlighted websites
maintained by the British government. In addition to these you
will probably want to consult secondary resources such as
materials produced by think tanks, research projects and/or
university departments as these can offer you critical comment
on the impact and effectiveness of government policies. Useful
starting points for these are the lists of think tanks mentioned
in Chapter 5. Note any political affiliations that these might
have as they can affect the content of their publications.
134

Political science education
The Internet can be a useful source of guidance on studying
politics at college or university. The type of information that
you can easily find includes:
■lists of appropriate courses;
■details of grants and scholarships;
■application forms;
■information on politics departments and academic staff at
individual universities;
■information on libraries which you can visit;
■careers advice.
However, remember to assess the quality of all the resources
which you find. Alongside the reputable sites there are also
commercial agencies and unreliable sources which exist only
to make money out of you! This chapter will guide you to a
number of useful starting points for studying in the UK.
How can I find out about applying to
British universities?
If you are seeking basic guidance on application procedures
and funding try looking at the website offered by the
8
135

Using the Internet for Political Research
Department for Education and Skills (DfES) (http://www
.dfes.gov.uk). This is an official source of information on
access to higher education. It currently maintains a section
called Aim Higher (http://www.dfes.gov.uk/aimhigher/)
which is specifically designed to provide GCSE and ‘A’ Level
students with basic information on how and when to apply
to college.
Another similar service is offered by the BBC Education
website (http://www.bbc.co.uk/learning/index.shtml). Again
this is designed for a younger audience, although it does
include a section of frequently asked questions covering
such topics as finance, housing and choice of course. There
is also some information for mature students.
An excellent site, which is designed for a more academic
audience but also includes an informative section on
beginning study, is HERO: Higher Education and Research
Opportunities in the UK (http://www.hero.ac.uk/). This is
an official gateway to information about Britain’s colleges
and universities. Its ‘Studying’ section includes guidance on
funding and applications. There is a specific section for
mature students. Other useful features of the site include
profiles of individual colleges and universities and up-to-
date news stories from the sector.
Foreign and international students who wish to study in the
UK should use as their starting point the British Council
website (http://www.britishcouncil.org/). This has an
education section which includes advice and a good directory
of links to further information on the British education system,
qualifications and sources of funding for overseas students.
136

Political science education
Students with special needs and/or disabilities can obtain
further guidance from SKILL: the National Bureau for
Students with Disabilities (http://www.skill.org.uk/). This is
a national organisation which seeks to promote equal access
to higher education in the UK. It can provide you with
general facts on legal rights, standards of provision and
support in the UK. It also maintains a listing of contact
details of all the disability coordinators based in higher and
further education colleges. This can be used to find out
details of local facilities and services.
A useful directory of other related resources can be found
on the StudentZone (http://www.studentzone.org.uk/).
EduServe, a UK charity, currently maintains this. It covers all
aspects of the student experience from selecting a course to
health and careers.
Finally there is the website of UCAS: the Universities and
Colleges Admission Service (http://www.ucas.ac.uk/). This is
the central clearing house for applications and as such is an
authoritative source of information on dates and procedures.
However, it currently contains less guidance on choosing
universities than those offered by the resources above.
Where can I find information on what
politics courses are available in the UK?
There are a large number of listings of courses available on
the Internet. The drawback of many of them is that they are
not kept up to date and can offer little insight into the
quality of the courses on offer.
137

Using the Internet for Political Research
An excellent starting point is the UCAS site (http://www
.ucas.ac.uk/). This has a searchable up-to-date directory of all
the political science single and joint honours degree courses
on offer. A particular strength of this site is that each
individual entry includes a link to the relevant quality
assessment report. These are conducted on a regular basis by
the Quality Assurance Agency for Higher Education (QAA)
and can be used as a means of judging the standard of the
course. The areas currently examined include: student
progress and outcomes; learning resources (IT and library
facilities); student support services; quality management
processes; and teaching, learning and assessment. However,
do remember that they are only one system of measuring
quality. Before making a final decision about a particular
course you should try to find out as much information as
possible about it. Useful tips include the following:
■Check the home page of the Quality Assurance Agency
(http://www.qaa.ac.uk/) for more detailed information on
the criteria and methodology used by the quality
assessment surveys. Consider whether the questions
which they ask are what you really want to know. Then
consult the reports for the individual departments.
■Look at the home pages of the individual politics
departments. A listing of these can be found on the Political
Studies Association (UK) website (http://www.psa.ac.uk/)
or the HERO website (http://www.hero.ac.uk/). These
differ in terms of the degree of detail offered but they can
generally give you an overview of the research specialisms
of the department and options offered. This can help guide
138

Political science education
you towards the university most attuned to your interests.
Many of the sites also provide details of seminar
programmes and student activities. However, do remember
that as the departmental sites are designed as promotional
tools, they will tend to emphasise the positive aspects of the
university.
■For a different perspective it is worth checking to see if
the individual university website has any student union
pages. These not only provide some insight into the social
life of the university, they can also contain ‘alternative
prospectuses’ to the facilities, courses and geographical
area. Some of these sites also offer free access to student
newspapers which give a flavour of life and conditions. A
directory of links to student unions can be obtained from
the National Union of Students website (http://www
.nusonline.co.uk/).
■Finally try to visit the university if you can. The Internet
can offer you a ‘virtual tour’ of a campus but it cannot
replace actually seeing the facilities yourself and meeting
with current students!
Other general directories of courses which you might find
useful include the following:
■The International Centre for Distance Learning database
(http://www-icdl.open.ac.uk/) contains a listing of part-
time, online and distance learning courses available in the
UK. This is very useful for tracing the existence of these
types of courses and offering general practical advice to
potential distance learners. However, information on the
actual content of the courses is currently rather sparse.
139

Using the Internet for Political Research
■Information offered by the Political Studies journal website
(http://www.politicalstudies.org/). This has a guide to
studying politics at university which provides basic advice
and links to UK university departments which offer courses.
What sites have information on grants
and funding?
In the current educational climate, tracing sources of
educational funding is a crucial issue. However, it is
important that you only use accurate accredited information.
Check the currency and source of any information offered.
Official sources of information on the current conditions
and levels of funding include the following:
■The Department for Education and Skills (http://www
.dfes.gov.uk/studentsupport/links.shtml) has a Student
Support section which provides authoritative information
on the type of financial help available and how to apply
for it. It includes separate sections for different categories
of student including mature students, overseas students
from European Union nations, undergraduates and
postgraduates.
■The Student Loans Company (http://www.slc.co.uk/) is
responsible for administering the official loans to students
in the UK. Its web pages will provide you with the latest
information on conditions for applying for a student
loan, current rates and repayment rules.
140

Political science education
■Another very useful site is Student Money (http://www
.studentmoney.org/). This is maintained by Hot Courses
(the publisher of a number of leading careers guides) in
association with the Universities and Colleges Admission
Service (UCAS). In addition to the basic facts offered by the
DfES site, it also includes a directory of grant, bursary and
scholarship resources and sections on financial advice. The
topics covered by the latter include advice on student loans,
budget planning and an online facility for calculating loan
repayments. This is an excellent introduction to the
financial implications of being a student.
■Other potential sources of online guidance include the
website of the National Union of Students (http://www
.nusonline.co.uk/), which has a large advice section, and
the StudentZone (http://www.studentzone.org.uk/), which
has a directory of links to legal and financial institutions
and bodies. However, don’t forget that all reputable banks
and building societies will also offer their customers
financial advice when required.
Can I use the Internet to find out
about jobs or research opportunities in
the UK?
It is possible to use the Internet to find job vacancies and
circulate your CV to potential employers; however, you should
be aware that many sites are run by commercial enterprises
and will ask for payment. Before using any agencies:
141

Using the Internet for Political Research
■Check their credibility and do not provide them with any
personal details until you are assured that they are
legitimate. Ways of ascertaining this include verifying the
company address and contact telephone number and
ensuring that the site displays secure credit card payment
symbols. The latter are usually displayed on the home page.
■Read any small print carefully to ensure you know
exactly what type of service is offered and any rates of
payment. Issues to consider include questions about the
types of companies which use the service. Will your CV
be circulated to the right industrial sectors? How many
companies will be included? Are they well-known
employers or small businesses? Which geographical areas
are covered by the service? Similarly, things to consider
when consulting job vacancy sites include the currency of
the information, the regions covered and the range of
employers submitting information. You also need to find
out whether the site includes ‘real vacancies’ direct from
the employers or is simply a collection of adverts from
recruitment agencies.
A site that can be recommended is the official UK graduate
careers service Prospects (http://www.prospects.ac.uk/).
This includes a jobs section with basic industry profiles that
offer advice on the current state of the sector and tips on
how to break into it. There are also company profiles and a
searchable database of up-to-date vacancies for graduates. It
is possible to register to receive e-mail notifications of the
latest openings. A ‘Further study’ section contains a
searchable database of postgraduate courses and tips on
142

Political science education
funding. Other useful features include a general careers
advice section that contains practical information about the
type of career openings available to graduates from all
disciplines, plus job hunting and interview technique tips. It
is also worth noting that there is a directory of links to all
the local careers services based within UK universities.
These can be useful sources of information on vacancies in
your geographical area and dates of recruitment fairs. They
will also provide you with information on any personal
consultations or training courses which they offer.
Other reliable sources include online vacancy supplements
from the broadsheet newspapers. A good example is the
Guardian Jobs section (http://jobs.guardian.co.uk/) which
includes vacancies taken from the paper versions of the
Guardian and Observer newspapers as well as some only
available online. It is regularly updated and includes the
facility to search or browse vacancies by industry sector. It is
also possible to register to create and submit your CV online.
Basic career guidance on job hunting is also available.
If you are looking for work in the British academic sector,
another potentially useful site is Jobs.ac.uk (http://www
.jobs.ac.uk/). This was established by the Universities
Advertising Group, a consortium of UK universities, on behalf
of the whole academic community. It includes full- and part-
time jobs in universities and colleges and work funded by the
research councils. It is possible to search the database by
subject area, job type or geographical area.
You might also like to take a look at the Grapevine site
(http://www.sosig.ac.uk/gv/). This service is being developed
by SOSIG (the Social Science Information Gateway) as a
143

Using the Internet for Political Research
service to the social science community and includes the
facility to publish CVs and search for jobs on an online
noticeboard. Its scope is currently far smaller in scale than
that of Jobs.ac.uk, but it is an interesting development
which is certainly worth consulting.
For information on current research opportunities, a good
starting point is the HERO website (http://www.hero.ac.uk/)
which has sound advice on the organisation and funding of
research in the UK HE sector. It also contains useful tips on
where to get funding and a news section which highlights the
latest initiatives.
Scholarship Search UK (http://www.scholarship-search
.org.uk/) currently provides a free database of charities,
research bodies and other organisations offering funding or
bursaries for undergraduate and postgraduate study in the
UK. This directory can give you a quick starting point for
tracing key organisations. However, it is advisable to either
contact the bodies directly or use their web pages before you
submit any applications as these may contain more detailed
information on the criteria used for awarding funds and the
current regulations.
How can I use the Internet to find
contact details of political scientists?
Unfortunately there is not currently a directory which contains
all e-mail addresses. It is a common source of frustration to
find that you cannot find contact details for people who you
144

Political science education
know exist. There are a large number of commercial
directories in existence. Examples of these include:
■Yahoo! People Search (http://people.yahoo.com/). This
gives access to a free e-mail or telephone and contact
address directory, although the results do tend to be
North American based.
■WhoWhere? (http://www.whowhere.lycos.com/). This is
another large directory managed by the search engine
Lycos. Again the emphasis is upon addresses based in the
USA and Canada.
However, although these may contain many thousands of
entries, they are all, whatever they may claim, incomplete.
Often this is because they may require self-registration or buy
lists of names from other sources (such as e-mail providers)
which are also incomplete. Further problems are related to
the fact that many people currently have several e-mail
addresses. It is common to have a Hotmail or Yahoo e-mail
account plus a work address; individuals may also sign up to
free e-mail services which they then never use. All this adds up
to complication. This situation is unlikely to change in the
foreseeable future. However, this does not mean that you
should give up! A few useful tips are given below.
■Find out as much information as possible about the person
you want to trace. Do you know whether they are based
at a particular university, organisation or company? Are
they members of a professional body or e-mail list? This
information can be useful as often organisational and
145

Using the Internet for Political Research
university websites maintain up-to-date listings of staff
members and it can be quicker to go to them directly
rather than using any of the specialist e-mail directories.
On occasion data protection issues mean that personal
e-mail addresses are not publicly displayed; however, you
are usually given general telephone or e-mail addresses
that can lead you to the person concerned. For instance,
the Political Studies Association maintains its own
directory of members who include UK academic staff and
researchers. Information about this can be found on its
website (http://www.psa.ac.uk/), although currently access
is limited to members only.
■Another thing to consider is the format of the name which
you use as a search term. Remember that all search
engines will require exact spelling matches; they cannot
interpret your results. Also be aware that an individual
may register himself or herself using their full first name,
initial only, shortened version of their first name or even
a nickname! It is usually safer to try a combination of
searches using variants of these. If they have an unusual
surname you can often save time by searching directly for
this and then sifting through the results.
■E-mail list archives can also be a useful source of
information. If you know that an individual belongs to a
particular list you could try looking at its website as this
may have a members list. Those that do not may have an
archive where you can view postings to the list. If you search
for a name messages sent by that person can be retrieved. A
useful starting point for doing this is the JISCMail site
146

Political science education
(http://www.jiscmail.ac.uk/) which is a national mailing list
service for the UK higher education community.
Are there any organisations or sites
that support politics students?
Within the UK, the main national organisation is the Political
Studies Association Graduate Network (http://www.psa
.ac.uk/) which is a specialist subsection of the PSA that is
directly involved in promoting the needs of postgraduate
students and researchers. Its website provides you with details
of the aims of the group and its current activities. It also
includes recent issues of its newsletter which contains regular
updates on funding opportunities and forthcoming
conferences. Information on local events can be obtained from
the regional sub-groups section of the site. Alternatively you
could try consulting the student union or politics departmental
web pages of your local university to find out if there is a
specialist politics interest group or society. The site also
provides information on how you can sign up to the postgrad
e-mail list to receive the latest updates to your desktop!
Likewise the American Political Science Association
website also has a large student section (http://www.apsanet
.org/students.cfm), which provides information on study 
and research in North America. It includes a searchable
database of courses, advice on funding and tips on preparing
dissertations.
Another site to consider is the Young Fabians (www
.fabian-society.org.uk). This is a section of the Fabian
147

Using the Internet for Political Research
Society whose members are under the age of 31 and is a
leading Socialist organisation affiliated to the British Labour
Party. While it is not specifically designed for students, it is
intended for young people and therefore its members will
share many of the same concerns. Members include young
MPs, parliamentary researchers and political activists.
Regular conferences and events are organised and a
quarterly journal is published.
Can I use the Internet to find 
student essays?
There are many other websites which claim to offer student
advice and free access to online essays and dissertations. In
most cases it is inadvisable to use these as quality can be low
unless you have been advised to do so by your tutor or have
checked the source with him/her. If you do consult any note
the following:
■Be careful that you remember to check the authenticity of
the information providers and the quality of the
information offered. The most valuable resources are
usually those posted on the official websites of university
departments or political studies associations.
■Remember that plagiarism is an offence. Do not copy any
information that you find.
■Give proper citations of any online document that you
use. Guidance on how to do this can be obtained from a
number of sources. An example is Online! A Guide to
148

Political science education
Using and Citing Internet Sources (http://www.bedford
stmartins.com/online/index.html). This is an online
version of a book by Andrew Harnack and Eugene
Kleppinger which is published by St. Martins Press. It is
designed specifically for students and offers free access to
chapters on using the APA, Chicago and MLA styles to
cite and document sources online. The type of resources
covered include e-mail messages and Internet sites.
Further examples of guides to citation can be found in the
final section of all the RDN Virtual Training Suite
tutorials (http://www.vts.rdn.ac.uk/).
Can I use the Internet to 
buy textbooks?
Online shopping is one of the great advantages of the
Internet. Major suppliers such as Amazon (http://www
.amazon.co.uk) all stock supplies of the major politics text-
books and these can be ordered directly from their website.
It is also possible to use the websites of smaller book shops
and second-hand book dealers to buy used copies. One of
the largest specialist politics shops in the UK is Politicos
(http://www.politicos.co.uk/). Its website can provide you
with a list of new publications. There are also separate
subject sections and a second-hand book department.
Another useful source for online book supply are the
websites of the major publishers which often allow you to
shop for the materials which they produce! Some of these
149

Using the Internet for Political Research
sites have added features such as subject resource sections
where you can access online companions to major
textbooks, individual chapters, book reviews or articles free
of charge. A good example is the Oxford University Press site
(http://www.oup.co.uk/readingroom/) which has an online
reading room section that is linked to the OUP catalogue. It
alerts you to new publications and enables you to read some
sample chapters from them. The Macmillan/Palgrave site
(http://www.palgrave.com/) also has a specialist online
resource section for students which includes companion
pages for some of its leading textbooks. These maintain up-
to-date URLs for websites referred to in the text.
Some useful tips for shopping online are as follows:
■Only use the websites of authenticated suppliers. Check
that they have arrangements for secure online shopping
before entering your credit card details. This is usually
displayed in the form of a padlock symbol commonly
found at the bottom of the screen. When entering a secure
payment page the beginning of the Internet address
displayed in the location bar also usually changes from
http:// to https://.
■Some suppliers, such as Amazon, have several versions of
their website based in different parts of the world. Check
that you are on the UK section before ordering as this will
save you delivery time and postage costs! You can easily do
this by looking at the Internet address (as most will end in
co.uk) and the currency in which the prices are displayed.
■Verify delivery methods and timescales before you make
a payment. Find out how the charges are calculated as
150

Political science education
sometimes rates are lower if you accept a slower delivery
method or opt to wait until all the items are in stock
before they are despatched. It is also worth comparing
rates between different companies as variations can make
a difference in your overall cost. Sites usually contain a
customer services or delivery charges section which you
can consult before placing your order.
■Make a note of any order numbers you are given and
store them in a safe place until the goods arrive. Often the
suppliers will send you a confirmation e-mail containing
these.
Happy shopping!
Can I use the Internet to locate
political science libraries?
Library catalogues are now widely available on the Internet.
Most college and university websites provide free access to
their catalogue. Specialist research bodies, think tanks and
public libraries are also making their catalogues accessible
to the public. If you are based at a particular university or
college your starting point should always be your local
library catalogue. Many of these have self-service features
which enable you to reserve and renew books online. Check
for local details on any passwords needed for these.
In addition, you may also want to consult the Internet
catalogues of other local libraries in your area. However, be
aware that not all these libraries may allow free access to their
collections. As a starting point you should find out whether
151

Using the Internet for Political Research
your local library has any collaborative arrangements with
other institutions. Many UK academic institutions are
members of the UK Libraries Plus Scheme (http://www
.uklibrariesplus.ac.uk/) which is a collaborative venture that
enables students to use libraries near their home or work
without paying an admission fee. Note that in many cases,
even when access is offered, you may not be able to access all
the materials as ‘course’ or teaching collection textbooks and
electronic databases are often excluded. Also, unless special
arrangements have been made, it is unlikely that you will be
able to loan any of the books. In practice visits to other
libraries can be most useful for locating additional research
materials or journal titles not held locally.
As we noted in Chapter 1, the UK does not currently have
a national union catalogue where you can search across all
university library holdings simultaneously. In the future this
may become technically possible, but at the moment one of
the largest alternatives is COPAC (http://www.copac.ac.uk/)
which currently provides free Internet access to the merged,
catalogues of over 20 of the UK’s largest university research
libraries, including the British Library catalogue. It has
particular value in tracing foreign language and more
obscure materials. Each entry gives details of all the
different locations available.
You should also check your local university library website
for details of any regional initiatives. If you are based in
London, a useful example is the M25 Consortium of Higher
Education Libraries (http://www.m25lib.ac.uk/). Its website
includes a useful union catalogue of serials which enables
you to search the journal title holdings of all the colleges in
152

Political science education
the University of London. In addition there are links to
individual library catalogues and details about access.
The British Library (http://www.bl.uk/) is the national
library of the UK and as part of the legal deposit requirement
receives one copy of all publications published in the UK and
Ireland. This includes books, journals, pamphlets, conference
papers, government documents, theses and technical reports.
Items published overseas are bought on a more selective basis.
Although its catalogue is available on the Internet (http://
blpc.bl.uk) it is not a public library. Access is restricted and
undergraduates are not normally admitted unless they have a
particular need that cannot be met elsewhere. Postgraduates,
researchers, academic staff and members of the public must
all fulfil the membership criteria outlined on the website. All
items are for reference use only. You should note that some
materials listed on the catalogue are held in off-site
warehouses so time must be allowed for collections to be
made. As a result, if you wish to use the collections, it is
advisable to check access arrangements in advance of visiting.
Likewise, you should also note that some holdings of
government documents are not indexed on the catalogue. If
you are interested in this type of material, you should contact
the Reading Rooms directly.
Generally some good tips for searching library catalogues
on the Internet are as follows:
■Check the date coverage of the catalogue. Note whether
it includes older materials or whether information on
these is still held on a card catalogue which is only
available within the library.
153

Using the Internet for Political Research
■Check the subject coverage. Note whether government
documents or journal articles are indexed. Often these are
not so you will need to use other indexes to locate them.
■Note whether all the items are held on site. Some older
university libraries use off-site storage areas or depots and
may require notice to collect items from them.
■Check to see whether items are on loan before you travel
to the library. This is usually clearly marked on the
catalogue and a return date indicated. However, if you are
unsure you can usually check with the library help or
information desk.
■Check whether you have access to the material. Visitors
may not be able to use some categories of material.
Usually libraries have admission policy pages that
indicate which these are.
154

Keeping up to date
It is possible to use the Internet to keep up to date with
emerging trends in political science research. Services which
it can offer you include:
■information on new publications in your subject field;
■details about conferences and events;
■recent journal contents pages;
■information about new research.
This chapter will guide you to some of the most useful
resources currently available. It will begin by focusing upon
electronic mailing lists which can offer all of the services
listed above.
Where can I find good political science
mailing lists?
E-mail discussion lists have the potential to enable you to
receive rapid updates of information about new
publications and developments in your field. You can also
use them to contact, ask questions and exchange opinions
with other like-minded students, researchers or political
science professionals. However, choose carefully before you
sign up as some lists can bombard you with masses of
9
155

Using the Internet for Political Research
irrelevant information or junk mail. Issues that you need to
consider when selecting a list include the following:
■Academic level. Think about whether the list is designed
for leisure use or academic study, and whether it is aimed
at the general public, undergraduates, specialised
researchers or lecturers. Then make a decision according
to your needs.
■The scope of the list. Is it covering a large subject area or
a specialised sub-field? Generally those covering very
wide subject areas will generate the most messages and as
a result it is usually more effective to find a list which is
as specific as possible.
Good quality mailing services will enable you to answer
these questions by providing help pages that outline the aims
of the list. You may also be able to search archived messages.
A key site is JISCmail (http://www.jiscmail.ac.uk/). This is
a national service which supports academic discussion lists
for the UK higher and further education communities. It is
possible to browse the lists for political science. Each list has
its own home page where you can find information on its
scope and intentions. It is also possible to see the number and
content of messages sent each month. This is particularly
useful as it saves you wasting time in signing up to irrelevant
lists. The site also offers you the facility to create your own
list if you cannot find one that matches your needs!
It is also worth checking the websites of the national
political science associations. Most of these have special
interest groups many of which support their own mailing
156

Keeping up to date
lists. Browse the Political Studies Association (UK) site
(http://www.psa.ac.uk/) for useful examples.
Finally remember to observe some basic etiquette when
using e-mail lists.
■It is usually acceptable to use lists to ask basic queries, but
be careful not to abuse this by asking others to undertake
detailed research for you. If you are unsure of whether a
message is suitable check with the list owner or moderator.
All JISCmail lists have these. Their contact details can be
obtained from the individual list home pages.
■Reread all messages before you send them. As e-mail is
such a rapid form of communication it can be easy to
distribute messages in the ‘heat of the moment’ and later
regret it. All e-mail messages should be respectful to other
members of the list and retain basic levels of politeness.
Where can I find out about 
new publications?
One potential starting point is the websites of individual
publishers as these usually provide access to their latest
book catalogues. However, monitoring these can be time
consuming due to the large number. An alternative is to
check the website of a specialist bookshop. The Politicos
website (http://www.politicos.co.uk/) enables you to sign up
to a mailing list which provides regular listings of new titles
which they have received. As this is based on their book
stock it will not include every title published, but it covers a
157

Using the Internet for Political Research
large proportion of UK materials including all the major
textbooks. Another excellent source is the Political Studies
website (http://www.politicalstudies.org/).
This is the home page of the Political Studies journal which
is published under the auspices of the Political Studies
Association. It contains a review section which offers free
access to a searchable database of book reviews. These are
usually very up to date and include critical commentary on the
most recent titles, including some in advance of publication.
There is also a section of editor’s recommendations which
highlights the most useful new titles.
You may also wish to keep up to date with pamphlets
issued by think tanks and research bodies. Many of the think
tanks listed in Chapter 5 enable you to sign up to receive
e-mail notifications of new publications. An alternative to
this is to use a website which provides information on new
releases from a number of bodies. This can save time and cut
down on the e-mails received; however, you should note that
at present none of the services are comprehensive so check
the sources covered before you sign up. Some of the most
useful examples are as follows:
■The Policy Library (http://www.policylibrary.com/) is an
independent organisation which provides links to recent
research on social, economic and foreign policy from
think tanks and government departments worldwide. It
can be used to alert you to some of the latest research.
■The Moving Ideas Network (http://www.movingideas
.org/) performs a similar function with regard to North
America. It provides access to news headlines, abstracts
158

Keeping up to date
and links to full-text resources from over 100 social and
economic policy think tanks.
■The equivalent for Australia is Australian Policy Online
(http://www.apo.org.au/). This enables you to sign up to
receive e-mails of new publications from the major
university and independent research think tanks in
Australia. In addition to topics relating to the public
administration of Australia, these often cover international
relations and globalisation. They can give a useful non-
European perspective on issues of current interest.
However, do note that all these sites tend to place the
emphasis on social and economic policy research rather
than on political theory. Alternatives for tracing the latest
political research include the websites of the professional
political science associations.
If you are interested in receiving alerts about new
government publications, you should check those resources
highlighted in Chapter 7. Of particular value is the Info4local
site (http://www.info4local.gov.uk/) which enables you to
register your subject areas and sign up to receive regular
e-mail updates of new releases.
How can I trace the most 
recent research?
As a large quantity of academic research is not commercially
published it can often be difficult to trace. Probably the most
useful source for the UK is Regard (http://www.regard.ac.uk/).
159

Using the Internet for Political Research
This is a database of information on research funded by the
Economic and Social Research Council (ESRC). It contains
records dating back to the 1980s and is updated daily. It is
possible to search the database by subject area, institution,
person or award number. You can also restrict searches to the
latest news and set up an account on the site so that you can
store your results. Individual records are particularly detailed,
covering both ongoing research projects and completed
programmes. They include descriptions of content and contact
addresses plus useful listings of any research outputs such as
journal articles, conference papers and published reports.
Links are also provided to any websites where more detailed
information on the projects and any full-text papers associated
with it can sometimes be found.
For more general news on trends in research funding and
new projects, it is also worth looking at the home page of
the Economic and Social Research Council (http://www.esrc
.ac.uk/) where you will find recent press releases and a
complete directory of links to its research centres. Another
useful source is the Scottish Research Information System
(http://www.scottishresearch.com/) which provides access
to up-to-date news on research being undertaken by
universities, projects and research bodies in Scotland. This
covers the full range of scientific and social science subject
areas so is quite general in scope. It also has information
about funding opportunities and links to the websites of all
the main universities in the region.
Other potential sources of information again include the
special interest groups of the national political studies
associations. Check the sections of the Political Studies
160

Keeping up to date
Association site (http://www.psa.ac.uk) and the American
Political Science Association site (http://www.apsanet.org/)
for details. However, you should note that sometimes these
websites are not as up to date as the central research body
websites. Also many are not as detailed so access to full-text
papers can be limited. However, despite these drawbacks,
they usually offer contact addresses which can serve as useful
starting points for tracing ongoing work in specialised areas.
How can I keep up to date with new
Internet sites?
This can be a problem as the Internet is continuously
growing with new sites being added daily. However, there
are several good newsletters that you can sign up to which
alert you to the latest new developments.
Search Engine Watch (http://searchenginewatch.com/)
produces two free publications: SearchDay and the Search
Engine Report. Search Day is issued every day and contains
news, tips and advice on technical issues such as Internet
searching and search engine performance. It is possible to
view recent copies from the website if you feel that you can’t
cope with receiving an e-mail everyday! Search Engine
Report is currently issued monthly and contains more
in-depth features on web searching developments.
If you are looking for information on new websites, a
good starting point is to sign up to the ‘My account’ feature
offered by SOSIG (the Social Science Information Gateway)
(http://www.sosig.ac.uk/). This enables you to register your
161

Using the Internet for Political Research
subject interests and receive free weekly e-mails on new
additions to the politics and government sections of the
database. Often these include sites relating to current news
events as well as new digital collections, working papers and
news stories. Information on how to do this can be obtained
from the SOSIG home page.
Another useful e-mail service is the Internet Resources
Newsletter
(http://www.hw.ac.uk/libWWW/irn/irn.html)
which is compiled monthly by staff at Heriot Watt University
Library. It aims to raise awareness about new Internet sites,
focusing in particular on those which are relevant for use in
academic study. It is quite general in scope, covering science
as well as the social sciences, so it can be time consuming to
browse through. However, despite this it often includes links
to interesting materials. Each resource has a brief added
description of content and there is also a ‘pick of the month’.
Another useful feature of the site are the news updates which
it provides from electronic library initiatives and service
providers in the UK. These can give you an insight into
ongoing projects and forthcoming developments.
An American equivalent of this is the Scout Report
(http://scout.wisc.edu/) which is published weekly by the
Internet Scout Project based at the University of Wisconsin-
Madison. Although it is also general in its subject coverage,
it has an established reputation for highlighting key research
sites, in particular those based in North America. These
include publications from government departments and new
digital initiatives. There is also a regular round-up of sites
linked to topical news stories. Descriptions of content are
162

Keeping up to date
informative and detailed. It is possible to sign up to receive
the letter by e-mail or view it and its archives online from
the website.
Another extremely useful service is FreePint (http://www
.freepint.com/). This is an e-mail newsletter which provides
advice on using the Internet for research. It was originally
designed for information workers and offers updates on
conferences and new publications particularly geared towards
the needs of librarians and information science students.
However, it may be fruitfully used by political science
students as it offers good general advice on academic use of
the Internet highlighting useful sites and search strategies.
Other features include reviews of recent Internet books, lists
of forthcoming Internet conferences and a section where users
can post questions.
If you are particularly interested in developments in electronic
government or the use of the Internet by political organisations,
it is worth signing up to a number of free services that can send
the latest news to your desktop. Stephen Clift of Publicus.Net
(http://www.publicus.net/about.html) is an online strategist
who specialises in issues relating to the Internet, democracy and
public participation in politics. He produces an excellent free
newsletter called the Democracies Online Newswire which
highlights events, publications and projects relating to all
aspects of electronic government worldwide. E-Government
Bulletin (http://www.headstar.com/egb/) is published by
Headstar and provides a free regular newsletter on electronic
public services. This has a UK focus but also includes articles
and links to projects worldwide. It is particularly good at
163

Using the Internet for Political Research
summarising UK electronic government policy developments.
This includes coverage of issues relating to technology, access,
implementation and impact of digital democracy.
How can I find out about 
forthcoming conferences?
Many of the good e-mail lists will regularly circulate advance
notices of important conferences and events. In addition to
relying on this you should also check the e-mail sites of the
leading professional associations and bodies. In the UK, the
Political Studies Association site (http://www.psa.ac.uk) has a
web page where it posts details of forthcoming events. Note
that while this includes all the major meetings, it may exclude
smaller events hosted by some of its specialist groups so if 
you are interested in a specialist subject area it is worth
checking individual websites directly. Likewise the American
Political Studies Association website (http://www.apsanet.org/)
maintains a similar listing of events. These tend to be 
North American based but there is some coverage of major
European events.
How can I get journal contents listings?
Many commercial publishers will enable you to register to
receive tables of contents listings from journals direct to your
e-mail account. These can be effective means of keeping up to
date with the latest research findings and book reviews. In
many cases it is possible to sign up without actually
164

Keeping up to date
subscribing to the journal. Most of these services can be
found by searching for the publisher’s website and then
locating the journals section. Key examples include Oxford
University Press (http://www3.oup.co.uk/jnls/) and SARA
(Scholarly Articles Research Alerting) (http://www.tandf.co
.uk/sara/). SARA provides free access to information from a
consortium of publishers including Routledge, Taylor &
Francis, Carfax and Spon Press. The only disadvantage of this
is the time that it takes to set up the original accounts as you
will need to locate the publishers of your favourite titles.
Some libraries have access to subscription services which will
enable you to register with a single system. A well known
example which is widely available in the UK is ZETOC
(http://zetoc.mimas.ac.uk/). This is an electronic table of
contents service offered by the British Library. As it is based
on the BL collections, it is extremely wide in scope, covering
over 20,000 titles across all academic disciplines. In addition
to the alerting service, its website also offers a searchable
database of journal article and conference paper abstracts to
subscribers. These cover the period 1993 to the present day.
165

Further reading
Here are some suggestions for further reading. Remember
that books are being published all the time. To keep up to
date with any new texts a good starting point is the Political
Studies journal website (http://www.politicalstudies.org/
review/) where you will find an excellent book review section.
Dissertation writing and research
Allan, Graham and Skinner, Chris (ed.) (1991) Handbook
for Research Students in the Social Sciences. London:
Falmer Press.
Bell, Judith (1993) Doing Your Research Project: A Guide
for First-Time Researchers in Education and Social
Science, 2nd edn. Buckingham: Open University Press.
Brause, Rita S. (2000) Writing Your Doctoral Dissertation:
Invisible Rules for Success. New York: Falmer Press.
Dunleavy, Patrick (1986) Studying for a Degree in the
Humanities and Social Sciences. Basingstoke: Macmillan
Education.
Dunleavy, Patrick (2003) Authoring a PhD Thesis: How to
Plan, Draft, Write and Finish a Doctoral Dissertation.
Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.
167

Using the Internet for Political Research
Garson, G. David (2002) Guide to Writing Empirical Papers,
Theses, and Dissertations. New York: Marcel Dekker.
Mauch, James E. and Birch, Jack W. (1983) Guide to the
Successful Thesis and Dissertation: Conception to
Publication: A Handbook for Students and Faculty. New
York: Marcel Dekker
Murray, Thomas R. and Brubaker, Dale L. (2000) Theses
and Dissertations: A Guide to Planning, Research, and
Writing. Westport, CT and London: Bergin & Garvey.
Preece, Roy A. (1994) Starting Research: An Introduction
to Academic Research and Dissertation Writing. London:
Pinter.
Rudestam, Kjell Erik (1992) Surviving Your Dissertation: A
Comprehensive Guide to Content and Process. Newbury
Park, CA: Sage.
Secrist, Jan (1998) Secrets for a Successful Dissertation.
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Watson, George (1987) Writing a Thesis: A Guide to Long
Essays and Dissertations. London: Longman.
Political science research
Goel, M. (1988) Political Science Research: A Methods
Handbook. Ames, IA: Iowa State University Press.
Johnson, Janet Buttolph, Reynolds, H. T. and Joslyn, Richard
(2002) Political Science Research Methods, 4th edn.
Washington, DC: CQ Press.
168

Further reading
Jones, Laurence F. and Olson, Edward C. (1996) Political
Science Research: A Handbook of Scope and Methods.
New York: HarperCollins College Publishers.
Manheim, Jarol B., Rich, Richard C. and Willnat, Lars
(2001) Empirical Political Analysis: Research Methods in
Political Science, 5th edn. New York: Longman.
Internet research techniques
Bradley, Phil (2002) Advanced Internet Searchers
Handbook, 2nd edn. London: Facet Publishing.
Branscomb, H. Eric (2001) Casting Your Net: A Student’s
Guide to Research on the Internet. Boston, MA: Allyn &
Bacon.
Cooke, Alison (2001) A Guide to Finding Quality
Information on the Internet: Selection and Evaluation
Strategies, 2nd edn. London: Facet Publishing.
Hewson, Claire et al. (2002) Internet Research Methods: A
Practical Guide for the Social and Behavioural Sciences.
London: Sage.
Hock, Randolph (2001) The Extreme Searcher’s Guide to
Web Search Engines: A Handbook for the Serious Searcher,
2nd edn. Medford, NJ: CyberAge Books.
Mann, Chris and Stewart, Fiona (2000) Internet
Communication and Qualitative Research: A Handbook
for Researching Online. London: Sage.
Maxwell, Bruce (2001) How to Track Politics on the
Internet. Washington, DC: CQ Press.
169

Using the Internet for Political Research
Ó Dochartaigh, Niall (2001) The Internet Research
Handbook: An Introductory Guide for the Social Sciences.
London: Sage.
Pedley, Paul (2001) The Invisible Web. London: Aslib.
Price, Gary and Sherman, Chris (2001) The Invisible Web:
Uncovering Information Sources Search Engines Can’t
See. Medford, NJ: CyberAge Books.
Winship, Ian and McNab, Alison (2001) Students Guide to
the Internet. London: Library Association Publishing.
170

Index
171
10 Downing Street, 63, 78–9
Acts of Parliament (UK), 127–8
Adam Smith Institute, 49, 70
American Memory Project, 85;
see also Library of Congress
American Political Science
Association, 23, 24, 34, 84,
147, 161, 164
ARK: Social and Political Archive
of Northern Ireland, 108
BBC News, 28, 46–7, 59–60, 99,
103, 106, 110, 120
Bills (legislative) (UK), 94–5,
129–30
Bookshops – online, 20–1,
149–51
Book reviews, 158
Boolean operators, 11–12
BOPCAS (British Official
Publications Current
Awareness Service), 125
BOPCRIS (British Official
Publications Collaborative
Reader Information Service),
125
Bow Group, 69
British Council, 136
British Election Studies, 52
British Library, 29, 153
Brookings Institution, 84
Bruges Group, 70
CAIN (Conflict Archive on the
Internet), 108
Campaign for Labour
Democracy, 64
Careers services (UK), 142–3
Catalyst, 49, 65
Cathie Marsh Centre for Census
and Survey Research, 133
Centre for Policy Studies, 49, 70
Centre for Reform, 72
Charter88, 100
Churchill, Winston, 81
Citation styles, 148–9
Civitas, 49 
CNN, 83
Command papers (UK), 123–4
Conferences – listings, 164
Conference papers, 22–3
Conservative Party (UK), 47,
67–71
Conservative Monday Group, 68
Constitution Unit UCL, 100,
101–2
Contents pages – journals: see
journals – tables of contents
services
COPAC, 152

Courses:
part time, 139
politics, 137–40
Current awareness services,
155–65
Daily List (TSO), 122
Demos, 49, 65
Democratic Dialogue (Northern
Ireland), 110 
Department for Constitutional
Affairs, 46
Devolution, 100–11 
Northern Ireland, 108–11
Scotland, 102–5
Wales, 105–8
see also Scottish Parliament;
National Assembly for
Wales
Discussion papers – political
science: see working papers
Early Day Motions Database
(UK), 96
Economic and Social Data Service
(ESDS) UK, 53, 132–3
Economic and Social Research
Council (ESRC), 160
Elections, 37–53
in the UK, 45–53
Election monitoring
organisations, 41
Electoral Commission (UK), 45,
52, 61, 101
Electoral Reform Society, 50
Electronic books, 20
Electronic government, 120, 163
Electronic journals, 24–6
E-journals – see electronic
journals
E-mail directories, 144–6
E-mail discussion lists, 147, 155–7
Encyclopaedias – see
Encyclopaedia Britannica;
Spartacus Internet
Encyclopaedia
Encyclopaedia Britannica, 77, 80
EPPI (Enhanced British
Parliamentary Papers on
Ireland Project), 126
Essays – Internet access, 148–9
Fabian Society, 49, 64, 147–8
Government departments (UK),
118–19
press releases, 119
Grants, 140–1, 144
Grapevine, 143–4
Green Papers, 123
Guardian newspaper, 60
Hansard (UK), 61, 79, 93–4, 96,
97
Hansard Society, 50, 100
Heads of state, 76–8
HERO: Higher Education and
Research Opportunities in
the UK (website), 136
HMSO, 122, 127–9
House of Commons, 79, 93–7;
see also House of Commons
Research papers; House of
Commons Weekly
Information Bulletin
Using the Internet for Political Research
172

House of Commons Research
Papers, 52, 96, 130
House of Commons Weekly
Information Bulletin, 129
House of Lords, 97–111
IBSS – see International
Bibliography of the Social
Sciences
IFES – International Foundation
for Election Systems, 38–9,
41, 51
Information Gateways, 7–9; see
also SOSIG
Institute for Public Policy
Research, 49, 65
Institute for Social and Economic
Research, 133
Institute of Welsh Affairs, 108
Institute of Welsh Politics, 107
Inter-Parliamentary Union (IPU),
92
International Bibliography of the
Social Sciences (IBSS), 27
Internet addresses – see URLs –
definition
Internet Resources Newsletter,
162
JISCmail, 147, 156
Jobs – politics, 141–3
Journal indexing services, 26–7
Journals – tables of contents
services, 164–5 
JSTOR, 25
Labour Left Briefing, 67
Labour Party (UK), 47, 63–7
Legislation (UK), 127–31; see
also Bills
Liberal Democrat History Group,
72
Liberal Democrat Party, 47, 71–3
Liberator, The, 73
Library catalogues, 21–2, 151–2
Library of Congress, 85–6
Lord Chancellor’s Department –
see Department for
Constitutional Affairs
M25 Consortium of Higher
Education Libraries, 152
Margaret Thatcher Foundation,
68, 81
Members of Parliament (UK) –
see MPs
MIMAS (Manchester Information
and Associated Services),
133
MORI, 48
Moving Ideas Network, 84, 158
MPs (UK), 95
National Archives (UK), 80,
126–7
National Archives and Records
Administration (USA), 85, 87
National Assembly for Wales,
105–6
National Digital Archive of
Datasets (UK), 133
National Union of Students (UK),
139, 141
Northern Ireland devolution,
108–11
Northern Ireland Executive, 109
Index
173

National Register of Archives
(UK), 63, 81
New Politics Network, 65
Newspaper websites, 28–9, 47
New Statesman, The, 67
Office of the Deputy Prime
Minister, 101
Official publications (UK), 121–7 
Official statistics (UK), 131–4
Opinion polls, 48
Parliaments, 89–111; see also
Scottish Parliament;
National Assembly for
Wales 
Parliament (UK), 61, 96–102,
129–30; see also House of
Commons; House of Lords
Parliamentary ethics (UK), 95
Parliamentary Commissioner for
Standards (UK), 95
PARLine, 92
PARLit, 92
POLIS (Parliamentary Online
Indexing Service), 96
Political parties (UK), 55–73; see
also Conservative Party;
Labour Party; Liberal
Democrat Party; SDP
Political Studies Association
(PSA), 23, 24, 33, 62, 138,
157, 161, 164
Political Studies Association
Graduate Network, 147
Politicos bookshop, 149, 157
President (USA), 82–7
Presidential Libraries (USA),
86–7
Prime Minister (UK), 78–82; see
also 10 Downing Street
Project Gutenberg, 20
Public Record Office (UK) – see
National Archives
Quality Assurance Agency for
Higher Education (QAA),
138
Quangos (UK), 118–19
Red Pepper, 67
Regard database, 159–60
Register of Members’ Interests
(UK), 95
Register of political parties (UK),
61
Renewal: A journal of Labour
politics, 67
Resource Discovery Network
(RDN), 8
RDN Virtual Training Suite, 17,
149
SARA (Scholarly Articles
Research Alerting), 165
Scholarships (UK) – see grants
Scottish Council Foundation, 105
Scottish Parliament, 102–5
Scottish Research Information
System, 160
Scotsman, The, 104
Scout Report, 162–3
SDP, 72
Search engines, 7, 161
Select Committee Reports (UK),
94, 97
Social Market Foundation, 65
Social Sciences Citation Index, 27
Using the Internet for Political Research
174

Social Science Information
Gateway – see SOSIG
SOSIG (Social Science
Information Gateway), 8,
30–3, 62, 82, 100, 105,
130–1, 161
Spectator, The, 71
Spartacus Internet Encyclopaedia,
80
Standing Committee reports
(UK), 128–9
Stationery Office, The (TSO)
(UK), 121–3
Statistics – see official statistics
Statutory Instruments (UK), 128
Student Loans Company, 140
Think tanks:
Australia, 159
Northern Ireland, 110–11
Scotland, 101, 105
UK – see Adam Smith Institute;
Centre for Policy Studies;
Civitas; Demos; Fabian
Society; Institute for Public
Policy Research 
USA – see Brookings Institution
Wales, 107–8
Tory Reform Group, 69
Trade unions (UK) – see TUC
Tribune, 67
TUC, 66
UCAS: Universities and Colleges
Admission Service (UK), 137
UK Data Archive, 52, 132 
UKonline, 118
UKOP, 124–5
Universities (UK):
application process, 135–7
politics departments, 137–40
URLs – definition, 3–4
Virtual Training Suite – see RDN
Virtual Training Suite
Welsh Assembly – see National
Assembly for Wales
Welsh Governance Centre, 107
Welsh Political Archive, 107
White House, 82; see also
President (USA) 
Working papers – political
science, 23
ZETOC, 165
Index
175

