EGG-FSP-11037
ITER/US/93/IE/SA- 18
"
Vacuum System Operating Experience
Review
For Fusion Applications
L. C. Cadwallader
Published
March
1994
G
Idaho
National
Engineering
Laboratory
EG&G
Idaho,
Inc.
Idaho
Falls,
ID
83415-3880
Prepared
for the
U.S. Department
of Energy
.
Office of Energy
Research
Under DOE Field Office,
Idaho
Contract
No.
DE-AC07-761D01570
MASTE_
4),4J_'40N
Of THiS i)flCUME_TIS UHLIMITEII
,.

ABSTRACT
This report presents a review of vacuum system operating experiences from particle
accelerator,fusionexperiment,space simulationchamber,andotherapplications. Safety relevant
•
operatingexperiences and accidentinformationare discussed. Quantitative order-of-magnitude
estimates of vacuumsystem componentfailureratesandaccidentinitiatingevent frequenciesare
,
presented for use in risk assessment, reliability,and availabilitystudies. Safety concerns with
vacuumsystems arediscussed,includingpersonnelsafety,foreignmaterialintrusion,and factors
relevant to vacuum systems being the primaryconfinementboundaryfor tritiumandactivated
dusts. This informationshould be usefulto fusionsystem designersand safety analysts, suchas
the team working on the Engineering Design Activities for the InternationalThermonuclear
ExperimentalReactor.

SUMMARY
This
report
is an overview
of vacuum system
operating experiences
from particle
accelerators, existing fusion experiments, and other facilities that use high vacuum systems.
This
"
report is not a chronicle of all vacuum system problems, but rather a guide to the persistent
problems that are discussed in the literature. Table S-1 gives a qualitative list of these problems.
While vacuum systems have not been a majorcause of downtime at the major fusion experiments,
they are growing in importance because they are the primaryboundary for radioactive tritium fuel
and for the induced radioactivity in the fusion vacuum system (activated dusts). More regulatory
review of vacuum systems is expected as fusion systems grow more robust. This report, and
others like it, will help to either prove that meaningful data can be generated for fusion, or to
generate enough controversy over these values that will motivate equipment vendors and existing
experiment operators to develop more accurate data sets.
Accidents, both real and postulated, are discussed.
Safety concerns with vacuum systems
are also briefly discussed.
Then, vacuum system component failure rate estimates are made for a
variety of components.
The failure rate values presented here apply to fusion experiments,
either
because (a) the data originated from existing fusion experiments,
(b) the data from non-fusion
experiments have been corrected to account for the more severe fusion environment, or (c) the data
for the component
in question from non-fusion sources would not have any increase because of
•
application in a fusion vacuum system. The component failure ra_e results are given in Table S-2.
The assumptions, definitions of component size, leak rate, etc., are given in Chapter 5.
The report concludes with some estimates of vacuum system initiating event frequencies.
These frequencies can be used as scoping values on future generation machines, such as the
International Thermonuclear Experimental Reactor 0TER), because the frequency values ate from
either the Next European Torus (a machine almost as large as ITER) or the values were generated
for ITER itself.
One area, the vacuum vessel wall failure frequency, must be further addressed.
The wall failure, or vessel breach, values presentedhere are judgment only.
This report is the third in a series of reports to harvest existing data for support of reliability
in design, reliability
analysis, and risk assessment.
The initial reports dealt with magnets and
cryogenic systems.
This report can also support the magnet systems, since a vacuum will be used
for thermal insulation.
Future work will also support the magnet work by examining electrical
power supply systems.
***
m

Table S-1. Summaryof vacuumcomponentfaultscitedin the literature
llln
lllId
I
Valveinternalsealleaks
Bellows leaks
Flangecrackingleaks
Personnelleavingforeignmaterialsinsidethevacuumvessel
Improperlytightenflanges
Valvepositionsnotverified,¢:ausingdamageto system
Gasotherthan heliumbeing sappliedto heliumleakdetectors
Dust intrusionintovalve seatsandseals causesleaks
Window,electricalfeedthrough,weld, bellows,flange,and vacuumgauge leaks
Electricalfeedthroughsexperiencingelectricaldischargesinlow pressureair
Valve bonnetleaks
Inadvertentopeningof valveto atmosphere
Objectsin magnetfringefield impactingthe torusorshiftingpositionto shearvacuumlines
Diagnosticstearingbellowsdueto misalignment
Diagnosticwindow cracks,bloating,orotherweaknessesthatallow airingress
Waterinleakagefrommetallurgyfaults,badwelds
Intrusionof dustinto the vacuumsystem
Lossof tensionin flangebolts,leadingto airleaks
Brazefailureat ceramic to metalinterface,leadingto airleaks
Rotary feedthroughs leakingbadly
ii
iv

Table S-2. Vacuum sysmm component failure ramestimates
......
Large turbopump
•
ceramic bearingfails to operate
9E-06/hour
error factor 3
metal _g
fails to operate
1.3E-05/hour
error factor 3
.
casing leakage
5E-O3/year
error factor 10
Mechanical roughing pump
high speed pump (vane, etc.)
1.SE-OS/hour
error factor 1.2
fails to operate
casing leak
5E-03/year
error factor 10
roots blower fails to operate
1.5E-05/hour
error factor 1.2
roots blower casing leak
5E-06/hour (upper bound)
Cryosorption roughing pump
fails to operate
Low failure rate; use availability of liquid
nitrogen supply, since zeolite can continue to
function indefinitely under good conditions
casing leak
5E-03/year
error factor 10
"4
Large cryopump
fails to operate (plugged)
2E-06/hour
error factor 10
leak cryogen into vacuum chamber
2E-O5/hour
error factor 1.7
casing leak
7E-O6/year
error factor 10
Small titanium sublimation pumF
fails to operate
9E-07/hour
error factor 1.7
(premature filament open circuit)
feedthrough leak
7.4E-05/hour
error factor 1.4
casing leak
3E-05/year
error factor 10
Non-evaporable getter (Zr-A1)pump
fails to operate
9E-07/hour (upper bound)
casing leak
3E-05/year
errorfactor 10
H
iHi
.i
ii
i
•
i
i

.....rmm ..
..............mmm
Small ion pump
diode pump fails to operate
2E-05/hour
errorfactor 3
casing leak
3E-05/year
error factor 10
feedthrough leak
1.SE-04/hour
error factor 1.4
Large ejector pump
all modes
7E-06/hour
error factor 10
(air leak, working fluid leak,
and fail to operate [plugged])
Metal gasket flanges
160 to 215 mm diameter leakage
1E-03/year
error factor 3
295 to 360 mm diameter leakage
6E-02/year
error factor 3
1m and larger diameter leakage
5E-01/year
error factor 10
flange bolt
2E-08/hour
error factor 10
.
Electrical feedthrough for diagnostics
leakage
5E-04/hour
error factor 1.4
"
Metal bellows
leakage
8E-04/hour
error factor 1.6
Bayard Alpert hot f'dament ionization gauge
all modes
6E-03/year
error factor 2.2
(same value for failure to operate
and tubular gauge leakage)
Penning cold cathode ionization gauge
all modes
6E-03/year (upper bound)
(fail to operate, leakage)
Pirani gauge
fail to operate
3E-05/hour
error factor 10
leakage
6E-03/year
error factor 2.2
,
vi

I
Ell
innmm
....
.....
'
Rough vacuum gauges
fail to operate
1E-O4/hour
errorfactor l0
_t
leakage
1E-O3/year
error factor 3
Vacuum windows (quartzoptical viewports)
leakage
1.4E-06/discharge or
1.4E-06/hour
errorfactor of 1.8
this value should be used for other windows (metal or ceramic) until future
data on windows becomes available.
Valves
fail to operate on demand
1E-O4/demand
errorfactor 2
(fail to open or fail to close)
spurious open or close
motor operated
5E-08/hour
errorfactor 10
-
air opemt_xl
3E-06/hour
error factor 10
solenoid operated
5E-07/hour
error factor 10
"
external air leakage
2E-07/hour
error factor 10
internal leakage across the seat
3E-O6/hour
error factor 30
Vacuum piping and ducts
piping leakage
1E-08/hour-m
error factor 30
tank leakage
1E-08/hour
error factor 30
(rupture values are a factor of 100 lower than the leakage estimates)
Vacuum vessel
wall breach
5.TE-05/year (for 25% availability)
Filters
electrostatic falter leakage
3E-07/hour
error factor 10
electrostatic filter fail to operate
1E-05/hour
error factor 10
.I
solid filter leakage
3E-07/hour
error factor 10
solid filtrate
7E-06/hour
error factor 10
vii

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This report would not have been possible without the help of several people.
First, the
INEL technical library staff did literature searches, helped procure many reports, books, and
conference proceedings. The people whom I interviewed, Dr. George Martin and Dr. Peter Taylor
were very helpful. My thanks also go to Dr. David Petti and Mr. Tom McDonald for their review.
Al_o, this work was funded by the International Thermonuclear Experimental Reactor (ITER)
design activity.
eoo

CONTENTS
Abstract .......................................................
ii
q,
Summary
......................................................
iii
o
Acknowledgments................................................
viii
Nomenclature...................................................
xi
1. Introduction ..................................................
1-1
2. Vacuum System Operating Experiences
...............................
2-1
2.1
Introduction ............................................
2-1
2.2
Fusion facilities ..........................................
2-1
2.3 Accelerator facilities .......................................
2-5
2.4 Space simulation chambers and other applications ...................
2-9
3. Vacuum System Accidents ........................................
3-1
3.1
Introduction
............................................
3-1
"
3.2
Air inleakage ............................................
3-1
3.3 Water or coolant inleakage ...................................
3-2
3.4
Plasma disruption effects ....................................
3-3
3.5
Equipment faults .........................................
3-3
4. Vacuum Safety Concerns
.........................................
4-1
4.1
Introduction
............................................
4-1
4.2
Vacuum vessel irradiation ...................................
4-1
4.3
Mechanical
vibrations and stresses
.............................
4-2
4.4
Electromagnetic
stress ......................................
4-2
4.5
Runaway electrons
......................................
4-2
4.6
Magnetic
forces
.........................................
4-3
4.7
Pump fire and explosion hazards
..............................
4-3
4.8
Personnel safety concerns
...................................
4-4
5. Vacuum System Component Failure Rates .............................
5-1
5.1 Introduction
............................................
5-1
5.2
Pumps ................................................
5-1
5.3
Flanges
...............................................
5-6
5.4 Electrical
feedthroughs
.....................................
5-7
-
5.5
Bellows feedthroughs
.....................................
5-8
5.6
Vacuum gauges ..........................................
5-8
5.7
Vacuum windows
........................................
5-9
ix

CONTENTS
(continued)
5. VacuumSystemComponentFailureRates (continued)
"
5.8 Vacuumvalves ..........................................
5-10
5.9 Vacuum ductsandvessels
5-11
5.l0 Othercomponents ........................................
5-11
6. VacuumSystem InitiatingEvents ...................................
6-1
6.1 Introduction ............................................
6-!
6.2 Loss of vacuumaccident....................................
6-1
6.3 Loss of coolant accident ....................................
6-2
6.4 Loss of flow accident......................................
6-2
6.5 Otherevents ............................................
6-3
I

NOMENCLATURE
BAG
Bayard-Alpcrt
Gauge
,e.
CERN
CenterforEuropeanResearchNucleaire
inGeneva,Switzerland
d
demand
.
EDA
Engineering Design Activities for 1TER
g
grams
h
hour
IE
initiating event
ITER
International
Thermonuclear
Experimental
Reactor
JET
JointEuropeanToms
yr-60
JapanToms,60 m 3volume
LEP
LargeElectron
Positron
Collider
atCERN
LHe
Liquidhelium
LOCA
LossofCoolantAccident
LOFA
LossofFlowAccident
LOVA
LossofVacuum Accident
LN2
Liquidnitrogen
m
meter
"
m3
cubic meter
mm
millimeter
NET
Next European Toms
Pa
Pascal
rpm
revolutions
per minute
s
second
SPS
Superconducting
Positron
Synchrotron
atCERN
TFTR
Tokarnak Fusion Test Reactor
Torr
pressure unit, equal to 133.3 Pa
xi

VACUUM
SYSTEM OPERATING
EXPERIENCE
REVIEW
FOR FUSION APPLICATIONS
1.
INTRODUCTION
This report contains a review of vacuum system operating experiences for use by fusion
,
system designers and safety analysts. Representative types of events found in published operating
histories,
safety
concerns
for vacuum systems
and equipment,
failure
rates for vacuum
components, and system failure frequencies are discussed.
Vacuum systems are necessary for
both inertial confmement and magnetic confinement approaches '_ofusion. Therefore, this report
should be of interest to a wide group of designers and safety personnel.
Vacuum systems have evolved greatly over the course of fusion research.
In the 1950's
vacuum was typically maintained by hot oil diffusion pumps. Some of those pumps could be quite
large, perhaps 4 m tall by I m diameter for large vacuum complexes. Those pumps could achieve
good vacuum, but were reputed to have had difficulties with oil backstreaming into the vacuum
chamber if they were not operated properly. While diffusion pumps are simple, reliable, and can
be modified with baffles or traps to stop oil migration into systems, oil contamination is very
detrimental to maintaining a good vacuum in the system. With prudent operation, diffusion pumps
work well, but as vacuum technology progressed, ion, sublimation (getters), cryosorption, and
"
then turbomolecular pumps began to be used for fusion systems since these types of pumps have
less contamination concerns. These pumps are generally regarded as cleaner, and can sometimes
generate higher vacuum than diffusion pumps. For this report, high vacuum is defined to be on
the order of 0.13 to 1.3E-05 Pa (1E-03 to 1E-07 Torr). Ultrahigh vacuum is defined to be less
than 1E-05 Pa (1E-07 Torr).
However, the range of vacuum from atmospheric pressure to
ultrahigh vacuum is considered here wherever practical, since most systems must provide for
'roughing' from atmospheric pressure down to the range where the sophisticated molecular flow
pumps operate.
The discussion in this report is not intended to be a complete discussion on vacuum safety,
nor is it a chronicle of all significant vacuum system failures and vacuum component failure rates.
Resources are too limited for such a complete treatment. This work does give a representative
view of vacuum experiences from a safety viewpoint; it cites items to be conscious of during
design and gives best estimates of frequencies of failures for designers and safety analysts to use in
treating the new InternationalThermonuclear Experimental Reactor (1TER) fusion design or other
fusion designs.
Providing representative vacuum accident events should help safety personnel
select initiating events for safety and risk work. Estimates of the frequencies of these events are
calculated and also quoted from the literature.
Some definitions are important for this report. The first is leak rate, typically given in
.
throughput units, Tort-liters/second, orPascal-m3/second. The leak rate is the quantity of gas (air)
in pressure-volume units flowing per unit time into the system of interest.l-I,
1-2
Once the
temperature and gas species are known, the throughput units can be converted to mass flow units,
1-1

such as grams/s. Obviously, the lowerthe throughputleak rate,the betterfor the system, since
this is a lower mass of foreign material in the system, andpump energy must be expended to
remove mass fromthe system. Often,as happenswith other types of engineering systems, leaks
aredefined on the basis of the ability to measurethem. Forexample,ff an ion vacuumgauge is
used,then only leak ratesabovea smallvalue (perhapsvalues on the orderof 10"10 Pa.m3/s)are
noted. The sizes of leaks, suchas 'small'and 'large'will be set on the basis of the capacity of the
pumpsavailable to handlethe gas loads,just as watersystem leak sizes aretypically set by the
abilityof the makeupsystemsto replenishthe leakagewater. Generally,for fusion experiments
1E-05 Pa-m3/s throughputleaks arethoughtto be large leaks that requiresystem shutdownand
leakdetection.
Two types of nomenclatureforleaks aregenerallyusedwhendiscussing vacuum systems:
virtual and real leaks. Virtual leaks arenot breaches of the vacuumsystem to the surrounding
environment,butrather arethe diffusionorevolution of some materialfromwithin the vacuum
system. A virtualleakcould be airleakingfromits entrapmentwithina weld seam orout from the
threadsof a threadedconnection. A subsetof virtualleaks areforeign materialsin the vacuum
system, such as water vaporfromatmospherichumiditycoming off of the interior walls of the
vacuumsystem, oil evaporatingfromfingerprintsorpumpoil contaminationwithin the system,
and outgassing from plastic, rubber(elastomer), ceramic seals, or from any number of other
foreign materials in the system. Virtualleaks can be as much a source of inconvenience and
frustrationas realleaks, butgenerallyonly good designpracticesand prudentmaterialchoices can
precludevirtualleaks. Real leaksarevacuumsystembreaches,howeversmall,to the surrounding
environment.Real leaksmightarisefrompoorsealcontacton a flange, foreign materialona seal,
a flawedor brokenseal, loose flangebolts, a crackedweld (orbrazeorsolderjoint) orbellows, a
crackedwindow, etc. This distinctionis veryimportantbecauseitdictatesthe meansto remedythe
leakproblem. Virtualleakscanbe treatedby goodsystem design(nosmall 'pockets'in the system
that hold air for slow evolution, good weld design, etc.), in-vessel cleanliness practices
assiduously followed by constructionand maintenancepersonnel,and system bakeout at high
temperatures (perhaps 150 to 300°C) to rapidly(that is, in hours or a day rather than slow
evolution over weeks or months) drivewatervaporand other gases off the walls for captureby
vacuumpumps. Conversely,real leaks can be located with leak detectors andfixed by system
maintenance, such as component or seal replacement,by tightening flange bolts, or perhaps
placinga temporaryguardvacuumoverthe leaklocation. Theremainderof this report dealswith
realleaksratherthan virtualleaks.
Thisreport is structured to firstdiscuss vacuumsystem operatingexperiencesfromexisting
fusion experiments, particleaccelerators,space simulationchambers, andany other large scale
usesof vacuumequipment(vacuummanufacturing,etc.). These experiencesareusedto formlists
of historical-basisaccident initiating events. Then safety concernsare discussed, followed by
component failure rate estimates and finally, a chapteron postulatedinitiating events andtheir
frequencyestimates.
.
1-2

l
l
Chapter 1 References
I-I.
A. Roth,Vacuum Technology, North-HollandPublishers, Amsterdam,Second Edition,
"
1982, page 440.
1-2.
M.H. Hablanian,High-VacuumTechnology.A PracticalGuide,MarcelDekker,Inc., New
York, 1990, page 41.
1-3

2.
VACUUM
SYSTEM
OPERATING
EXPERIENCES
2.1
Introduction
"
Thischapterdiscussesvacuumsystemexperienceforfusionfacilities, particleaccelerators,
space simulation chambers, and other facilities that use large vacuum systems (larger than
,
laboratorybench top scale equipment). These experienceshave all been found in the published
literatureorfrominterviewingexperts. Eachof the facilitiesis charactedz_ as well aspossiblefor
their given level of publishedinformationand resourcesavailableforreportpreparation. Citing
these parameters should help determinethe similarity of these experiences to future fusion
facilities.
2.2
Fusion
Facilities
Magnetic fusion facility experiencesarediscussed first,since they are most similarto the
proposedInternationalThermonuclear ExperimentalReactor(ITER)and other next generation
experiments, such as the U.S. Tokamak Physics Experiment. Several of the large fusion
experiments have outlined theirvacuumsystem experiencesin variousreports, andin papersat
conferences and workshops. These experiencesarediscussedbelow, foreach machine,together
withmachineparametersto assistthe readerin interpretingtheseexperiences.
Tokamsk
Fusion Test Reactor (TFTR). The TFTR experiment at the PrincetonPlasma
Physics Laboratoryin New Jersey beganoperationin December,1982.2.1 This experimenthas
operatedfor over 10 years. The TFTRvessel andductsenclose about85.6 m3. TFIR maintains
a pressureof about7E-07 Paby using8 tur_)pumps,2 cryopumps,andcryopanels. The vacuum
system leakrateis about3E-06Pa-m3/s. The TFTRvacuumsystem is describedin reference2-2.
Initialoperatingexperiencein the firsttwelve monthsuncoveredsome majoroperationalproblems.
Two of the 14 torus bellows hadsignificantleaks from undeterminedcauses, all of the 41 high
vacuumvalves to the vacuumpumpingsystem had significant internal seal leaks andbellows
failures,and one of the 12.'/mm thickneckflangeshadsignificantleakingfromthroughcracking,
attributedto flawed material.2-2 These problemswereall correctedquickly,with a combinationof
componentreplacement,patching,and othersolutions. Now, the TFTRvacuumsystem is only a
small contributorto overall machinedowntime. Magnetsandcomputersystems are the major
contributorsto downtime.
Princeton has also been the sourceof several widely-repeatedstories of vacuum systems.
The two most weU-knownstories areabouta lunchleft insidea vacuumchamber,and researchers
findingan animal (a mouse,a rat,ora cat, dependingon where one hasheardthe tale) inside the
vacuum chamber. In a conversationwith Dr. G. D. Martin,a PPPLresearcher, the origins of
these stories were uncovered.2-3 The lunchbag left in a machineis an apocryphalstory, likely
-
precedingthe PrincetonLarge Toms experimentfromthe 1970's. Perhapsit didactuallyhappen
decades ago, when the machines were small and there were few procedures. The mouse story
occurredas partof the stelleratorprojectin the mid-1950's. When a glass u-bendfitting on the
2-1

stellarator had cracked, a new one was obtained from the storage room. The new glass fitting had
a small dead mouse in it
The mouse was discardedand the glass u-bend was thoroughly cleaned,
then installed on the stellerator. The mouse was never inside the machine.
PPPL workers have inadvertently left tools, booties, a latex glove, and loose parts (screws,
etc.) inside the various fusion experiments.
As the experiments grew large enough to allow
persons m enter, more items began to be left behind when the vacuum vessel was closed for pump
down. Also, the larger the vessel, the more difficult it is to survey for loose parts. Any metallic
parts can create problems when the magnetic field is energized.
The Princeton Large Toms
suffered a rapid pressurization accident in September 1979 when a wrench, caught in the fringe
magnetic field, struck and broke a 0.3 m diameter window.
PPPL has also learned several
practical vacuum lessons, which Dr. Martin sharedwith me. Always check to verify if a flange is
just being used as a dust cover; that is, do the flanges have proper gaskets in place and are the
flange bolts properly tightened7 Always verify the positions of valves m avoid pumping down
only the volume in the vacuum duct between the pump and its isolation valve.
Always check to
verify that a helium gas bottle is connected to the helium leak detector, not an argon bottle (in the
US and some other countries, all inert gas botdes have the same fitting, so mixing different bottles
is possible).
Also, Dr. Martin suggests that it takes on the order of several years to become truly
proficient at leak testing, and every time new people are brought into a project, some of the same
mistakes are repeated.2-3
TFTR researchers have also discussed the cleanliness of the TFrR vacuum vessel and
vacuum system.
Over an operating campaign, several kilograms of dust can be created, and this
dust can get into vacuum valves and other components, causing a valve seat leakage problem.2"4
This will probably continue to be a problem for futureexperiments, depending on fu'stwall design.
TFTR solutions
m date are using gate valves equipped with rings to guard the seat areas and
providing passages for the material m settle out. The settling passages also tend to retain the dusts
during "up-to-air" (increasing vacuum system pressure to atmospheric pressure) events, which
helps to protect the machine. Remote maintenance for dust contaminated vacuum components has
also been considered for next generation devices.2"5
Joint
European
Toms
(JET).
The JET experiment near Culham Laboratory in the United
Kingdom initially operated in June 1983.
JET is about 200 m3 in volume, and keeps a base
pressure of about 1E-04 Pa by using 4 turbopumps. The overall vacuum system leak rate is about
1E-05 Pa-m3/s.
The vacuum system is described in references 2-6 and 2-7. The double-walled
JET vessel is divided into octants, each having about 1 km of welding and having a design leak
rate of 1E-07 Pa-m3/s. When initially tested after construction, on average one leak per octant was
found, ranging from IE-06 to 1E-04 Pa-m3/s. These leaks were found and repaired.
Over its lifetime, JET has reported that leaks and other vacuum-related delays have caused
more than 10% of the operation time delay and 2.5% of the operation time loss.
In a good
.
discussion of vacuum problems at JET,2-8 most of the routine vacuum components were evaluated
for their performance and leak frequency distribution. Optical windows, electrical feedthroughs,
2-2

bellows, flanges, valves, andvacuumgauges have all presentedsome level of leakage problem
over JET life.
In general, :lETwelds were found to be more reliable (leaktight) than seals,
something also true for high pressurewater systems. Table 2-1 is a reproduction taken from
reference 2-8, showing the number of vacuum componenttypes and the percentage of those
-
componentsthatleakedin assemblyorin operation: The valves evaluatedin Table 2-1 include
those valves thatsealportionsof the vacuumsystemfromotherportions(notjustbetweenvacuum
andair). The leakagevalue of 70.2%includesleaks acrosstheseats of those valves, butmostof
those leaks donot hampermachineoperation. Laterin thischapter,Table2-1 will be comparedto
a similartablefroma particleacceleratorfacility. TheJETexperimentrunswell; Table2-1 simply
illustrateshowdifficultit is to operatelarge,cleanvacuumsystems.
The JET discussion of vacuumproblems also contains cause and remedy information.
Flange leaks were mainly caused by damaged(scratches,dents) seals, uneven heating of the
flanges,reuseof seals, anddebrisintrusion.Valveleaksweremostoftencausedby debrisgetting
lodged in the valve seat, and also by improper,out of sequenceoperationof the valves. Optical
windows of quartz and sapphirehave failed due to waterimpingementwith resultantthermal
stresses(JETwindows normally operateat250°C),and dueto coatingdebondingfromthe face of
the glass. Waterleaks fromwatercooling linesforthe limitershaveoccurredbecauseof bellows
breachesdueto excess vibrationandweld failuresfromdisruption-inducedstressesand vibration.
Some of the bellows underhigh gas or waterthroughputhave failed from excess vibrationin a
matterof a few days. Bellows failuresat JEThave beenthe single largestcause of vacuumsystem
operationaldelays. There havebeen problemswithelectricalpenetrationsas well. JETdesigners
realized that these would always leak to some extent, andguardvacuums (that is, secondary
-
enclosurespumpedwith roughingpumpsto some low pressure,perhaps1 to 100 Paor so) cause
unexpectedproblems. Inthe pressurerangeof 100 to 1 Paof air,a voltageof 150 V can permitan
electrical discharge in the air that damagesthe electrical conductorin the feedthrough. Two
solutions have been used at JET - pumpingdown to 1E-03 Pa,orbackfillingwith a noble gas at
0.5 to 1 atmospherepressureto providemoreresistanceto breakdown.2-8
Penningvacuumgaugesrelyon a small permanentmagnetto enhanceionizations,andJETs
strong magnetic field for plasma confinement caused many Penning gauge magnets to shift
position, damaging the gauge'selectrical feedthrough(ceramicinsulator). Pirani gauges were
foundto be very proneto mechanicaldamage,whichcausedseveralleaks.2-8 Futuremachines
mightnotexperiencethe mechanicalproblem,sincemaintenancewouldbe performedremotelyand
the gaugescould beplacedawayfrommaintenancepathways. Shieldingfrommagnetfields will
be necessaryforfutureusesof Penningtypegauges.
As well as losing integrity(allowingadmissionof air),some JET in-vessel componentshave
"
leaked waterinto the machine. This was brieflydiscussedabove, andcan be importantto vacuum
chamber safety if the water coolant reacts with hot armor tiles to form hydrogen and oxides.
.
Radioactivematerialsembeddedin the first few micronsof the tiles wouldbe released duringsuch
reactions (tritium, activated dusts) at least locally. The hydrogen generation issue is a safety
concern for future experiments. These issues are discussed later in this report. In one event at
2-3

JET,a large amountof water(0.5 m3) floodedthe vessel.2"9 However,muchsmaller amountsof
watercould liberateenoughhydrogento presenta potentialhydrogenexplosion concern;on the
orderof ten or more liters. Of course, air would have to be admitted as well to result in a
deflagrationordetonation,so a verytightvacuumsystemandvesselwouldhelpto mitigatea water
leak/tile reactionevent. Overpressureevents must be toleratedby robust design or somehow
mitigatedby pressurerelief; if not, thendiagnosticductsmight fail and allow admission of air.
Vacuumwindows are reputedto not be ableto take much morethan 1 atmospheredifferential
pressure;greaterdifferencesleadto fracture.JETexperienceshowsthatwaterimpingementon hot
vacuumwindows causes thermalstress-inducedfracture,whichcould leadto airingresswithout a
largeinternaloverpressurein the vacuumvessel. Ignitorsforthegeneratedhydrogenandingress
aircould be a vacuumgaugefilament(suchas thatusedin a BayardAlpertGauge),hotwalltiles, a
hot Langmuirprobe tip, or perhapsjust the static ,dectricity generatedby flowing gas as the
vacuumsystem pressureequalizes.
Table 2-1. Leakpercentasedistributionby componenttypein JET
ComnonentTwe
Numberinstalled
Percentleakage
Boltedflanges
185
18.9
V-bandflanges
137
30.7
-
Lip weld
114
13.2
Buttweld
375
0.8
Filletweld
1235
2.8
Electronbeamweld
48
10.4
ConFlatflanges
115
2.6
Windows
41
34.0
Edgewelded bellows
75
13.3
Hydroformedbellows
273
5.5
Feedthroughsand gauges
196
7.7
Valves
57
70.2
|,
i,
,
.
,,l
,
Japan
Torus-60
(JT-60).
JT-60, at the Naka Fusion Research Establishment in Japan,
began operationin April1985. TheJT-60experimenthada 160 m3 vacuumchamber,and its base
pressure is about 7E-07 Pa, with a leak rate of about 7E-08 Pa-m3/s.2-10
The JT-60U (U
meaning upgrade) has a double walled Inconel vessel, like the JET, DIII-D, and Tore Supra
experiments. JT-60U uses turbopumpsandgetterpumpsforits vacuumsystem. The JT-60U is
2-4

I
I
described in reference 2-11. Between July 1986 andOctober 1987, the original JT-60 device
experienced78 vacuumleaks. Theseleaks occurredin metalo-ringseals (64.1%),copper gasket
seals (12.8%),gate valve bonnets(11.5%), gatevalve disk seals (2.6%), other places (3.8%),and
unknown (5.1%). The predominantcause was electromagneticforces fromplasma disruptions
(66.7% of leaks), followed by impropertorque-downof components with 17.9% of the leaks.
Misassembly (2.6%), thermal stresses (3.8%), bad manufacturing(2.6%), and "other" (6.4%)
madeuptheremainderof theleakcauses.2-10
Russian
suPerconducting
tokamak
experiment
(T-15).
The T-15
experimentis locatedat the KurchatovInstituteof AtomicEnergy,nearMoscow. T-15 initially
operatedwith low powerpulses in _mber
1988.2"12 TheT-15 vacuumsystem is pumpedby
turbopump,_for a basepressureof about8E-05 Paandhas a typicalthroughputleak rateof about
7E-05 Pa-m3/s.2"13 Apparently,turbopumpsarethe preferredtype of pumpfor existing fusion
experiments. Turbopumpsarenotedfortheirwide ra_e of pumpingpressures,cleanliness,rapid
on-line time, and low maintenancerequirements. Their only drawbacksare susceptibility to
vibration,possiblyradiation,andeddycurrentheatingof therotor.2-14
Other fusion experlment experiences.
Experiences from several other fusion
experimentshave beencollected to pointoutthe typesof possiblefaultsthatcan occur.2-15 The
ranges of faults discussed covers manytypes of faults: a torusinterfacevalve was inadvertently
.
opened to the atmosphere; in September 1979, the Princeton Large Torus had a wrench,
acceleratedbythe magneticfield,strikeandimplodeanunusedvacuumwindowwhilethe machine
was undervacuum;a diagnosticshiftingin themagneticfieldshearedits line to the vacuumvessel;
-
a retractablediagnostic ranpast its stop andtore open its vacuumbellows; diagnostic breaches
allowingairinleakagc;leakywelds;and bellows failuresthatallowairingress. Otherleak-prone
componentsforfusionvessels havebeendefinedfrompastexperiences: field welds, bellows, and
seals.2-16 Othernoted fusion experiments,such as the Tore Supraexperiment at Cadarache,
France,which began operationin April1988, have not publishedmany vacuumexperiences for
comparisonhere.
2.3
Accelerator
Facilities
Several of the largeacceleratorsaroundthe world,including the facilities at the Center for
EuropeanNuclear Research(CERN)in Geneva,Switzerlandandthe FermiNationalAccelerator
Laboratory(FNAL) in Batavia, Illinois, publish some of their operatingexperiences.
Since
acceleratorstypically requirepressuresof perhaps1E-06to 1E-09 Pa, these experiences can be
useful to fusion researchers. One physics researcherfor the CERN Intersecting StorageRings
(ISR) experiment, a 2 km-circumference experiment, gave this insight:
"The frequency of
occurrenceof small leaks is reasonablylow; it constitutesa nuisancebut as yet no more than a
slightheadache."2-17
4
The ISR experiment uses aluminumfor the vacuum chamber,and maintainsa pressure
between 1E-08 and 1E-09 Pa. Typical of largevacuumsystems, ISR researchershave reported

leaks in vacuum flanges (seal leakage) that were quickly sealed by varnishing the exterior of the
flange. The varnish-for-leakproofing seems to be a traditionalremedy, but is not recommended for
use on any fusion system.
Varnish is an oil-based paint substance that sets into a hard, thin film.
If varnish was drawn into the vacuum system through the leak location before the varnish hardens,
it could pervade the fusion system, leading to virtualleaks as the hydrocarbon chains in the varnish
broke down in the vacuum environment.
Also, since fusion systems are baked out much more
frequently (fusion systems have brief bakeouts weekly, long bakcouts occur perhaps monthly or
quarterly; as opposed to yearly bakeouts at accelerators) and often at higher temperatures than
accelerator systems, the varnish would not stand up under the thermal stress. Still, varnishing a
vacuum flange is, in principle, similar to "furmaniting"a leaky water system flange. Furmaniting
is a maintenance process where a hot fluid rubbercompound (called furmanite) is injected around
the edges of a leaky water flange or valve body, filling the volume between the halves of the
flanges.
The Furmanite rubber dries and hardens, thereby plugging the leak until the seal can be
rcpacked in next maintenance session.
Fusion systems cannot use temporary fixes such as
varnishing leaks or other furmaniting processes.
A better approach for fusion would be to
establish guard vacuums over leak locations until a maintenance session can solve the problem.
The ISR has also experienced'pressure bumps' of unknown origin.
Some sections of the
ISR accelerator have experienced localized pressure increases of up to 1,333 Pa. Since accelerators
are generally small diameter (less than 1 m) and very long circumference
(many kin), the
conductance is low and pressure increases can be somewhat localized.
The pressure spikes cause
loss of the accelerator beam,just as accidental airorwater ingress in afusion reactor would cause a
plasma disruption. The LEP pressure bumps might have been large virtual leaks, but the staff did
not know the exact cause.
Other pressure bursts have been attributed to oil leakage and
vaporization from hot oil diffusion pumps,2-18 but that is not the case for the ISR.
The Large Electron Positron (LEP) collider at CERN also has some interesting vacuum
experiences. 2-19 The LEP staff has documented their initial leakage experiences.
These data are
recreated in Table 2-2.
The LEP is a stainless
steel and aluminum chamber,
27 km in
circumference,
with an expected 20-year lifetime.
With these facts in mind, the information in
Table 2-2 can be considered as typical initial operating experience for a large vacuum system. The
failure ratio results are positive, since they are all less than 1%. Fusion systems would use many
fewer components than the LEP, which should reduce the number of expected leaks.
The flanges cited in the table are all metal to resist radiation levels, baking at 150°C, and
leaks in excess of 3E-11 Pa-m3/s. The larger flanges in Table 2-2 are aluminum (Al) to stainless
steel connections, with aluminum alloy 'diamond' cross section metal seals.
All of the Kovar
J
(Unified Numbering System K94610, an iron, nickel-cobalt alloy; Kovar is well known for its
ease of joining to ceramics and glass2-20) electrical feedthroughs were replaced by stainless steel
and a corrosion resistant nickel-silver ceramic. This was done to reduce any possible corrosion in
the LEP tunnel environment.2-21
t,
2-6

For the LEP components that had to be rebakedto meet vacuum criteria (18% or 358
aluminumchamberunits),abouta thirdof themhadmechanicalfailures(74 hadweld leaks;there
were also feedthroughleaks, demountablejoint leaks, measuringequipmentfeedthroughleaks,
etc.), and two-thirds hadvirtualleaks, mainly argongas evolution fromthe seams of inert gas
"
welds. The LEP team thought that the vacuum performancewas excellent, considering the
thousandsof componentstested andthe acceleratortunnelconditions: (a) the tunnelhad strong
draftsfromthe ventilatorsthathamperedleakdetection,(b) dustfromnew cement(construction
work)andhumiditycombinedto makecorrosiveagents,(c) ambienttemperaturesas low as 5°C
hamperedefforts, and (d)severalkilometersdistancebetweentunnelaccesspoints madethework
tedious.2-21
The researchersatthe LEPnotedthatusingvarnishto seal large leaks, those on the orderof
1E-07 Pa-m3/s, could cause varnishingress into the vacuumsystem, leading to unacceptable
system contamination. They would try to stop such leaks in other, more traditional ways,
includingtighteningthe flanges, dressingthe knife edges,changingthe metalseals onthe flanges,
etc.2-21
Table 2-2. Leak Statistics for the AluminumPortionof the LargeElectron PositronCollider,
following initialinstallationandfollowins initi'al24 hourb_out
............
ComponentandNumberof comnonents
I.eak.qafterinstallation Leaksafterbakeout
225 mm Al-steelflanges; 5,569
16, 0.3%
3, 0.06%
113mm Al-Al flanges;7,916
14, 0.2%
12, 0.2%
Bellows; 3,122
22, 0.8%
3, 0.1%
Beamposition
ceramicfeedthroughs;2,168
12, 0.7%
5, 0.3%
Getterpumpfeedthroughs;3,942
17, 0.5%
7, 0.2%
Ion pumpfeedthroughs;1,908
5, 0.4%
7, 0.5%
Aluminumchamberwelds;2,721
0, 0%
10, 0.04%
Note: Leakratesaregreaterthan3E-11Pa-m3/sat installationand3E-12 Pa-m3/safterbakeout,
butnotmuchgreaterinmostof _.i_eleaksfistedhere.
Bakeoutwas a 150or300°C(lowertemperatureforaluminum(AI)parts,higher
temperatureforstainlesssteelinterfaces).
ComparingTables2-1 and2-2 providessomeinterestinginsights. Whilethe LEPhasmany more
componentsthan YET,ithas uniformlylower leakagepercentagesthan YET. YEThas only 3%of
the numberof LEPflanges, only 65% thenumberof welds, 11% of the numberof bellows, and
•
only 2.5%of the numberof feedthroughs.However,JEThas hadalmost20 times the numberof
leaks in flanges, more than400 times the numberof weld leaks, 20 times the numberof bellows
leaks,and 5 times the numberof feedthroughleaks. Possibleexplanationsforthese results arethat
2-7

the LEPusesmanyaluminumparts,thesepartsarebakedoutatabouthalfthetemperaturethat
is baked out, and LEP does not operateat elevated temperatures like JET, so the LEP has less
thermalstress. JETalso experiencesmorevibrationsandother mechanicalstresses dueto plasma
disruptions. The componentson JETaretypicallylargerthan on LEP,so issues of properflange
alignmentand tightening,andotherinstallationand maintenanceissues can varybetween the two
machines. Whilethe JETestimates are higherthanLEPestimates,otherfusionexperimentshave
leakageexperiencesthatarecloser to theLEPresults. Forexample,the Axial SymmetricDivertor
Experiment(ASDEX), which operatedbetween February1980 and August 1990, showed that
there were only a few vacuum leaks with hundredsof flanges. Only two hours of machine
downtime for the decade were attributedto vacuum problems.2-22
Still, it is possible that
applying acceleratorvacuum componentreliability results to fusion component results would
overpredictfusionreliability,so lET-sizemachinefusionestimateswill be usedwheneverpossible
to extrapolateto future fusion machines. Since lET useful life failure experience gives higher
valuesthan LEPbeginningof life experience,increasesto applyacceleratorcomponentfailurerates
to fusioncomponentsareprudent. Vacuumcomponentfailureratesarediscussedin Chapter5.
The Lanzhoucyclotronin Chinahashadseveralexperiencesas well. Thisvacuumchamber
hasa design pressureof 6.5E-06 Pa(5E-08 Ton). On initial (commissioning)pumpdown,after
one hourof ivugh vacuumpumping,the Lan_ou researchersexperiencedleakagefromaluminum
gasketedsteel flanges thathad"slackened"screws, perhapsfrommaterialrelaxationorpersonnel
oversight. The flanges were tightened.After another 100 hours of high vacuumpumpingwi'_
cryopumps andturbopumps,therewere still some smallleaks present. The Lanzhouresearchers
also notedthatsince therewere novalves to isolate thecryopumpsfromthevacuumchamber,they
avoided using any fragile components in the vacuum boundary (bellows, etc.) so that any
accidentalairingresswas eliminated;therefore,the pumpswouldnotbe damaged.2-23
The StanfordLinearAcceleratorCenter'spositronelectronacceleratorring (SPEAR)hashad
severalinterestingexperiences. Inone event,a brazefailureata ceramicto stainlesssteel interface
caused the experimentto increase "up to air"pressure.Afterrepairs, the chamber could not be
j
restoredto high vacuum,untilan extensive4-daybakeoutsessionwasconducted.2-24
The FermiLabParticleaccelerator,the Tevatron,uses small turbopumps(160 l/s) at 210
cryostatvacuumfixed position stations and48 mobile beam tubepumpingcarts throughout the
facility. The flexhoses between the turbopumpandits backingpumparestuffed with copperpot
scrubbersto retardoil migration,and these hoses arechangedout with each pump oil change
(yearly). The turbopump'sforepumpsarerun at 33% speedreductionfromratedvalues to allow
these mechanicalpumpsto runat 10°Ccoolertemperature,thus increasingtheiruseful fife. Parts
installed on the Tevatronaretestedto a leak rateof 2E-11 Pa-m3/s,andresearchers estimatethat
only 5% of installed partsdevelop leaks within the body of the device. Bellows faults are the
worstproblemfor vacuumintegrity,whichis similar to JETresultsdiscussed earlier. Tevatron
seals thatleak arecarefully rubbeddown with number600 polishinggritto remove any scratches,
whicharethe mostcommonreasonforsealleaks.2-25 Scratchesarealso the maincause of fusion
flangeseal leaks.2-26,2-27 FortheTevatron,outof 256 seals inspected,48 needed replacement
2-8

on a firsttest, 10 aftera second test,andonly I aftera thirdtest. The Tevatronalso hashadsome
smallproblemswithheliumandnitrogenleaksthatcancauseupto a few tenthsof a percent(0.2 to
0.3%)of theseals to leakheliumintothe beamtube. The Tevatronpersonnelhave notfound any
evidence thatmultiple thermalcycles cause increasesin leak ratesfor these components. They
"
have had one event wherea faultybellows leaked,causing a warmupof an entire sector of the
machine.2-25
l
,s
i
The Daresbury facility in the United Kingdom has also experienced some interesting faults.
On their calibration vacuum system, high speed (43,000 rev/minute)turbomolecularpumpsare
used. On one occasion, while the mrbopumpwas operating,an internalseal in a rotarypump
failed, allowingoil to enterpartsof thevacuumsystem. The isolationvalve above the turbopump
receivedthe appropriatesensorsignal whenthe turbopumprotorbeganto slow down fromthe oil
load, andthevalve isolatedthepump. Uponrecoveryfromthatevent,anairleakwas encountered
froma 'closed'valve. While the valve seat was being tightenedto repairthe leak, the sapphire
cracked, which resultedin ventingthe entirechamberto the atmosphere. The interlocksystem
againfunctionedcorrectly,closing appropriatevalves so thatthe pumpswere isolated. Another
problem that they have faced was ion pumpscontinually trippingthe residualcurrentcircuit
breakers,so thestafflimitedtheoperatingtemperatureof t_heionpumpsto only 330°C.2-28
2.4.
Space simulation
chambers
and other applications
Space simulation chambers must be designed for more thanjust maintaining pressure of the
given altitude above the earth.
Ion bombardment, electromagnetic radiation from the sun,
colfisions with strayparticlesin orbit,andotherfactorsarealso takeninto account.2-29 At the
Skeats laboratoryin the US, a vacuum-relatedfatality occurredat a missile nose cone testing
chamberwhena vacuumwindow implodedfromeitherage orinadvertentimpact. This event is
discussedmorefully in Chapter4.
The EuropeanSpaceTribologyLaboratoryin theUnitedKingdomhasreportedthatvacuum
equipmentreliabilityis very importantto performinggood tests. This facility operatesat about
1.3E-05Pa,and performssome verydelicatemeasurements.Therefore,vibrationisolation is very
importantas well as cleanliness. Some cryopumpfaultstheredisruptedthe testsandendangered
theitem undertest. Oil got into thecryogenicheliumfromthecompressor,andcausedadditional
problems. Incontrast,the turbopumpsperformedvery well. In one instance, a turbopumpwas
found destroyeddue to vane fatigueafteronly 6000 hoursof operation,buttherewas no system
breach,just some pumping port contaminationby particles from the vanes and metallic dust
residue. Diode ion pumpsperformedwell in an 8 yearexperimentrun. Rotaryfeedthroughsdid
not performwell and were a source of constantleakage problems. Hot cathode ion gauges
(Bayard-AlpenGauges)werefoundto be accurateto withinonly about+ 30%.2.30
.
Experienceswith vacuumfurnacesin industry,whichcanoperateat IE-03 Pa, indicatethat
admissionof airinto the chamber(chambersrunatover 1000°C)can createproblemsbecauseair
2-9

can attackany graphiteorrefractorymetal at high temperatures.2"31 This is also a problemfor
fusion experimentsthatrunat hightemperatures.
Table2-3 gives a summaryof the typesof vacuumproblemsdiscussedin *.hischapterfrom
the varietyof fields reviewed. Theseeventswill be addressedthroughoutthis report.
Table 2-3. Summaryof vacuumco_.ponentfaultscited in the literature
ill
--
__
il
i
•
m!nn-
IIIII
II
III
iiInnn
--
--
I
Valveinternalsealleaks
Bellows leaks
Flangecrackingleaks
Personnelleaving foreignmaterialsinsidethe vacuumvessel
Improperlytightenflanges
Valvepositionsnot verified,causingdamageto system
Gas otherthanheliumbeingsuppliedto heliumleakdetectors
Dustintrusioninto valveseatsandsealscausesleaks
Window,electricalfeedthrough,weld, bellows,flange, andvacuumgauge leaks
Electricalfeedthroughsexperiencingelectricaldisch_ges in low pressureair
Valvebonnetleaks
Inadvertentopening of valve to atmosphere
Objectsinmagnetfringefieldimpactingthe torusorshiftingpositiontoshearvacuumlines
Diagnosticstearingbellowsdueto misalignment
Diagnosticwindow cracks,bloating,orotherweaknessesthat allowairingress
Waterinleakagefrommetallurgyfaults,badwelds
Intrusionof dustinto the vacuumsystem
Lossof tensionin flangebolts,leadingtoairleaks
Brazefailureatceramictometalinterface,leadingtoairleaks
Rotaryfeedthroughsleakingbadly
i |m
,ll
__
ill
HI
2-10

Chapter2 References
2-1.
M.D. Machalek, "First Plasma Operationof TFTR,"Fusion Technology, _, September
"
1983, pages 191-193.
2-2.
R.B. Krawchuket al., "OperationalExperience and Initial Performance of the TFTR
a
Vacuum System," Proceedings of the lOth Symposium on Fusion Engineering,
Philadelphia,PA, December 5-9, 1983, IEEEcatalog number83CH1916-6, pages 1031-
1087.
2-3.
G.D. Martin, PPPL vacuum and cryogenics expert, private conversation, October 14,
1991.
2-4.
P.H. LaMarcheet al., "Contaminationof the VacuumPumpingLines of the Tokam_k
Fusion Test Reactor," Fusion Technology _2. Proceedings of the 17th Svmoosium on
FusionTechnology,Rome, Italy,September14-18, 1992,pages 1172-1175.
2-5.
J.D. Stringerand J. D. Blevins, "Maintenanceof LargeGate Valves in Torus Vacuum
PumpingSystems," Fusion Technology92.Proceedings of the 17thSymposiumon Fusion
-
T,.¢y,hlll_,
Rome, Italy,September14-18, 1992, pages 1594-1598.
2-6.
M. Huguet et al., "The JET Machine:Design, Construction,andOperationof the Major
Systems,"Fusion Technology, 11, 1987, pages43-70.
2-7.
K.J. Dietz, "Modificationsto the JETVacuumVessel as a Result of PlasmaOperation,"
Y.gf.gum,38, 1988, pages591-595.
2-8.
T. WinkelandJ.Orchard,"LeakEvaluationin JETandItsConsequencesfor FutureFusion
Machines,"Y.agggln,_,[.,1990, pages 1988-1991.
2-9.
R. Herman, Fusiola.The Search for Endless Energy, Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge,1990, page 222.
2-10. M. Shimizu and T. Arai, "Vacuum Technological Experiences of JT-60 Operation,"
Proceedings of the Japan-U.S.Workshop p-11_ on Vacuum Technologies for Fusion
Devices, documentnumberIPPJ-T-38,August1-5, 1988,pages 36-56.
2-11. H. Ninomiya et al., "yr-60 UpgradeDevice for Confinementand Steady State Studies,"
PlasmaDevices andOperations,1, 1990, pages 43-65. For the basic machine description,
.
see M. Ohta et al., "The JT-60 TokamakMachine," Fusion Engineering and Design, 5,
1987, pages 27-46.
2-II

2-12. V. S. Strelkov, "ECRH in Low q Plasma in T-10, The First Plasma in T-15," Plasma
Physics and Controlled Fusion, 3.L 1989, pages 1699-1701.
2-13. L. S. Gurevich et al., "T-15 Vacuum System," Plasma Devices and Operations, l,
1992,
pages 267-275.
2-14. D. G. Goetz,
"Large Turbomolecular
Pumps for Fusion Research
and High-energy
Physics," Vacuum, 32, 1982, pages 703-706.
2-15. L. C. Cadwallader, Steady State Advanced Tokamak Water and Air Ingress Bounding
Freouencv Estimates, PPPL document number92-921201 -INELAX_ADW ALLADER-01 for
--
v
the Tokamak Physics Experiment program,_mber
1, 1992.
2-16. R. Gallix, "C1T Vacuum Vessel, First Wall, and Divertor Conceptual Design," Proceedings
of the U.S.-Janan Work._hopP118 on Vacuum Technologies for Fusion Devices, document
number IPPJ-T-38, Aug,_st 1-5, 1988, page 255.
2-17. E. Jones, "The Operation of the ISR Facility in Relation to the UHV Environment,"
Y.agtlllm, 22, 1979, pages 299-302.
2-18. R. A. Fluegge and J. E. Huber, "Pressure Bursts in High-Vacuum
Systems," _
Vacuum ScienceandTechnology,8,197I,pages419-423.
2-19.
LEP Vacuum Group, "LEP Vacuum System: Present Status," Y.tC,llllm, 41, 1990, pages
1882-1886.
2-20.
A. Roth, Vacuum.T.IKlllloJ_,
second edition, North-Holland,
Amsterdam, 1982, pages
370-371.
2-21. J. P. Bacher and N. Hilleret,
"Corrosion of Accelerator Vacuum Systems: Risks and
Prevention," Vacuum, 41, 1990, pages 1914-1916.
2-22. U. Schneider and the ASDEX Team, "Ten Years of Operating Experience with ASDEX,"
Fusion Tewhnology 1992. Proceedings of the 17th Symposium
on Fusion Technology,
Rome, Italy, September 14-18, 1992, pages 742-746.
2-23. Z. Shuxiu, "Vacuum Pumping System for the Lanzhou Cyclotron," _,
38, 1988,
pages 125-127.
2-24.
D. Bostic et al., "Vacuum System for the Stanford-LBL Storage Ring (PEP)," IEEE
Transactions on Nuclear Science, NS-22, 1975, pages 1540-1543.
2-12

2-25. C. L. Bartelson et al., "The Fermilab Tevatron:
Vacuum for a Superconducting
Storage
Ring," Journal of Vacuum Science and Technology, A1, 1983, pages 187-195.
2-26. G. M. Fuller and J. R. Haines, "Design Considerations for Achieving
High Vacuum
"
Integrity in Fusion Devices," Journalof Vacuum Science and Technology, A2, 1984, pages
1162-1169.
2-27. R. L. Livesey,
"Summary Abstract: Vacuum System Problems of EBT--A Steady-State
Fusion Experiment," Journal of Vacuum Science and Technology, 20, 1982, pages 1188-
1189.
2-28. A. P. James, _The Ultra High Vacuum (uhv) Calibration Facility at Daresbury Laboratoryof
the Science and Engineering Research Council (SERC)," Vacuum, 37, 1987, pages 343-
346.
2-29. D. J. Santeler et al., Vacuum Technoloev
and Soace Simulation,
NASA-SP-105,
US
v_
National Aeronautics and Space Administration, 1966.
2-30. K. Parker, "Some Experiences of Thermal Vacuum Testing of Spacecraft Mechanisms,"
Vacuum, 37, 1987, pages 303-307.
2-31. O. Oren, "Experience with Vacuum Furnaces for Industrial Heat Treatment," Y.af,uum, 21,
1971, pages 331-333.
2-13

3.
VACUUM SYSTEM ACCIDENTS
3.1
Introduction
This chapter contains descriptions of the few actualvacuumsystemaccidents that
have occurredat fusion experimentsandaccidentsthathave been postulated. Accidents
.
thathaveoccurredhavenot releaseAany significantamountof radioactiveeffluents,butfor
futuremachinestherecouldbe muchlargereffluentsourceterms.Datato supportanalyses
andconsequenceestimationarereferencedanddiscussed.
3.2
Air inleakage
As seenin thepreviouschapter,airorothergasesleakingintothevacuumsystem
is the mostcommon problem. The air leakscan occurfromany componentthat does not
maintain its integrity. Inthat sense, all vacuumcomponentsareproneto single failures,
unless they areredundant(suchas multiplevacuum windows in a given port,ormultiple,
concentricbellows). Theleaksize is anissue, sincesome componentsareknownto allow
migration of air into the system. Forexample, ceramic insulatorsand quartzwindows
allow a small amountof airoutgassingor migrationeven whenfully intact. Smallleaks
can be handledby the vacuum system pumps. Most vacuumsystems need one ormore
"
pumpsrunningcontinuallyto maintaina givenlevelof vacuum.Forthe DITI-Dexperiment
(with a base pressureof about 1E-06Pa, anda normalor typicalthroughputleak rateof
about 3E-06 Pa-m3/s) in La Jolla, California, a 1E-05 Pa-m3/s leak signifies a reduced
efficiency operation state (small leak). A 1E-04 Pa-m3/s leak rate is a 'stop-and-fix'
problembecause the air admissionwouldhamperany plasmaoperations(large leak).3-1
Inleakageeventsin excess of 1E-04Pa-m3/sareclassifiedasverylargeleaks.
Extremeairinleakageevents (called'upto air'events, meaningquickequilibration
of vacuumsystem and atmosphericpressures)aredetrimentalfor fusionexperimentsfor
several reasons.
First, the air inleakage would lead to a plasma disruption, if the
experimentis operatingat the timeof the leak. Disruptionsareplannedfor in experiment
design, butthe intensity of a disruptioncausedby a largeairingress event could be worse
than normal, leading to faster erosion of the protective wall files and more tile dust
generation. Second, air ingress can bring atmospherichumidityand entrained foreign
material into the vacuumsystem, contaminatingthe vacu,m chamberso that extensive
cleaning is requiredto eliminate outgassingandpotentialplasmacontamination- hours,
days, orperhapseven a week of cleaningto makethe machinereadyforoperationagain.
.
Third,a breachof the vacuumchamberorsystemcaneasily lead to a releaseof radioactive
tritiumoractivated/contaminateddust, orboth.3-2 Fourth,largeair ingress can threaten
the integrityof the vacuumpumps,dependingon the typeof pumpsused. Turbopumps,
-
favored for their cleanliness, quick time to full pumpingability, and their reasonable
pumping speed, can experiencerotorandhub overstressfromaerodynamicfrictionif too
much gas is loaded onto them. This problem was discussed briefly in Chapter 2.
3-1

Turbopumpscan have circuitsthatautomaticallysignal forisolationby closing a valve if
the rotor speed suddenly dropsbelow a critical value. Liquid helium cryopumps and
cryopanels can experience heatup problems due to the incoming air.
Therefore,
overpressureprotectionin the cryopumplines mustbe providedin case of heatupand/or
phasechange pressurization. Also, largeair ingress can cause all cryopumpsto require
simultaneous regeneration,which is another operational delay. Air ingress can also
threatenvacuum gauge integrity,suchas the fdamentsin Bayard Alpert gauges. These
gauges are importantfor controlling the vacuum pumps and providing operators with
informationaboutsystem status. Anotherseriousconcernfor airinleakageis the potential
forexplosion as airmixes with deuteriumand tritiumthatevolve fromthecryopumps.3-3
Also, airingress releases varying amountsof tritiumfromthe codeposited layer on the
plasma facing components and walls, depending on the surface temperature; at room
temperature, perhaps 10%, at 300°C, 100%.3-4 The ingress aircould also reactwith the
hot plasmafacing components,whichwouldmeanthe tileswouldneed replacement. The
reaction heat could also drive effluents out of the vacuum system breach location.3-5
Certainlythe coolant loss wouldalso be a thermal transientto the wall materials,possibly
leadingto tilecrackingorotherdamagethatalsorequirestilereplacement.
3.3
Water or Coolant
Inleakage
Water has leaked into the vacuumsystem of many fusion experiments that use
watercoolant. Both JETand Tore Suprahave hadwaterleaks, some being large. In the
Tore Supraevent, a copper cooling tube experienced a flow blockage during plasma
operation. The tube overheatedandthen fractured,releasingabout0.5 literof water into
the vacuum vessel.
A plasma disruption followed the leak,3-6 but there was no
informationaboutthe severityof the disruptionrelativeto typicaldensity-limitdisruptions.
JET hasalso reportedseveralsmallwaterinleakagesfromwater-cooledequipment,suchas
the limiter. Those leaks occurredbecauseof tubingmaterialflaws anda few were weld-
related problems.3"7 JETalso hadone largewaterleakevent,orrathertorusflood event,
as describedin Chapter2. Fortunately,the vessel walls were only at about200°C at the
time.
The effects of postulatedlargescale waterleakage,generallyreferredto as a Loss
of Coolant Accident (LOCA), into a vacuum system have been studied by several
authors.3"8,3"9 The US FusionSafetyProgramhasstudiedthe volatilityeffects of airand
steam admission into a hot vessel, with the protective tiles underaccident conditions.
Severalmaterials, such as steel, carbon,beryllium,andothers have been investigated for
theirresponseto airand steam ingressevents.3-10to 3-20
Water ingress can cause window fracture, as noted in Chapter 2 from JET
experience, and the water could also damage pumpsif it intrudesinto the pump casing.
Almost any kind of pumpwouldbe damaged by wateringress. Turbopumpshave blade
stressconcerns,cryopumpshave heatupconcerns,ion and sublimationpumpscould have
3-2

short circuit and filament damage concerns. None of these pumps could easily be restored
to operation afterbeing inundatedwith a large amountof water.
3.4
Plasma disruption effects
The JET experiment suffered a vacuum vessel shift as the result of a plasma
•
disruption in June 1984. The plasma was beginning to disrupt from its own instabilities,
and a control error by the vertical plasma positioning system aggravated the disruption.
the 2.7 MA plasma was driven 1 meter downward over 20 ms.
The result was a force
loading of 250 tons (over 2 MN)3-21 that moved the over 100,000 kg vessel3-22
down
against its supports and then upward by about 10 mm. There were some small permanent
vessel deformations.
The slamming sound of the vessel moving echoed throughout the
JET building.3-23 Such events must be precluded for future experiments where the plasma
carrieseven more current(the I'IER experiment could carrya 24 MA plasma). Such events
are a leading reason that a fusion vessel must be structurallystrong.
3.5
Equipment
Faults
Turbopumps
are very high speed pumps, turning in excess of 10,000 revolutions
per minute (rpm). As with other high speed moving parts,there can be a danger of rotor or
"
hub faults generating missiles.
Mr. R. O'Hara of the DHI-D experiment discussed one
such event. 3-24
A 5,000 l/s turbopump rotor seized because of poor bearing lubrication
while the pump had been running at rated speed of 35,000 rpm. The aluminum rotor
blades broke and flew up out of the pump inlet, piercing the foreign objects screen. [note:
these screens give a small decrease in pumping speed, but are well worth the decrease to
keep foreign objects such as screws, weld beads, stray tools, etc., out of the pump] The
blade pieces struck the vacuum chamber walls at a tee section of the vacuum duct directly
above the turbopump, but there was no damage to the duct walls.
The aluminum rotor
pieces had insufficient energy to dent, much less penetrate, the stainless steel vacuum duct
walls.
The space simulation chamber experiences from Chapter 2 and other turbopump
experiences also mention rotors flying apart,fortunately without notable effects other than
loss of the pump.3-25
Large air ingress or water ingress events must be considered
because they could damage the turbopumprotoror both the rotor and stator by increased
forces on the beatings and on the rotor blades. High temperature exposure can cause the
rotor blades to warp and fail; turbopumps are generally limited to 120°C "line-of-sight"
temperatures.
.
While turbopump rotor breakup is not welcome because of the equipment loss and
downtime for replacement, several operating experiences indicate that the event does not
directly lead to a breachof the vacuum chamber. However, if the turbopumpis not isolated
.
after a rotor breakup, then there could be pressure-driven backstreaming through the
secondary mechanical pump aligned to the turbopumpexhaust.3-25
3-3

Cryopumps and cryopanels could fail by leaking cryogen into the vacuum chamber.
This event would be difficult to mitigate, since the level of vacuum pressure and the hot
chamber walls would cause a cryogen phase change, pressurizing the chamber with cool
nitrogen or helium gas.3-26 For these two cryogens, the gas-to-liquid volume ratios could
be over 100 to 1 for low temperatures, and higher as the gases warm to room temperature.
If the chamber is small, then it must have rupture disks to protect the system
from
overpressurization failure.
If the pressure is high enough for the rupture disks to open,
then the effluent
must be routed to an expansion
volume
(holding
tank or other
confinement location) since the escaping gas would entrain tritium and activated dusts. If
the pump or panel is quickly isolated from the vacuum chamber, then only the pump (or
panel) casing will overpressurize, and its rupture disk will relieve to an expansion volume.
The amount of radioactive effluent (mainly tritium) would be reduced to only that trapped
on the cryogenic surfaces.
Chapter3 References
3-1.
P. Taylor, DIII-D
experimentalist
at General Atomics,
private conversation,
November 12, 1993.
3-2.
A.V.
Jones
and P. Rocco,
"Air Ingress
Accidents
in Tokamaks,"
Technology
1988. Proceedings of the 15th Symposium on Fusio_ Technology,
Utrecht, The Netherlands, 19-23 September 1988, pages 1731-1739.
3-3.
W. (3. (3raham et al., "Explosion Source Potential
of Neutral-Beam-Source
Cryopumps
for TFTR,"
Proceedings
of the Third Topical
Meeting
orl the
Technology
of Controlled Nuclear Fusion, Santa Fe, New Mexico, May 9-11,
1978, CONF-780508,
pages 931-934.
3-4.
R.A.
Causey et al., "Tritium Release from a Codeposited Layer of Carbon and
Tritium During Air Exposure," Journal of Vacuum Science and Technology, AT.,
1989, pages 1078-1082.
3-5.
L. Deleanu et al., "Safety Analysis Related to the Possible Release of Activated
Erosion Dust in Fusion Reactors," Fusion Technology 1986. Proceedings of the
Fourteenth Svmnosium on Fusion Technology, Avignon, France, 8-12 September
1986, pages 1329-1334.
3-6.
K.J.
Dietz et al., "Experience
with High Heat Flux Components
in Large
Tokamaks," Fusion Engineering and Desigrl, 16, 1991, pages 229-251.
3-4

3-7.
M. Huguet, "Assembly, Commissioning, and First Operation of JET," Proceedings
of the 10th Symposium on Fusion Engineering,
Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania,
December 5-9, 1983, pages 834-842.
"
3-8.
E. Ebert and J. Raeder, "Synopsis of LOCA, LOFA, and LOVA Accidents for
NET/ITER," Fusion Te_hnoloev 1990. Proceedings of the 16th Svmnosium
on
--
-
-
Fusion Technology, London, United Kingdom, 3-7 September 1990, pages 1472-
i,
1476.
3-9.
F. Andritsos
et al.,
"Loss-of-Vacuum,
Loss-of-Coolant,
and Loss-of-Flow
Accidents Analyses for NET/ITER," Fusion Technology 1990. Proceedings of the
16th Symnosium
on Fusion
Technology,
London,
United
Kingdom,
3-7
September 1990, pages 1477-1481.
3-10.
S.P.
Henslee, "The Volatility of Vanadium From a Candidate Fusion Reactor
Alloy," Transactions of the American Nuclear Society, 46, June 1984, pages 284-
286.
3-I1.
R.M.
Neilson, Jr., "Volatility of Vanadium from a Candidate Fusion Reactor
Alloy," Journalof Nuclear Materi_s, J.4L:l._,
1986, pages 607-610.
3-12.
S.J. Piet et al., "Oxidation/Volatilization Rates in Air for Candidate Fusion Reactor
Blanket Materials, PCA and HT-9," Journalof Nuclear Materials, 141-143, 1986,
pages 24-28.
3-13.
S.J. Piet et al., Initial ExtmrimentalInvestieation of the Elemental Volatility From
-
Steel Alloys for Fusion Safety Application,
EGG-FSP-8459,
EG&G Idaho, Inc.,
April 1989.
3-14.
G.R.
Smolik et al., "Volatility from Copper and Tungsten Alloys for Fusion
Reactor Applications,"
Proceedings of the Thirteenth Symnosium
on Fusion
Engineering, Knoxville, TN, October 2-6, 1989, pages 670-673.
3-15.
(3. R. Smolik et al., "Predictions of Radioactive Tungsten Release for Hypothetical
ITER Accidents," Fusion Technology, 19, 1991, pages 1398-1402.
3-16.
G.R.
Smolik et al., "Implications of Beryllium:
Steam Interactions in Fusion
Reactors," Journal of Nuclear Materials, 191-194, 1992, pages 153-157.
3-17.
G.R.
Smolik, Tunesten Alloy Oxidation Behavior in Air and Steam, EGG-FSP-
.
10166, EG&G Idaho, Inc., March 1992.
3-5

3-18.
G.R.
Smolik and K. A. McCarthy, Oxidation and Volatilization
of a Niobium
_,
EGG-FSP-I0341,
EG&G Idaho, Inc., July 1992.
3-19.
G.R.
Smolik et al., Bgg_".
of Porous Beryllium in Steam, EGG-FSP-10346,
EG&G Idaho, Inc., July 1992.
3-20.
G.R. Smolik et al., "Evaluation of Graphite/Steam Interactions for ITER Accident
Scenarios," Fusion Technology, 19, 1991, pages 1342-1348.
3-21.
M. Huguet et el., "Present Status and Commissioning Operation of JET," Egai_
Technology 1984_Proceedings of the thirteenth symposium on fusion technology,
Varese, Italy, 24-28 September 1984, pages 91-103.
3-22.
M. Huguet et al., "The JET Machine: Design, Construction, and Operation of the
Major Systems," Fusion Technolofy, 11, 1987, pages 43-70.
3-23.
R. Herman, Fusion. The Search for Endless Energy, Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, 1990, page 152.
3-24.
R. O'Hara, DIII-D vacuum specialist at General Atomics, private conversation,
November 7, 1990.
3-25.
B. S. Halliday and B. A. Trickett, "Vacuum Problems on a 5-GeV Electron
Synchrotron," Journalof Vacuum Science and Technology, 9, 1972, pages 42-45.
3-26.
M.E.P.
Wykes, Joint European Toms Safew Analysis Report for the Preliminary
Tritium Experin_ent,MW/ES/047, JET Joint Undertaking, August 7, 1991.
3-6

4.
SAFETY CONCERNS IN VACUUM SYSTEMS
4.1 Introduction
The safety concernswithvacuumsystemsarenumerous.Thereate mechanical,electrical,
chemical, cryogenic, andthermalhazardsfromthe componentsin the systems, such as flange
.
clearances, pumps (power.requirements,oils, possible use of cryogenics), gauges, and bakeout
subsystems.4-1,4-2
As discussed m Chapter3, the most serious vacuum-relatedconcern for
fusionis breachingthe vacuumsystem,sincethiscanleadto a radiationreleaseincident,anditcan
also cause tokamakdowntime. There are several safety concerns regardingsystem integrity.
These are vacuum vessel
irradiation/fatigue life,
mechanical stresses from thermal
expansion/contractionof dissimilarmetals,electromagneticstresseson thevacuum vessel during
plasmadisruptions,damagebyrunawayelectronsduringmajordisruptions,magneticfield effects
on the vacuumvessel andvacuumsystem,fire andexplosionhazardsin the vacuumpumps,and
system corrosion problems. These concerns are briefly addressed in this chapter. Several
importantpersonnelsafetyconcernsarealso includedattheendof thechapter.
As discussed in Chapter2, events that cause a system breachare possible for fusion
experimentvacuumsystems. These systemsaretheprimarycontainmentforradioactivetritium,
(boththe tritiumproducedin deuteriumreactions,andtritiumdirecdyusedas a fuel)andactivated
"
tokamakmaterials("tokamakium"dusts). U.S. Departmentof EnergyOrder6430.1A4-3 states
thatthe fusion vacuumvessel is a primaryconf'mementsystem andmustwithstandany possible
hydrogenexplosion (such as that due to airinleakagewith cryopumphydrogen outgassing or
becauseof airmixingwithhydrogenfromsWam-plasmafacingcomponentinteractions).Prudent
design indicatesthatsourcematerialsforexplosion shouldbe eliminated,ignitionsources should
be eliminated,and thatthe system should also be robustenoughto withstandexplosions if it is
conceivable thatexplosive conditions could still occur.4-4 TFI'Rsatisfied this requirementby
diluting the hydrogenisotope streamswithheliumandhavinga cleanupsystem forthe vacuum
vessel, so thatany airleakage is inwardratherthanoutwarduponvessel breach. Therefore,the
confinementfunction,if not actualconfinement,is preserved.Thisissue of primaryconfinement
mustbe addressedforfuturefusiondesigns.
4.2
Vacuum Vessel Irradiation
Another air inleakage concern is deteriorationof the fusion vacuum vessel with age.
Fusion vessels are typically very well constructeddevices, designed to mechanicalengineering
code standardsfor buckling andto withstandplasmadisruptionforces, but the many portsand
penetrationsrequirewindowsor othercoversthatarenotas structurallystrongas the walls. The
vessel walls also withstand harsh environments more easily than the windows and other
penetration seals. A radiationdamage assessmentof the Joint EuropeanTorus (JET) vacuum
vessel usingInconelcouponsto predictthe damagetothe vesselhas shownthatthe JETvessel can
withstandanother5 yearsof vessel operationwithoutfailure.4-5 The fatiguelife to datehas been
only a few percentof thecalculatedfatiguelife of theInconelvessel. Otherfusionvacuumvessels
4-1

can be expectedto behavein a similarmanner,unlessthefluencesincreasedramatically,in which
caseirradiationwill limitvesselHfetime.
Vacuumwindows forfusiondiagnosticsare moresusceptibleto radiationdamagethan the
vessel walls. There are several kinds of windows in use, either quartzor sapphirefor optical
diagnostics, and thin metals for neutroncollec.tion. The quartzwindows have been studiedfor
radiation damage, both browning and embnttlement.4"6 Prediction techniques have been
developedtoestimatethe lifetimeof thesewindows.4"7,4"8
The TRISTANacceleratorvacuumsystem in Japanis constructedof aluminum, similar to
many accelerators. Aluminum can accommodate the external pressure forces, and it is less
expensive andmore easily machinedthan Inconelor stainlesssteel. Strength,fabricability,and
cost are majorfactors for such large (kilometers in diameter) systems. Radiation damage at
accelerators is not a majorsafety concern,butradiationcan createcorrosive productsfrom the
mixture of inleakageair and outgassedproductsfrom seals.4-9,4-10 Fusion systems should be
ableto avoidthisconcernif all metalgasketsareusedratherthanany sortof elastomerseal.
4.3
Mechanical
Vibrations
and Stresses
The choice of pumps may allow vibrationsto be transmittedto the vacuumvessel and
system. Largeturbomolecularpumpsandtheirbackingpumpscan transmitvibrationson theorder
of 60 Hz. The backingpumpsarevibratoryin nature(eitherrotaryvane pumps,pistonpumps,
etc.), andthe turbopumpitselfmay vibratebecauseof rotorimbalance. Using bellows connections
will reducethevibration,butwill introducea potentiallyleakycomponentinto the vacuum
system.4-11 However,thereareother,largersourcesof vibrationin the vacuumsystem. The
magnetscan createvibrationsin thevesseland ducts,aswell as theplasma. Mechanicalstresses
mustbe accountedforin systemdesign.
4.4 Electromagnetic
Stresses
Vacuum vessels and ductworkaretypicallymadefromstainlesssteel orInconel. Magnetic
fieldsfromthe toroidalmagnetsmightbe onthe orderof 5 Teslaatthe centerof theplasma,higher
atthe vacuumvessel walls. Largeforcescan be generatedin the vacuumvessel duringoff-normal
events,suchas parti_,cooling interruptions,orplasmadisruptions.Adequateresistanceto plasma
disruptions is a mare design criteria for vacuum systems.4-12, 4-13
Disruptions can load
meganewtonsizedelectromagneticstressesonthe vessel.
4.5
Runaway Electrons
Existing fusionexperimentshavesuffereddamagefromrunawayelectrons. Suchelectrons
canbe energeticenough(up to the I00 MeVrange)to pierceprotectivetiles anddamagethe vessel
walls orcoolant piping,even breachcoolantpiping. These electronshave alreadydamagedwalls
and limiters of existing fusion machines.4-14,4-15 Some runawayelectron modelinghas been

performed,4-16,4-17 andthis modelingis very importantfor safety since coolant leaks pose a
safety concern, These electrons are not accounted for in any existing component failure rate
estimates, since predictionof theirgenerationandeffects is highly speculative. When more is
known about these electrons, then they can be better accounted for in reliabIHtyand safety
analyses.
•
4.6
Magnetic Forces
The magneticfields generateforcesin pipingandductingon the vacuumvessel, as well as
in the vessel itself.4-18 Generally,these forces aremuchlower _hanthose of the high pressure
fluids within the piping. Still, properreinforcingis essential forall piping and vacuum dacting.
Eddy currents, their forces and torques generated by the magnetic fields are also under
investigation.4-19 Otherproblemswithmagneticfields aretheireffects on vacuumcomponents.
Metallic turbopumprotors, usually aluminum,are susceptible to eddy current heating and
consequent swelling.4"20 Such swelling fromheatupcan threaten the close tolerancesin the
pump. Ceramic rotorshave been investigatedfor this reason.4"21 Turbopumpshave been
investigated for magnetic bearings,butshielding fromthe largermagnetic fields must be very
good, or .rotorimbalance could result. Bayard-Alpertion gaugeshave been investigatedfortheir
accuracym small magneticfields (5 gauss to 60 gauss; I gauss= IE-04 Tesla).4"22 The gauge
wasdefinitelyaffectedby themagneticfield. Theauthorsrecommendedplacing the gauge to take
"
advantageof thefielddirection.The ionscreatedin the gaugewill followthe fieldHnes,justas the
plasma ions do, so aligning to help route the ions in the gauge to the collection gridgives better
readings. Evenradiationinstrumentssuchas photomultipliertubescan reportfalsely low readings
in thepresenceof 200 gaussandhighermagneticfields.4"23
4.7
Pump Fire and Explosion Hazards
In the earlydays of fusion research,hotoil diffusionpumpswere used forgeneratingand
maintaining vacuum conditions. The pumpoils could volatilize and explode, and have been
blamed for backstreaming into the vacuum systems and causing virtual leaks, general
uncleanliness,etc. Fortunately,technologyhasimproved,and morereliable(less dirty)pumping
methodsare nowused. Still, thereare safetyconcernswith thecleanermethodsof cryogenicand
turbomolecularpumping. Incryogenicheliumpumps,thereis a thermalshield of liquidnitrogen,
and in the presence of neutrons,the impure nitrogencan createozone.4-24 The ozone could
explosively decompose into oxygen if impactedor if exposed to a static electricitycharge. The
cryogenic pumpsalso need to be regeneratedperiodically,and these pumpsdevolve hydrogen,
deuterium, tritium, water vapor, and oxygen.
If safety practices are not followed closely,
explosions in pumpeffluent lines could occur. Hotcathode ion gauges should never be located
nearcryopumpeffluentpiping,to precludea chanceof ignitinga gas explosion.4-25,4-26
•
Turbomolecularpumpshavethe advantageof notstoringuptritiumorothergases because
theyexhaustto a backingpump. The roughingpumpeffluentgasmustbe processedcarefully,or
perhapsdilutedwith anothergassuch ashelium,to avoid thechanceof explosion. Also, leaving
4-3
i
llmmim

ttu_pumps undervacuumwhile notrunningcanallow backingpumpoil to migrateintothe ptunp
chamber,then into the vacuum vessel.4"11 The only fire concernsareelectrical fires from the
pumpmotors.
Oil migration can be arrestedby using traps,such as cold traps. These trapsprovide
cryogenically cooled surfacesfor gas and oil particlesto adhereto, like a cryopump. The same
concernsof cryopumpsapply to the traps,and they addcomplexity- welds, coolant piping,etc. -
to the vacuumsystem. Propercleanersforvacuumcomponentsarealso importantto assuringthat
no fumes lingerfromvirtualleaksin thevacuumsysten_.4"27
4.8
Personnel Safety Concerns
There areseveral personnelsafety concernswith vacuumsystems. First,workerscan get
radiationdoses nearfusionvessels, as theyhaven_
acceleratorvessels.4-28 Anotherconcernis
the release of cryogenic gases fromcold trapsor cryopumps,which could lead to asphyxiation.
Another concern is a workerbeing pulled into a vacuum chamber by inrushingair. Normal
industrialsafety concerns (working with welding equipment, using cranes, hoists, or forklift
trucksto move heavy vacuumcomponents,using laddersaroundvacuumsystems, etc.) are also
presentin virtuallyall fusionexperimentfacilities.
In the United States,there hasbeen one knownfatalityinvolvng a vacuum system. The
facility where thiseventoccurt_ was testingmissilenose cones:it is a spacesimulationchamber.
The failed component,an optical vacuumwindow, was old, perhaps25 yearsold. The window
failurewasattributedmainlyto age,althoughthe technicianmayhave inadvertentlystruckitwith a
very light blow. The news accountis repeatedherein its entiretybecause of the severity of the
event:
LabTeclmician
inSoutlm,¢st
Philadelphia
isKilled
DuringExperiment
RobertL Bendorovich,
63,an equilnnent
technician
ata GeneralElectric
Co.
research
laboratory
inSouthwest
Philadelphia,
waskilled
Thursdaywhenan observation
windowskittered
duringanexper_nent
atOw.lab,causinghimtobepartially
drawnintoa
vacuum
c&_O_er,
investigators
w.htheDelaware
County
coroner's
o.O_ce
said
yesterday.
Investigators
saidBendorovich,
ofTinsel
RoadinLevitwwn,
so#ered
t_efatal
injuries about 11:30 am at the Skeats High Power Lab, 7500 Lindbergh Blvd. in the Eastwick
section, when a round window of the 5.foot-long chamber he was standing next to shattered
for an undetermined reason.
Investigators said suction caused by the vacuum drew him
partiaUyinto the clincher beforehis chest becan_ wM&edin the 12.inch.wide window.
About two hours later, investigators said, Bendorovich was pronounced dead of
asphyxia and chest injuries at Mercy Catholic Medical Center, Fit_erald
Division.
The
accidentwasbeinginvestigatedbythefederalOccupational
$ofayandHealth_i_ra:ion,
aut_rities
said
takenfrom the PMladt._l_ Inqu_irer newspaper
Saturday,
September
13,1986,pageB.2
4-4

Thereare meansto p_lude
suchevents forlarge vacuumreservoirfusion experiments,
While workers would not be nearmost futurefusion machines because of the superconducting
magnetcryostataroundthe vacuum vessel, the diagnosticpenetrationslead to other rooms and
mustbe treatedwith caution. The firstmeansto precludeinjuriesdueto vacuumsystem faultsis
"
fordesignersand operationsper-_nnelto be awareof the potentialdangers. Otherprecautionsfor
inhabited areas are: multiple vacuum windows, piexiglas or other covers mounted over the
windows and other vacuum line penetrations,and barriersto preclude personnel from closely
t,
approachingthevacuumsystemwhileit is undervacuum.
i
Thereis anotherper-_nnelsafetyconcern,oneof electrocution.At high pressuresof about
0.1 Paand greater,a Bayard-AlpertGaugecre,ates enoughplasmathatit can couple to the vacuum
chamber.Anyone touchingthechambercan becomea partof this 'sneakcircuit'. Humancontact
at these 100 V andmodest amperage levels can causecardiac fibrillationorcardiac arrest.4-29
Otherconcernscould be using an incorrectfill gas(thegas usedto initiallyfill thevacuumsystem
on pressurizationformaintenance) andhaving the systempressure increase much higher than
gaugescalibratedforothergases readout to the operators.4"30 Thisconcernis similar to the one
givenin Chapter2 regardingusingthe correctgas forleakdetection.
Chapter4 References
*l
4-1.
M.T. Thomas, "Abstract: The Many Facets of Vacuum Safety," Journal of Vacuum
Science and Technology,J_, 1973, page 279.
4-2.
L.C. Beavis et al., VacuumHazardsManual,secondedition, American Vacuum Society,
1979, ISBN 0-88318-261-0.
4-3.
U.S. Department of Energy, Order6430.1A, "GeneralDesign Criteria," April 6, 1989,
section 1328, fusion facilities.
4-4.
T.A. Kletz,LearningfromAccidentsin Industry,ButterworthPublishers,London, 1988,
chapter4.
4-5.
G. Sannazzaroet al., "LowCycle FatigueTesting of Incone1600 and Life Assessment of
JETVacuum Vessel," Proceedingsof the 14thSymposiumon Fusion Engineering,San
Diego, California, September30-October3, 1991, pages385-387.
4-6.
G.H. Miley et al., "Inflaenceof High-intensityRadiationon the Propertiesof Opticsfor
FusionDiagnostics,"FusionEngineeringandDesign. 18, 1991, pages 341-348.
.
4-7.
T. Fett andD. Munz, "LifetimePredictionsfor CeramicWindows in Fusion Reactors,"
Fusion Tefhnolo2y 1988. Proceedipgsof the 15thSymposium on Fusion Technology,
Utrecht,The Netherlands,19-23 September1988, pages899-904.
4-5

4-8.
A. Taylor, "On the Survivability of Diagnostic Windows in the CIT Reactor,"
Technology, J_, 1989, pages 321-326.
4-9.
T. Momose
and H. lshimaru, "Radiation Damages
in TRISTAN
Vacuum Systems,"
Journalof Vacuum Science and Technology, A9, 1991, pages 2149-2157.
4-10.
J.P.
Bacher and N. HillereL "Corrosion of Accelerator Vacuum Systems: Risks and
Prevention," Vacuum, _1,, 1990, pages 1914-1916.
4-1 i.
M.H.
Hablanian, High.Vacuum TechnologvL A Practical Guide, Marcel Dekker, Inc.,
--
v_
New York, 1990, pages 242, 252.
4-12.
B.J. Merrill and S. C. Jardin, "Consequences of Resistive Disruptions on Vacuum Ves_l
Components," Journal of Nuclear Materials, 145-147, 1987, pages 881-885.
4-13.
D. L. Conner et al., "Stress Analysis of a Double-Wall
Vacuum Vessel
for ITER,"
Pr__
of the 14th IEEE Symposium on Fusion Engineering, San Diego, California,
September 30-October 3, 1991, pages 988-991.
4-14.
G. Maddaluno and A. Vannucci, "Activation and Damage by Runaway Electrons on FT
Limiter," Journal of Nuclear Materials, _,
1987, pages 697-699.
4-15.
H. Hoven et al., "Material Damage in Graphite by Run-Away Electrons,"
]quclear Materials, _,
1989, pages 970-975.
4-16.
K.A. Niemer et al., "Magnetic Field Effects on Runaway Electron Deposition in Plasma
Facing Materials and Components," Proceedings of the 14th IEEE Symposium on Fusion
F.,agillggIi_, San Diego, California, September 30-October 3, 1991, pages 372-376.
4-17.
H.-W. Barrels, "Runaway Electrons on Plasma Facing Materials," Fusion Tecllpology
1992. Proceedings
of the 17th Symposium
on Fusion Technology,
Rome, Italy,
September 14-18, 1992, pages 181-185.
4-18.
H. Attaya et al., "Analysis of Forces on Ferromagnetic Components Used in Fusion
Reactors," Journal of Nuclear Materials, _-,
1984, pages 96-100.
4-19.
L.R. Turner et al., "Measurements of Reactor-Relevant Electromagnetic Effects with the
FELIX Facility," Fusion Technology, 10, 1986, pages 1053-1058.
4-20.
A. Nishide et al., "Influence of MagneticFields on a Large-siz_
Turbomolecular Pump,"
Journalof Vacuum Science and Technology, 20, 1982, pages 1105-1108.
4-6

4-21.
T. Abe and Y. Murakami, "Development of Ceramic Turbomolecular Pumps for Fusion
Devices,"Y.gggllllI,
41,1990,pages1992-1994.
4-22.
H. C. Hseuh,
"The Effect of Magnetic
Field on the Performance
of Bayard-Alpert
Gauges," Journalof Vacuum Science and Technology, 20, 1982, 237-240.
4-23.
J.C.
Liu et al., "The Effect of the Static Magnetic Field on the Response of Radiation
Survey Instruments," Health Physics, _.,
1993, pages 59-63.
4-24.
S.J.
Brereton, "Explosion Hazard in Liquid Nitrogen Cooled Fusion Systems," Fusion
T._,
15, 1989, pages 833-838.
4-25. B.A. Hands,"Cryopumping,"
Y_agllllln,
37.1987,pages621-627.
4-26.
W. Williams and R. Walker, "Ignition Characteristics of Vacuum System Components,"
Y.gf.ggla,
21,1971,pages473-477.
4-27.
B. S. Halliday, "Cleaning Materials and Components for Vacuum Use," Y.ag31glB,37,
1987, pages 587-591.
4-28.
O__ratioi_d Accidents and RadiationExnosure ExnerienceWithin the United States Atomic
Energy Commission.
1943-1975,
WASH-1192, US Atomic Energy Commission,
Fall
1975, Appendix C.
4-29.
C.F.
Morrison, "Safety Hazard from Gas Discharge Interactions with the Bayard-Alpert
Ionization Gauge," Journal of Vacuum Science and Technology, A3, 1985, pages 2032-
2034.
4-30.
R.N.
Peacock, "Safety and Health Considerations Related to Vacuum Gauging," J.o.u£naI
of Vacuum Science and Technology, All,
1993, pages 1627-1630.
4-7

5.
VACUUM SYSTEM COMPONENT FAILURE RATES
5.1 Introduction
"
This chapter contains estimates
of failure rates for fusion vacuum components.
Fusion and accelerator components function in rather clean environments (cleaner than
vacuum manufacturing processes), are baked between 150 and 350°C, and have little
internal contamination. The components discussed here function in the ldgh to ultra-high
vacuum range. Most of these failure rates pertain to vacuum leakage, while some refer to
loss of component function, such as loss of pumping ability.
The components
are
discussed
in order of pumps, flanges, electrical feedthroughs,
bellows feedthroughs,
vacuum gauges, and windows.
Vacuum ducts and vessels are briefly mentioned.
The
failure rates given here are steady-state values, that is, the rate at which random failures
occur during the component's useful life, not early failures (uncovering latent defects,
manufacturing faults, installation errors, etc.) or end-of-life failures (wearout). For early
failures, the failure rate can be much higher than the steady state value.
Electronic
components might have decreases of factors of 3 to over 100 from early life to the steady
state value, 5-1 and mechanical
components
such as remotely
operated valves and
compressors have been seen to decrease by factors of 3 up to 20 between early and useful
life. 5-2
For electronic components, 10,000 hours is the typical crossover time between
"
early and useful life.5"1 For mechanical components, that time could be shorter. Error
factors are either calculated
from the data, or they are assigned based on known
information. When assigned, they are chosen conservatively, to reflect the uncertainty in
the estimated failure rate value. A table at the end of this chaptersummarizes the results.
5.2 Pumps
There are many kinds of vacuum pumps. There are pumps for different pressures
and a variety of pump types for a given pressure range. For example, there are mechanical
pumps for high pressures (1E+05 Pa to 1 Pa) that range from carbon vane pumps, scroll
pumps, roots blowers, to reciprocating piston pumps. Cryosorption pumps can operate in
the same range, and are regarded as cleaner operating units. Some turbopumps can also
operate at atmospheric pressure as roughing units. For high vacuum, in the 1E-01 Pa to
1E-O4Pa range, there are ion pumps, turbopumps, getter pumps, and sublimation pumps.
The main pumps for future fusion experiments will be mechanical roughing pumps (for
evacuation to the 1 to 0.1 Pa range), turbopumps, cryopumps/cryopanels, and secondary
(mechanical)
pumps on the turbopump exhaust.
These pumps will receive the most
.
treatment here, but the other types will be briefly addressed. Also, reference 5-3 contains
some helpful design ideas for safety in various vacuum pumping systems.
-
Turbopumps.
For fusion, these pumps have speeds (capacities) of perhaps 5,000 to
7,000 l/s, and the rotors turn at high speed, perhaps up to 40,000 rpm. Such high rotor
speeds require good lubrication for the bearings, or perhaps the relatively recent approach
5-1

of a magneticallylevitatedrotor.5"4The magneticbearingpumpsarestill small (560 l/s)
andcost twice as muchas the moreconventionalpumps,so it is likely that1TERorother
nearterm machineswoulduse the largermechanicalbearingunits. Bearinglife has been
viewed as the limiting featureto turbopumpreliability,althoughceramic_gs
seem to
providelongerlife thanmetal _gs.5-5,
5-6 The bearingsshouldbe overhauledevery
10,000 hours(justover one year). Fora small turbopump(260 Fs), the drivebelt and oil
change take 2 or 3 hours, outside of radiationareas (the pump is located outside the
radiationshielding).5-7 Withthe beatinglife limitationon theturbopump,other reliability
characteristicsarenotas significant,unlessthere arerotoreddy currenteffects thatload the
bearingwith unnecessaryforces,5-8 heatcauses rotorwarping,orperhapsair inleakage
through the casing. There were no cases of air inleakage through the casing in any of
turbopumpreliabilityliteraturereviewedforthisreport,so thatfailuremode is apparently
rare. The turbopumpcan experience backstreamingthrough the secondary pump (or
forepump) aligned to the turbopumpexhaustwhen there is an interruptionin service.
When the power is lost, for example, then the vacuum in the chamber overwhelms the
pumping ability of the secondary pump, creating a reverse flow path.
In these cases
secondarypumpoff could flow into the chamber.5"3 Turhopumpsareused because they
are very clean, they have good pumpingspeed, fast on-line capability (a few minutes
comparedto other pumpsthat can take closer to an hour), good recoverabilityin brief
(minutes) power interruptions,andno tritium buildupor potential explosion concerns.
These pumps do, however,communicatetheir effluentoutside the vacuum chamber,so
there must be fast closing valves to isolate the pumplines in case of an unusualevent
(power loss, impropercommandsignal to shut down, etc.), a means to vent the pump
backpressureto mitigateany oil migration,and acontinuousmeansto clean upthe effluent
(as opposedto batchcleanupwhenregeneratingcryopumps).5"3
Given thatthe beatings arethe life limitingcomponentof thesehigh speed pumps,
then informationfromTable 1 of reference5-5 forN large turbopumpsgives an average
failure rate of (0.IN)/(11,000N) = 9E-06/hourforthe turbopumpitself failing to operate
because of greased ceramic beating failure. For a large turbopumpwith greasedmetal
bearings,thefailure ratewouldbe 1.3E-05/hour.Otherpossibleoperationlimitingfailures
(drive motor,etc.) shouldbe smallercontributorsthanthe bearingfailures. A small error
factorof 3 is assumed forthese databecausetheyhavea wide operatingbasis. Leakageof
air fromthe pumpto the system shouldbea combination(addition)of flange leakageand
casing leakage. Flangeleakageis treatedlaterin this chapter,andcasing leakage is a low
failure rateevent, about5E-03/year(basedon thinwall storagetankbreachfailureratesin
reference5-9; anerrorfactorof 10is assignedto the leakagefailurerate sincethis is a wide
extrapolationto the pumpcasing). A notableitemhere is thatmagneticbeatingturbopump
experiencethus farhasbeen foundto be excellent.5-10 Themechanicalpumpthat draws
the turbopumpexhaustis discussednext.
Mechanical
roughing
pumps.
These pumps typically move air by positive
displacement,and can only operate to certaininlet pressures(perhapsdown to 10 to 1 Pa)
5-2

becausethey wouldoverheatwhendrawingout more air. Pistonpumps,vane pumps,and
others are consideredhere. Mechanical pumps foreither turbopumpbacking or rough
pumpinga chamberaregenerallyregardedas reliabledevices, only requiringanoil change
each year. Belt drivenpumpsthat operateat low speedsmay last for 10 to 20 years of
"
continuousoperation. Modernhighspeed pumps,such as vane pumps,may last 5 to 10
yearsof continuousoperation.5-11 Forthemodern pumps, anaveragefailureto operate
failurerateis 1/7.5years,or 1.5E-05/hour.The upperboundforthis failurerate would be
1/5 years or2.3E-05/hour. For airleaks throughthe casing of a mechanical pump, the
flange leakagefailure rateanda casing leakfailure ratemustbe added. The casing leak
failurerateshouldbe similarto the turbopumpcasingvalue of 5E-03/year,unlessthereare
flanged halves of a pumpbody.
Oil migrationinto the vacuumsystem is often not the faultof the pumpunit,buta
matterof improperoperationalpractices.5-3 Since powerfailurescouldjustifiably leadto
oil migration,the site power loss frequencyshould be usedas a fh-stapproximationto
quantifythe frequencyof oil backstreamingintothevacuumsystem. If there is anisolation
valve,thenit mustbe consideredas amitigatorto systemcontamination.
Rootsblowershavea largeleakagefailurerateestimatedby Sartoet al.5-12 forthe
NET device as 5E-06/hour. This failure rate is considered to be an upperbound. The
modernmechanicalpumpfailurerateof 1.5E-05/houris a reasonableestimateforthis type
of pump.
"
Cryosorption pumps. Thesepumpsare usually roughingpumpsandare very clean
becauseno pumpmineraloils orothercontaminantsareused. These pumpsadsorbgases
(air,watervapor,etc.) ontozeolite molecularsieve pelletsthatarecooledto liquidnitrogen
(LN2) temperatures. These units aresimple - a chamberhousing the zeolite pellets, an
isolation valve, a vent line, a bakeoutheater,and an outerjacketforthe LN2 bath. From
vendorcatalogs, typical cryosorptionpumpscould be 120 mm in diameterand 320 mm
tall, witha 38 mm diameterline connectionto the vacuumsystem, anda 1.4 kg chargeof
zeolite. Possible failure modes couldbe zeolite bre_out with subsequentmigrationinto
the vacuum system, and pump loss of integrity (breachto the atmosphere). Zeolite
breakoutwould be a low frequencyevent,since pumpconstructionspecifically holds the
pellets with screens,plates,andother retentionmethods. The failureratefor the breakout
failure mode is considered to be muchless than rates forother failure modes, so it is not
quantifiedhere.
The cryosorptionpumpcan be baked at upto 300°C to regenerate the zeolite by
drivingoutthe air,watervaporandotherentrappedvapors. Zeolite can last long periods
of time, perhaps 15 to 20 years, with low use (roughing systems are typically used
infrequently, perhapsevery 6 months or so), properstorage,andinfrequentbakeout at
300°C or lower (higher temperature bakeoutat perhaps600°C will damage the zeolite
[noted in a vendorcatalog]). With propercare and no contamination,the zeolite is very
5-3

resilientandcould last perhapsupto 50 years. If the system has significantoil or other
hydrocarboncontaminationto clog the zeolite pellets,thenthe zeolite may onlycontinueto
pumpfor 1 or2 years. Or, ff irradiatedor highly vibrated,the zeolite could breakdown
andlose its adsorptionproperties. Also, if an appreciableamountof tritiumgot onto the
zeolite, say 1,000 Ci, then it might be easier to disposeof the pump's1.4 kg zeolite load
than to verify that all of the tritiumhad been removed by baking. With a lifetime of
between 15 and 50 years,the failurerate forthe failureto operate mode will be dominated
bythe availabilityof liquidnitrogen.TheLN2 availabilityis nota faultof the cryosorption
pump,butcan be treatedwith datafromanotherreport.5-13 The pumpcasingshouldbe as
sturdy as the others cited here, even though the sorption pump stainless steel casing
undergoesextreme thermal cycling (77 K to room temperatureto 573 K for bakeout).
Welds in the pumpcasing arekeptto a minimumorareeliminatedentirely,so the leakage
failure rate of 5E-03/yearshould be a reasonableestimateforpumpcasing airinleakage.
The flange leakagefailurerate shouldbe usedforthe pumpconnectionto the system. The
vent line has only a rubberorpolymersleeve to coverthe vent hole, butthisis a basically
reliablesystem. The only troublesomeissuewouldbe ifice builtupin the ventline during
outgassing, causing a casing ruptureon overpressure. With good pump design and
orientation, such ice buildup should be a rare occurrence,in the 1E-02 to 1E-04/year
frequencyrange. The average failurerate forthateventshouldbe 1E-03/year.The upper
boundwouldbe 1E-02/year,given thatthe cryosorpfionpumpis usedinfrequently(a few
timesa year).
Cryopumpe. These pumpsuse liquid helium (LHe) or very cold gaseous helium for
coolant, and LN2 fortheir thermal shields. The pumpsare a complicatedset of piping,
with the thermalshield and cooling panelsin the centralportionof the pump. Pumping
speedscould be 9,000 l/s or higher,which is an advantageover turbopumps.5-14 These
pumpshave flowing coolant, so theirreliabilityis morecomplex than thatof 'bath-cooled'
sorption pumps. Failure modes would be loss of cryogen into the vacuum system, air
inleakage through the pump, andfailure to operate. The JETexperimentanalyzed the
failure rateof theirneutralbeamcryopumps(largeunits)to leak cryogen into the vacuum
chamber. They found a tentative value of 2E-05/hour.5"15 Using a 95% chi-square
distribution5-16on no failuresoverthepump'soperatingtimeperiod(5E+04 hours) gives
an upperboundfailure rate of 5.99/2"5E+04h = 6E-05/hour. The failure rates fromthe
JET experienceare_nable,
butitshouldbenotedthatcontinuedoperationcouldlead to
even smallerfailure rates. The leak size is assumedto be small,since in this application,
even small leaks exhausting to vacuum will probablypressurize from wall heat, thus
leadingto overpressurizationof thevacuumvessel. Forcryopumpairinieakage,thereader
mustrememberthatthese pumpsmusthave provisionsforprotectionagainstheatleakage,
and this includes airinleakage. Forthe Next EuropeanToms (NET) fusiondesign, Sarto
etal.5-12 used7E-06/yearforcryopumplargeairinleakage. Anerrorfactorof 10 should
be usedwith thisvalue,sinceit wasassumedbasedon performanceof thick,single-walled
vessels. That value should includethe rupturediskorotherpressurerelief device on the
cryopumpcasing.
5-4

I
The cryopump fairing to operatecan only happen if the cryogen supply is lost, the
thermal shield fails, the thermal shield is thermally shortcircuited, orff the system becomes
plugged (loss of flow accident). Loss of cryogen can be add_
by using information in
another report.5-13 The only failure mode attributableto the cryopump itself is plugging
its piping.
Plugging should be of the same frequency as small pipe ruptures,5-17 so the
YETcryopump value of 2E-05/hour for leakage into the vacuum system should be reduced
by a factor of 10 to arrive at a cryopump pipe rupturefrequency,5-17 which is roughly the
same as a pump failure by plugging failure mode. Therefore, 2E-06/hour with an error
factor of 10 describes the failure ratefor cryopump plugging.
Sublimation
pumps.
This type of pump, mainly the titanium sublimation
pump,
removes gases by chemical combination.
For example, the titanium forms TiN with
nitrogen to remove the nitrogen from the vacuum chamber. Titanium fdaments that weigh a
few grams are heated, evaporating titanium from the filament so that it can combine with
gases and later the compounds (TIN, etc.) will adhere to the chamber walls. The titanium
on the walls also forms a nascent surface that reacts with more gas molecules,
thus
reducing gas pressure in the chamber.5-11
The emitted titanium must be physically
separated from other components, such as ion pumps, ionization gauges, and cryopumps
so that the compounds do not damage these other components.
An individual titanium
filament might last 8 hours under continuous pumping before breaking.5-18
Multiple
•
filaments are built in to the pump, so there is a casing-to-chamber flange, the casing itself,
and the filament electrical feedthrough that might leak. In Chapter 2, Table 2, the LEP
accelerator showed its leakage experience with getterpump feedthroughs. Over a 24 hour
"
bake of 3,942 getter pump feedthroughs, 7 had small leaks.
This gives a feedthrough
leakage failure rate of 7/3942*24 h = 7.4E-05/hour.
A 95% upper bound would be the
Chi-squared
distribution on 7 failures (that is, 16 degrees of freedom, 2(7)+2),
or
26.3/(2*3942*24)
= 1.4E-04/hour. The casing leak rate of 5E-03/year as discussed earlier
is also applied to the titanium sublimation pump casing, if it has a separate casing. Flanges
are discussed later in this chapter. For the pump failing to operate, there could be a loss of
power (attributedto a power supply), wire overheat due to foreign material plateout or wire
short circuit due to foreign material (both assumed to be in the 1E-02 to 1E-04/year event
category), or prematurewire open circuit. A prematureopen circuit for the titanium wire is
taken to be 2.3E-07/hour per filament, based on 3 m lengths of copper wiring in power
plants5-19
and filaments of 0.3 m length.
A typical pump might have four filaments
(vendor advertisements promise pumplifetimes of more than 30 hours), so the sublimation
pump failure rate for the fail to operate mode is 9E-07/hour. The upper bound failure rate
is 3E-06/hour for an error factor of 1.7. Larger pumps with many long filaments would
have to be calculated accordingly.
Non-evaporable getter (NEG) pumps would likely have lower failure rates than
.
sublimation pumps, since the getter (such as Zr-AI) remains basically intact. The high
temperatures (hundreds of degrees C) do not seem to deteriorate these pumps.
Many
accelerators use NE_ pumps built in at the periphery of the beam tube giving up to 500 Fs
5-5

pumpingpermeterof _
tubelength,andthesepumpsgive reasonableto good service
in thelargequantitiesthatacceleratorsemploythem.5-20 Unfortunatelyforthis report,no
good dataon these pumpshave been obtainedfrom the literature. Therefore, using the
average titaniumsublimationpumpfailure rate forthe upperboundfailure rate of NEG
unitsis assumeduntilmoredatacan be obtained.
Ion pumps.
There are diode andtriodeion pumps. O'Hanlon5"20 gives lifetimes for
these pumps on a basis of pressurein the system. For diode pumps, an average life of
about5,000 hoursat 1E-03 Pa,and 50,000 hoursat 1E-04Pa. The triodepump hashalf
the life of the diode unit. The diode pumplifetime is verifiedby field experience5-21 of
500 Wattdiode unitsthatachieve 1E-06Pa;these unitsreached6 yearsof operationbefore
becoming very difficult to start- the sign of pumpaging. Ion pumpproblems could be
internalshortcircuits thatcause failureto operate,andcasing leakage. Assuming proper
system cleanliness androughpumping,thenthe lifetimeof 1/50,000hoursgives a failure
rateof 2E-05/hour for the failureto operatefailure mode. A small errorfactor of 3 is
assigned to this failure ratefor diode ion pumpsbecause field experience supportsthe
averagelifetime estimates. Triodepumpfailure ratesare doublethose of diode pumps.
The pumpcasing leakagefailurerateinvolves a flange,the casing (at5E-03/year, as with
othercasings), and ion pump feedthroughs. FromTable 2 in Chapter2, the ion pump
feedthroughsare 1,908 in number. With 7 leakage failures, this gives 7/1908"24 h =
1.5E-O4/hour.A 95% chi-squareddistributionupperboundwould be 26.3/2*1908'24 -
2.9E-04/hour.
Ejector
pumps.
Another type of pump to consider is the ejector pump, where high
speedfluid flow froma nozzle nearthemainchamberentrainsgas molecules,then theflow
with entrainedgasesentersa funnelregion,creatinga vacuumin the mainchamber. Steam
ejectorsareoften usedon powerplantcondensersto keep the pressuresdown in the 6,000
to 7,000 Parange,and large,multi-stageejectorscan developeven lowerpressuresof 1 to
20 Pa.5"22 Steamjet ejectorsusedon condensersatfossil fueledpowerplantshave failure
rates(airleakage and loss of functionmodes combined)on the orderof 7E-06/hour.5-23
An errorfactorof l0 is assignedto thisvalue,sincethese sourcedataarespeculative. The
possibility of using cryogenicfluid ejectorpumpshas been suggested forITER,and this
failureratewouldhaveto sufficeforsucha pumpuntilitcould undergolife tests andmore
detailedexamination.
5.3 Flanges
The vacuum flanges consideredhere areall metal sealed, because of radiation
concernswith fusion systems as mentionedin Chapters2 and 4. Elastomerseals do not
have good irradiationlife, andeven particleacceleratorswith less irradiationthan fusion
experiments use metal gaskets in their flanges.
In some interesting work on CERN
stainless steel flanges, 6,000 units were examinedover a 14 yearperiod. These flanges
typically contained 1E-06 Pa pressure, were undermild irradiation(x-rays and gamma
5-6

I
rays), and had infrequent 300°C bakeouts. The 160- to 215-mm diameter flanges had a
small leakage failure ra._ of 5.TE-04/flange-year, and the l_ger flanges of 295- to 325-mm
diameter had leakage failure rates of 3E-03/flange-year.5-24 These results are much better
than those reported in Table 2-2, which would indicate about 0.2/year for 225 mm diameter
"
flange leakage after installation bakeout. The 14 year period does lend confidence that the
flanges are properly tightened over time. Still, the fusion results from JET show higher
leak incidence by about a factor of 20, so theCERN values will be inc_d
by that factor
to account for the more harsh fusion conditions.
Therefore, for the smaller diameter, the
flange leakage failure rate is about 1E-O3/year, and the larger failure rate is 6E-02/year.
The leakage value is assumed to be on the order of 1E-07 to IE-08 Pa-m3/s,5-22
since
acc_eleratorswith theirconfiguration of a small beam tube diameter (less than I m) and large
circumference (several kin) cannot handle very large localized air leaks without loss of the
beam. The error factor for these failure rates is assigned to be 3, since this is a wide data
set of many components over a long time period.
Largerflanges are expected to have largerleak rates,since thereis more sealing area
to develop a leak. Extrapolatingto larger size flanges, such as 1m diameter, gives a failure
rate of 2.5E-02/year.
Increasing this failure rate by the factor of 20 gives 5E-01/year.
Until more work can be done to define large flange reliability, this value will have to
suffice. An errorfactor of 10 is used on this extrapolated value. Another feature of flanges
•
is their bolts.
A typical bolt failure rate for loss of tension (by metal fatigue, thermal
fatigue, or shear, etc.) is 2E-08/hour,5-25 with an error factor of 10.
"
5.4 Electrical
Feedthroughs
Electrical feedthrough air inleakage for sublimation and ion pumps have already
been discussed
in this chapter.
Beam position ceramic feedthroughs
for the LEP
accelerator in Table 2-2 are very similar to the feedthroughs fusion experiments would use
for their own diagnostics.
With 5 leakage failures out of 2,168 ceramic units over a 24
hour period, the leakage failure rate is 5/(2168'24
h) - 9.6E-05/hour, or with round-up,
about
1E-04/hour.
The 95% chi-squared
distribution
upper
bound
would
be
21.0/2(2168"24
h) = 2E-O4/hour.
This leakage failure rate for the feedthroughs is
reasonable to use for fusion devices, but since the JET experience shows about a factor of
5 increase in the feedthrough leakage, this failure rate and its upper bound will be increased
by that amount. The airinleakage failure rate for ceramic feedthroughs is 5E-04/hour, and
the 95% upper bound is 1E-03/hour.
JET also noted problems with electrical feedthrough arcing, but the problem was
corrected with a change in the method of operation, as discussed in Chapter 2. No failure
rate for arcing will be given here, but for safety reasons, future designs must be
investigated to verify that gas pressures (Paschen curves for voltage breakdown of gas at
various pressures) will not be conducive to arc events at or nearthe feedthroughs.
5-7

5.5 Bellows Feedthrought
Bellows
were the leading cause of vacuum outages at JET.
The tokamak
environment is harsh for metallic bellows, with vibration, some irradiation, and thermal
cycling.
The vacuum vessel stainless steel and other metallic bellows have given rise to
leakage problems on the large machines, but only smaller bellows units will be discussed
here, since future fusion designs call for vacuum vessels with solid wall construction.
The LEP accelerator used 3,122 bellows units, and had 3 leaks over the 24 hour
bakeout. That gives a leakage failure rate of 3/(3122"24 h) ffi4E-O5/hour. The 95% chi-
square distribution
upper bound failure rate for 8 degrees
of freedom
would be
15.5/2"3122"24
h = IE-04/hour.
For comparison, water system bellows
units have
leakage failure rate averages in the range of 2E-06 to 5E-06/hour,5"26 thus demonstrating
that analogies between water coolant and other systems are not always reasonable.
The
JET experience was less reliable than the LEP, with 20 times the number of bellows leaks,
so the LEP failure rates will be adjustedto betteralign with existing tokamakenvironmental
stresses.
This is done since future experiments will still be subject to the same stresses:
thermal cycles for bakeout; high vibration from the plasma, the magnet forces, and the
pumps; and perhaps high irradiation.
If each of these concerns received a factor of 3
increase to the basic failure rate,5-27 the combined effect would be 27 rather than just 20,
thus providing an example of the slight conservatism
of reliability prediction
using
multiplicative factors. For fusion metallic bellows leakage, the average failure rate should
be 8E-04/hour and the 95% upper bound should be 2E-03/hour.
While there could be
several bellows failure modes (tearing, fatigue, squirm, etc.), only the resultant leakage is
of our concern here. The LEP leak rate value for bellows leaks was estimated to be about
3E-12 Pa-m3/s, but for fusion, the leakage value is probably much higher, on the order of
1E-06 Pa-m3/s.
5.6 Vacuum
Gauges
There are several kinds of vacuum gauges. Hot cathode ionization gauges, such as
the industry workhorse - the Bayard Alpert Gauge (BAG), and cold cathode gauges, such
as the Penning gauge. Pirani gauges are also used in fusion experiments.
BAGs are used
for lowest pressures (in the 1E-05 Pa range), Penning gauges for the 1 to 1E-04 Pa range,
and Pirani gauges in the 1to 1E-03 Pa region.
Experience with BAGs from the SRS synchrotron shows that 16 tubular units have
performed reliably (neither leaking or failing to function) over 7 years.5-28
For zero
failures, reference 5-16 gives the Chi-squared distribution as the formula for the leakage
and failure to operate failure rates, therefore 1.39/2"16"7 yrs = 6E-03/year for either failure
mode.
The 95% upper bound would be 5.99/2"16"7
= 3E-02/year.
There could be
arguments that this failure rate and upper bound are much too conservative;
in fact, in
reference 2-19 gives information that BAGs have been used on sequential facilities, so
5-8

these units could last for tens of years. The estimate here is reasonableuntil vendor
informationora widerset of BAGdatabecomesavailableforreliabilityanalysis. Sincethe
BAGs did not fail to operateor leakair into the vacuumsystem (including their flange
connection to the vacuum chamber),this failurerate is the same value for both failure
"
modes. As discussedin Chapter2, however,the BAG inaccuracycould varyby as much
as + 30%. The BAG also usuallyrequiresan amplifierto boost the signal out, which is
anothercomponenttoincludewhenfiguringinstrumentationand controlsystem reliability.
Cold cathodegauges, suchas the Penninggauge, arethoughtto be more reliable-
longerlived and morerugged- than hotfilamentgauges.5-29 The Penninggaugerequires
a smallpermanentmagnet;as discussedin Chapter2. ThesePenningmagnetshavemoved
in the JETmagneticfield,causingthe gaugesto breachvacuumorat leastto sendincorrect
pressurereadings. Ifthe Penninggaugesareset upcorrectly,then theirfailureratesshould
be lowerthan those of the BAGs. Therefore,the Penninggauge upperboundis set equal
to the BAG averagevalue.
Pirani gauges are wheatstonebridges,where one segment is in a vacuum tube.
Since the wheatstonebridgeis similarto a straingauge,thenfora firstapproximationto the
failure to operatefailuremode, a valueof 2.5E-07/hour5"25is used. An errorfactorof 10
is usedbecauseof thisextrapolationof components.Forthe airinleakagefailuremode,the
•
same valuefortubularBAGsis used. If a semiconductoris usedas the sensitiveelement,
then the Piranigauge is technicallya thermistorgauge,butsince thermistorshave failure
rates of 1E-07/hour,5-26 there is only a 40% difference to the given failure rate. This
"
differencecanbe accountedforif thereliabilityanalystis analyzinga thermistorgauge.
Rough vacuumgauges, suchas Bourdongauges, aregenerallysimplerthanhigh
vacuumgauges. However, they arelikely to requireperiodiccalibration. Therefore, an
analystjudgmentfailurerateof 1E-04/hourforthegaugefailingto operateproperlyshould
be usedin the absenceof otherdata. The airinleakagefailurerateforthese gauges is that
fora small flange.
5.7 Vacuum Windows
The JET experimenthasestimatedthe failurerateforsmalloptical(quartz)window
breachfailuresof 1.4E-06/window-houror1.4E-06/window-discharge.The upperbound
for these values would be 5.99/2"35"2E+04h = 4.3E-06/window-hour,or per window-
discharge. Both ratesarecalculatedbecauseJET safetypersonnel were unsureif hoursat
vacuumorthe stressesassociatedwithplasmadischargeswere moredominantforwindow
lifetime. Perhapsthe dischargescreatemorestressesfromvibration,hightemperature,and
irradiationthan stressesfromsimplehoursundervacuum. Windowscan also brownout,
.
thatis, discolorfromirradiation.There areno dataon thetimedurationfortypical window
browning,although it is an age relatedphenomena. The JETvalue is for small optical
(quartz) windows, but this operatingexperience value is suggested for use in future
5-9

experiments. Other windows, such as thinmetal or ce_i¢
windows, do not have as
much dataavailable. Acceleratorshavehadproblemswiththesewindows breachingfrom
heatincreasesdueto foreignmaterialbuildup.Untilmoredatacan befound,the JETvalue
shouldbe usedforany window,unlessanalystjudgmentprovidesbetterinsights.
p
5.8 Vacuum Valves
There are severalkinds of vacuumvalves. There_
Batevalves, poppet valves,
and angle valves, both manualand operatordriven. Herewe concentrateon gatevalves,
sincethese areusedin fusiondevices. Thereareseveralfailuremodesof interest;failingto
transferon command (fallto openorfailto close), spurioustransfer,externalairinleakage,
andleakage put the valve seat. Pluggingis only a concernfor valves that can develop
icing conditions.
Typically, vacuumvalves will havebellows on thestem to maintainvacuum if the
stem seal leaks. Gate valves would probablybe configu_d to fail closed on a loss of
power. Normal gate valve closingtimescouldrangefrom0.3 s to 3 s, dependingon their
size.5-30 A largeall metal gatevalve wastestedforJT.60.5-31 Inthattest, the valve was
exercised 4581 times at room temperature,and2619 timesat 275°C. The valve did not
appreciably leak past the seat in any of those exercises, nor did it fall to operate or
spuriously transferposition. For zero failures, a chi-square distribution5"16 gives the
averagefailurerate of 1.39/2(4581+2619) = 9.7E-O5/demand;this valueis roundedupto
1E-O4/demand.The 95% upperboundforthis valve test would be 5.99/2(4581+2619) =
4E-04/demand. This 1E-O4/demandfailurerateis in thesamerangeas the testing,,re3ultsof
a large bellows valve.5-32 However,the time of the testing was insufficient t0r a good
failurerateforleakagepasttheseat.
Externalleakageforlargevacuumvalves hasbeenestimatedby Sartoet al.5-12 as
2E-07/hour, with an assignederrorfactor of 10 since this value is derived from water
system information. If the valve has two bellows(aninnerbellows insidethe valve casing
that connects to the valve disk and the interiorof the casing, and an outer bellows that
attachesto the stem andthe exteriorof thecasing),thenthe secondbellows leakagefailure
rateshould be on the orderof 2E-06/hour(again,anerrorfactorof 10 should be used on
these valves).
Many valve designs call for only one interiorbellows. These bellows
shouldnot be gasketedwithelastomerseals.
Spuriouschange of position(openingorclosing without request)is more a matter
of valve operatorthan if thevalve is a gateorglobe valve. Some failureratesforspurious
transferare: motoroperatedvalve, 5E-08/hour,errorfactor 10, foran airoperatedvalve,
3E-06/hour,errorfactorof 10, and fora solenoidoperatedvalve, 5E-07/hour,errorfactor
of I0.5-33 These arereasonablevalues to apply to fusion valves, if there areno outside
influences, such as varying magnetic fields causing currentsin solenoid operators, air
control solenoids, ormotorwindings.
5-10

Leakagepastthevalve seathas beendiscussedin Chapter2. Dustandotherdebris
can scorethe seatandallow leakpaths. To approximatethiseffect, a check valve leakage
pastthe seat in a watersystemis usedhere. Thatvaluewouldbe 3E-_.s_our,with anerror
factorof 10.5.33 Forthisextrapolationto vacuumvalves, we shall use an errorfactorof
"
30.
5.9
Vacuum Ducts and Vessels
Vacuum pipin8 has been consideredsimilar to water system pipin8 in nuclear
fusion plants. A typicalstainlesssteelvacuumspoolpiece wall thicknessmiBhtbe 3 ram,
butcomparablediameterfissionpipin8mightbe 2 to4 timesas thick. _
fissionpipin8
is muchheavier walled thanvacuumpiping/ductin8, there is no good data availablefor
vacuumpipespool piecesorfittings. As a firstapI_ximation, useof fission piping datato
apply to vacuum pipes/ductsis reasonable. Forpipin8 externalleakage, IE-08/hour.m
(errorfactorof i0, butincreasedhereto 30), andtankleakageof IE-08_our (errorfactor
of I0, butincreasedhere to 30) arereasonablevalues.5-34 Rupturevalues area factor of
I00 lowerforhighqualitypiping.
Fusionvessel breaches,of the vessel walls (notwindows,etc.), are anareaof great
controversy. Severalanalogies have beendrawn;to thin.wailedpressurevessels, to thick
•
walled fission reactorpressurevessels, to fossil fuel boilers,etc. Operatingexperiences
have producedestimatesbetween IE-03to IE-05/year.5-35Inthe nextchapter,a value of
5.7E-05/year for a 25% available fusion experimentis adoptedfrom the NET studies.
"
Weldfailure rates shouldbe quantifiedusingworkbyBuendeet al.,5;36 since thatdataset
is the mostcomprehensiveavailableforfusionsystems.
5.10 Other Components
i
Some othercomponentsthatmightbe usedarefilters,either solid filters, such as
highefficiency particulateairfalters,orelectrostaticfaltersto remove dustorotherdebristo
keep thevacuumsystem uncontaminated.Le_age failureratesforthese componentswere
given by Sano et al.5-12 as 3E-07/hour. Errorfactors of 10 are assigned to these
componentfailureratessincetheratesareassumedfromotherexperiences.The failurerate
for failure to operate for electrostatic filters was 1E-05/hour from Sarto5-12 (note -
electrostaticprecipitatorsin coalplantshave a failure rateof about5E-05/hour,5-23 andthe
differencesin operatingenvironmentsshouldeasilyaccountforthe factorof 5 difference).
The solid filter failure to operate failureratefromSarto5-12 was about7E-06/hour. An
errorfactorof 10 is assignedto this value. Anothercomponentis the rupturedisk. This
componentcan have threefailure modesof interest,earlyopeningat pressurebelow rated
pressure,leakage,and failureto openon demand.
Rupturedisks for overpressureprotection can also be used on fusion vacuum
vessels. Rupturedisks forwatersystems have an 'allfailure modes'failurerate value of
5-11
,
,,,,,,,,
, ,,,
I
i,
I
IIIII
I
I
I
IIIIIIII

3E-06/hour.5"37 I assumeanerrorfactorof 3 forthisfailurerate. This failureratevalue
is a reasonablefirstapproximationfor rupturedisks to use on gas systems, using the full
valueforprematureopening,leakase,andfailureto openatratedpressure.
Table5-1 containsa listof failureratesestimatedin thischapter.These areourbest
estimatesatthe presenttime,untilvendordataormorefusionexperiencedataareobtained.
failureratespresentedhereshouldreflectfusionconditionswithoutthe need of any
multiplicative factors to account for harsh conditions (vibration, irradiation,thermal
cycling, etc.) sincethese datahaveeitheroriginatedin fusionconditions,arealreadyscaled
accordingto JET results, or arecomponentsthat do not reside within the area of harsh
fusion conditions (such as behind the radiationshields, isolated from vibration; for
example, the vacuumpumps). These failureratedatacan be used for existing and next
generationexperiments.
5-12

Table _1.
V_u_
systemcomponentfailurerateestimates ..............
f.amlmm
,Sfllm,tm
, aO ed eno,
Large turbopump
"
ceramicbearingfailsto operate
9_our
errorfactor3
metalbearingfailsto operate
1.3E-OS/hour
errorfactor3
casingleakage
5E-O3/year
errorfactor 10
Mechanicalroughingpump
highspeed pump(vane,etc.)
1.SE-O5/hour
errorfactor 1.2
failstooperate
casingleak
5E_3/year
errorfactor10
rootsblowerfailsto operate
1.5E-O5/hour
errorfactor 1.2
rootsblowercasingleak
5E-06/hour(upperbound)
Cryosorptionroughingpump
failsto operate
Low failurerate;useavailabilityof liquid
nitrogensupply,since zeolite cancontinueto
functionindefinitelyundergoodconditions
casingleak
5E-O3/year
errorfactor10
Largecryopump
failsto operate(plugged)
2E-O6/hour
errorfactor10
leakcryogenintovacuumchamber
2E-05/hour
errorfactor 1.7
Casing leak
7E-O6/year
errorfactor 10
Smalltitaniumsublimationpump
failsto operate
9E-OT/hour
errorfactor 1.7
(prematuref'flamentopencircuit)
feedthroughleak
7.4E-O5/hour
errorfactor 1.4
casingleak
3E-O5/year
errorfactor 10
Non-evaporablegetter(Zr-AI)pump
failsto operate
9E-OT/hour(upperbound)
casingleak
3E-05/year
errorfactorI0
_
,
i
IIIH
i
i ii
i i,,
i
i ii
5-13

II
Etiimr,z_
Associatederror
I
Smallion pump
diodepumpfailsto operate
2E-O5/hour
errorfactor3
casingleak
3E-05/year
errorfactor10
feedthroughleak
1.5E-O4/hour
errorfactor 1.4
Largeejectorpump
all modes
7E-06/hour
errorfactor10
(airleak,workingfluid leak,
and failto operate[plugged])
Metalgasketflanges
160to 215 mmdiameterleakage
1E-03/year
errorfactor3
295 to 360 mmdiameterleakage
6E-O2/year
errorfactor3
1 m andlargerdiameterleakage
5E-Ol/year
errorfactor 10
flangebolt
2E-OS/hour
errorfactorI0
Electricalfeedthroughfordiagnostics
leakage
5E-(H/hour
errorfactor 1.4
Metalbellows
leakage
8E-O4/hour
errorfactor 1.6
BayardAlperthotfdamentionizationgauge
all modes
6E-O3/year
errorfactor2.2
(samevalueforfailureto operate
andtubulargaugeleakage)
Penningcoldcathodeionizationgauge
allmodes
6E-03/year(upperbound)
(failto operate,leakage)
Piranigauge
fail tooperate
3E-05/hour
errorfactor10
leakage
6E-03/year
errorfactor2.2
,
5-14

i i
Hi|Hi
i ,ll
_
_1
i
i i_ _ll
iii
_rr_rl ii
i i
Roughvacuumgauges
failltooperate
1E-O4/hour
errorfactor 10
leakage
IE-O3/year
errorfactor3
Vacuum windows(quartzopticalviewports)
leakage
1.4E-06/dischargeor
1.4E-O6/hour
errorfactorof 1.8
thisvalueshouldbe usedforotherwindows(metalorceramic)untilfurore
dataon windowsbecomesavailable.
Valves
fail to operateon demand
1E-O4/demand
errorfactor2
(failto openorfailto close)
spuriousopenorclose
motoroperated
5E-OS/hour
errorfactor 10
,
airoperated
3E-06/hour
errorfactor 10
solenoidoperated
5E-07/hoer
errorfactor 10
"
externalairleakage
2E-07/hour
errorfactor 10
internalleakageacrosstheseat
3E-06/hour
errorfactor30
Vacuumpipingandducts
pipingleakage
1E-O8/h-m
elrorfactor30
tankleakage
1E-OS/hour
errorfactor30
(rupturevaluesarea factorof 100lowerthantheleakageestimates)
Vacuumvessel
wallbreach
5.7E-05/year(for25% availability)
Filters
e_static
f'dterleakage
3E-O7/hour
errorfactor I0
electrostaticfilterfail tooperate
1E-O5/hour
errorfactor 10
soldfalterleakage
3E-07/hour
errorfactor 10
solid filterfailto operate
7E-06/hour
errorfactor 10
5-15

Chapter5 References
5-1.
D.J. Klingler et al., editors, AT&T Reliabili_
Manual, Van Nostrand Reinhold,
New York, 1990, pages 25-36.
5-2.
L.C.
Cadwallader and G. L. Taylor, Experimental
Tritium Cleanup
System
Availability_ Analysis from 1984 to 1992, ECK]-FSP-10603, EG&G Idaho, Inc.,
May 1993.
5-3.
T.A.
Heppell, "High Vacuum Pumping Systems-An Overview," Y.af,gl_,
37,
1987, pages 593-601.
5-4.
H.-P. Kabelitz and J. K. Fremerey, "Turbomoelcular Vacuum Pumps with a New
Magnetic Bearing Concept," Vacuum, 38, 1988, pages 673-676.
5-5.
M. Heldner and H.-P. Kabelitz, "Reliability of Turbomolecular Vacuum Pumps: A
Comparison of Rolling Element and Magnetic Bearing Systems,"
Vacuum Science and Technology, AS, 1990, pages 2772-2777.
5-6.
D.G. Goetz, "Large Turbomolecular Pumps for Fusion Research and High-energy
Physics," Vacuum, 32, 1982, page 703-706.
5-7.
H.G. Broe, "Vacuum Systems Associated with the AAEC's 3 MeV Accelerator,"
_t
_,
18, 1968, pages 637-640.
5-8.
W. Bieger et al., "Performance of a Turbomolecular Pump in a pulsed Magnetic
Field," proceedings
of the Seventh Symposium on En_ineerin$
Problem_ of
Fusion Research, Knoxville, Tennessee, October 25-28, 1977, pages 976-980.
5-9.
D.C.
Arulananthan and F. P. Lees, "Some Data on the Reliability of Pressure
Equipment in the Chemical Plant Environment," International Journal of Pressure
Vessels and Piping, 9, 1981, pages 327-338.
5-10.
J. K. Jones,
"Experience
with Magnetic
Bearing Turbomolecular
Pumps,"
Proceedings
of the Japan-U.S. Workshop P-118 on Vacuum Tf_hnolo_ies
for
Fusion Devices, IPPJ-T-38, August 1-5, 1988, pages 165-173.
5-11.
M.H. Hablanian, Hi_h-Vacuum Technology. A Practical Guide, Marcel Dekker,
Inc., New York, 1990, pages 142, 295-301,.
5-12.
S. Sarto et al., NET Safety System Study. Exhaust System. Direct Failure Final
-
v
SEA 4.1, ENEA/NIER, Bologna University, October 1989.
5-16

|
5-13.
L.C. Cadwallader, Cryogenic System _OperatingEx_nerienceReview for Fusion
_AppHcations,EGG-FSP-10048, EG&G Idaho, Inc., January 1992.
5-14.
D.W.
Sedgley et al., "Cryopumping for Fusion Reactors," Nuclear Engineering
"
and Desi_Fusion,
4, 1987, pages 149-163.
.
5-15.
M.E.P.
Wykes, Joint EumrwamToms Safety Analysis Re_noRfor the Preliminary_
Tritium Experiment, MW/ES/047, JET Joint Undertaking,August 7, 1991.
5-16.
Manual on Reliability DataCollection for ResearchReactor PSAs, IAEA-TF__DOC-
v
636, International Atomic Energy Agency, January 1992, page 32.
5-17.
T.D. Marshall and L. C. Cadwallader, In-Vessel ITER Tubing Failure Rates for
v
Selected Materials and Coolants,
EGG-FSP-10928,
EG&G Idaho, Inc., draft
reportDecember 1993, submittedto the ITER JointCentral Team.
5-18.
T.S.
Chou and C. Lanni, "Lifetime of Titanium Filament at Constant Current,"
IEEE Transactions on Nuclear Science, NS-28, 1981, pages 3323-3324.
5-19.
N.C. Rasmussen et al., Reactor Safety Study--An Assessment of Accident Risks
'
iP US Commercial Nuclear Power Plants, WAS H- 1400, NUREG-75/014,
October
1975, Appendix HI, Failure Data.
"
5-20.
J.F.
O'Hanlon, A User's Guide to Vacuum Technology,
second edition, John
Wiley&Sons, Inc., New York, 1989, pages 243-44, 248.
5-21.
B .S. Halliday and B. A. Trickett, "Vacuum Problems on a 5 GeV Electron
Synchrotron," Journal of Vacuum Science and Technology, 9, 1971, pages 42-45.
5-22.
J.L.
Ryans and D. L. Roper, Process Vacuum System Design
& Opfration,
McGraw-Hill Book Company, New York, 1986, chapter 9 and page 86.
5-23.
Component Failure and Repair Data for Coal-Fired Power Units, EPRI AP-2071,
Electric Power Research Institute, October 1981, pages 2-28 to 2-29, 2-38.
5-24.
W. Unterlerchner, "Some ImprovementWork on ConFlat Joints and Their Limit of
Reliability in a Large-size Ultrahigh Vacuum System," Journalof Vacuum Science
and Technology, AS, 1987, pages 2540-2543.
5-25.
A. E. Green and A. J. BOurne, Reliability
Technology,
Wiley-Interscience,
,
London, 1972, Table A.7.
5-17

5-26.
A.H.
Dexter and W. C. Perkins, Comnonent Failure-Rate Data with Potential
_ppficability
to a Nuclear-Fuel-Renrocessing
Plant, DP-1633,
Savannah River
Laboratory, July 1982.
5-27.
L.C. Cadwallader, Investigation of Comnonent Failure Rates for Pulsed versus
Steady State Tokamak Operation, EGG-FSP-10262,
EG&G Idaho, Inc., July
1992.
5-28.
B.A.
Trickett, "Performance of the SRS Vacuum System," _,
37, 1987,
pages 747-755.
5-29.
S.R.
Conviser, "The Stanford Two-Mile Linear Accelerator Vacuum System,"
Ii_I_ETranmctions on Nuclear Science, NS-12, 1965, pages 699-704.
5-30.
H. Adam and G. Jokisch, "Vacuum Valves and Their Use in Practice," Vacuum,
37, 1987, pages 681-689.
5-31.
N. Ogiwara et al., "Reliability Tests of 40 cm id All Metal Gate Valve and 54 cm id
Ceramic Break for JT-60," proceedings of the Tenth Symposium
on Fusion
Engineering, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, December 5-9, 1983, pages 1058-1062.
5-32.
S.R. Thomas et al., "A Large Rectangular Bellows Valve," Proceedings of the
Seventh Symposium on Enfineering Problems of Fusion Research, Knoxville,
Tennessee, October 25-28, 1977, page 985-988.
5-33.
S.A.
Eide and M. B. Calley, "Generic Component Failure Data Base,"
proceedings
of the International Topical Meeting
on Probabilistic
Safety
Assessment, American Nuclear Society, Clearwater Beach, Florida, January 26-29,
1993, pages 1175-1182.
5-34.
S. A. Eide et al.,
"Component
External
Leakage
and Rupture
Frequency
Estimates,"
PSA '93. Proceedinus of the International Topical
Meetin_
on
_
-
v
Probabilistic Safety Assessment, American Nuclear Society, Clearwater Beach,
Florida, January 26-29, 1993, pages 1171-1174.
5-35.
L.C.
Cadwallader and C. G. Motloch, Potential Off-Normal Events and Releases
for the Tokamak Physics
Experiment, EGG-FSP-10710,
EG&G Idaho, Inc.,
August 1993.
5-36.
R. Buende, S. Fabritsiev, and V. Rybin, "Reliability of Welds and Brazed Joints in
Blankets and Its Influence on Availability," Fusion Engineering and Design, 16,
•
1991, pages 59-72.
5-18

5-37.
Instituteof ElectricalandElectronicsEngineers,IEEEGuideto theCollection and
presentation of Electrical. Electronic. Sensin_ Component. and Mechanical
F_uipmentReliabilityDamforNuclear-PowerGeneratin2Stations,IEEEStd500-
1984, December1983, page 1327.
5-19

6.
VACUUM SYSTEM INITIATING EVENT FREQUENCIES
6.1 Introduction
"
This chaptercontainsa summaryof informationaboutpublishedinitiating event
frequenciesforfusionandothervacuumsystems. Someof these frequenciesarebasedon
.
analystjudgment,otherson operatingexperiences. For futureexperiments,analysts can
eitheruse these values for scoping work,or they can comparethese estimates to values
calculatedfromfaulttreeanalysis,wherethefaulttreesarequantifiedusingfailureratedata
in the previouschapterorothersources.
6.2 Loss of Vacuum Accident (LOVA)
In this initiatingevent(IE),a largeairingressis assumed. Themachineis hot, and
air-waUmaterial reactions can occur. The codeposited layer of tritiumwill likely be
strippedaway, leavingthattritiumfreeto be drivenoutof the vessel by thermalexpansion
of airheated by the hot wall files. Work forthe Next EuropeanTorus (NET) design, a
machinesmallerbutcomparableto ITER,gavea large LOVAinitiatingeventfrequency,to
thebuildingatmosphere,of 3.4E-08/hour.6"1 Fora machine25%available,or operating
2200 hours/year,this value is 7.5E-05/year. ThisIE frequencyis fordirectfailuresof the
,
vacuumsystemcomponents.Otherfailures,suchas inducedfailures(forexample,leakage
water fracturinga hot window), and common cause failures (one cause failing many
components: an earthquake,an externalimpactevent,orothers),arenot consideredin this
value. The IE frequencyis probablyan upperboundestimate, so no uncertaintywas
reported.The readerwillrecallthatthe ITEREDAdesigncurrentlycalls fora robust,high
vacuumcryostataroundthe machine,so onlytheportsaredirecdyvulnerableto airingress
events. These ports could be well protected, with the use of multiple windows and
structuralreinforcement. Thus, the ITER value may be lower than this estimate for a
LOV_
Othervacuumsystem (vacuumvessel)large breachfailurefrequencyestimateshave
been based on the experience of thin-waUedtanks,6-2 and analyst judgment.6-3 The
values varyaround1E-03 to 1E-04/year. Recent workby Wu et al.6-4 indicates that for
nuclear pressure vessels, there has not been enough operatingexperience to estimate
accuratefailurerates,so onlyprobabilisticfracturemechanicscan give a good answer. Wu
et al. estimate that a boilingwaterreactorpressurevessel breachfailure rate is actuallyon
the order of 1E-08/year. Fusion vacuum vessels might also need to be treated with
probabilistic fracturemechanics. The vacuum vessel large breachfrequency must be
investigated further,but as a first approximationfor a device such as ITER, the NET
estimate of 3.4E-08/houris the most reasonablevalue to use for the conceptual stage of
•
fusion designs.
6-1

i
6.3 Loss of Coolant Accident (LOCA)
A small in-vessel loss of cooling water or other fluid could be very detrimental.
Water will react with the wall tiles and generate hydrogen, a possible explosive. 6-5
Several crude estimates for frequencies of in-vessel coolant line breaks have been made for
1TER based on operating experiences of similar material tubes with the likely coolants over
a 2200 houroperating year. These estimated IE frequencies for small LOCAs are:6-6
high pressure water
2/year; errorestimate of 10
helium
5E-04/year, errorestimate of 10
liquid metals
0.2/year; errorestimate of 10
The work from reference 6-6 has been refined with more detailed tubing failure rate
investigations. 6-7 These more detailed failure rates have been carefully adjusted for the
fusion environment and coolant-specific concerns. The same assumptions about length of
coolant tubing and hours of yearly operation are used. For water coolant and a variety of
materials, the frequency is between 0.1 to 4/year.
For the same materials with helium
coolant,
the frequency is 0.1 to 2/year, and similarly,
for liquid lithium coolant, the
frequency varies between
0.1 to 8/year.
These ranges show that, for the materials
considered
here (stainless
steel, ferritic steel, and inconel),
the differences
are not
significant.
The results also show that ITER must be able to mitigate this coolant leakage
event. Other ideas, such as duplex (two tube walls) tubing, might give lower failure rates
by perhaps a factor of 10. A frequency decrease to account for high level quality assurance
might be a factor of 3, perhaps with exceedingly stringent assurance then a factor of 10.
Even using the factor reductions for duplex tubing and detailed quality assurance, the
estimates still indicate a potential problem over the 10 (or more) year life of the machine.
These estimates treat only tubing material failures.
These estimates do not account for
runaway electrons or other common mode events.
Perhaps other approaches besides
cooling tubes can be explored for ITER.
Large LOCA events would be less frequent than the small LOCA.
In other work
for NET, a value of 1E-07/hour for a large leak from any large coolant manifold was
selected, for an in-vessel large LOCA IE frequency of 1E-05/hour.6-8
This frequency
would give O.02/year for 2200 operating hours per calendar year. The value is somewhat
conservative in comparison with piping failure rates used in the literature for fission reactor
systems.
Perhaps that value has been weighted for the more harsh fusion conditions of
radiation damage, thermal cycling, and vibration.
6.4 Loss
of Flow Accident
(LOFA)
For small in-vessel
tubes, tube plugging is of the same failure rate as tube
rupturing, which are generally a factor of 10 below tube leakage values. 6"7 That accounts
6-2

forin-vessel LOFAevents. The in-vesselLOFAfrequencywouldbe roughlyan orderof
magnitudelowerthanthein-vessel LOCAfrequenciesgivenabove.
OtherLOFA fault events outside the vessel could be valve inadvertentclosure,
°
pump failure, or loss of power to the pump. Considering these events for various
coolants, and simple flow circuits (500 m piping, one pump, one valve), has yielded
preliminaryresults. Some of the assumptionswere that coolant chemistryis controlled
very well, the piping andtubinghave beenthoroughlycheckedfor foreign materials,and
valves and pumpswere as reliableas those in fission applicationswiththe same materials
and coolants. For an ITER-like machine, the frequency of an ex-vessel loss of flow
accidentwouldbe:6"6
highpressurewater
4E-05/year,errorestimateof 12
helium
9E-06/year,errorestimateof 30
liquidmetals
2E-03/year;errorestimateof I0
These values are relativelyclose in magnitude,and are in the unlikely or very unlikely
events range.
6.S Other Events
f
For a machine like ITER,with a robustcryostat, there is another concern. If the
cryostatpressurizeswithoutrelievingto a ventlineorthe torushall,there could be pressure
stresses generatedon the vacuum vessel andits ports. Stresses suchas these have been
analyzed for some types of piping.6-9 If the vessel were to breachby buckling, a port
mightshift position, breachingits seal throughthe cryostat. The portbreach might allow
the overpressuretoescape,alongwith radioactiveeffluentsfromthebreachedvessel. This
event shouldbe a very low frequency,sinceanoverpressuresituationmustfirstexist in the
cryostat,andthen the overpressureshouldonly serve to actuatethe simple relief devices
(rupturedisks, blow out panels, etc.) presenton any cryostatas partof prudentdesign for
cryogenic systems.
qt
i
6-3

Chapter6 References
6-1.
A. Boschi et al., "Risk Evaluation of the In-Vessel Plant Area of a NET Type
Tokamak Machine: Direct, Induced and Common Cause Failures,"Proceedinfs of
the Thirteenth Symposium on Fusion En_g_
Knoxville, Tennessee, October
*
2-6, 1989, pages 1108-1111.
6-2.
D.C.
Arulanantham and F. P. Lees, "Some Data on the Reliability of Pressure
Equipment in the Chemical Plant Environment," International Journal of Pressure
i
VeL_els and Piping, 9, 1981, pages 327-338.
6-3.
L.C. Cadwallader and C. G. Mofloch, potential Off-Normal Events and Releases
for the Tokamak Physics
Experiment, EGG-FSP-10710,
EG&G Idaho, Inc.,
August 1993.
6-4.
W.F.
Wu, C. S. Shin, and C. H. Tai, "A Reliability
Assessment
of Reactor
Pressure Vessels," International Journalof Pressure Vessels and Piping, 57, 1994,
pages 77-84.
6-5.
P.L.
Goranson,
"Hydrogen/Hydrocarbon
Explosions
in the ITER Vacuum
Vessel," Fusion Technology, 21, 1992, pages 2041-2045.
6-6.
L.C.
Cadwallader, Investigation of Selected Accident Frequencies for Helium.
Water. and Liauid Metal ITER Coolants, ITER/US/93/EN/SA-3,
January 27,
1993.
6-7.
T.D. Marshall and L. C. Cadwallader, In-Vessel Tubin2 Failure Rates for Selected
Materials and Coolants, EGG-FSP-10928, March 1994.
6-8.
G. Cambi et al., "Risk Evaluation of Critical In-Vessel Accident Sequences for a
Next Step Tokamak Machine," Fusion Engineering and Design, 17, 1991, pages
395-401.
6-9.
G.D.
Galletly
and S. James, "Inter-ring Buckling
of Welded Ring-stiffened
Cylindrical Shells Subjected to External Pressure,"P_ings
of the Institution of
Mechanical Engineers. PartE, 2,1_, 1989, pages 101-114.
6-4

