Living one’s life as a vegan
is a clear ﬁrst step for many,
but then what? There are
countless ways in which motivated individuals can
use their gifts to reduce animal suffering each day.
The possibilities are limited only by our creativity.
There is no one-size-ﬁts-all method of activism.
What are your strengths/weaknesses? What do
you enjoy doing? How can you live a happy, pur-
poseful life and help the animals to the greatest
degree possible? The answers, of course, are dif-
ferent for each of us, and sometimes our answers
change over time.
While creative thinking and playing to one’s
strengths can open up new avenues for promoting
veganism, rigid adherence to doctrine can obstruct
advocacy. Isn’t one’s time better spent distributing
vegan literature than tracing the origins of obscure
ingredients? In order to be effective advocates,
the decisions we make—both on a daily basis and
long-term—must offer a net beneﬁt to the animals.
Vegans can remain true to their ideals regardless
of whether or not they engage in traditional 
methods of activism. Although striving to acquire
great wealth is seen by many as the antithesis of
activism, those who earn large amounts of money
through business can have an enormous impact
on animal liberation when they contribute funds
to organizations/activities aimed at reducing 
animal suffering.
Diverse and committed people have lent their 
talents to all aspects of Vegan Outreach. However,
if not for those who pursue other ﬁelds and
ﬁnancially support the printing of WHY VEGAN and
VEGETARIAN LIVING, we would be unable to reach
anyone with our information. It is because of our
members’ hard work in ﬁelds not directly related
to animal rights that we have the funds needed 
to print and distribute literature around the world.
In order to spread
vegetarianism and veganism
effectively, our focus should
be on educating people with credible, persuasive,
and focused literature; providing well-documented
and thorough answers for speciﬁc questions;
supplying educational materials to schools; 
working to get vegan options in various settings;
working with food manufacturers, grocery stores,
and restaurants for more options; and supplying
people with lists of local restaurants and shop-
ping opportunities where vegan options exist.
Our experience has shown that the most
effective way to accomplish the above is
through understanding and constructive
outreach. Positive outreach takes patience
and can be frustrating, but it is worth the
effort. We don’t have to force people to notice
us; simply being conﬁdent, articulate vegans
in public is enough.
Some speciﬁc activities that can lead to
people learning about veganism are:
Putting a reference (URLs or quotes)
in your email address or email signature.
Wearing clothes that say “vegan” or
“vegetarian.” This creates opportunities to 
give literature to people who ask.
Writing articles for/letters to publications,
including newsletters of local groups (e.g., your
local chapter of the Audubon Society, the Nature
Conservancy, Food not Bombs, etc.). Tell a story
tailored to the audience that gives the readers
a way of identifying with you.
Displaying information in public areas,
such as hanging copies of WHY VEGAN and/or
VEGETARIAN LIVING* on your ofﬁce door. Many 
have reported great success in displaying them 
at health food stores, restaurants, libraries, etc.
Also, posters and display prints can be downloaded
from the Vegan Outreach web site—perfect for
campus bulletin boards.
*A less graphic version of WHY VEGAN, with a different
order and weighting of subjects, which
may be more appropriate for some 
audiences and may be allowed for display
in areas where WHY VEGAN is not.
Providing people with good
vegan food. Although this sounds
obvious, it is far from easy. Our 
general advice now is to serve 
easily prepared, relatively simple
foods (e.g., pasta, potatoes, beans,
casseroles) with different sauces,
perhaps with a new food as an
••
••
••
••
••
TIPS
FOR
SPREADING
VEGANISM
PLAYING TO
STRENGTH
PLAYING TO
STRENGTH
—INSIDE—
Activism and Veganism Reconsidered . . . . 4
Anger, Humor, and Advocacy . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
Selecting Information for Advocacy . . . . . 8
Beyond Might Makes Right . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
CONSTRUCTIVE
OUTREACH
CONSTRUCTIVE
OUTREACH
—INSIDE—
Activism and Veganism Reconsidered . . . . 4
Anger, Humor, and Advocacy . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
Selecting Information for Advocacy . . . . . 8
Beyond Might Makes Right . . . . . . . . . . . . 10

appetizer (e.g., hummus). If serving vegetar-
ian “meats,” we suggest providing standard
condiments (mustard, pickles, etc.).
Joining/starting a local veg*an society.
Many people will be signiﬁcantly helped by
some support structure—shopping references,
dining guides, potlucks, etc. Your group can write
guest columns, seek out speaking engagements in
schools and clubs, give cooking classes, work with
local schools and restaurants to increase vegan
options, show documentaries, etc. There is really
no limit to this.
The initial impression is
crucial in establishing a
dialogue. Displays, needed
to attract visitors, should clearly and simply convey
the area of concern. Large-screen TVs are always
magnets for attracting people, to whom you can
then offer literature. Consider your audience and
location when you choose which pictures to display
or videos to show. Graphic images of animal torture
upset children, while teenagers and younger adults
are most likely to be moved by these photographs. 
Be clean, well-groomed, and conservatively dressed.
Counter-culture attire, except where this is the
norm, sends the message that your world radically
differs from that of your audience. This creates a
barrier between you and prospective visitors who
may react with a feeling of distrust, even hostility.
Remember, you are there as a spokesperson for
the animals, and should not let anything come
between your audience and your message.
Your credibility will increase if you actively listen:
repeat a visitor’s main points using different words,
showing that you understand. Then, ask thought-
provoking but courteous questions. Seek common
ground with your visitors by emphasizing shared
goals or concerns. Acknowledge your table visitors’
valid points or observations. Don’t turn the
encounter into a debate
or personal attack; keep
it a mutual exploration
of the issues.
If the main barrier seems
to be the visitors’ desire
to continue habits that
they ﬁnd pleasant—such
as sport ﬁshing or wearing
fur—mention any of your
own relevant changes in
lifestyle. In response to
a declaration such as
“I could never
give up meat,”
you might relate
something of
your own eat-
ing habits: e.g.,
“I used to feel the
same way, and at ﬁrst I just cut back on meat.
Now that I’m vegetarian, I’ve found that I really
don’t miss meat. In fact, I feel good about my diet,
being more at peace with the world around me.”
Such an honest admission of your own feelings
can build rapport. When people say something
a little obnoxious, smile and wish them a good day.
If they say something really mean, you might say,
“That was a mean thing to say.” If said as an
observation, without a tone of bitterness, it will
possibly get them thinking.
The great thing about
leaﬂetting is the
lack of prepara-
tion time required. At the right time and place, just
one person can hand out hundreds of brochures in
less than an hour. You will inevitably interest many
new people in making their way toward veganism,
sowing seeds of change where they do not 
currently exist.
Students tend to be more interested in veganism
than the rest of society, making college campuses
good places to leaﬂet; weekdays before 3 p.m. are
the busiest times. At large universities, there is
normally a steady ﬂow of pedestrian trafﬁc some-
where on campus at all times throughout the day.
Smaller colleges and universities usually have
a steady ﬂow of trafﬁc between classes.
You can ﬁnd a spot where many pedestrians are
passing, or you can walk around offering the bro-
chure to people you come across (which makes
you less conspicuous). Some schools have an open
policy on allowing leaﬂetting, while others do not.
Even if someone eventually tells you that you are
not permitted to hand out literature on campus, 
it will likely be after you’ve given out a great 
number of brochures.
People who take part in walkathons in order to
raise money for causes tend to be willing to
••
22
SUGGESTIONS
FOR TABLING
SUGGESTIONS
FOR TABLING
SUGGESTIONS
FOR LEAFLETTING
SUGGESTIONS
FOR LEAFLETTING

accept literature. (We target these people because
we think they are likely to take a brochure, read it,
and thoughtfully consider moving towards vegan-
ism, not because WHY VEGAN has anything to do
with the cause for which they are walking.) Animal-
related events, such as humane society beneﬁts or
animal rights presentations, are also a good place
to reach interested and committed individuals who
may not have considered the implications of their
own diet, or the idea of promoting veganism.
While leaﬂetting, keep in mind:
We have found that “Would you like a pamphlet
about vegetarianism?” or “Have you seen one of
these yet?” are effective ways of offering literature
to people (and minimize the number thrown away).
Many activists are nervous about leaﬂetting. 
In our experience, nervousness often fades once
you’ve offered the brochure to a few people.
Besides WHY VEGAN, Vegan Outreach can sup-
ply you with copies of our VEGAN STARTER PACK for 
people with questions.
One person can make an enormous difference.
Many people will pass the information on to others,
causing a chain reaction.
Few people have any interest in
engaging a religious zealot
bent on converting them.
Similarly, when animal rights advocates give the
impression that they are trying to convert people,
people resist the message. One activist reports
what has worked for him:
I started at a new university almost a year ago.
I wore my sweatshirt and t-shirts that say
Vegan Outreach on them at least every third
day. For months, only a few
people said anything to me.
Some of them joke with me
about eating meat. I don’t 
act offended, and try to con-
tinue the conversation. Slowly,
over time, more and more peo-
ple ask questions. I try not to
be pushy, but offer them a
WHY VEGAN pamphlet when
the circumstances are right.
Our conversations used to go somewhat like this:
Potential Vegan (PV): Oh, so you’re a vegan. 
I know someone else who is vegan. You know, 
I really think it’s terrible how they treat the 
animals, but I could never do it. Animal products
are in everything, aren’t they?
Vegan: They are in a lot of things. But you ﬁgure 
out what you can and can’t eat and then it
becomes easier.
PV: It just takes too much discipline for me.
Vegan: I could give you a list of the names of all the
different possible animal ingredients. There’s less
than 10,000 of them! And I can give you a list of
500 companies and whether they test on animals
or not. It’s not so bad. Hey, where are you going?
Now our answer goes:
Vegan: To me, veganism is not about personal purity,
but a way to stop suffering. You don’t have to avoid
every animal product, just the obvious ones for
which an animal was bred, raised, and eventually
killed. Some vegans avoid all they can as a sym-
bolic gesture, but minuscule amounts of animal
products or by-products will fade away as the
meat, dairy, and egg industries fade.
Sometimes a potential vegan will say, “I could just
never give up ice cream (or cheese, etc.).” Some
vegans now reply, “Then give up everything but
ice cream.” These types of reactions will often sur-
prise the potential vegan and make them realize
that veganism is not about making yourself pure,
but about doing what you can to stop suffering.
People often try to sidestep the issue by talking
about everything from Eskimos eating ﬁsh to being
stranded on a desert island. To be effective, we
have to bring conversations back to the fact that
eating animal products causes suffering, and each
of us can work to avoid creating this suffering.
We should not simply try to feel that we have won
an argument with a meat eater. Rather, we need
people to consider the issues in depth and want
to change. If we are to reach people’s hearts and
minds, and help them utilize the power of their
choices, we must make people aware that we are
sincere individuals who have made informed 
decisions. We must show everyone that we have
decided to use our choices to make a positive
statement about how the world should—and can—
be. Only then will others be inclined to join us in
creating a new world.
••
••
••
••
Tips for S
or Sprpreading V Veganism
sm
Tips for S
or Sprpreading V Veganism
sm
Tips for Spreading Veganism
33
Cover photos (clockwise): Basla Andolsun at U of NM;
display set up by Precious James Powell at U of GA
library; Chelsea Lincoln at U of OR; Marsha Forsman
at Chicago Earth Day event; Philip Rutkowski at U
of PA Econference 2000.
Page 2: VO display table at AR2000; Mark McEahern
at U of WI, Madison; Speak Out of Allendale, NJ; 
Katja Hrores at Harvard; Jack Norris at U of WA;
Matt Ball at Seton Hill College, Greensburg, PA.
Page 3: Joe Espinosa at Chicago Earth Day event;
Philip at U of PA; Kevin P. O’Gallagher at U of CO 
at Denver; Dave Costa at MI State; Michael Tucker
at FL International U; “Which item on this tray is
the most harmful to the environment?” display by
Vegetarian Solutions of Atlanta, GA; Tommy Nail 
of Allen, TX.
PERSONAL
INTERACTION
PERSONAL
INTERACTION

In the past twenty years, the animal rights (AR) movement has made the public
aware of many issues concerning animals. During this time, unfortunately, per-
capita meat consumption has risen, and the number of animals killed in the
United States has increased by hundreds of millions each year.
It may be possible to help small numbers of animals by stopping blatant, socially
unacceptable forms of cruelty. But true animal liberation can only be possible by
changing deeply ingrained patterns of thought about animals—specifically, that
animals exist for humans to use.
ations for improving advocacy, not as argument
or judgement.
Hoop Dreams A basketball coach once
told me: “Practice doesn’t make perfect. Poorly
planned and executed practice, no matter 
how hard you work, tends to just reinforce 
bad habits and will ultimately only make you 
a worse player.
“Only perfect practice makes perfect.”
The same can be said about activism. 
No matter how angry we are, how much we
believe in something, how hard we work, or
how much we suffer, our activities can be use-
less or even counter-productive. We should
always strive to think clearly, get good counsel,
be willing to admit our mistakes, and change
course in midstream if necessary (however
ego-damaging this can be). If our efforts are
not part of a well-deﬁned and thought-through
plan, we will spin our wheels.
Main Point During the time the AR move-
ment has been visible in the U.S. (since ~1980),
AR activists have stopped some abuses, received
media attention, and become a ﬁxture of pop
Fundamental Facts The number of animals
killed for fur in the U.S. each year is approxi-
mately equal to the human population of Illinois.
The number of animals killed in experimentation
in the U.S. each year is approxi-
mately equal to the human pop-
ulation of Texas. The number of
mammals and birds farmed and
slaughtered in the U.S. each year
is approximately equal to one
and two-thirds the entire human
population of Earth.
Over 99% of the animals killed in the U.S.
each year die to be eaten. Everyone makes
choices directly determining the fates of these
animals when deciding what to eat each day.
Because most people eat animals, the
commonplace view remains that animals are
tools and commodities. There are a million
symptoms of this view—small-
scale yet highly visible abuses
that always seem to demand
our attention: canned hunts,
circuses, cockﬁghting, fur, horse
racing, etc. Many activists burn
out because of the never-ending
torrent of these “battles” around
them and the difﬁculty in winning even the
smallest “victory.”
This cycle will continue until there is a 
fundamental change in society. The only way
to make this happen is by convincing people 
to stop eating animals.
Question Authority We expect the gen-
eral public to question everything they assume
and have ever been told about food, traditions,
health, etc. Given the enormity of the task at
hand, the increase in the number of animals
killed each year, and the relative paucity of our
resources, I believe we too must constantly
question everything we assume and have ever
been told about our activism and veganism.
My assumptions and ego have harmed the
effectiveness of my advocacy in the past. I
offer these lessons learned solely as consider-
B
Y
M
A
T
T
B
A
L
L
culture. Yet after two decades, with hundreds of
millions of dollars spent and possibly a similar
number of hours of work devoted, almost twice
as many animals will be killed in the U.S. this
year as were killed in 1980.
In the U.S., given the quantity of non-human
animals suffering, the extent to which they are
suffering, and the reason they are intentionally
made to suffer, I believe that animal liberation
is the moral imperative of our time. Our entire
focus should be on ending the suffering as 
efﬁciently and quickly as possible.
I believe we have an ethical obligation to
recognize and set aside all of our personal
baggage and to perform an
objective analysis of both the
pros/cons and costs/beneﬁts of
our choice of focus, our choice
of tactics, and the example we
choose to present to the public.
Focus: Limited Resources
Along with anger, guilt is a
highly motivating emotion among activists.
If we know of a highly visible case of animal
exploitation, we feel that we must take action
against it.
As much as we don’t want to admit it,
though, we can’t do everything: when we
choose to pursue one thing, we are choosing
not to pursue others.
Compared to the public as
a whole and the companies
which exploit animals, AR
activists have extremely limited
resources: money, time, and
emotional energy. Instead of
reacting to whatever visible
abuses that come up or following the leads of
other activists, utilizing our limited resources
so as to maximize their results should be our
ﬁrst priority.
There are a host of people out there who
are open to our efforts, while those who proﬁt
from the industries that exploit animals are not.
Shouldn’t we gain strength in numbers by ﬁrst
focusing the bulk of our energies into persuad-
ing those people who are willing to listen
to our message?
Money, Immediacy, and Victories
Some contend that small-scale, high-proﬁle
cases provide a hook to allow organizations 
to raise money and gain new members. Others
argue that victories can help energize activists
who would otherwise burn out on actions that
don’t have a tangible payoff. Although these
44
The number of animals killed for fur
in the U.S. each year is approximately equal to
the human population of Illinois.
The number of animals killed for fur
in the U.S. each year is approximately equal to
the human population of Illinois.
Activism and Veganism Reconsidered:
Activism and Veganism Reconsidered:
The number of animals killed in experimentation
in the U.S. each year is approximately equal to
the human population of Texas. 
The number of animals killed in experimentation
in the U.S. each year is approximately equal to
the human population of Texas. 

The number of mammals and birds farmed and slaughtered 
for food in the U.S. each year is approximately equal to
one and two-thirds the entire human population of Earth.
The number of mammals and birds farmed and slaughtered 
for food in the U.S. each year is approximately equal to
one and two-thirds the entire human population of Earth.
are valid considerations, these potential posi-
tives must be weighed against other factors. 
Hegins One example of our movement’s
priorities is the Hegins pigeon shoot—one of 
the primary AR accomplishments of the 1990s.
Immense amounts of money and human effort
went into this campaign. Ending the Hegins
pigeon shoot has saved ~5,000 animals each
year—the number of animals that die in U.S
slaughterhouses every 16 seconds.
In the future, we need to decide if the ani-
mals are best served by this type of allocation
of resources. If we choose not to decide, we
still have made a choice.
Tactics Given the wide range of animal
abuses and the various situations in which
activists ﬁnd themselves, I believe it is not pos-
sible to make a blanket statement that a speciﬁc
tactic is unquestionably positive or always
harmful. For example, a certain type of dem-
onstration, when run in a relevant situation
and with a respectful,
clear message, can pos-
sibly raise the public’s
awareness, receive fair
media coverage, and
encourage some activ-
ists. The same type of
demonstration, run
under different circum-
stances and with an outrageous message made
through chants, shouts, and/or stunts, can
serve to harm the progression of animal libera-
tion by alienating the public and frustrating
thoughtful activists.
Like deciding where to focus our limited
resources, decisions about tactics must be
made in the larger context of our goals. Why
are we doing this (e.g., is it because of anger
and guilt, or because it is a strategic step that
serves our larger goal)? What is the most prob-
able outcome? What effect will it have on the
public? On other activists? What other activities
could we do with the same time and resources,
and would one of those options have a greater
effect overall? Again, I believe that we have an
obligation to ask these questions.
The Media Circus Many activists feel
that the worth of their activism or event is
based on how much media coverage they
receive. It is not necessary, however, to focus
one’s activism on getting media attention.
Trying to use the media has a number 
of drawbacks. There is rarely enough time to
present a full and compelling case for veganism.
Nor is there time enough to get into important
nutritional aspects that need attention in order
to follow a vegan diet successfully. Furthermore,
the media makes opponents aware of our
efforts. This enables animal exploiters to mobi-
lize against us, as well as providing them with
a free venue in which to disagree with us, since
reports invariably give them equal or better air-
time. Many in the media will only air something
if they feel they are able to make us look silly,
or like vandals and terrorists. Others make the
entire issue of animal liberation (regardless 
of whether it was originally about fur, meat, 
or hunting) into “your baby or your dog.”
All of the above drawbacks can be avoided
by handing out detailed and accurate informa-
tion about veganism in one-on-one situations.
You might reach fewer people, but you will 
be providing them with thorough information,
versus a sound bite that is easy to dismiss 
or forget.
Why Veganism? Spreading information
about how veganism prevents animal suffering
helps to move individuals (and thus society)
away from relying on animal exploitation for 
a fundamental, daily activity—eating. Once
individuals have broken their attachment to 
a daily reliance on animal exploitation, it is
much easier for them to reject all animal
exploitation, rather than just the high-proﬁle
abuses committed by others. As more people
understand and act by the tenets of veganism,
it will be signiﬁcantly easier for others to join
them. This will bring pressure to bear on other
animal issues, and achievement of our goals
will be accelerated.
But we don’t need a majority in order to
make a huge reduction in animal suffering by
spreading veganism: if 5% of Americans were
to stop eating animals, more suffering would be
prevented than if we completely abolished every
other form of animal exploitation in the U.S.
Promoting veganism brings about the 
fundamental change that is needed. Done at 
a reasonable pace, it can sustain activists who
would otherwise burn out in the face of endless
“battles.” It can be hard to put fundamental
change ahead of expressing our anger in small
battles, but it is necessary if progress is to be
made towards animal liberation.
The Health Argument As Donna Maurer
concluded in her dissertation (1997) about 
the vegetarian movement in North America,
“the strategies that vegetarian groups enact 
to promote ‘healthy diets’ for each individual’s
personal beneﬁt inhibit people from adopting 
a collective vegetarian identity based on moral
concern regarding human/animal relationships;
without commitment to this moral concern,
‘being a vegetarian’ is a lifestyle vulnerable 
to changing personal and cultural tastes.”
Many activists believe the health argument
to be the most effective for promoting vegetar-
ianism because it is the least threatening and
appeals to people’s self-interest. We question
whether this is really the best tactic for the 
following reasons:
I Even if ethics is
not as effective as the
health argument at ini-
tially persuading some
people, those who are
motivated to change
based on ethics will be
better spokespersons
for veganism. In the
promotion of animal liberation, each individual’s
example and actions as a spokesperson are at
least as important as the economic impact their
individual choices have. Promoting a “plant-
based” diet for health reasons feeds our society’s
focus on selﬁshness by implying that animal
suffering is not worthy of people’s concern. 
It delays the time when we, as a society, will
come to terms with our treatment of animals.
I Diets based on health claims are subject
to further change based on new, low-fat animal
products and fad diets (THE ZONE, EAT RIGHT
FOR YOUR TYPE, etc.). People who follow a 
vegetarian or vegan diet to feel healthier will
resume consuming animal products if they feel
no improvement. Because they do not neces-
sarily have their hearts into being vegetarian 
or vegan, they often will not experiment with it
long enough to ﬁnd a way of eating that makes
them feel healthy. This can have far-reaching,
negative effects as they go on to tell others
how unhealthy they felt when they were veg.
I In the past twenty years, the number of
animals killed has skyrocketed because of the
move toward eating more chickens and ﬁsh,
Personal Thoughts at the New Millennium
Activism and Veganism R
sm Reconsnsider
ered: P
d: Persrsonal T
l Thoughts at th
t the N
e New Mill
w Millennium
Activism and Veganism R
sm Reconsnsider
ered: P
d: Persrsonal T
l Thoughts at th
t the N
e New Mill
w Millennium
Activism and Veganism Reconsidered: Personal Thoughts at the New Millennium
55

There are a thousand hacking at the branches of evil…
 …to one who is striking at the root…
There are a thousand hacking at the branches of evil…
 …to one who is striking at the root… Henry David Thoreau, WALDEN, 1854
brought about in part because of people trying
to eat less red meat for health reasons.
I Health claims regarding the beneﬁts 
of vegetarianism can often be exaggerated
and/or incomplete. Because so many people
have health questions regarding a vegetarian
diet, all activists should honestly educate
themselves with current and complete nutri-
tional information. When people ask about
health, we can conﬁdently state that a vegan
diet can be healthy and explain which nutrients
might be of concern. (For the information
Vegan Outreach considers the most up-to-date
and scientiﬁcally-thorough, please see:
http://www.veganoutreach.org/health)
The Vegan Example In general, people
do not want to believe that they are supporting
cruelty by eating animal products. They don’t
want to give up convenience and their favorite
foods, and they don’t want to separate them-
selves from their friends and family. So it is
unlikely that people will even listen to our
message—let alone think about changing—if
they perceive vegans as joyless misanthropes.
There often appears to be a contest among
vegans for discovering new connections to ani-
mal exploitation (of course, links can be found
everywhere if one looks hard enough). This
attitude makes us appear fanatical and gives
many people an excuse to ignore our message.
Some vegans claim sugar (and products
containing sugar, like Tofutti) isn’t vegan
because some sugar processing uses bone
char as a whitening agent. Bone char is also
used as a source of activated carbon in some
water ﬁlters and by some municipal water
treatment plants. (These plants also use tests
that involve animal products, and water itself
has been tested on animals.) So should we say
water isn’t “vegan”? 
The vast majority of people in our society
have no problem gnawing on an actual chicken
leg. Yet we make an issue of honey, despite the
fact that insects and other animals are killed in
the process of planting, raising, harvesting, and
transporting our vegan food. It is no wonder
that many people dismiss us as unreasonable
and irrational when they are told (or when it is
implied by our actions) that they must not eat
veggie burgers cooked on the same grill with
“meat,” drink wine, take photographs, use
medications, etc.; some vegans even tack on
other political or religious ideologies.
Busting the Vegan Police It is impera-
tive for us to realize that if our veganism is a
statement for animal liberation, veganism can-
not be an exclusive, ego-boosting club. Rather,
we must become the mainstream. Fostering
the impression that “it’s so hard to be vegan—
animal products are in everything,” and
emphasizing animal products where the con-
nection to animal suffering is tenuous, works
against this by allowing most to ignore us and
causing others to give up the whole process
out of frustration.
The way veganism is presented to a poten-
tial vegan is of major importance. The attractive
idea behind being a “vegan” is reducing one’s
contribution to animal exploitation. Buying meat,
eggs, and/or dairy creates animal suffering—
animals will be raised and slaughtered speciﬁ-
cally for these products. But if the by-products
are not sold, they will be thrown out or given
away. As more people stop eating animals, the
by-products will naturally fade, so there is no
real reason to force other people to worry about
them in order to call themselves “vegan.”
We want a vegan world, not a vegan club.
Practical and Symbolic Vegans Most
vegans have multiple motivations, but primary
motivations often distinguish vegans, such as
“health vegans” or “spiritual/religious vegans.”
I see another type of distinction as being useful:
“practical vegans” and “symbolic vegans.”
Practical vegans avoid the speciﬁc products for
which animals are bred, raised, and eventually
slaughtered. Every product they choose to avoid
can be directly and causally linked to animal
suffering. Symbolic vegans, in addition to
avoiding those products, go beyond this to
some level (e.g., avoiding sugar but not water)
so as to be able to make a statement (about
solidarity with the animals, personal purity, etc.).
Illustration The gelatin in ﬁlm makes
many vegans uncomfortable. However, ﬁlm
companies won’t use something more expen-
sive because of this discomfort. As long as 
animals are slaughtered for their ﬂesh, gelatin
will remain a dirt-cheap by-product. This won’t
change because of a relatively few symbolic
vegans. It will change, however, as the number
of practical vegans expands and there isn’t an
endless string of animals being slaughtered for
food, making a substitute necessary.
In dealing with others, practical vegans can
explain: “I don’t buy products that directly cause
animal suffering—things for which animals are
bred, raised, and slaughtered. A symbolic vegan
could add: “Personally, I choose to go further and
avoid ﬁlm [sugar, etc.] as a symbolic gesture.”
Once the demand for primary animal 
products shrinks and the by-products are 
no longer so cheap, companies will ﬁnd new 
ﬁltering methods, new ways to cure concrete,
new means of producing steel and rubber, 
new blood-test methods, etc. As more people
are concerned with animals, farming practices
will be altered so fewer animals are harmed
and killed during planting and harvesting 
of vegan food.
The Future: A New Vision We need 
an articulated and actionable plan for bringing
about animal liberation. In the current view,
we spend our resources and energy “ﬁghting
battles,” where they occur and on the exploiters’
terms. We need to move beyond this war
imagery to a constructive approach.
No matter how many chants we shout, 
no matter how many sound bites we gain, 
no matter how many labs we vandalize or
“enemies” we defeat, animal liberation will not
occur until we join with everyone in a vegan
world. If there is to be a fundamental change
in the manner in which other animals are
viewed—if there is to be animal liberation—
there can be no “us and them.”
There is hope for animal liberation if and
only if we learn how to help people get past
their wall of denial and manifest their latent
compassion. To succeed, our interactions with
others must be rooted in empathy and under-
standing—working with and from a person’s
motivations, fears, desires, and shortcomings.
Instead of approaching with a “ﬁghting” mind-
set, which necessarily makes people defensive
and closed to new ideas, we should provide
people with information that they can digest
on their own time and act upon at a sustainable
pace. Only then will real progress be made.
66

AS A REACTION TO WHAT GOES ON in factory
farms and slaughterhouses, very strong
feelings are understandable and entirely
justiﬁed. But I believe that our inability—
individually and as a movement—to deal
with our anger in a constructive manner 
is one of the greatest hindrances to the
advancement of animal liberation.
Over time, people tend to deal with
their anger in different ways. Some take to
protesting, some to screaming, hatred, and
sarcasm. Others disconnect from society and
surround themselves with only like-minded
people, seeing society as a large conspiracy
against veganism. I do not believe any of
this does much to move society towards
being more compassionate.
A different approach is to try to main-
tain a positive outlook and a sense of humor.
This makes it easier to continue in activism
and to avoid self-righteous fundamental-
ism, and also makes it possible to interact
positively and constructively with others.
Unfortunately, there is no easy way to
gain and maintain a sense of humor.
One suggestion is to always remember
your ultimate goal. In my case, it is the 
alleviation of suffering. If I allow myself to
be miserable because of the cruelty in the
world, I am adding to the suffering in the
world. More importantly, I am saying that
unless utopia is instantaneously established,
it is not possible to be happy. Thus, my goal
is fundamentally unachievable.
To have any change occur in the world,
we need to convince others to think beyond
themselves. We must be willing to do the
same. Just as we want others to look beyond
the short-term satisfaction of following
habits and traditions, we need to move past
our anger to effective advocacy (e.g., moving
from yelling and chanting to constructive
educational outreach). If I claim that I can’t
be happy—that I am a slave to my situation
—how can I expect others to be able to 
act differently?
It also helps to maintain a historical
perspective. I realize that I am not the ﬁrst
person to be upset by the state of affairs in
the world. I can learn from the mistakes and
successes of those who came before me.
Few people came to an enlightened view
of the world by themselves and overnight.
It took me over a year after my ﬁrst expo-
sure to the issues to go vegetarian, and
even longer after that to go vegan. If I had
been treated with disgust and anger because
of my close-mindedness and pathetic (in
retrospect) rationalizations, I would certainly
never have gone veg.
My story is not unique. Not only does
it show the shortcomings of anger and the
beneﬁts of patience, it also indicates that
you shouldn’t give up on your friends if
they don’t react to information as you
would like them to. Shunning your friends
because they don’t immediately adopt your
vegan views not only cuts you off from 
the very people we need to reach, it also
perpetuates the stereotype of the joyless
fanatic with no life other than complaining. 
“Fighting” suffering is not the only way
to make a better world; creating happiness
and joy as part of a thoughtful, compassion-
ate life can be an even more powerful tool
for creating change.
As long as there is conscious life on
Earth, there will be suffering. The question
becomes what to do with the existence each
of us is given. We can choose to add our
own fury and misery to the rest, or we can
set an example by simultaneously working
constructively to alleviate suffering while
leading joyous, meaningful, fulﬁlled lives.
Being a vegan isn’t about deprivation,
sobriety, and wallowing in misery. It’s about
being fully aware so as to be fully alive.
77
© B. Breathed 2000
BY MATT BALL
Anger, Humor
mor, and Advocacy
Anger, Humor
mor, and Advocacy
Anger, Humor, and Advocacy

Some Potential Problems
There are several traps when it comes to
choosing information. These include: 
N Starting with a desired claim and selectively
building an argument to support that claim.
This can be particularly harmful when the claim
is so at odds with conventional wisdom as 
to be easily dismissed, in which case anything
else said is tainted or ignored. An example 
is stating as fact that Jesus was a vegetarian
when trying to convince someone that they,
too, should be vegetarian. Some Christian veg-
etarians are drawn to this contention because
it connects their two strongest beliefs, while
some activists like the claim because it receives
media attention.
In the bigger picture, however, this claim, 
like others, can serve to harm the overall
spread of the vegetarian message. Since the
Bible portrays Jesus as eating ﬁsh, any Christian
devout enough to base their eating habits 
on what Jesus did will probably believe the
Bible. Others will conclude that
vegetarian advocates will
say anything to promote
their cause, either by
intentionally lying to the public or by deceiving
themselves.
Carl Sagan wrote: “Extraordinary claims require
extraordinary [i.e. overwhelming and indisput-
able] proof.” When we make an extraordinary
claim without this proof accompanying it, we
lose credibility. Claims in this category include:
75% of U.S. topsoil has been lost, with 85% of
this directly attributable to raising livestock; an
acre of trees disappears in the U.S. every eight
seconds; and one burger costs 55 square feet
of rainforest.
(While getting my M.S. in Forest Ecology, 
I worked with people who have done extensive
ﬁrst-hand research on tropical deforestation. 
I also dealt with other foresters, as well as
people working with the Soil Conservation
Service. As much as I tried, 
I was unable to ﬁnd proof
for the above oft-quoted
claims. Rather, I found con-
trary statistics or complex
chains of causation.)
Similar claims include: vegetari-
anism would extend the world’s
petroleum reserves 20-fold;
more than half the water and
33% of raw materials used in
the U.S. go to livestock produc-
tion; vegetarianism can solve
world hunger; an epidemic of
Mad Cow disease is “right around
the corner”; and eating meat causes
impotence. If we are going to make
such extraordinary claims in our
literature, they must be backed up with
overwhelming proof in that literature
if we expect people to believe them.
N Another trap involves a single number from
an uncertain range. One example is the claim
that 25% of college males are sterile. Many
years ago, I gave a pro-veg pamphlet to my
college advisor (an open-minded individual)
who dismissed it out of hand after coming to
this. This is a reasonable reaction because
research on the topic reveals information from
a variety of sources that
indicates 25% is much
too high.
88
In today’s society, it seems that if you don’t scream the loudest, you are not heard.
Because moderate voices are often drowned out, it can feel necessary to make fantastic
claims in order to advance your cause.
There is a natural tendency for uncritical acceptance of claims we want to believe. In
the long run, however, I believe that this causes more harm than good, because we lose
support from people who have come to realize that we are not objective, and we miss
chances to convince people who are inherently skeptical. Furthermore, most people are
looking for some reason to dismiss us. Thus, it is imperative that we present information
the public won’t regard as ludicrous and from sources that they won’t dismiss as partisan.
Selecting Information
for Advocacy
B Y
M A T T
B A L L

N Unwarranted generalization is a related
problem, such as taking the results from a single
study (e.g., heart attack rates of vegetarians
compared to nonvegetarians) and generalizing
those rates as facts for the entire population.
Often this is done
when there are other
studies indicating
more conservative
ﬁgures, or even
opposing conclusions.
In THE AMERICAN JOURNAL
OF CLINICAL NUTRITION
(1999:70S), Walter Willett
gives an example of the 
difﬁculties we face in getting
good information: “Although
an association between red
meat consumption and colon
cancer has been observed in
many studies, the available
evidence suggests that there
is little such relation with
breast cancer. Within Seventh-
day Adventist populations, little
if any reduction in breast cancer
incidence has been observed 
in comparison with the general
population. Positive relations
between consumption of red
meat and breast cancer were
noted in a few studies, but a
tendency to report positive
associations but not to pub-
lish negative ﬁndings may
have resulted in an over-
all bias in the literature.”
N Some also extrapolate epidemiological data
from another country to our own. Many activists
use the results of research done in other cultures
as though it necessarily applies to vegans in the
U.S. But there are a wide variety of confounding
factors that make many extrapolations difﬁcult,
such as the amount of weight-bearing exercise
in women as it relates to osteoporosis, and the
fact that very little of this research is done on
actual vegans.
N Another problem is connecting unrelated or
loosely-related facts, such as arguing that one
should be vegan to
avoid sterility.
Most people who hear this could, if they desired,
easily ﬁnd information that would indicate that
being vegetarian has little to do with sterility—
e.g., the Endocrine Society lists nothing related
to diet as a cause of male infertility.
Judging &
Presenting
Information
The general public 
is constantly being
bombarded with
“documented facts”
from all sides (e.g.,
THE ZONE/low-carb/
EAT RIGHT FOR YOUR
TYPE diet gurus).
These and others are
totally and passionately
convinced of the truth
of their facts. We can’t
assume that the public
will be swayed by our
claims, just because we
too are convinced that our
facts are correct. We have
to go beyond ﬁnding claims
and research that appeal 
to us, and use materials that
our target audience will ﬁnd
compelling and convincing.
Specifically, we need to be
appropriately skeptical of
claims which support our
position, and not dismissive 
of claims that don’t. The pro-
veg case is valid—and not
easily dismissed—even with
less fantastic contentions.
Nutritional Information
In order not to scare off potential vegans, some
advocates don’t mention any difﬁculties in
being vegan. This can backﬁre by not preparing
people well for a vegan diet: our experience
indicates there are a large number of people
who become vegetarian or vegan, don’t feel
healthy, and go back to meat-eating. As one
nutrition professor recently told a director of
Vegan Outreach, “You’re the only vegan I know.
I know a lot of ex-vegans, but no vegans.”
For example, much vegan advocacy literature
implies that being vegan reduces the risk of
osteoporosis, and thus, vegans do not need 
to be worried if they get less calcium and 
vitamin D than non-vegans (most vegans do
get signiﬁcantly less calcium). However, recent
studies do not show vegans to be more pro-
tected from osteoporosis than non-vegans.
Finding & Sharing
Accurate Information
Getting accurate, complete, and unbiased
information can be difﬁcult. Until 1999, some
of the information in
Vegan Outreach’s
pamphlets had
been based on
secondary sources.
When we ﬁnally had
the time to go to the
original sources, they
often did not corre-
spond to what was
being attributed to
them. Even ﬁrst
sources have
problems, and
thus cannot be
viewed in isolation.
Being rigorous and
thorough may seem
like an overwhelm-
ing task. But in
addition to being
more effective at
reaching our target
audience, these efforts
will increase our conﬁdence
in the information we are using,
and may even lead to other important facts
and understandings.
Selecting InInformation f
n for Advocacy
Selecting InInformation f
n for Advocacy
Selecting Information for Advocacy
99

WHAT IS MEANT BY “RIGHTS”
In most of the world, human beings
are granted basic rights. These funda-
mental rights are usually (at a mini-
mum): the entitlement of individuals 
to have basic control of their lives and
bodies, without infringing on the rights
of others. In other words: the right not
to be killed, caged, or experimented
on against their will at the hands of
moral agents (persons able to under-
stand and act from a moral code).
It is assumed that the reader believes
humans to have these rights.
A DIFFERENCE OF DEGREE
Many say that humans deserve rights
while other animals do not because
humans have a greater level of certain
characteristics: humans are more
intelligent, creative, aware, technologi-
cally advanced, dominant, able to use
language, able to enter into contracts,
able to make moral choices, etc. Thus,
humans deserve rights because they
have a greater degree of these characteristics.
This argument has two problems:
n Rights are not relevant to a group (e.g.,
“humans”), but only to individuals. Individuals,
not groups, are exploited and are capable of
suffering and dying; individuals, not groups, are
denied rights when there is a morally relevant
reason (e.g., after committing a crime).
n Not all humans possess these character-
istics to a greater degree than all other non-
humans. There are non-humans who are more
intelligent, creative, aware, dominant, techno-
logically advanced (in reference to tool making),
and able to use language, than
some humans (such as infants or
severely handicapped humans).
Furthermore, many animals per-
form actions that, in humans,
would be labeled moral behavior;
oftentimes some animals act more
ethically than many humans. If
rights were granted at a certain
threshold of intelligence, creativity, moral
behavior, etc., some animals would have rights
and some humans would not.
VALUE TO OTHERS
Some say that even though infants do not 
possess high levels of some characteristics,
they should be granted rights because they are
valued by other humans (their parents, for
instance). By this argument, infants themselves
do not possess any inherent rights, but receive
them only if valued by an adult human.
At the same time, being valued by an adult
human does not grant rights to pigs, parakeets,
pet rocks, or Porsches. This is inconsistent:
either one is granted rights by being valued by
an adult human—and thus everything valued
by an adult human has rights—or there must
be different criteria for granting rights. 
People who believe that rights are granted
to infants because of their value to adult
humans would have to admit that infants who
are not valued by other humans could be used
in medical research. Indeed, this would be
morally imperative in order to beneﬁt infants
who are valued by others. Most people would
contend, however, that even unvalued orphans
have rights. Therefore, rights must be based on
other criteria.
BIOLOGICAL RIGHTS
Another argument is that humans have rights
because they belong to the species Homo 
sapiens. In other words, a chimpanzee may
very well be as intelligent (or creative, etc.)
as some humans, but chimpanzees do
not have rights because they are not
members of the biologically-deﬁned,
rights-bearing species, Homo sapiens.
In the past, there have been a number
of biological deﬁnitions of what constitutes 
a species. Today, it is deﬁned genetically.
The questions then become:
n Why should rights be deserved solely on
the basis of a certain arrangement of genes?
n Among the genes that determine
one’s eye color, etc., which gene is it
that confers rights?
n If rights should be based on
genes, why should the line be drawn
at the species level? Why shouldn’t the
line be drawn at race, order, phylum,
or kingdom?
A thoughtful person might ﬁnd
having their rights (or lack thereof)
determined by a molecular sequence
to be a bit absurd. It is no better than
basing rights on the pigmentation of
one’s skin (which is also determined
by the individual’s genetic code).
Consider if we could genetically
engineer humanoids who were biolog-
ically distinct from humans (could not
reproduce with humans) but shared
human emotions and intelligence.
Could we justiﬁably enslave, experi-
ment on, and eat such people?
THE LAW
Some argue that infants and the mentally
handicapped deserve rights because the current
laws grant them rights. However, legal rights
are not the same as moral rights. Legal rights
change over time and by the whim of public or
governmental opinion, whereas inherent moral
rights do not. For example, the law in Nazi
Germany did not respect the inherent rights 
of Jewish people.
ABILITY TO UNDERSTAND
ABSTRACT CONCEPTS
It has been argued that non-humans do not
deserve rights because they cannot understand
abstract concepts, such as death.
Yet anyone who has observed
pigs in a slaughterhouse, for
example, would ﬁnd it difﬁcult not
to conclude that pigs understand
death to the extent that they are
terriﬁed when confronted with
it. What more do humans
understand about death
that is morally relevant?
THE GOLDEN RULE
In the past, humans may
have respected each
other’s rights in order
to survive without
constant violence.
Many people still
function on this
level. Yet over time,
more civilized peo-
ple have evolved a
moral system that
grants rights not just
10
10
10
THOSE WHO EXPLOIT AND MISTREAT ANIMALS
GENERALLY DEFEND THEIR ACTIVITIES ON THE GROUNDS
THAT ANIMALS LACK EVEN BASIC RIGHTS.
IS THIS TRUE, OR DO PEOPLE DENY ANIMALS RIGHTS
SIMPLY TO RATIONALIZE EXPLOITING THEM?
IN SEARCHING FOR AN HONEST, CONSISTENT ETHIC,
IF ONE BELIEVES THAT HUMANS HAVE RIGHTS,
WE FIND THAT THERE ARE NO LEGITIMATE GROUNDS
FOR REJECTING RIGHTS FOR ALL OTHER ANIMALS.
If rights should be based on genes, why should
the line be drawn at the species level?
Why shouldn’t the line be drawn at race, order,
phylum, or kingdom?
B E YO N D
MIGHT MAKES RIGHT
B E YO N D
MIGHT MAKES RIGHT
by Matt Ball & Jack Norris
for a ﬁrst-principle discussion, see http://www.veganoutreach.org/ethics.html

based on self-protection, but on the Golden
Rule—treat your neighbor as you would like
to be treated. We know that we want to stay
alive, do not wish to suffer, etc., and we assume
others like us have the same desires. Being
capable of looking beyond our own individual
interests, we apply the Golden Rule even to
people who could not harm us.
How much like us do beings have to be
before we include them under the Golden Rule?
At one time, women were not enough like the
men who held power to be granted many rights.
Neither were minorities in the United States
and other societies. Even though the circle has
expanded to include these individuals in the
United States, today other animals are still not
considered sufﬁciently like us for the majority
of people to treat these animals as our neigh-
bors under the Golden Rule.
THE SOUL
Some would say having a God-given soul is
what gives one rights. There is no way to prove
that humans have souls, just as there is no
way to prove that all other animals lack souls.
Those who insist that only humans have souls
(and thus rights) are faced with a theological
dilemma: it would require a cruel God to create
beings with the capacity to feel pain and the
desire to live, if these animals’ purpose was 
to suffer at the hands of humans.
ANIMALS KILL EACH OTHER
Some defend humans killing animals on the
grounds that animals kill each other in nature.
These people would be hard pressed to show
that our modern systems of animal agriculture
or experimentation are “natural.”
While it is true that some animals kill other
animals in nature, moral philosophy is based
on principles, not excused by the actions of
others. As Peter Singer writes: “You cannot
evade responsibility by imitating beings who
are incapable of making [an ethical] choice.”
Some humans assault, rape, or kill other
humans, yet we do not condone these actions.
APPEALS TO EMOTION AS
JUSTIFICATION FOR VIVISECTION
Vivisection defenders often use emotional,
hypothetical choices to make animal exploita-
tion appear necessary. For example, concerning
her daughter Claire, who has cystic ﬁbrosis,
Jane McCabe wrote in NEWSWEEK (Dec. 26, 1988):
“If you had to choose between saving a very
cute dog or my equally cute, blond, brown-eyed
daughter, whose life would you choose?…
It’s not that I don’t love animals, it’s that I love
Claire more.”
A single dog experiment could never cure
her child’s disease, but the
moral issue is whether
personal attachment 
justiﬁes harming innocent
others. Since McCabe
probably loves her daughter
more than other children, would she endorse
experimenting on other children (a scientiﬁcally
more productive research strategy than exper-
imenting on non-human animals) to save 
her child?
STRICT UTILITARIANISM
Still, many people view vivisection as a morally-
defensible trade-off of lives. For example, the
transplant surgeon involved in experiments
such as the baboon heart/Baby Faye operation
assumes that the
life of one human
is worth more than
that of one baboon.
This issue—inter-
species transplants
—most clearly demonstrates the problem of
determining morality from a utilitarian algebra
of worth.
Using simple equations to determine the
morality of actions, it would be acceptable to
take the life of one human infant to continue
the lives of two other infants in need of organs.
Indeed, arguing from the perspective of worth,
importance, or priorities, taking the life of one
infant to extend the lives of two would be
imperative. If this is not considered to be
acceptable, is the ﬁrst infant
then “more important” than
the two who are allowed 
to die?
Most people will agree
that it is not justiﬁable to
“sacriﬁce” one human for
the “greater good,” because
each human has a right to
live. This right is not to be
violated, regardless of pos-
sible beneﬁt to others. But
when it comes to animals,
they are assumed not to
have this right.
SUFFERING
Searching for some characteristic to justify
granting rights to all humans while denying
rights to all other animals is futile. A moral 
system based on any of the characteristics 
discussed so far would either include many
non-human animals or exclude some humans. 
To have a consistent set of ethics, a character-
istic must be found that not only allows for 
the inclusion of all humans, but is also morally
relevant. The only characteristic that simply
and consistently meets these requirements 
is the capacity for suffering.
As Jeremy Bentham, head of the Department
of Jurisprudence at Oxford University during the
19th century, said in reference to his belief that
animals should be granted moral consideration,
“The question is not, ‘Can they reason?’ nor,
‘Can they talk?’ But rather, ‘Can they suffer?’”
If a thing cannot suffer, then it does not
matter to that being what happens to it. For
example, computers have forms of intelligence
(in many ways greater than that of any human),
but these machines do not care whether they
are turned off or even destroyed.
On the other hand, if a being is able to
have subjective experiences of pleasure and
pain, then it does matter—to that individual—
what happens to it. Irrespective of intelligence, 
language, etc., a conscious, sentient being has
interests in its existence—at the very least to
avoid pain and to stay alive. Any complete
ethic cannot ignore these concerns.
FOR THE LOVE OF ANIMALS
There are many who claim that they love ani-
mals and don’t want them to suffer. Few oppose
“humane” treatment of animals. But fewer still
are willing to give up their prejudice of human
superiority. Thus, the distance between the
acceptable treatment and the actual, institution-
alized treatment of these animals 
is greater than ever:
slaughterhouses
Beyond Might Makes R
s Right
Beyond Might Makes R
s Right
Beyond Might Makes Right
11
11
11
How much like us do beings have to be before
we include them under the Golden Rule?
The question is not, Can they reason? nor,
Can they talk? But rather, Can they suffer?

211 Indian Drive, Pittsburgh, PA 15238 ▪ telephone 412.968.0268 ▪ web site www.veganoutreach.org ▪ email vegan@veganoutreach.org
©Vegan Outreach, 2000
Vegan Advocacy, Rev. 11/00
 100% recycled paper
 
50% post-consumer waste
are hidden away from populated areas, and
vivisectors’ labs are closed and locked.
Many scientists claim they use animals
only when it is “absolutely necessary to save
human lives.” Ignoring the question of whether
or not their contention of necessity is accurate
and what is the ethical use of limited resources
for medical care and research, these people are
betrayed by their actions: how many vegetarian
vivisectors are there? They can hardly argue that
it is necessary for them to kill animals for food.
In general, the animal welfarist
position, which has been endorsed (but
sparsely adopted) by the meat industry
and pro-vivisection groups, is at odds
with a truly respectful relationship
based on the recognition of the rights
of other animals. Welfarists concede
that animals have interests, but these
animals remain human property. Thus, the
fundamental interests of the animals remain
secondary to any interests of the owners. 
Laws based on the welfarist position, such as
the federal Animal Welfare Act, have proven 
to be almost useless in every practical sense,
as any use/abuse of an animal is allowed 
if deemed “necessary.”
Trying to legislate a humane balance
between the interests of animals and the 
interests of humans sounds good in principle
and appeals to most. However, given that the 
current system still allows such atrocities as
canned hunts, castration without anesthesia,
factory farms, pain experiments, etc.,
animal abuse will
continue until the
current system
recognizes that
many animals
are conscious,
sentient beings
whose rights are
independent of
the interests of
humans.
MIGHT MAKES RIGHT
The children whom the Jane McCabes of the
world hold up to defend vivisection have done
nothing to deserve their disease. It is precisely
these children’s innocence that makes their
plight so heartrending. However, anyone who
claims to be ethical must also ask what animals
have done to deserve being imprisoned in
cages, being infected with our diseases, and
being carved up in our labs. No one would
suggest that these animals “deserve” to be
exploited and killed in experiments. Rather, we
kill these healthy, innocent beings because we
have the power to do so and it is convenient
for us. In short, we follow the principle of
Might Makes Right.
The ability to do something does not make
it right. We are capable of many actions that
most contend are unacceptable—rape, abuse,
murder, etc. If we have any claim to “superior-
ity,” it comes from our ability to act according
to moral principles, guided by justice, fairness,
and compassion. But we deny our moral ability
when we selﬁshly harm others.
ANIMAL MORALITY
Even though rights can only be granted consis-
tently and justly on the basis of the capacity 
to suffer and not on the ability to make moral
choices, there is ample evidence that many
animals can and do make moral choices, often
to the shame of “superior” humans. As Drs.
Carl Sagan and Ann Druyan relate in SHADOWS
OF FORGOTTEN ANCESTORS:
In the annals of primate ethics, there are
some accounts that have the ring of parable.
In a laboratory setting, macaques were fed 
if they were willing to pull a chain and elec-
trically shock an unrelated macaque whose
agony was in plain view through a one-way
mirror. Otherwise, they starved. After learning
the ropes, the monkeys frequently refused to
pull the chain; in one experiment only 13%
would do so—87% preferred to go hungry.
One macaque went without food for nearly
two weeks rather than hurt its fellow.
Macaques who had themselves been shocked
in previous experiments were even less 
willing to pull the chain. The relative social
status or gender of the macaques had little
bearing on their reluctance to hurt others.
If asked to choose between the human
experimenters offering the macaques this
Faustian bargain and the macaques them-
selves—suffering from real hunger rather
than causing pain to others—our own moral
sympathies do not lie with the scientists. 
But their experiments permit us to glimpse
in non-humans a saintly willingness to make
sacriﬁces in order to save others—even those
who are not close kin. By conventional
human standards, these macaques—who
have never gone to Sunday school, never
heard of the Ten Commandments, never
squirmed through a single junior high
school civics lesson—seem exemplary 
in their moral grounding and their coura-
geous resistance to evil. Among these
macaques, at least in this case, heroism
is the norm. If the circumstances were
reversed, and captive humans were offered
the same deal by macaque scientists, would
we do as well? (Especially when there is an
authority ﬁgure urging us to administer the
electric shocks, we humans are disturbingly
willing to cause pain—and for a reward
much more paltry than food is for a starving
macaque [cf. Stanley Milgram, OBEDIENCE TO
AUTHORITY: AN EXPERIMENTAL OVERVIEW].) In
human history there are a precious few whose
memory we revere because they knowingly
sacriﬁced themselves for others. For each of
them, there are multitudes who did nothing.
If animals can feel pain as humans can, and
desire to live as humans do, how can we deny
them similar respect? As moral beings, how can
we justify our continued exploitation of them?
We must stand up against the idea that
might makes right. We must question the status
quo which allows the unquestioned inﬂiction 
of so much suffering. We must act from our
own ethics, rather than blindly follow authority
figures who tell us it’s okay and even necessary
to harm animals.
Discussing the macaque monkeys who
chose to starve rather than inflict pain on
another, Drs. Sagan and Druyan conclude,
“Might we have a more optimistic view of the
human future if we were sure our ethics were
up to their standards?”
If animals can feel pain as humans can,
and desire to live as humans do,
how can we deny them similar respect?
Many of the photos in this booklet were provided
courtesy of Farm Sanctuary, Green Acres Sanctuary,
and People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals.

