 
Verifying Paypal Without a Bank Account, Credit card or Check 
 
Note: This only works for residents of the United States. A Brief Introduction: NetSpend is an 
corporation that well-known for providing pre-paid Master and Visa cards. Little did people know 
that you can actually open a REAL bank account with the company.  
 
 
 

Paypal is an online money managing "merchant" site. People tend to use it to buy/sell products as 
well as many other uses. When a Paypal is first made, there is always the hassle of a spending limit. 
It usually increased by adding a credit card or get rid of all-together by adding a bank 
account/applying for a Paypal Credit Card.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

In  this guide, I will teach you, step-by-step, on how to verify Paypal using NetSpend. Requirements: 
Live in the United Stats (or have a U.S address with help from a friend) Internet A 
computer/labtop/any device that is connected to the internet A E-Mail Address Common Sense  
1. Go to any web (Internet) browser.  
2. 2. Type in https://www.netspend.com/prepaid-deb...te&SiteID=visa as the Web Address. It 
should a bit like this:  
 

3. Once you are on that page, it is suggested that you fill out the form completely with the 
information that is listed on your Paypal. (For those people with friends helping out, ask 
your friend for information).  

4. It should take you to the next page. There, you have to submit your email address along with 
your phone number and a desired Username. 5. After that screen, you are asked submit a 
password. (I cannot take a screen shot because I have already registered). 6. After verification, you 
must login on this URL: https://www.netspend.com/account/authenticate.m 7. After you log-into 
the account, go under the Add/Manage money tab. There should be a sub-section called Paypal 
Transfers.  
 
5. After that screen, you are asked submit a password. (I cannot take a screen shot because I have 
already registered). 
 6. After verification, you must login on this URL: 
https://www.netspend.com/account/authenticate.m 
 
 
7. After you log-into the account, go under the Add/Manage money tab. There should be a sub-
section called Paypal Transfers. 
 
 
 

8. Read the instructions on how to further verify your Paypal.  

9. Next, you can either open up a new tab or a new browser. Go the Paypal site (www.Paypal.com) 
and go to the top where it says "Get Verified"  

10. Choose "Get Verified by adding your Bank Account" 11. Once you pull up the screen, type in the 
information you were supplied on your NetSpend account 

11. Once you pull up the screen, type in the information you were supplied on your NetSpend 
account. 

12. Now you have to wait 2-3+ business days. Paypal will send your NetSpend bank account 2 
increments of small change. 

13. Enter it in on the Paypal Bank Verification page. 

Your Final Result: 
 

