
 “Loguidice and Barton prove that excellent research and technical accuracy can make for 
delightfully easy and fun reading. Vintage Games takes us through gaming’s evolution one 
exemplary game at a time. Charting the history of dance and music games with the ﬁ rst Dance 
Dance Revolution; Roberta Williams’ game design work as it leads up to King’s Quest and King’s 
Quest’s place within the history of adventure gaming and even within Sierra’s game guide mar-
ket; and the place of many other games as articulated within the overall gaming history.” 
 “While some of these titles won’t seem old enough to be ‘vintage’ to seasoned players, 
these games are like good wine—their vintage is one of quality as it relates to a particular 
place in history. Not only are the games featured in Vintage Games historically important for 
the qualities they possess, so too is writing like that by Loguidice and Barton. The pair has 
written extensively on games and gaming history, most notably for Armchair Arcade, and 
their writing time and again shows that quality writing crosses normal boundaries, engaging 
scholars, fans, and even casual readers.” 
 —Laurie N. Taylor, Digital Library Center, University of Florida 
 “I’ve seen dozens of video gaming books over the years, but rarely do you ﬁ nd one that is 
almost as fun to read as the games they talk about. Historically accurate, written with an 
obvious passion that never leaves the reader feeling left out or belittled. A must-read for any-
one even remotely interested in video gaming history—from the hardcore to the casual, this 
is a book that anyone that has ever held a joystick would enjoy. Vintage Games is highly rec-
ommended to my listeners.” 
 —Shane R. Monroe, Host of RetroGaming Radio/Monroeworld.com 
 “While calling games from the last two decades of the twentieth century ‘vintage’ might not 
sit well with thirty-something gamers, in so doing Barton and Loguidice remind us (through 
superb detail and smart, conversational prose) of the enormously rich history that games 
have already enjoyed and the rapidity with which they have reached the very core of popu-
lar culture. Barton and Loguidice will please scholars with their comprehensive research and 
excellent detail, but  Vintage Games  doesn’t feel ‘researched’: the authors’ love of the games is 
also clearly apparent. And that makes for a thoroughly enjoyable read. The book is smart and 
fun—much like the games it addresses.” 
 —Dr. Matthew S. S. Johnson, Southern Illinois University Edwardsville 
 “They say you can’t go back again, but reading  Vintage Games  comes close. Open the book, 
and I’m back in the video arcades of my youth. Turn the page, and I’m in college again, dis-
covering the secret joys of the early PC games. Turn the page again, and I’m back in my living 
room, playing Mario with my young kids. But  Vintage Games  is more than just a trip down 
memory lane, because the authors analyze each game in ways that bring fresh insights to 
those nostalgic memories.” 
 —Steve Meretzky, Veteran Game Designer 
 “An interesting and insightful trip down a gamer’s memory lane, focusing on titles that have 
become benchmarks in videogame history.” 
 —Didi Cardoso, Managing Editor, Grrlgamer.com 
 “The videogame industry has a poor track record when it comes to preserving its history. 
Fortunately, scholars and enthusiasts have stepped in to ﬁ ll the void, and  Vintage Games is 
an essential contribution to this effort. Loguidice and Barton are to be commended for docu-
menting the history of gaming’s greatest landmarks.” 
 —Michael Abbott, The Brainy Gamer Blog and Podcast and 
Professor of Theater and Film Studies, Wabash College 

This page intentionally left blank

 VINTAGE GAMES 
 An Insider Look at the 
History of Grand Theft Auto, 
Super Mario, and the Most 
Inﬂ uential Games of All T ime 
 BILL LOGUIDICE 
 MATT BARTON 
 AMSTERDAM • BOSTON • HEIDELBERG • LONDON • NEW YORK • OXFORD
PARIS • SAN DIEGO • SAN FRANCISCO • SINGAPORE • SYDNEY • TOKYO
Focal Press is an imprint of Elsevier 

 Focal Press is an imprint of Elsevier 
 30 Corporate Drive, Suite 400, Burlington, MA 01803, USA 
 Linacre House, Jordan Hill, Oxford OX2 8DP, UK 
 © 2009 Elsevier, Inc. All rights reserved. 
 No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in 
any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise, 
without the prior written permission of the publisher. 
 Permissions may be sought directly from Elsevier’s Science & Technology Rights 
 Department in Oxford, UK: phone: (+44) 1865 843830, fax: (+44) 1865 853333, 
 E-mail: permissions@elsevier.com. You may also complete your request online 
via the Elsevier homepage (http://elsevier.com), by selecting “Support & Contact” 
then “Copyright and Permission” and then “Obtaining Permissions.” 
 Recognizing the importance of preserving what has been written, Elsevier prints its books on 
acid-free paper whenever possible. 
 Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 
 Loguidice, Bill.
Vintage games : an insider look at the history of Grand Theft Auto, Super Mario, and the most 
inﬂ uential games of all time / Bill Loguidice, Matt Barton.
p. cm.
Includes index.
ISBN 978-0-240-81146-8 (pbk. : alk. paper)  1.  Video games—History.  I.  Barton, Matt.  II.  Title. 
GV1469.3.L64 2009
794.8—dc22
                                                                            2008048031 
 British Library Cataloguing-in-Publication Data 
 A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library. 
 ISBN: 978-0-240-81146-8 
 For information on all Focal Press publications 
visit our website at  www.books.elsevier.com 
Typeset by diacriTech, Chennai, India
 09 10 11 12 13 5 4 3 2 1 
 Printed in China 

 CONTENTS  
 Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ix 
 Acknowledgments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . xi  
 Chapter 1   Alone in the Dark (1992): The Polygons of Fear . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1 
 Chapter 2    Castle Wolfenstein (1981): Achtung! Stealth 
Gaming Steps out of the Shadows . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15 
 Chapter 3    Dance Dance Revolution (1998): The Player 
Becomes the Star . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27 
 Chapter 4   Diablo (1996): The Rogue Goes to Hell . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39 
 Chapter 5   Doom (1993): The First-Person Shooter Takes Control . . . . . . . . . . 51 
 Chapter 6    Dune II : The Building of a Dynasty (1992): 
Spicing up Strategy in Real Time  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 65 
 Chapter 7    Final Fantasy VII (1997): It’s Never Final in the 
World of Fantasy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 77 
 Chapter 8   Flight Simulator (1980): Digital Reality . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 93 
 Chapter 9   Grand Theft Auto III (2001): The Consolejacking Life . . . . . . . . . . . 105 
 Chapter 10    John Madden Football (1988): Modern Sports 
Videogames Kickoff . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 123 
 Chapter 11    King’s Quest  : Quest for the Crown (1984): 
Perilous Puzzles, Thorny Thrones . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 143 
 Chapter 12   Myst (1993): Launching Multimedia Worlds . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 163 
 Chapter 13    Pac-Man (1980): Japanese Gumption, 
American Consumption . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 179 

vi     CONTENTS
 Chapter 14    Pole Position (1982): Where the Raster 
Meets the Road . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 195 
 Chapter 15    SimCity (1989): Building Blocks for Fun and Proﬁ t . . . . . . . . . . . . 207 
 Chapter 16   Space Invaders (1978): The Japanese Descend . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 225 
 Chapter 17   Street Fighter II (1991): Would You Like the Combo? . . . . . . . . . . 239 
 Chapter 18    Super Mario 64/Tomb Raider (1996): 
The Third Dimension . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 255 
 Chapter 19    Super Mario Bros. (1985): How High 
Can Jumpman Get? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 271 
 Chapter 20   Tetris (1985): Casual Gaming Falls into Place  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 291  
 Chapter 21    The Legend of Zelda (1986): Rescuing Zeldas 
and Uniting Triforces . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 303  
 Chapter 22   The Sims (2000): Who Let the Sims Out? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 319 
 Chapter 23    Ultima (1980): The Immaculate Conception of the 
Computer Role-Playing Game . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 335 
 Chapter 24    Ultima Online (1997): Putting the Role-Play Back 
in Computer Role-Playing Games . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 353 
 Chapter 25   Zork (1980): Text Imps versus Graphics Grues . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 371 
 Index . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 391 

BONUS ONLINE CHAPTERS
Available at www.armchairarcade.com/vintagegames along with over 100 additional 
screenshots and images!
Defender (1980): The Joys of Difﬁ cult Games
Elite (1984): Space, the Endless Frontier
Pinball Construction Set (1982): Launching Millions of Creative Possibilities
Pong (1972): Avoid Missing Game to Start Industry
Robotron: 2084 (1982): Running Away while Defending Humanoids
Rogue (1980): Have @ You, You Deadly Z’s
Spacewar! (1962): The Best Waste of Time in the History of the Universe
Star Raiders (1979): The New Hope
Tony Hawk’s Pro Skater (1999): Videogame Ollies, Grabs and Grinds

This page intentionally left blank

 Preface 
 This book is about vintage games—or, more speciﬁ cally, the vintage games that have had 
the most potent inﬂ uences on both the videogame industry and the culture that supports it. 
These are the paradigm shifters; the games that made a difference. 
 The word  vintage  has its origins in the wine industry, where it usually denotes wine pro-
duced during a special year—a year in which the grapes were particularly delightful. Your 
humble authors, both lifelong and dedicated gamers and enthusiasts, beg your indulgence: 
let us be your connoisseurs, your guides on a wondrous tour through the history of some 
of the ﬁ nest games ever made. And if during your journey through these pages, you desire 
a sip of  Chateau Haut-Brion Pessac-Lognan  (v. 1982), we promise not to stop you. It was a 
good year. 
 Before we embark, however, you might want to know how we selected your destinations. 
How did we decide which games were truly the “most inﬂ uential”? 
 When we were ﬁ rst asked to write this book, we were skeptical, particularly because we’ve 
become disenfranchised with the “best ever” lists that saturate the Internet. Major gaming 
websites never tire of trotting out some “top ten” this or that—yet despite so many  varied 
attempts, not one has gotten it right. The latest over-hyped movie crossover is as likely 
to appear on these lists as  Pac-Man and  Pole Position.  About the only thing these lists are 
good for is stirring up controversy on blogs and community sites: “What—they didn’t men-
tion  Tunnels of Doom ? And where the heck is  Ultima ?” As is always the case, the true criteria 
of such lists is the whims and personal experiences of their creators. If you grew up with a 
TI-99/4a in the house, of course you think  Tunnels of Doom  is a great game, and we agree, 
but it’s only mentioned here.  Ultima is Chapter 23. 
 What really, then, constitutes a great game? Does it mean “a bestseller”? If so, this list 
would look quite different, with far more modern and far fewer vintage titles. Why? Because 
there are millions more gamers now than ever before, and the industry continues to expand. 
Even the most wretched sequel of a sequel may sell more copies than several of the games 
discussed in this book. Meanwhile, several of the games we discuss in this book weren’t sold 
at all—or at least were initially distributed for free:  Rogue ,  Spacewar! ,  Tetris , and  Zork  all ﬁ t 
this description. 
 If not sales, perhaps “innovation” is the key to separating the vintage from the vinegar. If a 
game does something ﬁ rst, doesn’t that make it more inﬂ uential than the later games that did 
it better? Alas, if this were so, the outline of our book would look like a Gordian Knot. As we’ll 
see, videogames have not followed a nice, neat linear evolution, and even the most original-
seeming game had plenty of predecessors and inﬂ uences, whether it was an earlier game or 
some other cultural phenomenon. 
 Even if we could prove, beyond all doubt, that a game had done something ﬁ rst—though 
important, that fact doesn’t necessarily mean it was inﬂ uential.  Spacewar!  wasn’t the ﬁ rst 
videogame; it was preceded by at least two earlier and all but forgotten projects,  OXO and 
 Tennis for Two.  Does that make  Spacewar!  less inﬂ uential? Certainly not. The game devel-
opers who would make such a difference in the 1970s and 1980s probably had never heard 
of  OXO  or  Tennis for Two , but many of them played  Spacewar!.  In short, innovation alone 
doesn’t  sufﬁ ce to make a game inﬂ uential; it also requires exposure and recognition. Why 
dote on an old clunker like Vectorbeam’s  Warrior  (1979) when it’s obvious to everyone that 
Capcom’s  Street Fighter II  (1991) is the ﬁ ghting game that deﬁ ned (and continues to deﬁ ne) 
the ﬁ ghting genre? 

 Neither is novelty a reliable sounding board. If we shared this view, we’d be talking 
 primarily about titles like Atari’s  Tempest  (1981; Arcade), Namco’s  Dig Dug  (1982; Arcade), 
Datasoft’s  Mancopter (1984; Commodore 64), or Nintendo’s  Kirby: Canvas Curse (2005; 
Nintendo DS), each examples of brilliant games with unique features. Are these great games? 
Sure. Did they inspire hundreds—if not thousands—of clones and derivatives? No. 
 The games chosen in this book represent every signiﬁ cant genre. Readers who are disap-
pointed to ﬁ nd that their favorite game didn’t receive its own chapter might still ﬁ nd it ref-
erenced and described in the context of a game that did. We make no claims, however, to 
offering anything like a comprehensive listing of all videogames, which would be about as 
much fun as reading a dictionary. The book’s main focus is to provide a concise yet detailed 
overview of an inﬂ uential game, its antecedents, and its predecessors. We might also warn 
readers that we have not let our recognition of these games restrain our criticism of their 
weaknesses. 
 Who is this book for? Clearly, it’s for anyone with a passion for videogaming, but most par-
ticularly those who enjoy learning the history of their favorite pastime. It’s also sure to be 
useful for both experienced and aspiring game designers. There is probably no better way to 
learn the 50+-year history of videogames than to read about (and hopefully play) the greatest 
and most inﬂ uential games of all time. Such experience beneﬁ ts both designers and players, 
who may be surprised at the depth and diversity of our gaming heritage. Designers should 
know what’s been done before, what’s worked, and what hasn’t worked. These pages offer 
an endless source of inspiration for a developer longing to create the next great game. As a 
player, it’s important to have a respect for the past, not just callously dismissing everything 
before the current generation as obsolete. Besides leaving the gamer woefully ignorant and 
even naive, such an attitude leads to the boring sameness we currently ﬁ nd so much of in the 
industry. Read this book, and let us know if you still think every new game has to be a sequel 
of a sequel. If nothing else, this book should raise your expectations about what developers 
are truly capable of producing. 
 Does the world really need another compilation of the best games ever—even if it is, for 
the sake of argument, one hell of a ﬁ ne read? Because our experiences and palates are so very 
distinct, what does “best” or “greatest” really mean anyway? There are few objective criteria 
that we can bring to bear on the matter. What we can bring, though, is our own extensive 
experience playing, studying, writing about, and discussing thousands upon thousands of 
games from all eras and all platforms. Whether we’re talking arcades, consoles, computers, 
handhelds, or mainframes—if it’s a game, we’ve probably played it. If we say a game is great, 
it is not because it is great compared to the games of the previous few years, or even the past 
few decades, but because it is great, period. Plus, we really like these games. 
 We decided to take this project on as a challenge—a challenge not only to pick a truly 
representative list of the greatest and most inﬂ uential games of  all  time—not just from the 
period when  we ﬁ rst started playing games—but to truly add something useful to the often-
haphazard videogame literature out there. These may not have been the bestselling or even 
most memorable games, but each of these carefully chosen titles in their own special way 
changed videogames forever. In addition to discussing the games themselves, we’ll also direct 
your attention to other critically important titles that either inﬂ uenced or were inﬂ uenced by 
them. If you ﬁ nd yourself convinced by this book to seek out the many forgotten gems of 
game history, drop us a postcard (or at least an email!) at Armchair Arcade. 
 Now sit back and let the videogames begin! 
x     PREFACE

 Acknowledgments 
 Bill Loguidice  
 I’d like to thank literary agent Matt Wagner, Focal Press representatives Chris Simpson and 
Anaïs Wheeler, and technical editor Alexandra (Alyx) Hall, for all of their help before and dur-
ing production of this book. Of course, I can’t forget my co-author and friend, Matt Barton, 
whose talent and drive help to keep me on my toes. There’s no one I’d trust to partner with 
on challenges like this book more. I’d also like to thank fellow Armchair Arcade editor Mark 
Vergeer for providing comments and supplying us with the invader images for our cover, and 
a whole range of our members and friends for their input during the writing of this book, 
including “Rowdy Rob,” “Calibrator,” “yakumo9275” (Stu), “CkRtech,” “steve,” and “davyK.” 
The discussions with you guys were a big help! Finally, I’d like to thank my family for being 
there for me through all the trials and tribulations, especially my wife Christina, who was a 
huge help with the book, particularly with the  Super Mario Bros. and  Tony Hawk’s Pro Skater 
chapters, and my daughters, Amelie and Olivia. I love you all more than anything! 
 Matt Barton  
 I’d like to thank everyone at Armchair Arcade for their support and assistance during this 
project. I also appreciate Simon Carless and Christian Nutt of Gamasutra for recommend-
ing our great reviewer, Alyx, who has been a great help. I’m also indebted to my colleagues 
Patty Remmell and Dennis Jerz, who helped with  The Sims and  Zork chapters, respectively. 
Of course, no one has done more to make this project than my long-time collaborator and 
friend Bill Loguidice. It seems like only yesterday when Bill and I were writing those lengthy 
posts on the forums of RetroGaming Radio! 

This page intentionally left blank

1
 ALONE IN THE DARK (1992): 
THE POLYGONS OF FEAR  
Part of the opening cut scene 
from Alone in the Dark, showing 
female protagonist Emily 
Hartwood approaching the 
mysterious Derceto mansion.
1
 When most people think of survival horror, they think of 
Capcom’s  Resident Evil series, which debuted in 1996 and sold 
nearly 35 million copies in just over 10 years.1 However, the con-
ventions of Capcom’s survival horror games, as well as others like 
 Silent Hill  (Konami, starting 1999), owe much of their success to 
Infogrames’  Alone in the Dark, a PC game released in 1992.  
 Alone in the Dark , designed principally by Frederick Raynal and 
Franck de Girolami, is an early blend of 2D and 3D technology; 
speciﬁ cally, of software-based 3D polygons for characters and 
items, and prerendered 2D images for backgrounds. This hybrid 
engine allowed characters and items to be rendered (redrawn) 
 1 March 4, 2008, Capcom Co. Ltd., press release. 

2     Chapter 1 ALONE IN THE DARK (1992): THE POLYGONS OF FEAR
on the ﬂ y and free to move to and from any position, whereas the 
environments or rooms could be shown only from a certain ﬁ xed 
camera angle that was dependent upon the player character’s 
location. The technique allowed for dramatic, predetermined 
camera angles, but also meant that the player didn’t always have 
a clear view of the action. Arguably, this feature made the engine 
work well for horror, as such camera angles are a quintessential 
aspect of most horror ﬁ lms—you know something is around the 
corner, but can’t make it out until it is too late. 
 Although the 3D graphics of  Alone in the Dark  were crude and 
blocky by today’s standards, with ﬂ at-shaded rather than textured 
polygons, they were remarkable for their time. Combined with 
superb atmospheric sound effects and a rich soundtrack, the 
overall presentation created a potent feeling sense of horror. 
 Because this was an early software-based 3D engine, it does not 
move as quickly as gamers might expect. However, the develop-
ment team was able to turn this potential liability to their advan-
tage—the slowness of some of the in-game actions  heightens the 
sense of panic when the character is about to be attacked; direct 
or impending attack: it’s like the nightmare in which you can’t run 
fast enough to get away from the monster. In fact, the designers 
took this one step further by slowing down the player character 
even further when hurt, a realistic touch that few other games 
share. 
 Of course,  Alone in the Dark  was certainly not the ﬁ rst graphic 
action adventure or even the ﬁ rst horror-themed adventure. As 
far back as Atari’s 1981  Haunted House  for the Atari 2600 Video 
Computer System (VCS), action, adventure, and horror were logi-
cal combinations. 
If Haunted House looks a lot like 
Atari’s classic Adventure (1979), 
it’s no coincidence—it’s based on 
the same engine. Shown here are  
based on the same engine. Shown 
are the eyes that represent the 
protagonist and a bat.

 
Chapter 1 ALONE IN THE DARK (1992): THE POLYGONS OF FEAR     3
 In  Haunted House , the player’s avatar is a pair of eyes ﬂ oating 
about a darkened mansion. The player’s goal is to ﬁ nd the pieces 
of a magic urn and escape, all the while avoiding tarantulas, 
bats, and a ghost. Clever use of simple sound effects for actions 
like walking up and down stairs, wind blowing, and doors shut-
ting help set the mood, and the visuals are blocky but still easy to 
identify. Although the programming effort that went into  Haunted 
House  was masterful, the VCS just wasn’t powerful enough to set a 
truly horriﬁ c mood. 
 Other attempts at horror videogames on the VCS would fol-
low, like Wizard Video’s  Halloween  (1983), based on the popular 
1978 slasher ﬁ lm. The player assumes the role of a babysitter in a 
two-story house, and scores points by escorting children to safe 
rooms or stabbing the killer with a kitchen knife. Michael Myers, 
the famous antagonist from the ﬁ lm, is also the killer in the game, 
and pursues the player in his iconically slow but relentless man-
ner. Again, although the visuals and sound were pretty much 
what was expected on the platform at the time, the system’s capa-
bilities limited how terrifying the game could actually be. Other 
than the tension sparked by Michael Myers’ appearances, there 
was little to genuinely frighten the player. 
 Other platforms, like Mattel’s Intellivision, also witnessed 
pioneering attempts at what would become the survival horror 
genre. Imagic’s 1982  Dracula  puts a slight twist on the standard 
formula by casting the player as the titular vampire. The vampire 
has the ability to transform into a bat and must stalk and bite a 
certain number of victims and return to his resting place before 
sunrise. Antagonists include wolves, vultures, and stake-throwing 
constables. Although the Intellivision had greater technical capa-
bilities than the VCS and  Dracula ’s presentation was fairly well 
done for the time, there was also nothing particularly scary about 
the game other than the system’s controllers. 
 Even the arcade had its fair share of horror-themed games, like 
the gory and sadistic light gun shooter from Exidy,  Chiller (1986), 
which tasked the player with shooting everything on screen, 
including humans chained and tortured in a dungeon. With 
more realistic graphics and sound, the game might have actually 
achieved more than mere revulsion. 
 The closest that the arcade came to something like survival 
horror was the visually rich  Splatterhouse  (1988), a side scrolling 
beat ’em up from Namco. The game casts the player as Rick, who 
must rescue his girlfriend held captive in yet another apparently 
abandoned, creepy, demonic mansion. Luckily for the player, an 
evil hockey-like mask attaches itself to Rick’s face and gives him 
super strength, with which he battles the ghouls and demons 
throughout the house. Despite having many home translations 

4     Chapter 1 ALONE IN THE DARK (1992): THE POLYGONS OF FEAR
and sequels, including a 2009 home console remake from Namco 
Bandai Games for the Microsoft Xbox 360 and Sony PlayStation 3, 
the  Splatterhouse  series remains ﬁ rmly in the horror action 
 category, with little apparent inﬂ uence on or from other horror-
themed games. 
 There is little to indicate that any of these earlier games or the 
myriad other titles that failed to deliver videogame scares for pre-
dominantly technical reasons, like Avalon Hill’s  Maxwell Manor 
(1984; Apple II, Atari 8-bit, Commodore 64) or LJN’s  Friday the 
13th  (1988, Nintendo Entertainment System), had any inﬂ uence 
on  Alone in the Dark ’s design. Instead, American author and hor-
ror icon, Howard Phillips Lovecraft (1890–1937), better known 
as H. P. Lovecraft, with his famed Cthulhu Mythos, was the cred-
ited inspiration for the ﬁ nal product, right down to the tagline: 
“A Virtual Adventure Game Inspired by the Work of H. P. Lovecraft” 
on the front of the box. However, Raynal was also inspired by 
zombie movies. In an August 3, 2006,  Adventure Europe interview, 
Raynal stated, “Romero’s  Zombie  can be considered as my ﬁ rst 
inspiration. Since that movie, I [have] wanted to make a game 
where you need to ﬁ ght against zombies, add to this the atmo-
sphere from a lot of horror movies, which I found very entertain-
ing, especially those where you are alone against the environment 
and your only goal is to survive. . . . So Cthulhu wasn’t the main 
The only obvious way 
Splatterhouse relates to Alone 
in the Dark is that the in-game 
mansion is supposedly that of 
Dr. Herbert West, H. P. Lovecraft’s 
“Reanimator.”

 
Chapter 1 ALONE IN THE DARK (1992): THE POLYGONS OF FEAR     5
The back of the box for Maxwell 
Manor. Creepy mansions and 
haunted houses have been 
videogame staples for the 
35+-year history of mainstream 
videogames.
inﬂ uence, but as I wanted the player to read texts to ﬁ nd clues, we 
used Cthulhu for its atmosphere and to add a few monsters.”2
  However, this does not mean that there were no games that 
inﬂ uenced  Alone in the Dark ’s development. In fact, in that 
same  Adventure Europe  interview, Raynal states that it was his 
own work on porting Christophe de Dinechin’s little-known but 
 2 http://www.adventure-eu.com/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=
207&Itemid=29. 

6     Chapter 1 ALONE IN THE DARK (1992): THE POLYGONS OF FEAR
groundbreaking  Alpha Waves  (1990, Atari ST) to the PC that was 
one of the game’s biggest inﬂ uences. 
 Alpha Waves , one of the ﬁ rst 3D home videogames, was a 
surprisingly robust software-driven, polygon-based platform 
jumping and exploration title that featured simple shapes and 
 multiobject interactions. A quick glance at the game in motion is 
enough to see how inﬂ uential it was on the implementation and 
design of  Alone in the Dark . As Raynal described: 
 When I was making the PC conversion of  Alpha Waves , a 
very primitive 3D game, I had the feeling that it was time 
for 3D to offer something new to gameplay; I was convinced 
that it was possible to create a new animation system for 
human characters (angles interpolation in real time), then 
everything became obvious in less than three seconds, a 
man in a house, zombies, my old dream at least possible? 
But I knew that it was not possible at this time to have realis-
tic 3D backgrounds needed to give the player the feeling that 
he is trapped in a real haunted manor. So I came out with 
the idea of 3D bitmapped backgrounds. In the beginning, I 
thought I could use digitalized photos of a real manor but 
hand drawn pictures came out to be better for characters’ 
integration and ambiance. Then I had to program all those 
3D tools to make it happen as nothing existed for real time 
3D at this time. 
 Alone in the Dark  is set in 1925. The action takes place in 
Derceto, a Louisiana mansion owned by the late Jeremy Hartwood, 
who apparently committed suicide after being haunted by a 
strange presence. Before passing, Hartwood translated many of 
Screenshot from Alpha Waves, 
which was a major inﬂ uence 
for Frederick Raynal in the 
implementation of Alone in the 
Dark. The triangular blue object 
casting a black shadow is the 
player, and the ﬂ oating orange 
objects are the platforms. Similar 
jumping-centric 3D platforming 
elements would appear again 
in other 3D games like Jumping 
Flash! (SCE, 1995; Sony 
PlayStation) and Montezuma’s 
Return (WizardWorks, 1998; PC).

 
Chapter 1 ALONE IN THE DARK (1992): THE POLYGONS OF FEAR     7
the ancient manuscripts found within the house. The player must 
investigate the mansion, and has a choice of two avatars: a mus-
tachioed private detective, Edward Carnby, who was sent to ﬁ nd 
a piano for an antique dealer, or Jeremy’s niece, Emily Hartwood, 
who wants to ﬁ nd the piano for a possible hidden clue to her 
uncle’s suicide. The choice makes little difference to the story, but 
does affect the look of the player’s character. 
 As the game loads, a rendered Infogrames armadillo mascot 
spins, followed by the image of a book that is turned to reveal 
 credits. After answering a copy protection question from the 
manual, the player is asked to choose either Emily on the left, 
or Edward on the right, where a picture of the chosen character 
alongside some introductory text is then displayed while omi-
nous music plays. Once the introductory text is ﬁ nished, the 
scene shifts via an in-engine cut scene to the player’s character 
being driven in a jalopy, speeding up a dirt road leading to the 
mansion. This sequence gives an initial sense of the game’s third-
person perspective presentation, with a rendered car and passen-
gers in richly  prerendered environments that change perspective 
at key points. Once the character gets out at the front gate he or 
she starts to walk the rest of the way to the mansion, demonstrat-
ing to the player the nice walking animation; movement point 
interpolation is a key feature of the game engine. The camera 
angle changes again, this time to the perspective of the eyes of a 
mysterious creature looking down at the character from a win-
dow, with only its hands showing, as the car drives off. 
 Once the character enters the mansion, the front doors quickly 
close, offering no escape for the startled character, who now has 
no choice but to continue on. The player takes control of the 
avatar’s actions only after he or she reaches the attic, ratcheting 
up the tension and giving the player a small tour of the mansion 
on the way. The sequences also introduces the abrupt changes in 
camera angle as the character steps into certain predetermined 
points. 
 Although the animation is excellent (if somewhat deliberate) 
and the environments are well drawn, the characters are notice-
ably blocky (and in the case of Emily, “pointy”), consisting of a 
minimal number of ﬂ at-shaded polygons. Nevertheless, with 
clever use of color and clear distinctions between body parts and 
clothing, the characters are at least identiﬁ able and work well 
within the game’s carefully orchestrated art direction. 
 Once the character reaches the attic, players learn (often after a 
few restarts) that they must ﬁ gure out how to block the trap door 
and the window so monsters can’t make their way in, demonstrat-
ing the game’s special mix of action and puzzle solving right away. 
By pushing a large chest over the trap door and an armoire in 
front of the window, the character is then free to explore the attic. 

8     Chapter 1 ALONE IN THE DARK (1992): THE POLYGONS OF FEAR
Soon enough, the player ﬁ nds items in the armoire  (blanket), 
piano (letter), chest (shotgun), and bookshelf (book). As this 
exploration takes place, a monster breaks the window’s glass, but 
can’t get past the armoire, while another monster tries to push 
up the trap door in the ﬂ oor, but can’t move the chest. After ﬁ nd-
ing and taking an oil lamp on the table, the character can safely 
direct the character to an exit out a side door and down the stairs. 
The goal is to search for further clues about the mansion’s deadly 
occupants and ultimately ﬁ nd a way out. 
 The atmosphere is retained throughout the rest of the game 
with creaky doors, weakened ﬂ oors, and the sudden appearance 
of monsters who the character may not be equipped to ﬁ ght and 
trying to stay one step ahead of the monsters—which the char-
acter isn’t always equipped to ﬁ ght. This is a mix that few games 
before or since, including the game’s sequels, have been able to 
get quite right. 
 All player commands are executed from the keyboard, with the 
up and down arrow keys moving the avatar, and the left and right 
arrow keys changing direction. By tapping twice then holding the 
up arrow key, the player can make the avatar run (one of a handful 
of animation sequences in the game that doesn’t look quite right). 
Running is a very imprecise affair and can heighten the sense of 
panic when trying to move the character away from danger. 
 Pressing the “I” or Enter/Return keys brings up the options 
screen, which lists inventory items, character portrait, and any 
active items, and possible actions. Fight, Open/Search, Shut, and 
Push are always available, and Jump (Hop, Jump, or Leap) is pos-
sible in certain situations. Further, certain items allow for addi-
tional commands, like Reload, Eat, Drop, and Throw. When one of 
In this screenshot, Emily 
successfully covered the trap 
door, but failed to block the 
window, allowing the toothy 
creature to burst through.

 
Chapter 1 ALONE IN THE DARK (1992): THE POLYGONS OF FEAR     9
the actions is selected, the player is returned to the game to carry 
them out. For combat, the player can engage in hand-to-hand 
ﬁ ghting consisting of punches and kicks, or use cutting or thrust-
ing weapons and ﬁ rearms. 
 In 1993, a CD-ROM version was released for the PC that 
included voiceovers for the in-game text and an enhanced 
soundtrack, as well as a small bonus game,  Jack in the Dark , billed 
as an interactive Christmas adventure, but set during Halloween, 
somewhat like the animated Tim Burton ﬁ lm from the same year, 
 The Nightmare Before Christmas . The player takes the role of a 
young child, Grace Saunders, who enters a toy store after dark 
and gets locked in. She ﬁ nds that the toys are alive. Her ultimate 
goal is to save Santa Claus from an evil jack-in-the-box. With an 
emphasis on puzzle solving over combat, the game is a decid-
edly different experience from  Alone in the Dark , though it obvi-
ously utilizes the same engine as that game and two of its sequels. 
 Jack in the Dark  was also made available by itself on a single 3.5˝ 
disk and on the CD-ROM version of  Alone in the Dark 2 , where is 
served introduction to that game’s main nemesis. 
 Alone in the Dark  was ported to the 3DO and Apple Macintosh 
in 1994, with the former port making use of the standard game-
pad instead of keyboard controls.  Alone in the Dark 2  was released 
in 1994 for the PC, 1995 for the 3DO, and 1996 for the Apple 
Macintosh, Sega Saturn, and Sony PlayStation, with improved 
visuals for the latter two platforms. Unfortunately for fans of the 
previous games, Raynal was no longer involved with the series. As 
he described in the  Adventure Europe interview: 
 I didn’t decide to leave the license, but Infogrames itself, 
because of many disagreements with them. At this time, 
In this screenshot, Edward has 
successfully made it down from 
the attic and avoided falling 
through the rotten ﬂ oor just 
outside this room. After ﬁ nding 
nothing in the armoire, he is 
attacked by a shufﬂ ing zombie.

10     Chapter 1 ALONE IN THE DARK (1992): THE POLYGONS OF FEAR
A sequence of four images from 
Alone in the Dark 2, showing 
from the top, left to right, an early 
unarmed encounter with a zombie 
gangster. To the chagrin of fans 
of the ﬁ rst game, the sequel was 
often more focused on combat 
than puzzle-solving exploration.
games were completely handled by the creator who usually 
was also the main programmer so I never wrote anything 
about game mechanics and ambiance secrets. I think they 
didn’t understand what I did, the engine was brand new and 
helped the success of the game, but a game is not an engine 
or a movie, it’s a whole system where situations and game-
play are the ﬁ rst things to think about. There are complex 
links between technology, gameplay, and story, all of them 
always sending the ball back to each other, a game is good 
when the players feel this synergy.   
 Alone in the Dark 2  takes place at Christmas in the year 1924, 
where Edward Carnby (now known as the “Supernatural Private 
Eye”) and his partner Ted Stryker are investigating the kidnap-
ping of Grace Saunders, leading them to another mansion, “Hell’s 
Kitchen,” the home of infamous gangsters. Edward learns that 
Ted has disappeared in the mansion and investigates, but ﬁ nds 
his partner murdered. Edward discovers that the mobsters are 
merely the corporeal forms of ghost pirates, and he must make 
his way through the house and eventually onto a hidden pirate 
ship to ﬁ nd a way to save Grace. 
 Beyond limiting the player to the initial choice of the one 
 protagonist, the biggest differences between this sequel and the 
original is the downplaying of the horror theme and the empha-
sis on action. Interestingly, the player is occasionally asked to 
take the role of Grace, who—as in  Jack in the Dark —is unable to 
ﬁ ght, so she must sneak around and avoid direct confrontations 
with the gangsters, instead setting traps to defeat them. This fea-
ture brought a brief, but welcome change of pace for fans of the 
style of the original game. 

 
Chapter 1 ALONE IN THE DARK (1992): THE POLYGONS OF FEAR     11
A collection of four scenes from 
Alone in the Dark 3, sequenced 
from the top, left to right. The 
third game was the last title in 
the series to use the by then 
creaky game engine, but it 
nevertheless delighted many fans 
of the original by placing less 
emphasis on combat.
 Alone in the Dark 3  was released in 1995 for the PC, with a port 
to the Apple Macintosh following a year later. In the ﬁ nal game in 
the series that uses the original game engine, Edward Carnby is 
asked to investigate the disappearance of a ﬁ lm crew, one mem-
ber of which is Emily Hartwood of the original game. Though 
the setting was different—this time a western ghost town called 
Slaughter Gulch, located in the Mojave Desert—the game’s devel-
opers decided to go back to the original game’s formula of more 
balanced action and puzzle elements. 
 Alone in the Dark 3  also makes a further concession to the 
sometimes overly challenging action sequences by allowing the 
player to adjust the difﬁ culty of combat. Welcome changes from 
previous games are unlimited save game slots, which allow for 
more player experimentation, and an onscreen map that shows 
Edward’s exact location. The map eliminates much of the frustra-
tion from the game’s dramatic but sometimes disorienting cam-
era angles, making it easier for the player to make progress in the 
large gameworld. 
 Because the next entry in the series was not released until 
2001, the time was ripe for many other games to take on the sur-
vival horror challenge. These included Acclaim’s time-limited 
 D  (1995; 3DO, PC, Sega Saturn, Sony PlayStation); Capcom’s B-
movie homage,  Resident Evil  (known as  Biohazard  in Japan; 1996, 
Sony PlayStation), Konami’s fog-laden and sound-centered  Silent 
Hill  (1999, Sony PlayStation), and Tecmo’s  Fatal Frame (known 
as  Project Zero  in Europe and Australia, and  Zero  in Japan; 2001, 
Microsoft Xbox, Sony PlayStation 2), which has the player bat-
tling ghosts by sealing their spirit in ﬁ lm. Of these,  Resident Evil 
is the best known and has spanned the most sequels and series 

12     Chapter 1 ALONE IN THE DARK (1992): THE POLYGONS OF FEAR
offshoots, though the others, with the exception of  D and  D2 
(2000, Sega Dreamcast), have also been critical and commercial 
successes. 
 Though said to be thematically inspired by Capcom’s Japan-
only Nintendo Famicom role-playing game,  Sweet Home (1989, 
itself based on a movie), including the mansion setting, puzzles, 
and loading screen when opening doors,  Resident Evil  is in many 
ways a reimagining of the original  Alone in the Dark . For instance, 
the player has a choice between two characters—one male, one 
female, each with a different backstory, the backgrounds are pre-
rendered and the camera angles ﬁ xed, and character and crea-
ture movements are deliberate, with somewhat sluggish control. 
Further, many of the same surprises take place, such as monsters 
bursting through windows and startling the player. Naturally, 
in the span of four years, the visuals are signiﬁ cantly better and 
there are now numerous cheesy cut scenes to advance the story, 
with awkwardly translated and badly voiced dialog, including the 
infamous line, “Jill, here’s a lockpick. It might be handy if you, the 
master of unlocking, take it with you.” 
 In an attempt to cash in on the success of the  Resident Evil 
series, Infogrames released the fourth game in the  Alone in the 
Dark  series in 2001 for the Nintendo Game Boy Color, PC, Sega 
Dreamcast, and Sony PlayStation. In  Alone in the Dark: The New 
Nightmare , Edward Carnby is reimagined in a different timeline 
(the year is 2001), and as a darker and more sarcastic character 
exploring Shadow Island. The player can also choose to play as 
anthropologist Aline Cedrac. Though borrowing liberally from the 
control scheme and settings of the early  Resident Evil games,  The 
New Nightmare  introduces more dynamic lighting effects that are 
worked into the game’s mechanics (the creatures in the game are 
sensitive to light) and features two different styles of gameplay, 
much like playing as either Edward or Grace offered in  Alone in 
the Dark 2 . This time, playing as Edward presents a more action-
oriented game, and playing as Aline offers a more puzzled-ori-
ented experience. Despite some promising features, reviews were 
mixed and sales relatively tepid in a genre dominated and likely 
biased by higher-proﬁ le series. 
 Like the other genre staples,  Resident Evil and  Silent Hill , 
 Alone in the Dark received a movie adaptation in 2005, very 
loosely based on  The New Nightmare . Unfortunately, as bad 
as movies based on videogames can be, the  Alone in the Dark 
movie was even worse than most of these, directed incompe-
tently by the infamous Uwe Boll, who seemingly found most of 
the survival horror aspects of the game unimportant for inclu-
sion in the ﬁ lm. As ﬁ lm critic Mark Ramsey quipped, “ Alone in 
the Dark  is certainly what you’ll be if you’re in the theater for 
 this movie.”3 

 
Chapter 1 ALONE IN THE DARK (1992): THE POLYGONS OF FEAR     13
 Despite being saddled with the legacy of what is considered 
one of the worst movies of all time, Atari, which holding company 
Infogrames has a majority stake in, still released a new entry in 
the series. Under the now-overused title of  Alone in the Dark , the 
game was released in 2008 for the Nintendo Wii, Microsoft Xbox 
360, Sony PlayStation 2, and Sony PlayStation 3. Completing 
Edward Carnby’s transformation from an unusual 1920s private 
detective to a rather generic leather-coat-wearing, ﬁ ve-o’clock-
shadow-having Keanu Reeves lookalike, the game tasks the player 
with investigating rumors, allegations, and suspicions of clandes-
tine activity in the tunnels below Central Park in New York City. 
 The 2008 version of  Alone in the Dark  adds a few intriguing ele-
ments to the classic formula, including driving cars, an option for 
ﬁ rst-person perspective (something present in light-gun-based 
 Resident Evil  games), and a highly publicized ﬁ re modeling ele-
ment. The ﬁ re simulation boldly attempts to mimic the real thing, 
and can be used for taking out enemies and burning or melting 
objects in the environment. Unfortunately, some of the other 
newer elements—like fetch quests and extensive backtracking—
don’t work quite as well and drag down what could have been a 
tighter and more impactful gaming experience. Critical reception 
was mixed at best, with major criticisms being its glitchy game-
play and confusing controls. However, with sufﬁ cient sales, unlike 
 The New Nightmare , the game should provide a strong founda-
tion for additional sequels that might address some of the game’s 
failings and help to deservedly restore the  Alone in the Dark name 
to something more than a  Resident Evil  pretender in the eyes of 
many modern gamers.
 3 http://www.moviejuice.com/2005/alone . 

This page intentionally left blank

15
 CASTLE WOLFENSTEIN (1981): 
ACHTUNG! STEALTH GAMING 
STEPS OUT OF THE SHADOWS  
2
 Silas Warner’s  Castle Wolfenstein,  published by Muse in 1981 
for the Apple II (later ported to Atari 8-bit, Commodore 64, 
and PC) laid the foundation and set the standard for all other 
games of stealth. Set during World War II,  Castle Wolfenstein 
puts the player in the boots of an Allied prisoner. The prison-
er’s mission is not only to escape the heavily guarded dungeon 
in which he is imprisoned, but also to steal Nazi war plans hid-
den elsewhere in the castle. This exciting setting creates the 
perfect environment for the game’s emphasis on stealth. Years 
before games like Konami’s  Metal Gear  (1987, MSX2; and later 
in a modiﬁ ed form for other platforms),  Castle Wolfenstein 
and its 1984 sequel,  Beyond Castle Wolfenstein (Apple II, Atari 
8-bit, Commodore 64, PC), demonstrated that cleverly avoiding 
enemies can be just as fun as blowing them to bits.  
 One of the ﬁ rst things new players notice about  Castle Wolfenstein 
is the depth and variety of its control options. On the Apple II ver-
sion, there are options for the  keyboard, paddles, or two-button 
joystick. However, only the keyboard option provides access to all 
commands; the space bar is used for searching and unlocking, the 
“T” key is used to throw a grenade, the “U” key is used to utilize a 
chest’s contents, and the “Return” key is used to list the character’s 
inventory. Control is based on separate and very deliberate move-
ment and aiming, though simultaneous movement and indepen-
dent aiming can be difﬁ cult or even impossible depending on the 
conﬁ guration.1 Atari 8-bit owners can play with the keyboard alone 
or in conjunction with one or two single-button joysticks;2 the 
 1 See  bonus chapter ,  “Robotron: 2084 (1982): Running Away While Defending 
Humanoids,” for games that offer smooth independent, simultaneous movement 
and aiming. 
 2      When using two joysticks on the Atari 8-bit version, the ﬁ rst joystick’s ﬁ re button 
throws grenades, and the second ﬁ res the gun. 

16     Chapter 2 CASTLE WOLFENSTEIN (1981) 
Commodore 64 and PC allow for a keyboard or a single joystick (one 
button on the former system, two on the latter). Needless to say, the 
variety of control options not only indicate the game’s depth, but 
allow for different styles of play, including the participation of a sec-
ond player. 
 Besides control options, the only other major differences 
between the versions are the visuals, and even those only vary cos-
metically in color and detail. In each case,  Castle Wolfenstein sports 
an unusual perspective. Each room is displayed from an over-
head view, but the characters and objects are displayed from the 
side. Though the animation is jerky, the modiﬁ ed perspective and 
simple visuals set against a black background work well. It’s easy 
to identify everything and know exactly where you are, an example 
that many modern 3D ﬁ rst- and third-person perspective games 
have failed to follow. In addition, regardless of what is happening, 
everything takes place on the current room screen, including infor-
mational text. The player is never taken away from the action. 
 Each room in the castle either has a doorway leading to another 
room or a stairway leading to another level. Other room elements 
are various combinations of interior doors, guards, and chests. 
Chests can be searched for useful items such as keys, and not-
so-useful items, such as Eva Braun’s diary,3  which have zero 
 Pictured on top of an Apple 
IIe with black paddles is the 
packaging for a later release 
of Castle Wolfenstein for 
the Apple II, with its iconic 
cover art and award note for 
Electronic Games magazine’s 
1983 Certiﬁ cate of Merit for 
Outstanding Achievement. The 
inside back of the manual listing 
Muse’s software catalog touts 
the game as “The #1 Best Selling 
Game in America!.”
 3      The companion of Adolf Hitler. With the war obviously lost, she committed 
 suicide alongside the German Fuhrer roughly 24 hours after their marriage.  

 
Chapter 2 CASTLE WOLFENSTEIN (1981)     17
impact on gameplay. Food items are typically in the not-so-useful,  
zero-impact category, save for alcoholic  beverages, which if 
chugged will temporarily impair player control until the drunken 
stupor wears off. 
 Guards can be searched (like chests), either when held up at 
gunpoint or when dead. Unlike a chest, which can take some 
time to unlock and search, searching a guard produces nearly 
instant results. Items are automatically transferred to the player’s 
inventory if they are needed or exceed present supply, but the 
maximum is 10 bullets, three grenades, keys, a bulletproof vest, a 
uniform, and the war plans for Operation Rheingold. 
 When the prisoner is spotted by a guard from a distance, the 
guard will shout German-language commands like “Achtung!” 
(“Attention!”) or “Halt!” (“Stop!”). If the prisoner stops, the guard 
will typically approach and touch (capture) him, effectively end-
ing the game. If the prisoner ﬂ ees, the guard will open ﬁ re. If the 
guard succeeds in killing the prisoner (which, realistically, occurs 
after only a few shots), the game also ends immediately. 
 The player can hold up a guard by surprising him with a drawn 
gun. Unfortunately, in one of a small handful of unfortunate 
design decisions, once held up and searched, guards cannot be 
disabled. The player must either quickly ﬂ ee or just kill the guard 
anyway—assuming he has enough bullets. Indeed, bullet man-
agement is the key to the game. Ammunition tends to be sparsely 
available, and a clip can’t be replenished, merely replaced with 
one containing more bullets. Players intending to “run and gun” 
their way through the game will have no chance; the only way 
to succeed is to methodically go from room to room, avoiding 
guards whenever possible. Players must carefully observe the 
Searching a chest in Castle 
Wolfenstein.

18     Chapter 2 CASTLE WOLFENSTEIN (1981) 
guards’ patrol patterns and walk by them when their backs are 
turned. Of course, guards within earshot will hear bullets and 
shouts, also alerting them to the player’s presence and location. 
Interestingly, sometimes the very act of where the player kills a 
guard must be carefully considered; even if other guards don’t 
hear anything, when they come across a fallen comrade, they will 
know something is amiss and be on alert. 
 Although guns are sometimes necessary to open locked doors 
(if there is no key or a guard doesn’t open it ﬁ rst), chests can also 
be shot one or more times to speed up the time-consuming auto-
matic unlock and search process. Unfortunately, chests sometimes 
contain explosives, which blow up if shot, immediately killing the 
player. In short, patience is less a virtue than a requirement. 
 SS stormtroopers can’t be fooled as easily or intimidated like 
normal guards. They wear bulletproof vests, thus requiring a large 
number of bullets or a grenade to take them down. Grenades 
have a large zone of destruction and must be used with great care. 
Destructible environments are something that today’s games are 
still struggling to fully implement, but  Castle Wolfenstein offered 
a form of it over a quarter century ago. Though calling  Castle 
Wolfenstein ’s environments destructible is an exaggeration, the 
grenade could be used to damage interior walls, adding another 
layer of strategy to the already nuanced gameplay. For instance, 
the player could blow up a wall and kill a guard behind it, or 
create a hole with which to shoot through. Although certainly 
no  Crusader: No Remorse  (Origin, 1995; PC, Sega Saturn, Sony 
The end result of searching 
a held-up guard in Castle 
Wolfenstein.

 
Chapter 2 CASTLE WOLFENSTEIN (1981)     19
Here, the player has procured 
a bulletproof vest and lobbed a 
grenade at the wall, which will 
remove two of the rectangular 
bricks to the lower right of 
the explosion. Grenades in 
Castle Wolfenstein can easily 
accidentally kill the player, but are 
highly effective when used 
correctly.
PlayStation) in terms of destructible, interactive environments,4 
Warner’s strategic design considerations never fail to impress. 
 Audio is perhaps  Castle Wolfenstein ’s most iconic element. 
Although there’s no music and only sparse sound effects for 
walking and gunshots, where the game really shines is in its use 
of speech synthesis. Computers with poor sound capabilities 
like the Apple II and PC, which typically produced beeps and 
clicks on their tiny internal speakers, were nevertheless coaxed 
to generate recognizable speech in the form of eight German 
phrases and a scream. For fans of the game, hearing any of these 
clipped phrases brings an immediate nostalgia-tinged smile to 
their faces. 
 What can get lost in the haze of nostalgia beyond long load 
times is each room’s inanimate objects, including the walls—or, 
more speciﬁ cally, what happens when the player accidentally 
walks into one of them. The result is the player being momen-
tarily subjected to a screeching, alarm-like sound effect, ﬂ ashing 
screen, lack of control, and the character’s return to an unarmed 
stance. Interestingly, as one of the game’s most annoying features, 
there is no explanation for this in the game’s manual. The only 
possible reasons from a design standpoint would be to force the 
player to play the game in a more methodical manner and make 
a quick escape from a dangerous situation even less certain. 
Of course, a comparison to Warner’s unstated inspiration,  Berzerk 
 4 Though the  Crusader  series had other similarities to  Castle Wolfenstein  and its 
sequel, like the ability to loot intact dead bodies, working alarms, and enemies 
who made use of the environment, Origin’s game was heavily biased toward fran-
tic weapons-based combat and over-the-top deaths. 

20     Chapter 2 CASTLE WOLFENSTEIN (1981) 
(Stern Electronics, 1980; Arcade, Atari 5200, Atari VCS 2600, GCE 
Vectrex), sheds further light on this and other features and design 
elements of  Castle Wolfenstein . 
 Berzerk  casts the player as a humanoid trying to escape indi-
vidual rooms ﬁ lled with robots before the indestructible Evil 
Otto appears. Armed with only a laser gun, the humanoid must 
avoid being killed by a robot’s touch, shot, or explosion, as well as 
contact with the electriﬁ ed walls. With its clever and early use of 
speech synthesis (“The humanoid must not escape”), modiﬁ ed 
perspective, single-screen encounters, enemies interacting with 
each other and the environment, and the requirement to some-
times escape a room without dispatching all enemies,  Berzerk is 
the undeniable progenitor of  Castle Wolfenstein .5 However, while 
many games like Datamost’s  Thief  (1981; Apple II, Panasonic JR-
200U) were essentially shameless  Berzerk  clones, right down to 
mimicking Evil Otto’s timed appearance that kept arcade players 
from dawdling,  Castle Wolfenstein did something special with the 
base concepts, turning a pure action game into something much 
more thoughtful and slower paced. 
 Castle Wolfenstein ’s 1984 sequel,  Beyond Castle Wolfenstein , 
released for the same platforms, kept most of the best play 
mechanics of the ﬁ rst game, while dramatically upping the 
Screenshot from the arcade 
version of Berzerk. The 
indestructible Evil Otto (the round 
smiley face) has come out to 
attack because the player has 
lingered too long in the room.
 5 Though  Berzerk ’s direct sequel,  Frenzy  (1982; Arcade, Coleco ColecoVision, 
Sinclair ZX Spectrum), featured slightly more sophisticated play elements and 
shootable walls, it’s unlikely that  Castle Wolfenstein  had much, if any, inﬂ uence on 
its development. 

 
Chapter 2 CASTLE WOLFENSTEIN (1981)     21
in-game possibilities. As the escape specialist from the ﬁ rst game, 
the underground resistance movement has arranged to sneak you 
from a courtyard into Adolf Hitler’s underground Berlin bunker 
with a gun, 10 bullets, 100 German Marks (money) and at least 
one pass to show the guards. Upon entry into the bunker, it’s up 
to the player to ﬁ nd a briefcase containing a bomb, locate Hitler’s 
private conference room, and plant the bomb. Once the briefcase 
is in place and the timer set, the player must make it back to the 
courtyard before the explosion. 
 Sneaking past the guards is a bit more complicated this time, 
and involves passes. When a guard demands a pass, the player 
will have to show the proper pass or be asked again. The player 
Box and manual back for Beyond 
Castle Wolfenstein.

22     Chapter 2 CASTLE WOLFENSTEIN (1981) 
can either try again with a different pass or attempt to bribe the 
guard with money. Besides the standard patrolling guards, there 
are guards seated at desks that can also be bribed, this time for 
information. 
 As usual, shooting guards must be done as covertly as possi-
ble, though now alarms add additional challenge. Not only will a 
guard pursue you if he thinks something suspicious is going on, 
he will also attempt to set off an alarm, which alerts the whole 
bunker to your presence. The alarm can only be disabled by 
 ﬁ nding and using a toolkit. 
 In a further nod to stealth over brute force, the grenades from 
the previous game have been replaced with a dagger, which can 
be used to silently kill guards. The player’s character  also has the 
ability to drag dead bodies to a less conspicuous location within a 
room. With additional emphasis on uniformed disguise, there are 
also new commands for holstering a weapon, helping to further 
mitigate the guard’s suspicions. 
 There are no chests in the bunker—only closets. Instead of an 
automatic timed search, the player must crack a three-digit code, 
listening closely for when each of the lock’s tumblers is triggered. 
If an incorrect number in any of the three slots is entered, the 
player must try again. Closets contain the usual assortment of 
items, as well as the occasional ﬁ rst aid kit, allowing the character 
to tend to injuries, which have a noticeable effect on his ability to 
maneuver. 
 In just about every way,  Beyond Castle Wolfenstein is a sequel 
done right. Gameplay is more stealth-based, ambitious, and chal-
lenging; even accidentally walking into objects causes only a 
A guard asks the player for the 
correct pass in Beyond Castle 
Wolfenstein. Shown to the left, 
the player has passes 1, 4 and 5.

 
Chapter 2 CASTLE WOLFENSTEIN (1981)     23
slight pause this time around. It gives fans of the ﬁ rst game more 
of what they loved, but is a refreshingly distinct experience. It set 
an even higher bar for in-game interactivity. 
 Although there would be no other  Wolfenstein  games from 
either Warner or Muse, there were games from countless other 
sources that took some of the elements of the original two games 
much further. These include  Impossible Mission  (Epyx, 1984; 
Commodore 64, Nintendo DS, Sega Master System, and others), a 
side-perspective action adventure that casts the player as an ath-
letic, acrobatic, and unarmed secret agent who needs to search 
through danger-ﬁ lled rooms for puzzle pieces to ultimately bring 
down the diabolical Professor Elvin Atombender;6  D/Generation 
(Mindscape, 1991; Atari ST, Commodore Amiga CD32, and oth-
ers), where, from an isometric perspective, the player is tasked 
with getting through puzzle-heavy booby-trapped rooms in a 
high rise building; and  Relentless: Twinsen’s Adventure (Activision, 
1994; PC, Sony PlayStation),7 which is played from a 3D isometric 
perspective, with the player putting the main character into one 
of four different modes of behavior, including “Discreet,” which 
includes quietly tip-toeing and the ability to hide. 
 Of course the most famous of these latter-day  Wolfenstein -
inspired games is the aforementioned  Metal Gear , marking the 
ﬁ rst appearance of “Solid Snake,” a now legendary videogame 
In a very interesting design 
decision that actually works in 
making the gameplay notably 
different from the original, 
grenades have been replaced 
with a knife in Beyond Castle 
Wolfenstein, allowing for silent 
kills. Unfortunately for the player 
(gun drawn) in the screenshot, the 
alarm has already been set off 
from a failed gunﬁ ght in the prior 
room and he is severely wounded, 
making him an easy target for the 
oncoming guard.
 6 Like  Castle Wolfenstein  before it,  Impossible Mission  was famous for its speech 
synthesis, which included the game opening, “Another visitor. Stay awhile . . . stay 
forever!” 
 7 Released as  Little Big Adventure  through Electronic Arts in Europe, this under-
rated title was Frederick Raynal’s next game after  Alone in the Dark , which is 
 discussed in  Chapter 1 ,  “Alone in the Dark (1992): The Polygons of Fear.” 

24     Chapter 2 CASTLE WOLFENSTEIN (1981) 
character used in countless games right up to 2008’s  Metal Gear 
Solid 4: Guns of the Patriots  (Konami; Sony PlayStation 3). Each 
successive game in the series typically ramped up the original 
 Metal Gear ’s complexity and ambition levels and built further on 
the previous entry, right through its initial overhaul from a slanted 
overhead 2D perspective to state-of-the-art third-person 3D. 
 Metal Gear  casts the player as special forces operative Solid 
Snake, who must inﬁ ltrate a fortiﬁ ed compound to ultimately 
destroy the titular machine, a bipedal walking tank capable 
of launching nuclear missiles from anywhere in the world. 
The player must carefully avoid visual contact and direct con-
frontation with patrolling guards. If Solid Snake is spotted, he 
must hide in a manner speciﬁ c to the type of alert the guards 
are on. Initially unarmed, Solid Snake eventually becomes well 
equipped with a wide range of weaponry, which can also be used 
to clear obstacles. Punching guards can sometimes yield rations 
or ammunition, and, much like in  Beyond Castle Wolfenstein , 
speciﬁ c key cards are sometimes needed to gain access to addi-
tional areas. 
 In what amounted to nothing less than a lovingly crafted and 
well-executed tribute to  Castle Wolfenstein , id Software released 
 Wolfenstein 3D  in 1992 (3DO, Apple Macintosh, PC, and others).8 
Though it’s discussed in  Chapter 6 , “ Doom (1993): The First Person 
Shooter Takes Control,” for its inﬂ uence on  Doom , it’s important 
to note here that  Wolfenstein 3D  took all of the iconic elements 
from  Castle Wolfenstein  and its sequel, like the castle setting, the 
guards, and the clever use of speech synthesis, and turned it all 
into a silky-smooth and approachable single-player ﬁ rst- person 
shooter. Though there is some possibility for sneaking up on 
guards, the majority of stealth and slower-paced elements were 
removed in lieu of quick action, which favored the game engine 
and interface. Starting with 2001’s  Return to Castle Wolfenstein 
(Apple Macintosh, Microsoft Xbox, PC, and others),  Wolfenstein 
3D  has received a semiregular stream of sequels, though the large 
jump in technology and player expectations have made them only 
marginally recognizable to fans of the original. 
 Castle Wolfenstein ’s legacy can’t be overestimated, particu-
larly in regard to its integration of basic stealth elements into its 
gamplay. Today, of course, there are countless games with some 
type of stealth-based elements in them, ranging from games that 
make stealth an integral part of their gameplay, like the critically 
acclaimed series-spawning action adventures,  Thief: The Dark 
Project  (Looking Glass Studios, 1998; PC),  Hitman: Codename 47 
(Eidos, 2000; PC), and  Beyond Good and Evil (Ubisoft, 2003; 
 8 Wolfenstein 3D is the reason some refer to the original  Castle Wolfenstein as 
“Wolfenstein 2D” today. 

 
Chapter 2 CASTLE WOLFENSTEIN (1981)     25
Microsoft Xbox, Nintendo GameCube, PC, Sony PlayStation 2), 
to games that include them as a small part of their total game-
play scope, like ﬁ rst-person shooter  The Operative: No One Lives 
Forever  (Fox Interactive, 2000; PC, Sony PlayStation 2), action 
adventure  The Legend of Zelda: The Wind Waker  (Nintendo, 2002; 
Nintendo GameCube), and the licensed  Kung Fu Panda (2008, 
Activision; PC, Sony PlayStation 3, and others). It is a testament 
to Warner’s genius that his brilliant gameplay designs, introduced 
so early in videogame history, are still inspiring developers and 
thrilling gamers to this day. 
Back of the box for the Atari 
Jaguar version of Wolfenstein 
3D, a game that focused more 
on action and aspects of the 
Nazi regime’s infamous human 
experiments than its progenitors.

26     Chapter 2 CASTLE WOLFENSTEIN (1981) 
Beyond id’s own contributions 
to the Wolfenstein legacy, fans 
of the series have also kept 
the torch burning, such as with 
2004’s homebrew cartridge 
Wolfenstein VCS for the Atari 
2600 Video Computer System, box 
back shown, and its enhanced 
sequel, Wolfenstein VCS: The 
Next Mission (2006). Both of 
the homebrew games are based 
on code from the Atari 2600 
version of Exidy’s 1981 arcade 
game, Venture (Coleco, 1982), a 
fantasy-themed action adventure 
that shares similarities with both 
Berzerk and Castle Wolfenstein.

27
3
 DANCE DANCE REVOLUTION  
(1998): THE PLAYER BECOMES 
THE STAR  
 At ﬁ rst glance,  Dance Dance Revolution (Konami, 1998;1 Arcade; 
other platforms and games in the series later), or  DDR ,2 is a glori-
ﬁ ed game of “Simon Says.”3 After all, to play  DDR , the gamer sim-
ply steps on one of four arrows positioned up, down, left, and right 
on a platform, trying to match a corresponding scrolling arrow 
when it reaches a speciﬁ c point at the top of the screen (when the 
game “says”). If the player successfully steps on the right arrow at 
the right time, the player’s score and status increases; if not, the 
player’s status decreases (the game didn’t “say”). This is of course 
set to any one of a number of original and licensed dance songs 
with a wacky disembodied DJ voice shouting encouragement 
like, “Yeah! Do it!” and “You’re a dance animal!,” and some not-
so-positive comments like, “Did you have breakfast today?” and 
“Are your legs okay?,” relative to your performance.  
 To understand what makes  DDR  truly a revolution, we need to 
ﬁ rst reﬂ ect on the gamer stereotype. It seems almost any time a 
“gamer” is represented in a ﬁ lm or television show, we see a pale, 
overweight teenager with awkward movements and stilted speech. 
 1      From Konami’s Bemani music videogame division, which (besides the title game) 
has produced many other popular performance games, including those that use 
faux DJ mixing boards and musical instruments. Many games in the Bemani 
series have been released only in Japan.  
 2      Some territories and later entries in the series used the name  Dancing Stage 
instead of  Dance Dance Revolution , making the abbreviation  DS . 
 3 Or Milton Bradley’s Ralph Baer–designed electronic handheld  Simon game 
(1978), with its four large iconic colored buttons arranged in a circular formation. 
 Simon  would play a tone as each one of the colored buttons were lit. The player 
was required to repeat the colored lighting/sound sequence by pressing the cor-
responding buttons.  Simon  succeeded where the game that inspired it, Atari’s 
arcade  Touch Me  (1974), failed, by focusing on color and pleasing sounds—in 
other words, providing a good interactive experience to go along with the core 
gameplay. This was a lesson obviously not lost on the designers of DDR. 

28     Chapter 3 DANCE DANCE REVOLUTION (1998): THE PLAYER BECOMES THE STAR
Further, the mass media seems obsessed with vilifying the games 
industry for society’s woes, blaming them for—among other 
things—the alleged crisis in adolescent and teenage obesity. Even 
avid gamers often deride their own favorite hobby, lamenting that 
they wasted so much time playing games when they should have 
been playing sports or enjoying the outdoors. As Dani Bunten 
Berry, developer of  M.U.L.E.  and  Cytron Masters once put it, “No 
one ever said on their deathbed, ‘Gee, I wish I had spent more 
time alone with my computer.’”4 Part of the problem may be that, 
unlike most sports, watching someone play a videogame is seldom 
a rewarding activity for spectators, today’s professional gaming 
leagues notwithstanding.5 In short, even if all sorts of wonderful 
things are happening onscreen, the gamer seems to be doing little 
more than clicking buttons from a comfy seat. Few games offer 
opportunities for impressive physical performances. 
 The brilliance of  DDR  lies precisely in providing such oppor-
tunities. A dedicated fan of  DDR  will often develop the physical 
prowess necessary not only to achieve high scores in the game, but 
to impress spectators passing by the machine. Because players are 
penalized only for not hitting correct dance steps and can add in 
their own, many  DDR  aﬁ cionados create intricate ﬂ ourishes and 
routines that are intended more for fun and the audience’s delight 
than for winning the game.6 In an interview with the authors, Ryan 
Cravens, Marketing Manager for arcade game and amusements 
 4 See  http://www.anticlockwise.com/dani/personal/biz/index.html for this and 
other Bunten quotations, and  Chapter 6 , “ Dune II: The Building of a Dynasty 
(1992): Strategy in Real Time,” for more on  Cytron Masters . 
 5      It can be argued that outside of certain countries like South Korea, professional 
gaming leagues are geared more to masses of competitors rather than masses of 
spectators. 
 6      Episode 103 from Season 5 of the TV show  Malcolm in the Middle , entitled 
“Dewey’s Special Class,” features the characters of Hal and Craig playing a ﬁ c-
tional DDR clone called  Jump Jump Dance Party . The half-hour comedy effectively 
spoofed the often over-the-top theatrics and choreographed antics that can result 
when the best players take to a  DDR  platform, even earning the show an Emmy 
Award nomination for outstanding choreography. A similar scenario would play 
out in a memorable scene from the otherwise forgettable comedy movie about a 
videogame tester,  Grandma’s Boy (2006). 
A sequence of two screenshots 
from the Sony PlayStation version 
of Dance Dance Revolution, 
describing the simple gameplay.

 
Chapter 3 DANCE DANCE REVOLUTION (1998): THE PLAYER BECOMES THE STAR     29
distributor Betson Enterprises, draws a performance parallel to 
another phenomena—karaoke—stating, “Both came out of Japan, 
are music-related, and are all a more complicated version of the 
‘follow the bouncing ball’ sing-a-longs from 1950s television.” 
 In a way,  Dragon’s Lair  (Cinematronics, 1983; Arcade; dozens 
of home ports later), one of the ﬁ rst laserdisc videogames, was 
all about performance as well. It certainly wasn’t the compelling 
gameplay, which—like  DDR  well after it—consisted of moving up, 
down, left, or right at precisely the right time.7 Whereas  Dragon’s 
Lair ’s hook is in its animated ﬁ lm-quality visuals by former Disney 
animator Don Bluth,  DDR  draws the player in by physically involv-
ing them in the game, in fact paying little mind to its graphics. 
 Dragon’s Lair  was all about the novelty of its video quality, a 
fact punctuated by many arcade operators setting up additional 
video displays so the audience could view the play sessions.8 
Unfortunately for future games using similar technology, it was 
difﬁ cult for designers to invent ways for players to interact with 
canned video footage in an entertaining manner.9 Thus, once the 
novelty of simplistic interactions with high-quality video wore 
off and profoundly interactive real-time graphics continued to 
A scene from an episode of 
sitcom Malcolm in the Middle, 
entitled “Dewey’s Special 
Class,” featuring ﬁ ctional DDR 
clone Jump Jump Dance Party, 
complete with over-the-top 
theatrics.
 7 Dragon’s Lair did have an additional “direction” as an option, an action button 
for use of the sword, but, like the four-way joystick, it could be used only when a 
speciﬁ c spot in certain video scenes required it. 
 8 Author Loguidice conﬁ rms this from one of his summer visits to the arcades on 
the boardwalk at the Jersey Shore, where arcade operators would have additional 
 Dragon’s Lair  displays not only around the machine, but also occasionally fac-
ing outside to attract passersby.  Dragon’s Lair  was also one of the ﬁ rst games for 
which arcade operators charged 50 cents versus the usual 25 cents! 
 9 Later video-based games, like Sega’s  Tomcat Alley  (1994; PC, Sega CD) and 
Hudson Soft’s ﬁ ghting game for the Japanese market,  Battle Heat  (1994; NEC 
PC-FX), did eventually offer near-real-time interaction, but the interaction still fell 
short of games with traditional computer-generated visuals.  

30     Chapter 3 DANCE DANCE REVOLUTION (1998): THE PLAYER BECOMES THE STAR
improve in quality, games that took inspiration from  Dragon’s 
Lair  fell out of favor. It was therefore only with a performance 
hook that what amounted to little more than  Touch Me ’s game-
play could be so inﬂ uential. 
 Besides the common but unconscious habit of moving one’s 
body in the direction one moves the controller, games that 
demanded more from the player than ﬁ nger tapping have been, 
until recently, few and far between. Early products worth mention-
ing include  Video Jogger and Video Reﬂ ex  (Exus, 1983; Atari 2600 
Video Computer System), a two-cartridge bundle with the Foot 
Craz controller; Nintendo’s  World Class Track Meet  (1988, Nintendo 
Entertainment System), bundled with the Power Pad;10 and Sega’s 
Activator (1994), a controller designed primarily for use with ﬁ ght-
ing games like  Eternal Champions  (Sega, 1993; Sega Genesis). 
 The Foot Craz is a ﬂ oor mat controller used in a similar manner 
as modern dance pads, save for its purely horizontal layout, which 
registers one of four directions on each of its colored stepping cir-
cles. A green circle, which acts like a standard Atari joystick’s ﬁ re 
button, sits above the row of other circles. Besides achieving only 
a limited release before “The Great Videogame Crash of 1984”11 
and spotty responsiveness, the cartridges that accompanied the 
Foot Craz were mundane.  Video Jogger  required the player to run 
Screenshot from Exus’ Video 
Jogger, designed for use with 
the Foot Craz controller on the 
Atari 2600.
 10 World Class Track Meet  was originally  Stadium Events , and the Power Pad was 
originally Family Fun Fitness, both released by Bandai before Nintendo bought 
out all rights. Naturally, today the Bandai versions are highly collectible. 
 11      The iconic name given to a period of massive ﬁ nancial losses, stock liquidations, 
and generally bad times for the videogame industry at large in the United States. 

 
Chapter 3 DANCE DANCE REVOLUTION (1998): THE PLAYER BECOMES THE STAR     31
in place, and  Video Reﬂ ex tasked the player with stepping on the 
matching color or colors when a bug appeared. Although Exus 
should be praised for their innovative hardware ideas, it would take 
others to make equally compelling software for them. 
 Nintendo’s Power Pad is a ﬂ oor-mat controller taken to the 
extreme, with 12 numbered circles laid out in a 4  3 grid, with 
the circles on the left half in blue and on the right half in red. On 
the ﬂ ip side of the large mat are eight unnumbered blue and red 
colored circles in a plus pattern. Though the 12-circle side of the 
pad allowed for two (careful) simultaneous players and 11 differ-
ent total cartridges were released worldwide, with themes ranging 
from sports to aerobics to chasing and apprehending criminals, 
the now-obvious killer app of a dance game was not considered 
(perhaps because of the system’s modest sound capabilities). 
Though faring better than many of the Nintendo Entertainment 
System’s wacky add-ons in terms of support and general interest, 
the Power Pad failed to maintain momentum or further develop-
ment beyond the lifespan of its release system.12 
 12      Craven adds, “You cannot take the Power Pad out of the equation as far as los-
ing weight. As a child, I found it hard to play the game and eat Oreo cookies at 
the same time, so I had to lose a pound or three, playing with it . . . but DDR is the 
poster child for the ‘Active Gaming’ initiative.” 
One side of Nintendo’s oversized 
Power Pad for the NES, shown 
with the Street Cop, Athletic 
World, Dance Aerobics, Super 
Team Games, and Short Order/
Eggsplode! cartridges.

32     Chapter 3 DANCE DANCE REVOLUTION (1998): THE PLAYER BECOMES THE STAR
 Sega’s Activator, on the other hand, was undeniably  exciting 
and groundbreaking in theory, but poor in execution. The 
Activator is a hollow, octagonal platform that registers an action 
in one of eight directions via infrared sensors. After stepping 
within the octagon, the player is asked to either punch or kick 
in one of the eight directions to perform an onscreen move. 
Unfortunately, the infrared sensors were easily distorted by com-
mon room elements like lights, and there were never any games 
designed speciﬁ cally for the device. As such, performing the 
complex moves of standard ﬁ ghting games of the day, like  Mortal 
Kombat  (Acclaim, 1993), requiring both precision and multiple 
keypresses (which are sometimes difﬁ cult to pull off even on a 
standard controller) to be matched by the player’s physical con-
tortions, quickly made even the most dedicated player give up. 
It’s by keeping the technological ambition level reined in and a 
game designed speciﬁ cally for the platform that  DDR provides a 
sharp contrast to the Activator’s failings. 
 With the passing of the ﬁ ghting game craze by the latter part of 
the 1990s,13 increased operating costs and further interest wan-
ing in the United States in light of ever-more-powerful consoles, 
arcades began to morph into something akin to mini amusement 
parks. Arcades began to showcase games that featured special-
ized hardware, environmental cabinets, and multiplayer com-
petitive setups that were not easy to replicate at home. These 
games included  Top Skater  (Sega, 1997), in which the player 
 performs tricks and other activities on a realistic skateboard 
 13 See  Chapter 17 , “ Street Fighter II (1991): Would You Like the Combo?” for more 
information. 
Box shot of Sega’s Activator, a 
product that sounded great on 
paper, but disappointed in its 
actual execution.

 
Chapter 3 DANCE DANCE REVOLUTION (1998): THE PLAYER BECOMES THE STAR     33
 platform;  Airline Pilots  (Sega, 1999), in which the player was 
tasked to ﬂ y a commercial Boeing 777 aircraft, complete with 
realistic controls and three-screen cockpit;  Beach Head 2000 
(Global VR, 2000), a shooting game played using an immersive 
turret controller;  Arctic Thunder  (Midway, 2001), where one or 
more players sat on faux snowmobiles and competed in a high-
speed, jump-ﬁ lled race; and of course,  DDR , with the arcade 
 version’s metal light-up dance pads and oversized speakers.14 
 After  DDR ’s success in arcades around the world, it was only 
natural for Konami to try to bring the experience home. Though 
Japan received home translations of  DDR  and other games in the 
Bemani series well before other territories, it was with the wide 
2001 release of  Dance Dance Revolution  for the Sony PlayStation 
(PS1) that  DDR ’s legend began to grow, opening up the game to 
a whole new generation of players who may have never set foot 
in an arcade or been intimidated by the idea of being the cen-
ter of public attention. As a March 2001 review from  GamePro 
magazine put it, “ Dance Dance Revolution  [for the PS1] offers all 
the fun of the arcade and none of the humiliation.” Further, as 
Cravens adds, “Players use the arcade version as a stage to show 
off the moves that they have been practicing at home on the con-
sole versions.” 
 Although  DDR could be played using just a standard controller 
without the soft, plastic, foldable dance pad, it was with this add-
on, available either bundled with versions of the game or sold 
Screenshot for Epyx’s 
Breakdance on the Commodore 
64, which featured a crude 
audiovisual presentation and 
rudimentary “Simon Says”–style 
gameplay throughout its various 
play modes.
 14 Similar to  Dragon’s Lair  before it, arcade operators would often set up  DDR 
machines in conspicuous locations for maximum audience impact. 

34     Chapter 3 DANCE DANCE REVOLUTION (1998): THE PLAYER BECOMES THE STAR
separately,15 that the game transcended other attempts at similar 
play styles and themes. These included Epyx’s  Breakdance (1984; 
Commodore 64), which made players remember and repeat the 
breaking moves of their opponent using a joystick; SCEI’s surreal 
 PaRappa the Rapper  (1996; PS1), in which players direct a rap-
ping dog by pressing controller buttons in the correct sequence 
and timing; and Eidos’  Mad Maestro  (2002; Sony PlayStation 2), 
which had players conduct an orchestra by tapping buttons on 
the controller16 with varying degrees of pressure.17 Though some 
of the other games in the genre were  popular in their own right, 
their popularity never rose to the degree of  DDR , which had the 
advantage of its specialized controller. To be fair, a dance pad, like 
any other controller that outputs standard signals, can be used to 
control other types of games—but it’s ideally suited to  DDR -like 
experiences.18 
Back of the box for the ﬁ rst U.S. 
home release of Konami’s Dance 
Dance Revolution series for the 
Sony PlayStation.
 15 Third parties would soon get in on the act, releasing their own pads with varying 
degrees of quality and innovation, including hard platforms; though, as Cravens 
states, “The arcade version of DDR will always be a much stronger version of the 
game, simply because the dance pad is superior to anything any company has 
developed [for the home].” 
 16 The Japanese release supported a baton peripheral. 
 17      Though plenty of other systems, including the PC and units from Microsoft and 
Nintendo, received many of the same games, it’s Sony’s PlayStation series of consoles 
where the largest diversity of performance-based games have been released to date.  
 18 See  http://www.ﬂ orian.ca/index.php?id=35 for one unusual alternative usage. 

 
Chapter 3 DANCE DANCE REVOLUTION (1998): THE PLAYER BECOMES THE STAR     35
 Where the home experience differed the most from the arcade 
was game modes, which were far more plentiful at home than 
in the arcade. The ﬁ rst home version of  DDR included Game, 
Workout, Lesson, and Training modes. Game Mode is the main 
mode for  DDR  and is identical to the difﬁ culty level found in the 
arcade version. Workout Mode adds ﬁ tness goals while count-
ing the number of calories burned during play. Lesson Mode 
enables novice players to learn the game’s basics in a more 
relaxed tutorial setting. Training Mode allows players to practice 
and master the game’s more difﬁ cult songs. Future games in the 
series and the various clones and knock-offs would continue to 
expand on the intricacies of these core modes and add slightly 
to the play mechanics, such as requiring players to hold a foot 
position for a set period of time. 
 The success of the Bemani series and of course  DDR would 
inspire other attempts at using special peripherals and add-
ons to enhance the gameplaying experience.19 Some, like Sega’s 
 Samba de Amigo  (1999; Arcade, Sega Dreamcast), where the player 
used maracas to play the game, and Sony’s EyeToy (2003, Sony 
PlayStation 2), a motion-sensing camera used with a variety of 
games, never really caught the public’s attention,20 while others like 
Screenshot from Codemasters’ 
2006 Dance Factory for the 
Sony PlayStation 2, which 
allowed gamers to use their 
own music CDs to create custom 
dance steps.
 19      Prior to the Bemani series, most peripherals that weren’t included with a system, 
including light guns and other specialized controllers, received limited support 
due to too few owners, making more aggressive forays into this area by developers 
few and far between. 
 20      Although Sony’s EyeToy has chalked up respectable worldwide sales and has a wide 
variety of game support, including many in the performance-based category, the 
concept has yet to capture the imagination of mainstream media and nongamers.  

36     Chapter 3 DANCE DANCE REVOLUTION (1998): THE PLAYER BECOMES THE STAR
RedOctane’s  Guitar Hero  (2005; Sony PlayStation 2), which features 
a guitar controller, and MTV Games’  Rock Band  (2007; Nintendo 
Wii, Microsoft Xbox 360, and others), which features a guitar, drum, 
and microphone, have become cultural phenomena.21 Others still, 
like Konami’s own microphone-based  Karaoke Revolution Party 
(2005, Microsoft Xbox, Sony PlayStation 2, and others), allow incor-
poration of the basic  DDR  gameplay and dance pad as an adjunct 
to their own main modes of play. 
 With the continued popularity of  DDR  and the even more 
popular  Guitar Hero and  Rock Band series,22 performance-based 
gaming is a genre to be reckoned with for the foreseeable future. 
After all, combining popular music with the fun of performing 
is a concept that transcends many of the social biases against 
 21      As Cravens states, “Since the Bemani line of games included  Guitar Freaks and 
 Drum Mania  (not just  DDR ), there was obviously a huge inﬂ uence.  Guitar Hero 
and  Rock Band  are more popular than DDR because Harmonix [developer of 
 Rock Band ] took the  DDR  formula and made it for a more mainstream audience. 
Instead of jumping around on a lit stage, you are now ‘looking cool’ with a hunk 
of guitar-shaped plastic or a ‘drum kit’ in front of you while you played songs that 
were familiar and accepted by American audiences. The Bemani line of games 
proved that the concept would work; it just took a company that was more in tune 
with American pop culture to [really] make it explode.” 
 22      As well as Konami’s own, newer multiperipheral band game,  Rock Revolution 
(2008; Nintendo Wii, Sony PlayStation 3, and so on). 
Promotional screenshot 
from 2004’s Dance Dance 
Revolution Extreme for the Sony 
PlayStation 2, which—among 
other features—added support 
for Sony’s EyeToy camera.

 
Chapter 3 DANCE DANCE REVOLUTION (1998): THE PLAYER BECOMES THE STAR     37
the idea of videogames, particularly as games like  DDR and 
Nintendo’s  exercise-centric  Wii Fit  game and Wii Balance Board 
(2008, Nintendo Wii) continue to rack up weight loss and ﬁ tness-
related successes in otherwise sedentary individuals. As Cravens 
 summarizes, “ DDR  is a series that is so positive, grandparents are 
aware of it and they can endorse it for their family. It is a whole-
some game (save for a few stray lyrics) that is healthy for the play-
ers and it is not a game that was made entirely for 25-year-old 
men. Mainstream media have parodied it and embraced it for 
being an oddity that does not seem to lose much steam.”
Karaoke has proven a popular 
subgenre in the performance 
games category, with Konami’s 
own Karaoke Revolution series 
of games one mainstay. Box back 
for Karaoke Revolution Presents 
American Idol Encore for the 
Microsoft Xbox 360 shown.

This page intentionally left blank

39
4
 DIABLO  (1996): THE ROGUE 
GOES TO HELL  
 Perhaps the handiest way to illustrate  Diablo ’s (Blizzard, 
1996; Apple Macintosh, PC, Sony PlayStation) impact is by com-
paring it to another breakout hit of the 1990s: id’s ﬁ rst-person 
shooter  Doom  (1993; Apple Macintosh, Atari Jaguar, PC, and 
others; see  Chapter 5 , “ Doom  (1993): The First Person Shooter 
Takes Control”). The two games have much in common. First, 
they both introduced critical innovations that established new 
genres. Second, they were staggeringly successful in their own 
right, inspiring other developers to shamelessly duplicate their 
formula. Both games offer similar plots (go to hell, confront 
demons). Finally, and perhaps most importantly, both games 
took full advantage of the tremendous graphics and networking 
potential of the PC. Simply put,  Diablo  did for the action role-
playing game (RPG) genre what  Doom  did for the ﬁ rst-person 
shooter. Like all the games in this book, they have helped shape 
the videogame industry as we know it today.  
 Diablo -inspired games are still produced today, and the major 
game sites and magazines wax endlessly over highly anticipated 
games like Ascaron’s  Sacred II: Fallen Angel  (2008, Microsoft Xbox 
360, PC, Sony PlayStation 3) and Blizzard’s own  Diablo III (2009; 
Apple Macintosh, PC). Although  Sacred II and  Diablo III boast 
terriﬁ c graphics and interesting innovations, they still have much 
in common with the  original—which was still being sold a decade 
later as part of Blizzard’s  Diablo Battle Chest .  
 Before going into detail about the game, let’s explain the dif-
ferences between conventional computer role-playing games 
(CRPGs) and action RPGs. The key difference is how the games 
handle time. Conventional CRPGs like Sir-Tech’s  Wizardry: 
Proving Grounds of the Mad Overlord (1981; Apple II, Nintendo 
Entertainment System, and others) and Origin’s  Ultima (1981; 
Apple II, Atari 8-bit, and others; see  Chapter 23 ) are turn-based, 
much like their table-top role-playing cousins. This means that 
the gameplay is periodic; the game pauses at key periods to allow 

40     Chapter 4 DIABLO (1996): THE ROGUE GOES TO HELL
players time to make decisions and devise tactics. The advantages 
of this setup is that battles can be more intricate; the player has 
time to weigh more variables and assign complex tasks to her 
hero or party members. 
 In real-time games such as FTL Games’  Dungeon Master (1987; 
Atari ST, Commodore Amiga, PC, and others) and Westwood’s  Eye 
of the Beholder  (1990; Commodore Amiga, Nintendo Game Boy 
Advance, PC, and others), the monsters don’t stand around wait-
ing for the player to make a move. Instead, they roam about freely, 
and the player has to respond immediately to threats. Combat in 
these games tends to be reduced to clicking on monsters rather 
than wading through complicated menus; there simply isn’t time 
to devise elaborate tactics once battle has commenced. Some 
games, such as Bioware’s  Baldur’s Gate  (1998; Apple Macintosh, 
PC) or New World Computing’s  Might and Magic VI  (1998, PC) 
offer hybrids of real-time and turn-based gameplay, but  Diablo 
and other action-RPGs are purely real-time. 
 Another deﬁ ning characteristic of action RPGs is the emphasis 
on rapid dexterity with the mouse. Typically, this means moving 
the mouse pointer over each enemy and quickly pressing the left 
or right mouse button—taken to extremes, the game becomes a 
“clickfest” and a true test of hand-eye coordination. Later action 
RPGs such as Gas Powered Games’  Dungeon Siege  (2002; Apple 
Macintosh, PC) reduce the clickfest aspect, automating many 
tasks that formerly had to be manually executed by the player. 
Games like Wizardry: Proving 
Grounds of the Mad Overlord, box 
back and front shown, have a very 
different design philosophy than 
games like Diablo, relying more 
on careful planning and strategy 
than quick ﬁ ngers.

 
Chapter 4 DIABLO (1996): THE ROGUE GOES TO HELL     41
 Finally, unlike older real-time games such as the aforementioned 
 Dungeon Master , action-RPGs are depicted in third-person, iso-
metric view. This means that players see their avatars, rather than 
viewing the action from a ﬁ rst-person perspective. Although other 
action RPGs differ markedly in their details, they all adhere (at least 
to some degree) to these basic paradigms. 
 One of the major breaks that  Diablo  made with conventional 
CRPGs concerns complexity. Conventional CRPGs, especially 
venerable old classics such as SSI’s  Wizard’s Crown  or Interplay’s 
 The Bard’s Tale  (both 1985; Apple II, Commodore 64, and oth-
ers), tend to be far more difﬁ cult to learn than  Diablo . This fact is 
apparent from the start of the game. In  Diablo , the player  simply 
picks one of three premade characters (warrior, rogue, sorcerer) 
to serve as the avatar, then the gameplay begins.  Wizard’s Crown 
and  The Bard’s Tale  require players to build a whole party of 
 characters from scratch, making dozens of critical and esoteric 
decisions that have a crucial, permanent impact on the gameplay. 
A few bad choices can make winning the game difﬁ cult or even 
impossible. Making smart decisions means reading the often-
lengthy instruction manuals, and having a solid background in 
pen-and-paper  Dungeons & Dragons  and fantasy novels is help-
ful if not mandatory. Players are likewise challenged to make 
their own maps or risk becoming lost in dungeons. In short, these 
games require far more preparation and patience than many 
modern gamers are willing or able to commit. They simply are 
not casual games. 
Unlike many CRPGs, which 
require lengthy character or party 
creation sequences, Diablo asks 
players to make a single choice 
before the game begins.

42     Chapter 4 DIABLO (1996): THE ROGUE GOES TO HELL
The action begins in this 
foreboding village. Lovely but 
slightly disturbing guitar music 
sets the mood. Note the red and 
blue orbs indicating health and 
mana (magic power), respectively. 
A comparable setup is seen in 
Blue Sky’s critically acclaimed 
ﬁ rst-person-perspective role-
playing game Ultima Underworld: 
The Stygian Abyss (1992; PC, 
Windows Mobile, and others).
 Blizzard’s strategy was to keep what was fun about CRPGs 
intact, but move the complex and often intimidating statistical 
and literary elements under the hood. All fans of CRPGs enjoy 
watching characters “level up,” becoming stronger and more 
 proﬁ cient as the game progresses. They also enjoy the visceral 
nature of defeating increasingly tougher monsters and explor-
ing dangerous and mysterious places. However, standard CRPGs 
can take days or even weeks for novices to master, whereas any 
reasonably intelligent person can get  Diablo  up and running in 
 minutes. Indeed, the single-player campaign can be beaten in 
under 10 hours. Blizzard also added a brilliant online component 
through  Battle.net , which ensured that avid fans would  continue 
to enjoy the game long after they had completed the single-
player campaign. The new formula was a tremendous success for 
Blizzard, and many of the innovations we see in the  Diablo series 
were carried over into the even more successful massively mul-
tiplayer online game,  World of Warcraft  (2004; Apple Macintosh, 
PC). In this chapter, however, we focus on  Diablo  and its impact 
on the industry. 
 Blizzard was not the ﬁ rst developer that attempted to inject 
more adrenaline into what many considered an overtly nerdy 
and contemplative genre. FTL’s  Dungeon Master offered real-time 
dungeon crawling from a ﬁ rst-person perspective, and was itself 
inspired by the earlier wireframe game  Dungeons of Daggorath 
(Tandy Corp, 1982) for the Radio Shack Color Computer. Origin 
and SSI had also released some intriguing action-based CRPG 

 
Chapter 4 DIABLO (1996): THE ROGUE GOES TO HELL     43
titles such as  Moebius: The Orb of Celestial Harmony (Origin, 
1985; Apple II, Commodore Amiga, and others) and  Hillsfar (SSI, 
1989; Commodore Amiga, PC, and others).  Moebius  is a hybrid 
beat ’em up (see  Chapter 17 , “ Street Fighter II  (1991): Would You 
Like the Combo?”) and CRPG, whereas  Hillsfar  is a simplistic 
CRPG with a series of action-based minigames. There were even 
some real-time games that offered a similar third-person iso-
metric view featured in  Diablo , such as  Shadow Sorcerer (SSI, 
1991; Atari ST, Commodore Amiga, PC),  The Four Crystals of 
Trazere  (Mindscape, 1992; Atari ST, Commodore Amiga, PC), and 
 The Summoning  (SSI, 1992; PC). However, none of these games 
attracted as much attention as Diablo and are seldom played 
today. Without question, the most enduring of these pre- Diablo 
games is Origin’s  Ultima VII: The Black Gate  (1992; PC, Super 
Nintendo). This richly interactive game was well received by crit-
ics and fans of the series, and remains a fan favorite. 
 Action-oriented RPGs were far more plentiful on consoles than 
computers. In particular, Nintendo’s  The Legend of Zelda (1986, 
NES), which is covered in  Chapter 21 , “ The Legend of Zelda (1986): 
Rescuing Zeldas and Uniting Triforces,” is worth mentioning 
here. Although the ﬁ rst Zelda game isn’t a true role-playing game 
(it lacks a statistical system for leveling and is referred to as an 
“action adventure”), it nevertheless shares many of its features, 
and few developers could ignore the proﬁ ts it reaped. Origin 
seems to have been thinking along these lines with  Ultima VIII: 
Pagan  (1994, PC), which added precision jumping sequences 
reminiscent of a Super Mario game (see  Chapter 19 , “ Super Mario 
Bros.  (1985): How High Can Jumpman Get?”) to the venerable old 
series. However, reactions to the games were mixed. Writing for 
 Computer Shopper  magazine, Barry Brenesal remarked, “ Pagan is 
certainly harder to play than any previous  Ultima , and its mouse-
based combat may frustrate fans of earlier releases.”1 
 Brenesal’s comment brings us to an important point regarding 
computer and console games: modern computers are far more 
likely to have mice and keyboards than game pads, a factor with 
serious implications for gameplay. Game pads are designed with 
arcade-like gameplay in mind; keyboards and mice are  primarily 
intended for productivity. Although it was easy enough to buy a 
game pad or joystick for PCs, few outside the hardcore gaming 
community ever bothered to do so, and not all games supported 
them anyway. Furthermore, computer gamers (particularly CRPG 
fans) were thought to be older and more sophisticated than 
their console cousins. They thrived on complexity, not dexterity. 
The common assumption was that, at least on computers, role-
 playing and action games were mutually exclusive, and the long 
 1 Computer Shopper (June 1994). 

44     Chapter 4 DIABLO (1996): THE ROGUE GOES TO HELL
line of failed action-CRPGs seemed to attest to that fact. Blizzard 
ﬁ nally proved, once and for all, that they were wrong. 
 Perhaps the most signiﬁ cant feature of  Diablo  is its highly pol-
ished, instantly addictive gameplay. In many ways it is compa-
rable to  Rogue  (see  bonus chapter , “ Rogue  (1980): Have @ You, You 
Deadly Zs”), a very old but still widely played CRPG that originated 
on university minicomputers. 
 Like  Diablo ,  Rogue  offers procedurally generated dungeons 
and bite-size, quick-ﬁ x style adventuring—a vast change from 
the drawn-out and even laborious campaigns of other CRPGs. 
A procedurally generated dungeon is one that relies on predeﬁ ned 
algorithms to create dungeons on-the-ﬂ y; it’s important not to 
confuse this process with purely random dungeons. After all, no 
one wants to play a dungeon that has no exits, or has hordes of the 
highest-level monsters roaming about the ﬁ rst levels. The major 
advantage of procedurally generated dungeons is replay value; as 
the dungeons will always be fresh, there is no need for the adven-
ture ever to end. Indeed, several other CRPGs took advantage of 
the same technique; examples include  Telengard  (Avalon Hill, 
1982; Commodore PET, TRS-80, and others) and  Sword of Fargoal 
(Epyx, 1982; Commodore 64, Commodore VIC-20). 
 However, though randomizing the dungeons may improve 
replay value, it seems to diminish the opportunities for narrative 
and creative level design. What usually happens is that the game-
play descends into a simple yet addictive “hack ’n’ slash” style, 
similar to the gameplay in the multiplayer arcade classic  Gauntlet 
As with Rogue before it, 
characters gain levels quickly and 
frequently in Diablo. With each 
level, the player gains points to 
distribute among ﬁ ve attributes.

 
Chapter 4 DIABLO (1996): THE ROGUE GOES TO HELL     45
(Atari, 1985),2 in which the objective is only to kill the next wave of 
monsters with little thought to plot or long-term planning. If your 
character dies in  Rogue , for instance, it’s painless enough to create 
a new character and begin anew; little is lost in the process, and 
many versions lack any way to save a character anyway. Compare 
this to a game such as  Pool of Radiance  (SSI, 1988; Commodore 64, 
Commodore Amiga, PC, and others), which offers a huge campaign 
that takes weeks and hundreds of hours of gameplay to complete. 
Although  Diablo  has a plot and a mission for the character, it also 
lacks the long and drawn-out character creation sequence of most 
other CRPGs, and dying is a relatively trivial affair. As with  Rogue , 
the idea is to get the player up and hacking as quickly and pain-
lessly as possible, and although it is possible to save the current 
game, the player cannot save and restore multiple games. 
 By far the most obvious difference between  Diablo and  Rogue 
is the audiovisuals. Whereas  Rogue  is based on simple character-
set graphics and has only rudimentary sound, if any,  Diablo offers 
quality graphics, full-motion video, and some of the best music of 
its era. Every spell and attack is fully animated, and a semitrans-
parent overlay provides an onscreen map to help navigate the 
dungeons. 
 2 Games like  Dandy  (APX, 1983; Atari 8-bit),  Gauntlet , and their direct sequels 
and numerous clones focus almost entirely on direct action rather than any type 
of exploration or role-playing, mitigating their ultimate inﬂ uence on  Diablo ’s 
design. 
Battles tend to be over and done 
with quickly, though the character 
can face dozens of enemies at 
once. Note here the transparent 
map overlay that can be turned 
on and off.

46     Chapter 4 DIABLO (1996): THE ROGUE GOES TO HELL
 Diablo ’s storyline is probably the least remarkable thing 
about it. As with  Doom , the goal of the game is to battle wave after 
wave of demonic forces, ultimately battling it out with Diablo, 
Lord of Terror. Many of the game’s most raving reviews, such as 
Trent C. Ward’s for  GameSpot , make no mention of the plot what-
soever. Nevertheless, the game and its sequels have inspired a 
series of six novels by Richard A. Knaak, and there have long been 
rumors of a movie based on the franchise. 
 Like  Doom ,  Diablo  also took advantage of the by-then explod-
ing network multiplayer scene, and its massively popular 
Battle.net  server became the ﬁ rst such project to turn a proﬁ t.3 
 Battle.net  stood out in stark contrast to other online gaming 
offerings of its era by focusing on its excellent player-match-
ing  service. First, anyone who had bought  Diablo  could use the 
 service for free, without any monthly fees or obligations what-
soever. Although Blizzard was able to fully recoup the losses by 
advertising revenue, the service was mainly intended to boost 
sales of the game itself. According to Paul W. Sams, spokesman for 
the service, “We don’t look at Battle.net as a proﬁ t center. We look 
at it as a value add to our customers that is justiﬁ ed by increased 
retail sales.” Sams estimates that  Battle.net  led to a 10% boost in 
sales.4 The genius of  Battle.net  was that game data wasn’t chan-
neled through Blizzard’s servers. Instead, the service functioned 
as a matchmaker, connecting gamers directly. However, this setup 
opened the door wide for cheaters, who could modify their data 
ﬁ les to gain an unfair advantage. Blizzard struggled mightily with 
this problem, regularly issuing patches to stymie the cheaters. 
 Even though  Battle.net  was free to use, that didn’t stop a group 
of programmers from reverse-engineering the code and releasing 
bnetd, a free alternative to Blizzard’s own service. Blizzard moved 
quickly to shut down bnetd, arguing that it promoted piracy. After 
all, Blizzard required users of  Battle.net  to verify their purchase 
by entering a special code printed on their game discs. The rival 
service offered a refuge to gamers who, for whatever reason, were 
unable or unwilling to provide a legitimate code. After a series of 
court battles, Blizzard ultimately prevailed. 
 Rather than design their own expansion to  Diablo , Blizzard 
North outsourced to Synergistic Software, a company with roots 
going back to some of the earliest CRPGs produced for home 
computers. Their  Diablo  expansion,  Hellﬁ re , was released in 
1997 to lukewarm reviews. Although it added plenty of new con-
tent and two new character classes, it lacked multiplayer sup-
port and was not nearly as well received as the original. Writing 
 3 See Greg Costikyan’s “Online gaming’s store-self chains” article on Salon.com: 
 http://www.salon.com/tech/feature/1999/04/21/battlenet/ . 
 4 See Barbara Walter’s interview with Sams at  http://www.gamasutra.com/features/
19971128/battlenet_01.htm . 

 
Chapter 4 DIABLO (1996): THE ROGUE GOES TO HELL     47
for  GameSpot , “Desslock” wrote that the expansion “fails to 
 provide as compelling an experience as Diablo” and that fans of 
multiplayer ought to pass on it.5 However, Blizzard’s ﬁ rst ofﬁ cial 
sequel,  Diablo II , released in 2000, became another smash hit for 
the company—and this despite what one reviewer described as 
Diablo II offered superior 
graphics, more classes, and 
outdoor areas to explore. 
However, the core gameplay 
remained the same.
Diablo II offered a more 
sophisticated leveling system 
than the original. This branching 
tree system would show up in 
later games such as World of 
Warcraft.
 5 See  http://www.gamespot.com/pc/rpg/hellﬁ re/review.html . 

48     Chapter 4 DIABLO (1996): THE ROGUE GOES TO HELL
“somewhat outdated” graphics.6 The sequel maintained much of 
the gameplay that had proven so  successful, but added several 
welcome features. These included large outdoor areas to explore, 
a more linear quest  structure, new classes, and a branching tree 
system for leveling. Blizzard also improved its online experience 
for  Diablo II , now storing all the private data on their own serv-
ers. This change greatly curtailed the cheating that had been such 
a problem for fans of the ﬁ rst game.  
 Diablo ’s impact on the industry was immediate and has prov-
en long-lasting. Though simplistic compared to classics such as 
 Wizard’s Crown  or  Pool of Radiance , the game compensates with 
highly polished gameplay, attractive audiovisuals, and a highly 
intuitive interface. It was easy enough for even total novices to 
learn, but certainly challenging enough to keep from getting 
 boring—and the randomized dungeons and highly active multi-
player options upped the replay value substantially. Its legacy is 
seen today in the aforementioned  Sacred II  and  Diablo III games, 
but developers took the concept in wildly different directions; 
consider Iridon Interactive’s  Dink Smallwood  (1998; PC), a com-
edy set in a typical fantasy setting; Interplay’s  Fallout: Brotherhood 
of Steel  (2004; Microsoft Xbox, Sony PlayStation 2), set in a post-
apocalyptic wasteland; or Activision’s  Marvel: Ultimate Alliance 
(2006; Nintendo Wii, Sony PlayStation Portable, and  others), 
where the familiar fantasy paradigms are replaced with a contem-
porary superhero setting. 
 Other noteworthy  Diablo -inﬂ uenced games include  Gauntlet 
Legends  (Atari, 1998; Arcade, Sega Dreamcast, and others),7 
 Darkstone  (Delphine Software, 1999; PC, Sony PlayStation), 
 Revenant  (Cinematix Studios, 1999; Apple Macintosh, PC),  Nox 
(Westwood Studios, 2000; PC),  Baldur’s Gate: Dark Alliance 
(Interplay, 2001; Microsoft Xbox, Nintendo GameCube, and oth-
ers),  Divine Divinity  (Larian Studios, 2002; PC), and  Champions 
of Norrath  (Sony Online Entertainment, 2004; Sony PlayStation 2). 
Blizzard has also gotten back into the  Diablo business with 
 Diablo III , which has a richer single-player story with multiplayer 
integration possibilities. As Leonard Boyarsky, Lead World Artist 
for  Diablo III , says, “It’s kind of like, ‘I’m playing a single-player 
experience, but I can share that with my friends. There are going 
to be things like class quests that only certain classes go on, but 
my friends can get experience from going on those and helping 
me.’”8 Though differing in their details, all of these games—and 
 6 See Desslock’s review at  http://www.gamespot.com/pc/rpg/diablo2/review.html . 
 7 After the original’s release, the  Gauntlet  series of titles continued reﬁ ning the 
original game’s scope by introducing an increasing number of exploration and 
RPG elements until the latest releases had little to differentiate themselves from 
the myriad of  Diablo -like clones. 
 8 http://www.gamasutra.com/php-bin/news_index.php?story=19259 .   

 
Chapter 4 DIABLO (1996): THE ROGUE GOES TO HELL     49
 ultimately all modern action-CRPGs—derive their core gameplay 
elements from the original  Diablo . 
 Although  Diablo  may not have inspired quite as many derivatives 
as  Doom , there’s no doubt that it belongs in anyone’s list of histori-
cally signiﬁ cant games. The inﬂ uence it exerted on CRPG developers 
is striking, comparable only to the blow made by  Dungeon Master 
and  Ultima  before it. Even prior to its release, there were few games 
attracting more attention than  Diablo III , and even if that game is lit-
tle more than a relatively minor overhaul of the ﬁ rst, no one doubts 
that Blizzard will continue to reap enormous proﬁ ts from the series’ 
immense, dedicated fan base.
Although the commands in 
games like Champions of Norrath 
(box back shown) tend to be 
executed in a more direct manner 
than Diablo, the inﬂ uence from 
Blizzard’s classic game is clear.

50     Chapter 4 DIABLO (1996): THE ROGUE GOES TO HELL
All kinds of themes have been 
explored in the myriad games 
inspired by Diablo’s style of play, 
ranging from superhero to military 
to comedy, such as in the well-
acted single-player fantasy spoof, 
The Bard’s Tale (Vivendi Universal, 
2004; Microsoft Xbox, PC, Sony 
PlayStation 2), box back shown.

51
5
 DOOM (1993): THE FIRST-PERSON 
SHOOTER TAKES CONTROL  
 On December 10, 1993, the “Two Johns”—John Carmack and 
John Romero1—unveiled the infamous  Doom for PC,2 described 
in its manual as “a lightning-fast virtual reality adventure where 
you’re the toughest space trooper ever to suck vacuum.” The 
game was an instant success, catapulting Carmack and Romero’s 
company, id Software, to the short list of the world’s most emi-
nent shareware game developers. It also spawned a genre now 
labeled the “ﬁ rst-person shooter” (FPS) or just “shooter,” a genre 
that is still dominating the industry.  Doom  offered gamers vis-
ceral 3D-like graphics and intense, arcade-like action that could 
be soloed or enjoyed simultaneously against their friends in a 
mode affectionately dubbed “Deathmatch,” now a commonly 
used term. Although it wasn’t the ﬁ rst FPS, it was by far the most 
successful and inﬂ uential PC game of the 1990s, if not of all time. 
 Doom  puts players in the role of a bullet-chewing marine who’s 
sent to Mars after assaulting an ofﬁ cer who ordered an attack 
on civilians. The Martian post was mind-numbingly boring, at 
least until the researchers on the Martian moons began making 
headway in their interdimensional space travel project. You and 
your combat troop were sent to Martian moon Phobos to secure 
the situation; they rushed in while you guarded the perimeter. 
However, you’ve now lost radio contact with the troop, who are 
likely dead, and have no way off the moon. Your only hope is to 
re-enter the station, facing the waiting terror with nothing more 
than a pistol—though there’s every indication that more formi-
dable ﬁ rearms are to be found in the base.  
 This story, which seems inspired by such sci-ﬁ  and horror clas-
sics as  Alien  (1979) and  The Evil Dead  (1981), is well suited to the 
 1 Other important ﬁ gures at id at the time included Tom Hall, Adrian Carmack (no 
relation), and Sandy Petersen. 
 2 Since the game’s original release, ofﬁ cial and unofﬁ cial ports of  Doom have been 
created for nearly every capable platform.  

52     Chapter 5 DOOM (1993): THE FIRST-PERSON SHOOTER TAKES CONTROL
gameplay. However, although the game did serve as the basis for a 
series of novels and a movie, no one bought this game for its story-
line. The game’s success was owed, in part, at least, to the devel-
opers’ marketing as well as their technical savvy. Before moving 
on to the game’s technical achievements, we should reﬂ ect on id’s 
unusual marketing strategy. 
 Doom  took advantage of two revolutionary trends in software 
distribution and production: shareware and user-generated con-
tent. The ﬁ rst of these was a well-established practice by 1993, 
and id had tried it before to great success with their earlier PC 
games  Commander Keen  (1990) and  Wolfenstein 3D  (1992), a vital 
predecessor that we’ll discuss shortly. Then, as now, the majority 
of commercial software was published by traditional publishers, 
who did everything in their power to prevent others from ille-
gally copying and distributing their products. Shareware publish-
ers, however, encourage users to copy and share their programs, 
then employed a variety of methods to generate revenue. Usually 
these amount to a screen or message that displays while the pro-
gram loads, asking users to send a donation to the developer. 
Sometimes trivial or even crucial features are unavailable until 
the user has paid a fee to receive a “registered copy” or a special 
key code. In the case of the original  Doom,  the user received a 
fully working game, but only the ﬁ rst part—to see the rest of the 
game, users were asked to send money. However, the free ver-
sion included one pivotal feature: multiplayer gameplay over a 
local area network (LAN). This fact made it much easier for large 
groups of gamers to organize LAN parties, as they would other-
wise have had to purchase an individual copy for each machine. 
 The shareware method proved exceptionally successful for id, 
but it took some doing to get the game uploaded to the University 
Doom begins in a room free of 
monsters to give players a chance 
to master the interface.

 
Chapter 5 DOOM (1993): THE FIRST-PERSON SHOOTER TAKES CONTROL     53
of Wisconsin’s FTP server, where id had planned to release the 
game.3 According to David Kushner, author of  Masters of Doom, 
ten thousand users swarmed to the server, generating enough 
demand to crash the network.4 Fortunately for id, many users 
weren’t satisﬁ ed to own just the shareware version and eagerly 
sprang for the full registered version. According to estimates at 
the Doom Wiki , Doom  and its sequel  Doom II  have sold over two 
million copies each.5 Kushner’s lively narrative describes in vivid 
detail the hectic bliss at id when hundreds of thousands of dol-
lars ﬂ ooded into the tiny company, swelling the bank accounts 
and egos of its team. id would later abandon shareware, though 
they still seem committed to the open source and free software 
movements, eventually releasing the full source code to  Doom 
and other games to the public, greatly extending the life of the 
titles beyond their original platforms. 
 The other innovation—user-generated content—made per-
haps a more signiﬁ cant contribution to the gaming industry. 
Again, id was certainly not the ﬁ rst game developer to encour-
age and even create tools to help gamers expand or modify their 
products. However,  Doom’s immense popularity and the tools’ 
impressive capabilities drew wads of dedicated and creative 
Several types of demons roam 
Doom’s levels, eager to make you 
an ex-soldier.
 3      Internet usage was not yet widespread, so shareware games depended upon a 
wide variety of distribution methods. These methods included individually dialed 
Bulletin Board Systems (BBS) and mail order companies whose sole business 
model was selling disks ﬁ lled with shareware and demo software. 
 4 Kushner, David. 2004.  Masters of Doom (ISBN: 0-8129-7215-5). Random House. 
 5 See  http://doom.wikia.com/wiki/Sales . The ﬁ gure considers other estimates 
from a variety of published and online sources. 

54     Chapter 5 DOOM (1993): THE FIRST-PERSON SHOOTER TAKES CONTROL
Ah, Doom’s boomstick, 
one step closer to the BFG 
(Big Fucking Gun).
 talent to the task. As a result, hundreds of gamers happily went 
to work designing new levels or taking the engine in unexpected 
directions. These user-built levels are called WADs, an acronym 
that stands for “Where’s all the data?” id had speciﬁ ed in their 
licensing agreement that these WADs would be distributed free; 
makers were not allowed to charge for them. However, that fact 
didn’t stop shady dealers from collecting WADs and selling them 
at unscrupulous or ignorant outlets. id countered by offering their 
own  compilations via retail. 
 Some of the better WAD makers eventually got involved with 
commercial game development. These include Tim Willits, 
later lead designer at id, and Dario Casali, whose work attracted 
Valve Software. Some of the more notable WADs include  Eternal 
Doom,  which offers 34 giant levels to explore, and  Hell Revealed, 
an intensely difﬁ cult WAD designed to test an expert’s prowess. 
A few off-the-wall WADs include  Chex Quest,  a game that served 
as a promotional tie-in for the cereal, and  Mockery, a WAD that 
Scott Cover made speciﬁ cally to illustrate the errors made by nov-
ice WAD makers. However, the wad became popular enough to 
inspire a subgenre of “joke mods.” There are also programs such 
as  SLIGE that can create randomly generated WADs.6 
 Before continuing the discussion of  Doom,  we should take 
a moment to examine id’s 1992 game  Wolfenstein 3D. This 
game, loosely based on the much older  Castle Wolfenstein (see 
 Chapter 2 , “ Castle Wolfenstein  (1981): Achtung! Stealth Gaming 
 6      The top 100 WADs of all time have been collected and reviewed at Doom World, 
a must-see site for anyone interested in WADs. Visit  http://www.doomworld
.com/10years/bestwads/ . 

 
Chapter 5 DOOM (1993): THE FIRST-PERSON SHOOTER TAKES CONTROL     55
Blue Sky’s (later known as 
Looking Glass Studios) Ultima 
Underworld: The Stygian Abyss 
beat id to the feature punch in 
many respects, but its steep 
hardware requirements and 
relatively complex interface may 
explain its relative obscurity.
Steps out of the Shadows”), prototyped many of the critical 
graphical and gameplay elements that would show up in  Doom 
and later shooters, sans the familiar FPS control scheme, ability 
to signiﬁ cantly modify and extend the game,7 and critical multi-
player components. The game puts players in control of William 
“B. J.” Blazkowicz, a soldier trying to escape a Nazi stronghold. 
Although its graphics are somewhat crude compared to  Doom , 
it still allowed gamers to experience 3D-like graphics rendered 
on-the-ﬂ y with a ﬁ rst-person perspective. According to Kushner, 
Romero and Carmack were inspired by Blue Sky’s  Ultima 
Underworld: The Stygian Abyss  (Origin, 1992; PC, Windows 
Mobile, and others), an incredibly ambitious role-playing game 
doomed by its steep hardware requirements. Carmack was con-
vinced he could achieve similar effects on lower-end PCs, and 
proved it with  Wolfenstein 3D .8 
 Of course,  Wolfenstein 3D ’s impressive performance was not 
entirely without precedent, as id’s two earlier titles,  Hovertank 
3D and  Catacomb 3D , both from 1991, were pioneering games 
in their own right and formed the foundations from which 
the far-better-known shooter was built and greatly extended.9 
In  Hovertank 3D , the player controls Brick Sledge, a merce-
 7 Wolfenstein 3D  did allow for some modiﬁ cation of its graphics and maps, but not 
to the extent found in  Doom . 
 8      It’s important to note, however, that although  Wolfenstein 3D  looked great 
and moved smoothly, the original  Ultima Underworld  still featured a far more 
advanced engine, with features like ﬂ oor and ceiling textures, terrain of vary-
ing height, and lighting effects that would not be realized in an id creation until 
 Doom . 
 9 See  http://www.idsoftware.com/games/vintage/hovertank/ . 

56     Chapter 5 DOOM (1993): THE FIRST-PERSON SHOOTER TAKES CONTROL
nary hired by an unknown organization to rescue people from 
enemy-ﬁ lled cities under the threat of nuclear attack. The game 
used a combination of scaled sprites and rendered walls, much 
like  Wolfenstein 3D , but the walls in  Hovertank 3D were untex-
tured and solid in color.  Catacomb 3D , where the player, as the 
high wizard of Thoria, must save the troublesome but useful 
Nemesis of Kelquest from his suspended animation in magical 
amber, showed the character’s hands and added other, now famil-
iar, character-based features, along with textured walls. Both of 
these mostly forgotten early games—with their extremely  modest 
system requirements, relative to their groundbreaking features—
contributed greatly to  Wolfenstein 3D ’s emergence as such a 
polished product and ultimately to the even greater success of 
 Doom . 
 Now let’s turn our attention back to the actual gameplay of 
 Doom. At the start of the single-player campaign, the player is 
presented with a view of a futuristic room (the moon base) and a 
hand pointing a pistol. At this point, the player is offered a variety 
of control schemes, though most will tend toward the character’s 
line of sight. A combination of mouse and keyboard control that 
is popular today. A typical conﬁ guration is to move with the arrow 
keys (this conﬁ guration later conformed to the standard W, A, S, 
and D keys) and aim and ﬁ re with the mouse. Spinning the mouse 
around changes the view; holding down the Alt key allows the 
arrow keys to strafe (locked in left and right movement).10 Holding 
down the right shift key and the arrow keys makes the character 
run—an often-vital skill. Though moving and aiming can be ter-
ribly confusing and disorienting for the novice, most gamers 
will likely master the interface in a few  minutes. To this end, id 
placed no monsters in the ﬁ rst room, so players are free to experi-
ment with the control schemes until they feel ready for their ﬁ rst 
encounters. Other controls are for opening doors and operat-
ing switches. All of the action is depicted from “ﬁ rst-person per-
spective,” meaning that the player is seeing from the  character’s 
 10 Use of the mouse often negates the need for a strafe modiﬁ er key.  
id’s Hovertank 3D (left) and 
Catacomb 3D (right), could be 
considered the earliest testing 
grounds for technology and 
concepts later used to popular 
acclaim in Wolfenstein 3D 
and Doom.

 
Chapter 5 DOOM (1993): THE FIRST-PERSON SHOOTER TAKES CONTROL     57
point of view. This setup is intended to make players feel a more 
 immediate connection to the action.11 
 After leaving the ﬁ rst room, players will begin ﬁ ghting demons 
and possessed soldiers. These enemies are dispatched readily 
with a shot or two from the pistol. However, the player must be 
careful not to waste ammo—an empty gun is merely a paper-
weight. There are also armor pickups, radiation suits, and health 
packs, a.k.a. “stimpacks,” a “booster enzyme that make[s] you 
feel like a new man,” to quote from the manual. By far the most 
welcome of all these powerups was a bigger and badder weapon. 
Persistent players eventually replace their pistol with shotguns, 
chainguns, rocket launchers, plasma riﬂ es, and eventually the 
infamous BFG 9000, which can clear an entire room of monsters. 
Each weapon requires a speciﬁ c type of ammo, and rationing out 
the ammo is an important part of the strategy. For instance, since 
pistol clips are far more plentiful than shotgun shells or rock-
ets, it’s better to use them for wimpy demons and save the rarer 
ammo for more powerful enemies. There’s also a berserker rage 
powerup that greatly boosts the character’s muscles, turning his 
ﬁ sts into weapons of mass destruction. 
 Monsters aren’t the only perils awaiting the player. Ceilings can 
cave in, slime/lava is radioactive, and barrels can explode. Indeed, 
the manual suggests (and any observant player will quickly dis-
cover) that these explosive barrels can be used to quickly clear a 
 11      As author Loguidice recalls, “Playing this game for the ﬁ rst time on a fast 
Pentium 90 computer up close to a 15" ﬂ at-screen CRT monitor created one of 
those ‘wow’ moments in gaming for me that are few and far between. The immer-
sive effect was particularly stunning when walking down the game’s dimly lit inte-
rior corridors.” 
Doom’s built-in automapper helps 
keep players on track.

58     Chapter 5 DOOM (1993): THE FIRST-PERSON SHOOTER TAKES CONTROL
room of enemies—simply wait until they are near the barrels and 
shoot them from a safe distance away. 
 At the bottom of the screen is the character’s “mug,” an ani-
mated face that changes upon receiving damage. The face 
winces when the character takes a blow, for instance, and quickly 
becomes bruised and bloodied as his health declines. This fea-
ture is important, because it helps balance out the ﬁ rst-person 
perspective; it’s a constant reminder that the player is controlling 
an actual character rather than a ﬂ oating camera. 
 id was quick to follow the original  Doom  with many upgrades, 
sequels, and spin-offs.  Doom II: Hell on Earth appeared on 
In the mid-1990s, it seemed 
all but a prerequisite to have 
a Doom game for your system. 
Back of the box for the single-
player-only version of Doom for 
the Sega 32X shown, which was 
often compared to the superior 
multiplayer-capable, though 
music-less, Atari Jaguar version. 
Doom was at home on a wide 
range of computers, consoles, 
and handhelds, including the 3DO, 
Nintendo Game Boy Advance, 
Super Nintendo, Sega Saturn, and 
Sony PlayStation.

 
Chapter 5 DOOM (1993): THE FIRST-PERSON SHOOTER TAKES CONTROL     59
October 10, 1994, and featured the same basic gameplay as the 
original, though with a larger area to explore. The critical differ-
ence was that  Doom II was intended for the retail market; it was 
never released as shareware. This game received ofﬁ cial expan-
sion packs that were based on levels designed by users, includ-
ing  Master Levels for Doom II  (1995) and  Final Doom (1996). The 
retail versions of  Doom  were quite proﬁ table for id, who soon 
found themselves awash with cash.12 
 12 The Ultimate Doom  (1995) was a retail version of the original  Doom  that featured 
a new, fourth episode, “Thy Flesh Consumed.” 
The Doom games have been 
ported to an amazing array of 
platforms, both popular and 
obscure, like this conversion of 
Doom II for the Palm OS–based 
Tapwave Zodiac handheld, back 
of box shown.

60     Chapter 5 DOOM (1993): THE FIRST-PERSON SHOOTER TAKES CONTROL
 id has also published spin-off games that utilized their  Doom 
engine. These include Raven Software’s  Heretic  (1994) and  Hexen 
(1996), well-received games with a fantasy setting.13 These games 
are noted for introducing a more sophisticated inventory  system 
and the ability to look up and down. In 1996, id released  Quake, 
another FPS that became a deﬁ nitive series of the genre. This 
tremendously successful game and its sequels again put play-
ers in command of a soldier, and the plot is also based on a 
 13      These games could be said to have taken inspiration from id’s earlier  Catacomb 
3D games. 
Although for many it took the 
release of the Microsoft Xbox 
platform to legitimize FPS gaming 
on consoles as an alternative to 
using a computer, the genre had 
seen several strong console 
releases years earlier, though often 
with compromised performance 
and control schemes. The Nintendo 
64 was a favorite target for id’s 
properties, with the release of 
games like Quake and Hexen (back 
of box pictured). Below Hexen 
is the back of the box for Rare’s 
original creation from the James 
Bond ﬁ lm, GoldenEye 007, one 
of the most popular console FPS 
titles prior to 2001’s Halo: Combat 
Evolved for the Xbox.

 
Chapter 5 DOOM (1993): THE FIRST-PERSON SHOOTER TAKES CONTROL     61
similar  contrivance to the  Doom  games: government ofﬁ cials 
experimenting with teleportation technology (“slipgates”) have 
unwittingly granted access to a race of vicious “death squad” 
marauders. It’s up to the player to enter the slipgate and dispatch 
“Quake,” a mysterious and powerful enemy who is responsible 
for the death squads. 
 Quake II , released in 1997, is a much different game than its 
predecessor. The game employs a science ﬁ ction setting. The 
player’s character, a marine named Bitterman, is sent with a 
team to the home planet of a cybernetic race called the Strogg. 
Their mission is to destroy Makron, the Strogg’s leader. As we 
might expect, Bitterman’s team is quickly liquidated at the start 
of the game, and it’s up to him to single-handedly complete the 
mission. 
 Perhaps id’s most radical departure from the  Doom  setup is 
 Quake III Arena  (1999), which is entirely focused on multiplayer 
gameplay. After the ﬁ rst  Doom, many gamers found themselves 
much more interested in playing with other humans rather than 
computer-controlled opponents. Because these early games 
existed in the early days of the Internet, mutiplayer sessions took 
place over LANs. This setup required that gamers assemble in the 
same physical location, then plug all of their computers into the 
same local or private network. This activity soon became a cul-
tural phenomenon known as “LAN parties,” and many games 
besides  Doom  were enjoyed during these events. LAN parties 
ranged from as little as two to four connected computers to the 
massive DreamHack party of Jonkoping, Sweden, which holds the 
Guinness Book of Records with 10,638 computers all connected 
to the same network. LAN parties have contributed much lingo to 
modern gaming culture, such as the term “frag” for killing one’s 
opponents. The next  Quake game,  Quake IV  (2005), returned 
to the story in  Quake II  with a long single-player campaign. Of 
course, there are also multiplayer options. 
 id’s  Doom 3  (2005) was a highly anticipated release that pushed 
the boundaries of the then-current 3D graphics technology, par-
ticularly in regard to the use of light and shading. Unlike previous 
 Doom  games, the third lacks black humor and dark wit. Instead, 
the game strives for pure horror, placing players smack in the 
middle of a situation reminiscent of an  Alien movie. Speaking 
of movies, it was around this time that the franchise received its 
ﬁ rst (and so far only) ﬁ lm treatment: Andrzej Bartkowiak’s  Doom 
(2005). This ﬁ lm, like so many games based on movies, did not 
fare particularly well at the box ofﬁ ce. 
 Of course, id and its licensed partners are not the only devel-
opers who have produced ﬁ rst-person shooters worthy of 
note. Indeed, one could easily write an entire book covering 
the  evolution of the genre. Two of the most popular are Valve’s 

62     Chapter 5 DOOM (1993): THE FIRST-PERSON SHOOTER TAKES CONTROL
 Half-Life  (1998) and Bungie’s  Halo: Combat Evolved  (2001).  Half-
Life   introduced several ambitious innovations to the genre, but is 
perhaps most notable for weaving in a more sophisticated nar-
rative. Its sequel,  Half-Life 2  (2004) is even more story-focused, 
with characters and a plot that rivals that of a good science ﬁ c-
tion ﬁ lm.  Halo: Combat Evolved  is also acclaimed for its excellent 
story and writing, but is also noteworthy for successfully adapting 
the genre to the console market. Although there had been plenty 
of earlier attempts (including many ports of  Wolfenstein 3D and 
Quake III Arena took a purely 
multiplayer approach to its 
design, allowing for lots of great 
human-on-human conﬂ ict, as seen 
here in a screenshot from the 
Sega Dreamcast version.
Despite selling well, Doom 3 
received a relatively lukewarm 
reception for its focus on 
improved audiovisuals over 
advancing the series’ play 
mechanics.

 
Chapter 5 DOOM (1993): THE FIRST-PERSON SHOOTER TAKES CONTROL     63
 Doom ), with the key exceptions of Rare’s  GoldenEye 007 (1997) 
and  Perfect Dark  (2000) for the Nintendo 64, these largely failed 
to make much of an impact. The precision control and some-
times complex control schemes demanded by the genre seemed 
to necessitate a keyboard and a mouse. Bungee and Microsoft 
solved this problem admirably; the game’s control scheme took 
full advantage of the Microsoft Xbox’s well-designed game con-
troller. Indeed, now there are as many fans of the genre who 
prefer game controllers to the keyboard and mouse setup, mak-
ing development of FPS games for every conceivable platform 
commonplace. 
 There are, of course, a multitude of other games we could men-
tion, such as Looking Glass Studios’  System Shock  (1994; Apple 
Macintosh, PC), 3D Realms’  Duke Nukem 3D  (1996; PC, Tiger 
game.com, and others), Red Storm Entertainment’s  Tom Clancy’s 
Rainbow Six  (1998; PC, Sega Dreamcast, Sony PlayStation, and 
others), Dynamix’s  Starseige: Tribes  (1998; PC), Valve’s  Counter-
Strike  (2003; Microsoft Xbox, PC), Crytek’s  Far Cry  (2004; PC), 
and Monolith’s  F.E.A.R.  (2005; Microsoft Xbox 360, PC, Sony 
PlayStation 3).14 All of these games contributed new ideas and are 
well worth playing today. However, they are all variations on the 
model introduced by id’s  Doom,  which is most certainly the pro-
genitor of the incredibly successful FPS genre.
 14 First Encounter Assault Recon , or  F.E.A.R. , is arguably considered a survival 
 horror FPS. For more on the survival horror genre, see  Chapter 1 , “ Alone in the 
Dark (1992): The Polygons of Fear.” 

This page intentionally left blank

65
6
 DUNE II: THE BUILDING 
OF A DYNASTY (1992): SPICING 
UP STRATEGY IN REAL TIME 
  Westwood Studios’  Dune II: The Building of a Dynasty 1 (1992; 
Commodore Amiga, PC, RISC OS, Sega Genesis) is widely regarded 
as the ﬁ rst modern real-time strategy (RTS) game. Although cer-
tainly not the ﬁ rst, it was highly successful and inﬂ uential, inspir-
ing later games that eventually became one of the major genres of 
the industry. Later hits such as  Warcraft  and  Command & Conquer 
can trace their ancestry back to  Dune II,  which is still enjoyable to 
play—even more than a decade after its initial release. 
 Prior to  Dune II , most strategy games were turn-based. They 
included classics like MicroProse’s  Civilization  (1991; PC, Nokia 
N-Gage, Sony PlayStation, and others), a multilayered title that 
 1 Subtitled  Battle for Arrakis  in some territories. The game also received a remake 
and pseudo update in 1998 as  Dune 2000 , for the PC and Sony PlayStation. 
Dune II’s gameplay is instantly 
recognizable by anyone familiar 
with the RTS genre.

66     Chapter 6 DUNE II: THE BUILDING OF A DYNASTY (1992): SPICING UP STRATEGY IN REAL TIME
launched a series of turn-based strategy (TBS) games that is still 
going strong today.2 Although  Civilization  is probably the most well 
known today, there were dozens of lesser-known strategy games, 
many based on tabletop wargames from the likes of Avalon Hill. 
With a few notable exceptions, such as Danielle Bunten Berry’s3 
groundbreaking 1982 release,  Cytron Masters,  and Sir-Tech’s hybrid, 
 Rescue Raiders  (1984; Apple II),4 these earlier games broke the 
gameplay into discrete turns, during which only a single player 
(or computer opponent) could make any moves.  Dune II popular-
ized a form of gameplay in which the action was continuous; just 
because the player decided to break for coffee didn’t mean that 
the computer-controlled opponents weren’t steadily building up 
their resources. Although we’ll have more to say about real-time 
versus turn-based games in a moment, for now let’s just say that 
Westwood’s game introduced a new facet to strategy gameplay by 
considering the passage of “real time,” that is, the actual time the 
player spent playing. This fact meant that the player’s physical abil-
ity to select units, scroll the map, and so on became vital. Westwood 
addressed this issue by integrating intuitive mouse control into the 
computer versions—a key innovation that sets  Dune II apart from 
previous efforts at RTS games.5 
 2      See  Chapter 15 , “ SimCity (1989): Building Blocks for Fun and Proﬁ t,” for more on this game. 
 3      Dani Bunten Berry is also known as Dani Bunten and Dan Bunten. Born Daniel 
Paul Bunten, she changed her name after undergoing gender reassignment surgery. 
 4 Rescue Raiders would be released by Three-Sixty Paciﬁ c in a slightly updated 
form for the Apple Macintosh and PC as  Armor Alley . With superﬁ cial similarities 
to Dan Gorlin’s  Choplifter  (1982, Broderbund; Apple II, Coleco Adam, and  others), 
the 2D side perspective game puts the player in direct control of a helicopter, 
while releasing a variety of armored, autonomous ground forces in an attempt to 
get an explosives-ﬁ lled van to the enemy base. 
 5      It’s important to note, however, that a mouse, though highly recommended, is 
not required. 
Screenshot from the intriguing 
hybrid, Rescue Raiders, for the 
Apple II.

 
Chapter 6 DUNE II: THE BUILDING OF A DYNASTY (1992): SPICING UP STRATEGY IN REAL TIME     67
 Why did the elements found in  Dune II  prove so inﬂ uential? 
For many gamers, the constant action and immediate responses 
of RTS games are more appealing and easier than planning one 
or more moves a turn and then waiting for the results to be cal-
culated and displayed, as in TBS. This feature became important 
as the potential buying population grew along with the indus-
try; the new breed were often less enamored with the traditional 
wargame, with its complex strategy, statistics, and concern with 
historical accuracy. Titles like Chris Crawford’s  Eastern Front 
(1941)  (Atari, 1981; Atari 8-bit), Hudson Soft’s  Military Madness 
(1989; NEC TurboGrafx-16, and others),6 MicroProse’s  X-COM: 
UFO Defense  (1993; PC, Sony PlayStation),7 SSI’s  Panzer General 
(1994; Apple Macintosh, PC, Sony PlayStation), and Irrational 
Games’  Freedom Force  (2002; Apple Macintosh, PC) were well-
designed, approachable, critically acclaimed, and ultimately 
sold well. Nevertheless, those games and others like them never 
allowed the TBS to reach the same critical mass in both depth 
and breadth of mainstream titles as RTS. 
 Perhaps the main reason why RTS triumphed over TBS gaming 
is that it’s a purely electronic creation. The only real analog is tak-
ing command of a real-life army, an activity probably best engaged 
in virtually. Although the top TBS games add slick and logical inter-
faces, automate the complex statistical calculations automatically 
behind the scenes, and may even feature impressive audiovisual 
elements, there is nothing inherent in such a game that can’t be 
done between two or more dedicated players sitting at a table with 
a well-designed board game.8  
Screenshot from Chris Crawford’s 
user-friendly TBS game, Eastern 
Front (1941).
 6 Also known as  Nectaris , depending upon territory and/or platform. 
 7 UFO: Enemy Unknown in Europe and Australia. 
 8 Sometimes referred to as “pen-and-paper” games. 

68     Chapter 6 DUNE II: THE BUILDING OF A DYNASTY (1992): SPICING UP STRATEGY IN REAL TIME
Dune II ’s optional mouse-driven 
interface enables fast yet precise 
input that works well with the 
real-time gameplay.
 As its name implies,  Dune II  was represented as a sequel to an 
earlier game, Cyro Interactive’s  Dune  (1990; Commodore Amiga, 
PC, Sega CD). Although  Dune II  is based on the same franchise, it 
is a vastly different experience. The original  Dune  is an adventure/
strategy hybrid closely based on David Lynch’s ﬁ lm  Dune, which is 
itself based (or perhaps “inspired by”) Frank Herbert’s novel by the 
same name. Cyro’s  Dune  is noted for easy, hand-holding gameplay, 
which guides the player (who takes on the role of the novel and 
movie’s main character, Paul Atreides) along a path similar to the 
movie’s. Paul must recruit help from the Fremen, a mysterious race 
of desert dwellers who have somehow managed to survive and 
even thrive in the harsh environment of the planet Arrakis. Arrakis 
is the only known source of Melange, also known as Spice, a mys-
tical substance required for space travel and quasi-immortality. 
Arrakis was formerly the sole domain of vile House Harkonnen, 
who aren’t in the least pleased with Atreides’ arrival on the planet. 
Without spoiling the story, the gist of the game’s plot is that Paul 
has mystical powers and must fulﬁ ll his role in an ancient proph-
ecy. Although the game seems mostly concerned with keeping 
the player headed toward that goal, there are some basic strategy 
components as well. Players must specify which of the converted 
Fremen will mine ore and which will ﬁ ght, and must equip and 
train them. In other words, the germ of what would become  Dune 
II  is present in the original, though the all-important strategic ele-
ments are buried underneath a fairly linear adventure game.9 
 9 On a side note,  Dune ’s soundtrack, composed by the French game composer 
Stéphane Picq, is considered some of the best music ever heard in a Commodore 
Amiga or PC game. It’s been frequently remixed and updated, and remains a sta-
ple on sites that offer downloads of classic game music. 

 
Chapter 6 DUNE II: THE BUILDING OF A DYNASTY (1992): SPICING UP STRATEGY IN REAL TIME     69
The ﬁ rst Dune has a few things in 
common with its sequel, but is far 
more focused on adventure and 
story than strategy.
 Dune II  differs most notably from its predecessor in its far 
greater emphasis on action and strategy over plot. Indeed, 
Westwood even dared to alter Frank Herbert’s story, introducing a 
third house (House Ordos) and omitting the characters from the 
novel. The story here is that the emperor is low on funds, and has 
essentially improvised a contest to see which of the three houses 
can harvest the most Spice from Arrakis. The player begins as a 
military commander of the house of his or her choice, gradually 
building up Spice and eventually ﬁ ghting for sole supremacy with 
the other houses and even the emperor. 
 Dune II’s  gameplay is eerily familiar to anyone who has played 
modern RTS games, and it’s easy to forget how revolutionary 
it felt in 1992. For instance, clicking on a unit causes it to play a 
sound sample; “Yes, sir,” for example. This convention would be 
carried over into most later RTS games such as  Warcraft .10 More 
important, though, is how the passage of “real time”—that is, the 
actual time the player interacts with the game—affects the game-
play. Though we’ve discussed a parallel issue with role- playing 
games in  Chapter 4 , “ Diablo  (1997): The Rogue Goes to Hell,” it’s 
worthwhile to raise it again in the context of strategy games. 
 The essential difference between RTS and TBS games is the 
gameplay. TBS games can be compared to a game of chess or 
checkers, in which each player can theoretically take as long as 
he or she wants to make a move. The other player cannot legally 
move until the ﬁ rst has moved.11 If we wanted to make chess 
more like an RTS, the players would not wait for each other, but 
 10 Warcraft ’s implementation of speech took a more humorous slant; for instance, 
grunts that would grow increasingly agitated after repeated clicks. 
 11 Unless the game is speciﬁ cally designed to allow other players, typically remote-
human or computer-controlled, to perform certain activities in the background 
for expediency’s sake. 

70     Chapter 6 DUNE II: THE BUILDING OF A DYNASTY (1992): SPICING UP STRATEGY IN REAL TIME
would move their pieces as frequently as they could. However, 
the  differences between RTS and TBS are a bit more profound 
than this analogy suggests. Indeed, a set of real-time rules for 
chess would probably also include penalties for moving across 
certain squares, or a “cooling off” period for certain pieces. For 
instance, whereas in traditional chess the queen can move an 
unlimited number of spaces per turn, in a real-time version, she 
might only move one square every 30 seconds, whereas a pawn 
could only move one square every ﬁ ve minutes. Obviously, such 
factors would be impractical, if not impossible, to account for in 
the board game, but computers can easily track such variables, 
making for some very interesting strategic possibilities. Most fans 
of RTS games feel that the real-time aspect makes them more 
intense, whereas TBS fans can argue that their preferred setup 
allots more time for decisions and can thus seem much larger 
and more complex. Indeed, a single turn in  Civilization IV (2K 
Games, 2005; Apple Macintosh, PC) can easily take 15  minutes or 
more. 
 Another important consideration is the number of  computers 
one has available on the same network. Most multiplayer RTS 
games require at least two networked computers, whereas it’s 
usually possible to “hot seat” a TBS. A hot seat game means 
that players literally take turns sitting in front of the computer; 
the seat is still warm when the next player takes over. Although 
 Dune II  is a single-player game, later RTS games would allow 
for multiple players over a LAN; a direct computer-to-computer 
connection via either serial cable or modem; and eventually, 
the Internet. These games include Blizzard’s aforementioned 
 Warcraft: Orcs and Humans  (1994; Apple Macintosh, PC) and 
 Command & Conquer (1995; Apple Macintosh, PC, Sega Saturn, 
Blizzard’s ﬁ rst foray into RTS, 
Warcraft, proved decisive for the 
company.

 
Chapter 6 DUNE II: THE BUILDING OF A DYNASTY (1992): SPICING UP STRATEGY IN REAL TIME     71
and others), a deeply inﬂ uential game codeveloped by Westwood 
and Looking Glass Studios. 
 As we noted near the beginning of this chapter,  Dune II wasn’t 
the ﬁ rst attempt at an RTS, and it’s worth taking a moment to 
examine the earlier pioneers. Perhaps the most cited games in 
this context are Dani Bunten’s aforementioned  Cytron Masters , 
Dan Daglow’s  Utopia  (Mattel, 1981; Mattel Aquarius and 
Intellivision), and Technosoft’s  Herzog Zwei (1990; Sega Genesis). 
 Dani Bunten, perhaps better known for the Electronic Arts’ mul-
tiplayer classic  M.U.L.E.  (1983; Atari 8-bit, Nintendo Entertainment 
System, and others) and the action adventure  The Seven Cities of 
Gold  (1984; Apple II, Commodore 64, and others), is certainly an 
intriguing developer worthy of a book of her own.  Cytron Masters, 
published by SSI for the Apple II and Atari 8-bit computers, was 
a rather abstract war game with a real-time component. Two 
 players12 work to conquer each other’s command centers by build-
ing cytrons, “cybernetic electronic units” that can perform different 
tasks. Bunten herself remarked in her memoirs that “rather than 
appealing to both action gamers and strategy gamers, it seemed to 
fall in the crack between them.”13 Bunten followed up these con-
cepts in 1988 with  Modem Wars  (Electronic Arts; Commodore 64, 
PC) .  This revolutionary game took the important step of having the 
players connect to each other via modems; that way, each could 
have full control of his or her own machine and screen rather than 
Screenshot from the animated 
tutorial from the original Apple II 
version of Cytron Masters.
 12 Or one against a rather perfunctory computer opponent. 
 13 http://www.anticlockwise.com/dani/personal/biz/memoir.htm . Additionally, a 
tribute in the October 1998 issue of  Game Developer  magazine by Brian Moriarty 
described  Cytron Masters  as a “two-player design [that] offered a curious conjunc-
tion of strategy and real-time action in a game that pushed the Apple II hardware 
to its limits.” 

72     Chapter 6 DUNE II: THE BUILDING OF A DYNASTY (1992): SPICING UP STRATEGY IN REAL TIME
having to share. Unfortunately, at the time, the lack of widespread 
modem use and long-distance telephone service costs for those 
that did prevented the game from achieving great sales, and, for all 
their innovation, neither  Cytron Masters nor  Modem Wars  seem to 
have had much inﬂ uence on other RTS games. 
 Dan Daglow’s  Utopia  is another very interesting game from 
the early 1980s, often claimed as the predecessor of Maxis’ 
 SimCity and Bullfrog’s  Populous (both 1989 for various sys-
tems). A strictly two-player game,14  Utopia put players in charge 
Box back from Mattel’s Utopia, 
Intellivision version.
 14      A single player could play for a high score if they so chose by simply leaving the 
other island abandoned. 

 
Chapter 6 DUNE II: THE BUILDING OF A DYNASTY (1992): SPICING UP STRATEGY IN REAL TIME     73
of their own island economy. The goal is to construct  buildings 
on the island, generating revenue and curtailing rebellion. 
However, since the players couldn’t directly attack each other 
and combat was highly abstract,  Utopia  ultimately has more 
in common with  SimCity  than  Dune II  and later RTS games. 
 SimCity and  Populous  were certainly better known than  Utopia, 
and were widely admired by critics and gamers alike in the early 
1990s. Although these games were not focused on combat, they 
did feature many of the elements that would become estab-
lished conventions of the RTS genre.  Populous  is a “God game” 
that puts players in the role of a god who can manipulate land to 
aid followers and stymie the followers of the rival god.  SimCity 
( Chapter 15 ), lets players plan and build a city, which develops 
in real time. As a parallel,  Dune II  takes both land and structures 
into consideration; for instance, players can build structures 
only on concrete foundations. 
 According to the popular gaming website, 1up.com,  Herzog Zwei 
is “in many ways the progenitor of all modern real-time strategy 
games,” and claims that it laid the foundation for  Dune II  and later 
RTS games.15 However, this rather obscure game by Technosoft 
didn’t make it to Western shores until 1990 and is actually a sequel 
to  Herzog , a game released only in Japan. Although the sequel is 
very popular among members of the Genesis community, for oth-
ers it seems more of a historical curiosity, and there is little evi-
dence to support 1up’s claim. Regardless,  Herzog Zwei  is deﬁ nitely 
Screenshot from Herzog Zwei, 
a surprisingly forward-thinking 
console RTS.
 15 See  http://www.1up.com/do/feature?cId=3134179 . 

74     Chapter 6 DUNE II: THE BUILDING OF A DYNASTY (1992): SPICING UP STRATEGY IN REAL TIME
a forward-thinking game with many features commonly seen in 
later RTS games. It supports one or two players (via a split screen), 
who compete in real time to take over neutral bases, gradually pro-
ducing the combat units necessary to destroy their enemy’s base. 
Players directly control a ﬂ ying transport ship that can transform 
into a robotic armor type combat unit. Although a very interesting 
game, it was not well received at the time and only later achieved 
cult status. 
 In short, while there were plenty of games that shared or intro-
duced  Dune II  ’s pivotal features, it stands alone as the ﬁ rst true 
modern RTS. It was the ﬁ rst to take advantage of the mouse and 
keyboard combo that had started to take over the computer gam-
ing scene, and its high-resolution graphics made it possible to 
distinguish units and view a wider gaming map than ever before. 
Furthermore, its graphics were not abstract as in many earlier 
wargames, but representational—a trike looked like a trike, not 
a symbol. The vehicles even make trails in the sand they travel 
across. It’s difﬁ cult to exaggerate the importance of mouse con-
trol as well, which made scrolling the map and selecting units far 
more efﬁ cient than ever before. However, even these innovations 
would have been for naught if the game hadn’t been fun to play. 
Fortunately, Westwood’s game offered some of the best gameplay 
of its era, coupled with high production values. 
 There could easily be an entire book on the many RTS 
games that followed in  Dune II ’s wake, including innovators 
like Chris Taylor’s  Total Annihilation  (GT Interactive, 1997; 
Apple Macintosh, PC), which featured 3D units and terrain that 
inﬂ uenced gameplay; and Ensemble Studios’  Age of Empires 
(Microsoft, 1997; Apple Macintosh, PC, Pocket PC), which com-
bined the civilization-building elements from  Civilization with 
typical RTS mechanics. Perhaps the two most enduring are the 
 Warcraft  and  Command & Conquer  series.  Warcraft: Orcs & 
Humans  was a tremendously successful game that helped estab-
lish Blizzard as one of the world’s eminent game  developers. 
Its gameplay is unmistakably inﬂ uenced by  Dune II, though 
themed on fantasy rather than sci-ﬁ . The game also featured 
popular options for multiple players over LANs, a pivotal fea-
ture that took advantage of the networking frenzy created by 
id’s  Doom ( Chapter 5 , “ Doom (1993): The First-Person Shooter 
Takes Control”), which had penetrated to the core of the com-
puter gaming industry.  Warcraft  spawned three sequels, and at 
least some of the gameplay seen in the massively multiplayer 
RPG,  World of Warcraft  (see  Chapter 24 , “ Ultima Online (1997): 
Putting the Role-Play Back in Computer Role-Playing Games”), 
is borrowed from the older title (as well as the characters and 
stories). Of course, Blizzard’s  StarCraft  (1998 for various systems) 
series of best-selling RTS games is also impossible to ignore. 

 
Chapter 6 DUNE II: THE BUILDING OF A DYNASTY (1992): SPICING UP STRATEGY IN REAL TIME     75
 Command & Conquer  (1995; Apple Macintosh, Nintendo 64, 
PC, and others) was developed by Westwood, so it’s certainly 
no surprise that many of  Dune II ’s best qualities show up in this 
long-lived series. This massive and many-forked franchise would 
take some time and space to describe accurately. Some of the 
games are based on sci-ﬁ  settings, whereas the  Red Alert games 
(beginning 1996) are alternate history, in which Albert Einstein 
ﬁ nds a way to travel back in time to assassinate Hitler. The 
 Generals  branch (beginning 2003) is not connected to the earlier 
games, introducing a storyline set in modern times. 
Total Annihilation’s key 
innovation was its 3D terrain, 
which inﬂ uenced gameplay. For 
instance, units could move across 
hills, but at reduced speed.
The Red Alert series of 
Command & Conquer games pits 
the Allies against the Soviets.

76     Chapter 6 DUNE II: THE BUILDING OF A DYNASTY (1992): SPICING UP STRATEGY IN REAL TIME
 In these and other RTS games, gameplay is based on building 
structures, generating units, managing resources, and engag-
ing in strategic combat. This formula, ﬁ rst to see maturation in 
 Dune II,  has consistently proven successful with gamers, and 
there seems little doubt that RTS games will continue being pro-
duced and thrilling gamers worldwide for many years to come, 
 particularly as efforts continue to streamline interfaces for play 
on gamepads.16
 16      Although every new console RTS seems to boast that it has at last overcome this 
challenge, computers remain the platform of choice for most fans of the genre. 

77
 FINAL FANTASY VII (1997): IT’S 
NEVER FINAL IN THE WORLD 
OF FANTASY  
7
 For countless gamers in the United States and Japan, the  Final 
Fantasy  series are more than just games—they’re  the games. Just 
hearing the word “Chocobo” or “Moogle”1 is enough to tickle the 
thumbs of dedicated fans all over the world. Indeed, few video-
game franchises in the history of the industry have enjoyed the 
popularity, longevity, and high acclaim of Hironobu Sakaguchi’s 
epic series. The ﬁ rst  Final Fantasy , developed during a ﬁ nancial 
crisis at Square, not only rescued the company but soon became 
Final Fantasy VII offered an 
immense area to explore, 
including populated towns where 
players could buy equipment, talk 
to the locals, and advance the 
plot. The red triangles indicate 
possible exits, and the white 
glove makes it easier to spot the 
main character.
 1      Not to be confused with J. K. Rowling’s word “Muggle,” meaning a person not 
born in a magical world and lacking any sort of magical ability, in the 1997 U.K. 
book  Harry Potter and the Philosopher’s Stone . 

78     Chapter 7 FINAL FANTASY VII (1997): IT’S NEVER FINAL IN THE WORLD OF FANTASY
a deﬁ nitive console role-playing game—a reputation the series 
continues to enjoy. Because the series is much too lengthy and 
complex to cover adequately in a single chapter, we’ve decided to 
focus here on  Final Fantasy VII. 
 Why the seventh game? Although fans and critics argue (often 
quite divisively) about which of the many  Final Fantasy  games are 
the best or most inﬂ uential, the seventh game is perhaps the most 
interesting from a historical perspective. It was the ﬁ rst to take 
advantage of the CD-ROM format, a decision that necessitated 
(or perhaps justiﬁ ed) Square’s infamous break with Nintendo and 
new partnership with Sony. This exclusive partnership played an 
important role in the PlayStation’s commercial dominance over the 
Nintendo 64.  Final Fantasy VII  is also notable for being the ﬁ rst of 
the series to receive an ofﬁ cial PC Windows port, which expanded 
its audience and inﬂ uence considerably. It also made the transition 
from the 2D of its predecessors to 3D, polygonal characters on pre-
rendered backgrounds.2 Though the graphics may look primitive by 
modern standards, they were stunning in 1997. 
Finally, and perhaps most importantly,  Final Fantasy VII  is argu-
ably among the best games ever made. The highly polished game-
play, lavish production, intricate storyline, and well-developed char-
acters all contribute to the game’s high playability, then and now. It 
has won countless awards and remains at the top of many online 
and printed best-of lists. In August of 2006,  GameSpot  named it one 
of its “Greatest Games of All Time,” remarking that “the game stands 
the test of time.”3  IGN ’s contemporary review called it a “cinematic 
wonder,” the “RPG by which all others are to be measured.”4 There 
is even a computer animated ﬁ lm based on the game,  Final Fantasy 
VII: Advent Children , released in the United States in 2006.5 In this 
chapter, we’ll explore the history of the game and touch on the 
series, paying particular attention to what makes it so different from 
most Western role-playing games. 
 Final Fantasy VII  raises a number of contentious issues among 
fans of computer and console role-playing games. Some of these 
issues are technical and are concerned with how the game han-
dles combat and leveling, the quintessential components of 
any role-playing game (henceforth, RPG; we’ll ignore the table-
top RPG and focus on electronic games only). The  Final Fantasy 
series is famous for experimenting with combat and leveling sys-
tems, and because of or despite these many changes, the series 
has continued to please old fans and win over new gamers, year 
after year. Another major concern is the role of story and plot 
 2 See Chapter 1, “ Alone in the Dark  (1992): The Polygons of Fear,” for more on this 
technique. 
 3 See  http://www.gamespot.com/features/6155700/index.html . 
 4 See http://psx.ign.com/articles/150/150494p1.html. 
 5      The movie picks up two years after the events in the game. 

 
Chapter 7 FINAL FANTASY VII (1997): IT’S NEVER FINAL IN THE WORLD OF FANTASY     79
in RPGs. Whereas most RPGs originating in the United States and 
Europe were focused primarily on tactics and statistics, the east-
ern RPGs of Japan distinguished themselves by railing their game-
play into tightly orchestrated, linear narratives. This convention 
turned off some fans of American RPGs, who preferred freedom 
to directorial control. A good example of this trend in modern 
RPGs is Bethesda’s  The Elder Scrolls IV: Oblivion  (2007; Microsoft 
Xbox, PC, Sony PlayStation 3), a game praised for its open-ended, 
“sandbox”-style gameplay. What we’ll see in our discussion of 
 Final Fantasy VII  is how its emphasis on character development 
and storytelling plays out in one of the most celebrated of all 
Japanese RPGs. However, the ﬁ rst issue we’ll address here is the 
cultural differences between the American and Japanese gaming 
communities. 
 We see one crucial difference in the types of games preferred 
by the two markets, particularly as they stood in the late 1990s. 
Although the American audience for console RPGs was hum-
ble, this was completely untrue of the Japanese market, where 
Enix’s  Dragon Quest ( Dragon Warrior  in the West) and other 
console-based RPGs dominated the shelves. Indeed, an article 
in  Newsweek about  Final Fantasy VII condescendingly referred 
to American gamers as “vidiots [who would] rather twitch-and-
shoot or ﬁ ght hand to hand than explore and interact.”6 These 
and other critics hoped that  Final Fantasy VII  might at last inspire 
more U.S. gamers to turn away from the latest  Mortal Kombat 
or  Street Fighter 7 and engage in what they saw as a much more 
thoughtful and substantial genre. Although it’s debatable whether 
 Final Fantasy VII  answered their prayers, many of the millions 
of gamers who purchased it for the PlayStation or PC became 
dedicated—even fanatical—fans of the franchise. 
 Another key cultural difference worth addressing is cuteness, 
or what Chris Kohler calls “kawaisa.”8 Although the majority of 
American RPGs are quite serious and even gritty in tone, most 
(if not all) Japanese RPGs prominently feature cute, comic-relief 
type characters, often juxtaposed (or clashing) with more mature 
themes and situations. It’s likely this element of kawaisa that tra-
ditional RPG fans ﬁ nd so off-putting about  Final Fantasy VII and 
other games. Though it is well beyond the scope of this chap-
ter to analyze kawaisa in the Japanese context, it seems to be a 
deﬁ ning characteristic of the manga style of comics and graphic 
novels that have so deeply permeated Japanese  popular  culture. 
 6      Croal, N’Gai, and Rambler, Mark. 1997. “More game than guns.”  Newsweek , 
07/15/97, Vol. 130, Iss. 11, p. 11. 
 7 See Chapter 17, “ Street Fighter II (1991): Would You Like the Combo?” 
 8 For a much lengthier and insightful look at Japanese versus American gaming 
culture, see Kohler’s  Power Up: How Japanese Video Games Gave the World an 
Extra Life (Brady Games, 2004). 

80     Chapter 7 FINAL FANTASY VII (1997): IT’S NEVER FINAL IN THE WORLD OF FANTASY
Japanese audiences also seem less concerned with graphical real-
ism than American gamers, many of whom value realism over the 
exquisite but highly stylized aesthetics of famous manga  artists 
and the “super-deformed” style9 of games like  Final Fantasy VII . 
To put it simply, Western gamers raised on  Ultima  and  The Bard’s 
Tale 10 may have a hard time getting over kids with blue, spiky hair 
and enormous eyes, to say nothing of kawaisa-like talking kitties 
(Sega’s  Phantasy Star ) and smiling slimes ( Dragon Warrior ). These 
gamers can seem prejudiced in their criticism of Japanese RPGs, 
which can seem quite juvenile to the uninitiated. Fortunately 
for Japanese developers hoping to tap into the U.S. market, this 
cultural rift has narrowed, thanks to the inﬂ ux of anime and 
manga, a growing movement that  Final Fantasy VII might very 
well have sparked. More Americans than ever have been exposed 
to hit ﬁ lms from Hayao Miyazaki (2001’s  Spirited Away and 
 9      Meaning characters drawn in an exaggerated manner, often with large heads and 
small, stocky bodies. 
 10 See Chapter 23, “ Ultima  (1980): The Immaculate Conception of the Computer 
Role-Playing Game.” 
The Dragon Quest series has 
always been huge in Japan, but 
has had more modest success in 
the United States. Promotional 
image for Dragon Quest IV: 
Chapters of the Chosen (2007) 
from Square Enix for the 
dual-screen Nintendo DS.

 
Chapter 7 FINAL FANTASY VII (1997): IT’S NEVER FINAL IN THE WORLD OF FANTASY     81
2004’s  Howl’s Moving Castle ) and rave about many of the anime 
 programs now broadcast on outlets like the SCI FI Channel. 
 There is also the problem of language. As anyone knows who 
has even the most basic knowledge of linguistics, translation 
is a difﬁ cult and frightfully inaccurate process. Grammar and 
syntax aren’t the only obstacles; a much larger problem is the 
cultural concepts and understandings expressed in language. 
For instance, games such as Shigeru Miyamoto’s  Devil World 
(Nintendo, 1984; Nintendo Famicom, NES) were not released 
in the United States because of their rampant religious imag-
ery, which may well have offended some American gamers and 
brought negative publicity to Nintendo. Kohler gives several such 
examples in his book, but for our purposes it’s enough to realize 
that even with superb translation, at least some important con-
cepts will be lost. What seems confusing, inappropriate, or even 
incoherent to us may make perfect sense in the original language 
and cultural context. One characteristic quality of the pre-2000 
 Final Fantasy games is inaccurate—even laughable—translations. 
Thankfully, the later Nintendo Game Boy Advance (GBA) and DS 
ports have been retranslated and handled with care. 
 Much as Richard Garriott and Origin altered and even redeﬁ ned 
the gameplay mechanics of each new  Ultima  title, the long-lived 
 Final Fantasy  series has itself often changed. However, this is not 
to say that the series has evolved in a linear progression. Instead, 
innovations that appear in one game may be omitted from the 
next, only to be restored later in altered form. Some of these 
Like most role-playing games, 
Final Fantasy VII offered plenty 
of shops where characters can 
buy equipment. The bottom row 
shows how each character would 
beneﬁ t from the item, including 
characters that aren’t currently 
in the party. Since characters can 
wear only one piece of armor (an 
armlet or bangle), these choices 
are very signiﬁ cant.

82     Chapter 7 FINAL FANTASY VII (1997): IT’S NEVER FINAL IN THE WORLD OF FANTASY
changes fundamentally alter the gameplay, such as the Active 
Time Battle (ATB) introduced in 1991’s  Final Fantasy IV (released 
as  Final Fantasy II  in the West). ATB revolutionized combat with 
a hybrid turn-based system. Although it superﬁ cially resembled 
the turn-based games of its predecessors, now the characters’ 
turns were timed and required faster reactions from players. ATB 
seemed the right system at the right time, appealing to the Super 
NES generation, who were far more familiar with classic action 
games like  Super Mario Bros .11 than legendary RPGs like  Ultima. 
A seminal innovation introduced in the ﬁ fth  Final Fantasy game 
is the reﬁ ned job system, designed by Hiroyuki Ito¯.12 This system 
offered vast customization options for characters, allowing them 
to train in more than 22 jobs that ranged from traditional classes 
(Thief, Knight) to some seen in no other RPG (Dancer, Mime). 
Each of these jobs eventually offered secondary abilities, such as 
the Dancer’s ﬂ irt, which reset the enemy’s ATB timer. Characters 
could train in a job long enough to learn some of its secondary 
abilities, then switch to other jobs for some truly interesting and 
effective combinations. This incredibly ﬂ exible and nuanced sys-
tem was largely missing in the next installment, whose characters 
were limited to a single, prechosen job. The ATB and reﬁ ned job 
system are only two obvious examples; a more comprehensive 
history could list many more important innovations, discussing 
at length how they affected gameplay. 
 11 See Chapter 19, “ Super Mario Bros.  (1985): How High Can Jumpman Get?”  
 12      An earlier job system had been introduced in  Final Fantasy III,  which was 
released in Japan in 1990. It was recently updated and released in the U.S. for the 
Nintendo DS in 2006. 
Here, the characters in Final 
Fantasy VII are given the chance 
to order a meal. The goal is to 
procure a coupon that can be 
turned in at the pharmacy.

 
Chapter 7 FINAL FANTASY VII (1997): IT’S NEVER FINAL IN THE WORLD OF FANTASY     83
 Now that we’ve covered some of the background issues 
 surrounding the series, let’s delve into  Final Fantasy VII itself. As the 
ﬁ rst of the series to break from the conﬁ nes of cartridge onto the 
seemingly unlimited vistas of multiple CD-ROMs,  Final Fantasy VII 
was intended to launch a bold new generation of console RPGs. 
The massive increase in storage space made it possible to incor-
porate full-motion video (FMV), or prerendered cut scenes that 
interrupted gameplay to advance the plot and character develop-
ment. Interestingly, however, the developers did not incorporate 
digitized speech, having gamers instead read vast amounts of 
onscreen text. Voiceovers wouldn’t appear until  Final Fantasy X , 
released four years later for the PlayStation 2 (PS2). 
 Though CD-ROMs offered much more storage space than 
cartridges, they were infamous for long loading times. Loading 
delays were commonplace for computer gamers, but console 
gamers had come to expect instant gratiﬁ cation. One of Square-
Soft’s main concerns was that  Final Fantasy VII would suffer from 
the long loading times that dogged other CD-ROM games found 
on earlier platforms like the Sega CD, ruining the pace of the 
game and turning off gamers. Thankfully, Square devised clever 
programming feats that minimized or even eliminated loading 
downtime, pleasing gamers and impressing critics. 
 Sony’s PlayStation was far better equipped to handle advanced 
3D graphics than the Super NES had been, and SquareSoft 
 (formerly Square, now Square Enix) meant to take full advantage 
Shown here is part of a minigame 
in Final Fantasy VII in which Cloud 
must perform more squats than 
his opponent. The minigames vary 
in their control schemes, but this 
one involves pushing a sequence 
of three buttons on the controller 
in rapid succession.

84     Chapter 7 FINAL FANTASY VII (1997): IT’S NEVER FINAL IN THE WORLD OF FANTASY
of the technology. Many games before  Final Fantasy VII  had very 
impressive cut scenes that featured far superior graphics to the 
in-game graphics. Although SquareSoft’s game had the same type 
of disparity,  Final Fantasy VII  surpassed gamers’ expectations by 
placing many of the best special effects in-game, making even 
routine battles superior to the cut scenes of other games. Battles 
are shown from an immense variety of camera angles, keeping 
these repetitive sequences fresh and appealing. The developers 
also blended the cut scenes carefully into the gameplay, lend-
ing the game a more coherent, ﬁ lm-like feel. In many games, the 
cut scenes tell a story that seems only marginally related to the 
actual gameplay. This rupture between gameplay and cut scene 
can make gamers feel little connection to the protagonist.  Final 
Fantasy VII  succeeds marvelously in bridging this gap, keeping 
players ﬁ rmly tied to their onscreen persona. 
 Beyond all these important graphical innovations,  Final Fantasy 
VII  also offered two new gameplay features: Materia and Limit 
Breaks. One surprising aspect of the game is that the characters 
can wear only one piece of armor and a relic. This limitation is a 
substantial departure from other RPGs, which place great empha-
sis on ﬁ nding and equipping dozens of various pieces. However, 
the game compensates for this simplicity with Materia, an evolved 
form of the “Esper system” seen in the sixth game. Materia can be 
inserted into slots on certain pieces of equipment. The manual 
breaks it into ﬁ ve color-coded categories:   
 Independent (Purple): Enhances stats 
 Support (Blue): Increases the effects of other Materia 
 Command (Yellow): Grants new combat abilities  
•
•
•
Shown here are Aeris and Cloud, 
dressed up as a girl in Final 
Fantasy VII. The cross-dressing is 
necessary to get past the Don’s 
guards. The story suggests that 
many girls are being raped by the 
Don and his henchmen.

 
Chapter 7 FINAL FANTASY VII (1997): IT’S NEVER FINAL IN THE WORLD OF FANTASY     85
  Magic (Green): Lets character cast offensive or healing 
spells 
 Summon (Red): Allows characters to summon monsters  
 Materia levels up along with the players, assuming it has been 
equipped. Higher-level Materia offers new or greater abilities. 
Furthermore, it can be swapped between items or party mem-
bers, greatly expanding the possibilities for customizing char-
acters. Materia also plays a critical role in the plot, which we’ll 
 discuss in a moment. 
 The Limit Break is a variation of the “desperation attack” that 
debuted in 1994’s  Final Fantasy VI  (released as  Final Fantasy III in 
the West). In the sixth game, characters gained special, powerful 
attacks when their health bars were low. The seventh game bor-
rowed this concept, but now the effect’s meter ﬁ lls up with each 
enemy attack. Once the Limit Break is achieved, characters can 
use it immediately or save it for a future battle. Higher-level char-
acters gain additional Limit Break attacks, and the regeneration 
rate is affected by the character’s emotional state: fury increases 
it, and sadness slows it down. The Materia and Limit Break sys-
tems are a great way to add variety and complexity to what would 
otherwise become very tedious battle sequences. 
 A ﬁ nal technical consideration worthy of note is the highly 
acclaimed soundtrack composed by Nobuo Uematsu, perhaps 
one of the industry’s best-known game composers. Uematsu real-
ized that the PlayStation gave him many more channels of sound 
to work with than had been possible with the Super NES. Instead 
of that unit’s humble eight channels, Uematsu now had 24, though 
•
•
A typical combat scene in Final 
Fantasy VII has Cloud pitted 
against three opponents. When 
the “time” bar ﬁ lls, Cloud is able 
to execute a move. When the 
“limit” bar ﬁ lls, he can execute a 
“break,” a special, super-powerful 
move.

86     Chapter 7 FINAL FANTASY VII (1997): IT’S NEVER FINAL IN THE WORLD OF FANTASY
eight of those were reserved for sound effects. However, Uetmatsu 
decided to use the PlayStation’s integrated MIDI support rather 
than incorporate prerecorded sounds, which would have required 
longer loading delays. Nevertheless, the score is varied and effec-
tive, and has subsequently been rearranged and released on com-
mercial audio CDs and remixed by dozens of amateur artists. 
However, Uematsu’s decision to rely on the PlayStation’s sound 
hardware was disastrous for the PC port, whose MIDI output 
tended to sound tinny and outmoded in many PCs. Fortunately 
for PC owners, a variety of unofﬁ cial patches and ﬁ xes are avail-
able to address this problem. 
 Although the game’s graphics and audio may seem dated 
today, modern gamers can still appreciate the story and richly 
developed characters. Unlike previous  Final Fantasy  games,  Final 
Fantasy VII is set in what can perhaps best be described as an 
alternative future of fantasy and sci-ﬁ ; factories and robots mesh 
with magic and swordplay. The game is set on Gaia, a planet 
being slowly destroyed by the giant corporation named Shinra. 
Shinra is killing the planet to acquire a mystical energy called 
Mako, though its ultimate purpose isn’t clear until much later in 
the game. The main character, Cloud Strife, begins the game as 
a hesitant mercenary assisting a group of eco-terrorists named 
AVALANCHE. AVALANCHE is committed to destroying the Mako 
reactors, but they are opposed by SOLDIER, Shinra’s elite squad-
ron of ﬁ ghters. 
 Eventually, Cloud ﬁ nds himself embroiled not only with 
AVALANCHE but a girl named Aerith, a sweet “ﬂ ower girl” who 
turns out to be much more important than anyone expects. 
Cloud agrees to be Aerith’s bodyguard, and it’s up to the player to 
decide how to handle her as a love interest. Aerith is being pur-
sued by SOLDIER, who may be interested in what she believes to 
be useless white Materia. Because the game’s story is often con-
sidered one of its most memorable features, it would be a shame 
to give away the many surprises for the sake of summary. Sufﬁ ce 
it to say that many gamers came to love the characters and care 
about what happened to them, and the narrative turns out to 
be much darker and sophisticated than the typical RPG. Although 
the game certainly scores high in the fun department, it has also 
brought many tears to the eyes of sensitive gamers. 
 Final Fantasy VII  was a grand success for SquareSoft, and it’s 
hardly surprising that sequels would soon follow. The eighth game 
appeared in 1999, again for Sony’s PlayStation. This game eschews 
the “super-deformed” in-game look of the previous games for a 
more realistic, Western aesthetic. Though still hugely successful, 
the sequel met with more negativity than its predecessor. Andrew 
Vestal of GameSpot wrote that “a large part of the game simply 
consists of proceeding from area to area with little or no  impetus 

 
Chapter 7 FINAL FANTASY VII (1997): IT’S NEVER FINAL IN THE WORLD OF FANTASY     87
to continue, and the main villain is almost assuredly the least 
threatening in the series’ history,” giving the game an 8.5 out of 10 
point score.13 IGN’s David Smith had more praise, but still noted 
that “ Final Fantasy may be showing its age, or perhaps more pre-
cisely a lack of evolution to suit that age.”14 Both reviewers criti-
cized the audio, which they felt didn’t rise to the series’ own high 
standards. However, the bulk of the reviews in other publications 
had nothing but praise, and it’s likely that SquareSoft had simply 
pushed the PlayStation’s capabilities too far in the previous game. 
The technological leap from  Final Fantasy VI  to  VII  was immedi-
ately noticeable, but the next game simply didn’t have much more 
to offer in terms of audiovisuals. 
 Final Fantasy IX , released in 2000 for the Sony PlayStation, 
abandoned the realistically proportioned characters of its pre-
quel and dove back into traditional anime-style graphics. It was 
billed as a return to the series’ roots—welcome news indeed to 
longtime fans of the series. By this point, the ﬁ rst PlayStation was 
showing its age; the PS2 had debuted the same year. Nevertheless, 
SquareSoft was able to push the original system to the limits, and 
critics were generally pleased with the result. IGN’s David Smith 
wrote that the developers had built a fantasy world “he would 
be content to stare at,” praising the graphics while wonder-
ing if the gameplay might be “showing its age.”15 Andrew Vestal 
 13 See  http://www.gamespot.com/ps/rpg/ﬁ nalfantasy9/review.html . 
 14 See  http://psx.ign.com/articles/162/162190p1.html . 
 15 See http://psx.ign.com/articles/162/162190p1.html. 
This cut scene from Final Fantasy 
VII is an odd mix of humor and 
dread, because the Don clearly 
intends to rape Tifa. The odd 
juxtapositions of “inappropriate” 
humor and gritty realism are one 
of the more intriguing aspects of 
Japanese role-playing games.

88     Chapter 7 FINAL FANTASY VII (1997): IT’S NEVER FINAL IN THE WORLD OF FANTASY
of GameSpot felt that the game was “great” despite feeling like 
“a throwback” to earlier games in the series.16  
 The tenth game,  Final Fantasy X , debuted in December 2001 
for the PS2. Meeting with near-universal acclaim, the tenth game 
abandoned the  prerendered backdrops of its predecessors and 
replaced them with full 3D environments. Facial expressions are 
now more realistic and detailed, an apt innovation considering 
that this is the ﬁ rst game in the series to incorporate digitized 
speech. A direct sequel,  Final Fantasy X-2 , followed in 2003. This 
game features a female cast and was yet another commercial suc-
cess for the company. 
 Final Fantasy XI  marks a severe departure from the previ-
ous installments, abandoning the tried-and-true single-player 
campaign for the massively multiplayer online (MMO) model.17 
It debuted in 2002 in Japan for the PS2 and was released later 
 16 See http://tinyurl.com/69rjxy. 
 17 See Chapter 24, “ Ultima Online  (1997): Putting the Role-Play Back in Computer 
Role-Playing Games.” 
Although the earlier Final Fantasy 
games have been rereleased on 
modern platforms, they were very 
different games from their later 
sequels, playing much more like 
traditional Western RPGs. Box 
back for Final Fantasy I & II: Dawn 
of Souls (2004) for the Nintendo 
Game Boy Advance shown here.

 
Chapter 7 FINAL FANTASY VII (1997): IT’S NEVER FINAL IN THE WORLD OF FANTASY     89
in other territories, as well as in PC and Microsoft Xbox 360 for-
mats. Although the game enjoyed initial success, the arrival of 
Blizzard’s  World of Warcraft  in 2004 ended its dominance on the 
MMO charts. The criticisms and explanations for the game’s per-
formance are many, but most seem to agree on one point: Square 
Enix simply had neither distinguished itself from the competition 
nor learned from their successes. At ﬁ rst it didn’t offer the Player-
Versus-Player (PVP) options that popularized its rivals, and it suf-
fered from the usual setbacks with lag and exploits that plagued 
other new MMOs. Greg Kasavin of GameSpot complained about 
the lengthy installation required for the Windows PC version, 
Japanese RPGs have gone in 
weird—and for many gamers, 
wonderful—new directions. Back 
of the box for Kingdom Hearts 
for the Sony PlayStation 2 shown 
here, which combines the worlds 
of Final Fantasy and Walt Disney 
into an enjoyable experience for 
fans of both properties.

90     Chapter 7 FINAL FANTASY VII (1997): IT’S NEVER FINAL IN THE WORLD OF FANTASY
which took over an hour after all the necessary patching and 
updating.18 According to the latest information available from 
MMOGCHART.com, a website dedicated to tracking MMO sub-
scriptions,  Final Fantasy XI  commanded only 3.1% of the total 
market share in April 2008.19  World of Warcraft , meanwhile, com-
manded 62.2% of the market during the same period, with more 
than 10 million active subscribers. Nevertheless, the game is the 
longest-lived MMO in the console market, where it can avoid 
direct competition from  World of Warcraft and the many other 
computer-speciﬁ c MMOs. 
 Given the developer’s lengthy record of past successes and 
stunning innovations, the modest response to its ﬁ rst foray into 
the online world seems puzzling. Beyond the technical aspects 
already mentioned, perhaps the key failure is the lack of a solid, 
coherent narrative and memorable characters. Although the game 
did employ a variety of set quests and cinematics, these elements 
tended to get buried in the rather repetitive, exacting nature of the 
gameplay; this was no game for novices. A few American gamers 
also resented having to wait so long to enter the world, which had 
been colonized a year earlier by Japanese gamers, many of whom 
had already risen to the highest levels and were far more power-
ful than the U.S. immigrants. Despite several expansions,  Final 
Fantasy’s  MMO simply hasn’t managed to win the acclaim of its 
single-player cousins. Hiromichi Tanaka, Square Enix’s producer, 
told  Electronic Gaming Monthly  that the next online incarnation 
will “aim for something different from the beginning,” though it’s 
unclear at this point what this entails.20 
 Perhaps in response to the relatively faint praise received for 
 XI , Square Enix returned to the single-player model for its next 
sequel,  Final Fantasy XII,  which debuted in North America in 
2006. This PS2 exclusive helped restore the series’ former glory. 
The random encounters were gone, and story and character 
development took center stage. The game is also notable for its 
highly effective voice cast, which Greg Kasavin of GameSpot felt 
“deserved special mention” and Jeremy Dunham of IGN called 
“top-notch.”21 Perhaps the largest change to the gameplay is that 
now combat didn’t involve switching to a different screen, one of 
several new features likely inspired or borrowed from the online 
game. This smoothed out the narrative by reducing the disrup-
tions caused by the frequent random encounters of its prede-
cessors. However, a more controversial change was the ability to 
 18 See  http://www.gamespot.com/pc/rpg/ﬁ nalfantasy11/review.html . Surprisingly, 
the console versions also feature lengthy hard drive installs. 
 19 See  http://www.mmogchart.com for the latest charts. 
 20 Electronic Gaming Monthly , September 2008 Issue 232, pp. 34–35.  
 21 See  http://www.gamespot.com/ps2/rpg/ﬁ nalfantasy12/review.html and  http://
ps2.ign.com/articles/741/741991p4.html , respectively.    

 
Chapter 7 FINAL FANTASY VII (1997): IT’S NEVER FINAL IN THE WORLD OF FANTASY     91
automate many of the tasks that formerly had to be managed for 
each character in the party. Some gamers felt that the result was 
hands-off gameplay; others thought it was a great leap forward. 
In any case, the game continues to sell well and is overall highly 
regarded. Of note,  Final Fantasy XII  is set in Ivalice, the game 
world explored earlier in the  Final Fantasy Tactics games, among 
the most important in terms of the numerous  Final Fantasy series 
spin-offs and compilations. 
 Released for the PlayStation in 1998 (a year earlier in Japan), 
 Final Fantasy Tactics  is labeled as a “tactical role-playing game,” 
a subgenre that emphasizes strategic combat. In the case of  Final 
Fantasy Tactics,  this involves a fully 3D isometric battleﬁ eld that 
can be rotated to offer a better view. Though not as popular as 
the main  Final Fantasy  series, a spin-off named  Final Fantasy 
Tactics Advance  was released in 2003 for the Nintendo Game Boy 
Advance. A sequel to this game,  Final Fantasy Tactics A2 , followed 
in 2008. All of these games are set in Ivalice, Yasumi Matsuno’s 
creation. The central idea behind Ivalice is that magic coexists 
with machinery. It’s essentially a medieval world based loosely 
on Christian Europe, including a powerful religious institution 
named the Glabados Church. 
 The  Final Fantasy  franchise is so immense and diverse that it’s 
easy to get lost in the many sequels, spin-offs, and cross-overs. 
However, it’s important not to lose sight of  Final Fantasy VII ’s role 
in establishing this franchise in the United States. Although the 
series had always been popular among console RPG aﬁ cionados, 
it wasn’t until the seventh game that it really hit the U.S. main-
stream. Gamers who had never played an RPG, much less a  Final 
Fantasy  game, were drawn to the title by the media buzz and the 
game’s own intense marketing campaign. This multimillion- dollar 
marketing campaign emphasized the 3D graphics and anima-
tion, intriguing gamers with its promise of ﬁ lm-like action and an 
Blue Dragon (2007), based on a 
design by Final Fantasy series 
creator Hironobu Sakaguchi, who 
also supervised development and 
wrote the plot, is a role-playing 
game developed by Mistwalker 
and Artoon, and distributed 
by Microsoft Game Studios 
exclusively for the Microsoft 
Xbox 360 as an effort to make the 
American console more popular 
in Japan. The loose association 
with the Final Fantasy series was 
played up in all the countries the 
game was released in, though the 
game itself was only a modest 
commercial success.

92     Chapter 7 FINAL FANTASY VII (1997): IT’S NEVER FINAL IN THE WORLD OF FANTASY
epic  storyline. Surprisingly, the commercials showed little actual 
gameplay—nary a single battle scene, in fact. This tactic suggests 
that the advertisers felt the thrilling cutscenes would sell the game 
better than the underlying gameplay mechanics. However, most 
fans of the series would likely agree that the graphics were merely 
the bait; the hook was the story and gameplay. 
 Final Fantasy VII ’s legacy is hard to overestimate. Its incredible 
popularity and record-breaking sales helped launch the RPG as 
a viable genre for the console market. Countless Japanese RPGs 
of varying quality followed in its wake, and nowadays it’s com-
mon enough to see even top-rank American RPG makers such as 
BioWare targeting the console market ﬁ rst. Moreover, the game’s 
impact wasn’t limited merely to the gaming industry, but is likely 
one of the major forces behind the rise of Japanese manga and 
anime in North America. In short,  Final Fantasy VII  was a true 
cultural phenomenon that is without question one of the greatest 
games of all time.

93
  
 FLIGHT SIMULATOR (1980): 
DIGITAL REALITY 
8
 There are two basic approaches to creating a videogame 
 simulation: Casual and Strict. In the interest of providing the best 
possible gaming experience, the Casual Simulation Approach 
(CSA) purposely models only select aspects of the real world to 
provide a familiar framework or reference point. In other words, 
fun takes precedence over reality in situations where reality 
would get in the way of the fun. In the realm of ﬂ ight simulation, 
this might take the form of automated take-offs and landings, for 
instance, or minimizing or eliminating in-ﬂ ight stalls. The Strict 
Simulation Approach (SSA), on the other hand, models as many 
aspects of the real world as possible. The fun comes from allowing 
the player to mirror, as closely as possible, the real-world actions of 
something he or she might never get the chance to do in real life. 
In turn, as it relates to the earlier ﬂ ight simulation example, this 
would take the form of often difﬁ cult manual take-offs and land-
ings, and having to take aircraft performance into consideration 
to minimize in-ﬂ ight stalls (and performing realistic maneuvers to 
hopefully pull the plane out of one when a stall happens). 
 The SSA approach has very real limitations—there are no holo-
decks1 as of yet. Even the most precise simulation isn’t perfect, and 
consumer versions lack the budget busting custom controls and 
extended displays of military or commercial simulators.2 Further, 
even an SSA-designed program needs to make concessions for 
both the platform and its respective technical limitations, as well 
 1 Which  knowledgerush.com deﬁ nes as follows: “In the ﬁ ctional  Star Trek universe, 
the holodeck is a form of virtual reality. It is an enclosed room with force-ﬁ elds 
(which are similar to shields and deﬂ ector ﬁ elds), onto which light is projected, 
allowing the simulation of three-dimensional surfaces of objects (including 
people). The effect is a simulation of entire environments, with which the user 
can interact. Two of the main purposes of the holodeck are for recreation and 
training.” 
 2      It is important to note, however, that there always have been and always will be 
truly dedicated home enthusiasts who go to great lengths to bridge this gap, with 
elaborate cockpits, multiple displays, professional controls, and so on. 

94     Chapter 8 FLIGHT SIMULATOR (1980): DIGITAL REALITY
as its potential audience, often by allowing the end user to turn off 
various levels of realism or activate automated assists as a gate-
way (or form of training) for the full, unﬁ ltered experience. 
 By the 1960s, after years of manual and electromechanical sim-
ulators that, at best, put pilots in realistic cockpits with minimal 
feedback and only a limited sensation of ﬂ ight, digital computers 
were integrated and allowed for increasingly robust simulations, 
even playing a critical role in NASA’s nascent space program. By 
the 1970s, the foundation was in place for today’s full-ﬂ ight simu-
lators, which accurately replicate the cockpit and characteristics 
of a speciﬁ c aircraft type, ﬂ ight condition, ﬂ ight dynamics, and 
navigation, with full outside vision and sound for other aircraft 
and meteorological variables. 
 It was during this period in the 1970s that one man, Bruce 
Artwick, almost single-handedly established the market for real-
istic simulations in the ﬂ edgling home computer market. The 
website Flight Simulator History sums Simulator History, sums up 
Artwick’s early history best: 
   In the mid-’70s Bruce Artwick was an electrical engineer-
ing graduate student at the University of Illinois. Being a 
passionate pilot, it was only natural that the principles of 
ﬂ ight became the focus of his master’s work. In his thesis of 
May 1975, called “A versatile computer-generated dynamic 
ﬂ ight display” he presented a model of the ﬂ ight of an air-
craft, displayed on a computer screen. He proved that the 
6800 processor (the ﬁ rst available microcomputer) was 
able to handle both the arithmetic and the graphic display, 
Screenshot of a later revision 
of subLOGIC’s original Flight 
Simulator for the Apple II.

 
Chapter 8 FLIGHT SIMULATOR (1980): DIGITAL REALITY     95
needed for real-time ﬂ ight simulation. In short: the ﬁ rst 
Flight Simulator was born. In 1978 Bruce Artwick, together 
with Stu Moment, founded his own software company by 
the name of SubLOGIC and started developing graphic soft-
ware for the 6800, 6502, 8080 and other processors. In 1979 
he decided to take the model from his thesis one step fur-
ther and developed the ﬁ rst Flight Simulator program for the 
Apple-II (based on the 6502 processor), followed shortly by a 
version for the Radio Shack TRS-80. Both versions were com-
pletely coded in their respective platform’s machine-code. In 
January 1980 SubLOGIC FS1 hit the consumer market. . . . By 
1981 Flight Simulator was reportedly the best selling title for 
the Apple. By the end of 1997 Microsoft claimed to have sold 
not less than 10 million copies of all versions of FS, mak-
ing it the best sold software title in the entertainment sec-
tor. And in 2000 Microsoft Flight Simulator was taken up in 
the  Guinness Book of Records  with 21 million copies sold per 
June 1999. We certainly owe one to Bruce Artwick.3   
 Although visually crude to modern eyes, with a painfully low 
frame rate and rendered in only four colors, the original  Flight 
Simulator , released on cassette for the 16K (RAM) Apple II in 1980, 
nevertheless contained all of the necessary elements to model ﬂ ying 
an aircraft—in this case a slow, but maneuverable Sopwith Camel4 
biplane from World War I. The view was ﬁ rst-person, looking out of 
the front of the plane, which was represented on the top half of the 
screen, with the simpliﬁ ed cockpit display (instrument panel) on 
the bottom half. The graphics and collision detection were far from 
realistic. The scenery consisted of unﬁ lled line drawings and players 
could ﬂ y right through mountains. Even crashing into the ground 
caused the plane to bounce back up rather than explode. 
 With the virtual world limited to a 6  6 grid, where each grid 
represented one square mile, Artwick chose to tie into the World 
War I theme with an option for aerial combat. At any time during 
a ﬂ ight, the player could press the “w” key to declare war, which 
would immediately send ﬁ ve enemy planes into the air. It was 
then up to the player to engage the opposing planes and drop a 
bomb on their fuel depot before being shot down. Although not a 
great action game by any stretch of the imagination, the addition 
 3 http://fshistory.simﬂ ight.com/fsh/versions.htm. It has also been suggested that 
Airﬁ ght (1974) for the PLATO networked computer system was an inspiration for 
the young Artwick. While Artwick would have had access to PLATO through the 
university, there is no evidence of any direct inﬂ uence . 
 4 A British single-seat ﬁ ghter biplane that debuted in 1917 and was famous for its 
maneuverability (as well as being the plane that Snoopy from  Peanuts imagined 
his dog house to be). According to Artwick’s description in the manual for the ﬁ rst 
TRS-80 version, the plane was chosen for having similar ﬂ ight characteristics to a 
modern Piper Cub 150. 

96     Chapter 8 FLIGHT SIMULATOR (1980): DIGITAL REALITY
of combat provided more incentive for the would-be player to try 
what otherwise might have been an intimidating simulation.5 
 Shortly after the initial Apple II release, subLOGIC published 
a version on cassette for the technically inferior TRS-80 com-
puter from Radio Shack (Tandy).6 However, this did not stop 
Artwick from improving the program in at least a few key areas 
based on user feedback, a habit that would become a hallmark 
of subsequent  Flight Simulator  releases. Improvements included 
the frame rate, which was increased from three to six frames per 
 second7 and an additional overhead, or “radar” view. Of course, 
inherent to the platform, there was no sound and the visuals 
were black and white and blocky. The resolution was limited to 
the TRS-80’s 128  48 display, which necessitated the removal 
of the graphical instrument panel. Nevertheless, as laughable as 
this sounds today, at the time what the program accomplished 
 5      To be fair, the breakthrough visual display would certainly have been a big 
enough initial appeal, but this ultimately goes back to the earlier discussion of 
balancing realism with fun and would have been one of the factors that helped 
mitigate any potential monotony from just ﬂ ying about, keeping players coming 
back for more. 
 6      Also requiring 16K RAM, which—on a platform where conﬁ gurations at the time 
could range from just 4K to 8K—was still a fairly reasonable requirement. 
 7      As a point of reference, movies are generally shot in 24 frames per second, tele-
vision in 30 frames per second, and modern videogames often 60 frames per 
second. 
Screenshot from subLOGIC’s TRS-80 
version of Flight Simulator.

 
Chapter 8 FLIGHT SIMULATOR (1980): DIGITAL REALITY     97
was groundbreaking, as this statement from a contemporary 
1980 review by Roxton Baker indicates: “This is a superb pro-
gram. It is so innovative and advanced that it must be praised in 
parts; its whole effect is beyond comparison with any existing 
TRS-80 software. First, FS1 is a highly realistic simulation of small 
aircraft ﬂ ight. It combines with that a sophisticated, ingenious, 
and breathtaking 3D graphics display. Finally it provides an excit-
ing and challenging real-time dogﬁ ght game. In any one of these 
aspects FS1 must be rated well ahead of its competition. Indeed 
for the graphics display, it has no competition.”8 
 subLOGIC would release several more notable updates to 
 Flight Simulator:  two for the Apple II,9 one for the TRS-80 and 
a fourth, a completely new version for the IBM PC, published 
through Microsoft. On the Apple II, version 2 added a crash 
graphic message if the player hit the ground too hard, a low 
 altitude counter for a better sense of ground clearance, and the 
overhead view from the ﬁ rst TRS-80 version; version 3 expanded 
the size of the environment and added several new 3D objects in 
place of the previously ﬂ at landmarks. On the TRS-80, the update 
included a ﬂ oppy disk version with enhanced frame rate and col-
lision detection. The IBM PC version, released in 1982, would 
represent a second generation product and be the true blueprint 
for how the  Flight Simulator series would look and perform right 
through to the present day. 
 Microsoft Flight Simulator ﬁ rst appeared in late 1982 to imme-
diate acclaim. With modest requirements—64K RAM and a 
monochrome or CGA (four-color) graphics card—it was one of 
the few game titles that showcased what an expensive IBM PC 
was capable of at a time when even many low-end computers like 
the Commodore 64 had far greater audiovisual capabilities.10 The 
simulated aircraft was a modern-day Cessna 182 (complete with 
retractable landing gear), and the interface featured an instru-
ment panel with eight gauges, a new coordinate system, four dif-
ferent ﬂ ight areas—Chicago, Seattle, Los Angeles, and New York/
Boston—with 20 airports, weather, and more. In other words, it 
took  Flight Simulator  to the next level. Regularly updated releases 
would follow, with Microsoft publishing the ﬁ rst of several 
 initially black-and-white-only Macintosh versions, in 1986. 
 8 http://fshistory.simﬂ ight.com/fsvault/fs1-trs80.htm . 
 9      Check out Mark Percival’s excellent introduction to each Apple II version update 
at  http://fshistory.simﬂ ight.com/fsvault/fs1-apple.htm . 
 10      In fact, it was common for both  Microsoft Flight Simulator  and the spreadsheet 
software  Lotus 1-2-3  to be used to prove how compatible an “IBM-compatible” 
computer really was. Microsoft would release a few additional versions of their 
original program for other IBM-like platforms that didn’t have IBM PC compatibil-
ity but did run a version of Microsoft DOS, like the Texas Instruments Professional 
Computer. 

98     Chapter 8 FLIGHT SIMULATOR (1980): DIGITAL REALITY
 In 1983, subLOGIC went back to the Apple II platform to 
release  Flight Simulator II , which would later be ported to the 
Atari 8-bit,11 Commodore 64, and Radio Shack Color Computer 3. 
It featured even more enhancements and innovations than 
Microsoft Flight Simulator, and was based on the Piper Archer 
 aircraft. In 1986,  Flight Simulator II was released for the advanced 
Atari ST and Commodore Amiga computers, and represented 
another audiovisual and feature leap for the series including 
the ability to ﬂ y different kinds of aircraft. Over time, the  Flight 
Simulator  series would receive expansions and complementary 
programs in the form of additional scenery, aircraft, and features, 
such as air trafﬁ c control or real-time weather. 
 subLOGIC and Microsoft would continue to release software 
titles independently of each other, including related  simulations, 
Box back from Microsoft Flight 
Simulator. Note the modest 
system requirements.
 11 Interestingly,  Flight Simulator II  would be one of Atari’s pack-in cartridges with 
their XE Game System (XEGS), which was an Atari 8-bit computer with a detach-
able keyboard that was marketed against the Nintendo Entertainment System as a 
more sophisticated videogame console. 

 
Chapter 8 FLIGHT SIMULATOR (1980): DIGITAL REALITY     99
like subLOGIC’s  Jet  (1985; Apple II, Commodore 64, PC, and 
 others) and  Microsoft Combat Flight Simulator: WWII Europe 
Series  (1998; PC). Today, only Microsoft has the rights to the  Flight 
Simulator  name and continues to release new, ever-more-realistic 
Screenshot of Flight Simulator II 
on the Apple II.
Flight Simulator II running on the 
transportable Commodore SX-64, 
shown with a custom controller 
and the program’s detailed 
documentation.

100     Chapter 8 FLIGHT SIMULATOR (1980): DIGITAL REALITY
versions (like 2006’s  Microsoft Flight Simulator X ), with full support 
for all kinds of expansions and third-party adjuncts to enhance 
the product even further, rivaling even the most advanced com-
mercial systems of years past. 
 In 1988, Artwick left subLOGIC and founded BAO, or Bruce 
Artwick Organization, retaining the copyright to  Flight Simulator , 
though the company and remaining rights were bought out by 
Microsoft in 1996. Artwick remained on as a consultant. BAO’s 
Box back for Silent Service (1985), 
Atari 8-bit version.

 
Chapter 8 FLIGHT SIMULATOR (1980): DIGITAL REALITY     101
most notable development was  Microsoft Space Simulator (1994; 
PC), one of the ﬁ rst and so far only comprehensive mainstream 
general-purpose space-ﬂ ight simulators, featuring different space-
craft, space stations, missions, and intergalactic travel.12 subLOGIC, 
which released  Flight Assignment: A.T.P.  (Airline Transport Pilot) in 
1990 for PC,13 was bought out by Sierra in 1995, who released the 
ﬁ rst of the short-lived  Pro Pilot series of  Flight Simulator competi-
tors in 1997.14 
 By the mid-1980s, many competitive titles had been released, 
some taking  Flight Simulator head on ( Solo Flight [MicroProse, 
1983; Commodore 64 and others]), with others focused on 
more targeted experiences, like pure combat ( Falcon [Spectrum 
Holobyte, 1987; Atari ST and others]) or strict instruments 
(nonvisual) simulation ( BHXP1 Experimental Aircraft [Bruce 
Hellstrom, 1987; TI-99/4a]). Of course, simulations, both of the 
CSA and SSA variety, were not limited to ﬂ ight. Many other nota-
ble simulations were developed over the years, including  SCRAM 
(Atari, 1981; Atari 8-bit), a nuclear reactor simulator by Chris 
Crawford;  Pinball Fantasies (Digital Illusions, 1992; Atari Jaguar, 
Commodore Amiga, PC, and others), a pinball machine simula-
tor with realistic physics;  C.P.U. Bach  (Microprose, 1993; 3DO), a 
simulation of Johann Sebastian Bach’s music creation abilities by 
Sid Meier;  Gran Turismo  (Sony, 1997; Sony PlayStation), a sophis-
ticated driving simulation with an arcade mode;  Baseball Mogul 
(Sports Mogul, 1997; PC), which simulates managing an entire 
baseball franchise; and  Microsoft Train Simulator  (2001; PC), an 
Simulations have often bordered 
on the fanciful, like subLOGIC’s 
pictured UFO (1989) for the PC, 
which simulates control of an 
alien spacecraft.
 12 See bonus chapter, “ Elite  (1984): Space, the Endless Frontier,” for more on 
 Microsoft Space Simulator and similar games. 
 13 Modeling the Boeing 737, 747, 767, Airbus A320, and Shorts 360. 
 14      Today, “subLOGIC Corporation” provides custom part-task or full simulations to 
industry or research organizations. 

102     Chapter 8 FLIGHT SIMULATOR (1980): DIGITAL REALITY
add-on friendly train simulator. Like  Flight Simulator , all of those 
games and more took great pains to model reality as closely as 
possible to create compelling experiences. 
 Surprisingly, in an industry best known for quick pick-up-and-
play experiences, the arcade has also played a part in advancing 
the state-of-the-art for low-cost simulations. Outside of today’s 
arcade games that mimic traditional activities like skateboarding, 
skiing, riding a motorcycle, or racing a car—almost like a mix of 
videogames and amusement park rides (see Chapter 3, “ Dance 
Dance Revolution  (1998): The Player Becomes the Star”)—as far 
back as 1979, the arcade was providing immersive experiences, 
thanks in large part to Atari. In that year, Atari’s  Lunar Lander 
was released, an unforgiving vector-based simulation of land-
ing a manned spaceship on the moon. The player must carefully 
manage fuel consumption and the effects of gravity and inertia 
while applying thrust in an attempt to carefully touch down on 
one of several landing areas. Atari would follow up a year later 
with  Battlezone  (mentioned in bonus chapter, “ Defender (1980): 
The Joys of Difﬁ cult Games”), a vector-graphics action tank game 
Box back for paper airplane 
simulator, Glider 4.0 (1994), 
Apple Macintosh version.

 
Chapter 8 FLIGHT SIMULATOR (1980): DIGITAL REALITY     103
with  realistic controls that the U.S. Army famously commissioned 
in a modiﬁ ed form for a simulation of their own. Atari would 
repurpose the  Battlezone  hardware themselves that same year for 
 Red Baron , a ﬁ rst-person ﬂ ight simulator skewed heavily toward 
action-packed dog ﬁ ghts.15 
 Perhaps more than any other genre of videogame, the simula-
tion—and more speciﬁ cally, the ﬂ ight simulator—has pushed the 
boundaries of both hardware and software. A convincing simu-
lation of ﬂ ight requires an immense knowledge of both the real 
world and the technology to represent it. Once these technologies 
 15 Not to be confused with Sierra’s  Red Baron , a 1990 game for the Commodore 
Amiga and PC (and now the Microsoft Xbox 360’s Xbox Live Arcade). Sierra’s game, 
which offered a story-based campaign mode, became a huge hit for the company, 
and is widely regarded as a classic of the genre. The game’s own sequels failed to 
live up to the original. 
Some simulations, like Microsoft 
Space Simulator (box back 
shown), have amazingly ambitious 
scopes.

104     Chapter 8 FLIGHT SIMULATOR (1980): DIGITAL REALITY
had been developed, they could be adapted for a wide variety of 
other types of videogames, such as the ubiquitous ﬁ rst-person 
shooters of today. However, as we’ve seen in this chapter, the most 
successful commercial developers of simulators had to carefully 
balance fun with realism, making trade-offs that would hope-
fully please more gamers than they turned off. Artwick’s  Flight 
Simulator  certainly achieved such a balance, and thus stands as 
one of the greatest and most inﬂ uential games of all time.
Lunar Lander screenshot.
Red Baron screenshot, with 
simulation of the color overlay.

105
 GRAND THEFT AUTO III (2001): 
THE CONSOLEJACKING LIFE  
 Although Rockstar Games’ 2001  Grand Theft Auto III , or  GTA III , 
for the Sony PlayStation 2 (PS2) was by no means the ﬁ rst open-
ended or “sandbox” game,1 it was the ﬁ rst with a believable, fully 
3D world that was designed with Western audiences in mind. This 
fact may account for part of its blockbuster commercial success 
over Sega’s innovative  Shenmue  (1999; Sega Dreamcast), which—
while an amazing achievement—played out at times like a slow-
paced Chinese soap opera.  GTA III  impressed gamers with its 
realistic simulation of a modern city and its inhabitants, as well 
as its almost comical, over-the-top violence and tongue-in-cheek 
parody and satire. Gamers enjoyed exploring this vibrant virtual 
world that seemed to react so convincingly to their every deci-
sion, even when that meant rewarding criminal behavior.  GTA III 
was able to achieve a degree of unprecedented verisimilitude, a 
feature that distinguished the game and its sequels from the com-
petition. However, it brought with it a rush of antigame hysteria 
from people who felt its morally neutral (or immoral) gameplay 
threatened to corrupt young minds. 
 GTA III beneﬁ ted greatly from the technology of its era, which 
far surpassed what previous sandbox games had at their dis-
posal. Brilliant games such as 1984’s  Elite  (see  bonus chapter , 
“ Elite  (1984): Space, the Endless Frontier”) and 1990’s  Ultima VII: 
The Black Gate  (see  Chapter 23 , “ Ultima (1980): The Immaculate 
9
 1      In this case, a sandbox game is deﬁ ned as one that allows the player to move 
about a large environment and perform a wide range of typically realistic activi-
ties, but with a primary focus on accomplishing various goals and activities over 
creative or artistic production. Compare this to the primary goal of a “software 
toy,” like in the  Pinball Construction Set bonus chapter , “ Pinball Construction Set 
(1982): Launching Millions of Creative Possibilities,” which is to provide either the 
parts or allow the creation of the parts to build a game in a typically creative man-
ner, and a “virtual playground”, like  The Sims  in  Chapter 22 , “ The Sims (2000): Who 
Let the Sims Out?,” where the primary goal is to essentially play with or manipu-
late premade elements, with less focus on creativity and creation. 

106     Chapter 9 GRAND THEFT AUTO III (2001): THE CONSOLEJACKING LIFE
Conception of the Computer Role-Playing Game”) had offered 
amazingly detailed and interactive virtual worlds that gamers 
could spend weeks or even months exploring. Gamers marveled 
that they could plant seeds and sow grain in  The Black Gate, 
actions that had no real effect on the game’s plot. However, these 
optional activities were included in the game to make it feel more 
realistic; those seeds and tools weren’t just there as decoration, 
but behaved the way we’d expect them to in the real world. 
 However, these games—while certainly ambitious—were nev-
ertheless rigidly limited by the technology of their time. In other 
words, the verisimilitude of these games only extended so far. 
Players of  Elite  found that they couldn’t leave their spaceships 
except when docked in spaceports, which amounted to a series 
of menus for buying and selling. Only the spaceﬂ ight segments 
were immersive, and even there monochromatic wireframe 
graphics for ships and asteroids demanded plenty of imagina-
tion to bring to life.  The Black Gate ’s world was densely populated 
with functional virtual objects of all sorts, but they were ﬂ at, 2D 
sprites. You could click on a pair of pliers lying on a workbench to 
add them to your inventory, but their functionality was limited to 
very speciﬁ c, predetermined usage. Despite the best efforts of the 
programmers, players of these games were constantly seeing the 
machinery at work behind the illusion. 
 GTA III ’s robust cause-and-effect physics engine and 3D 
graphics enabled players to interact with the game world and 
its objects like never before. Objects could be viewed from any 
Grand Theft Auto III  ’s gritty, 
realistic setting was certainly a 
big factor in the game’s success.

 
Chapter 9 GRAND THEFT AUTO III (2001): THE CONSOLEJACKING LIFE     107
angle. Furthermore, the game maintained the same level of detail 
during driving and ﬂ ying segments as when walking or ﬁ ghting 
hand-to-hand. Whereas previous games had switched to different 
modes and interfaces for driving versus walking,  GTA III made 
these transitions seamless and much more natural. Although 
there were still limits on what a player could do, the options 
seemed limitless. 
 As the roman numeral in its title indicates,  GTA III ’s develop-
ment did not take place in a vacuum. There were important 
 prequels, expansion packs, and related games. These  earlier 
games were made by DMA Design, now known as Rockstar 
Box back from Shenmue II for the 
Microsoft Xbox. The technical 
accomplishments in the Shenmue 
series were impressive, but 
the games failed to inspire 
blockbuster sales.

108     Chapter 9 GRAND THEFT AUTO III (2001): THE CONSOLEJACKING LIFE
North,2 and included  Grand Theft Auto (1997; Nintendo Game 
Boy Color, PC, Sony PlayStation),  Grand Theft Auto 2 (1999; 
same platforms, plus Sega Dreamcast), and  Body Harvest (1998; 
Nintendo 64). 
 Grand Theft Auto  or  GTA , features a top down, bird’s-eye view 
of the action. Depending upon the platform, the player takes on 
the role of one of four or eight different criminals. Each of these 
criminals vary only in appearance, and players can give them 
new names if they don’t like the default (certain names act as 
cheat codes). Although the character is tasked with missions, 
he or she can freely roam the levels of one of three cities in the 
game: Liberty City, Vice City, and San Andreas,3 each of which 
would become the settings for future titles in the series. In con-
trast to the greater ﬂ exibility in later games, here the player must 
attain a certain number of points within a set number of lives 
before moving on to the next level. The player has some freedom 
in scoring points, like stealing and selling cars or causing general 
destruction, but by far the quickest path, worth the most points, 
is to complete the missions. Although the end result of a multiob-
jective mission is always the same, the player can usually make 
choices along the way, such as killing the police chief or rescuing 
 2      Rockstar Games is a development division of Take-Two Interactive and presently 
comprises nine studios, all named for their respective locations, that is, Rockstar 
North (Edinburgh, Scotland), Rockstar Toronto, and Rockstar Japan. 
 3      Loosely based on New York City, Miami, and Los Angeles, respectively. 
Grand Theft Auto could be played 
in “free play mode,” or players 
could focus on fulﬁ lling missions. 
Here, a mission has gone awry 
when a tanker blew up outside 
the building it was meant to 
destroy. Although the missions 
are often morally repugnant, the 
visuals and campy scenarios are 
typically more humorous than vile.

 
Chapter 9 GRAND THEFT AUTO III (2001): THE CONSOLEJACKING LIFE     109
a kidnap victim. The player can move about on foot, in a variety 
of cars, or even in a tank and boat, and has access to a variety of 
weapons, including a machine gun and ﬂ amethrower.4  
 Besides the general theme and ﬁ ctional cities based on real cit-
ies, the original  GTA  established other series standards, including 
radio stations with original music, a police band, and the ability 
to play your own music.5 The PC version of the game had limited 
network multiplayer support, an option that wouldn’t be seen 
again until  Grand Theft Auto IV . An add-on mission pack that 
required the original game was released in 1999 for both the PC 
and PlayStation called  Grand Theft Auto Mission Pack #1: London, 
1969 , with a second following shortly thereafter, entitled  Grand 
Theft Auto Mission Pack #2: London, 1961 , though this time just 
for the PC. Both of these expansion packs eschewed the previ-
ous cities and time period for a trip back to London in the 1960s, 
though gameplay was still based on a criminal’s climb up the lad-
der of a mob family . 
 Grand Theft Auto 2 or  GTA 2 , takes place in an unspeciﬁ ed near 
future (“three weeks”) in an unspeciﬁ ed city (“Anywhere City”) that 
consists of three distinct areas: Downtown (for example, casinos, 
hotels), Residential (prison, trailer park), and Industrial (seaport, 
In Grand Theft Auto, whenever 
the player hijacks a vehicle, music 
or radio stations play. These 
infectious grooves add a great 
deal of value to the game.
 4 The player also has the basic, nonlethal ability to punch. 
 5      Features depended upon the version, with the PC having everything, the 
PlayStation having less, and the Game Boy Color having the least, with signiﬁ cant 
censoring of violence and language. 

110     Chapter 9 GRAND THEFT AUTO III (2001): THE CONSOLEJACKING LIFE
nuclear power plant). The player is cast as criminal “Claude Speed,” 
who wants to be “King of the City” by game’s end. 
 Although  GTA 2  plays and scores the same as the previous game, 
there were several key improvements. One was the option to work 
for different gangs; choosing sides inevitably brought hostility 
from the rival group. Furthermore, characters with a high enough 
“wanted” level garner interest from higher authorities than just 
the local police. City activity is a bit more robust, with pedestrians 
going about their normal activities, such as  entering and riding in 
taxi cabs or buses—there is also more criminal activity going on 
than the player’s own. One of the more popular additions is the 
option to carjack a cab or bus and then earn fares. Though still 
limited by its zoomed-out overhead perspective, all these addi-
tions (along with a greatly expanded selection of weapons and 
vehicle enhancements) made the game a much more realistic 
sandbox experience.  GTA 2 , like the rest of the series until the ﬁ rst 
downloads became available on Xbox Live for the Microsoft Xbox 
360 version of  Grand Theft Auto IV , did not receive any expan-
sions or add-ons. However, a multiplayer patch for the PC version 
of  GTA 2  was incorporated when both that and the original game 
were released for free on Rockstar’s website in 2004.6   
 Body Harvest , though not part of the ofﬁ cial  GTA  series, was nev-
ertheless the ﬁ rst time the developers took the gameplay concepts 
into 3D, albeit with a larger emphasis on action. Despite being 
“cursed with delays and development problems”7 and the blurry 
graphics typical of all but the best games on the Nintendo 64,  Body 
Harvest  proved a critical success. Though limited to the capacity of 
Grand Theft Auto II had improved 
graphics, but still depicted all 
the action from a top-down 
perspective. Players could not 
only steal cars, but actually 
earned points for running down 
pedestrians. The game seemed 
to take every opportunity to 
encourage players to break 
the law.

 
Chapter 9 GRAND THEFT AUTO III (2001): THE CONSOLEJACKING LIFE     111
the Nintendo 64’s cartridge format, the game still delivered a large, 
relatively open Sandbox experience. 
 The player assumes the role of Adam Drake, a genetically 
enhanced soldier who must investigate and stop a time traveling 
alien attack force. Drake must battle in ﬁ ve different areas, cover-
ing Greece in 1916, Java in 1941, the United States in 1966, Siberia 
in 1991, and the alien homeworld in 2046. As players explore each 
of these time periods, they can talk to the locals and commandeer 
any vehicle they ﬁ nd. Like  GTA ,  Body Harvest  allows the charac-
ter to move about on foot; drive various vehicles, including tanks, 
boats, and helicopters; and ﬁ re weapons. Unlike  GTA ,  Body Harvest 
incorporates simple puzzles, such as ﬁ nding parts to ﬁ x a boat, 
along with the usual rescue or assassination missions. In fact,  Body 
Harvest  is even more mission-based than the  GTA games, requir-
ing strict completion before opening up further levels. 
 6 Each game also received necessary tweaks to run on most modern systems. 
 7  http://ign64.ign.com/articles/150/150405p1.html ; a reoccurring concept through out 
the increasingly complex  GTA series.  
 8 The ﬁ rst version was released for the PS2 on October 22, 2001, giving DMA Design 
time to make minor cuts and modiﬁ cations in deference to the series of coordi-
nated suicide attacks by al Qaeda upon the United States on September 11, 2001, 
particularly on New York City, on which Liberty City is loosely modeled. A few 
other titles were affected around this time, as well, including Sega’s promising 
air racing game,  Propeller Arena , for their Dreamcast, which was never ofﬁ cially 
released in part due to the system’s weak market position and in part because it 
featured a race that took place between skyscrapers. 
Body Harvest was DMA Design’s 
ﬁ rst attempt at a 3D sandbox. 
Note the ﬂ eeing bystander.

112     Chapter 9 GRAND THEFT AUTO III (2001): THE CONSOLEJACKING LIFE
 This brings us back to the next game after  Body Harvest , 
 GTA III , released for Microsoft Xbox, PC, and PS28. Despite the 
innovations of the previous games, no one expected all of the 
elements to come together as magniﬁ cently as they did in 
 GTA III. The game garnered almost universal critical acclaim 
along with nearly unprecedented commercial success and 
numerous awards.9 Legendary developer, Will Wright (see 
 Chapters 15 and 22 ), raved about the game, describing it “as 
such an open-ended world . . . you can actually be very nice in 
the world and drive an ambulance around saving people, or you 
can be very mean. The game doesn’t really force you down one 
path or the other unless you’re playing the missions. For me, it’s 
not really about the missions, it’s about the open-endedness . . . 
going out and living a life in this little simulated city. It’s like a 
big playground.”10 Improvements ranged from the now-iconic 
art style on the packaging and load screens to the addition of a 
24-hour clock that featured true day and night cycles. Although 
not totally without ﬂ aw,  GTA III  got a lot more right than it did 
wrong, and completed the developer’s transition from 2D to 3D 
worlds in style. 
 The player is again cast as an unnamed thug11 trying to move up 
the mob ladder in Liberty City. The plot involves double-crosses, 
revenge, and love triangles, all told through copious cutscenes that 
form the basis of the missions.12 The game’s design allows players 
to choose how involved they actually want to get in the various 
machinations, if at all. As Doug Perry of IGN put it in his review:  
 I spent the ﬁ rst three hours of playing Grand Theft Auto III 
choosing some primary missions, but found myself con-
stantly being distracted by random missions, side jobs, and 
simply exploring. My own personal raison d’etre was just to 
ﬁ nd the impressive insane stunt jump sections and to test 
the cars to their limits. After I got my ﬁ ll, I then went back to 
playing the story in a more linear fashion. Players essentially 
can play the game as fast and as linear as their skills allow, 
or as distracted and as random as they feel. It’s just another 
way in which Grand Theft Auto III offers freedom, nonlinear 
gameplay, and variety like never before. 
 9 See  http://tinyurl.com/42c8da for a small sampling. 
 10       http://www.msnbc.msn.com/id/26630611/?pg=3#games_top5_080909_
WillWright . 
 11 Later revealed to be Claude in  Grand Theft Auto: San Andreas , where he appears 
as a nonplayer character. 
 12 GTA III  has a notable voice cast, including veteran actors Frank Vincent, Michael 
Madsen, Michael Rapaport, Joe Pantoliano, Debi Mazar, Kyle MacLachlan, Robert 
Loggia, and Lazlow Jones. Future games in the series would follow suit. 

 
Chapter 9 GRAND THEFT AUTO III (2001): THE CONSOLEJACKING LIFE     113
 One advantage to completing the story’s missions and side 
missions is gaining access to more of Liberty City’s domain,13 
which includes three large urban areas: industrial, commercial, 
and suburban. Each has a distinct look and feel. Even the demo-
graphics vary from area to area, populated with citizens of the 
corresponding demographic. Clearly, it is impressive stuff. 
 GTA III  features cinematic opening credits that wouldn’t be out 
of place in the latest Hollywood hipster gangster ﬁ lm. After the 
credit sequence and quick set of animated cutscenes, the player 
is immediately thrust into a fully playable tutorial—another hall-
mark of the series. The tutorial acts as a gradual introduction to 
the in-game controls and also sets the context for the story. 
 However, there are more signs of player progress than simply 
completing missions or advancing the story. The game tracks a 
seemingly countless number of statistics in real time. These stats 
are accessible any time, and let players know how much of the 
story they’ve completed and how many times they’ve attempted 
missions. Players can also ﬁ nd out how many people they’ve 
“wasted,” number of hospital visits, and even how much distance 
they’ve traveled by car or foot, among many other statistics. All 
of this information gives players insight into their play style and 
overall ability. 
 The audio has been signiﬁ cantly enhanced, with better 
and more abundant speech, sound effects, and music, which 
now includes both original and licensed works. The songs are 
announced by talkative DJs, and there’s even an all-talk station. 
The radio commercials are often quite funny, complementing the 
game’s blend of humor and mature themes. 
 Some of the gameplay is identical to that found in many third-
person shooters, but  GTA III  also involves a great deal of driv-
ing. These driving sequences have a signiﬁ cantly higher learning 
curve and difﬁ culty level than the shooter mode. Driving doesn’t 
work like typical racing games, which usually offer pinpoint con-
trol (see  Chapter 14 , “ Pole Position  (1982): Where the Raster Meets 
the Road”). Instead, the vehicles seem purposefully designed to 
crash into things, causing random destruction wherever one 
turns the wheel. Even stopping at stop lights or maintaining a 
consistent, law abiding speed can be challenging. It takes a lot of 
practice to acquire the skills needed to drive properly, and even 
the best players often fail to stay off the curb. Fortunately for poor 
drivers, obeying trafﬁ c laws is not the fun part anyway. 
 13 GTA III ’s excuse for initially limited access to certain parts of the city is that the 
particular access subway or bridge needs to be “repaired,” which ties back into the 
believability aspect; that is, if a gamer is given a reasonable explanation for being 
restricted from going somewhere that they would easily be able to reach in real 
life, immersion in the gameworld is retained. 

114     Chapter 9 GRAND THEFT AUTO III (2001): THE CONSOLEJACKING LIFE
 Contemporary critics of  GTA III  tended to be very forgiv-
ing, overlooking many of its ﬂ aws and harping on its litany of 
groundbreaking features. For instance, few criticized the repeti-
tive missions, particularly those of the “drive from point A to 
point B” variety. These repetitive missions would show up (and 
be lambasted) in nearly every other open-world sandbox game, 
such as the otherwise inspired  The Simpsons Hit & Run (Vivendi 
Universal, 2003; Microsoft Xbox, Nintendo GameCube, and oth-
ers). This game placed more focus on its driving and platforming 
elements, but infuriated gamers with an excess of timed and very 
frustrating driving missions. 
 GTA III  suffered the same standard technical issues seen in 
most games of the time, such as pop-in (objects suddenly appear-
ing) and variable frame rate (smoothness). However,  GTA III also 
had a surprising lack of variety in its character models: a startling 
omission, given the otherwise diverse world. It’s disconcerting, 
for instance, to see small groups of the exact same hooker on dif-
ferent sidewalks—it’s as though there’s a city-wide clone conven-
tion. Furthermore, as is typical of 3D gaming (see  Chapter 18 , 
“ Super Mario 64/Tomb Raider  (1996): The Third Dimension”), 
even with a choice of multiple viewpoints, players could have 
difﬁ culty ﬁ nding just the right camera angle to view the action. 
Blind spots could affect everything from backing up in a car to 
being surprised by a police ofﬁ cer just out of the player’s sight. 
 Despite these ﬂ aws,  GTA III  is still as playable today as it was 
back in 2001. However, Rockstar North didn’t rest on its laurels, 
Controlling a vehicle can be a real 
challenge in Grand Theft Auto III.

 
Chapter 9 GRAND THEFT AUTO III (2001): THE CONSOLEJACKING LIFE     115
releasing a steady stream of improved sequels, starting with 
2002’s  Grand Theft Auto: Vice City , or  GTA: VC (same platforms). 
 GTA: VC  mined the rich pop culture references of the 1980s, 
going the  Miami Vice 14 route, though with plenty of nods to iconic 
mob ﬁ lms like  Scarface .15 The player is cast as Tommy Vercetti, a 
mob hitman who is released from prison after serving 15 years for 
killing 11 men, and who is promptly sent to Vice City to under-
take a series of cocaine deals. Naturally, complications arise. 
Tommy’s ultimate goal is to become the crime kingpin of Vice 
City. Though  GTA: VC  retains the series reliance on mob themes, 
Vice City’s more upscale, summery landscape is a pleasing con-
trast to Liberty City’s drab and dirty environments. 
 Besides featuring a large selection of period music,16  GTA: VC 
expands on its predecessor in several other areas, including both 
a larger weapon selection and a greater variety of law enforce-
ment. The character can now steal and operate helicopters and 
ﬁ re trucks, the latter of which can actually be used to douse ﬁ res 
in the game. Players can also purchase building for hideouts or 
business purposes.17 As expected,  GTA: VC was another huge 
Jacking a car in Grand Theft Auto: 
Vice City.
 14      A popular 1984–1989 NBC television series starring Don Johnson as a cool and 
stylish cop, drawing inﬂ uence from and deﬁ ning 1980s fashion and pop culture. 
 15 A violent ﬁ lm from 1983 starring Al Pacino as Tony Montana, who becomes a 
gangster against the backdrop of the 1980s cocaine boom. 
 16 A hit multi-CD companion music compilation was sold separately. 
 17      These properties can also generate missions of their own, such as eliminating 
certain competition. 

116     Chapter 9 GRAND THEFT AUTO III (2001): THE CONSOLEJACKING LIFE
critical and commercial success, selling 15 million units as of 
September 2008, three million more than its predecessor.18 
 Rockstar North ﬁ nally replaced the gangster (mob) theme 
with a similarly gritty gangsta (gang) lifestyle in 2004’s  Grand 
Theft Auto: San Andreas , or  GTA: SA  (same platforms). Cast as 
gang member Carl “CJ” Johnson, it’s up to the player to unravel 
the plot behind his mother’s murder. Achieving this goal requires 
reestablishing CJ’s gang and expanding his business ventures. 
Although  GTA: SA  offered expanded environments, improved 
artiﬁ cial intelligence, and a series-ﬁ rst ability to swim, the biggest 
innovation was the introduction of role-playing/character build-
ing elements. 
 Not only could CJ’s hair, clothing, and tattoos be purchased and 
modiﬁ ed, these changes could also have a signiﬁ cant impact on 
his in-game relationships, both positive and negative. CJ’s body 
is affected by diet and exercise; riding a bike instead of driving 
in a car, for instance, makes CJ increasingly muscular, whereas 
overeating can make him overweight. CJ can also acquire skills 
in various disciplines, such as driving, ﬁ rearms, and martial arts. 
Finally, CJ can meaningfully interact with most pedestrians, who 
will react accordingly.19
Hand-to-hand combat with 
hookers in Grand Theft Auto: 
Vice City.
 18 See  http://tinyurl.com/4da24g . 
 19      CJ can make more than 4,200 comments, which are separate from the 3,500 
scripted comments and lines in the over two hours of motion-captured cutscenes. 
See  http://tinyurl.com/475xfz . 

 
Chapter 9 GRAND THEFT AUTO III (2001): THE CONSOLEJACKING LIFE     117
  Even with all of these impressive features, perhaps  GTA: SA ’s 
biggest claim to fame is the infamous “Hot Coffee” incident. 
Normally, when the player takes CJ’s girlfriend home, she asks 
him to come in for “some coffee” and he walks inside. The cam-
era, however, remains outside and comically sways back and 
forth as moaning sounds emanate from within. Enterprising 
hackers were able to either modify the game in the PC version or 
use cheating devices on the console versions to access unused 
game assets, which included a crude but blatant sex scene as a 
minigame sequence. Even though the content was not acces-
sible by ordinary means and the game itself was already rated M 
for Mature by the ESRB20, the usual public outcry over the con-
tent reached dizzying heights, with politicians looking for an easy 
cause to latch onto and calling for action. In response, publisher 
Take-Two gave stores the option of relabeling the game as AO, or 
Adults Only, a game designation most don’t allow, or to send their 
remaining inventory back for replacement with an M version, 
with the offending content removed. Despite (or perhaps because 
of) the controversy,  GTA: SA went on to sell over 20 million copies 
as of September 2008.21 
 Grand Theft Auto IV , or  GTA IV , which bore no subtitle, was 
released in 2008 for the Microsoft Xbox 360, PC, and Sony 
PlayStation 3 (PS3). It takes place in a redesigned Liberty City. 
Grand Theft Auto: San Andreas 
protagonist CJ riding a bike.
 20      The Entertainment Software Rating Board.  
 21 See  http://tinyurl.com/4da24g . 

118     Chapter 9 GRAND THEFT AUTO III (2001): THE CONSOLEJACKING LIFE
The player stars as Niko Bellic, an Eastern European war veteran 
who comes to the United States with grand ambitions, but soon 
ﬁ nds himself embroiled in a seedy criminal underworld. Besides 
the huge audiovisual leap expected for the move to the next gen-
eration of systems,  GTA IV  distinguishes itself from its prede-
cessors with the long-awaited inclusion of an integrated online 
 multiplayer mode, which consists of 15 different game types. For 
the creative (and dedicated), the PC version even allows players to 
modify the game well beyond what was possible with any of the 
previous games. It’s hardly surprising that the game arrived amid 
a ﬂ ood of positive reviews and sold more than six million copies in 
just a week after its release, earning Take-Two over $500 million—
and that was just for the PS3 and Xbox 360 versions.22 
 In the years since  GTA III ’s release, several canon titles for por-
tables were created, including  Grand Theft Auto 23 (2004), for the 
Nintendo Game Boy Advance, an unevenly received variation 
of  GTA III  that mostly returned to the overhead perspective of 
 GTA 1 and  2. The PSP saw  Grand Theft Auto: Liberty City Stories 
(2005) and  Grand Theft Auto: Vice City Stories (2006),24 both of 
which maintained much of the look, feel, and scope of the con-
sole games.  Grand Theft Auto: Chinatown Wars  (2009) for the 
Nintendo DS uses an isometric perspective25 and takes advantage 
of that platform’s dual- and touchscreen functionality. 
 Of course, besides its own impressive list of sequels and off-
shoots,  GTA III ’s success inspired many other developers to build 
their own sandboxes. Examples include Sony’s  The Getaway 
(2002) for the PS2, which painstakingly modeled a portion of the 
city of London for its gangster-themed setting; Electronic Arts’ 
 The Godfather: The Game  (2006; Nintendo Wii, PC, PS2, and oth-
ers), which is based on the movie of the same name; Microsoft’s 
 Crackdown  (2007) for their Xbox 360, a futuristic third-person 
shooter that casts the player as a cybernetically enhanced agent; 
Electronic Arts’  Mercenaries 2: World in Flames  (2008; PC, PS2, 
PS3, Xbox 360), a third-person shooter set in Venezuela that fea-
tures destructible environments; and THQ’s  Saints Row 2 (2008; 
PC, PS3, Xbox 360), a sandbox game with many similarities to 
the  GTA  series, but placing a greater emphasis on gang life and 
related customization. The various Rockstar studios would take 
inspiration themselves with the 2006 release of the imagina-
tive  Bully  (PS2, PC, Xbox 360, and others), casting the player as 
a  teenage rebel trying to survive a boarding school. However, 
 22 http://tinyurl.com/5vfqmd . 
 23 Also known as  Grand Theft Auto Advance . 
 24 Both were later ported to the PS2 as budget titles. 
 25      This perspective features a similar overhead view like the ﬁ rst two  GTA games, 
but with more 3D elements. 

 
Chapter 9 GRAND THEFT AUTO III (2001): THE CONSOLEJACKING LIFE     119
though many of these are good games in their own right, none 
lived up to Rockstar North’s creations in either critical or com-
mercial success. 
Box back for Grand Theft Auto: 
Liberty City Stories.

120     Chapter 9 GRAND THEFT AUTO III (2001): THE CONSOLEJACKING LIFE
 GTA III ’s inﬂ uence extends beyond sandbox games, with its 
open-world elements being incorporated into other genres, like 
racing games. These include Atari’s  Test Drive Unlimited (2006; 
PC, PS2, PSP, Xbox 360), which uses the modeled Hawaiian island 
of Oahu for its racing environment; and  Burnout Paradise (2008; 
PC, PS3, Xbox 360), which is set in the ﬁ ctional Paradise City. 
Both games allow players to challenge opponents, either ofﬂ ine 
or online, to a race at nearly any point in the game. 
 The sandbox, open-ended, or open-world format has a lot of 
future potential as programming for realism (physics, destruc-
tible environments, and so on) continues to improve alongside 
the hardware. Although most critics praise Rockstar for making 
games with such rich possibilities for interaction, others—con-
cerned but uninformed citizens—condemn it, blaming it for 
corrupting youth and valorizing violent crime and misogyny. 
Whereas Garriott’s  The Black Gate  allowed players to commit 
unethical deeds, these were often cleverly (and decisively) pun-
ished later in the game; indeed, Garriott had long insisted that 
games should actively promote ethical behavior and strong 
moral values. Rockstar, conversely, seems to show no remorse 
for its products or how people play them, and it’s hard to argue 
that “the public” disapproves of games that reap such enormous 
commercial rewards. There’s perhaps an argument that allow-
ing players to engage in  virtual  crime will make them less likely 
to commit  actual  crimes, though no legitimate psychological or 
sociological study to date has compellingly proven or disproven 
such claims. The lack of mutually acceptable evidence has in 
Screenshot from Mercenaries 2: 
World in Flames, showcasing the 
destructible environments.

 
Chapter 9 GRAND THEFT AUTO III (2001): THE CONSOLEJACKING LIFE     121
no way silenced critics of either camp, and we’ve certainly seen 
 similar  unscientiﬁ c diatribes raised over other pop-culture icons 
like the tabletop role-playing game  Dungeons & Dragons and 
comic books. 
 Although it’s tempting to view the less savory aspects of the 
 GTA  series as evidence of its developer’s immorality, we might 
also see it as rather cynical social commentary. Given the choice, 
would most people prefer to play the game as a Christian or a 
criminal, a Jesus or a Machiavelli? Rockstar can always fall back 
on the position that they merely create possibilities—it’s up to 
the player to enact them. If living the life of a criminal is more fun 
than being a law-abiding citizen, what does that say about our 
society?

This page intentionally left blank

123
  
 JOHN MADDEN FOOTBALL 
(1988): MODERN SPORTS 
VIDEOGAMES KICKOFF  
10
 Although this chapter focuses on the highly inﬂ uential and 
commercially successful  Madden  series of football videogames, 
it’s also concerned with sports videogames in general.1 As the 
sports videogame industry grew and developed, so too did the 
 Madden  series—sometimes innovating, sometimes liberally bor-
rowing ideas from others. To put it simply, what’s good for  Madden 
is good for the genre as a whole. 
 Some critics might wonder whether all videogames can be 
considered sports. After all, nearly all of them have some type 
of competitive and scoring element. We certainly ﬁ nd a strong 
sports inﬂ uence in the earliest videogames. The ﬁ rst true video-
game translations of sporting activities are discussed in  bonus 
chapter , “ Pong  (1972): Avoid Missing Game to Launch Industry,” 
and include William Higinbotham and Robert Dvorak’s  Tennis for 
Two  (1958), a custom analog computer game; the sports games 
for Ralph Baer’s Magnavox Odyssey console from 1972 ( Table 
Tennis ,  Tennis ,  Hockey ,  Football , and others); and of course, 
Atari’s arcade  Pong  from later that same year.  Pong ’s great suc-
cess with such humble technology inspired more imitators than 
innovators, and it took a while for sports videogames to expand 
beyond tepid paddle and ball variations in which designers could 
simply change the number and size of paddles and balls and call 
it a different sport. Nevertheless, expand it did, culminating with 
the  Madden  games, which became perennial bestsellers and chal-
lengers for the top spot on the sales charts every year. 
 With all of that in mind, ﬁ rst we’ll take you through a quick tour 
of the history of some notable games based on traditional sports: 
 1      With the exceptions of vehicle racing, which are discussed in  Chapter 14 , “ Pole 
Position (1982): Where the Raster Meets the Road,” and casual and extreme sports 
games, which are discussed in  bonus chapter , “ Tony Hawk’s Pro Skater (1999): 
Videogame Ollies, Grabs, and Grinds.”  

124     Chapter 10 JOHN MADDEN FOOTBALL (1988): MODERN SPORTS VIDEOGAMES KICKOFF
baseball, basketball, boxing, golf, soccer, hockey, tennis, and of 
course, football, as well as how they evolved, getting into more 
detail on what makes the  Madden  series what it is today. Let’s 
begin then with a look at baseball games over the years. 
 The ﬁ rst major baseball videogame was  Tornado Baseball , 
released to the arcade in 1976 by Midway. The game featured an 
overhead view of the playing ﬁ eld that became the standard for 
a number of years. The black and white players, foul line, and 
scores were mirrored against a color overlay. Like many early 
games,  Tornado Baseball required two players. The game’s audio-
visuals were quite simple: besides the movement of the ball, there 
was only minimal animation of the stick-ﬁ gure players and just a 
simple bat to represent the batter. What the game did have was a 
nifty control panel, complete with a mini bat-like lever for hitting. 
The simple two-player gameplay and perspective would reappear 
in various simpliﬁ ed and enhanced successors, such as the mod-
est RCA Studio II’s  Baseball  (1977) and the Mattel Intellivision’s 
classic and relatively sophisticated  Major League Baseball (1980), 
which was one of the earliest examples of obtaining an ofﬁ cial 
sports association license, though it affected only branding. 
Screenshot from Midway’s 
Tornado Baseball.

 
Chapter 10 JOHN MADDEN FOOTBALL (1988): MODERN SPORTS VIDEOGAMES KICKOFF     125
 The next major change in presentation and perspective came 
with the 1983 release of Gamestar’s  Star League Baseball for the 
Atari 8-bit and Commodore 64.  Star League Baseball presented 
the action from the right-ﬁ eld stands, offering the player a type 
of isometric view of the action. Unlike overhead views, which 
typically avoided up-down ball movement in either pitching or 
hit balls,  Star League Baseball  embraced it. Several other games 
would copy this perspective, but the one drawback to this point-
of-view, much like overhead, was the relative lack of detail in 
the pitcher-batter interaction critical to the sport. Games like 
 Hardball! and  R.B.I. Baseball  would address this issue. 
 Hardball! , ﬁ rst released by Accolade in 1985 for the Commodore 
64, presented the battle between the pitcher and batter from a 
television-style point of view, which is behind the pitcher, more 
or less from the perspective of the second baseman. Though this 
point of view proved popular and was particularly good for pitch-
ing, it was not quite as ideal for hitting because it was easy for bat-
ters to judge location, but not necessarily depth.  R.B.I. Baseball , 
ﬁ rst released by Tengen in 1987 for the Nintendo Entertainment 
System, reversed the perspective and made the point of view that 
of the home plate umpire just behind the catcher. Though mod-
ern baseball games typically allow for a myriad of perspectives in 
their 3D engines, this point of view remains the default because it 
provides the best balance of visibility for both pitcher and  batter. 
Though  R.B.I. Baseball  did not have a Major League Baseball 
license, which would have allowed it to use ofﬁ cial branding 
and team names, it did have a Major League Baseball Players 
Association license, which allowed it to feature well-known play-
ers. Games like  World Series Major League Baseball  (1994) by Sega 
Electronic Arts’ Earl Weaver 
Baseball (1987) was one of 
the early efforts to associate 
a famous name with a game, 
hoping to give it an edge with 
fans. The Commodore Amiga 
version of this game used the 
computer’s built-in speech 
synthesis instead of digitized 
speech.

126     Chapter 10 JOHN MADDEN FOOTBALL (1988): MODERN SPORTS VIDEOGAMES KICKOFF
for their Genesis console would eventually bring it all together, 
with every license and top-notch gameplay and visuals. Games 
like 3DO’s  High Heat Major League Baseball 2004 (2003; Microsoft 
Xbox, PC, Sony PlayStation) and Sony’s  MLB 09: The Show (2008; 
Sony PlayStation, Sony PlayStation 3, Sony PlayStation Portable) 
would eventually bring it all together in 3D, which was a boon for 
sports gaming, as the action could be rendered from nearly any 
angle necessary. 
 The ﬁ rst notable basketball game was Atari’s trackball-
 controlled  Atari Basketball , released to the arcade in 1979.  Atari 
Basketball  was a one- or two-player one-on-one full-court bas-
ketball game, shown from an angled side view. The side view 
would be a commonly used perspective over the years, though 
some games showed the full court at all times and others showed 
half or scrolling courts. Electronic Arts would release  Julius Erving 
and Larry Bird Go One-on-One  in 1983 on the Apple II (later for 
many other platforms), which featured an angled top-down half 
court game of one-on-one. Although the game played great and 
had neat touches, like a breakable backboard that caused an 
angry janitor to come out and sweep up the debris, it was most 
famous for being one of the ﬁ rst sports games to both involve and 
use the likenesses of actual sports stars, taking into consideration 
the strengths and weaknesses of each. The success of the game 
Box back for Julius Erving and 
Larry Bird Go One-on-One.

 
Chapter 10 JOHN MADDEN FOOTBALL (1988): MODERN SPORTS VIDEOGAMES KICKOFF     127
 certainly predicted the demands of future sports videogame fans 
in regard to the modeling and usage of their favorite athletes. Of 
course, there have been many team-based basketball games over 
the years, including Konami’s  Double Dribble  (1986) arcade game, 
famous for its scrolling court and cutscenes showing spectacu-
lar plays, and Electronic Arts’ long-running  NBA Live franchise, 
which besides the typical assortment of current teams, players, 
and signature moves, in the 2009 edition features daily player 
updates that modify tendencies, rosters, and hot and cold streaks 
based on their real-world counterparts. 
 Boxing has been one of the most consistently translated sports, 
making an appearance on even the most obscure platforms, 
though it has never achieved anywhere near the popularity of its 
close cousin, the ﬁ ghting game (described in  Chapter 17 , “ Street 
Fighter II  (1991): Would You Like the Combo?”). Notable titles 
include Activision’s  Boxing  (1980) for the Atari 2600 VCS, which 
displayed the action from an overhead view; Mattel’s  Boxing for 
its Intellivision, which displayed the action from the side;  4-D 
Sports Boxing  (1991; Commodore Amiga, PC, and others) from 
Distinctive Software, which featured a crude, but effective free-
form 3D ﬁ ghting engine; and Sega’s  Greatest Heavyweights (1993) 
for their Genesis console, which featured licensed likenesses of 
famous boxers, a close-up side view of the top half of the boxers, 
and a rotating ring. Of course the biggest challenge with  boxing 
games is balancing button-mashing action with the sport’s inher-
ent strategic elements, and one of the best at combining these has 
been Electronic Arts’  Fight Night  series, which began back in 2004. 
Screenshot from Activision’s 
Boxing for the Atari 2600 Video 
Computer System.

128     Chapter 10 JOHN MADDEN FOOTBALL (1988): MODERN SPORTS VIDEOGAMES KICKOFF
Fight Night sets the bar for boxing videogames high, offering a 
robust and responsive 3D ﬁ ghting engine, custom and licensed 
boxers, career modes, and the usual polish of EA Sports titles.2 
 Golf would seem at ﬁ rst glance to be one of the more difﬁ -
cult sports for early hardware to simulate, with its myriad clubs, 
Box back for INTV Corporation’s 
surprisingly advanced successor 
to Mattel’s PGA Golf, Chip Shot: 
Super Pro Golf, released in 1987 
for the Intellivision.
 2 Though considered sports entertainment rather than an actual sport, the evolu-
tion of wrestling games have many parallels to both ﬁ ghting and boxing video-
games, with a similar important and beneﬁ cial transition from 2D to 3D. One of 
the best 3D evolutions of wrestling has been the  WWE SmackDown! series, which 
began back in 2000 and featured the usual mix of licensed wrestlers, customiza-
tion, and assortment of moves.  

 
Chapter 10 JOHN MADDEN FOOTBALL (1988): MODERN SPORTS VIDEOGAMES KICKOFF     129
 distances, and long and short driving and putting games. Of 
course, as our discussions throughout this book have shown, it is 
not always necessary to re-create a complete experience to have a 
fun videogame, and in fact golf titles were available fairly early on. 
Atari’s  Golf  (1978) for their VCS and Mattel’s  PGA Golf  (1979) for 
their Intellivision are two good examples. In Atari’s title, there are 
nine different full screen holes that switch to a closer view when it 
becomes necessary to putt. Mattel’s title, besides having licensed 
Box back for Links: The Challenge 
of Golf (1992) for the Video 
Information System (VIS) platform. 
The multiclick swing system was 
the de facto standard until fairly 
recently.

130     Chapter 10 JOHN MADDEN FOOTBALL (1988): MODERN SPORTS VIDEOGAMES KICKOFF
branding, takes a similar approach to Atari’s, save for changing 
the point of view when putting. What really  differentiated  PGA 
Golf , however, was its surprisingly advanced features for the time, 
including aiming, swinging (don’t slice!), and ball trajectories—
all in the interest of avoiding standard  hazards like sand traps, 
roughs, and trees. The videogame golf experience would remain 
virtually unchanged until Access’  Leader Board Golf , ﬁ rst released 
in 1986 for the Commodore 64.  Leader Board Golf  featured a third-
person behind-the-golfer viewpoint, with the course redrawn each 
time the ball changed its resting location.  Leader Board Golf would 
eventually morph into the long running  Links series. Incredible 
Technologies’  Golden Tee  series of popular arcade games debuted 
in 1989, eventually making the successful transition from 2D to 
3D gameplay. With its intuitive trackball controls and solid pacing, 
the  Golden Tee  games continue to be popular bar ﬁ xtures, even 
inspiring regular tournaments. Like many of the other sports in 
this chapter, Electronic Arts presently has the strongest showing 
in golf videogames with their  PGA Tour  series, which started back 
in 1990 on the PC. It later became the  Tiger Woods PGA Tour series 
starting in 1998 on the PC and Sony PlayStation. The latest  Tiger 
Woods  games feature an assortment of control schemes, tourna-
ments, and real-time events based on the platform’s internal clock 
and showcases the expected group of licensed professionals. 
 Soccer, better known outside North America as football, has of 
course received countless treatments over the years. One of the ear-
liest recognizable videogame conversions was Atari’s  Atari Soccer 
(1979), which—like their other early sports titles—made excel-
lent use of the trackball for more realistic control. Supporting up 
 Commodore’s International 
Soccer for the Commodore 64.

 
Chapter 10 JOHN MADDEN FOOTBALL (1988): MODERN SPORTS VIDEOGAMES KICKOFF     131
to four simultaneous players, Atari’s game presented the black-
and-white action from an overhead left-right perspective, and fea-
tured well-paced two-on-two (plus goalies) play. A good portion 
of the playﬁ eld was shown onscreen at one time, with scrolling as 
needed. Commodore’s colorful  International Soccer  (1983) for the 
Commodore 64 used a similar scrolling technique, but this time pre-
sented the action from an angled side perspective, which allowed 
for the ball to bounce in a more realistic-looking fashion, as well as 
increased the number of players on the ﬁ eld. The popular  Sensible 
Soccer  series from Sensible Software, ﬁ rst released in 1992 on plat-
forms like the Atari ST and Commodore Amiga, used a zoomed-out, 
top-down overhead view, and offered full season, quick play, and 
management modes. Electronic Arts’  FIFA  series debuted in 1993 
and initially featured a zoomed-in, angled, isometric perspective, 
though on the marquee 3DO version, it sported greatly enhanced 
2D graphics and a pseudo-3D camera. Perhaps the most popular 
soccer game today is Konami’s  Pro Evolution Soccer  series, which 
was also known by the name  Winning Eleven . The latest versions 
of the game, which include a bewildering array of features, con-
tinue to receive accolades. IGN’s Alex Simmons mentions the series’ 
“instinctive controls, the way you almost feel at one with your team 
when you’re playing well.”3 
 Hockey was perhaps the most popular sports variation on  Pong 
outside of tennis, so there were of course many games released 
 3      See  http://ps3.ign.com/articles/828/828327p1.html .  
Sensible Soccer was one of the 
more popular games for the 
Commodore Amiga platform. Its 
smooth animation, superb audio, 
and bright graphics even made it 
popular with many gamers who 
didn’t enjoy the sport.

132     Chapter 10 JOHN MADDEN FOOTBALL (1988): MODERN SPORTS VIDEOGAMES KICKOFF
in the paddle and ball format both in the arcade and at home 
that called themselves “hockey.” However, the ﬁ rst major realis-
tic hockey game appeared on the Intellivision in 1980, in the form 
of Mattel’s visually rich  NHL Hockey . It was a two-player game 
of three-on-three hockey, plus goalies, all shown from a single-
screen angled side perspective. Nintendo’s  Ice Hockey , released in 
1988 for the NES; Bethesda Softwork’s 1989  Wayne Gretzky Hockey 
(Commodore Amiga, NES, and others); NHL 2K (starting in 2000 
on the Sega Dreamcast); and Electronic Arts’ long-running  NHL 
series (starting in 1991 on the Sega Genesis) competed for the 
affections of hockey fans. Although  NHL  started out as a popu-
lar companion to the  Madden  series on the Sega Genesis with a 
similar top-down overhead view, eventually morphing into the 
feature-rich 3D experience it is today,  NHL 2K  was always based 
on a 3D engine. 
 Tennis videogames often made use of a left-right overhead per-
spective that became increasingly popular, though in its more 
Konami’s Blades of Steel arcade 
game from 1987.

 
Chapter 10 JOHN MADDEN FOOTBALL (1988): MODERN SPORTS VIDEOGAMES KICKOFF     133
common top-down form. Tennis videogames are often thought of 
as “ Pong  with window dressing,” but that’s a bit unfair to the free-
doms many such interpretations of the sport (particularly later 
ones) offer. We again turn to the Atari VCS and Mattel Intellivision 
for two very different early interpretations. On the VCS, Activision 
released  Tennis  (1981), which features a simple angled top-down 
view of the action for one or two players. Although there are no 
out-of-bounds shots and each of the players automatically hits 
Electronic Arts’ NHL Hockey 
series has proven a videogame 
mainstay. Shown is NHL 95 (1994) 
for the Sega Genesis.
Gamestar’s On Court Tennis (1984) 
was a highly accessible game, 
mostly because the computer 
automatically controlled the 
competitors’ movement about 
the court. All the player had to do 
was focus on hitting the ball.

134     Chapter 10 JOHN MADDEN FOOTBALL (1988): MODERN SPORTS VIDEOGAMES KICKOFF
the ball, the angle can be controlled based on player location. On 
the Intellivision, Mattel released  Tennis  (1980), a two-player game 
with an angled side view that offered full control over each player, 
as well as ball velocity and placement. Many future games would 
experiment with both the viewpoint and level of interaction, with 
most choosing some type of modiﬁ ed top-down view and full 
control over both the player and racket. There are two main series 
worth talking about that are still going strong today:  Virtua Tennis 
and  Top Spin . Sega’s  Virtua Tennis  started out as an arcade game 
in 1999 and soon made its way home. The series is known for its 
quick, intuitive gameplay and—in the home versions—its quirky 
training minigames. PAM Development’s  Top Spin  started out in 
2003 for the Microsoft Xbox before seeing release on other plat-
forms, and featured a robust create-a-player mode and online 
Screenshot from Atari Football.

 
Chapter 10 JOHN MADDEN FOOTBALL (1988): MODERN SPORTS VIDEOGAMES KICKOFF     135
play. Both series make a point of licensing the likenesses of 
famous tennis players to round out their feature sets. 
 The ﬁ rst major football videogame was another black-and-white 
Atari arcade game with trackball control,  Atari Football , released in 
1979. Supporting two or four players controlling Os (offense) and 
Xs (defense) from an overhead, scrolling left-right perspective, the 
game offered quick action and a choice of plays. Mattel led the way 
at home again with  NFL Football , another two-player 1980 release 
for the Intellivision that featured the same ﬁ eld perspective as 
 Atari Football , but showed its colorful animated players from the 
side.  NFL Football  also featured a large number of plays to choose 
from. Tecmo’s  Tecmo Bowl  arcade game, released in 1987, utilized 
the same type of perspective and look as  NFL Football , except with 
a closer, more zoomed-in camera, and far better graphics and 
sound.  Tecmo Bowl ’s most notable feature in its fast-paced game-
play was the ability to shake off would-be tacklers. However, it 
would be its ﬁ rst home release for the NES in 1989 that gave the 
 Tecmo Bowl  series legendary status among competitive arcade 
sports game fans, who would make shaking off defenders into an 
art form. In fact, the stir that  Tecmo Bowl  created on the NES con-
trasted sharply with the release of a game from Electronic Arts for 
computers called  John Madden Football  from the previous year 
that went mostly unnoticed. 
 At the time of  Madden ’s development and release, the 
 computer gaming market was not in a position to support a 
Imagic’s Touchdown Football 
was a popular six-on-six football 
game for multiple platforms. IBM 
PCjr version shown.

136     Chapter 10 JOHN MADDEN FOOTBALL (1988): MODERN SPORTS VIDEOGAMES KICKOFF
breakout hit  computer game as we think of them today. The 
 primary  development platform, the Apple II, though still popular, 
was no longer a particularly lucrative market. The even more pop-
ular Commodore 64 was also in decline, and the PC was still not 
a particularly capable audiovisual platform. With Electronic Arts 
not yet heavily vested directly in the console market, a system like 
the NES was not an option. That left a year or two until Electronic 
Arts’ investment in the Sega Genesis platform as their direct entry 
point into consoles (i.e., as a big ﬁ sh in a small pond) would really 
pay off with the system that  Madden became most identiﬁ ed with 
and ﬁ rst became a best seller on. 
 Famously, even on the modest Apple II platform, John Madden 
insisted that for him to lend his name, the game must have full 
11-member football teams facing off against each other, which 
was no small feat for any platform, let alone the aging 8-bit tech-
nology. By the time the game made it to the Sega Genesis in 1990 
(ports for the Commodore Amiga and Super Nintendo would 
 follow), the game’s famous view from above and behind the quar-
terback would be set,4 along with audibles, variable ﬁ eld condi-
tions, and password-protected games. However, the game still 
lacked any other license besides Madden himself. 
 John Madden Football ’92 , released in 1991 for the Sega 
Genesis,5 introduced instant replay, weather conditions, two-player  
 4      Contrasting the mostly overhead perspective of the previous versions.  
 5 John Madden Football II  would be released independently for the PC the same 
year, with impressive updates of its own, but it did not receive the same notice as 
the Sega Genesis version.  
John Madden Football on the 
Apple II.

 
Chapter 10 JOHN MADDEN FOOTBALL (1988): MODERN SPORTS VIDEOGAMES KICKOFF     137
cooperative play, injuries, and additional play modes. There was 
still no NFL or NFL Players Association license, so the developers 
were able to take liberties with the property, including  having a 
reckless ambulance appear to cart off an injured player. The terms 
Screenshot from John Madden 
Football ’92 for the Sega 
Genesis. John Madden is 
forever associated with football 
videogames. The franchise 
bearing his name still represents 
the cutting edge of sport-to-
console adaptations.
John Madden Football (1993) for 
the 3DO was a high point for the 
platform.

138     Chapter 10 JOHN MADDEN FOOTBALL (1988): MODERN SPORTS VIDEOGAMES KICKOFF
of future licensing agreements with the professional  football 
 associations meant that humorous touches like that would no 
longer be an option. 
 John Madden Football ’93  (1992) and  Madden NFL ’94 (1993),6 
both for the Sega Genesis and Super Nintendo, continued  adding 
features, with the latter release ﬁ nally getting a full NFL team 
license—hence the change in name.  Madden NFL ’95 , released in 
1994, was the ﬁ rst version to feature the full names of most NFL 
players (not just their numbers), with full-season stat tracking. It 
was also the ﬁ rst version in a while to see release on multiple plat-
forms again, including the Nintendo Game Boy, Sega Game Gear, 
Sega Genesis, and Super Nintendo. 
 Madden NFL ’95 , released in 1995 for the Nintendo Game Boy, 
PC, Sega Game Gear, Sega Genesis, and Super Nintendo, added 
classic teams and a create-a-player feature. Interestingly, a Sony 
PlayStation version was planned, but was canceled when Sony 
demonstrated an early version of the surprisingly advanced  NFL 
GameDay , a series that would remain competitive through the 
PlayStation 2 era before being canceled. 
 6  An advanced one-off version for the 3DO platform was produced this same year, 
with the title of  John Madden Football , as well as a one-off version for the NEC 
Turbo Duo, titled  John Madden Duo CD Football .  
Even the NEC Turbo Duo 
received John Madden Duo CD 
Football (1993). Similar to the 3DO 
version, the NEC release featured 
occasional video cutscenes.

 
Chapter 10 JOHN MADDEN FOOTBALL (1988): MODERN SPORTS VIDEOGAMES KICKOFF     139
 Madden NFL 97  (1996) was the ﬁ rst version to be created for 
the Sega Saturn and Sony PlayStation, though versions were 
released for the Nintendo Game Boy, PC, Sega Genesis, and Super 
Nintendo as well.7 
 Madden NFL 98  (1997) was the last version released for the 
Sega Genesis, Super Nintendo, and Sega Saturn platforms, with 
Electronic Arts continuing to produce new versions for the PC and 
Sony PlayStation, and adding the Nintendo 64 with the release of 
 Madden NFL 99  (1998). Most notable in those releases was the 
addition of a franchise mode, which allows play across multiple 
seasons and involves off-season draft picks and trades.  Madden 
NFL 2000 (1999) added the Apple Macintosh and Nintendo Game 
Boy Color to the platform mix. 
 With the release of  Madden NFL 2001  (2000), Electronic Arts 
would begin the tradition of featuring a current athlete on the 
cover instead of John Madden.8 Year after year, new games and 
platforms would follow, with online features, presnap adjust-
ments, special defensive hits that might cause fumbles, and 
Box back for Sony’s NFL 98 (1997) 
for the Sony PlayStation.
 7      A one-off version for the Nintendo 64,  Madden Football 64 , was released in 1997 
and was a step back for the series, containing only a player license.  
 8      Do a web search on “Madden curse” for some fun trivia regarding each game’s 
cover athlete.  

140     Chapter 10 JOHN MADDEN FOOTBALL (1988): MODERN SPORTS VIDEOGAMES KICKOFF
many other features added to the mix to make each new year’s 
release sound more exciting than what cynics basically called “the 
same game with just a few graphical tweaks and roster updates.” 
The biggest addition to  Madden NFL 09  (2008), for instance, 
besides greatly improved graphics and expected gameplay 
tweaks, is the option to play in online leagues, allowing up to 32 
players to compete in a simulated season.9 
 Madden NFL  is the bestselling videogame sports franchise 
in history, spawning countless competitive tournaments and 
 television competitions. It’s no wonder that we chose  John 
Madden Football  as the greatest and most inﬂ uential in its class. 
Although critics will argue that the “Madden Model” of typically 
incrementally improved new annual releases has hurt video-
games in  general,10 the simple fact of the matter is that Electronic 
Arts has hit on a formula that works. As long as  Madden ’s rabid, 
foaming-at-the-mouth fanbase continues to clamor for each new 
release, other videogames and their creators will have no choice 
but to look to the series for how to release new versions of their 
 9      Microsoft Xbox 360 and Sony PlayStation 3 versions only. The other releases for 
the Microsoft Xbox, Nintendo DS, Nintendo Wii, Sony PlayStation 2, and Sony 
PlayStation Portable are all different games.  
 10      Perhaps the biggest offender pointed to is the  Tony Hawk’s Pro Skater series dis-
cussed in  bonus chapter , “ Tony Hawk’s Pro Skater (1999): Videogame Ollies, Grabs, 
and Grinds.”    
Box back from Visual Concepts’ 
NFL 2K1 for the Sega Dreamcast. 
Sega’s sports games were extremely 
well done, but the lack of support 
from Electronic Arts helped doom 
the Dreamcast.

 
Chapter 10 JOHN MADDEN FOOTBALL (1988): MODERN SPORTS VIDEOGAMES KICKOFF     141
own games on a regular basis. Even if  Madden ’s development 
did not happen in a vacuum, it’s been as successful as any single 
game or series at giving the public exactly what they want, in this 
case evolving sports videogames to fall in line with the public’s 
tastes from anonymous arcade fare to big-name-licensed sports 
simulations.

This page intentionally left blank

143
 KING’S QUEST: QUEST FOR 
THE CROWN (1984): PERILOUS 
PUZZLES, THORNY THRONES  
 Roberta Williams’  King’s Quest: Quest for the Crown , published 
ﬁ rst in 1984 for IBM’s short-lived PCjr platform, established many 
of the features we take for granted in modern adventure games. 
It’s hard to exaggerate its importance on the development of the 
genre, to which it introduced brightly colored animated graph-
ics, a navigable, pseudo-3D environment allowing for three 
axes of movement, and the quirky, irreverent humor that would 
dominate the adventure scene until Cyan’s  Myst  exploded onto 
the world in 1993 (see  Chapter 12 , “ Myst  (1993): Launching 
Multimedia Worlds”). Sierra On-Line, the software publishing 
company formed by Williams and her husband Ken, would soon 
become the world’s preeminent publisher of adventure games, 
releasing many highly popular and inﬂ uential games based on 
11
Critics and gamers alike were 
blown away by the colorful 
animated visuals of the original 
King’s Quest on the IBM PCjr.

144     Chapter 11 KING’S QUEST: QUEST FOR THE CROWN (1984)
the  King’s Quest  model. Although few serious critics would claim 
that  King’s Quest  is without ﬂ aw, it represented a huge leap for-
ward and is still played in various versions by adventure game 
fans today. 
 The history of  King’s Quest  begins rather inauspiciously. Instead 
of releasing the game directly to the dominant computer plat-
forms of the era (Apple II, Atari 8-bit, and Commodore 64), Sierra 
arranged an exclusive licensing deal with IBM for their upcom-
ing PCjr platform. The PCjr, as the name implies, was intended 
as a cheaper, more family-friendly personal computer than the 
business-oriented IBM PC, and offered better sound and graphics, 
as well as built-in joystick ports. However, the PCjr’s high price and 
a combination of other factors (awful keyboard, limited memory, 
compatibility issues) made it uncompetitive in the marketplace. 
Even with IBM’s golden reputation, heavy advertising budget, and 
costly efforts to avert disaster (including a new and better key-
board), the PCjr failed miserably. Thankfully for adventure game 
fans, Sierra soon rereleased the game for other platforms, includ-
ing the Tandy 1000, a much more successful IBM PC–compatible 
computer inspired by the PCjr. Sales of the game soared as scores 
of gamers ﬂ ooded into software shops, eager to play the game that 
all their friends and magazines were talking about. 
 Roberta Williams was no stranger to the adventure game mar-
ket, having already established a name for herself with  Mystery 
House ,  The Wizard and the Princess  (both 1980), and  Time Zone  
(1982). All three of these games were among the ﬁ rsts for their 
genres.  Mystery House  was the ﬁ rst graphical adventure game, 
and—though laughably primitive by today’s standards—this Apple 
II game was tremendously progressive. Despite its crudely drawn 
monochrome graphics, poorly edited script, and one of the worst 
text parsers in the business, it still sold more than 11,000 copies 
in its ﬁ rst year of release.1  The Wizard and the Princess  upped the 
ante with color graphics and sold even better than its predeces-
sor.  Time Zone  was by far the most ambitious graphical adven-
ture game produced by anyone prior to that time; it shipped on 
six double-sided ﬂ oppy disks at a time when many games ﬁ t com-
fortably alongside many others on one side. Unfortunately, the 
exorbitant cost of the game (over $100 in 1982 dollars) prevented 
its success, despite the immense size and somewhat improved 
graphics. Williams and Sierra produced several other “Hi-Res 
Adventures” during this era, but certainly none to rival their later 
 King’s Quest.  We should note, too, that the company was called 
“On-Line Systems” during these early years, changing to “Sierra 
On-Line” later on to avoid confusion with another company. 
 1      See The Dot Eaters’ coverage of the game at  http://www.thedoteaters.com/
p4_stage2.php . 

 
Chapter 11 KING’S QUEST: QUEST FOR THE CROWN (1984)     145
 IBM made a smart decision in asking Sierra On-Line to create 
one of its popular adventure games for its PCjr. Roberta Williams 
was determined to up the ante yet again, producing a game that 
would not only look better than the competition but offer a much 
freer range of movement. Although Williams maintains in several 
interviews that she prioritizes plots and characters over inter-
face,  King’s Quest  was a technological marvel. Not only were the 
16-color animated graphics superior to Sierra’s earlier works, 
IBM’s traditionally stuffy 
packaging and cover art for the 
original IBM PCjr version of King’s 
Quest contrasted with the game’s 
whimsical, storybook setting.

146     Chapter 11 KING’S QUEST: QUEST FOR THE CROWN (1984)
but this time the player controlled a character that could move 
in three dimensions, all in real time. Williams’ earlier games had 
been shown in ﬁ rst person, and it’s interesting here to note that 
the designer felt that a third-person perspective would be more 
realistic—we’ll see that line of thought reversed in the next chap-
ter, when we discuss  Myst. King’s Quest  isn’t true 3D—the charac-
ter does not shrink or expand as he moves toward the foreground 
or background, but could go behind or in front of objects on the 
screen. It was still an impressive feat for the time. 
 Simplicity was one of Sierra’s main goals while designing the 
interface, but the game still relied heavily on textual input. As 
Although Time Zone’s scope was 
impressive, the visuals were 
anything but.
King’s Quest simple parser 
worked in conjunction with 
real-time character movement to 
heighten the sense of interaction 
in the gameworld.

 
Chapter 11 KING’S QUEST: QUEST FOR THE CROWN (1984)     147
with Sierra’s earlier games, the text parser was woefully dumb 
compared to Infocom’s  Zork  (see  Chapter 25 , “ Zork  (1980): Text 
Imps versus Graphics Grues”), a fact that the legendary text 
adventure developer exploited ruthlessly in its magazine ads. 
A bigger problem, though, was that the relatively low resolution 
of the graphics made it difﬁ cult to identify certain objects; what 
looked like a stone might actually be a walnut. Typing “TAKE 
STONE” would simply result in the same error message over and 
over; only “TAKE WALNUT” would work. Although savvy players 
found ways to deal with these problems (such as typing “LOOK 
GROUND” to learn the name of the object), others were forced to 
rely on hint books or advice from friends. The cumbersome and 
vexing text parser was dropped in later Sierra adventure games 
(including  King’s Quest V   ), though some fans objected that doing 
so inhibited their (perceived, at least) freedom and creativity. 
 Even though  King’s Quest ’s interface was easy for novices to 
master, the game itself was often quite difﬁ cult. The character, 
Graham, was easily and frequently killed in the adventure, so 
frequent saves were necessary to prevent tedious repetition—
another factor that the game’s diehard fans offer as a “feature,” 
since it extends the time it takes to complete the game and thus 
ups the “play value.” 
 A nastier problem was that it was also quite easy to get the 
game into an unwinnable state, so that even though Graham 
wasn’t dead, there was no way to complete the game without 
restoring to an earlier save point. Sometimes it wouldn’t even be 
obvious to players that they’d reached such a state; they’d simply 
continue trying things for hours or even days until ﬁ nally giving 
up. Roberta Williams earned a reputation during these years for 
creating hard puzzles and obscure or even misleading clues. 
 One such puzzle in the game concerns a condor. The idea is 
to stand in a certain spot on the screen (walkthroughs have gone 
so far as to offer close-up screenshots to help) and enter “JUMP” 
into the parser at just the right moment. The precise timing and 
placement, combined with the somewhat obscure command to 
jump (why not catch or grab?) stumped many gamers. Another 
puzzle is based on the old fairy tale about Rumplestiltskin, but 
with a twist—when players were asked to name the gnome, they 
might not have realized that an earlier clue to “think backwards” 
meant they had to transcribe the name Rumplestiltskin using a 
backwards alphabet, yielding “IFNKOVHGROGHPRM.” Williams 
admitted that this was an “awfully nasty puzzle,” but defended 
it as a “typical ‘advanced’ puzzle in those days.”2 Yet perhaps the 
most infamous and frustrating “puzzle” has the player climbing 
 2      See Joppe Bos’s review of the game at  http://www.adventureclassicgaming.com/
index.php/site/reviews/120/ . 

148     Chapter 11 KING’S QUEST: QUEST FOR THE CROWN (1984)
a beanstalk. The climb involves careful coordination with the 
keyboard, since Graham will fall to his death at even the  slightest 
deviation from the preestablished (and difﬁ cult-to-ﬁ nd) path. 
Even seasoned veterans were forced to save and restore count-
less times to ﬁ nally get to the top of the beanstalk. Fortunately 
for modern adventurers, these and other puzzles have been sim-
pliﬁ ed in later remakes of the game, and of course the diehards 
maintain that the challenge is what makes the game fun in the 
ﬁ rst place. 
 As we’ve alluded to several times already, the difﬁ culty of the 
game is a point of contention among fans of the series and genre. 
Later adventure games, such as those from LucasArts, were much 
more forgiving; players were encouraged to explore without fear 
of dying or making the game impossible to beat. Some fans of 
the older style disliked these changes, claiming that gamers sim-
ply weren’t patient or intelligent enough to meet the challenge. 
Sharply disagreeing with this opinion is Ron Gilbert, designer of 
LucasArts’ breakaway comedy hit  The Secret of Monkey Island  
(1990). His 1989 diatribe, “Why Adventure Games Suck,” has been 
widely quoted and is worth partially quoting here: 
   Some people say that following [my] rules makes the games 
too easy to play. I disagree. What makes most games tough to 
play is that the puzzles are arbitrary and unconnected. Most 
are solved by chance or repetitive sessions of typing “light 
candle with match,” “light paper with match,” “light rug with 
match,” until something happens. This is not tough game 
play; this is masturbation. I played one game that required 
the player to drop a bubble gum wrapper in a room in order 
to get a trap door to open (object names have been changed 
to protect the guilty). What is the reasoning? There is none. 
It’s an advanced puzzle, I was told. 
 Gilbert’s essay is very much still relevant today, and it’s easy 
to think that one reason the adventure game genre has declined 
somewhat in recent years is that not enough developers have 
read and applied it. In  King’s Quest’s defense, there are usually 
at least two possible solutions to the puzzles, and there are, of 
course, many diligent gamers who have completed it without any 
outside help. 
 Cynics might point out that, whether by design or not, the difﬁ -
cult puzzles created a healthy niche market for Sierra’s own set of 
hint books. However, Sierra didn’t seem to object to others’ hint 
books, and both Roberta and Ken Williams had high praise for 
Peter Spears’s  The King’s Quest Companion,  which offered hints 
integrated into a novella based on the games. A historian would 
do well to pay attention to the hint book industry, as they were 
widely read and applied by adventure game fans. 

 
Chapter 11 KING’S QUEST: QUEST FOR THE CROWN (1984)     149
 According to Roberta Williams, the  King’s Quest  series is pri-
marily about personalities and stories: “Trying to come up with 
mind-bending puzzles and brain-twisting plots was never some-
thing that I strived for.”3 As you may have inferred from the earlier 
description of the puzzles, most of the stories and personalities 
involve popular folk and fairy tales, though usually with a twist 
to throw off gamers familiar with the outcomes. Whether one 
enjoys these games depends on their willingness to be charmed 
by the stories and characters, aspects that stand in stark contrast 
to Cyan’s revolutionary  Myst  series. 
 The goal of  King’s Quest  is to recover three stolen artifacts for 
the Kingdom of Daventry. These items are a shield that makes 
its bearer invulnerable, a chest that never empties of gold, and a 
mirror that shows the future. The mirror, which will play a strong 
role in later  King’s Quest  games, was taken by a wizard who prom-
ises in exchange to “bring an heir” to the king and queen, who 
have been childless throughout their long and otherwise happy 
marriage. Rather than bear a child, however, the queen becomes 
deathly ill. Now a dwarf shows up who offers to cure the queen 
in return for the shield. The dwarf takes the shield, but the queen 
dies shortly after. The miserable king, however, manages to res-
cue a beautiful princess, whom he takes for his wife. When she 
learns about the chest, though, she runs away with it, leaving 
the king without a bride and the kingdom without its last magi-
cal artifact. The player’s character, Sir Graham, shows up to help, 
and is promised the throne of Daventry if he can restore the three 
artifacts. 
 3      See Philip Jong’s 2006 interview with Roberta Williams at  http://www.adventure-
classicgaming.com/index.php/site/interviews/198/ . 
The low-resolution graphics 
sometimes made identifying 
objects quite difﬁ cult, as seen 
here in King’s Quest II. Thankfully, 
typing “LOOK TREE” causes a 
pop-up window to appear that 
offers a text description of the 
object (a stake). Sierra relied on 
its text parser to both control 
the game and supplement the 
graphics technology.

150     Chapter 11 KING’S QUEST: QUEST FOR THE CROWN (1984)
 King’s Quest II: Romancing the Throne , released in 1985, 
 continues the story introduced in the ﬁ rst game. Graham is now 
King Graham, and adventure ensues after he uses the mirror to 
ﬁ nd a suitable bride and queen for his kingdom. He is teleported 
to the land of Kolyma, where Hagatha the witch has trapped 
Valanice in a quartz tower. Graham sets out on a quest to save 
the damsel in distress, but rescuing her means searching all over 
Kolyma for the three missing keys and, of course, solving many 
puzzles along the way. The game’s title, by the way, is an allusion 
to  Romancing the Stone,  a lighthearted 1984 action ﬁ lm/romantic 
comedy starring Michael Douglas and Kathleen Turner. 
 The second  King’s Quest  game was written with AGI (Adventure 
Game Interpreter), a tool comparable to Infocom’s Z-Machine 
(see  Chapter 25 , “ Zork  (1980): Text Imps versus Graphics Grues”). 
AGI, introduced in the 1984 multiplatform release of  King’s 
Quest , allowed writers and graphic designers to work indepen-
dently of programmers, focusing on story and puzzle design 
rather than the game engine. It also made it easier to offer ports 
to the platforms of the day; once an AGI port was available for a 
given platform, Sierra could offer its entire library to its owners. 
AGI allowed Sierra to quickly develop and release not only later 
 King’s Quest  games, but a plethora of popular spin-offs (which 
we’ll discuss in a moment). The downside of Sierra’s reliance was 
that many AGI games look and feel quite similar, and major inno-
vations were a long time coming. An upgraded engine called SCI, 
or Sierra’s Creative Interpreter, was introduced in 1988 for  King’s 
Quest IV.  The superior audiovisuals of SCI offered 320  200 
resolution (AGI was limited to 160  200), and support for 
sound cards and mice, two innovations that were rapidly being 
adopted by PC gamers. We’ll discuss these issues later in this 
chapter. 
 King’s Quest II  is often considered one of the weaker games 
in the series. Harry Kaplan of  Adventure Classic Gaming,  for 
instance, calls it a “virtual carbon copy of the original title in both 
concept and style,” and a sequel that has “lost both the charm and 
freshness of the original.”4 There were again objections to the puz-
zles, which some found illogical, and criticisms of the story, which 
some found hopelessly cliched. What’s interesting from a histori-
cal perspective is the tension between the need for innovation 
and continuity: here, the sequel was too similar to the prequel, 
and suffered for it. Later games, especially the last one, would 
vary too widely from the model, again disappointing or even 
enraging loyal fans. Williams has stated in several interviews that 
she always carefully read and considered criticism of her games, 
which ranged from the highest ﬂ attery to the grossest insult. In 
 4  See  http://www.adventureclassicgaming.com/index.php/site/reviews/132/ . 

 
Chapter 11 KING’S QUEST: QUEST FOR THE CROWN (1984)     151
any case, even the “worst” games in the series tended to sell more 
copies than previous entries, though that fact might be explained 
by the broadening market and rising demand in general. 
 The third game,  King’s Quest III: To Heir Is Human , debuted in 
October of 1986, and again found a ready audience of fans eager 
to return to Daventry. However, they must have been shocked to 
discover the game is not about Graham or Daventry, but rather 
a boy named Gwydion who has been kidnapped by Manannan, 
an evil magician. However, Gwydion does eventually make his 
way to Daventry, where he rescues Princess Rosella and saves the 
kingdom. Some fans were disappointed that the game didn’t con-
tinue the storylines established in the earlier games, but most of 
the complaints focused on the difﬁ cult, frustrating gameplay. 
Box back for King’s Quest III.

152     Chapter 11 KING’S QUEST: QUEST FOR THE CROWN (1984)
 Roy Wagner, writing in the June 1987 issue of  Computer Gaming 
World,  recommended that players buy the hint book immedi-
ately, since “there will be very few that can get through this game 
without a lot of help.” Again, the problems were illogical puzzles 
and the expectation that players would recognize objects on 
the screen, which, as Wagner quips, are “drawn with two colors 
and a few pixels.” There were also plenty of difﬁ cult climbing 
sequences, which seemingly only a true zealot would ever hold 
up as a selling point. Another controversial issue was Sierra’s deci-
sion to integrate a copy protection system that expected  players 
to have access to the printed manual. At certain points,  players 
were asked to type in portions of the manual. Unfortunately, 
these weren’t always accurate, as Emily Morganti of  Adventure 
Gamers  describes: “You’re supposed to follow the directions in 
the manual to the letter, space, and period, but even then, some 
don’t work. For example, typing ‘Mold the dough into a cookie,’ as 
written in the game manual, yields the response ‘What’s a mold?’ 
(I took a lucky guess and found that Gwydion needs to ‘pat’ the 
dough instead.) Even without typos, it’s very easy to mess up 
these spells, and it’s game over if you do.”5 Fortunately for Sierra 
and fans of the series, these problems weren’t bad enough to sty-
mie sales, and modern gamers can ﬁ nd all the necessary manu-
als and codes easily enough online. After  King’s Quest III , Roberta 
Williams took a break to produce  Mixed-Up Mother Goose  (1987) , 
a popular edutainment title designed for young children. The box 
cover showed Roberta Williams herself, surrounded by a group of 
children, including her own. 
 5  See  http://www.adventuregamers.com/article/id,590/p,2 . 
King’s Quest IV put players in 
control of a female character, 
Princess Rosella. One of the 
starting puzzles involves this 
unicorn, who shyly retreats each 
time Rosella gets too close.

 
Chapter 11 KING’S QUEST: QUEST FOR THE CROWN (1984)     153
 The fourth  King’s Quest ,  The Perils of Rosella  (1988) , makes 
an even more radical break from the series than its prequel. The 
most talked-about change concerns the protaganist, who is now 
female. King Graham’s daughter, Princess Rosella, is whisked by 
the fairy Genesta to Tamir, where a magic fruit grows that can 
cure her father (who has recently suffered a massive heart attack). 
As we noted previously, this is the ﬁ rst  King’s Quest  built with 
SCI, and critics made much of the improved audiovisuals and 
 interface. However, they were again aggravated by the often illog-
ical, obscure puzzles. The tedious and frustrating climbing seg-
ments are back, but another oft-criticized puzzle concerns a bri-
dle. Scorpia writes about the puzzle in her December 1988 review 
of the game published in  Computer Gaming World:  “Finding [the 
bridle] can be a frustrating experience, since it is not visible on 
the screen, and you would never know it was there unless you 
had Rosella search every possible spot on the screen. There are no 
clues at all to this, therefore you might not even search very long, 
if at all. And as the location itself is not easy to reach (you have 
to do some swimming, among other things) it makes the situa-
tion that much more exasperating.” Again, gamers hoping to ﬁ n-
ish the game sprang for a hint book, and it truly seems difﬁ cult to 
accept that such challenges make the game more fun to play—no 
matter what the zealots claim. 
 The next game in the series,  King’s Quest V: Absence Makes the 
Heart Go Yonder  (1990), made another leap forward in graphics, 
this time to 256-color VGA. In her March 1991 review of the game 
in  Computer Gaming World , Scorpia remarked that “this is the 
game to boot up when you want to show off your VGA system,” 
a sentiment shared by plenty of other gamers and critics at the 
King’s Quest V made a 
tremendous leap in graphics 
technology, making the older 
games look primitive by 
comparison. It also integrated 
full support for the mouse. The 
greatly simpliﬁ ed interface may 
have been more intuitive, but 
some fans objected, claiming 
that the older text parser allowed 
for more creative and fulﬁ lling 
approaches to problem solving.

154     Chapter 11 KING’S QUEST: QUEST FOR THE CROWN (1984)
time. An updated version released a year later on CD-ROM went 
a step further by offering digitized voices, but shoddy voice act-
ing raised some question whether this was really an upgrade to 
the original. Another big change is a switch to icon-based inter-
action, with the cumbersome and oft-lamented text parser ﬁ nally 
laid to rest. This design made the game much more accessible 
to newcomers, and also reduced the frustration associated with 
trying to ﬁ nd the right word that would satisfy Sierra’s hopelessly 
limited parser. However, again gamers were burdened with illogi-
cal puzzles and tedious action sequences (several of which were 
timed). 
 King’s Quest VI: Heir Today, Gone Tomorrow , released September 
1992, is usually regarded as the ﬁ nest game in the series, and it 
shows up on several “greatest game” lists. GameSpot, for instance, 
includes it on its “Greatest Games of All Time” list, describing it 
as a “clever, beautiful, and unique adventure game [that] is truly 
one of the best games that the genre has ever had to offer, and 
reminds us sadly that adventure gaming may be dying rapidly, 
but it’s never going to be forgotten.”6 Adam Rodman wrote for 
 Just Adventure  that “I, the reviewer, personally believe that  King’s 
Quest 6  is the best adventure game Sierra has ever produced, and 
it would be one of my top candidates for the best adventure game 
of all time.”7 Indeed, it is hard to ﬁ nd any serious fan of the genre 
who can’t appreciate the title, and it’s certainly a worthy introduc-
tion for anyone new to the series. 
 Adventure game fans note  King’s Quest VI  for bringing together 
two of Sierra’s most celebrated designers: Roberta Williams 
and Jane Jensen, the designer responsible for the hugely popu-
lar  Gabriel Knight  series. Although fans will of course recog-
nize the familiar blend of folk and fairy tales that are one of the 
series’ trademarks, they seem more thoughtfully and artistically 
explored here than before. What appears at ﬁ rst to be a very basic 
plot (Prince Alexander sets off to ﬁ nd Princess Cassima) expands 
rapidly. Alexander must contend with four different islands in the 
Land of the Green Isles, each with its own theme and personal-
ity. What makes the story worthwhile are the characters: neither 
Alexander nor Cassima act in the stereotypical ways we might 
expect from the previous games, and the people of each island 
have a unique theme and personality. Finally, and perhaps most 
importantly, the puzzles are much less frustrating than in  previous 
games, and the game is much more forgiving of mistakes, thus 
encouraging experimentation. It’s quite accessible to novices, 
especially when compared to previous entries. 
 6  See  http://www.gamespot.com/features/6144989/index.html . 
 7  See  http://www.justadventure.com/reviews/KQ6/KQ6_Review.shtm . 

 
Chapter 11 KING’S QUEST: QUEST FOR THE CROWN (1984)     155
 The biggest change graphically was a lengthy introductory 3D 
cutscene; it was cutting edge for its day and provided gamers with 
a new “tech demo” to show off their systems. The intro is par-
ticularly impressive in the later CD-ROM release, which features 
 professional-quality voice acting. Both versions boast full 3D ani-
mation and dramatic music. The introduction sets up the context 
of the game and introduces the characters. Though of course the 
actual game is less impressive than this cinematic introduction, 
everyone knew it was only a matter of time before graphic tech-
nology caught up with the imagination of visionary designers like 
Williams and Jensen. 
 One of the best puzzles involves ﬁ ve gnomes, each with a single, 
highly ampliﬁ ed sense organ (and no others). The player must ﬁ nd 
objects for Alexander that will fool the gnomes into thinking he’s 
not human. For instance, one gnome has an acute sense of smell, 
and must be fooled by waving a ﬂ ower under his nose. Clever 
and original puzzles such as this abound in the game, and have 
delighted the countless gamers who have managed to solve them. 
 The series seemed to decline after the sixth game,  perhaps 
because Williams was by that point engrossed in her 
 Phantasmagoria  project, an adult-oriented game that incor-
porated large amounts of full-motion video.  King’s Quest VII: 
The Princeless Bride appeared November 1994, and seems to be 
an effort to create a game in the style of Disney’s  Aladdin  and 
similar animated features. It featured cell animation and SVGA 
graphics, qualities that still give the game a distinctly modern 
look, despite its age. The protagonists are Queen Valanice and 
Princess Rosella, who has been resisting Valanice’s requests that 
she seek a  suitable husband. Rosella leaps into a magic pool 
King’s Quest VI: Heir Today, Gone 
Tomorrow, is widely regarded 
as the best game of the series. 
Shown here is the memorable 
gnome puzzle. Each gnome has 
only a single sense organ, and 
it’s up to the player to ﬁ nd ways 
to exploit this fact to convince 
them he’s not a human being. 
For this game, Roberta Williams 
was joined by Jane Jensen, who 
went on to create the best-selling 
Gabriel Knight series.

156     Chapter 11 KING’S QUEST: QUEST FOR THE CROWN (1984)
and is followed by a dumbstruck Valanice, but the two are trans-
ported to a realm named Eldritch. The game shifts from Valanice 
to Rosella as the two search all over Eldritch for each other. The 
rather cutesy nature of the story, characters, and animation style 
seemed a rather sharp contrast to the previous game, which 
seemed to cater more to mature gamers.  The Princeless Bride  also 
offers a simpliﬁ ed interface reminiscent of Cyan’s  Myst,  which 
had debuted the year before. The puzzles were also far easier (or 
more intuitive) than ever before, naturally with zealous fans of 
the “hard” puzzles of previous games objecting. 
 In 1996, Sierra On-Line was purchased by CUC International, 
an event that signaled the beginning of the end for the devel-
oper’s prominence. Because Sierra was a publicly traded com-
pany, the decision wasn’t up to CEO Ken Williams, and he found 
 afterwards that “I had no power to control things, and they got 
out of hand. I transferred out of the games division, primarily 
because I couldn’t stomach watching my company being ripped 
apart.”8 Although Sierra would continue making games for some 
years, it’s hard not to imagine how this tragedy behind the scenes 
was affecting morale and, subsequently, the quality of the ﬁ nal 
 King’s Quest  games. 
 While some fans may have found  The Princeless Bride  disap-
pointing, the ﬁ nal game,  Mask of Eternity  (1998), aroused much 
greater controversy. The boldest change to the gameplay was 
the introduction of role-playing elements. Sierra had achieved 
great success with Lori Ann Cole’s  Quest for Glory  (also known 
as  Hero’s Quest ) series of adventure/RPG hybrids, but many fans 
King’s Quest VII brought the 
visual quality up to that of an 
animated ﬁ lm.
 8  See Philip Jong’s interview with Ken Williams at  http://www.adventureclassic-
gaming.com/index.php/site/interviews/197/ . 

 
Chapter 11 KING’S QUEST: QUEST FOR THE CROWN (1984)     157
were appalled to ﬁ nd them in a  King’s Quest  game. Sierra had 
been doing poorly for some time, and Williams felt that a drastic 
change was necessary: “I was trying to bring new blood into the 
genre . . . thereby trying to keep it from dying. Times change, and 
tastes change . . . they just do, and you’ve gotta do what you’ve 
gotta do to try and reach the biggest possible audience to keep 
a genre alive. . . . The old-style adventure game that we all know 
and love will just not cut it in today’s world.”9 Williams had also 
been quoted in other interviews claiming that because computers 
were now more affordable, the audience for games had become 
less sophisticated—many of them just couldn’t handle a difﬁ cult 
game like  King’s Quest.  
 Reactions to the game were mixed. IGN’s Tal Blevins called it 
a “welcomed addition” to the series, though acknowledging that 
“more traditional fans of the genre will probably scoff at this 
one.10 Vince Broady of GameSpot was likewise favorably dis-
posed: “Sierra should be applauded for trying something new, 
even if its reach somewhat exceeds its grasp.”11 However, two of 
the Internet’s biggest adventure game sites, Quandary (defunct) 
and Adventure Gamers, gave it failing scores. Josh Roberts’s 
review for Adventure Gamers describes a game “caught between 
two genres, unable to fully succeed in either,” and complaints 
 9      See Randy Sluganski’s interview with Roberta Williams at  http://www.justadventure
.com/Interviews/Roberta_Williams/Roberta_Williams_Interview_3.shtm . 
 10  See  http://pc.ign.com/articles/153/153529p1.html . 
 11  See  http://reviews.cnet.com/pc-games/king-s-quest-mask/4505-9696_7-30976333
.html .  
Mask of Eternity went 3D and 
bears little resemblance to the 
previous games, a fact that upset 
many fans. The main character, 
Connor, can run, jump, and ﬁ ght, 
arcade elements that were 
intended to make the series more 
accessible to modern gamers. 
Whether these innovations 
helped or hindered the game is 
controversial, though designer 
Roberta Williams thought they 
were essential to revitalize the 
genre.

158     Chapter 11 KING’S QUEST: QUEST FOR THE CROWN (1984)
about the uneven graphics, “complicated” controls, and the “stiff, 
 boring, and frequently just plain irritating” protagonist.12 
 It’s easy to compare the controversy surrounding the ﬁ nal 
 King’s Quest  with the ﬁ nal  Ultima  game (See  Chapter 23 , “ Ultima  
(1980): The Immaculate Conception of the Computer Role-
Playing Game”); both Roberta Williams and Richard Garriott felt 
that the tried-and-true models established by their earlier tri-
umphs just weren’t compatible with the modern industry. The two 
icons had always striven not just to be on the leading edge, but 
rather the bleeding edge of game design. They played a vital role 
in establishing higher standards for PC games. Countless gamers 
upgraded their graphics and sound cards—if not their whole sys-
tems—just to play the latest  King’s Quest  or  Ultima,  and it’s quite 
possible that their risky efforts in these areas laid the foundation 
for the modern PC industry. Now that their games had been over-
shadowed by the next generation of top-tier developers—Cyan, 
id, and Bethesda, to name just a few—they no doubt felt some-
thing drastic had to be done. Unfortunately for both, this drastic 
action served more to alienate existing fans than win new ones. 
 Mask of Eternity  deviated from its predecessors in several key 
technological aspects, the most noticeable being the shift to full 
3D graphics. It also offered a choice of perspectives: third- person 
or ﬁ rst-person. This ability to shift perspectives proved vital, as 
so many of the puzzles involved precision running and jumping 
sequences reminiscent of  Tomb Raider  (see  Chapter 18 , “ Super 
Mario 64/Tomb Raider  (1996): The Third Dimension”). The world 
was very massive, consisting of seven regions, each with its own 
look and theme. The story introduced a new protagonist named 
Connor, who accidentally turns the entire citizenry of Daventry 
to stone when he picks up a mysterious object (a shard of the tit-
ular mask). Connor’s quest, naturally, is to restore their freedom, 
a task that requires exploring nearly every inch of the sizable 
gameworld. 
 King’s Quest  legacy is immense, particularly regarding the adven-
ture game genre. As we mentioned earlier, the early adoption of 
the multiplatform AGI and SCI engines made it easier for Sierra 
to quickly develop and release games. The ﬁ rst of these was  Space 
Quest , a 1986 game developed by Mark Crowe and Scott Murphy. 
This zany and irreverent game was rife with parody and satire of 
popular science ﬁ ction, and launched a highly successful series 
that lasted for ﬁ ve sequels. A more controversial spin-off series 
is Al Lowe’s  Leisure Suit Larry , a notorious 1987 game intended 
for mature audiences. The game’s protaganist, the nerdy Larry 
Laffer, remains one of the most recognizable characters in all of 
adventure gaming, and games based on the franchise are still in 
 12  See  http://adventuregamers.com/article/id,96 . 

 
Chapter 11 KING’S QUEST: QUEST FOR THE CROWN (1984)     159
production today, though Lowe himself is no longer involved. Jim 
Walls’s  Police Quest , a shorter-lived series that also debuted in 
1987, is notable for being designed by an actual highway patrol 
ofﬁ cer. In 1989, Lori Ann Cole’s  Quest for Glory  series debuted, 
which was a tremendously popular hybrid adventure with role-
playing and action elements. Unlike  Mask of Eternity,  this earlier 
attempt to blur genres was a rousing success, and remains one of 
the most beloved of Sierra’s many games and series. Although the 
look and feel of the games depended on the SCI or AGI engine, 
they pushed it in wildly different creative directions. 
Box back for the Space Quest 
Collection.

160     Chapter 11 KING’S QUEST: QUEST FOR THE CROWN (1984)
 Beyond inﬂ uencing other developers at Sierra, Roberta Williams’ 
ideas spread far and wide across the industry. Although there are lit-
erally hundreds of games we could mention, by far the most impor-
tant are those developed by LucasArts (earlier Lucasﬁ lm Games). 
In particular, these include two classics designed or codesigned 
by Ron Gilbert:  Maniac Mansion  (1987) and  The Secret of Monkey 
Island  (1990), which are indisputably two of the greatest adventure 
games of all time. Like Sierra, LucasArts created its own in-house 
development tool called SCUMM, or “Script Creation Utility for 
Maniac Mansion,” and countless best-selling games were com-
posed with it.  Maniac Mansion  offered a purely icon-based inter-
face (no text parser), and was much more forgiving than Sierra’s 
hits.  The Secret of Monkey Island  further reﬁ ned the formula, mak-
ing it impossible for the protagonist (Guybrush Threepwood) to die 
except in one place. Because players no longer had to be worried 
Box back for Police Quest III: 
The Kindred.

 
Chapter 11 KING’S QUEST: QUEST FOR THE CROWN (1984)     161
about sudden death or getting the game into an unwinnable state, 
they were much more comfortable exploring and experimenting, 
savoring the story and witty dialog. Gilbert’s masterpiece has been 
translated into ﬁ ve languages and is certainly worth the attention 
of any  King’s Quest  fan. LucasArts would go on to produce many 
best-selling graphical adventure games, giving Sierra a run for their 
money (or, rather, a run for their customers’ money). 
 Nevertheless, LucasArts only reﬁ ned what Roberta Williams 
and Ken Williams created. The inﬂ uence of  King’s Quest  still lives 
on today, surviving even the onslaught brought on by Cyan’s  Myst.  
After all, the bulk of adventure games still being produced today 
for computers, consoles, and handhelds are in third-person per-
spective, not ﬁ rst-person, and many are loaded with characters, 
humor, and plots that all make them much closer to  King’s Quest  
than  Myst  in spirit. We also see a revival of the genre in the lat-
est  Sam & Max  games from Telltale Games (starting 2006), avail-
able in episodic form online and in a combined “season” on 
disc. Although many critics seem to think the adventure game is 
dead,  Sam & Max  and similar projects like 2008’s  Penny Arcade 
Adventures: On the Rain-Slick Precipice of Darkness (Hothead 
Games) and  Strong Bad’s Cool Game for Attractive People  (Telltale 
Games and Videlectrix), demonstrate that gamers will always ﬁ nd 
time (and funds) for games with well-written stories, intriguing 
characters, and clever puzzles.

This page intentionally left blank

163
  
 MYST (1993): LAUNCHING 
MULTIMEDIA WORLDS  
12
 Cyan’s  Myst , ﬁ rst released in 1993 for the Apple Macintosh and 
later for the PC and countless other platforms, is one of the most 
inﬂ uential adventure games ever made. It was so ﬁ nancially suc-
cessful, in fact, that it helped spur the widespread adoption of 
CD-ROM technology, a critical development that changed the 
surface of the computer gaming industry. It also offered some of 
the best graphics of the era, offering a viable alternative to the 
often cartoony, pixilated, or blocky raster1 or polygonal graphics 
of its contemporaries. Beyond these technological factors,  Myst 
also ushered in a new type of graphical adventure game, one that 
deviated sharply from past adventure game hits such as Infocom’s 
 Zork (see  Chapter 25 , “ Zork  (1980): Text Imps versus Graphics 
Grues”), Sierra’s  King’s Quest  (see  Chapter 11 , “ King’s Quest: Quest 
for the Crown  (1984): Perilous Puzzles, Thorny Thrones”) or 
Lucasﬁ lm’s  Maniac Mansion  (1987; Apple II, Commodore Amiga, 
and others) .  Unlike these games, which emphasized story, char-
acter, and humor,  Myst  is primarily about ambiance, exploration, 
and complex logic puzzles. It is timeless and surreal, comparable 
to a quiet day spent wandering about a Zen rock garden. 
 However,  Myst  is not without its detractors, who are often as 
vehement in their condemnation as others are in praise. Despite 
its bold innovations in graphics,  Myst’s  game engine is mundane 
and even primitive, often likened to an interactive slideshow. 
Even the prerendered, static graphics that were so compelling in 
the early 1990s looked fairly dated only a few years later, eclipsed 
even by Cyan’s own sequel,  Riven . Furthermore, the difﬁ culty of 
the puzzles and lack of clear objectives frustrated many  gamers, 
who eventually either gave up or were forced to consult hint 
books to ﬁ nish the game. The severest critics lump  Myst along 
with  The 7th Guest and other early CD-ROM games as mere 
 1      In reference to bitmapped graphics, which are the representation of a digital 
image as a matrix of pixels or, more simply, tiny squares. 

164     Chapter 12 MYST (1993): LAUNCHING MULTIMEDIA WORLDS
 historical curiosities; important in context, perhaps, but certainly 
not worth playing today. In this chapter we’ll embark on our own 
exploration of  Myst , keeping these criticisms in mind, but point-
ing out why we include it as one of the greatest and most inﬂ uen-
tial games of all time. 
 Academic studies of  Myst , such as the one found in Jay David 
Bolter and Richard Grusin’s book  Remediation: Understanding 
A recurring theme throughout the 
Myst series is books and writing, 
speciﬁ cally the ability to create 
worlds merely by writing about 
them. The series explores the 
complex relationship between 
writing, video, and gaming, 
blurring the boundaries among 
these supposedly discrete media.
This Myst opening shot, one 
of the most canonical in all of 
computer gaming, gives the 
player a good idea of what the 
game will be about: mysterious 
machinery in surreal settings. 
It’s up to the player to ﬁ gure 
out where to go and what to 
do, but the primary joy is simply 
exploring these highly artistic 
environments.

 
Chapter 12 MYST (1993): LAUNCHING MULTIMEDIA WORLDS     165
New Media , tend to focus on how the game seems to reﬂ ect on 
the relationship between books and games, offering itself, per-
haps, as the future of storytelling. This aspect of  Myst  is evident 
from the beginning; after all, the adventure begins when the 
Stranger (the player’s avatar) is literally sucked into a mysteri-
ous book about an island. As the Stranger learns more about 
the world of  Myst , he (or she) learns about its creators, powerful 
beings who create whole worlds with a magic script. The central 
dilemma of this game—which was principally developed by two 
real-life brothers (Rand and Robyn Miller)—concerns two broth-
ers and their father. All are trapped in books; it’s up to the player 
to collect the missing pages of these books and restore their 
 freedom. Actually, these “books” contain blurry and distorted 
full-motion video segments; each restored page sharpens these 
videos and eventually lets the player hear and see the brothers. 
 The brothers accuse each other of murdering their father, 
but a savvy player will soon discover that neither is trustworthy. 
However,  Myst  spells out nothing; instead, players must piece the 
story together themselves, considering what they see and hear as 
they explore the large gameworld. Although there is no way for 
the Stranger to die, only one of the game’s possible endings is a 
happy one. 
 The game is represented through the Stranger’s eyes in a ﬁ rst-
person perspective, but is not free-roaming like modern 3D 
games. Instead, the player clicks “hot spots,” which are special 
locations on the screen that enable possible actions. For instance, 
clicking on an exit will move the perspective to a new location, 
Many clues in Myst are hidden 
within journals and other writings 
sprinkled across the worlds, 
though their purpose is seldom 
clear initially. For instance, 
players will likely stumble upon 
this clue long before they discover 
the machine it corresponds to.

166     Chapter 12 MYST (1993): LAUNCHING MULTIMEDIA WORLDS
This Buck Rogers–style rocket 
ship is a good example of the 
creativity, artistry, and diversity 
of the worlds in Myst. The desire 
to explore the ship more fully 
(to ﬁ nd a way to open the door, 
for instance) helps keep players 
invested in the game.
whereas clicking on a lever may raise or lower it. The interface 
is deliberately minimal and is easily controlled entirely by the 
mouse (or in other versions, gamepad or stylus). This setup was 
radically different from most adventure games of the era, which 
are usually represented in third-person perspective. The player 
sees the avatar and can move him or her around the screen by 
clicking the mouse, pushing the arrow keys, or (rarely) moving a 
joystick or gamepad. This is not to say that ﬁ rst-person adven-
ture games were unheard of; indeed, the ﬁ rst commercially avail-
able graphical adventure game, On-Line Systems’  Mystery House 
(1980; Apple II) was ﬁ rst-person, and ICOM Simulations’  Deja Vu 
(1985; Apple IIGS, Atari ST, Nintendo Game Boy Color, and others) 
offered ﬁ rst-person perspective and mouse control. Nevertheless, 
the great majority of successful graphical adventure games were 
third-person point-and-click games such as Lucasﬁ lm’s  The Secret 
of Monkey Island (1990; Apple Macintosh, PC, Sega CD, and oth-
ers) and the aforementioned  King’s Quest . Both Lucasﬁ lm (later 
LucasArts) and Sierra (was On-Line Systems and Sierra Online) 
took similar approaches to the genre, weaving witty, self-effacing 
narratives around scores of puns and puzzles. 
 Nevertheless,  Myst  differed sharply from these games, and not 
just in terms of perspective. Another signiﬁ cant difference is the 
lack of clear objectives, especially in the crucial ﬁ rst stages of the 
game. There is no orb to recover, no wizard to slay, no princess 
to rescue. Indeed, it’s not at all clear what the player is  supposed 
to do at all; the plot and characters are only revealed after hours 

 
Chapter 12 MYST (1993): LAUNCHING MULTIMEDIA WORLDS     167
A classic Myst dilemma: how 
does one get across the water to 
reach the switchbox? Clearly, the 
controls have something to do 
with it, but what? Is the time on 
the clock signiﬁ cant?
of diligent exploration and experimentation. Of course, there are 
plenty of puzzles to solve, most involving strange machinery—a 
theme that shows up in later  Myst  games. Gameplay consists 
mostly of ﬁ nding such machines, manipulating them, observing 
(or listening to) the results, and eventually discovering how one 
machine interacts with another. Clues are sprinkled around the 
gameworld, and only the most observant players will ﬁ nd them 
all. In short, it’s a game of tinkering and exploration. 
 One good example of a puzzle (or “friction,” as the game’s 
developers are wont to say) involves a locked chest at the bottom 
of a ﬂ ooded lighthouse. Opening the chest requires several steps. 
First, players must empty the lighthouse of water by manipulat-
ing a lever in an area called the Umbrella Crow’s Nest. Then they 
must travel to the chest and drain it of water by opening a small 
valve, resealing the valve, then reﬂ ooding the lighthouse. The 
chest will now ﬂ oat up to the top of the lighthouse, where a key 
is chained nearby that can (at last) unlock it. Puzzles of this sort 
abound in  Myst.  Note how this puzzle doesn’t involve carrying 
or collecting items;  Myst  deliberately avoids the inventory sys-
tems that continue to be a staple of the genre. The only items the 
player can collect in  Myst are the pages from the brothers’ books. 
 The best moments in  Myst  occur when the player begins 
to grasp the purpose and function of the various machines; 
the “aha!” moments that justify the hours of trial and error. 
However, sensitive players will also savor the lush environments 
and  relaxing ambiance created by the visuals and the superb 

168     Chapter 12 MYST (1993): LAUNCHING MULTIMEDIA WORLDS
audio. The music, composed by Robyn Miller, is what might 
be described now as new age electronica, soothing synths that 
are occasionally dark and foreboding. Miller’s 40-odd minutes 
of music ﬁ ts the game perfectly, but it has also been released, 
along with some bonus material, as a standalone album by Virgin 
Records. Later games in the series would continue to uphold the 
high standard set by Miller’s score;  Myst IV: Revelation  (2004), for 
instance, boasts a soundtrack by Jack Wall and Peter Gabriel. 
 Myst  was a phenomenal success for Cyan, appealing to gamers 
of both sexes. Indeed, it was the best-selling computer game of 
all time until  The Sims  (see  Chapter 22 , “ The Sims (2000): Who Let 
the Sims Out?”) ﬁ nally surpassed it in 2002.2 Most critics raved 
about the product. Jeff Sengstack of GameSpot wrote that “if you 
own a PC, you owe it to yourself to try  Myst ,” and Philip Jong of 
Adventure Classic Gaming calls it the “second coming of graphical 
adventure games.”3 Some recent reviews have been less kind. In a 
review of the 2008 Nintendo DS version of the game, Jack DeVries 
of IGN wrote, “Even when it’s free,  Myst  is barely worth playing, 
so charging $30 for a portable version is just ridiculous, especially 
since the port absolutely ruins the game. No amount of nostal-
gia can make this pixelated, boring, sorry excuse for an adventure 
fun.”4 DeVries is certainly not the only critic to bash the game’s 
fuzzy graphics and miserable interface. However, the industry as 
a whole has seemed to turn away from the graphical adventure 
game genre. The majority of recent releases are imported and 
often poorly translated games from Eastern Europe. We’ll explore 
some possible explanations for this shift in a moment. 
 To better understand  Myst ’s legacy, it’s worthwhile to compare 
it to a contemporary game, Trilobyte’s  The 7th Guest , released in 
1993 for PC and later ported to the Apple Macintosh and Philips 
CD-i platforms. Superﬁ cially,  The 7th Guest  and  Myst  have much in 
common. Both pioneered the use of CD-ROM to create a more cin-
ematic gameplay experience. Both weave a thin narrative around 
a series of difﬁ cult logic puzzles. Like  Myst ,  The 7th Guest was also 
a tremendous ﬁ nancial success, sending hordes of gamers to the 
computer store to purchase a CD-ROM drive and updated graphics 
card. However, unlike  Myst ,  The 7th Guest  has not withstood the test 
of time, and very few people would care to play it today. Trilobyte’s 
game simply relied too heavily on its ﬂ ashy graphics and trendy live 
action segments to dazzle gamers. Such gimmicks were exciting 
enough in the early 1990s to compensate for lackluster gameplay 
 2 See Trey Miller’s “The Sims Overtakes Myst” at  http://www.gamespot.com/pc/
strategy/simslivinlarge/news_2857556.html .  
 3 See  http://www.gamerankings.com/itemrankings/launchreview.asp?reviewid=
255087  and  http://www.gamerankings.com/itemrankings/launchreview.asp?
reviewid=922115 , respectively. 
 4 See  http://ds.ign.com/articles/874/874807p1.html . 

 
Chapter 12 MYST (1993): LAUNCHING MULTIMEDIA WORLDS     169
and mediocre acting, but the reign of full-motion video (FMV) in 
games was short-lived. Dozens of lesser developers surged in, rush-
ing even the most decrepit FMV products onto the shelves in hopes 
of luring customers before the fad died out. These projects typically 
employed cheap, rightfully unknown actors, though a few man-
aged to recruit faded stars.5 In any case, the decline of FMV games 
after 1995 was severe, and nowadays it’s rare to ﬁ nd any game with 
footage of live actors. 
 Unlike  The 7th Guest ,  Myst ’s reputation was able to survive the 
onslaught and general discrediting of FMV as a viable technique. 
It certainly helped that  Myst relied much less on FMV than its 
contemporaries, but we shouldn’t forget its intricate puzzles and 
the great attention to detail paid by the Miller brothers. Playing 
 The 7th Guest  today feels like roaming through an empty and 
decaying theme park; all that was once bright and shiny is now 
rusted and dirty.  Myst , by contrast, may look dated by modern 
standards, but its gameplay is still enjoyable today. 
 Modern gamers will probably want to play one of the remakes 
of the game. These include  Myst: Masterpiece Edition , released in 
1999. In addition to greatly improved graphics (24-bit color depth 
instead of 8-bit), it also includes a handy in-game hint guide. A 
more ambitious remake released in 2000 is  realMyst , a fully 3D 
game that allows players to freely roam about the world. Because 
both games include the exact same puzzles, a modern gamer 
would do well to sample both interfaces before committing to one. 
 5 For instance, Amazing Media’s  Frankenstein: Through the Eyes of the Monster 
and  Mummy: Tomb of the Pharoah  (both 1997) starred Tim Curry and Malcolm 
McDowell, respectively. 
An iconic scene from The 
7th Guest. The 7th Guest was 
a hugely popular and award-
winning computer title back in its 
day, but lacked the staying power 
of Myst. The 7th Guest’s direct 
sequel, The 11th Hour (1995), was 
ironically late to market and had 
only modest sales.

170     Chapter 12 MYST (1993): LAUNCHING MULTIMEDIA WORLDS
 Cyan followed  Myst  with ﬁ ve sequels, which, with one exception, 
have been generally well regarded by critics and gamers. The ﬁ rst of 
these, 1997’s  Riven , was undoubtedly the most highly anticipated 
computer game of that year. By that time,  Myst  had sold more than 
3.5 million copies, and game sites and magazines had been buzz-
ing for months about the upcoming sequel.6  When it was ﬁ nally 
released, critics praised it and over 1.5 million gamers purchased it. 
Again, most of the praise focused on the audiovisuals; Cyan had a 
much larger team and budget to work with, and had even recruited 
a former Disney designer who had worked on the hit animated 
ﬁ lm  Aladdin (1992) .  The game also offered much more FMV than 
 Myst , though as we’ve seen the enthusiasm for this technique was 
 waning by 1997. The story picks up after the ﬁ rst game, and has the 
player chasing down Gehn, a villain who has captured Atrus’s (the 
father in the ﬁ rst game) wife Catherine. Along the way, of course, 
the player will ﬂ esh the story out by exploring and examining the 
machines, journals, and other artifacts placed throughout the mas-
sive gameworld. After  Riven , the Miller brothers went their separate 
ways. Rand stayed on at Cyan, while Robyn left to pursue writing 
and music. 
 The next  Myst  game was entitled  Myst III: Exile , a project out-
sourced to Presto Studios and released in 2001. Cyan was busy 
developing  Uru , which we’ll discuss in a moment, and didn’t have 
the time or resources to allocate to the sequel. Presto Studios had 
earned a solid reputation with  The Journeyman Project (starting 
 6      See Jeff Sengstack’s review of the game at  http://www.gamespot.com/pc/adventure/
riventhesequeltomyst/review.html .  
Riven offers more upfront story 
and structure than Myst. Shown 
here is Rand Miller portraying 
Atrus, a recurring character 
throughout the series.

 
Chapter 12 MYST (1993): LAUNCHING MULTIMEDIA WORLDS     171
in 1992) series of adventure games for the Macintosh and other 
platforms, and seemed a good choice for the project.  Exile proved 
to be another successful game in the series, with good production 
values, well-designed puzzles, and decent acting. The game sold 
well, though it didn’t generate the media sensation brought on by 
its prequels. If the game suffers, it’s from being too faithful to its 
predecessors; there is little here to make the game stand out. The 
general consensus seems to be that if you loved  Myst  and  Riven , 
you’ll love this game. 
 The next wrinkle in the tale takes us down the steep slope of 
 Uru: Ages Beyond Myst , an ill-fated project released in late 2003. 
Developed by Cyan Worlds, the idea was to bring the  Myst con-
cept to a massively multiplayer online (MMO) format, which had 
become a vital sector of the games market. The potential of the 
product was substantial: individual players would be able to cre-
ate their own realms and puzzles, adding value to the game far 
beyond Cyan Worlds’ initial investment. It is also the only  Myst 
game to offer third-person perspective and the ability to create a 
unique avatar. Unfortunately, the developer ran out of time and 
money, and the resulting product was a half-hearted effort to sal-
vage the material for use as a single-player game. Brass Lantern’s 
reviewer Murray Peterson was aghast, remarking that “Cyan and 
Ubisoft have completely ruined the  Myst experience for me. 
I won’t be playing the online version of  Uru , and unless things 
change, I won’t be playing any future  Myst games.”7 Like many 
 7 See  http://www.brasslantern.org/reviews/graphic/urupeterson.html . 
Shown here is one of Riven’s 
celebrated, full-screen gondola 
sequences, a sort of desktop 
rollercoaster that made good use 
of the era’s graphic capabilities. 
These noninteractive but 
nevertheless thrilling rides also 
helped players learn the layout of 
the land.

172     Chapter 12 MYST (1993): LAUNCHING MULTIMEDIA WORLDS
other reviewers, Peterson objected to the cumbersome control 
scheme, limited save game options, and the many tedious puzzles 
involving running and jumping. Although the sterling reputa-
tion of the franchise was enough to guarantee good sales initially, 
word soon spread of the bugs and substandard gameplay. Later, 
Cyan Worlds worked out a deal with GameTap, an online games 
subscription service, to offer the game in a format closer to the 
original vision, but it again failed. Sadly, the failure of  Uru paints 
a gloomy picture for the future of adventure games of this style, 
which have proven very resistant to the MMO format. 
Back of the box for Uru: Ages 
Beyond Myst.

 
Chapter 12 MYST (1993): LAUNCHING MULTIMEDIA WORLDS     173
 Myst IV: Revelation  was developed by Ubisoft Montreal and 
released in 2004. Critics were impressed with the quality of this 
single-player game, which boasted the best audiovisuals and 
some of the best puzzles yet seen in the venerable series. The 
major game sites rated it highly, but the reception still paled in 
comparison to the ﬁ rst two games. That said, it is still the best-
looking  Myst  game, with immaculate backgrounds and skillful 
direction. 
For the ﬁ nal entry in the series, Cyan Worlds’ Rand Miller again 
took the helm. For 2005’s  Myst V: End of Wages , the series at last 
abandoned prerendered graphics for real-time 3D. The end result 
may not have been as pretty as  Revelation , but was still well 
The back of the box for Myst IV: 
Revelation.

174     Chapter 12 MYST (1993): LAUNCHING MULTIMEDIA WORLDS
received by many critics, who admired its detailed models and 
quality voice acting. Despite glowing accolades, however, some 
reviewers bestowed mediocre ratings on the game. GameSpot 
commented that it was “not as immersive as it could have been,” 
and the  New York Times  commentator argued that the game “does 
less with its real-time 3-D engine than 1997’s  Riven  did with prer-
endered backgrounds and some clever animations.”8 In any case, 
 End of Ages  is a quality entry that any true fan of the series would 
be foolish to miss—if for no other reason than it brings a long-
awaited resolution to the gaps left by the earlier games. 
 The impact of  Myst  is substantial, and it is no exaggeration 
to say that  Myst  brought about a paradigm shift in graphical 
adventure games. The extent of the inﬂ uence ranges from doz-
ens of derivatives such as Dreamcatcher’s  The Crystal Key (1999), 
Knut Muller’s  Rhem  (2003), and Detalion’s  Sentinel: Descendants 
in Time  (2004), to more creative offerings like Her Interactive’s 
 Nancy Drew  series (starting in 1998), XXv’s  Dark Fall (2003), Omni 
Adventure’s  Riddle of the Sphinx II: The Omega Stone  (2003), and 
Kheops Studio’s  Return to Mysterious Island  (2004). The type of 
gameplay pioneered in  Myst  is a touchstone for the genre, and 
countless reviews of modern games inevitably compare the new 
product to the venerable classic. 
 8 See  http://www.gamespot.com/pc/adventure/mystvendofages/review.html?page=2
and http://www.nytimes.com/2005/10/01/sports/othersports/01game.html?_r=1
&page,  respectively.  
Myst IV reintroduced the 
gondola sequence, but surpassed 
all expectations by making 
it more interactive—and even 
incorporating a live actor! During 
the ride, the player can move 
the camera without distorting 
the animation of the girl or the 
terrain.

 
Chapter 12 MYST (1993): LAUNCHING MULTIMEDIA WORLDS     175
 Unfortunately for fans of  Myst  and its derivatives, the number of 
new adventure games produced each year has steadily declined, 
and even big-budget games like FunCom’s  Dreamfall: The Longest 
Journey  (2006) get lost in the buzz over the latest crop of violent 
shooters. The majority of new adventure games are imports pub-
lished by The Adventure Company and Dreamcatcher Interactive. 
However, few of these are ﬁ rst-person games, relying instead on 
the third-person perspective popularized by Sierra and LucasArts. 
Third-person is a popular choice because it allows the player to 
see the facial expressions and body language of the avatar, a par-
ticularly important aspect of humorous games. Indeed, one of 
the most common complaints heard about  Myst  is that it feels 
 alienating; even in later games that feature live actors more prom-
inently, the somewhat detached ﬁ rst-person perspective and total 
anonymity of the avatar can make for a decidedly disconnected 
experience. 
 If  Myst  was such a huge ﬁ nancial success, why don’t we have more 
 Myst- like games on the shelf today? Steve Meretzky, author of sev-
eral of the greatest text adventure games of all time, blames the big 
budgets and corporate-style decision making of the modern indus-
try. “I like violent games as much as the next non- psychopathic 
gamer—but with the whole range of human experience, is there 
nothing else, nothing else that we can concentrate on?” Meretzky 
asked in a 2008 interview.9  Myst  certainly offered an alternative to 
violent games like  Doom , id’s seminal shooter released the same 
 9 See  http://www.gamesetwatch.com/2008/08/opinion_meretzky_lets_loose_on.php . 
Cyan went to great lengths to 
make Myst IV feel less lonely 
and more populated, carefully 
integrating footage of live actors 
in compelling and unobtrusive 
ways.

176     Chapter 12 MYST (1993): LAUNCHING MULTIMEDIA WORLDS
year (see  Chapter 5 , “ Doom  (1993): The First-Person Shooter Takes 
Control”). Nevertheless, that game, not  Myst , has come to domi-
nate modern gaming. Perhaps developers simply found it easier to 
follow in id’s footsteps than Cyan’s, as designing ingenious puzzles 
seems inﬁ nitely more challenging than throwing together a bunch 
of monsters for players to shoot. Likewise, the tranquil nature of 
 Myst  stands in stark contrast to the ﬁ ery explosions and adrenaline-
pumping action of  Doom . Apparently, the number of gamers, devel-
opers, and publishers who prefer the latter are just much greater. 
Nevertheless, just as Hollywood produces sophisticated ﬁ lms as 
well as action-packed blockbusters, there seems little reason why 
gaming can’t do both as well. 
 Speaking in a 2007 interview with Adventure Classic Gaming’s 
Philip Jong, Rand Miller described what he thought made  Myst 
special: “First was the attempt on our part to make it feel like a 
real place. We were fairly certain that the interface and game-
play should be simple and intuitive enough to fade into the 
background. You should not have to be distracted with interface 
 elements, and the game-play had to be built to support that. 
So no inventory, no on-screen arrows or menus, no points or 
 timers—just the world. Second was the idea to step away from 
dying. We felt that dying was simply a brute force level of game-
play friction to keep players from completing games too quickly. 
 Myst  would be large enough that we wouldn’t have to depend on 
starting over to provide gaming value.”10  
 10 See  http://www.adventureclassicgaming.com/index.php/site/interviews/269/ .  
Rhem, primarily the product of 
a single person (Knot Muller), is 
distinctly Myst-like, which seems 
to be its primary appeal. Myst 
inspired countless other games.

 
Chapter 12 MYST (1993): LAUNCHING MULTIMEDIA WORLDS     177
 Miller’s analysis seems quite astute, and it seems fair to say that 
the Miller brothers succeeded in creating a plausible world and 
intuitive interface. Still, although  Myst  remains one of the best-
selling games of all time, its inﬂ uence has not proven as long-
lived as fans would have liked. Nevertheless, it spawned its own 
subgenre of adventure games that is still active in its own niche 
today, and Cyan Worlds seems eager to produce remakes and new 
compilations of the epic series.

This page intentionally left blank

179
 PAC-MAN  (1980): JAPANESE 
GUMPTION, AMERICAN 
CONSUMPTION  
13
 Now that we’re awash with countless videogame mascots, it’s 
hard to imagine when there was only one—a little yellow pizza 
with a missing slice, named Pac-Man. Yet long before the days of 
Master Chief, Lara Croft, Sonic, and of course Mario, this humble 
pie guy chomped out of the arcades and into public conscious-
ness.1 Here was proof that videogames were more than the sum 
of their parts; they could have personality and charisma. Pac-
Man eventually found his way onto lunchboxes, breakfast cereal, 
Saturday morning cartoons, a hit song, toys, and pretty much 
anything else that could be afﬁ xed with his image and sold in a 
store. Indeed, the cavalcade of collectibles eventually grew large 
enough to warrant a book of its own, Deborah Palicia’s  Pac-Man 
Collectibles  (Schiffer Publishing, 2002), which offers more than 
400 photographs of Pac-Man products. Americans were as eager 
to gobble up Pac-Man as he was to chow down on power pellets! 
 But what made this game so overwhelmingly popular, and 
what were the repercussions for the ﬂ edgling gaming industry? In 
this chapter, we’ll explore the history of one of the most impor-
tant and deﬁ nitive games in the videogame canon, Toru Iwatani’s 
1980 masterpiece for Namco,  Pac-Man . 
 According to legend, the inspiration for  Pac-Man— or  Puck 
Man , as it was originally known—came from a pizza. Iwatani 
looked down at his pizza after removing a slice, and wondered if 
the shape could work as a videogame character. Unfortunately 
for the many journalists and historians who have told this story, it 
is only “half-true” according to Iwatani. He claims the shape was 
 1 See  Chapter 5 , “Doom (1993): The First-Person Shooter Takes Control,” for more 
on Master Chief; Chapter 18, “Super Mario 64/Tomb Raider (1996): The Third 
Dimension,” for more on both Mario and Lara Croft; and Chapter 19, “Super Mario 
Bros. (1985): How High Can Jumpman Get?” for more on both Mario and Sonic.  

180     Chapter 13 PAC-MAN (1980): JAPANESE GUMPTION, AMERICAN CONSUMPTION
simply a rounded version of the Japanese word for mouth (kuchi).2 
The game’s title has a similar origin; in Japanese slang, “paku 
paku” represents the mouth opening and closing during eating; it 
was a small stretch to  Puck Man.  What the popular myth does get 
right, though, is the centrality of eating, or consumption rather 
than destruction. After all, everyone enjoys a good meal. Then 
as now, it was speculated that one reason more girls weren’t into 
gaming was the overwhelmingly violent or serious nature of most 
games. A cute, accessible, and addictive maze game might help 
the industry expand to other demographics. At the time, arcades 
in both Japan and the U.S. were dominated by  Space Invaders and 
its clones (see  Chapter 16 , “ Space Invaders (1978): The Japanese 
Descend”). Although these games were tremendously successful, 
Iwatani still felt the industry was too narrowly focused and wanted 
to do something about it. 
Title screen from the arcade 
version of Pac-Man, showcasing 
the emphasis on its characters.
 2 See Marty Goldberg’s “Pac-Man: The Phenomenon” at  http://classicgaming
.gamespy.com/View.php?view=Articles.Detail&id=249. 

 
Chapter 13 PAC-MAN (1980): JAPANESE GUMPTION, AMERICAN CONSUMPTION     181
 Unfortunately, Iwatani’s  Puck Man  wasn’t initially a hit in Japan; 
Namco’s  Galaxian , a colorful  Space Invaders– style shooter, fared 
much better. Midway Manufacturing imported both games into the 
United States, altering  Puck Man ’s cabinet to make it both cheaper 
to produce and more eye-catching (bright yellow instead of white). 
They also changed the name to  Pac-Man , fearing that pranksters 
would have too much fun rendering  Puck Man  into something far 
less appropriate. Fortunately for Midway and Iwatani, the game hit 
Western shores like a tsunami, ﬂ ooding ﬁ rst into arcades, then the 
wider market. Soon, every pizza parlor, supermarket, and drug store 
in the United States had to have one. It was all Midway could do 
to keep up with the demand for the quarter-munching machines, 
churning out a hundred thousand of them in 1980 (three times that 
number were produced over the next seven years). The machines 
were well worth the investment; in total they raked in over a billion 
dollars worth of quarters in the ﬁ rst year alone.3 Iwatani’s desire 
Pac-Man’s legendary maze.
 3 See Steven L. Kent’s book, The Ultimate History of Video Games (Three Rivers 
Press, 2001). 

182     Chapter 13 PAC-MAN (1980): JAPANESE GUMPTION, AMERICAN CONSUMPTION
to appeal to nontraditional gamers succeeded:  Pac-Man ’s appeal 
went far beyond young men; small kids and their moms could all 
enjoy  Pac-Man.  The 2005 edition of the  Guinness Book of World 
Records  even awarded  Pac-Man  the designation of “most success-
ful coin-operated game” in history. 
 Pac-Man ’s initial success seemed to rest mostly on its unique 
gameplay, which is most often described as a “maze chase game,” 
a designation that emphasizes the geometrical layout of the 
screen.  Pac-Man  was certainly not the ﬁ rst game in this early 
genre; precursors include Magnavox’s 1972 two-player game for 
its Odyssey home system,  Cat and Mouse , a very simple game 
that used an overlay (a mostly transparent screen placed over 
the television screen) to show a maze. Players, represented by 
white dots, moved about the maze, being careful not to hit the 
walls—if they did, the game reset their position at the start. One 
player controls a mouse, which must get through the maze to a 
“mouse house,” erstwhile avoiding the cat, controlled by the 
other player. Likewise, there was  Gotcha , a 1973 arcade game 
designed by Atari. This simple two-player game had players chas-
ing each other through a maze shown from a top-down perspec-
tive. However, it never really caught on, with the game arousing 
little more than controversy—versions of the game’s controllers 
featured two skin-tone bulges that resembled female breasts. 
Interestingly, Midway had released its own arcade maze game in 
1976,  The Amazing Maze Game.  Though hardly as  impressive as 
the title implies, the game improved on  Gotcha in several ways. 
First, players were challenged to escape the maze rather than 
merely catch the  opponent. Second, players could compete 
There were many maze game 
precursors to Pac-Man, even on 
the most modest systems, like 
1978’s Tunnel Vision and Kat and 
Mouse by Michael Riley for the 
Commodore PET computer.

 
Chapter 13 PAC-MAN (1980): JAPANESE GUMPTION, AMERICAN CONSUMPTION     183
with each other or a computer-controlled opponent. None of 
these games, however, are played much today, having long been 
eclipsed by  Pac-Man  and its descendants in terms of playability, 
personality, and popularity. 
 Although  Pac-Man  has much in common with these earlier 
games, it relies entirely on computer-controlled opponents (the 
“monsters” or “ghosts”); the game’s two-player mode simply has 
players alternating turns. Competition is thus indirect and limited 
to the high score table. Indeed, the artiﬁ cial intelligence of the 
ghosts is perhaps the game’s most-discussed feature. The ghosts 
do not wander randomly throughout the game’s single maze, but 
follow programs that ostensibly give each one a unique person-
ality. Savvy players quickly learned that following a certain path 
through the maze, called a “pattern,” allowed them to achieve 
very high scores. Players who knew the patterns could play indef-
initely on a single quarter, as they caused the game to react in a 
predictable manner every time. This fact no doubt displeased the 
owners of the machines, but magazines and eventually books 
happily published the patterns for anyone who cared to master 
the game.  
Nibbler was a 1982 arcade game 
by Rock-Ola where the player, as 
the titular snake, grows longer 
every time he eats. The player 
must be careful to avoid having 
the snake collide with himself. 
Broderbund’s Serpentine (1982; 
Apple II, Commodore 64, and 
others) and Magnavox’s K.C.’s 
Krazy Chase! (1982; Odyssey2) 
created excellent home variations 
of this alternate type of maze 
chase gameplay. Earlier forms of 
the basic gameplay mechanics 
include Gremlin’s Hustle (1977; 
Arcade) and Atari’s Surround 
(1978; Atari 2600 VCS), though 
many gamers will recognize 
it simply as “Snake” or some 
variation thereof.

184     Chapter 13 PAC-MAN (1980): JAPANESE GUMPTION, AMERICAN CONSUMPTION
 However, modern fans who wish to truly dominate the game  
might want to emulate Billy Mitchell,4 the world’s ﬁ rst perfect 
 Pac-Man  player: rather than devise or follow patterns, Mitchell 
worked out methods to manipulate the ghosts into the corners of 
his choice. “I chose to do it this way because I wanted to demon-
strate the depths of my abilities,” says the reigning champ, defying 
anyone else to duplicate his amazing feat.5 However, players who 
take the game as seriously as Mitchell are in the extreme minor-
ity. For most modern gamers,  Pac-Man is a casual game; it’s some-
thing you can play for ﬁ ve minutes while waiting for a pizza. If you 
have to leave before the game is over, who cares? For this reason, 
among countless other platforms, the game has made its way onto 
most games-capable mobile devices, including cell phones. 
 Pac-Man  also features a small set of cutscenes or “intermis-
sions,” one of the ﬁ rst games to have this often controversial 
enhancement.6 These humorous sketches star Pac-Man and 
Blinky, the red ghost. Unlike modern games where long cutscenes 
often interrupt a game’s pacing, these charmingly brief segments 
in  Pac-Man  gave gamers a chance to relax their wrists, while also 
helping to establish personalities for what would otherwise have 
been fairly abstract characters.  
A scene from the ﬁ rst Pac-Man 
intermission.
 4 See the 2007 movie, The King of Kong: A Fistful of Quarters, or Joshuah Bearman’s 
article “The Perfect Game” in the July 2008 issue of Harper’s Magazine, for more 
on the colorful Mitchell. 
 5 See GameSpot’s interview with Mitchell at  http://www.gamespot.com/features/
vgs/universal/hist_pacman/p11_01.html.   
 6 See  Chapter 7 , “Final Fantasy VII (1997): It’s Never Final in the World of Fantasy,” 
for more on cutscenes. 

 
Chapter 13 PAC-MAN (1980): JAPANESE GUMPTION, AMERICAN CONSUMPTION     185
 Naturally, Atari and other console manufacturers were eager 
to cash in on the  Pac-Man  craze, but efforts to adapt the arcade 
game to the consoles of the day were mixed at best. The most 
infamous is Atari’s  Pac-Man (1981) for its Atari 2600 VCS console. 
The popularity of the arcade game had generated a huge demand 
for this home version, but developer Tod Frye’s company man-
dated effort to rush the game’s completion by the all-important 
Christmas  season resulted in one of the worst ports of all time. 
Although Atari would rectify the 
issues on both the Atari 2600 
VCS and other platforms with 
future Pac-Man and Pac-Man-
family releases, the original 
VCS adaptation, pictured, was a 
technical disaster.
Magnavox’s catalog entry for 
their superior maze game, K.C. 
Munchkin!.

186     Chapter 13 PAC-MAN (1980): JAPANESE GUMPTION, AMERICAN CONSUMPTION
Even by the standards of the Atari 2600’s humble capabilities, the 
audio, visuals, and gameplay were dismal. Although millions of 
unsuspecting or desperate Atari 2600 owners purchased the car-
tridge, word quickly spread, and Atari was soon overwhelmed with 
unsold inventory. Though this is an oversimpliﬁ cation of the mar-
ket dynamics at the time, together, the Atari 2600 versions of  Pac-
Man  and the equally rushed  E.T. the Extra-Terrestrial  (1982) are 
often blamed for the sharp decline in videogame sales in 1983 and 
The Great Videogame Crash the following year. Nevertheless, most 
other ports, such as Mike Winans’ for the Mattel Intellivision in 
1983, published under Atari’s Atarisoft label, adhered more faith-
fully to the original. 
 Having paid millions for the exclusive home translation rights, 
Atari was determined to stop competitive maze chase games from 
reaching market, particularly on non-Atari hardware. Even though 
programmer Ed Averett took obvious pains to distinguish 1981’s 
 K.C. Munchkin!  Magnavox Odyssey2 game from Namco’s  Pac-Man , 
providing four mazes, moving dots, and user-programmable play-
ﬁ elds, Atari felt it was close enough that it infringed on its exclu-
sivity. Magnavox’s game sold briskly at ﬁ rst and was far superior to 
what would be Atari’s weak attempt for the 2600.  Pac-Man -remi-
niscent cover art on  K.C. Munchkin! ’s box and manual aside, there 
were enough differences and enough danger in Atari’s attempt to 
corner the entire home maze chase genre that Magnavox won in 
court. Unfortunately, Magnavox became complacent in victory, 
and Atari eventually won on a hard-fought appeal. Despite the 
abundance of other maze chase games far more derivative that 
remained on the market going forward, it was  K.C. Munchkin! 
and Magnavox that would ultimately be the most damaged. With 
 K.C. Munchkin!  off store shelves, the void was ﬁ lled by its voice-
enhanced sequel,  K.C.’s Krazy Chase!  (1982), which—although gen-
erally considered less fun—again took the maze chase concept in 
a slightly different direction while still retaining the unique ability 
for gamers to create their own mazes. As Averett put it, “ K.C.’s Crazy 
Chase  was designed soon after the  K.C. Munchkin! court exercise 
and did a good job of capturing the moment at Magnavox. There 
was something about the adversary biting the behind of little K.C. 
that appealed to everyone at the moment. I had another result 
planned when the bad guys bit K.C., but that is one time I did not 
get my way in the design or in the real world.”7
  In 1981, Midway released an unauthorized sequel to  Pac-Man 
in the arcade called  Ms. Pac-Man , which was itself based on  Crazy 
Otto , an unauthorized  Pac-Man  conversion (mod) kit developed by 
engineers at the General Computer Corporation. Midway adopted 
the game as a sequel to  Pac-Man , altering its appearance to make 
 7 See  http://www.dadgum.com/halcyon/BOOK/AVERETT.HTM. 

 
Chapter 13 PAC-MAN (1980): JAPANESE GUMPTION, AMERICAN CONSUMPTION     187
it more in line with the original. Now celebrated as one of the best 
games ever designed,  Ms. Pac-Man  improved on its  predecessor 
in several key areas. First, the character was less abstract, now 
sporting a bright red bow, lipstick, and a beauty mark. Many crit-
ics claim this change made the game more appealing to women, 
though the game was popular with men as well. The sequel 
also added new mazes, new behavior for the ghosts, and new 
 intermissions concerned with the budding relationship between 
Mr. and Ms. Pac-Man.  Ms. Pac-Man  was widely admired by fans 
of the original, many of whom concluded that it was superior. 
Some legal wrangling followed between Midway and Namco, who 
was rightfully concerned about Midway’s questionable conduct. 
Nevertheless, the popularity of the game eventually persuaded 
Namco to adopt  Ms. Pac-Man  as an ofﬁ cial sequel, and in a com-
bination cabinet with  Galaxian  sequel  Galaga , remains among the 
most commonly spotted arcade games today. This time around, 
Atari took more care in porting the game to the 2600 in 1982, and 
the results were comparatively impressive in terms of playability 
and overall faithfulness to the arcade release. 
Screenshot from the still-popular 
Ms. Pac-Man.

188     Chapter 13 PAC-MAN (1980): JAPANESE GUMPTION, AMERICAN CONSUMPTION
 A few months after  Ms. Pac-Man ’s debut in arcades, Midway 
released  Super Pac-Man , Namco’s ofﬁ cial and long-awaited 
sequel. This sequel substantially altered the gameplay of the orig-
inal. Most noticeably, Pac-Man no longer eats dots, but fruits and 
keys. As the title suggests, Pac-Man can now gain super powers by 
munching a “super pellet.” In super form, Pac-Man is twice as big 
and invulnerable, but cannot eat ghosts. Despite these innova-
tions, the game isn’t nearly as popular as  Ms. Pac-Man , though it 
has its share of loyal fans. Bally and Midway (later Bally Midway) 
released other unauthorized  Pac-Man -related games throughout 
the early 1980s, including  Pac-Man Plus  (1982), a minor altera-
tion of the original that manipulates the effects of power pel-
lets; an innovative, but notoriously difﬁ cult pinball/videogame 
hybrid named  Baby Pac-Man  (1982), and a poorly received trivia 
game called  Professor Pac-Man  (1983). Towards the middle of the 
decade, the franchise drifted further away from the familiar maze 
game setup, opting instead for platforming. Though innovative 
at the time of its 1984 release,  Pac-Land  was a lackluster side-
scrolling platformer (see Chapter 19, “ Super Mario Bros. (1985): 
How High Can Jumpman Get?” for more) that had little in com-
mon with its predecessors. Similarly, Namco released  Pac-Mania 
in 1987, which took the maze game into an isometric perspective 
and featured boards that were much larger than a single screen. 
The key innovation was Pac-Man’s ability to jump at any time, 
including over enemy ghosts. 
 Perhaps the oddest Pac-Man game is  Pac-Man 2: The New 
Adventures , released in 1994 by Namco for the Nintendo Super 
NES and Sega Genesis. Again eschewing the maze layout for a 
side-scrolling game,  Pac-Man 2  had players using a slingshot to 
try to keep Pac-Man from stumbling into trouble. The oddball 
gameplay failed to impress critics and gamers. Namco followed 
up that same year with  Pac-in-Time , which is a rebranded ver-
sion of Kalisto’s  Fury of the Furries  (1993), for Apple Macintosh, 
Commodore Amiga/CD32, and PC. The high production values 
made the game more popular than  Pac-Man 2 , and helped extend 
the life of the venerable franchise, despite its tenuous connection 
to the earlier games. 
 In anticipation of  Pac-Man ’s twentieth anniversary, Namco 
released  Pac-Man World  for the Sony PlayStation in 1999, a 3D mix 
of adventure gaming and simple problem solving that retains 
many of the maze, and pac-dot-, fruit-, and ghost-eating elements 
of the original.  Pac-Man World  was followed by several sequels, 
including  Ms. Pac-Man Maze Madness  (2000; Sega Dreamcast, 
Sony PlayStation, and others), which was more puzzle-oriented 
and even more faithful to the original source. 
 The latest true  Pac-Man  maze game worthy of mention is 
 Pac-Man Championship Edition  (or  Pac-Man C.E. ), released by 

 
Chapter 13 PAC-MAN (1980): JAPANESE GUMPTION, AMERICAN CONSUMPTION     189
Namco Bandai in 2007 for Xbox Live Arcade on Microsoft’s Xbox 
360. Iwatani designed the game as his last project before enter-
ing retirement. Despite trippy, high-deﬁ nition visuals and sound 
combined with wild new game modes, the game stays faithful to 
the original game’s concepts and timing.  Pac-Man C.E.  was well 
received and proved a worthy tribute to its legendary namesake—
a distinction that few other classic game updates and remakes 
can claim. 
 As mentioned earlier, despite the risks, there were countless 
clones, knock-offs, and derivatives of  Pac-Man throughout the 
1980s, some of which tried to advance the depth-of-play mechan-
ics. One such title was Data East’s  Lock ’ n ’  Chase , published by Taito 
in 1981 for the arcade and later by Mattel for a variety of home con-
sole and computing platforms. The player’s character is a thief 
As part of the Namco Classic 
Collection Volume 2, the fast-
paced Pac-Man Arrangement 
was released to the arcades in 
1996 (home ports followed) and 
included two-player simultaneous 
play, additional enemies, updated 
graphics and music, and a true 
ending. Besides the original 
version of Pac-Man, other Namco 
classics included in the collection 
were Rally-X and Dig Dug.

190     Chapter 13 PAC-MAN (1980): JAPANESE GUMPTION, AMERICAN CONSUMPTION
Make Trax is a 1981 arcade game 
by Williams that reverses the 
consumption paradigm. Instead 
of picking up pellets or other 
objects, the player’s task is to use 
a paintbrush to color the level, all 
the while avoiding ﬁ sh (the game 
is set in an aquarium). Though 
certainly based on an odd and 
illogical premise, the game is still 
charming and quite fun to play.
The Pac-Man games have 
always been popular targets for 
alternative videogame products, 
like MGA’s Pac-Man Electronic 
Handheld Game (2005), Coleco’s 
Pac-Man Tabletop (1981), and 
JAKKS Paciﬁ c’s Namco Featuring 
Pac-Man Plug It In & Play TV 
Games (2004).

 
Chapter 13 PAC-MAN (1980): JAPANESE GUMPTION, AMERICAN CONSUMPTION     191
who can open and close doors to collect coins and treasure while 
avoiding policemen. On the other hand,  Piranha , a 1981 game by 
GL, despite a visual overhaul, more or less replaced Pac-Man with a 
piranha and the ghosts with squids. Others took more of a middling 
approach to their design considerations, like Commodore’s  Cosmic 
Cruncher  (1982) for their VIC-20 computer, a game in which Pac-
Man had been replaced by the company’s logo, but balanced its 
lack of innovation with a large number of levels and mazes. 
 Ultimately, what may be even more important than  Pac-Man ’s 
gameplay is its cultural impact. Rarely has a game managed to 
attract so much mainstream attention; even today’s biggest and 
best-known franchises, such as  Halo  and  Madden  (see  Chapters 
5  and  10 , respectively), pale in comparison. Although the reign of 
the maze chase game was relatively short-lived,  Pac-Man ’s legacy 
continues to this day, as few other videogame characters are as 
universally recognizable as the little, yellow, and different, circu-
lar wedge who was almost named Puck Man.
Universal Games’ Lady Bug (1981; 
Arcade) is, as the name implies, 
based on an insect theme. The 
player guides a ladybug through 
a maze, eating dots and bonus 
objects while avoiding other 
insects. One nice innovation 
here is a gate system. The player 
can shift these gates to divert 
enemies, but they can always ﬁ nd 
a way around.

192     Chapter 13 PAC-MAN (1980): JAPANESE GUMPTION, AMERICAN CONSUMPTION
Exidy’s Mouse Trap (1981; 
Arcade) shares Lady Bug’s gate 
system, but is slightly more 
complex: the colored gates can 
only be activated by tripping a 
corresponding button located 
elsewhere in the maze. In this 
game, the player controls a 
mouse on the run from cats; 
the power pills turn the player’s 
mouse into a dog who can 
eat them.
1983’s Ms. Candyman by L&M 
Software and Bit Fiddlers was 
one of the Bally Professional 
Arcade’s (Astrocade) answers to 
the Pac-Man craze; every platform 
had to have its maze chase game.

 
Chapter 13 PAC-MAN (1980): JAPANESE GUMPTION, AMERICAN CONSUMPTION     193
The Pac-Man family of games 
continues to be a favorite target 
of homebrew authors on a variety 
of platforms. Bob DeCrescenzo’s 
hack of the original Atari 7800 
version of Ms. Pac-Man (1984, 
but released 1986) has resulted 
in 2006’s Pac-Man Collection, 
which contains well over a 
half-dozen different games and 
variations, ﬁ lling a glaring hole 
in the system’s software library. 
A similarly titled and even more 
impressive Pac-Man Collection 
homebrew cartridge from Opcode 
Games was released in late 2008 
for the Coleco ColecoVision.

This page intentionally left blank

195
 POLE POSITION (1982): WHERE 
THE RASTER MEETS THE ROAD 
Screenshot from the Japanese 
version of Pole Position. Note 
the billboard advertising a brand 
of cigarettes. When the game 
made it to the United States, 
the billboards were changed to 
advertisements of other games.
14
  “Prepare to qualify!” What gamer of the 1980s could forget 
these words? Certainly none of those whose souls still carry 
some trace of rubber, some hint of those skid marks left there by 
Namco’s  Pole Position.1   
 Introduced to the United States by Atari in 1982,  Pole Position 
is arguably the most important racing game ever made. Although 
it wasn’t the ﬁ rst, it was far more successful than its predecessors 
and established the conventions of a genre that has ﬂ ourished 
 1      Just in case you don’t recognize the allusion here, watch Atari’s infamous televi-
sion commercial for the home version of Pole Position at  http://www.youtube
.com/watch?v=Om84Zc4-KcQ. 

196     Chapter 14 POLE POSITION (1982): WHERE THE RASTER MEETS THE ROAD
ever since. Of particular note are its audiovisuals and physics, 
which steered mightily toward realism. Whereas most previous 
arcade hits had been abstract or ﬁ ctitious,  Pole Position seemed 
to follow  Pong  in simulating a recognizably human activity. The 
game became a key title for Atari’s 2600 VCS console, but was 
eventually ported to almost every viable platform of the era. 
 Pole Position  was widely imitated, and naturally other develop-
ers were eager to launch their own racing games and franchises. 
As we’ll see, these efforts eventually splintered into several sub-
genres of racing, with different vehicles, objectives, perspectives, 
and gameplay. First, though, let’s talk about the racing games that 
came before. 
 Modern gamers might be surprised to learn that the ﬁ rst arcade 
racing games were introduced as early as the 1940s.2 Games like 
 Drive Mobile , made by International Mutoscope Reel Company in 
1941, operated purely on “electromechanics.” Although not tech-
nically “videogames” (there was no video display!), these games 
used electrical and mechanical components like relays, resist-
ers, belts, and bells to simulate the driving experience. The basic 
idea was that players controlled a small metal car by moving a 
steering wheel. The car hovered above a road or map printed on 
a cylinder that rotated and moved from side to side as the game 
 progressed. It was the player’s job to keep the car positioned 
above the road while avoiding any obstacles. Though woefully 
primitive by today’s standards, these games still earned tidy prof-
its for their owners—even though players inserted pennies rather 
than quarters! 
 Auto Test , a driving simulation released in 1959, was—as the 
name implies—intended more to help student drivers than 
entertain children. Nevertheless, it offered a nice innovation—the 
road was shown in a ﬁ lm projected onto a screen located directly 
in front of the player. There were plenty of similar machines     pro-
duced throughout the 1960s and 1970s, gradually introducing 
innovations and reﬁ ning techniques. Perhaps the pinnacle of this 
genre is Namco’s  F-1 , manufactured in the United States in 1977 
by Atari. The “deluxe” model offered a cabinet that resembled an 
actual race car and was quite popular with gamers. Unfortunately 
for modern collectors and anyone who’d like to try these 
machines, their ﬁ ne, complex assemblies of moving parts made 
them anything but durable—particularly after years of abuse by 
overenthusiastic children. 
 The ﬁ rst true racing videogame to show up in arcades was 
Atari’s  Gran Trak 10 , which debuted in 1974. The cabinet featured 
 2      The material for this section comes mostly from Lance Carter’s excellent History 
of Racing Games, which features lots of photos and scans of vintage hardware and 
advertisements. This highly recommended book is available for free at  http://
historyofracinggames.wordpress.com. 

 
Chapter 14 POLE POSITION (1982): WHERE THE RASTER MEETS THE ROAD     197
a steering wheel, accelerator and brake pedals, and even a gear 
shift. However, the graphics consisted of a ﬁ xed screen, with the 
player’s car shown from a top-down perspective. Since there were 
no other cars besides the player’s, the game was really only a race 
against time. Unfortunately, an accounting error caused Atari 
to lose quite a bit of money manufacturing the machine. Atari 
offered a scaled-down version in 1974 called  Trak 10. A more 
ambitious project was  Gran Trak 20 , which allowed two players to 
simultaneously race about the track. Perhaps the most ambitious 
of all such games was Atari’s  Indy 800 , a 1975 game that allowed 
eight simultaneous players. The players’ wheels surrounded a 
screen located in a pit in the center. It was also the ﬁ rst video-
game to use full color, boasting a 25" display. There were even 
mirrors that let bystanders watch the race! Atari’s much later 
release, the popular  Super Sprint  (1986), is somewhat of a spiri-
tual successor to this game. 
 The Japanese got into the top-down racing craze at this time as 
well. A great example is Taito’s  Speed Race , which made its way in 
1974 to U.S. arcades via Midway, who rebranded it as  Racer. Its key 
claims to fame were vertical scrolling and great collision detec-
tion. This model would prove quite inﬂ uential. We can deﬁ nitely 
see its inﬂ uence in Atari’s 1975 game  Highway , the ﬁ rst racing vid-
eogame to feature a sit-in cabinet like the old electromechanicals. 
In passing, we should mention Exidy’s  Death Race  (1976), a top-
down game that aroused some controversy for its gameplay that 
Screenshot from Atari’s Super 
Sprint.

198     Chapter 14 POLE POSITION (1982): WHERE THE RASTER MEETS THE ROAD
consisted of running over people (later called “gremlins”) to earn 
points. An otherwise utterly forgettable game,  Death Race attracted 
the attention of the mass media, and the resulting controversy 
marred the image of the neophyte arcade industry. Such hysteria 
is still with us today, as any fan of  Grand Theft Auto  (see  Chapter 9 , 
“ Grand Theft Auto III  (2001): The Consolejacking Life”) can easily 
attest. 
 Some of the leftover cabinets from  Highway  were used for 
Atari’s  Night Driver , released in 1976.  Night Driver  was a differ-
ent kind of racing game. Superﬁ cially, it resembled the older 
 electromechanical games, which offered a scrolling road rather 
than a ﬁ xed view. Atari’s game was black and white, and the car 
was merely a plastic overlay glued to the bottom of the screen. 
The “night driving” aspect of the game was a brilliant design 
 decision, as it justiﬁ ed the sparse graphics, which consisted of 
rectangular reﬂ ectors that demarcated the road. The challenge 
came from  taking sharp turns at high speeds; there were no other 
cars. Despite all these limitations, the game deserves some respect 
for offering some semblance of the ﬁ rst-person perspective that 
would become such an integral part of later racing games. 
Screenshot from Atari’s Night 
Driver with simulated plastic 
overlay.

 
Chapter 14 POLE POSITION (1982): WHERE THE RASTER MEETS THE ROAD     199
 Perhaps the next big step came in 1981 with Sega’s  Turbo. Like 
 Night Driver ,  Turbo offered a ﬁ rst-person perspective of the road. 
Besides the obvious addition of color and other cars to com-
pete against, the game also offered a third-person (“above and 
behind”) view of the player’s vehicle on the screen. The objects 
alongside the road (buildings, trees, and so on) also scaled and 
whizzed by as the race progressed. However, the game isn’t won 
by reaching a ﬁ nish line, but only by staying on the road and 
passing 30 other cars before a time limit runs out. 
 As this brief history shows, by the time  Pole Position appeared on 
the scene in 1982, gamers had come to expect some sort of racing 
game at every major arcade. However, it would blaze past the com-
petition like a Formula One against a Model T, establishing itself as 
the future of the genre. But what was so great about  Pole Position ? 
 For one thing, its graphics made other racing games—even 
those released months earlier—antiquated by comparison. The 
animation was much smoother and more realistic, and the sound 
Screenshot from Sega’s popular 
Turbo. Coleco would bundle a 
home conversion of Turbo for 
their ColecoVision with Expansion 
Module #2, which consisted of a 
steering wheel and pedal.

200     Chapter 14 POLE POSITION (1982): WHERE THE RASTER MEETS THE ROAD
effects were varied and clear. It also offered an actual racetrack 
(the Fuji Speedway) that had a deﬁ nite start and ﬁ nish line. 
Another novel feature was a “qualifying lap” that determined the 
player’s “pole position” for the actual race. Players who couldn’t 
complete the lap in 73 seconds were disqualiﬁ ed and had to pony 
up another quarter to try again. 
 Atari really lucked out by securing the rights to what became 
the best-selling arcade game of its year. Namco had given Bally/
Midway ﬁ rst dibs on which of two new games it would license for 
manufacture in the United States. The company lucklessly chose 
 Mappy , a cutesy jump-and-run game that achieved nowhere near 
the success of  Pole Position.  Atari later licensed  Pole Position for 
its own platforms and several of its competitors. There was even a 
version for the Intellivision, whose eager owners could at last put 
the arcade pedal to the Mattel. 
 Namco released  Pole Position II  the following year, which 
offered two new racetracks and improved graphics, and of course 
there was no shortage of derivatives and clones for arcade, 
computer, and console markets. One of the most innovative of 
these is Epyx’s  Pitstop , a 1983 game for the Atari 8-bit, Coleco 
ColecoVision, and Commodore 64. The big innovation here is the 
titular “pitstops,” where players took control of a pitcrew to refuel 
their racecar and change its tires. A sequel released in 1984 offered 
split-screen modes so that two players could compete simultane-
ously. Perhaps the ultimate customizable racing game of the era 
was Rick Koening’s  Racing Destruction Set  (1985), for the Atari 
8-bit and Commodore 64, a popular but often-overlooked com-
puter racing game that let players design their own tracks, then 
race on them (alone or with a friend) using a selection of modi-
ﬁ able types of vehicles (see  bonus chapter , “ Pinball Construction 
Set (1982): Launching Millions of Creative Possibilities” for more). 
 1986 saw the release of Sega’s  Out Run , an inﬂ uential arcade 
game itself with much in common with  Pole Position. However, here 
the player controls a Ferrari Testarossa convertible, and the game 
seemed to take itself much less seriously than many of its rivals. 
Players could select from among three different songs to listen to 
while driving, and could choose which route they took through 
the course. One version of the cabinet introduced a hydraulic sys-
tem that would become inﬂ uential in later arcade racing games; 
it moved along with the car on the screen, greatly heightening the 
feeling of immersion. 
 Another great innovation came in 1988 with Atari’s  Hard Drivin’ , 
which the company billed as “the world’s ﬁ rst authentic driv-
ing simulation game.” It offered a racing environment composed 
entirely of 3D polygons, a highly realistic gear shift, and a steer-
ing wheel with “force feedback,” which made it bump and vibrate 
in a manner that corresponded to the car’s situation in the game. 

 
Chapter 14 POLE POSITION (1982): WHERE THE RASTER MEETS THE ROAD     201
The game’s most impressive feature was its accurate simulation of 
actual driving, but also boasted a fun stunt track. The “above and 
behind” perspective of  Pole Position and  Out Run was replaced 
with a ﬁ rst-person or “windshield” view. 
 The trend toward increasingly realistic driving games con-
tinued in 1989 with Papyrus’  Indianapolis 500: The Simulation , 
a game released for Apple Macintosh, Commodore Amiga, and 
PC computers. Like  Hard Drivin’ , it offered a ﬁ rst-person view 
and focused on realistic physics and detailed graphics. However, 
Pitstop added a crucial new 
feature to the Pole Position 
model: the pit stop (below), where 
players had to move quickly to 
refuel their vehicle and replace 
worn tires. Commodore 64 version 
shown.

202     Chapter 14 POLE POSITION (1982): WHERE THE RASTER MEETS THE ROAD
what really set it apart was its “car setup” options, which allowed 
players to make all sorts of adjustments to their car, such as gear 
ratios and tire pressure. It also offered a replay mode that let 
players study a race from six different perspectives. Sega’s  Virtua 
Racing  (1992) took things a step further by offering fully rendered 
3D cars as well as environments and the ability to switch perspec-
tives during the race. It was left behind a year later when Namco’s 
 Ridge Racer rolled into arcades. 
 If games like  Hard Drivin’ and  Indianapolis 500: The Simulation 
were racing toward realism, other games of the era strove to incor-
porate elements from other genres. We certainly see this in Bally 
Midway’s 1983 arcade hit  Spy Hunter , which combined a verti-
cal-scrolling racing game with elements from shoot ’em ups. We 
can also ﬁ nd alternatives to realism in Rare’s  R.C. Pro-Am  for the 
Nintendo Entertainment System, a 1987 game that put players 
behind remote controls instead of steering wheels. As with  Spy 
Hunter  before it, the gameplay was focused not just on racing but 
on collecting powerups for battling one’s opponents. This trend 
would continue in later games like Nintendo’s  Super Mario Kart 
(1992), for the Super Nintendo, which would inspire a whole series 
of clones itself, and Silicon & Synapse’s  Rock N’ Roll Racing (1993; 
Nintendo Game Boy Advance, Sega Genesis, Super Nintendo). 
 None of these games would likely appeal to someone wish-
ing to simulate an authentic racing experience, though they are 
certainly fun and many are inﬂ uential. We might be better off 
Screenshot from Atari’s Hard 
Drivin’.

 
Chapter 14 POLE POSITION (1982): WHERE THE RASTER MEETS THE ROAD     203
thinking of them as “simulations of driving simulations” rather 
than driving simulations in their own right. Indeed, some games 
get so far off track, so to speak, that they defy classiﬁ cation. This 
is certainly the case with Sega’s  Crazy Taxi  (1999), an innovative 
action arcade game whose similarity to  Pole Position  is superﬁ -
cial at best.  Crazy Taxi  is one of many vehicle-based games that 
focus more on stunts and destruction than realistic racing; other 
examples include Reﬂ ection’s  Destruction Derby (1995; Sony 
PlayStation) and Angel Studios’  Midtown Madness (1999; PC). 
 Unlike some of the genres we’ve discussed in this book, the 
racing sim’s best days seem to be ahead of it rather than behind. 
Modern fans have a number of superb franchises to choose from, 
such as Atari’s  Test Drive (ﬁ rst Accolade release, 1987; Atari ST, 
Indianapolis 500: The Simulation, 
Commodore Amiga version 
shown, allowed players to ﬁ ne-
tune their cars, then instantly try 
out the results on the track. It 
was a deﬁ nite move toward more 
realistic, simulation-style racing 
games.

204     Chapter 14 POLE POSITION (1982): WHERE THE RASTER MEETS THE ROAD
Commodore 64 and others), Electronic Arts’  The Need for Speed 
(starting in 1994 for the 3DO), and Polyphony Digital’s  Gran 
Turismo  (1998; Sony PlayStation), to name just three. Big budget 
racing games are still able to command the attention of the gam-
ing media, and the genre shows no signs of slowing down. Indeed, 
if anything, it is rapidly expanding, with high-proﬁ le games avail-
able for nearly every type of vehicle—real or imagined. 
 But what is it about games like  Pole Position  that made and 
continue to make them so fun for so many people? Some obvious 
explanations are that they offer a viable alternative to the many vio-
lent games on the market. Although some of the games we’ve dis-
cussed in this chapter do contain violence, most racing sims punish 
players who intentionally or accidentally crash into other vehicles. 
Another appealing aspect of the genre is its emphasis on cinematic 
realism; the best of these games look almost identical to a race one 
might see on television. There is also some pleasure to be found in 
competing, either against the clock or against other cars, particu-
larly when those other cars are controlled by one’s friends. 
 Finally, and perhaps most importantly, driving games seem 
more familiar to many gamers than other genres. After all, most 
of us will at some point drive a car or at least ride in a  motorized 
Box back for Mario Kart: Super 
Circuit (2001) for the Nintendo 
Game Boy Advance, one of 
several entries in the popular and 
inﬂ uential franchise.

 
Chapter 14 POLE POSITION (1982): WHERE THE RASTER MEETS THE ROAD     205
Box back for the original 3DO 
version of The Need for Speed.

206     Chapter 14 POLE POSITION (1982): WHERE THE RASTER MEETS THE ROAD
vehicle. Americans, in particular, seem obsessed with their 
 vehicles, and many (if not most) of us have fantasized about 
 driving as recklessly (yet skillfully) as the many action heroes we 
see in the movies or on the NASCAR track. Of course, trying to do 
so in reality will likely get one killed, or at least handed a nasty 
ticket. These games give us a safe opportunity to explore these 
fantasies, performing the delicate maneuvers that we would love 
to initiate each time we’re stuck in trafﬁ c. Thus, racing and driv-
ing sims offer, on one hand, an intimately familiar experience. On 
the other hand, they offer the exotic—the chance to qualify as a 
true speed racer.

207
 SIMCITY (1989): BUILDING 
BLOCKS FOR FUN AND PROFIT 
 Maxis’  SimCity , ﬁ rst published in 1989,1 is one of those games 
whose premise doesn’t sound much fun at all. Only the most 
open-minded of gamers would have found a game about city 
planning anything to get excited about, and Will Wright had to 
work hard to ﬁ nd a publisher. Who wants to be mayor of a vir-
tual town, overseeing seemingly tedious matters as constructing 
highways and power grids? On paper, the game looks like some 
disgruntled developer’s idea of a joke. Yet Wright was able to use 
these atypical gameplay concepts to make one of the most criti-
cally acclaimed games ever, launching a best-selling series of 
sequels and spin-offs that is still vibrant today.  SimCity  not only 
established Wright as one of the world’s foremost game develop-
ers, but introduced a new subgenre of strategy games typically 
called “god games” or “system simulation games,” though “man-
agement games” might be the best descriptor. Such games focus 
on simulating complex systems, such as the ecosystem in Maxis’ 
 SimEarth: The Living Planet  (1990) or the railroad transportation 
system in Microprose’s  Railroad Tycoon (1990). 
 The fun of these games doesn’t come from obliterating ene-
mies or rescuing princesses. Instead, they’re about observing the 
results of one’s decisions played out on a grand scale. They are 
system games that encourage tinkering and experimentation, 
and the grounding in everyday reality adds to the thrill. Few of us 
have ﬁ rsthand experience ﬂ ying to outer space or gunning down 
enemy soldiers, but almost all of us have spent some time in a 
city. Many of us have wondered why cities are the way they are, 
and what would happen if someone came along and changed 
things. These games offer precisely the opportunity to be in 
15
 1      It was released in 1989 for PC, Commodore Amiga, Commodore 64, Apple 
Macintosh, and Amstrad CPC. It was later released for a number of other plat-
forms including the Atari ST and Nintendo’s Super NES. 

208     Chapter 15 SIMCITY (1989): BUILDING BLOCKS FOR FUN AND PROFIT
charge—to make the big decisions that have a real impact not 
just on our own lives, but on all the citizens in the community. 
 These games are also wonderfully educational, encouraging us 
to see the world as a collection of complex, intertwining systems; 
a constantly evolving mosaic whose pieces interact with one 
another in often surprising ways. They can model anything from 
economics to evolution. Will raising taxes stimulate or stall the 
economy? How should a mayor plan and respond to natural (or 
even extraterrestrial) disasters? How does an intelligent, sentient 
being evolve from a unicellar organism?  SimCity and its many 
sequels, clones, and derivatives vary widely in theme and con-
tent, but they’re all about managing a complex, intricate system. 
They are both virtual laboratories and electronic playgrounds. 
 Before moving on to a speciﬁ c discussion of  SimCity , it’s worth-
while to mention some games that predated or may have inﬂ u-
enced its development. As usual, even a highly original game like 
 SimCity  has its precedents: its gameplay concepts didn’t sponta-
neously come into being. We’ve already discussed Don Daglow’s 
 Utopia  in our discussion of  Dune II (see  Chapter 6 , “ Dune II: The 
Building of a Dynasty  (1992): Spicing up Strategy in Real Time”), 
but it’s worth mentioning again here. This 1981 game for the 
Mattel Aquarius and Intellivision put players in charge of a small 
island economy. The goal was to generate revenue by construct-
ing buildings and pacifying the populace. It was intended for two 
players, who would simultaneously work to build up their respec-
tive island while inciting rebellion on the other’s. Occasionally 
the computer would generate a random natural event, such as a 
tropical storm or hurricane. 
SimCity appears quite 
intimidating, with an array 
of windows stuffed with 
information. However, the tidy 
graphics and catchy music 
suggest a less serious, more 
playful tone. Players could either 
build a new city from scratch or 
take control of one based on a 
historical scenario. Shown here is 
the San Francisco setting.

 
Chapter 15 SIMCITY (1989): BUILDING BLOCKS FOR FUN AND PROFIT     209
 Critics such as William Cassidy of GameSpy and T. Byrl Baker 
of GameSpot have described it as an unsung hero, a progeni-
tor of both Wright’s  SimCity  and Sid Meier’s  Civilization , a turn-
based game mentioned in  Chapter 6  that we’ll discuss again later 
in this chapter. However, it’s not clear whether Wright or Meier 
ever played the game, and similarities could be coincidental. 
Daglow began work in 1987 on a computer game version of the 
boardgame  Civilization  from Avalon Hill, but was promoted to an 
executive position at Broderbund and never completed the game 
that established Meier’s legend. He also signed the original distri-
bution deal for  SimCity  with Maxis and Broderbund, defending 
Wright’s vision against “bureaucratic meddling.”2 
Box back for the Commodore 64 
version of SimCity.
 2 See  http://www.gamasutra.com/php-bin/column_index.php?story=8450. 

210     Chapter 15 SIMCITY (1989): BUILDING BLOCKS FOR FUN AND PROFIT
 A slightly later and even more obscure predecessor is Circuits 
and Systems’  Fortune Builder , a 1984 game for the Coleco 
ColecoVision. This game has much in common with  SimCity . 
Players began with an empty map, then built roads and all man-
ner of buildings whose earning potential depends on their prox-
imity to other kinds of buildings (i.e., a hotel next to a factory 
will not do well). The goal is to generate a speciﬁ ed net worth 
before reaching the time limit. It also offered a two-player mode, 
which used a split-screen to let players compete in real time. As 
with  Utopia , there were also natural disasters that could affect 
gameplay. 
 Although  Utopia and  Fortune Builder  both have features found 
in later sim games, neither achieved the staggering success of 
 SimCity.  One reason could simply be a matter of bad timing; both 
were console games, a market that collapsed in 1984. By 1989, 
few gamers cared about old ColecoVision or Intellivision games. 
Back of the box for Coleco’s 
impressive Fortune Builder.

 
Chapter 15 SIMCITY (1989): BUILDING BLOCKS FOR FUN AND PROFIT     211
It’s interesting to speculate, though, what might have happened 
if these enterprising games had been ported to the Apple II or 
Commodore 64. 
 If Will Wright wasn’t inspired by  Utopia or  Fortune Builder , 
where did he get his ideas? Wright himself often credits his wide 
reading and research interests. These include Jay Forrester’s 
urban planning theories ( SimCity ), James Lovelock’s Gaia theory 
( SimEarth ); and Christopher W. Alexander, an architect con-
cerned with “pattern languages” ( The Sims , see Chapter 22, “ The 
Sims  (2000): Who Let the Sims Out?”). According to Wright, “I’ll 
ﬁ nd some subject that I’m reading about that fascinates me. It 
will pique my interest and then I’ll slowly become obsessed with 
it. About half of those subjects I’ll end up seriously pursuing as 
a game project.”3 This approach has seemed to work well, and 
no doubt at least some fans of the games have found themselves 
interested enough in the ideas behind them to conduct their own 
research. 
 A more immediate inspiration for  SimCity  was  Raid on 
Bungeling Bay , Will Wright’s ﬁ rst game. It was released in 
1984 for the Commodore 64 and later ported to the Nintendo 
Entertainment System and MSX platforms. Raid on Bungeling 
Bay is an action game set in a war zone; it’s the player’s task to 
ﬂ y a “helicraft” around a 2D map, dropping bombs on six differ-
ent factories. The gimmick was that the factories evolved over the 
course of the game, developing more powerful weapons to use 
against the player and eventually a super weapon—a  battleship—
to destroy civilization itself. 
 Although  Raid on Bungeling Bay  is considered a classic by 
many, Wright himself had more fun creating a map editor to aid 
in the game’s development. With that, an odd idea occurred to 
him: could the process of making a map (or, by extension, a full-
ﬂ edged city) be fun for other people? It was this question that led 
Wright to his research on urban planning. Besides the empha-
sis on urban planning, the game would also have another novel 
feature—there was really no way to win or lose. Wright describes 
the experience quite aptly himself: “My games are more like a 
hobby—a train set or a doll house. Basically they’re a mellow and 
creative playground experience.”4 
 Not surprisingly given its radical nature, Wright had a hard time 
ﬁ nding a major publisher after he completed a version for the 
Commodore 64 in 1985. Wright described his experiences trying 
to get Broderbund interested in the concept: “They kept saying, 
 3 See Melanie Cambron’s interview with Wright at  http://www.gignews.com/
goddess_wright.htm.  
 4      See Geoff Keighley’s “Simply Divine: The Story of Maxis Software” at  http://
www.gamespot.com/features/maxis/page2.html. 

212     Chapter 15 SIMCITY (1989): BUILDING BLOCKS FOR FUN AND PROFIT
‘Where’s the ending? When do you win or lose?’ And they wanted 
to have an election where you got kicked out of ofﬁ ce or not. And 
I was like, ‘No, it’s even more fun if you’re doing it badly.’ And they 
just parked it. They decided they weren’t going to release it.”5 
Wright ended up having to form his own publishing company, 
Maxis, with Jeff Braun. Broderbund ﬁ nally published the original 
Commodore 64 version and ports for the Apple Macintosh and 
Commodore Amiga in 1989, with a PC version following shortly 
after.6 Let’s take a look now at the game itself. 
 SimCity  puts players in charge of a city, either one they build 
from scratch or an existing one that requires some type of reform 
(a “scenario”). Players are allocated a budget for setting up build-
ings, basic utilities (electricity and water), and highways. Cities 
must be divided into three zones: Residential, where the citizens 
or “Sims” live; Industrial, which houses factories and warehouses; 
and Commercial, where the Sims go to shop and tend to business. 
Players can adjust the tax rate to receive more income, as well as 
set a budget for police, ﬁ re, and transportation departments (the 
Super Nintendo version adds a casino and amusement park for 
generating additional revenue). All of these factors affect other 
factors; for instance, densely populated areas with low property 
Taken on its own, Wright’s Raid 
on Bungeling Bay is a classic 
action game with depth, but 
its most signiﬁ cant historical 
role would be in inﬂ uencing 
SimCity’s development. SimCity ’s 
ﬁ nal terrain model would look 
very similar to what is seen 
in this screenshot from the 
Commodore 64 version of Raid on 
Bungeling Bay.
 5      See Brandon Sinclair’s “Spot On: Here’s the Pitch” at  http://www.gamespot.com/
c64/strategy/simcity/news.html?sid=6183997  for this and other fun stories of 
great developers who struggled with timid publishers. 
 6      Other versions would continue to be released over the years. 

 
Chapter 15 SIMCITY (1989): BUILDING BLOCKS FOR FUN AND PROFIT     213
values have an increased crime rate. Such a situation might occur 
in a city with too many factories and not enough or poorly situ-
ated residential zones. Likewise, the player has to make sure that 
the city is properly powered; natural disasters can cause black-
outs that, if untended, quickly lead to drastic problems. 
 However, the gameplay isn’t necessarily about building a 
wealthy or well-ordered city, and it’s even possible for players to 
introduce their own natural disasters (such as an earthquake or 
Godzilla-like monster attack) just to view the awesome conse-
quences. This is a point Wright has made frequently in interviews; 
sometimes, doing poorly in this game is as much fun as doing well. 
 For the ﬁ rst few months after its release, sluggish sales indi-
cated that Broderbund’s executives were justiﬁ ed in their skepti-
cism. Fortunately for Wright and Maxis, however, word began to 
spread. The game received its big break when  Newsweek covered 
it in a full-page story, instantly catapulting it from the fringe to 
the mainstream. The game enjoyed a tremendously broad appeal, 
winning over large audiences who had formerly cared very little 
for computer games. The game was viewed as not just fun but 
educational, and it found its way into 10,000 classrooms.7 The 
game eventually sold millions of copies, a fact that made a sequel 
practically inevitable. However, the next few “Sim” games would 
not be direct sequels, but a plethora of mediocre spin-offs. The 
Screenshot from the Commodore 
64 version of SimCity.
 7 See “Inside Scoop: The History of SimCity” at  http://simcity.ea.com/about/
inside_scoop/sc_retrospective02.php.   

214     Chapter 15 SIMCITY (1989): BUILDING BLOCKS FOR FUN AND PROFIT
ﬁ rst was  SimEarth: The Living Planet , a game released for a range 
of platforms in 1990. 
 SimEarth , which was never as well received as  SimCity , put 
players in control of a planetary ecosystem that they could affect 
by altering its temperature, atmosphere, and landmasses, then 
observing how these conditions inﬂ uenced the evolution of liv-
ing organisms. The game was based on James Lovelock’s famous 
Gaia hypothesis. The hypothesis describes the earth itself as a 
living organism; its organs are living and nonliving entities, who 
interact in powerful and dynamic ways. Although this idea is cer-
tainly intriguing, the game’s steep learning curve and complex 
interface (described in the manual as a “planetary spreadsheet”) 
turned away gamers looking for a more  SimCity -like experience. 
Lovelock himself contributed to the game’s manual, a 212-page 
document loaded with facts, theories, and even the occasional 
one-liner, such as “is this a random world or did you planet?”. 
 The next Sim game was  SimAnt , released in 1991, also for 
a variety of platforms. This ant colony simulation attracted a 
bit more attention than  SimEarth , probably because of its less 
intimidating interface and subject matter. This game was fol-
lowed by another abstract/scientiﬁ c title called  SimLife , a 1992 
game that focused again on ecosystems. However, this time 
players could modify the genetic code of plants and animals. 
Wright would return to this theme in 2008 with  Spore (discussed 
later  ), though in a much more accessible fashion. In 1993, Maxis 
released  SimFarm , a game that, as the title suggests, had players 
managing a farm. 
SimEarth is a planetary ecologist’s 
game. The dense interface, 
steep learning curve, and lack 
of immediate feedback made it 
inaccessible to most gamers.

 
Chapter 15 SIMCITY (1989): BUILDING BLOCKS FOR FUN AND PROFIT     215
 None of these spin-offs achieved anywhere near the popularity 
of the original, which ﬁ nally received a true sequel,  SimCity 2000 , 
in 1993. This game marked a huge leap forward in audiovisuals, 
with the city now shown in isometric perspective instead of the 
top-down view of the original. This angled perspective made the 
structures look more realistic; taller buildings visibly looked taller. 
The sequel also added many new structures and options, such as 
subways, airports, and seaports. Although all the new bells and 
SimAnt put players in charge 
of an ant colony. The colorful 
graphics and zany situations 
(such as being destroyed by the 
“evil lawnmower”) made the 
game more accessible than other 
sim titles, but it never attained 
SimCity’s level of success.
SimCity 2000 offered a 
substantial leap in audiovisuals, 
along with new buildings and 
events. Shown here is a disaster 
caused by a giant robot.

216     Chapter 15 SIMCITY (1989): BUILDING BLOCKS FOR FUN AND PROFIT
whistles pleased fans and critics, others were more impressed 
with the  SimCity Urban Renewal Kit , which allowed players to 
alter the in-game images to represent particular buildings or set-
tings. The award-winning game reestablished the franchise and 
was widely discussed in gaming circles and beyond. 
 Nearly a dozen other spin-offs followed  SimCity 2000. Two 
of the most intriguing of these are  SimTunes and  SimCopter. 
SimTunes  (1996), designed by Toshio Iwai, is a musical game 
for children. Players draw a picture using dots of various colors, 
each of which represents a certain musical note. Then up to four 
“bugz” crawl over the picture, playing the notes of the resulting 
composition. Players could also add functions, such as having 
the bugz turn or jump.  SimCopter  (1996) is a 3D game that puts 
players in the cockpit of a helicopter. Gameplay consists of redi-
recting trafﬁ c, apprehending criminals, ﬁ re ﬁ ghting, rescues, and 
(naturally) transporting people. One nice innovation was the abil-
ity to import maps from  SimCity 2000.  However, Maxis was later 
embarrassed when it was discovered that a disgruntled designer 
named Jacques Servin had inserted some unauthorized code. 
The code caused mobs of shirtless male “himbos” with ﬂ uores-
cent nipples to appear on certain dates, hugging and kissing each 
other. Maxis quickly removed the code, but the word had spread.8 
SimCopter is one of the more 
unusual sim-games, casting 
players in the role of a helicopter 
pilot. The gimmick was that 
maps from SimCity 2000 could be 
imported into the game, allowing 
players to ﬂ y through a 3D 
re-creation of their own cities.
 8 See Ben Silverman’s “Controversial Games” article at  http://videogames.yahoo
.com/feature/controversial-games/530593.   

 
Chapter 15 SIMCITY (1989): BUILDING BLOCKS FOR FUN AND PROFIT     217
 Streets of SimCity , released in 1997, was a racing and “vehicular 
combat” game that also allowed players to import maps from 
 SimCity 2000.  However, the game is now considered the black 
sheep of the Sims line, mostly because of its poor collision detec-
tion, driving simulation, and quality assurance. 
 The third ofﬁ cial sequel,  SimCity 3000 , appeared in 1999. By 
this point, 3D games had taken over the industry, and Maxis’s 
management “wanted the game to be 3D so much that it wasn’t 
receptive to the people who were actually making the game tell-
ing them it wasn’t going to work,” according to Ocean Quigley, 
Maxis’s art director.9 Unfortunately for Maxis, the intricate detail 
of the  SimCity  series made a move to full 3D difﬁ cult indeed; the 
graphics and processors of the era simply couldn’t handle it. The 
long line of so-so Sim titles had cost Maxis much of its credibility 
and revenue, and the ﬂ oundering company was ﬁ nally acquired 
by Electronic Arts. Luc Barthelet was named the general manager, 
and the young French engineer faced a difﬁ cult job salvaging the 
project. One of his ﬁ rst decisions was that  SimCity 3000 would 
not be a 3D product, a choice that ﬁ nally brought focus back to 
the project. 
 SimCity 3000  may not have been 3D, but it did boast great 
graphics and even more sophisticated gameplay. Naturally, 
Along with better audiovisuals 
and more buildings, SimCity 3000 
was signiﬁ cantly more complex. 
Players could now negotiate 
with neighboring cities, selling 
or buying services like water or 
power.
 9 See  http://www.gamespot.com/features/maxis/page7.html. 

218     Chapter 15 SIMCITY (1989): BUILDING BLOCKS FOR FUN AND PROFIT
there were more structures to build, which now included farms 
and wastewater management services. Players could also inter-
act with neighboring cities to work out business deals or pur-
chase services. There was also a greater emphasis on land values. 
A jazzy score by Jerry Martin rounds out the package. Incidentally, 
 SimCity DS  (2007) for the Nintendo DS is based on this version of 
the game. 
SimCity 4 is the latest ofﬁ cial 
SimCity game. The audiovisuals 
have been enhanced for modern 
hardware, with an interface 
reminiscent of The Sims. Shown 
on the bottom is the “night mode.”

 
Chapter 15 SIMCITY (1989): BUILDING BLOCKS FOR FUN AND PROFIT     219
 SimCity 4 , released in 2003 for Apple Macintosh and PC, is the 
fourth game in the long-lived series. This release ﬁ nally brought 
the game up to 3D graphics. It also allowed players to shape land 
(terraforming) before establishing their city, creating moun-
tains, canyons, and mesas as desired. Neighboring cities and 
towns played a greater role, and day and night cycles were ﬁ nally 
depicted graphically. Perhaps the most interesting innovation, 
though, was the ability to import Sims from  The Sims , who could 
afterwards “tell” players about their personal lives in the new city. 
Although most critics had positive things to say about the game, 
a few glitches and performance issues cropped up that damp-
ened their enthusiasm. Greg Kasavin of GameSpot remarked that 
while the game “does a ﬁ ne job overall of living up to its name, . . . 
[s]ome players will invariably get soured on the experience due 
to some of the bugs and the missing or underdeveloped features 
and options.”10 
 In 2007, a game called  SimCity Societies  by a developer named 
Tilted Mill Entertainment debuted for PC. Tilted Mill had achieved 
some recognition for its  Caesar IV  (2006), the fourth game in 
a series that we’ll discuss in a moment. With  SimCity Societies , 
Tilted Mill strived to create a “social engineering simulator” 
rather than another mayor or god game. Players work to balance 
three competing ideals: Creativity and Authority, Knowledge and 
Productivity, and Prosperity and Spirituality. The balances are 
affected by buildings, which either increase or decrease the lev-
els. The gimmick is that the look of the city will change depending 
Caesar is essentially SimCity set 
in ancient Rome, though with 
emphasis on military strategy.
 10 See  http://www.gamespot.com/pc/strategy/simcity4/review.html. 

220     Chapter 15 SIMCITY (1989): BUILDING BLOCKS FOR FUN AND PROFIT
on its core values. Despite an interesting premise, the game was 
widely criticized for counterintuitive gameplay and performance 
issues. Steve Butts of  IGN  called it “fun . . . for a short period but 
you’ll constantly be battling the developers’ decisions about how 
the game should work,” and Kevin VanOrd of GameSpot wrote that 
“unlike most city builders, there’s nothing to keep you engaged.”11 
 Although  SimCity Societies  may have been a disappointment to 
some, fans were more receptive to  SimCity Creator , a 2008 release 
by Hudson Soft for the Nintendo Wii platform. The game takes 
advantage of the Wii Remote to allow players to “draw” roads and 
tracks. Another interesting feature is the ability to view the city 
from a helicopter or airplane. 
 Wright’s most ambitious project to date,  Spore , debuted in 2008 
for the Apple Macintosh and PC. This high proﬁ le project hear-
kens back to 1992’s  SimLife , though Wright was careful to make 
this game more accessible to the general public. The player begins 
with a species of unicellular organisms, guiding its development 
through the stages of evolution until it becomes a member of a 
spacefaring culture. One much-talked about feature of the game 
is “asynchronous sharing,” which allows players to download and 
import creatures from other players. Once they reach the space-
faring stage, they can visit the planets and civilizations of other 
players as well. 
Screenshot from SimCity Creator.
 11 See  http://pc.ign.com/articles/834/834720p3.html and  http://www.gamespot
.com/pc/strategy/simcitysocieties/review.html,  respectively.  

 
Chapter 15 SIMCITY (1989): BUILDING BLOCKS FOR FUN AND PROFIT     221
 Obviously, Maxis and later Electronic Arts exploited the 
 SimCity brand as much as they could, producing dozens of spin-
offs and four direct sequels. However, other developers and 
publishers were also eager to create their own Sim - like games. 
One of the most successful and perhaps enduring of these is 
Impressions Games’s  Caesar , which debuted in 1992 for the Apple 
Macintosh, Atari ST, Commodore Amiga, and PC. Essentially 
 SimCity  set in Roman times,  Caesar  focused more on military 
combat and real-life history. The game was popular enough to 
warrant three sequels, the ﬁ nal one being the aforementioned 
 Caesar IV.  Impressions also developed city-building games based 
on Ancient Egypt, Greece, and China. 
 Another branch of  SimCity- style games are called “business 
management simulations,” which focus more on business and 
commerce. Perhaps the most inﬂ uential of these is Enlight’s  
 Capitalism , published by Interactive Magic in 1995 for Apple 
Macintosh and PC. Designed by Trevor Chan,  Capitalism  is about 
founding and growing a thriving corporation in retail, manufac-
turing, research and development, or farming. While the game 
attracted mainstream media attention for its highly detailed and 
realistic gameplay, its steep learning curve was not suitable for 
the casual gamer, but did appeal to teachers and professors. Chan 
remarked in an interview with  GameSpot  that “for the  Capitalism 
series, I attempted to immerse myself in the academic world by 
reading an extensive list of academic books on the subject dur-
ing the early stage of development. On the other hand, the gam-
ing perspective came relatively effortlessly, as I have always been 
a gamer.”12 An expanded version called  Capitalism Plus appeared 
in 1995, and a full sequel,  Capitalism II , was published by Ubisoft 
in 2001. Chan also introduced the “Empire” franchise of business 
simulation games, beginning with  Restaurant Empire in 2003. 
Other games in this franchise include  Zoo Empire (2004) and 
 Marine Park Empire  (2005). As their titles suggest, these popular 
games are focused on a single business sector. 
 An earlier attempt at a business simulation was  Railroad 
Tycoon , a 1990 game designed by Sid Meier. This series, focused 
on the train industry, was successful enough to warrant a scad of 
sequels. The latest is  Sid Meier’s Railroads! , a 2006 game published 
by Firaxis Games. Of course, there are plenty of other “Tycoon” 
games with different themes, such as Chris Sawyer’s  RollerCoaster 
Tycoon  (1999), Holistic Design’s  Mall Tycoon (2002), and Blue 
Fang Games’  Zoo Tycoon (2001). Bullfrog Productions also devel-
oped two popular games in this subgenre:  Theme Park (1994) and 
 12 See  http://www.gamespot.com/pc/strategy/capitalism/news.html?sid=2833574 
&mode=news. 

222     Chapter 15 SIMCITY (1989): BUILDING BLOCKS FOR FUN AND PROFIT
 Theme Hospital (1997). Business-simulation games seem to have 
become popular among casual gaming fans. A quick glance at the 
strategy section of Big Fish Games, a major distributor of casual 
games, turns up titles like  Fish Tycoon ,  Plant Tycoon ,  Virtual 
Farm ,  Restaurant Empire , and even  Fairy Godmother Tycoon .13 
 Sid Meier’s Civilization  (also known as  Civilization  or  Civ ), 
published by Microprose in 1991 for most viable platforms, takes 
a radically different spin on the genre. The two most noticeable 
Box back for the Atari Jaguar 
version of Theme Park.
 13 For the whole list, see  http://www.bigﬁ shgames.com/download-games/genres/ 
29/strategy.html. 

 
Chapter 15 SIMCITY (1989): BUILDING BLOCKS FOR FUN AND PROFIT     223
differences are a much larger time frame and turn-based, rather 
than real-time, gameplay. Instead of starting players off in mod-
ern times,  Civilization  and its sequels begin in ancient times (the 
ﬁ rst begins in 4000 BCE). Players then work to build up empires 
that gradually become more technologically advanced, eventu-
ally reaching the Space Age. Like the  SimCity  games, players can 
adopt different gameplay styles. Some will prefer to build up 
a strong military and conquer rival civilizations, whereas oth-
ers may take a more passive stance. However, the game can be 
won, though in different ways—by destroying all rivals, sending 
a spaceship to Alpha Centauri, or simply by earning the high-
est number of points when time reaches the modern age. One 
of the game’s main appeals is that players must make choices 
about which technology to research next, with each new technol-
ogy affecting the gameplay in fundamental ways. For instance, 
the civilization who ﬁ rst develops ﬂ ight technology will have a 
tremendous military advantage over its rivals. The turn-based 
gameplay also makes a considerable difference. Gamers could 
take as long as they wanted to make endless micromanagement 
decisions, and it was easier to move troops and settlers. The 
 Civilization  series has been incredibly popular in its own right, 
leading to numerous sequels and spin-offs. 
 Will Wright’s  SimCity  was one of the most important and 
inﬂ uential games at the turn of the 1990s, leading to hordes 
of sequels, spin-offs, clones, and derivatives that has repre-
sented a considerable slice of the gaming industry ever since. 
Although modern sim games are orders of magnitude more 
complex than Wright’s original, his basic gameplay model has 
endured. Whether building theme parks or corporations, players 
Civilization offers turn-based 
gameplay and individual units 
(settlers, soldiers, etc.) that can 
be moved about the map. The 
civilization eventually develops 
new technologies, forcing players 
to adapt their strategies to 
accommodate.

224     Chapter 15 SIMCITY (1989): BUILDING BLOCKS FOR FUN AND PROFIT
seem to enjoy  simulating wondrously interconnected  systems. 
As  computer, console, and handheld technology continues 
to improve, we are likely to see even more sophisticated and 
nuanced  SimCity -inﬂ uenced games.14
 14      This development might well be spurred by Maxis’s decision to release a free 
version of the original game under a GNU license as part of the One-Laptop-Per-
Child initiative. The license allows other developers to see and borrow freely 
from the code, provided that they don’t use Electronic Arts’ trademarks. The ﬁ rst 
of the major projects to take advantage of the arrangement is Micropolis by Don 
Hopkins.    

225
 SPACE INVADERS (1978): THE 
JAPANESE DESCEND  
16
 Toshihiro Nishikado’s 1978 masterpiece  Space Invaders  is on the 
shortlist of the world’s most important videogames—another mas-
ter stroke that truly brought the masses to the medium. A success 
in both the United States and Japan,  Space Invaders would become 
Screenshot from the original 
Space Invaders arcade game, with 
simulated color overlay.

226     Chapter 16 SPACE INVADERS (1978): THE JAPANESE DESCEND
one of the most widely imitated games of all time:  endlessly 
cloned, copied, and modiﬁ ed right up to the present day. 
 Even if you’ve never actually played  Space Invaders  or even 
seen a working machine, chances are you’ve played one of its 
thousands of derivatives, such as Namco’s ever-popular  Galaga 
(1981) or Konami’s  Gradius  (1986). Although  Space Invaders is 
primitive even compared to these early games, its foundational 
inﬂ uence is unmistakable.  Space Invaders ’ importance goes far 
beyond serving as the basis of so many “shoot ’em ups,” how-
ever. Perhaps even more so than  Pong  (see  bonus chapter , “ Pong 
(1972): Avoid Missing Game to Start Industry”),  Space Invaders 
appealed to the general public. Their quarters and 100-yen coins 
advanced into coin slots as relentlessly as the aliens themselves 
descended, making millions for Taito, inspiring hundreds of 
would-be developers, and exploding the market for videogames. 
It’s hard to imagine what the modern arcade and console markets 
would look like were it not for Japanese games like  Space Invaders 
and  Pac-Man ( Chapter 13 , “ Pac-Man  (1980): Japanese Gumption, 
American Consumption”)—assuming that it survived at all! 
Arcade screenshot with 
simulated color overlay from 
Space Invaders II (1980), which 
featured a competitive mode 
where two players ﬁ ght to 
destroy each other in addition to 
the advancing attackers.

 
Chapter 16 SPACE INVADERS (1978): THE JAPANESE DESCEND     227
 Perhaps we should begin with some geography. How was 
Japan’s gaming industry and pop culture different than those 
found in the United States, and why have so many Japanese 
games been so extraordinarily successful both here and abroad? 
 Space Invaders  was only the ﬁ rst of what would become an 
onslaught of Japanese imports that would become the founda-
tions of the arcade and console industries. It’s difﬁ cult to exagger-
ate the importance of Japanese games like  Pac-Man ,  Super Mario 
Bros. (Chapter 19, “ Super Mario Bros.  (1985): How High Can 
Jumpman Get?”),  The Legend of Zelda  (Chapter 21, “ The Legend 
of Zelda  (1986): Rescuing Zeldas and Uniting Triforces”),  Street 
Fighter II ( Chapter 17 , “ Street Fighter II  (1991): Would You Like 
the Combo?”), and  Final Fantasy VII ( Chapter 7 , “ Final Fantasy 
VII  (1997): It’s Never Final in the World of Fantasy”). It’s likewise 
a mistake to question the relevance of Japanese consoles like the 
Nintendo Entertainment System, the Sega Genesis, and the Sony 
PlayStation. 
 Superstar American developers—such as Richard Garriott 
(Chapter 23, “ Ultima  (1980): The Immaculate Conception of the 
Computer Role-Playing Game”), Roberta Williams ( Chapter 11 , 
“ King’s Quest: Quest for the Crown  (1984): Perilous Puzzles, 
Thorny Thrones”), and Will Wright ( Chapters 15  and 22)—all 
got their start on home computer platforms like the Apple II 
and Commodore 64. Though there was of course the occa-
sional modestly successful port (such as  SimCity  for the Super 
Nintendo), Japanese games dominated the console market. 
Jack Tramiel, president of Commodore, had always worried that 
cheap Japanese home computers would topple the American 
home computer industry, but that never happened. Although the 
Japanese never seriously challenged America’s desktops, they ﬁ rst 
captured the arcades and later the living rooms of U.S. gamers, 
where they have dominated ever since. 
 Chris Kohler discusses the Japanese gaming industry in 
depth in his book  Power Up: How Japanese Video Games Gave 
the World an Extra Life (Brady Games, 2004).  Kohler thinks that 
the reason Japan’s gaming industry ﬂ ourished was the country’s 
unique pop culture, which was (and is) saturated with cartoons 
and comics (anime and manga, respectively). Whereas such 
things were typically viewed as ﬁ t only for children in the United 
States, they enjoyed far broader appeal and acceptance in Japan. 
Furthermore, the highly stylized aesthetics of anime and manga 
lent themselves well to  videogames, which were (at the time) too 
limited to represent anything approaching graphical realism. 
Nevertheless, Kohler points out that Japanese games became 
increasingly like movies, borrowing frequently from ﬁ lm and 
working to spin coherent narratives around the gameplay. Kohler 
argues that whereas American games like  Pong and  Breakout 
were abstract, Japanese games were more like movies, with 

228     Chapter 16 SPACE INVADERS (1978): THE JAPANESE DESCEND
identiﬁ able  characters and ﬁ ctional scenarios.  Space Invaders , 
for instance, gives us a  recognizable threat (alien invasion), and 
the player is cast in a desperate and ultimately futile mission to 
save the world.1 The cinematic nature of Japanese games would 
become even more pronounced with Shigeru Miyamoto’s  Donkey 
Kong in 1981, another dizzyingly successful Japanese import. 
 Are the Japanese simply better at making games than their 
American counterparts? Although Kohler makes some good 
points about the Japanese gaming industry, we could also posit 
more banal explanations for why Japanese games came to domi-
nate the West—or, more speciﬁ cally, our arcade and console 
industries. Perhaps the most glaring factor was the frequently 
mentioned Great Videogame Crash of 1984, which devastated the 
American console industry, creating a massive vacuum that no 
American manufacturer or retailer seemed willing or able to ﬁ ll. It 
was Nintendo who ﬁ nally resurrected the console, joined later by 
Sega, another Japanese company. Though there were, of course, 
many American games made for these systems, the most suc-
cessful were typically imported from Japan. Furthermore, while 
games like  Super Mario Bros.  and  Final Fantasy VII  were smash 
hits in both countries, few games originating in the West were 
popular in Japan. Even today, it’s a surprise to ﬁ nd an American 
game on the Japanese best-seller charts. Of course, in recent 
years, Western developers have had a renaissance in the United 
States, creating a wide range of innovative best-sellers, though 
they still have an uphill climb in a mostly indifferent Japan. 
 In 1978, many an American game developer must have felt 
like the laser cannon in  Space Invaders , hopelessly outnumbered 
and watching dismally as the last defenses eroded (a process 
often aided by the player’s own shot). On a more positive note, 
the popularity of  Space Invaders  was hard to miss. Whole arcades 
sprang up around the machine, offering row after row of identical 
machines to satiate the public’s desire to blast aliens. Although 
 Pong  had enjoyed tremendous popularity,  Space Invaders made 
it look primitive in comparison. Who wants to knock a ball back 
and forth when you can save the universe? 
 Steven L. Kent discusses the game at some length in his  The 
Ultimate History of Video Games  (Three Rivers Press, 2001), noting 
that it wasn’t an instant success in its mother country. After a few 
quiet months, though, the game swept across the country—even 
small shops selling raw vegetables would shove aside their inven-
tory to make room for more  Space Invaders machines. According 
to Kent, when the game was exported to the United States, arcade 
owners found they could recoup the $1,700 it cost to buy a  Space 
 1 Though Kohler doesn’t seem to recognize it, Breakout did have a recognizable, 
if abstract, story that was established through the cabinet art––help some crooks 
break out of a prison. 

 
Chapter 16 SPACE INVADERS (1978): THE JAPANESE DESCEND     229
Invaders  machine in a single month. Taito and its partner Midway 
ended up selling the United States more than 60,000 machines. 
Naturally, the excitement and piles of cash that built up around 
 Space Invaders  helped spur the growth of the broader arcade 
industry, which was still very much in its infancy in the late 
1970s. Indeed, before  Space Invaders , it was rare to ﬁ nd an arcade 
machine outside of bars and arcades; afterwards, grocery stores, 
pizza parlors, and even waiting rooms were often stocked with 
them, predating the coming ubiquity and even greater domi-
nance of  Pac-Man machines. 
 What made  Space Invaders  such a hit? Before we discuss 
the gameplay, let’s pause to consider the historical context. 
Speciﬁ cally,  Space Invaders  arrived on the heels of George Lucas’ 
 Star Wars , a 1977 science ﬁ ction ﬁ lm that became a true cultural 
phenomenon. That same year, Americans had also lined up to 
see Steven Spielberg’s  Close Encounters of the Third Kind , another 
Screenshot from the arcade 
version of Galaga.

230     Chapter 16 SPACE INVADERS (1978): THE JAPANESE DESCEND
high-proﬁ le science ﬁ ction ﬁ lm about visitors from space. The 
space program was also still in its heyday, and many children 
dreamed of one day becoming an astronaut. Coupled with these 
science ﬁ ction ﬁ lms were plenty of paranoid thrillers, such as 
Spielberg’s earlier movie,  Jaws  (1975), whose ominous music 
served as the inspiration for so many other movies and games. 
Indeed, as we’ll see,  Space Invaders  relied heavily on movies like 
 Jaws  for inspiration for its sound effects, which certainly added to 
the tension and dread of the descending aliens. In short, the pop 
cultural milieu of the late 1970s was perfect for a game like  Space 
Invaders , which combined science ﬁ ction themes with a level of 
tension and anxiety comparable to the groundbreaking thrillers 
of the era. 
 Space Invaders ’ gameplay is not as simple as some take it to 
be. The player controls a laser cannon that can be moved left 
and right along the bottom of the screen; vertical movement is 
Screenshot from the arcade 
version of Galaxian.

 
Chapter 16 SPACE INVADERS (1978): THE JAPANESE DESCEND     231
not possible. Pressing the ﬁ re button causes a shot to move rap-
idly from the cannon to the top of the screen, assuming it is not 
“intercepted” by an object or alien. Only one shot can be in the air 
at one time, so players either have to wait for it to hit something 
or reach the top of the screen. In the middle of the screen are ﬁ ve 
rows of invaders. In a movement reminiscent of a manual type-
writer, the aliens move to the extreme left and right of the screen, 
dropping down one row each time they reach the border. Between 
the cannon and the aliens are four destructible fortiﬁ cations that 
serve as (temporary) cover. The typical strategy is to duck in and 
out of cover, ﬁ re some shots, then use the cover to avoid the alien 
bombardment. The player can also try to shoot the aliens’ bombs 
with the cannon; doing so renders the bomb harmless. The aliens 
speed up as they are eliminated; the last few move very quickly 
and can be very difﬁ cult to hit. The game also features a ﬂ ying sau-
cer that occasionally ﬂ ies across the top of the screen. Hitting this 
target requires precision, timing, or just dumb luck. 
 The invaders come in three basic designs. Nishikado mapped 
these designs onto graph paper ﬁ rst, striving to create bit-
mapped images that would resemble the alien monsters of H.G. 
Wells’s  The War of the Worlds.  In a 2005 interview with  Edge 
magazine, Nishikado said that his original idea had been to 
have the player battling against tanks or airplanes, but couldn’t 
ﬁ nd a way to make these objects look recognizable with lim-
ited graphics technology. “Human movement would have been 
easier,” said Nishikado, “but I felt it would be immoral to shoot 
humans, even if they were bad guys. Then I heard about a movie 
called  Star Wars  released in the U.S. which was coming to Japan 
next year, so I came up with a game based in space which had 
space aliens as targets.”2 Nishikado’s challenge was great—he 
not only had to design the game itself, but the hardware to 
run it. It was an incredible achievement for the 34-year-old 
engineer. 
 Perhaps the single most-discussed feature of  Space Invaders 
is its innovative use of sound. The most important of these is the 
“thump thump thump” that plays as the aliens advance, gradu-
ally rising in frequency like an over-excited heartbeat. Later 
games such as DynaMicro’s  Dungeons of Daggorath  (1982) for the 
Radio Shack Color Computer would borrow or adapt this feature. 
Sounds also play when the player ﬁ res a shot or strikes a target. 
All of these effects make the game almost as fun to listen to as to 
see in action, and indeed, many gamers can easily identify the 
game sight unseen. 
 Besides the innovative sound and graphics, we might attri-
bute some of  Space Invaders ’ success to more basic impulses. 
 2 See  http://www.edge-online.com/news/the-creation-space-invaders. 

232     Chapter 16 SPACE INVADERS (1978): THE JAPANESE DESCEND
For instance, most of us feel somehow responsible for the fate 
of the laser cannon (and the world under attack by the aliens). It 
 needs  us to save it; neglecting it for even a few seconds results in 
catastrophe. We might also compare destroying the aliens to rap-
idly popping the air pockets in a sheet of bubble wrap—an activ-
ity which, we might add, has recently made its way into several 
casual and Web-based games. 
 Another key aspect of the game’s appeal was its high score 
indicator, an innovation that quickly became a mainstay of the 
arcade industry.  Space Invaders  didn’t offer the more elaborate 
high score tables with initials seen in later games—only the sin-
gle highest score was recorded and displayed. Nevertheless, this 
component added a vital competitive edge to an already engross-
ing game, and no doubt many an aggressive gamer spent that 
extra quarter to try once more to beat the existing score. 
 As everyone knows,  Space Invaders  was widely imitated, 
spawning a massive genre that eventually split into a variety of 
subgenres. Although it is well beyond this chapter to offer a com-
prehensive look at the thousands of games inspired by  Space 
Invaders , we can’t help but mention at least a few of the most 
celebrated. 
 Perhaps the most famous of all  Space Invaders clones is 
 Galaga , a 1981 shooter developed by Namco and manufactured 
in the United States by Midway.  Galaga , which is still widely 
available today in almost any venue that offers arcade machines,3 
was based on an earlier game, from the same company, named 
 Galaxian  (1979), which we’ll discuss ﬁ rst.  Galaxian introduced 
several key innovations to the  Space Invaders formula. Besides 
vastly improved audiovisuals (it was the ﬁ rst arcade game in 100% 
RGB color4), the aliens could now attack in kamikaze-style forma-
tions. The four destructible shields were gone as well, making 
the game even more difﬁ cult.  Galaga  is essentially an enhanced 
remake of  Galaxian , offering stat tracking and better audiovisu-
als. The best innovation, though, is that the enemy’s motherships 
(“Boss Galagas”) can trap the player’s ship in a tractor beam. If 
the player is out of ships, the game is over. Otherwise, the player 
can try to destroy the mothership that’s holding the trapped ship; 
if successful, the captured ship is released. It then attaches to the 
side of the player’s ship and doubles its ﬁ repower. 
 With  Space Invaders  and its clones causing so much commotion 
in arcades, it was only a matter of time before it swept into living 
rooms. At this time, the “console market” was almost entirely lim-
ited to self-contained  Pong  systems. Atari had released its famous 
 3 Galaga is usually seen nowadays in a special combination cabinet with Ms. Pac-Man. 
 4      RGB is a convenient Red, Green, Blue color model for computer graphics, 
because the human visual system works in a similar manner. 

 
Chapter 16 SPACE INVADERS (1978): THE JAPANESE DESCEND     233
Atari 2600 Video Computer System (VCS) in October of 1977, but 
success had proven elusive. Even though several of Atari’s ﬁ rst game 
releases for its VCS were translations of their own arcade titles, none 
were true blockbusters that people wanted to play badly enough to 
buy the system. It wasn’t until 1980 when arcade blockbuster  Space 
Invaders  was converted to the VCS that the ﬁ rst console killer app 
was born. It became the best-selling game of the year and helped 
establish the VCS as the deﬁ nitive videogame console of its era. 
 Space Invaders– style games would eventually evolve into a 
plethora of styles. One of the ﬁ rst major innovations was scroll-
ing. Instead of showing all the action on a single screen, games 
like Konami’s  Scramble  (1981) and  Gradius  featured a background 
that moved horizontally as the game progressed. The player’s ship 
Screenshot from the Atari 2600 
VCS version of Space Invaders, 
which was the ﬁ rst of several 
arcade-to-home conversions 
that put the system on the map. 
Though not necessarily a faithful 
conversion, Space Invaders for 
the 2600 was a great deal of fun 
and featured more than 100 play 
variations. Although this version 
is among the most famous home 
conversions, nearly every other 
platform during this era—no matter 
how obscure or limited—would 
receive at least one knock-off of 
this game, if not an ofﬁ cial port.
Screenshot from the Atari 2600 
VCS version of River Raid.

234     Chapter 16 SPACE INVADERS (1978): THE JAPANESE DESCEND
could also move up and down as well as left and right, increasing 
the complexity considerably.  Defender ( bonus chapter , “ Defender 
(1980): The Joys of Difﬁ cult Games”), introduced in 1980, is per-
haps the most difﬁ cult and sophisticated of all such games. 
Instead of a background that moved independently of the player 
(as with  Scramble ),  Defender  let players move all over the map 
(and even gave them a radar to keep their bearings). Although 
such a setup was undoubtedly more advanced, games that con-
tinuously autoscrolled were far more common. 
 Namco’s  Xevious (1982) is often credited with being the ﬁ rst ver-
tically scrolling shooter, though it was predated by Atari’s arcade 
game  Sky Raider  (1978). In any case, vertical scrolling became 
quite popular. Activision’s  River Raid  (1982) for the Atari VCS is an 
example of an early console game of this type. Other inﬂ uential 
arcade shooters of the 1980s include Capcom’s  1942  (1984; verti-
cal), Toaplan’s  Tiger-Heli  (1985; vertical), and Irem’s  R-Type (1987; 
horizontal), just to name a few. As the years progressed, the audio-
visuals improved dramatically, along with nice features like pow-
erups, damage resistance, and boss ﬁ ghts. The genre seemed to 
peak in the 1990s with ambitious titles such as Konami’s  Axelay 
(1992, Super Nintendo), which featured both horizontal and verti-
cal scrolling along with a bevy of impressive visual effects. The Atari 
ST and Commodore Amiga computers were also home to plenty 
of lavishly detailed shooters, particularly those from the British 
company Psygnosis, such as  Menace  (1988),  Blood Money  (1989), 
and  Agony  (1992). Game developers competed to see who could 
design the best-looking and best-sounding shooters, and even if 
the actual gameplay varied little, gamers looked forward to these 
Screenshot from the arcade 
version of Centipede.

 
Chapter 16 SPACE INVADERS (1978): THE JAPANESE DESCEND     235
richly aesthetic experiences. For instance, though the shooters from 
Thalamus,  Sanxion  (1986) and  Delta  (1987), offered little-to-no 
innovation gameplay-wise, their superb musical scores (composed 
by Rob Hubbard) are still enjoyed today on Remix.Kwed.Org and 
other Commodore 64 music sites. 
 There were also plenty of exotic shooters that innovated even 
more radically from the  Space Invaders model. These include 
Atari’s  Centipede , a fast-paced 1980 arcade game that utilized a 
trackball for more ﬂ uid movement. Another 1980 arcade classic 
from Atari is  Tempest , a 3D vector-based shooter that is rather 
difﬁ cult to describe. Essentially, players move a ship around the 
edges of a complex web that emanates outward from the center of 
the screen. The enemies begin at the center and move toward the 
outer edges, destroying the player’s ship if they make contact with 
it. Instead of a trackball, this game used a spinner5 to give  players 
Screenshot from the arcade 
version of Tempest.
 5      A paddle or dial that spins freely. See  bonus chapter,  Pong (1972): Avoid Missing 
Game to Start Industry, for more information. 

236     Chapter 16 SPACE INVADERS (1978): THE JAPANESE DESCEND
more precise control around the grid. Konami seems to have been 
inspired by  Tempest  to create the raster-based  Gyruss in 1983. 
 Gyruss  lost the spinner in favor of a joystick and the abstract, grid-
look of  Tempest , but maintained its intriguing 3D look and feel. 
 It’s tempting to try to lump all games that involve spaceship 
combat under the “shooter” designation. However, it seems 
more sensible to attribute games like Atari’s  Asteroids  (1979) and 
Midway’s  Omega Race  (1981) to an earlier inﬂ uence—namely, 
 Spacewar! ( bonus chapter, SpaceWar! (1962): The Best Waste of 
Time in the History of the Universe ). Like  Spacewar! ,  Asteroids 
and  Omega Race  employed realistic physics, complete with iner-
tia and momentum. This characteristic seems to set it and games 
like it apart from the less realistic action of  Space Invader –style 
games. Likewise, it seems ludicrous to group ﬁ rst-person games 
with light ﬂ ight simulation elements like Atari’s  Star Raiders 
(1979) and  Star Wars  (1983) under the “shooter” label, as no one 
would confuse their gameplay with  Space Invaders. 6
 What about “shooter” games that feature human or humanoid 
avatars rather than some type of ﬂ ying craft? Often enough, “run ’n’ 
gun” arcade games like Capcom’s  Commando  (1985), SNK’s  Ikari 
Warriors (1986), and Nazca Corporation’s Metal Slug (1996) end up 
in the same category as Space Invaders, though it’s plain that these 
games have precious little in common with conventional shooters. 
Even though all these games involve shooting enemies, the control 
scheme (and thus the gameplay) is entirely different. 
 One might also wonder why games like id’s Doom ( Chapter 5 , 
“ Doom  (1993): The First-Person Shooter Takes Control”) are called 
ﬁ rst-person shooters, as though they shared a heritage with the 
shooters we’ve been talking about. Again, just because these games 
involve shooting enemies doesn’t seem a sound  reason for placing 
them alongside  Space Invaders and  Galaga ; one might as well throw 
in Nintendo’s  Duck Hunt  (1984) and Sega’s  The House of the Dead 
(1996)—arcade light-gun games—for the same reason. 
 But, we are at something of an impasse here if we try to nail 
down precisely what we mean by “shooter,” “shoot ’em up,” or, as 
they are known by their fans, “shmups.” The only criterion that 
really seems to distinguish them is the player’s  inability  to direct 
the avatar’s (or ship’s) progress through the gameworld. Instead, 
the player can navigate only within a designated area, and is 
either prevented or punished for violating those boundaries.7 
 For instance,  Space Invaders  and  Galaga are ﬁ xed-screen 
games; the player cannot move the ship beyond the conﬁ nes of 
the screen (though in  Galaga  the aliens can move out of sight). 
6For more on Star Raiders and the Star Wars arcade game, see bonus chapter, Star 
Raiders (1979): The New Hope.
 7      Of course, even with this, there are exceptions, such as Sega’s Fantasy Zone (1985; 
Arcade), where players can control the scrolling by moving right or left. 

 
Chapter 16 SPACE INVADERS (1978): THE JAPANESE DESCEND     237
Scrolling games may give players the freedom to move in all four 
directions, but players don’t change the way the screen moves. 
It’s comparable to a child bouncing around inside a school bus. 
Although the child may be free to move all around the vehicle, 
he or she is unable (hopefully, at least!) to change the direction 
the bus is moving. In fact, many games, like the aforementioned 
 River Raid and  Blood Money , actually punish the player for stray-
ing from the path. In the almost sadistically difﬁ cult  Blood Money , 
for instance, contact with the walls damages the player just as 
much as colliding with an enemy ship or being hit by its ﬁ re. 
 In short, a conventional shooter constrains players’ range of 
movement, forcing them into a sort of dodgeball match with the 
computer. Indeed, perhaps dodgeball is the closest physical  analogy 
Box back from Opcode Games’s 
2003 homebrew release for the 
Coleco ColecoVision, Space 
Invaders Collection, featuring 
near-perfect ports of both Space 
Invaders and Space Invaders 
Part II. Space Invaders and its 
basic play style continues to be 
an inspiration for new games 
today.

238     Chapter 16 SPACE INVADERS (1978): THE JAPANESE DESCEND
we have to these games, though with one  exception—the player can 
throw balls as well (at enemies who seldom bother to dodge!). 
 Space Invaders  is responsible for many “ﬁ rsts” that came to 
deﬁ ne the arcade experience. It was the ﬁ rst mega hit from Japan, 
a country whose exports remain a vital part of the American 
gaming industry. It also represents a bold step toward represen-
tational (as opposed to symbolic) graphics; the aliens looked like 
aliens, not blocks or wedges. The sound effects were revolution-
ary, escalating the tension of an already intense experience. The 
high score added the all-important competitive spirit that would 
afterwards come to characterize the arcade era. Finally, the easy-
to-learn yet hard-to-master gameplay of  Space Invaders would be 
endlessly duplicated and reﬁ ned in hundreds if not thousands of 
clones and derivatives. Practically any games-capable device in 
existence has some form of  Space Invaders. We even ﬁ nd versions 
that rely totally on character-set graphics! 
 With the possible exception of  Pac-Man , no game seems to 
represent all of videogaming as well as  Space Invaders.  Even peo-
ple who have never seen or played the game are familiar with its 
iconic aliens and trademark sound effects. Even if the industry 
has come a long way since the ﬁ rst eager teenager plunked in a 
quarter and blasted her ﬁ rst space invader, there’s still something 
strangely satisfying about a good shmup. Let them come, wave 
after wave; we’ll happily burst each bubble of the bubble wrap. 
Thankfully, the aliens are a fully renewable resource.
Treasure’s Ikaruga, screenshot 
from the 2002 Sega Dreamcast 
version shown, is one of a long 
line of fast-paced shooters 
from Japan that continue to be 
released today. Their designs are 
in stark contrast to the relatively 
pedestrian pacing of classics 
like Space Invaders. Some critics 
argue that these later games 
were so difﬁ cult and elaborate—
making it a point of pride to ﬁ ll a 
player’s screen with bullets—that 
casual fans turned away, leaving 
only hardcore enthusiasts in the 
cockpit.

239
 STREET FIGHTER II (1991): 
WOULD YOU LIKE THE COMBO? 
Street Fighter II ’s cast of 
characters.
17
  Ryu, Ken, E. Honda, Guile, Chun-Li, Zangief, Dhalsim, Sagat and 
M. Bison—do they really need an introduction? If so, you’re over-
due for a serious Shoryuken.1 The game: Capcom’s  Street Fighter II , 
probably the single most important arcade title of the 1990s. 
 Although there had been several competitive ﬁ ghting games 
before it,  Street Fighter II  trumped them all with its spectacu-
lar graphics and sophisticated—even artistic—gameplay. If the 
graphics were the bait, the gameplay was the hook. A seemingly 
endless line of teenagers lined up in front of these machines, 
 1 A special attack in the Street Fighter series, of course, consisting of a jumping 
uppercut in which the user spins, knocking the opponent to the ground. 

240     Chapter 17 STREET FIGHTER II (1991): WOULD YOU LIKE THE COMBO?
eager to demonstrate their virtual street ﬁ ghting skills—or, at least 
their mastery of  Street Fighter II ’s esoteric combat system. For 
many boys (and no doubt many girls as well!) growing up in the 
1990s,  Street Fighter II wasn’t just a game, but a rite of passage. 
 Street Fighter II  joins the ranks of other Japanese games that 
overwhelmed American arcades:  Space Invaders ( Chapter 16 , 
“ Space Invaders (1978): The Japanese Take Over”),  Pac-Man 
( Chapter 13 , “ Pac-Man  (1980): Japanese Gumption, American 
Consumption”), and  Pole Position ( Chapter 14 , “ Pole Position 
(1982): Where the Raster Meets the Road”) .  All four games intro-
duced critical innovations that would be shamelessly duplicated 
and endlessly reﬁ ned. Although they perhaps had their greatest 
impact in the arcades, they also played a critical role in the con-
sole industry. Console makers competed ﬁ ercely for the rights 
to port these titles, as they knew countless fans would purchase 
their console speciﬁ cally to play these games in their living 
rooms. Indeed, one of the recurring standards of console excel-
lence throughout the 1980s and 1990s was the degree to which 
their ports of games like  Pac-Man and  Street Fighter II approxi-
mated the arcade experience. 
 However, there’s little argument that what made  Street Fighter 
II  so popular was its competitive nature, which, like  Pong ( bonus 
chapter , “ Pong  (1972): Avoid Missing Game to Start Industry”) 
before it, made it uniquely suited to the arcade. Though it was 
possible to play  Street Fighter II  and other ﬁ ghting games against 
the computer, the real challenge was facing off against a skilled 
human opponent. The arcade owners of the early 1990s must 
have loved these ﬁ ghting games, which ﬁ lled their arcades with 
quarter- popping teens who otherwise would have stayed home 
to play videogames on their consoles and computers. Indeed, the 
only real competition that ﬁ ghting games had at the arcades were 
driving simulations, which beneﬁ ted from specially built enclo-
sures and cabinets that would have been prohibitively expen-
sive to have at home (see  Chapter 14 ). Other arcade games didn’t 
enjoy this advantage, and their graphical superiority gradually 
eroded as console technology improved. However, unless one 
had like-minded friends to play with at home, the arcades were 
still the best place to test one’s mettle against other  Street Fighter 
II  fans. This fact helped keep ﬁ ghting games ﬂ ourishing in the 
arcades long after shoot ’em ups and platformers had faded from 
that venue to the family television. 
 Street Fighter II  was certainly not the ﬁ rst ﬁ ghting game, and 
we’ll spend some time in this chapter describing its most inﬂ u-
ential predecessors. However, it did offer some key innovations 
that came to deﬁ ne the genre, which we’ll discuss in turn. There is 
some contention about what was actually the ﬁ rst true competitive 
ﬁ ghting game. One very early contender is Vectorbeam’s  Warrior , 

 
Chapter 17 STREET FIGHTER II (1991): WOULD YOU LIKE THE COMBO?     241
a 1979 arcade game that showed an overhead view of two dueling 
knights with swords. It featured vector graphics, and the two play-
ers could win either by whacking their opponent with their swords 
or forcing them into a pit (solo play wasn’t possible). However, 
the machine’s hardware was unreliable, and poor collision detec-
tion and sluggish controls—two of the most critical aspects for a 
ﬁ ghting game—certainly didn’t help endear it to gamers. It faded 
quickly from the scene.
Marc Goodman’s The Bilestoad 
(1982) for the Apple II was a 
superb expansion of concepts from 
Warrior. Using a sophisticated 
control scheme, players battle 
it out on a small island with 
limb-severing axes and protective 
shields.
Vectorbeam’s Warrior, 
shown with simulated 
color backdrop.

242     Chapter 17 STREET FIGHTER II (1991): WOULD YOU LIKE THE COMBO?
In 1984, John G. Avildsen’s  The Karate Kid  debuted in theaters. 
This ﬁ lm smashed into theaters like a ﬂ ying sidekick, raking in 
over $90 million and inspiring untold legions of boys to seek mar-
tial arts training at one of the new dojos popping up all over the 
country. Everyone seemed to be saying “wax on, wax off” in their 
best Mr. Miyagi accent. Needless to say, the time was ripe for a 
good karate game that would let players reprise Ralph Macchio’s 
role as Daniel LaRusso.
 Technos Japan Corporation’s  Karate Champ , released in 1984 by 
Data East, certainly gave them the chance. The original version was 
for a single player who fought against computer- controlled oppo-
nents. The interface relied on a pair of joysticks for control; the 
left was primarily for movement and the right for attacks.  Karate 
Champ  also offered the familiar side-by-side perspective that 
would become standard in almost every subsequent  ﬁ ghting game. 
Technos is also responsible for  Double Dragon , a side-scrolling 
Screenshot from Data East’s 
Karate Champ.

 
Chapter 17 STREET FIGHTER II (1991): WOULD YOU LIKE THE COMBO?     243
“beat ’em up” that we’ll discuss later. In addition to the now-
standard sparring mode,  Karate Champ  also offered a series of 
minigames to further test one’s skill at the controllers. 
 Data East revised the game and rereleased it as  Karate Champ 
Player vs. Player later in 1984, with home ports for a variety of 
systems following shortly thereafter. The arcade version featured 
two pairs of joysticks, and, as the title makes clear, offered com-
petitive gameplay. Naturally, the ports had to make concessions 
for simpler control schemes, such as requiring players to hold 
down a controller button while moving the joystick (or operating 
International Karate (top) and The 
Way of the Exploding Fist (bottom) 
were clearly based on the earlier 
Karate Champ, but courts ruled 
that they were different in the 
ways that mattered—such as 
background graphics and scoring 
systems. Both shots shown here 
are from the Commodore 64.

244     Chapter 17 STREET FIGHTER II (1991): WOULD YOU LIKE THE COMBO?
the d-pad) in a certain direction to execute a move. For instance, 
the rather inadequate Nintendo Entertainment System (NES) 
port required players to move right on the d-pad and simulta-
neously press the A and B buttons to leap right. All versions but 
the NES have the players ﬁ ghting over a woman, who seems to 
prefer a boyfriend who can pulverize his rival. The NES version 
removed this aspect of the game, though it’s unclear whether 
this was a move to make the game less sexist or simply to get the 
coding done faster. The sloppiness of the collision detection and 
control schemes suggest the latter. 
 A British company named System 3 developed and released a 
computer game in 1986 called  International Karate.  The game was 
quite similar to  Karate Champ , but was available on far more plat-
forms, including British computers like the ZX Spectrum. The game 
was published in the United States by Epyx. Data East sued System 
3, accusing them of a complex set of copyright and trademark vio-
lations. The case was eventually decided against Data East, though 
the reasoning behind the judge’s decision was somewhat compli-
cated. Essentially, he believed that the many elements the games 
had in common were essential to the sport of karate and could not 
be copyrighted. On the other hand, the elements of  Karate Champ 
and  International Karate  that were “creative contributions,” such 
as scoring and background scenes, were quite different and did 
Konami’s Yie Ar Kung-Fu (1985) 
was a very popular single-player-
versus-the-computer arcade 
ﬁ ghting game. Though it lacks the 
depth of most other one-on-one 
ﬁ ghting games, Yie Ar Kung-Fu 
was heralded for its fast action 
and colorful cast of opponents.

 
Chapter 17 STREET FIGHTER II (1991): WOULD YOU LIKE THE COMBO?     245
not violate copyright. Data East seemed to have learned from the 
 experience, and tried something similar in 1993 with  Fighter’s 
History , which Capcom felt was similar enough to its  Street Fighter 
II  to warrant another trial. Again, the courts ruled in favor of the 
clone-maker, and Data East emerged victorious in the struggle.2 
 There were several other notable ﬁ ghting games made in 
the  Karate Champ  style, such as Beam Software’s  Way of the 
Exploding Fist  (1985), a popular Australian game that made its 
way to Britain and the United States for the Commodore 64 and 
most British computers of the time. However, arguably the best 
of the lot is Jordan Mechner’s  Karateka , a methodically paced 
1984 side-scrolling ﬁ ghting game for the Apple II published by 
Broderbund and ported to most other platforms of the era. 
 Karateka , like Mechner’s later hit  Prince of Persia  (1989), was 
known for its realistic graphics and convincing animation of the 
human body. Unlike most ﬁ ghting games,  Karateka featured a 
comprehensive and cinematic storyline—the player must face 
a series of increasingly difﬁ cult ﬁ ghts to rescue princess Mariko 
from the evil Akuma. Interestingly enough, in most versions, the 
box art portrayed the player’s character and Princess Mariko as 
blond Europeans; only Akuma looks Asian. 
 Another early approach to the ﬁ ghting genre is represented 
by Technos’s side-scrolling  Double Dragon  (1987), often called 
the deﬁ nitive “beat ’em up.”  Double Dragon  and its imitators dif-
fer from competitive ﬁ ghting games in several key ways. Most 
 2      These legal battles are discussed at length in Steven L. Kent’s The Ultimate History 
of  Video Games (Three Rivers Press, 2001).  
Screenshot from Karateka 
(the Apple II version).

246     Chapter 17 STREET FIGHTER II (1991): WOULD YOU LIKE THE COMBO?
 signiﬁ cantly, instead of all the action taking place on a single screen, 
the screen scrolls horizontally as the player (or players) progress 
through the game, battling increasingly tougher or more numer-
ous enemies. Second, the controls are greatly simpliﬁ ed, with 
much fewer moves—a fact compensated for with the ability to pick 
up and use a variety of weapons (baseball bats, whips, and so on). 
Third,  players usually cooperate with each other to ﬁ ght computer-
controlled thugs rather than duel one-on-one. Beat ’em ups like 
 Double  Dragon  were popular in the arcades, but were also a hit on 
home platforms. 
 Double Dragon  saw several sequels and even a typically medio-
cre ﬁ lm treatment in 1994. It also inspired a slew of quality clones, 
including Capcom’s  Final Fight  and Sega’s  Golden Axe , both in 
1989. There have also been several successful beat ’em ups based 
on comic book and cartoon characters, such as Konami’s  Teenage 
Mutant Ninja Turtles: The Arcade Game , yet another bestseller 
of 1989, and Konami’s  X-Men  (1992), a quarter-gobbler that 
offered simultaneous gameplay for up to six players. The popular 
TV show  The Simpsons  also served as the basis for a classic beat 
’em up, with Konami’s unlikely  The Simpsons: The Arcade Game 
in 1991. 
Screenshot from 
Double Dragon.

 
Chapter 17 STREET FIGHTER II (1991): WOULD YOU LIKE THE COMBO?     247
 There was a cavalcade of computer, arcade, and console games 
based more or less on  Karate Champ  released in the mid to late 
1980s, but most of these were quickly forgotten. One such game 
that might have ended up in the dustbin of history was Capcom’s 
 Street Fighter  (1987). Though it offered better audiovisuals than 
 Karate Champ , the controls were inaccurate and often frustrat-
ing, and players only had two virtually identical playable charac-
ters to choose from (Ryu and Ken). The original controls were a 
joystick and two pneumatic pads. The idea was that the charac-
ters in the game would execute a strong or weak move depending 
on how hard players smacked these pads; needless to say, these 
machines were quickly ruined by abusive players. Later versions 
replaced these pads with the six-button setup that afterwards 
became a staple of the genre. It also featured three secret tech-
niques (special moves) that players had to learn on their own. 
The game was eventually ported to many home platforms of the 
day, though sometimes with modiﬁ cations, like the release for the 
NEC TurboGrafx-CD as  Fighting Street . 
 Capcom more than redeemed itself four years later with  Street 
Fighter II: The World Warrior.  The sequel represented a vast 
improvement over its prequel. Besides the expected improve-
ment in audiovisuals, Capcom made some innovative changes 
to the gameplay that revolutionized the genre: eight unique 
playable characters, each with an extensive set of attacks, some 
of which could be combined into multihit combinations, or 
Screenshot from Street Fighter. 
This unremarkable ﬁ ghting game 
was the unlikely precursor to one 
of the most famous videogames 
of all time.

248     Chapter 17 STREET FIGHTER II (1991): WOULD YOU LIKE THE COMBO?
“combos.” It also offered four AI-only “boss” characters and 
 borrowed the competitive “loser pays” game system from the 
previous game; the winner of player versus player match could 
play another bout for free, but the loser had to ante up another 
quarter. This design gave gamers yet another incentive to mas-
ter the combos! 
 The huge number of moves made  Street Fighter II  the most 
sophisticated game of its kind. Players enjoyed trying out the dif-
ferent characters and devising strategies to deal with every possi-
ble situation. Although of course there had been strategy involved 
in earlier ﬁ ghting games,  Street Fighter II  was substantially more 
complex. Players had to work hard to learn all the moves and 
then the right circumstances to execute them. Furthermore, the 
super-tight controls and detailed graphics made the game fun to 
play and impressive to watch. Players could either compete head-
to-head or take on the game solo, in which case they’d ﬁ ght all the 
other characters and the four bosses. Later versions made these 
bosses playable characters as well. 
 Although arcades had always been veritable arenas of competi-
tion,  Street Fighter II  took things to a new level. Dedicated players 
discussed moves and strategies with their friends, read magazines 
and guides, and spent countless hours practicing and tweaking 
their performance. Naturally, novice players facing a seasoned 
veteran often found themselves hopelessly outmatched, unable 
to last more than a few seconds or get off a single attack. Although 
some such players might accuse the other of cheating or playing 
Screenshot from 
Street Fighter II.

 
Chapter 17 STREET FIGHTER II (1991): WOULD YOU LIKE THE COMBO?     249
“cheap,” for the most part even the nastiest attacks and combos 
had their appropriate countermove. 
 Street Fighter II: The World Warrior  was a staggering success for 
Capcom and the arcade industry as a whole. Capcom released 
multiple variations over the years, adding or revising content and 
tweaking or speeding up the gameplay. The game was also ported 
to most computer and console platforms. A Super Nintendo ver-
sion appeared in 1992, but the NEC TurboGrafx-16 and Sega 
Genesis platforms didn’t see the game until 1993 with the arrival 
of  Street Fighter II: Champion Edition . Late 1993 saw the arcade 
release of  Super Street Fighter II , which upgraded the audiovisu-
als and added new characters but slowed the gameplay down. In 
1994,  Super Street Fighter II Turbo  added “super combos” and let 
players adjust the game’s speed.  Street Fighter II aﬁ cionados end-
lessly debated the merits and limitations of each port, sequel, 
and remake. Fans would have to wait until 1995, however, for the 
ﬁ rst true sequel with all new content— Street Fighter Alpha , which 
was set chronologically before  Street Fighter II  and had a younger 
cast of ﬁ ghters. This was followed in 1997 by  Street Fighter III: New 
Generation , which revamped the gameplay and got rid of all the 
original characters except Ryu and Ken.  
 The enormous success of  Street Fighter II  spurred a huge num-
ber of clones and spin-offs. SNK added several key games to the 
genre, including  Fatal Fury: King of Fighters (1991),  Art of Fighting 
(1992), and  Samurai Shodown  (1993). A comprehensive list (much 
less description) of each such game would strain the energies of 
Screenshot for Super Street 
Fighter II Turbo.

250     Chapter 17 STREET FIGHTER II (1991): WOULD YOU LIKE THE COMBO?
the authors and the patience of even the most devoted reader. 
Through it all, however,  Street Fighter II remained the standard by 
which all others were measured. 
 Perhaps the most notorious of all is Midway’s  Mortal Kombat , 
a 1992 arcade game that aroused almost instant controversy for 
its cinematic realism and over-the-top violence.3 It looked more 
realistic than  Street Fighter II , because it was made with live 
actors who had been ﬁ lmed over a bluescreen and digitized—a 
technique utilized in Atari Games’s otherwise insigniﬁ cant 
 Pit-Fighter , released two years earlier.4 Word quickly spread of the 
game’s “fatality” system, which allowed victorious players to per-
form some particularly gruesome ﬁ nishing moves on the fallen 
competitor. Perhaps the worst offender was a “spine rip” fatality 
performed by the character Sub-Zero. As we might expect, the 
publicity made the game even more popular. 
 The excessive violence made for plenty of drama when it came 
time to port  Mortal Kombat  to consoles. Nintendo had long had 
a decidedly family-friendly policy when it came to its games, and 
naturally  Mortal Kombat  would need a serious scrubbing before 
it satisﬁ ed their censors. For the 1993 Super Nintendo port, the 
fatalities were toned down or taken out completely, and the blood 
 3      Though beyond the scope of this book, politicians such as U.S. Senator Joseph 
Lieberman conducted hearings during the 1990s regarding violent videogames, 
which––to his thinking––included titles like Mortal Kombat. It’s partially from this 
sometimes unfounded political and social hysteria that today’s Entertainment 
Software Ratings Board (ESRB) ratings and advertising guidelines came about. 
 4      An even earlier example of digitized graphics is Gottlieb’s Exterminator (1989), an 
otherwise forgettable shooter game that used 100% digitized graphics. 
Screenshot from 
Mortal Kombat.

 
Chapter 17 STREET FIGHTER II (1991): WOULD YOU LIKE THE COMBO?     251
was recolored gray and referred to as “sweat.” Meanwhile, Sega, 
who had long distinguished itself from Nintendo by projecting 
an edgier image, also had their Genesis version altered to make 
it less offensive to parents, but by entering a special code, gamers 
could bring back the violence. Needless to say, even though the 
Super Nintendo version featured better graphics and sound, once 
word got out about which version kept more of the arcade expe-
rience intact, the version for Sega’s Genesis won the battle for 
most sales. No doubt due in no small part to this sales disparity, 
Nintendo would lower their censorship standards for the game’s 
many popular sequels. 
 Due to their immense cultural impact, both  Street Fighter II and 
 Mortal Kombat  received live-action silver screen treatments. The 
ﬁ rst was Steven E. de Souza’s dreadful  Street Fighter , a 1994 Jean-
Claude Van Damme action vehicle. Richard Harrington of the 
 Washington Post  derided the movie, quipping that “fortunately, 
we’re as unlikely to see a ‘Street Fighter’ sequel as we are to see 
one to the latest video/ﬁ lm ﬁ asco, ‘Super Mario Bros.’.”5 Paul W. 
S. Anderson’s ﬁ lm  Mortal Kombat , which debuted in 1995, fared 
much better both critically and commercially, with a solid story 
and excellent martial arts action, even spawning a few sequels. 
 As the 1990s continued, developers kept searching for ways to 
keep the ﬁ ghting genre fresh. Sega had a surprise hit in 1993 with 
its arcade game,  Virtua Fighter , a pioneering attempt to bring 
the third dimension to ﬁ ghting games. Critics raved about its 
realistic ﬁ ghting system and impressive 3D graphics. The series 
hit its seventh installment with  Virtua Fighter 5 , a 2006 arcade 
game released the following year for the Sony PlayStation 3 and 
Microsoft Xbox 360, with the latter allowing for online play. The 
 Virtua Fighter  series inspired several other 3D ﬁ ghting games, 
including Namco’s  Tekken  (1994) and Team Ninja’s  Dead or Alive 
(1996). Both games led to best-selling and long-running series. 
The  Dead or Alive  series gained some measure of fame for its 
scantily clad female characters, something of a staple in ﬁ ght-
ing games, culminating in 2003 in  Dead or Alive Xtreme Beach 
Volleyball  for the Microsoft Xbox—a volleyball game that starred 
the series’ female cast in next to nothing. 
 There are, of course, plenty of other interesting and inno-
vative one-on-one ﬁ ghting games we could mention, such as 
Squaresoft’s  Bushido Blade  (1997; Sony PlayStation), a realistic 
weapons-based game featuring one-hit kills, Arc System Works’ 
 Guilty Gear  (1998), featuring beautiful anime-style graphics, and 
Namco’s  Soulcalibur  (1998), a weapons-based ﬁ ghter with greater 
freedom of movement—all of which can boast of sequels and 
loyal fanbases. 
 5 See  http://tinyurl.com/3lm9r3. 

252     Chapter 17 STREET FIGHTER II (1991): WOULD YOU LIKE THE COMBO?
 An interesting trend in ﬁ ghting games has been mixing 
together characters from different titles or even different genres, 
like 2008’s  Soulcalibur IV  for the Microsoft Xbox 360 and Sony 
PlayStation 3 including Yoda and Darth Vader, respectively, from 
 Star Wars . Often it seems like the cast of ﬁ ghters is as important 
as the gameplay. We certainly see this in games like Sega’s  Fighters 
Megamix , a 1997 game that includes characters from the compa-
ny’s earlier  Virtua Fighter 2 and  Fighting Vipers titles. There are 
also several unlockable characters such as Bark the Polar Bear 
and Bean the Dynamite, obscure characters from Sega’s  Sonic 
the Fighters (1996). Capcom and SNK also teamed up to cre-
ate several fan-pleasing mashups. Other examples of crossover 
games are Capcom’s  X-Men vs. Street Fighter  (1996) and  Marvel 
vs. Capcom  (1998), which pits warriors from  Street Fighter II 
and other Capcom games against several of Marvel’s most 
famous heroes, including Spiderman and Wolverine. Although 
some players found the idea of Spiderman going head to head 
with Megaman somewhat unsettling, others were delighted by 
the variety. These games were followed up with several sequels 
and spin-offs. 
 Perhaps the most famous modern game of this type is  Super 
Smash Bros. , an approachable multiplayer Nintendo 64 game 
developed by HAL Laboratory and released in 1999. It features 
characters from many of Nintendo’s franchises:  Donkey Kong , 
 Super Mario Bros. ,  The Legend of Zelda , and  Metroid are repre-
sented, to name just a few. This critically acclaimed hybrid of 
Screenshot from Virtua 
Fighter Remix (1995) on the 
Sega Saturn. Virtua Fighter 
Remix was a game Sega sent 
for free to all registered Saturn 
owners as a type of mea culpa 
for the lackluster ﬁ rst release on 
the platform.

 
Chapter 17 STREET FIGHTER II (1991): WOULD YOU LIKE THE COMBO?     253
ﬁ ghting and platforming games sold nearly ﬁ ve million copies and 
spawned two sequels:  Super Smash Bros. Melee (2001; Nintendo 
GameCube) and  Super Smash Bros. Brawl (2008; Nintendo Wii). 
This latter title is the ﬁ rst in the series to introduce third-party 
 creations: Solid Snake from Konami’s  Metal Gear  series and Sega’s 
famous Sonic the Hedgehog. 
 Despite the occasional smash hit like  Super Smash Bros. , ﬁ ght-
ing games have fallen considerably from the position they enjoyed 
at their peak in the 1990s. Their decline was likely brought on by 
the sheer glut of these games, but also by the popularity of ﬁ rst- 
and third-person shooters in the 2000s. 
First, whereas before gamers had to visit arcades to ﬁ nd worth-
while competition, the newer consoles offered easy networked 
and online gameplay. Thus, the type of hardcore gamer who 
was drawn to  Street Fighter II  in the 1990s is probably playing a 
deathmatch in some version of  Halo or  Gears of War  today, which 
accommodates both competitive and cooperative gameplay 
styles. Even though modern ﬁ ghting games like  Virtua Fighter 5 
and  Tekken 6  offer online multiplayer gameplay, these often dis-
tant matches don’t seem to stimulate quite the same competitive 
intensity of the old arcade games, where players literally stood 
only a few feet apart. Of course  several classic ﬁ ghting games, 
such as  Street Fighter II , and new creations of both the one-on-
one and side-scrolling variety, do see plenty of competitive online 
matches on the Microsoft Xbox 360’s and Sony PlayStation 3’s 
respective networks. Capcom’s recent  Street Fighter IV  (2008), a 
Super Smash Bros. is a popular 
Nintendo 64 game that included 
characters and themes from 
Nintendo’s many successful 
franchises. Shown here is a battle 
between Mario and Link.

254     Chapter 17 STREET FIGHTER II (1991): WOULD YOU LIKE THE COMBO?
high-deﬁ nition reimagining of  Street Fighter II , certainly proves 
the commercial viability of such a setup when paired with the 
right property. 
 Second, the learning curve required to play ﬁ ghting games 
had risen to the point where only seasoned veterans could hope 
to master their incredible sophistication. If  Street Fighter II had 
alienated some novices,  Street Fighter III —with its myriad spe-
cial moves and parries—was downright forbidding. Another 
factor, of course, is that consoles had caught up to the arcades 
in terms of audiovisuals; no longer did console ports seem like 
pale imitations of the real thing. Serious gamers left arcades, 
never to return. 
 What is the legacy of  Street Fighter II  ? Although it’s easy to get 
lost in the many revisions, sequels, clones, and spin-offs, the 
game’s role in gaming history may turn out to be more social than 
anything else. The many gamers who became obsessed with this 
game, tirelessly discussing strategies and reﬁ ning techniques, 
were the seeds of what we’d now call the “hardcore gamer” 
community. 
 Hit games of the 1980s like  Space Invaders  and  Pac-Man were 
certainly inﬂ uential, but seemed more suited to individuals than 
communities of gamers. Competition was only indirect and 
based on the rather abstract high score table.  Street Fighter II was, 
if nothing else, very clear about winning and losing. As players 
competed, they talked, either to taunt their opponent or compare 
notes. Serious players analyzed the game’s ins and outs with the 
same dedication a sports nut might lavish on a favorite team. In 
short, fans of  Street Fighter II  didn’t talk to each other the same 
way the fans of older games did. How much, really, can you say 
about playing  Pac-Man ? On the other hand, any competent  Street 
Fighter II  player can easily talk your ear off about the comparative 
merits of Ryu versus Guile—and probably still remembers how to 
pull off at least a few favorite combos.  Street Fighter II deﬁ ed the 
old paradigm of good game development: it was  not  easy to learn 
how to play well. Capcom took a serious risk by introducing such 
a complex and sophisticated game, but the gamers of 1991 and 
beyond welcomed the challenge.

255
   SUPER MARIO 64/ TOMB RAIDER 
(1996): THE THIRD DIMENSION 
A scene from Atari’s 1983 arcade 
game, I, Robot, which was the 
ﬁ rst commercial videogame 
with ﬂ at, shaded 3D polygonal 
graphics. Though ostensibly a 
shooter, I, Robot was a hybrid that 
featured maze and platforming 
(jumping) elements.
18
 So far in our journey through the greatest and most inﬂ uential 
games of all time—a list compiled with no small apprehension by 
your humble and well-meaning authors—we have yet to cheat. 
But, alas, we at last come to a tie that neither of us could break: 
was it  Super Mario 64 or  Tomb Raider  that ﬁ nally established 3D 
as the new standard for videogames? Which of these two best-
selling, trend-setting games can really be said to have rendered 
2D  obsolete? Unable to decide between Mario’s mustache or Lara 
Croft’s . . . pistols, we ﬁ nally decided not to decide. Both of these 
critically acclaimed games established paradigms that are still 
guiding the industry today. 

256     Chapter 18 SUPER MARIO 64/TOMB RAIDER (1996): THE THIRD DIMENSION
 Clearly,  Super Mario 64 and  Tomb Raider  are two very different 
games, but still have much in common. They both, for instance, 
featured or came to feature two of the industry’s most recognizable 
and beloved characters. Both games were widely praised and sold 
millions of copies, establishing or extending massive franchises 
that extended to Hollywood. Perhaps most importantly, however, 
is that these games offered some of the best 3D gameplay ever 
seen to that point. They demonstrated, conclusively, that 3D was 
the future of videogames. 
 Adding a new dimension to a game like  Super Mario Bros. 
(Chapter 19, “ Super Mario Bros.  (1985): How High Can Jumpman 
Get?”) wasn’t just a matter of graphics; the real challenge was the 
interface. How could players accustomed to the 2D games learn to 
move a character in three dimensions, particularly in situations that 
required very precise control? In short, could the run-and-jump 
gameplay that practically deﬁ ned the NES and Super Nintendo eras 
survive the transition to 3D? What sort of interface and controller 
setup would best accommodate these new games? Would novice 
and child gamers be able to cope with the added complexity? 
 Perhaps the biggest problem was “camera control,” or perspec-
tive. This hadn’t been an issue with 2D platformers, as the screen 
could simply scroll left and right (or occasionally up and down) 
as the character moved along the X (horizontal) and Y (vertical) 
axes. The third dimension meant that now characters could move 
along the Z axis, toward and away from the camera. This feature 
made the gameworlds feel much more realistic and immersive, 
Super Mario 64 consists of a 
number of highly diverse worlds, 
which Mario enters by leaping 
into paintings like these. Each 
world has its own theme and 
special challenges, making for 
highly varied gameplay.

 
Chapter 18 SUPER MARIO 64/TOMB RAIDER (1996): THE THIRD DIMENSION     257
but it came at a cost. The groundbreaking 3D game  Alone in the 
Dark  (see  Chapter 1 , “ Alone in the Dark (1992): The Polygons of 
Fear”), for instance, was slow and sometimes difﬁ cult to navigate. 
The game was set up as a series of prerendered rooms or scenes, 
each with a “ﬁ xed camera.” Although the arrangement worked 
well for a horror-themed game like  Alone in the Dark,  it cer-
tainly wouldn’t have accommodated a fast-paced, cheerful run-
and-jump game like  Super Mario Bros ., where fast movement 
and accurate collision detection were critical. Furthermore, gam-
ers now expected the backgrounds as well as the characters to be 
rendered on the ﬂ y, as they were in ﬁ rst-person shooters. 
 A more speciﬁ c consideration is that the third dimension made 
jumps much harder to estimate; players might need to study the 
situation from several angles to properly aim and time a difﬁ cult 
leap. All of this hadn’t been a problem with ﬁ rst-person 3D games 
such as id’s  Doom ( Chapter 5 , “ Doom (1993): The First-Person 
Shooter Takes Control”), where the camera behaved as if it  were 
the character, though more like a disembodied eye. Jumping had 
been limited in these games anyway and was not necessarily seen 
as a key inclusion, as in  Star Wars: Dark Forces (LucasArts, 1995; 
Apple Macintosh, PC, Sony PlayStation). Such sequences called 
for third-person perspective; the player needed to be able to see 
the character and ledge from a distance. However, such a feat 
required a more dynamic camera than those seen in ﬁ rst-per-
son shooters. In short, players would need an easy way to control 
both the character and the camera. As we’ll see, though still work-
ing towards mastery, game developers found clever ways to make 
these cameras “smart,” automatically maintaining a useful per-
spective and requiring fewer adjustments from the player.  
 Richly interactive 3D games like  Super Mario 64  and  Tomb 
Raider  were obviously quite demanding from a technological 
perspective, and by the mid-1990s the Super Nintendo and Sega 
Genesis were clearly not up for the challenge, even with extra 
hardware added inside cartridges like  Star Fox (1993; Nintendo) 
or  Virtua Racing  (1994; Sega) to give them the ability to process 
small numbers of polygons. However, the major console devel-
opers seemed hesitant about placing their bets on 3D graphics 
technology. Were 3D games simply an expensive fad? Would they 
catch on with console gamers as they had with PC gamers? 
 Sega, which seemed to pride itself on beating its rival Nintendo 
to the latest technological standards, hedged its bets in 1994 with 
the Sega Saturn.1 This system had originally been intended as the 
world’s most powerful 2D console with modest 3D  capabilities, 
but the plans changed after Sega learned of Sony’s decision to 
enter the market with its PlayStation. Sony’s device was said to 
 1 Released in early 1995 in the US. 

feature powerful support for 3D games, and Sega certainly didn’t 
want to seem behind the times. The Sega Saturn ended up as a 
hodgepodge of 2D and 3D technology that proved difﬁ cult for 
developers to contend with. The system would end up ﬂ opping 
miserably outside of Japan, and the stigma carried over to Sega’s 
ﬁ nal console, the Dreamcast. 
 The Sony PlayStation, built from the ground up as a 3D 
machine, would be amazingly successful, soon putting Sony in 
the enviable position of the world’s biggest console producer. 
Nintendo, meanwhile, waited a year after the release of the 
PlayStation before launching its Nintendo 64 in 1996. However, 
the surprising decision to rely on cartridges instead of CD-ROM 
technology hindered its ability to compete squarely with Sony’s 
juggernaut; though cartridges offered quick access, cost and stor-
age capacity were serious issues. Nevertheless, the Nintendo 64 
would see several successful and inﬂ uential 3D games besides 
 Super Mario 64 : Nintendo’s  Wave Race 64  (1996), Rare’s  GoldenEye 
007  (1997), and Nintendo’s  The Legend of Zelda: Ocarina of Time 
(1998; see Chapter 21, “ The Legend of Zelda (1986): Rescuing 
Zeldas and Uniting Triforces”). 
 Besides added support for 3D graphics, the newer consoles 
offered controllers with features that made them a better ﬁ t for 
3D games. Perhaps the most important addition was an analog 
stick and extra buttons for adjusting the camera. Controllers with 
just a “d-pad” were limited to four directions: up, down, left, and 
right, and their diagonals, with no intermediate values. The ana-
log stick allowed for nuanced, ﬂ uid movement in all directions 
and greatly improved the control of 3D games like  Super Mario 
64.  We should note that neither the Sony PlayStation nor the Sega 
Saturn originally shipped with such controllers, but both would 
eventually have analog controllers as an option.2 The Nintendo 
64’s controller was the only one equipped with an analog stick 
and buttons designated speciﬁ cally for camera control from the 
beginning. It was designed with  Super Mario 64  in mind, which 
Nintendo knew would be its surest bet for promoting the system. 
 In short, the mid-1990s were the turning point from 2D to 3D, 
and it soon became obvious that the “best system” was the one 
with the best 3D games. The challenge was manifold—the system 
itself would have to be capable of handling the high demands of 
3D gameplay, but a console with even the ﬁ nest hardware would 
sit on the shelf without innovative games to harness its power. 
Fortunately, two such games were just around the corner. 
 2      Few games on the Sega Saturn would support its analog controller, but a large 
number of games for the PlayStation came to support its famous DualShock, 
which eventually shipped as the default controller with all new systems (there 
were revisions before this model that were quickly discontinued). 
258     Chapter 18 SUPER MARIO 64/TOMB RAIDER (1996): THE THIRD DIMENSION

 
Chapter 18 SUPER MARIO 64/TOMB RAIDER (1996): THE THIRD DIMENSION     259
 Perhaps the ﬁ rst major 3D platformer out the gate was  Jumping 
Flash! , a game developed by Exact and Ultra and published by 
Sony Computer Entertainment (SCE) in 1995 exclusively for its 
new PlayStation. This highly innovative game didn’t go unno-
ticed, but was all but forgotten after the arrival of  Super Mario 64 
and  Tomb Raider . 
 Jumping Flash!  is one of only a handful of platform games 
depicted in ﬁ rst-person perspective.3 Players can move the avatar 
(a robotic bunny named Robbit) in three dimensions and con-
trol the camera as they see ﬁ t. The bulk of the gameplay consists 
of Robbit leaping from platform-to-platform in fully rendered 
and quite colorful 3D worlds. As we’ll see in  Tomb Raider , the 
developers of  Jumping Flash!  were able to give the impression of 
extreme heights—no doubt, players with acrophobia found the 
game quite unsettling. 
 As we mentioned earlier, one of the big problems with jump-
ing in ﬁ rst-person games is accurately judging the distance and 
aiming at a suitable landing spot.  Jumping Flash! admirably 
solved this problem by automatically pivoting the camera down 
during jumps and showing Robbit’s feet and shadow as he fell 
toward a landing platform. The game was successful enough to 
warrant a sequel in 1996, but even with its improved graphics, 
could not compete with Nintendo’s  Super Mario 64 , particularly 
The worlds in Super Mario 64 are 
richly detailed and fun to explore, 
though getting a handle on the 
3D control scheme might be a bit 
challenging at ﬁ rst for those more 
familiar with the 2D Mario games.
 3 1997’s Montezuma’s Return from Utopia Technologies for the PC was another. 
The game was a well-received spiritual sequel to the classic Parker Brothers 
 multiscreen platformer from 1984, Montezuma’s Revenge, released for most con-
temporary platforms. 

260     Chapter 18 SUPER MARIO 64/TOMB RAIDER (1996): THE THIRD DIMENSION
as it was difﬁ cult to identify with the mostly unseen character . It’s 
 disheartening to think that  Jumping Flash! ’s innovative interface 
may never return, because it offers extraordinary possibilities 
for ﬁ rst-person games. GameSpy selected both games as part of 
its “25 Most Underrated Games of All Time” list, a well-deserved 
placement if there ever was one.4 
 On September 26, 1996, North Americans got their ﬁ rst taste 
of the game that would come to deﬁ ne the 3D platformer:  Super 
Mario 64.  The game was unsurprisingly a smash hit for both the 
 Mario  franchise and the Nintendo 64, which certainly beneﬁ ted 
from the game’s sensational publicity (understandably, it was 
also set up for play on countless in-store kiosks). The game is 
still widely admired and played today,5 and was named as one of 
GameSpot’s “15 Most Inﬂ uential Games of All Time,” arguing that 
it “set the standards for how 3D space would be navigated within 
video games,” a bold claim, to say the least.6 Contemporary 
reviews raved about the game. Matt Casamassina of IGN called it 
“possibly the greatest videogame achievement ever,” though oth-
ers seemed reluctant to give any cartridge-based game full scores 
now that CD-ROMs had become a standard.7 
 4 See  http://archive.gamespy.com/articles/september03/25underrated/index9
.shtml .  
 5      Nintendo DS (2004) and Nintendo Wii Virtual Console (2006) versions were also 
released to critical acclaim and robust sales. 
 6 See  http://www.gamespot.com/gamespot/features/video/15influential/p15_
01.html .  
 7 See  http://ign64.ign.com/articles/150/150606p1.html. 
Jumping Flash! was a very 
playable ﬁ rst-person platform 
game with several innovations. 
Perhaps the best is allowing 
players to see the character’s 
feet and shadow to help guide 
his landings.

 
Chapter 18 SUPER MARIO 64/TOMB RAIDER (1996): THE THIRD DIMENSION     261
 What made  Super Mario 64  so super? Besides the vivid graph-
ics, memorable music, and meticulous attention to detail that 
deﬁ nes all of Nintendo’s Mario and Zelda games, it’s really the 
interface that stands as the game’s greatest achievement. The 
integration of the analog stick was particularly impressive. 
Depending on how hard players pushed it one direction, Mario 
would either tiptoe, walk, or run. Although the camera would 
sometimes automatically switch to the “recommended view,” 
players were “cinematographers” as well (to quote from the 
manual), utilizing the controller’s four “c” buttons. Mario was fol-
lowed by Lakitu, a camera “crew” that ﬂ ew around on a cloud. 
The player could move the camera closer or further (zoom) and 
around to get a better view of the scene. Players could also see 
what Mario himself was  looking at, a useful technique for spot-
ting Power Stars and powerups. 
 The Power Stars, by the way, are what Mario needed to col-
lect to win the game. The Power Stars, which protected Princess 
Peach’s Mushroom Castle, have been stolen by Mario’s famous 
nemesis, Bowser. It’s up to Mario, of course, to ﬁ nd the stars. This 
meant traveling into a set of magical paintings, which were self-
contained worlds full of puzzles and monsters. 
 These worlds are quite diverse, bringing welcome variety to 
both the aesthetics and challenges of the game. They also give 
Mario a chance to show off his many abilities, such as swimming, 
climbing, ﬂ ying, and even launching himself from cannons. Mario 
also has a bevy of jumps and leaps available, such as wall kicks, 
long jumps, and side and back somersaults—in short, the skills of 
a master acrobat. In addition to his classic squashing technique 
to destroy enemies, Mario can now punch and kick them as well. 
Although all of these moves might seem intimidating, the game 
introduces them gradually, mostly by reading text on signs sprin-
kled throughout the worlds. Although it’s naturally more difﬁ cult 
to control than the classic 2D Mario games, Nintendo streamlined 
the 3D interface to the point where even a child could master it 
with little struggle. Nintendo had brought 3D gaming to the pub-
lic the right way. 
 Nintendo followed up  Super Mario 64 with several sequels 
and spin-offs. The ﬁ rst was  Super Mario Sunshine  in 2002 for 
their GameCube console. Besides the expected graphic enhance-
ments, the game offered a new spin jump and FLUDD, a water 
tank that let Mario spray water or hover in the air. Although  Super 
Mario Sunshine sold well, it didn’t have quite the same critical 
impact as  Super Mario 64 .8 The next game changed that,  Super 
Mario Galaxy , released to a rousing critical reception9 in 2007 for 
 8 See, for example IGN’s review at  http://cube.ign.com/articles/368/368539p1
.html .  
 9 For example, IGN’s review:  http://wii.ign.com/articles/833/833298p1.html . 

262     Chapter 18 SUPER MARIO 64/TOMB RAIDER (1996): THE THIRD DIMENSION
the Nintendo Wii. It features levels that take the form of galaxies 
ﬁ lled with a variety of minor planets and worlds, and gameplay is 
affected by gravity and new powerups. 
 If  Super Mario 64  was cute, family-friendly, and full of bright 
colors and bouncy music,  Tomb Raider  was sexy, dark, and 
hip. What it lacked in polish it made up for in spit—that is, the 
drool flowing from the mouths of so many men who found 
themselves in love with Lara Croft.  Super Mario 64  is to  Tomb 
Raider  what Kool-Aid is to Budweiser.  Tomb Raider seemed 
to cater to every stereotypical male desire: guns, gold, and 
gazongas. 
Screenshot from Sega’s Sonic 
Adventure 2 on the Dreamcast. 
Despite Sega’s best efforts, Sonic 
has not had the same successful 
transition from 2D to 3D like 
Mario or Link has.
Lara Croft, guns drawn, running 
through traps in an early scene 
from the Sega Saturn version of 
Tomb Raider.

 
Chapter 18 SUPER MARIO 64/TOMB RAIDER (1996): THE THIRD DIMENSION     263
 Let’s start, then, with the topic most often raised in any discussion
of  Tomb Raider : Lara Croft’s boobs. When Lara ﬁ rst bounced onto 
the scene in November 1996, critics seemed to expect a strong 
backlash from feminists and female gamers. IGN’s review of the 
game, which awarded the game an “Outstanding” score, ran under 
the byline “IGN Staff,” as if no individual critic wanted to be held 
responsible for praising the game so highly. The opening line of their 
review read, “ Tomb Raider  is bound to stir up lots of trouble with the 
feminists. Lara Croft’s unrealistic proportions can only lead to fur-
ther gender stereotyping and objectiﬁ cation of women.” With these 
 disclaimers out of the way, the staff went on to call it “one of the 
best games of 1996.”10 A similarly “anonymously” authored review 
in  The Economist  began with the question, “WHAT man could resist 
a creature like Lara Croft? This ravishing British heiress divides her 
time between acrobatic workouts in her stately home and danger-
ous expeditions to exotic ruins. She wears shorts everywhere, which 
show off her sprinter’s legs, and a tiny waist draws attention to her 
gravity-defying bust. Then there is the small matter of the twin auto-
matic pistols she straps to her bare thighs.”11 
 Was  Tomb Raider  simply a sexist game that pandered to horny 
boys? Though some might think so, others point out that since 
the game put players in the role of a woman—and a strong, self-
assured one at that—it perhaps did more to dispel sexist ste-
reotypes than reinforce them, despite attempts to market the 
 character in a sexual manner. In an interview with  Forbes  maga-
zine, Eidos’ spokesman Gary Keith argued that “it used to be that 
when we played videogames, it wasn’t cool to be a girl,” and sug-
gested that Lara and her imitators had reversed the situation.12 
Although the game was ostensibly targeted at 18- to 35-year-old 
males, plenty of women enjoyed the game as well. “There was 
something refreshing about looking at the screen and seeing 
myself as a woman,” said Nikki Douglas, a female gamer inter-
viewed by Justine Cassell and Henry Jenkins for their book  From 
Barbie to Mortal Kombat: Gender and Computer Games (MIT 
Press, 1998). Other female gamers and critics were less pleased. 
Even if Lara were a strong female character in a genre domi-
nated by male characters (and weak women), she still presented 
a physical stereotype that ordinary women could not (and 
should not) equal. Espen Aarseth, one of the world’s foremost 
game scholars, found the whole subject irrelevant: “When I play, 
I don’t even see her body, but see through it and past it.”13 
 10 See  http://psx.ign.com/articles/150/150097p1.html . 
 11 Anonymous. 1997. The Economist. 2/22/97, Vol. 342, Iss. 8005, p. 74.  
 12 See Forbes, 1/12/98, Vol. 161, Iss. 1, p. 39. 
 13 See “Genre Trouble: Narrativism and the Art of Simulation” in First Person: New 
Media as Story, Performance, and Game (MIT Press, 2004). 

264     Chapter 18 SUPER MARIO 64/TOMB RAIDER (1996): THE THIRD DIMENSION
 The game may have had some feminists gnashing their teeth, 
but it certainly had millions of gamers mashing their controllers. 
It certainly put its developer Core Design in the spotlight, and 
generated millions in earnings for publisher Eidos Interactive. 
Incidentally, these two companies were both based in the United 
Kingdom. The international success of  Tomb Raider  was a wel-
come boon to the United Kingdom’s gaming industry, which had 
lagged behind that of the United States and Japan. 
 Although the game was better known on the Sony PlayStation 
and PC, it actually debuted on the aforementioned Sega Saturn 
platform.14 This version, though one of the best-sellers on the plat-
form, is understandably overshadowed by the later releases, which 
offered slightly better visuals15 and a larger user base. All versions 
offer third-person perspective and a camera that follows along 
behind Lara (or over her shoulder). Like Mario in  Super Mario 64, 
Lara can perform a wide variety of movements—walking, running, 
jumping, side-stepping, and swimming. She can also grip onto 
ledges and climb up, a feature that makes leaping from platform 
to platform much easier to master. Lara makes frequent use of her 
pistols to kill beasts or human enemies, but most of the gameplay 
is focused on avoiding traps and solving puzzles. Lara can push or 
pull objects, throw switches, and use items that she collects  during 
the adventure. The game is a great deal more violent than  Super 
Mario 64 , with several grisly ways for Lara to meet her end, includ-
ing being impaled by spikes. 
Lara Croft in a temporary state of 
repose in the Sega Saturn version 
of Tomb Raider.
 14 Apple Macintosh, Pocket PC, and Nokia N-Gage versions would be released later. 
 15      The PC release came in versions supporting software-only and hardware-
 accelerated 3D rendering, as the latter was not a standard feature at the time. 
Naturally, those with supported 3D cards had the best-looking versions.    

 
Chapter 18 SUPER MARIO 64/TOMB RAIDER (1996): THE THIRD DIMENSION     265
 Perhaps the most important feature from a gameplay perspective 
is its superb control and response. There is no free-roaming cam-
era, but players can force the camera immediately behind Lara and 
then use the direction buttons to look around (essentially seeing 
what she’s seeing). This feature came in handy whenever the built-
in camera was stuck at an awkward angle. 
 As the title implies,  Tomb Raider  is set in an ancient ruins, 
a theme comparable to that of the  Indiana Jones movies. Like 
Indy, Lara is a brash adventurer, more than happy to risk her life 
in pursuit of some archaeological treasure or another. Indeed, 
the game’s fast-paced plot reads very much like an  Indiana 
Jones  script, with plenty of intrigue, double-crosses, history, 
and travel to exotic locales (Peru, Greece, Egypt, and ultimately 
Atlantis). 
 Another feature worth mentioning is the in-game tuto-
rial  system. Rather than thrust players directly into the adven-
ture,  Tomb Raider  let players experiment ﬁ rst in a special level 
that takes place in Lara’s home. Players could use Lara’s home 
to familiarize themselves with the controls before embarking on 
the adventure. Later  Tomb Raider  games would elaborate on this 
concept, eventually offering lengthy in-game tutorials that not 
only taught players the controls, but ﬁ lled them in on the back-
story along the way. Perhaps the best example of this is seen in 
 Tomb Raider: The Last Revelation  (1999; Sega Dreamcast, Sony 
PlayStation, and others), the fourth game in the series. This game 
begins with Lara as a rather spunky teenager. Lara accompanies 
her mentor Werner Von Croy to a set of ancient ruins, where the 
experienced adventurer guides Lara through a series of traps and 
Screenshot from the tutorial 
“gym” mode that takes place in 
Lara’s home in the Sega Saturn 
version of Tomb Raider.

266     Chapter 18 SUPER MARIO 64/TOMB RAIDER (1996): THE THIRD DIMENSION
tests of agility. Along the way, Von Croy offers instructions and tips, 
but Lara needn’t follow his directions to the letter. Indeed, deviat-
ing a bit can actually earn her some bonus points as well as the 
chance to try more difﬁ cult (and perilous) training sequences. 
 Tomb Raider  may well have made more impact on the industry 
than  Super Mario 64,  if for no other reason than it was so much 
more widely available. It was a best-selling and deﬁ nitive title for 
both the Sony PlayStation and the PC, and Lara’s celebrity  status 
seemed to ensure a grand future for the franchise. However, the 
series seemed to generally decline with each sequel or spin-
off, which either lacked the originality or polish of the original. 
The worst offender was the sixth game,  Tomb Raider: The Angel 
of Darkness (2003; Apple Macintosh, PC, Sony PlayStation 2), 
which critics lambasted for its glitchy gameplay and cumber-
some control scheme. The seventh game,  Tomb Raider: Legend 
(2006; Microsoft Xbox 360, PC, Sony PlayStation 2, and others) 
was developed by Crystal Dynamics, a California team. This 
game seems to have put the franchise back on track. The com-
pany also worked on  Tomb Raider: Anniversary  (2007; Apple 
Macintosh, Nintendo Wii, Sony PlayStation Portable, and others) , 
an enhanced remake of the original.  Tomb Raider: Underworld 
(2008; Microsoft Xbox 360, Nintendo Wii, Sony PlayStation 3, and 
others)   offers the typical audiovisual improvements, but its most 
interesting feature is a gameworld that reacts dynamically to 
Lara’s actions in a persistent manner—mud will stick to Lara until 
washed away by rain, enemies will remain where they were killed, 
and any environmental destruction is permanent. 
 The inﬂ uence of  Super Mario 64 and  Tomb Raider on both 
 console and PC gaming has been immense. Indeed, it’s hard 
to know where to start. Seemingly any 3D action-adventure 
game—particularly any with a third-person perspective—owes a 
debt to these trailblazers. It’s also tempting to say that any later 
game featuring a sexy female avatar was probably inspired by 
Lara Croft. Would we have Joanna Dark of  Perfect Dark (Rare, 
2000; Nintendo 64), Cate Archer of  The Operative: No One Lives 
Forever  (Eidos, 2000; Apple Macintosh, PC, Sony PlayStation 2), 
Rayne of  BloodRayne  (Majesco, 2002; Microsoft Xbox, Nintendo 
GameCube, and others), or Nariko of  Heavenly Sword (Sony, 2007; 
PlayStation 3) without Lara Croft? There’s no doubt that the num-
ber of games with female main characters swelled after  Tomb 
Raider . 
 Perhaps the three games that seem to have followed most 
closely in Nintendo’s wake are Sega’s  Nights into Dreams . . . 
(1996; Sega Saturn), Naughty Dog’s  Crash Bandicoot (1996; Sony 
PlayStation), and Rare’s  Banjo-Kazooie  (1998; Nintendo 64). 
 Nights into Dreams . . .  is an intriguing game from Sonic Team 
packaged with an analog controller that unfortunately arrived 

 
Chapter 18 SUPER MARIO 64/TOMB RAIDER (1996): THE THIRD DIMENSION     267
too late to save the Sega Saturn. It is essentially a “rail” 3D plat-
former, meaning that while the graphics are rendered in 3D, the 
movement of the player’s character is constrained to preestab-
lished paths. Nevertheless, it was an impressive achievement, and 
remains one of the ﬁ nest games ever made for the system.  Crash 
Bandicoot  is one of the best-selling games for the PlayStation, and 
its eccentric central character became a mascot of sorts for the 
platform, though many of the sequels and offshoots would come 
to appear on other platforms. As with  Nights into Dreams . . .  , 
the character’s movement is a linear, “railed” game with intense 
jumping action. Perhaps  Crash Bandicoot ’s greatest claim to fame 
is its polish and ability to capture a 2D side-scrolling platformer 
feel in 3D. Rare’s  Banjo-Kazooie  is a closer derivative of  Super 
Two screenshots from Ubisoft’s 
Tomb Raider: Underworld, which 
again upped the ante on the 
popular series.

268     Chapter 18 SUPER MARIO 64/TOMB RAIDER (1996): THE THIRD DIMENSION
Mario 64,  with nonlinear 3D worlds. However,  Banjo-Kazooie 
expanded on the concept. The characters can transform into dif-
ferent creatures, for instance, and learn new moves as the game 
progresses. All three of these games are of course important and 
inﬂ uential in their own right. 
Screenshot from Sega’s cult 
favorite, Nights into Dreams . . . 
for the Sega Saturn.
Screenshot from Crash Bandicoot 
for the Sony PlayStation, a 
character who appears to have 
been inspired in many ways 
by Sonic—complete with comical 
attitude.

 
Chapter 18 SUPER MARIO 64/TOMB RAIDER (1996): THE THIRD DIMENSION     269
 Taken together,  Super Mario 64  and  Tomb Raider  represent a 
paradigm shift from 2D to 3D. They demonstrated not only that 
such games were technologically feasible, but that they could be 
intuitive and easy even for novices. After these games, any 2D 
game—even “railed” 3D games such as  Nights into Dreams . . . and 
 Crash Bandicoot— would suffer the unﬂ attering comparison to 
 Super Mario 64  or  Tomb Raider.  Naturally, the success of 3D plat-
form and action games seems all but certain to continue well into 
the next decade.

This page intentionally left blank

271
 SUPER MARIO 
BROS.  (1985): HOW HIGH 
CAN JUMPMAN GET?  
Screenshot from the famous 
World 1-1 in Super Mario Bros.
19
 Mario.  This mustachioed Italian plumber from  Super Mario 
Bros. , a 1985 run-and-jump platform game for the Nintendo 
Entertainment System (NES), is one of the most recognizable 
videogame characters of all time. Indeed, his fame is rivaled 
only by  Pac-Man.  His humble, even comical image is the face of 
Nintendo and the unlikely hero of generations of American and 
Japanese videogamers. If any videogame character is truly worthy 
of the epithet “super,” it’s Mario. 

272     Chapter 19 SUPER MARIO BROS. (1985): HOW HIGH CAN JUMPMAN GET?
 Mario made his debut in the 1981 arcade game  Donkey Kong , 
in which he was known only as Jumpman. Nintendo of Japan had 
begun exporting coin-operated videogames to the United States 
approximately one year earlier, in December 1980. Their venture 
got off to a rocky start with ﬂ ops like  Radar Scope , which interested 
Americans about as much as shrimp-ﬂ avored breakfast cereal. To 
prevent the company from sinking, Nintendo’s president, Hiroshi 
Yamauchi, decided to repurpose the  Radar Scope  machines, 
selecting game designer Shigeru Miyamoto1 for the task. After the 
company failed to obtain the license to develop a game based on 
the popular  Popeye  comic strip,2 it decided to create its own char-
acters. The end result was  Donkey Kong , one of the hottest arcade 
games of the 1980s. 
 The  Donkey Kong  franchise earned Nintendo over $280 million 
by 1983,3 and encouraged them to develop other arcade hits like 
 Mario Bros.  (1983), a spin-off of  Donkey Kong.  It also gave them 
the capital to enter the home console business, starting with the 
Nintendo Family Computer (Famicom) in Asia, later  modiﬁ ed 
 1      Responsible for many classics and three primary games in this book. Besides 
Super Mario Bros., he was also instrumental in the creation of The Legend of Zelda 
(Chapter 21, “The Legend of Zelda (1986): Rescuing Zeldas and Uniting Triforces”) 
and Super Mario 64 (Chapter 18, “Super Mario 64/Tomb Raider (1996): The Third 
Dimension”). 
 2      Something that Nintendo would rectify with the 1982 release of the popular sin-
gle screen arcade platformer, Popeye. 
 3 Based on adding ﬁ gures from Steven Kent’s book, The Ultimate History of 
Video Games (Three Rivers Press, 2001). 
Screenshot from the arcade 
version of Donkey Kong.

 
Chapter 19 SUPER MARIO BROS. (1985): HOW HIGH CAN JUMPMAN GET?     273
and introduced in the United States as the NES. The success of 
the NES and  Super Mario Bros. , which has sold over 40 million 
copies worldwide,4 are credited with resurrecting the moribund 
videogame market after The Great Videogame Crash of 1984 (see 
 Chapter 13 , “ Pac-Man (1980): Japanese Gumption, American 
Consumption”).  Super Mario Bros.  played a decisive role not only 
in the revival of the console market, but in the expansion of the 
videogame industry as a whole. 
 Mario, the star of  Super Mario Bros. , is a short and stocky Italian 
plumber who resides in the Mushroom Kingdom. His appearance 
had not changed much from his Jumpman days. He still had his 
prominent mustache and characteristic cap and overalls. These 
features, incidentally, were largely dictated by the limitations of 
the era’s hardware and software; the mustache, for instance, was 
easier to represent than a mouth. Nevertheless, the image was 
endearing and accessible, and what Mario lacked in heroics he 
made up for with charm. He is a kind-hearted soul, always will-
ing to help those in need (except in  Donkey Kong Junior , the only 
game in which he is portrayed as a villain). 
 Mario’s goal in  Super Mario Bros.  was once again to save a 
damsel in distress from an anthropomorphic creature. In  Donkey 
Kong , Jumpman/Mario is a carpenter on a quest to save his girl-
friend from his peeved pet ape, whereas in  Super Mario Bros. , he 
is on an epic adventure to save Princess Toadstool (also known as 
 4 http://gamers.guinnessworldrecords.com/records/nintendo.aspx . 
Screenshot from the Mario Bros. 
arcade game.

274     Chapter 19 SUPER MARIO BROS. (1985): HOW HIGH CAN JUMPMAN GET?
Princess Peach) from the evil Bowser, a turtle-like creature who 
is king of the Koopas. In his quest, Mario encounters a series of 
enemies and obstacles, some of which had been previously intro-
duced in  Mario Bros.  The most notable of these are the Koopa 
Troopas, which closely resemble the earlier game’s Shellcreepers. 
 Super Mario Bros.  can be played in one- or two-player mode, 
with players taking turns and advancing through each world 
independently. Player 1 is Mario and player 2 is Luigi, who was 
ﬁ rst introduced in  Mario Bros.  and is Mario’s doppelganger in 
white overalls. The game consists of eight worlds, each of which 
has four subworlds. At the end of each world, Mario must defeat 
one of Bowser’s henchmen. Along the way, Mario (or Luigi) col-
lects coins, magic and “1-up” mushrooms, ﬁ re ﬂ owers, and star 
men. Once 100 coins are collected or a 1-up mushroom is con-
sumed, an extra life is awarded. Magic mushrooms cause Mario 
to grow in stature, becoming Super Mario, and allow him to take 
a hit from an enemy without dying, though afterwards he returns 
to his regular size. Fire ﬂ owers turn Mario into Super Mario and 
also allow him to spit ﬁ reballs at enemies; star men provide tem-
porary invincibility, acting much like power pellets in  Pac-Man . 
The mission is to complete each board before the allotted time 
runs out. Otherwise, Mario loses a life and must restart the board 
at the beginning—or at roughly the midpoint, if the invisible 
checkpoint had been reached. Despite the time limit, there is still 
plenty of opportunity for exploration. There are subterranean 
worlds, which can be accessed through select pipes. These are 
generally self-contained areas that offer coin rewards. There are 
also sky worlds, which are accessed through vines that grow when 
certain blocks are nudged. These worlds tend to be larger and 
offer coin rewards or access to warp zones, which allow Mario to 
advance to other worlds. Besides defeating enemies, Mario must 
navigate his way over and under obstacles. Getting sucked into a 
“whirlpool” (bottom of the screen in a water world) or falling into 
a pit or into lava will result in instant death. 
 Super Mario Bros.  came bundled with the NES and remained 
one of the best games ever made for the system throughout the 
platform’s long shelf life. Although Nintendo had to make amends 
of sorts for the sins of others at retail for The Great Videogame 
Crash by promoting their system more as an electronic toy5 than a 
console—explaining the inclusion of the basically useless Robotic 
Operating Buddy (R.O.B.) robot and avoiding the term “videogame” 
on packaging and promotional materials— Super Mario Bros. left 
no doubt in consumers’ minds what the system was all about. The 
gameplay was superb, which is why the formula continues to be 
 5 See  http://archive.gamespy.com/articles/july03/25smartest/index22.shtml . 

 
Chapter 19 SUPER MARIO BROS. (1985): HOW HIGH CAN JUMPMAN GET?     275
popular today, as demonstrated by the release of games like 2006’s 
 New Super Mario Bros.  on the Nintendo DS. The controls in  Super 
Mario Bros. are straightforward and intuitive. 
 Unlike the previous generation of game consoles, which relied 
on joysticks for movement, the NES shipped with the now-
 common game pads. The NES controllers had a directional pad 
(d-pad) and A and B buttons. Each button had a main function 
and a secondary function, depending on the environment or 
status of the character. Players advanced left or right by press-
ing accordingly on the controller’s d-pad, though the screen only 
scrolls to the right, preventing backtracking. Pressing down allows 
Mario to crouch or access hidden worlds in pipes. Pressing up is 
used to ﬂ oat up in a water world or to climb vines. The A button is 
the jump button and also allows Mario to stay aﬂ oat in an aquatic 
environment if pressed repeatedly. The B button allows Mario to 
accelerate and to shoot ﬁ reballs at his enemies, provided that 
he is ﬁ ery Mario. Usage of the buttons is ﬂ exible; the longer the 
A button is held down, the higher Mario will jump, and the extent 
to which the B button is held down determines the pace at which 
Mario walks or runs. Although the new controllers were arguably 
easier to manipulate than joysticks, some gamers complained of 
“numb thumb” and even bought items of dubious value like spe-
cial gloves to deal with the problem. 
 Besides its intuitive controls,  Super Mario Bros.  boasts superb 
physics. Objects interact with each other consistently and in a 
convincing manner. Also, each category of enemy has speciﬁ c 
Surprisingly, maze-game maestro 
Pac-Man starred in one of the 
ﬁ rst side-scrolling platformers, 
Pac-Land, in 1984. Original arcade 
version shown.

276     Chapter 19 SUPER MARIO BROS. (1985): HOW HIGH CAN JUMPMAN GET?
mechanics and requirements for being defeated. Piranha plants 
can only be eliminated with ﬁ reballs. Goomba mushrooms, the 
weakest of all enemies, can be jumped on. Turtle Koopas require 
a two-step process (unless they are hit with a ﬁ reball), and Mario 
must ﬁ rst render them vulnerable to attack. 
 This two-step attack concept was introduced in  Mario Bros. 
by jumping under a ﬂ oor with an enemy on top of it or with use 
of the “POW” block. Hitting this block, like hitting the ﬂ oor from 
under them, would cause enemies to ﬂ ip on their backs, allowing 
Mario or Luigi to dispose of them upon direct contact. In  Super 
Mario Bros. , Mario is not powerful enough to destroy blocks 
unless he is Super Mario, but he is able to nudge them. If an 
enemy happens to be on the block that is nudged, it may be dis-
posed of (such as the Hammer Brothers) or it may simply change 
the direction the enemy advances (for example, Goombas); how-
ever, Super Mario will destroy blocks on contact along with any 
enemy on it. Any enemies that can be defeated by being jumped 
on must be attacked from above. If Mario or Super Mario hits the 
enemy from the side or brushes against them, he takes a hit. 
 Besides avoiding or defeating enemies, players must master 
timing to successfully complete various running and jumping 
feats, such as advancing between moving platforms or those that 
straddle seemingly insuperable chasms. This gameplay is reminis-
cent of  Pitfall! , a classic platformer published in 1982 for the Atari 
2600 VCS by Activision. In this multiscreen, nonscrolling game, 
Screenshot from the arcade 
version of Williams Electronics’ 
Joust (1982), which was perhaps 
the ﬁ rst time the play mechanic of 
being higher than your enemy to 
overcome them was introduced, 
a key concept when jumping on 
enemies in Super Mario Bros.

 
Chapter 19 SUPER MARIO BROS. (1985): HOW HIGH CAN JUMPMAN GET?     277
Pitfall Harry must navigate a series of jungle obstacles to recover 
32 treasures within a 20-minute period. To accomplish this, play-
ers must master various timing feats. Unlike  Super Mario Bros. , 
there are no enemies to kill, so they must be avoided altogether or 
landed on in a spot where they are innocuous (e.g., the very tops 
of the crocodile heads). The jumping mechanics in  Pitfall! are not 
as reﬁ ned as they are in  Super Mario Bros . In some cases, even 
when it appears an enemy has been avoided successfully, a hit is 
taken, leading to frustration. In  Donkey Kong , Mario also had very 
limited jumping abilities; thus, what distinguishes  Super Mario 
Bros.  from other platformers is a very precise but ﬂ exible jumping 
mechanic that feels just right. 
Pitfall! (above) was one of the 
ﬁ rst platformers, but did not 
scroll; as Harry passed through a 
screen edge, a new scene would 
appear. Pitfall II: Lost Caverns 
(1984), left, like the later Super 
Mario Bros. 3, would have extra 
hardware in the cartridge to give 
additional technical capabilities 
to its home platform and was an 
amazing technical achievement 
on the Atari 2600 VCS.

278     Chapter 19 SUPER MARIO BROS. (1985): HOW HIGH CAN JUMPMAN GET?
 It is clear that a lot of thought went into the level designs in 
 Super Mario Bros.  Enemies and obstacles are placed so that 
the player is progressively challenged, unlike many other side-
scrollers, which are notoriously difﬁ cult from the outset— Mega 
Man  (Capcom, 1987; NES) comes to mind. Another element that 
adds to the appeal of Super Mario Bros. is that it can be played 
multiple ways. One can play it as an epic adventure, with the goal 
of racking up as many points as possible and collecting as much 
as possible in each world, or as a time trial by racing to the ﬁ nish 
as quickly as possible.6  
 Super Mario Bros. 2 —which was released in North America in 
1988, in Japan in 1989, and in Europe in 1992—was not a direct 
sequel to  Super Mario Bros. , but was actually a conversion of a 
Japanese game called  Yume K  
__
 o j  
__
 o : Doki Doki Panic (1987). The 
Japanese market, however, had received a true sequel to the game 
three years earlier in 1986, which was released to the U.S. market 
in 1993 as  Super Mario Bros.: The Lost Levels  as part of the  Super 
Mario All-Stars  compilation for the Super Nintendo (SNES). The 
reason that this version had not been initially released as the real 
 6      Numerous videos on YouTube demonstrate how to defeat the game in a matter of 
minutes. Individuals have even raced each other by placing televisions side-by-side. 
The ability to race through the game is a feature that is maintained in Super Mario 
Bros. 2 and Super Mario Bros. 3. Although this feat takes a little longer to accom-
plish in these games, it can be done in under 15 minutes.  
Screenshot from Super 
Mario Bros. 2 from the Super 
Nintendo’s Super Mario 
All-Stars compilation.

 
Chapter 19 SUPER MARIO BROS. (1985): HOW HIGH CAN JUMPMAN GET?     279
sequel in the U.S. market was that it had been deemed too difﬁ cult
by some Nintendo of America employees. 
 The premise of the converted  Super Mario Bros. 2  game is actu-
ally a radical departure from  Super Mario Bros. and 1990’s  Super 
Mario Bros. 3 . In this game, Mario dreams of a kingdom called 
Subcon, which has been cursed by a character called Wart, and 
Mario is asked to return this kingdom to its “natural state.” When 
he wakes up, he talks to the Princess, Toad, and Luigi about it, and 
they decide to go on a picnic, only to discover the world Mario 
dreamed about is real. 
 Super Mario Bros. 2  is a one-player game in which players 
can alternate playing as Mario, Luigi, Toad, and Princess Peach, 
each of which has different abilities (i.e., speeds) and jumping 
mechanics. Mario has average jumping power, which decreases 
slightly upon lifting an object. Luigi can jump higher and farther 
than Mario, but he is slow and his power is decreased more than 
Mario’s when he carries an item. Toad has the least jumping power 
with very short jumps, but he is the quickest character and his 
abilities are not diminished when carrying objects. The Princess 
is the weakest character and third in jumping power, but she 
can ﬂ oat in the air for roughly 1.5 seconds if the A button is held 
down. Players can also increase their character’s jumping capac-
ity by pressing down on the d-pad while pressing the A button.
Once the character ﬂ ashes, he or she will be able to jump 
1.5 times higher than usual.  Super Mario Bros. 2  was one of 
the few Mario games in which the objective was not to rescue 
Screenshot from Super Mario 
Bros.: The Lost Levels from the 
Super Nintendo’s Super Mario 
All-Stars compilation.

280     Chapter 19 SUPER MARIO BROS. (1985): HOW HIGH CAN JUMPMAN GET?
Princess Peach; in fact she could be the hero. However, once the 
game is ﬁ nished and Wart is defeated, we ﬁ nd Mario still sleep-
ing, demonstrating this was in fact all a dream (which, as many 
angry  Dallas fans know, is often a frustrating resolution). 
 Super Mario Bros. 2  introduced a menagerie of unusual and 
quirky characters, mainly because these characters were repur-
posed from  Doki Doki Panic ; however, many of these would 
appear in subsequent Mario games. The most notable of these 
is Ostro, also known as Birdo. This sweet character from Subcon 
is Nintendo’s ﬁ rst full-ﬂ edged transsexual, and one would not 
know it except through the description in the ﬁ rst-edition game 
manual: “He thinks he is a girl and he spits eggs from his mouth. 
He’d rather be called Birdetta.” Interestingly, subsequent edi-
tion manuals omitted the second line, and when he reappears in 
 Mario Tennis  for the Nintendo 64 and subsequent games, there 
is no mention of the fact that she was ever a “he.” In fact there 
is affectionate interaction between Birdo and Yoshi, the dinosaur-
like creature who ﬁ rst appears in 1991’s  Super Mario World . 
 Players defeat enemies by throwing vegetables at them, which 
must ﬁ rst be plucked from the ground. Enemies can’t be stomped 
on, but certain ones can be picked up and thrown at others. To 
defeat Birdo, one must capture his eggs and throw them back at 
him.  Super Mario Bros. 2  is the ﬁ rst Mario game to feature a life 
meter. The player starts the game with three lives and a total of two 
units on the life meter, which can be increased to a total of four 
units, allowing four hits to be taken before death. As in Super  Mario 
Bros. , however, falling into a chasm will result in instant death. This 
is also the ﬁ rst Mario game to use doors, including those requir-
ing keys, as a means of entering other rooms and secret worlds. 
If a player uproots a magic potion from the ground and throws 
it down, a door to “Sub-space” will appear. If the player enters 
the door, he or she will ﬁ nd a nonscrolling world that is an unlit 
duplicate of the current screen sans the enemies. In this world, 
the music becomes the iconic  Super Mario Bros.  theme song and 
coins are uprooted instead of vegetables. If the magic potion had 
been used in just the right spot, a life-meter-increasing mush-
room will appear. Unlike its predecessor, this game does not have 
a time limit and players can backtrack. Players may also uproot 
a  stopwatch, which will suspend enemies in time for a certain 
period. It also introduced the “minigame” to the Mario franchise 
through the bonus slot machine game, through which a player can 
win more lives (up to a maximum of ﬁ ve if they get three cherries). 
There are a total of seven worlds with a combined 20 levels. As with 
 Super Mario Bros. , there are warp zones, allowing players to skip 
worlds, though these are accessed only through select vases. Some 
of these vases inhabited by cobras, reminiscent of piranha plants 
in  Super Mario Bros.  

 
Chapter 19 SUPER MARIO BROS. (1985): HOW HIGH CAN JUMPMAN GET?     281
 Although  Super Mario Bros .  2 was radically different from its 
predecessor and is sometimes referred to as the “black sheep” of 
the series, it was still very successful. The game sold more than 
10 million copies on the NES, making it the third highest gross-
ing game on the system. The second highest selling game was 
 Super Mario Bros. 3  at more than 18 million copies.7 This game 
was released in 1990 and hailed by some as the best Mario game 
of all time.  Nintendo Power  ranked it sixth in their list of the 200 
Greatest Nintendo Games and it also made GameSpot’s list of 
“The Greatest Games of All Time.”8 Stanford University History of 
Science and Technology released a list of the 10 Most Inﬂ uential 
Games of All Time. Several industry insiders were consulted, 
each of whom picked some games. Christopher Grant, the edi-
tor of Joystiq.com, was one consultant, and when asked why he 
selected  Super Mario Bros. 3 , he said that the game was impor-
tant for its nonlinear play, a mainstay of contemporary games, 
and new features like the ability to move both backward and for-
ward (scroll left, as well as right). For many, what makes the game 
so appealing is that it stuck to the formula that made  Super Mario 
Bros.  so enjoyable, but improved upon this by adding an even 
better soundtrack and many exciting new features, such as more 
 7 Nintendo Power, February 2006, pp. 58–66. 
 8 See  http://www.gamespot.com/gamespot/features/all/greatestgames/ . 
Screenshot from Super 
Mario Bros. 3 from the Super 
Nintendo’s Super Mario 
All-Stars compilation.

282     Chapter 19 SUPER MARIO BROS. (1985): HOW HIGH CAN JUMPMAN GET?
minigames and hidden items, an overview map outlining the lev-
els in each world, and a two-player mode that allows players to 
take turns clearing levels or to compete against each other. 
 The antagonist in this game is once again Bowser, who has sent 
his seven children (known collectively as the Koopalings) out to 
disrupt the kingdoms that make up the Mushroom World. They 
have stolen the royal magic wands of each kingdom and turned 
the kings into animals. Mario and/or Luigi must recover the 
wands and return the kings to their true forms. There is a king to 
be saved at the end of each level; however, as with other Mario 
games, players can advance to distant kingdoms by using magic 
whistles. Once played, these whistles will bring forth a tornado, 
which transports Mario or Luigi to a distant world. This warping 
technique had been introduced previously in  The Legend of Zelda 
(see Chapter 21, “ The Legend of Zelda  (1986): Rescuing Zeldas and 
Uniting Triforces”), and even the tune of this warp whistle is the 
same as the one that transports Link in  Zelda .9 The musical refer-
ences in Super Mario Bros. 3 also manifest in the names and like-
nesses of the Koopalings. Morton Koopa Jr., for instance, is named 
after the late controversial talk show host, Morton Downey Jr., but 
also has the trademark makeup of guitarist Paul Stanley from rock 
group KISS. The only female Koopaling is Wendy O. Koopa, and 
she is named after punk singer Wendy O. Williams. Larry Koopa 
is the only Koopaling for which the musical reference, if there is 
any, is unclear. 
 Super Mario Bros. 3  brings back many familiar enemies, includ-
ing Goombas, Koopa Troopas, and Piranha Plants, but with a 
twist. For instance, in addition to there being the usual walking 
Goombas, there are now Para-Goombas, which ﬂ y and unleash 
micro-Goombas that attack Mario by clinging to him. The famil-
iar staples in Mario’s arsenal from  Super Mario Bros. are there, 
including the magic/super mushrooms, ﬁ re ﬂ owers, and star men. 
Additional powerups include the frog suit, which increases his 
swimming abilities, as well as super leaves, which change Mario 
into Raccoon Mario. This powerup allows Mario to use his tail to 
attack enemies and to ﬂ y short distances. If Mario uncovers the 
incredibly rare Tanooki suit, he appears in full Raccoon regalia and 
is granted the same abilities as with the super leaf, but he can now 
also turn to stone to defeat enemies.10 Other  useful items include 
 9       The tunes can be compared at  http://themushroomkingdom.net/games/smb3 . 
As Shigeru Miyamoto and Koji Kondo had worked on both games, this similarity 
was unsurprising. 
 10      “Tanooki” refers to the Japanese term “tanuki,” which according to Japanese 
folklore are raccoon dogs. These mythical creatures are thought to be able to use 
leaves to shapeshift and cause chaos. Tanuki statues are found outside many 
temples and restaurants in Japan; thus, Mario or Luigi’s added ability to turn into 
stone with the Tanooki suit is quite a clever play on the tanuki mythology. 

 
Chapter 19 SUPER MARIO BROS. (1985): HOW HIGH CAN JUMPMAN GET?     283
a magic wing, a music box, a hammer, and a cloud. These items 
allow Mario to ﬂ y, put enemies to sleep, break through rocks on 
the map scene, and bypass an action scene, respectively. Powerups 
can be stored in an item box, which is accessible on the world 
map. At the end of most levels is a goal, which has three cards 
ﬂ ashing in it—mushroom, ﬂ ower, and star. Once Mario jumps to 
hit the goal, a card is gained. If three cards are eventually obtained, 
an extra life is granted. If three cards of the same type are acquired, 
even more lives are granted (two lives for three mushrooms, three 
lives for three ﬂ owers, and ﬁ ve lives for three stars). In two-player 
battle mode, Mario or Luigi are opponents and can steal these 
cards from each other or get rid of the ones that they do not want. 
Once the level goal is hit, any enemies on the screen will be turned 
into coins and a bonus will be added to the player’s score, depend-
ing on how much time is left on the clock. 
 The game features several types of minigames, some of which 
appear on the map board. One is a spade panel, which is a slot-
machine-type game in which the object is to line up the mush-
room, ﬂ ower, and star pictures. Lives are granted based on which 
pictures are aligned, and star again ranks highest in the hierarchy.
There is also an N-mark spade panel, which is a memory-type 
card matching game. If two matching cards are uncovered, that 
item is obtained. The player is allowed to continue matching 
cards until there are two misses or all nine items are acquired. 
Another way to obtain booty is by visiting Toad’s house, where 
Mario can select one of three treasure chests to open. The game 
also includes a true minigame, which is actually a version of 
 Mario Bros . Players can access this minigame by entering two-
player mode and selecting the other player’s resting square on 
the world map. The player wins if he or she defeats ﬁ ve enemies 
or the opponent gets hit by an enemy. 
 Before we continue our discussion of the Mario series, you may 
be wondering how the competition responded to Nintendo’s plat-
forming masterpieces. The short answer is: not particularly well. 
Starting in 1986, Sega had the Alex Kidd and  Wonder Boy series for 
their Sega Master System, but neither platformer had particularly 
broad appeal. Atari had three consoles out at the time—the VCS, 
XEGS, and 7800—but managed only the visually ﬂ at and late to the 
party  Scrapyard Dog  (1990) for the latter. NEC ﬁ rst tried on their 
TurboGrafx-16 console with the pack-in of  Keith Courage in Alpha 
Zones  (1989), which was an audiovisually rich action adventure 
platformer, but proved to be little fun. NEC then came back with 
the much more successful  Bonk’s Adventure  (1990), starring a fun 
cartoon caveman, Bonk, who would go on to star in several addi-
tional games and represented the platform admirably, but could 
do little to improve sales in the United States.11 In fact, it wouldn’t 
be until 1991 that Mario met his match:  Sonic the Hedgehog , for 
Sega’s ﬂ edgling Genesis console. 

284     Chapter 19 SUPER MARIO BROS. (1985): HOW HIGH CAN JUMPMAN GET?
 Although  Sonic the Hedgehog became known for the cheeky 
attitude of its main character—for instance, Sonic would 
famously tap his foot in impatient frustration if the player took 
too long to move—it was the game’s speed that really differenti-
ated it from the competition. Whereas a game like  Super Mario 
Bros. 3  encouraged careful exploration,  Sonic the Hedgehog 
encouraged running through its levels as quickly as possible, 
which was often the only way to make it through the loops to 
get the highest rings. With springboards and other high-speed 
launching devices, there was no shortage of encouragement to 
feed a player’s need for speed.  Sonic the Hedgehog 2  was released 
the following year and sold even better than the best-selling ﬁ rst 
game, both of which separately came as pack-ins for a time with 
the system.12 Like the Mario series, Sonic would see countless 
spin-offs, off-shoots, and clones, and would become a worldwide 
media icon himself. 
 In the same year as Sonic’s ﬁ rst appearance,  Super Mario 
World  was released for the SNES, which once again Nintendo had 
 bundled with a sureﬁ re hit. Mario and Luigi are back on a quest 
 11      The console was a big hit in its country of origin, Japan, as the PC Engine, but 
had poor sales elsewhere in comparison to Nintendo and Sega. 
 12 According to Wikipedia [Sonic_the_Hedgehog_(video_game)]: “As of November 
19, 2007, [Sonic the Hedgehog] has sold 4 million copies, the second-highest 
amount for a Genesis game, behind Sonic 2, which has sold 6 million copies.”  
Screenshot from Bonk’s Revenge 
(1991) for the NEC TurboGrafx-16.

 
Chapter 19 SUPER MARIO BROS. (1985): HOW HIGH CAN JUMPMAN GET?     285
to save the Princess from the Bowser, who captured her while the 
brothers were relaxing in a magical world called Dinosaur Land. 
During their search for the Princess, Mario and Luigi ﬁ nd a sealed 
egg, from which a dinosaur named Yoshi hatches. Yoshi tells the 
Screenshots from Sonic the 
Hedgehog (top) and Sonic the 
Hedgehog 2 (bottom), both for 
the Sega Genesis.

286     Chapter 19 SUPER MARIO BROS. (1985): HOW HIGH CAN JUMPMAN GET?
brothers that he and his pals were sealed in the eggs by evil turtles 
and proceeds to give them a magic cape. This starts the journey 
across seven worlds and two secret worlds, with a cumulative of 
72 levels. In the game, Mario is able to pick up and throw items or 
place them down gently. In addition to super mushrooms and ﬁ re 
ﬂ owers, there are now cape feathers, which allow Mario to ﬂ y with 
a cape. When enemies are hit with a ﬁ re ball from ﬁ ery Mario, 
they turn into coins instead of being knocked off the screen. In 
the game, Mario is also able to ride the Yoshis. These come in 
various types and each has unique abilities; however, they all are 
able to eat enemies. If Mario ﬁ nds a little Yoshi, he must feed it 
ﬁ ve enemies so that it becomes a big Yoshi. Most levels have one 
exit, but some have two, with the second being hidden. 
 Super Mario World introduced many ﬁ rsts to the Mario series. 
It was the ﬁ rst to allow players to exit a level without dying or hav-
ing to complete it; however, this feature is activated only when 
replaying the level after completing it. It was also the ﬁ rst to have 
a visible marker, or checkpoint, in the level, so if a player reached 
that marker before exiting the board or dying, upon returning to 
the board, they would pick up at that marker instead of having to 
restart the level. The marker also serves as a powerup if Mario did 
not reach it as Super Mario. Although all levels do not need to be 
played or explored to complete the game, this was one of the ﬁ rst 
games to reward gamers who did. 
Screenshot from Super Mario 
World for the Super Nintendo.

 
Chapter 19 SUPER MARIO BROS. (1985): HOW HIGH CAN JUMPMAN GET?     287
 Because of the increased capabilities of the SNES,  Super 
Mario World  features a more modern 3D effect, which is partially 
achieved through the use of parallax scrolling as well as Mode 
7–style rendering in select boss battles, most notably those 
between Morton, Ludwig, Roy, and Bowser. The ﬁ rst technique 
employs multiple layers, and by moving the background layer 
slower than the foreground layers, creates the illusion of depth. 
The second technique uses texture mapping that allows the back-
ground layer to be rotated and scaled, also contributing to a 3D 
effect. The colors throughout the game are very vibrant, making 
the graphics aesthetically pleasing. 
 Of course, Nintendo was not alone in offering innovations; 
Sega introduced several of their own in the  Sonic  series. Unlike 
with Nintendo’s, these did not necessarily involve gameplay, but 
came in the forms of  Sonic CD  and  Sonic & Knuckles .  Sonic CD , 
which was released ﬁ rst for the Sega Genesis’s Sega CD add-on 
in 1993, was really the only epic side-scrolling platformer ever 
put on such an expansive storage medium. The main innovation 
of  Sonic CD  was allowing Sonic to time travel to the same game 
zone in the past, present, or future, with player actions in one 
period affecting the outcome and appearance of another.  Sonic &
Knuckles , released on cartridge for the Sega Genesis in 1994, fea-
tured lock-on technology that enabled another cartridge to be 
plugged in via the game’s top or pass-through socket.  Sonic & 
Knuckles  allows play through the same game levels as either of 
the titular characters, with each having their own unique abilities 
Screenshot from Super Mario 
World 2: Yoshi’s Island for 
the Super Nintendo.

288     Chapter 19 SUPER MARIO BROS. (1985): HOW HIGH CAN JUMPMAN GET?
to interact with the levels differently. While Sonic has the speed 
and a type of shield, Knuckles the echidna can climb walls, break 
through blocked entryways, and glide in the air. By inserting either 
the  Sonic the Hedgehog 2  or  3  cartridge in the  Sonic & Knuckles 
pass-through socket, extra areas and features are unlocked in the 
earlier games, including the ability to play as Knuckles. 
 Sonic, Sega’s mascot, began the “animal with attitude” craze, 
of course, which Nintendo addressed in a way through the Mario 
franchise by introducing  Super Mario World 2: Yoshi’s Island in 
1995. This was the ﬁ rst Mario game to allow Yoshi to be the main 
playable character. The premise is that baby Mario and Luigi are 
being delivered to their parents, when an evil Magikoopa inter-
cepts the stork. He thinks he has captured both babies, only to 
ﬁ nd upon returning to his castle that he has only Luigi. Mario had 
fallen onto Yoshi’s Island. The Yoshis decide that they will reunite 
Mario with his brother, using a relay system to do so, “not unlike 
the old pony express.” Throughout the game, Mario rides on 
Yoshi’s back, while Yoshi is used to defeat enemies along the way, 
who were sent out to capture baby Mario. Yoshi can take a lot of 
damage, but if he is hit, Mario is knocked off his back and encap-
sulated in a bubble, initiating a countdown timer. Yoshi must 
recover Mario before time runs out, otherwise Mario is captured 
by the Koopas and a life is lost. Unlike Sonic, the Yoshis do not 
have much “attitude” and are very laid-back creatures, but they do 
offer some whimsical moves to defeat enemies. As in  Super Mario 
World , they can swallow up enemies and spit them out, but they 
can also make an egg out of them. Much of the game involves the 
collection and use of eggs to defeat enemies and solve puzzles. At 
various points in the game, a metamorphosis bubble will appear, 
which allows Yoshi to become another transportation vehicle, 
including a helicopter, mole tank, race car, train, or submarine. 
During these sequences, baby Mario is left behind, and Yoshi 
must reach a Yoshi block within a speciﬁ ed period of time, oth-
erwise he returns to the point at which he started. However, if he 
reaches that block, Mario is warped there and reunited with him. 
If a Super Star is obtained, baby Mario becomes playable and can 
inﬂ ict a lot of damage on enemies. He becomes much like Sonic, 
with his ability to dash and “climb” walls. The game features 
many mini battle games, such as balloon and watermelon-seed-
spitting activities. There are also bonus challenge games, many of 
which are lottery- and casino-style. 
 As technological capabilities increased, the thirst for 3D gam-
ing also increased. Few 2D platformers made a successful transi-
tion to 3D, but Mario did it with style in the 1996 release of  Super 
Mario 64  for the Nintendo 64. Despite this success, there was still 
nostalgia for the 2D Mario platform games, leading to some inter-
esting hybrids, most notably the  Paper Mario series.  Paper Mario 

 
Chapter 19 SUPER MARIO BROS. (1985): HOW HIGH CAN JUMPMAN GET?     289
was ﬁ rst released in 2001 for the Nintendo 64 and juxtaposed 2D 
character renderings with a 3D environment. The game is a role-
playing platformer in which Mario is again on a quest to save the 
Princess from Bowser. The manner in which he progresses in this 
quest depends on how he interacts with the nonplayable char-
acters. In 2007, Nintendo released  Super Paper Mario  for the Wii, 
which took the 2D/3D juxtaposition to the next level. To advance 
between levels, players must switch between 2D and 3D views to 
solve puzzles and pass obstacles. When switching from 2D into 
3D, a “ﬂ ip meter” appears and slowly starts decreasing. If a player 
is not cognizant of the time spent in this dimension, the meter 
will run empty, costing one health point. Although games in the 
 Paper Mario  series were well received and highly successful, the 
desire for traditional platformers did not cease. When  New Super 
Mario Bros.  was released on the Nintendo DS in 2006, it sold 
500,000 copies in the ﬁ rst 35 days, or one copy every 20 minutes.13 
This game was largely inﬂ uenced by  Super Mario Bros. , but incor-
porated elements from other Mario games. 
 The Mario games introduced innumerable innovations to gam-
ing, right through to games like 2008’s  Braid  for the Microsoft 
Xbox 360, which took signiﬁ cant inﬂ uences from both  Donkey 
Kong  and the main Mario franchise.  Braid ’s designer, Jonathan 
Blow, discussed his inﬂ uences on Independent Gaming: “As far 
as games go, the main inﬂ uence is Super Mario Bros., which is 
Photo of the Nintendo Game 
Boy’s Super Mario Land 2: 
6 Golden Coins (1992), shown 
running on a Nintendo Game Boy 
Advance. Most Nintendo systems 
featured great Mario series 
platform games.
 13 http://www.gamespot.com/ds/action/supermariobrosds/news.html?sid=6153037 .   

290     Chapter 19 SUPER MARIO BROS. (1985): HOW HIGH CAN JUMPMAN GET?
obvious as soon as you start playing.” Braid is a visually stunning
 platformer that requires the player to manipulate time to solve 
puzzles. The story is the timeless tale of a boy looking for a  princess, 
but the narrative is cryptic and pieced together slowly much like a 
patchwork quilt. 
 The Mario series feature, some of the greatest videogames the 
world has ever seen, directly inﬂ uencing at least two generations 
of games and gamers. They have remained popular and inﬂ uen-
tial well beyond the technical shift from 2D to 3D. Mario games 
are platforming the way it should be, with no cut corners. The 
worlds are vibrant and alive and the critical jumping mechanics 
feel exactly right. Many games tried to follow in their footsteps 
with often-forced attempts at mascots, low-budget hacks, and the 
like, but none—save for Sonic—could get anywhere near that spe-
cial Mario magic. To many,  Super Mario Bros.  is the quintessential 
videogame, and—based on the game’s success and the amazing 
amount of reverence given to the series even today—who are we 
to argue? Besides his inﬂ uence on countless other videogames, 
Mario has permeated other media as well, like ﬁ lm, adventure 
books, and comics. Nevertheless, videogames are still clearly his 
home turf. With old and new gamers alike adoring him, Jumpman 
will no doubt continue to reach new heights.

20
291
 Alexey Pajitnov’s  Tetris , created and introduced to the United 
States in the mid-1980s, is perhaps the greatest videogame ever 
to come out of Russia—or arguably anywhere else in the world, 
for that matter. It has been endlessly cloned and ported for 
almost every viable platform, and is still widely played today 
on all manner of devices, including mobile phones.  Tetris is 
also a useful illustration of two important principles of good 
game design. The ﬁ rst is that it’s easy to learn, yet hard to mas-
ter. Second, despite its simple appearance, it’s a game that could 
be possible (practically speaking, at least) only in electronic 
 format. It’s one of those games that we wish we had thought of 
ourselves; it seems so obvious, yet it took a computer engineer 
to invent. 
 Tetris later led to the rise of what is now called “casual  gaming.” 
This genre of videogames covers a broad array of gameplay 
styles, but is usually conﬁ ned to low-tech games that can be run 
in a browser or low-budget hardware. They are also casual in the 
sense that they can be picked up, played for a few minutes, and 
put down without losing anything important—in stark contrast to 
most popular games for computers and consoles, which require 
a signiﬁ cant time investment to learn and play. In this chapter, 
we’ll discuss the history of  Tetris , its impact on the market, and 
the future of the genre that it helped create. 
 Tetris  is usually described as a “sliding block” or, more gener-
ally, a “puzzle” game. The game consists of moving and rotat-
ing seven different pieces (called “tetrominoes”) as they fall 
toward the bottom of the screen. The goal is to make the indi-
vidual squares that make up the tetrominoes form a horizontal 
line; when this happens, the line is erased, lowering any incom-
plete lines above it. The player is also awarded points; most ver-
sions offer bonus points if the player is able to simultaneously 
clear more than one line at once (the maximum is four, which is 
   TETRIS (1985): CASUAL GAMING 
FALLS INTO PLACE 

292     Chapter 20 TETRIS (1985): CASUAL GAMING FALLS INTO PLACE
called the titular “Tetris”). Making clean lines is critical, because 
bungled efforts quickly result in stacks of unmatched pieces. 
The game ends if a new piece is blocked by such a stack and is 
unable to fall past the top of the playﬁ eld. In most versions, the 
pieces fall very slowly at ﬁ rst, gradually speeding up as the game 
progresses. 
 Why do so many people have so much fun playing such a sim-
ple game? Besides the competitive factor (most versions offer a 
high score table) and the increasing speed (which quickly ratch-
ets up the intensity), the game seems to satisfy some basic desire 
to impose order on chaos; to “tidy up.” We might compare this 
aspect of the game to blasting the aliens, one by one, in  Space 
Invaders ( Chapter 16 , “ Space Invaders (1978): The Japanese 
The IBM PC version of Tetris credits 
A. Pajitnov and V. Gerasimov. 
Despite the game’s overwhelming 
popularity, Pajitnov himself 
wouldn’t earn a dime from the 
game until a decade later, when 
he at last acquired the rights to his 
own program.

 
Chapter 20 TETRIS (1985): CASUAL GAMING FALLS INTO PLACE     293
Descend”), which we  likened to the joys of popping each bubble 
on a sheet of bubble wrap. It’s tempting to bandy about terms like 
 “obsessive- compulsive” to describe such behavior. Perhaps we 
could also talk about Freud’s “anal stage,” with the disappearing 
lines of tetrominoes analogous to our solid waste being ﬂ ushed 
away in the toilet. Given this model, we might describe  Tetris -
fans as “anal-retentive,” compulsively arranging those pieces in 
some futile quest to achieve the gratiﬁ cation they missed during 
toilet training. Pajitnov himself had designed some psychology-
related games before  Tetris , so it’s possible he had such things 
in mind as he created his masterpiece. In any case, there’s no 
denying the satisfaction one gets from  seeing a stack of badly 
arranged tetrominoes organized and whisked away. 
 Pajitnov programmed the game on an Elektronika 60, a Soviet 
clone of the DEC PDP-11 mainframe. According to his friend 
and fellow game programmer Vadim Gerasimov, Pajitnov got 
the name by combining “tetramino” and “tennis,” his favorite 
sport. Although Pajitnov’s exposure to videogames was quite lim-
ited, he did get a chance to see  Pac-Man ( Chapter 13 , “ Pac-Man 
(1980): Japanese Gumption, American Consumption”) and cube-
 hopping arcade classic,  Q*bert  (Gottlieb, 1982).1 Pajitnov created 
the game purely for fun as a type of electronic variation of the 
Many of the countless original 
Tetris ports, like the one shown 
here on the Philips CD-i from 
1992, added superﬂ uous 
window dressing around the 
core gameplay model. In the CD-i 
version’s case, it was the addition 
of full-motion video backgrounds. 
For most fans, all that mattered 
to them about a port or clone 
was whether the core gameplay 
remained intact, not the quality 
of the graphics or sound.
 1      See Kikizo’s interview with Pajitnov for the source of these and other facts about 
Tetris at  http://games.kikizo.com/features/tetris_iv_dec07_p2.asp . 

294     Chapter 20 TETRIS (1985): CASUAL GAMING FALLS INTO PLACE
pentomino puzzles he liked to solve,2 but soon realized he had a 
hit on his hands when he noticed the game showing up on pretty 
much every Elektronika 60 in the country. 
 Pajitnov ported it to the IBM PC, upgrading the graphics along 
the way. This version spread just as quickly, and it wasn’t long 
before foreign companies wanted to secure exclusive rights to 
distribute what was sure to be a multimillion dollar mega hit. 
Here’s where the story gets quite murky and contested. In short, 
the Soviet Union didn’t allow individuals like Pajitnov to own pro-
grams and make contracts with foreign companies concerning 
those programs. Instead, the government (and its agencies) were 
responsible for such matters. 
 Pajitnov seems quite touchy about the subject: “I don’t really 
like to talk about that because when I think about those things I 
lose my sense of humour,” he said in an interview posted on the 
website  Kikizo.  To make a long story short, Pajitnov lost control 
of the project, and several different foreign companies held (or 
thought they held) rights or even exclusive rights to the game. 
One of the ﬁ rst commercial releases was Spectrum Holobyte’s ver-
sion for the IBM PC, which debuted in 1986. Spectrum Holobyte 
had secured the rights from a British software company named 
Andromeda, who didn’t really have any ofﬁ cial authorization 
to do so (they had gotten the game from some Hungarians who 
had somehow managed to get a copy from the Soviet Union). 
Eventually Andromeda did secure ofﬁ cial rights to license the 
game for the IBM PC and other home computers. 
 2      A standard pentomino puzzle involves tiling a rectangular box with the differ-
ently shaped pentominoes by covering it without overlap or gaps. 
Atari’s arcade conversion of 
Tetris, shown here, which was 
later ported to the NES before 
being pulled over rights, featured 
a head-to-head mode.

 
Chapter 20 TETRIS (1985): CASUAL GAMING FALLS INTO PLACE     295
 The licensing arrangements got even more complicated (and 
dubious) after 1988, when the Soviet government set up the 
“Elektronorgtechnica,” which was made responsible for mar-
keting and licensing the game. However, by this point six differ-
ent companies were claiming rights to  Tetris  for all manner of 
platforms. The government ended up giving Atari the rights to 
the arcade version and Nintendo rights to versions for consoles 
(except, strangely enough, in Japan) and handhelds. 
 Atari jumped the gun, however, and, under its Tengen banner, 
released a Nintendo Entertainment System (NES) version with-
out permission. This version was considered to be superior to 
Nintendo’s, because it allowed two players to play the game simul-
taneously on juxtaposed boards. Nintendo, however, took them to 
court and managed to get Tengen’s game taken off the shelves. 
 Meanwhile, Nintendo was able to leverage its license to great suc-
cess for its Game Boy handheld, released in 1989. The game sold 
millions of copies, and countless gamers bought a Game Boy specif-
ically to play  Tetris , which for a time came bundled with the system. 
 In 1996, the rights reverted to Pajitnov, who had emigrated 
to the United States and teamed up with Henk Rogers. Rogers 
formed  The Tetris Company  with the goal of extracting some roy-
alties from the many companies making  Tetris  games. However, 
Nintendo’s Tetris for their NES, 
shown here, was considered 
inferior to Tengen’s conversion, 
which allowed for simultaneous 
two-player competitions.

296     Chapter 20 TETRIS (1985): CASUAL GAMING FALLS INTO PLACE
although the company claims the exclusive right to the  Tetris 
name, their control over  Tetris- like games is not certain. The 
upshot is that people making unauthorized  Tetris clones have 
called them by other names, such as Wolfgang Strobl’s  Klotz 
(1989; PC), to avoid litigation, and The Tetris Company hasn’t 
been aggressive in shutting down these operations. Although 
Pajitnov may not have received any royalties when he made the 
game, he seems satisﬁ ed with the money he has received in con-
junction with this new company. 
 Pajitnov created several other games based on  Tetris , such 
as  Welltris  (1989). The game gets it name from its 3D setup; the 
pieces fall into the center of the screen as though into a hole (or 
a well). Although perhaps more cognitively advanced than  Tetris , 
this game hasn’t received nearly the same publicity. Pajitnov went 
on to make several other mind and puzzle games. Among his lat-
est is  Hexic , a colorful puzzle game inspired by  Bejeweled (which 
we’ll discuss in a moment). 
 Although no derivative of  Tetris  has achieved the recognition 
or success of the original, there have been several noteworthy 
attempts. One of the best known is  Dr. Mario , a 1990 game for 
the NES with branding from Nintendo’s popular Mario franchise. 
Dr. Mario for the NES was one 
of many “themed” Tetris-style 
games, and one of the many 
examples of Nintendo’s practice 
of repackaging its characters 
from one type of game for 
use in another. Dr. Mario also 
offered the popular side-by-side 
competitive play mode that was 
absent from Nintendo’s original 
attempt at Tetris for the platform.

 
Chapter 20 TETRIS (1985): CASUAL GAMING FALLS INTO PLACE     297
Here, the  Tetris- style gameplay is given a medical theme. Instead 
of blocks, players guide pills (consisting of two blocks) that fall 
from the top of the screen to a set of viruses toward the bottom. 
Players win the game by matching up pills and viruses of the cor-
responding color (red, blue, or yellow). There was also a popular 
two-player mode available, which employed side-by-side simul-
taneous gameplay. 
 An even more radical derivative is Capcom’s  Super Puzzle 
Fighter II Turbo , released in 1996. The game pits players against 
each other in the same side-by-side setup we saw in  Dr. Mario 
and Atari’s version of Tetris. The players are represented by paro-
died versions of characters from Capcom’s  Street Fighter series 
( Chapter 17 , “ Street Fighter II (1991): Would You Like the Combo?”), 
who ﬁ ght each other as the players match up gems. Like  Dr. Mario , 
the falling bits consist of two blocks, and must be connected to 
other gems of the identical color. However, lining them up isn’t 
enough; only a special exploding block of like color will clear the 
formations. Whenever this happens, the ﬁ ghters will respond with 
one of the moves (or combos) that they used in Capcom’s popular 
ﬁ ghting games. 
 It’s likely that the staggering success of  Tetris made publishers 
more responsive to similar puzzle games from other developers. 
Of these, perhaps the four most famous are Sega’s  Columns (1990), 
Compile’s  Puyo Puyo  (also known as  Puyo Pop , 1991), Taito’s  Puzzle 
Bobble  (also known as  Bust-a-Move , 1994), and PopCap Games’s 
 Bejeweled (2001). 
The main Tetris series has had a 
series of interesting offshoots, 
including WordTris (box back 
for the Super Nintendo version 
shown), in which the object is 
to build words of three letters 
or more using tiles that fall 
from the top of the playing area. 
Nintendo’s platforms have always 
been home to popular puzzle 
games, including the unrelated—
though extremely popular—Tetris 
Attack, which requires matching 
colored blocks.

298     Chapter 20 TETRIS (1985): CASUAL GAMING FALLS INTO PLACE
 Columns  takes place inside a tall, rectangular playing ﬁ eld, 
similar to Tetris. Columns of three different colored jewels 
appear, one at a time, at the top of the screen and fall to the bot-
tom, landing either on the ﬂ oor or on top of previously fallen 
columns. After a column has fallen, if there are three or more of 
the same symbols connected in a straight line horizontally, verti-
cally, or diagonally, those symbols disappear. The pile of columns 
then settles under gravity. Occasionally, a special column called 
Screenshot from the arcade 
version of Sega’s Columns.
Screenshot from the arcade 
version of Compile’s Puyo Puyo, 
which is probably better known to 
U.S. gamers in some of its home 
incarnations, like Dr. Robotnik’s 
Mean Bean Machine for the Sega 
Genesis and Kirby’s Avalanche for 
the Super Nintendo.

 
Chapter 20 TETRIS (1985): CASUAL GAMING FALLS INTO PLACE     299
the Magic Jewel appears, which ﬂ ashes with different colors and 
destroys all the jewels with the same color as the one underneath 
it when it lands. 
 Puyo Puyo ’s basic goal is for one of the players to defeat their 
opponent (computer or human) in a battle by ﬁ lling their tall, 
rectangular playing ﬁ eld up to the top with garbage blocks. The 
gelatinous and expressive Puyos fall from the top of the screen 
in groups of two or more, and can be moved left and right and 
rotated. When four or more Puyos of the same color form 
together to create a group—whether vertical, horizontal, or in 
a Tetris-shaped piece—they form a chain, then pop and disap-
pear. Because doing well in one playﬁ eld would send the garbage 
blocks to the opponent’s, it was always an exciting race to exe-
cute a chain reaction big enough to completely bury the other 
player’s Puyos. 
 Puzzle Bobble , based on the characters from single-screen 
arcade platformer,  Bubble Bobble  (1986), contains a rectangular 
playﬁ eld with a prearranged pattern of colored bubbles. At the 
bottom of the screen, the player controls a rotating pointer that 
can aim and ﬁ re a queued colored bubble at the top bubbles, 
preferably forming and clearing matching chains of three. The 
objective is to clear all the bubbles from the playﬁ eld before they 
eventually creep down to the bottom. 
 Bejeweled  is one of the ﬁ rst major “casual games.” It was cre-
ated with Macromedia Flash, a Web programming language 
often used to make animated ads for websites. The game was so 
Screenshot from Taito’s arcade 
version of Puzzle Bobble for SNK’s 
Neo Geo platform.

300     Chapter 20 TETRIS (1985): CASUAL GAMING FALLS INTO PLACE
 successful that it was eventually published as a best-selling mul-
tiplatform stand-alone game, but has continued to be a mainstay 
of online casual gaming sites.  Bejeweled , like  Puzzle Bobble , has 
its pieces already ﬁ ll the board when the game begins. The goal is 
to swap adjacent gems around to make a chain of three gems of 
the same color. New gems fall only when players clear room for 
them on the board. 
 Highly addictive and well-crafted games like  Bejeweled are no 
doubt responsible for the rise in “casual gaming” over the last 
few years. Although many of these games are available exclu-
sively online, some also appear on store shelves alongside titles 
with bigger budgets. They are also popular choices for gaming 
on mobile phones. In general, though, these games seem to have 
the most appeal for “nontraditional” gamers with little interest 
in the latest  Halo  or  Madden  (Chapters 5 and 10, respectively). 
They are, as is often stated, quite popular among women and 
older gamers. For instance, all of author Barton’s grandparents 
are avid casual gamers, spending hours and hours every eve-
ning engrossed in casual games like PopCap’s aforementioned 
 Bejeweled  and  Bookworm  (2004).  Bookworm , also known as 
 Bespelled , is a fun variation on  Bejeweled; instead of matching 
gems, players make words out of letter tiles. Interestingly, though 
ostensibly role-playing games, the  Puzzle Quest series, starting 
with the 1997 release of  Puzzle Quest: Challenge of the Warlords 
on the Nintendo DS and Sony PlayStation Portable, even uses a 
competitive  Bejeweled -style playﬁ eld to resolve in-game combat 
and other activities as part of its hybrid gameplay. 
Bejeweled is one of the most 
successful “casual games” ever 
made. Casual games are intended 
for so-called noncore (hardcore) 
gamers, who often have limited 
technical knowledge and little 
interest in investing their time 
in learning complicated games. 
Games like Bejeweled are 
known for being easy to learn, 
yet hard to master.

 
Chapter 20 TETRIS (1985): CASUAL GAMING FALLS INTO PLACE     301
 When Emma Boyes of GameSpot UK asked Pajitnov whether 
people would play  Tetris  forever, he responded, “Yes. Technology 
may change but our brains don’t. So basically, I don’t know why 
not.”3   To many, this is what makes  Tetris  the “perfect” videogame—
one that’s at home on any platform in any setting.  Tetris has never 
been about dazzling graphics or sophisticated gameplay; it’s a sim-
ple diversion that somehow manages to stay fresh and compelling 
year after year. It’s also a testament to the fact that great, best-selling 
games don’t always require multimillion-dollar budgets and huge 
teams of professional game developers. As  Tetris proves, what one 
really needs to make a great game is the imagination to conceive it.
As Pajitnov’s original character-
based version of Tetris proved, 
any platform with a display makes 
a suitable playing environment. 
Box back shown from a version 
of Joseph Zbiciak’s 4-Tris (2000) 
for the Mattel Intellivision, just 
one of a seemingly never-ending 
series of modern homebrew 
games based on Tetris for classic 
platforms.
 3 http://tinyurl.com/46c429 .  

This page intentionally left blank

21
303
   THE LEGEND OF ZELDA (1986): 
RESCUING ZELDAS AND 
UNITING TRIFORCES 
  Like most of the games covered in this book, Shigeru Miyamoto’s 
 The Legend of Zelda  needs no introduction. A gamer who’d never 
heard of  Zelda  would be as bizarre as a science ﬁ ction fan who’d 
never heard of  Star Wars , or a fantasy buff who’d never read Tolkien. 
Love it or hate it,  The Legend of Zelda  is a foundational game, one 
of only a handful of titles that can truly be said to have helped 
to deﬁ ne the industry as we know it today. Its popularity and 
name recognition is rivaled only by the likes of  Super Mario Bros. 
(Chapter 19, “ Super Mario Bros.  (1985): How High Can Jumpman 
Get?” also from Miyamoto) and  Pac-Man ( Chapter 13 , “ Pac-Man 
(1980): Japanese Gumption, American Consumption”). To say that 
it “inﬂ uenced” the games industry is like saying that the biblical 
Moses “inﬂ uenced” the Red Sea. It didn’t just sell copies, it parted 
the Paciﬁ c Ocean, helping to open a critical link between Japan 
and America that has yet to close. If Miyamoto’s  Super Mario Bros. 
was the lure,  The Legend of Zelda  was the hook. It was a game that 
turned ordinary people into lifelong gamers. 
 But what was it about  The Legend of Zelda  that aroused such 
hyperbole? Maybe, you say, it was just a case of the right game 
at the right time, a simplistic action game with just enough role-
playing elements to titillate the unwashed masses. After all, surely 
the plot—rescue Princess Zelda from the evil clutches of Ganon by 
assembling eight pieces of a magical artifact called the Triforce—is 
hopelessly cliché, more Mother Goose than Norman Mailer. And 
surely the gameplay is simplistic as well, having more in com-
mon with  Space Invaders ( Chapter 16 , “ Space Invaders (1978): The 
Japanese Descend”) than  Ultima  (Chapter 23, “ Ultima (1980): The 
Immaculate Conception of the Computer Role-Playing Game”). 
Perhaps the record-setting sales of  The Legend of Zelda  and its 

304     Chapter 21 THE LEGEND OF ZELDA (1986)
sequels say more about the naïveté of the buying public than the 
artistry of its creators: a masterpiece only of marketing. 
 But such claims, no matter how eloquently presented, would 
be as eccentric as a science ﬁ ction fan who hated  Star Wars , or a 
fantasy buff who loathed Tolkien. They certainly exist. But nobody 
particularly likes them. 
 In this chapter, we’ll explore the legacy of  The Legend of Zelda , 
one of the most successful and long-lived franchises in the his-
tory of the industry. As we’ll see, all of these games were instant 
best-sellers and were routinely given perfect or near perfect 
scores by all major critics.  Zelda —at least in the eyes of its many 
fans—can simply do no wrong. 
 The ﬁ rst  Zelda  game debuted in 1986 for the Japanese version 
of the Nintendo Entertainment System (NES)—the Famicom—
followed by a North American release in 1987. Often described as 
an “action-adventure,” the game put players in the role of a cou-
rageous lad named Link. Link’s quest is to reassemble the eight 
pieces of a powerful artifact called the Triforce of Wisdom, which 
Princess Zelda had separated and hidden to keep them away from 
the megalomaniac Ganon, Prince of Darkness. Ganon learned of 
Zelda’s deed and imprisoned her, but not before the wily princess 
sent her nursemaid (Impa) to search for a hero. Link saves Impa 
and learns of the threat to the land of Hyrule. Fortunately for 
Link, there are some people willing to help him on his quest, and 
they provide vital but often cryptic clues. 
Amazingly, legendary Donkey 
Kong and Mario creator Shigeru 
Miyamoto designed yet another 
“mascot” game in the 1980s that 
would spawn a huge mainstream 
phenomena and franchise. 
Screenshot from the original 
The Legend of Zelda on the 
NES that started it all.

 
Chapter 21 THE LEGEND OF ZELDA (1986)     305
 The gameplay is usually described as “action-adventure,” though 
some people wrongly consider it an RPG. Players spend most of 
their time exploring a tile-based map, shown from an overhead 
perspective comparable to early  Ultima  games. Many maps are 
swarming with monsters, who can be vanquished by swings from 
Link’s sword. If Link’s “life hearts” are at their maximum capacity, 
he can also throw the sword. Because the sword instantly reap-
pears in Link’s hand,1 this aspect of the gameplay is similar to that 
found in the many “run and gun” games of the era, such as SNK’s 
 Ikari Warriors  (1986; Arcade) and Konami’s  Contra  (1987; Arcade). 
Link can also ﬁ nd an upgrade for his shield and a magical bow and 
arrows, as well as other character items that allow him to gradually 
access more areas, but there’s hardly the emphasis on upgrading 
arms and armor found in most role- playing games. 
 Although  The Legend of Zelda  has much in common with 
many RPGs, such as a fantasy setting and the presence of magic, 
it lacks both a leveling system and tactical turn-based combat 
system, two of the quintessential features of the computer RPG 
genre. We can easily contrast it with contemporary games like 
Enix’s  Dragon Warrior , which debuted ﬁ rst in Japan as  Dragon 
Quest  in 1986 and a year later in North America under its new 
name. Though not nearly as popular here as it was in Japan, it 
still gave American NES owners a chance to play a true “Japanese 
role-playing game.”  Dragon Warrior  offered both the point-based 
leveling system and tactical combat that has characterized much 
of the genre ever since. A similar point could be made of Square’s 
 Final Fantasy  (1987), another classic console RPG, discussed in 
 Chapter 7 , “ Final Fantasy VII  (1997): It’s Never Final in the World 
of Fantasy.” Both  Final Fantasy and  Dragon Warrior  were hugely 
successful in Japan, but didn’t seem to attract much attention in 
North America, where console owners at the time seemed to pre-
fer action-oriented games. 
 It’s important to bear in mind the state of the console market in 
1987. Although the NES was more advanced than the last genera-
tion of American consoles, the bulk of successful console games 
still tended to be rather simplistic action games. This situation was 
in stark contrast to the computer games market, where adventure, 
RPG, and strategy games were far more abundant. Furthermore, 
the NES seemed targeted primarily to children, an idea that 
Nintendo reinforced with its strict censorship policies, cartoony 
mascots, and family-friendly advertisements. Although plenty of 
adults could enjoy games like  Super Mario Bros.  and the light-gun 
game  Duck Hunt , these were simple diversions indeed compared 
to the latest offerings from Origin or Sierra On-Line. No doubt 
 1      In reality, Link’s sword never really leaves his hand––it just shoots out a ﬂ ashing 
replica. 

306     Chapter 21 THE LEGEND OF ZELDA (1986)
Zelda II for the NES had random 
encounters, like so many 
Japanese RPGs of its era. Players 
could try to avoid these monsters 
if they wanted, but Link would 
miss out on the experience points.
Zelda II offered a 2D, side-
scrolling view during combat and 
some exploration modes. Even 
though the game sold well, many 
fans consider it the worst game of 
the series on a Nintendo system.

 
Chapter 21 THE LEGEND OF ZELDA (1986)     307
many publishers feared that a more sophisticated game would 
have ﬂ oundered miserably in a market dominated by adolescents. 
On the other hand, Nintendo clearly needed more than run-and-
jump games if it wanted to expand its North American user base. 
 The Legend of Zelda  seemed destined to ﬁ ll the gap. Like  Super 
Mario Bros. , it was simple enough for kids, but still compelling for 
adults. Miyamoto confessed that he was initially nervous about 
the game, because it “forced the players to think about what they 
should do next. We were afraid that gamers would become bored 
and stressed by the new concept.”2 Fortunately for Miyamoto, 
console gamers were more than up for the challenge. 
 We’ve already alluded to the action sequences, which consist 
mostly of destroying or avoiding the roaming monsters with Link’s 
sword or bow. Link also collects money as he slaughters foes, 
which can be used to purchase special items from merchants. 
The adventure elements are mostly ﬁ nding keys and items, gath-
ering clues, and navigating the large overland and dungeon maps. 
Naturally, magazines were quick to publish guides and maps, and 
there’s no telling how many fans of the game compared strategies 
and shared insights with their friends. 
 The relative complexity of  The Legend of Zelda  raised the need 
for a key innovation: the battery backup system for cartridges. 
Before  The Legend of Zelda , most console games were intended 
to be played in one sitting. If players quit and resumed hours or 
days later, they were forced to start over from the beginning. The 
only way around this limitation was a password system, but this 
was an often-cumbersome process. The battery in the shiny gold 
 Zelda  cartridges let gamers painlessly save their games, restoring 
them later with hardly any hassle. Although it’s easy enough to 
trivialize such a detail, it was instrumental in narrowing the gap 
between console games and computers, the latter of which had 
the beneﬁ t of cassette and disk storage. 
 The success of  The Legend of Zelda  is hard to exaggerate. It not 
only sold millions of copies, but spawned a cavalcade of licensed 
consumer products like breakfast cereal and bedsheet sets. It also 
served, along with its ﬁ rst sequel, as the basis for a short-lived 
Saturday morning cartoon that ran in 1989. The game is still fre-
quently played today in various incarnations and remains a pop-
ular entry on many of the Web’s greatest game compilations. 
 The next  Zelda  game was  Zelda II: The Adventure of Link , 
released in the United States in 1988. Although wildly popular at 
the time, this title is generally considered the black sheep of the 
series and has a number of features that are found in no other 
 Zelda  game. The most noticeable change from the original was 
a shift to a 2D, side-view perspective reminiscent of Nintendo’s 
 2 See  http://www.miyamotoshrine.com/theman/interviews/230403.shtml . 

308     Chapter 21 THE LEGEND OF ZELDA (1986)
popular run-and-jump games for combat and in-town scenes (the 
overhead perspective was maintained for overland travel). This is 
also the only  Zelda  game that qualiﬁ es as a true RPG, since Link 
now gains experience points and attack, magic, and life levels. 
 The third  Zelda game and the ﬁ rst for the Super Nintendo 
(SNES) is  The Legend of Zelda: A Link to the Past , published in the 
United States in 1992. It returned to the overhead perspective of 
the ﬁ rst game, but took advantage of the SNES’s superior tech-
nology to offer substantially improved audiovisuals. The game’s 
enormous sales undoubtedly helped Nintendo’s new platform 
establish itself in the market and eventually outperform its rival, 
the Sega Genesis—which had beaten Nintendo to the 16-bit era. 
Box back for Atari’s Secret Quest 
(1989), one of the last games 
released for the Atari 2600 VCS 
during its original commercial 
lifetime. Many feel that Secret 
Quest’s development and release 
was part of Atari’s last-ditch 
attempt to demonstrate that the 
software library on their modest 
system from 1977 could still 
compete with more sophisticated 
systems like the NES and games 
like The Legend of Zelda.

 
Chapter 21 THE LEGEND OF ZELDA (1986)     309
Box back (top) and screenshot 
(bottom) from Sega’s Golden 
Axe Warrior (1991) for the 
Sega Master System. Though 
little known today, some fans 
of the game claim it is better 
than its obvious inspiration, 
The Legend of Zelda.

310     Chapter 21 THE LEGEND OF ZELDA (1986)
 Sega, always struggling to outdo Nintendo, had also introduced 
a CD-ROM add-on for the Genesis in 1992, and new titles with 
full-motion video were attracting a great deal of buzz. Besides the 
Sega CD, there were several stand-alone CD-ROM consoles avail-
able, all of which proved to have minimal staying power. One of 
these was Philips’s CD-i platform, released in 1991, which plays a 
small role in the  Zelda story. 
 Nintendo famously wavered on the CD-ROM issue. On the 
one hand, CD-ROMs had enormous storage capacity and were 
very cheap to produce. On the other, Nintendo feared they would 
be much easier than cartridges to copy and distribute  illegally. 
The company eventually decided not to release a CD-ROM 
add-on that it had commissioned from Philips,3 but agreed to 
let them develop and release software using Nintendo charac-
ters for the CD-i platform. Philips moved quickly to exploit the 
arrangement and in addition to developing Mario-themed titles, 
released three low-quality  Zelda  games for its console:  Link: The 
Faces of Evil ,  Zelda: The Wand of Gamelon (both 1993) and  Zelda’s 
Adventure  (1994). Like most early CD-ROM games, these were 
loaded with noninteractive full-motion video sequences (the 
ﬁ rst two are animated; the third has live actors). All three of these 
games were poorly contrived and had none of the polish and 
attention to detail that characterized Nintendo’s games. Few fans 
of the series consider these wretched games worth playing today.4 
 The next ofﬁ cial  Zelda  game was  The Legend of Zelda: Link’s 
Awakening , a 1993 game for Nintendo’s Game Boy. Despite its lack 
of color, the game was quite successful, selling millions of copies 
and receiving praise from nearly all major critics. Nintendo would 
continue to release  Zelda  games for its handheld platforms, such 
as  The Legend of Zelda: Oracle of Seasons  for the Game Boy Color 
in 2001, and  The Legend of Zelda: A Link to the Past & Four Swords 
for the Game Boy Advance in 2002, which combined an update of 
the SNES game with a multiplayer game that could interact with 
the single-player game. One of the more recent handheld  Zelda ’s 
is  The Legend of Zelda: Phantom Hourglass for the Nintendo DS, 
which was released in 2007 and supported both local and online 
multiplayer. These games have not received as much media 
attention as the console versions, but are still must-haves for any 
serious fan and have all been top sellers. 
 3      Nintendo initially contracted with Sony to develop the add-on, dubbed “Play 
Station,” but for various reasons the deal fell through and the relationship 
between the two corporations soured. Sony reworked the concepts into an 
entirely new console entitled “PlayStation,” becoming one of Nintendo’s most 
powerful competitors. 
 4      For a detailed overview of the CD-i games, see  http://www.zeldaelements.net/
cdiseries_foe.shtm . 

 
Chapter 21 THE LEGEND OF ZELDA (1986)     311
 The next game in the console series,  The Legend of Zelda: Ocarina 
of Time , was released in 1998 for the Nintendo 64 and is consid-
ered by many fans to be the best game in the series, if not of all 
time. Even though it was released in November 1998, it still became 
the bestselling game of that year, with more than 2.5 million units 
Sega’s 1991 Ax Battler: A Legend 
of Golden Axe for their Game 
Gear, was very similar to Zelda II, 
featuring a traditional top-view 
overworld mixed with side-
scrolling action sequences.
Box back for one of 
the controversial Philips 
CD-i releases: Zelda: 
The Wand of Gamelon.

312     Chapter 21 THE LEGEND OF ZELDA (1986)
Nintendo was always eager to 
promote its new platforms by 
offering exclusive games based 
on its popular franchises, like 
The Legend of Zelda: Link’s 
Awakening for the Game Boy.
The Legend of Zelda: A Link to 
the Past brought the beloved 
franchise to the Super Nintendo.

 
Chapter 21 THE LEGEND OF ZELDA (1986)     313
shipped.5 The game raked in dozens of awards and even today 
is one of the top downloadable purchases for the Nintendo Wii’s 
 virtual console.   
Screenshots from the multiplayer 
Four Swords portion of The Legend 
of Zelda: A Link to the Past & 
Four Swords for the Nintendo 
Game Boy Advance.
 5 See  http://ign64.ign.com/articles/066/066340p1.html . 

314     Chapter 21 THE LEGEND OF ZELDA (1986)
 Ocarina of Time  adapted the series for the 3D era, pioneered in 
Nintendo’s earlier  Super Mario 64 (see Chapter 18, “ Super Mario 
64/Tomb Raider (1996): The Third Dimension”). However, it also 
reﬁ ned the formula with “Z-Targeting,” which let Link lock on to 
a target and perform straﬁ ng and other maneuvers without hav-
ing to wrestle with the camera. Another nice feature was that the 
Screenshots from The Legend of 
Zelda: Ocarina of Time rerelease 
for the Nintendo GameCube, 
which also contained Ocarina of 
Time: Master Quest, featuring 
rearranged dungeons.

 
Chapter 21 THE LEGEND OF ZELDA (1986)     315
function of the controller’s buttons, which were always displayed 
onscreen, changed depending on the context of the situation, 
creating a versatile but intuitive control scheme. The game also 
contained many puzzles, including several based on the titular 
musical instrument. Contemporary reviews of the game read like 
overhyped ad copy. Peer Schneider of IGN, for instance, wrote 
that “if you’re making games and you haven’t played this game, 
then you’re like a director who has never seen Citizen Kane or 
a musician who has never heard of Mozart.”6 Jeff Gerstmann of 
GameSpot was just as enthusiastic, writing that to call it anything 
but perfect “would be a bald-faced lie.”7 
 Nintendo followed up  Ocarina of Time  in 2000 with  The Legend 
of Zelda: Majora’s Mask , another game for the Nintendo 64. As 
the title implies, the main theme is a collection of masks that 
grant Link different powers and abilities. Three of them actu-
ally transform him into different creatures. Though the game 
had some novel concepts and sold millions of copies, it wasn’t 
as well received as its predecessor. Jeff Gertsmann of GameSpot 
complained about the tedious side-quests and “meaningless 
minigames.”8 IGN’s reviewers were less critical, but knocked off 
a tenth of a point for lacking any major innovations, including a 
remedy for the “sometimes-sluggish framerate and occasionally 
blurry textures.”9 Some gamers resented that the game required 
the system’s memory Expansion Pak to even play, one of only 
two games to do so along with Nintendo’s 3D platformer  Donkey 
Kong 64 (1999). 
 There were two very different followups to the Nintendo 
64 series:  The Legend of Zelda: The Wind Waker  (2002) and  The 
Legend of Zelda: Twilight Princess  (2006). Both of these were 
released for the GameCube, though a special version of the  latter 
is available for the Wii. Perhaps the most noteworthy aspect of 
 The Wind Waker  is its distinctive and controversial aesthetic; its 
cartoon-like cell-shaded animation gives it a fresh appearance, 
though many gamers missed the darker tone of the previous 
games. There was also an option to connect a Game Boy Advance 
handheld. Once Link ﬁ nds the “Tingle tuner,” the handheld can 
be used to view maps and hints as well as activate exclusive in-
game abilities. Unsurprisingly, this game was also a massive hit 
for Nintendo and received a direct sequel on the Nintendo DS in 
the form of the aforementioned  The Legend of Zelda: Phantom 
Hourglass .  Twilight Princess , which returned the series to a 
 6 See  http://ign64.ign.com/articles/150/150437p1.html . 
 7 http://www.gamespot.com/n64/adventure/legendofzeldaoot/review.html . 
 8 See  http://tinyurl.com/3n4ﬂ 3 . 
 9 See  http://ign64.ign.com/articles/151/151933p1.html . 

316     Chapter 21 THE LEGEND OF ZELDA (1986)
darker and more traditional look, also boasted terriﬁ c audio-
visuals and compelling gameplay. However, GameSpot’s critic 
complained about its lack of innovation; it still relied on text for 
dialog, and the special features added for the Wii version seemed 
like afterthoughts. Of course, there are no shortage of supposedly 
critical reviews that declare it ﬂ awless. IGN’s video review, for 
instance, called it the “the best Zelda, period,” and claimed that 
Wii controllers made the game feel more natural and satisfying.10 
 Although the  Zelda  series is one of the bestselling video-
game franchises in the history of the industry, we have yet to 
see another developer successfully duplicate its formula with 
both critical and commercial success. Whereas other mega-
hit titles like Nintendo’s own  Super Mario Bros. , id Software’s 
 Doom ( Chapter 5 , “ Doom  (1993): The First-Person Shooter Takes 
Control”), Cyan’s  Myst ( Chapter 12 , “ Myst  (1993): Launching 
Multimedia Worlds”), and many others have seen whole genres 
and subgenres form in their wake,  Zelda  seems to stand alone. 
This isn’t to say there are  no  clones, just that games like Hudson 
Soft’s  Neutopia  (1990, NEC TurboGrafx-16) and Nextech’s 
 Crusader of Centy  (1994; Sega Genesis) have seemed to pose little, 
if any, challenge to the epic franchise. Surely, no one would seri-
ously prefer such games to the real thing. 
The Legend of Zelda: The 
Wind Waker for the Nintendo 
GameCube, featured a 
controversial art style.
 10 See  http://tinyurl.com/4geha8 .  

 
Chapter 21 THE LEGEND OF ZELDA (1986)     317
 However, the games have perhaps exerted an indirect inﬂ u-
ence on RPGs for computer and console, which have moved far 
away from the stat-heavy, turn-based games of the 1980s. We can 
see this clearly in games such as Blizzard’s  Diablo ( Chapter 4 , 
“ Diablo  (1997): The Rogue Goes to Hell”), and might well have 
inspired the ill-fated push towards arcade action we saw in the 
latter  King’s Quest ( Chapter 11 , “ King’s Quest: Quest for the Crown 
(1984): Perilous Puzzles, Thorny Thrones”) and  Ultima games. 
We might hunt for  Zelda ’s inﬂ uence in other games classiﬁ ed as 
“action-adventures,” such as  Tomb Raider (Chapter 18, “ Super 
Mario 64/Tomb Raider (1996): The Third Dimension”) and even 
Capcom’s  Resident Evil ( Chapter 1 , “ Alone in the Dark (1992): The 
Polygons of Fear”), though admittedly these linkages seem a triﬂ e 
far-fetched. 
 Nevertheless, what seems to set the  Zelda  series apart is not 
so much its originality or innovation, which it had in spades, 
but its immaculate polish and sense of mysterious adventure. 
These are games that were built to stand the test of time. It’s obvi-
ous that the developers took nothing for granted, scrutinizing 
every detail, even when occasionally reimagining a new entry in 
the series. Although it’s of course possible to point out the occa-
sional misspelling or questionable translation, these lavish pro-
ductions heightened gamers’ expectations and have helped 
establish videogames as a respectable and even artistic form of 
entertainment.
Screenshot from the The Legend 
of Zelda–inspired Neutopia for 
the NEC TurboGrafx-16.

This page intentionally left blank

22
319
   THE SIMS  (2000): WHO LET 
THE SIMS OUT? 
 Will Wright’s  The Sims  (Electronic Arts, 2000; Apple Macintosh, 
Nintendo GameCube, PC, and others) is one of those rare games 
whose appeal extends to people who wouldn’t normally consider 
themselves gamers. Plenty of people who would never dream of 
playing  Halo or  John Madden Football 1 are diehard fans of  The 
Sims , and, conversely, many gamers who obsess over the latest 
shooter or MMORPG2 have little knowledge of Wright’s virtual 
playground,3 or, as he called it, “Virtual Dollhouse.” 
 Thus, although the game and its sequels constitute the best-
selling franchise of all time for the PC, it’s not hard to ﬁ nd sea-
soned gamers who’ve never played it. Indeed, it’s estimated that a 
full 50% of the series’ fan base is female, a key demographic that 
many game developers have either failed to interest or simply 
ignored entirely.4 This isn’t to say that  The Sims  is not accessible 
or intriguing to all sorts of gamers, but its focus on family and fur-
niture is a radical alternative to almost any other game we might 
ﬁ nd on the shelf. Nevertheless, for the millions of gamers turned 
off by shooters, MMORPGs, sports, and strategy titles,  The Sims 
is the best game in town. In this chapter, we’ll explore the history 
 1 See Chapters 5 and 10, respectively. 
 2 Massively Multiplayer Online Role-Playing Game. 
 3      A virtual playground’s primary goal is to essentially play with or manipulate pre-
made elements, with less focus on creativity and creation. Compare this to the 
primary goal of a “Software Toy,” like Pinball Construction Set in  bonus chapter , 
“Pinball Construction Set (1982): Launching Millions of Creative Possibilities,” 
which is to provide either the parts or allow the creation of the parts to build a 
game in a typically creative manner, and “sandbox” games, like Grand Theft Auto 
III in  Chapter 9 , “Grand Theft Auto III (2001): The Consolejacking Life,” in which 
the player is able to move about a large environment and perform a wide range 
of typically realistic activities, but with a primary focus on accomplishing various 
goals and activities over any type of creative or creation possibilities.  
 4 See http://news.cnet.com/Will-Sims-Online-alter-gaming-world/2100-1040_
3-977912.html. 

320     Chapter 22 THE SIMS (2000): WHO LET THE SIMS OUT?
of  The Sims , analyze its unusual gameplay, and speculate on the 
future of the franchise. 
 As its title suggests,  The Sims  has much in common with 
Wright’s earlier masterpiece  SimCity  (see  Chapter 15 , “ SimCity 
(1989): Building Blocks for Fun and Proﬁ t”), whose invisible citi-
zens were called “sims.” However, whereas that game cast play-
ers in the role of a mayor or city planner,  The Sims  puts them in 
charge of a family of semi-autonomous characters (the titular 
“sims”). Like real people (or pets), sims require food, sleep, and 
the occasional trip to the bathroom. Beyond these simple physi-
cal needs, they also require entertainment and fellowship with 
their friends and loved ones. Another important part of the game 
is building an appropriate home, reveling in the possibilities 
of interior design. Wright has described the game as a “Virtual 
Dollhouse,” and originally conceived of it as having more to do 
with building houses than the virtual people who’d live in them. 
However, as the concept evolved, it embraced both themes. What 
 SimCity  is to cities,  The Sims  is to citizens. If  SimCity  is a macro-
cosm,  The Sims  is a microcosm, a zoomed-in view of one of those 
ant-sized dots that ﬂ ow between the buildings of  SimCity . 
 Although  The Sims , like  SimCity  before it, has no deﬁ nite 
goals for players to accomplish, most players adopt one of three 
styles of gameplay. The ﬁ rst focuses on the “virtual pet” aspects; 
that is, carefully managing and controlling one’s family of sims. 
Players creating sims can adjust the levels of ﬁ ve different per-
sonality attributes: neat, outgoing, active, playful, and nice. The 
aggregate of these attributes is calculated as a sign of the zodiac. 
In The Sims, the player’s family 
can interact in all sorts of ways, 
such as dancing (shown here). 
These interactions have varied 
effects on the sims themselves; 
it’s important to keep track of 
their needs (notice the panel on 
the bottom right of the screen). PC 
version shown.

 
Chapter 22 THE SIMS (2000): WHO LET THE SIMS OUT?     321
Players can also choose their sims’ skin tone, sex, and age, and 
customize their appearance with different heads and outﬁ ts (the 
latter expansions greatly expand the options). Once the sims 
are created, the player must strive to satisfy their many needs or 
“motives.” These are hunger, comfort, hygiene, bladder (need to 
urinate), energy (sleep and caffeine levels), fun (entertainment), 
social (talking to other sims), and room (decor). Although some 
of these needs are straightforward (characters who don’t get to a 
bathroom will soil their clothes), others are more complex and 
are affected by the personality traits. For instance, a very playful 
character will get more fun out of a game than a book. 
 The sims are conspicuous consumers, deriving much more 
satisfaction from high-end products than cheap stuff. The man-
ual puts it this way: “Sims get the most gain from ‘high-quality’ 
objects: that is, a small TV is less efﬁ cient at entertaining than a 
large TV.” These are simple but compelling utilitarian principles: 
“good” decisions amount to what brings the greatest pleasure 
and least pain to the most people. What makes  The Sims interest-
ing to play, however, is the challenge (if not the impossibility) of 
pleasing people with such radically different personalities. The 
ensuing drama is what makes the game unpredictable and fun, 
but might also inspire gamers to reﬂ ect on their social life. Why, 
for instance, does one spend so many hours playing  The Sims 
when there are so many other ways to spend one’s time? It’s also 
likely that the chance to “play God” is quite compelling for many 
gamers. 
Another important part of The 
Sims is the build and buy menus, 
which let players customize 
their sims’ environment. There 
are countless options available, 
and the many expansion packs 
extend them further. The captions 
are often quite witty and wry, 
contributing to the game’s 
“smart” aesthetic and tongue-in-
cheek humor. PC version shown.

322     Chapter 22 THE SIMS (2000): WHO LET THE SIMS OUT?
 Another important part of a sim’s life is a job, as money is 
required for buying things. The type of job a sim can get depends 
on his or her skills, which are improved in speciﬁ ed ways. The 
skills are cooking, mechanical, charisma, body, logic, and cre-
ativity. Cooking and mechanical skills are improved by reading 
(a bookcase is all but a requirement) charisma requires a mirror, 
and body requires physical exercise (swimming, working out, 
dancing, and so on). Logic and creativity are increased by play-
ing chess or the piano, respectively. With the right skills, a charac-
ter can land a job advertised in the newspaper or online. The jobs 
vary in terms of pay and satisfaction, of course, but players don’t 
get to see or control sims that are away at work except to respond 
to workplace crises (how the player handles these determines 
whether the sim gets promoted or demoted). The original game 
included 10 career tracks, each with prerequisite skills. Perhaps 
the two most unusual career paths are crime (pickpocket) and 
“x-treme” (daredevil). Eventually, sims can get married (same-
sex is allowed) and even have children, though anyone expecting 
torrid sex scenes will likely be disappointed by the comical way 
these activities are represented. 
 We should note that sims don’t talk to each other using English 
or any other language, but rather a form of gibberish called 
“Simlish.” Simlish is spoken but also depicted in small comic 
book-like bubbles, though with icons rather than words. Simlish, 
which had been pioneered in Maxis’s earlier  SimCopter (see 
 Chapter 15 , “ SimCity  (1989): Building Blocks for Fun and Proﬁ t”), 
became one of the series’ most deﬁ ning characteristics and was 
Back of the box for 2004’s The 
Sims: Bustin’ Out on the Nokia 
N-Gage handheld. Console and 
handheld versions tend to play a 
bit differently than their computer 
counterparts, often allowing for 
more direct control and having 
more predeﬁ ned goals.

 
Chapter 22 THE SIMS (2000): WHO LET THE SIMS OUT?     323
even parodied in an episode of  The Drew Carey Show .5 Since 
Simlish is essentially a made-up nonsense language, there was no 
need to worry about translators or hiring different groups of voice 
actors for non-English versions of the game. 
 In yet another adaptation from  SimCity ,  The Sims  threw a vari-
ety of random events at players to keep them from getting too 
comfortable with their routines. These included natural disasters 
(ﬂ oods and ﬁ res) and burglars. The sims could also die in acci-
dents or from neglect. For example, forgetting to put ladders in a 
pool will prevent swimming sims from escaping; they will even-
tually drown. If the entire family dies, the house is sold. 
 Although many players lavished most of their attention on their 
sims, others focused on building things—what we might call the 
“dollhouse” approach to the game. The game offered countless ways 
to customize and renovate homes, turning players into virtual Bob 
Villas or Martha Stewarts. Players could add pools, fences, columns, 
plants, stairs, wallpaper, and windows just to name a few—and each 
type of object had dozens of variations. Lighting was a key concern, 
because sims languished in dark rooms. Ambitious builders could 
even add extra stories onto their homes. Many avid fans of the game 
spent hours and hours decorating, landscaping, and building, cre-
ating the perfect dream home for their lucky sims. 
 A last approach to  The Sims  is reminiscent of one of the game’s 
inﬂ uential predecessors:  Game of Life ,6 a mathematical simula-
tion created in 1970 by British mathematician John Conway. In 
 Game of Life , “players” began by setting up the initial conditions, 
then studying how these conditions determined the evolution of 
living cells, which the game’s algorithms were supposed to model. 
Although  Game of Life  was highly abstract, it’s easy to see how the 
same principles can apply to  The Sims , where players could set 
up a huge variety of conditions, then sit back to watch how their 
sims respond. The thrill of this “great watchmaker” approach was 
that the player could never predict the outcome of such grand 
experiments—there were just too many variables. We might call 
this the “ant farm” approach, as it emphasizes observation over 
interaction. 
 Obviously, a project as ambitious as  The Sims presented a for-
midable challenge from a technological perspective, and pub-
lisher Electronic Arts was initially skeptical that Wright’s vision 
was feasible. The ﬁ nal product offered a combination of 2D 
and 3D graphics to maintain smooth performance on the era’s 
 5      Episode s06e01. Drew Carey even appeared as a character in the 2001 House Party 
expansion pack. Malcolm in the Middle , episode 16 in season three, also featured 
a lengthy parody, with the titular character becoming obsessed with “The Virts.” 
 6 Sometimes referred to as Conway’s Game of Life. Many clones were created for 
various platforms over the years. 

324     Chapter 22 THE SIMS (2000): WHO LET THE SIMS OUT?
 hardware. Although the buildings and objects were rendered in 
2D, the sims were 3D, consisting of what was then a high number 
of polygons. A later expansion allowed advanced gamers to create 
their own furniture, clothing, hairstyles, makeup, and more, and 
share them with their friends. The game and its sequels have all 
boasted sleek production values, with high-quality sound effects 
and catchy music. 
 To say that the  The Sims  was a commercial success is an 
understatement. The game and its countless offshoots have sold 
well over 100 million copies, making it one of the best-selling 
 franchises in history.7 Although originally available only for com-
puters, well-received ports were later developed for consoles and 
handhelds, introducing an even larger audience to the joys of sat-
isfying sims.
  Before moving on to the many expansions, sequels, and spin-
offs, it’s worthwhile to reﬂ ect on the game’s antecedents. Besides 
the aforementioned  SimCity , what other games may have inﬂ u-
enced or at least anticipated  The Sims ? Although an exhaustive 
list of all such games would test even the most patient reader, no 
responsible historian could omit such obvious examples as David 
Crane’s  Little Computer People  (1985), Paul Reiche’s  Mail Order 
Monsters  (1985), Peter Molyneux’s  Populous  (1989), and Yasuhiro 
Wada’s  Harvest Moon  (1996). We’ll also brieﬂ y compare  The Sims 
to Ubisoft’s  Petz  series (1995), which also embodies many of the 
 7 See  http://thesims2.ea.com/images/100million/100mmLetter.jpg .
Screenshot from the Apple II 
version of Life, part of Golden 
Oldies Volume 1: Computer 
Software Classics (Software 
Country, 1985), which also 
features versions of Adventure 
(Chapter 25, “Zork (1980): Text 
Imps versus Graphics Grues”), 
Eliza (a “computer shrink”/
artiﬁ cial intelligence simulator), 
and Pong (bonus chapter, “Pong 
(1972): Avoid Missing Game to 
Start Industry”).

 
Chapter 22 THE SIMS (2000): WHO LET THE SIMS OUT?     325
concepts present in Wright’s masterpiece. In each case, the key 
similarity is the “pet raising” aspect of these games. 
 Little Computer People 8 was released by Activision for most 
viable computer platforms of the mid-1980s, though never for the 
IBM PC. It has a great deal in common with  The Sims  and is a clear 
progenitor—Wright himself acknowledged that he had played the 
game and even knew several of its developers, who later provided 
feedback on  The Sims .9 Like  The Sims ,  Little Computer People 
offers open-ended gameplay, with no clear way to win or lose. The 
gameworld is 2D, resembling a slice-away of a three-story house. 
A “little computer person” moves into the house and goes about 
his daily activities. The player can interact with him in various 
ways, including playing games (poker, “Card War,” or anagrams) 
or giving him presents. Players interacted by typing commands 
blindly into an unseen text parser, such as “please play piano 
for me,” sometimes eliciting no noticeable response. Strangely, 
although  Little Computer People  was highly original and compel-
ling (critics tended to rave about it), it faded into obscurity. 
Screenshot from the Commodore 
64 version of Little Computer 
People, illustrating the game’s 
full-time point of view, a cross 
section of the little computer 
person’s house.
 8 Also known as The Activision Little Computer People Discovery Kit, Little Computer 
People Research Project, and House-on-a-Disk. It was also released in a modiﬁ ed and 
less interactive form in Japan for the Nintendo Famicom as Apple Town Story.  
 9 See “A Chat About ‘The Sims’ and ‘Simcity’” at  http://www.cnn.com/chat/
transcripts/2000/1/wright/index.html . 

326     Chapter 22 THE SIMS (2000): WHO LET THE SIMS OUT?
 Mail Order Monsters  was another original game from 1985, 
released by Electronic Arts for the Atari 8-bit and Commodore 
64 platforms. Although  Mail Order Monsters  was primarily an 
action game, it did have various ways for players to improve 
their pet monsters with equipment or genetic enhancements. It’s 
the player’s job as a type of rancher to successfully manage his or 
her stable of monsters in order to do weapons-based gladiato-
rial combat in a variety of arenas. Up to two  players could battle 
it out in the arenas or in a game similar to capture-the-ﬂ ag. For 
additional motivation, the game kept track of won-lost records 
and other stats. The head-to-head aspects of  Mail Order Monsters 
seems to have been a precursor to Satoshi Tajiri’s immensely 
popular  Pokemon  series (starting in 1995) for Nintendo plat-
forms. However, we should note that  Mail Order Monsters did 
allow players direct control over their pet monsters during com-
bat; later “pet” games would increase their autonomy. 
 Bullfrog’s  Populous  is one of the ﬁ rst “god games,” a descrip-
tion that characterizes the players’ relationships to the game’s 
characters and world. Simply put, players act as deities, affecting 
the destiny of the population by shaping the land, causing natural 
disasters, and raising up a hero to overthrow the people of their 
rival god. The player’s ability to inﬂ uence the world depended 
Back of the box of the 
Commodore 64 version of Mail 
Order Monsters.

 
Chapter 22 THE SIMS (2000): WHO LET THE SIMS OUT?     327
on “mana,” a divine substance generated by one’s followers. 
 Populous  was immensely inﬂ uential, eventually seeing release on 
almost every viable platform of its time, and was highly praised 
by critics for its originality. 
 Harvest Moon , ﬁ rst released on the Super Nintendo, is a “farm 
simulator”; that is, a game that tasks players primarily with grow-
ing fruits, ﬂ owers, vegetables, and herbs. The player assumes 
Back of the box for Tecmo’s 
Monster Rancher from 1997 for 
the Sony PlayStation, a series 
that has much in common with 
Electronic Arts’ much earlier Mail 
Order Monsters. The Monster 
Rancher series is notable for 
allowing unique monsters to be 
created by reading data from 
external sources, which in this 
case is other CDs.
Populous is the ﬁ rst of the major 
“god games.” Rather than put 
players directly in control of a 
person or group, these games 
give players indirect control over 
their lives. For instance, a player 
can ﬂ atten terrain to make it 
easier to build more complex 
structures.

328     Chapter 22 THE SIMS (2000): WHO LET THE SIMS OUT?
the role of a young boy who has inherited his grandfather’s old, 
dilapidated farm. The boy can also get married, though doing 
so means working hard to attract a spouse and building on to 
his home. Despite its seemingly banal and repetitive gameplay, 
 Harvest Moon  was a huge hit, and spawned many sequels and 
spin-offs. 
 Although  The Sims  is ostensibly a “people simulator,” the game 
treats the sims more like pets than persons. Why, for instance, 
Lionhead Studios’ Black & White 
from 2001 is a modern “god 
game.” Players can be good or 
evil deities and have many ways 
to interact with the world and its 
people. The game begins with 
a lengthy playable tutorial that 
slowly introduces players to the 
game’s many features. PC version 
shown.
Tending to the farm animals in 
Natsume’s Harvest Moon: Tree of 
Tranquility (2008) for the Nintendo 
Wii. In an increasingly common 
occurrence for the series, players 
can choose a female character 
instead of the standard male main 
character.

 
Chapter 22 THE SIMS (2000): WHO LET THE SIMS OUT?     329
can a sim who can successfully hold down a 9-to-5 job not visit a 
bathroom on his or her own initiative? 
 Factors such as this are reminiscent of “pet” games like 
Ubisoft’s  Petz  series. The ﬁ rst of these games,  Dogz: Your 
Computer Pet  was developed by PF Magic and published by Virgin 
Interactive Entertainment in 1995 for PC.  Dogz  is essentially 
a virtual pet; a sort of evolving toy that required regular atten-
tion from their owners. Players (if we can indeed use that term) 
could pet and play with their dogs and even teach them tricks. 
Perhaps the most intriguing aspect of the game was that it was 
played right on the desktop; the dog could scamper right across a 
Microsoft  Excel  spreadsheet or be conﬁ ned to a playpen. Players 
could also spray them with water if they misbehaved.  Dogz was 
followed in 1996 by  Catz  and  Oddballz , the latter of which fea-
tured bizarre alien pets. These games were an amazing success 
for the company, which ended up shipping more than 500,000 
units by 1997.10 Sequels and spin-offs are still being published by 
Ubisoft today, and feature many different kinds of pets—such as 
 Bunnyz ,  Hamsterz ,  Horsez , and  Tigerz —just to name a few. All of 
the games seem to focus on the “cute” aspects of the animals and 
seem to appeal mostly to children. 
 Some readers may wonder how Aki Maita’s Tamagotchi toy 
compares to games like  Petz.  The Tamagotchi is essentially a 
 10 See  http://www.virtualpet.com/vp/farm/petz/petz.htm , which reprints an arti-
cle from Business Wire on the topic. 
Dogz is one of the many Petz 
games that lets players control a 
virtual pet. The pets have enough 
artiﬁ cial intelligence to learn 
tricks as well as play simple 
games. The pets behave better 
if the player treats them well, 
giving them treats or petting 
them. These games evolved from 
simple desktop toys to rather 
sophisticated simulations, and 
versions are available for almost 
every conceivable type of pet.

330     Chapter 22 THE SIMS (2000): WHO LET THE SIMS OUT?
handheld version of such games. It’s egg-shaped (the name 
means “cute little egg”) and meant to be carried by the user at 
all times. Users interact with the pet by feeding it, playing with 
it, cleaning it, and keeping an eye on its steadily evolving stats. 
The original unit was released in 1996, and sold more 40 million 
units worldwide and 12 million in North America.11 There have 
been ﬁ ve versions of the toy so far, and though their popularity 
has waned over the years, we’re likely to see many more. There 
are also plenty of videogame interpretations, as well as knock-
off toys from other companies, like Tiger Electronics’ Giga Pets, 
which debuted in 1997.12  
 What makes these games so appealing to children and even 
many adults? Aki Maita says that “It is dependent on you. That’s 
one reason it became so popular. . . . I think it’s very important for 
humans to ﬁ nd joy caring for something.”13 Maita’s insight seems 
to extend to games like  The Sims , who share much of the behavior 
of the Tamagotchi. Neglected sims can get into all sorts of trouble, 
such as setting their house and themselves on ﬁ re while making 
dinner. Naturally some players will feel more guilt at such calami-
ties (or elation when their sims are happy), but it seems safe to 
say that most players who enjoy games of this sort do form a bond 
with their sims or virtual pets comparable to that experienced by 
real pet owners. Indeed, one of the more popular expansions for 
 The Sims 2  allows sims to adopt and train their own virtual pets; 
it’s an interesting case of a virtual pet with a virtual pet. 
 The Humane Society of the United States offers several reasons 
why people enjoy pets, including that “caring for a companion 
animal can provide a sense of purpose and fulﬁ llment and lessen 
feelings of loneliness and isolation in all age groups.”14 Although 
it’s of course arguable that no virtual pet can ever compete with 
“the real thing,” as technology improves, we’ll no doubt see closer 
and closer approximations—and, let’s face it, a virtual device is 
inﬁ nitely more convenient and less messy. 
 On December 17, 2002, Electronic Arts published Maxis’  The 
Sims Online.  As the title suggests, this was an effort to adapt 
their best-selling franchise to the MMO15 format. Players would 
 11 See  http://www.mimitchi.com/tamaplus/tama_history.shtml . 
 12      These types of toys have aroused some controversy among parents and school 
administrators. Tamagotchi can compete quite maddeningly for children’s atten-
tion, making regular demands on them to feed or play with their pets––who will 
“die” if neglected. Later Tamagotchi models offered pause options that let owners 
go about their day without worrying over their pet. 
 13      See Murakami Mutsuko’s “Just Another Day’s Work: The Strange Tale of How a 
Craze Was Born” at  http://www.mimitchi.com/html/aki.htm . 
 14 See  http://www.hsus.org/pets/pet_care/how_pets_help_people/ . 
 15 Or MMOG: Massively Multiplayer Online Game. 

 
Chapter 22 THE SIMS (2000): WHO LET THE SIMS OUT?     331
buy the product, then pay a monthly fee (which was later made 
optional) to gain access to the game’s servers. 
 The idea seemed sound; if players were having so much fun 
playing with  virtual  people, wouldn’t they have even more fun 
with  actual  people? Naturally, there were several key changes to 
the gameplay to accommodate online play—the most noticeable 
was the lack of Simlish. Now, characters spoke English to each 
other. Players were also limited to controlling a single sim, rather 
than a whole family. The graphics were kept mostly consistent 
with  The Sims , which some critics felt gave the game a dated look. 
 Unfortunately, the online experience was sorely lacking in fun, 
and the game didn’t last long. Most gamers didn’t seem to ﬁ nd 
the social elements very compelling, and gameplay tended to 
boil down to repetitive actions intended to raise skill levels (and 
generate more income). The stand-alone game had generated 
tension with a series of timed activities;  The Sims Online took 
a more relaxed but ultimately less exciting approach. In 2008, 
Electronic Arts rebranded the game as  EA Land , added custom-
ization features and made it free—most likely as an attempt to 
compete with the much more popular virtual world of  Second 
Life.  Unfortunately, this experiment didn’t pan out either, and EA 
took the game ofﬂ ine permanently on August 1, 2008. 
 It’s only fair to say a few words about  Second Life ,16 an MMO 
developed by Linden Research and released for computers on 
June 23, 2003.  Second Life  has become the most successful of 
all social-based MMOs, receiving many awards and generating 
large amounts of buzz in the mass media as well as academic 
circles. Although  Second Life has superﬁ cial similarities to other 
MMORPGs (such as  Ultima Online ), its key appeal seems to lie 
in the creative opportunities that it extends to users. Players are 
given several ways to add their own content to the game; this 
“user-generated content” ranges from virtual objects to new ges-
tures and animations for their characters (or “Residents”). They 
can also use Linden Scripting Language (LSL) to program behav-
iors, and can of course buy and sell all manner of things from 
other players (users retain copyright of the objects they create for 
 Second Life ). 
 Unlike  The Sims Online ,  Second Life  was a staggering success. 
Although the game was free to play, Linden was able to make 
money with an optional subscription package. For about $10 
a month, players were given some land and in-game money, as 
well as additional tech support. For more money, players could 
lease more land, and companies and institutions (as well as seri-
ous individual players) can pay fees of $1,000 or more for “private 
 16 We also brieﬂ y touch on this title in Chapter 24, “Ultima Online (1997): Putting 
the Role-Play Back in Computer Role-Playing Games”  

332     Chapter 22 THE SIMS (2000): WHO LET THE SIMS OUT?
estates” or islands. Universities seem to be particularly keen on 
 Second Life , perhaps as a way to interest their students in online 
educational experiences. 
 The media is full of reports of people earning their living sim-
ply by playing  Second Life , exchanging their in-game money for 
real-life dollars. Other reports concern married players divorcing 
their spouses for the sake of their in-game lovers, and so on. The 
game is fairly well known outside the gaming community, and 
it’s not unusual to hear it mentioned or alluded to in popular TV 
shows like  The Daily Show  or  The Ofﬁ ce.  Indeed, one of the char-
acters in  The Ofﬁ ce is an avid fan of the game. 
 Perhaps as a response to the failure of  The Sims Online , EA 
Games went back to the stand-alone model and released  The 
Sims 2  on September 14, 2004. The key additions were a much 
improved 3D engine, lifetime aspirations, and genetic inheritance. 
Essentially, sims could strive for fortune, romance, family, popu-
larity, or knowledge. The sims also had memories and genes that 
were passed on to subsequent generations. The aspiration system 
seemed intended most for players who disliked the open-ended 
nature of the ﬁ rst game; now, players who so desired could spend 
their time fulﬁ lling speciﬁ c goals for the sims.  The Sims 2 was 
another success, and EA eventually issued eight expansion packs 
and 10 “stuff packs,” which consisted of new objects (such as holi-
day-themed objects or IKEA furniture). The latest experiment of 
this sort is  The Sims 2 Store , which sells furniture, clothing, hair, 
Shown here is the sim creation 
screen from The Sims 2, which 
went fully 3D. There are many, 
many ways to customize the look 
of each sim. Some players might 
prefer to make sims that resemble 
their own families, whereas 
others might opt for something 
more creative.

 
Chapter 22 THE SIMS (2000): WHO LET THE SIMS OUT?     333
and other objects in exchange for “SimPoints,” the game’s  virtual 
currency. Of course, players can also exchange real money for 
SimPoints, and the store happily accepts all major real world credit 
cards. 
 There have been several spin-offs from  The Sims franchise. 
Perhaps the most notable are  MySims , which brought the series to 
the Nintendo Wii and DS platforms in 2007, and  The Sims Stories , 
a series of Sims games for laptops that debuted in 2007.  The Sims 
Stories  tend to be more linear than other games in the franchise, 
and feature a “story mode” that follows a preset (and hopefully 
dramatic) script. There is also a “classic mode” available for those 
who prefer the more ﬂ exible gameplay of the main series. 
 The future of  The Sims  seems quite bright, with additional 
sequels, ports, and expansions forthcoming. Any game that has 
sold as many copies as  The Sims  deserves a place in any legiti-
mate compilation of history’s best games, and its inﬂ uence on 
both other casual games and the casual gamer market in gen-
eral is undeniable. In addition, its eccentric gameplay and 
 nontraditional fan base make it a worthwhile object of study for 
anyone serious about game development. Although its fans enjoy 
 The Sims  for different reasons, the main appeals seem to be its 
emphasis on nurturing (e.g., the “virtual pet” aspects), build-
ing (the “dollhouse” aspects), and experimenting (the “ant farm” 
aspects). Chances are good that almost any serious gamer can 
ﬁ nd satisfaction in at least one of these styles of gameplay in the 
virtual playground, and many will ﬁ nd pleasure in all of them.

This page intentionally left blank

335
   ULTIMA (1980): THE 
IMMACULATE CONCEPTION 
OF THE COMPUTER 
ROLE-PLAYING GAME 
23
  The unprecedented success of  Ultima  surprised no one more 
than its creator, Richard Garriott, known by his friends and fans 
as “Lord British.” Released in 1980 for the Apple II,  Ultima wasn’t 
the ﬁ rst computer role-playing game (CPRG), but it soon became 
the one that all others would be judged by—the one that  really 
mattered. The game and its sequels would become so popu-
lar and inﬂ uential that it’s hard to imagine the industry without 
them. The  Ultima  series would last for nearly two decades, and 
its pioneering online incarnation,  Ultima Online  (see Chapter 24, 
“ Ultima Online  (1997): Putting the Role-Play Back in Computer 
Role-Playing Games”) is still active today. The story of  Ultima is 
primarily about one man’s drive for ultimate perfection—or at 
least his determination to make the perfect videogame. Not all 
the changes that Garriott would introduce to his famous series 
over the years would meet with universal praise, of course, and 
many fans consider 1992’s  Ultima VII: The Black Gate  as its ﬁ nest 
moment. In this chapter, we’ll discuss  Ultima  and the vital role 
it played in shaping the industry—so, in the words of  Akalabeth’s 
famous card insert, “Beware, foolish mortal!” 
 Ultima  was not Garriott’s ﬁ rst attempt at a CRPG. His earlier 
game  Akalabeth (circa 1979) was also released commercially, but 
he’d been quietly developing less-ambitious CRPGs years before. 
At this time, personal computers and commercial software were so 
scarce that it would certainly be a stretch to call it an “industry.” 
Software was typically sold mail order and in local, privately owned 
computer hobbyist shops, copied by the developers themselves, 
and packaged in plastic baggies with amateurish inserts. Such was 
the case for  Akalabeth , a very early CRPG for the Apple II that fea-
tured ﬁ rst-person perspective and wireframe graphics, rendered 

 
336     Chapter 23 ULTIMA (1980)
Screenshot from Akalabeth.
Screenshot of the self-running 
demo from Ultima.
on the ﬂ y. Garriott claims to have spent $200 on the plastic zipper 
storage bags and cover sheets, undoubtedly one of the most seren-
dipitous investments in all of game history.1 
 According to Garriott, one of the eight copies he sold of the game 
ended up on the desk of California Paciﬁ c Computer Company. 
The publisher ﬂ ew Garriott from Texas to California, where they 
worked out a deal for wider distribution. The game proved a suc-
cess for Garriott and the publisher, but Lord British was just getting 
 1      See David Taylor’s 1992 interview with Garriott at  http://www.uo.com/archive/
ftp/text/intrview/richgar.txt . 

 
Chapter 23 ULTIMA (1980)     337
started. He felt that  Akalabeth  had been a hobby project, an 
 amateurish production whose unexpected success owed more to 
luck than his own skill and talents. Nevertheless,  Akalabeth pro-
vided him with the capital and conﬁ dence to pursue a more ambi-
tious goal—a game targeted squarely at the ﬂ edgling computer 
games market. That project was  Ultima , which—together with its 
sequels—not only set sales records but helped expand the market 
from a tiny niche to the multibillion dollar juggernaut it is today. 
Garriott’s determination to up the ante with each new  Ultima 
earned him a reputation as one of the world’s best game develop-
ers, and his eagerness to take full advantage of the latest hardware 
and programming routines kept him (and fans) on the cutting 
edge of technology. In time, gamers and critics would look to the 
latest  Ultima  as a paradigm shift—not just a new installment in 
the series, but the next stage of gaming itself. Garriott’s ambition 
and perfectionism often caused clashes with his publishers, who 
felt that his more radical ideas were unsound. Indeed, after Sierra 
On-Line failed to see things his way, he founded his own company, 
Origin Systems, in 1983, to publish  Ultima III . Garriott proved him-
self an able publisher, selecting and releasing projects that were 
nearly as popular and inﬂ uential as his own games.2 
 What was it, though, about the  Ultima  series that can explain 
its broad appeal? How did it rise to dominance over its contempo-
raries, which include Sir-Tech’s  Wizardry  (starting in 1981; Apple II 
and others) and Epyx’s  Apshai  series (starting 1979; TRS-80 and 
others)?3 Perhaps the best way to begin answering these questions 
is with a closer look at Lord British, whose ﬂ amboyant public per-
sona and concern with such “trivial” issues as packages and pack-
ins helped make the series stand out against the competition. 
 Garriott’s nickname was bestowed on him by some of his older 
schoolmates at Clear Creek High School in League City, Texas, 
ostensibly because they thought he spoke with a British accent. 
Although Garriott claims he never affected such an accent (at least 
not intentionally), it’s easy to imagine that even at this early stage, 
he found many creative ways to express his keen interest in medi-
eval life and fantasy ﬁ ction. Always a fan of role-playing, the Society 
of Creative Anachronisms (SCA), and renaissance fairs (one such 
festival even makes an appearance in  Ultima IV  ), Garriott enjoyed 
re-creating the medieval life. He dressed up in medieval costumes 
for game conventions, and later bought a medieval-style castle, 
appropriately named Britannia Manor. During an interview with a 
public television station, Garriott remarked that “my gaming life and 
 2      Origin would still rely on the distribution networks of other companies, such as 
Broderbund. 
 3      For more about these and other CRPG series, see author Barton’s book Dungeons 
and Desktops (A K Peters, Ltd, 2008). 

 
338     Chapter 23 ULTIMA (1980)
my real life are very related to each other,” an insight that goes a long 
way toward explaining the series’ unique appeal.4 It’s hard to imag-
ine a developer who could immerse himself as deeply in his subject 
matter as Lord British. The son of a noted astronaut, Garriott never 
lacked for encouragement or example, and could inspire other 
 4 See  http://www.klru.org/austinnow/archives/garriott/richard_garriott.php . 
Back of the box for Epyx’s updated 
Temple of Apshai Trilogy.

 
Chapter 23 ULTIMA (1980)     339
people as well. It’s rare today for a developer to attain the personal 
fame and celebrity of Lord British—perhaps only Roberta Williams 
of Sierra On-Line loomed as large during the 1980s (see  Chapter 11 , 
“ King’s Quest: Quest for the Crown (1984): Perilous Puzzles, Thorny 
Thrones”). 
 Garriott’s perfectionism extended beyond the game to the pack-
aging and extras. He was convinced that the buying public would 
take games more seriously if they came in well-designed boxes 
and included memorable souvenirs or trinkets (called “feelies”). 
These included full-color cloth maps of Britannia and small metal 
ankhs. Most publishers were skeptical, because the quality box and 
extensive printed documentation would contribute to higher costs 
(which would ultimately be passed on to consumers, of course). 
However, few if any gamers objected to these materials. Indeed, it’s 
important to realize that many of the joys associated with  Ultima 
came from reading the well-written manuals, admiring the box 
and map art, and cherishing the feelies. Those who acquired the 
game illegally (or modern users playing them in an emulator) have 
missed out.5 
 Let’s turn our attention, though, to the game itself. Though 
of course primitive by today’s standards,  Ultima  helped lay the 
groundwork for most later CRPGs. Of particular note here is 
the top-down, tile-based graphics. This key innovation enabled 
Garriott to build what felt like a large, expansive gameworld, 
all represented onscreen. What’s even more impressive is that 
Garriott and his friend Ken “Sir Kenneth” Arnold were able to 
achieve this using only Apple BASIC, a simple but effective pro-
gramming language for the Apple II computer. The overhead view 
was used whenever the main character (known after the fourth 
game as “The Avatar”) roams outside or in towns or  villages. 
However, when the character descends into a dungeon, the per-
spective shifts to the same ﬁ rst-person, wire-frame mode seen 
in  Akalabeth ; Garriott had recycled these routines from his ear-
lier endeavor. Garriott also added plenty of new features, includ-
ing quests and a deﬁ nite ending. There was also a clearly deﬁ ned 
mission: destroy the evil wizard Mondain, hated ruler of Sosaria. 
Achieving this goal required traveling back in time to destroy 
a gem that granted the wizard immortality. Naturally, traveling 
back in time wasn’t easy—in fact, the player had to travel to outer 
space! The fact that the game included both fantasy and sci-ﬁ  
elements generated a great deal of buzz; it was one of the most 
ambitious games players had ever seen. 
 The underlying role-playing mechanics were fairly simple. 
Players are given 90 points to distribute among six stats (strength, 
 5      See author Loguidice’s “Game Packaging: A Look to the Past when Treasures Beyond 
the Game Were in the Box” at  http://www.armchairarcade.com/neo/node/225 .  

 
340     Chapter 23 ULTIMA (1980)
agility, stamina, charisma, wisdom, and intelligence), and can 
play as a ﬁ ghter, cleric, wizard, or thief. There are also four races 
to choose from, one of which was hobbits—an obvious allusion 
to J. R. R. Tolkien’s famous fantasy works.6 What is perhaps most 
unusual is that players had to either “buy” hit (health) points for 
the character, which were available from kings, or receive them 
automatically upon leaving a dungeon. The character was also in 
constant need of food and water; running out of these precious 
items would result in instant death. Thankfully, an option existed 
to resurrect the character, though he ran the risk of materializing 
on a water tile and being unable to move. 
 Garriott turned to Sierra On-Line in 1982 to publish the sequel, 
 Ultima II: The Revenge of the Enchantress. California Paciﬁ c had 
gone bankrupt, and Garriott may have been intrigued by the pos-
sibilities of working with such a noted and innovative publisher. 
Although the relationship was short-lived and soon went sour, 
Sierra agreed to let Garriott include a cloth map within each box. 
 The new game offered several key improvements, most nota-
bly the option to talk to other characters. It was, like the earlier 
 6 Akalabeth is also a Tolkien reference, albeit a far more obscure one from Tolkien’s 
Silmarillion. These allusions aren’t surprising, given that Garriott refers to himself 
as a “big believer in what I call Tolkien game design. I believe we––as developers––
must know much more about the science, philosophy, language, and history than 
ever comes out in the game.” For the source of this quotation, see  http://www
.computerandvideogames.com/article.php?id=167484 .  
Screenshot from the 
Commodore 64 version 
of Ultima II.

 
Chapter 23 ULTIMA (1980)     341
game, an immense undertaking that included both fantasy and 
sci-ﬁ  elements. It also marked a major leap for Garriott as a pro-
grammer, since he was now programming in assembly language 
rather than BASIC. The more advanced language allowed for far 
more efﬁ cient routines and much smoother gameplay. In any 
case, it says something about Garriott’s personality that he would 
have risked creating a new game with a difﬁ cult language he 
hadn’t mastered; indeed, he was learning as he went. As we might 
expect, the ﬁ nished product had its share of bugs. 
 The game was successful, but Garriott had become disillu-
sioned with Sierra. One problem concerned the IBM PC port of 
 Ultima II , which hadn’t been discussed in his contract, since that 
platform didn’t exist (or at least wasn’t viable) when it was drafted. 
Garriott thought Sierra was bilking him on royalties. Another 
problem was that Sierra felt its licensing agreement extended 
to making new  Ultima  games, even if Garriott wasn’t involved 
in their production. This is the origin of the infamous  Ultima: 
Escape from Mt. Drash , a 1983 game for the Commodore VIC-20.
This wretched game added insult to injury with its storyline. The 
character had to escape from a prison, where he was being held 
by evil “garrintrots,” a word that bears a suspicious likeness to 
“Garriott.” However, Garriott apparently didn’t hear about the 
game until after he’d broken ties with the company, and it sold 
very few copies.7 After breaking with Sierra, Garriott decided to 
form his own software publisher, Origin Systems, with his father, 
his brother, and a friend named Chuck “Chuckles” Bueche. 
 The ﬁ rst  Ultima  game to debut under the new label was  Ultima 
III: Exodus . By this time, Garriott felt that he had at last mastered 
assembly language and was ready to put his freshly honed skills 
to the test. The third game, which became the company’s ﬂ ag-
ship product, introduced a number of bold changes, including 
the ability to create and control a party of adventurers rather 
than the lone Avatar. In an interview with Shay Addams, Garriott 
acknowledged that he was inspired by  Wizardry , the series that 
represented  Ultima ’s key rival of the early 1980s.8 Whether a 
player should create and/or control a single character or a whole 
party has long been an issue with the genre, though most modern 
games have opted for the former. The common belief is that the 
party-based games are better for sophisticated tactical combat, 
whereas single-character games give developers tighter control 
over the story, characters, and structure. 
 Combat was also altered, now adopting a turn-based system 
with time limits; if players didn’t move fast enough, the mon-
 7      In fact, it’s clear that the game received only a limited production run and distri-
bution, making it a much sought-after and very pricey collectible today. 
 8 See Shay Addams’s The Ofﬁ cial Book of Ultima (# Compute! Books, 1990). 

 
342     Chapter 23 ULTIMA (1980)
sters got a free swing at the characters. This model may have 
served as the inspiration for the Active Time Battle system of the 
 Final Fantasy  series (see  Chapter 7 , “ Final Fantasy VII (1997): 
It’s Never Final in the World of Fantasy”). There were also loads 
of new magical spells and weapons, including ranged weapons 
like bows. The dungeons, which were now central to the mis-
sion, had been upgraded from the monochromatic wireframe to 
solid color (perhaps the only similarity between this game and 
 Escape from Mt. Drash ). The story has the party chasing after 
Exodus, the child of Mondain and Minax (the villains of the pre-
vious games). It also omits the sci-ﬁ  elements that character-
ized the earlier games. Finally, Garriott incorporated a dynamic 
musical score that took advantage of Sweet Micro Systems’s new 
Mockingboard card for the Apple II. The Mockingboard compen-
sated greatly for the Apple’s limited sound capabilities and is a 
good early example of how Garriott pushed the industry forward 
by catering to high-end gamers, rather than the far more numer-
ous low-end gamers. 
 Exodus  was a triumph for the series and a best-seller for 
Origin. It established the company as a world-famous devel-
oper and Lord British as a master craftsman of CRPGs. The game 
was ported to most of the popular platforms of the era, includ-
ing the Nintendo Entertainment System, and is certainly the best 
of the early series. GameSpot selected it as one of its “15 Most 
Inﬂ uential Games of All Time,” citing it as the inspiration for later 
hits such as BioWare’s  Baldur’s Gate (1998; Apple Macintosh, PC). 
 The immense popularity of  Exodus  had made Garriott a power-
ful and inﬂ uential ﬁ gure in the industry, but he didn’t necessarily 
feel giddy—indeed, he began to feel guilty about his previous work. 
Title screen from Ultima III.

 
Chapter 23 ULTIMA (1980)     343
To put it comically—in the Stan Lee sense—he felt that “with great 
power comes great responsibility.” He believed that most games, 
including his own, did little to promote good, ethical conduct in 
players, instead rewarding them for pillaging and plundering. 
 The result of Garriott’s soul-searching was  Ultima IV: Quest of 
the Avatar , a 1985 release that debuted the “Age of Enlightenment,” 
a trilogy of games exploring morality and society. The gameplay 
was reworked substantially from the previous game, and the dif-
ference was visible immediately. Rather than create a character or 
party based on stats, players were asked a series of questions per-
taining to moral dilemmas. The system was based on eight virtues: 
humility, sacriﬁ ce, compassion, justice, valor, spirituality, honor, 
and honesty, each of which was linked to a particular character 
class. The goal was to let the player make a character that would 
truly conform to his or her own outlook and moral values, as well 
as take the game well away from its roots in “hack and slash.” 
 Garriott took the real-life social aspect of the game quite seri-
ously, and seems to have genuinely desired to use his position to 
improve society. The manual speaks of the game as a “search for a 
new standard, a new vision of life for which our people may strive,” 
in short, a game that would make players into better people. This 
spiritual aspect of the game was reinforced with another feelie, this 
time a small metal ankh. 
Box and contents from the 
Apple II version of Ultima IV.

 
344     Chapter 23 ULTIMA (1980)
 Quest of the Avatar  was another massive hit for Origin, outsell-
ing its predecessor and reaping praise from critics. It remains the 
favorite of many long-time fans of the series, and has shown up on 
plenty of “all time” lists;  Computer Gaming World  voted it the #2 
game of all time in 1996, and 1UP.com named it as the twenty-ﬁ rst 
Title screen from Ultima IV.
Box and contents from the 
Apple II version of Ultima V.

 
Chapter 23 ULTIMA (1980)     345
Title screen from Ultima V.
of its “Essential 50” list. After  Quest of the Avatar , Garriott set him-
self to converting the earlier games into full assembly language, 
updating the audiovisuals and releasing the set as  Ultima Trilogy in 
1987. The timing was perfect for such a compilation, as the count-
less thousands who had been introduced to the series with  Quest 
of the Avatar  now had a convenient way to familiarize themselves 
with its backstory. The trilogy sold exceptionally well, and it’s likely 
these versions that most people have in mind when they discuss 
the ﬁ rst three  Ultima games. 
 The next game in the series,  Ultima V: Warriors of Destiny 
(1988), was the last to be developed on the venerable old 
Apple II platform—it was also the last time Garriott would take 
an active hand in the coding. Whereas the ﬁ rst game had been 
about the Avatar’s own quest for virtue, this game put players in 
a more ambiguous position—what happens when the state tries 
to force its own interpretations of moral virtues on its people? 
As players explored the world, they found that some bad people 
prospered and some good people were condemned; the lines 
between good and evil were often quite blurry.  Ultima VI: The 
False Prophet  brought the series up to the new VGA standard on 
the PC.9 It was the best-looking game of the series so far, with 
2,048 different tiles in 256 colors. It also had support for the 
Roland and AdLib sound cards, expensive but gamer-friendly 
alternatives to the IBM PC’s single-channel internal speaker. As 
with his support of the Mockingboard earlier, here Garriott was 
a driving force behind the wider adoption of these graphic and 
audio standards. The moral theme this time was racism and 
 9 Like the earlier games, The False Prophet received multiple ports. 

346     Chapter 23 ULTIMA (1980)
xenophobia, and again players were faced with tough decisions 
with disturbing consequences. 
 Ultima VII: The Black Gate , released in 1992 for the PC, was 
again a paradigm shift from earlier games and is often regarded 
as the best in the series. The game’s primary feature is a huge 
and robust interactive world, which was far more detailed than 
anything gamers had experienced. Players could, for instance, 
plant seeds, grow wheat, bake it into bread, and sell it at the 
market. It also took advantage of the mouse, which had by 
Box back from Ultima VI.

 
Chapter 23 ULTIMA (1980)     347
that time begun to take root among PC users. Mouse control 
was perhaps a necessity given the alterations to the gameplay, 
which was now in real time; fast, precise control was essential. 
Garriott claims to have been inspired by  Times of Lore (Apple II, 
Atari ST, Commodore 64, and others), a game by Chris Roberts 
that Origin published in 1988, and FTL’s  Dungeon Master 
(1987; Apple IIgs, Atari ST, Commodore Amiga, and others),
a pioneering real-time game with ﬁ rst-person perspective and 
full-color 3D graphics. Though Origin spent a million dollars 
Box back from Dungeon Master II: 
Skullkeep.

348     Chapter 23 ULTIMA (1980)
developing the game, they were back in black the ﬁ rst day it 
was released.10 
 Although the game had a deﬁ nite storyline and mission, it was 
quite ﬂ exible. Players could spend countless hours in a type of 
sandbox mode, simply exploring and interacting without wor-
rying about what a developer had intended them to do. Several 
other games used  Ultima VII ’s engine to good effect, including 
 Ultima VII ,  Part Two: The Silver Seed  (1993). The reason for the odd 
name is that Lord British felt it wasn’t a proper sequel, because 
the engine hadn’t changed; only major innovations deserved a 
new iteration. Besides expansions, we also ﬁ nd a short-lived spin-
off series called  Worlds of Ultima: The Savage Empire  (1990) and 
 Martian Dreams  (1991). These games were more story-focused 
than  The Black Gate , based on the works of Arthur Conan Doyle 
and Jules Verne, respectively. It was also during this time that 
Origin published Blue Sky’s  Ultima Underworld: The Stygian Abyss , 
a real-time, ﬁ rst-person 3D game that inspired id’s  Wolfenstein 
3D  (see  Chapter 5 , “ Doom  (1993): The First-Person Shooter Takes 
Control”). 
 Looking back across such a succession of increasingly great 
games, we might expect the ﬁ nal two entries in the series to be 
even better. However, most critics see a steep decline begin-
ning with  Ultima VIII: Pagan , a 1994 game for PC. Garriott had 
signed on with Electronic Arts to publish the game, a deal that 
he regretted after they harried him to rush the game through 
production. The gameplay is a sharply different affair than previ-
ous games, involving a great deal of running, jumping, and fast-
paced  combat. Although these sorts of games were becoming 
Screenshot from Ultima VII.
 10 See Taylor, ibid. 

 
Chapter 23 ULTIMA (1980)     349
very  popular on consoles, many found them out of place in the 
Ultima series. What’s interesting here is that Roberta Williams had 
tried something similar with her ﬁ nal  King’s Quest game,  Mask of 
Eternity , and in both cases the efforts to graft on elements popu-
lar in other genres did not succeed. 
 The last  Ultima  game, 1999’s  Ultima IX: Ascension  for PC, 
promptly descended from the shelf to the bargain bin. Although 
Garriott had been touting the game and building up buzz for 
months, a long and soap-opera-like production had done its 
damage. Perhaps still smarting from the sharp criticism he 
received after  Pagan , Lord British seems to have become quite 
shaken and indecisive, forcing the code through four different 
versions. We should also keep in mind that  Ultima Online was in 
production at this time, and Garriott may have struggled to stay 
on top of the two vastly different projects. Much like the afore-
mentioned  Mask of Eternity , this game was also fully 3D rendered 
in third-person perspective and involved quite a few action/
reﬂ ex sequences. Greg Kasavin’s review for GameSpot called it 
“both an epic and a farce,” admiring its ambition but lamenting 
the poor implementation, which was fraught with bugs.11 Trent C. 
Ward of IGN, a longtime fan of the series, faced the unpleasant 
task of reviewing a game he felt was “nearly unplayable,” describ-
ing himself as “nearly paralyzed with disappointment over the 
way the last chapter turned out.”12 The criticisms were many, but 
Screenshot from Ultima VIII.
 11 See  http://www.gamespot.com/pc/rpg/ultima9ascension/review.html . 
 12 http://pc.ign.com/articles/161/161753p1.html . 

350     Chapter 23 ULTIMA (1980)
the consensus seems to be simply that Lord British had lost his 
way. Although some fans claim (perhaps out of loyalty) to love the 
game,13 most thought it was a sad ending for this magniﬁ cent and 
inﬂ uential series. 
 Ultima ’s inﬂ uence on the games industry is difﬁ cult to exag-
gerate. The games were discussed at great length in almost every 
gaming magazine of the day, and ports found their way onto 
virtually every viable platform. Countless people active in the 
gaming industry today were inspired by these games and their 
developers to pursue their careers, and plenty of talented cod-
ers and artists contribute their energies to making unauthorized 
remakes of their favorite games. One of the more popular of these 
is  xu4 , a project to update the fourth  Ultima  for use on modern 
PCs (including those with Linux kernels). The website  Ultima: 
The Reconstruction , tracks several efforts to remake the original 
games with 2D or 3D engines and is certainly worth checking out 
if you’re a new or long-time fan of the series.14 
 Compiling a list of commercial games that have been inspired 
by  Ultima  would be a formidable task indeed. Some, such as 
DieCom Production’s  Gates of Delirium (1987) for the Radio 
Shack Color Computer, are shameless and insipid clones. Others, 
such as SSI’s  Questron  (1984) were authorized games based on 
 13 In fact, there has been a long-time fan-led effort to ﬁ x the game’s problems. 
 14 See  http://reconstruction.voyd.net/index.php?event=news . 
Screenshot from Ultima IX.

 
Chapter 23 ULTIMA (1980)     351
Garriott’s engine.  Questron  was admired for its smooth gameplay 
and accessibility to novices. This series led to SSI’s later and more 
inspired  Phantasie  (starting in 1985),  Wizard’s Crown (starting in 
1985), and the “Gold Box” (Advanced Dungeons & Dragons; start-
ing 1988) series of RPGs. The  Ultima  series also had its impact on 
Japan, where it inspired the countless games featuring top-down 
perspective, randomized combat, and roaming NPCs who must 
be found and interrogated. 
Box back from SSI’s classic Pool 
of Radiance “Gold Box” game.

 
352     Chapter 23 ULTIMA (1980)
 In general, we can describe the early history of CRPGs as  falling 
into two camps:  Ultima  and  Wizardry. Whereas  Ultima  and its 
sequels featured top-down perspective, immense gameworlds, 
and eventually an emphasis on character development;  Wizardry 
offered ﬁ rst-person perspective and kept the focus on hack-and-
slash combat in dungeons. Both models were essential com-
ponents of later games, which often combined the two. A good 
example of this is Enix’s  Dragon Warrior ( Dragon Quest  in Japan) 
games (see  Chapter 7 ), which offered a top-down perspective for 
exploration, but a ﬁ rst-person mode for combat. 
 The future of  Ultima  is bleak. A game called  Ultima X: Odyssey 
was planned for release in 2004, but Electronic Arts canceled the 
project. Garriott had left Origin, and the project seemed doomed 
from the start. It would have been a multiplayer online game based 
on the Unreal Engine.15 As Garriott no longer owns the rights to his 
 Ultima  series, the chances of his being involved in another sequel 
are small, and his latest project,  Richard Garriott’s Tabula Rasa 
(published by NCSoft in 2007), is a massively multiplayer game 
with a sci-ﬁ  theme. It cost over a hundred million dollars to make, 
but dismal sales led to NCSoft’s hemorrhaging employees and 
frightening away investors shortly after its debut, with the game’s 
servers shutting down for good in February 2009. In short, beyond 
his much publicized trip into space aboard a Russian rocket in 
October 2008, Garriott’s ﬁ nest achievements seem to be behind 
him, but with such an incredible legacy, pity seems misplaced. 
For countless gamers and developers worldwide, the name “Lord 
British” is synonymous with quality, sincerity, and the endless drive 
toward perfection.
 
 15      See  http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Unreal_engine for more on the engine .     

353
  ULTIMA ONLINE (1997): 
PUTTING THE ROLE-PLAY 
BACK IN COMPUTER 
ROLE-PLAYING GAMES 
Promotional screenshot showing 
the key elements of a recent 
version of Ultima Online.
24
 Origin’s  Ultima Online , ﬁ rst released on September 25, 1997, 
is one of the most important games of the modern era. It marks 
a critical turning point from stand-alone single-player products 
to massively multiplayer online games, or MMOs, a genre that 
seems destined for dominance. Although  Ultima Online was 
knocked from its throne by Sony’s  EverQuest  in 1999, which was 
itself conquered by Blizzard’s  World of Warcraft  (also known as 
WoW) in 2004, these and all later massively multiplayer online 
role-playing games, or MMORPGs, owe a massive debt to Origin’s 

354     Chapter 24 ULTIMA ONLINE (1997) 
pioneering game. It was  Ultima Online  that established the model 
and proved the viability of the MMORPG. Origin certainly didn’t 
do everything right, but the painful lessons they learned proved 
invaluable for all subsequent MMORPG developers. 
 In this chapter, we’ll discuss the often tumultuous history of 
 Ultima Online , but also explain why the genre is so appealing to 
so many modern gamers and developers. As we’ll see, perhaps 
its key feature is not technological but social, bringing together 
gamers from all over the world to share and experience a persis-
tent virtual world. 
 Ultima Online  was not the ﬁ rst MMORPG and certainly not 
the ﬁ rst online role-playing game that enabled multiple players 
to simultaneously enjoy the same persistent world. Predecessors 
include multi-user dungeons (MUDs), as well as the original 
 Neverwinter Nights ,  The Shadow of Yserbius , and  Meridian 59. 
Before delving into the intricacies of  Ultima Online , let’s take a 
moment to examine these earlier networked games. 
 The logical starting place for any investigation into MMORPGs 
is MUDs, an early genre of computer game popular among col-
lege students and others with convenient access to mainframes. 
They were quite limited graphically; like  Rogue  (see  bonus chap-
ter , “ Rogue  (1980): Have @ You, You Deadly Zs”), MUDs were usu-
ally housed on UNIX machines that could only output graphics in 
the form of character sets. Unlike  Rogue , which used these char-
acter sets to depict crude graphics, MUDs were usually prose-
based; players read textual descriptions of rooms, monsters, and 
so on, just like in text adventure games. 
A sample character creation 
screen from Ultima Online. 
Although not as robust as later 
versions and other games, all the 
essentials were there.

 
Chapter 24 ULTIMA ONLINE (1997)     355
 The original MUD (simply called  MUD) was created by Roy 
Trubshaw and Richard Bartle, students at the University of Essex 
in Britain. It was essentially an effort to combine the gameplay 
of  Dungeons & Dragons (D&D), the popular tabletop role play-
ing system, with the computer game  ADVENT (Adventure), also 
known as  Colossal Cave Adventure  (1976). The two were fans of 
text adventures like  ADVENT  and  Zork  (see  Chapter 25 , “ Zork 
(1980): Text Imps versus Graphics Grues”), but felt they suffered 
from low replay value. Once you’ve solved all the puzzles, what’s 
to keep you playing? Trubshaw and Bartle felt that perhaps the 
key was integrating gameplay from    D&D . Their ﬁ nished product 
was essentially a text adventure game with a  D&D- style char-
acter creation and combat system. Players could also chat with 
one another and share in the adventure, a critical feature that 
would distinguish MUDs from most other types of computer 
games. 
 MUD  quickly became immensely popular, even when the 
administrators of the university’s DEC PDP-10 mainframe limited 
its use to off-peak hours. Bartle eventually made a commercial 
version of the game for the pioneering proprietary online ser-
vice, CompuServe, called  British Legends , though not before plac-
ing the name “MUD” into the public domain and allowing it to 
become the generic name by which such games would be known. 
MUDs offered countless opportunities for fantasy fans to explore 
rich worlds and test their mettle against the ﬁ ercest monsters, but 
the real appeal was connecting to like-minded people and form-
ing or joining online communities. In many cases, by the time 
players were burned out on the game itself, they had built close 
friendships and would log in to the game simply to chat. Others 
became self-appointed or ofﬁ cial mentors, helping novices learn 
the interface and improve their characters. 
 MUDs continued to gain popularity throughout the 1980s and 
into the 1990s, especially when the rise of the Internet made it 
easier to connect home computers to mainframes; prior to the 
Internet, most home users who wanted to go online had to con-
nect to private networks like CompuServe or America Online 
(AOL). In addition to countless other features, these networks 
offered many online games for their customers. Simutronics’s 
 Gemstone series, for instance, debuted on GEnie in 1988 and 
attracted quite a large following. Although certainly lucra-
tive, the private and costly nature of these services limited their 
appeal, especially when people discovered they could connect 
to a much larger public network for a much lower rate. One by 
one the private networks shut down, but MUD fans found that 
they had many more alternatives on the Internet than they ever 
had before. Indeed, the demand for MUDs was great enough that 
they split into different types for diverse applications. Perhaps the 

356     Chapter 24 ULTIMA ONLINE (1997) 
most popular type of these were MOOs (MUD Object-Oriented), 
which abstracted the chat and social functions from MUDs and 
are still used in various academic settings. Professors at St. Cloud 
State University in Minnesota, for instance, use them to teach 
English to students from other countries. 
 Even in the late 1990s, the majority of MUDs were still entirely 
text- or ASCII-based; transmitting graphics would have taken too 
long given the slow dial-up modems of the era, and games pro-
grammed for UNIX, while accessible via terminal programs, were 
typically limited to character-set graphics. However, a logical 
work-around to this problem was to put a game’s audiovisuals on 
a disk and then use the bandwidth merely to update object loca-
tions, send messages, and handle the players’ input. This could 
all be done “behind the scenes,” with the installed software serv-
ing as an intermediary between the host (the mainframe  running 
the gameworld) and the client (i.e., the user’s personal  computer). 
The host tracked the locations and activities taking place in the 
gameworld, whereas the client provided the user with a handy 
graphical interface. 
 One of the earliest examples of such a game is  Habitat , a 
Lucasﬁ lm Games product that debuted in 1987 exclusively for 
the Commodore 64. It ran for a brief period on Quantum Link, 
the service that would later become AOL, and was only available 
during nonpeak hours. It offered a third-person perspective in a 
2D world, and the players’ characters could communicate with 
each other as well as interact with the world itself. The focus was 
on social activities, and there were many fun things for players to 
do—write books, visit theaters, or even get married. The develop-
ers watched how the players performed and expanded the game 
accordingly, grafting on new features as they saw ﬁ t. The game 
didn’t offer RPG elements such as leveling or skills, but did pio-
neer many of the technologies that would show up in later games. 
The license changed hands a few times after the project shut 
down in 1988, reappearing on Japanese and American networks 
in various incarnations. 
 A more successful early MMORPG was Beyond Software’s 
 Neverwinter Nights , a game hosted on AOL between 1991 and 
1997. This popular online role-playing game was based on SSI’s 
Gold Box engine, the code behind such successful multiplatform 
games as  Pool of Radiance  (1988) and  Curse of the Azure Bonds 
(1989) .  For many years, the game earned high proﬁ ts for AOL 
and Beyond Software; the addictive gameplay kept paying cus-
tomers online for hours, racking up hundreds of dollars worth of 
fees. However, in 1996 AOL switched to a ﬂ at-fee rate, and games 
like  Neverwinter Nights  posed serious problems. AOL’s ideal cus-
tomer was now someone who made only minimal use of the 
service, logging on once in a while to check email, not playing 

 
Chapter 24 ULTIMA ONLINE (1997)     357
 Neverwinter Nights  from dusk to dawn. AOL ﬁ nally pulled the 
plug despite opposition (and no doubt some canceled subscrip-
tions) from fans. 
 Other efforts at graphical online games failed as well. One of 
the most spectacular failures was Sierra On-Line’s ImagiNation 
Network (INN), also known as The Sierra Network (TSN), which 
operated from 1991 to 1996. The service focused mostly on 
boardgames, but did offer a role-playing game called  The Shadow 
of Yserbius  (1992) and two sequels. The game was shut down in 
1996 when AOL took over Sierra’s network. Like  Neverwinter 
Nights , it was seen as ﬁ nancially incompatible with a ﬂ at-fee 
structure.  The Shadow of Yserbius  offered four-member par-
ties, turn-based combat, and colorful graphics—it was certainly 
ahead of its time. 
 Ken Williams, the CEO of Sierra, blamed the fall of the network 
on a series of bad corporate decisions. In a 2006 interview with 
Philip Jong of  Adventure Classic Gaming , he confessed that “I now 
know that we should have continued alone. . . . We sold half of TSN 
to AT&T, and quickly mired the project in big-company bureau-
cracy. As all development ground to a halt, I tried to unbreak 
the logjam by selling  all  of the network to AT&T with the condi-
tion that Sierra could have a proprietary position to build the 
games that would run on the TSN. . . . This was also a disaster. . . . 
There became an ‘us versus them’ mentality between Sierra and 
Sample screen showing Ultima 
Online’s “shards” or servers that 
a player can log onto. “Latency” 
and “Packet Loss” indicate 
relative performance on each 
shard for this particular user, 
which is a key issue for any 
online game.

358     Chapter 24 ULTIMA ONLINE (1997) 
ImagiNation.”1 Still, it’s unclear how any private network could 
have survived the rise of the Internet.2 
 By the late 1990s, it was obvious (at least to sensible developers 
and publishers) that the Internet was the future of online gaming. 
One of the best advantages the Internet offered game developers 
and publishers was independence—there was no need to negoti-
ate and share proﬁ ts with a giant corporate entity such as AOL or 
CompuServe. 
 It’s here that Archetype Interactive’s  Meridian 59  enters the pic-
ture, an MMORPG published by 3DO in 1996 for the PC. It was 
billed as the “ﬁ rst-ever Internet-based 3D MUD,” and indeed 
seems to live up to the hype. Here we have all the features that are 
now a staple of the genre: 3D graphics, RPG-style combat, player 
guilds, mail systems, and regular “expansions,” or updates to the 
content or interface. The graphics were similar to those seen in 
id’s  Doom  (see  Chapter 5 , “ Doom  (1993): The First-Person Shooter 
Takes Control”), and even offered some of the same limitations, 
such as the inability to jump. After buying the game, players were 
assessed a $10 monthly fee for access, a ﬁ gure that has remained 
stable (give or take a few dollars) for MMORPGs ever since. 3DO 
pulled the plug in 2000, but some of the developers cofounded 
Near Death Studios and keep the game online today. 
A promotional screenshot 
from Meridian 59, showing the 
implementation of a newer 
3D engine.
 1 See the interview at  http://www.adventureclassicgaming.com/index.php/site/
interviews/197 .  
 2 Sierra would launch  The Realm  in 1995, a graphical MUD ofﬁ cially released just 
months after  Meridian 59 . It was later taken over by Norseman Games and is still 
online today. 

 
Chapter 24 ULTIMA ONLINE (1997)     359
 Despite their innovative ideas and addictive gameplay, these 
games existed on the margins of the gaming industry. Although 
all of them enjoyed a core community of intensely loyal fans, 
most gamers lacked the requisite knowledge, interest, or 
resources to play them. The situation is comparable to that faced 
by Origin and Sierra throughout the 1980s and 1990s, when their 
early adoptions of advanced graphics, sound cards, and mice 
risked alienating gamers with older machines. Origin’s decision 
to bring a high-proﬁ le Internet game to market was yet another 
bold gamble for Lord British and seems to be the last time the 
famous developer would sweep the table.  Ultima Online  was the 
ﬁ rst truly “massive” online RPG, the ﬁ rst to reach over 100,000 
subscribers, peaking in 2003 at 250,000. Although its market share 
has declined, it is still actively played today. 
 Ultima Online ’s development was rife with drama and frus-
tration. Despite his name recognition and fame, Garriott had a 
hard time getting his publisher, Electronic Arts, to fund the proj-
ect. How would gamers react to an online-only game? Many were 
skeptical of the pay-to-play model—why would gamers buy a 
game and consent to a monthly fee to play it when they could buy 
other games outright? Although Electronic Arts and Origin ﬁ nally 
came to an agreement, the relationship was sorely strained. 
According to Garriott, “I wish that things had worked out better 
with Electronic Arts. . . . We constantly tried to tell them that we 
understood the online game business and give advice, but the 
company had a very different agenda.”3 The constant bickering 
at last led Garriott to leave Origin and abandon his legendary 
 Ultima franchise altogether. 
 Ultima Online ’s debut was catastrophic. Like many of the 
MMORPGs to follow, the ﬁ rst few weeks were subject to intense 
growing pains as some 45,000 gamers swarmed on to the “shards,” 
or servers running the game. Gamers found crashed servers, long 
lag times/response delays, glitches galore, and the mobs of “pkill-
ers,” or players who roamed outside the cities wantonly killing 
any other players naïve enough to leave. Origin moved quickly 
to ﬁ x these problems, but the blare of negative publicity per-
manently tarnished its image. GameSpot’s review of the game 
gave it a “poor” score of 4.9, calling it a “major disappointment.” 
The reviewer seemed incensed at the lag times and “extremely 
 frustrating” gameplay.4 Other reviewers were more forgiving, 
including Emil Pagliarulo of The Adrenaline Vault . Although 
acknowledging the game’s problems, he still wrote that “no 
 3      See Scott Steinberg’s “A Chat with the Lord” at  http://archive.gamespy.com/
interviews/february03/british/ . 
 4 See Desslock’s review at  http://www.gamespot.com/pc/rpg/ultimaonline/review
.html . 

360     Chapter 24 ULTIMA ONLINE (1997) 
game has completely and utterly immersed me in a  gameworld 
so involving, so life-like.”5 Fortunately, most of the worst prob-
lems faded in intensity over time, and a series of regular updates, 
patches, and expansions helped immensely. 
 Many of the things players found appealing could also be 
found in MUDs. New players were encouraged to talk to others, 
make friends, and explore the immense gameworld together—all 
aspects that are difﬁ cult if not impossible for stand-alone games. 
The social nature of games like  Ultima Online hearkens back to 
the tabletop game  D&D , which is intensely social, but also larger 
fantasy events such as Renaissance fairs (Ren fairs) and the 
Society for Creative Anachronism (SCA), all of which fascinated 
Richard “Lord British” Garriott. For instance, many players took it 
upon themselves to form posses to deal with the aforementioned 
“pkillers,” a phenomenon that the game’s developers didn’t antic-
ipate. The buzzword “emergent gameplay” was coined to describe 
such phenomena, and the developers often added direct support 
for them into the code of updates and expansions. Although the 
manual points out that “it is possible to play  Ultima Online on 
your own,” “the community” is what makes the game special. The 
manual also encouraged the sort of role-playing one might ﬁ nd at 
an SCA event or Ren fair: “While ‘Sup’ may be completely appro-
priate among your friends in the game, when speaking to strang-
ers a nice ‘Hello’ or even a ‘Hail’ will go a long way to improving 
the opinion others have of you.” It also encouraged adherence to 
grammar rules, but one suspects that those who’d type “Plz Halp 
me kill the dragon” would be the least likely to encounter, much 
less follow, such advice in a printed manual. 
 Besides MUDs,  Ultima Online  was also inﬂ uenced by Origin’s 
own  Ultima VII: The Black Gate , often considered the ﬁ nest of the 
single-player  Ultima  games (see  Chapter 23 , “ Ultima (1980): The 
Immaculate Conception of the Computer Role-Playing Game”). 
The deﬁ nitive feature of that game had been its intricately inter-
active gameworld; gamers could do so much more than just hack 
and slash monsters.  Ultima Online  extended this functionality 
to a persistent world, so that players could perform all sorts of 
tasks, develop trade skills, and even earn a virtual living making 
and selling things to other players.  Ultima Online  also offered a 
2D, isometric perspective comparable to  Ultima VII , albeit with 
improved audiovisuals. 
 New players could opt for two basic templates for their charac-
ters: adventurer or merchant. The former was made up of the tra-
ditional RPG classes, such as warriors and mages. The latter was 
more concerned with the economy and trades, such as  tailors 
and ﬁ shermen. More advanced players could distribute their 
 5 See  http://www.avault.com/reviews/pc/ultima-online/3/ . 

 
Chapter 24 ULTIMA ONLINE (1997)     361
points as they saw ﬁ t. Overall, it’s an impressively ﬂ exible system. 
The game also boasted an inﬂ ation system for items; the in-game 
merchants would adjust their prices according to how many of a 
certain item they had in stock. This feature necessitated travel-
ing to other towns to ﬁ nd better trading conditions. Skills were 
enhanced by a brute force approach, improving with each suc-
cessful use. 
 The early game relied mostly on other players to deal with 
pkillers. The game used a simple color scheme to differentiate 
innocent from neutral or guilty characters, and a “karma” system 
encouraged law-abiding behavior. An innocent character was 
blue; killing one would decrease karma as well as get the offender 
branded as a murderer. The murdered player could then offer a 
bounty on the assailant’s head—the idea was that other players 
relentlessly seeking these bounties would discourage such devi-
ance. Murderers were also instantly attacked by town guards, and 
dead murderers lost a “substantial” amount of stats and skills. 
However, murderers could wait it out—every eight hours lowered 
his or her murder count by one. However, players who couldn’t 
Promotional screenshot from 
Ultima Online: Stygian Abyss.

362     Chapter 24 ULTIMA ONLINE (1997) 
get the hint would become “long term murderers,” and have to 
wait 40 hours rather than eight per tick. 
 All of this talk of karma and pkilling may seem superﬂ uous, 
but it was actually a vital issue for Origin and all subsequent 
MMORPGs. The fear was that some novice players would be so 
turned off by the pkilling aspect that they would leave the game, 
taking their $10 monthly fees with them. One of the ﬁ rst ques-
tions MMORPG fans ask about a new game is how it handles 
“PVP,” meaning player vs. player combat, as that factor will deter-
mine much of the gameplay. 
 Another key consideration is death, or what happens to players 
whose characters were slain. In  Ultima Online , fallen characters 
would return as a ghost, with no loss to stats or skills unless they 
were murderers (who’d lose 20% of all stats and skills!). These 
ghosts could be resurrected by traveling to a healer, shrine, or 
mage, but would then have to trek back to their corpse to regain 
their material possessions. This trek could prove quite difﬁ cult, 
because newly resurrected characters were given only the most 
basic equipment. 
 Ultima Online  offered plenty of other advanced features to 
keep players invested in the long term. Probably the most impor-
tant feature was houses, which players could build once they had 
accumulated sufﬁ cient capital for a deed. Houses were primar-
ily places to store one’s accumulated possessions, but could also 
serve as stores for selling crafted items. Unfortunately, houses 
tended to get routinely deleted by the system, so it was important 
to log in every few days to “refresh” one’s house. 
 Players could also join one of 13 professional guilds, arranged 
by profession (Thieves’ Guild, Fellowship of Blacksmiths, and so 
on), as well as player-run guilds. Occasionally these player guilds 
would engage in “guild wars,” which allowed members to kill cer-
tain other players without fear of losing karma. 
 As we’ve already seen, there were plenty of opportunities 
for players who were more interested in socializing with other 
players than killing monsters. One such player, “Adamantyr,” 
speaking at Armchair Arcade, was one of only 15 beta testers 
to become a “Seer,” a high-ranking player with special pow-
ers. Instead of roaming the countryside killing monsters, 
Adamantyr became a bartender and chef. The small bar where 
his character “Ben Kahns” set up shop became a popular 
hangout:  
  I hosted guild dinners and had dart contests, gave out lit-
tle known trinkets in the game like glass mugs and dough-
nuts (which were in the game art ﬁ les and item lists but  not 
in game), and generally had a good time playing a cheer-
ful happy-go-lucky bartender, always ready to lend an ear. 

 
Chapter 24 ULTIMA ONLINE (1997)     363
I had a regular crowd who would always show up; I’m still 
good friends with several of them today. My only vice was I 
usually would have him make fun of players with weird or 
silly names, and humored players roleplaying as elves or 
orcs (there were no races in UO initially, a state I personally 
think they should have kept). It helped that I can type 85–95 
words per minute, so I could quickly and easily respond to 
questions, without using Internet shorthand or leet speak. 
(Which I despise.) I even ended up doing the services for 
in-game weddings, both in my green robe (seer disguise) 
and as Ben. 
   Even Lord British himself showed up to the tavern to meet the 
colorful barman. Still, even Adamantyr eventually burned out 
on the game. “Working volunteer work like this is, in many ways, 
just another job.” Constant struggles with malicious players had 
ﬁ nally turned him off his favorite hobby. 
 All in all,  Ultima Online  was a staggeringly ambitious game 
that offered a multitude of options from the beginning, but it was 
only a small fraction of the game it has become today. Electronic 
Arts churned out several expansions between 1998 and 2007, 
many of which signiﬁ cantly altered the gameworld and the game-
play.  Ultima Online: Renaissance , which was released on April 
3, 2000, doubled the size of the gameworld by offering a “mirror 
image” world called Trammel, which forbade pkilling. Although 
some players rejoiced, others were displeased, feeling that the 
change threatened the economy. The problem was that now 
players could more easily level up and work on skills and crafts, 
since they didn’t have to worry about pkills. With the risk factor 
reduced, if not eliminated, the markets were soon saturated with 
products and inﬂ ation soared. Other critics, such as Michael E. 
Ryan of GameSpot, complained that the game was “getting rather 
long in the tooth,” with audiovisuals that looked quite dated com-
pared to its competitors—particularly  EverQuest , which had been 
released a year earlier. 
 EverQuest  had several advantages over its rival. For one, it 
offered 3D-accelerated graphics, which gave it a distinctly mod-
ern look compared to  Ultima Online.  PVP combat was moved to 
a designated server, which made it much easier (and less frus-
trating) for new or less aggressive players to ﬂ ourish on the main 
servers—the emphasis there was on cooperating rather than 
ﬁ ghting with other players. There were several means in place to 
ensure cooperation, such as monsters that were difﬁ cult if not 
impossible to beat alone. It was also less prone to lag than  Ultima 
Online , even with dial-up modems. It did, however, punish death 
more severely: dying cost experience points as well as a tedious 
run to one’s corpse. 

364     Chapter 24 ULTIMA ONLINE (1997) 
 EverQuest surpassed  Ultima Online ’s userbase by the end 
of 1999, reaching more than 400,000 users in 2004.6  EverQuest 
eventually became successful enough to capture the atten-
tion of the mass media, though—as we might expect—their 
coverage was often sensationalized reports of addiction. They 
seemed particularly puzzled by the fact that players were will-
ing to offer real money for objects or money in the game. Much 
was made of a study by Edward Castronova, an economics pro-
fessor at California State University, Fullerton. Castronova’s 
study suggested that the gross domestic product, or GDP, of 
Norrath (the gameworld of  EverQuest ) was somewhere between 
Russia and Bulgaria’s, and that the virtual currency was worth 
more than several real-life currencies. The public’s fascination 
with the “real value” of virtual economies would crop up again 
and again in discussions of  Second Life  (starting in 2003) and 
other popular MMOs. Like  Ultima Online ,  EverQuest  was regu-
larly expanded; there were 14 such enhancements by 2007. On 
November 8, 2004, Sony released an ofﬁ cial sequel,  EverQuest 
II , which upgraded the audiovisuals and incorporated digitized 
speech for NPCs. 
 It’s likely that the timing of  EverQuest II  was a response to 
Blizzard’s  World of Warcraft , released just a few weeks later. 
Blizzard was already a major player in the online gaming world 
with its Battle.net service, ﬁ rst introduced in 1996 with  Diablo 
 6 See  http://championsofnorrath.station.sony.com/headset.jsp . 
Promotional screenshot 
from EverQuest: Gates 
of Discord.

 
Chapter 24 ULTIMA ONLINE (1997)     365
(See  Chapter 4 , “ Diablo  (1997): The Rogue Goes to Hell”). Blizzard 
had been the ﬁ rst company to really proﬁ t with an online model, 
and their hugely successful games had made them one of the 
most inﬂ uential companies in the industry. Blizzard’s trick was to 
use the free Battle.net service as an incentive to get more players 
to buy the game—in effect using the Internet as “added value” for 
their product. Naturally, this same approach wouldn’t work for 
a full-scale MMORPG, but Blizzard seems to have had no prob-
lems making the transition to a subscription model. Much as 
 EverQuest  had done back in 1999,  World of Warcraft  soon became 
 the  MMORPG, rapidly seizing market share but also swelling 
that market to unprecedented numbers: on September 19, 2008, 
Blizzard announced that the game had reached 10 million sub-
scribers.7 When we consider that past developers were boasting 
about hitting milestones of 100,000, this ﬁ gure is truly amazing. 
 What was it about  World of Warcraft  that generated—and gen-
erates—so many sales? Besides impressive audiovisuals and an 
intuitive interface, the developers also seem to have beneﬁ ted 
from a careful study of what had come before. Although there 
are many aspects of the game that we could talk about, perhaps 
the most signiﬁ cant is its careful balance between PVP and PVE, 
or Player vs. Environment. Although, like  EverQuest ,  World of 
Warcraft  offers dedicated servers for PVP, the rules for PVP on 
regular servers are relaxed. Players who want to ﬁ ght other play-
ers have several options at their disposal, from harmless duels 
to battlegrounds, where members of the two opposing factions 
(Alliance and Horde) clash in battle. However, at any time players 
can ﬂ ag their characters for PVP, making it possible for any other 
 7 See  http://www.blizzard.com/us/press/080122.html . 
A scene from virtual world, 
Second Life, which mirrors many 
aspects of reality.

366     Chapter 24 ULTIMA ONLINE (1997) 
ﬂ agged character to attack them nearly anywhere in the game. 
The game encourages PVP mostly in the battlegrounds, where 
players can compete for special titles and equipment. 
 PVE is probably where  World of Warcraft  shines the most, how-
ever, ensuring that even the most antisocial player has plenty of 
things to do. This is most evident in the quest structure; there 
are hundreds of possible quests to fulﬁ ll, many of which are easy 
enough for a solo player to complete. There are also quests for 
groups, which usually involve entering an “instance.” This concept 
of “instances” is particularly important, as the problem it solved 
was one of the main complaints about  EverQuest. The problem 
is that the nature of MMORPGs makes it hard for one person or 
even one group to complete certain objectives, such as defeating 
a speciﬁ c foe. By the time the group arrives on the scene, another 
group has already killed the beast. To make matters worse, some 
players may opt to “kill steal” or “boss camp,” meaning to either 
swoop in at the last minute to ﬁ nish off a monster (and thus gain-
ing the treasure and experience), or simply hanging around where 
the monster reappears after death, selﬁ shly killing it again and 
again before anyone else can respond. 
 The “instance” solves these problems by making certain areas 
of the game unique to an individual player or group. When a 
group enters an instance together, a special version of that area 
is created just for them; no other players are allowed inside. 
This technique makes it possible for a player or group to “run 
instances” without interference. Furthermore, Blizzard included 
a “looking for group” tool to help players ﬁ nd others in search 
of groups to run these instances (a popular activity, since the 
Promotional screenshot from 
EverQuest II: Kingdom of Sky.

 
Chapter 24 ULTIMA ONLINE (1997)     367
monsters in instances tend to drop more gold and better items). 
Although even  World of Warcraft  is far from perfect, it seems to 
be one of the best-balanced of MMORPGs, with just the right 
level of complexity. Expansions have been much less frequent 
than we’ve seen in past MMORPGs as well;  The Burning Crusade 
was released in 2007, and  Wrath of the Lich King  in late 2008. 
However, Blizzard has regularly issued patches, which add con-
tent as well as tweaks to the gameplay. 
 There are of course many, many other important and innova-
tive MMORPGs that we could discuss in this chapter, but it seems 
clear that the trinity of  Ultima Online ,  EverQuest , and  World of 
Warcraft  are by far the most important, at least for the computer 
games industry. Console gamers have traditionally enjoyed little 
access to MMOs, though that seems to be dramatically changing. 
Probably the two most talked about console-based MMORPGs 
are from Japan: Sega’s  Phantasy Star Online  (2001 in the United 
States) and Square’s  Final Fantasy XI  (2002).  Phantasy Star Online 
began as a service for the short-lived Dreamcast platform, but 
was later ported to the Nintendo GameCube, PC, and Microsoft 
Xbox. Unfortunately, its status as a true MMORPG is open to 
question; it offered a fully playable stand-alone mode and a 
game-matching system comparable to Blizzard’s Battle.net ser-
vice. Although scores of players could interact with each other in 
lobbies, the actual gameplay areas were limited to four-person 
groups.  Final Fantasy XI  debuted in the United States exclusively 
for the PC, with a Sony PlayStation 2 version arriving in 2004; in 
2006, a version appeared for the Microsoft Xbox 360. Sony Online 
Entertainment also released  EverQuest Online Adventures  for the 
Promotional screenshot from 
World of Warcraft: Wrath of the 
Lich King.

368     Chapter 24 ULTIMA ONLINE (1997) 
PlayStation 2 in 2003, but to a decidely muted reception. Though 
none of these games can rival the enviable success of computer-
based MMORPGs, the future of console MMOs seems bright. All 
three of the current consoles have made Internet access a highly 
desirable—if not necessary—feature, and an increasing focus on 
MMOs seems all but inevitable.8  
After the roaring success of  EverQuest  and then  World of 
Warcraft ,  Ultima Online  seemed to sink further and further into 
the background. Still, it still had a considerable base of loyal users 
who refused to emigrate. Electronic Arts continued to support 
this community, steadily releasing expansions and various com-
pilations.  Third Dawn , which debuted on March 7, 2001, offered 
a 3D client and a new area available exclusively in 3D (it was later 
available in 2D as well). However, the results of this facelift were 
uneven, and critics like Michael E. Ryan of GameSpot warned 
that “compared with the competition . . .  Third Dawn doesn’t have 
all that much to offer.”9 Many  Ultima Online  fans continued to 
use the 2D client, which they found easier to navigate. 
 On June 27, 2007, Electronic Arts unveiled Mythic Entertainment’s 
 Ultima Online: Kingdom Reborn , yet another attempt to revitalize 
the aging MMORPG. The goal was not just to update the audiovisu-
als but to make the game more inviting to novices. Unfortunately, 
 8 Interestingly, as both the Nintendo Wii and Sony PlayStation offer web browsers, 
many browser-based—and often free—massively multiplayer games have been 
made accessible. 
 9 See  http://www.gamespot.com/pc/rpg/ultimaonlinethirddawn/review.html . 
Promotional screenshot from 
Ultima Online: Kingdom Reborn, 
showcasing the improved visuals.

 
Chapter 24 ULTIMA ONLINE (1997)     369
even though critics seem generally pleased with the enhancements, 
it seems to have had a hard time attracting attention outside of the 
existing  Ultima Online  community. Neither GameSpot nor IGN 
even bothered to review it. 
 Garriott returned to the MMORPG scene in 2007 with  Tabula 
Rasa , a shooter/MMORPG hybrid that eschewed the prevailing 
fantasy settings for sci-ﬁ . Garriott had successfully generated 
enormous buzz around the game, consenting to dozens of inter-
views and taking every opportunity to plug the product. Despite 
some intriguing ideas such as “morality quests” and the ability to 
clone one’s character to try out new professions, the game was no 
 World of Warcraft  killer, despite rumors of a $100 million devel-
opment that spanned more than six years. For whatever reason, 
the game failed to win over many subscribers, and its user base 
remained paltry compared to the competition.  Tabula Rasa went 
from being the gaming media’s 800-pound gorilla to its elephant 
in the room. As discussed in the previous chapter, like so many 
other MMORPGs that were unable to quickly build a sizeable 
audience,  Tabula Rasa eventually shut its servers down for good. 
 Even as  Tabula Rasa  and even  Ultima Online eventually fade 
away, Richard Garriott’s legacy as one of the world’s most inno-
vative developers will never diminish. Just as his  Ultima series 
practically deﬁ ned the CRPG for decades, the inﬂ uence of  Ultima 
Online  on modern MMORPGs is simply undeniable. If later 
developers were able to do better, it was only because they had 
spent so many pleasant evenings in Brittania, studying under the 
noble Lord British. 
 As the case with  Tabula Rasa  shows, the MMO model seems 
at once promising and threatening for game developers. On one 
hand, the subscription model has proven quite lucrative and 
sustainable for the winners. Why settle for a one-time sale when 
you can rake in fees month after month? However, it’s proven 
difﬁ cult for even big-budgeted and greatly hyped new MMOs to 
lure gamers away from the dominant MMO. Neither the afore-
mentioned  Tabula Rasa  nor Funcom’s highly touted  Age of 
Conan: Hyborian Adventures  (2008) seem to have dented  World of 
Warcraft ’s subscriber base. The latest serious contender is Mythic 
Entertainment’s  Warhammer Online: Age of Reckoning  (2008), a 
game that Steven Crews of TheMMOGamer describes as a “hell 
of a lot like WoW.”10 Although quite promising, this game, or any 
other, is unlikely to topple Blizzard’s champion. Despite this 
issue, developers do not have to have the number one MMORPG 
as long as they can attract a respectably sized community of ded-
icated players, and it seems likely that at least some gamers will 
gradually become disillusioned with  World of Warcraft and seri-
ously start exploring the alternatives.
 10 See  http://tinyurl.com/3h6nyn .  

This page intentionally left blank

371
25
 ZORK (1980): TEXT IMPS VERSUS 
GRAPHICS GRUES 
  It is only ﬁ tting that Infocom’s  Zork  should be the ﬁ nal game 
 discussed in this book. After all, it is the only game we’ve covered 
that relies totally on text for both input and output—it’s the most 
 book- like of all the games we’ve covered! Although modern critics 
might take its lack of graphics and sound as proof of its obsoles-
cence, anyone with an appreciation for human language should 
consider it miraculously advanced.  Zork  represents something of 
a paradox: it’s at the same time obsolete and cutting edge. On one 
hand, computers and consoles have made huge gains in audiovi-
sual technology since text adventures like  Zork  were dominating 
best-seller lists. On the other hand, developers have made sur-
prisingly little progress in the areas of natural language process-
ing. It’s easier for a game to let us realistically blow a man’s brains 
out than engage him in conversation! Where  Zork  and its heirs 
 triumph over modern games is precisely in presenting the illu-
sion of consciousness. Playing  Zork  isn’t about moving a disem-
bodied shotgun through a 3D battleground in search of demons 
to perforate with buckshot (see Chapter 5, “ Doom (1993): The 
First-Person Shooter Takes Control”). Instead,  Zork  is like reading 
a novel as it’s being written, or starring in a play without knowing 
one’s lines. 
 The goal is to improvise one’s way through a labyrinth, intu-
iting the proper responses to a series of conundrums. It’s also 
about getting to know the narrator, whose witty repertoire and 
scathing one-liners come most often at our own expense.  Zork  is 
funny,  Zork  is witty, and—above all— Zork  is human. Where the 
game fails is precisely where we glimpse the machine posing as 
a person; the telltale blush response that proves our seductive 
companion is an automaton. 
 It’s quite likely that no computer game in history has inspired 
as much prose as  Zork , even if we omit the billions of commands 
inputted by legions of hunt-and-peckers.  Zork  and other text-
based adventure games have long been the subjects of academics 

372     Chapter 25 ZORK (1980): TEXT IMPS VERSUS GRAPHICS GRUES
writing about games, such as Brenda Laurel, Janet Murray, and 
Espen Aarseth. The games were also widely discussed in popular 
media, where journalists were fascinated by their artiﬁ cial intel-
ligence and imaginative scenarios. Although these games lacked 
audiovisuals, they were still widely played and admired by pretty 
much anyone who played them. 
 No doubt, many of those early visitors to the Great Underground 
Empire felt like they were experiencing the future of the novel. 
Developers dreamed of a day when interactive ﬁ ction (IF) “novels” 
would stand proudly alongside Thomas Pynchon and Norman 
Mailer on the shelves of Borders and Barnes & Noble. Sadly, it 
hasn’t happened—but why not? 
 Most gamers would respond simply that these games lost 
their appeal as technology progressed. Modern gamers demand 
sophisticated audiovisuals; text alone just won’t cut it. However, 
although television and movies have been around for quite some 
time, people still buy and read books. A fan of novels might 
respond that the pleasure she gets from reading a good novel is 
simply  different than watching a ﬁ lm; it’s not necessarily a ques-
tion of which one’s  better  in some universal sense. There doesn’t 
seem to be any practical reason why  all  games should have 
advanced audiovisuals; conceivably there could still be an audi-
ence for games consisting of well-written text. Nick Montfort, 
author of  Twisty Little Passages  (MIT Press, 2003), argues that 
interactive ﬁ ction will remain an “essential part of digital media 
and literature even if no one manages to sell it,” likening the 
genre to poetry.1 Indeed, there are thriving niche communities 
of gamers who still enjoy playing (and making) interactive ﬁ c-
tion, but this activity has sadly remained very much on the mar-
gins of the industry.2 We’ll now table this discussion and proceed 
to the story of  Zork . 
 Zork  began life in much the same way as many of the early 
computer games; that is, as a fruitful, informal collaboration by 
starry-eyed college students.3 Indeed, it’s easy (if, perhaps, a bit 
misleading) to compare the development of  Zork  with that of 
another classic computer game,  Spacewar!  (see bonus chapter, 
 1      Unless otherwise noted, all quotations in this chapter are from private email cor-
respondence with the authors. 
 2      Today, dedicated and talented IF authors continue to advance the art of interac-
tive storytelling as part of a mostly noncommercial effort. Unfortunately, for all 
of the innovation in story constructs and styles, the technology has more or less 
remained the same as that originally found in Zork. On the plus side, the mod-
ern interactive ﬁ ction creation languages are still highly portable and appear 
on nearly every possible platform, including directly within Web browsers. See 
 http://www.ifarchive.org for more on modern interactive ﬁ ction. 
 3  To be speciﬁ c, three of Zork’s developers were college students at MIT (Blank, 
Anderson, and Daniels). The fourth, Dave Lebling, was a member of MIT’s staff. 

 
Chapter 25 ZORK (1980): TEXT IMPS VERSUS GRAPHICS GRUES     373
“Spacewar! (1962): The Best Waste of Time in the History of the 
Universe”). 
 Zork  was developed by four members of the MIT’s Dynamic 
Modeling Group, whereas  Spacewar! was developed by mem-
bers of MIT’s Tech Model Railroad Club. Both teams were excited 
about the possibility of computer games, and both were fueled by 
the adrenaline rush of hacking. However, the authors of  Zork  had 
a much different vision of the future of computer games than the 
hackers responsible for  Spacewar!. For, although  Spacewar!  paved 
the way for graphical “twitch” games,  Zork  was a game for folks 
who preferred prose to pyrotechnics. 
 The authors of the mainframe  Zork , Tim Anderson, Marc 
Blank, Bruce Daniels, and Dave Lebling, began writing the pro-
gram in 1977 for the DEC PDP-10, the same computer used by 
Will Crowther and Don Woods to create  Colossal Cave Adventure  
( Spacewar! was programmed on the earlier PDP-1). The PDP-10 
was a mainframe computer that was much more powerful than 
any home computer of the time, but certainly too large and 
expensive for the consumer market. 
 The few home computers that existed were so woefully under-
powered compared to mainframes like the PDP-10 that most of the 
early game developers had little interest in trying to restrict or sell 
their software; if you had access to one of these behemoths, chances 
are you could easily acquire games like  Colossal Cave Adventure  for 
free using the ARPANET,4 the progenitor to the Internet. 
Colossal Cave Adventure is 
a groundbreaking game that 
pioneered the adventure game. 
The ﬁ rst version was designed 
by Will Crowther and later 
substantially expanded by 
Don Woods. It is the progenitor 
of Zork and all later games in 
the genre. Screenshot from a PC 
conversion shown.
 4      The Advanced Research Projects Agency Network of the United States 
Department of Defense was the world’s ﬁ rst operational packet switching 
network. 

374     Chapter 25 ZORK (1980): TEXT IMPS VERSUS GRAPHICS GRUES
 The “imps,”5 as they would later style themselves, were 
enchanted with  Colossal Cave Adventure, also known as 
Adventure or simply Advent, whose ﬁ rst appearance was in 1976. 
 Colossal Cave  is certainly a groundbreaking game, both in the ﬁ g-
urative and literal sense—the original author, Crowther, and his 
wife, were dedicated cavers and he based much of the game on 
an actual cave system in Kentucky. Although many critics tend 
to overlook this caving connection, it’s important if we want to 
fully understand the appeal of games like  Colossal Cave  and  Zork . 
It’s not simply a coincidence that both games are focused on 
the thrilling exploration one enjoys as a caver or urban explorer. 
These games are less “interactive novels” than “interactive maps” 
(or “interactive worlds” to use language popularized by Cyan of 
 Myst  fame). Another intriguing coincidence is that the ﬁ rst jigsaw 
puzzle ever sold was of a map.6 It seems that maps and puzzles 
have been associated from very early times! 
 Although exploration games can be rendered with graphics 
instead of text, this eliminates much of the freedom (or at least 
the illusion of such) allowed by text—a point we’ll return to later. 
As for Crowther, his purported intention for creating the game 
was chieﬂ y as a way to share some of his enjoyment of caving and 
the role-playing game  Dungeons & Dragons  ( D&D ) with his two 
daughters. It’s easy for critics, perhaps avid  D&D players them-
selves, to get so ﬁ xated on this fantasy role-playing connection 
that they overlook the inﬂ uence of caving. 
 Colossal Cave  established many of the conventions and princi-
ples upon which almost all subsequent text adventures are based, 
such as the familiar structure of rooms and objects, inventory, 
point system, and input structure (“OPEN DOOR,” “GO NORTH,” 
and so on). The game also introduced several elements inspired 
by J. R. R. Tolkien’s famous works, including dwarves and magic 
(Tolkien was always drawing maps himself). To get through 
the game, players frequently sketched out their own graphical 
maps of the areas they explored.  Colossal Cave  also famously 
introduced the “non-Euclidean maze,” or a series of identically 
described rooms. 
 The only way players can navigate these mazes (besides cheat-
ing) is to drop breadcrumbs, or objects whose placement in a 
room will alter its description (thus allowing the player to retrace 
steps). The game also requires players not merely to  collect 
 treasures, but to deposit them in the proper location to earn 
points. Although  Colossal Cave  was certainly a breakthrough, it 
didn’t take long for hackers to master it. Some hackers went a step 
 5  Short for “implementers.” 
 6  See Daniel McAdam’s “History of Jigsaw Puzzles” at  http://www.jigsaw-puzzle
.org/jigsaw-puzzle-history.html . 

 
Chapter 25 ZORK (1980): TEXT IMPS VERSUS GRAPHICS GRUES     375
beyond; they had sighted a new vista and wanted to explore its 
possibilities to the fullest. 
 Much like Crowther and Woods, the imps were initially inspired 
more by a desire to test their hacker skills than a singular desire 
for wealth. Indeed, in a famous 1979 article published in the sci-
entiﬁ c journal  IEEE Computer , the authors promised to send 
anyone a copy of the game who sent them a magnetic tape and 
return postage. 
 This article, written by Dave Lebling, Marc Blank, and Tim 
Anderson, describes the game as a “computerized fantasy simu-
lation,” and uses terminology familiar to anyone who remembers 
 D&D : “In this type of game, the player interacts conversationally 
with an omniscient ‘Master of the Dungeon,’ who rules on each 
proposed action and relates the consequences.” However, like 
 Colossal Cave ,  Zork  is primarily a game about exploration, involv-
ing such activities as breaking into a supposedly abandoned house, 
rappelling down a steep cavern, and even ﬂ oating across a river in 
an inﬂ atable raft (watch your sword!). Along the way, the player is 
continuously confronted with puzzles and even a few ﬁ ghts (such 
as a troll to be dispatched with the sword). Most famously, though, 
the player must at all times be wary of the grue—a mysterious 
beast which lurks in total darkness, always hungry for adventurers. 
 On the surface,  Zork  appears to have much in common with its 
progenitor,  Colossal Cave , and IF scholar Dennis Jerz has gone so 
far as to say that “whereas Adventure began as a simulation of a 
real cave, Zork began as a simulation of Adventure.”7
 Zork  added several key innovations, including a much more 
sophisticated parser capable of handling commands like “KILL 
TROLL WITH SWORD” and “PUT COFFIN, SCEPTRE, AND 
GOLD INTO CASE,” whereas  Colossal Cave  (and for several years, 
Infocom’s commercial competition) was limited to commands of 
one or two words (“GET BOTTLE,” “PLUGH”).  Zork  also offered a 
more sophisticated antagonist, the famous thief, who roams about 
the world independently of the character and eventually plays an 
important role in solving the game. Montfort described the thief 
as a “real character with the functions of a character as seen in lit-
erature, not the mere anthropomorphic obstacle that was seen in 
Adventure.”  Zork II  also introduces a coherent plot to add some 
narrative coherence to the player’s treasure hunting. Overall, 
though, the game was praised for its humor and excellent writing. 
 The mainframe  Zork  was not broken into a trilogy, but rather 
existed as a single massive game. After the imps founded 
Infocom and decided to commercially release the game for per-
sonal  computers, they were faced with stiff memory limitations 
(and a wide variety of incompatible platforms). To get around the 
 7  See  http://jerz.setonhill.edu/if/canon/Zork.htm . 

376     Chapter 25 ZORK (1980): TEXT IMPS VERSUS GRAPHICS GRUES
 problem, they broke the game up into three parts, though not 
without some modiﬁ cations and additions. It’s also worthwhile to 
mention the brilliant design strategy they followed. 
 Rather than port the code to so many different platforms, 
Joel Berez and Marc Blank created a virtual platform called the 
“Z-Machine,” which was programmed using a LISP-like lan-
guage called ZIL. Afterwards, all that was required to port the 
entire library to a new platform was to write (or have written) a 
“Z-Machine Interpreter,” or ZIP. Scott Cutler took on the task of 
 creating the ﬁ rst commercial ZIP, which was written for Tandy’s 
TRS-80.8 Indeed, one of Infocom’s key assets as a text adventure 
publisher was the ease with which they could offer their games 
on a tremendous number of platforms; graphical games were 
much harder to port. 
Early on, Infocom’s popular 
software came in packaging of 
all different shapes and sizes. 
Some of the rarer types, like 
Starcross, which came in a plastic 
ﬂ ying saucer, and Suspended, 
which came in a plastic mask, are 
particularly valuable collector’s 
items today—sometimes selling 
for hundreds of dollars.
 8  These ﬁ rst commercial versions of Zork for the TRS-80 (late 1980) and Apple II 
(early 1981) were published by Personal Software (known for the 1979 Apple II 
“killer app,” VisiCalc, one of the ﬁ rst spreadsheet programs) with poorly matched 
cover art that featured a crazed, sword-wielding warrior standing over a cower-
ing troll. Infocom would soon take over publishing for Zork themselves, com-
plete with new cover art. See  http://home.grandecom.net/~maher/if-book/if-
4.htm for more on the story and to see the original Personal Software cover art. 
Interestingly, while the Personal Software releases are generally considered the 
ﬁ rst true commercial versions of Zork, an early form of the Infocom company 
sold a crudely packaged PDP-11 version of Zork on 8” disk that is said to predate 
them. See http://inventory.getlamp.com/2008/11/30/pdp-11-zork-manual-save-
234831/ for more information.  

 
Chapter 25 ZORK (1980): TEXT IMPS VERSUS GRAPHICS GRUES     377
 Indeed, for many of the more obscure platforms, Infocom’s 
lineup was the best (if not the only) games available. It seemed 
like no matter what type of computer you had, you could always 
buy a copy of  Zork. This fact no doubt offered them considerable 
leverage in the terriﬁ cally diversiﬁ ed home computer market of 
the early 1980s, when consumers could pick from many different 
machines, each with its own advantages and disadvantages (cost, 
speed, memory, ease of use, expandability, software library, and 
so on). However, Lebling notes that there were some “negative 
impacts, especially as the newer machines began to have more 
memory and better graphics. We had to write to the lowest com-
mon denominator, or spend time on each game ﬁ tting it to the 
different platforms.” As the latter approach was cost- prohibitive, 
Infocom’s games were identical on every platform. It’s notable 
that later adventure game publishers followed Infocom’s example, 
including Sierra (AGI) and LucasArts (SCUMM; see Chapter 11, 
“ King’s Quest: Quest for the Crown  (1984): Perilous Puzzles, 
Thorny Thrones”). In each case, the idea was to separate the cre-
ative assets (script, graphics, and so on) from the machine-level 
programming. 
 Infocom also lured gamers with innovative packaging and “feel-
ies,” or small items included with the disks and manuals. Usually 
these items were added to complement the game’s theme, such as 
the peril-sensitive sunglasses included with  The Hitchhiker’s Guide 
to the Galaxy  (1984). Other feelies served to curtail illegal distribu-
tion. For instance, without the “QX-17-T Assignment Completion 
Form,” players would not be able to input the coordinates needed 
Infocom’s games were known 
for their “feelies,” or extra items 
inside the box. Some, like letters 
and maps, provided vital clues 
or information for the game, 
while others—like Wishbringer’s 
glow-in-the-dark magic stone, The 
Hitchhiker’s Guide to the Galaxy’s 
peril-sensitive sunglasses, and 
Sherlock’s key fob—were just 
for fun.

378     Chapter 25 ZORK (1980): TEXT IMPS VERSUS GRAPHICS GRUES
to access the space station in  Stationfall.  Sadly, the ambiance 
achieved by the clever packaging and feelies are incapable of 
being “emulated,” and players really wanting to get the full experi-
ence would do well to own an original boxed copy. 
 The three commercially released  Zork  games are  Zork I: The 
Underground Empire  (1980),  Zork II: The Wizard of Frobozz  
(1981), and  Zork III: The Dungeon Master  (1982). Although these 
games are based on parts of the massive mainframe version, the 
imps worked hard to make each game more coherent, such as the 
plot structure of  The Wizard of Frobozz.  Now, players had to do 
more than just ﬁ nd all the treasures—they had to ﬁ nd a way to 
bring the story to its natural resolution. 
 No doubt to the angst of many parents worried about the 
“Satanism” of so much fantasy role-playing, this story culminates 
in giving ten treasures to a demon, who takes them as payment 
for performing one critical task. The game is also noted for two 
infamously difﬁ cult puzzles called the “Bank of  Zork  Vault” and 
the “Oddly-Angled Room.” The ﬁ nal game in the trilogy,  The 
Dungeon Master , takes leave of much of the humor and opts for 
a more solemn and gloomy tone; one reviewer calls it “brooding.” 
Instead of merely hunting for loot, the player must ﬁ nd items that 
allow him (or her) to take on the role of Dungeon Master. 
 In 1983, Infocom released  Enchanter , the ﬁ rst of another 
 trilogy of games set in the  Zork  universe. These games were much 
more focused on magic and spellcasting than  Zork , but retained 
much of the humor and excellent writing.  Sorcerer  (1984) and 
 Spellbreaker (1985) round out the series. Each entry in the series 
is increasingly difﬁ cult, to the point that some critics complained 
An early scene from Zork III: 
The Dungeon Master on 
the Apple II.

 
Chapter 25 ZORK (1980): TEXT IMPS VERSUS GRAPHICS GRUES     379
that  Spellbreaker  was a contrived effort to boost sales of Infocom’s 
 InvisiClues  hint books. 
 Infocom’s  Zork  and  Enchanter  trilogies were fabulous suc-
cesses, and the company followed up with several other classics. 
To make a long story short, Infocom’s business was booming, and 
its superior interactive ﬁ ction titles earned them enough “zork-
mids” to build their own empire, not to mention throw incredible 
promotional parties, including the legendary “murder mystery 
party” thrown at the 1985 Consumer Electronics Show (CES) for 
 Suspect  (1984). Infocom even hired a troupe of actors and let par-
ticipants indulge in some “live-action role-playing” to solve the 
murder. Infocom was at their zenith. 
 Unfortunately, the company would soon ﬂ ounder. From the 
beginning, Infocom was not intended solely to develop and 
Box back from the Coleco Adam’s 
2010: The Text Adventure 
Game from 1984. Although still 
considered a text adventure, the 
game was played entirely with 
the Adam computer’s arrow keys 
and SmartKeys (function keys), 
which eliminated the need for 
a traditional parser. Although 
the only real graphics and music 
were at the title screen, players 
would hear their own breathing 
(which would slow and quicken 
depending upon the situation), as 
if they were playing the game in 
a spacesuit.

380     Chapter 25 ZORK (1980): TEXT IMPS VERSUS GRAPHICS GRUES
 publish games (one thinks of countless rock and pop bands 
 dreaming of producing “serious” music with the London 
Philharmonic Orchestra). Although their text adventure games 
had sold amazingly well, Infocom wasn’t satisﬁ ed—they were 
convinced they were destined for bigger and better things. The 
albatross ﬂ opping around Infocom’s corridors was a relational 
database called Cornerstone (1985). Cornerstone sounded like a 
brilliant idea—everyone knew that database software had revolu-
tionary potential for business, but the current offerings were far 
too complex for the average user. Infocom saw an opportunity, 
and felt that the same virtual machine strategy they used for  Zork  
would work well for Cornerstone. But it didn’t. 
 By the time copies of Cornerstone began lining up on store 
shelves, the IBM PC was the overwhelmingly dominant platform 
for business; portability was no longer an issue. Furthermore, the 
virtual machine setup reduced its speed, and it lacked several 
of the advanced features that made its rival database programs 
worth learning in the ﬁ rst place. The program was not a success, 
and several critics remarked that its name was apt—it sat on store 
shelves like a stone. Infocom had foolishly invested so heavily in 
the product, however, that they were unable to recover, and in 
1986 the company was acquired by Activision. 
 What happens next is a rather dismal story indeed. Activision 
seemed uninterested in publishing text games, preferring 
instead to exploit the popularity of games like  Zork  in graphical 
 adventure games, starting with  Beyond Zork , in 1987, by Brian 
Moriarty ( Wishbringer ,  Trinity , and others). 
Micro-Fun’s Death in the 
Caribbean from 1985, Apple II 
version shown, was advertised for 
its visuals rather than its parser, 
which was severely limited in 
comparison to Infocom’s text-
based games.

 
Chapter 25 ZORK (1980): TEXT IMPS VERSUS GRAPHICS GRUES     381
 Beyond Zork  offered players a crude automap and several ran-
dom and RPG elements to theoretically enhance the game’s replay-
ability. Replayability is always an issue with most  adventure games: 
once the player ﬁ gures out the puzzles and solves the game, there 
is little reason to play it through again—though a few years may be 
sufﬁ cient time to forget enough of the details to make it fun again. 
 Steve Meretzky ( Planetfall ,  A Mind Forever Voyaging , and 
others) got in on the act with  Zork Zero , another graphically 
enhanced game published in 1988.  Zork Zero  is a prequel to the 
Screenshot from the Commodore 
64 version of Datasoft’s The Dallas 
Quest (1984). Despite having 
only superﬁ cial similarities to the 
popular television series, this text 
and graphics adventure was part 
of a unique group of surprisingly 
good licensed games in the format 
from the 1980s, which includes 
the text-only Rambo: First Blood 
Part II (Mindscape, 1985) and Star 
Trek: The Kobayashi Alternative 
(Simon & Schuster Interactive, 
1985), among others.
Screenshot from the Apple IIgs 
version of Activision’s quirky Tass 
Times in Tone Town (1986), a 
text and graphics adventure that 
can be considered a transitional 
type of product—the game 
could be played using either 
traditional text input or by clicking 
on the various icons, either in 
combination with or exclusive of 
each other.

382     Chapter 25 ZORK (1980): TEXT IMPS VERSUS GRAPHICS GRUES
trilogy, and offers several nice features like in-game hints, menus, 
and an interactive map. 
 The last game to be published under the Infocom label was 
 Return to Zork , a 1993 game released for Apple Macintosh and 
PC. Developed by Activision,  Return to Zork  is quite a differ-
ent animal than the previous  Zork  games, even the graphically 
enhanced games described previously.  Return to Zork will no 
doubt remind most gamers of the far more popular  Myst  (see 
Screenshot from the PC version 
of Infocom’s Arthur: The Quest 
for Excalibur (1989), one of a 
handful of later releases from the 
company that would go the text-
and-graphics route.
Infocom’s games were often 
more varied in theme than other 
companies. Take for instance, 
Trinity, pictured to the left, which 
blends history and ﬁ ction as part 
of a prose poem regarding the 
destructive power of the atomic 
bomb and the nature of war in 
the modern era; and Plundered 
Hearts, pictured to the right, 
which is the equivalent of a 
romance novel and casts the 
player as a young female in the 
late seventeenth century.

 
Chapter 25 ZORK (1980): TEXT IMPS VERSUS GRAPHICS GRUES     383
The Lost Treasures of Infocom, 
Commodore Amiga version box 
front and back shown, was one of 
several collections of Infocom’s 
classic games released 
over the years.

384     Chapter 25 ZORK (1980): TEXT IMPS VERSUS GRAPHICS GRUES
chapter 12  ), which was released a few months afterwards. The 
parser is gone, replaced by a purely graphical interface that is sur-
prisingly complex and multifaceted. 
 The game also offers live action sequences, including perfor-
mances by a few recognizable but second-tier actors. Contemporary 
reviewers seemed to mostly enjoy the game, though  Zork  aﬁ ciona-
dos were (and are) divided over whether to include the game as part 
of the  Zork  canon. Very few of the original characters show up in the 
game, and there will always be the issue of whether  any  graphical 
adventure game could truly compare to the great text-based clas-
sics. Jay Kee, who reviewed the game for  Compute!  magazine, wrote 
that “people accustomed to the speed and ﬂ exibility of a text-only 
parser are going to feel handcuffed.”9 
 Activision released two more  Zork -themed graphical adven-
tures:  Zork Nemesis: The Forbidden Lands  (1996) and  Zork: Grand 
Inquisitor  (1997), quietly dropping the name “Infocom.”  Nemesis  
offers a much simpliﬁ ed graphical interface and a much darker 
atmosphere than previous games. Like  Return to Zork ,  Nemesis  
was loaded with live action sequences—to the point that the 
game shipped on three CD-ROMs. 
 Most reviewers noticed the game’s intense gore, including a 
puzzle requiring the player to behead a corpse with a guillotine. 
However,  Grand Inquisitor  did try to bring back much of the 
humor missing in  Zork Nemesis , and seemed to pay more homage 
to the series than the previous two games. Perhaps more signiﬁ -
cantly, Activision released  Zork: The Undiscovered Underground  
for free, a text adventure by Marc Blank and Michael Berlyn.  The 
Undiscovered Underground  no doubt eased some of the bitterness 
that dyed-in-the-wool  Zork  fans felt toward Activision, who some 
viewed as merely exploiting the franchise to turn a quick buck. 
 Unfortunately, even a new text adventure was not enough 
to save  Zork ;  Grand Inquisitor  did not sell as many copies as 
Activision hoped. To date, there have been no more ofﬁ cial  Zork  
titles, though there have been several anthologies. 
 It is important to consider that even without Infocom’s fail-
ure with Cornerstone, the desire for graphics would have likely 
pushed the pure text adventure to the side anyway. Many other 
companies had tried text and graphics adventures before, like 
On-Line Systems/Sierra with  Mystery House  (1980; Apple II and 
others), or text adventure pioneer Scott Adams’s10 Adventure 
International with  Return to Pirate’s Isle  (1983; Texas Instruments 
TI-99/4a), though the parsers in such games rarely went beyond 
simplistic, two-word input. Even when companies like Trillium/
 9  See the September 1994 issue of COMPUTE! magazine.  
 10  No relation to the author of Dilbert. Scott Adams began releasing often-difﬁ cult 
commercial text adventures with simple two-word parsers as far back as 1978. 

 
Chapter 25 ZORK (1980): TEXT IMPS VERSUS GRAPHICS GRUES     385
Telarium with  Amazon (1984; Apple II, Commodore 64, and 
 others) from author Michael Crichton, or Magnetic Scrolls with 
 The Pawn (1986; Atari ST, Commodore Amiga, and others), had 
strong combinations of graphics and parser technology, the 
push always seemed to be to automate the process away from 
natural language interaction to point-and-click simplicity. Even 
Legend Entertainment, founded in 1989 by Bob Bates and Mike 
Verdu after the ofﬁ cial end of Infocom, eventually changed from 
 producing text and graphics adventures with natural language 
input to purely mouse- and menu-driven graphics adventures,11 
until ﬁ nally settling on action games before their shutdown in 
2004. The market had spoken.12 
 Nevertheless, to say that  Zork  is not an inﬂ uential adventure 
game is like saying the  Iliad is not an inﬂ uential poem. At some 
point, the question is not so much one of “inﬂ uences” but rather 
Scott Adams and his Adventure 
International Company, started 
in 1978, preceded Infocom’s 
philosophy of releasing games—
particularly text adventures—on 
as many platforms as possible. 
The Scott Adams games had 
modest parsers and complexity, 
which—unlike Infocom’s—
allowed them to work on 
systems with limited processing 
power and memory, and ship on 
cartridge, tape, or disk. Despite 
moving to text and graphics 
adventures and having popular 
licenses like Marvel Comics, 
Adventure International went 
bankrupt in 1985.
 11      Legend Entertainment’s last game to feature a text input option was 1993’s 
Gateway 2: Homeworld. Early on, the company published several titles from Steve 
Meretzky. 
 12      In recent years, a smattering of mainstream games have tried to incorporate text 
input into their gameplay, but this has resulted in little to no impact on future 
developments. For instance, 1998’s Starship Titanic adventure game from Douglas 
Adams’s The Digital Village for Apple Macintosh and PC featured a full-sentence 
text parser in its conversation engine, and Konami’s futuristic survival horror 
game Lifeline from 2003 for the Sony PlayStation 2 allowed the player to speak 
full-sentence commands to the in-game protagonist. 

386     Chapter 25 ZORK (1980): TEXT IMPS VERSUS GRAPHICS GRUES
of laying foundations. Although the game’s mechanics have no 
doubt been surpassed by later parsers and arguably, interfaces, 
no one can deny the incalculable inﬂ uence  Zork  has extended 
across a broad spectrum of games and genres. Could we have 
 Myst  without  Zork ? What about  Doom ? All of these games borrow 
and pay homage, whether directly or indirectly, acknowledged or 
not, from the type of gameplay found in  Zork . 
 The player is still exploring spaces, uncovering possibilities, 
and overcoming obstacles. The only crucial differences are the 
ways these activities are represented on the screen, and the way 
they are selected by the player. In the ﬁ rst case,  Myst , rooms and 
actions are described via graphics rather than text. In the second, 
 Doom , players use arrow keys or mouse clicks rather than typ-
ing commands in the form of words and sentences. For example, 
if the player “goes north” in  Doom by pressing the up arrow key, 
players in  Zork  type “GO NORTH” or simply “N.” To say that the 
former method is objectively superior or more “immersive” than 
the latter seems foolhardy at best. 
Box back for the PC version of 
text and graphics adventure, 
Spellcasting 101: Sorcerers Get All 
the Girls, from Steve Meretzky and 
Legend Entertainment Company. 
Note the menu-driven interface 
option in the screenshot on the 
upper right of the box.

 
Chapter 25 ZORK (1980): TEXT IMPS VERSUS GRAPHICS GRUES     387
 What  Zork  seemed to contribute more than anything was the 
idea that the computer could simulate a rich virtual environment—
much, much larger and nuanced than the playing ﬁ elds seen in 
games like  Spacewar!  or  Pac-Man  (Chapter 13, “ Pac-Man  (1980): 
Japanese Gumption, American Consumption”). Furthermore, 
the game demonstrated the literary potential of the computer. 
Thousands upon thousands of gamers have been charmed by the 
wit and elegance of  Zork ’s many descriptions. Perhaps more than 
anything, though, these games offered players the illusion of total 
freedom. Instead of merely selecting a few set commands from a 
menu,  Zork  encouraged players to imagine inﬁ nite possibilities. 
 For most players, a great deal of the fun was simply experiment-
ing with strange commands to see whether the developers had 
anticipated them. For example, typing “HELLO” results in, “Nice 
weather we’re having lately.” or “Good day.” Type “JUMP”, and you’re 
told, “Very good. Now you can go to the second grade.” On the other 
hand, typing “HELP” results in “I don’t know the word ‘help,’” a 
response that seems to have unintended signiﬁ cance. You can try 
out the results of curse words and more sinister actions yourself. 
 There have been many claims made over the years (particu-
larly by disgruntled fans of interactive ﬁ ction) that their games 
are simply more intellectually challenging, and that the reason 
so many modern gamers don’t like them is that they simply aren’t 
intelligent or reﬁ ned enough to appreciate them. On the other 
hand, we might question whether a textual description really 
requires more imagination than an image. Perhaps a similar 
Synapse’s short-lived “Electronic 
Novel” series came packaged 
as hardcover books in slipcases. 
The parser for these products 
were considered comparable 
in most cases to the best that 
Infocom could offer at the time 
and even featured some unique 
capabilities. Unfortunately for 
Synapse, upon the games’ release 
in 1985, the market was shifting 
away from pure text adventures.

388     Chapter 25 ZORK (1980): TEXT IMPS VERSUS GRAPHICS GRUES
sort of thing is going on in our heads whether we see the word 
“mailbox” or see an image of one on the screen. To make sense of 
either, we have to have some sort of familiarity with the concept 
of mailboxes, and imagine the possible reasons why the mailbox 
is there and what role it could play in the game. Either way, we 
have to use our brains to make sense of it. 
 What, then, is the true advantage of a text adventure over a 
graphical one? The answer to this question seems to be the per-
ceived freedom and intelligence of the parser. It’s nice to be able 
to interact with a game in such a thoroughly compelling manner, 
and it’s here that we may see the future of  Zork , or the future of 
any text-based interactive narrative. The key is an increasingly 
sophisticated parser, with enough artiﬁ cial intelligence to make 
convincing responses to anything the player might type; it would 
be as though there was an actual person or “dungeon master” on 
the other side of the screen. This technology could also be useful 
in graphical games, where it could complement the icon-based 
and context-driven interfaces of modern graphical adventure 
games. An intriguing and important example is Procedural Arts’ 
 Facade (2005), an experimental videogame that had players using 
textual input to interact with an estranged couple. Though still 
clearly in its early stages, these technologies could easily lead to a 
true breakthrough for gaming, greatly enriching the possibilities 
There have actually been three 
major The Hitchhiker’s Guide 
to the Galaxy text-adventure 
adaptations of Douglas Adams 
legendary radio, book, and 
television series (among others). 
The ﬁ rst, released in the early 
1980s by Supersoft for the 
Commodore PET and 64, was 
quickly pulled from the market 
over publishing rights. The ﬁ rst 
ofﬁ cial translation came from 
Infocom in 1984 with help from 
Adams and proved to be one of 
the company’s best-sellers. In 
2004, the game was revived by 
the BBC for free play in a Web 
browser, shown here in its second 
edition. The BBC adaptation 
added illustrations and a visual 
interface to the previously text-
only game.

 
Chapter 25 ZORK (1980): TEXT IMPS VERSUS GRAPHICS GRUES     389
for conversations with and between computer-controlled char-
acters. Imagine, for instance, a role-playing game or ﬁ rst-person 
shooter in which players could talk to characters about practically 
anything—rather than simply clicking on a small set of options 
in a dialog menu. The dramatic possibilities of such a feat are 
practically endless. 
 Although such technology is far beyond what we currently have 
available, consider how far graphics technology has come since 
1980. What if the same level of exponential growth had occurred 
in artiﬁ cial intelligence and natural language processing? “The 
things that interest me,” writes Montfort, “are advancing the 
state of the art, tackling simulation and language in new ways, 
and doing important work within our culture.” Though we’ve yet 
to see a resurgence of text adventures in the commercial sector, 
there’s no doubt that it’s easier than ever to create them. Powerful 
tools like TADS13 and Inform14 offer would-be authors with mini-
mal technical knowledge the chance to design their own pro-
fessional-quality interactive ﬁ ction. Dennis Jerz, a scholar who 
 frequently writes about interactive ﬁ ction, notes that these tools 
have contributed to the “literary feel of most of the prize-winning 
IF games these days.” These tools and the Internet have helped 
foster a small but growing community of IF developers and 
enthusiasts, who continue to push the boundaries of the genre, 
and there have been recent efforts to reintroduce it  commercially. 
Perhaps one day we will ﬁ nd the latest interactive ﬁ ction titles 
alongside other best-sellers at our local bookstore—but we may 
also ﬁ nd parsers cropping up in the latest triple-A titles, where 
they could greatly enrich our conversations with computer-
 controlled characters.
 13  Standing for “Text Adventure Development System.” See  http://tinyurl.com/
4l6zxk for top titles created with the language. 
 14      See  http://tinyurl.com/4ceoxf    for top titles created with the language.    

This page intentionally left blank

    INDEX  
  2D Mario games,   259,   261  
  3D game,   6,   216–217,   257–258  
  3D graphics,   2,   61,   83,   91,   106,  
 251,   257–258  
  The 7th Guest,   169  
 2010: The Text Adventure,  379 
 Action-adventure,  304–305,  317 
 Active Time Battle (ATB),  82, 
 342 
 ADVENT,  355,  373–374 
 Adventure Classic Gaming,  150, 
 357 
 Adventure Game Interpreter 
(AGI),  150 
 Age of Conan: Hyborian 
Adventures,  369 
 AGI.  See Adventure Game 
Interpreter 
 Airline Pilots,  33 
 Airline Transport Pilot (ATP), 
 101 
 Akalabeth,  335–337,  340n 
 Alone in the Dark,  1–13   
 Amazing Maze Game,  182 
 America Online (AOL),  355–356 
  Andromeda,   294  
  The Angel of Darkness,   266  
 Anniversary,  266 
  Apple II,   15–16,   71 
 Flight Simulator II on,  99 
 ﬂ ight simulator program,  94 
 John Madden Football on, 
 136 
 Apshai,  337 
 Arcade game,  200,  203,  240, 
 246 
 Arcade shooters,  238 
 Arctic Thunder,  33 
 Art of Fighting,  249 
 Artwick, Bruce,  94–95,  100 
 Asteroids,  236 
 Asynchronous sharing,  220 
 Atari 2600 Video Computer 
System (VCS),  2,  26,  30, 233 
 Atari Basketball,  126 
 Atari Football,  135 
 ATP.  See Airline Transport Pilot 
 Auto Test,  196 
 Ax Battler: A Legend of Golden 
Axe,   311  
  Axelay,   234      
  Baby Pac-Man,   188  
  Banjo-Kazooie,   266–268  
  Bank of Zork Vault,   378  
  BAO.  See Bruce Artwick 
Organization  
  The Bard’s Tale,   41,   80  
  Bartle,   Richard, 355  
  Baseball videogame,   124  
  Battle.net,   42,   46  
 Battlezone hardware,  103 
  Beach Head 2000,   33  
  Bejeweled,   296,   299–300  
  Berez,   Joel, 376  
  Berzerk,   20  
  Bespelled,   300  
  Beyond Castle Wolfenstein,  
 21–23  
  Beyond Zork,   380–381  
  The Bilestoad,   241  
  Black & White,   328  
  Blank,   Marc, 373,   375–376,   384  
  Blizzard,   364–365  
  Blue Dragon,   91  
  Body Harvest,   111  
 Bonk’s Revenge,  283 
 Bookworm.  See Bespelled 
 Brawl,  253 
 Breakdance,  33–34 
 British Legends,  355 
 Bruce Artwick Organization 
(BAO),  100 
 Bubble Bobble,  299 
 Bulletin Board Systems (BBS), 
 53n 
 The Burning Crusade,  367 
 Bushido Blade,  251 
 Business management 
simulations,  221 
 Business-simulation games,  222 
 Caesar,  221 
 Caesar IV,  219 
 Capcom’s games,  1,  12,  247 
 Capitalism,  221 
 Capitalism II,  221 
 Capitalism Plus,  221 
 Castle Wolfenstein,  15–26 
 Castronova,  Edward, 364 
 Casual gaming,  291,  300 
 Casual simulation approach 
(CSA),  93,  101 
 Catacomb 3D,  56 
 Cat and Mouse,  182 
 Catz,  329 
 Centipede,  234–235 
 Chex Quest,  54 
 Civilization,  65,  209,  223 
 Coleco Colecovision game,  210, 
 237 
 Colossal Cave,  374 
 Colossal Cave Adventure.  See 
ADVENT  
  Columns,   297–298  
  Command and Conquer,   75  
 CompuServe,  355 
 Computer Gaming World, 
 152–153,  344 
 Computerized fantasy 
simulation,  375 
 Computer role-playing game 
(CPRG),  39,  41–42,  335,  339, 
 342,  352 
 Consumer Electronics Show 
(CES),  379 
 Contra,  305 
 Conway,  John, 324 
 Crash Bandicoot,  266–268 
 Crazy Taxi,  203 
 CRPG.  See Computer role-
playing game 
 Crusader series,  18–19,  19n 
 CSA.  See Casual simulation 
approach  
 Curse of the Azure Bonds,  356 
 Cytron Masters,  71 
  The Dallas Quest,  381 

392     INDEX
 Dance Dance Revolution (DDR), 
 27–37 
 game mode,  35 
 lesson mode,  35 
 training mode,  35 
 workout mode,  35 
 DDR.  See Dance Dance 
Revolution 
 Dead or Alive,  251 
 Dead or Alive Xtreme Beach 
Volleyball,  251 
 Death in the Caribbean,  380 
 Death Race,  197–198 
 Defender,  234 
 Destruction Derby,  203 
 Devil World,  81 
 Diablo,  39–50 
 Dogz,  329 
 Donkey Kong,  228,  272–273, 
 277 
 Donkey Kong  64,  315 
 Doom,  51–63 
 Double Dragon,  245–246 
 Dr. Mario,  296 
 Dracula,  3 
 Dragon Quest,  79–80,  305 
 Dragon’s Lair,  29 
 Dragon Warrior,  305 
 The Drew Carey Show,  323   
 Duck Hunt,  305 
 Dune II,  65–76 
 Dungeon Master,  41–42 
 Dungeon Master II: Skullkeep, 
 347 
 Dungeons & Dragons (D&D), 
 121,  355,  360,  374 
 Dungeon Siege,  40 
 Dungeons of Daggorath, 
 42,  231 
 EA Land,  331 
 The Elder Scrolls IV: Oblivion, 
 79 
  Elektronika   60,   293  
  Elektronorgtechnica,   295  
 Eternal Champions,  30 
 EverQuest,  353,  364,  367 
 EverQuest: Gates of Discord,  363 
 EverQuest II: Kingdom of Sky, 
 364,  366 
 EverQuest Online Adventures, 
 368 
 Facade,  388 
 Famicom,  304 
 Fatal Fury,  249 
 Fighters Megamix,  252 
 Fighting games,  239–240,  244, 
 251 
 Fighting Vipers,  252 
 Final Fantasy,  305 
 Final Fantasy VII,  77–92 
 Final Fantasy IX,  87 
 Final Fantasy X,  88 
 Final Fantasy XI,  88,  90,  367 
 Final Fantasy XII,  90–91 
 Final Fantasy Tactics,  91 
 First-person shooter (FPS) 
control,  51 
 Flight Assignment: A.T.P,  101 
 Flight simulation,  93 
 for Apple II,  94 
 Flight Simulator,  95–96 
 Flight Simulator II,  98–99 
 FMV.  See Full-motion video 
  Football videogames,   123  
  Foot Craz,   30  
  Fortune Builder,   210–211  
  Full-motion video (FMV),  
 169      
  Galaga,   229,   232,   236  
  Galaxian,   230,   232  
  Game of Life,   324  
  Garriott,   Richard, 120,   335–343,  
 345,   347,   349,   359,   363,   369  
  Gas powered games,   40  
  Gates of Delirium,   350  
  Gauntlet Legends,   48  
 Gemstone,  355 
 Gerasimov,  Vadim, 293 
  Glider 4.0,   102  
 God games 
  Black & White,   328  
  Populous,   326–327  
  SimCity,   207   
  Golden Axe Warrior,   309  
  Golden Tee games,   130  
 Grand Theft Auto III (GTA III), 
 105,  114 
 Grand Theft Auto IV (GTA IV), 
 117 
 Grand Theft Auto Mission Pack, 
 109 
  Gran Trak  10,  196–197 
 Gran Trak  20,  197 
 Gran Turismo,  203 
 Graphical adventure game, 
 144 
 The Great Videogame Crash of 
1984,  30, 186, 228, 273, 274 
 Gremlins,  198 
 Gross domestic product (GDP), 
 364 
 Guild wars,  362 
 Guilty Gear,  251 
 Guinness Book of Records,  95, 
 182 
 Habitat,  356 
 Half-Life,  62 
 Halloween,  3 
 Hardball!,  125 
 Hard Drivin,  201–202 
 Harvest Moon,  327–328 
 Haunted House,  2–3 
 Herzog Zwei,  73 
 Hexic,  296 
 Highway,  197–198 
 Hillsfar,  43 
 The Hitchhiker’s Guide to the 
Galaxy,  377,  389 
 Hockey game,  132 
 Horror-themed games,  3 
  Hovertank 3D,   55–56      
 Ikari Warriors,  305 
 Ikaruga,  238 
 ImagiNation Network (INN), 
 357 
 Impossible Mission,  23 
 Indianapolis  500,  201–203 
 Indy  800,  197 
 Infocom,  371,  375–380 
 Interactive ﬁ ction (IF) novels, 
 372 
 International Karate,  244 
 Japanese games,  225–238 
 Jaws,  230 
 Jensen,  Jane, 154–155 
 John Madden Football, 
 135–136 
 Jong,  Philip, 168,  176,  357 
 Julius Erving and Larry Bird Go 
One-on-One,  126 
  Jumping Flash!,   259–260      

  Karate Champ,   242–243,  
 247  
 Karate Champ Player vs. 
Player,  243 
 Karateka,  245 
 Karate Kid,  242 
 Karma system,  361 
 K.C. Munchkin!,  186 
 Keith Courage in Alpha 
Zones,  284 
 King of Fighters,  249 
 King’s Quest,  144,  149 
 King’s Quest II,  150 
 King’s Quest III,  151 
 King’s Quest VI: Heir Today, 
 Gone Tomorrow, 154  
 The King’s Quest Companion, 
 148 
 Leader Board Golf,  130 
 Legend,  266 
 The Legend of Zelda,  303–317 
 The Legend of Zelda: A Link to 
the Past,  308 
 The Legend of Zelda: A Link to 
the Past & Four Swords, 
 310,  313 
 The Legend of Zelda: Link’s 
Awakening,  310,  312 
 The Legend of Zelda: Majora’s 
Mask,  315 
 The Legend of Zelda: Ocarina of 
Time,  311–313 
 The Legend of Zelda: Oracle of 
Seasons,  310 
 The Legend of Zelda: Phantom 
Hourglass,  310 
 The Legend of Zelda: The Wind 
Waker,   316  
 The Legend of Zelda: Twilight 
Princess,  315 
 Linden Scripting Language 
(LSL),  331 
 Link: The Faces of Evil,  310 
 Little Computer People,  325 
 Living Planet,  214 
 Lord British.  See Garriott, 
 Richard 
 The Lost Treasures of Infocom, 
 384 
 Lovecraft,  H. P., 4 
 Lunar Lander,  102 
 Madden NFL  97,  139 
 Madden NFL  98,  139 
 Madden NFL 2000,  139 
 Magnavox’s game,  186 
 Mail Order Monsters,  326 
 Maita,  Aki, 329–330 
 Mario,  271–290 
 Mario Tennis,  280 
 Marvel vs. Capcom,  252 
 Mask of Eternity,  157–158, 
 349 
 Massively multiplayer online 
(MMO),  171,  330–331,  369 
 Mattel’s Intellivision,  3 
 Maxwell Manor,  4–5 
 Melee,  253 
 Meridian  59,  358 
 Metal Gear,  23–24 
 Microsoft Combat Flight 
Simulator,  99 
 Microsoft Flight Simulator,  97 
 Microsoft Space Simulator, 
 101 
 Microsoft Xbox,  60,  63,  91 
 Microsoft Xbox  360,  4,  13,  37,  89, 
 91,  111 
 Midtown Madness,  203 
 MMORPG,  319,  354,  356,  362, 
 367,  369 
 Mockingboard card,  342 
 Moebius,  43 
 Monster Rancher,  327 
 Mortal Kombat,  32,  250 
 M-rated game,  117 
 Ms. Pac-Man,  186 
 MUD object-oriented (MOOs), 
 356 
 Multi-user dungeons (MUDs), 
 354–355 
 Musical game,  216 
 MySims,  333 
 Mystery House,  144 
 Myst,  143,  146,  149,  156, 161, 
 163–177,  382,  386 
 Myst III,  170 
 Namco’s F-1,  196 
 The Need for Speed,  203,  205      
 Neutopia,  316 
 Neverwinter Nights,  356–357 
 The New Nightmare,  12–13 
 NFL Football,  135 
 NFL GameDay,  138 
 Night Driver,  198–199 
  Night mode,   218  
  Nights into Dreams,   266–268  
  Nintendo,   281,   289,   295,   305,  
 308, 310,   311,   316  
  Nintendo 64 game,   60,   63,   78,  
 111,   253,   258,   280,   288,  
 315–316  
 Nintendo Entertainment 
System (NES) games,  98n, 
271, 273, 275, 281, 305 
 Nintendo Game Boy,  138 
 Ocarina of Time: Master Quest, 
 314–315 
 Oddballz,  329 
 Oddly-Angled Room,  378 
 The Ofﬁ ce,  332 
 Omega Race,  236 
  Online gaming,   358  
 On-Line Systems,  144,  166,  385 
 Origin Systems,  341 
 Out Run,  201 
 Pac-Man,  179,  254,  271,  274–
275,  293,  387 
 Pac-Man  2,  188 
 Pac-Man Championship Edition 
(Pac-Man C.E.),  188 
 Pac-Mania,  188 
 Pac-Man World,  188 
 Pajitnov,  Alexey, 291,  293–294, 
 296,  301 
 Paper Mario,  288 
 PaRappa the Rapper,  34 
 PCjr platform,  143 
 Petz,  329 
 Phantasy Star Online,  367 
 Pinball Fantasies,  101 
 Piper Archer aircraft,  98 
 Pitstop,  200–201 
 Pkillers,  359–361 
 Player vs. environment (PVE), 
 365–366 
 Player vs. player (PVP),  362, 
 364–365 
 Pokemon series,  326 
 Pole Position,  195–206 
 Japanese version of,  195 
 as racing game,  195–196 
 Pool of Radiance,  351,  356 
 
INDEX     393

394     INDEX
  Populous,   73,   326–327  
  The Princeless Bride,   155  
  Prince of Persia,   245  
  The Princess,   144  
  Princess Rosella,   153  
  Professor Pac-Man,   188  
  Puyo Puyo,   297–299  
  Puzzle Bobble,   297,   299  
  Puzzle Quest,   300  
  PVE.  See Player vs. environment 
 PVP.  See Player vs. player 
 Quake II,  61 
 Questron,  350 
 Racetrack,  200 
 Racing Destruction Set,  200 
 Racing game 
 Pole Position as,  195–196 
 realistic, simulation-style, 
 202–203 
 Raid on Bungeling Bay,  211–212 
 Railroad Tycoon,  221 
 R.C. pro-am,  203 
 Real-time strategy (RTS) game, 
 65,  69–70,  76 
 Red Alert,  75 
 Red Baron,  103–104 
 Rescue Raiders,  66 
 Resident Evil,  11–12 
 Return to Zork,  382 
 Ridge Racer,  202 
  River Raid,   233–234  
 Rock N’ roll Racing,  203 
 Rockstar North,  107 
 Rogue,  354 
 Role playing games (RPGs), 
 39–40,  43,  78–79,  81–82,  89 
 RPGs.  See Role playing games 
 RTS game.  See Real-time 
strategy game 
  Ryan,   Michael E., 364      
  Samba de Amigo,   35  
  Samurai Shodown,   249  
  Sandbox game,   105,   118  
  Schneider,   Peer, 315  
  SCI.  See Sierra’s Creative 
Interpreter 
 Scott Adams games,  385 
 Scrolling games,  233–234,  236 
 Second Life,  331–332,  364 
 Secret Quest,  308 
 Sega Game Gear,  138 
 Sega Genesis,  138 
 Sensible Soccer series,  131 
 The Shadow of  Yserbius,  357 
 Shooter games,  235–236 
 Sid Meier’s Civilization,  222 
 Sid Meier’s Railroads!,  221 
 Sierra On-Line,  144,  337, 
 339–340 
 Sierra’s Creative Interpreter 
(SCI),  150 
 Silent Hill,  1 
 SimAnt,  214–215 
 SimCity,  320 
 building blocks for fun and 
proﬁ t,  207–224 
 commodore 64 version of, 
 209,  213 
 as god games,  207 
 SimCity  4,  218–219 
 SimCity 2000,  215 
 SimCity 3000,  217 
 SimCity Creator,  220 
 SimCity Societies,  219–220 
 SimCity Urban Renewal Kit,  216 
 SimCopter,  216,  322 
 SimEarth,  214 
 SimFarm,  214 
 SimLife,  214 
 Simlish,  322–323 
 The Simpsons,  246 
 The Sims,  319–333 
 job types,  322 
 people simulator,  328 
 personality attributes,  320 
 virtual pet aspects,  320 
 The Sims 2,  330,  332 
 The Sims 2 Store,  332 
  The Sims Online,   330–331  
 The Sims Stories,  333 
 SimTunes,  216 
 The Simulation,  201–203 
 Slaughter Gulch,  11 
  Society of Creative Anachronism 
(SCA),  337,  360 
 Sonic Adventure  2,  262 
  Sonic and Knuckles,   287  
  Sonic CD,   287  
  Sonic the Fighters,   252  
  Sonic the Hedgehog,   284–285,  
 288  
  Sony computer entertainment 
(SCE),   259  
 Sony PlayStation 1 (PS1),  33 
 Sony PlayStation 2 (PS2),  13,  34, 
 83,  88,  90,  105 
 Sony PlayStation 3 (PS3),  4,  13, 
 118,  126 
 Sony’s EyeToy,  35 
 Soulcalibur,  251 
 Soulcalibur IV,  252 
 Space Invaders,  292,  303 
 as ﬁ xed-screen game,  236 
 Japanese games,  225–238 
 sound effect of,  231,  238 
  VCS version of,   233   
  Space Invaders Collection,   237  
  Spacewar!,   373  
  Spectrum Holobyte,   294  
  Speed Race,   197  
  Spellbreaker,   379  
  Splatterhouse series,   4  
  Spore,   220  
  Spy Hunter,   203  
  SSA.  See Strict Simulation 
Approach 
 Star League Baseball,  125 
 Star Wars,  231 
 Stationfall,  378 
 Street Fighter,  297 
 Street Fighter II,  239–254 
 Street Fighter III,  249 
 Street Fighter IV,  253 
 Street Fighter Alpha,  249 
 Streets of SimCity,  217 
 Strict Simulation Approach 
(SSA),  93 
 The Stygian Abyss,  55 
 subLOGIC,  95,  96–98,  100–101 
 Super Mario  64,  255–269,  314 
 vs. Tomb Raider,  262 
 Super Mario Bros.,  82,  271–290, 
 303,  305,  307 
 Super Mario Bros.  2,  278–281 
 Super Mario Bros.  3,  281 
 Super Mario Galaxy,  261 
 Super Mario Kart,  203–204 
 Super Mario Sunshine,  261 
 Super Nintendo (SNES),  138, 
249, 308 

 Super Puzzle Fighter II Turbo, 
 297 
 Super Smash Bros.,  252–253 
 Super Sprint,  197 
 Super Street Fighter II,  249 
 Super Street Fighter II Turbo, 
 249 
 Suspect,  379 
 Tabula Rasa,  352,  369 
 Tamagotchi,  329 
 Tass Times in Tone Town,  381 
 TBS games.  See Turn-based 
strategy games 
 Tecmo Bowl,  135 
 Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles, 
 246 
 Tekken,  251 
 Tempest,  235 
 Temple of Apshai Trilogy,  338 
 Tennis videogames,  132 
 Test Drive,  203 
 Tetris,  291–301 
 Atari’s arcade conversion of, 
 294 
 as sliding block,  291 
 The Tetris Company,  295–296 
 Tetrominoes,  291 
 Theme Hospital,  222 
 Theme Park,  222 
 The Sierra Network (TSN),  357 
 Third Dawn,  368 
 Third-person perspective, 
 257 
 Times of Lore,  347 
 Time Zone,  144 
 Tolkien,  J. R. R., 340,  374 
 Tomb Raider,  255–269 
 Sega Saturn version of,  262, 
 264 
 vs. Super Mario  64,  262 
 Top Skater,  32 
 Top Spin,  134 
 Tornado Baseball,  124 
 Trak  10,  197 
 Trammel,  363 
 Triforce of Wisdom,  304 
 Trilobyte’s game,  168 
 Trubshaw,  Roy, 355 
 Turbo,  199 
 Turn-based strategy (TBS) 
games,  66–67,  69 
 Ultima,  80,  303,  305,  335–352 
 Ultima: Escape from Mt. Drash, 
 341 
 Ultima: The Reconstruction,  350 
 Ultima II: The Revenge of the 
Enchantress,  340 
  Ultima III: Exodus,   337,   341–342  
 Ultima IV: Quest of the Avatar, 
 343–344 
 Ultima V: Warriors of Destiny, 
 344–345 
 Ultima VI: The False Prophet, 
 345–346 
 Ultima VII, Part Two: The Silver 
Seed,  348 
 Ultima VII: The Black Gate,  43, 
 105–106,  346–347,  360 
 Ultima VIII: Pagan,  348 
 Ultima IX: Ascension,  349 
 Ultima X: Odyssey,  352 
 Ultima Online,  335,  353–370 
 character creation from,  354 
 key elements in,  353 
 Ultima Online: Kingdom 
Reborn,  368 
 Ultima Online: Renaissance,  363 
 Ultima Online: Stygian Abyss, 
 361 
 The Ultimate History of Video 
Games,  228 
 Ultima Trilogy,  345 
 Ultima Underworld: The Stygian 
Abyss,  348 
 Umbrella Crow’s Nest,  167 
 Underworld,  266 
 Utopia,  71–73,  210 
 Video Information System (VIS), 
 129 
 Video Jogger,  30 
 Video Reﬂ ex,  30–31 
 Videogame Crash of 1984,  30, 
186, 228, 273, 274 
 Virtua Fighter  5,  251 
 Virtua Fighter Remix,  252 
 Virtua Racing,  202,  257 
 Virtua Tennis,  134 
 Virtual Dollhouse,  319–320 
 Warcraft,  69,  74 
 Warhammer Online: Age of 
Reckoning,  369 
 Warrior,  241 
 Way of the Exploding Fist, 
 245 
 Welltris,  296 
 Williams,  Ken, 156,  357 
 Williams,  Roberta, 143–145,  147, 
 149,  152,  155,  160–161,  339, 
 349 
 Wizardry,  40,  337,  342,  352 
 Wolfenstein 3D,  24n, 55 
 Wonder Boy,  284 
 World of Warcraft,  353,  364–366 
 Worlds of Ultima: Martian 
Dreams,   348  
 Worlds of Ultima: The Savage 
Empire,  348 
 The World Warrior,  247 
 Wrath of the Lich King,  367 
  Wright,   Will, 207,   319      
 Xbox Live Arcade,  189 
 XE Game System (XEGS),  98n 
  Xevious,   234  
  X-Men,   246      
  Yume K
–oj
–o Doki Doki Panic, 
 278 
 Zelda: The Wand of Gamelon, 
 310,  312 
 Zelda II: The Adventure of Link, 
 306–307 
 Zelda cartridges,  307 
 Zelda’s Adventure,  310 
 Z-Machine,  376 
 Z-Machine Interpreter (ZIP), 
 376 
 Zork,  355,  371,  375 
 Zork: Grand Inquisitor,  384–385 
 Zork: The Undiscovered 
Underground,  384 
 Zork I: The Underground 
Empire,  378 
 Zork II: The Wizard of Frobozz, 
 375,  378 
 Zork III: The Dungeon Master, 
 378 
 Zork Nemesis: The Forbidden 
Lands,  384 
 Zork Zero,  381 
 Z-targeting,  314  
 
INDEX     395

This page intentionally left blank

