www.allitebooks.com

www.allitebooks.com

Virtualization: A Manager’s Guide
www.allitebooks.com

www.allitebooks.com

Virtualization: A Manager’s Guide
Dan Kusnetzky
Beijing • Cambridge • Farnham • Köln • Sebastopol • Tokyo
www.allitebooks.com

Virtualization: A Manager’s Guide
by Dan Kusnetzky
Copyright © 2011 Kusnetzky Group LLC. All rights reserved.
Printed in the United States of America.
Published by O’Reilly Media, Inc., 1005 Gravenstein Highway North, Sebastopol, CA 95472.
O’Reilly books may be purchased for educational, business, or sales promotional use. Online editions
are also available for most titles (http://my.safaribooksonline.com). For more information, contact our
corporate/institutional sales department: (800) 998-9938 or corporate@oreilly.com.
Editor: Mike Hendrickson
Production Editor: Teresa Elsey
Proofreader: Teresa Elsey
Cover Designer: Karen Montgomery
Interior Designer: David Futato
Illustrator: Robert Romano
Printing History:
June 2011:
First Edition. 
Nutshell Handbook, the Nutshell Handbook logo, and the O’Reilly logo are registered trademarks of
O’Reilly Media, Inc. Virtualization: A Manager’s Guide, the image of a condor, and related trade dress
are trademarks of O’Reilly Media, Inc.
Many of the designations used by manufacturers and sellers to distinguish their products are claimed as
trademarks. Where those designations appear in this book, and O’Reilly Media, Inc., was aware of a
trademark claim, the designations have been printed in caps or initial caps.
While every precaution has been taken in the preparation of this book, the publisher and authors assume
no responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from the use of the information con-
tained herein.
ISBN: 978-1-449-30645-8
[LSI]
1307547056
www.allitebooks.com

Table of Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . vii
1. A Model of Virtualization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  1
Model of Virtualization
1
What Is Virtualization?
1
Layers of Virtualization at Work
2
Goals of Virtualization
4
2. Access Virtualization: Providing Universal Access . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
What Is Access Virtualization?
5
What Does Access Virtualization Do?
6
When Is Access Virtualization the Right Choice?
8
Players in the Access Virtualization World
8
A Few Examples of Access Virtualization in Use
9
3. Application Virtualization: Application Isolation, Delivery and Performance . . . . .  11
What Is Application Virtualization?
11
What Does Application Virtualization Do?
12
When Is Application Virtualization a Suggested Approach?
14
Players in the Application Virtualization World
15
A Few Examples of Application Virtualization in Use
15
4. Processing Virtualization: Doing System Tricks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
What Is Processing Virtualization?
17
What Does Processing Virtualization Do?
18
When Is Processing Virtualization the Preferred Approach?
20
Players in the Processing Virtualization World
21
A Few Examples of Processing Virtualization in Use
22
5. Network Virtualization: Controlling the View of the Network . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
What Is Network Virtualization?
23
v
www.allitebooks.com

What Does Network Virtualization Do?
23
When Is Network Virtualization Required?
25
Players in the Network Virtualization World
26
A Few Examples of Network Virtualization in Use
26
6. Storage Virtualization: Where Are Your Files and Applications? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  29
What Is Storage Virtualization?
29
What Does Storage Virtualization Do?
29
When Should Storage Virtualization Be Used?
32
Players in the Storage Virtualization World
32
A Few Examples of Storage Virtualization in Use
33
7. Security for Virtual Environments: Guarding the Treasure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
What Is Security for Virtual Environments?
35
What Does Security for Virtual Environments Do?
36
When Is Security for Virtual Environments Needed?
36
Players in the Security for Virtual Environments World
37
A Few Examples of Security for Virtual Environments in Use
37
8. Management for Virtual Environments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  39
What Is Management for Virtual Environments?
39
What Does Management for Virtual Environments Do?
40
When Is Management Software for Virtual Environments Needed?
41
Players in the Management for Virtual Environments World
42
A Few Examples of Management for Virtual Environments in Use
42
9. Using Virtualization: The Right Tool for the Job . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  45
Highlighting When Use Cases Are Confused with Technology
45
Big Data
46
Clusters
48
Desktop Virtualization
49
High-Performance Computing
52
Server Virtualization
53
Extreme Transaction Processing
54
10. Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  57
Virtualization Is a Double-Edged Sword
57
Where to Go Next
58
vi | Table of Contents
www.allitebooks.com

Preface
About This Book
This book is intended to introduce managers or subject matter experts outside of in-
formation technology (IT) to the concepts behind virtualization technology, the dif-
ferent categories of virtualization, and how they are used. It is not meant to replace
product documentation. It is not meant as a “how to” guide for IT analysts, developers,
or administrators.
Conventions Used in This Book
The following typographical conventions are used in this book:
Italic
Indicates new terms, URLs, email addresses, filenames, and file extensions.
Constant width
Used for program listings, as well as within paragraphs to refer to program elements
such as variable or function names, databases, data types, environment variables,
statements, and keywords.
Constant width bold
Shows commands or other text that should be typed literally by the user.
Constant width italic
Shows text that should be replaced with user-supplied values or by values deter-
mined by context.
Using Code Examples
This book is here to help you get your job done. In general, you may use the code in
this book in your programs and documentation. You do not need to contact us for
permission unless you’re reproducing a significant portion of the code. For example,
writing a program that uses several chunks of code from this book does not require
permission. Selling or distributing a CD-ROM of examples from O’Reilly books does
vii
www.allitebooks.com

require permission. Answering a question by citing this book and quoting example
code does not require permission. Incorporating a significant amount of example code
from this book into your product’s documentation does require permission.
We appreciate, but do not require, attribution. An attribution usually includes the title,
author, publisher, and ISBN. For example: “Virtualization: A Manager’s Guide by Dan
Kusnetzky (O’Reilly). Copyright 2011 Kusnetzky Group LLC, 978-1-449-30645-8.”
If you feel your use of code examples falls outside fair use or the permission given above,
feel free to contact us at permissions@oreilly.com.
Safari® Books Online
Safari Books Online is an on-demand digital library that lets you easily
search over 7,500 technology and creative reference books and videos to
find the answers you need quickly.
With a subscription, you can read any page and watch any video from our library online.
Read books on your cell phone and mobile devices. Access new titles before they are
available for print, and get exclusive access to manuscripts in development and post
feedback for the authors. Copy and paste code samples, organize your favorites, down-
load chapters, bookmark key sections, create notes, print out pages, and benefit from
tons of other time-saving features.
O’Reilly Media has uploaded this book to the Safari Books Online service. To have full
digital access to this book and others on similar topics from O’Reilly and other pub-
lishers, sign up for free at http://my.safaribooksonline.com.
How to Contact Us
Please address comments and questions concerning this book to the publisher:
O’Reilly Media, Inc.
1005 Gravenstein Highway North
Sebastopol, CA 95472
800-998-9938 (in the United States or Canada)
707-829-0515 (international or local)
707-829-0104 (fax)
We have a web page for this book, where we list errata, examples, and any additional
information. You can access this page at:
http://www.oreilly.com/catalog/0636920020417/
To comment or ask technical questions about this book, send email to:
bookquestions@oreilly.com
viii | Preface
www.allitebooks.com

For more information about our books, courses, conferences, and news, see our website
at http://www.oreilly.com.
Find us on Facebook: http://facebook.com/oreilly
Follow us on Twitter: http://twitter.com/oreillymedia
Watch us on YouTube: http://www.youtube.com/oreillymedia
Preface | ix


CHAPTER 1
A Model of Virtualization
Model of Virtualization
Analysts often find that it is much easier to understand a complex environment if they
build a reference model. The Kusnetzky Group Model of virtualization (Figure 1-1) is
an example. Reference models must be comprehensive and the segments must be mu-
tually exclusive to be really useful.
Over time, most of the functions that computers perform have in some way benefited
from virtualization. It is important to note that some products incorporate features that
straddle one or more layers of the model. Those products are typically assigned to the
layer describing their most commonly used functions. As one would expect, industry
and technological changes require that the model be revisited regularly to determine if
previous categories should be merged into a single new category or deleted.
What Is Virtualization?
Virtualization is a way to abstract applications and their underlying components away
from the hardware supporting them and present a logical or virtual view of these re-
sources. This logical view may be strikingly different from the physical view. The goal
of virtualization is usually one of the following: higher levels of performance, scalability,
reliability/availability, agility, or to create a unified security and management domain.
This virtual view is constructed using excess processing power, memory, storage, or
network bandwidth.
Virtualization can create the artificial view that many computers are a single computing
resource or that a single machine is really many individual computers. It can make a
single large storage resource appear to be many smaller ones or make many smaller
storage devices appear to be a single device.
1

Layers of Virtualization at Work
There are many layers of technology that virtualize some portion of a computing en-
vironment. Let’s look at each of them in turn.
Access virtualization
Hardware and software technology that allows nearly any device to access any
application without either having to know too much about the other. The appli-
cation sees a device it’s used to working with. The device sees an application it
knows how to display. In some cases, special-purpose hardware is used on each
side of the network connection to increase performance, allow many users to share
a single client system, or allow a single individual to see multiple displays.
See Chapter 2 for more information.
Application virtualization
Software technology allowing applications to run on many different operating sys-
tems and hardware platforms. This usually means that the application has been
Figure 1-1. Kusnetzky Group model of virtualization
2 | Chapter 1: A Model of Virtualization

written to use an application framework. It also means that applications running
on the same system that do not use this framework do not get the benefits of
application virtualization. More advanced forms of this technology offer the ability
to restart an application in case of a failure, start another instance of an application
if the application is not meeting service-level objectives, or provide workload bal-
ancing among multiple instances of an application to achieve high levels of scala-
bility. Some really sophisticated approaches to application virtualization can do
this magical feat without requiring that the application be re-architected or rewrit-
ten using a special application framework.
See Chapter 3 for more information.
Processing virtualization
Hardware and software technology that hides physical hardware configuration
from system services, operating systems, or applications. This type of virtualization
technology can make one system appear to be many or many systems appear to be
a single computing resource, to achieve goals ranging from raw performance, high
levels of scalability, reliability/availability, agility, or consolidation of multiple en-
vironments into a single system.
See Chapter 4 for more information.
Network virtualization
Hardware and software technology that presents a view of the network that differs
from the physical view. A personal computer, for example, may be allowed to “see”
only systems it is allowed to access. Another common use is making multiple net-
work links appear to be a single link. This approach makes it possible for the link
to present higher levels of performance and reliability.
See Chapter 5 for more information.
Storage virtualization
Hardware and software technology that hides where storage systems are and what
type of device is actually storing applications and data. This technology allows
many systems to share the same storage devices without knowing that others are
also accessing them. This technology also makes it possible to take a snapshot of
a live system so that it can be backed up without hindering online or transactional
applications.
See Chapter 6 for more information.
Security for virtual environments
Software technology that controls access to various elements in a virtual environ-
ment and prevents unauthorized or malicious use.
See Chapter 7 for more information.
Management for virtual environments
Software technology that makes it possible for multiple systems to be provisioned
and managed as if they were a single computing resource.
See Chapter 8 for more information.
Layers of Virtualization at Work | 3

Each of these layers of virtualization will be examined in the following chapters.
Goals of Virtualization
Organizations are often seeking different things when using virtualization technology.
An organization’s virtualization goals might include the following:
• Allowing any network-enabled device to access any network-accessible application
over any network, even if that application was never designed to work with that
type of device
• Isolation of one workload or application from another to enhance security or man-
ageability of the environment
• Isolation of an application from the operating system, allowing an application to
continue to function even though it was designed for a different version of the
operating system
• Isolation of an application from the operating system, allowing an application to
function on a foreign operating system
• Increasing the number of people that an application can support, by allowing mul-
tiple instances to run on different machines simultaneously
• Decreasing the time it takes for an application to run, by segmenting either the data
or the application itself and spreading the work over many systems
• Optimizing the use of a single system, allowing it to work harder and more intel-
ligently (that is, reducing the amount of time the processor sits idle)
• Increasing the reliability or availability of an application or workload through re-
dundancy (if any single component fails, this virtualization technology either
moves the application to a surviving system or restarts a function on a surviving
system)
The organization’s choice of virtualization technology is dependent upon what it’s try-
ing to accomplish. While there are typically many ways to accomplish these goals, some
goals direct organizations’ decision-makers to select specific tools.
4 | Chapter 1: A Model of Virtualization

CHAPTER 2
Access Virtualization:
Providing Universal Access
What Is Access Virtualization?
As we dive deeper into the model (see Figure 2-1), we start to understand how a virtual
environment is created. Access virtualization hardware and software are designed to
place access to applications and workloads in a virtual environment. The user interface,
the business rules processing (the series of steps that make an application work), the
data, and the storage management functions reside back in the network on a server.
The server supporting this processing could be a Blade PC, a Blade Server, a virtual
server, or a physical server. This technology allows “any place, any time, any device”
computing.
As with other virtualization technologies, access virtualization has a long track record
of success. The earliest forms of access virtualization were developed by mainframe
suppliers, such as IBM, Burroughs (now part of Unisys), RCA, and others, to allow
clusters of terminals to access applications running in the data center.
In 1983, the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) partnered with IBM and
Digital Equipment Corporation (now part of HP) in the Athena Project. The goal was
to create a campus-wide computing environment. One of the products of that collab-
oration was the X-Windows system. X-Windows, now available for UNIX, Linux,
Windows, and many mainframe environments, is another early example of access
virtualization.
Windows has been the center of intense development of access virtualization as well.
Citrix, Microsoft, and the X-Windows community have been offering virtual access to
Windows applications since the late 1980s.
Today, this type of virtualization is often used in conjunction with various forms of
processing virtualization, which will be examined in Chapter 4. It is also an important
component of desktop virtualization, virtual desktop infrastructure (VDI), and some
5

forms of cloud computing, such as Software as a Service (SaaS). Desktop virtualization
and VDI will be considered in Chapter 9.
What Does Access Virtualization Do?
As shown in Figure 2-2, access virtualization inserts itself into the flow of communi-
cations from devices such as the following:
• Terminals
• Desktop PCs
• Laptop PCs
• Netbooks
• Tablets
• Thin clients
• Smartphones
• Other network-enabled intelligent devices, such as a point-of-sale device or labo-
ratory instrument
Figure 2-1. Access virtualization
6 | Chapter 2: Access Virtualization: Providing Universal Access

Access virtualization technology makes it possible for the remote device to display the
user interface of a remote application and accept keyboard, mouse, and other input
from the user.
The flow continues to applications or workloads running on the following types of
devices:
• Physical systems
• Virtual systems (virtual desktop, virtual client, or virtual server)
This intervention allows individuals to access applications running anywhere, on any
type of system, over nearly any type of network—without devices on either side of the
conversation knowing too much about what’s happening on the other side. This type
of technology is often used to allow devices to access applications running in virtual
processing environments (see Chapter 4 for more information).
Figure 2-2. Access virtualization at work
What Does Access Virtualization Do? | 7

When Is Access Virtualization the Right Choice?
When organizations are attempting to achieve the following goals, access virtualization
technology is the best choice:
Greater agility
When organizations need mobile staff members to have the ability to access ap-
plications and data from wherever they are and would rather not provide them
with a general-purpose system having its own storage, applications, and the like.
Device independence
When staff members need the ability to access applications and data using many
different types of devices, without the organization being forced to rewrite appli-
cations or change how or where data is stored.
Improved availability
When staff members need the ability to access applications and data even if their
access-point devices fail or are out of service for some reason. Staff members can
simply access needed applications from another device using access virtualization.
Greater security
When organizations are trying to prevent worms, viruses, and other forms of mal-
ware from entering the data center, access virtualization provides an additional
level of security. The remote device may not have the ability to store data—making
transmission of worms and viruses difficult or impossible. All of the actual appli-
cation execution (application, database, storage, and other processing) happens
remotely.
Cost reduction
When organizations are doing their best to reduce the costs of provisioning client
systems, installing client software, updating client software, and the like, access
virtualization makes it possible to do all of this from a central location. It is also
possible to fix problems from a central location.
Access to cloud computing software as a service (SaaS) applications
Some SaaS offerings download a sophisticated client that runs inside of the web
browser that runs inside of the remote device. This approach can also be thought
of as access virtualization. (Cloud computing, such as software as a service, is not
the focus of this book, however.)
Players in the Access Virtualization World
Although there are many players in the access virtualization market, a short summary
of the most important suppliers follows:
Citrix
Citrix offers virtualization technology in a number of different categories. One of
the company’s earliest products was called Mainframe. It allowed a number of
8 | Chapter 2: Access Virtualization: Providing Universal Access
www.allitebooks.com

different types of client systems to access Windows and Solaris (UNIX) applica-
tions. Over time, the product was renamed MetaFrame, and it is now known as
XenApp.
Microsoft
Microsoft started including access virtualization capabilities in its operating sys-
tems as far back as Windows 95 and Windows NT Server. The company’s tech-
nology was not sold separately. The capability was called Microsoft Terminal
Services.
HP, IBM, Sun (now Oracle), and all other suppliers of UNIX
X-Windows has been a standard part of the UNIX operating system since shortly
after the Athena Project was completed at MIT. X-Windows Servers, as the client
portions of the X-Windows system are called, are available for nearly all client
systems.
Red Hat, SUSE, and all other Linux distributions
Linux has provided capabilities compatible with X-Windows since the first com-
mercial distributions of the software were made available. X-Windows Servers that
support UNIX typically will support Linux environments as well.
A Few Examples of Access Virtualization in Use
There are many different environments in which access virtualization can be beneficial.
The following list contains only a few examples.
Health care
Health care regulations, such as the Health Insurance Portability and Accounta-
bility Act of 1996 (HIPAA) in the United States, require that health care providers
ensure that personal data is not disclosed accidentally. When doctors, nurses,
therapists, and other health care workers access patient data, the organization must
make sure that patient data is protected. This also means that this data cannot be
left on access point devices, such as smartphones, PCs, laptops, or tablets. One
way to be certain that these regulations are followed is to make sure that patient
data never permanently resides on these devices. Access virtualization products
simplify compliance by allowing organizations to keep the applications and their
data back in the data center.
Task-oriented workers
Task-oriented workers often use computers as part of their work. For the most
part, they are not interested in how the computers operate. Rather than giving these
staff members PCs or laptops, some organizations provide a much simpler device:
a thin client, or a PC or laptop set up to run only the access virtualization client.
Staff members can easily access the applications and data needed for the task at
hand without becoming computer administrators or operators. This approach
drastically lowers the administrative costs of system management, software
A Few Examples of Access Virtualization in Use | 9

installation, and software updating and it allows support to be provided from a
central location.
Non-computer-focused knowledge workers
Many knowledge workers, such as doctors, attorneys, and managers, use comput-
ers as part of their work. They often are not interested in understanding, in any
detail, how their systems work. As with the task-oriented workers, organizations
often find it easier to provide these staff members with access to centralized com-
puting without putting general-purpose systems on their desks.
10 | Chapter 2: Access Virtualization: Providing Universal Access

CHAPTER 3
Application Virtualization: Application
Isolation, Delivery and Performance
What Is Application Virtualization?
Let’s dive one level lower into the model (see Figure 3-1). Application virtualization
has two forms: client-side application virtualization and server-side application virtu-
alization. Application virtualization runs on top of the operating systems that manage
the functioning of systems. It makes it possible for an application to be “encapsulated”
or run in an artificial environment.
The major difference between access virtualization and application virtualization is that
a portion, or perhaps all, of the application actually runs on the local device rather than
on a remote server. The encapsulated application still requires support functions of-
fered by a specific operating system, so this means, for example, that encapsulated
Windows applications need to be executed on a remote Windows device. This is dif-
ferent, by the way, from processing virtualization (see Chapter 4 for more information
on processing virtualization), which isolates a workload from either the operating sys-
tem or physical system it is running on.
As with other virtualization technologies, application virtualization has a long track
record of success. The earliest forms of application virtualization were developed by
mainframe suppliers, such as IBM, Burroughs (now part of Unisys), and others, as a
structured form of application development and deployment. At that time, “transaction
processing monitor” was the industry catchphrase for server-side application virtuali-
zation tools.
Windows has been the center of intense development of application virtualization as
well. AppZero, Citrix, Microsoft, VMware, and others have been offering client-side
and/or server-side application virtualization since the early 1990s.
Today, this type of virtualization is often used in conjunction with various forms of
processing virtualization, which will be examined in Chapter 4.
11

What Does Application Virtualization Do?
As shown in Figure 3-2, there are two different forms of application virtualization,
client-side and server-side. They make it possible for applications to run in a protected,
isolated, or artificial environment.
Let’s examine each type in turn:
Client-side application virtualization
The client-side form of application virtualization creates a protected environment
that makes it possible for applications to be isolated from one another and from
the base operating system. This means that applications that could not successfully
reside on the same client system could be used together. This prevents the “library
version mismatch” problem with Windows applications.
It also means that an application designed for an earlier version of the operating
system may continue to function on a newer version of that operating system, even
though it would be incompatible without being placed in a virtual environment.
Figure 3-1. Application virtualization
12 | Chapter 3: Application Virtualization: Application Isolation, Delivery and Performance

This is very useful when an organization is in the process of upgrading from one
operating system version to another and can’t upgrade the application.
Another use is delivering applications or application components to a target client
system as needed. Application virtualization also makes it possible for those
applications or application components to either remain on the client system for
later use or be automatically removed after they have been used.
Server-side application virtualization
Placing server-side applications in a virtual environment offers many of the same
benefits as client-side application virtualization. Applications that are normally
incompatible with one another can be made to work together. Applications that
might be incompatible with new versions of an operating system can continue to
be used.
Server-side application virtualization offers a few other valuable functions as well.
Multiple instances of an application can be automatically started on other
Figure 3-2. Application virtualization at work
What Does Application Virtualization Do? | 13

machines when the workload is no longer meeting service-level guidelines. This
could mean faster performance or being able to handle workload requests from a
larger number of people.
Another important benefit is that applications can be restarted upon failure. While
this is not the same thing as a high availability cluster (a processing virtualization
function that will be described in Chapter 4), it can be very valuable.
When Is Application Virtualization a Suggested Approach?
Application virtualization is the best choice if the organization has one of the following
goals:
Greater application isolation
Organizations need to make incompatible applications run side-by-side on the
same system. This requirement can arise when the applications were purchased
from third parties and require support of different versions of the same tools. Typ-
ically new versions of application development and runtime tools replace older
versions when they are installed. This can cause older applications to fail.
Operating system independence
Applications designed for an earlier version of an operation must be made to work
with a newer version. Running applications in a virtual environment can signifi-
cantly extend the life cycle of an application, giving the organization time to update
the application or find a replacement for the application.
Improved availability
Applications provide critical functions and the organization will suffer great harm
if those functions become unavailable for any reason. Applications can be made to
fail over from one server to another.
Improved performance or scalability
Applications must perform faster or be able to service larger numbers of users.
Server-based application virtualization products often include a workload man-
agement function, allowing the same application to automatically be started on
multiple systems, to either improve application performance or allow more people
to access the application simultaneously.
Cost reduction
It is necessary to reduce the cost for provisioning, installation, updating, and ad-
ministrating applications. It is far easier and less costly to provision systems, install
software, update software, and the like if it can be done from a central location.
Once encapsulated, or placed in a virtual environment, applications can more
easily be copied to remote systems or streamed to remote systems when required.
14 | Chapter 3: Application Virtualization: Application Isolation, Delivery and Performance

Players in the Application Virtualization World
Although there are many players in the application virtualization market, a short sum-
mary of the most important suppliers follows:
Citrix
Citrix offers virtualization technology in a number of different categories. The
company’s XenApp is considered an application virtualization, too. XenApp is a
client-side application virtualization product.
Microsoft
Microsoft acquired Softricity in July 2006 and enhanced its product, renaming it
SoftGrid. It is now called Microsoft Application Virtualization or App-V. App-V
provides both client- and server-side application virtualization functions.
VMware
VMware acquired ThinApp from Thinstall in January 2008. ThinApp is a client-
side application virtualization function.
AppZero
AppZero makes it possible for organizations to encapsulate applications into a
virtual application environment (VAA). VAAs can be easily delivered to one or
more servers.
A Few Examples of Application Virtualization in Use
There are many different environments in which application virtualization can be ben-
eficial. The following list contains only a few examples:
Operating system updates
When new versions of operating systems are released, they often include enhance-
ments that prevent older software from operating properly. A properly encapsu-
lated application, one that has been placed in a virtual environment, may continue
to function as expected. The operating system sees a “current application” and the
application sees the proper operating system.
Application delivery and protection
An organization may wish to deliver applications and application updates to its
staff, consultants, or customers in an encapsulated or virtual form. The application
may either be copied to the client system or be streamed down as needed. Appli-
cations can then be set to run only at specific times, from specific locations, and
even to disable themselves after a certain date.
A Few Examples of Application Virtualization in Use | 15


CHAPTER 4
Processing Virtualization:
Doing System Tricks
What Is Processing Virtualization?
Ready to dive one more level deeper into the model? Processing virtualization (see
Figure 4-1) has five forms: parallel processing monitors, workload management mon-
itors, high availability/fail over/disaster recovery monitors, virtual machine software,
and operating system virtualization and partitioning. Parallel processing, workload
management, and high availability configurations are commonly called “clusters,” even
though they serve different purposes. Although some forms of processing virtualiza-
tion, such as virtual machine software and operating system virtualization and parti-
tioning software, seem similar (see Chapter 3 for more information on application
virtualization), processing virtualization operates at or below the operating system.
Processing virtualization does one of three things: encapsulates the operating system
so that many virtual systems can run on a single system, links multiple systems together
so that workloads will fail over if a system fails, or links systems together so an appli-
cation or data can be spread across all of them for performance or scalability. This
means that, depending upon the type of processing virtualization, the application can
be run on multiple systems simultaneously or run under a hypervisor. A hypervisor can
run as a process under another operating system or can run directly on the system
hardware. Hypervisors can support one or more complete virtual systems at the same
time.
This technology, as with other virtualization technologies, was originally developed for
mainframe systems in the late 1960s, was recreated on minicomputers (now called
midrange machines) in the 1980s, and started appearing on industry-standard systems
(X86-based) in the early 1990s.
This type of virtualization is often used in conjunction with several other types.
17

What Does Processing Virtualization Do?
As shown in Figure 4-2, there are many different forms of processing virtualization.
They make it possible for either a single system to appear to be many or many systems
appear to be a single system.
Let’s examine each type in turn:
Making one system appear to be many (see Figure 4-3 )
Virtual machine software allows the entire stack of software that makes up a system
to be encapsulated into a virtual machine file. Then a hypervisor can run one or
more complete virtual systems on a physical machine. There are two types of hy-
pervisors: A type 1 hypervisor runs on top of the physical system. A type 2 hyper-
visor allows a guest system to run as a process under another operating system.
Each of these systems processes as if it has total control of its own system, even
though it may only be using a portion of the capabilities of a larger physical system.
Figure 4-1. Processing virtualization
18 | Chapter 4: Processing Virtualization: Doing System Tricks
www.allitebooks.com

Operating system virtualization and partitioning allows many applications to run
under a single operating system and gives each a completely isolated, protected
environment. Each application functions as if it is running on its own system and
is managing its own resources.
Making many systems appear to be one
Parallel processing monitors make it possible for many machines to execute the
same applications or application components, with the goal of reducing the pro-
cessing time of the application. Each system is asked to process one segment of
data or run a single application component. As it finishes its task, the parallel
processing monitor passes it another task to complete. This computational ap-
proach allows applications to complete hundreds, thousands, or, perhaps, tens of
thousands times faster.
Workload management monitors (also known as load balancing monitors) make it
possible for multiple instances of a single application to run simultaneously on
many machines. As requests are made, the workload monitor sends each to the
system having the most available capacity. While each application may run no
more quickly than before, more people can be served by the application.
High availability/fail over/disaster recovery monitors make it possible for people
using a computing service to be protected from an application, system, or system
component failure. The monitor detects a failure and restarts an application to a
surviving system.
Figure 4-2. Processing virtualization at work
What Does Processing Virtualization Do? | 19

Memory virtualization or distributed cache memory makes it possible for many sys-
tems to share their internal memory. This capability is at the heart of the many
non-relational databases known collectively as NoSQL databases.
When Is Processing Virtualization the Preferred Approach?
Processing virtualization is the best choice if the organization is pursuing the following
goals:
Greater application isolation
The organization needs to have different workloads or applications share the same
machine, even though those workloads or applications were developed to run un-
der different versions of the same operating system, say Windows Server 2003 and
Windows Server 2008. Virtual machine software, a form of processing virtualiza-
tion, makes it possible to run several different operating systems on the same phys-
ical system simultaneously.
Operating system independence
The organization needs to have different workloads or applications share the same
machine, even though those workloads or applications were developed to run
Figure 4-3. Physical versus virtual servers
20 | Chapter 4: Processing Virtualization: Doing System Tricks

under different operating systems, say Windows Server 2008 and Linux. Virtual
machine software, a form of processing virtualization, makes it possible to run
several different operating systems on the same physical system simultaneously.
Improved availability
Applications must remain available even though components or complete systems
have failed. This can be achieved using three different processing virtualization
technologies: high availability/fail over/disaster recovery monitors, workload man-
agement monitors, or virtual machine software combined with a special form of
management software. Complete system environments can be made to fail over
from one physical system to another.
Improved performance or scalability
The organization needs a single application to run faster than is possible using a
single system. In this case, parallel processing software can be used to harness the
computational power of many physical or virtual systems to handle tasks signifi-
cantly faster or significantly larger than a single system could manage.
Cost reduction
The organization needs to reduce the overall cost of hardware, reduce power con-
sumption, and/or reduce system administrative costs. Virtual machine or operating
system virtualization and partitioning software could be used to move multiple
physical system workloads onto a single physical machine. While this can reduce
the overall costs of hardware, power, or system administration, it may not reduce
the overall costs of administrations, operations, or software.
Optimization
The organization needs to manage costs by optimizing the use of physical systems.
Virtual machine or operating system virtualization and partitioning software can
be used to bring many workloads together on a single machine. The goal is to bring
workloads having different peak usage patterns together on a single physical ma-
chine. If done correctly, idle time for one workload is the busy time for another.
Players in the Processing Virtualization World
Although there are many players in the processing virtualization market, a short sum-
mary of the most important suppliers follows:
Citrix
Citrix offers virtualization technology in a number of different categories. Citrix
acquired XenSource. The company’s XenServer is a hypervisor. The company also
offers workload management software.
Microsoft
Microsoft acquired Connectix in February 2003. The company’s product was re-
named Hyper-V and has been enhanced significantly over the years. Microsoft also
Players in the Processing Virtualization World | 21

offers parallel processing, workload management, and high availability/fail over/
disaster recovery software.
VMware
VMware offers a hypervisor called ESX Server. It has developed virtual machine
migration software and automation software that functions as a high availability/
fail over/disaster recovery product.
A Few Examples of Processing Virtualization in Use
There are many different environments in which processing virtualization can be ben-
eficial. The following list contains only a few examples.
Parallel processing monitor
Modeling of financial transactions, architectural models, and creation of digital
content is very processing intensive. Parallel processing monitors are used to har-
ness the power of many physical systems to create a single, very-high-performance
computing environment.
Workload management monitor
Organizations needing to support enormous transactional workloads, such as an
ecommerce site, use workload managers to allow their order entry application to
run on many physical systems. This makes it possible for hundreds of thousands
or, perhaps, millions of customers to be serviced simultaneously.
High availability/fail over/disaster recovery monitor
Applications that cannot be allowed to fail or slow down may be hosted on several
systems simultaneously. If a system, the application, or some application compo-
nent doesn’t meet service-level objectives, the application can be automatically
restarted on another system. Another use of this technology is to allow multiple
systems to shadow the functions of a primary system. If that primary system fails,
the backup systems can complete the transactions in flight. The end users are un-
aware of a failure.
Virtual machine software
Organizations wish to make optimal use of their physical systems, but they need
to make applications supported by many different operating system versions or
operating systems function side by side. This is the approach commonly selected
for industry-standard system workloads, even though operating system virtuali-
zation and partitioning might be a better choice in many situations.
Operating system virtualization and partitioning software
When all of an organization’s applications are designed to work with a single op-
erating system, it might be more efficient to use operating system virtualization
and partitioning rather than virtual machine software to provide the application
isolation and system optimization needed. This is the approach usually selected
for mainframe and midrange system workloads.
22 | Chapter 4: Processing Virtualization: Doing System Tricks

CHAPTER 5
Network Virtualization:
Controlling the View of the Network
What Is Network Virtualization?
Our journey into the layers of virtualization continues. This time, we’re going to ex-
amine the concept of network virtualization (see Figure 5-1). Network virtualization
refers to tools used to present an artificial view of the network environment.
Network virtualization often is supported by network routers, network servers, and the
like. Systems executing the organization’s applications and workloads may not know
this is happening. Client systems and server systems just see the network as presented
by those network resources.
This technology, as with other virtualization technologies, was originally developed for
mainframe systems in the late 1960s, was recreated on minicomputers (now called
midrange machines) in the 1980s, and started appearing on industry-standard systems
(X86-based) in the early 1990s. One difference is that network virtualization often was
implemented on separate network servers rather than inside the operating systems
supporting clients or servers.
This type of virtualization is often used in conjunction with several other types.
What Does Network Virtualization Do?
As shown in Figure 5-2, network virtualization creates an artificial view of the network
that hides the physical network from clients and servers. It provides the following
functions:
Network routing
Network traffic directed to remote clients or servers is sent from network to net-
work until it reaches the target systems.
23

Network address translation
One network address may actually be used by a number of network clients or
servers. A network address translation layer sends network messages from and to
the right client or server systems. This means that a network service provider could
provide a single Internet protocol address (IP address) for an entire facility and all
of the clients and servers in that facility would still be able to send and receive
messages to outside resources.
Network isolation
Clients and servers may only be allowed to see (and thus communicate with) spe-
cific systems. This reduces the possibility of the data center becoming infected with
worms, viruses, or other malware.
Figure 5-1. Network virtualization
24 | Chapter 5: Network Virtualization: Controlling the View of the Network

When Is Network Virtualization Required?
When organizations have the following goals, network virtualization technology is the
best solution:
Improving network reliability
When the organization needs constant network access in a data center, two or more
physical networks supplied by different providers are typically installed. Network
virtualization makes it possible for network communications to fail over from one
network to the other in the case of a failure.
Improving network performance
Increased network throughput can be achieved if several, or perhaps all, outside
network communications links are used simultaneously to improve overall net-
work performance as well as to increase network scalability.
Improving network security
If network security is a key requirement, the data center network can be configured
as several secure zones. Only specific network traffic may cross from one zone to
another or from the internal network to the external network. This reduces the
Figure 5-2. Network virtualization at work
When Is Network Virtualization Required? | 25

possibility of clients or servers being infected by worms, viruses, or other malware.
It is also possible to allow clients to only see servers they are allowed to access,
even though other network resources are available.
Players in the Network Virtualization World
Although there are many players in the network virtualization market, a short summary
of some of these suppliers follows:
Cisco
Cisco offers a number of network servers that perform network virtualization
functions.
HP
HP offers network virtualization functions as part of its general-purpose server
operating systems and also offers network servers providing those functions.
IBM
IBM offers network virtualization functions as part of its general-purpose server
operating systems and also offers network servers providing those functions.
Juniper Systems
Juniper offers a number of network servers that perform network virtualization
functions.
A Few Examples of Network Virtualization in Use
There are many different environments in which network virtualization can be bene-
ficial. The following list contains only a few examples:
Increasing performance or scale of network-centric workloads
A transaction-oriented ecommerce application might overwhelm the capacity of a
single network link, so an organization may install many network links from the
same or different suppliers. Network virtualization would make optimal use of
these resources.
Data center security
Network virtualization can be used to isolate the internal network from all of the
external networks in use. Only authorized network traffic is allowed to enter and
leave the data center network.
High availability/fail over/disaster recovery
Organizations may install network links from many different suppliers. If any link
fails, the network virtualization function would reroute messages from the failed
network connection to one of the surviving network connections.
26 | Chapter 5: Network Virtualization: Controlling the View of the Network

Physical and network resources devoted to department or business unit
Some regulated industries require that sensitive or personal information be main-
tained on separate systems and networks. Network virtualization makes it possible
to segment a single network into multiple independent networks without requiring
the organization to install separate wiring and networking equipment.
A Few Examples of Network Virtualization in Use | 27

www.allitebooks.com

CHAPTER 6
Storage Virtualization:
Where Are Your Files and Applications?
What Is Storage Virtualization?
Our journey into the layers of virtualization continues and we have reached the bottom
of the model. The remaining two layers of virtualization technology touch all of the
others. This time, we’re going to examine storage virtualization (see Figure 6-1). Storage
virtualization refers to the tools used to present an artificial view of the storage
environment.
Storage virtualization often is supported by storage servers. Clients and servers need
not know where the files they’re processing really reside. They also need not know what
type of storage device holds their applications and data. The storage devices could be
based on rotating media, such as traditional disk drives, or solid state technology, such
as SSDs or dynamic random access memory (DRAM).
Once again, this technology was originally developed for mainframe systems in the late
1960s, was recreated on minicomputers (now called midrange machines) in the 1980s,
and started appearing on industry-standard systems (X86-based) in the early 1980s.
The industry is still in the middle of a transition from server- or client-attached storage
to virtual storage that is located in the network.
This type of virtualization is often used in conjunction with several other types.
What Does Storage Virtualization Do?
As shown in Figure 6-2, storage virtualization creates an artificial view of the network
that hides the physical network from clients and servers. It provides the following
functions:
29

Allowing distributed file systems
Remote storage devices are made to look like they were directly attached to the
system. The local system does not know where they are located or what type of
storage device they are.
Creating artificial storage volumes
Multiple storage devices can be harnessed together to create the image of a single,
much larger storage device.
Creating arrays of storage volumes
Applications and data can be spread over a number of storage devices and storage
servers to improve overall storage performance. This function can also be used to
improve storage reliability. The same data can be stored on several storage devices
or storage servers. If one storage device or server fails, the data can be reconstructed.
Allowing greater control of storage space
Storage devices can be segmented into several “file systems,” allowing the storage
device to be more fully utilized.
Figure 6-1. Storage virtualization
30 | Chapter 6: Storage Virtualization: Where Are Your Files and Applications?

Allowing incompatible systems to share storage devices
Mainframes, single-vendor operating systems, Windows, Linux, and UNIX all use
different mechanisms to store and retrieve applications and data. Storage virtual-
ization makes it possible for all of these to share the same storage devices and the
files they contain.
Storage servers are, by the way, computer systems managing a number of storage de-
vices. This allows many general-purpose systems to access the same storage. The stor-
age server’s operating system keeps track of which general-purpose server is allowed
to access what data storage on individual storage devices. If these storage servers con-
nect to the general-purpose systems over a special-purpose storage network, the con-
figuration is often called a storage area network (SAN). Storage accessed over a network
is called network attached storage (NAS), regardless of whether it is on a SAN or the
same local area network (LAN) used by general-purpose systems.
Figure 6-2. Storage virtualization at work
What Does Storage Virtualization Do? | 31

When Should Storage Virtualization Be Used?
Storage virtualization should be used by organizations seeking to achieve the following
goals:
High availability/fail over/disaster recovery
If organizations are deploying application or processing virtualization, it is likely
that storage virtualization should also be deployed. When organizations need con-
tinuous access to applications and data, if a single storage device, the network used
to access that device, or the storage server fails, storage virtualization can press
another device, network, or storage server into service.
Improve storage performance
If application virtualization, workload management, or parallel processing soft-
ware is deployed to increase overall scalability or performance, storage virtualiza-
tion should be deployed, too. Today’s distributed applications often assign the
same task to many systems. Many systems working together on a single task can
overwhelm the storage system. If the workload is spread over many different stor-
age devices, the workload can be handled.
Making the same storage resource serve everyone
If the organization is deploying many virtual environments, each running on a
different type of operating system, storage virtualization should be deployed as
well. Organizations typically have a large number of different applications. Each
of them may be hosted on a different physical or virtual system. Each of the ap-
plications may be hosted on a different operating system, each of which uses stor-
age differently. Storage virtualization is used to make the same storage devices serve
many tasks.
Players in the Storage Virtualization World
Although there are many players in the storage virtualization market, a short summary
of some of the suppliers follows:
EMC
EMC began as a company offering third-party memory boards and storage devices
for mainframes and minicomputers. Over time, the company created storage serv-
ers that could serve the storage needs of many different types of systems.
Hitachi
Hitachi offers storage devices and storage servers for mainframes, midrange sys-
tems, and industry-standard systems.
HP
HP offers its own storage servers to support its midrange systems and industry-
standard systems.
32 | Chapter 6: Storage Virtualization: Where Are Your Files and Applications?

IBM
IBM has offered its own mainframes, midrange systems, and industry-standard
servers. The company offers storage servers and storage devices that can serve the
needs of all of its products.
NetApp
NetApp has long offered storage servers for industry-standard systems and mid-
range systems from many suppliers.
A Few Examples of Storage Virtualization in Use
There are many different environments in which storage virtualization can be benefi-
cial. The following list contains only a few examples:
Increasing performance or scale of storage-centric workloads
A transaction-oriented ecommerce application might overwhelm the capacity of a
single storage system, so an organization typically spreads the applications and
data over a number of storage devices and storage servers. Another approach is to
substitute special, high-speed storage technology with devices that use solid state
devices (SSD) or dynamic random access memory (DRAM) rather than a spinning
disk. These devices may provide latency and throughput similar to the system’s
own internal memory.
Data center optimization
If each server had its own private storage system, a great deal of space would be
taken up in the organization’s data center for storage devices. Furthermore, it is
likely that these storage devices would be lightly used; that is, a great deal of empty
space would be found on each device. To reduce overall costs for storage devices,
data center space, power, and heat production, organizations use storage virtual-
ization to share storage devices among all of the servers supporting a given
workload.
High availability/fail over/disaster recovery
Organizations may install redundant storage servers. If any storage device or stor-
age server fails, the storage virtualization function would reroute requests from the
failed devices to one of the surviving storage devices or servers.
A Few Examples of Storage Virtualization in Use | 33


CHAPTER 7
Security for Virtual Environments:
Guarding the Treasure
What Is Security for Virtual Environments?
There are two segments of the Kusnetzky Group Model that cut across all of the func-
tional segments. Security and management for virtual environments protect and
manage all of the other layers. This time, we’re going to examine security for virtual
environments (see Figure 7-1). Security for virtual environments refers to the tools
necessary to control access to and use of all of the other layers of virtualization
technology.
Depending upon the approach, security can require a small piece of software, often
called an agent, to be added to each virtual resource. This, of course, can be quite a
task in itself. This approach also means that part of each system’s time is spent doing
security processing. If we consider a physical system supporting 40 virtual servers, each
of which is supporting multiple workloads and communicating to thousands of client
systems, the task of installing and maintaining all of that security software could be an
overwhelming task.
Other suppliers have developed a different approach. Their approach is to capture the
stream of network communication going from server to server, from application to
application, from storage device to server, and funnel it through a separate security
appliance server. This way, a great deal of processing can be done on each stream of
communication to filter out worms, viruses, malware, and the like. This function is
often combined with other management functions, such as configuration management,
performance management, or automation of tasks. This approach does not require that
agents be installed on each resource.
This technology is a far more recent addition to virtualized environments. It started to
appear in the late 1980s as a way to protect midrange and industry-standard systems
from intrusions coming from the network.
35

What Does Security for Virtual Environments Do?
Security for virtual environments guards access to each of the layers of virtualization
found in an organization.
It is best if security for virtualized environments is part of the architecture (that is, part
of the plan, rather than added on later). As systems become increasingly complex, they
expose more interfaces, sometimes called “surface area,” to the network and, thus, to
potential attackers.
When Is Security for Virtual Environments Needed?
The goals of security in a virtual environment are really simple. This layer is meant to
protect all information and computing resources so that only authorized use is made
of them. While simple in concept, this is exceedingly difficult to accomplish in reality.
Figure 7-1. Security for virtual environments
36 | Chapter 7: Security for Virtual Environments: Guarding the Treasure

As each new application or layer of virtualization technology is added, there are new
areas to attack. Organizations should consider security when moving functions into a
virtual environment and then deploy the appropriate security tools.
Players in the Security for Virtual Environments World
Although there are many players in the security for virtual environments market, a short
summary of some of the suppliers follows:
CA
CA has long been a major player in security. It is natural as virtual environments
become more popular that CA would enhance its products to protect them.
Cisco
Cisco offers security products that work in conjunction with its network virtuali-
zation servers and, more recently, with its unified computing systems (UCS).
HP
HP has offered security products for its computing environments for a long time.
IBM Tivoli
Tivoli, like CA, has been a security player for many years.
Juniper Systems
Juniper, like Cisco, offers security products that work in conjunction with its net-
work virtualization servers.
A Few Examples of Security for Virtual Environments in Use
There are many different environments in which security for virtual environments can
be beneficial. The following list contains only a few examples:
Access virtualization
When remote devices are accessing applications through access virtualization, se-
curity technology on the server can monitor attempts to connect to the server and
overall application usage. This technology ensures that access is allowed only to
authorized individuals, using appropriate devices, at authorized times, and only
from authorized places. Usually this function is based on a directory of computing
resources, individuals, and roles within the company.
Application virtualization
The encapsulation technology used in application virtualization may contain tools
that communicate with directory and security services back at the remote server.
The encapsulated application can disable itself if it finds that it has been asked to
run on the wrong system, at the wrong time, or from some unknown part of the
network. The application virtualization technology would disable the encapsulated
A Few Examples of Security for Virtual Environments in Use | 37

application and report the attempted misuse to the remote systems security mon-
itoring system so that it can be logged.
Processing virtualization
In processing virtualization configurations, security monitoring can determine if
anyone attempts unauthorized use of computing resources, regardless of whether
they are physical or virtual. Only authorized individuals would be able to use ap-
plications managed by workload managers/load balancers, virtual desktops, vir-
tual servers, or clustered servers.
Storage virtualization
Security software can monitor access to storage devices and storage servers. Only
authorized applications or servers would be allowed access to information
resources.
Network virtualization
Security monitors can monitor network traffic and only allow authorized users,
applications, or systems to send and receive messages. Unauthorized users or sys-
tems would not be able to use the network, even if physically attached to the
network.
38 | Chapter 7: Security for Virtual Environments: Guarding the Treasure
www.allitebooks.com

CHAPTER 8
Management for Virtual Environments
What Is Management for Virtual Environments?
Two segments of the model cut across all of the functional segments. Security and
management for virtual environments protect and manage all of the other layers. This
time, we’re going to examine management for virtual environments (see Figure 8-1).
Management for virtual environments refers to the tools necessary to install virtual
environments and to watch, analyze, control, automate, and optimize what they are
doing.
As virtual environments become more and more complex, this layer of virtualization
technology becomes more and more important. We have already reached a point at
which human operators cannot track what is happening in real time and respond before
there is a slowdown or failure.
Technology used for management of virtual environments includes the following func-
tions:
• Creating virtual environments or components of virtual environments
• Provisioning those environments or components
• Monitoring their execution
• Controlling execution of virtual environments or components
• Analyzing execution log data to find configuration, performance, or operational
issues
• Optimizing use of virtual environments or components
• Automating use of virtual environments or components
39

What Does Management for Virtual Environments Do?
Management for virtual environments guards access to each of the layers of virtualiza-
tion found in an organization.
Virtualized client resources
• Creation of client-side virtual machine images and setting the proper parameters
(virtual memory, number of virtual processors, virtual storage size, etc.)
• Installation of operating systems, setting up the proper parameters, and instal-
ling updates
• Setting user personalization (desktop images, preferred desktop icons, etc.)
Figure 8-1. Management for virtual environments
40 | Chapter 8: Management for Virtual Environments

• Configuring user data
• Installation of applications, moving necessary data, and adjusting application
configuration settings
Virtualized server resources
• Creation of server-side virtual machine images and setting proper parameters
(virtual memory, number of virtual processors, virtual storage size, etc.)
• Installation of operating systems, setting up proper parameters, and installing
updates
• Installation of applications, moving necessary data, and adjusting application
configuration settings
• Workload management; that is, sending user requests to one of a number of
systems depending upon which system has the most available capacity
• Automation of virtual environment workloads; that is, staging applications so
that they don’t start until the necessary data is available or dealing with an
application failure
• Managing policies that guide the functioning of the virtual environment; that
is, telling the system the requirements of each job, when jobs can run, who is
allowed to use them, where they are allowed to run, and performance
requirements
• Orchestration of server workloads; that is, moving tasks from system to system
as required to meet service-level objectives or handle failures
It is best if management for virtualized environments is part of the architecture (that
is, part of the plan, rather than added on later). As systems become increasingly com-
plex, they require more and more attention to real-time events.
When Is Management Software for Virtual Environments
Needed?
Whenever an organization embarks on the journey to a virtual environment, it is im-
portant to also deploy the technology that manages creation of virtual resources, pro-
visions those resources, monitors the environment’s operation, automates functions to
reduce the need for manual intervention, and creates an optimal environment that
complies with the organization’s service-level goals and other policies.
When Is Management Software for Virtual Environments Needed? | 41

Players in the Management for Virtual Environments World
A new player in management for virtual environments comes to my attention almost
every day. Although there are many players, a short summary of some of the suppliers
follows:
CA
CA has long been a major player in management software. It is natural that, as
virtual environments became more popular, CA would enhance its products to
manage those environments.
HP
HP has offered management products for its computing environments for a long
time.
IBM Tivoli
Tivoli has been a management player for many years. It, too, has brought its prod-
ucts into virtual environments.
A Few Examples of Management for Virtual Environments
in Use
There are many different environments in which management for virtual environments
can be beneficial. The following list contains only a few examples:
Access virtualization
Management technology provisions clients, monitors usage, and ensures that ac-
cess is performing properly. Failures and slowdowns are prevented when possible
and failover routines are executed when failure occurs.
Application virtualization
Access to applications and application components is provisioned, monitored, and
controlled so that they are configured properly, they run optimally, and slowdowns
and failures are prevented. As with access virtualization, failover routines are exe-
cuted when a failure occurs.
Processing virtualization
Access to computing resources, regardless of whether they are physical or virtual,
is provisioned, monitored, and controlled so that resources are configured prop-
erly, they run optimally, and slowdowns and failures are prevented. As with access
virtualization, failover routines are executed when a failure occurs.
Storage virtualization
Storage resources are provisioned, monitored, and controlled so that they are con-
figured properly, they run optimally, and slowdowns and failures are prevented.
As with other layers of virtualization, failover routines are executed when a failure
occurs.
42 | Chapter 8: Management for Virtual Environments

Network virtualization
Network resources are provisioned, monitored, and controlled so that they are
configured properly, they run optimally, and slowdowns and failures are preven-
ted. As with other layers of virtualization, failover routines are executed when a
failure occurs.
Security for virtual environments
Security services are provisioned, monitored, and controlled so that they are con-
figured properly, they run optimally, and slowdowns and failures are prevented.
As with other layers of virtualization, failover routines are executed when a failure
occurs.
A Few Examples of Management for Virtual Environments in Use | 43


CHAPTER 9
Using Virtualization:
The Right Tool for the Job
Highlighting When Use Cases Are Confused with Technology
Media reports often confuse base virtualization technology with specific use cases or
instances of use of virtualization technology. So, for example, when virtual machine
technology, one of the five types of processing virtualization, is used, media reports
might discuss that as either server virtualization or desktop virtualization. The use of
application virtualization, processing virtualization, or storage virtualization might be
discussed as “clustering.” Let’s examine a few use cases or instances and see what
technology is really being used:
• “Big data”
• Clusters
• Desktop virtualization
• High-performance computing
• Server virtualization
• Extreme transaction processing
This chapter is meant to examine industry catchphrases and quickly review which parts
of the virtualization model are actually in use. Please refer to the chapter on each of
those topics for more information.
45

Big Data
“Big data” (see Figure 9-1 ), a specific use of a combination of processing virtualization
and storage virtualization, is a catchphrase that has been bubbling up from the high-
performance computing niche of the IT market (more about that later in this chapter).
Yes, this configuration is a cluster (see the next section) that is being used specifically
to manage extremely large stores of rapidly changing data.
Figure 9-1. Big data
Increasingly suppliers of processing virtualization and storage virtualization software
have begun to flog “big data” in their presentations. What, exactly, does this phrase
mean? If you sit through the presentations of ten suppliers of technology, fifteen dif-
ferent definitions are likely to come forward. Each definition, of course, tends to sup-
port the need for that supplier’s products and services. (Imagine that.) In simplest
terms, the phrase refers to tools, processes, and procedures that allow an organization
to create, manipulate, and manage very large data sets and storage facilities.
46 | Chapter 9: Using Virtualization: The Right Tool for the Job

Does this mean terabytes, petabytes, or even larger collections of data? The answer
offered by these suppliers is “yes.” They would go on to say that you need their products
to manage and make best use of that mass of data. Managing huge, dynamic sets of
data can be problematic without the appropriate tools and processes.
An example often cited is the mass of weather data collected daily by the U.S. National
Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) to aid in climate, ecosystem,
weather, and commercial research. Add that to the masses of data collected by the U.S.
National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) for its research, and the num-
bers get pretty big.
The commercial sector has its poster children as well. Energy companies have amassed
huge amounts of geophysical data. Pharmaceutical companies routinely munch their
way through enormous amounts of drug testing data. Commercial sites, such as Face-
book and Twitter maintain huge amounts of data that changes moment by moment,
as well. Large organizations increasingly face the need to maintain large amounts of
structured and unstructured data to comply with government regulations. Recent court
cases have also lead them to keep masses of documents, email messages, and other
forms of electronic communication that may be required if they face litigation.
The following virtualization technology is typically in use when people discuss “big
data”:
• Storage virtualization (distributed file systems)
• Virtual processing (parallel processing monitors, workload management monitors,
memory virtualization)
• Management for virtual environments
If your organization is dealing with extremely large amounts of data or data that changes
more rapidly than a typical database can manage, you are clearly in the big data
category.
Since the requirements for “big data” applications differ from many other forms of
structured data, many suppliers are offering new data management tools. Sometimes
the suppliers call their products NoSQL databases. They may also talk about segment-
ing the database so that pieces of it may be spread over many machines. In this case,
many suppliers speak about packaging and supporting open source data management
technologies such as Apache’s Hadoop and Cassandra projects.
Big Data | 47

Clusters
There are many different uses for a configuration that harnesses the power of many (up
to thousands of) systems (see Figure 9-2). Although different technology may be in use,
all of these configurations are called clusters. The fact that the same word is used to
describe different uses of technology creates quite a bit of confusion. Depending upon
the requirements, different virtualization technology may be in use.
Figure 9-2. Clusters
Here are the typical requirements and technology:
High performance
When huge amounts of computational power must be applied to speed up the
processing of a single task, a parallel processing monitor, a form of processing
virtualization, is used to harness the computational power of many systems. These
clusters may include desktop systems as well as servers. This type of configuration
is often used for modeling financial risk, nondestructive testing, rendering digital
graphics, or other forms of modeling. Typically, these tasks run directly on the
physical systems rather than being encapsulated into virtual machines or run in
partitions when operating system virtualization is being used.
48 | Chapter 9: Using Virtualization: The Right Tool for the Job
www.allitebooks.com

Scalability
When large numbers of people need to access the same application, a similar sys-
tem configuration might be harnessed using workload management monitors, a
form of virtual processing software. As transactions come in to be processed, the
workload manager sends them to the system that has the most available capacity.
Since performance is also a critical requirement in this use case, it is quite likely
that the applications will be hosted directly on the physical systems, rather than
being hosted on a virtual server. Server-centric application virtualization technol-
ogy often contains a workload management function. Even though the workload
management is happening at the application level, the multiserver configuration
might be called a cluster.
Big data storage
Memory virtualization or distributed cache software is used to spread data out
among a large number of systems, making it possible to access and update large
amounts of data very quickly. Sometimes this configuration is described as a Ha-
doop or Cassandra cluster.
Storage cluster
In this case, storage servers, not general-purpose computing systems, are clustered
together to create a very large high-performance storage environment for general-
purpose computing functions. Distributed file system software might be used to
access this data. The storage servers might use a special-purpose storage network
called a SAN. Storage server suppliers also support a form of memory virtualization
among the members of the storage server cluster.
Desktop Virtualization
Desktop virtualization is the use of several virtualization technologies, either together
or separately. Let’s look at each of these cases in turn.
When “desktop virtualization” is used to describe making it possible for people to
access a physical or virtual system remotely, access virtualization technology is used to
capture the user interface portion of an application. It is then converted to a neutral
format and projected across the network to a device that can display the user interface
and allow the user to enter and access information (see Figure 9-3). This means that
just about any type of network-enabled device could be used to access the application.
Suppliers such as Citrix, Microsoft, and VMware offer client software for tablets,
smartphones, laptops, and PC, making it possible for users of those devices to access
the applications running elsewhere on the network.
Desktop Virtualization | 49

Figure 9-3. Desktop virtualization via access virtualization
When “desktop virtualization” is used to describe encapsulating an application using
client-side application virtualization technology and then projecting it in whole or
piecemeal to a remote system for execution, the application could either remain on that
client device or be deleted once the user completes the task, depending on the settings
used by the IT administrator (see Figure 9-4). This means, of course, that the client
system has to run the operating system needed by the application. So, Windows ap-
plications, for example, would need to run on Windows executing on a PC or laptop.
50 | Chapter 9: Using Virtualization: The Right Tool for the Job

Figure 9-4. Desktop virtualization via application virtualization
When “desktop virtualization” is used to describe encapsulating the entire stack of
software that runs on a client system, the phase starts to take on a great deal of com-
plexity (see Figure 9-5). That encapsulated virtual client system becomes highly mobile.
Here are the possibilities:
• One or more virtual client systems could execute on a single physical client system.
This allows personal applications to run side by side with locked-down corporate
applications.
• Local execution. Virtual client systems could run on a local blade server. The user
interface is projected to physical PCs, laptops, or thin client systems using access
virtualization technology.
• Remote execution. Virtual client systems could run on a server that resides in the
organization’s data center. The user interface is projected to physical PCs, laptops,
or thin client systems using access virtualization technology.
Since the industry is using the same phrase to describe all of these different approaches,
the concept of desktop virtualization can be quite confusing to those unfamiliar with
all of the different types of technology that could be pressed into service.
Desktop Virtualization | 51

High-Performance Computing
When an application or a workload require more computational power than is available
from a single computer because of either technical or financial limitations, organiza-
tions harness a large number of computers (yes, a cluster) to work on a single task or
a small number of tasks (see Figure 9-6). Typically a parallel processing monitor, a type
of processing virtualization software, is used to manage these systems. The monitor
sends some work to each system. As systems complete their tasks, they send the results
back to the system running the monitor and request another task.
This approach is used to support financial modeling, geophysical modeling, risk anal-
ysis, scientific research, digital content creation, and a number of other tasks that re-
quire enormous processing power.
Figure 9-5. Desktop virtualization via processing virtualization
52 | Chapter 9: Using Virtualization: The Right Tool for the Job

Server Virtualization
Server virtualization is the use of either virtual machine technology or operating system
virtualization and partitioning technology to make a single physical server support
multiple independent workloads (see Figure 9-7). If operating system virtualization and
partitioning technology is used, all of the workloads must be supported by a single
operating system. If virtual machine technology is being used, each virtual machine
runs a different operating system. This could be different versions of the same operating
system (such as Windows 2003, Windows 2008, etc.) or many different operating sys-
tems (Windows, Linux, UNIX, etc.).
Figure 9-6. High-performance computing
Server Virtualization | 53

Figure 9-7. Server virtualization
This approach more fully utilizes the power of the underlying physical system. Since
all of the individual workloads are sharing a single computer, this approach is not
selected when the goal is high-performance computing or extreme transaction
processing.
Extreme Transaction Processing
Extreme transaction processing (see Figure 9-8) is the use of a number of virtualization
technologies—such as workload managers, memory virtualization, and virtual storage
technology—to create an environment that can support hundreds of thousands or,
perhaps, millions of transactions per second. The work is spread over a large number
of computing and storage resources (yes, another version of a cluster).
54 | Chapter 9: Using Virtualization: The Right Tool for the Job

Figure 9-8. Extreme transaction processing
Extreme Transaction Processing | 55


CHAPTER 10
Summary
Virtualization Is a Double-Edged Sword
As with many types of technology, virtualization is a very powerful tool. If it is used
properly, organizations gain quite a number of benefits:
• Applications can perform faster than today’s processor technology would normally
support or make it possible to use many lower-cost, lower-performance machines
to handle work that would normally be assigned to a larger, more expensive
machine.
• Applications can scale to support more users than would be possible on a single
system.
• Application environments can be much more reliable and dependable. System
configurations can be constructed that will survive the loss of any single
component.
• Client applications can be isolated from one another so that previously incompat-
ible applications can share the same machine.
• Personal workloads and locked-down corporate workloads can share the same
machine.
• Server use can be optimized.
Virtualization, however, is not a panacea. Using the wrong tool or using the right tool
improperly can result in poor performance, higher costs for the organization, and the
organization not being able to meet its objectives.
Virtualization is best used when the organization has an overarching plan and is de-
veloping solutions to fit an architecture rather than focusing on the “hot” tool of the
moment.
57

Where to Go Next
Before embarking on the journey to a more virtualized environment, an organization
should answer the following questions:
• What are the organization’s goals?
• What needs to be done to achieve those goals?
• Who needs to be involved to marshal all of the necessary resources?
• What types of technology are needed to build the tools that will help the organi-
zation achieve its goals?
• Does the plan allows for technological improvements, new technology, or changes
in suppliers?
In short, the organization needs to have a plan, needs to implement solutions according
to that plan, and needs to carefully monitor ongoing development and operations to
make sure the organization achieves its goals.
As Yogi Berra once said, “If you don’t know where you’re going, you might end up
somewhere else.”
If your organization doesn’t have the appropriate expertise on staff, it would be very
wise to seek out a supplier or consultants to help.
58 | Chapter 10: Summary
www.allitebooks.com

About the Author
Daniel Kusnetzky, distinguished analyst and founder of the Kusnetzky Group LLC, has
been involved with information technology since the late 1970s. He’s interested in
system software, virtualization technology, cloud computing, and mobility.
Colophon
The animal on the cover of Virtualization: A Manager’s Guide is a condor.
The cover image is from Wood’s Animate Creations. The cover font is Adobe ITC Ga-
ramond. The text font is Linotype Birka; the heading font is Adobe Myriad Condensed;
and the code font is LucasFont’s TheSansMonoCondensed.


