
VMware Workstation Player: A
Beginner's Guide
Your first steps into virtualization
by Tuna Peyo
IT Courses Press

VMWARE WORKSTATION PLAYER: A BEGINNER'S GUIDE
by Tuna Peyo
First edition
Copyright© 2017 IT Courses Press
Published by:
IT Courses Press
ISBN-13: 978-1977814500
ISBN-10: 1977814506
Disclaimer
This book is designed to provide information about VMware Workstation Player. Every effort has been
made to make this book as complete and as accurate as possible, but no warranty is implied. The
information is provided on an as is basis. Neither the authors, IT Courses Press, nor its resellers, or
distributors will be held liable for any damages caused or alleged to be caused either directly or indirectly
by this book. The opinions expressed in this book belong to the author and are not necessarily those of IT
Courses Press.
Note that this is an unofficial book. VMware, Inc is in no way affiliated with this book or its content.
Trademarks
IT Courses is a trademark of IT Courses Press and may not be used without written permission. Some of the
diagrams used in the book were created by Dia Diagram Editor (http://dia-installer.de).
Feedback Information
At IT Courses Press, our goal is to create in-depth technical books of the highest quality and value. Readers’
feedback is a natural continuation of this process. If you have any comments about how we could improve
our books and learning resources for you, you can contact us through email at info@it-courses.org. Please
include the book title in your message. For more information about our books, visit our website at http://it-
courses.org.
Errata information
We have taken every care to ensure the accuracy of our content found in this book. However, mistakes do
happen. If you find a mistake, we would be grateful if you report it to us, since you can save other readers
from frustration and help us improve the subsequent versions of this book. If you find any mistakes, report
them to info@it-courses.org. Please include the book title in your description. Any existing errata can be
viewed at http://it-courses.org/errata.

About the author
Tuna Peyo is a systems engineer and an independent author with more than 10 years of experience in the
internetworking and systems engineering field. His certifications include CCNA Routing and Switching,
CompTIA Network+, CompTIA Security+, and many others. Tuna is the founder and editor of geek-
university.com and it-courses.org, free online education portals that offer courses covering various aspects
of the IT system administration. Tuna can be reached at info@it-courses.org.
About this book
This book teaches you how to work with VMware Workstation Player, a free virtualization application from
a company called VMware. The book is written for people with some experience in the world of computers
and computer networking. Prior experience with virtualization technologies is not required.
What will you learn
You will first find out what virtualization is and what features VMware Workstation Player has to offer. You
will learn how to install Player on Windows and Linux, how to install a guest operating system in a VM,
how to start, stop, or suspend a VM. You will also learn some of the cool features that Player includes, such
as the Drag-and-Drop and Copy features, transferring files between two VMs using shared folders,
expanding virtual disks... We will wrap up by explaining different types of networking configuration
available in Player.
 

Contents at a Glance
 
Chapter 1 - Introduction to VMware Workstation Player
Chapter 2 - Creating virtual machines
Chapter 3 - Using virtual machines
Chapter 4 - Managing virtual machines
Chapter 5 - Working with devices and disks
Chapter 6 - Configuring virtual networks
Afterword
Appendix A - VMware Workstation Player use cases
Appendix B - VMware Workstation Player Preferences Menu
Appendix C - Enabling VT-x
Appendix D - Finding out the UUID of a virtual machine
Glossary

Table of contents
 
Chapter 1 - Introduction to VMware Workstation Player
What is VMware Workstation Player?
Reasons to use VMware Workstation Player
System requirements for VMware Workstation Player
Download VMware Workstation Player
Install VMware Workstation Player on Windows
Install VMware Workstation Player on Linux
VMware Workstation Player home screen
Chapter 2 - Creating virtual machines
What is a virtual machine?
What is a guest operating system?
Create a virtual machine
Manually install a guest operating system
Easy Install feature in VMware Workstation Player
VMware Tools overview
Install VMware Tools in Windows
Install VMware Tools in Linux
Summary
Chapter 3 - Using virtual machines
Start a virtual machine
Suspend a virtual machine
Drag-and-Drop feature
Copy and Paste feature
Shared folders overview
Enable a shared folder for a virtual machine
Access a shared folder
Map the shared folder as a network drive
Connect or disconnect a USB device to a virtual machine
Choose what happens when you connect USB devices
Connect USB HIDs to a virtual machine
Unity Mode
Enabling Unity Mode
Summary

Chapter 4 - Managing virtual machines
Change the virtual machine name
Change the guest operating system version
Change the working directory of a virtual machine
Change the memory allocation
Move a virtual machine
Configure a virtual machine for compatibility
Universal Unique Identifier (UUID)
Configure a virtual machine to keep the same UUID
Delete a virtual machine
Log files
Log in automatically to a Windows virtual machine
Summary
Chapter 5 - Working with devices and disks
Add a CD-ROM drive
Configure Legacy Emulation Mode
Add a floppy drive
Configure a USB Controller
Add a USB controller
Enable isochronous USB devices
What is a virtual disk?
Virtual hard disks overview
Add a new virtual hard disk
Add an existing virtual hard disk
Virtual machine files
Compact a virtual hard disk
Expand a virtual hard disk
Defragment a virtual hard disk
Remove a virtual hard disk
Add a virtual parallel port
Add a virtual serial port
Add a generic SCSI device
Virtual SMP (Symmetric Multi-Processing)
Enhanced virtual keyboard feature
Summary
Chapter 6 - Configuring virtual networks
Virtual networking components
Networking configurations
Add a virtual network adapter

Set up bridged networking
Set up NAT networking
Set up host-only networking
Limit network bandwidth for a VM
Configure packet loss percentage
Change VM's MAC address
Summary
Afterword
Appendix A - VMware Workstation Player use cases
Run virtual appliances
Install and try Linux
Appendix B - VMware Workstation Player Preferences Menu
Appendix C - Enabling VT-x
Appendix D - Finding out the UUID of a virtual machine
Glossary
 

 
Chapter 1 - Introduction to VMware
Workstation Player
IN THIS CHAPTER
Learning what VMware Workstation Player is and what it is used for
Reasons to use Player
System requirements needed to install Player
Installing Player on Windows and Linux
 
In this chapter you will learn what VMware Workstation Player is used for and
the features it offers. We will then go through the system requirements needed to
install and run Player on your computer. Finally, I will explain how you can
download and install the application on both Windows and Linux.

What is VMware Workstation Player?
VMware Workstation Player is a free desktop application from a company
called VMware that can be run on Windows and Linux. This application enables
you to create, run, and configure virtual machines. A virtual machine can be
defined as a software computer that, just like a physical computer, runs an
operating system and executes programs. This allows you to run one operating
system emulated within another operating system. For example, you can install a
Linux operating system within your Windows OS and simply run it in a separate
window, like in the following example: 
Some of the features VMware Workstation Player offers are:
support for countless guest operating systems, such as Windows 7, 8, 10,
XP, Windows Server 2012, Red Hat, FreeBSD, CentOS, and many more.
virtual machine isolation - it is possible to isolate a virtual machine from
the host PC. This way, you can safely run programs from untrusted
sources in a virtual machine, without worrying that a malware will hurt
your host computer.
DHCP server - VMware Workstation Player offers a built-in DHCP server
to provide IP addresses to virtual machines.
adjustable memory - virtual machine memory can be optimized for better
performance.

drag & drop support - you can drag files between the host operating
system and the guest operating systems.
copy and paste features - you can copy and paste text and files between
the virtual machine and the host PC.
support for USB 3.0.
different types of network connection for the virtual machine: bridged,
host-only, or NAT.
 
VMware Workstation Player is free for non-commercial, personal and home use.
However, commercial organizations are required to pay for licenses in order to
use the software. Buying a license gives you the following benefits:
you can use the software commercially.
you can run restricted virtual machines created by VMware Fusion Pro or
VMware Workstation.
you get a better support for mass deployments to thousands of users.
Note that VMware Workstation Player was formerly known as VMware Player,
but in 2015 VMware decided to discontinue that software and replaced it with
VMware Workstation Player. There is also a more advanced version of the
desktop virtualization software called VMware Workstation Pro. This version
supports features not available in VMware Workstation Player, such as creating
snapshots, cloning of virtual machines, running multiple virtual machines at the
same time, connecting to vSphere servers, creating encrypted virtual machines,
etc.
Reasons to use VMware Workstation Player There are many scenarios
in which you would want to use Player, some of which are:
try other operating systems - let's say that you've been using Windows
all your life, and finally decided to give Linux a try. Instead of dual-
booting or installing Linux on an older machine you don't quite use
anymore, you could simply install Linux inside a virtual machine and try it
out.
run older software incompatible with your current OS - there are
plenty of applications that were written way before Windows 7, 8, or 10
became popular. If the application that you would like to run is not
compatible with your current operating system, you can install an older
operating system in a VM and run the application from there.
deliberately execute malware - security researchers commonly use

virtual machines to execute programs known to contain malware. This is
done in order to take apart the malware to see what vulnerabilities the
malicious software is exploiting. Of course, virtual machines that are used
for such purposes are isolated from the rest of the network and the
Internet.
experiment with the OS - you could install an OS inside a virtual
machine and tinker with it, without fear of repercussion. For example, if
you install a Windows OS, you can modify the registry, delete system
files, kill processes, and do other dangerous things that could otherwise
damage your system.
run virtual appliances - virtual appliances are prebuilt and preconfigured
virtual machine images that can be deployed on Player. A virtual appliance
usually contains a complete software stack needed to run a particular
service. For example, if you want to run WordPress in your virtual
machine, you can simply download the prebuilt virtual appliance that
already contains the server, database, and WordPress installed and have a
fully functional WordPress installation in a matter of minutes.
NOTE
Appendix A describes two of the scenarios mentioned in the list - how to use
Player to try out Linux and how to run virtual appliances.
System requirements for VMware Workstation Player Before we
dive deeper into all the cool features that VMware Workstation Player provides,
let's get the boring stuff out of the way - here is a list of all the requirements you
need to fulfill in order to install and run Player on your computer: Host
operating system (this is the machine you will install Player on): CPU
at minimum 64-bit x86 CPU with 1.3 GHz core speed.
For 64-bit guest operating systems (the operating systems installed in a virtual
machine), the host system must have one of the following processors:
AMD CPUs need to have segment-limit support in long mode.
Intel CPUs that has VT-x support.
The good news is that most newer processor support the requirements listed
above. Check out the website of your CPU's manufacturer to determine if these
features are supported. The Appendix C describes how to enable VT-x support
for Intel processors.
Memory
1GB minimum, 2GB and above is recommended.
in order to use Windows 7 Aero graphics in a virtual machine, 3GB of

host system memory is required.
It's important that the host on which you plan to run virtual machines has enough
RAM to operate smoothly. If the host runs out of the physical RAM, it starts
swapping to disk, which drastically reduces the system performance. To make
sure the swapping never happens, the total amount of RAM in your computer
should be more than the total amount of RAM that your virtual machines will
use, with an addition of (at least) 2 GB for the host operating system.
Hard disk
IDE, SATA, and SCSI hard drives are supported.
a minimum of 1GB free disk space is required for guest operating systems.
Optical CD-ROM and DVD
IDE, SCSI, and SATA optical drives are supported.
CD-ROM and DVD drives are supported.
ISO disk image files are supported.
Network
any Ethernet controller that the host operating system supports.
Host operating systems
You can install Player on a variety of Windows and Linux operating systems.
Note that Player requires a 64-bit host operating system. The supported
operating systems are:
Windows 10
Windows 8
Windows 7
Windows Server 2012
Windows Server 2008
Ubuntu 8.04 and above
Red Hat Enterprise Linux 5 and above
CentOS 5.0 and above
Oracle Linux 5.0 and above
openSUSE 10.2 and above
SUSE Linux 10 and above
Guest operating system
A guest operating system is the operating system you will install in a virtual
machine. Both 32-bit and 64-bit operating system versions are supported. Some
of the most popular guest operating systems are:
Windows 10
Windows 8
Windows 7
Windows Vista

Windows XP
Windows Server 2016
Windows Server 2012 R2
Windows Server 2003 R2
Ubuntu
RedHat
SUSE
Oracle Linux
Debian
Fedora
openSUSE
Mint
CentOS
Solaris
FreeBSD
Download VMware Workstation Player VMware Workstation Player is
free for personal non-commercial use, so you can download your own version of
this software. You don't even have to register an account. Here are the steps:
First, go to https://my.vmware.com/web/vmware/downloads. You will be shown a
list of VMware products. Find VMware Workstation Player (under the
Desktop & End-User Computing menu) and click on the Download Product
link on the right: 

VMware Workstation Player is available for both Windows and Linux operating
systems. Select the version you would like to download and click the Download
button next to it: 
NOTE
You can install the software only on a 64-bit operating system.
After the download finishes, you can proceed with the Player installation.

Install VMware Workstation Player on Windows To start the
installation, double-click the installer file you’ve downloaded in the previous
step: 
The VMware Workstation Player setup should start. On the Welcome screen,
click Next to continue: 
Accept the license terms and click Next:

Select the installation location and whether to install the Enhanced Keyboard
Driver, which provides better handling of international keyboards and
keyboards that have extra keys: 
Select whether you would like to check for product updates when Player starts
and whether you would like to send anonymous data and system usage to

VMware: 
Select the shortcuts you wish to create and click Next:
Finally, click Install to start the installation:

After a minute or two the installation process should be finished:
To complete the installation process, you will need to restart your computer: 

Install VMware Workstation Player on Linux NOTE
If you are using Windows as your operating system and are not interested in
running Player on Linux, feel free to skip this lesson. This lesson explains how
to install Player on Linux, not how to install a Linux distribution in a virtual
machine.
VMware Workstation Player can also be installed on a Linux host. Supported
Linux distributions are:
Ubuntu 8.04 and above
Red Hat Enterprise Linux 5 and above
CentOS 5.0 and above
Oracle Linux 5.0 and above
openSUSE 10.2 and above
SUSE Linux 10 and above
On most Linux distributions, the Linux bundle installer is installed using the
GUI. However, on some Linux distributions, the bundle installer starts a
command-line wizard instead of a GUI wizard. You can also manually start the
command-line wizard using the --console option, if you want to use the shell for
installation.
I will show you how to install Player on an openSUSE host. First, you will need
to download the Linux bundle installer, available on the following link:
https://my.vmware.com/web/vmware/free#desktop_end_user_computing/vmware_

Next, become root. On most Linux distributions, this is accomplished using the
su - command:
bob@linux-bv3p:~> su -
Password: linux-bv3p:~ #
Navigate to the directory in which you’ve stored the installer file:
linux-bv3p:/ # cd /tmp/player linux-bv3p:/tmp/player # ls VMware-Player-12.5.7-5813279.x86_64.bundle
Make the bundle script executable by entering the following command: linux-
bv3p:/tmp/player # chmod +x VMware-Player-12.5.7-5813279.x86_64.bundle Run the script in
order to start the installation:
linux-bv3p:/tmp/player # ./VMware-Player-12.5.7-5813279.x86_64.bundle The installer should
start. Accept the license agreement and click Next: 

Select whether you would like to check for Player updates on startup: Select
whether you would like to send anonymous data and system usage to VMware:

In the License key window, click Next unless you got a license key for VMware
Player Pro: 
Click Install to start the installation process:

After the installation is finished, you can log out of the root account. You do not
need to be root to run Player.
To start Player, simply run the vmplayer command in the shell.
VMware Workstation Player home screen When you start VMware
Workstation Player, you are presented with the home screen: 

The home screen consists of the following components:
1. Player menu - contains some common menus and options, such as the File
menu to create or open a virtual machine, options to power off or restart the VM,
run the VM in full screen, and other actions used to manage a virtual machine.
2. Action icons - the green power icon allows you to power on, restart, suspend
or power off the virtual machine. The second icon on the left sends Ctrl+Alt+Del
to the selected VM. The following icon enables you to connect to VMware
Horizon FLEX Server (Horizon FLEX Server allows users to run locally a
locked-down virtual machine). The forth icon activates the full screen mode, and
the last icon enables Unity Mode, which displays applications from virtual
machines directly on the host system desktop.
3. Library - contains the list of virtual machines created or opened in Player.
The list will be empty if you haven't created any virtual machine.
4. Working window - when the Home icon above the Library is selected, links

for some common actions in Player are displayed. When a VM listed in the
Library is selected, its information are displayed, along with the option to start or
edit the VM: 

Summary In this chapter you've learned what VMware Workstation Player is
and what it is used for. You've learned about the minimum and recommended
system requirements for Player installation. We went through the process of
downloading and installing Player on Windows and Linux and even started the
application for the first time.
In the next chapter you will learn how to create your first virtual machine and
install an operating system in it.
 

 
Chapter 2 - Creating virtual machines
IN THIS CHAPTER
Creating virtual machines in Player
Installing a guest operating system
Using Easy Install feature
VMware Tools overview and installation
 
In this chapter you will create your first virtual machine. I will show you how
you can use operating system images to install a guest operating system, either
manually or using the Player's Easy Install feature. We will finish this chapter by
learning what VMware Tools is and how to install this free set of drivers to
enhance the performance of the virtual machine’s guest operating systems.

What is a virtual machine?
A virtual machine can be defined as a software computer that, just like a
physical computer, runs an operating system and executes programs. A virtual
machine contains its own virtual hardware, such as the virtual CPU, memory,
hard disk, and network interface cards, which provide the same functionality as
the physical hardware to the operating systems and applications.
A virtual machine uses the physical resources of the physical host on which it
runs. It interacts with installed hardware through a software component called
the hypervisor. The hypervisor provides the physical hardware resources
dynamically as needed and allows virtual machines to operate with a degree of
independence from the underlying physical hardware. Two types of hypervisors
exist:
type 1 - runs directly on the host's hardware to control the hardware and
manage guest operating systems.
type 2 - runs on a conventional operating system, just like any other
computer program.
VMware Workstation Player is an example of a type 2 hypervisor, which means
that it is installed inside an existing operating system (such as Microsoft
Windows or one of the numerous Linux distributions).
Consider the following example:
In the picture you can see that I have installed Player on Windows and I am

running a Linux distribution (openSUSE) as a guest operating system in Player.
Since VMware Workstation Player is a type 2 hypervisor, it needs to be installed
inside an operating system - Windows 10 in my case.
What is a guest operating system?
A virtual machine has an operating system (called the guest operating system)
that you install and manage in much the same way like you would do with an
operating system on a physical machine. The guest operating system installation
is carried out using a CD-ROM, DVD, or an ISO image that contains the
operating system installation files.
NOTE
A guest operating system can be different from the host operating system (for
example, you can run a Linux distribution such as openSUSE in Player installed
on a Windows 10 machine, as shown in the previous example).
Many guest operating systems are supported by Player, such as Windows XP,
Windows 7, Windows 8, Windows 10, Windows Server 2008, Windows Server
2012, Solaris, Debian, CentOS, SUSE, FreeBSD, Red Hat, etc. For the most
recent list of the supported guest operating systems, check out the VMware
Compatibility Guide on the following link:
https://www.vmware.com/resources/compatibility/search.php?
deviceCategory=software Workstation Player is not listed, but the information
for Workstation Pro is applicable to Workstation Player: 

Just like with the operating system installation on a physical computer, you need
to have an installer disc or an ISO image file of the operating system you would
like to install. An ISO file (also called an ISO image) is a single file that
replicates the contents of an optical disc. ISO files are used to distribute large
programs over the Internet, including operating systems such as Microsoft
Windows and Linux. For example, on the link below you can download an ISO
version of Damn Small Linux and use it to install this Linux distribution in
Player: ftp://distro.ibiblio.org/pub/linux/distributions/damnsmall/current/
Create a virtual machine Let's create our first virtual machine. To do this,
we need to use the New Virtual Machine wizard. To start the wizard, select
Player > File > New Virtual Machine: 

Next, select the source from which the guest operating system will be installed.
Three options are available:
Installer disc - install the guest OS from an optical drive.
Installer disc image file (iso) - use an ISO image file for the guest OS
installation.
I will install the operating system later - this option creates a new virtual
machine with a blank hard disk. You will need to install the guest
operating system manually after the virtual machine creation. I will select
this option and install the OS later:
 

Next, select the guest operating system that your VM will be running. If the
operating system is not listed, choose the Other option. Since I will be installing
a Linux distribution, I will select Linux under Guest operating system: 
Type the name of the virtual machine and choose the folder on the host system
where the virtual machine files will be stored. This is simply a folder on your
(physical) computer - in my case the location is C:\VMs: 

Next, select the virtual disk size. You can choose to split the virtual disk into
multiple files, which makes it easier to move the virtual machine to another
computer. Note that the disk space is not preallocated for the disk and the actual
files that the virtual disk uses start small and expand to their maximum size as
needed: 
Click Finish to create the virtual machine:

Since we've chosen an option to install the operating system later, the VM has a
blank hard disk and we need install an operating system on it. So let’s do than
now.
Manually install a guest operating system Since we didn’t use the New
Virtual Machine wizard to install the guest operating system in a virtual
machine, we need to do it manually. The guest OS installation in a virtual
machine is similar to installing an operating system on a physical machine. It can
be done in three ways:
install the guest OS from an installer disk.
install the guest OS from an ISO image.
use a PXE server to install the guest OS over the network.
In this section I will describe how you can install the guest operating system
using an ISO file. I will use the ISO file containing the image of Damn Small
Linux operating system. If you would like to follow along, you can get the ISO
file here (download the dsl-VERSION-initrd.iso file):
ftp://distro.ibiblio.org/pub/linux/distributions/damnsmall/current/
1. Select the virtual machine in Player and go to Player > Manage > Virtual
Machine Settings:

2. Under the Hardware tab, select CD/DVD drive. Check the Connect at power
on checkbox.
Select Use ISO image file and browse to the location of the ISO file: 
3. Next, power on the virtual machine:

4. The virtual machine boots from the ISO image, which contains the installation
for your guest operating system. You can now install the guest OS just like you
would do it on a physical machine: 
Easy Install feature in VMware Workstation Player Workstation

Player includes a feature called Easy Install for automating the guest operating
system installation. When the New Virtual Machine wizard detects an operating
system that supports this feature, it prompts you for information about the guest
operating system, such as the product key, username, and password. After the
virtual machine is created, the guest operating system installation will be
automated and should finish without your intervention.
NOTE
After the guest OS is installed, Easy Install will also install VMware Tools.
Here is how you can install the guest OS using Easy Install:
1. Create a new virtual machine in Player by using the New Virtual Machine
wizard. To start the wizard, go to Player > File > New Virtual Machine.
2. Select the Installer disc image file (iso) option and browse to the location of
the ISO file. Note that VMware Workstation Player has recognized the OS
version (Windows 8.1, 64-bit version) and that Easy Install will be used for the
guest OS installation: 
NOTE
ISO files containing Windows 8.1 installation can be downloaded here:
https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/software-download/windows8. You will need to
provide a valid Windows product key .
3. Provide the Easy Install information for the guest operating system (you can
enter the Windows product key later): 

4. Type the virtual machine name and choose the the folder on the host system
where the VM will be stored: 
5. Select the virtual disk size. You can split the virtual disk into multiple files,
which makes it easier to move the virtual machine to another computer: 

6. Click Finish to create the VM:
7. The guest operating system installation should begin when the virtual machine
is powered on. The installation is automated and should finish without your
intervention. Easy Install will also install VMware Tools: 

VMware Tools overview VMware Tools is a free set of drivers and utilities
that enhances the performance of the virtual machine’s guest operating systems
and improves management of virtual machines in VMware Workstation Player.
Although VMware Tools is not installed by default and is not required for the
guest OS to run, VMware strongly recommends installing it in all of your virtual
machines because of the following benefits:
enhanced and faster graphics.
improved mouse performance.
time synchronization with the host operating system.
the ability to shut down or restart a virtual machine.
the ability to copy and paste between the guest OS and the host OS.
VMware Tools is available for a number of guest operating systems, such as
Windows, Linux, Solaris, FreeBSD, and NetWare. The installers for VMware
Tools are ISO files. The most recent versions of the ISO image files are stored
on the VMware official website. When you start a VMware Tools installation,
Player downloads the file and the installation is started. The virtual machine’s
first virtual CD-ROM drive temporarily connects to the VMware Tools ISO file
for the guest OS.
NOTE

The Windows or Linux Easy Install feature will install VMware Tools as soon
as the operating system is finished installing and the virtual machine is powered
on.
Install VMware Tools in Windows VMware strongly recommends
installing VMware Tools in a virtual machine running Windows OS. If you
didn’t use the Easy Install option for Windows installation, you can install
VMware Tools manually. Here are the steps: 1. If the virtual machine is turned
off, power it on. The guest OS must be running in order to install VMware
Tools.
2. Configure the virtual CD/DVD drive to autodetect a physical drive. This
enables the virtual machine’s first virtual CD/DVD drive to detect and connect to
the VMware Tools ISO file. To do this, go to Player > Manage > Virtual
Machine Settings.
Under Hardware, go to CD/DVD and select the Use physical drive option on
the right. Make sure that the Auto detect option is selected: 
3. Log in to the guest OS as the administrator.
4. From the Player menu bar, select Player > Manage > Install VMware Tools to
start the VMware Tools installation: 

5. Click Download and Install in the Software Updates window that opens: 
6. After the download finishes, the AutoPlay window should open. Click on Run
setup64.exe to start the VMware Tools installation. If you didn’t get the
AutoPlay window, go to D:\setup.exe, where D: is the virtual CD-ROM drive,
and run the setup from there.
7. Click Next in the Welcome to the installation wizard window:

8. Select the installation type and click Next. The Typical installation option will
suffice for most situations. The Complete installation option installs all VMware
Tools features, while the Custom installation option lets you decide which
features to install: 9. Click Install to start the installation process:

10. When prompted, restart the VM's guest OS:
Install VMware Tools in Linux VMware Tools is automatically installed
when the Easy Install option is used for Linux installation, but if you didn’t use
this option, you will need to install VMware Tools manually. Installation of
VMware Tools in Linux is done through the shell.
Here are the steps for installing VMware Tools in Ubuntu, a popular Linux
distribution: 1. If the virtual machine is turned off, power it on. The guest
operating system must be running in order to install VMware Tools.
2. Configure the virtual CD/DVD drive to autodetect a physical drive: 

3. Log in into the guest OS as the user that has root privileges and open up the
shell.
4. The VMware Tools installer is written in Perl, so Perl has to be installed in the
guest operating system. Verify that Perl is indeed installed by entering the perl -v
command, which should return the Perl version:
bob@ubuntu:~$ perl -v This is perl 5, version 22, subversion 1 (v5.22.1) built for x86_64-linux-gnu-thread-
multi (with 58 registered patches, see perl -V for more detail) Copyright 1987-2015, Larry Wall Perl may
be copied only under the terms of either the Artistic License or the GNU General Public License, which
may be found in the Perl 5 source kit.
Complete documentation for Perl, including FAQ lists, should be found on this system using "man perl" or
"perldoc perl". If you have access to the Internet, point your browser at http://www.perl.org/, the Perl Home
Page.
If Perl is not installed, install it using the packet manager of your Linux
distribution. In Ubuntu, this can be done by using the following command:
bob@ubuntu:~$ sudo apt-get install perl 5. From the Player menu bar, select Player >
Manage > Install VMware Tools to start the VMware Tools installation.
6. Click Download and Install in the Software Updates window:

7. The VMware Tools virtual CD-ROM image should be mounted after the
download finishes.
8. Find out the mount directory location by running the mount command:
bob@ubuntu:~$ mount sysfs on /sys type sysfs (rw,nosuid,nodev,noexec,relatime) proc on /proc type proc
(rw,nosuid,nodev,noexec,relatime) ...
output shortened for clarity ...
fusectl on /sys/fs/fuse/connections type fusectl (rw,relatime) /dev/sr0 on /media/bob/VMware Tools type
iso9660
(ro,nosuid,nodev,relatime,uid=1000,gid=1000,iocharset=utf8,mode=0400,dmode=0500,uhelper=udisks2)
In my case, the directory has been mounted at /media/bob/VMware Tools.
List the content of the mount directory using the ls -l command:
bob@ubuntu:~$ ls -l /media/bob/VMware\ Tools/
total 56377
-r-xr-xr-x 1 bob bob 1975 Mar 17 07:10 manifest.txt -r-xr-xr-x 1 bob bob 2287 Mar 17 07:07
run_upgrader.sh -r--r--r-- 1 bob bob 56072885 Mar 17 07:11 VMwareTools-10.1.6-5214329.tar.gz -r-xr-xr-
x 1 bob bob 802620 Mar 17 07:08 vmware-tools-upgrader-32
-r-xr-xr-x 1 bob bob 848816 Mar 17 07:08 vmware-tools-upgrader-64
9. Create the tmp directory and enter it:
bob@ubuntu:~$ mkdir /tmp/vmtools bob@ubuntu:~$
bob@ubuntu:~$ cd /tmp/vmtools
10. Uncompress the installer using the following command:
tar zxpf /PATH/VMWARE_TOOLS_VERSION
In my case, the command looks like this:
bob@ubuntu:/tmp/vmtools$ sudo tar zxpf /media/bob/VMware\ Tools/VMwareTools-10.1.6-5214329.tar.gz
[sudo] password for bob:
11. Enter the vmware-tools-distrib directory and run the Perl installer:
bob@ubuntu:/tmp/vmtools/vmware-tools-distrib$ sudo ./vmware-install.pl 12. The installer will
ask you a series of questions. In most cases, it is recommended to keep the
default values by simply pressing Enter.
13. Once the installation finish, reboot the virtual machine in order for the

installation of VMware Tools to take full effect.
Summary In this chapter you've learned how to create your own virtual
machine and install a guest operating system in it. I've showed you how to use
the Easy Install feature to automatically install a guest OS. We've then discussed
VMware Tools and how to install this set of drivers to a VM running Windows
or Linux.
In the next chapter we will various features Player offers - Suspend, Drag-and-
Drop, Copy and Paste, and Shared Folders, I will also explain how to use Unity
Mode to display applications from virtual machines directly on the host system
desktop.
 

 
Chapter 3 - Using virtual machines
IN THIS CHAPTER
Starting and stopping virtual machines
Working with the Drag-and-Drop and Copy/Paste features Transferring
files using shared folders
Using Unity mode
Connecting USB devices to a VM
 
This is the chapter in which we are going to do some real work with our virtual
machines. I will show you a couple of cool features that Player has to offer, such
as copying files between your host system and a virtual machine using drag-and-
drop, using shared folders to share files between virtual machines and the host
system, and how to use Unity Mode to display applications from virtual
machines directly on the host system desktop.

Start a virtual machine The library on the left site of the VMware
Workstation Player window is populated with virtual machines you’ve created.
To start a virtual machine, simply select a virtual machine from the library and
click Play virtual machine: 
If the virtual machine you’ve created is not listed in the library, select Player >
File > Open. Browse to the virtual machine configuration (.vmx) file, and click
Open: Once you start a VM, click inside the virtual machine console to give the
virtual machine control of the mouse and keyboard of the host system. To release
the input from the virtual machine and return the control to the host system, use
the Ctrl+Alt hotkey. To send the Ctrl-Alt-Delete keystroke combination to a
virtual machine, select Player > Send Ctrl+Alt+Del: 

Suspend a virtual machine You can save the current state of a virtual
machine by suspending it. The suspend feature is useful when you want to save
the current state of the virtual machine, and resume your work later from the
same state. All documents and applications you were working on will be in the
same state as they were at the time you suspended the virtual machine.
To suspend a virtual machine, choose Player > Power > Suspend Guest: 
In the warning window that opens, choose Yes:

You can now exit Player and even turn off your computer. The state of a
suspended virtual machine is stored in a file with a .vmss extension. When the
virtual machine is resumed, its state is restored from this file.
To resume a suspended virtual machine, select the suspended virtual machine
from the library and click Play virtual machine: 
The resumed VM will be in the same state as before the suspend operation: 

NOTE
The speed of the suspend and resume operations depends on how much data
changed after you started the virtual machine. The first suspend operation
usually takes a bit longer than the subsequent suspend operations do.
Drag-and-Drop feature The Drag-and-Drop feature in VMware
Workstation Player enables you to easily move files between the host system and
virtual machines. You can move files, directories, email attachments, plain or
formatted text, and images using a simple drag-and-drop operation.
The Drag-and-drop feature has the following requirements:
VMware Tools must be installed.
Linux hosts and guests must run X-Windows. Solaris 10 guests must run
run an Xorg server and JDS/Gnome.
images can be dragged only between applications on Windows hosts and
applications on Windows guests. Linux hosts or guests don’t support
image dragging.
you can only drag email attachments smaller than 4MB.
you can only drag text smaller than 4MB.
you can drag Unicode text only.
When you drag a file between the host and a virtual machine, VMware
Workstation Player copies the file to the location where you drop it. In the
example below I’ve dragged a text file called important.txt to from Windows 10

(the host system) to a virtual machine running Windows 8.1 (the guest OS): 
NOTE
The file that was dragged will not be deleted from the original location. Any
changes made to the copied file will not be reflected to the original file.
Copy and Paste feature You can cut, copy, and paste text, images, email
attachments and other types of files between applications running on the host
system and applications running in a virtual machine.
The Copy and Paste feature has the following requirements:
VMware Tools must be installed in a virtual machine.
this feature works only with Linux and Windows host systems and Linux,
Windows, and Solaris 10 guests.
Linux hosts and guests must run X-Windows. Solaris 10 guests must run
run an Xorg server and JDS/Gnome.
you can only copy email attachments smaller than 4MB.
you can only copy Unicode text smaller than 4MB.
You can use the usual hot keys or menu choices to cut, copy and paste. For
example, here is how I can copy a file from the host system and paste it into the
guest OS: 1. First, I will copy a file from the desktop of the host operating

system: 
 
2. Next, I can paste this file on the desktop of the guest operating system: 

3. The file has been copied to the guest OS:
NOTE
The same procedure can be used to copy text from the host OS to the guest OS
and vice versa - simply copy the text from application in one operating system

and paste it into the appropriate application running in the other.
Shared folders overview Using shared folders, you can share files between
virtual machines and the host system. The shared directories can be on the host
system, or they can be network directories that are accessible from the host
computer. Shared folders can save you a lot of time, especially when you are
installing software that would otherwise take a long time to download - you can
download the software only once on the host system, and then use shared folders
to distribute the software to all the VMs in your environment.
To use shared folders, you must install VMware Tools in the guest operating
system, specify which directories are to be shared, and use one of the following
supported guest operating systems:
Windows Server 2003 R2
Windows Server 2008 R2
Windows Server 2012 R2
Windows Vista
Windows 7, Windows 8, Windows 10
Linux with a kernel version of 2.6 or later
Solaris x86 10
Enable a shared folder for a virtual machine You can enable shared
folders for a specific virtual machine. Here are the steps: 1. Choose the virtual
machine and select Player > Manage > Virtual Machine Settings.
2. Go to the Options tab and select the Shared Folders option: 

3. Under Folder sharing, choose a sharing option. Besides the Disabled option,
two other options are available:
Always enabled - keeps folder sharing enabled, even when the virtual
machine is shut down, suspended, or powered off. Use this option if you
want the files on the shared folder to be always accessible.
Enabled until next power off or suspend - enables folder sharing
temporarily, until the virtual machine is shut down, suspended, or powered
off. Note that if the guest operating system is restarted, shared folders will
remain enabled. This option is grayed out in the picture above because the
VM is currently not running.
4. (Optional) You can also map the drive to the Shared Folders directory that
contains all shared folders. To do that, select the Map as a network drive in
Windows guests option. This option is described in more detail in the next
section.
5. Click Add to add a share folder:

6. The Add Shared Folder Wizard opens. Click Next to Continue:
7. Type the path on the host system to the directory you want to share and
specify the name under which the folder will appear inside the virtual machine: 


8. Select the shared folder options:
Enable this share - enables the shared folder. Deselect this option when
you want to disable the shared folder without deleting it from the virtual
machine configuration.
Read-only - makes the shared folder read-only. The virtual machine users
can view and copy files from the shared folder, but they cannot add,
change, or remove files.
9. Click Finish to finish adding the shared folder.
Access a shared folder The way in which a shared folder can be accessed
from the VM depending on the guest operating system type and version. To view
a shared folder in a Windows guest OS, go to File Explorer > Network. You
should see a list of computer available on the network, including a computer
called vmware-host: 

Double click vmware-host and browse to the shared folder: 
You can also go directly to the shared folder by using its UNC path: 

In a Linux virtual machine, shared folders usually appear under the /mnt/hgfs
directory:
bob@ubuntu:~$ cd /mnt/hgfs/
bob@ubuntu:/mnt/hgfs$ ls Host OS shared folder
NOTE
Do not open a file stored in a shared folder in more than one application at once!
For example, do not open the same file in an application on the host operating
system and in another application in the guest operating system. If either of the
applications writes to the file, data might become corrupted.
Map the shared folder as a network drive In the last lesson, when we
enabled shared folders, there was an option Map as a network drive in
Windows guests under the Shared Folders menu. When enabled, this option
allows you to display the shared folder in File Explorer in Windows, so you don't
have to look for it or type its network address each time.
You can enable this option by going to Virtual Machine Settings > Options >
Shared Folders tab:

Once this option is enabled, you should see the shared folder mapped to a drive
letter in your Windows guest operating system: 
Connect or disconnect a USB device to a virtual machine You've
probably noticed that you can connect and disconnect USB devices to a virtual
machine in Player. If you plug an USB device into the host system while a
virtual machine is running and its window is the active window, the device
should connect to the virtual machine instead of the host system.

When an USB device connected to the host system does not connect to a virtual
machine at power on, you can manually connect it to the VM. Here are the steps:
1. Make sure that the virtual machine is powered on.
2. Select Player > Removable Devices. You should get a list of removable
devices. Select the removable device and click Connect (Disconnect from
host): 
3. The USB device should now appear in a guest OS:
4. To disconnect a removable device from the VM and connect it back to the
host system, repeat the process, but this time, select the Disconnect (Connect to
host) option: 

 
You can also connect or disconnect the device by right-clicking the device icon
on the virtual machine taskbar: 
Choose what happens when you connect USB devices By default,
when you plug a new USB device into your host system and the VM has focus,
the USB device will automatically connect to the VM, and not to the host
system. If you don't want this to happen and want to keep control of the USB
device in your host system, you can disable this autoconnect feature. Note that
this is a per-VM feature, so you have to change it for each VM individually.
Here are the steps:
1. Make sure that the virtual machine is powered off.
2. Select the virtual machine from the library in Player and select Player >
Manage > Virtual Machine Settings.
3. Select USB Controller under the Hardware tab and clear the checkbox next to

Automatically connect new USB devices: Connect USB HIDs to a
virtual machine

By default, USB HIDs (human interface devices), such as USB keyboards, mice,
or game controllers, do not appear in the Removable Devices menu in a virtual
machine, even though they are connected to the USB ports on the host system.
To connect these devices exclusively to a virtual machine, you must configure
the virtual machine to show all USB devices in the Removable Devices menu.
Here are the steps:
1. Make sure that the virtual machine is powered off.
2. Select the virtual machine from the library in Player and select Player >
Manage > Virtual Machine Settings.
3. On the Hardware tab, select USB Controller and check the Show all USB
input devices checkbox on the right: 

4. USB human interface devices should appear in the Removable Devices menu
after you power on the virtual machine: 
NOTE
An USB human interface device that is connected to a virtual machine is not
available to the host system.
Unity Mode Unity Mode enables you to display applications from a virtual
machine directly on the host system desktop. You can access the VM's Start and
Applications menus from the host system while the virtual machine console
view is hidden. Items for open virtual machine applications are displayed on the
host system taskbar in the same way as open host applications.

Unity Mode has the following requirements:
virtual machine must be powered on.
virtual machine must be a Player 3.x or later virtual machine.
VMware Tools must be installed.
the guest OS must be Linux or Windows 2000 or later.
Linux guests and hosts must have a recent version of Metacity or KDE
installed.
NOTE
When you save or open a file from an application in Unity Mode, the file system
you see is the file system inside the virtual machine. You cannot open or save a
file from the host operating system.
You can, however, copy and paste files between the host and the guest operating
system.
Enabling Unity Mode Here is how you can enable Unity Mode in VMware
Workstation Player: 1. Make sure that the virtual machine is powered on.
2. Select Player > Unity:
3. The Player window should be hidden and applications opened in a VM should
appear on the host system taskbar.
4. You can display the virtual machine Start menu on the host system by pointing

to the Start menu: 
5. If you run an application from the virtual machine Start menu on the host
system, the application will be displayed on the host system desktop: 
As you can see from the picture, I’ve run WordPad from the virtual machine
Start menu on the host system. You can see that the WordPad window appears on
the host system desktop, just like any other application.
NOTE
You can't open a file from the host operating system in the application in Unity

Mode. Also, you can't save from an application in Unity mode to the host
operating system - you can only save it on the guest OS filesystem.
6. To exit Unity Mode, display the Player window and click Exit Unity: 
 

Summary In this chapter we've gone through some of the features Player
offers - Suspend, Drag-and-Drop, and Copy and Paste. You've learned how to
transfer files between the host and guest operating systems using shared folders.
I've then explained how you can use Unity Mode to display applications from
virtual machines directly on the host system desktop.
In the next chapter you will learn how to change some basic properties of your
VM, such as its name, working directory, and the guest OS version. We will also
go through the process of allocating more RAM to a VM.
 

 
Chapter 4 - Managing virtual machines
IN THIS CHAPTER
Modifying VM properties
Adding more memory to a VM
Moving and deleting VMs
Viewing logs
 
In this chapter you will learn how to modify various properties of a virtual
machine, such as its name, the working directory, and memory allocated to it. I
will explain how you can move and run a virtual machine on another host system
and how you can use log files to get more information about what is going on
with your virtual machines.

Change the virtual machine name You can change the name under which
the virtual machine appear in Player. Here are the steps: 1. Select Player >
Manage > Virtual Machine Settings.
2. Go to the Options tab and select General. On the right side of you screen you
should see the Virtual machine name field. Enter the new virtual machine name
and click OK: 
3. The VM should appear under the new name in the library:
 

Note that changing the name of a virtual machine does not change the name of
the virtual machine directory or the names of the virtual machine files on the
host system. VM files retain the original name of the virtual machine: 
Change the guest operating system version The operating system
version is specified when you create the virtual machine. If you’ve specified the
wrong operating system version or you plan to upgrade the already installed
guest operating system, you should change the guest operating system version.
Here are the steps:

1. Power off the virtual machine.
2. Select the virtual machine from the library and select Player > Manage >
Virtual Machine Settings.
3. Go to the Options tab and select General. On the right side of you screen you
should see the Guest operating system and Version menus. Select the new
operating system or version and click OK:
NOTE
When you change the operating system version, the virtual machine
configuration file (.vmx) changes. Of course, the guest operating system itself
does not change. To change the guest operating system, you need to install the
new operating system in the virtual machine.
Change the working directory of a virtual machine The VM’s
working directory is where Player stores the suspended state (.vmss), snapshot
(.vmsn), virtual machine paging (.vmem), and redo log files for a virtual
machine. By default, this directory is the same as where the virtual machine files
are stored.
The working directory can be changed in order to improve system performance.
For example, you can create a paging file on a fast disk that has a lot of disk
space but leave the virtual disk and configuration file on a different disk.
Here are the steps to change the working directory of a virtual machine: 1.
Power off the virtual machine.
2. Select the VM from the library and go to Player > Manage > Virtual Machine

Settings.
3. Go to the Options tab and select General. Find the Working directory field: 
4. Click Browse and choose the new working directory for your VM.
NOTE
Changing the working directory does not change the directory where the virtual
machine configuration file ( .vmx) or the log files are stored.
Change the memory allocation You can adjust the amount of memory that
is allocated to a virtual machine in Player. The guest operating system memory
size should not be set lower than the minimum recommendations of the
operating system provider. For example, because Windows 10 64-bit require at
least 2 GB of RAM, you will need to allocate at least that amount of RAM to a
virtual machine if you plan on running that operating system.
Let’s say that my Windows 8.1 virtual machine is slow and I want to enhance its
performance by adding more memory to it. Right now my VM has only 1 GB of
RAM, so I need to add more memory to it: 

Here are the steps to adjust the amount of RAM a VM has:
1. Power off the VM.
2. Select the VM from the library and select Player > Manage > Virtual Machine
Settings.
3. On the Hardware tab, select Memory. On the right side of the screen you will
see the Memory panel with information that can help you select the appropriate
amount of memory for the virtual machine. The size must be a multiple of 4:

4. Power on the VM in order for the changes to take effect. My VM now shows

1.5 GB of RAM: 
NOTE
On 64-bit host systems, the maximum amount of memory for each VM is 64GB.
On 32-bit hosts, the maximum amount of memory for each VM is 8GB. There is
no limit in VMware Workstation Player on the total amount of memory that you
can assign to all virtual machines running on a single host system.
Move a virtual machine You can move a virtual machine to a different
location on the same host system or even to a different host system. Usually all
files needed to run a virtual machine are stored into a single folder and can be
moved quickly to another location. It is even possible to move a virtual machine
to the host system that is running a different operating system.
There are certain things you need to be aware of before moving a virtual
machine to a different host system:
the virtual machine might not work correctly on the new host if the new
host has significantly different hardware.
you can move a virtual machine from a 32-bit host to a 64-bit host, but
cannot move a virtual machine from a 64-bit host to a 32-bit host unless
the 32-bit host has a supported 64-bit processor.
when you move a virtual machine, Player generates a new MAC address
for the virtual network adapter(s).
Here are the steps to move a virtual machine created in Player to a different host
system: 1. Verify that all virtual machine files are stored in the same virtual
machine directory, since some files might reside outside of the virtual machine
directory. For example, if you configured the working directory to reside in a

different location, you will need to move files from the working directory into
the virtual machine directory and change the VM's working directory to this
location.
2. Power off the virtual machine that you would like to move.
3. Copy the virtual machine files to the new location. In my example I will copy
the virtual machine files from the C:\VMs\Ubuntu 16 directory on the host
system and move them to the E:\VMs\Ubuntu 16 directory on another host
system.
4. Open the virtual machine in VMware Workstation Player installed on the
computer that the virtual machine has been moved to by selecting File > Open
and browsing to the <VM-name>.vmx file in its new location: 

5. Power on the virtual machine on the new host to make sure it is working
correctly.
Configure a virtual machine for compatibility Sometimes, you might
want to create a virtual machine with the intention of distributing it to other
users. It is recommended to configure the virtual machine for maximum
compatibility with all expected host machines and systems.
Here is a list of recommendations that can help you configure virtual machines
for maximum compatibility:
install VMware Tools in the virtual machine.
determine which virtual devices are actually required. Do not include
virtual devices that are not needed for the software you are distributing
with the virtual machine.
if you want to connect a physical device to a virtual device, always use the
Auto detect option when configuring the virtual machine. This option
allows the virtual machine to adapt to the user’s system, whether the host
operating system is Windows or Linux.
if you want to connect a CD-ROM to an image file that you ship with the
virtual machine, make sure the image file is in the same directory as the
virtual machine and make sure that a relative path to access the image file
is being used (e.g. use images\windows8.iso instead of

C:\images\windows8.iso).
choose a reasonable amount of memory to allocate to the virtual machine.
If the user’s host machine doesn’t have enough physical memory to
support the memory allocation, the user might not be able to power on the
virtual machine.
choose a reasonable screen resolution for the guest operating system.
Universal Unique Identifier (UUID) Each virtual machine is
automatically assigned a universal unique identifier (UUID). The UUID is
generated when you initially power on the virtual machine and ensures that the
VM is properly identified. It is stored in the SMBIOS system information
descriptor and can be accessed using standard the SMBIOS scanning software,
such as SiSoftware Sandra, smbios2, or FirmwareTablesView.
The UUID will remain constant as long as the virtual machine is not moved or
copied to another location. If you move or copy the virtual machine to another
location, you will be prompted to specify whether you moved or copied the
virtual machine the first time you power it on. If you specify that the virtual
machine was copied, the virtual machine will receive a new UUID.
NOTE
Appendix D describes the process of finding the VM's UUID.
Configure a virtual machine to keep the same UUID
A virtual machine can be configured to always keep the same UUID, even when
it is moved or copied. When you configure a virtual machine to keep the same
UUID, you will not be prompted to specify whether you moved or copied the
virtual machine the first time you power it on. Here are the steps to do it: 1.
Power off the virtual machine.
2. Open the virtual machine configuration file (<VM-NAME>.vmx) in a text
editor of your choice and add the following property at the end of the file:
uuid.action = “keep”

Delete a virtual machine You can delete a virtual machine and its files from
the host file system. You do not need to manipulate files in the host file system
in order to delete a virtual machine; the whole process can be done through the
VMware Workstation Player interface. Note that this action is irreversible.
Here are the steps:
1. Power off the virtual machine.
2. Right-click the virtual machine in the library and select the Delete from Disk

option: 
3. Click Yes when prompted for the confirmation:
4. The virtual machine and all of its files should be deleted from the host file
system.
NOTE
To simply remove a VM from the library, right click the VM and select Remove
From the Library. This option will not delete any of the VM's files and you can
add the VM back later.
Log files You can view the Message Log of a virtual machine in VMware
Workstation Player. This log contains various warning information, such as
driver and display errors. Here are the steps: 1. Power on the virtual machine.
2. Go to Player > Manage > Message Log:


3. The Message Log window opens:
The Message Log displays only warning information about the virtual machine.
To view more information about the virtual machine, browse to the directory on
the host system where the virtual machine files are stored. You should see a file
called vmware.log:

This file contains information specific to a running instance of the virtual
machine, such as startup configuration, operations, and shutdown of the virtual
machine. You can open this file in a text editor of your choice to review it: 

NOTE
Player keeps up to six rotations of the vmware.log file: vmware.log, vmware-
0.log, vmware-1.log, etc.
Log in automatically to a Windows virtual machine Player includes a
neat feature called Autologin that enables to you log in automatically to a
Windows virtual machine. This feature can be particularly useful if you are using
a VM for testing purposes and need to restart the guest operating system
frequently.
The prerequisites for the Autologin feature are:
the guest operating system of the VM needs to be Windows 2000 or later.
the account you would like to use to log in automatically must be a local
user account.
VMware Tools needs to be installed.
Here are the steps to enable this feature:
1. Power on the VM.
2. Select the VM from the library and go to Player > Manage > Virtual Machine
Settings.
3. Under the Options tab, select Autologin and click Enable: 

4. Enter the user credentials:
5. Restart the virtual machine to test whether the user will automatically be
logged in.
NOTE
The user used for autologin needs to be a local user account. Domain users are
not supported.

Summary In this chapter you've learned how to change basic properties of a
virtual machine - its name, working directory location, and the amount of RAM
allocated to it. You've learned about UUID and how to configure a VM to always
keep the same UUID. We've then discussed how you can use log files to find out
more about your VM's operations and how to use the Autologin feature to log in
automatically to a Windows virtual machine.
In the next chapter we will start adding virtual devices to our VMs. We will also
talk a little bit about the virtual disks and how to manage them.
 

 
Chapter 5 - Working with devices and disks
IN THIS CHAPTER
Adding devices to virtual machines
Learning about virtual disks
Expanding, compacting, and defragmenting virtual disks Enabling the
Enhanced virtual keyboard feature
 
In this chapter I will show you how to add various devices to virtual machines,
such as virtual CD-ROMs, floppy drives, parallel and serial ports, and disks. You
will learn how you can compact and defragment virtual disks and how to add
more space to a disk when you need it. Lastly, I will explain the Enhanced
virtual keyboard feature that offers better handling of international keyboards
and keyboards with extra keys.

Add a CD-ROM drive It is possible to add one or more DVD or CD-ROM
drives to a virtual machine in Player. Drives can be connected to physical CD-
ROM drives or ISO images.
You can configure the virtual DVD or CD drive as either IDE or SCSI,
regardless of the type of the physical drive you will connect it to. For example, if
the host computer has an IDE DVD or CDROM drive, you can set up the virtual
machine’s drive as either SCSI or IDE and connect it to the host’s drive.
Here are the steps to add a DVD or CD-ROM drive to a virtual machine in
Player: 1. Select Player > Manage > Virtual Machine Settings.
2. On the Hardware tab, click Add:
3. The Add Hardware wizard opens. Select CD/DVD Drive as the hardware

type: 
4. Select whether you want to connect the drive to a physical drive or an ISO
image file: 
5a. If you’ve selected the Use physical drive option in the previous step, you
will need to select a specific drive, or select the Auto detect option to allow
Player to auto-detect the drive to use. To connect the drive to the virtual machine
when the virtual machine is powered on, check the Connect at power on option:

5b. If you’ve selected the Use ISO image option in the previous step, you will
need browse to the location of the ISO image file. This option is usually used
when installing an operating system in a virtual machine: 
6. Click Finish to add the drive to the virtual machine.
The drive should appear in the guest operating system:

NOTE
You cannot play DVD movies in a VM, unless you install a DVD player
application that does not require video overlay support in the video card.
Configure Legacy Emulation Mode In some cases, the physical DVD or
CD drive you've added to your VM may not work correctly when the guest
operating system is communicating directly with the drive. Also, certain drives
and their drivers do not work correctly in raw mode. However, there is an option
you can use to work around these problems - Legacy Emulation Mode.
The legacy emulation mode for a DVD or CD drive connected to your virtual
machine helps avoid direct communication problems between a guest operating
system and a DVD/CDROM drive. When this mode is turned on, you can read
from data discs in the DVD/CD drive, but some other functions are not available
(e.g. recording CDs, reading multisession CDs, and performing digital audio
extraction).
Here is how you can configure Legacy Emulation Mode if you've encountered
problems using your DVD-ROM or CD-ROM drive in a virtual machine: 1.
Power off the virtual machine.
2. Select Player > Manage > Virtual Machine Settings.
3. Select the CD/DVD drive and click Advanced:

4. Check the Legacy emulation checkbox and click OK: 
NOTE
If you run more than one virtual machine with their CD-ROM drives in Legacy
Emulation Mode at the same time, you must start the virtual machines with their
CD-ROM drives disconnected. This prevents multiple virtual machines from
being connected to the CD-ROM drive at the same time.
Add a floppy drive It is possible to add up to two floppy drives to a virtual
machine in Player. A virtual floppy drive can be configured to connect to a
physical floppy drive, an existing floppy image file, or a blank floppy image file.

Here is how you can add a floppy drive to a virtual machine:
1. Power off the virtual machine. A floppy drive can’t be added while the VM is
powered on.
2. Select the virtual machine from the Library and go to Player > Manage >
Virtual Machine Settings.
3. On the Hardware tab, click Add.
4. The Add Hardware wizard opens. Select Floppy Drive as the hardware type: 
5. Select the floppy media type. Three options are available:
Use a physical floppy drive - the virtual machine uses a physical floppy
drive on the host computer.
Use a floppy image - the drive connects to an existing floppy image file
(.flp).
Create a blank floppy image - the drive connects to a blank floppy image
file (.flp).

5a. If you’ve selected the Use a physical floppy drive option in the previous
step, you need to select the specific floppy drive or select the Auto detect option
to allow Player to auto-detect the drive to use. To connect the drive to the virtual
machine when the virtual machine is powered on, check the Connect at power
on option: 
5b. If you’ve selected the Use a floppy image or Create a blank floppy image
option in the previous step, you will need browse to the location of the floppy
image file on the host system (or specify where the blank image will be stored,
in case you’ve selected the latter option): 

6. Click Finish to add the drive to the virtual machine.
The drive should appear in the guest operating system after you power on the
VM: 
Configure a USB Controller In order to use USB devices, a virtual
machine must have a USB controller configured. The USB
controller in VMware Workstation Player supports the following USB device
types:
USB 1.1 UHCI (Universal Host Controller Interface) - supported for all
virtual machine hardware versions.
USB 2.0 EHCI (Enhanced Host Controller Interface) - supported if the

virtual machine hardware is compatible with Workstation 6 and later
virtual machines.
USB 3.0 xHCI (Extensible Host Controller Interface) - available for
Linux guests running a kernel version 2.6.35 or later and for Windows 8
guests or later. The virtual machine hardware must be compatible with
Workstation 8 or later virtual machines. All USB device types are
supported, including USB 1.1, 2.0, and 3.0 devices.
In order to use USB devices inside a virtual machine, the host operating system
must support USB. You do not need to install device drivers for USB devices in
the host operating system to use those devices in the virtual machine.
NOTE
USB human interface devices (such as the keyboard and mouse) do not appear
in the Removable Devices menu and are not available to connect to the virtual
machine by default. To connect such devices to the virtual machine, you need to
enable the Show all USB input devices option, as explained in the Connect
USB HIDs to a virtual machine lesson in one of the previous sections.
Add a USB controller A virtual machine must have a USB controller in
order to use USB devices and smart card readers. A USB controller is added by
default when a virtual machine is created. You can't add more than one USB
controller per VM.
If you remove a USB controller that was added by default, you can add it back
later. Here are the steps: 1. Power off the virtual machine.
2. Select the virtual machine from the library and go to Player > Manage >
Virtual Machine Settings.
3. On the Hardware tab, click Add.
4. The Add Hardware wizard opens. Select USB Controller as the hardware

type: 
5. You need to configure the following options:
USB compatibility - the USB version (1.1, 2.0, or 3.0).
Automatically connect new USB devices to this virtual machine when
it has focus - when enabled, new USB devices will be connected to the
virtual machine when the virtual machine window has focus. If this option
is disabled, new USB devices will be connected only to the host system,
even when the focus is in the VM.
Show all USB input devices - by default, USB human interface devices
(HIDs), such as the keyboard and mouse, do not appear in the Removable
Devices menu and are not available to connect to the virtual machine. To
connect such devices to the virtual machine, this options needs to be
checked.
Share Bluetooth devices with the virtual machine - enables support for
Bluetooth devices.

6. Click Finish to finish adding the USB controller.
Enable isochronous USB devices Isochronous USB devices, such as
modems, speakers and webcams, require timing coordination in order to work
correctly. You need to enable support for isochronous USB devices to be able to
use them in a virtual machine in VMware Workstation Player. Note that the
guest operating system must support USB 2.0 and USB 3.0 in order to use this
feature.
Here are the steps to enable support for isochronous USB devices in VMware
Workstation Player: 1. Select the virtual machine from the library and go to
Player > Manage > Virtual Machine Settings.
2. Select USB Controller on the Hardware tab. Selecting USB 2.0 or 3.0 enables
support for isochronous USB devices, so from the USB compatibility list, select
one of the following options:
USB 2.0 - available if the virtual machine hardware is compatible with
Workstation 6 or later virtual machines.
USB 3.0 - available for Linux guests running a kernel version 2.6.35 or
later and for Windows 8 or later guests. The virtual machine hardware
must be compatible with Workstation 8 or later virtual machines.

What is a virtual disk?
A virtual disk is a file (or a set of files) stored on the host system that appears as
a physical disk drive to the guest operating system. Virtual hard disk files store
information such as the operating system, program files, and data files. They
have a .vmdk extension.
The New Virtual Machine wizard creates a virtual machine with a single disk
drive. You can add more disk drives to a virtual machine, remove disk drives
from a virtual machine, and change the existing disk drives’ settings. By default,
the actual files that the virtual hard disk uses start small and grow to their
maximum size as needed, but they can also be configured so that all of the disk
space is allocated when the virtual disk is created.
A key advantage of virtual hard disks is their portability. Because they are stored
as files on the host filesystem, you can move them easily to a new location on
the same computer or to a different computer.
In the picture below you can see virtual disk files of my Windows 8.1 virtual
machine on the host filesystem: 

Virtual hard disks overview Virtual hard disk files store information such
as the operating system, program files, and actual data. They are named <VM-
NAME>.vmdk (for example, Windows 8.1 VM.vmdk for the virtual machine
named Windows 8.1 VM). Virtual hard disks can be configured as either IDE or
SATA disks for the guest operating system. If the guest operating system has a
driver for the LSI Logic or BusLogic SCSI adapter, a virtual disk can also be
configured as a SCSI disk.
The files that make up virtual hard disks can be stored on IDE, SATA, or SCSI
hard disks, or any other type of fast-access storage media. The size of virtual
disks can be up to 8TB. Each virtual hard disk can be stored in one or more files,
depending on the size of the virtual hard disk and the host operating system.
You can also configure a virtual hard disk to use a set of files limited to 2GB per
file, which can be useful if you plan to move the virtual hard disk to an older file
system that does not support files larger than 2GB.
Add a new virtual hard disk You can add up to 4 IDE devices, up to 60
SCSI devices, and up to 120 SATA devices to a virtual machine in VMware
Workstation Player. Here is how you can add a new virtual hard disk to your
virtual machine: 1. Select the virtual machine from the library and go to Player >
Manage > Virtual Machine Settings.
2. Click Add on the Hardware tab.
3. The New Hardware wizard opens. Select Hard Disk as the hardware type: 

4. Select the disk type. Three options are available:
IDE - creates an IDE disk. You can add up to four IDE devices to a virtual
machine.
SCSI - creates a SCSI disk. You can add up to 60 SCSI devices to a virtual
machine. It is recommended that you use this option.
SATA - create a SATA disk. You can add up to 120 SATA devices: four
controllers and 30 devices per controller.
5. Select the Create a new virtual disk option: 

6. Set the virtual disk size and choose how to allocate the disk space. You can
choose between the following options:
Allocate all disk space now - this option enhances performance, but
requires all of the physical disk space to be available immediately. Use this
option if you will frequently transfer large amounts of data to the guest
virtual machine.
Store virtual disk as a single file - select this option if the virtual disk
will be stored on a file system that doesn’t have a file size limitation.
Split virtual disk into multiple files - select this option if the virtual disk
will be stored on a file system that has a file size limitation and does not
support files larger than 2 GB (such as older version of FAT or ext file
systems):

7. Select the filename and location and click Finish to add the new virtual hard
disk: 
The guest operating system should see the new virtual hard disk as a new blank
disk. You will need to format the disk before using it, just like you would do if

you’ve added a physical disk: 
Add an existing virtual hard disk You can add an existing virtual hard
disk to a virtual machine in Player. Here are the steps: 1. Select the virtual
machine from the library and go to Player > Manage > Virtual Machine Settings.
2. Click Add on the Hardware tab.
3. The New Hardware wizard opens. Select Hard Disk as the hardware type.

4. Select the disk type:
5. Select the Use an existing virtual disk option: 
6. Browse to the disk file and click Finish:

7. If the disk is formatted in the way the guest OS understands it, the disk should
be mounted automatically and you should be able to access its contents
immediately: 
Virtual machine files Each VM consists of several types of files that are
stored on the host operating system. Here is a list and a brief description of the
files that make up a virtual machine:
Configuration file (<VM name>.vmx) - the primary configuration file
that stores the settings of a virtual machine.
BIOS file (<VM name>.nvram) - a file that contains the virtual
machine’s BIOS.
Log files (vmware.log or <VM name>.log) - a virtual machine log file.
Paging file (<VM name>.vmem) - the virtual machine paging file.
Disk file (<VM name>.vmdk) - the virtual disk file that stores the

contents of the virtual machine hard disk.
Snapshot data file (<VM name>.vmsd) - a file that stores information
and metadata about
snapshots (note that snapshots are supported by VMware Workstation
Pro).
Snapshot state file (<VM name>.vmsn) - a file that stores the running
state of a virtual machine at the time you take the snapshot.
Suspend state file (<VM name>.vmss) - a file that stores the state of a
suspended virtual machine.
Here is a list of files that make up my Ubuntu 16 virtual machine:
Some of the files that make up a virtual machine can be opened and edited in a
text editor. For example, here is the Ubuntu 16.vmx file opened in Notepad: 

Compact a virtual hard disk You can compact a virtual hard disk in order
to reclaim unused space. If a disk has empty space, this process reduces the
amount of space the virtual hard disk occupies on the host system drive.
The prerequisites:
the virtual disk should not be mapped or mounted.
disk space must not be preallocated for the virtual hard disk.
Here is how you would compact a virtual hard disk:
1. Power off the virtual machine.
2. Select the virtual machine from the library and go to Player > Manage >
Virtual Machine Settings.
3. On the Hardware tab, select the virtual hard disk you would like to compact

and click Compact: 

4. The compact process should start:
4. The process lasts for a couple of minutes, depending on the size of the disk
and the speed of your computer. When the process completes, click OK.
5. Note that in my case the disk size was reduced by almost 2 GB (from 10.4 GB
to 8.6 GB): 
Expand a virtual hard disk You can expand a virtual hard disk in order to
get more storage space. After you expand a virtual disk, you need to use a disk
management software in order to increase the size of an existing partition on the
virtual hard disk to match the expanded size. The software you will use depends
on the type of the guest operating system installed in the virtual machine. For
Windows guests, you can use a built-in utility called Disk Management. For
Linux guests, use tools such as fdisk or parted.
The prerequisites:

the virtual disk must not be mapped or mounted.
the virtual machine should not have snapshots.
the virtual machine should not be a linked clone or the parent of a linked
clone.
 
Let’s say that I want to expand a disk in my Windows 8.1 VM. Right now, the
disk has 60 GB of allocated space: 
Here are the steps to expand a virtual hard disk:
1. Power off the virtual machine.
2. Select the virtual machine from the library and go to Player > Manage >
Virtual Machine Settings.
3. Select the virtual hard disk to expand and click Expand: 

4. Set the new maximum size for the virtual hard disk. The size can be between
0.001GB and 2TB.
5. Click OK when the expand process completes.
6. Now, power on the VM. You will need to use a disk management utility in the
guest operating system in order to increase the disk partition size to match the
expanded virtual disk size. Since I’m using Windows, I will need to enter the
Disk Management utility and prepare the disk for usage there: 

Defragment a virtual hard disk Just like physical disk drives, virtual hard
disks can become fragmented. You use the Player's defragmentation tool to
defragment a virtual hard disk. Defragmentation rearranges files, programs, and
unused space on the virtual hard disk in order to improve the disk's performance.
Here are the prerequisites:
the virtual disk must not be mapped or mounted.
adequate free working space must be available on the host system. There
must be free space equal to the size of the virtual disk file.
Here is how you can defragment a virtual hard disk:
1. Power off the virtual machine.
2. Select the virtual machine from the library and go to Player > Manage >
Virtual Machine Settings.
3. Select the virtual hard disk you would like to defragment and click

Defragment: 
4. Click OK when the process is completed.
Remove a virtual hard disk Removing a virtual hard disk disconnects it
from a virtual machine in Player. Virtual disk files are not removed from the host
system. After a virtual hard disk has been removed from a virtual machine, it can
be mapped or mounted to the host system or added to another virtual machine, as
explained in the lesson Add an existing virtual hard disks.
Here is how you would remove a virtual hard disk:
1. Select the virtual machine from the library and go to Player > Manage >
Virtual Machine Settings.
2. Select the virtual hard disk you would like to remove and click Remove: 


The disk should be removed from the VM. As mentioned, removing the disk
doesn’t delete the virtual disk files from the host system: 
Add a virtual parallel port A virtual machine in VMware Workstation
Player can use up to three bidirectional parallel (LPT) ports. Virtual parallel
ports can be configured to send output to parallel ports or to files on the host
system.
NOTE
Although rarely used today, parallel ports can still be found on some older
printers or scanners. Most modern computers do not even provide a parallel port
anymore.
Here is how you can add a virtual parallel port to a virtual machine: 1. Power off
the virtual machine.
2. Select the virtual machine from the library and go to Player > Manage >
Virtual Machine Settings.
3. Click Add on the Hardware tab.
4. Select Parallel port as the hardware type:

5. Select where the virtual parallel port will send output. Two options are
available:
Use physical parallel port on the host - send output to the parallel port
on the host system.
Output to file - send output from the virtual parallel port to a file on the
host system.
5a. If you’ve selected the Use physical parallel port on the host option in the
previous step, you need to select the physical parallel port or select the Auto

detect option to allow Player to autodetect the port to use. To connect the virtual
parallel port to the virtual machine when the virtual machine is powered on,
check the Connect at power on option: 
5b. If you’ve selected the Output to file option, you will need to select the
output file: 
6. Click Finish to finish adding the virtual parallel port.
Add a virtual serial port To make devices such as modems and printers
accessible to the virtual machine, you must add a virtual serial port. A virtual

machine in VMware Workstation Player can use up to four serial (COM) ports.
They can be configured to send output to physical serial ports, files, or named
pipes.
Here is how you can add a virtual serial port to a virtual machine: 1. Power off
the virtual machine.
2. Select the virtual machine from the library and go to Player > Manage >
Virtual Machine Settings.
3. Click Add on the Hardware tab.
4. Select Serial port as the hardware type:
5. Select where the virtual serial port will send output. Three options are
available:
Use physical serial port on the host - send output to a physical serial port
on the host system. Of course, your host needs to be equipped with such
port.
Output to file - send output to a file on the host system.
Output to named pipe - set up a direct connection between two virtual
machines, or between a virtual machine and an application on the host
system.

5a. If you’ve selected the Use physical serial port on the host option in the
previous step, you will need to select the physical serial port or select the Auto
detect option to allow Player to auto-detect the port to use. To connect the
virtual serial port to the virtual machine when the virtual machine is powered on,
check the Connect at power on option: 
5b. If you’ve selected the Output to file option, you will need to select the

output file: 
5c. If you’ve selected the Output to named pipe option, you will need to
configure the named pipe. The configuration depends on the operating system
version.
6. Click Finish to add the virtual serial port.
Add a generic SCSI device The guest operating system can have direct
access to SCSI devices connected to the host system, such as scanners or tape
drives. A virtual machine can use the generic SCSI driver to run any SCSI
device supported by the guest operating system.
You must add a generic SCSI device to the virtual machine to map virtual SCSI
devices on the virtual machine to physical generic SCSI devices on the host
system. Up to 60 generic SCSI devices can be added to a virtual machine.
Here is how you can add a generic SCSI device to a virtual machine in VMware
Workstation Player: 1a. If you are using Windows host system, run Player as a
user who has administrative access.
1b. If you are using Linux host system, log in as a user who has read and write
permissions for the SCSI device.
2. Select the virtual machine from the library and go to Player > Manage >
Virtual Machine Settings.
3. Click Add on the Hardware tab.
4. Select Generic SCSI Device as the hardware type: 

5. Select the physical SCSI device to map to the virtual SCSI device. To connect
the SCSI device to the virtual machine when the virtual machine is powered on,
check the Connect at power on option.
6. Click Finish to add the device.
Virtual SMP (Symmetric Multi-Processing) Virtual SMP (Symmetric
Multi-Processing) enables a single virtual machine in VMware Workstation
Player to use two or more processors simultaneously. This feature increases the

processing capacity of a virtual machine and is usually used when you run
resource intensive applications (e.g. databases or CRM applications) in a VM.
You can assign processors and cores per processor to a virtual machine on a host
system that has at least two logical processors. The following hosts are
considered to have two logical processors:
multiprocessor hosts with two or more physical CPUs.
single-processor hosts with a multicore CPU.
single-processor hosts with hyperthreading enabled.
Here is how you can configure the four-way virtual symmetric multiprocessing
(SMP) for an existing virtual machine:
1. Select the VM from the library and go to Player > Manage > Virtual Machine
Settings.
2. On the Hardware tab, select Processors. On the right side, change the Number
of processor cores setting to 4 and click OK: 
Enhanced virtual keyboard feature The Enhanced virtual keyboard
feature is useful if you have a non-US keyboard, since it offers better handling
of international keyboards and keyboards with extra keys. This feature also
improves security because it processes raw keyboard input as soon as possible
and bypasses Windows keystroke processing and any malware that is not already

at a lower layer. Note that this features is available only on Windows host
systems.
You can choose to install the Enhanced virtual keyboard driver during the Player
installation. If you didn't install it then, here are the steps to do it at a later stage:
1. Log in to your computer as an administrator.
2. Go to the Programs and Features menu in Control Panel. Find VMware Player
under the list of the installed programs, and select Change: 
3. Click Next in the Welcome window. Choose Change on the next screen: 
4. Check the Enhanced Keyboard Driver checkbox to install the feature: 5.
Once the installation finishes, restart your computer.

Once you've installed the Enhanced virtual keyboard driver, you can modify
some of the options. Here are the steps: 1. Power off the virtual machine.
2. Select the virtual machine from the library and go to Player > Manage >
Virtual Machine Settings.
3. Go to the Options tab and select General. From the Enhanced virtual
keyboard drop-down menu, select one of these three options:
Off - do not use the Enhanced virtual keyboard feature.
Use if available (recommended) - use the Enhanced virtual keyboard
feature, but only if the enhanced virtual keyboard driver is installed on the
host system.
Required - the virtual machine must use the Enhanced the virtual
keyboard feature. If the enhanced keyboard driver is not installed on the
host system, VMware Workstation Player returns an error message.

4. Click OK to save the changes.
 

Summary In this chapter you've learned how to add various types of devices to
your VM - a floppy drive, CD/DVD-ROM drive, serial and parallel ports, and a
generic SCSI device. We've mentioned virtual disks and how to perform some
basic operations on them. We've then discussed how the Enhanced virtual
keyboard feature offers better handling of international keyboards and keyboards
with extra keys and how to enable it.
The last chapter of this book deals with different types of networking
configuration available in Player - the bridged, NAT, and host-only networking.
 

 
Chapter 6 - Configuring virtual networks
IN THIS CHAPTER
Learning about different types of virtual networks Adding virtual network
adapters
Configuring bridged, NAT, and host-only networking Limiting network
bandwidth
 
This chapter deals with virtual networking. You will learn about different types
of networking configurations available in Player (bridged, NAT, and host-only)
and what are the benefits and drawbacks of each type. I will then show you how
to limit the amount of network bandwidth available to the VM and how to
change the MAC address of a virtual network adapter.

Virtual networking components The virtual networking components in
VMware Workstation Player are virtual switches, virtual network adapters, the
virtual DHCP server, and the NAT device. Let’s cover each of them in more
detail.
Virtual switches
Virtual switches (also called virtual networks) connect networking components
together, just like their physical counterparts. They are named VMnet0, VMnet1,
VMnet2, VMnet3, etc. The following virtual switches are mapped to the specific
networks by default:
VMnet0 - Bridged
VMnet1 - Host-only
VMnet8 - NAT
You can create up to 20 virtual switches on a Windows host system and up to
255 virtual switches on a Linux host system. It is possible to connect an
unlimited number of virtual network devices to a virtual switch on a Windows
host system, but only up to 32 virtual network devices to a virtual switch on a
Linux host system.
Virtual network adapters
A virtual network adapter is created when you create a VM. It appears in the
guest operating system as either the AMD PCNET PCI or Intel Pro/1000 MT
Server adapter. You can have up to 10 virtual network adapters for a single
virtual machine. I will describe the process of adding a new virtual network
adapter later in the chapter.
Virtual DHCP server
A virtual DHCP server assigns IP addresses and other network parameters to
virtual machines in the host-only and NAT networking configurations.
NAT device
A NAT device passes network data between virtual machines and the external
network, identifies incoming data packets intended for each VM, and sends them
to the appropriate destination.
Networking configurations Three types of networking configurations are
available in VMware Workstation Player: bridged networking, NAT networking,
and host-only networking. It is also possible to create custom virtual networks.
Bridged networking
A virtual machine is connected to a network using the network adapter on the

host system. If the host system is on a local network, this networking
configuration is often the easiest way to give your virtual machine access to it. A
bridged network (VMnet0) is set up for you when you install Player.
NAT networking
A virtual machine does not have its own IP address on the external network.
Instead, a separate private network is set up on the host system and the virtual
machine gets an IP address on this private network from the virtual DHCP
server. The virtual machine and the host system share a single network identity
that is not visible on the external network.
A NAT network (VMnet8) is set up for you when you install Player. You can
have only a single NAT network.
Host-Only networking
A network that is completely contained within the host computer is created. This
networking configuration provides a network connection between the virtual
machine and the host system by using a virtual network adapter that is visible on
the host operating system.
A host-only network (VMnet1) is set up when you install Player.
Add a virtual network adapter Up to 10 virtual network adapters can be
added to a virtual machine in VMware Workstation Player. Here are the steps to
add a new virtual network adapter to a VM: 1. Select the VM from the library
and go to Player > Manage > Virtual Machine Settings.
2. Click Add on the Hardware tab.
3. Select Network Adapter as the hardware type: 
4. Select the network adapter type. Three options are available:

Bridged: Connected directly to the physical network - the virtual
machine is connected to the network by using the network adapter on the
host system.
NAT: Used to share the host’s IP address - the virtual machine does not
have its own IP address on the external network. Instead, a separate private
network is set up on the host system and the virtual machine gets an IP
address on this private network from the virtual DHCP server. The virtual
machine and the host system share a single network identity that is not
visible on the external network.
Host-only: A private network shared with the host - a network that is
completely contained within the host computer.
5. Click Finish to finish adding the virtual network adapter.
I’ve added a new virtual network adapter to my Windows 8.1 virtual machine.
So now I have two network adapters (the first one was added when I've created
the VM): 
Set up bridged networking In bridged networking, a virtual machine is

connected to a network using the network adapter on the host system. This
networking configuration is often the easiest way to give your virtual machine
access to the network. A bridged network (VMnet0) is set up for you when you
install Player.
In the figure below you can see an example bridged networking configuration: 
Bridged networking works with both wired and wireless host network adapters.
A virtual machine is an unique identity on the network, unrelated to the host
system. It has its own IP address and can communicate with other computer on
the network, as if it is a physical computer on the network.
Usually, the guest operating system acquires an IP address and other network
parameters from the DHCP server on the network, but you can also set the IP
address and other network parameters manually in the guest operating system.
Configure bridged networking for an existing virtual machine Here is how
you can configure bridged networking for an existing virtual machine: 1. Select
the virtual machine from the library and go to Player > Manage > Virtual
Machine Settings.
2. On the Hardware tab, select the network adapter you would like to modify.
Under Network connection, select Bridged: Connected directly to the physical

network: 
If you use the virtual machine on a laptop, check the Replicate physical
network connection state checkbox. This option causes the IP address to be
renewed when you move from one wired or wireless network to another.
3. Click OK to save the changes.
I’ve modified the network adapter I’ve created in the previous lesson. The
DHCP server in my local network is a router with the IP address of 192.168.5.1,
which also serves as the default gateway. Since bridged networking means that a
VM is an unique identity on the network, my VM will get its IP address and
other network parameters from the DHCP server on my router: 

This is the DHCP table on my router, with antun-pc being the host OS and
Windows8-1VM being the guest operating system running in the VM: 
Other hosts on the network will see the VM as a unique entity on the network.
The logical view of my bridged network looks like this: 

Set up NAT networking In NAT (Network Address Translation)
networking, a virtual machine does not have its own IP address on the external
network. Instead, a separate private network is set up on the host system and the
virtual machine gets its IP address on this private network from the virtual
DHCP server. A VM configured for NAT networking uses a different IP address
from a different IP subnet to the one in use on the physical network.
The virtual machine and the host system share a single network identity that is
not visible on the external network. When the virtual machine sends a request to
access a network resource, it appears to the network resource as if the request is
coming from the host system. Virtual machines can reach the outside network
and can communicate with other hosts on the LAN.
In the figure below you can see an example NAT configuration:

A NAT network (VMnet8) is set up for you when you install Player. The host
system has a virtual network adapter on the NAT network that enables the host
system and virtual machines to communicate. The NAT device passes network
data between virtual machines and the external network, identifies incoming data
packets intended for each virtual machine, and sends them to the appropriate
destination.
Configure NAT networking for an existing virtual machine Here is how you
can configure NAT networking for an existing virtual machine in Player: 1.
Select the virtual machine from the library and go to Player > Manage > Virtual
Machine Settings.
2. On the Hardware tab, select the network adapter you would like to modify.
Under Network connection, select NAT: Used to share the host’s IP address: 

3. Click OK to save the changes.
If I change the network adapter type in my Windows 8.1 VM back to NAT, the
IP address and other parameters of the adapter will change. Notice that the
network adapter no longer gets its DHCP information from the DHCP server on
the local network - the virtual DHCP server provides all the parameters instead: 

Set up host-only networking In host-only networking, a network
completely contained within the host computer is created. This networking
configuration provides a network connection between the virtual machine and
the host system by using a virtual network adapter that is visible on the host
operating system. The virtual DHCP server provides IP addresses on the host-
only network. This type of networking is usually used for testing purposes (e.g.
running malware in a VM without worrying that the malware will reach other
hosts on your local network or the Internet).
In the figure below you can see an example host-only networking configuration:

A host-only network (VMnet1) is set up for you when you install Player. In the
default configuration, a virtual machine is isolated and cannot connect to the
Internet or reach other hosts on the LAN.
Here is how you can configure host-only networking for an existing virtual
machine: 1. Select the virtual machine from the library and go to Player >
Manage > Virtual Machine Settings.
2. On the Hardware tab, select Network Adapter. Under Network connection,
select Host-only: A private network shared with the host: 
(Optional) You can also connect the adapter to a custom host-only network.
Under Network connection, select Custom: Specific virtual network and select

the custom host-only network: 
3. Click OK to save the changes.
If I change the network adapter type in my Windows 8.1 virtual machine to
host-only, the network adapter will get the IP address from the virtual DHCP
server and the VM will not be able to access the Internet. Notice the lack of the
default gateway: 
NOTE

To configure host-only networking for a new virtual machine, select the
Customize Hardware option during the New Virtual Machine wizard.
Limit network bandwidth for a VM
You can limit the network bandwidth available to a VM. This feature can come
in handy when you are downloading a large software package in the VM that is
slowing down your Internet connection, and you want to continue browsing the
Internet on your host computer. Another use of this feature would be to test how
applications you are developing react to a limited network bandwidth.
It is possible to limit both the upload and download speed. Here is how you can
do that: 1. Go to Player > Manage Virtual Machine Settings. Select the network
adapter for which you want to limit the bandwidth and click the Advanced
button: 
3. You can limit both the upload and download speed. Under the Bandwidth
drop down menu, choose one of the network connection types listed or enter the
value manually in the Kbps field. I will limit my VM to 1 Mbps of the incoming
data transfer rate: I can test whether the download speed of my VM has been
limited to 1 Mbps by using websites such as fast.com:

Configure packet loss percentage Under the Advanced setting of a virtual
network adapter, there are also Packet Loss fields for incoming and outgoing
transfers. These fields allow you to specify the packet loss percentage. For
example, if you are developing an application and would like to test how it
works in networks in which 50% of packets are dropped, entering 50 in these

fields will allow you to simulate such conditions: 
Now if I try to ping a public IP address, many packets will be dropped:
C:\>ping 8.8.8.8 -n 10
Pinging 8.8.8.8 with 32 bytes of data: Reply from 8.8.8.8: bytes=32 time=78ms TTL=128
Reply from 8.8.8.8: bytes=32 time=77ms TTL=128
Request timed out.
Request timed out.
Request timed out.
Reply from 8.8.8.8: bytes=32 time=76ms TTL=128
Request timed out.
Request timed out.
Request timed out.
Request timed out.
Ping statistics for 8.8.8.8: Packets: Sent = 10, Received = 3, Lost = 7 (70% loss), Approximate round trip
times in milli-seconds: Minimum = 76ms, Maximum = 78ms, Average = 77ms
Change VM's MAC address A MAC address is a 48-bit address that is
used for communication between two hosts in an Ethernet environment. The
address is written in the form of 12 hexadecimal digits, with the first six
hexadecimal characters representing the vendor. That is why VM's addresses
usually start with 00:50:56 or 00:0C:29 - these identifiers are assigned to
VMware.
Player automatically assigns each of its virtual network adapters an Ethernet
MAC address. You can use the Advanced settings under the virtual network

adapter menu to change the adapter's MAC address.
Here are the steps to change to assign a new MAC address to the network
adapter: 1. Make sure that the VM is not in the suspended state. The VM can
either be powered on or powered off.
2. Go to Player > Manage Virtual Machine Settings. Select the network adapter
for which you want to change the MAC address and click the Advanced button.
3. Click on the Generate button to let Player determine the new MAC address of
enter the address manually: 
4. Power off the VM and then power it back on. You can verify that the MAC
address has indeed been changed by running the ipconfig/all command (of
course, this command works only if you are running Windows as your guest
OS):
C:\Users>ipconfig/all ...
Ethernet adapter Local Area Connection: Connection-specific DNS Suffix . : Description . . . . . . . . . . . :
Intel(R) PRO/1000 MT Network Connection Physical Address. . . . . . . . . : AA-BB-CC-11-22-33
DHCP Enabled. . . . . . . . . . . : Yes Autoconfiguration Enabled . . . . : Yes Link-local IPv6 Address . . . . .
: fe80::3105:21ee:e3d0:d5de%11(Preferred) IPv4 Address. . . . . . . . . . . : 192.168.5.105(Preferred) Subnet
Mask . . . . . . . . . . . : 255.255.255.0
Lease Obtained. . . . . . . . . . : Wednesday, September 06, 2017 9:52:24 PM
Lease Expires . . . . . . . . . . : Thursday, September 07, 2017 9:52:23 PM
...
NOTE
Many routers offer an option to reserve certain IP addresses to device with

specific MAC addresses. You can test whether the reservation will work by
changing the MAC address of your virtual network adapter to a reserved address
and verifying that the router will provide the valid IP address.

Summary In the last chapter of this book we've talked about different types of
virtual networking. You've learned about bridged, NAT, and host-only
networking and differences between them. I showed you how to add and
configure a new virtual network adapter. We've also learned how to limit
network bandwidth available to a VM and how to change the virtual network
adapter's MAC address.
 

Afterword Congratulations! You’ve learned the basics of VMware
Workstation Player. From here, you can go in a number of different directions.
You can try out other free desktop virtualization applications (such as Oracle
VM VirtualBox) or you can continue with some more advanced VMware
products, such as VMware Workstation Pro or even start with server
virtualization technology such as VMware vSphere.
I hope you have learned what you wanted when reading this book. If you
encounter any problems or have a question regard the topic feel free to contact
me at info@it-courses.org. I will try respond to your email within 3 business
days. Thank you!
 

Appendix A - VMware Workstation Player
use cases At the beginning of the book I've mentioned some scenarios in
which you would use VMware Workstation Player. In this appendix I will
describe two of those scenarios in more detail.
Run virtual appliances Virtual appliances are prebuilt and preconfigured
virtual machine images that can be deployed on VMware Workstation Player.
These appliances are usually packaged in the OVA (Open Virtualization) format
or come as a zip file containing a virtual disk file (.vmdk) and a .vmx
configuration file.
A virtual appliance usually contains a complete software stack needed to run a
particular product. For example, consider the situation in which you need a
virtual machine with WordPress installed in it. Without virtual appliances, you
would have to go through the following scenario: 1. Find and download an ISO
file containing the operating system that WordPress will be installed on.
2. Install and configure the OS in VMware Workstation Player.
3. Install a local server and database that WordPress will use.
4. Download and install WordPress.
5. Configure WordPress to use the installed web server and database.
With virtual appliances, you can download an image that already contains the
server, database, and WordPress installed and have a fully functional WordPress
installation in a matter of minutes.
One of the largest free open source libraries of virtual appliances is The
Turnkey Linux Virtual Appliance Library (https://www.turnkeylinux.org/).
This library contains hundreds of Debian-based VM images, available for free
download. One of such appliances contains the whole WordPress installation,
and can be downloaded from here: https://www.turnkeylinux.org/wordpress
Appliances are usually available in different formats. Since we are going to
install the appliance in VMware Workstation Player, we will download the
appliance as the zip file that contains the virtual disk and configuration file. So
click on the VMDK link to start the installation:

After the download finished, extract the zip file:
 
Next, open VMware Workstation Player and select Player > File > Open.
Browse to the location of the extracted .vmx file and click Open: 

The VM should appear in the library. Click Play virtual machine to start it: 
After you start the appliance, you will be asked a series of questions (the root
password, the WordPress admin password...). Answer these questions and the
configuration should finish without your further intervention.
After all configuration finishes, the VM will boot into the TurnKey
Configuration Console with information about your WordPress installation: 

To access WordPress, simply point your browser to the IP address specified in
the console: 
NOTE
VMware has an online marketplace where you can browse and download virtual
appliances and plugins for various VMware products. You can check it out at the
following link: https://marketplace.vmware.com/vsx/
Install and try Linux Let's say that you've been using Windows all your life,
and finally decided to give Linux a try. Two options for installing Linux are
usually available:
install Linux alongside Windows. First you install Windows, and then

create a new partition on your hard drive and install Linux on it. This
process is known as dual-booting.
install Linux on an older machine that you don't use anymore.
Instead of dual-booting or installing Linux on an older machine, you could
simply install Linux inside a virtual machine and try it out. The whole process
should last less than an hour, depending on the speed of your computer and your
internet connection.
Linux has many different distributions, and sometimes it is difficult to pick a
right one for a beginner. I recommend installing Ubuntu, simply because it is one
of the most popular Linux distribution and a lot of guides and how-tos are
available online for it. Here are the steps to install Ubuntu in a virtual machine in
VMware Player: 1. Download the Ubuntu .iso file on the following link:
https://www.ubuntu.com/download/desktop
2. Once the file has been downloaded, run Player and go to Player > File > New
Virtual Machine.
3. Browse to the location of the .iso file. You will notice that Player has
recognized the operating system included in the image and will use the Easy
Install feature for installation: 
4. Enter the Easy Install information - the full name, username and password: 

5. Enter the VM name and the location on the host system where it will be
stored: 
6. Choose the virtual disk size and whether to split the disk into multiple files or

not: 
7. Click Finish to start creating the VM. Leave the checkbox on to power the
VM after it has been created: 
8. The Ubuntu installation should start automatically. Since you've provided the
Easy Install information, the process should finish without your intervention.
9. Once the process finishes, you should get the login screen. Log in using the

credentials you've defined: 
10. And that's it, your Ubuntu system should be ready for you to start
experimenting: 
NOTE
There are tons of Linux tutorials available online. You can check out my Linux
tutorial here: http://geek-university.com/course/free-linux-course/

 

Appendix B - VMware Workstation Player
Preferences Menu You can use the Preferences menu to change
various global configuration settings for Player. This menu can be accessed by
selecting Player > File > Preferences: 
This opens up the Preferences window:
The following settings can be modified:
Confirm before closing a virtual machine - if enabled, you will be

prompted for a confirmation before a VM is closed.
When closing a virtual machine - specifies what happens when you
close a VM. The first option (Suspend the virtual machine) will suspend
the VM, and the second option (Power off the virtual machine) will power
off the VM when you close it.
Software updates - you can specify whether Player will check for newer
versions of the application and installed components when you start it.
You can also specify whether Player will check for a new version of a
component (such as VMware Tools) when it is required.
Download All Components Now - downloads all of the available
software components to the host system. This option is useful is if you are
planning to use a VM at a later time when you do not have Internet access.
Connection Settings - if you use a proxy server to connect to the Internet,
you can configure its settings here.
Help improve VMware Player - check this box if you would like to send
system data and usage statistics to VMware.
Enable virtual printer - check this box if you would like to enable the
virtual printer. The virtual printer allows you to print from a VM to any
printer connected to the host computer without having to install additional
drivers in the virtual machine.
 

Appendix C - Enabling VT-x In order to run VMware
Workstation Player, your Intel CPU needs to have the Intel's technology for
virtualization (VT-x) enabled. This technology is usually enabled by default, but
some laptop vendors are known to disable it by default. If VT-x is disabled, you
can turn it on in BIOS.
Here are the steps:
1. Reboot the computer and open the system's BIOS menu. This is usually done
by pressing the delete key, the F1 key, or some other key, depending on your
motherboard.
2. Open the Processor submenu. It is usually found under the Chipset, Advanced
CPU Configuration, Northbridge, or BIOS Features menu.
3. Find and enable Intel Virtualization Technology: 
4. Select Save & Exit.
 

Appendix D - Finding out the UUID of a
virtual machine The UUID is a 128-bit integer, written in
hexadecimal. To find out the UUID your VM uses, download the
FirmwareTablesView program from NirSoft:
http://www.nirsoft.net/utils/firmware_tables_view.html Extract the downloaded
zip file and run the FirmwareTablesView.exe file. Under the Firmware Provider
column, find SMBIOS and select it. In the lower part of the screen you should
see the UUID your VM uses: 
An UUID consists of 32 hexadecimal characters. As shown in the picture, my
VM has the UUID of 56 4d 26 8b d1 7c 5c fd-48 9a 69 b0 09 bc 71 7b.
 

Glossary Autologin - a feature in Player that enables to you log in
automatically to a Windows virtual machine.
bridged networking - a networking configuration in which a virtual machine is
connected to a network by using the network adapter on the host system. A
virtual machine is an unique identity on the network, unrelated to the host
system. It has its own IP address and can communicate with other computers on
the network, as if it is a physical computer on the network.
Compact - an option in Player that enable you to compact a virtual hard disk in
order to reclaim unused space.
Copy and Paste - a feature in Player that enables you to easily cut, copy, and
paste text and files between applications running on the host system and
applications running in a virtual machine.
Damn Small Linux - a Linux distribution used in this book, notable for its small
size (only 50MB).
Defragment - an option in Player that enables you to defragment a virtual hard
disk in order to improve performance.
Drag-and-Drop - a feature in Player that enables you to easily move files
between the host system and virtual machines.
Easy Install feature - a feature in Player for automating the guest operating
system installation.
Enhanced virtual keyboard - a feature in Player that offers better handling of
international (non-US) keyboards and keyboards with extra keys.
Expand - an option in Player that enable you to expand a virtual hard disk to get
more storage space.
guest operating system - the OS installed in a virtual machine.
host-only networking - a networking configuration in which a network
completely contained within the host computer is created. This networking
configuration provides a network connection between the virtual machine and
the host system by using a virtual network adapter that is visible on the host
operating system.
host operating system - the physical machine on which you install Player.
hypervisor - a software component that enables virtual machines to interact with
installed hardware.
Intel VT-x - Intel's technology for virtualization that needs to be enabled in
BIOS in order to run VMware Workstation Player.
ISO image - a single file that replicates the contents of an optical disc. ISO files

are used to distribute large programs over the Internet, including operating
systems such as Microsoft Windows or Linux.
Isochronous USB devices - USB devices such as modems, speakers and
webcams, that require timing coordination in order to work correctly.
Legacy Emulation Mode - the setting in Player that enables you to work around
direct communication problems between a guest operating system and a
DVD/CDROM drive.
Message Log - the log that each VM includes. It contains various warning
information, such as driver and display errors.
NAT device - a virtual device that passes network data between virtual machines
and the external network, identifies incoming data packets intended for each
virtual machine, and sends them to the appropriate destination.
NAT networking - a networking configuration in which a VM does not have its
own IP address on the external network. Instead, a separate private network is set
up on the host system and a virtual machine gets its IP address on this private
network from the virtual DHCP server. The virtual machine and the host system
share a single network identity that is not visible on the external network.
Perl - a cross-platform programming language. Required in order to install
VMware Tools in Linux.
Shared folders - a feature in Player that enables you to share files between the
virtual machines and the host system.
Suspend - a feature in Player that enables you to save the current state of a
virtual machine and recover it at the later stage.
type 1 hypervisor - a hypervisor that runs directly on the host's hardware to
control the hardware and manage guest operating systems.
type 2 hypervisor - a hypervisor that runs on a conventional operating system,
just like any other computer program. VMware Workstation Player is an
example of a type 2 hypervisor.
USB HIDs (human interface devices) - a device class for human interface
devices such as keyboards, mice, and game controllers. By default, these devices
do not appear in the Removable Devices menu in a virtual machine.
Unity Mode - a feature in Player that enables you to display applications from
virtual machines directly on the host system desktop.
Universal Unique Identifier (UUID) - a unique identifier for a VM that ensures
that the virtual machine is properly identified.
virtual appliances - prebuilt and preconfigured virtual machine images that can
be deployed on VMware Workstation Player. They are usually packaged in the
OVA (Open Virtualization Format) format or come as a zip file containing a
virtual disk file (.vmdk) and a .vmx configuration file.

virtual DHCP server - a virtual device that assigns IP addresses to virtual
machines in the host-only and NAT networking configurations.
virtual disk - a file (or a set of files) on the host system that appears as a
physical disk drive to the guest operating system. Virtual hard disk files store
information such as the operating system, program files, and data files. They
have a .vmdk extension.
virtual machine - a software computer that, just like a physical computer, runs
an operating system and executes programs.
virtual network adapter - a network adapter for the guest OS, created during
the VM creation.
Virtual SMP (Symmetric Multi-Processing) - an option in Player that enables
a single virtual machine to use two or more processors simultaneously.
virtual switch - a virtual device used to connect networking components
together, just like its physical counterpart.
vmware.log - the log file for a VM, stored in the VM's directory on the host
system.
VMware Tools - a free set of drivers and utilities that enhances the performance
of the virtual machine’s guest operating system and improves management of
virtual machines in VMware Workstation Player.
working directory of a VM - the directory in which the suspended state (<VM
name>.vmss), snapshot (<VM name>.vmsn), virtual machine paging (<VM
name>.vmem), and redo log files for a virtual machine are stored.
 

