TO 
BURT ORE BEN 
firm friend and 
constructive critic 
down the decades 
Copyright C 1992, 1990 by the President and Fellows of Harvard College 
All rights reserved 
Printed in the United States of America 
10 
9 
8 
7 
6 
5 
4 
3 
2 
1 
First Harvard University Press 
paperback edition, 1992 
Library of Congrtss Cataloging-in-PwbliUltion Data 
Quine, w. V. (Wilard Van Orman) 
Pursuit of truth I W. V. Quine. - Rev. ed. 
p. 
cm. 
Includes bibliographical references and index. 
ISBN 0-674-73951-5 (pbk. : alk. paper) 
I. Meaning (Philosophy) 
2. Reference (Philosophy) 
3. Knowledge, 
Theory of. 
4. Semantics (Philosophy) 
I. Title. 
B945·Q53P87 
1992 
UI-dc20 
92-5606 
CIP 

Preface to the Revised Edition 
In May 1990, a mere four months after this book first 
appeared, I was in the gallant little Republic of San Marino 
for a week-long international colloquium on my philoso­
phy. Six months later I was in medieval Girona, in Cata­
lonia, giving the Josep Ferrater Mora Lectures-fifteen 
hours of them and five of discussion. Donald Davidson, 
Burton Dreben, Dagfinn F0Uesdal, and Roger Gibson 
were all imported with me, to add depth and zest to the 
discussion. The busy months of preparation and the stimu­
lating exchanges on these occasions sparked thoughts that 
would have made for a better book if the chronology had 
been inverted. I am approximating such an inversion as 
best I can by this early revised edition . 
Old §13, "Ontological relativity, " has become more 
emphatically "Ontology defused," and incorporates bits 
from my responses in the projected San Marino volume. 
My treatment of domestic meaning in §22 is utterly 
changed, and so also, thanks to Davidson's and F0Uesdal's 
abetting , are §§28-29 on propositional attitudes. 
March 1992 
W.V.Q. 


Preface to the First Edition 
In these pages I have undertaken to update, sum up, and 
clarify my variously intersecting views on cognitive mean­
ing, objective reference, and the grounds of knowledge. 
Some of the progress is expository and some substantive. 
The substance has been precipitating sporadically over the 
past ten years, and some of it has surfaced in lectures, infor­
mal discussions, and scattered paragraphs. In interrelating 
these thoughts I have occasionally found a faulty joint and 
have firmed it up to my satisfaction. 
I intend this little book no less for my past readers than for 
my new ones, so I have curbed my exposition of things 
already belabored in my other books. I do retrace familiar 
ground where 1 see an improvement in the idea or its pre­
sentation, and also where the new reader needs a little 
briefing to be kept abreast. 
The bits of the book that have previously appeared in 
print add up to a scant nine pages, and are identified on a 
back page. Unpublished lectures were a richer source. My 
lecture "The Mentalistic Heritage" in Calcutta, 1983, is a 
source of §3 I, and "The Forked Animal" yielded earlier 
parts of Chapter IV. That lecture was the third of four 
Immanuel Kant Lectures that I gave at Stanford in 1980. 
The tide of the series off our was "Science and Sensibilia, " a 
takeoff of John Austin's takeoff of Jane Austen. The four 
lectures appeared as a little book in Italian, La scienza e i dati 

viii 
P REF A C E  T O  F IRS T E D I T I ON 
di senso, translated by Michele Leonelli ( Rome: Armando, 
1987). Instead of publishing them intact in English, I have 
used portions of them in subsequent publications, as here. 
Much of my lecture "Three Indeterminacies, " presented 
at the Quine symposium at Washington University in April 
1988, is woven into Chapter I, and bits into Chapter V. 
That lecture is to appear in the symposium volume, Barrett 
and Gibson, editors, Perspectives on Quine ( Oxford: Black­
well). Another overlapping publication in the offing is 
"Truth," written at the request of the Institut International 
de Philosophie and slated for Philosophical Problems Today 
( The Hague: Nijhofl). I drew heavily on it for Chapter V, 
by prior arrangement. 
I am blessed with bright and earnest readers. Leonelli 
wrote me from Pis a that my new blend of reification with 
observation gave him una sona di crampo mentale. After two 
letters I began to feel the cramp myself. Result: a substantial 
revision of Chapters I and II. A letter from Felix Miihlholzer 
in Munich prompted me to insert a couple of paragraphs 
recognizing the untidy side of scientific method. 
A 
difficulty spotted by Lars Bergstrom of Stockholm is now 
noted and dealt with in the text, and my indebtedness to 
Donald Davidson, Dagfinn F011esdal, and Roger Gibson is 
noted at appropriate points. I am much indebted to Burton 
Dreben, who has read earlier drafts with care and insight 
and has made many helpful suggestions. 
W.V.Q. 

CONTENTS 
I .  EV I D EN C E  
I 
I. Stimulation and prediction 1 
2. Observation sentences 2 
) . Theory-laden? 
6 
4· Observation categoricals 9 
5. Test and refutation 12 
6. Holism 
I) 
7. Empirit:4l content 16 
8. Norms and aims 19 
II . REF ER EN C E 
23 
9. Bodies 2) 
10. V.lues of variables 25 
11. Utility of reification 29 
12. Indiference of ontology 
)1 
I). Ontology defosed )) 
I I I . MEA N I N G  37 
'4. Thefold linguist's entering wedge )7 
15. Stimulation again 
40 
16. To each his own 42 
17. Translation resumed 44 
18. Indeterminacy of translation 47 
19· Syntax 49 

x 
C O NTE NTS 
20. Indeterminacy of reference 50 
21. Whither meanings? 52 
22. Domestic meaning 53 
23. Lexicography 56 
I V. I NTE N SION 
61 
24. Perception and observation sentences 61 
25. Perception extended 
63 
26. Perception of things 64 
27. Belief and perception 65 
28. Propositional attitudes 67 
29. Anomalous monism 71 
30. Modalities 73 
31. A mentalistic heritage 
74 
V. TRUTH 
77 
32. Vehicles of truth 
77 
33. Truth as disquotation 
79 
34. Paradox 
82 
35. Tarski's construction 84 
36. Paradox skirted 86 
37. Interlocked hierarchies 88 
38. Excluded middle 90 
39. Truth versus warranted belief 93 
40. Truth in mathematics 94 
41. Equivalent theories 95 
42. Irresoluble rivalry 98 
43. Two indeterminacies 101 
References 
105 
Credits 109 
Index 111 

PURSUIT OF TRUTH 

O'W'ĺl.lI Tel cfHxI.1I6Ļ1IQ. 
PLATO 
Save the surface and you save all. 
SHERWIN-WILLIAMS 

I 
EVIDE NCE 
1. Stimulation and prediction 
From impacts on our sensory surfaces, we in our collective 
and cumulative creativity down the generations have pro­
jected our systematic theory of the external world. Our 
system is proving successful in predicting subsequent sen­
sory input. How have we done it? 
Neurology is opening strange new vistas into what goes 
on between stimulation and perception. Psychology and 
more particularly psycholinguistics may be looked to for 
something to say about the passage from perception to ex­
pectation, generalization, and systematization. Evolution­
ary genetics throws further light on the latter matters, ac­
counting for the standards of similarity that underlie our 
generalizations and hence our expectations. The heuristic of 
scientific creativity is illuminated also, anecdotally, by the 
history of science. 
Within this baffling tangle of relations between our sen­
sory stimulation and our scientific theory of the world, 
there is a segment that we can gratefully separate out and 
clarify without pursuing neurology, psychology, psycho­
linguistics, genetics, or history. It is the part where theory is 
tested by prediction. It is the relation of evidential support, 

2 
P U R S U I T  OF T R U T H  
and its essentials can be schematized by means oflittle more 
than logical analysis. 
Not that prediction is the main purpose of science. One 
major purpose is understanding. Another is control and 
modification of the environment. Prediction can be a pur­
pose too, but my present point is that it is the test of a theory, 
whatever the purpose. 
It is common usage to say that the evidence for science is 
observation, and that what we predict are observations. But 
the notion of observation is awkward to analyze. Clarifica­
tion has been sought by a shift to observable objects and 
events. But a gulf yawns between them and our immediate 
input from the external world, which is rather the trigger­
ing of our sensory receptors. I have cut through all this by 
settling for the triggering or stimulation itself and hence 
speaking, oddly perhaps, of the prediction of stimulation. 
By the stimulation undergone by a subject on a given occa­
sion Ijust mean the temporally ordered set ofa11 those of his 
exteroceptors that are triggered on that occasion. 
Observation then drops out as a technical notion. So does 
evidence, if that was observation. We can deal with the 
question of evidence for science without help of 'evidence' 
as a technical term. We can make do instead with the notion 
of observation sentences. 
2. Observation sentences 
We were undertaking to examine the evidential support of 
science. That support, by whatever name, comes now to be 
seen as a relation of stimulation to scientific theory. Theory 
consists of sentences, or is couched in them; and logic con­
nects sentences to sentences. What we need, then, as initial 

EV I D EN C E  
3 
links in those connecting chains, are some sentences that are 
direcdy and firmly associated with our stimulations. Each 
should be associated affirmatively with some range of one's 
stimulations and negatively with some range. The sentence 
should command the subject'S assent or dissent outright, on 
the occasion of a stimulation in the appropriate range, with­
out further investigation and independendy of what he may 
have been engaged in at the time. A further requirement is 
intersubjectivity: unlike a report of a feeling, the sentence 
must command the same verdict from all linguistically 
competent witnesses of the occasion. 
I call them observation sentences. Examples are 'It's rain­
ing', ' It's getting cold', ' That's a rabbit'. Unlike ' Men are 
mortal', they are occasion sentences: true on some occasions, 
false on others. Sometimes it is raining, sometimes not. 
Briefly stated, then, an observation sentence is an occasion 
sentence on which speakers of the language can agree out­
right on witnessing the occasion. See further § I  S. 
Observationality is vague at the edges. There are grada­
tions in an individual's readiness to assent. What had passed 
for an observation sentence, say 'That's a swan', may to the 
subject's own surprise leave him undecided when he en­
counters a black specimen. He may have to resort to con­
vention to settle his usage. We shall need now and again to 
remind ourselves thus of the untidiness of human behavior, 
but meanwhile we foster perspicuity by fancying bound­
aries. 
The range of stimulations associated with an observation 
sentence, affirmatively or negatively, I call its affirmative or 
negative stimulus meaning for the given speaker. Each of the 
stimulations, by my definition, is global: it is the set of all 
the triggered exteroceptors, not just the ones that happened 

P U R S U I T  OF T R UTH 
to elicit behavior. Hence the stimulations encompassed in a 
stimulus meaning wil differ wildly from one another in 
their ineffective firings, but in their effective core they are 
bound to be similar to one another in some respect, by the 
subject's lights;l similar, that is, in eliciting similar behav­
ior. His according them all the same observation sentence is 
itself a case of similar elicited behavior. 
An observation sentence may consist of a single noun or 
adjective, thought of as a sentence; thus ' Rain', 'Cold', or 
'Rabbit', for 'It's raining', 'It's cold', ' It's a rabbit'. Obser­
vation sentences also may be compounded to form further 
observation sentences, for example by simple conjunction: 
'The sun is rising and birds are singing'. Another way of 
compounding them is predication: 'This pebble is blue', as a 
compound of 'lo, a pebble' and 'lo, blue'. An equivalent 
rendering is simply 'Blue pebble'; they have the same 
stimulus meaning. But they are not equivalent to the mere 
conjunction 'Lo, a pebble, and 10, blue'. Their connection is 
tighter. The conjunction is fulfilled so long as the stimula­
tion shows each of the component observation sentences to 
be fulfilled somewhere in the scene-thus a white pebble 
here, a blue flower over there. On the other hand the predi­
cation focuses the two fulfilments, requiring them to coin­
cide or amply overlap. The blue must encompass the peb­
ble. It may also extend beyond; the construction is not 
symmetric. 
What brought us to an examination of observation sen­
tences was our quest of the link between observation and 
theory. The observation sentence is the means of verbaliz­
ing the prediction that checks a theory. The requirement 
1 Hence perceptually similar, not receptually. Roots of Reformce, 
pp. 16-18. 

EV ID EN C E  
s 
that it command a verdict outright is what makes it a fmal 
checkpoint. The requirement of intersubjectivity is what 
makes science objective. 
Observation sentences are thus the vehicle of scientific 
evidence, we might say-though without venturing a defi­
nition of 'evidence' itself. But also they are the entering 
wedge in the learning oflanguage. The infant's first acqui­
sitions in cognitive language are rudimentary observation 
sentences, including 'Mama', 'Milk', and the like as one­
word observation sentences. They become associated with 
stimulations by the conditioning of responses. Their direct 
association with concurrent stimulation is essential if the 
child is to acquire them without prior language, and the 
requirement of intersubjectivity is essential in order that he 
learn the expressions from other speakers on appropriately 
shared occasions. 
That observation sentences serve in both ways-as vehi­
cles of scientific evidence and as entering wedge into lan­
guage-is no cause for wonder. Observation sentences are 
the link between language, scientific or not, and the real 
world that language is all about. 
Observation sentences as I have defined them far exceed 
the primitive ones that are the child's entering wedge. 
Many of them are learned not by simple conditioning or 
imitation, but by subsequent construction from sophis­
ticated vocabulary. The requirement of direct correspon­
dence to ranges of stimulation can be met either way. 
Which ones are learned directly by conditioning, and which 
ones indirectly through higher language, will vary from 
person to person. But the two requirements, intersubjectiv­
ity and correspondence to stimulation. assure us that any 
observation sentence could be learned in the direct way. We 

6 
P U R S U IT OF T R U T H  
hear our fellow speakers affirming and denying the sentence 
on just the occasions when we are stimulated in the charac­
teristic ways, and we join in. 
J. Theory-laden? 
My definition of observation sentence is of my devising, 
but the term is not. Philosophers have long treated in their 
several ways of what they called observation terms or ob­
servation sentences. But it has now become fashionable to 
question the notions, and to claim that the purportedly ob­
servable is theory-laden in varying degrees. It is pointed out 
that when scientists marshal and check their own data or 
one another's, they press no farther than is needed to assure 
agreement among witnesses conversant with the subject; 
for they are reasonable men. 'The mixture is at 180°C' and 
'Hydrogen sulfide is escaping ' are observational enough for 
any of them, and more recondite reports are observational 
enough for some. I agree that the practical notion of obser­
vation is thus relative to one or another limited community, 
rather than to the whole speech community. An observa­
tion sentence for a community is an occasion sentence on 
which members of the community can agree outright on 
witnessing the occasion. 
For philosophical purposes we can probe deeper , how­
ever, and reach a single standard for the whole speech com­
munity. Observable in this sense is whatever would be at­
tested to on the spot by any witness in command of the 
language and his five senses. If scientists were perversely to 
persist in demanding further evidence beyond what sufficed 
for agreement, their observables would reduce for the most 
part to those of the whole speech community. Just a few, 

EV I D EN C E  
7 
such as the indescribable smell of some uncommon gas, 
would resist reduction. 
But what has all this to do with a sentence's being theory­
laden or theory-free? My definition distinguishes obser­
vation sentences from others, whether relative to special 
communities or to the general one, without reference to 
theory-freedom. There is a sense, as we shall now see, in 
which they are all theory-laden, even the most primitive 
ones, and there is a sense in which none are, even the most 
professional ones. 
Think first of primitive ones, the entering wedge in lan­
guage learning. They are associated as wholes to appropri­
ate ranges of stimulation, by conditioning. Component 
words are there merely as component syllables, theory­
free. But these words recur in theoretical contexts in the 
fullness of time. It is precisely this sharing of words, by 
observation sentences and theoretical sentences, that pro­
vides logical connections between the two kinds of sen­
tences and makes observation relevant to scientific theory. 
Retrospectively those once innocent observation sentences 
are theory-laden indeed. An observation sentence contain­
ing no word more technical than 'water' will join forces 
with theoretical sentences containing terms as technical as 
'H20'. Seen holophrastically, as conditioned to stimulatory 
situations, the sentence is theory-free; seen analytically, 
word by word, it is theory-laden. Insofar as observation 
sentences bear on science at all, affording evidence and tests, 
there has to be this retrospective theory-lading along with 
the pristine holophrastic freedom from theory. To impugn 
their observationality thus retrospectively is to commit 
what Firth (p. 100) called the fallacy of conceptual retrojec­
tion. 

8 
P U RSUIT OF TRUTH 
More sophisticated observation sentences, including 
those of specialized scientific communities, are similarly 
two-faced, even though learned by composition rather than 
direct conditioning. What qualifies them as observation 
sentences is still their holophrastic association with fIXed 
ranges of sensory stimulation, however that association be 
acquired. Holophrastically they function still as theory­
free, like C. I. Lewis's "expressive" sentences (p. 179), 
though when taken retrospectively word by word the self­
same sentences are theory-laden, like his "objective" ones. 
When epistemology rounded the linguistic tum, talk of 
observable objects gave way to talk of observation terms. It 
was a good move, but not good enough. Observation sen­
tences were distinguished from theoretical ones only 
derivatively, as containing observation terms to the exclu­
sion of theory-laden or theoretical terms. Consequently 
Reichenbach and others felt a need for "bridge principles" 
to relate the two kinds of sentences. No bridge is wanted, 
we now see, and bridging is the wrong figure. Starting with 
sentences as we have done rather than with terms, we see no 
bar to a sharing of vocabulary by the two kinds of sentences; 
and it is the shared vocabulary that links them. 
Starting with sentences has conferred the further boon of 
freeing the definition of observation sentence from any de­
pendence on the distinction between the theory-free and the 
theory-laden. Yet a third advantage of this move is that we 
can then study the acquisition and use of observation sen­
tences without prejudging what objects, if any, the compo­
nent words are meant to refer to. We thus are freed to 
speculate on the nature of reification and its utility for 
scientific theory-a topic for Chapter II. Taking terms as 
starting point would have meant finessing reification and 

EVI DENCE 
9 
conceding objective reference out of hand, without consid­
ering what it is for or what goes into it. 
4. Observation categoricals 
The support of a theory by observation stands forth most 
explicitly in experiment, so let us look into that. The scien­
tist has a backlog of accepted theory, and is considering a 
hypothesis for possible incorporation into it. The theory 
tells him that if the hypothesis under consideration is true, 
then, whenever a certain observable situation is set up, a 
certain effect should be observed. So he sets up the situation 
in question. If the predict ed effect fails to appear, he aban­
dons his hypothesis. If the effect does appear, his hypothesis 
may be true and so can be tentatively added to his backlog of 
theory. 
Thus suppose a team of field mineralogists have turned 
up an unfamiliar crystalline mineral of a distinctively pink­
ish cast. They speak of it provisionally as litholite, for want 
of a better name. One of them conjectures its chemical 
composition. This is the hypothesis, of which I shall spare 
myself the details. From his backlog of chemical lore he 
reasons that if this chemical hypothesis is true, then any 
piece oflitholite should emit hydrogen sulfide when heated 
above 180°C. These last provisions are the observables; for 
our mineralogist and his colleagues know litholite when 
they see it and hydrogen sulfide when they smell it, and 
they can read a thermometer. 
The test of a hypothesis thus hinges on a logical relation 
of implication. On one side, the theoretical, we have the 
backlog of accepted theory plus the hypothesis. This com­
bination does the implying. On the other side, the observa-

10 
P U RSU I T  OF T R UTH 
tional, we have an implied generality that the experimenter 
can directly test, directly challenge-in this case by heating 
some of the pink stuff and sniffing. 
A generality that is compounded of observables in this 
way-'Whenever this, that'-is what I call an observation 
categorical. It is compounded of observation sentences. The 
'Whenever' is not intended to reify times and quantify over 
them. What is intended is an irreducible generality prior 
to any objective reference. It is a generality to the effect 
that the circumstances described in the one observation sen­
tence are invariably accompanied by those described in the 
other.2 
Though compounded of two occasion sentences, the ob­
servation categorical is itself a standing sentence, and hence 
fair game for implication by scientific theory. It thus solves 
the problem of linking theory logically to observation, as 
well as epitomizing the experimental situation. 
That situation is where a hypothesis is being tested by 
an experiment. An opposite situation is equally familiar: a 
chance observation may prompt us to conjecture a new 
observation categorical, and we may invent a theoretical 
hypothesis to explain it. For example, we might notice wil­
lows leaning over a stream. This suggests the observation 
categorical: 
(I) 
When a willow grows at the water's edge, it leans 
over the water. 
2The observation categorical is not to be confused with the observa­
tion corulitioltl,z, a less fruitful notion that I ventured in 1975. The observa­
tion conditional is formed from two standing sentences each of which has 
ben built upon an observation sentence with help of theory. Se Theories 
arul Things, pp. z6-l,7. 

EVI D E N C E  
II 
This suggests, in tum, a theoretical hypothesis: 'A willow 
root nourishes mainly its own side of the tree'. Taken to­
gether with prior bits of theory, such as that roots get more 
nourishment from wetter ground, and that nourishment 
promotes the growth of branches, the hypothesis is found 
to imply the observation categorical. Other observation 
categoricals will be implied too, and the continued testing 
of the hypothesis would proceed by testing various of 
them, along with further testing of the one that happened to 
suggest the hypothesis. 
The observation categorical (1) exceeds my definition in a 
subtle way: it is not compounded of two self-sufficient ob­
servation sentences. It cannot be read 'When a willow 
grows at the water's edge, a willow leans over the water'. 
The component observation sentences have to bear not just 
on the same scene, this time, but on the same part of the 
scene, the same willow. Such was the force of'it' in (1). We 
have what may be called afocal observation categorical, as 
distinct from a free one. 
In §2 we saw a contrast between conjunction and predica­
tion. Now the free observation categorical generalizes 
merely on a conjunction, and claims that every occasion 
presenting the one feature will present the other somewhere 
about. The focal observation categorical generalizes rather 
on a predicational observation sentence. (1) generalizes on 
the predication 'This riverine willow leans over the water' 
to say that they all do. 
A more succinct predicational observation sentence is 
'This raven is black', or 'Black raven'. It generalizes to the 
focal observation categorical 'Whenever there is a raven, it 
is black ', or, succinctly, 'All ravens are black '. 

P URS UIT OF TRUTH 
.5. Test and refotation 
An observation categorical is tested by pairs of observa­
tions. It is not conclusively verified by observations that are 
conformable to it, but it is refuted by a pair of observations, 
one affirmative and one negative-thus observation of 
litholite at I80Ge but absence of hydrogen sulfide, or obser­
vation of riverine willows leaning away from the water. 
The free observation categorical 'When the sun comes up 
the birds sing' is refuted by observing sunrise among silent 
birds. 
The observational test of scientific hypotheses, in turn, 
and indeed of sentences generally, consists in testing obser­
vation categoricals that they imply. Here again, as in the 
case of the observation categorical itself, there is no conclu­
sive verification, but only refutation. Refute an observation 
categorical, by an affirmative and a negative observation, 
and you have refuted whatever implied it. 
Traditional epistemology sought grounds in sensory ex­
perience capable of implying our theories about the world, 
or at least of endowing those theories with some increment 
of probability. Sir Karl Popper has long stressed, to the 
contrary, that observation serves only to refute theory and 
not to support it. We have now been seeing in a schematic 
way why this is so. 
But again we must bear in mind, as in §2, that we are 
schematizing: positing sharp boundaries where none can be 
drawn. The pair of observations in purported refutation of 
an observation categorical may be indecisive because of un­
foreseen indecision over the stimulus meaning of one of the 
pair of observation sentences, as in the case of the black 
swan or an albino raven. A theory that implied the observa­
tion categorical 'All swans are white', or 'All ravens are 

EV ID E N C E  
13 
black', might or might not be refuted by the discovery of 
the odd specimen, depending on our own decision regard­
ing the vague stimulus meaning of the word. In both exam­
ples the verbal usages actually adopted, which do admit 
black swans and blond ravens, are the ones that make for the 
smoother terminology in the overall theory. 
It is clearly true, moreover, that one continually reasons 
not only in refutation of hypotheses but in support of them. 
This, however, is a matter of arguing logically or probabil­
istically from other beliefs already held. It is where the tech­
nology of probability and mathematical statistics is brought 
to bear. Some of those supporting beliefs may be observa­
tional, but they contribute support only in company with 
others that are theoretical. Pure observation lends only 
negative evidence, by refuting an observation categorical 
that a proposed theory implies. 
6. Holism 
Let us recall that the hypothesis regarding the chemical 
composition of litholite did not imply its observation 
categorical single-handed. It implied it with the help of a 
backlog of accepted scientific theory. In order to deduce an 
observation categorical from a given hypothesis, we may 
have to enlist the aid of other theoretical sentences and of 
many common-sense platitudes that go without saying, 
and perhaps the aid even of arithmetic and other parts of 
mathematics. 
In that situation, the falsity of the observation categorical 
does not conclusively refute the hypothesis. What it refutes 
is the conjunction of sentences that was needed to imply the 
observation categorical. In order to retract that conjunction 

14 
P URS UIT OF TRUTH 
we do not have to retract the hypothesis in question; we 
could retract some other sentence of the conjunction in­
stead. This is the important insight called holism. Pierre 
Duhem made much of it early in this century, but not too 
much. 
The scientist thinks of his experiment as a test specifically 
of his new hypothesis, but only because this was the sen­
tence he was wondering about and is prepared to reject. 
Moreover, there are also the situations where he has no 
preconceived hypothesis, but just happens upon an anoma­
lous phenomenon. It is a case of his happening upon a 
counter-instance of an observation categorical which, ac­
cording to his current theory as a whole, ought to have been 
true. So he looks to his theory with a critical eye. 
Over-Iogicizing, we may picture the accommodation of 
a failed observation categorical as follows. We have before 
us some set S of purported truths that was found jointly to 
imply the false categorical. Implication may be taken here 
simply as deducibility by the logic of truth functions, 
quantification, and identity. (We can always provide for 
more substantial consequences by incorporating appropri­
ate premisses explicitly into S.) Now some one or more of 
the sentences in S are going to have to be rescinded. We ex­
empt some members of S from this threat on determining 
that the fateful implication still holds without their help. 
Any purely logical truth is thus exempted, since it adds 
nothing to what S would logically imply anyway; and sun­
dry irrelevant sentences in S will be exempted as well. Of 
the remaining members of S, we rescind one that seems 
most suspect, or least crucial to our overall theory. We heed 
a maxim of minimum mutilation. If the remaining mem­
bers of S still conspire to imply the false categorical, we try 

EVI DENCE 
15 
rescinding another and restoring the first. If the false 
categorical is still implied, we try rescinding both. We con­
tinue thus until the implication is defused. 
But this is only the beginning. We must also track down 
sets of sentences elsewhere, in our overall theory, that im­
ply these newly rescinded beliefs; for those must be defused 
too. We continue thus until consistency seems to be re­
stored. Such is the mutilation that the maxim of minimum 
mutilation is meant to minimize. 
In particular the maxim constrains us, in our choice of 
what sentences of S to rescind, to safeguard any purely 
mathematical truth; for mathematics infiltrates all branches 
of our system of the world, and its disruption would re­
verberate intolerably. If asked why he spares mathematics, 
the scientist will perhaps say that its laws are necessarily 
true; but I think we have here an explanation, rather, of 
mathematical necessity itself. It resides in our unstated pol­
iey of shielding mathematics by exercising our freedom to 
reject other beliefs instead. 
So the choice of which of the beliefs to reject is indifferent 
only so far as the failed observation categorical is con­
cerned, and not on other counts. It is well, we saw, not to 
rock the boat more than need be. Simplicity of the resulting 
theory is another guiding consideration, however, and if 
the scientist sees his way to a big gain in simplicity he is even 
prepared to rock the boat very considerably for the sake of 
it. But the ultimate objective is so to choose the revision as 
to maximize future success in prediction: future coverage of 
true observation categoricals. There is no recipe for this, 
but maximization of simplicity and minimization of muti­
lation are maxims by which science strives for vindication 
in future predictions. 

16 
P U R S U I T  OF T R UTH 
It is difficult to see how anyone can question holism, in 
the sense now before us. Griinbaum has indeed argued 
against holism, but in a stronger sense than is here enter­
tained. He construes holism as claiming that when a predic­
tion fails, we can always save the threatened hypothesis by 
so revising the backlog of accepted theory that it, plus the 
threatened hypothesis, will imply the failure of the predic­
tion. I am making no such presumption. Inactivating the 
false implication is al that is at stake. Explaining the unex­
pected counter-observation is quite another step of scien­
tific progress, which may or may not be made in the fullness 
of time. 
Holism in this moderate sense is an obvious but vital 
correction of the naive conception of scientific sentences as 
endowed each with its own separable empirical content. 
Content is shared, even by mathematics insofar as it gets 
applied. 
7. Empirical content 
Stimulus meanings have fuzzy boundaries, as witness again 
the black swan and the albino raven. If we imagine sharp 
demarcation, however, we can build up to a deceptively 
precise but withal instructive definition of empirical con­
tent. 
Cal an observation categorical analytic for a given 
speaker if, as in 'Robins are birds', the affirmative stimulus 
meaning for him of the one component is included in that 
of the other. Otherwise synthetic. Call a sentence or set of 
sentences testable if it implies some synthetic observation 
categoricals. Call two observation categoricals synonymous 

EVIDEN C E  
17 
if their respective components have the same stimulus 
meanings. Then the empirical content of a testable sentence or 
set of sentences for that speaker is the set of all the synthetic 
observation categoricals that it implies, plus all synony­
mous ones. I add the synonymous ones so that merely ver­
bal variation will not obstruct sameness of content. 
Having thus defined empirical content and hence empir­
ical equivalence for the individual speaker, we can call two 
sentences or sets of sentences equivalent for a whole com­
munity when equivalent for each member. 
Some unconjoined single sentences qualify as testable, 
notably the synthetic observation categoricals themselves. 
For the most part, however, a testable set or conjunction of 
sentences has to be pretty big, and such is the burden of 
holism. It is a question of critical semantic mass. 
We must recognize, along with the idealization of 
stimulus meanings, a significant degree of idealization in 
the foregoing account of hypothesis-testing. The scientist 
does not tabulate in advance the whole fund of theoretical 
tenets and technical assumptions, much less the common­
sense platitudes and mathematical laws, that are needed in 
addition to his currently targeted hypothesis in order to 
imply the observation categorical of his experiment. It 
would be a Herculean labor, not to say Augean, to sort out 
all the premisses and logical strands of implication that ulti­
mately link theory with observation, if or insofar as linked 
they be. 
Worse, it seems that in many cases no such marshaling of 
tacit premisses could quite clinch the observation categor­
ical, because of vagueness. The situation is illustrated by the 
near-platitude 

1 8  
P URSU I T  O F  T R U TH 
(I) 
Sodium chloride dissolves in water. 
Notoriously, this is tenable only ceteris paribus, and the cetera 
are left vague. Normally one j ust treats (1) as true and ad­
mits it to the backlog of auxiliary tenets, implicitly or ex­
plicitly. If an experimenter faced with a negative result 
elects to save his hypothesis by tampering with the auxiliary 
tenets, and with (1) in particular, he will do so by devel­
oping a subsidiary theory to account for an exception to (1). 
In general (1) is accepted as a vague statement of strong 
probability, open to question only where the improbable 
counter-instance can be plausibly accounted for. 
Similar cushioning shields much of science, it would 
seem, from the simple probe of observation categoricals. It 
has even been argued that our broadest scientific laws es­
cape evidence altogether. Yosida writes (pp. 207-208) that 
they "may become out offashion, . . .  they are never refuted 
by direct observation, they are the old soldiers who never 
die but only fade away." 
The point of the doctrine of observation categoricals, 
meanwhile, is to explain the bearing of sensory stimulation 
upon scientific theory so long and insofar as science has not 
parted its empirical moorings. My concern has been with 
the central logical structure of empirical evidence. In fused 
phrases of Kant and Russell, it is a question of how our 
knowledge of the external world is possible. Science does 
stay responsive somehow to sensory stimulation both early 
and late, but its mode of response after the parting of the 
moorings eludes my schematism. My defmition of empir­
ical content, accordingly, applies only to sentences and sets 
of sentences that are testable in the defined sense of flatly 
implying synthetic observation categoricals. 

EVI DENCE 
19 
8. Norms and aims 
I am of that large minority or small majority who repudiate 
the Cartesian dream of a foundation for scientific certainty 
firmer than scientific method itself. But I remain occupied, 
we see, with what has been central to traditional epistemol­
ogy. namely the relation of science to its sensory data. I 
approach it as an input-output relation within flesh-and­
blood denizens of an antecedently acknowledged external 
world, a relation open to inquiry as a chapter of the science 
of that world. To emphasize my dissociation from the 
Cartesian dream, I have written of neural receptors and 
their stimulation rather than of sense or sensibilia. I call the 
pursuit naturalized epistemology, but I have no quarrel 
with traditionalists who protest my retention of the latter 
word. I agree with them that repudiation of the Cartesian 
dream is no minor deviation. 
But they are wrong in protesting that the normative ele­
ment, so characteristic of epistemology, goes by the board. 
Insofar as theoretical epistemology gets naturalized into a 
chapter of theoretical science, so normative epistemology 
gets naturalized into a chapter of engineerin g: the technol­
ogy of anticipating sensory stimulation. 
The most notable norm of naturalized epistemology ac­
tually coincides with that of traditional epistemology. It is 
simply the watchword of empiricism: nihil in mente quod non 
prius in sensu. This is a prime specimen of naturali zed epis­
temology, for it is a finding of natural science itself, how­
eVer fallible, that our information about the world comes 
only through impacts on our sensory receptors. And still 
the point is normative, warning us against telepaths and 
soothsayers . 

20 
P U RSUIT O F  T R U TH 
Moreover, naturalized epistemology on its normative 
side is occupied with heuristics generally-with the whole 
strategy of rational conjecture in the framing of scientific 
hypotheses. In the present pages I have been treating rather 
of the testing of a theory after it has been thought up, this 
being where the truth conditions and empirical content lie; 
so I have passed over the thinking up, which is where the 
normative considerations come in. Ullian and I did go into 
it somewhat in The Web ofBelieJ, listing five virtues to seek 
in a hypothesis: conservatism, generality, simplicity, re­
futability, and modesty. Further counsel is available anec­
dotaly in the history of hard science. In a more technical 
vein, normative naturalized epistemology tangles with 
margin of error, random deviation, and whatever else goes 
into the applied mathematics of statistics. (See §s.) 
But when I cite predictions as the checkpoints of science, 
I do not see that as normative. I see it as defining a particular 
language game, in Wittgenstein's phrase: the game of sci­
ence, in contrast to other good language games such as 
fiction and poetry. A sentence's claim to scientific status 
rests on what it contributes to a theory whose checkpoints 
are in prediction. 
I stressed in § I that prediction is not the main purpose of 
the science game. It is what decides the game, like runs and 
outs in baseball. It is occasionally the purpose, and in primi­
tive times it gave primitive science its survival value. But 
nowadays the overwhelming purposes of the science game 
are technology and understanding. 
The science game is not committed to the physical, what­
ever that means. Bodies have long since diffused into 
swarms of particles, and the Bose-Einstein statistic (§I3) 
has challenged the particularity of the particle. Even telep-

EVI D E N C E  
21 
athy and clairvoyance are scientific options, however mor­
ibund. It would take some extraordinary evidence to en­
liven them, but, if that were to happen. then empiricism 
itself-the crowning norm, we saw, of naturalized epis­
temology-would go by the board. For remember that that 
norm. and naturalized epistemology itself, are integral to 
science, and science is fallible and corrigible. 
Science after such a convulsion would still be science, the 
same old language game, hinging still on checkpoints in 
sensory prediction. The collapse of empiricism would ad­
mit extra input by telepathy or revelation, but the test of the 
resulting science would still be predicted sensation. 
In that extremity it might indeed be well to modify the 
game itself, and take on as further checkpoints the predict­
ing of telepathic and divine input as well as of sensory input. 
It is idle to bulwark definitions against implausible contin­
genCles. 


II 
REFERENCE 
9. Bodies 
There were advantages. we saw (§3). in starting with obser­
vation sentences rather than terms. One advantage was that 
the nature and utility of reification could be deferred for 
consideration until an epistemological setting had been 
sketched in. We are now at that stage . 
Incipient reification can already be sensed in the prediC"a­
tional observation sentences (§2). That mode of combina­
tion favors. as components. observation sentences that fo­
cus on conspicuously limited portions of the scene; for the 
compound expresses coincidence of such foci. 
A second step of reification, and a step beyond ordinary 
observation sentences, was recognizable in the move to fo­
cal observation categoricals (§4). I think of the child as first 
mastering this construction. like the free observation cate­
gorical, simply as a generalized expression of expectation: 
whenever this. that. For her the difference between the two 
kinds of categorical would not at first obtrude. The differ­
ence is, we recall. that the focal categorical requires the two 
features-'Raven' and 'Black', say-to fuse in the scene , 
while the free categorical does not. However, the scenes 
first associated with 'Raven' will show a raven at the salient 
focus, and those first associated with 'Black' will show 

P U RSU IT OF TR UTH 
black at the salient focus. Insofar, the free categorical al­
ready meets the focal demand. The difference between the 
free and the focal in other cases, and between conjunction 
and predication (§2.), can gradually dawn on the child in its 
own time. 
By virtue of its narrowed focus, however, the focal ob­
servation categorical-unlike the free one-has decidedly 
the air of general discourse about bodies: willows in the one 
example, ravens in the other. This is where I see bodies 
materializing, ontologically speaking: as ideal nodes at the 
foci of intersecting observation sentences. Here, I suggest, 
is the root of reification. 
For the very young child, who has not got beyond obser­
vation sentences, the recurrent presentation of a body is 
much on a par with similarities of stimulation that clearly 
do not prompt reification. Recurrent confrontation of a ball 
is on a par at first with mere recurrent exposure to sunshine 
or cool air: the question whether it is the same old ball or 
one like it makes no more sense than whether it is the same 
old sunbeam, the same old breeze. Experience is in its 
feature-placing stage, in Strawson's phrase. Individuation 
comes only later. 
True, an infant is observed to expect a steadily moving 
object to reappear after it passes behind a screen; but this all 
happens within the specious present, and reflects rather the 
expectation of continuity of a present feature than the reifi­
cation of an intermittently absent object. Again a dog's rec­
ognition of a recurrent individual is beside the point; the 
dog is responding to a distinctive odor or other trait, un­
available in the case of qualitatively indistinguishable balls. 
To us the question whether we are seeing the same old 
ball or just a similar one is meaningful even in cases where it 

R E F E R E N C E  
25 
remains unanswered. It is here that the reification of bodies 
is full blown. Our venerable theory of the persistence and 
recurrence of bodies is characteristic of the use of reification 
in integrating our system of the world. If I were to try to 
decide whether the penny now in my pocket is the one that 
was there last week, orjust another one like it, I would have 
to explore quite varied aspects of my overall scheme of 
things, so as to reconstruct the simplest, most plausible 
account of my interim movements, costumes, and expen­
ditures. 
Perhaps such indirect equating and distinguishing of 
bodies is achieved by some other animals to some extent. 
Perhaps a dog seeking a bal that disappeared fairly recently 
in one quarter will not settle for a similar ball at an unlikely 
distance. However that may be, it seems clear that such 
reification of bodies across time is beyond the reach of ob­
servation sentences and categoricals. Substantial reification 
is theoretical. 
1 0 .  Values of variables 
Even our sophisticated conception of enduring and recur­
rent bodies, so characteristic of our human ontology, is for 
us little more than a beginning. With our progressive sys­
tematization of science we have gone on to reify liquids and 
the invisible air, and we have integrated these things with 
bodies by reckoning them as aggregates of bodies too small 
to be detected. Nor have we stopped here. Abstract objects 
have long since proved indispensable to natural science­
thus numbers, functions, classes. 
At this level a question arises of what to count as 
reification. and what to count rather as just a useful but 

P U R S U I T  O F  T R U T H  
ontologically noncommittal tum of phrase; for the idea that 
seemed to mark so decisively the reification of bodies, 
namely persistence between exposures, makes no sense for 
abstract objects. I have urged elsewhere that the most deci­
sive general marks of reification in our language and kin­
dred ones are the pronouns, and indeed it was 'it' in (1) of§4 
that signaled those early rumblings of reification in the focal 
observation categoricals. The theme is taken up in full by 
the relative pronouns and their auxiliaries. 1 When a lan­
guage is regimented in the logical notation of the predicate 
calculus. the role of such pronouns is played by bound vari­
ables. 
Observation sentences are to be taken holophrastically 
from the standpoint of evidence, I urged (§3). and analyt­
ically word by word from the retrospective standpoint of 
theory. From the latter standpoint a focal observation 
categorical is an outright quantification. 'Ravens are black' 
becomes 
Vx(x is a raven ' -+ . x is black). 
Free observational categoricals would be construed simi­
larly, usually by quantifying over times or places. 
So I have insisted down the years that to be is to be the 
value of a variable. More precisely. what one takes there to 
be are what one admits as values of one's bound variables. 
The point has been recognized as obvious and trivial, but it 
has also been deemed unacceptable. even by readers who 
share my general philosophical outlook. Let me sort out 
some of the considerations. 
The artificial notation '3x' of existential quantification is 
explained merely as a symbolic rendering of the words 
1 See Thtorits lind Things. pp. S-6. 

R E F E R E N C E  
27 
'there is something x such that'. So, whatever more one 
may care to say about being or existence, what there are 
taken to be are assuredly just what are taken to qualify as 
values of 'x' in quantifications. The point is thus trivial and 
obvious. 
It has been objected that what there is is a question offact 
and not of language. True enough. Saying or implying 
what there is ,  however, is a matter of language; and this is 
the place of the bound variables. 
It has been objected that the logical notation of 
quantification is an arbitrary and parochial standard to 
adopt for ontological commitment. The answer is that the 
standard is transferable to any alternative language, insofar 
as we are agreed on how to translate quantification into it. 
For predicate-functor logic, thus, the equivalent principle is 
that what one takes there to be are what one takes one's 
monadic predicates (complements included) to be true of. 
For ordinary English what one takes there to be are what 
one takes one's relative pronouns to refer to. Ordinary dis­
course is indeed seldom meticulous about ontology, and 
consequently an assessment based on the relative pronouns 
of ordinary discourse is apt to bespeak a pretty untidy 
world; but ontological clarity and economy can be pro­
moted by paraphrase, if one so desires, in terms still of 
relative clauses and pronouns rather than quantifiers and 
bound variables. The notation of quantification is what is 
most usual and familiar, currently, where one is expressly 
concerned with ontological niceties; hence my choice of it 
as paradigm. 
One thinks of reference, first and foremost, as relating 
names and other singular terms to their objects. Yet singu­
lar terms often fail to refer to anything. Conversely, also, 

P U R S U I T  O F  T R U T H  
set theory teaches that there are bound to be individually 
unspecifiable objects-unspecifiable irrational numbers, 
notably-no matter how rich our notation and cumber­
some our expressions. Variables, on the other hand, take all 
objects as values, irrespective of specifiability. 
Once our language is regimented to fit the predicate cal­
culus, moreover, it is easy and instructive to dispense with 
singular terms altogether, leaving variables as the only link 
to objects. The underlying principle here is the equivalence 
of'3x(Fx and a = x)' to 'Fa'; for this enables us to maneuver 
every occurrence of , a' into the context 'a = " and then to 
treat that context as an indissoluble predicate ' A', absorbing 
the singular term. Singular terms can still be recovered 
afterward as a convenient shorthand, by introducing singu­
lar description in Russell's way and defining 'a' as 
'(U)Ax'.2 
If in some language we are at a loss to arrive at a satisfac­
tory contextual translation of 'there is', and hence of exis­
tential quantification, then we are at a loss to assess the 
ontology of the speakers of that language. Some languages 
are perhaps so unlike ours that any translation of 'there is' 
or '3x', however cunningly contextual, would be too far­
fetched and Procrustean to rest with. To entertain the na­
tion of an ontology at all, known or unknown, for the 
speakers of such a language would be an unwarranted pra­
jection on our part of a parochial category appropriate only 
to our own linguistic circle. Thus I do recognize that the 
question of ontological commitment is parochial, though 
within a much broader parish than that of the speakers and 
writers of symbolic logic. 
2 See Word and Object, pp. 1 76- 190. 

R E FE R E NCE 
J 1 .  Utility of reijication 
2.9 
We detected the first hint of reification in the predicational 
compounding of observation sentences, as contrasted with 
simple conjunction. Predication is a stronger connection 
than conjunction; it requires immersion of the pebble in the 
blue (§2.) and the raven in the black, while mere conjunction 
allows the features to go their separate ways. 
At its inception, thus, we find reification contributing to 
the logical connections between observation and theory by 
tightening up on truth functions. Elsewhere I have made 
the point more emphatically by a four-part example: 
(1) 
A white cat is facing a dog and bristling. 
Four simple observation sentences underlie this. One is 
'Cat', or, on the analogy of the ontologically innocent 'It's 
raining', 'It's catting'. The others are 'White', 'Dog-facing', 
and 'Bristling ' .  But (1) cannot be rendered as a mere con­
junction of these four, because the conjunction is too loose. 
It tells us only that the four things are going on in the same 
scene. We want them all in the same part of the scene, 
superimposed . It is this tightening that is achieved by sub­
jecting the four-fold conjunction to existential quantifica­
tion, thus: 
Something is catting and is white and is 
dog-facing and is bristling . 
which is to say (1). An object has been posited, a cat.3 
For all its complexity . (1) is an observation sentence. It 
could be acquired by direct conditioning to the complex 
l My approach here was inspired by Davidson 's logic of adverbs, in his 
F.ssays on Action and Events, pp. 166. See my "Events and Rcification. "  

30 
PURSUIT O F  TRUTH 
situation that it reports, if this situation were to recur and be 
reported oftener than one is prepared to expect. But it is 
illustrative o f  an unlimited lot of equally complex and un­
likely observation sentences. There is no hope of direct 
acquisition of each; systematic construct ion from elements 
is mandatory. Reification, we see, to the rescue. 
For purposes of that context, a cat of the moment would 
suffice; no need of an enduring cat. To illustrate the need 
of an enduring cat I must go beyond observation sentences 
and suppose that we have somehow worked our way far 
enough up into scientific theory to treat of time; earlier and 
later. Suppose then we want to convey this thought: 
(2.) 
If a cat eats a spoiled fish and sickens, then she 
will thereafter avoid fish. 
We cannot treat this as a simple "if-then" compound of two 
self-sufficient component sentences. Like the " and" of the 
preceding example. the "if-then" connection is too weak. It 
has to be the same cat in both sentences, and hence an endur­
ing cat. O ur sentence is really a universally quantified con­
ditional: 
Everything is such that if it is a cat and it eats a 
spoiled fish and it sickens then it will thereafter 
avoid fish. 
Hilary Putnam and Charles Parsons have both remarked 
on ways of economizing on abstract objects by recourse to a 
modal operator of possibility.4 We have just observed the 
other side of the same coin: the positing of objects can serve 
to reinforce the weak truth functions without recourse to 
modal operators. Where there are such trade-offs to choose 
4 Putnam, pp. 47-49: Parsons, pp. 44-47. 

R E F E R E N C E  
3 1 
between, I am for positing the objects. I posit abstract ones 
grudgingly on the whole, but gratefully where the alterna­
tive course would call for modal operators. (Cf. §30.) 
My examples offer a crude notion of how it may be that 
reification and reference contribute to the elaborate struc­
ture that relates science to its sensory evidence. At its most 
rudimentary level, reification is a device for focusing obser­
vation sentences convergently; thus (I). Anaphora, clinch­
ing of cross-reference, continues to be its business also at 
more sophisticated levels, as in (2). It is no coincidence that 
this is precisely the business also of pronouns, or bound 
variables. To be is to be the value of a variable. 
1 2 .  Indifirence of ontology 
Reference and ontology recede thus to the status of mere 
auxiliaries. True sentences, observational and theoretical, 
are the alpha and omega of the scientific enterprise. They 
are related by structure, and objects figure as mere nodes of 
the structure. What particular objects there may be is indif­
ferent to the truth of observation sentences, indifferent to 
the support they lend to the theoretical sentences, indiffer­
ent to the success of the theory in its predictions. 
The point can be accentuated by invoking what I have 
called proxy jUnctions. A proxy function is any explicit one­
to-one transformation, J, defined over the objects in our 
purported universe. By 'explicit' I mean that for any object 
x, specified in an acceptable notation, we can specify fx. 
Suppose now we shift our ontology by reinterpreting each 
of our predicates as true rather of the correlates Jx of the 
objects x that it had been true of. Thus, where 'Px' origi­
nally meant that x was a P, we reinterpret 'Px' as meaning 

32 
P U R S U I T  OF T R U T H  
that x is f of a P. Correspondingly for two-place predicates 
and higher. Singular terms can be passed over in view of 
§IO. We leave all the sentences as they were, letter for letter, 
merely reinterpreting. The observation sentences remain 
associated with the same sensory stimulations as before, 
and the logical interconnections remain intact. Yet the ob­
jects of the theory have been supplanted as drastically as you 
please. s  
Sometimes w e  can waive the requirement that the proxy 
function be one to one. Thus consider Godel's numbering 
of expressions. in the course of his proof of his famous 
incompleteness theorem. In one's global theory of things it 
would be unnatural to say that the expressions are identical 
with those numbers, but still there might be no call to dis­
tinguish them. In that event a proxy function might just as 
well treat them alike, assigning the same proxies to the 
expressions as to the numbers. 
However, one-to-one proxy functions were all I needed 
for my present purpose, namely, to show the indifference 
of ontology. A more radical case for the indifference of 
ontology is afforded by the Lowenheim-Skolem theorem, 
in a strengthened form due to Hilbert and Bemays.6 When 
applied to a theory that has been fitted to predicate logic, 
cleared of singular terms, and encompassed in a fmite lot of 
axioms, this theorem enables us to express a truth­
preserving reinterpretation of the predicates that makes the 
universe come to consist merely of natural numbers 0, 1 , 2, 
. . . . This theorem does not, like proxy functions, carry each 
of the old objects into a definite new one, a particular num­
ber. This was not to be hoped for, since some infinite do-
5 For more see Ontologietli Relativity, pp. 55-S8. 
6See Mnhods of Logie, 4th ed. ,  pp. 209-2 1 1 .  

R E F E R E N C E  
3 3  
mains-notably that of the irrational numbers-are of too 
high a cardinality to be exhausted by correlation with natu­
ral numbers. Despite this limitation, however, the rein­
terpretations leave all observation sentences associated with 
the same old stimulations and all logical links undisturbed. 
Once we have appropriately regimented our system of 
the world or part of it, we can so reinterpret it as to get by 
with only the slender ontology of the whole numbers; such 
is the strengthened Lowenheim-Skolem theorem. But we 
could not have arrived at our science in the first place under 
that interpretation, since the numbers do not correspond 
one by one to the reifications that were our stepping stones. 
Practically, heuristically, we must presumably pursue sci­
ence in the old way or within the reach, at least, of proxy 
functions. 
1 J . Ontology de}Used 
We found that two ontologies, if explicitly correlated one to 
one, are empirically on a par; there is no empirical ground 
for choosing the one rather than the other. What is empiri­
cally significant in an ontology is just its contribution of 
neutral nodes to the structure of the theory. We could rein­
terpret 'Tabitha' as designating no longer the cat, but the 
whole cosmos minus the cat; or, again, as designating the 
eat's singleton, or unit class. Reinterpreting the rest of our 
terms for bodies in corresponding fashion, we come out 
with an ontology interchangeable with our familiar one. As 
wholes they are empirically indistinguishable. Bodies still 
continue, under each interpretation, to be distinct from 
their cosmic complements and from their singletons; they 
are distinguished in a relativistic way, by their roles relative 

34 
P U R S U I T  O F  T R U T H  
to one another and to the rest of the ontology. Hence my 
watchword ontological relativity. But see further §20. 
The importance of the distinction between term and ob­
servation sentence shone forth in §§3 and 9, and it does so 
again here. 'There's a rabbit' remains keyed to the sensory 
stimulations by which we learned it, even if we reinterpret 
the term 'rabbit' as denoting cosmic complements or sin­
gletons of rabbits. The term does continue to conjure up 
visions appropriate to the observation sentence through 
which the term was learned, and so be it; but there is no 
empirical bar to the reinterpretation. The original sensory 
associations were indispensable genetically in generating 
the nodes by which we structure our theory of the world. 
But all that matters by way of evidence for the theory is 
the stimulatory basis of the observation sentences plus the 
structure that the neutral nodes serve to implement. The 
stimulation remains as rabbity as ever, but the corre­
sponding node or object goes neutral and is up for grabs. 
Bodies were our primordial reifications, rooted in innate 
perceptual similarities. It would be gratuitous to swap them 
for proxies; the point was just that one could. But our on­
tological preconceptions have a less tenacious grip on the 
deliberate refinements of sophisticated science. Physicists 
did first picture elementary particles and light waves in anal­
ogy to familiar things, but they have gone on to sap the 
analogies. The particles are less and less like bodies, and 
the waves seem more like pulsations of energy in the void. 
When we get to the positing of numbers and other abstract 
objects, I have conjectured in Roots oj ReJerence that we are 
indebted to some fruitful confusions along the way. Lan­
guage and science are rooted in what good scientific lan-

R E F E R E N C E  
35 
guage eschews. In Wittgenstein's figure, we climb the lad­
der and kick it away. 
Some findings known as the Bose-Einstein and Fermi­
Einstein statistics suggest how we might be led actually to 
repudiate even the more traditional elementary particles as 
values of variables, rather than retaining them and just ac­
quiescing provisionally in their mysterious ways. Those 
results seem to show that there is no difference even in 
principle between saying of two elementary particles of a 
given kind that they are in the respective places Q and b and 
that they are oppositely placed, in b and Q. It would seem 
then not merely that elementary particles are unlike bodies; 
it would seem that there are no such denizens of space-time 
at all, and that we should speak of places Q and b merely as 
being in certain states, indeed the same state, rather than as 
being occupied by two things. 
Perhaps physicists will accommodate this quandary in 
another way. But I prize the example as illustrating the kind 
of consideration that could prompt one to repudiate some 
hypothetical objects. The consideration is not based on 
positivistic misgivings over theoretical entities. It is based 
on tensions internal to theory. 
Theories can take yet more drastic turns: such not merely 
as to threaten a cherished ontology of elementary particles, 
but to threaten the very sense of the ontological question, 
the question what there is. What I have been taking as the 
standard idiom for existential purposes, namely quantifica­
tion, can serve as standard only when embedded in the 
standard form of regimented language that we have been 
picturing: one whose further apparatus consists only of 
truth functions and predicates. If there is any deviation in 

P URSU I T  OF T R U T H  
this further apparatus, then there arises a question offoreign 
exchange: we cannot judge what existential content may be 
added by these foreign intrusions until we have settled on 
how to translate it all into our standard form. Notoriously, 
in particular, quantum mechanics invites logical deviations 
whose reduction to the old standard is by no means evident. 
On one rendering these deviations take the form of proba­
bilistic predications. On an alternative rendering they call 
for basic departures from the logic of truth functions. When 
the dust has settled, we may find that the very notion of 
existence, the old one, has had its day. A kindred notion 
may then stand forth that seems sufficiently akin to warrant 
application of the same word; such is the way of terminol­
ogy. Whether to say at that point that we have gained new 
insight into existence, or that we have outgrown the notion 
and reapplied the term, is a question of terminology as well. 
The objectivity of our knowledge of the external world 
remains rooted in our contact with the external world, 
hence in our neural intake and the observation sentences 
that respond to it. We begin with the monolithic sentence, 
not the term. A lesson of proxy functions is that our ontol­
ogy, like grammar, is part of our own conceptual contribu­
tion to our theory of the world. Man proposes; the world 
disposes, but only by holophrastic yes-or-no verdicts on 
the observation sentences that embody man's predictions. 

I I I  
ME A N I N G 
1 4 .  The field linguist's entering wedge 
Philosophers in ancient India disputed over whether sen­
tences or words were the primary vehicles of meaning. The 
argument in favor of words is that they are limited in num­
ber and can be learned once for all. Sentences are unlimited 
in number; we can fully master them only by learning how 
to construct them, as needed, from words learned in ad­
vance. Despite this situation, however, words can still be 
said to owe their meaning to their roles in sentences. We 
learn short sentences as wholes, we learn their component 
words from their use in those sentences, and we build fur­
ther sentences from words thus learned. See §23 . 
The quest for a clear and substantial notion of meanings 
then should begin with an examination of sentences. The 
meaning of a sentence of one language is what it shares with 
its translations in another language, so I propounded my 
thought experiment of radical translation. It led to a nega­
tive conclusion, a thesis of indeterminacy of translation. 
Critics have said that the thesis is a consequence of my 
behaviorism. Some have said that it is a reductio ad absurdum 
of my behaviorism. I disagree with this second point, but I 
agree with the first. I hold further that the behaviorist ap­
proach is mandatory. In psychology one may or may not be 

P U R S U I T  OF T R UTH 
a behaviorist, but in linguistics one has no choice. Each of us 
learns his language by observing other people's verbal be­
havior and having his own faltering verbal behavior ob­
served and reinforced or corrected by others. We depend 
strictly on overt behavior in observable situations. As long 
as our command of our language fits all external check­
points, where our utterance or our reaction to someone's 
utterance can be appraised in the light of some shared situa­
tion, so long all is well. Our mental life between check­
points is indifferent to our rating as a master of the lan­
guage. There is nothing in linguistic meaning beyond what 
is to be gleaned from overt behavior in observable circum­
stances. 
In my thought experiment the "source language. " as the 
jargon has it, is Jungle; the "target language" is English. 
Jungle is inaccessible through any known languages as way 
stations, so our only data are native utterances and their 
outwardly observable circumstances. It is a meager basis, 
but the native speaker himself has had no other. 
Our linguist would construct his manual of translation 
by conjectural extrapolation of such data. but the confirma­
tions would be sparse. Usually the concurrent publicly ob­
servable situation does not enable us to predict what a 
speaker even of our own language will say, for utterances 
commonly bear little relevance to the circumstances out­
wardly observable at the time; there are ongoing projects 
and unshared past experiences. It is only thus, indeed, that 
language serves any useful communicative purpose; pre­
dicted utterances convey no news. 
There are sentences, however. that do hinge pretty 
strictly on the concurrent publicly observable situation, 

M E A N I N G  
39 
namely the observation sentences. We saw these in Chapter 
I as the primary register of evidence about the external 
world, and also as the child's entering wedge into cogni­
tive language. They are likewise the field linguist's entering 
wedge into the jungle language. Other utterances-greet­
ings, commands, questions-will figure among the early 
acquisitions too, but the first declarative sentences to be 
mastered are bound to be observation sentences, and usu­
ally one word long. The linguist tentatively associates a 
native's utterance with the observed concurrent situation, 
hoping that it might be simply an observation sentence 
linked to that situation. To check this he takes the initiative, 
when the situation recurs, and volunteers the sentence him­
self for the native's assent or dissent. 
This expedient of query and assent or dissent embodies, 
in miniature, the advantage of an experimental science such 
as physics over a purely observational science such as as­
tronomy. To apply it the linguist must be able to recognize, 
if only conjecturally, the signs of assent and dissent in 
Jungle society. If he is wrong in guessing those signs, his 
further research will languish and he will try again. But 
there is a good deal to go on in identifying those signs. For 
one thing, a speaker will assent to an utterance in any cur­
cumstance in which he would volunteer it. 
What the native's observation sentence and the linguist's 
translation have in common, by this account, is the concur­
rent observable situation to which they are linked. But the 
notion of a situation has seemed too vague to rest with. In 
earlier writings I have accordingly represented the linguist 
as trying to match observation sentences of the jungle lan­
guage with observation sentences ofms own that have the 

P U R S U I T  OF T R U T H  
same stimulus meanings. That is to say, assent to the two 
sentences should be prompted by the same stimulations; 
likewise dissent. 
J5 . Stimulation again 
It would seem then that this matching of observation sen­
tences hinges on sameness of stimulation of both parties, 
the linguist and the informant. But an event of stimulation, 
as I use the term (§ I), is the activation of some subset of the 
subject's sensory receptors. Since the linguist and his infor­
mant share no receptors, how can they be said to share a 
stimulation? We might say rather that they undergo similar 
stimulation, but that would assume still an approximate 
homology of nerve endings from one individual to another. 
Surely such anatomical minutiae ought not to matter here. 
I was expressing this discomfort as early as 1965 . 1  By 
1981 it prompted me to readjust my definition of observa­
tion sentence. In my original definition I had appealed to 
sameness of stimulus meaning between speakers.2 but in 
198 I I defined it rather for the single speaker, by the follow­
ing condition: 
If querying the sentence elicits assent from the given speaker 
on one occasion. it will elicit assent likewise on any other 
occasion when the same total set of receptors is triggered; 
and similarly for dissent. J 
Then I accounted a sentence observational for a whole com­
munity when it was observational for each member. In this 
I E.g. in a lecture "Propositional Objects, " published in Onto/i1gictJ/ 
Relltivity aM Othtr Essays. 
2 Thus Word and Object, p. 43 . 
) Theories tJnd Things, p. 25. 

M E A N I N G  
41 
way the question of inter subjective sameness of stimulation 
could be bypassed in studies of scientific method, I felt, and 
deferred to studies of translation. There it continued to 
rankle. 
The question was much discussed in the course of a 
closed conference with Davidson, Dreben, and Fellesdal at 
Stanford in 1986.4 Two years later, at the St. Louis confer­
ence on my philosophy,S Lars Bergstrom observed that 
even my bypassing of the question within studies of scien­
tific method was unsuccessful, since a sentence could be 
observational for each of various speakers without their 
being disposed to assent to it in the same situations. [t is odd 
that [ overlooked this, for already in a lecture of 1974 [ had 
remarked in effect that the fisherman's sentence '[just felt a 
nibble' qualifies as observational for all individuals and not 
for the group. 6 
At the Stanford conference, Davidson proposed provid­
ing for intersubjective likeness of stimulation by locating 
the stimulus not at the bodily surface but farther out, in the 
nearest shared cause of the pertinent behavior of the two 
subjects. Failing a rabbit or other body to the purpose, 
perhaps the stimulus would be a shared situation, if on­
tological sense can be made of situations. But I remain un­
swerved in locating stimulation at the neural input, for my 
interest is epistemological, however naturalized. I am inter­
ested in the flow of evidence from the triggering of the 
senses to the pronouncements of science. My naturalism 
4July 14-17, supported by Stanford's Center for the Study of Lan­
guage and Information. 
5 "Perspectives on Quine," Washington University, April 9- 1 3 ,  1988. 
6 "The Nature of Natural Knowledge, " p. 71,. 

P U R S U I T  O F  T R U T H  
does allow me free reference to nerve endings, rabbits, and 
other physical objects, so I could place the stimulus out 
where Davidson does without finessing any reification on 
the subject's part. But I am put ofT by the vagueness of 
shared situations. 
16. To each his own 
The view that I have come to, regarding intersubjective 
likeness of stimulation, is rather that we can simply do 
without it. The observation sentence 'Rabbit' has its stim­
ulus meaning for the linguist and 'Gavagai' has its for the 
native, but the affinity of the two sentences is to be sought 
in the externals of communication. The linguist notes the 
native's utterance of 'Gavagai' where he, in the native's 
position, might have said 'Rabbit'. So he tries bandying 
'Gavagai' on occasions that would have prompted 'Rabbit', 
and looks to natives for approval. Encouraged, he tenta­
tively adopts 'Rabbit' as translation. 
Empathy dominates the learning of language, both by 
child and by field linguist. In the child's case it is the parent's 
empathy. The parent assesses the appropriateness of the 
child's observation sentence by noting the child's orienta­
tion and how the scene would look from there. In the field 
linguist's case it is empathy on his own part when he makes 
his first conjecture about 'Gavagai' on the strength of the 
native's utterance and orientation, and again when he 
queries 'Gavagai' for the native's assent in a promising sub­
sequent situation. We all have an uncanny knack for em­
pathizing another's peceptual situation, however ignorant 
of the physiological or optical mechanism of his perception. 

M E A N I N G  
43 
The knack is comparable, almost, to our ability to recog­
nize faces while unable to sketch or describe them. 
Empathy guides the linguist still as he rises above obser­
vation sentences through his analytical hypotheses (§I7), 
though there he is trying to project into the native's associa­
tions and grammatical trends rather than his perceptions. 
And much the same must be true of the growing child. 
As for the lacuna that Bergstrom noted, my definition of 
observation sentence in §2 reflects the correction in a rough 
and ready form. More fully: I retain my 198 1  definition of 
observation sentence for the single speaker, and then ac­
count a sentence observational for a group if it is observa­
tional for each member and if each would agree in assenting 
to it, or dissenting, on witnessing the occasion of utterance. 
We judge what counts as witnessing the occasion, as in the 
translation case, by projecting ourselves into the witness's 
position. 
A pioneer manual of translation has its utility as an aid to 
negotiation with the native community . Success in com­
munication is judged by smoothness of conversation, by 
frequent predictability of verbal and nonverbal reactions, 
and by coherence and plausibility of native testimony. It is a 
matter of better and worse manuals rather than flatly right 
and wrong ones. Observation sentences continue to be the 
entering wedge for child and field linguist, and they con­
tinue to command the firmest agreement between rival 
manuals of translation; but their distinctive factuality is 
blurred now by the disavowal of shared stimulus meaning. 
What is utterly factual isjust the fluency of conversation and 
the effectiveness of negotiation that one or another manual 
of translation serves to induce. 

P U R S U I T  O F  T R UT H  
In Word and Objec, (p. 8) I pointed out that communica­
tion presupposes no similarity in nerve nets. Such was my 
parable of the trimmed bushes, alike in outward form but 
wildly unlike in their inward twigs and branches. The out­
ward uniformity is imposed by society, in inculcating 
language and pressing for smooth communication. In a 
computer figure, we are dissimilar machines similarly pro­
grammed. Performance is mandated. implement it how 
one may. Such is the privacy of the nerve net. Dreben has 
likened it to the traditional privacy of other minds. Now in 
my new move I give the subject yet wider berth, allowing 
him the privacy even of his sensory receptors. 
Unlike Davidson, I stil locate the stimulations at the 
subject's surface. and private stimulus meanings with them. 
But they may be as idiosyncratic. for al I care. as the sub­
ject's internal wiring itself. What floats in the open air is our 
common language, which each of us is free to internalize in 
his peculiar neural way. Language is where intersubjectiv­
ity sets in. Communication is well named. 
Obervation sentences are stimulus-synonymous for a 
speaker if their stimulus meanings are the same for him. But 
whereas one's stimulations and their ranges are a private 
affair. stimulus synonymy makes sense socially. Sentences 
are stimulus-synonymous for the community if stimulus­
synonymous for each member. This still does not work 
between languages, unless the community is bilingual. 
1 7. Translation resumed 
Our linguist then goes on tentatively identifying and trans­
lating observation sentences. Some of them are perhaps 
compounded of others of them. in ways hinting of our 

M E A N I N G 
45 
logical particles 'and', 'or', 'but', 'not'. By collating the 
situations that command the natives' assent to the com­
pounds with the situations that command assent to the 
components, and similarly for dissent, the linguist gets a 
plausible line on such connectives. 
Unlike observation sentences, most utterances resist cor­
relation with concurrent stimulations. Taking the initia­
tive, the linguist may volunteer and query such a sentence 
for assent or dissent in various situations, but no correlation 
with concurrent stimulation is forthcoming. What next? 
He can keep a record of these unconstrued sentences and 
dissect them. Some of the segments will have occurred also 
in the already construed observation sentences. He will 
treat them as words, and try pairing them off with English 
expressions in ways suggested by those observation sen­
tences. Such are what I have called analytical hypotheses. 
There is guesswork here, and more extravagrant guess­
work to follow. The linguist will turn to the unconstrued, 
nonobservational sentences in which these same words oc­
curred, and he wil project conjectural interpretations of 
some of those sentences on the strength of these sporadic 
fragments. He wil accumulate a tentative Jungle vocabu­
lary, with English translations. and a tentative apparatus of 
grammatical constructions. Recursion then sets in, deter­
mining tentative translations of a potential infinity of sen­
tences. Our linguist keeps testing his system for its efficacy 
in dealing with natives, and he goes on tinkering with it and 
guessing again. The routine of query and assent that had 
been his standby in construing observation sentences con­
tinues to be invaluable at these higher and more conjectural 
levels. 
Clearly the task is formidable and the freedom for conjec-

P U R S U I T  OF T R U T H  
ture is enormous. Linguists can usually avoid radical trans­
lation by finding someone who can interpret the language, 
however haltingly, into a somewhat familiar one. But it is 
only radical translation that exposes the poverty of ultimate 
data for the identification of meanings. 
Let us consider, then, what constraints our radical trans­
lator can bring to bear to help guide his conjectures. Con­
tinuity is helpful: successive utterances may be expected to 
have some bearing on one another. When several such have 
been tentatively interpreted, moreover, their interrelation 
itself may suggest the translation of a linking word that will 
be helpful in spotting similar connections elsewhere. 
The translator will depend early and late on psychologi­
cal conjectures as to what the native is likely to believe. This 
policy already governed his translations of observation sen­
tences. It will continue to operate beyond the observational 
level, deterring him from translating a native assertion into 
too glaring a falsehood. He will favor translations that as­
cribe beliefs to the native that stand to reason or are conso­
nant with the native's observed way oflife. But he wil not 
cultivate these values at the cost of unduly complicating the 
structure to be ascribed to the native's grammar and se­
mantics, for this again would be bad psychology; the lan­
guage must have been simple enough for acquisition by the 
natives, whose minds, failing evidence to the contrary, are 
presumed to be pretty much like our own. Practical psy­
chology is what sustains our radical translator all along the 
way, and the method of his psychology is empathy: he 
imagines himself in the native's situation as best he can. 
Our radical translator would put his developing manual 
of translation continually to use, and go on revising it in the 
light of his successes and failures of communication. The 

M E A N I N G  
47 
successes consist-to repeat-in successful negotiation and 
smooth conversation. Reactions of astonishment or bewil­
derment on a native's part, or seemingly irrelevant re­
sponses, tend to suggest that the manual has gone wrong. 
We readily imagine the translator's ups and downs. Per­
haps he has tentatively translated two native sentences into 
English ones that are akin to each other in some semantic 
way, and he finds this same kinship reflected in a native's 
use of the two native sentences. This encourages him in his 
pair of tentative translations. So he goes on blithely suppos­
ing that he is communicating, only to be caught up short. 
This may persuade him that his pair of translations was 
wrong after all. He wonders how far back, in the smooth­
flowing antecedent conversation, he got off the beam. 
1 8. Indeterminacy of translation 
Considerations of the sort we have been surveying are all 
that the radical translator has to go on. This is not because 
the meanings of sentences are elusive or inscrutable; it is 
because there is nothing to them, beyond what these fum­
bling procedures can come up with. Nor is there hope even 
of codifying these procedures and then defining what counts 
as translation by citing the procedures; for the procedures 
involve weighing incommensurable values. How much 
grotesqueness may we allow to the native's beliefs, for in­
stance, in order to avoid how much grotesqueness in his 
grammar or semantics? 
These reflections leave us little reason to expect that two 
radical translators, working independently on Jungle. 
would come out with interchangeable manuals. Their 
manuals might be indistinguishable in terms of any native 

P U R S U I T  O F  T R U T H  
behavior that they give reason to expect, and yet each 
manual might prescribe some translations that the other 
translator would reject . Such is the thesis of indeterminacy 
of translation. 
A manual of Jungle-to-English translation constitutes a 
recursive, or inductive, definition of a translation relation 
together with a claim that it correlates sentences compatibly 
with the behavior of all concerned. The thesis of indetermi­
nacy of translation is that these claims on the part of two 
manuals might both be true and yet the two translation 
relations might not be usable in alternation, from sentence 
to sentence, without issuing in incoherent sequences. Or, to 
put it another way, the English sentences prescribed as 
translation ofa given Jungle sentence by two rival manuals 
might not be interchangeable in English contexts. 
The use of one or the other manual might indeed cause 
differences in speech afterward, as remarked by Robert 
Kirk in connection with the idioms of propositional at­
titude; but the two would do equal justice to the status quo. 
I have directed my indeterminacy thesis on a radically 
exotic language for the sake of plausibility , but in principle 
it applies even to the home language. For given the rival 
manuals of translation between Jungle and English, we can 
translate English perversely into English by translating it 
into Jungle by one manual and then back by the other. 
The indeterminacy of translation is unlikely to obtrude in 
practice, even in radical translation. There is good reason 
why it should not. The linguist assumes that the native 's 
attitudes and ways of thinking are like his own, up to the 
point where there is contrary evidence. He accordingly im­
poses his own ontology and linguistic patterns on the native 
wherever compatible with the native's speech and other 

M E A N I N G  
49 
behavior, unless a contrary course offers striking simplifi­
cations. We could not wish otherwise. What the indetermi­
nacy thesis is meant to bring out is that the radical translator 
is bound to impose about as much as he discovers. 
1 9 .  Syntax 
Readers have supposed that I extended my indeterminacy 
thesis to syntax. This puzzled me until I became aware, 
recentl y, of a subtle cause of the misconception. In Word and 
Object (pp. 5 5, 68-72) I claimed that our distinctive ap­
paratus of reification and reference is subject to indetermi­
nacy of translation. The apparatus includes pronouns, • = " 
plural endings, indeed whatever serves the logical purposes 
of quantifiers and variables. But these devices, some of my 
readers have reasoned, are part of what syntax is about. So 
indeterminacy, they have supposed, extends to syntax. 
The business of syntax is the demarcation of strings of 
phonemes proper to the language. More than one battery of 
grammatical constructions and vocabulary will probably be 
capable of generating the same total output of strings, but in 
this freedom there is no indeterminacy analogous to that of 
translation. Indeterminacy of translation consists rather in 
conflict in the outputs themselves. 7 
What misled those readers was the indeterminacy of 
translation of pronouns and other referential devices. But 
that indeterminacy was only over whether to equate certain 
Jungle locutions to these devices or to something else. The 
translator will accommodate those locutions anyway, 
7The syntactician may indeed exercise some freedom in setting the 
limits of the language. but only marginally. See From a Logical Point of 
View, pp. 5 3 - 5 5 .  

so 
P U R S U I T  O F  T R U T H  
whatever his translations. He may or may not call them 
pronouns, plurals, quantifiers, and so on, according as he 
thinks in terms of one or another manual of translation. The 
difference will be only verbal or, at most, a choice of one 
syntactic structure rather than another for generating one 
and the same total output of Jungle strings. 
20 . Indeterminacy of reference 
The difference between taking a sentence holophrastically 
as a seamless whole and taking it analyticaly term by term 
proved crucial in earlier matters (§§3, 9, 1 3). It is crucial also 
to translation. Taken analytically, the indeterminacy of 
translation is trivial and indisputable. It was factually illus­
trated in Ontological Relativity (pp. 3 5-36) by the Japanese 
classifiers, and more abstractly above by proxy functions 
(§1 3). It is the unsurprising reflection that divergent inter­
pretations of the words in a sentence can so offset one an­
other as to sustain an identical translation of the sentence as a 
whole. It is what I have called inscrutability of reference; 
'indeterminacy of reference' would have been better. The 
serious and controversial thesis of indeterminacy of trans la­
tion is not that; it is rather the holophrastic thesis, which is 
stronger. It declares for divergences that remain unrecon­
ciled even at the level of the whole sentence, and are com­
pensated for only by divergences in the translations of other 
whole sentences. 
Unlike indeterminacy of reference, which is so readily 
illustrated by mutually compensatory adjustments within 
the limits of a single sentence, the full or holophrastic inde­
terminacy of translation draws too broadly on a language to 
admit of factual illustration. Radical translation is a rare 
achievement, and it is not going to be undertaken success-

M E A N I N G  
5 1 
fully twice for the same language. But see Levy for a plausi­
ble artificial example, based on measurement in deviant 
geometries. Also there is Massey's sweeping example based 
on the duality of affirmation to negation, conjunction to 
alternation, and universal quantification to existential. His 
rival translations, the homophonic and its dual, conflict on 
every sentence. A weakness of this construction is that the 
dual manual depends on viewing the natives' volunteered 
sentences as denied rather than affirmed-a gratuitous re­
versal of the translator's conventional orientation. Still, in 
view of Levy's construction if not Massey's, one can 
scarcely question the holophrastic indeterminacy thesis. 
A thick and imposing periodical on the philosophy of 
language is published twice a year in the Canary Islands 
under the title Gavagai. A book by David Premack, on his 
language experiments with chimpanzees, came out lately 
under the title Gavagai. Hubert Dreyfus has California van­
ity plates on his Volkswagen Rabbit that spell 'GA V AGAr. 
The word has become the logo of my thesis of indetermi­
nacy of translation, and now it is making its way in a wider 
world. Ironically, indeterminacy of translation in the 
strong sense was not what I coined the word to illustrate. It 
did not illustrate that, for 'Gavagai' is an observation sen­
tence, firmly translatable holophrastically as '(Lo, a) rab­
bit'. But this translation is insufficient to fix the reference of 
'gavagai' as a term; that was the point of the example. It is an 
extreme example of the indetenninacy of reference, the 
contained term being the whole of the sentence. No room 
is left here for compensatory adjustments, and none are 
needed. 
Kindly readers have sought a technical distinction be­
tween my phrases 'inscrutability of reference' and 'ontolog­
ical relativity' that was never clear in my own mind. But I 

S2 
P U R S U I T  O F  T R U T H  
can now say what ontological relativity is relative to, more 
succinctly than I did in the lectures, paper, and book of that 
title. It is relative to a manual of translation. To say that 
'gavagai' denotes rabbits is to opt for a manual of translation 
in which 'gavagai' is translated as 'rabbit', instead of opting 
for any of the alternative manuals . 
And does the indeterminacy or relativity extend also 
somehow to the home language? In "Ontological Relativ­
ity" I said it did, for the home language can be translated 
into itself by permutations that depart materially from the 
mere identity transformation, as proxy functions bear out. 
But if we choose as our manual of translation the identity 
transformation, thus taking the home language at face 
value, the relativity is resolved. Reference is then explicated 
in disquotational paradigms analogous to Tarski's truth 
paradigm (§33); thus 'rabbit' denotes rabbits, whatever they 
are, and 'Boston' designates Boston. 
21 . Whither meanings? 
If we could contrive an acceptable relation of sameness of 
meaning, it would be a short step to an acceptable definition 
of meanings. For, as more than one philosopher has noted, 
we could define the meaning of an expression as the class of 
all expressions like it in meaning. Conversely, if we had the 
meanings to begin with, they and identity would provide 
sameness of meaning, there being no entity without iden­
tity.8 In short, meanings and sameness of meaning present 
one and the same problem. 
8 This platitude has latd y been obscured by a confusion over the axiom 
of extensionality. which individuates sets. or classes. and has been sus­
pended by some set theorists in an exploratory spirit. Might we not 
likewise recognize meanings without identity? No. Dropping extension-

M E A N I N G  
53 
Translation does enjoy reasonable determinacy up 
through observation categoricals and into the logical con­
nectives. Thus one could make a stab at the interlinguistic 
equating of empirical content (§7). even in radical transla­
tion. But empirical content pertains only to testable sen­
tences and sets of sentences. We are still left with no general 
concept of the meanings of sentences of less than critical 
semantic mass. 
It is not a conclusion that one readily jumps to or rests 
with. One is tempted to suppose that we might define 
meanings for sentences of less than critical mass, and even 
for terms, by substitutivity. If we can interchange two ex­
pressions without disturbing the empirical content of any 
testable context. are they not alike in meaning? Well, the 
plan collapses between languages. Interchanging expres­
sions would tum the context into nonsense if the expres­
sions belong to different languages. So the plan offers no 
relief from the indeterminacy of translation. 
22 . Domestic meaning 
Lowering our sights. then, and giving up on "proposi­
tions" as language-transcendent sentence meanings, we 
might still look to the substitutivity expedient for a strictly 
domestic, interlinguistically inapplicable notion of same­
ness of meaning. Sentences are cognitively equivalent, we 
might say, if putting one for the other does not affect the 
empirical content of any set of sentences. This sounds right 
in principle. For the most part it resists decisive application, 
allty does not exempt sets from identity either. It only tables the question 
of sufficient conditions for their identity. The notation 'x = y' stays on, 
with sets as values of the variables. There is still no entity-no set, 
nothing-without identity. 

54 
P U R S U I T  O F  T R UT H  
however, because of the rather visionary status of empirical 
content (§7). 
Another approach looks to belief: to the speaker's assent 
or dissent when the sentences are queried. This would not 
do for standing sentences; it would equate all his beliefs. 
But it works for occasion sentences, where we can check 
each pair for concomitance over varying occasions. Two 
occasion sentences may be accounted cognitively equiva­
lent for a given speaker ifhe is disposed on every occasion to 
assent to both or dissent from both or abstain. Derivatively, 
then, they may be accounted cognitively equivalent for the 
community if cognitively equivalent for each member. 
When in particular the sentences are observation sentences, 
we are back to stimulus synonymy (§I6). 
Cognitive equivalence so defined then extends immedi­
ately to terms, or predicates. They are cognitively equiva­
lent, or we might now say cognitively synonymous, if their 
predications-'It's an F', 'It's a G'-are cognitively equiva­
lent. In view of our definition of cognitive equivalence of 
occasion sentences, this boils down to saying that terms are 
cognitively synonymous for a speaker if he believes them 
to be coextensive, that is, true of the same things; and syn­
onymous for the community if synonymous for each 
member. 
Some slight progress can then be made toward cognitive 
equivalence of standing sentences. Certainly they should be 
rated cognitively equivalent if one can be got from the other 
by supplanting a component term by a cognitive synonym. 
But this does not cover all the pairs of standing sentences 
that we would want to regard as cognitively equivalent. 
There is a third approach in a,udyticity. Once we have 
analyticity, cognitive equivalence is forthcoming; for two 

M E A N I N G  
55 
sentences are cognitively equivalent if and only if their 
truth-functional biconditional is analytic. Now a sentence 
is analytic, in mentalistic semantics, when it is true by virtue 
of the meanings of its words. In Roots of Reftrence (pp. 
70-80) I suggested externalizing the criterion: a sentence is 
analytic if the native speaker learns to assent to it by learning 
one or more ofits words. This accounts for such paradigms 
of analyticity as 'No bachelor is married', and also for the 
analyticity of many elementary logical truths. The concept 
can be adjusted to cover also the truths derivable from ana­
lytic truths by analytic steps. 
I think this definition does some justice to the intuitive 
notion of tautology, the notion that comes into play when 
we protest that someone's assertion comes down to '0 = 0' 
and is an empty matter of words. But the definition gives 
no clue to the demarcation between analytic and synthetic 
sentences that has exercised philosophers, out beyond 
where anyone either remembers or cares how he learned the 
pertinent words. And it gives no clue, certainly, to a general 
concept of cognitive equivalence. 
Why was it important? Where metaphysics had sought 
the essence of things, analytical philosophy as of G. E. 
Moore and after settled for the meanings of words; but still 
it was as if there were intrinsic meanings to be teased out 
rather than just fluctuant usage to be averaged out. Analy­
ticity, then, reflected the meanings of words as metaphysi­
cal necessity had reflected the essences of things. In later 
years analyticity served Carnap in his philosophy of mathe­
matics, explaining how mathematics could be meaningful 
despite lacking empirical content, and why it is necessarily 
true. However, holism settles both questions without ap­
peal to analyticity. Holism lets mathematics share empirical 

P U R S U I T  OF T R U T H  
content where it is applied, and it accounts for mathematical 
necessity by freedom of selection and the maxim of mini­
mum mutilation (§6). 
23 . Lexicography 
To question the old notion of meanings of words and sen­
tences is not to repudiate semantics. Much good work has 
been done regarding the manner, circumstances, and devel­
opment of the use of words. Lexicography is its conspicu­
ous manifestation. But I would not seek a scientific rehabili­
tation of something like the old notion of separate and 
distinct meanings; that notion is better seen as a stumbling 
block cleared away. In later years indeed it has been more of 
a stumbling block for philosophers than for scientific lin­
guists, who, understandably, have simply found it not 
technically useful. 
Dictionaries are reputedly occupied with explaining the 
meanings of words, and the work is neither myth-bound 
nor capricious. How does it proceed? I hold that it is not 
directed at cognitive equivalence of sentences, nor at syn­
onymy of terms, and that it presupposes no notion of mean­
ing at all. Let us consider then what the business of dic­
tionaries really is. 
Sometimes the dictionary explains a word by supplying 
another expression that can replace it salva veritate at least in 
positions uncontaminated by quotation or idioms of prop­
ositional attitude. Sometimes, instead, a selection of in­
formation is set down regarding the object or objects to 
which the word refers. There is no pretense here of a dis­
tinction between essential and accidental traits. It is a matter 

M E A N I N G  
57 
purely of pedagogy: the lexicographer wants to improve his 
reader's chances of successful communication as best he can 
in a small compass. Often, moreover, a dictionary entry 
neither paraphrases the word nor describes its objects, but 
describes, rather, the use of the word in sentences. This is 
usually the way with grammatical particles, and it is often 
the way also with terms. It is bound to be the way with a 
term that neither refers to concrete objects nor admits of a 
separable, self-contained paraphrase. 
Behind this seeming disorder there is a unifying princi­
ple. The goal may be seen always as the sentence. The 
lexicographer is out to help his reader profit by the sen­
tences that he sees or hears, and to help him react to them in 
expected ways, and to help him emit sentences usefully. 
But sentences are unlimited in their variety, so the lexicog­
rapher organizes his teaching of sentences word by word, 
teaching how to use each word in making sentences. One 
way of teaching this, which is convenient when available, is 
by citing a substitute expression; for the lexicographer thus 
exploits the reader's presumed knowledge of how to use 
that substitute expression in making sentences. And the 
other sorts of dictionary entry likewise aim, in their differ­
ent ways, at the same end: teaching the use of sentences. 
When from semantics as pursued by philosophers we 
move to lexicography, we shift our focus from likeness of 
meaning to knowledge of meaning, so to speak; from syn­
onymy of expressions, anyway, to the understanding of ex­
pressions. The lexicographer's job is to inculcate under­
standing of expressions, that is, to teach how to use them. 
He can be wholly successful in teaching the use of sentences 
without considering in what sense they might be said to be 

58 
P U R S U I T  OF T R U T H  
equivalent. Nothing, apparently, could be more remote 
than meanings from the lexicographer's concern. Why 
should they be less remote from ours? 
So we might try looking to the understanding of expres­
sions, rather than to synonymy, as the operationally basic 
notion of semantics. What sense can we make of it? In prac­
tice we credit someone with understanding a sentence if we 
are not surprised by the circumstances of his uttering it or 
by his reaction to hearing it-provided further that his reac­
tion is not one of visible bewilderment. We suspect that he 
does not understand it if the event is drastically at variance 
with those conditions. Still no boundary is evident, no gen­
eral criterion for deciding whether he actually misunder­
stands the sentence or merely holds some unusual theory 
regarding its subject matter. 
We can be more confident in imputing misunderstanding 
of a word than of a sentence, for we can then observe some­
one's use of numerous sentences, or his response to them, 
aU of which contain the word. We can control our experi­
ment, choosing and querying sentences ourselves. We may 
find that he responds otherwise than would generally be 
expected when the sentences contain the word in question, 
and that he responds in the more usual ways to many sen­
tences that lack that word but are much the same in other 
respects. 
In this matter of understanding language there is thus a 
subtle interplay between word and sentence. In one way the 
sentence is fundamental: understanding a word consists in 
knowing how to use it in sentences and how to react to such 
sentences. Yet if we would test someone's understanding of 
a sentence, we do best to focus on a word, ringing changes 
on its sentential contexts. Once we have thus satisfied our-

M E A N I N G  
59 
selves, through a multiplicity of such sentences, that he 
misunderstands the word, we are justified at last in conclud­
ing that his odd response to the original sentence containing 
it was due to a misunderstanding of the word and not to 
some odd opinion regarding matters of fact. 
Understanding, behavioraly viewed, is thus a statistical 
effect: it resides in multiplicities. The nucleus is the word, 
and the mass is made up of the countless sentences in which 
the word occurs. A predominantly healthy or unhealthy 
coloring of this mass is what counts as understanding or 
misunderstanding of the word and the sentences; and a 
sharp boundary need not be sought. A forest presents a 
sharp boundary to the airborne observer but not to the man 
on the ground; an ink blot presents a sharp outline to the 
unaided eye and not under a magnifying glass; and we can 
acquiesce in a similar attitude toward the distinction be­
tween understanding and misunderstanding an expression. 
Lexicography has no need of synonymy, we saw, and it has 
no need of a sharp distinction between understanding and 
misunderstanding either. The lexicographer's job is to im­
prove his reader's understanding of expressions, but he can 
get on with that without drawing a boundary. He does 
what he can, within a limited compass, to adjust the reader's 
verbal behavior to that of the community as a whole, or of 
some preferred quarter of it. The adjustment is a matter of 
degree, and a vague one: a matter of fluency and effec­
tiveness of dialogue. 


I V  
I N T E N S I O N  
24 .  Perception and observation sentences 
Observation sentences, typically, are reports of events or 
situations in the external world. Some are mentalistic, how­
ever. and they can play an important role. Thus consider, to 
begin with. the observation sentence 'It's raining'. Tom is 
learning it from Martha by ostension. Martha's business is 
to encourage Tom in uttering the sentence, or in assenting 
to it, when she sees that he is noticing appropriate phenom­
ena, and to discourage him otherwise. Thus Tom's mastery 
of the physicalistic sentence 'It's raining' hinges on Martha's 
mastery, virtual if not literal, of the mentalistic sentence 
'Tom perceives that it's raining'. 
Observation sentences, learned ostensively. are where 
our command of language begins, and our learning them 
from our elders depends heavily on the ability of our elders 
to guess that we are getting the appropriate perception. The 
handing down of language is thus implemented by a con­
tinuing command, tacit at least, of the idiom 'x perceives 
that p' where 'p' stands for an observation sentence. Com­
mand of this mentalistic notion would seem therefore to be 
about as old as language. It is remarkable that the bifurca­
tion between physicalistic and mentalistic talk is fore­
shadowed already at the level of observation sentences, as 

62 
P U R S U I T  O F  T R U T H  
between 'It is raining' and 'Tom perceives that it is raining'. 
Man is indeed a forked animal. 
Each perception that it is raining is a fleeting neural event. 
Two perceptions by Tom that it is raining are apt to differ, 
moreover, not only in time of occurrence but neurally, 
because there are varied indicators of rain. Tom's percep­
tions of its raining constitute a class of events that is perhaps 
too complex and heterogeneous neurally to be practically 
describable in neurological terms even given full knowl­
edge of the facts. Yet there is also, we may be sure, some 
neural trait that unites these neural events as a class; for it 
was by stimulus generalization, or subjective similarity, 
that Tom eventually learned to make the observation sen­
tence 'It's raining' do for all of them. 
So much for Tom. The class of the whole population's 
perceptions of its raining will be much more forbidding 
still, since people's nerve nets differ-certainly in conse­
quence of different histories oflearning, and perhaps genet­
ically as well. Yet the idiom 'perceives that it's raining' cuts 
through all that hopeless neurological complexity and en­
capsulates all perception that it is raining-not just on 
Tom's part, but on everyone's. 
It does so by citing a symptom rather than a neural mech­
anism. And what a remarkable sort of symptom! We detect 
it by empathetic observation of the subject's facial expres­
sions and what is happening in front of him, perhaps, and 
we specify it by a content clause consisting of a vicarious 
observation sentence. 
Martha empathizes Tom's perception that it is raining 
just as the field linguist empathizes the native's perception 
that a rabbit has appeared (§I6). Learning a language in the 
field and teaching it in the nursery are much the same at the 

I N T E N S I O N  
level of observation sentences: a matter of perceiving that 
the subject is perceiving that p .  
25 . Perception extended 
Observationality varies with the group of speakers con­
cerned, and is also, within the group, somewhat a matter of 
degree (§2). Consequently the construction 'perceives that 
p' continues to ftourish when the content clause is not obser­
vational, or not very. We even hear 'Tom perceives that the 
train is late'. 
Consider how one would get on to using that sentence. 
People have ways of showing that they perceive that the 
train is late, and these ways run to type. One way is by 
saying that the train is late. Also people pace impatiently, 
they look at the clock, they look along the track. Along 
with acquiring such habits ourselves, we have learned to 
observe similar manifestations on the part of others. We are 
ready to see our own ways replicated in another person. 
This readiness was what enabled us to teach observation 
sentences to other persons, and to learn when to affirm 'x 
perceives that p' in observational cases; and the ability ex­
tends beyond observation sentences to sentences like 'The 
train is late'. 
The evidence is not assembled deliberately. One em­
pathizes, projecting oneself into Tom's situation and Tom's 
behavior pattern, and finds thereby that the sentence 'The 
train is late' is what comes naturally. Such is the somewhat 
haphazard basis for saying that Tom perceives that the train 
is late. The basis becomes more conclusive if the observed 
behavior on Tom's part includes a statement of his own that 
the train is late. 

P U R S U I T  O F  T R U T H  
An occasion sentence of the form 'x perceives that p' can 
be true even when the content clause is a standing sentence, 
such as 'Randy is a dog', rather than an occasion sentence. 
What is then required, however, is not only that the perci­
pient be prepared on that occasion to assent to that clause, 
but also that he be just then becoming aware that it is true. 
Ascriptions of perceptions call increasingly for background 
knowledge and conjecture on the ascriptor's part as we 
move away from observation sentences. 
26. Perception of things 
Alongside the construction 'x perceives that p', where the 
perception is described by a content clause, we have the 
construction 'x perceives y', where the perception is de­
scribed by a term as objective complement. The term desig­
nates an object that incites sensory receptors that arouse the 
percipient's attention. If the object is a bowl, the force may 
be the light that it reflects to the eye. But that light is coming 
also from the sun, or from a lamp, via the bowl. What 
distinguishes the perceived object is perhaps that the force 
comes from it directly? No, this will not do; we want also to 
allow the bowl to be perceived by reflection in a mirror. 
There is an easy solution: focus. Between perceiving the 
bowl reflected in the glass and perceiving the glass itself 
there is a difference in the tension of the eye muscles; for the 
focal distance of the bowl is the total distance from the eye 
to the glass and thence to the bowl. The same criterion of 
focus serves to distinguish between seeing something 
through a glass and seeing the glass. 
But focal distance and causality do not suffice to single 
out the perceived object. A bit of the surface of the bowl 

I N T E N S I O N  
would meet those conditions as well as the bowl itself. 
Anything of which that patch of surface is a part would 
likewise qualify-thus the bowl, or the nearer half of the 
bowl, or any sector of the environment that includes the 
bowl, taken over any period of time that includes the 
stimulatory event. Which of these objects to count as per­
ceived would be settled by the percipient's observation sen­
tence, if he were to volunteer one. I 
We noted earlier (§§3, 9, 1 3) that observation terms, ret­
rospectively seen as designating objects, are best viewed at 
their inception rather as one-word observation sentences. 
The same attitude best befits the ascription of perceptions: 
think of 'x perceives y' in the image rather of 'x perceives 
that p'. We say 'Tom perceives the bowl' because in em­
pathizing Tom's situation we fancy ourselves volunteering 
the observation sentence 'Bowl' rather than 'Surface of a 
bowl', 'front half of a bowl', 'Bowl and background'. 
Adherence to content clauses, in preference to perceived 
objects, imposes no real restraint on our day-to-day ascrip­
tions of perception. When we ask 'What did he perceive?' 
we are content with an answer of the form 'He perceived 
that p'. When we say 'They perceived the same thing' 
a fuller explanation in the form 'They perceived that p' af­
fords satisfaction. The stubbornly substantival 'What' and 
'same thing' intrude only for lack of words to stand for 
clauses. 
27. Belief and perception 
The idiom 'x perceives that p' applies beyond observation 
sentences, we saw, and even beyond occasion sentences 
I For further quandaries about perceived objects see Chisholm. ch 10. 



68 
P U R S U I T  O F  T R UTH 
whether p', and indeed 'says that p'. Empathy figures in 
most ascriptions of these kinds, to subjects other than one­
sel£ This is true even of 'says that p': the allowable depar­
tures from direct quotation depend on what the ascriber 
deems the quoted subject to have had in mind. Whether to 
paraphrase 'the commissioner' as 'that scoundrel', in an in­
direct quotation, is a question not of the commissioner's 
character, but of the quoted speaker's view of it. 
Empathy is why we ascribe a propositional attitude by a 
content clause. We saw (§26) that content clauses were 
more to the point than terms as grammatical objects even in 
the case of perception. The content clause purports to refleϮt 
the subject's state of mind rather than the state of things. 
From the ascriber's point of view it figures holophrastically; 
its component terms do not necessarily refer, here, as he 
means them to when he speaks for himself. 
The objects of propositional attitudes-what are be­
lieved, regretted, etc.-have commonly been taken to be 
propositions, or sentence meanings; but these have gone by 
the board (§21). 1 take them simply as sentences, namely the 
content clauses themselves, thus treating 'that' as a quota­
tion mark initiating a name of what comes after it. Obvious 
adjustments are to be understood in cases like 'He believes 
he is Napoleon'; the beliefis 'I am Napoleon. ' 
In thus ascribing propositional attitudes to men ϯnd 
beasts by quotation I do not ascribe a command of the 
quoted language, or of any. A cat can believe 'A mouse is 
in there'. The language is that of the ascriber of the attitude. 
though he projects it empathetically to the creature in the 
attitude. The cat is purportedly in a state of mind in which 
the ascriber would say ' A mouse is in there'. The quotational 

I N T E N S I O N  
account reflects the empathy that invests the idioms of 
propositional attitude from 'perceives that' onward. 
If we were to activate this account by actually rewriting 
the 'that' as quotation, rather than just noting it as tacit in­
tent, we would confound indirect quotation with direct. 
But we could easily resolve the ambiguity by agreeing to 
distinguish two verbs: 'say' for indirect quotation, 'utter' 
for direct, and quotation marks for both. 
We are familiar with the failure of substitutivity of iden­
tity in content clauses of propositional attitude. It fails be­
cause the person in the attitude may be unaware of the per­
tinent identity. This failure was a concern of Frege's. 
Likewise we must beware of quantifying into such a clause, 
for the values of the variable of our outlying quantifier are 
the things of our real world, and might not fit the attitudi­
nist's ontology. Such is the referential opacity of the propo­
sitional attitudes. The quotational account nicely drama­
tizes it, for the quotation designates a mere string of 
phonemes or signs, whose syntax and semantics, if any, are 
a strictly internal affair. 
Not that we must acquiesce in the quotation as a syntacti­
cally indigestible mass relative to the broader context. It is 
digestible by spelling. We adopt names for all single signs, 
finite in number, and then generate a name of any string of 
signs by intercalating a sign of concatenation. Thus '11'av' is 
pi-alpha-nu, and this is as straightforward in its syntax as 
arithmetical addition or a polynomial. 
Spelling dissolves the syntax and lexicon of the content 
clause and blends it with that of the ascriber's language. So 
long as we rest with the unanalyzed quotational form, on 
the other hand, the inverted commas mark an opaque inter-

70 
P U R S U I T  OF T R U T H  
face between two ontologies, two worlds: that of the man 
in the attitude, however benighted, and that of our respon­
sible ascriber of the attitude. 
The interface is sometimes breached. Like an actor step­
ping out of his part and speaking for himself, the ascriber is 
heard to say of the real people of his world that 
(I) 
There are some whom Ralph believes to be spies, 
not just that 
(1) 
Ralph believes '3x(x is a spy)'. 
If rendered quotationally, (I) goes incoherent. 
(3) 
3x(Ralph believes 'x is a spy'). 
The quotation in (3) is just a name of a string of seven letters 
and three spaces; its 'x' has nothing to do with the outlying 
'3x'. (I) ascribed belief de rei quotation ascribes it de dicto. 
Between (I) and (1) we sense the vital difference between 
spotting a suspect and merely believing, like all of us, that 
there are spies. In affirming (I) we dissociate Ralph's suspi­
cions from the world as he conceives it and train them upon 
denizens of our real world; we ride roughshod over failures 
of identification on his part. Ralph suspects a man whom 
he has seen lurking about a certain sensitive installation; 
meanwhile he esteems Bernard). Ortcutt as a pillar ofsoҼ­
ety. He is unaware that they are the same man. Does he then 
both suspect Ortcutt and think him innocent? That would 
be impossible or, at best, unfair to Ralph. 2 
Propositional attitudes de re presuppose a relation of inten­
tion, between thoughts and things intended, for which I 
2 Accommodation of (I) by singular descriptions was refuted by 
Sleigh, q. v. 

I N T E N S I O N  
7 1 
conceive of no adequate guidelines. To garner empirical 
content for (I) we would have to interrogate Ralph and 
compile some of his pertinent beliefs de dicto. 
I conclude that the propositional attitudes de re resist an­
nexation to scientific language, as propositional attitudes de 
dicto do not. At best the ascriptions de re are signals pointing 
a direction in which to look for informative ascriptions de 
dicto. 
29 . Anomalous monism 
We reflected in §24 that a neurological rendering of 'Tom 
perceives that it is raining', applicable to all such occasions 
merely on Tom's part, would already be pretty formidable 
even if Tom's neural make-up were known in detail. We 
reflected further that a neurological rendering of 'perceives 
that it is raining', applicable to all comers, would be out of 
the question. 
Yet each perception is a single occurrence in a particular 
brain, and is fully specifiable in neurological terms once the 
details are known. We cannot say the same for a belief, 
which can be publicly shared. but we can say somewhat the 
same for the instance of the belief in a single believer. The 
period during which I go on believing that the earth rotates 
is distinguished from my earlier stages by at least some 
verbal dispositions, which must reside in some distinctive 
quirks in my nervous system. 
Perceptions are neural realities. and so are the individual 
instances of beliefs and other propositional attitudes insofar 
as these do not fade out into irreality altogether (§27). Phys­
icalistic explanation of neural events and states goes blithely 
forward with no intrusion of mental laws or intensional 

71. 
P U R S U I T  O F  T R U T H  
concepts. What are irreducibly mental are ways of grouping 
them: grouping a lot of respectably physical perceptions as 
perceptions that p, and grouping a lot of respectably physi­
cal belief instances as the belief that p .  I acquiesce in what 
Davidson calls anomalous monism, also known as token 
physicalism: there is no mental substance, but there are 
irreducibly mental ways of grouping physical states and 
events. 
At first the problem of mind was ontological and linguis­
tic. With the passing of mind as substance, there remained 
a twofold problem of mentalistic language: syntactic and 
semantic. The distinctive syntactic trait of mentalistic ss­
course was the content clause, 'that p'. This obstructed ex­
tensiorudity: that is, the substitutivity of identity and more 
generaly the interchangeability of all coextensive terms and 
clauses salva veritate. It obstructed classical predicate logic 
as a universal theoretical framework. Now this quarter of 
the mind problem is in a fair way to dissolution. Quota­
tional treatment of propositional attitudes de dicto delivers 
them to the extensional domain of predicate logic, thanks 
to the reduction of quotation to spelling. Propositional atti­
tudes de re, on the other hand, we downgraded. 
So we see the attitudes de dicto reconciled syntacticaly 
with extensional logic. A single language, regimented in 
predicate logic, can take them in stride along with natural, 
science. The residual oddity of these mentalistic predicates 
de dicto is purely semantic: they do not interlock produc­
tively with the self-sufficient concepts and causal laws of 
natural science. 
Stil the mentalistic predicates. for all their vagueness 
(§1.7). have long interacted with one another, engendering 
age-old strategies for predicting and explaining human ac-

I N T E N S I O N  
73 
tion. They complement natural science in their incommen­
surable way, and are indispensable both to the social sci­
ences and to our everyday dealings. Read Dennett and 
Davidson. 
30 . Modalities 
The modalities of necessity and possibility are not overtly 
mentalistic, but still they are intensional, in the sense of 
resisting substitutivity ofideϭtity . Here again we have the 
interplay between de dieto and de reo Thus 'nee (7 < the 
number of the planets), is true de re, since nec (7 < 9). but 
false de dicto. 
In respect of utility there is less to be said for necessity 
than for the propositional attitudes. The expression does 
serve a purpose in daily discourse. but of a shallow sort. We 
modify a sentence with the adverb 'necessarily ' when it is a 
sentence presumed acceptable to our interlocutor and stated 
only as a step toward the consideration of moot ones. Or we 
write 'necessarily' to identify something that follows from 
generalities already expounded. as over against new conjec­
tures or hypotheses . Such utility is local. transitory, and 
unproblematic. like the utility of indexical expressions. The 
sublimity of necessary truth turns thus not quite to dust, but 
to pretty common clay. 
The subjunctive or contrary-to-fact conditional has had 
close associations with the necessity idiom. and a similar 
account of it expresses almost a commonsense view. The 
conditional holds ifits consequent follows logically from its 
antecedent in conjunction with background sentences that 
one's interlocutor is prepared to grant, or sentences that one 
has already set down or implicitly assumed in one's exposi-

74 
P U R S U I T  O F  T R U T H  
tory piece. The consequent of the conditional follows from 
the antecedent ceteris paribus, and those supporting sen­
tences are the cetera paria. 
Chatting of sublimity and common clay, I might pause 
for a word on essence. Champions of modal logic mean 
necessity to have an objective sense, as if to say metaphys­
ical necessity or physical necessity. But then it must make 
sense to speak of a thing's essence, comprising those prop­
erties that it has necessarily. For, 'x necessarily has F' is 
simply 'nec Fx'. The essence has to be de re, inherent in the 
thing independently of how referred to, since the thing can 
figure simply as the value of a neutral variable as here. 
In its everyday use as I described it, 'necessarily' is a 
second-order annotation to the effect that its sentence is 
deemed true by all concerned, at least for the sake and space 
of the argument. A similar second-order role is cut out, 
then, for 'possibly '. Since it simply means 'not necessarily 
not', 'possibly' marks its sentence as one that the beliefs or 
working assumptions of concerned parties do not exclude 
as false. Thanks to our overwhelming ignorance, the realm 
of possibility thus conceived is vaster far than that of neces­
sity. It is the domain of all our plans and conjectures, all our 
hopes and fears. 
31 . A mentalistic heritage 
Appreciation of one another's perceptions is fundamental, 
we saw (§24), to the handing down oflanguage. The men­
talistic strain is thus archaic. We see it in animism, the 
primitive ascription of minds to bodies on an excessive 
scale. Perhaps there was a vestige of animism in Aristotle's 
theory of the natural motion of substances: earth down-

I N T E N S I O N  
75 
ward, fire upward, stars around and around. We see the 
archaic dominance of mentalism in a preference for final 
cause over efficient cause as a mode of explanation. It is 
evident in the Middle Ages. The bestiaries accounted for the 
supposed traits or practices of various animals as God's way 
of setting moral examples for man to emulate. This predi­
lection for explanation by final cause is evident still today in 
people who seek the meaning of life. They want to explain 
life by finding its purpose. 
Purpose is one of various mentalistic notions drawn from 
introspection of one's mental life. Others are disposition 
and capability. All three reflect one's sense of will, one's 
sense of freedom to choose and act. The modality of possi­
bility is perhaps a depersonalized projection of the subjec­
tive sense of capability, a projection reminiscent of the 
animists' projection of spirits into the rocks and trees. 
Necessity, then, would be a projection of the subjective 
sense of constraint, or abridgment of capability. 
I suppose the idea even of efficient cause was mentalistic 
in origin, being a projection of the subjective sense of effort. 
Anyway it gained the upper hand over final cause with the 
rise of physics in the Renaissance. Concomitantly, matter 
gained the upper hand over mind. Mind was selflessly do­
ing itself in. Matter and efficient cause were a formidable 
combination, vindicated in waves of successful prediction. 
Final cause still had its explanatory duties too, not only in 
relation to the mind of man but also in biology, where it 
became an embarrassment, depriving biology of the aus­
terely scientific status that physics had come to enjoy. Dar­
win at length settled that matter, reducing final cause in 
biology to efficient cause through his theory of natural 
selection. 

P U R S U I T  O F  T R U T H  
Efficient cause figures conspicuously still in fairly austere 
science. It is not clearly intensional, in the sense of resisting 
substitutivity of identity , but it is like the intensional idioms 
in lodging sentences indigestibly within sentences. We can­
not resolve 'p because q' into predicates, quantifiers, and 
truth functions, nor do we have as clear a notion of cause as 
we could wish. Science at its more austere bypasses the 
notion and settles for concomitances. 
Disposition is like cause in admitting substitutivity of 
identity but resisting the predicate calculus. Also it is like 
cause in its want of clarity. It seems to rest on an uncomfort­
able notion of potentiality. But these discomforts can be 
quickly dissipated, for there is no need to invest the disposi-" 
tional suffixes '-ble' and '-ile' with any theoretical content. 
'Fragile' and 'soluble' are physical predicates on a par with 
others, and the dispositional form of the words is just a 
laconic encoding of a relatively dependable test or symp­
tom. Breaking on impact and dissolving on immersion are 
symptomatic of fragility and solubility. See Roots of Refer­
ence, §§3-4. 

v 
TRUTH 
32 . Vehicles of truth 
What are true or false, it will be widely agreed, are proposi­
tions. But it would not be so widely agreed were it not for 
ambiguity of 'proposition ' .  Some understand the word as 
referring 
to 
sentences 
meeting 
certain specifications. 
Others understand it as referring rather to the meanings of 
such sentences. What looked like wide agreement thus re­
solves into two schools of thought: for the first school the 
vehicles of truth and falsity are the sentences, and for the 
second they are the meanings of the sentences. 
A weakness of this second position is the tenuousness of 
the notion of sentence meanings. The tenuousness reaches 
the breaking point if one is pursuaded of my thesis of the 
indeterminacy of translation (§§ I 8, 21). Even apart from that 
thesis, it seems perverse to bypass the visible or audible 
sentences and to center upon sentence meanings as truth 
vehicles; for it is only by recurring to the sentence that we 
can say which sentence meaning we have in mind. 
There was indeed a motive for pressing to the sentence 
meanings. Many sentences in the same or different lan­
guages are deemed to be alike in meaning . and distinctions 
among them are indifferent to truth; so one narrowed the 
field by ascribing truth rather to the meanings. This motive 

P U R S U I T  O F  T R U T H  
would be excellent if the notion of sentence meaning were 
not so elusive. But as matters stand we fare better by treat­
ing directly of sentences. These we can get our teeth into. 
There was also a second motive, equal and opposite to the 
first, for pressing on to the sentence meanings; namely, that 
one and the same sentence can be true on some occasions 
and false on others. Thus 'The Pope will visit Boston' was 
true but turned false after his last visit. 'I have a headache' is 
true or false depending on who says it and when. Ambi­
guity or vagueness of terms, also, can cause the truth value 
of a sentence to depend in part on the speaker's intention. 
Propositions, thought of as sentence meanings, were the 
meanings exclusively of sentences of a firmer sort, not sub­
ject to such vacillations; what we may call eternal sentences. t 
My obvious response, then, is that those eternal sentences 
themselves can serve as the truth vehicles. Just think of T, 
'you', 'he', 'she', 'here', and 'there' as supplanted by names 
and addresses or other identifying particulars as needed. 
Think of tenses as dropped; we can use dates, the predicate 
'earlier than', and the like as needed. Think of ambiguities 
and vaguenesses as resolved by paraphrase-not abso­
lutely, but enough to immobilize the truth value of the 
particular sentence. The truth values need not be known, 
but they must be stable. 
The attitude is the one that is familiar in the teaching of. 
logic. When we take illustrative sentences from everyday 
l In my logic books Of1940, 1 94 1 ,  and 1950, and revised editions down 
the years, my word for them was 'statement'; but I became chary of it 
because of its customary use rather for an act. ' Eternal sentence', along 
with 'standing sentence' (§4), dates from Word and ObjtCl. 'Standing 
sentence' is more inclusive. 'The Timts has come' is a standing sentence, 
for it can command assent all day independently of interim stimulation; 
but it is not eternal. 

T R U T H  
79 
language and paraphrase them into the notation of truth 
functions and quantifiers , we think of the reference of 
demonstratives and personal pronouns as fixed-albeit 
tacitly-and we never dream of reading '3x' as 'there was' 
or 'there will be something x'. 
Declarative sentences thus refined-eternal sentences­
are what I shall regard as truth vehicles in ensuing pages, for 
the most part. On the whole it is the convenient line for 
theoretical purposes. We must recognize, though, that it 
bypasses most of what counts in daily discourse as true or 
false, since our utterances are not for the most part thus 
refined. The truth vehicles directly related to behavior are 
not sentences as repeatable linguistic forms, but rather the 
individual acts of uttering them. These are for the most part 
univocal in truth value without benefit of paraphrase. There 
are just occasional failures, perhaps because some name 
turns out to be empty or because some vague term turns out 
to be indeterminate just where it matters for the utterance in 
question. Such utterances may be dismissed as neither true 
nor false. 
So much by way of coming to terms with the realities of 
verbal behavior. Let us now return to the more conve­
niently manageable domain of eternal sentences, whose 
truth or falsity, known or unknown, is unchanging. 
JJ . Truth as disquotation 
Such being what admit of truth, then, wherein does their 
truth consist? They qualify as true, one is told, by corre­
sponding to reality. But correspondence word by word will 
not do; it invites the idle cluttering of reality with a bizarre 
host of fancied objects, just for the sake of correspondence. 

80 
P U R S U I T  O F  T R U T H  
A neater plan is to posit facts, as correspondents of true 
sentences as wholes; but this still is a put-up job. Objects in 
abundance, concrete and abstract, are indeed needed for an 
account of the world; but facts contribute nothing beyond 
their specious support of a correspondence theory. 
Yet there is some underlying validity to the correspon­
dence theory of truth, as Tarski has taught us. Instead of 
saying that 
'Snow is white' is true if and only if it is a fact 
that snow is white 
we can simply delete 'it is a fact that' as vacuous, and there­
with facts themselves: 
'Snow is white' is true if and only if snow is 
white. 
To ascribe truth to the sentence is to ascribe whiteness to 
snow; such is the correspondence, in this example. Ascrip­
tion of truth just cancels the quotation marks. Truth is dis­
quotation. 
So the truth predicate is superfluous when ascribed to a 
given sentence; you could just utter the sentence. But it is 
needed for sentences that are not given. Thus we may want 
to say that everything someone said on some occasion was 
true, or that all consequences of true theories are true. Such 
contexts, when analyzed logically, exhibit the truth predi­
cate in application not to a quotation but to a pronoun, or 
bound variable. 
The truth predicate proves invaluable when we want to 
generalize along a dimension that cannot be swept out by a 
general term. The easy sort of generalization is illustrated 
by generalization on the term 'Socrates' in 'Socrates is mor-

T R U T H  
8 1  
tal'; the sentence generalizes to 'All men are mortal'. The 
general term 'man' has served to sweep out the desired 
dimension of generality. The harder sort of generalization is 
illustrated by generalization on the clause 'time flies' in 'If 
time flies then time flies'. We want to say that this com­
pound continues true when the clause is supplanted by any 
other; and we can do no better than to say just that in so 
many words, including the word 'true'. We say "All sen­
tences of the form 'If p then p' are true. " We could not 
generalize as in 'All men are mortal', 1?ecause 'time flies' is 
not, like 'Socrates', a name of one of a range of objects 
(men) over which to generalize. We cleared this obstacle by 
semantic ascent: by ascending to a level where there were 
indeed objects over which to generalize, namely linguiҙtic 
objects, sentences. 
Semantic ascent serves also outside of logic. When Ein­
stein propounded relativity, disrupting our basic concep­
tions of distance and time, it was hard to assess it without 
leaning on our basic conceptions and thus begging the ques­
tion. But by semantic ascent one could compare the new 
and old theories as symbolic structures, and so appreciate 
that the new theory organized the pertinent data more sim­
ply than the old. Simplicity of symbolic structures can be 
appreciated independently of those basic conceptions. 
As already hinted by the correspondence theory, the 
truth predicate is an intermediary between words and the 
world. What is true is the sentence, but its truth consists in 
the world's being as the sentence says. Hence the use of the 
truth predicate in accommodating semantic ascent. 
The disquotational account of truth does not define the 
truth predicate-not in the strict sense of 'definition'; for 
definition in the strict sense tells how to eliminate the 

P U R S U I T  O F  T R U T H  
defined expression from every desired context in favor of 
previously established notation. But in a looser sense the 
disquotational account does define truth. It tells us what it is 
for any sentence to be true, and it tells us this in terms just as 
clear to us as the sentence in question itself. We understand 
what it is for the sentence 'Snow is white' to be true as 
clearly as we understand what it is for snow to be white. 
Evidently one who puzzles over the adjective 'true' should 
puzzle rather over the sentences to which he ascribes it. 
'True' is transparent. 
For eternal sentences the disquotational account of truth 
is neat, we see, and simple. It is readily extended, more­
over, to the workaday world of individual utterances; thus 
an utterance of ' I have a headache' is true if and only if the 
utterer has a headache while uttering it. 
34 . Paradox 
It seems paradoxical that the truth predicate, for all its trans­
parency, should prove useful to the point of indispensabil­
ity. In the matter of paradox, moreover, this is scarcely the 
beginning. Truth is notoriously enmeshed in paradox, to 
the point of out-and-out antinomy. 
An ancient form of the antinomy of truth is the Paradox 
of the Liar: 'I am lying', or 'This sentence is not true'. A 
looser and fancier version was the paradox of Epimenides 
the Cretan, who said that all Cretans were liars. The under­
lying antinomy can be purified for logical purposes to read 
thus: 
(I) 
'yields a falsehood when appended to its own 
quotation' yields a falsehood when appended to 
its own quotation. 

T R U T H 
Executing the instructions in (I), we append the nine-word 
expression to its quotation. The result is (I) itself. Thus (I) 
says that (I) itself is a falsehood. It is thus tantamount to 'I 
am lying', but more clean-cut. It hinges only on the innocu­
ous operations of quoting and appending and the notion of 
falsehood, which reduces to an innocent 'not' and true. The 
truth predicate is clearly the trouble spot. The inevitable 
conclusion is that the truth predicate, for all its transparency 
and seeming triviality, is incoherent unless somehow re­
stricted. 
For further explicitness a technical tum of phrase will be 
convenient. The truth predicate will be said to disquote a 
sentence S if the form 
__ is true if and only if 
__ _ 
comes out true when S is named in the first blank and 
written in the second. Thus what the disquotational ac­
count of truth says is that the truth predicate dis quotes 
every eternal sentence. But the lesson of the antinomy is 
that if a language has at its disposal the innocent notations 
for treating of quoting and appending, and also the nota­
tions of elementary logic, then it cannot contain also a truth 
predicate that disquotes all its own eternal sentences-on 
pain of inconsistency. Its truth predicate, or its best approx­
imation to one, must be incompletely disquotational. 
Specifically, it must not dis quote all the sentences that con­
tain it. That was the trouble with (I). And of course it must 
not dis quote all the sentences containing terms by which 
that predicate could be paraphrased. This, apart from its 
special orientation to quoting and appending, is substan­
tially what has come to be known as Tarski's Theorem. He 
has proved harder things. 

P U R S U I T  O F  TRUTH 
The truth predicate loses little in general utility thereby, 
for it can still disquote all the eternal sentences that do not 
themselves contain it or other expressions to the same ef­
fect. And even these excluded applications can be accom­
modated by a hierarchy of truth predicates. The hierarchy 
begins with a predicate 'trueo', which disquotes all sen­
tences that contain no truth predicate or equivalent devices. 
A predicate 'truet ' ,  next, disquotes all sentences that contain 
no truth predicate or equi valent devices beyond 'trueo'. And 
so on up. It is a hierarchy of progressively more nearly 
perfect truth predicates. The plan dates back in a way to the 
early phase of Russell's theory of types (1908), by which he 
meant to obstruct the Paradox of the Liar among others. 
35 . Tarski's construction 
We saw that dis quotation is loosely defmitive of truth . We 
may now be thankful for the looseness , seeing as we do that 
definability of truth for a language within the language 
would be an embarrassment. And thus it was that Tarski 
undertook the perilous adventure of defining it for the lan­
guage within the language , as nearly as possible, if only to 
see what minimum obstacle saved the situation. This was 
not his order of presentation, but it comes out the same. 
The language chosen for the construction contains the 
logical notations for quantification and the truth functions 
and the set-theoretic notation 'x E y' for membership.2 It 
contains also a finite lexicon, as large as you please, of predi­
cates for natural science and daily life. Finally it contains the 
2 Readers expecting a contrast between object langU4lge and metalan­
guage should bear in mind that I am already addressing the aforesaid 
perilous adventure. 

T R U T H  
8S 
means, in effect, of quoting and appending, as in ( I ) ;  that is, 
it can specify each of its single signs and it can express the 
concatenation of expressions. 
Truth pertains to closed sentences, that is, sentences 
without free variables. Its analogue for open sentences is the 
two-place predicate of satisfoction. An assignment of objects 
to variables slltisfits a sentence if the sentence is true for those 
values of its free variables. 
What sort of object is an assigrtlfltnt of objects to variables? 
It is simply a function, or one-many rtlation, relating one 
and only one object to each variable-that is, to each letter, 
'w', 'x', 'y', 'z' , 'w" , etc. A relation, in turn, is a set, or class, 
or oNtrtd pairs. Ways are well known of defining the nota­
tion '(x,y)' of ordered pairs contextually by means of epsi­
lon and the logical particles. 
Once satisfaction is defined, truth comes easily; for a 
closed sentence, having no free variables, is vacuously 
satisfied by all assignments or none according as it is true or 
false. We can simply define 
(2.) 
'y is true' as 'Vx(x is assignment . ... . x satisfies y) ' .  
So Tarski's bigjob i s  to define satisfaction. First he defines it 
for atomic sentences, each of which consists of just a predi­
cate adjoined to one or more variables. For instance an as­
signment satisfies the atomic sentence 'x E y' if and only if 
what is assigned to the letter 'x' is a member of what is 
assigned to the letter 'y'. Corespondingly for each of the 
other predicates in the lexicon. An assignment satisfies an 
alternation of sentences, next, if and only if it satisfies one 
or both of them; it satisfies their conjunction if and only if it 
satisfies both; and it satisfies a negation if and only ifit does 
not satisfy the sentence that is negated. Finally, an assign-

86 
P U R S U I T  O F  TRUTH 
ment satisfies an existential quantification '3x( . . .  x . . . )' if 
and only if some assignment, matching that one except 
perhaps for what it assigns to 'x', satisfies ' . . .  x . . . .. 
Such is Tarski's recursive or inductive definition of satis­
faction. It explains satisfaction of atomic sentences out­
right, and it explains satisfaction of sentences of each higher 
grade or complexity in terms of satisfaction of their compo­
nents. Universal quantification is passed over because it is 
expressible in terms of existential quantification and nega­
tion in familiar fashion. 
36. Paradox skirted 
Clearly al the clauses of this inductive definition can be 
formulated within the formal language itself, except for the 
word 'satisfies' that is being defined. Thus we have appar­
andy defmed satisfaction for the language within the lan­
guage. Invoking (2), then, we have done the same for truth. 
This was supposed to spell contradiction. 
We could even get contradiction directly from satisfac­
tion, without the detour through (2), 'truth', and (I). We 
have merely to ask whether assignment of the sentence 'not 
(x satisfies x) ' to the variable 'x' satisfies the sentence 'not (x 
satisfies x)' itself Such is Grelling's so-called Heterological 
Paradox.3 
What saves the situation is that the definition of satisfac­
tion is inductive rather than direct. The inductive definition 
explains satisfaction of each specific sentence, but it does 
not provide a translation of 'x satisfies y' with variable 'y'. 
l See my Ways of Paradox , pp. 4-6. 

T R U T H  
Consequently it does not translate the 'not (x satisfies x)' of 
Grelling's paradox, and does not suppon the truth defi­
nition (2) for variable 'y'; it just explains truth of each spe­
cific closed sentence. It leaves the truth predicate in the same 
state in which the disquotational account left it; namely, 
fully explained in application to each specific sentence of the 
given language but not in application to a variable. 
It was a near miss, and I turn now to a nearer one. Treat­
ing relations again as classes of ordered pairs, we can write 
'(x,y) E Z' to mean that x bears the relation z to y. Now 
imagine the above inductive definition of satisfaction writ­
ten out in our formal language, with the variable 'z' always 
in place of 'satisfies' and so '(x, y) E z' in place of ' x satisfies 
y'. Let the whole inductive definition, thus edited, be ab­
breviated as 'Ƴz'. It fixes z as the satisfaction relation. Evi­
dently we arrive thus at a direct definition: 
(3) 
3z(Ƴz . (x, y) E z) 
of 'x satisfies y' strictly within the formal language itself. 
Doesn't this spell contradiction? 
No. The catch this time is that there might not be any 
relation z such that Ƴz. Indeed there better not be, on pain, 
we see, of contradiction. The two-place predicate 'satisfies' 
remains well defined in its inductive way, but a grasp of the 
predicate and how to use it carries no assurance of the exis­
tence of a corresponding abstract object, a corresponding 
set of ordered pairs. And, failing such a pair set, (3) fails to 
translate 'x satisfies y'. Though the satisfaction predicate is 
well explained even within the formal language by the re­
cursion, it does not get reduced to the prior notation of that 
language. Satisfaction, and truth along with it, retain the 

88 
P U R S U I T  OF TR U T H  
status that truth already enjoyed under the disquotation 
account: clear intelligibility without full eliminability. 4 
37. lnterloclud hierarchies 
The inductive definition fully explains what it is for an 
assignment to satisfy a sentence. That there is such a satis­
faction relation, then, or pair set, is sheer common sense. 
The paradoxes of set theory, however-Russell's, Burali­
Foni's, Cantor's-have overruled the commonsense no­
tion that clear membership conditions· assure the existence 
of a class, a set. All of those were paradoxes ultimately of the 
membership predicate 'E'; what is striking about the present 
case is just that we find set theory responding also to para­
doxes of truth and satisfaction. 
Some mathematicians supplement the universe of 
classes, or sets, with a layer of classes that are not eligible for 
membership in any further classes. The hitheno inter­
changeable terms 'set' and 'class' are then used to mark the 
distinction: sets are classes that '' members of funher 
classes. The added classes, members of nothing, came to be 
known lamely as classes proptr. or "proper classes. "  I have 
called them ulti""'tQ classes. Membership conditions that 
failed to determine sets can be reinstated without fear of 
contradiction as determining ultimate classes. Luxuriously, 
thenceforward, every membership condition on sets deter­
mines a class; maybe it wil be a set, maybe an ultimate class. 
Parsons has shown (pp. 2U-2I4) that the satisfaction rela-
4The foregoing aaulysis is adapted from my Philosophy oj Logic, pp. 
] s-46. A somewhat different analysis, in my 19SZ paper "On an Appli­
cation ofTarski's Theory of Truth, " is  called for when the set theory is of 
the kind that admits both sets and ultimate classes. 

T R U T H  
tion that had failed to exist as a set of pairs now comes to 
exist as an ultimate class of pairs. A direct definition of 
satisfaction, and so of truth, is thus achieved after all. But it 
is achieved only for sentences of the old theory, unsupple­
men ted with ultimate classes. 
Thus let us suppose that along with adding the ultimate 
classes we introduced a new style of variables, to range over 
classes generally-the old variables being limited to sets. 
Then the point is that truth, as newly and directly defined, 
is assured of disquotationality over all the old sentences, 
but will fail of it for some sentences containing the new 
variables. 
But we can repeat the expedient, adding layer on layer of 
new classes without end. 'Ultimate' ceases to be the word 
now; I must submit to 'proper class'. The classes at each 
level admit members freely from al and only lower levels. 
For the ith level, for each i, the variables 'x;', 'y;" etc. range 
over that level and lower ones; thus ' xo', 'Yo', etc. range only 
over sets. Predicates 'trueo'. 'true.'. and so on are then all 
forthcoming by direct definition. For each i, 'true;' is de­
pendably disquotational in application to sentences contain­
ing no bound variables beyond level i. We get a self­
contained language with a hierarchy of better and better 
truth predicates but no best. Trutho is already good enough 
for most purposes, including classical m .. thematics. 
In his early version of his theory of types, mentioned at 
the end of §34. Russell sought to block the paradoes both of 
truth and of membership by decreeing a single complex 
hierarchy of predicates. The scheme was vague and cum­
bersome. He and others subsequently sharpened and 
simplified it for purposes of set theory by dispensing with 
the truth aspect as extraneous to set theory. And now we see 

P U R S U I T  O F  T R U T H  
a new interlocking o f  the class hierarchy with the truth 
hierarchy, along clean-cut lines and for clear but subtle rea­
sons that could not be foreseen in Russell's dOly. 
I have pictured the hierarchy of class variables and the 
hierarchy of truth predicates as embraced within a single 
inclusive language. This is how I like it. But alternatively 
we can pictUre a hierarchy of languages, each with single­
sorted variables and a unique truth predicate for the next 
lower language. This approach has an important mathe­
matical application in establishing relative strengths of for­
mal systems. To prove that one system is stronger than 
another, reinterpret its predicates in such a way as to be able 
to define, within it, the truth predicate of the other system. 
J8. Excluded middle 
Let us look into some seemingly deviant notions about 
truth. One such, traceable to Aristotle, is that a prediction is 
neither true nor false until events have occurred that caus­
ally determine it. Theologians have favored the doctrine. If 
contingent predictions were true now, they reason, the 
events would be determined now by God's knowledge, and 
hence would not be contingent. The consequent determin­
ism, it is felt, would leave no place for man's moral re­
sponsibility. 
This doctrine, for all its bizarreness, is no repudiation of 
the disquotational account of truth. If it is not yet true that 
there will be a sea-fight tomorrow-to take Aristotle's ex­
ample-then it is a mistake to say now that there will be a 
sea-fight tomorrow; for as of now the contingent sentence 
is neither true nor false. The logic, granted, is deviant: the 
law of excluded middle is suspended pending causal deter-

T R U T H  
91 
mination. But the disquotational character of truth re­
mains. 
Bizarreness remains too. There is the abandonment of the 
law of excluded middle; also the drastic narrowing of the 
range of sentences with fixed truth values. Happily, how­
ever, the theological argument underlying this desperate 
move is inconclusive on two points. One is the assumption 
of an omniscient God. The other is the notion that universal 
determinism precludes freedom of action. We are free and 
responsible, it can be argued, in that we act as we choose to; 
whether our choices are determined by prior causes is be­
side the point. 
Some other apparent challenges to the law of excluded 
middle are, in part, not what they seem. Let it be clear, to 
begin with, that ignorance of the truth or falsity of a sen­
tence is par for the course, and quite in keeping with its 
being true or false. Further, it commonly happens that a 
sentence can be rendered eternal in divergent ways, reflect­
ing a speaker's intentions in different situations. Here it is 
rather the respective utterances that are true or false, to­
gether with their full unambiguous elaborations if we care 
to elaborate them. The original ambiguous sentence is in­
deed then neither true nor false, but this need not be seen as a 
breach of the law of excluded middle; it is better seen as an 
incompleteness that has still to be filled out in one Qr an­
other way. This line was not available in the case of the 
theologians' strictures on contingent predictions, because 
those sentences were meant still to become true or false, 
without supplementation, once they stopped being con­
tingent. 
There is another and stronger case that likewise threatens 
the law of excluded middle. It is where a purported name or 

91 
P U R S U I T  O F  TR UTH 
singluar description fails to designate anything. When a 
sentence contains such a term, one possible line is to drop 
the sentence from consideration; treat it as meaningless . 
This line is awkward when we regiment our sentences for 
logical purposes, for the existence of the object may be an 
open question-as in the case of Camelot or Prester John or 
the outermost satellite of Pluto. It is quite in order for the 
truth value of a sentence to remain an open question, but it 
is inconvenient to leave the very meaningfulness of a sen­
tence forever unsetded . 
One might accordingly relinquish the law of excluded 
middle and opt rather for a three-valued logic, recognizing 
a limbo between truth and falsity as a third truth value. 
What then comes to hinge on existence of Camelot, or 
whatever, is truth value rather than meaningfulness. and 
that is as it should be. But a price is paid in the cumber­
someness of three-valued logic. Alongside 'not', which 
sends truths into falsehods, falsehoods into truths, and 
now limbo into limbo, there would be a truth function that 
sends truths into limbo, limbo into falsehoods, and false­
hoods into truths; ako three more such one-place truth 
functions, playing out the combinations-as contrasted 
with a single one, negation, in two-valued logic . When we 
move out to two-place truth functions (conjunction , alter­
nation, and their derivatives), proliferation runs amok. It 
can still be handled, but there is an evident premium on our 
simple streamlined two-valued logic. 
We can adhere to the latter, in the face anyway of the 
threat of empty singular terms, by simply dispensing with 
singular terms as in § I O. 'Camelot is fair' becomes '3x(x is 
Camelot and x is fair)'. It does not go into limbo; it simply 
goes false if it is false that 3x(x is Camelot). The predicate 

T R U T H  
93 
'is Camelot' is seen on a par with 'is fair', as a predicate irre­
ducibly . 
39 . Truth versus warranted belief 
Pilate was probably not the first to ask what truth is, and he 
was by no means the last. Those who ask it seek something 
deeper than disquotation, which was the valid residue of the 
correspondence theory of truth (§3 3). Yet there is surely no 
impugning the disquotation account; no disputing that 
'Snow is white' is true if and only if snow is white. More­
over, it is a ful account: it explicates clearly the truth or 
falsity of every clear sentence. It is even a more than ful 
account: it imposes a requirement on the truth predicate 
that is too strong for any predicate within the language 
concerned-on pain of contradiction (§34.). 
There are recurrent references to a coherence theory of 
truth, or a pragmatist theory of truth. The question that 
motivates this quest beyond disquotation can perhaps be 
phrased thus: if to call a sentence true is simply to affirm it, 
then how can we tell whether to affirm it? 
The lazy answer is "That al depends on what the sen­
tence is. In the case of ' Snow is white' you just look at snow 
and check the color. " The more sympathetic answer is a 
general analysis of the grounds of warranted belief, hence 
scientific method-perhaps along the lines of §§2-7. 
The moderately holistic considerations there set forth are 
uncongenial to a line currently urged by Michael Dummett, 
in which he contests the law of excluded middle on epis­
temological grounds. The attack was mounted in mathe­
matics by L. E. J. Brouwer early in this century, and Dum­
mett adopts the attitude toward science in general. His 

94 
P U R S U I T  O F  T R U T H  
rough idea is to reckon a sentence of natural science neither 
true nor false if no procedure is known for making a strong 
empirical case for its truth or falsity. 
Holistic considerations make it doubtful what sentences 
should be retained, then, as eligible for truth or falsity . 
Clear candidates for retention are the observation categori­
cals. Other sentences share empirical content in varying 
degrees by implying observation categoricals jointly . It 
seems vain to seek an invidious distinction between sen­
tences eligible for truth or falsity and sentences in limbo, 
unless we either draw that boundary at the observation 
categoricals themselves or else draw it at the far extreme to 
exclude just those sentences that never imbibe any empirical 
content by patticipating in the joint implying of any obser­
vation categoricals. 
Truth is one thing, warranted belief another. We can gain 
clarity and enjoy the sweet simplicity of two-valued logic 
by heeding the distinction . 
40. Truth in mathematics 
What now of those parts of mathematics that share no em­
pirical meaning, because of never getting applied in natural 
science? What of the higher reaches of set theory? We see 
them as meaningful because they are couched in the same 
grammar and vocabulary that generate the applied parts of 
mathematics. We are just sparing ourselves the unnatural 
gerrymandering of grammar that would be needed to ex­
clude them. On our two-valued approach they then qualify 
as true or false, albeit inscrutably. 
They are not wholly inscrutable. The main axioms of set 
theory are generalities operative already in the applicable 

T R U T H  
95 
part of the domain. Further sentences such as the con­
tinuum hypothesis and the axiom of choice, which are inde­
pendent of those axioms, can still be submitted to the con­
siderations of simplicity, economy, and naturalness that 
contribute to the molding of scientific theories generaly. 
Such considerations support COders axiom of construcribil­
ity, 'V = L'.5 It inactivates the more gratuitous flights of 
higher set theory, and incidentally it implies the axiom of 
choice and the continuum hypothesis. More sweeping 
economies have been envisioned by Hermann Weyl, Paul 
Lorenzen, Errett Bishop, and currently Hao Wang and Sol­
omon Feferman, who would establish that all the mathe­
matical needs of science can be supplied on the meager basis 
of what has come to be known as predicative set theory. 6 
Such gains are of a piece with the simplifications and econo­
mies that are hailed as progress within natural science itself. 
It is a matter of tightening and streamlining our global sys­
tem of the world. 
41. Equivalent theories 
I defined empirical content in §7 only for testable theories, 
and I went on to point out that much solid experimental 
science fails of testability in the defined sense. This can 
happen, we saw, because of vague and uncalibrated proba­
bilities in the backlog of theory. No doubt it happens also 
in more complex ways, not clearly understood. I have no 
definition of empirical content to offer for such theories, 
but it still seems to make reasonable intuitive sense to speak 
of empirical equivalence among them, since experimenta-
sSee my St' Thtory and Irs Logic, 2.d ed., pp. 2.34-2.38. 
6 See Quiddi'its, pp. 34-36. 

P U R S U I T  O F  T R U T H  
tion i s  still brought to bear. The idea is that whatever obser­
vation would be counted for or against the one theory 
counts equally for or against the other. What I shall have to 
say about empirically equivalent theories applies indiffer­
ently to testable ones and to theories that are empirically 
equivalent in this ill-defined way. 
Theories can differ utterly in their objects, over which 
their variables of quantification range, and still be empiri­
cally equivalent, as proxy functions show (§12). We hardly 
seem warranted in calling them two theories; they are two 
ways of expressing one and the same theory. It is inter­
esting, then, that a theory can thus vary its ontology. 
Effort and paper have been wasted, by me among others, 
over what to count as sameness of theory and what to count 
as mere equivalence. It is a question of words; we can stop 
speaking of theories and just speak of theory formulations. I 
shall still write simply 'theory', but you may understand it 
as 'theory formulation' if you will. 
Theories (theory formulations) can be logically incom­
patible and still be empirically equivalent. A familiar ex­
ample is Riemannian and Euclidean geometry as applied to 
the surface of a sphere. Riemannian geometry says that 
straight lines always meet. Euclidean geometry says that 
some do and some do not, and in particular that there are 
none on a sphere. The conflict is resolved by reinterpreting 
'straight line' in the Riemannian glossary as 'great circle'. 
The next example, due to Poincare (ch. 4), is less trivial. 
We have on the one hand our commonsense conception of 
infinite space and rigid bodies that move freely without 
shrinking or stretching, and on the other hand the concep­
tion of a finite spherical space in which those bodies shrink 
uniformly as they move away from center. Both concep-

T R UTH 
97 
tions can be reconciled with all possible observations; they 
are empirically equivalent. Yet they differ, this time, more 
deeply than in the mere choice of words. The theory with 
the finite space makes crucial use of a theoretical term that 
admits of no counterpart in the theory with the infinite 
space-namely, 'center of space'. 
Imagine now two theories, ours and another, such that 
we are persuaded of their empirical equivalence but we see 
no way of systematically converting one into the other by 
reinterpretation sentence by sentence, as we did in the ex­
ample of the proxy function and that of the sphere. There 
are three cases to consider. 
Case I :  The other theory is logically compatible with our 
own and is expressed directly in our own terms. It differs 
from ours in that it implies some theoretical sentences that 
ours leaves unsettled, and vice versa. Yet the theories are 
empirically equivalent. This case presents no problem. We 
would simply accept the other theory and incorporate it 
into our own as an enrichment, answering many theoretical 
questions that ours left open. 
Cast 2: Again the other theory is logically compatible 
with ours, but, like Poincare's example, it hinges on some 
theoretical terms not reducible to ours. 
Case 3: The two theories are logically incompatible. 
Donald Davidson showed me that this case can be reduced 
to Case 2 by the following maneuver. Take any sentence 'S 
that the one theory implies and the other denies. Since the 
theories are empirically equivalent, S must hinge on some 
theoretical term that is not firmly pinned down to observ­
able criteria. We may then exploit its empirical slack by 
treating that term as two terms, distinctively spelled in the 
two theories. S thus gives way to two mutually indepen-

P U R S U I T  O F  T R U T H  
dent sentences S and S'. Continuing thus, we can make the 
two theories logically compatible. 
42 . Irresoluble rivalry 
So we may limit our attention to Case 2. Let us limit it 
further to global systems of the world, so that there is no 
question of fitting the rival theories into a broader context. 
So we are imagining a global system empirically equivalent 
to our own and logically compatible with ours but hinging 
on alien terms. It may seem that as staunch empiricists we 
should reckon both theories as true. Still, this line is unat­
tractive if the other theory is less simple and natural than 
ours; and indeed there is no limit to how grotesquely cum­
bersome a theory might be and stil be empirically equiva­
lent to an elegant one. We do better, in such a case, to take 
advantage of the presence of irreducibly alien terms. We can 
simply bar them from our language as meaningless. After 
all, they are not adding to what our own theory can predict, 
any more than 'phlogiston' or 'entelechy' does, or indeed 
'fate', 'grace', 'nirvana', 'mana'. We thus consign all con­
texts of the alien terms to the limbo of nonsentences. 
We have here an encroachment of coherence considera­
tions upon standards of truth. Simplicity and naturalness 
are making the difference between truth and meaningless­
ness. 
We might still choose to enrich our original theory with 
any novel findings of the other theory that do not use the 
alien terms. It would be a matter of welcoming information 
from a presumed dependable outside source, much as sup­
plementary truths of number theory are got by excursions 

TRUTH 
99 
through analysis, or as the four-color-map question was 
setded by an elaborate computer program. 
But now suppose rather that the rival theory is as neat and 
natural as our own. Our empiricist scruples reawaken. 
Should we incorporate that theory into our own, as in Case 
I ?  No, this would il accord with the scientists' quest for 
simplicity and economy; for the irreducible new terms im­
ported with the annexed theory have added no new cov­
erage of observables. The two theories were already em­
pirically equivalent to each other, and hence to their 
conjunction. The two theories were streamlined and neck­
and-neck, but the tandem theory is loaded beyond neces­
sity: loaded with all the sentences containing the new terms. 
One possible attitude to adopt toward the two theories is 
a sectarian one, as I have called it: 7 treat the rival theory as in 
the preceding case, by rejecting all the contexts of its alien 
terms. We can no longer excuse this unequal treatment of 
the two theories on the ground that our own is more ele­
gant, but still we can plead that we have no higher access to 
truth than our evolving theory, however fallible. Dagfmn 
Fellesdal and Roger Gibson abetted me in this sectarian 
attitude. The opposing attitude is the ecumenical one, which 
would count both theories true. Its appeal is empiricism: 
reluctance to discriminate invidiously between empirically 
equivalent and equally economical theories. The tandem 
theory, which we found prohibitively uneconomical, was 
one ecumenical line. But a different ecumenical line has 
been urged by Donald Davidson: that we account both 
theories separately true, the truth predicate being under-
'''Reply to Gibson. " 

100 
P U R S U I T  O F  TRUTH 
stood now as disquotation in an inclusive and thcory­
neutral language in which both theories are couched. In 
recent years I have vacillated among these alternatives, 
which are now down to two: the sectarian line and the 
ecumenical line a la Davidson. 
The latter alternative raises questions regarding the inclu­
sive language. It would include all terms of both of the rival 
systems of the world, and its variables would range over 
both ontologies. Distinctive predicates would serve to de­
limit values of the variables to the one ontology or the other 
as needed. How much more widely should the variables 
range? And what of truth: will there be a hierarchy of truth 
predicates and a matching hierarchy of styles of variables, as 
at the end of §37? We must call a halt. We sought only an 
inclusive language, not a third theory. 
What is to be gained is not evident, apart from the satis­
faction of conferring the cachet of truth evenhandedly. The 
sectarian is no less capable than the ecumenist of appreciat­
ing the equal evidential claims of the two rival theories of 
the world. He can still be evenhanded with the cachet of 
warrantedness, if not of truth. Moreover he is as free as the 
ecumenist to oscillate between the two theories for the sake 
of added perspective from which to triangulate on prob­
lems. In his sectarian way he does deem the one theory true 
and the alien terms of the other theory meaningless, but 
only so long as he is entertaining the one theory rather than 
the other. He can readily shift the shoe to the other foot. 
The fantasy of irresolubly rival systems of the world is a 
thought experiment out beyond where linguistic usage has 
been crystallized by use. No wonder the cosmic question 
whether to call two such world systems true should simmer 

T R U T H  
101 
down, bathetically, to a question of words. Hence also, 
meanwhile, my vacilation. 
Fare these conventions as they may, the rival theories 
describe one and the same world. Limited to our human 
terms and devices, we grasp the world variously. I think of 
the disparate ways of getting at the diameter of an impene­
trable sphere: we may pinion the sphere in calipers or we 
may girdle it with a tape measure and divide by pi, but there 
is no getting inside. 
43 . Two indeterminacies 
There is an evident parallel between the empirical under­
determination of global science and the indeterminacy of 
translation. In both cases the totality of possible evidence is 
insufficient to clinch the system uniquely. But the indeter­
minacy of translation is additional to the other. If we settle 
upon one of the empirically equivalent systems of the 
world, however arbitrarily, we stil have within it the inde­
terminacy of translation. 
Another distinctive point about the indeterminacy of 
translation is that it clearly has nothing to do with inaccessi­
ble facts and human limitations. Dispositions to observable 
behavior are all there is for semantics to be right or wrong 
about (§ I 4). In the case of systems of the world, on the other 
hand, one is prepared to believe that reality exceeds the 
scope of the human apparatus in unspecifiable ways. 
Let us now look more closely to parallels. On the one 
hand we have the two incompatible but equally faithful 
systems of translation; each propounds some translations 
that the other rejects. On the other hand we have two in-

102 
P U R S U I T  O F  TRUTH 
compatible but empirically equivalent systems of the 
world. We noted in § 1 8  that we can reconcile the two sys­
tems of translation by recognizing them as defining differ­
ent relations, translation! and translation2' We noted in §4I 
that we can reconcile the two systems of the world by simi­
larly splitting one or more theoretical terms. 
What the indeterminacy of translation shows is that the 
notion of propositions as sentence meanings is untenable. 
What the empirical under-determination of global science 
shows is that there are various defensible ways of conceiv­
ing the world. 

REFE R E N C E S  
CREDITS 
INDEX 


REFERENCE S 
Barrett, R. B. , and R. F. Gibson, cds. Persptctivts Oil Quillt. Oxford: 
Blackwell. In press. 
Bergstrom, Lars. "Quine on Underdetermination. "  In Barrett and 
Gibson. 
Carnap, Rudolf. Logischt SYlltax du Spracht. Vienna, 1934. 
Chisholm, Roderick. Puctivillg: A Philosophical Study. Ithaca: Cor­
nell University Press, 1 957. 
Davidson, Donald. Essays on Action and Evtnts. Oxford: Clarendon, 
1980. 
Denett, Daniel. Tht Intmlional Stanct. Cambridge: MIT Press, 
1987. 
Duhem, Pierre. La thlorit physique: son objet tt sa structUrt. Paris, 1906. 
Dummett, Michael. Truth and Othu Enigmas. Cambridge: Harvard 
University Press, 1 978. 
Firth, Roderick. "Reply to Sellars. "  Monist 64 (198 1), pp. 9 1 - 101 . 
Grinbaum, Adolf. "The Falsifiability of Theories. " Synthtse 14 
(196:1), pp. 1 7-34. 
Kirk, Robert. "Quine's Indeterminacy Thesis. "  Mind 78 (1969), 
pp. 607-608. 
Levy, Edwin. "Competing Radical Translations. " Boston Studits in 
Philosophy ofScimct 8 (197 1), pp. 590-605. 
Lewis, C. I. An Analysis of Knowltdgt and ValU4tion. La Salle: Open 
Coun, 1946. 
Masey, G. J. "Indeterminacy, Inscrutability, and Ontological Rel­
ativity. "  Amuican Philosophical Quarterly, Monograph u (1978), 
pp· 43-55· 
Parsons. Charles. Mathematics and Philosophy. Ithaca: Cornell Uni­
versity Press, 1 983. 

106 
R E F E R E N C E S  
Poincare. Henri. Scimct and Hypothesis. New York. 1905. 
Popper. Sir Karl. The Logic oj Scientific Discover. New York: Basic 
Books. 1959. 
Premack. David. eavagai. Cambridge: MIT Press. 1986. 
Pumam. Hilary. "Mathematics without Foundations. "  Journal oj 
P#ailosophy 64 (1 967). pp. 5-22. 
Quine. W. V. Mathemaliad Logic. New York. 1940. Corrected ed. 
(thanks to Wang). Cambridge: Harvard University Press. 195 1 .  
-- Elemmt4ry Logic. Boston. 1941. Rev. ed . •  Harvard Univer­
sity Press. 1965. 
-- Methods oJLogic. New York. 1950. 3d ed . •  1972. 4th, Harvard 
University Press, 1982. 
-- "On an Application of Tar ski's Theory of Truth . .. Proceedings 
oJlhe National Academy oJSciences 38 (1951). pp. 43Q-43 J . Rpt. in 
Selected Logic Papm. New York: Random House, 1966. 
-- From a Logical Point 0J Vit1l. Harvard University Press, 1953. 
-- Word and Object. Cambridge: MIT Press, 1960. 
-- Set Theory and Its Logic. Harvard University Press, 1963. Rev. 
cd . •  1969. 
-- TIt Ways oj Paradox and Other Essays. New York, 1966. 
Enlarged ed . •  Harvard University Press, 1976. 
-- Ontological Relativity and Other Essays. New York: Columbia 
University Press. 1969. 
-- Philosophy oj Logic. Englewood Cliffs. N.J. , 1970; Harvard 
University Press, 1986. 
-- Roots oJRefrmce, La Sale: Open Court, 1974. 
-- "The Nature of Natural Knowledge. "  In J. Guttenplan. ed. 
Mind and Language (Oxford: Clarendon Press, (975). pp. 67-81 .  
-- Theories and Things . Harvard University Press. 1981 .  
-- "Events and Reification . .. 
In E .  Lepore and B .  McLaughlin. 
cds. , Action and Evmls (Oxford: Blackwell, 1985). pp. 161-171. 
-- "Reply t o  Roger F. Gibson, Jr." In L. E. Hahn and P .  A .  
Schilpp. cds. , TIt Philosophy oJ W. V. QuiM (laSalle: Open Court. 
1986), pp. 155-1 57. 
-- Quiddities. Harvard University Press, 1987. 
Quine. W. V . ,  and J. S. Ullian. The Web oJBelieJ New York: Ran­
dom House. 1970. Rev. ed. , 1978. 

R E F E R E N C E S  
107 
Russen, Bertrand. "00 Denoting. "  Mirul 14 (19OS), pp. 479-493 . 
-- "Mathematical Logic as Based on the Theory of Types. " 
AmtrictUljou"",I ofMathmultics 30 (1908), pp. 1U-161. 
Sleigh, R. C. "On a Proposed System of Episternic Logic," NoNs 1 
(1968), pp. 391-398. 
Tanki, Alfred. "The Concept of Truth in Formalized Languages. " 
In his Logic, Smulrtics, Mttamathtmatics (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 
19S6), pp. I Sl-178. Translated from the German of 1936. 
Ullian, J. S. Stt Quine and Ullian. 
Vosida, Natuhiko. "Scientific Laws and Tools for Taxonomy. II An­
Mis oftht japantst Association for tht Philosophy of Scittlt 6 (1984), 
pp. 107-11 8. 


CREDITS 
Five and a half pages are from theJou",'ojPlti'osophy, 198]- 1987. as 
follows. Part ofpp. 499-500 of "Ontology and Ideology Revisited" 
(vol. 80) appears in §10; part of p. 6 of "States of Mind" (vol. b) 
appears in §g; and parts of pp. 5-9 of "Indeterminacy of Transla­
tion Again" (vol. 84) appear in S§14. 1 7. 1 8. and 2.]. Two pages 
from pp. 1 39- 1 4 1  of "Cognitive Meaning" in the Monist, vol . 62.. 
1979. appear in §2. ... Most of page 16.t of my reply to daIla Chiara 
and Toraldo di Francia in A",,'isis filos6.fico, vol. 2. (Buenos Aires, 
1982.) appears in S I ] .  Most of p. 5 1  of "Sensory Support of Sci­
ence, " in Discursos de i""utidurQ "Doaor Ho"oris CQNSQ", Granada, 
Spain, 1986, appears in SI I .  I am grateful to al the copyright hold­
ers for their permission. 


INDEX 
Abstract objects, 30, 34 
Analytical hypotheses. 43, 45 
Analyticity. 16. 55-56 
Animism. 74-75 
Anomalous monism. 71-72 
Aristode. 74. 90 
Assignment, 85 
Austin. John L.. vi 
Axioms: of choice, continuum, 
constructibility, 95; of exten­
sionality, 52n 
Behaviorism, 37-38 
Belief, 66-67, 71; waranted, 93-
Ǜ, 100 
Bergstrom, Lars, vii. 41, 43 
Bernays, Paul, 32 
Bishop, Erret, 95 
Bodies, 24-26, 34 
Bose-Einstein statistic, 20 ,  3S 
Bridge principles, 8 
Brouwer, L. E. j., 93 
Carnap, Rudolf, 56 
Cause, 75-76 
ennis paribus, 1 8. 74 
Checkpoints, 10-21, 3 8, 43-47 
Chisholm, Roderick M . ,  65n, 71n 
Classes, 88-90 
Coherence, 93, 98 
Communication, 44 
Concatenation, 69, 85 
Conditionals, 73 
Conjunction, .. 1 1  
Content clause, 61-69, 72 
Correspondence theory, 79-8 1 ,  
93 
Critical semantic mass, 1 7, 53 
Darwin, Charles, 7S 
Davidson, Donald. vii, 19n, 4 1 ,  
41, 44. 71, 73, 97, 99- 100 
Dt diao, ,0-73 
DefiIUtion, 8 1 -82, 86-87 
Dennett, Daniel A. , 73 
Dt rt, 70-73 
Descriptions, 28, 92 
Determinism, 90-91 
[ijctionaries, 56-59 
[ijspositions, 76 
[ijsquotation, 51, 80-84, 89-91 ,  
93 
Dreben, Burton S., v, viii, 4 1 ,  44 
Dreyfus, Hubert L., 5 1  
Duhem, Pierre, 14 
Dummeti. Michael, 93 
Ecumenical line, 99-100 
Einstein, Albert. 20, 3 5. 81 
Empathy. 42-43, 46. 61-63, 
68-69 
Empirical content, 1 6- 1 8. SJ-54, 
94-95 
Empirical equivalence. 17, 95-101 

1 1 2  
I N D EX 
Empiricism, 19 
Epistemology, 1-2, 8, 1 2, 19-20, 
42 
Equivalence, 1 7. 54-55, 95- 101 
Esence. 56. 74 
Eternal sentences, 78-79 
Evidence. 1 -2. 5. 1 2- 1 3  
Excluded middle. 90-92 
Existence, 27-28. 92 
Experiment. 9- 10. 14 
Extensionality. 52n. 72 
Facts, 80 
Fallibility, 21 
Feferman, Solomon, 95 
Firth. Roderick, 7 
FsUesdal. Dagfinn. viii. 4 1 .  99 
Freedom, 91 
Frege. Gottlob, 69 
Future. 90-91 
Gavdgai, 4Ũ, 5 1 
Geometry. 5 I .  96 
Gibson. Robert F . •  viii. 99 
God, 90-91 
GOdel, Kurt. 32. 95 
GreUing. Kurt. 86-87 
Gninbaum. Adolf, 16 
Heterological. 86 
Hierarchies. 84. 81)-90 
Hilbert, David. 32 
Holism. 14- 16. 56. 93-94 
Holophrastic sense. 8. 23. 26, 34, 
37. 50. 68 
Hypotheses. 9. 12- 1 4; analytical. 
43. 45 
Identity. 52 
Implication. 9. 14 
Indeterminacy: of reference. 
50-52; of translation. 37. 
47-5 1; 53. 77. 101- 102 
Indexicals. 78 
Intensionality. 68, 71 -73 
Kant. Immanuel. 1 8  
Kirk, Robert, 48 
Learning. 5-8, 23-24, 29-30, 39. 
44; empathy in. 42. 61 -62 
Leonelli, Michele, viii 
Levy, Edwin, 5 1  
Lewis, Clarence I. . 8 
Lexicography. 56- 59 
Logic, 14, 27-2.8. 3 5-36• 45. 
78-79. 8 1 .  92. 
Lorenzen. Paul, 95 
LOwenheim-Skolem Theorem. 32 
Masey. G. J. . 5 1  
Mathematics. 1 5 .  56. 94-95 
Meurings. 3 7, 52-56. 77. 102. 
Mind, 6 1 ,  72, 74-75 
Minimum mutilation. 14. I S. S6 
Modal operators, 30, 73 
Moore, G. E . •  55 
Miihlholzer, Felix, viii 
Naturalism, 19-20, 41-42 
Necessity, 5 5-56, 73 
Nerves, I. 41-42, 44, 62, 71-72 
Norms. 19-20 
Observation, 2, 1 3  
Observation categoricaJs, 1 0-1 2, 
18, 23 . 94 
Observation sentences. 2-8, 1 3 .  
29-30; translation of, 39-40. 
42.-45 

I N D E X  
1 1 3  
Occasion sentences, 3 ,  10, 54, 61, 
63-64, 78 
Ontological relativity, 34, 5 1-P. 
Ontology, 27-28, 3 1-33, 3 5-36, 
96 
Opacity, 69-70 
Ordered pairs, 85 
Paradoxes, 82-84, 86-88 
Parsons, Charles Do, 30, 88 
Perception, 1, 61-68, 71-72 
Physical objects, 20-2 1 , 24-26, 
34-35 
Poincare, Henri, 96, 97 
Popper, Sir Karl R., 12 
Possibility, 30, 73-74 
Predicate-functor logic, 27 
Predicate logic, 1 4, 28, 3 5-36, 72 
Predication, 4, I I ,  23-24, 29 
Predicativity, 95 
Prediction, 1-2, 16, 20, 90-91 
Premack, David, 5 I 
Probability, 1 3 ,  20, 36, 95 
Pronouns, 26, 3 1  
Propositional attitudes, 48, 56, 
67-73 
Propositions, 53. 68, 77-78, 102 
Proxy functions, 3 1 -33 . 52, 96 
Putnam, Hilary, 30 
Quantification, 14, 26-27, 30, 
69-70 
Query and assent, 39-40 
Quotation, 68-70, 72, 80, 82-83 
Reference, 27, 52, 68 
Reichenbach, Hans, 8 
Reification, 8, 23-25, 29-30, 42 
Relations, 85 
Russell, Bertrand, 1 8, 28, 84, 
88-90 
Satisfaction, 85-87, 89 
Science, 1-2, 20--2 1 ,  71-73 , 
15-16; analogy in, 34-35; cush­
ioning of, 11-19, 95; under­
detennination of, !)6-1020 Stt 
also Hypotheses ami Theories 
Sectarian line, 99- 100 
Semantic ascent, 8 1  
Semantics, 56-59 
Sentence versus term, 8, 23, 26, 
34, ]1; in lexicography, 51-59; 
under translation, 50-5 I 
Set theory, 5 1.n, 88-90, 95 
Sheŏin-Williams (paint makers), 
Xl 
Similarity, 4, 34, 62 
Simplicity, 20, 8 1 ,  95, 98, 99 
Singular terms, 28, 92 
Sleigh, R. C . ,  101 
SpeUing, 69, 12, 85 
Standing sentences, 10, 64, 78n 
Stimulation, 1-4, 40--41. 
Stimulus equivalence, 1 6- 1 1. 44 
Stimulus meaning. 3-4, 12- 1 3, 
16, 40, 42, 44 
Strawson, Sir Peter, 24 
Substitutivity, 53-540 69, 12 
Synonymy, 16- 1 7, 44, 54-55 
Syntax, 49-50. 69, 71. 
Synthetic, 16, 1 8  
Tarski, Alfred, 52, 80, 83-86, 88n 
Telepathy, 1 9. 21 
Tense, 78 
0 
Terms, Stt Reification ami Sen-
tence versus term 
Testability, 16- 1 8, 95 
Tests, 1 2 ,  1 7  
Theology, 75, 90-91 
Theories, I ,  4, 6-8, 1 3 ,  95- 101 . 
Stt also Hypotheses and Science 
Time, 30 
Translation, 3 7-40, 43-5 1 

I N D E X  
Truth. 79-80. 93; as disquotation. 
80-84. 8cr91. 93; definition of. 
81-82. 85; paradoxes of, 82-84. 
86-88; utility of. 80-8 1; vehi­
cles of. 77-79 
Truth functions. 29. 45. 92 
Ullian. Joseph S. . zo 
Under-determination. 96- 102 
Understanding. 58-59 
Variables. 26-28. 3 1 .  6cr70. 89 
Wang Hao, 95 
Warranted belief. 93-94. 100 
Weyl, Herman. 95 
Wittgenstein. Ludwig. 20, 3 5  
Yosida. Natuhiko. 1 8  


