Wall fixings for 
hollow surfaces  
F
s
a
how to u
d
h
s
t
m
s
tever.  
ixings for hollow 
tructures 
(walls, 
ceilings 
nd doors etc.) and 
se them 
When fixing onto any 
urface the strength of the 
fixing 
is 
always 
ependent upon the strength 
of the actual surface, with 
ollow 
surfaces 
this 
is 
generally less than for a 
olid structure. It is always 
best with hollow surfaces 
o try to locate and fix into 
one 
of 
the 
support 
embers. This is not always 
possible 
and 
it 
is 
ometimes 
necessary 
to 
actually secure onto the covering, be it plaster board, hardboard or wha
s
When drilling relatively thin, soft materials it is not necessary or desirable to use hammer 
action if a power drill is used.  
Before drilling into any void, check for possible concealed pipes and electric wiring.  
Rubber-sleeved fixing with captured insert  
As the screw is tightened into the rubber sleeve inserted through the wallboard, the sleeve is 
compressed against the reverse side of wall. The screw can be removed/replaced if required, 
the fixing will remain in place through the wall.  
After the required hole is drilled, the rubber sleeve is inserted through the covering; the sleeve 
needs to be a fairly tight fit through the hole to ensure that it does not rotate when the screw is 
tightened. The screw is then inserted through the workpiece and into a tapped insert, which is 
moulded into the back end of the sleeve.  
The sleeve has a small rim which stands proud of the outer surface, to allow the workpiece to 
sit flat against the surface, the back of the workpiece should be relieved around the hole.  
Various sizes are available; the screws are supplied with the fitting although longer screws of 
the appropriate diameter/thread can be used where the workpiece is too thick for the screw 
supplied.  
Plastic collapsible fixing  
Very similar to the above fixing but using an ordinary wood screw. The fixing is used in the 
same manner as the above but they tend to stand up less well to repeated screw 
removal/replacement as the screw tends to cut a new thread each time it is inserted.  
 
Plastic spread fixing  
An inexpensive fixing which is not reusable - removal of the screw will result in the fixing 
dropping down the cavity.  
Drill a hole just large enough to take the head of the fixing.  

An ordinary wood screw of the appropriate length (at 
least equal to the thickness of the workpiece plus the 
thickness of wallboard plus the length of the fixing), is 
inserted through the workpiece and into the fixing by 
about 2 or 3 turns. The fixing is then pushed through 
the hole in the wallboard. As the fixing is pushed 
through, the 'legs' of the fixing are compressed and 
they spring out once the fixing is through the board. 
The workpiece needs to be pulled away from the front 
surface so that the legs of the fixings bear on the 
reverse side of the wall as the screw is tightened.  
Various sizes are available to suit various diameters 
of 
wood 
screw.  
 
Spring metal toggle fixing 
These fixings tend to give a stronger anchor than the plastic types above as they spread the 
load over a larger area on the reverse side of wallboard. The fixing consists of two spring-
loaded metal arms with a thread tapped into the hinge pivot. The two arms are held against 
the screw as the fixing is inserted through the pre-drilled hole and then spring out to spread 
the load on the reverse side of the wallboard. The fixings cannot be reused - removal of the 
screw will result in the fixing dropping down the cavity.  
Drill a hole just large enough to allow the toggle to be pushed through with its spring-loaded 
arms held together.  
Pass the fixing screw through the workpiece into toggle. Push the toggle through the hole until 
the arms spring out, pull the workpiece away from the front surface (so that the arms bear 
against the reverse side of the wallboard) and tighten the screw.  
Various sizes are available; the screws are supplied with the fitting although longer screws of 
the appropriate diameter/thread can be used where the workpiece is too thick for the screw 
supplied.  
 
Gravity metal toggle fixing  
These fixings are similar to the spring type above except that the toggle is made in one piece 
which is passed through the hole and then drops down under gravity to be parallel to a 
vertical wallboard. These fixings can only be used when fixing to vertical surfaces. The fixings 
cannot be reused - removal of the screw will result in the toggle dropping down the cavity.  
Drill hole just big enough to allow the toggle to be passed through when the toggle is parallel 
to the fixing screw.  
Pass the fixing screw through the workpiece into toggle. Push the toggle through the hole until 
it turns within the cavity, pull the workpiece away from the front surface (so that the toggles 
bear against the reverse side of the wallboard) and tighten the screw.  
Various sizes are available; the screws are supplied with the fitting although longer screws of 
the appropriate diameter/thread can be used where the workpiece is too thick for the screw 
supplied.  
 

 
Wall fixings for solid surfaces 
Fixing into solid brick, block or concrete 
When you need a fixing into brick, block or concrete, you need to be confident that it will be 
strong enough for the application - the easiest way to be confident is to use the correct type of 
insert with the correct size of drill and screw.  
Although often referred to as 'wall' fixings, they are equally suitable for fixing into floors or 
concrete beams.  
Plugs for screws: 
General.  
All the plugs described below for use in solid surfaces are designed for use with ordinary 
wood screws. Each basic type of plug is available in a range of sizes to suit specific screw 
diameters and often for specific length of screw. To ensure maximum strength when using a 
particular type and size of plug, always follow the manufacturers recommendations regarding 
the drill size and the length/size of screw.  
Generally it does not matter what material the screw is made from or the type of screw head, 
but when selecting the type of screw to use, think about the position and environment in 
which it will be used. If the screw head will be exposed, consider a brass or chrome finish, if 
the screw will be used in a damp area, avoid steel or other materials which will corrode. 
Drilling  
All the plugs detailed require a hole to be drilled in the brick, block or concrete before the plug 
can be used. Often on internal walls, the material will be covered with a relatively thin coating 
of render and/or plaster.  
Before drilling into any surface, check for possible concealed pipes and electric wiring.  
To ensure that the drill bit has a long and happy life, a tungsten-carbide masonry drill bit 
should be used. The effort required to drill the hole depends a lot upon the material being 
drilled: 
Brick:  
Brick is basically baked clay, and a good quality brick will be free of both internal voids and 
internal pieces of flint, stone or other 'non-clay' material. While the hardness of bricks will 
vary, they can normally be drilled accurately and cleanly. You may need to use a power drill 
with a hammer action on bricks that are very hard. 
Block:  
Block material can vary considerably from the ultra-soft lightweight/thermal blocks to the 
concrete block containing large pieces of very hard flint etc.  

Lightweight blocks can be drilled very easily using a hand-brace or a power drill 
without hammer action. A risk with these blocks is that they are not very 
forgiving', a small amount of pressure in the wrong direction and the drill bit will 
be away where you never intended it to go.  
'
At the other end of the block materials, is the concrete block - these can vary 
greatly in hardness and the cleanness of the final hole. Concrete can vary both 
between different areas of the same block and between blocks from different 
manufacturers. A drilled hole tends not to be as clean as in brick and there is always a danger 
that the drill bit will hit a piece of hard material causing the bit to wonder off the intended line. 
Even when no large pieces of hard material is encountered, the drill bit will often remove 
smaller pieces of grit which will unintentionally enlarge the drilled hole. A hammer action 
power drill is generally required. 
Concrete:  
Cast concrete is different from the block version in that the material is less 'grainy' with the 
particles more firmly bonded together. Like the block material, when drilling into cast concrete, 
large or small pieces of hard flint etc. may be encountered, causing the drill bit to wonder off 
line, prevent drilling to an increased depth or producing a ragged hole.  
Most plugs need to be a push fit into the drilled hole, if the hole is undersize, hammering the 
plug into the hole may damage the plug and/or make it impossible to drive the screw home in 
the correct manner. Too large a hole may make it difficult to drive the screw home (the plug 
may turn in the hole as the screw is turned) or provide reduced strength when the screw has 
been tightened.  
Plastic plugs  
These are available in a variety of lengths and for a variety of screw sizes. The interior of the 
plugs will usually be designed so that when a screw is fully inserted the end of the plug 
furthest from the surface expands the greatest.  
Drill hole to the same depth as the wall plug. Push the plug into the hole, insert the screw 
through 
the 
workpiece 
into 
the 
plug 
and 
tighten.  
 
Plastic 'plug sticks'  
Plug sticks are sold as lengths (12 in/300mm) of a uniform cross section along the whole 
length. Different diameter sticks are available for different screw sizes - the different 
diameters are normally made with differing material colours for easy identification. It is only 
necessary to cut off the appropriate length after the hole has been drilled and insert the length 
of stick into the hole. Although convenient, the sticks do not give as firm a fixing as the plugs 
because of their uniform cross-section.  
Fibre plugs 
Fibre plugs are often though of as old-fashioned however they still have a use today. One of 
their advantages over plastic is that screw can be removed/replaced a number of times 
without having to replace the plug. There also tend to stand up to high temperatures better 
than plastic. Fibre plugs are available in a number of lengths and diameter; they are of a 
uniform cross-section along the length so can be cut down to size if necessary. The plug 
should be as long as the threaded part of screw.  
Drill the hole and insert the plug to just below the wall surface. Insert the screw through the 
workpiece and turn the screw into the plug until the plug starts to bind in the hole and then 

w
f
h
 
ithdraw it so that the top of the plug is in 
ine with the surface. The plug expands to 
it the hole tightly as the screw is driven 
ome.  
l
 
Ribbed barrel plugs  
Ribbed barrel give a really tight fit. Each plug will take a range of screw sizes and a choice of 
lengths is available.  
Drill hole slightly deeper than wall plug being used. Push the plug into the hole, insert the 
screw through the workpiece into the plug and tighten.  
 
 
Soft materials, such as lightweight block 
Because lightweight block is a very soft substance, special plugs are required. These plugs 
tend to be like ordinary wall plugs but with helical wings around the barrel. The helical wings 
grip the sides of hole. As the screw is tightened, the wings cut further into the block giving a 
very strong fixing.  
Drill the hole the same diameter as the plug barrel. The overall diameter of the plug will be 
about twice the diameter of the barrel, and the plug will need to be hammered into the wall so 
that the wings cut into the sides of the hole. Slip the screw through the workpiece into the plug 
and 
tighten. 
 
Bolts and nuts metal wall inserts 
These can offer a stronger and more temperature resistance fixing than plastic or fibre plugs.  
The anchoring part of the insert comprises a number of metal segments which are forced into 
the side of the hole by a cone which is pulled forward into the segments by the bolt or nut 
being tightened. Tightening the nut or bolt pulls the cone into the segments but it also tends to 
force the insert out of the wall if it is not held in position until the segments begin to bite into 
the wall of the hole. The nuts/bolts can be removed/replaced numerous times, the only risk is 
that the wall material may be weakened by repeated application of the securing pressure.  
Projecting type have an external screw thread which projects from the insert. Different lengths 
of thread are available (from 12mm to over 75mm) to allow for different thicknesses of 
workpieces. The hole in the surface only needs to be as deep as the actual insert itself.  
Having drilled the hole just large enough for the insert, push the insert into the hole, position 
the workpiece over the thread, put on the washer and nut. Keeping the workpiece against the 
surface (to ensure the insert is not pulled from the hole) tighten the nut - any excess thread 
may 
be 
sawn 
off.  
 

Bolt type inserts incorporate a thread in the cone and a bolt is inserted from the wall 
surface, different lengths of bolt are available for workpieces of different thicknesses. The 
hole in the wall needs to be deep enough to ensure that the bolt does not bottom when it 
is fully tightened.  
Having drilled the hole just large enough for the insert (but deep enough for the tightened 
bolt), push the insert just into the hole, put the bolt through a washer and the workpiece, 
offer up the workpiece and engage the bolt into the threaded cone at the back of the 
insert. Keeping the workpiece against the surface (to ensure the insert is not pulled from 
the hole) tighten the bolt.  
 
 

