Welcome to our decorating guide, in this part of the guide we will take 
you through the process of decorating a ceiling, we take you through the 
process from hanging lining paper to hanging the ceiling covering. 
 
 
To complete this task you will need the following items: 
• 
Ceiling Covering  
• 
Lining Paper  
• 
Appropriate Paste  
• 
Stanley Knife (trimming knife)  
• 
Pair of suitable Scissors  
• 
Sponge  
• 
Tape Measure  
• 
Paste Brush  
• 
2 Trestle tables (or step ladders) 
and two scaffold boards  
• 
Paperhanging brush  
• 
Decorating table (pasting table)  
• 
1 Bucket for the Paste  
• 
1 Bucket of Clean Water  
• 
Wooden Stick (to mix the paste)  
• 
Wallpaper Seam Roller  
• 
Soft nib Pencil  
• 
Broad knife Trimming Tool  
• 
Rule  
 
 
When working at heights always ensure that the structure is safe and 
secure. Never stretch out, always get down and re-position the scaffold. 
 
Lining Paper 
Why use lining paper?  
 
It is worth the extra effort of using lining paper to 
give a better finish, especially if the ceiling has 
imperfections that may protrude underneath the 
covering. 
 
Lining paper needs to be hung at a 90º angle to the 
final covering paper, this stops the edges of both 
papers lining up and protruding, it also reduces the 
risk of the final covering upseating the first. 
 
First we need to decide how many rolls we need, 
take your tape measure (steel) and measure the 
run of the room (in this case the length of the 
room), add 10cm (100mm) onto this measurement.
 
Now measure the width of the room (remember to 
take into account any alcoves you may have). 
 
Next note the width and length of the lining paper.  
Roll Calculation: 
1. Divide the roll length by the run length to 
give the number of lengths per roll --call this 
A--  
2. Divide the width of the room by the roll 
width to give the number of lengths required 
Using the measurements of the 
example room above we will work 
out how many rolls of paper are 
needed. 
 
Note: We are running the lining 
paper along the length of the 
room, the reason is so when we 
hang the top covering at 90º it 
will be runnning from the window 
eliminating shadows along the 
joins. 
 
For example purposes we will 
presume that our rolls of paper 

--call this B--  
3. Divide B by A to give the number of rolls 
required, it is better to go slightly over than 
under.  
See the example on the right.  
 
have the following dimensions: 
• 
Roll Length: 10m  
• 
Roll Width: 50cm 
(500mm)  
and the room has the following 
dimensions: 
• 
Room Length = 4.5m + 
10cm (100mm) waste = 
4.6m run length  
• 
Room Width = 3.5m  
So our calculation is:  
1. Divide 10m (roll length) by 
4.6m (run length) = 2.1 
runs to a roll (approx, it is 
always best to allow a bit). 
2. Divide 3.5m (room width) 
by 0.5 (roll width) = 7 
pieces (runs) are needed.  
3. Divide 7 by 2.1 = 3.5 rolls. 
 
So we need 3.5 rolls (4 rolls).  
 
 
Preparing the Ceiling for application 
Firstly make sure your trestles and boards are 
set at the right height and are safe and 
secure. 
 
If the ceiling has an old covering then remove it 
making sure to get rid of everything (pay close 
attention to light fittings, paper tends to get caught 
underneath), wash down the ceiling with sugar 
soap (or similar), check for loose plaster and 
replace where necessary. Remove any loose paint, 
and fill any holes or cracks in the ceiling. If the 
plaster has a gloss finish then sand it down with a 
suitably abrasive sandpaper (glasspaper).  
Here we see the one side of the 
setup, the ideal height means 
that you can stand on the board 
and put the palm of your hand 
against the ceiling with your arm 
slightly bent. Most importantly 
make sure it is safe and secure.  
 
 
 

Hanging the Lining Paper - Part 1 
First it is best to get a guide marked on the ceiling 
which can guide you when you hang your first 
piece, to do this decide which end of the room you 
are going to start, take your tape and measure the 
width of the paper, then deduct 1cm (10mm) and 
mark this distance out from the wall at each end of 
the run. 
 
You can then take a chalk line and chalk a line 
between the 2 marks, or if you don't have a chalk 
line then you can place marks at intervals to guide 
you when you hang the paper.  
 
 
Hanging the Lining Paper - Part 2 
Next it's time to mix the paste, paste normally takes around 15-20 minutes to 
develop the right consistency. If we mix the paste now then it should be ready by the 
time we are ready to use it, although always follow the manufacturers 
guidelines.  
 
Now we cut the paper, measure the paper (remembering to add 10cm (100mm) 
extra) and cut as many runs as you need.  
Note: If you are using patterned paper check the manufacturer's instructions for any 
special pattern matching information.  
 
When you have cut each run, check the time to make sure you have allowed 
sufficient time for the paste. Lay the runs onto the table with the face down, you will 
probably find it helpful if you have any clips to clamp the paper to the table while you 
work.  
 
When you paste work from the middle out towards the edges, when you have 
completed the section on the pasting table pull the unpasted section onto the table, it 
is sometimes a lot easier to work with if you fold the pasted section in a concertina 
effect (never crease along the fold) as you are pulling the dry section onto the 
table, this also makes things a lot easier when you come to hang it !  
 
Now leave the paper to soak (see manufacturer's instructions)  
 
 
 
Hanging the Lining Paper - Part 3 
Now we can hang the first piece, you will need your scissors, stanley knife and 
wallpapering brush (to smooth the paper).  
 
It is important to get the first piece in position pefectly as this piece will dictate the 
position of the rest of the runs.  
 
Unfold the paper to a comfortable size to work with, starting at the end furthest from 
the window (if it is the top covering) or the other wall (if it is lining paper) place the 
paper against the ceiling in line with the guide marks you made earlier, allow around 
5cm (50mm) overhang at the end.  
 
Now slowly moving along the plank smooth and align the paper as you unfold it, 
making sure you remove all the trapped air with your wallpapering brush as you go.  

 
If you are going to paper the walls next then when you reach the other end of the 
room leave around an 8mm overhang, if you are not papering the walls then run a 
pencil along the edge, then pull the paper back enough for you to trim it to the pencil 
line, now smooth out the paper with your wallpapering brush. Repeat at each end.  
 
Now repeat the process with another section, this time butt it against the first piece, 
the first piece will be your guide line. If you are hanging patterned wallpaper then 
ensure the pattern is matched correctly (see manufacturer's instructions).  
 
Now hang the remaining lengths, the last piece you hang will probably be narrower 
than the width of the roll, in this case measure how wide you need the piece, add on 
5cm (50mm) and then cut a run to that width measurement, paste it and hang it 
butting up to the last piece you hung, then simply trim the piece using a pencil and 
scissors.  
 
After the paper has dried a bit go along the edges with your seam roller to smooth 
them, if you are hanging an embossed covering try using a clean dry paint roller 
instead as this will not flatten the paper as much.  
 
When you have smoothed all the edges take a damp sponge and lightly clean the 
paper to remove any excess paste at the joins.  
 
If you have followed this guide to hang the lining paper, then to hang your top 
covering simply follow the instructions through again but this time start with the run 
going away from the window. Allow 24 hours for the lining paper to dry.  
 

