WALL TILING  
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
Good tiling is relatively easy if accompanied by careful 
planning. Estimate the number of tiles you need beforehand 
and know your design requirements if you are introducing a 
pattern or border. Then set out your starting point, and plan 
how to deal with awkward corners or recesses. Take care 
with spacing and bedding the tiles and clean off excess 
adhesive and grout as you go. 
  
 
 
Protect your eyes with safety glasses or goggles when 
cutting tiles. Be careful of snapped tile edges because they 
can cut you. To protect sensitive or dry skin, gloves should 
be used when applying adhesive or grout (the ready-mixed 
paste which fills the gaps between adjacent tiles). 
  
 
 
You can easily brighten up your bathroom or kitchen by 
using wall tiles. These are both decorative and functional. 
  
Wall tiles provide bright and easy-clean surfaces which are 
especially useful in kitchens and bathrooms. They are hard 
wearing and water resistant, and can help to brighten up 
small rooms or shaded work areas by reflecting natural light.
 
2  - Tile choice  
Ceramic wall tiles are available in a wide choice of sizes, 
colours, designs and shapes. Square tiles are the most 
common, but other shapes include rectangles, hexagons, 
diamonds, octagons or interlocking designs. Wall tiles are 
thinner (4 to 6mm thick) than floor tiles, as they are subject 
to less wear. They are easier to work with and cut or snap to
a scored line. They are also brittle and will chip or break 
easily if dropped.  
 
 
 
Combination tiles feature a pattern or design motif on a 
background and coordinate with plain tiles. They allow you 
to add interest to an otherwise plain wall.  
 
 
 
Universal tiles have bevelled edges and/or spacing lugs to 
give correct spacing for grout between tiles.  
 
 
 

Standard field tiles have 
square edges and must be 
spaced by other means. 
Plastic spacers can be used t
give even spacing for the 
grout.  
 
Rectangular border tiles 
(often half-size), ceramic 
edging trims and mouldings 
are available to give 
definition to the tiled area. 
Clearly defined and well-
finished edges give a 
professional look.  
o 
 
 
 
Grout lines must be aligned and a constant width, as the eye
is drawn to the straight lines of the grouting. When choosing 
a border tile or trim, make sure that it is the same width as 
the other tiles used.  
 
 
 
 
3  - Surface preparation  
Tiles can be stuck to most surfaces with the right 
preparation. The surface must be flat because tiles reflect 
light and show up any unevenness.  
 
 
 
Surfaces must be clean, dry and stable. Crumbling plaster 
must be removed and all imperfections and holes made 
good. Newly plastered walls must be allowed to dry 
thoroughly for several months. 
 
 
 
Flaky, crumbly and absorbent surfaces can be primed with a 
PVA-based adhesive. Use a building/construction type as 
directed. Waterproof adhesive should also be used in areas 
which could become wet.  
 
 
 
Old ceramic tiles do not have to be removed: you can tile on 
top. Check if they are firmly fixed - if not, use a good tile 
adhesive to stick them into place. Make sure that the joints 
between the new tiles are not in the same place as the old 
ones.  
 
 
 
You do not have to re-plaster a wall that is either bare brick 
or taken down to brick level. Use exterior grade ply or 
plasterboard fixed to the wall to give a clean and flat base 
surface on which to tile.  
 
 
 
Do not attempt to tile over wallpaper. This must be stripped 
back to plaster first. If tiling over a gloss-painted surface, 

roughen up the surface with coarse abrasive paper to 
provide a key to which the adhesive will bond.  
 
4  - Measuring & planning  
The number of tiles needed for plain, uninterrupted wall 
areas is easy to calculate. Find out the number required for 
the height and for the width (counting part tiles as whole 
tiles). Multiply the two together and add a further 10% for 
breakages. 
 
 
 
There can be significant variations between batches of tiles. 
Always buy the quantity you need in the first place and 
check that all the boxes are from the same batch.  
 
 
 
Window recesses and alcoves should be calculated 
separately and added on. If you are using patterned tiles as 
inserts, these must be calculated and deducted from your 
total figure.  
 
 
 
If you want to incorporate patterned or motif tiles, plan their 
exact positions using graph paper, with each large square 
representing a tile. Shade in where you want the patterned 
tiles to fall. Stick with this plan because it may be difficult to 
change once you have started tiling.  
 
 
 
Step 1:  
Make a tiling gauge from a 
length of straight wooden 
batten (say 1.8m or 2.4m of 
planed 2 x 1in wood). Mark 
the spacing of the tiles on it 
and the separate spacer g
if used.  
 
Starting at the top of the 
skirting board, use the tiling 
gauge to plan your tile rows. 
If a narrow strip is left at the 
top, move the bottom row up by half a tile width to give 
more even margins. 
aps 
 
 
 
Step 2:  
Using a spirit level, mark out the first horizontal row of tiles 
to be fixed above the floor or skirting boards. This must be 
one tile height or less above the base level. Nail a thin guide 
batten along this line so that the tiles can be positioned 
against it.  
 
 
 
Use masonry nails for the guide battens, but do not drive 
them fully in - then they can be removed easily.  
 
 

 
Step 3:  
Mark a vertical line down the centre of the wall, using a 
plumb bob and line. Use the gauge stick again to set out the 
vertical rows on each side of this line. 
 
 
 
If the border tiles measure less than half a tile width, move 
the rows sideways by half a tile. Fix another guide batten 
against the final vertical line.  
 
 
 
Since very few lines or fittings in a house are truly horizontal
or vertical, you will probably have to cut 'filler' tiles to fit in 
odd areas around skirting boards, architrave and corners 
between walls.  
 
5  - Laying the tiles  
Most ceramic tile adhesives can be bought ready-mixed and 
some can also be used for grouting between the tiles.  
 
 
 
Step 1:  
Use a notched spreader 
(normally supplied with the 
tile adhesive) to apply the 
adhesive evenly over the 
surface to be tiled. The r
in the adhesive allow for 
positioning and bedding of 
the tiles. Cover an area of 
about 1m² (1yd²)at a time, 
to prevent the adhesive 
drying out.  
idges 
 
 
 
Step 2:  
Start with the first tile in the corner formed by the two guide 
battens, pressing it until it is firmly fixed. Continue by 
adding the tiles on each side, building up three or four rows 
at a time. Use spacers between the tiles if they are not the 
self-spacing universal type.  
 
 
 
Continue with successive rows of tiles until the whole area 
has been built up, applying new adhesive as and when 
required. 
 
 
 
Periodically, use a damp sponge to wipe any excess 
adhesive from the surface of the tiles.  
 
 
 

Step 3:  
The guide battens can be removed after 12 hours and the 
cut filler tiles fitted (see 'Cutting tiles to fit').  
 
 
 
Tiles in a window recess, and 
particularly on a window sill, 
should be laid to overlap the 
wall tiles.  
 
Better still, use plastic edge 
trim to give a neat quadrant 
moulding between the two 
surfaces and to protect the 
edges from accidental k
and chips. 
nocks 
 
 
 
Edge trim is supplied in 1.8m lengths, in a variety of colours 
to suit tiles and grouting. It is the same thickness as 
standard tiles and is simply bedded into the tile cement 
under the top surface tiles.  
 
 
 
 
6  - Cutting tiles to fit  
Step 1:  
To mark each filler tile, place it face down, partly 
overlapping the tile next to the space and butting up against 
the adjacent wall or ceiling. On the edge of the tile mark 
where it needs to be cut (taking account of spacing), using a 
sharp chinagraph pencil or child's crayon. Turn the tile over 
and draw a line between the two edge marks with a ruler.  
 
 
 
Do not use felt-tip pens for marking out. The ink may run 
into the unglazed portion of the tile and may also bleed into 
the grouting and discolour it.  
 
 
 
Step 2:  
Using a steel rule as a guide, score along the marked line 
with a tungsten-tipped cutter. Make one good strong stroke 
to penetrate the glazed surface of the tile.  
 
 
 
Step 3:  
Place tiles glazed side up o
either matchsticks or a thin 
wooden kebab-type skewer,
placed directly under the 
scored line. Apply even 
pressure with the hands 
either side to snap the tile 
along the scored line.  
ver 
 
 
 
 

Alternatively, use a tile-
s 
 
 
here you need to remove thin strips of tile, and even 
e 
Step 4:  
around shaped 
or 
 
 
ternatively, use card cut-outs to trace the shape onto the 
hen working in confined spaces, it is often easier to apply 
 - Grouting  
d 24 hours after tiling. Professionals use 
ep 1:  
reader to force the grout into the gaps between 
ll 
ep 2:  
fter covering the surface area to be worked, wipe away the 
snapping tool with the jaw
directly aligned with the score
mark or use a platform 
cutting table with a scoring 
wheel to score and snap the 
tiles.  
 
W
pressure cannot be successfully applied to snap it, nibble 
away at the excess tile with a pair of tile nibblers.  
 
You may have to break the tile away in several smaller 
pieces along the score line, and the cut edge may requir
smoothing with a tile file.  
 
 
 
To fit tiles 
areas such as a washbasin 
around a pipe, use a profile 
template gauge to copy the 
shape and transfer it to the 
surface of the tile. 
 
l
A
tile. Grip the tile firmly, but without excessive pressure, in a 
wooden vice or in the jaws of a Workmate, then cut to shape
with a tile saw. This has a blade like a thin round file, which 
is held in a frame similar to a junior hacksaw.  
 
 
 
W
adhesive to the rear of the tile rather than to the wall - 
especially when fitting filler tiles.  
 
 
 
 
7 
G
a
rout can be applie
 'squeegee' type tool, but a piece of dense foam sponge or 
a rubber spreader are also suitable.  
 
 
 
t
S
Use the sp
the tiles. Spread in all directions to ensure the gaps are we
filled.  
 
 
 
t
S
A

excess gro
bucket of clean water.  
 
 
ut with another sponge, rinsing it frequently in a 
 give an even, polished finish to the grout, use a piece of 
owel to run down the grout lines, to ensure an even depth 
 
hen the grout is dry, polish the tiled area with a soft cloth 
p ball of newspaper.  
s such as hooks, soap dishes and 
ile inserts. However, you may 
 
rst mark the hole position in chinagraph pencil.  
 
  
ith a hard, pointed tool (a centre punch or hole-boring 
e a dimple in the tile. This will score the surface as
 
o prevent the drill point from slipping when starting up, 
area with masking tape and drill through this, 
ent the tile from cracking when tightening a screw 
xing, make sure that the wall plug is fully seated in the wall
 
To
d
and thickness to the grouting lines.  
 
 
 
Step 3: 
W
or rolled-u
 
8 - Drilling tiles  
 
Certain bathroom fitting
ings are made as ceramic t
r
wish to add screwed-on towel rails or similar fittings.  
 
 
 
Step 1: 
Fi
 
 
Step 2:
W
tool), mak
a starting point for your masonry drill.  
 
 
 
Step 3: 
T
cover the 
using the dimple as a starting guide.  
 
 
 
To prev
fi
behind the tile. Tightening a screw expands the plug in the 
hole. If the plug is still seated within the tile, the tile may 
crack.  
 

