WALLPAPERING 
TECHNIQUES 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
Wallpapering is a skill that develops with practice. If you are 
a beginner, leave papering stairwells and ceilings until you 
are reasonably competent. 
  
 
 
Take care when working on ladders, and do not overreach. 
  
 
 
Wallpapering is one of the most popular ways of changing 
the appearance of a room. 
  
Modern materials make decorating much easier for 
beginners. The extensive range of wallcoverings available 
means that you can change the colour, pattern and texture 
of your walls with ease. With practice you will be able to 
paper even the most difficult areas of your home with 
confidence. Wallpapering is usually the final stage of 
decorating a room after painting. From solid colours to 
sophisticated prints to patterned papers for children's rooms,
wallpapering is a simple, versatile and effective way of 
refreshing any space in the house.  
• 
When planning your decor, don't forget we stock a 
wide range of coordinating borders, trims, blinds, 
lighting and tiles as well.  
• 
B&Q wallpapers also come in easy-clean waterproof 
vinyl for high-splash areas like kitchens and 
bathrooms.  
 
2  - Measuring  
Use the chart below to estimate the amount of wallpaper you are going to need. Allow and 
calculate extra when using a paper with a large repeating pattern. 
 
 
 
 
 
HOW MANY ROLLS FOR THE WALLS?  
WALL HEIGHT 
DISTANCE AROUND ROOM 
2.3-2.4m 
2.4-2.6m  
2.6-2.7m  
(INCLUDE DOORS & WINDOWS) 
(7ft 6in-8ft) 
(8ft-8ft 6in) 
(8ft 6in-9ft) 
10m (33ft) 
5 rolls 
5 rolls 
6 rolls 
12m (39ft)  
6 rolls  
6 rolls 
7 rolls 
14m (46ft)  
7 rolls 
7 rolls 
8 rolls 
16m (52ft)  
8 rolls 
8 rolls 
9 rolls 
18m (59ft)  
9 rolls 
9 rolls 
10 rolls 
 
20m (66ft)  
10 rolls 
10 rolls 
11 rolls 
  

For a more accurate estimate, calculate the area of your walls, using the method outlined 
below. 
 
 
Step 1: A standard roll of wallpaper is approximately 10.5m (33ft) long and 530mm (1ft 9in) 
wide. If you measure the height of the walls from skirting to ceiling, you can work out how 
many strips of paper you can cut from a standard roll - four strips is about average.  
 
 
Step 2: Measure around the room (ignoring doors and windows) to work out how many roll 
widths you need to cover the walls. Divide this figure by the number of strips you can cut from 
one roll to calculate how many rolls you need to buy. Make a small allowance for wastage.  
 
 
When buying wallpaper, ensure that all of the rolls have the same batch number to be certain 
that the colours match. Keep your receipts so that you can return unused rolls.  
 
 
3  - Preparing the surfaces  
Walls should be clean, dry and sound. You can paper directly
over painted surfaces, as long as you have washed them 
thoroughly with sugar soap.  
 
 
 
Remove peeling or damaged wallpaper  
Stripping wallpaper is a messy job, so take up carpets or 
cover them with dust sheets. Take all the furniture out of the
room or group it together in the middle of the floor and 
protect it with more dust sheets.  
 
 
 
Use warm soapy water (or 
water with paper stripper) to 
soften old absorbent 
wallcoverings, then use a 
wide stripping knife to s
the paper off the wall. A 
steam-generating wa
stripper makes the job even 
easier. When removing 
painted wallpapers or 
washable wallcoverings, 
scratch the surface with a 
wallpaper scorer to enable 
the moisture to penetrate.  
crape 
llpaper 
 
 
 
You can peel vinyl wallcoverings off the wall, leaving the 
backing paper behind. If it is sound, just paper over the 
backing, or strip it like ordinary wallpaper.  
 
 
 
Repair damaged plaster  
Repair damaged plaster with a fine surface filler. Rake loose 
material from deep cracks and holes, then pack filler into all 
the crevices, using a flexible filler knife.  

 
 
 
When the filler is dry, sand it smooth with medium-grade 
abrasive paper.  
 
 
 
Size newly plastered walls with a 'proprietary size' or diluted 
wallpaper paste to make sure paper will adhere.  
 
4  - Cutting and pasting wallpaper  
Step 1:  
Mix wallpaper paste in a bucket. Instructions on the 
packaging will give you a guide to the strength and amount 
of paste you need for the type of paper you are hanging.  
 
 
 
Use fungicidal paste to prevent mould from growing behind 
vinyl or blown vinyl.  
 
 
 
Step 2:  
Measure the height of the wall to ascertain the length of the 
first strip, adding about 100mm (4in) for trimming top and 
bottom. Cut similar lengths from the roll. If your paper is 
patterned, you may have to allow extra for matching the 
pattern on adjacent strips - check before cutting.  
 
 
 
When cutting wallpaper strips from a roll, first mark or nick 
the edge of the paper at the required length. Then fold the 
paper over at this point, aligning the side edges carefully, 
and slit along the crease with a metal ruler or wallpaper 
scissors.  
 
 
 
Step 3:  
Lay the cut strips face down on your pasting table. To 
prevent the strips curling while you apply the paste, tuck the
free ends of the paper behind a piece of string tied between 
the legs of the table.  
 
 
 
Step 4:  
Align the top strip with the front edge of the table and, using
a wide pasting brush, apply the paste evenly, first down the 
centre of the strip, then brush it out towards the front edge. 
Slide the strip across to align with the back edge of the table 
and brush on more paste towards that edge. Make sure both 
edges are well covered.  
 
 
 
Try not to get paste on the front side because it can leave 
marks.  
 
 
 
Fold the pasted section over, pasted side to pasted side, and 

slide the paper along the table to paste and fold the other 
end in a similar way. Use this method to paste subsequent 
strips of paper and keep your pasting table clean.  
 
 
 
Keep your pasting brush clean by resting the bristles on 
string tied across the top of the paste bucket. 
 
 
 
You may have to leave some heavyweight papers to soak for
a short while before hanging them. Check the 
manufacturer's instructions.  
 
5  - Hanging wallpaper - Basics  
Step 1:  
If possible, start by papering a wall that contains neither 
door nor window. Begin at one corner, working away from 
the window. When hanging paper with a large regular 
pattern, start at a central feature such as a chimneybreast.  
 
 
 
Walls and corners are rarely 
true or square, so they 
cannot be relied upon as a 
guide. The trick is to mark a 
vertical guideline on the wall, 
using a plumb line.  
 
Mark the line on the wall, 
slightly less than one roll 
width away from the corner. 
 
 
 
Step 2:  
Unfold the top half of the paper and lightly press it to the 
wall using a paperhanger's brush.  
 
 
 
Step 3:  
Slide the strip to align its 
edge with the plumbed line 
on the wall. Allow the paper 
to overlap the ceiling by 
about 50mm (2in). Brush o
from the centre to exclu
trapped under the paper. 
Unfold the bottom half and 
brush it into place in a similar way.  
ut 
de air 
 
 
 

Step 4:  
Using the back of your 
wallpaper scissors or sharp 
knife, score a line along the 
corner between the wall and 
ceiling. Peel back the paper 
and cut along the crease to 
remove the waste, then 
smooth the paper back into 
place. Use the same method 
to trim the strip to length at skirting level. 
 
 
 
To avoid tearing wet wallpaper, put a new blade in your craft
knife or scalpel.  
 
 
 
Step 5:  
Hang the next strip beside the first, making a neat butt 
between them. At the same time, slide the strip up or down 
to align any pattern motif. Keep checking that the match is 
accurate as you brush the strip into place.  
 
 
 
As you proceed, wipe excess paste from the ceiling and 
skirting, using a damp sponge. Similarly, wipe smears of 
paste off the surface of the paper. Run a seam roller along 
the butt joints to make sure they are stuck down, and that 
your wallpaper is flat.  
 
 
 
Disguise a less-than-perfect line at the ceiling by pasting a 
narrow, patterned border along the top of the wall 
 
6  - Hanging wallpaper - Around switches  
When you get to a light 
switch, make two diagonal 
cuts across the centre of the 
faceplate, running from 
corner to corner. Tap the 
paper in around the fa
and trim off most of the 
waste with scissors. 
ceplate 
 the pasting brush to stipple the paper down firmly 
 
 
 
Turn off the electricity at the consumer unit and loosen the 
faceplate so that you can tuck the paper behind it. Turn the 
power on again when the paste is dry.  
 
 
 
Paper around flush wall sockets in a similar way: cut the 
wallpaper to butt against the mounting box of a surface-
mounted socket or switch. Cut the diagonals with scissors 
and use a sharp knife to trim off the waste.  
 
 
 
Use

around the edge of the mounting box.  
 
7 - Hanging wallpaper - Papering around 
he strip of paper next to the door, butt it 
 
ake a diagonal cut in the waste towards the corner of the 
 
rush the paper down against the side of the frame, make a 
mooth down what's left of the strip above the door, then 
o
 
ontinue with short strips over the door, hanging the next 
 - Hanging wallpaper - Papering around 
s are more or less flush with the internal face 
 
hen a window is set back into the wall, it leaves a narrow 
 
tep 1:  
full strip of wallpaper adjacent to the window and 
nto 
 
tep 2:  
 paper into place below the window, trimming to fit
doorways  
 
hen hanging t
W
against its neighbour in the usual way, allowing the other 
edge to overlap the doorframe.  
 
 
M
doorframe.  
 
 
B
crease with your scissors and cut off the waste.  
 
 
 
S
trim off the waste, leaving a 12mm (1/2in) overlap pasted t
the top of the frame.  
 
 
C
full strip down the other side of the doorframe. Crease and 
trim off the waste as before 
 
8
windows  
 
f your window
I
of the wall, paper up to the window frames as if you were 
papering around a door.  
 
 
W
strip of wall all around, known as the 'reveal'. There is a 
specific technique for papering a reveal:  
 
 
S
Hang the 
make two horizontal cuts in the paper overlapping the 
reveal, one just above the top and another along the 
underside of the sill. Fold and brush the flap of paper o
the side of the reveal. Crease and trim off the waste at the 
window frame.  
 
 
S
Brush the
 
as required.  
 
 
 

Step 3:  
At the top, cut a small piece 
of wallpaper to match the 
width of the overlap above 
the reveal. Paste this to the 
underside of the reveal and 
wrap it around the front 
corner, tucking it under the 
paper pasted above. Trim off 
the waste next to the window frame.  
 
 
 
Where one piece of thick paper overlaps another, cut 
through both layers with a sharp knife to make a matching 
butt joint. Remove the waste and press down the joint with 
a seam roller.  
 
9  - Hanging wallpaper - Papering corners  
Papering internal corners  
Trying to wrap a wide strip of wallpaper around a corner 
invariably results in unsightly creases. The answer is to cut 
the strip of paper lengthwise, allowing 12mm (1/2in) only to 
turn the corner. 
 
 
 
If the offcut is wide enough, paste it onto the adjacent wall, 
covering the overlap in the corner. Mark a plumbed guideline
on the wall to make sure the offcut is vertical.  
 
 
 
Papering external corners  
When taking wallpaper around an external corner, cut the 
strip to width, leaving a 25mm (1in) overlap to wrap around 
the corner. Hang the offcut on the adjacent wall so that it 
overlaps the turned edge by about 12mm (1/2in).  
 
 
 
10 - Hanging wallpaper - Papering behind 
adiators  
r 
Ideally, you should drain a radiator and take it off the wall 
so that you can paper behind it. If that is not possible, first 
turn off the heat and wait for the radiator to cool. Paste the 
strip of paper to the wall above the radiator. Then slit it from
the bottom edge so that you can smooth it down on either 
side of the radiator's fixing brackets. Press the paper into 
place behind the radiator, using a narrow radiator paint 
roller.  
 

