

PRECISELY



Columbia University Press
Publishers Since 1893
New York  Chichester, West Sussex
cup.columbia.edu
Copyright © 2023 Zachary Tumin and Madeleine Want
All rights reserved
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Names: Tumin, Zachary, author. | Want, Madeleine, author.
Title: Precisely : working with precision systems in a world of data / Zachary Tumin and Madeleine
Want.
Description: New York : Columbia University Press, [2023] | Includes bibliographical references and
index.
Identifiers: LCCN 2022039185 (print) | LCCN 2022039186 (ebook) | ISBN 9780231200608
(hardback; alk. paper) | ISBN 9780231553704 (ebook)
Subjects: LCSH: Decision support systems. | Decision making—Data processing. | Predictive
analytics. | Big data—Industrial applications. | Transformational leadership. | Industrial efficiency.
Classification: LCC HD30.213 .T86 2023 (print) | LCC HD30.213 (ebook) | DDC 658.4/038011—
dc23/eng/20221221
LC record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2022039185
LC ebook record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2022039186
A Columbia University Press E-book.
CUP would be pleased to hear about your reading experience with this e-book at cup-
ebook@columbia.edu.
Cover design: Noah Arlow
Cover image: Getty images

Zach:
To my wife Laura,
With my love, gratitude, and devotion
Maddy:
To Nick, who lifted me up and nudged me along countless times.
To my parents, who gave me a childhood full of books.
To my friends and family who believed I could do it from day one.

CONTENTS
Foreword by Thomas H. Davenport
1. Introduction: From Digitization to Precision
2. Six Kinds of Precision Systems
3. Design, Test, and Prove: Key Steps in Building a Precision System
4. Getting Started with Data and Platforms
5. The Precision Vanguard
6. The Political Management of Precision
7. Bootstrapping Precision
8. Creating and Managing Teams of Precision
9. Building the Precision Enterprise
10. Red Zones of Precision
11. Summing Up: Some Final Lessons for Leaders
Acknowledgments
Chapter Notes
Bibliography
Index

FOREWORD
 I am a big fan of precision, so I really like Precisely. I confess that I hadn’t
thought of that term as a way to summarize the desirable data-driven
changes taking place in business and society, but I think it’s a good one. It
connotes accuracy, measurement, efficiency, and attention to detail—all
attributes that we want in our decisions and actions.
I like even more the idea of “precision systems,” which is really what
this book is about. Zachary Tumin and Madeleine Want describe, through
many different topics and examples, the problem that many organizations
encounter with data, analytics, and artificial intelligence (AI): they don’t
have the needed “ancillary” systems—processes, attitudes, relationships, and
skills—to make effective use of these tools.
The sports analytics examples in the book are great examples of this.
Like the authors, I too have marveled at the teams that innovate with data
and analysis and make key decisions, not on tradition or intuition but on
what plays and players the data and analysis say will be most effective. More
and more often, every team—at least in major professional sports—has the
same data, the same analytical and AI tools, and even the same types of
smart people in analytics or data science roles. But some perform much
better than others with similar capabilities. What many lack is close
relationships between the data geeks and the coaches, and the sense of trust
among decision makers that will ultimately make data-driven decisions, and
thus the team, more successful.
Of course, not just sports teams but organizations of all types today are
seeking more precision. I primarily work with big companies, almost all of
which desire to become more digital, more analytical, more data-driven. But
it’s not the hardware, software, or data that usually get in the way of
progress; it’s the wetware. Technology changes rapidly, but most

organizations and the people within them change much more slowly. Some
companies have achieved great results with digitization, analytics, and AI
initiatives, but none of them got there by focusing exclusively on
technology.
We can also understand the value of precision systems by observing the
absence of them. Perhaps the best example compares South Korea, which
the authors profile in the book, to the United States in terms of their COVID-
19 response. The United States, of course, had plenty of resources to fight
the pandemic, including money, vaccines, computers, health-care workers,
and public health experts. However, it lacked a functioning precision system
for tracking and responding to the coronavirus. A lack of trust in government
and science, politicization of the disease, and a highly fragmented approach
to disease response across states and counties contributed to the lack of
precision. The outcome has been tragic; over 1 million people have died
from COVID in the United States, and it has one of the highest case fatality
percentages and death rates per capita in the world.
On the other hand, South Korea, as Tumin and Want describe, had both
an early and effective response to COVID-19. The virus was detected
quickly, tests were developed rapidly, and an effective tracking and tracing
program was introduced. South Korea’s fatality rate per capita was less than
one sixth of the United States, and its case fatality rate less than one tenth of
the United States. Precision systems clearly matter, not just for making more
money or winning more games but also for keeping more people alive and
well.
At least in the United States, we tend to believe that technology
advances are the key to success with precision decisions and actions. This
techno-utopianism is deeply embedded in society, and it has nourished a
very successful tech industry. But as this book explains, it’s only one factor
in achieving precision systems, and it’s rarely the most difficult to put in
place. Creating precision systems is a human discipline, requiring the right
beliefs, attitudes, and behaviors from leaders to frontline workers.
Precisely doesn’t avoid technology by any means, and it’s up-to-the-
minute in the tools and methods it describes. But it also contains great
chapters on leadership, politics, organizational and business design, and
other factors that are likely to bring about the “precision enterprise.” If you
want your organization to be a precision enterprise—and you certainly

should—you need to turn or swipe the page and read the rest of this
excellent book.
Thomas H. Davenport
Distinguished Professor, Babson College
Visiting Professor, Oxford Said Business School
Fellow, MIT Initiative on the Digital Economy

CHAPTER 1
INTRODUCTION
From Digitization to Precision
The Game
In December 2019, fans witnessed two surprising developments in the
National Football League (NFL). The unheralded Baltimore Ravens surged
to a championship season, while the Dallas Cowboys—“America’s Team”—
imploded. What made the difference? Both teams were rich with on-field
talent. But the Ravens had a secret weapon. In the coaches’ box high above
the field in M&T Bank Stadium, 25-year old Daniel Stern, a Ravens
“football analyst” (holding a degree from Yale in cognitive science) sat
elbow to elbow with Baltimore’s offensive coordinator, Greg Roman. Play
after play, they pumped Moneyball-style options down to coach John
Harbaugh’s headset, each built with artificial intelligence (AI), each a
prediction of the game and a prescription for what the Ravens should do
next. Harbaugh would pick and choose. Game after game, the Ravens picked
up key yardage gains; turned failed, four-and-out possessions into sustained
drives; and put points on the board. Games that might have been lost were
won.
Dallas coach Jason Garrett had no such advantage, nor did he want it.
“Yeah, we don’t use those stats within the game,” he told reporters. The
upshot: precision systems that mix human judgment with analytics can easily
outperform gut instinct or data alone. Adapt to the new game in town or
perish.

The Crime Wave
That same month, in the fading light of a winter’s day in New York City,
Tessa Majors, a nineteen-year-old freshman at Barnard College, was
murdered in Morningside Park, a majestic but decaying jewel. In November,
a neighbor had reported twenty-three streetlamps out in the park “for the
umpteenth time,” a reporter wrote—five in the area at the base of the steps
where Tessa Majors was murdered. “Most people know somebody who has
gotten robbed there,” a victim said. “I was told by police that it was not a
very safe place to be.” One nearby storeowner had complained to cops at the
26th Precinct station house by phone of harassment by kids. He was tired of
it, and he was scared. “A lady told me to tell them to ‘move along.’ ”
If the New York Police Department (NYPD) had no idea this crime was
coming, it should have. The knifepoint robbery by three teens was the latest
in a neighborhood crime wave. One attacker later admitted that they were in
the “habit” of robbing people in the park. Since June, five people reported
being robbed near the staircase in Morningside Park where Tessa Majors
was killed—including two robberies ten days before. There were twenty-one
reported muggings in the park and its perimeter compared to eleven the same
period a year prior.
Just in case, for some reason, cops missed these patterns, the NYPD
had an advanced AI-enabled precision system called Patternizr for
discovering look-alike crimes. A well-managed pattern recognition system—
whether AI-driven or manual—should have exposed the attackers’ robbery
habit sooner, but Patternizr didn’t. Cops might have stopped the crime spree
sooner, but they didn’t. Inevitably, one mugging went wrong. Tessa Majors
fought back and lost her life. Lori Pollock, Chief of NYPD Crime Control
Strategies at the time, reflected on this: “You could see this coming from a
mile away. People weren’t paying attention or didn’t want to tackle it. Youth
crime was becoming an epidemic. No one in the court system or the judicial
system seemed to take it seriously. There were no consequences for young
people to rob two or three people in an hour—just, roll people. And that’s
what happened to Tessa Majors.” The failure was unusual for New York’s
Finest. In all things operational and digital, the NYPD holds itself out as the
gold standard in crime fighting. In movies, television, and real life, its
achievements are legendary, its tools and techniques emulated everywhere.

But when it comes to putting data and AI to work even New York’s
Finest can stumble. Having a precision system on hand will not flag what
matters most if you don’t tell it to, nor will it change the world as a precision
system should. “Fix broken process first,” and “Get your organization right
and ready for precision” are imperatives you will hear throughout this book
—before any precision system can work its magic.
In the end, the only pattern matching done here was by Officer Randy
Ramos-Luna. On patrol the next day, he recognized a kid on the street by the
clothing he was wearing: it matched the Wanted video still he’d seen on his
department cellphone. Pursuit, confrontation, and arrest followed. Back at
the station house, the kid gave up his two accomplices—just like in the
movies.
Chasing COVID
On December 26, 2019, a Chinese researcher at Weiyuan Gene Technology
in Guangzhou was browsing the latest test results from routine disease
surveillance. Wuhan had sent over a lung fluid sample taken from a sixty-
five-year-old man hospitalized with pneumonia-like symptoms. What the
researcher saw alarmed her. The sample, she wrote a colleague, “was
brimming with something that looked like SARS.” In 2002, severe acute
respiratory syndrome (SARS) had killed 774 people worldwide.
“It’s no joke,” her coworker replied on WeChat. “It’s the same level as
the plague.” Tests the next hour confirmed “bat_SARS_like_coronavirus.”
“*Worse* than the plague,” her coworker replied.
China did not lock down Wuhan for twenty-eight days. The virus, being
no respecter of politics, borders, or national pride, seeped out of China by
car, train, bus, and plane. It caught governments from Washington to Tokyo
unaware. Studies would later show that, had China locked down Wuhan one
week earlier, it could have reduced infections across China by 66 percent,
three weeks earlier by 95 percent. In the pandemic that followed, COVID-
19, as the virus came to be known, went on to kill over 6.5 million people
around the world.
Korea was already on the move. In 2015, it had bungled its own Middle
East respiratory syndrome (MERS) outbreak—and fixed its playbook to act
fast the next time it encountered a pandemic. That time was now: in January,

Korea’s four confirmed COVID cases weren’t exactly a catastrophe—yet it
was enough to launch the new protocols. One week in, Korea’s Disease
Control 
and 
Prevention 
Agency 
(KDCA) 
convened 
twenty 
test
manufacturers and told them to build COVID tests. The government
guaranteed their cost reimbursement. KDCA gave them early access to viral
samples and standardized the validation process. Korea’s Ministry of Food
and Drug Safety was ready with authorizations.
When Dr. Jong-Yoon Chun, CEO of the Korean biotech firm Seegene,
got word of the pandemic, he responded quickly. Using a supercomputer
equipped with AI tools, Seegene’s team analyzed the molecular structure of
the new virus; worked through billions of possible permutations; and built a
COVID-19 test that yielded results within four hours, a test that was
standardized so any of Korea’s 120 labs could read them
Three weeks in, across Korea 700,000 test kits were ready. Doctors at
Incheon Medical Center proposed innovations in testing protocol: drive-
through sites would keep drivers in their cars, avoid spreading COVID in
hospitals, and triple hourly screening capacity. By February 23, Chilgok
Hospital in hardest-hit Daegu had installed South Korea’s first drive-through
testing center. The invention brought South Korea’s testing capacity to
20,000 tests per day. In the opening weeks of the outbreak, 225,000 Koreans
were tested. Over that period 8,000 were diagnosed with the disease. Sixty
died, but the rapid implementation of a tracing system and social-distancing
protocols made possible by the Seegene test and others undoubtedly saved
many more lives.
“We are a molecular diagnosis company, specializing in medical testing
kits,” Dr. Chun told CNN. “We have to prepare in advance. Even if nobody
is asking us.” The upshot: it takes an ecosystem with all players aligned to
make precision happen. With that, precision systems can have global impact,
and fast.
Race on the Water
When the pandemic was brought under more control, and travel again
became possible, international sports events resumed. In September 2021,
off the coast of Cadiz, Spain, spectators might have caught sight of a flotilla
of F50 sailboats racing through the Atlantic at speeds of 100 miles per hour,
their ninety-five-foot winglike masts and hydrofoils flying them above the

waves. Eight teams of A-list sailors from around the world were making a
run for a place in the championship Grand Final of the SailGP campaign in
San Francisco the next spring and a prize of $1 million. Every boat was
identical. Their crews saw and shared the same data. Each boat was
connected to the Oracle cloud, streaming terabytes of data from sensors
tracking their location, wind speed, boat speed, wind angle, and a host of
other elements.
If each boat was identical and all the data were shared, what would be
the key to winning? Talent and experience, certainly. Training, too. During
the few months between the Olympics and the America’s Cup, these teams
had to come together fast with little time to practice. Every minute together
mattered. But the difference maker off Cadiz and later San Francisco was the
playbook unique to each team. Each choreographed its own moves, starting
with a sprint to the video room after practice to see what worked and fix
what didn’t. That proved decisive on the open waters of San Francisco Bay
where the Australia boat defeated all, dodging collisions, capsized
competitors, and even a whale wandering onto the racecourse. The upshot:
well-managed and built for continuous improvement, world-class precision
systems deal with exigency, unleash the power of talent, and take the win.
“You’re racing against the best guys in the world,” Russell Coutts,
SailGP’s CEO and five-time America’s Cup champion told a reporter. “If
you give them more time against you, you’re going to get hurt, aren’t you?”
Time to the finish wasn’t just everything—it was the only thing.
“Glory,” the Australia boat captain said, “lasts forever.”
What do these four stories have in common? Massive amounts of data
became available, sometimes deluging decision makers. Each was a race of
teams against time and nature. Each depended on human-built and -run
systems, loaded with AI, but with men and women, not machines, finally
making the difference. Some used the data and the tools well, whether in the
press of a game or a pandemic and changed the course of history. Others
became tangled in the same old work routines and unchanged job designs.
We call this new mix of people, processes, and platforms built to shape
the future precisely as managers require precision systems. And in today’s
incredibly fast-paced, competitive, unpredictable world, precision systems
matter—a lot.

What This Book Is About
This book provides a new blueprint for today’s leader, from a Fortune 10
business executive to a teacher, doctor, or police officer, to convert the
enormous potential of today’s digital world into powerful change, not just
once, but, in the words of Tom Davenport, a global leader in the embrace of
analytics, “repeatedly, reliably, and quickly.” How? With precision systems
—the highly engineered working arrangements of people, processes, and
technologies that put big data and AI to work creating exactly the change
leaders want, exactly where, when, and how they want it.
From Rosabeth Moss Kanter to John Kotter, change gurus have focused
on how to get a person, a team, or an entire organization to start acting
differently, one person or group at a time. That’s important because a lot of
change happens at that level. More recently, Richard H. Thaler and Cass
Sunstein’s Nudge suggests ways to trigger mass change. Nudges are blunt-
force tools for promoting change. They are passive, imprecise, embedded in
a designed “choice architecture,” and left to run, always “on.” They wait
quietly for the next one or a million unsuspecting consumers, users, or
readers to stumble across their trip wires and change course. Nudges wait for
you at the end-of-aisle grocery store displays, or at the child-height candy
shelves at checkout, in yellow warning strips on subway platforms, or in
purposefully designed defaults on websites that you either opt out of or fall
slave to. Whether for broad public policy goals like climate change, obesity,
and addiction, or more modest purposes like painting steps toward a trash
bin to encourage its use, the power of a nudge is potent but hit or miss. You
have to stumble upon it to get the ball rolling.
Precision systems are different. In their highest form, precision systems
don’t wait for you to find them—they seek you out—one gene at a time or
from among millions of people. Political campaigns hunt down crucial
single-issue voters and peel them away from parties and party-line voting;
railroads scan thousands of engines, boxcar wheels, and track miles
searching for a few life-threatening flaws; health authorities desperately seek
the handful of truly sick among the millions of well citizens even before the
few show symptoms. If you want to win an election, improve the health of a
city or a nation, or sell vastly increased amounts of your company’s
products, you may have to get millions of people or things, or even just a

few, behaving differently, fast and in real time, once or continuously over
days, weeks, or months—precisely as you want.
The data is there—big data—but it can be a tremendous technical and
operational challenge to put that data to work for the change you want,
precisely where, when, and how you want it. Giant data sets like GPT-3 for
language and ImageNet for images make available billions of examples that
make life easier for engineers building everything from chatbots to machines
that use images to sort weeds from crops (as we describe in our discussion of
John Deere’s See and Spray system). Developers don’t have to start from
scratch.
But these data sets remain unwieldly, costly to use all the same, and
flawed—gifted with a “stunning ability to produce human-like text,” as one
reporter observed of GPT-3, but also “a powerful capacity for biases, bigotry
and disinformation.”
And there’s a catch: the world is rich with events that comprise only a
handful of images or words. “I’ve built AI systems of hundreds of millions
of images,” AI pioneer Andrew Ng told a reporter. Ng was founder of
Google’s Google Brain group, chief scientist at Baidu, and now CEO of
Landing AI. “Those techniques don’t really work when you have only 50
images.”
Now new techniques championed by Ng and others can train precision
models from small data—a handful of images or words. GE Global
Researchers recently used only forty-five training sample images to locate
kidneys in ultrasound images, for example. These novel techniques open the
door to detection of thousands of rarely occurring manufacturing flaws or
predictions of low-frequency natural disasters or disease, no matter how
scarce the data. In that respect, they expand the reach of precision systems
even to those events that are exceedingly rare.
Big data or small, “born digital” tech titans like Facebook, Amazon,
Apple, and Netflix make real-time precision look easy—practically
automatic. Their AI-driven recommendation systems nudge you to the best
next choice, personalized for you—or at least for people like you—millions
of times each day. While by no means perfect, those highly automated
precision systems are good enough, and fast enough, to have turned
Amazon, Apple, and others into multi-trillion-dollar corporations. It wasn’t
easy getting there; their battles of years gone by are legendary. But today, at
the so-called FAANG firms—Facebook, Amazon, Apple, Netflix, and

Google, everyone is a believer; the skill sets, job designs, and organization
setups are long proved; and the ability to test, prove, and continuously
improve automated decision making built long ago into systems and
platforms, operations, and culture. The born-digitals among us still have
many issues, but getting to precision isn’t one of them.
For those organizations not born digital—and most today are not—
precision systems require a far different kind of approach by managers.
Everywhere, they are putting precision systems to work on a smaller scale,
and not just personalized but particularized to a specific business problem—
to find an elusive pattern, perform a repetitive task, target a payload, or tailor
a message. Depending on the nature of the business, the value proposition is
entirely different each time: to accelerate mathematics learning among
seventh-graders, to prevent workplace injury in mines and manufacturing, or
to deepen reader engagement and increase digital subscriptions. Across these
diverse missions, the leadership challenge for executive managers looks a lot
like the classic work of managers everywhere who bring corporate or
organization assets together for a purpose, with results and outcomes that
matter. But the nature of precision changes everything, comprising as it does
unique technologies, new talents, and prospects for change impossible to
achieve otherwise—from the moment managers conceive the precision
system, then sell it, make it work, and deliver on its promise.
That’s where Precisely comes in. This book explores how leaders in
every domain are dealing with these challenges and notching wins for their
organizations by taking real-time precision systems into the marketplace, the
combat space, the political race. We provide insights that will help any
leader who is considering the move to precision to choose the system that’s
right for them, decide which problem to tackle first, sell the importance of
precision to stakeholders, power up the people and the technology,
accomplish change that delivers precisely what’s needed every time—and do
it all responsibly.
In this first chapter, we will look at three precision systems, each vastly
different but sharing essential traits common to all. The first chapter will
give us an early look at some important lessons every manager can learn
from.
Zipline: Delivering Precision, Saving Lives

Since the uncrewed aerial vehicles known as drones were first developed,
autonomous delivery has been a dream of innovators for everything from
household products to medicines. It turns out to be incredibly difficult,
fraught with risk and danger, but when it happens, transforms the world.
Zipline cofounder Keller Rinaudo created the San Francisco–based
company with a specific mission in mind: “To provide every human on earth
with access to vital medical supplies.” One-third of the world has limited
access to essential blood products, vaccines, and injectables—none more so,
Rinaudo discovered, than in sub-Saharan Africa. In Tanzania, Uganda,
Rwanda, Malawi, Ghana, and the Democratic Republic of the Congo, for
example, stockouts and expiration rates are high, and cold-chain and short-
shelf-life commodities fail against the brutal realities of conflict, heat, and
rough access. Rinaudo found the governments of these countries willing to
let him experiment with delivery by Zipline. Early networking and hustling
found responsive leaders. “We were meeting with the presidents of countries
off of a sketch deck,” CTO Keenan Wyrobek recalled. “The market ‘pull’
was there.” By 2019, three years after its start, Zipline was delivering 75
percent of Rwanda’s blood supply to 2,500 hospitals and health facilities far
from Kigali, its principal city, and operating from six distribution centers
that covered 100 percent of Rwanda and 50 percent of neighboring Ghana.
Success scaled massively. Through 2022, Zipline operated a network of
autonomous drones in Africa, Asia, and North America. Although each
instance of success was personal, when massively scaled, it conferred vast
social benefit. Thanks to Zipline, for example, an urgent order for blood
from a regional hospital for a mother bleeding out during childbirth can be
dispatched and arrive in as little as an hour. The drone drops the parachuted
package at the destination and flies directly back to home base for reload and
the next job. Zipline calls it “last-mile, on-demand emergency medical
delivery.” We call it a precision system in action.
“I used to see the drones fly and think they must be mad,” Alice
Mutimutuje, a Rwandan mother said. “Until the same drone saved my life.”
If the achievement is astounding, Zipline’s end-to-end supply chain is
precise to a fare-thee-well. Its two Rwanda distribution centers, for example,
each run eight cold-chain storage devices at different temperatures and
agitation levels, each fed by three supply chains, among them the national
blood bank system. Zipline updates its blood inventory each evening for the

next day’s deliveries, based on forecasts that Zipline’s algorithms built with
continuous improvement to 99 percent accuracy.
An optimized pick-and-pack system whittles the time from “order
received” to “drone dispatched” down to five minutes on average and to as
little as one minute. The drones themselves are remarkable feats of
engineering; lightweight and streamlined, their frames maximize efficiency
on the ground and in-flight. Every surface is tagged with a QR code for
preflight inspections. Technicians point their phones at the QR codes; the
plane activates the control surface, technicians image it, and algorithms
predict any issues and pass or fail each control surface. Launches are tightly
controlled, with each drone launched the same way every time: with an
electric catapult that accelerates the plane to 110 kilometers per hour
cruising speed in a quarter of a second. “That’s why we call it ‘zip,’ ”
Wyrobek explains with a grin.
In flight, continuous global positioning system (GPS) signaling and
radar allow each drone to “know” its own location in three-dimensional (3D)
space as well as the locations of any nearby drones and planes. That’s
essential for regulators, safety, and scaling into busy airspace. Zipline drones
drop their supplies by parachute, taking in terabytes of data in real time,
making ballistic calculations and dynamically adjusting for wind speed and
direction so that the package drifts with the wind right where the customer
wants it—no clinic needs any infrastructure to receive the shipment. Back at
home base, a capture system stretches a wire across two goalpost-like
towers; as the drone approaches, it communicates with radio receivers,
navigates between the posts, extends its tail hook to grab the wire and
powers down: mission accomplished. All without a human pilot, all guided
by algorithm, the entire voyage mapped to precise three-meter by three-
meter coordinates provided by What3Words—the astonishing app that has
mapped the globe with 57 trillion such precise coordinates—“the national
addressing system of dozens of countries,” Wryobek says. “We’d literally
just get a GPS coordinate for hospitals and clinics, go visit them, and ask,
‘Hey, so where do you want this to drop?’ The future of Africa is getting
solved by What3Words.”
In combination, these elements add up to a precision system dubbed by
Wyrobek an “instant logistics infrastructure.” Replete with AI and
physiotechnical assets managed by doctors, pharmacists, aviators, engineers,
and logistics professionals, Zipline delivers exactly what a patient needs,

exactly where it is needed, at exactly the right moment—and does it
repeatedly, at scale, with utter reliability. It takes a system to bring health and
safety precisely where and when it is needed most.
Good leadership pivots robust precision systems fast to new
possibilities. In 2020, Zipline faced a new test. COVID-19 was spreading in
Ghana. In its midst, a presidential election was creating an unprecedented
demand for rapid delivery of health-care supplies. “Polls were opening in
forty-eight hours,” Zipline reported. “Poll workers lacked masks and
personal protective equipment. Tens of thousands of face masks needed to be
distributed in some thirty-three districts over an area of more than nineteen
thousand square kilometers.” The Zipline team mobilized, pivoting its
operations from health to voting rights. Within twenty-four hours, Zipline
flew over 160 drone flights to twenty-nine locations and delivered 18,000
face masks to poll workers. Hands-free drop-off minimized human contact
and reduced the risk of transmission of the virus.
Pivots like this emerge unexpectedly as the value of on-demand drone
deliveries becomes clearer. Zipline modifies its success metrics accordingly.
For example, in its partnership with Novant, a North Carolina–based health
and hospital system, Zipline claims an average reduction of $169 for patient
costs by telehealth visit, an 18 percent increase in medication adherence with
on-demand delivery, and a 28 percent reduction in transportation costs
compared to ground transport, all with thirty times fewer carbon dioxide
(CO2) emissions per mile than an electric vehicle.
This is the power of precision—not simply an incremental
improvement in the way things have usually been done, but a fundamental
transformation of a delivery system, changing life on the ground precisely as
Renaudo envisioned for millions, one patient, one delivery at a time. No
improvement to a regional trucking network could ever produce the
exponential increase in efficiency and impact that Zipline achieved. “We set
out five years ago with a goal to come as close to teleportation as possible—
a goal many people found crazy at the time,” he told reporters. Suddenly the
way forward “to provide every human on earth with access to vital medical
supplies” is within view.
Zest: Using Precision Systems to Transform the Payday Loan Market

For a different look into the power of precision systems, let’s look at another
example—a small corner of the financial services industry that has been
transformed by a new, precision-enabled business model revolutionary in its
day.
“What would you have done if I hadn’t answered the phone?” Former
Google CIO Douglas Merrill was incredulous. His sister-in-law had just
called for help paying for a new tire. Mother of three, with a full-time job,
and a full-time student, she was broke. “I would have taken out a payday
loan,” she said.
At the time, 19 million U.S. households did the same—unbanked, at-
risk, they turned to one of America’s 25,000 payday lenders to cover needs.
Thirty-three percent of Americans couldn’t lay their hands on $1,000 when
they needed to. They were prepared to pay payday lenders over 400 percent
annual percentage rate (APR)—$15 to $30 on a $100 loan. It all added up to
about $30 billion in short-term credit each year.
“I thought that wasn’t fair,” Merrill said. “Isn’t there a way to provide
loans to these people that’s not so expensive?”
By now, millions of gig workers have entered the payday-borrowing
market. As more and more people take up new types of work far removed
from the traditional, steady, nine-to-five job, many find they need short-term
cash to get through periods between gigs or while waiting for the first check
to arrive from a new client. This is where access to a reliable source of credit
can be a lifesaver.
Until recently, gig workers and their need for credit were sidelined,
largely ignored by financial marketplaces that had no way (and not much
desire) to understand them, price products and services for them, or connect
the buyers with the sellers. But now the markets have discovered these gems
and are unleashing their value. How? By listening to millions of new signals
that turned these lumps of untouched consumer coal into diamonds.
For decades, the credit scores calculated by the agency originally
known as Fair, Isaac and Company and now called FICO have largely
shaped the decisions made by loan underwriters. With the invention of
standardized credit scores, lenders saw risk better and could increase both
credit availability and profit. But FICO scoring was a blunt instrument,
freezing out the underbanked and the unbanked—people with scant or no
formal financial histories. Their “thin files” gave FICO scorers little good-
caliber banking activity to go on. Risk-averse lenders hedged their bets,

which meant that a bankruptcy or credit card default could ruin a consumer’s
record for a lifetime.
Merrill believed that the data needed to calculate fair lending terms for
underbanked customers wasn’t scarce. “All data is credit data,” Merrill said.
“We just don’t know how to use it yet. If you could get access to thousands
of signals, you could correct that.”
Merrill created Zest Cash and began scooping up and feeding in
millions of signals from online data, building algorithms and models,
helping his clients re-predict risk and make loans to the unbanked and
underbanked. The more signals, the better the models, the more insight into
real risk, and the higher the likelihood of payback from folks who until then
were frozen into a group called the “unbankable” and thought of as
“uncreditworthy.”
Some, true, were awful risks. But they were mixed in with perfectly
sound risks. If Merrill could “liquefy” this frozen mass, divide them into
segments, and find the gems among them, he could do for them what FICO
did for everyone else: price loans according to true risk, making credit more
affordable where warranted.
Sifting through all the big data Merrill could get his hands on, Zest
added a bevy of small signals to those used by traditional credit scoring:
whether an applicant’s Social Security number belonged to a dead person,
for example; how much time an applicant spent reading the fine print on the
Zest website or filling out the application. They also used contrarian signals.
When customers dialed in to let them know they’d be late on a payment,
banks saw risk, but Zest analyzed their subsequent behavior and discovered
these folks could in fact be diligent and good bets for full repayment. The
more signals that Merrill incorporated into his models, the better they
predicted borrower risk and the better they could price the loans. “Not 50
percent better,” Merrill said, “just a little better. But take a lot of things that
are a little better, and you get something that’s a lot better.”
Zest’s machines learned well. Incorporating classic scoring data and
then adding 70,000 new variables boosted the predictive accuracy of the
algorithms by 40 percent and increased net repayment rates by 90 percent.
Add some further analytics by humans and Zest did even better. “The
combination of really big data and human artistry is the underlying value
here,” Merrill said. “We went into this business to save the underbanked
billions of dollars,” Merrill told an interviewer. “We knew that applying

machine learning and big data analysis to underwriting would make a real
difference, and it has.”
Several key factors helped to explain Zest’s success:
• First, a vision, simple in the extreme: “Save the underbanked billions
of dollars—and monetize that for profit.” That was Merrill’s North Star,
guiding the enterprise through ups and downs, against a plan sized for
action to test and prove his assumptions and discoveries.
• Second, hard resources, including talented people, loaded up with
business acumen and technical skills. A platform and software from
which engineers and data scientists could extract the data, analyze it,
and make it ready for business action.
• Third, soft resources of motivation and leadership for “doing good”
but also scoring big paydays. An organization led by a manager who
was open to discovery and expected the unexpected, skilled at building
models for new products and services that delivered on the promise.
Zest’s approach has spawned plenty of competition—and issues. It was
good news for the unbanked around the world—half the world by some
estimates, comprising 800 million people in South Asia alone. A similar
approach, for example, has helped Mahindra Finance bring new credit-
scoring methods and lower-cost loans to India’s nonbanked rural poor. By
2019, reported Harvard Business Review, Mahindra Finance had become the
largest rural nonbanking financial company in India, serving 50 percent of
villages and 6 million customers.
But the application of precision to the financial needs of the unbanked
has also served to expand a payday loan industry whose practices and fees
are still often labeled as rapacious, exploitative, and exorbitant. Better with
Zest, but not great. And now more of it. Precision alone doesn’t guarantee
results that are socially beneficial. Human judgment and ethical values
remain as essential as ever.
The NFL: Precision Systems at Work
In the fall of 2021, ESPN.com’s Kevin Seifert wrote this:

Social media lit up on Sunday night in the moments after the
Baltimore Ravens converted a fourth-down run to seal an
exhilarating 36–35 victory over the Kansas City Chiefs. Amid the
flurry of “WOWs,” shock emojis and celebratory GIFs was a tweet
from Michael Lopez, the NFL’s director of football data and
analytics. After watching Ravens coach John Harbaugh make a
difficult decision from his team’s own 43-yard line, sending
quarterback Lamar Jackson up the middle for two yards, Lopez
posted the headshot of a man that only his followers and a handful
of other devotees to football analytics would recognize: Daniel
Stern.
Lopez needed no words. Stern’s smiling child-like visage was well known to
the NFL’s in-most crowd as one of a handful of twenty-something analysts
bringing the rigors of data science and prediction to in-game decisions.
Whether for a quick retooling of strategy between halves, or in-the-moment
calls to pass or run on first down, to punt or go for it on fourth down, Stern
and his cohort were breaking down the historic confines of data from the
quiet pastures of recruitment and player development, coming into their own
under the bright lights of game time. In the booth, headsets on, game on the
line, Stern’s mission was plain: lay out win probabilities to Harbaugh for a
handful of plays that would have the best chance for a score and a win.
And Harbaugh—how does he gulp down all this data? “I trust my eyes
first,” he told a reporter. “The information confirms or opens your eyes to
something.” He will look at it, consider, and make the call.
Come autumn in America, on any given Sunday, fortunes rise and fall
for thirty-two NFL teams. It all depends on what twenty-two huge, strong
men, eleven on either side of the football, each incredibly fast, all well-
coached and -trained, do to get their hands on the ball sitting quietly on a
white chalk line, waiting. In a moment, nothing in the world will matter
more. They will claw and tackle and pound away for five or six seconds at a
time (the average length of a football play), eleven minutes per game (the
total minutes of actual contact), for sixty game minutes (on the clock),
spread over 3½ hours. Stoked by beers and junk food, millions of fans cheer
from the stands in the cold, rain, snow, and heat, or watch at desks, bars, and
in man caves around the world. Billions in team revenues, media rights, and

fan-wagering dollars are at stake. Competition is fierce, and every move by
every player counts. For every coach, on every play, the challenge remains
the same: run the data, perfect the models, predict performance, make the
call, hope and pray that in the next five seconds the game changes just the
way you want it.
For 100 years, NFL coaches have done all this in their heads. Now
machines are having their say, loaded up with AI and machine learning,
plumbed by analysts (and now offensive assistant) like Daniel Stern for the
nugget that will turn “couldn’t be” to “maybe” to “probably,” all stitched
together in precision systems that turn insight to calling plays on the field.
The teams’ precision systems chow down on data coming from cameras,
embedded radio frequency identity (RFID) chips in uniforms and the
footballs themselves, and history, all filtered through models that let analysts
predict and prescribe and give options to coaches. Built on the promise of
gaining the winning edge, they offer deep insight to players on either side of
the ball. They do it fast. And the decision “team” of coaches and analysts
preps hard.
Harbaugh, his coaches, and Stern start Mondays talking through their
approach to the coming game. They settle on principles and rules they’ll
follow come game time—when Stern will remind Harbaugh of those
guardrails in the headset, giving options. On every play, the coach has a few
seconds to weigh the numbers and give thumbs up or down to the offensive
coordinator’s play call.
“A lot of work goes into it,” Harbaugh told a reporter. “We always have
a plan every week.”
Stern learned by watching his bosses communicate with Harbaugh
during games—short, terse, to the point. They speak a similar language,
making it fast, talking about win probabilities and expected points added
(EPAs). The upshot: “Aggressive fourth-down calls have become a weekly
occurrence for the Ravens,” reported The Athletic’s Sheil Kapadia. “They’ve
gotten 10 of 14 fourth-down attempts on the season, averaging 10.5 yards
per play. Eight resulted in touchdowns.”
Many debate when this modern-day data wrangling all started. Some
ascribe it to Ryan Paganetti, of the Philadelphia Eagles, and peg the date not
to a win with data, but to a loss without it. Paganetti was the Eagles’ analyst
and game management coach for six seasons, starting in 2015. By 2017 he
was sitting up in the booth during games and meeting with Coach Doug

Pederson at half times. Like Stern, weeks and weeks of prep, research, and
engagement with coaches and players had earned him a seat and a headset.
Toward the end of an early season game against the Kansas City Chiefs,
Paganetti counselled Pederson to go for a dicey two-point conversion after a
touchdown, rather than a sure-bet one-point kick. The coaches game-side
and on the headsets freaked out—“borderline, having a confrontation,”
Paganetti told reporter Liam Fox. Pederson relented, went for the sure bet,
and the game was lost.
Reflecting later, Pederson and coaches committed to Paganetti’ s
analytics. “From that moment on, there was never another time that entire
rest of the season where anyone questioned the information I was sharing
with him,” Paganetti said. It is the stuff of NFL legend that Philadelphia
thereafter won nine straight games, and the Super Bowl.
The move to precision systems in the NFL was on. With the right
quarterback—a Lamar Jackson, for example, who could run and pass no
matter where or when—fourth down became a “go-for-it” proposition. In
2019, the Ravens ran seventeen successful fourth-down tries, a watershed
development. Being the NFL, where innovation is on display every Sunday,
fast-follower “copycat” NFL teams soon made the shift to a differently-
talented playmaker, too—more mobile quarterbacks like Jackson rose to the
top of everyone’s must-have lists. Through the first two weeks of the 2021
season across the NFL there were 88 “go-for-it” plays on fourth down, more
than at any time in league history. “Pass on first down” was gaining new
currency, too.
Today, all NFL coaches are competing on precision as never before. But
where “old school” competed on who had the best data, all teams now have
much the same basic data available, courtesy of the National Football
League’s data platform and network, dubbed the NFL Player Tracking
System and its customer facing product, the NFL’s Next Gen Stats. The
platform comprises sensors, receivers, and displays throughout every
stadium, fueled by nickel-sized RFID chips in every player’s pads and the
footballs themselves, on the referees, pylons, sticks, and chains, all beaming
player and ball data via in-stadium transmitters and antennas ten times per
second, precisely locating individuals within inches on the field, instantly
calculating their speed, separations, distance travelled, and acceleration. On
every play of every game this NFL data “firehose” adds more than two
hundred new data points, sent up to the cloud via Amazon Web Services and

back down to fans, coaches, and players around the world, everyone putting
it to their own best use.
If all teams are equal in data, a new breed of Sunday warrior makes
some teams more equal than others. Each team’s “data guys” run from
kibitzers and Sunday hackers to pros. Top units comprise software engineers,
data scientists, data analysts, and product managers. The average ones don’t
do much more than read out data from commercially available, off-the-shelf
algorithms. The best of them pull the data into highly customized models
that integrate data for coaches who, like Harbaugh, trust their eyes but keep
their minds open. Tested, proved, and fine-tuned to conditions, NFL models
are proprietary and well-guarded crown jewels of high performance. But
even the best analysts must elbow their way into the booths and onto the
headsets and, like any coach, earn their keep with calls that win matchups
and games.
It all starts with player drafts and roster construction. Models describe
the fit of prospects to the coach’s strategy, as Lamar Jackson fit John
Harbaugh’s like a glove. They predict outcomes of matchups against
opposing teams and players. They prescribe, in turn, the general manager’s
offers of incentive and compensation packages, knowing what models say
the team needs from the player to win—numbers of sacks, runs after
completions, or interceptions. Those incentives drop down to weight rooms
and trainers’ tables where players incorporate data for gains in strength,
agility, and speed, not just one time in one game but all season long and over
a career. “High caliber athletes could always do that [once],” Sports Business
Journal’s Ben Fischer told an audience. “What they’re trying to figure out is,
‘How do I do that 25 times in the game, and keep that performance going
through the entire season?’ ”
If player longevity is everything, safety is the key. Data drove the
invention of vastly improved helmets, for example, precisely configured for
the shock of collisions at full tilt, then spurred player adoptions from 40
percent to 99 percent in three years. Data informed NFL rules changes by
showing certain plays as the most injurious. It helped the NFL predict
impacts on player safety from adding a proposed seventeenth game to the
season.
In the stadium, precision systems have transformed the season ticket-
holder experience, personalizing it seat by seat, competing successfully with
the comforts of the man cave, spurring renewals even for losing teams,

whether by showing unique-to-the-stadium replays-on-demand from every
angle on massive screens or phones and tablets, or delivering food and drink
right to the seats. Precision systems underpin the lucrative Fantasy Football
industry and deepen fan engagement with competition unthinkable even five
years ago. Betting on NFL games has accordingly soared, with a piece of all
the action going to the NFL. In-game systems have opened new vistas for
coaches and players, choosing which first- and fourth-down plays to run
depending, for example, on the fatigue of opponents in late quarters
measured by cameras that time players who trudge back to the sidelines, or
sprint.
As new users pull the data forward in astonishing ways, some players,
coaches and teams gain further advantage. Every player could, but only
some do. It is that unique, distinguishing, and difficult.
Imagine, for example, if all players managed their personal
development as Cooper Kupp has managed his. Kupp ran poorly in the pre-
draft player showcases and went late in the 2017 draft to the Los Angeles
Rams. Riven with curiosity about the science of high performance and
driven by personal thirst for success, Kupp transformed his backyard tennis
court into a barn and a personal football laboratory. His goal: test and prove
a new science of personalized, data-driven football. His gear, laid in for the
purpose: stadium-style turf, specialized treadmills, timing gates, towing
units, all to measure his speed, agility, and GPS locations as given by
imaging and sensors. His team: consultants who helped Kupp winnow his
personal data firehose down to “one actual step and football’s most critical
movement option,” Sports Illustrated’s Greg Bishop wrote, literally “the first
step off the line of scrimmage.” Kupp’s plan: achieve maximum velocity
five yards off the line sooner than any receiver ever had, leaving defenders
behind. Train with drills and sprints “not for every day or every session, but
for every rep.”
The upshot? By his fifth season with the Rams Kupp had become a
“phenomenal accelerator, aggressive in his bursts,” Bishop wrote, “amassing
borderline historic numbers.” Kupp was the first receiver to have over two
thousand receiving yards in a season as both a receiver and a running back,
on the snap of the ball “shuffling through his repertoire of movement options
en route to exactly the right place, at precisely the right time,” a gift of the
gods to his quarterback and coaches.

As teams and precision systems mature, powerful new consumers like
the Rams’ Kupp, or the NFL’s Health and Safety Committee, or the Ravens’
coaches emerge who exert a tidal pull on data, gaining advantage from
precision, at least for a time. As novelty wears off and innovation becomes
standard issue, new equipment and in-stadium infrastructure anchor the data.
New business practices embed it. New models shape it. New outcomes
measure and validate it.
If all teams are created (or soon become) equal on data, advantage
comes from platforms, processes, and people bringing all these systems
together across the enterprise, in time, continuously improving, applying
precision solutions exactly where, when and how coaches want the change,
achieving highest performance of the parts and the whole, at once and over
time. That takes leadership with the mindset and the skills to do it—thinking
of precision not as a “nice to have,” but as the cornerstone of new strategy.
And in that respect, all teams are decidedly unequal.
As we have seen, some teams, like the Dallas Cowboys, were slow to
embrace the power of data-driven precision. Former head coach Jason
Garrett told the press in 2019 that analytics were “not valuable” to the team
during the game—an opinion generally received as moronic. Garrett had no
Daniel Stern sitting side by side his own coaches up in the booth. That was
Garrett’s call, and he paid for it, being fired twice from NFL coaching jobs
since.
In 2019, after an abysmal 4–12 season, David Gettleman, the New York
Giants’ general manager finally conceded the game begrudgingly to
analytics, at least in the back office. “We have hired four computer folks,
software, and we are completely redoing the back end of our college and pro
scouting systems.” Nothing about in-game management, however. In fact,
that same year Gettleman hired Jason Garrett as the Giants’ new offensive
coordinator, then fired him as the Cowboys had, and then lost his own job
after the Giants went 4–13 on the season.
Though the times are changing, any coach favoring analytics still must
have some steel. Played right, on average, he’ll do better following the
numbers, but on any given play or game he could lose. Then the “dumb and
I’m proud” crowd will descend. When Brandon Staley’s LA Chargers “went
for it” on five fourth downs but converted just two against the Kansas City
Chiefs, and lost in overtime, Howie Long and Terry Bradshaw went after

him on Fox. “Neither of us can spell analytics,” Long said, “but it took a
beating tonight.”
By the end of the 2021 season Staley had redeemed himself rising to
the top of FootballOutsiders.com’s new “Aggressiveness Index,” passing the
Ravens’ Harbaugh on the way, who fell to number sixteen. In his own rear-
view mirror Staley could see upstarts closing fast, like the Indianapolis
Colts’ head coach Frank Reich as he stepped over the still-warm football
corpse of NFL workhorse coach Bill Belichick. In their game 15 matchup,
Reich called for three fourth-down tries, making but two, but ultimately
exhausted Belichick’s Patriots and their options. Meanwhile, with nine
minutes to go in the game Belichick settled for a three-point field goal rather
than attempt a fourth-and-goal conversion for six points. Final score: Colts
27, Patriots 17.
“It’s crazy how much more the Patriots would win if he made three to
four better decisions each game,” a league source told Stephen Holder of
The Athletic. “Despite being perhaps the greatest strategist in the game’s
history,” Holder wrote, “Belichick still has a sizeable blind spot when it
comes to analytic decisions.”
Being known as a numbers-driven coach can create perverse new
disadvantage, which other coaches may seize and win on. In a late season
matchup between the Pittsburgh Steelers and the Ravens in 2021, Harbaugh
and Jackson failed at a game-winning two-point conversion. They went
home losers. Steelers head coach Mike Tomlin had studied Harbaugh’s game
film and was not at all surprised by the Ravens going for the win. “They
aggressively play analytics,” Tomlin said. “From that standpoint, they're
predictable.”
As for Tomlin, a Super Bowl Champ, and the only man in history to not
have a losing season for 15 straight years (and Zach Tumin’s favorite NFL
coach), he was last on the FootballOutsiders.com “Aggressiveness Index.”
And still he was finding a way to win.
Why We Wrote This Book
In this first chapter, we have book-ended an extraordinary decade with
accounts like Zest, one of the earliest commercial exploitations of big data
primed for market entry; the sophisticated, dexterous use of precision

systems for change in Zipline; and the change brought to the venerable NFL.
By 2022, as Kara Swisher had predicted, digitization was practically a
commodity. As Doug Merrill blazed the trail by liquefying (a term coined by
venture capitalist Marc Andreessen) credit data, a venturesome few armed
with dazzling technologies liquefied whole markets and spawned some of
the richest and most powerful new firms on the planet—seemingly lifting
not a finger in the physical world, providing platforms rich with AI and
machine learning, and designed and serviced by brilliant engineers,
designers, and product teams. These platforms connect billions of buyers and
sellers. “Uber, the world’s largest taxi company, owns no vehicles,”
marketing guru Tom Goodwin wrote. “Facebook, the world’s most popular
media owner, creates no content. Alibaba, the most valuable retailer, has no
inventory. And Airbnb, the world’s largest accommodation provider, owns
no real estate.” For good measure, add Shein—“the biggest fast-fashion
retailer in the United States, with no stores,” says Benedict Evans.
That’s the power and allure of precision systems putting product and
service into the hands of billions of new customers for their consideration
and choice. But if everyone everywhere has gone digital, what’s making the
difference between winners and losers in the marketplace, the political race,
the battle space? It’s the ability to turn all that digital infrastructure into real-
world value where people will pay premiums to get the change they want,
where, when, and how they want it—an Uber rolling up to a fare on a lonely
city street, same-day drone delivery of medicine to a rural hospital, or a vital
payday loan in the urban core. Every solution involves a precision system
built to deliver change exactly—precisely—where, when, and how
customers want it and managers intend it. If we look, we can we see such
precision systems in action everywhere:
• Precision marketing campaigns uniquely customize offers to millions
of end users (voters, shoppers, travelers).
• Precision pattern search discovers hidden links across real-world
events (crimes, financial irregularities, cyberattacks).
• Precision customer shaping suggests the products or services that a
target consumer may want to see or buy next (films, music, clothing).
• Precision sensor systems monitor the status of machine and human
activities via the networked Internet of Things (train and track integrity,
oil pipeline safety, health and fitness wearables).

• Precision product and services engineers personalized offerings to
suit customers’ tastes and requirements (athletic gear, automobiles,
medical devices).
• Precision matching finds best fits to produce specific desired results
(matching buyers to sellers, faces to identities, terrorists to locations,
sentences to offenders, job candidates to jobs, curricula to students,
football plays to game conditions).
• Precision scheduling smooths the operations of computer-assisted
physical systems (supply chain flows, airline scheduling, and hospital
bed utilization).
We’ve looked at hundreds of such efforts and spoken with hundreds of
executives, managers, and teams, from New York–Presbyterian Hospital and
BNSF Railways to the New York Times and the Biden 2020 campaign. Each
used precision systems for their own purposes—whether to boost
subscriptions and revenues, win games and elections, speed freight and
passengers on their way, or improve health and save lives.
In each instance, we see precision systems comprising a range of
techniques and an experimental approach that can be applied in diverse
settings. Precision, like math, fits everywhere and can be used for
everything. Like math, precision is a collection of techniques, facts, and
methods that can be used to answer all sorts of questions—to describe the
current world, model and predict the future, prescribe the best step forward.
As this perspective unfolded through our research, we learned a lot
about the amazing results that precision systems make possible—the power
to create just the change managers want, where, when, and how they want it.
That’s power for good, when used wisely. We’ve also discovered just how
difficult precision systems are to design and implement well, and the risks of
doing it badly.
We wrote this book to help managers be successful facing this new
onslaught of possibilities and demands. We share what we learned from
those in the forefront of precision by studying their tools, techniques, habits,
and best moves forward. No matter what kind of organization you may lead
or manage, you’ll find insights here that can help you see how precision can
enable you to do your work better, as well as nuts-and-bolts guidance into
the details of making it happen.

What You Can Expect from This Book
Over the next ten chapters, we’ll unpack the technologies, people, and
strategies of precision systems to yield lessons that any executive or
manager, coach or campaign chief can use right now to get ahead and stay
ahead.
Chapter 2, “Six Kinds of Precision Systems,” homes in on six precision
designs and their essential attributes, technical requirements, and fit to a
range of business problems. It explains how the designs work, when to use
them, and how to determine what kind of problems your organization
currently faces.
Chapter 3, “Design, Test, and Prove: Key Steps in Building a Precision
System,” brings you inside precision operations. You’ll read about and learn
from managers as they test whether have found the right audiences for their
campaigns, 
whether 
their 
pattern 
finding 
works, 
whether 
their
recommendations are relevant. You’ll learn how to determine what counts as
a win at the outset—big enough to matter, small enough to work.
Chapter 4, “Getting Started with Data and Platforms,” helps you decide
which business problems are best suited for precision solutions and how to
prioritize opportunities to get the most value possible into the right hands as
soon as possible.
Chapter 5, “The Precision Vanguard,” explains the roles that
organizational leaders play in driving the conversion to precision.
Chapter 6, “The Political Management of Precision,” describes the
challenges and headwinds facing precision, from status quo bias to the
endowment effect. You’ll learn how successful leaders have found ways to
overcome these barriers.
Chapter 7, “Bootstrapping Precision,” examines the kinds of
collaboration needed to bring precision to life. You’ll learn about the
external and internal partnerships that precision design requires, as well as
the critical issues of governance for collaboration where traditional lines of
authority will be missing.
Chapter 8, “Creating and Managing Teams of Precision,” offers insights
into the special challenges involved in organizing and leading the kinds of
interdisciplinary, cross-functional teams that are needed to design and
implement a winning precision system

Chapter 9, “Building the Precision Enterprise,” examines the best
organizational architectures for precision. We organize the discussion around
the critical tasks that precision requires, the formal structures needed to
support it, the essential skill sets and work design that make it happen, and
the cultural norms and values needed to insert new precision systems into
existing business processes.
Chapter 10, “Red Zones of Precision,” examines some of the principal
technical, ethical, and operating risks that the leaders of any precision
initiative must address. It illustrates specific ways of measuring and
minimizing these risks.
Chapter 11, “Summing Up: Some Final Lessons for Leaders,”
summarizes the most important takeaways from the book. You’ll learn about
the three key leadership roles involved in launching precision systems. The
admiral creates a strategy for developing a portfolio of precision projects.
The orchestra leader manages a group of self-sufficient professionals who
must harmonize their efforts in implementing precision. The pit boss guides
precision projects past implementation barriers and pitfalls to reach the end-
point delivery of value.
Throughout the book, you’ll be introduced to organizations from many
industries and economic sectors that have made the big leap to precision
systems, overcoming obstacles and challenges along the way. Their stories
will help you recognize the enormous opportunities that precision offers
your organization—and they’ll likely inspire you to begin or accelerate your
own journey of exploration into the amazing new world of precision
systems.

CHAPTER 2
SIX KINDS OF PRECISION SYSTEMS
 We use the term “precision system” throughout to refer to the powerfully
connected assets of people, processes, platforms, processes and data that
managers use to change the behavior of people, places, and things exactly
how, when, and where they need to. Whether it’s searching out crime
patterns, recommending the best next song, or sending the right patient
straight to the intensive care unit from the emergency room, precision
systems are in use all around us today.
People can be addressed with appropriate messaging (like cohort-
specific political campaign emails), presented with thoughtful options
(goods and services they might like), or alerted to problems they are
concerned about (like an unusually bad night’s sleep). These capabilities can
be used to influence people to think and act differently—presenting them
with a different news article or a different type of clothing in order to
influence a vote or a purchase down the line.
Places and objects can be monitored, and the flow of them adapted, like
automatically rescheduling hundreds of flights based on predicted bad
weather or decommissioning a train whose brakes were detected to have
worn thin. Objects are enabled to assess situations and even make decisions
autonomously, like recognizing a face in a crowd and alerting law
enforcement or identifying a fraudulent transaction and freezing the credit
card.
Precision systems are often based on artificial intelligence (AI) and,
with machine learning, can take on human-like capabilities, from
communicating to planning; reasoning to manipulating objects; and, above

all, learning. They are put to tasks ranging from chatbots for lead
development to website operation and optimization, to complex imaging of
everything from cracks in train wheels to brain slices. While managers can
“pop up” precision systems for specific, quite narrow purposes, the great
challenge of managers and executives is to stitch systems together for
maximum effect across entire “journeys” of people, places, or things,
whether the journey is of a patient to good health or a river to clean water or
a locomotive to continuous service. “Executives,” Tom Davenport wrote in a
2021 Harvard Business Review article, “will ultimately see the greatest value
by pursuing integrated machine-learning applications” that span the entirety
of such journeys, literally from cradle to grave.
And it all starts with technology.
The Technologies of Precision
One useful way to introduce precision technology is by illustrating how it
has transformed preexisting technology types that most people are already
familiar with. Consider, for example, the difference between calling a taxi
company to request a pickup, as we did only ten years ago, and today’s
option of opening a smartphone app, requesting a ride, and watching on the
screen as the car approaches your location. Ten years ago, the technology
used to accomplish this transaction was the telephone. As the customer, your
data (your current location) had to be shared with the taxi company verbally.
The operator would provide confirmation of dispatch, but after hanging up
the phone, you would have no idea where the driver was, how long they
would take to arrive, and what the price of the trip would be because the taxi
company shared none of this data with to you. This was technology before
precision.
Today, the technology used is the smartphone app. It has access to your
location (global positioning system [GPS]), your payment method (digital),
and your preferences (such as saved favorite locations). You input your
destination, and in an instant the GPS locations of all nearby drivers are
calculated, they are alerted to a new customer, a price is dynamically
calculated, and an estimated time to arrival is offered. This is technology
with precision. It involves the purposeful use of data points to offer a
customer experience that is simultaneously more customized, more accurate,
and more transparent than its predecessors.

Another example of how precision enhances existing technology can be
found from the sofa. Not so long ago, the way to find something to watch on
TV was to scroll through a list of available channels and, if you were lucky
enough to have cable, reading the menu of currently playing and next-up
shows. Shows played at set times that were inflexible, although determined
customers could record timed shows to watch later. This was a digital
experience, but not a precise one.
Today, the browsing experience offered by digital video-streaming
platforms is much different. You can pull up an app on your TV, which
remembers what you have recently been watching, what you haven’t seen
yet, and can recommend what you’re likely to enjoy watching. These apps
collect data about what you click on, the trailers you watch, the shows you
binge, and the shows you abort early, and they use all that data to run myriad
experiments designed to perfectly hone a profile of what you like and don’t
like: a quotidian experience powered by unimaginable digital precision.
The term “precision systems” doesn’t embrace everything online or
everything powered by data. There are plenty of examples of precision
operating offline (we’ll discuss John Deere’s computer vision tractors in
chapter 3) and likewise many data-powered systems that aren’t precise at all
(presenting a viewer with a list of all currently playing shows requires some
data).
Precision can be identified by a range of tools, techniques, purposes,
and outcomes. Prediction is a recognizable example; something as simple as
predicting next month’s sales based on last month’s sales is an attempt at
precision. Another is personalization—launching a product experience
unique to each customer. Devices we colloquially refer to as “smart” are
often hubs of precision applications: cameras that can recognize the faces of
friends and family, speakers that can understand commands and return
responses, even refrigerators that can tell our milk is expired.
If a system collects data, and that data is used as an input toward some
kind of process, and the output of that process is not predefined by rules,
then there’s a good chance it’s a precision system. Precision systems
surround us today.
Under the Hood of Precision Systems

Under the hood, the actual mathematics powering precision systems can
range from sophisticated statistical analyses and advanced machine learning
to much simpler, back-of-an-envelope calculations. There’s no rule that
precision must be AI- or machine learning–enabled. The variety of tools and
techniques at the disposal of analysts is vast, and the range of situations they
can tackle to solve problems and create value is even more so.
The defining difference between a precision system and any other kind
of system, however, is the use of all available data by managers to bring
about a specific desired change in the status and future of a person, place, or
thing—and no other. It may be said that precision systems’ entire purpose is
to convert the transparency of the world offered by big data into value in the
real world, measured by producing benefits with few if any collateral costs.
Precision systems built on massive new data can confer this advantage
because they are more accurate, faster, and more adaptive—more intelligent
—than any comparable systems of old. If powered by AI and machine
learning, they are designed to get smarter with each use—what Jim Collins
has called AI’s “flywheel effect” and Andrew Ng its “virtuous cycle.” The
more these systems are used, the smarter they get, the better
recommendations they make, and the more they get used—to the point
where 85 percent of Netflix customers’ choices result from Netflix’s
recommendations.
It’s neither possible nor necessary for every manager to have mastery of
all these tools and techniques, and most don’t. As long as they grasp the
basics under the hood well enough, says Harvard professor Jim Waldo, a Sun
Microsystems veteran and recent past chief technology officer at Harvard,
they can manage precision systems for success. “The biggest change today is
that every manager is now a technology manager,” Waldo says. “They either
understand that, or they screw up—no matter what kind of management
they’re doing. Technology is going to be what you’re up to and that, in turn,
means that whether you succeed as a manager will depend on things that you
don’t understand.” Understanding and mastering the technological problems
is only one part of the precision challenge, however, as the following story
illustrates.
Patternizr at the NYPD

In 2018, a December holiday-season robbery wave hit Bronx convenience
stores in New York City. It was the Bronx command’s turn in the docket of
the New York Police Department (NYPD) weekly Compstat, the high-
pressure weekly calling-to-account all commands face at some point. New
York Magazine reporter Chris Smith recalled the excoriation of the Bronx
command as Chief of Department Terrance Monahan and Chief of Crime
Control Strategies Dermot Shea grilled Bronx detectives.
“Squad, who is looking at this? This is a commercial gunpoint robbery!” Monahan snaps.
Shea interrupts. “I want to go backwards: We have a robbery and there’s a woman in the store. She
happens to be on the phone, puts the phone down, opens the door, and the robber comes in?”
“That’s correct,” says Betania Nazario, a sergeant in the detective squad of the 42nd Precinct,
which covers Morrisania and Crotona Park. “Do we believe she’s involved?” Shea asks. “Um, we’re
still working on that,” Nazario replies.
“Hold on,” Shea says, flipping through sheets of paper supplied by a research assistant. “Seven
blocks away, a week earlier, we’ve got another bodega robbery in the 4–2, four perps, one of them a
female. I don’t remember that many bodega robberies with female perps. Could she be part of this one
too?” “That’s a possibility,” Nazario says. Shea’s tone turns cutting: “Unless you’re telling me it’s
common for females to be involved in bodega robberies.”
“Commercial robs are spiking significantly, all with perps casually walking to a robbery,” Shea
says. “We’ve got to backtrack, draw that circle, find what building they went into, and ID them. This
is time well spent, this is why we close shootings, because we put the resources in, we backtrack, and
we canvass.” Then he says it’s time for a coffee break, and the entire room exhales in relief.
“I remember sitting in that Compstat,” Zach Tumin says. One of the
coauthors of this book, Tumin was deputy commissioner at the NYPD on
Commissioner Bill Bratton’s executive team. Compstat was the weekly
meeting of the top 200 NYPD commanders to discuss crime on their beats.
“The Chief of the Bronx was at the podium, being interrogated by
Monahan and Shea. Shea was asking the chief how many robberies were
outside a pattern at that moment. ‘About a thousand,’ the Bronx chief
replied.”
“I was astonished,” Tumin said. “We know that typically robbers
commit more than one robbery. They work out how, and where, and when,
and what works. Then they do it again and again. Robberies should be easy
to pattern.”
Tumin turned to a captain sitting next to him. “Why are there so many
robberies outside a pattern?” he whispered. “You want patterns to solve
crimes more easily, don’t you?”
“Yes,” came the answer, “but once you ‘declare a pattern,’ you’re on
the clock for solving the crime. The commander is on the spot to throw

resources at it—resources she may not have. So best to keep it out of a
pattern a long as you can.”
Tumin realized this might turn out to be more complicated than he
thought.
Throughout history, recognizing the similarities among crimes has been
the key to solving mysteries and bringing criminals to justice in every police
department worldwide. Until very recently, however, this craft has been as
much art as science. Television shows and movies showcase the power of
genius investigators mulling a seemingly unsolvable crime until—bingo—
they use an obscure detail to connect it to an earlier case, the criminal’s story
quickly unravels, justice is restored, and the city sleeps well that night. It
makes for thrilling entertainment; in the real world, intuitive pattern finding
is not the most scalable or reliable method of crime solving. Police
investigators need either really good memories (which some have, but not
all), or detailed systems for record keeping and technical support (often in
short supply as well).
Tumin was fascinated by the potential of pattern recognition as a crime-
fighting tool. But the exchange at Compstat made it clear that the NYPD’s
current methods of pattern making had much room for improvement. It was
all too iffy and left to chance.
Alex Cholas-Wood, a data scientist on Tumin’s staff, also had an
interest in patterns. Coming out of the meeting, Tumin chartered Cholas-
Wood to launch a project to see whether and how computing could pattern
crimes faster. Together with Evan Levine, another data scientist at NYPD,
Cholas-Wood set out to bring the power of precision to the age-old problem
of recognizing when one recent crime is similar to another and likely
perpetrated by the same criminal.
Sitting around his worktable with Cholas-Wood and Levine, Tumin
probed three metrics that mattered. First, what proportion of robberies are
not patterned at any given time? “In a perfect world,” Tumin suggested,
“that number should be pretty close to zero.” The underlying guess here?
Most if not all robberies are committed by an individual or group who has
done it before. But is that true? The first step would be to verify that guess
by drawing a sample—it could turn out that 95 percent of all robberies were
repeats. If 95 percent of robberies were committed by one or more or the
same individuals, and you had 1,000 robberies not patterned, you had a lot of

work to do to make more matches. After all, the data predicts that 950 of
those 1,000 are related but not yet matched.
Second, how many crimes are committed before a pattern is declared?
“In a perfect world, again,” Tumin said, “that number would be two.” In this
respect, crime patternmaking might be a lot like the TV game show Name
That Tune—the host reads a clue and two contestants bid the fewest notes
they need to identify the song.
Third, how much time elapses from first crime of a pattern to the last,
when the perpetrator is arrested? “How long did we let this guy walk around
being dangerous? In a perfect world,” Tumin suggested, “top performance is
exactly the time elapsed between the first and second crime. If we find the
pattern in two events, then he’s on the prowl only for the time between those
two. But if it takes us ten robberies to see the pattern and make an arrest, he
could be on the prowl for months while will we figured out his pattern.
That’s a lot of dangerous time on the loose.”
“If we can create a pattern-making system with these three metrics as
our guide,” Tumin said, “we should never again hear a chief stand up at
Compstat and announce he has a thousand un-patterned robberies. That
would be an embarrassment.”
Cholas-Wood and Levine recognized that this problem had all the
characteristics of a good candidate for precision systems treatment. A
precision system could turbocharge criminal pattern detection by making
those “genius” connections great detectives make between case A and case
B much faster and across a much broader range of crimes than any
investigator could reasonably cover alone. The automated system would
scale well across hundreds of detectives, adding consistency and improving
effectiveness. The data required to train the models were available and high
quality. Machine learning with new cases would constantly improve the
data’s accuracy. With thousands of robberies, burglaries, and assaults sitting
outside patterns across the city, the need was urgent. No one could dispute
the value of stopping crime short: it would save lives.
Although the NYPD was hardly born digital, it did have a long history
of innovating crime-fighting tools and techniques. In the 1990s, Bratton’s
legendary aide Jack Maple had pressed precinct commanders to push pins
into precinct maps wherever a crime occurred, updating them regularly. As
crimes clustered visually on the map, commanders could respond by putting
“cops on the dots,” as Bratton famously boasted.

What Maple soon realized was that the locations of the pins on the map
were never updated. It was precision in name only. Frustrated, Maple strung
wires from the upstairs servers at One Police Plaza headquarters, through his
window into a RadioShack computer and downloaded the data himself.
NYPD crime fighting had gone digital, presaging digital Compstat—and
leading to a reduction in violent crime of 10 percent in two years. A 10
percent year-over-year gain was huge. It suggested either that the cops were
much worse than anyone thought at the core business of fighting crime, or
perhaps they were great and Compstat just made them that much better.
Bratton came down in the middle, as was his style. He served the
NYPD twice as its commissioner, first from 1994 to 1995, when he
developed Compstat, and again from 2014 to 2107. Tumin left the NYPD
shortly after Bratton did in 2018. Cholas-Wood and Levine were transferred
to the command of the new Chief of Crime Control Strategies Lori Pollock.
While Chief Pollock was open to change, she recalls being skeptical of the
precision project that Cholas-Wood and Levine were bringing to her, which
had now been given the name of Patternizr.
“It all depends on how unique the crime is,” she explained. She often
lectured Tumin on the realities of policing:
You could have a guy using a brick to smash a window in a candy
store between the hours of midnight and 5 a.m. But that’s not that
unique of an MO—“brick-through-store-window” happens a lot.
Can you make a pattern out of that? Yes. you can, but only by
using other details—like getting DNA off one brick and seeing if it
matched the DNA off another brick. Of course, just because you
have DNA, obviously it doesn’t identify somebody. It just tells you
that it’s the same person.
Undaunted, Levine and Cholas-Wood took stock of what they had: the skills
to build the model; access to the analysts and detectives who could use the
tool; and sets of data covering a decade’s worth of grand larcenies, robberies,
and burglaries. Their hardware was modest—a standalone Mac computer, a
gift from the head of information technology (IT) who thought they would
use it to produce the department newsletter.

They got to work using a common machine-learning model framework
called random forests. The random forest framework classifies items from a
given data set into useful categories. In this case, it examined individual
crimes of interest—so-called seed crimes—and asked, “Does this crime fit a
pattern with another crime?”
The result was a collection of decision trees used to parse the input data
set and separate the crimes methodically according to their various features.
Some of these features applied to all the crimes—for example, the date of
the crime and its location. Others applied only to specific types of crimes:
Was a robbery armed or not? If it was, what type of weapon was used? If a
grand larceny was involved, what was the item stolen and what was its dollar
value? Each of the many decision trees that make up a random forest sorts
through such features and calculates the likelihood that one item in the
database is related to another.
“What Patternizr does,” Chief Pollock explains, “is it sifts through these
large data sets of time and space after you put a seed complaint in, to
generate things that closely resemble your seed complaint. Usually, we
looked at the top ten because they give you the highest ranked confidence
levels. From there, you can decide whether they’re part of your pattern or
not.”
Historical data about established crime patterns were used to train and
test the model to be as accurate as possible. They called this rebuilding a
pattern—could Patternizr accurately identify the same crimes in a pattern
that detectives already had? For example, if a historical crime pattern had
five crimes, and Patternizr was given one of those five, could it suggest the
other four as related? In a test of 150 patterns, Patternizr correctly rebuilt 37
percent of burglary patterns, 26 percent of robbery patterns, and 27 percent
of grand larceny patterns. For those three crime types, it was able to find
patterns with a match in the top ten crimes of 82 percent, 78 percent, and 76
percent, respectively. This was a good starting point for a brand-new
precision system, but there was still much work to do.
Cholas-Wood and Levine were keenly aware of the need to make
Patternizr trustworthy and trusted. They removed from the data sets any
feature describing sensitive personal information such as the race and gender
of victims and perpetrators, as well as precise details of crime locations.
These steps helped to reduce the number of false positives based unfairly on
race or gender, and they avoided exposing the precise locations of innocent

people. The team also established a multilevel structure of human review so
that any detected pattern would be confirmed by police leadership before the
arrest of a suspect.
Cholas-Wood and Levine developed the user interface for ease of use
and ability to integrate with other NYPD systems. Patternizr proved useful in
its early applications. But design elements and work routines affected its use
in operations. These are worth enumerating because they impaired its overall
usefulness and value.
The Challenge of Patternizr
Even with technical safeguards, real-world design elements and work
routines affected Patternizr’s use in operations. First, Patternizr did not run
in the background, constantly examining new cases and setting off alerts
when a new case might bear similarities to existing unsolved crimes. Rather,
it had to be turned on—operated on demand by civilian analysts and
detectives for robberies, burglaries, and grand larcenies
Second, the need to turn on Patternizr meant its use had to be
prioritized, which could easily move it to the back burner. For example, if
the NYPD brass placed a high priority on suppressing a rash of gang
shootings in some tit-for-tat turf battle in the Bronx, that could divert
detectives’ and analysts’ attention from other violence, such as stranger-on-
stranger muggings.
Third, Patternizr was initially built for only three crimes: burglary,
robbery, and grand larceny. This left holes in its usability, making it
something of a mysterious “black box”—and potentially unreliable for
investigators.
Fourth, machine learning works worst on its first day and better every
day it is in use. But that takes engineers, data scientists, and end users
looking at results and fine-tuning models. In an organization not set up to
sustain AI systems, that requirement puts AI systems like Patternizr at risk
of becoming ineffective and thus lowers confidence of its users.
Fifth, metrics did not change—no one was held to account for
patternmaking when using Patternizr any more than they were in the good
old days prior. That risked letting crimes go unpatterned that should have set
off alarm bells instead.

Sixth, perverse incentives could delay “declaring a pattern” deep into a
crime spree. Chief Pollock explains:
If I’m a precinct detective and I’m working a robbery, say, a guy robbed somebody with a gun. I do all
this work—I get video, I talk to witnesses, I have all my DNA, I get ballistics. I do all this work, and
now I put that crime into Patternizr. And I find out that the same guy did it two boroughs over—that’s
going to go to a different unit. So all my work is going to get taken out of my queue. I’m still going to
be part of it, but all my work is now going to go to Manhattan Robbery, let’s say, or Central Robbery,
guys who work patterns citywide.
So as you get closer to the investigator, he may or may not want to use Patternizr. He may want to
get rid of that case right away. He’s like, “Let’s put this in Patternizr. Let me see if there’s a pattern
somewhere in the city that I can go, ‘Here you go.’ ” You know? It’s politics, right? It’s not that the
crime is not going to get prosecuted, hopefully. It’s just, there’s different reasons why people outside
of the crime analysts might or might not use Patternizr.
All of this was sand in the machine, grinding against Patternizr’s
usefulness in practice compared to its potential. None of the points of
weakness listed above constitute fundamental failures. The availability and
quality of the data, the performance of the original model, the skills of the
team who built it, and the good intentions of the organization all remain
unchanged. The NYPD developers carefully built three high-performance
models; they rightly excluded sensitive data like gender and race and even
kept the data stored on local computers rather than using cloud storage and
risking a data breach. In all these ways, the NYPD teams did a fine job in
crafting Patternizr. The NYPD’s failings here were less obvious, more
complicated, last-mile failures that prevented—and likely still prevent—a
good product from having the impact that it should have.
The upshot: when leaders invest resources in a risky but potentially
powerful precision system but then layer it on top of unchanged everyday
workflows, neglect to remetric performance accordingly, and leave it
imperfect in development and optional in use, they may unwittingly pave the
way for failure. Precision systems require careful preparation and constant
care and feeding. As if painting a room or a house, preparation of the
underlying surface is everything; regular maintenance is essential to
improved performance. Failing either risks a loss of value in the investment
and declining performance over time.
Systems for Finding Patterns

As the Patternizr story shows, implementing a precision system and
achieving the results desired is far from simple. Solving the technology
challenges is only part of the equation. Equally important are the managerial
and social challenges that make most leadership tasks difficult, including
those involved in the world of precision.
Fortunately, myriad sources of information can help leaders dive into
this world. In the next part of this chapter, we describe common problem
types to which precision systems can be applied rather than focus on specific
technical tools. By being problem- instead of solution-centered and focusing
on the why instead of the how, we can achieve two goals. First, we can help
you grasp the value of precision without asking you to master a profusion of
technical information. Second, we can provide a range of examples across
varied industries and sectors that will encourage you to recognize possible
applications to your own challenges.
The challenges that Patternizr was designed to address vividly illustrate
one of the most common problems faced by leaders today—the challenge of
finding patterns. In a world that’s awash in a vast, constantly flowing stream
of information, it’s extremely difficult for a human brain to extract the most
accurate, useful signal from the noise. The scale and speed of the data are
simply too much for one person or even a team of people to manage. They
may know or suspect that within this information lie patterns hidden to the
naked eye—correlations between one variable and another, clusters of
similar objects, or a reliable prediction that A often leads to B. But most
people are unable to put their fingers on the patterns without extra help.
Imagine a baseball manager who wants to know how many base hits his
everyday left fielder is likely to have in a crucial upcoming series against the
team’s toughest rival. He is wondering whether it’s time to bench the player,
who has been struggling at the plate, in favor of a different outfielder who
may be ready to get hot. To predict this, the baseball manager could attempt
to watch recordings of every game his team and the opposing team have ever
played at this stadium, scrutinizing player profiles, specific pitcher-batter
matchups, even weather conditions. Ingesting this volume of data would be
difficult or impossible, let alone absorbing it well enough to identify subtle
correlations within the games. A precision system designed to watch
hundreds of hours of games could do so without trouble, remembering and
analyzing every millisecond and independently estimating that, given the
variables of the upcoming games, the star player is likely to continue his

struggles with the bat. The baseball manager can take that insight and
restrategize as he sees fit.
Now consider a marketing manager who wants to know the following:
of all the people who arrive at my website, which ones are most likely to end
up making a purchase on the website—the people who arrive from a Google
search, those who arrive from an email referral, or those who click a link on
Facebook? She could trawl through millions of rows of raw click data in a
database, looking for visual clues indicating the relative frequency with
which a purchase click happened from a user who came to the website via
one source or another. She could also use a system that would crunch those
totals for her in a moment while also offering her different variables, such as
the country of the user and the dollar amount of the purchase, and streaming
in new click data to update the result every few minutes. She could then
prioritize her marketing efforts accordingly.
These scenarios rely on tools that find patterns in information, an
activity sometimes known as data mining. These tools can be instructed to
look for a specific pattern or to sift through the data without looking for
anything specific, surfacing discovered patterns of any kind.
Data scientists looking for patterns may also use tools trained in skills
like anomaly detection to catch notable deviations from the norm, linear and
logistic regression to find associations, or cluster analysis to find similar
groups. After the insights have been mined from the data, any number of
things can be done with them. Regardless of the specific quantitative
technique used, what matters is the overall goal or purpose of the
application: to sift out the signal from the noise and learn about patterns and
insights hidden within the data that would otherwise be invisible to the
human eye.
Systems for Personalization
The concept of personalization is a mainstay of ecommerce companies and
digital organizations in general. Personalization is the effort to take what is
known about an individual customer, prospect, or other target and present to
them a version of the digital experience that reflects what they are interested
in and likely to engage with. This can result in literally millions of slightly
different experiences being presented to millions of people worldwide, by
the same company, in the same instant.

Flagship examples of personalization include Google, Amazon, and
Netflix—tech giants who make your search results different from the results
for the next person, even when you both enter the same search term. When
you log into your Netflix home screen, it’s not just the “recommended for
you” section that reflects what you prefer—it’s everything. The order of the
sections on the page, the arrangement of program titles within each section,
the titles that appear first when you type the first letter of a search term, even
the short ten-second clips that play automatically when you hover over a title
are all selected just for you, in an instant.
There’s a reason for personalization. No longer just “nice to have,” it is
for many businesses practically existential—“the rod of iron that runs
through the foundation of every successful organization,” Jenna Delport
wrote in a blog post, “without which there is little left to differentiate itself.”
“Personalization adds a layer of stickiness to the business,” Patrick
Reeves at marketing firm Axiz told Delport. “It binds the customer and
keeps them in an orbit you can use to further engage and build loyalty.”
Many news publishers and aggregators employ personalization
techniques that are similar to Google, Amazon, and Netflix. They consider
the types of stories you have clicked on before balanced with the top
headlines of the day, which results in a package of articles personalized for
you. Especially within the context of news media, this kind of
personalization can have far-reaching impacts on public perception of truth
and facts.
One of the ways these systems achieve personalization at such massive
scale continuously is through the concept of audiences. Precision systems
can bunch together groups of people and objects based on characteristics it
knows that they share. For example, millions of people who have clicked on
products, movies, or news articles about self-driving vehicles might be
grouped together under an audience label like “interest group: machine
learning & autonomous vehicles.”
The technique often powering these audiences is called collaborative
filtering, and it relies on metadata about the content in order to recommend
similar content to the people who interacted with it. This means that the next
time an article about self-driving cars is published, the recommendation
engine will show it to that audience with a higher priority than it shows it to
other groups, on the assumption that they’ll be more interested.

Sometimes collaborative filtering can’t be used, for example, when no
one has interacted with new content yet. Without interactions, collaborative
filtering can’t find similar users. This is known as the cold start problem. To
get around it, a technique called the genomic approach is emerging; it aims
to understand the actual nature and attributes of the content itself, using
content descriptors, and begin recommending that content to people who
have liked content with similar attributes.
Precision content management goes beyond just recommendations. The
articles, posts, and videos we see are generated more and more often by
intelligent systems, too. If you were reporting on the Olympics, would you
need to write individual and different articles to summarize the results of
hundreds of different matches in different sports? The Washington Post
thinks not. It built a bot to scrape the results of each match and use a natural
language processing (NLP) algorithm to produce succinct event summaries.
They called the system Heliograf, and today it has been expanded to high
school sports events and even election coverage, freeing up journalists’ time
to write more complex pieces involving investigative and editorial expertise.
Other examples of precision systems generating, augmenting,
personalizing, and distributing content abound. Their use has exploded along
with the internet, social media, and consumer rates of digital consumption.
Once the content has been produced, it can then go through the rigors of
personalized recommendation systems so that what you see on your screen
may been shown only to you and a few “people like you” without having
been touched by a human. Advances in speech-to-text and text-to-speech
technology allowed Amazon’s audiobook arm Audible to sync up the audio
reading of a book with its text sibling word-for-word, allowing readers to
switch seamlessly between reading on device and audio narration—another
form of personalization made possible by precision systems.
Systems for Predicting Values
Sometimes, all you need is a number. Predicting values is one of the most
common applications of precision. The challenges involved may run the
gamut, from simple, even obvious, to enormously complex.
A business that is forecasting sales numbers for next quarter needs to
consider changes to internal factors like the number of salespeople and sales
support technology staff, along with external factors like economic strength

and average consumer disposable income. It then uses proven predictive
techniques to forecast future sales values. They may need to repeat this
exercise every quarter.
Another example might be a customer care center manager who needs
to predict the number of staff she’ll need to schedule for Cyber Monday, the
annual shopping day when online holiday sales hit their peak. She could use
a probability distribution to blend data from prior Cyber Monday customer
call volumes with her own intuition from years of managing the center. The
function would spit out a range of predictions with various likelihoods, and
she’d be able to create a plan A and a backup plan B for staffing.
For a use case on a massive scale, consider a company running a
programmatic advertising campaign for a particular brand that needs to
calculate the exact dollar amount it should bid on an impression opportunity
—that is, a chance to appear on a website visitor’s page—in order to win the
auction and have its ad appear, while not bidding too much higher than
competing brands and thereby wasting money. For large programmatic
advertisers, this number needs to be calculated thousands of times every
second. Settling on the answer depends in part on tracking and measuring
the real-world impact of programmatic “spend.” Sources of sales data for
such purposes vary from Nielsen home-scanning panels, where shoppers
record their purchases, to Facebook data that show whether ad exposure
brought people to car dealerships, to footfall analysis that links individual
store visits to specific programmatic campaigns via in-store WiFi, to classic
click-through rates.
But until Instacart came along, it was all ultimately rough recollection
and guesswork. marketing’s version of “Just So Stories,” as one critic
lamented, “made up examples of superficially plausible targeting,” but
lacking the rigor of multiple tests and controlled exposures. Instacart, by
contrast, “was the first ‘performance marketing’ consumer package good
makers had ever seen,” Ryan Caldbeck of CircleUp told a podcaster. “It gave
them direct awareness of every item a consumer ever bought. If they know I
love Heineken beer, and if the product manager of Stella wants to try to
convert me, they can give me a Stella coupon and then see if I change my
behavior over time. Getting that data is the holy grail.”
Once settled, precision systems designed to evaluate a multitude of
changing input factors and create the optimal output value—be it a sales
forecast, a staff number, a bid, or anything else—can range from a handmade

one-time analysis on the back of an envelope to an industrial-scale, real-time
prediction engine. As with data science in general, the scale of the system
needed for a use case depends on the speed, frequency, and volume of
decisions the system needs to make. There is no need for a machine-learning
algorithm to answer a simple question once a year.
When a complex question must be answered, an array of statistical tools
may be called upon. For example, there’s uni- or multivariate linear
regression that predicts future values based on past inputs, economic
concepts like supply and demand modeling, and advanced data science
techniques like random forest algorithms that can predict the changing
likelihood of an event occurring. All of these can be deployed in predicting
important values.
Ben Singleton, a data science leader formerly of JetBlue Airways, led a
team that used data science tools called XGBoost and LightGBM to predict
the specific dollar amount that customers would be willing to pay for an
extra-leg-space seat upgrade for a flight. These tools, which Singleton
describes as “statistics on steroids,” consider the length of the flight, the time
of day (red-eye flights are more painful), and the average ticket cost, among
a number of other data points, and outputs the recommended price for each
flight. To eke out a decent profit margin from this offering in the brutally
competitive airline industry, an airline may need to calculate this for every
single flight, every single day—lest it let the price sink too low and lose
profit or let it rise too high and lose customers.
This practice is known as dynamic pricing, and it’s something most
airlines have invested heavily in by now. Earlier techniques for price
calculation were rule-based, meaning that the airline used “if X then Y”
logic to define the price for a ticket or service; for example, “if this customer
is booking more than thirty days prior to flight, the price offered should be
$300”. This was not precise, by our definition, because the prices were
neither computed for individuals nor computed on the spot.
In comparison, newer algorithmic pricing techniques take in a wider
range of factors: the customer’s loyalty status, competitor airline prices in
real time, and even the weather, to produce a specific price for each
customer at the time of search. Rather than prescribing the price according to
rules, the correct price is derived from a continuous process of offering
individual prices and adapting them according to consumers’ decisions to

purchase or not. Altexsoft describes these two approaches as “static pricing”
and “dynamic pricing,” respectively.
Predicting can be a matter of life or death, too. In early 2020, Peter
Chang, physician and director of the Center for Artificial Intelligence in
Diagnostic Medicine (CAIDM) at the University of California, Irvine (UCI),
saw the rapidly rising numbers of COVID-19 cases and knew immediately
that hospital intensive care units could easily be overwhelmed, which in turn
could lead to unnecessary mortalities from the disease. Using statistical
techniques, he built an algorithm that used a patient’s demographic data,
physical condition, and lab results to predict the likelihood that the patient
will require intubation in intensive care. He called it the Vulnerability
Scoring System and was able to roll it out for use in UCI Health facilities
within four weeks.
Systems for Entity Recognition
If you’ve ever complied with an internet browser’s infuriating demand to
identify all the trees, cars, or bridges in a photo, you have participated in
training an entity recognition algorithm. Yes, these so-called captchas are
used to weed out humans from bots, but the process also effectively
outsources data labeling. Thanks to you and millions like you, the
underlying model got slightly smarter at recognizing trees, cars, or bridges in
other photos.
Entity recognition is something the human brain is naturally very good
at. You don’t need to think very hard to recognize your friend’s face
approaching you on the street or tell the difference between a photo of a dog
and a photo of a muffin. Now AI systems (box 2.1) are learning to master
entity recognition on a much larger scale than a human can.
Systems for entity recognition are in wide use today. Sky News used
entity resolution to recognize the faces of celebrities present at a royal
wedding for fashion and style coverage of the event. BNSF Railway uses
entity recognition to find microscopic cracks in wheels as trains roll by at
seventy miles per hour (more on this case in chapter 9).
Box 2.1 AI

AI is often a principal technology component of precision systems. Using AI, humans train
computers to make humanlike decisions. Making calculations, understanding written text, and
performing a trained set of actions are all things that an AI system can do. But before it can
learn, humans need to teach it.
Machine learning is a subset of AI in which computers are enabled to learn things without
humans explicitly teaching them. Given a huge amount of data and a starting algorithm, the
computer is set loose to discover things in the data, learn patterns, and make predictions.
University hospital AI departments are now developing clinical support
tools for radiologists that can sift through X-ray, magnetic resonance
imaging (MRI), and computed tomography (CT) scans, sorting them into
normal (healthy) and abnormal (unhealthy), and highlight sections of the
scan to prompt a radiologist’s focused attention. Cardiologist and author of
Deep Medicine Eric Topol told a conference audience that his favorite
algorithm outputs to review are heart scans: “I’ve been doing it for a few
decades. I’m afraid to admit, and I would never know if the patient is a man
or a woman, but of course you can train algorithms to know that pretty darn
well—not to mention their heart function, whether they have anemia and the
extent of it—and then to make difficult diagnoses like amyloidosis or
pulmonary hypertension, very accurately.”
Competitive sports leagues use entity recognition technology to analyze
in-game videos, measuring everything from the distance between an
offensive player trying to score a goal and a defender trying to block the shot
to the angles at which players in a cluster move toward and away from each
other in a contact scenario. These advanced, commercialized precision
systems create exhilarating slow-motion replays that fans love—and players
too—watching it all on stadium jumbotrons. Using these same precision
systems, coaches can zero in on specific player weaknesses or decide
whether to dispute a referee’s call in real time.
Retail stores, casinos, and other workplaces have long been under the
watch of video cameras scanning aisles, card tables, and cash registers for
known shoplifters, card counters, or sticky-fingered store clerks. Airline
check-in and building security scans now match images to authorized
passengers and employees. Counterterrorism teams use entity recognition
technology for signs that passengers who may be seated separately in airport
waiting areas actually know each other and are working in unison—or
walking oddly, indicating perhaps a suicide vest or heavy armaments
underneath street clothes. Counterespionage teams track foreign agents on

their streets and watch for meetings with confidential informants, revealing
tradecraft and networks never before known or seen. Facial recognition
technologies help governments around the world spy on their own citizens at
work, at play, and even in their own homes.
Concerns about privacy and security aren’t the only difficult aspects of
entity recognition systems. Unlike other precision system types discussed in
this chapter, entity recognition has fairly high technical barriers to entry.
Rudimentary systems can be programmed to execute specific rules—for
example, if color equals red, then fruit equals apple, and if color equals
orange, then fruit equals orange. But such systems are quickly overwhelmed
by the complexity of reality in which fruit bowl images may contain
strawberries, apricots, and other confounding fruits. However, off-the-shelf
software systems are gradually learning how to meet these technical
challenges. Entity recognition algorithms are now being widely popularized
as software-as-a-service offerings with simple interfaces and programmatic
access options capable of processing millions of images for a few thousand
dollars. Thus, the barriers to entry for people exploring the use of precision
systems for entity recognition needs are lower than ever.
Systems for Geotracking
We know that the tiny supercomputers we keep in our pockets all day—our
mobile phones—capture our locations and periodically relay them to
satellites, servers, and nearby devices. Precision systems for geotracking
ingest information like GPS coordinates, maps, Bluetooth beacons, satellite
terrain imagery, internet protocol (IP) addresses, and other spatial data. With
geotracking, precision systems track and trace, detect and spot, predict and
plan. They can re-create past movements and locations of people, cars, and
planes, but they can also predict futures: collisions, on-time arrivals, or fuel
shortages, and prescribe course changes as needed.
ESRI, a provider of geographic information software, describes two
main types of geospatial data: discrete feature data such as exact locations,
often used to describe the built environment with coordinates and
administrative attributes like census information, and raster data, which is
used to segment chunks of the natural world and apply descriptive
characteristics like temperature and precipitation. Using the right tools,
analysts of geographical data can perform the same kinds of analyses they

would on other data types: hunting for associations, trends, anomalies,
clusters, and characteristics. For those willing to dip their toes into the pool
of geotracking analysis, the rewards can be powerful.
Geotracking systems are the foundation for many of the personal
utilities we’ve come to take for granted, including the GPS maps we use on
highways, finding routes through urban canyons, photo sharing among
friends via Bluetooth, detecting changes in a time zone, and the magical
appearance of the right boarding pass onto your mobile phone screen as you
approach the airport.
The same systems are also used for a growing array of less familiar
applications. Satellite imagery is essential for governments and nonprofits in
their battles with big-game poachers in wildlife reserves, in tracking the
melting rate of the polar ice caps keeping our planet habitably cool, and in
monitoring large swaths of agricultural land for quality degradation and crop
management. Privately owned Google Earth aims to capture a complete
picture of the entire world regularly, indexing it and sharing it widely at no
cost.
Geotracking in precision systems helps businesses transform customer
experience. The New England Patriots football team pioneered the use of
high-bandwidth, in-stadium Wi-Fi and digital “fences” for video replays on
thousands of fans’ smartphones simultaneously, with in-seat food and
beverage service while they watched, all to make the in-stadium experience
superior to watching at home, even in the New England winters, and worthy
of a season ticket purchase. On a more modest scale, the gym chain Equinox
surfaces customers’ swipe-in passes on their phone once they are within a
few feet of the entry, saving them from digging around for it at check-in.
Entrepreneurs use geotracking for the public good in many ways. As we
saw in chapter 1, the Rwandan start-up Zipline has built a fleet of self-
navigating medicine drones, which, in the words of the company, “deliver
critical and lifesaving products precisely where and when they are needed,
safely and reliably, every day, across multiple countries.” Governments use
geotracking for everything from forensics and crime scene investigations to
regulatory reforms, to pandemic control. Investigators of the January 6 U.S.
Capitol insurrection identified many attackers from logs of their cellphones
—all pinging from inside the Capitol building during the hours of attack.
Businesses operating within the European Union use location information to

know whether a customer falls within the jurisdiction of European privacy
law and offer them consumer controls accordingly.
In cases like these, the precision technology is often the easy part—the
human challenges of collaboration, adoption, privacy protection, and citizen
engagement prove much more complex.
Systems for Modeling Scenarios
Predicting the future is notoriously difficult but also vitally important—
hence the widespread fascination with efforts to sketch potential futures and
form a plan for responding to each of them. Such scenario modeling
involves examining different combinations of factors both inside and outside
our control and using mathematical methods to identify which future
patterns are most likely to occur. Working with a volume and variety of data
never before manageable at scale and with speed, precision systems are now
making such exercises more accurate and useful. Budgeting is one of the
most recognizable ways we do this. Organizational leaders constantly ask:
“Given the monetary constraints we have and the financial commitments
we’ve made, what would the future look like twelve months from now if we
spent conservatively, moderately, or liberally? And which of those three
scenarios is the most likely?”
A biopharmaceutical start-up concerned with investing its limited
resources in the manner most likely to yield a viable product might model
the scenario outcomes of various research and development (R&D)
strategies. Considering constraints such as dollars, team members, and
opportunity costs, how many variants of a potential drug is the company
likely to cycle through before it hits something with promise, based on how
long it’s previously taken in similar situations?
Competitive scenario modeling increases the complexity by including
the likely behavior of an adversary or a challenger. Until recently, systems
designed to model variants of competitive scenarios had to be run, adjusted,
and run again under human supervision. The earliest algorithms to compete
with human chess players, for example, required a human chess player to
compete against and were developed by data scientists who tweaked and
refined them to be better every time. Today, the same processes no longer
need to be set up and run by humans. Google AI’s fully autonomous, self-
teaching chess algorithm AlphaZero learned how to win a chess game after

just four hours of training and is now available as a product that runs
innumerable game variations against competitors both real and simulated.
Modern applications for competitive scenario modeling span many
industries in which a strategy is required and a variety of actions is possible,
each with its own ramifications. Merger and acquisition firms use game
theory to strategize the most effective way to buy or sell a target firm,
hypothesizing what the party on the other side of the table might do every
step of the way.
Combat simulation is another application of scenario modeling. The
U.S. Navy developed some of the most sophisticated scenario models to
coordinate the positioning, targeting, and cyberdefense of aircraft carrier
strike groups during attack. The Netherlands Aerospace Center offers a suite
of systems for purchase that use machine learning to generate computer
generated forces, or simulated combat opponents. The user of the system can
simulate various interactions and battle strategies, playing them to their
likely conclusion, without ever having to step onto a real battlefield or fire a
real weapon. This is positioned as an intelligence imperative because real-
world opponents are likely to have invested in such scenario modeling
themselves. Such military modeling systems are closely related to entity
recognition systems because each of the opponents and objects within the
simulated scenario are generated through similar techniques.
Shared Principles Across Precision Systems
This framework of six types of precision systems is our preferred way to
think about high-level categories of precision, but it is not the only way.
Other leaders have proposed different lenses to view the same problem. For
example, Steven Miller at Singapore Management University proposed only
three buckets: cognitive process automation for automating workflows and
decisions, cognitive insights for finding information within data, and
cognitive engagement for interactive tools like voice assistants and chatbots.
We find the slightly more granular breakdown into six buckets to be
more helpful. In the chapters that follow, we will reference each of these six
types of precision systems and study examples of their application. They are
used again and again to go further than even the cleverest human brains can
go in the public, private, and nonprofit sectors; in a range of industries; and

by leaders from executive managers of large corporations to individual
contributors.
As you can imagine, there are important differences among the many
kinds of precision systems being developed and deployed by this array of
organizations. But there are also several underlying similarities, all of which
offer useful lessons for those interested in exploring the creation of such a
system. Next we discuss four of the most important.
Precision Systems Exist Within a Human and Organizational Context
It’s tempting to think of a precision system as a sum of the platforms, code,
and data that power it. But a precision system does not exist in a vacuum. It
is a living combination of technology, people, processes, and goals—all
operating within an organizational culture and a broad social context. People
are needed to understand the problems and opportunities characterizing the
status quo and to envision systems with the ability to improve it. Processes
serve to link the technology to real life and adapt to changes over time.
Goals are needed to state the purpose of the system and measure progress
toward them, connecting the present to the desired future. And the
organizational culture and social context help to define how employees,
customers, users, and other stakeholders will respond to the precision system
and use it effectively—or not.
Designing a Precision System Is a Fundamentally Nonlinear Process
Creating a precision system is a form of systems engineering, with all the
complexities that work generally involves. But data science—the
multidisciplinary field that underlies the developing of precision systems—
involves unique difficulties, particularly in software engineering.
In traditional software engineering, a target state of desired features and
functionality can be articulated before work begins, and engineers can
estimate with relative accuracy the time and complexity required to move
from the current state to that target state. For example, a product designer
can sketch a new screen for an app, specifying what each button should do
when clicked, along with the expected behavior for a variety of edge cases.
Engineers can then work collaboratively to assign that vision a complexity

versus effort estimation. This process enables teams to plan while retaining
the flexibility they need to adapt to changing priorities.
This is not the case with data science development. Much as in
traditional software engineering, target states can usually be described; for
example, the team working on a precision system for the emergency room in
a hospital might decide “the target state is that we can predict with 80
percent accuracy which patients arriving at an emergency department will
require intensive care.” However, the problems to be solved by engineers
and data scientists to arrive at that target state are much more difficult to
describe in advance. Data science development is fundamentally nonlinear—
it requires iterations of research and development, trial and error, model
optimization, training and retraining. It’s simply not possible to know
whether or when you’ll reach the 80 percent accuracy goal—or whether and
when circumstances will change and drive that 80 percent down to 70 and 60
until models are corrected and high performance resumes. For this reason,
when a precision system is being built, timelines and outcomes are both
uncertain. The sooner leaders understand that, the better.
When Developing a Precision System, Defining What’s “Good Enough” Is a
Core Challenge
Because of the inherent ambiguity involved in creating a precision system,
improvements can be pursued indefinitely. An accuracy rate of 80 percent
may be solid enough to solve most of the problem for most users of the
system most of the time. But the team working on the system must consider
questions like, “Would 60 percent or 70 percent be just as acceptable as 80
percent? Would the effort to improve to 90 or 95 percent be worthwhile?”
Answers to these questions are rarely obvious. In the pursuit of
performance, much can be gained and much can be lost. When to call your
precision project “done” may not be clear, and leaders will ultimately need
to draw a line to avoid infinite tweaking, seeking certainty that data science
inherently resists. The choice between building a simple, good-enough
system and an ultra-high-performance system—a skateboard or a Ferrari—
will involve a number of factors, including the resources available (such as
data, time, and talent) and the cost of errors (human, commercial, strategic,
and otherwise).

A simple Excel spreadsheet that took a few hours to design (the
skateboard) may be the right answer for some problems. In other cases, a
highly complex and massively scaled system (the Ferrari) may be necessary.
Both can get you from A to B, but with different costs and benefits. As a
leader, knowing whether you need a skateboard or a Ferrari is a make-or-
break insight for your precision endeavors as cost of improvement increases
against relative value of improvement.
Precision Systems Are Subject to Several Forms of Bias
The problem of bias built into decision-making algorithms isn’t new; it
existed long before precision systems did. In 1988, the British Medical
Journal published a scathing account of a London medical school that had
been disproportionately rejecting female applicants and nonwhite applicants
because the algorithm that sifted through applications initially had been
trained to pick and prioritize applications that most closely resembled
previously approved ones. In other words, because most of the student body
was white and male, that’s what the algorithm was looking for.
Today, we still see the same kind of bias perpetuation, but now the data
and the computers are bigger and more powerful than ever. Data science can
have the unfortunate effect of cementing bias—which means that those who
are developing precision systems need to be on guard against bias at every
stage in the process. Here’s a simple example of how bias can be perpetuated
in the design of a precision system. In 2018, researchers Timnit Gebru from
Microsoft and Joy Buolamwini from the Massachusetts Institute of
Technology (MIT) proved that some facial recognition products made
inaccurate deductions about women and nonwhite men much more often
than they did when analyzing the faces of white men. Depending on the
purposes for these facial recognition technologies—for example, the
identification of criminal suspects—the results could produce significant
harm to members of particular demographic groups.
Gebru and Buolamwini found that the cause of this bias was the
underlying data set on which the machine-learning algorithm had been
trained. The data set contained approximately 80 percent images of white
people and only about 20 percent nonwhite people. Because the algorithm
was less familiar with nonwhite faces, it was more likely to classify them
incorrectly. When the researchers retrained the same algorithm using a

different data set that had been deliberately balanced across gender and race,
it performed equally well for people of all backgrounds.
As this story illustrates, guardrails need to be put in place at every step
of the process of creating a precision system to ensure that bias is avoided.
We’ll have more to say about this challenge in later chapters, particularly in
chapter 10, where advice on avoiding some of the most dangerous pitfalls of
precision systems is detailed.
In the chapters that follow, we’ll see teams in many different situations
using whatever resources, skills, and time they have to envision and realize
their precision strategy. Good precision leaders learn how to use the variety
of tools in their toolbox and are ready to adjust, retool, and even abandon
their agreed-upon strategy when changing circumstances or new discoveries
make it necessary. They’re prepared to experiment with all the variables—
technological, human, process, and beyond—at their disposal, even down to
the last mile of the journey. Above all, they know that, unless all the pieces
come together at the right time, in the right way, to serve the most urgent
human needs their organizations seek to meet, all their effort may be in vain.

CHAPTER 3
DESIGN, TEST, AND PROVE
Key Steps in Building a Precision System
 Precision is, first and foremost, a way of doing business that uses
established scientific methods to achieve finely tuned results at scale. The
technology and the vast data that may be employed are also hallmarks of
precision, but precision is nothing without an underlying methodology of
design, test, and prove. Understanding how organizations achieve
transformation through precision begins with understanding the basis of this
methodology, which this chapter sets out to introduce and elaborate.
The difference between a product or service that operates simply at
scale versus one that operates with precision at scale is visible throughout
our everyday lives. Facebook serves billions of users, but each user’s news
feed is personalized based on their networks and interests, and it is designed
to become more accurately personalized with each new click. Contrast this
to a traditional news publisher, which prints one home page full of articles
and one only—no matter who reads it. Or contrast waiting on the street to
hail a taxi and hoping one happens to be nearby with requesting a ride via an
app like Uber and watching it, tracked by a global positioning system (GPS),
approach you instantly. Or contrast a teacher who delivers one consistent
lesson to a classroom of thirty diverse students with an instruction platform
that enables self-paced learning and unique remediation pathways for
individual students based on their quiz results and other performance
indicators.

The precision we see and touch increasingly in our daily lives is only
the tip of the iceberg. Services we don’t notice or have never heard of also
employ analogous methods. On the farm, computer vision systems trained
by Blue River and affixed to tractors built by John Deere poison individual
weeds; contrast this with traditional methods, in which weed killer is
distributed across a whole field.
Just how did companies like Blue River, Uber, and Facebook achieve
these transformations? How did they begin? How did they proceed? And
what ways of thinking allowed the creation and success of these
revolutionary products? This chapter will answer these questions.
The methodology of design, test, and prove is a process of creation and
improvement that begins, first, with framing a problem or opportunity and a
definition of success. Second, it is followed by an initial attempt at a
solution, rapid feedback, then iteration with increasing complexity and scale.
Above all, it is guided by a mindset of curiosity and discovery, and
continuous measurement and improvement. Across many different industries
and products, the precision approach of design, test, and prove is consistent.
It existed long before digital data did, but it was supercharged by its arrival.
Blue River, John Deere, and Precision Agriculture
The Blue River Technologies story captures the essence of the design, test,
and prove methodology, and it is a good way to begin our discussion. It
starts with a vast variety of data in open farm field environments being
gathered and then transformed by the most sophisticated computer
applications, fitted to infrastructure common to almost every farm around
the world: the tractor.
Look at a John Deere tractor and you’ll see the familiar, shiny yellow
and green machine with six-foot tires—a favorite tool that has helped
farmers perform a range of basic agricultural tasks for generations. But when
Jorge Heraud and Lee Redden, two young entrepreneurs out of Stanford
Business School, first saw a John Deere tractor, they saw a beautiful
platform waiting to deliver, with precision and perfection, one of the most
extraordinary innovations in American farming in 200 years.
Heraud and Redden are founders and CEO and CTO, respectively, of
Blue River Technologies and the inventors of John Deere’s See and Spray

precision agriculture system. The Deere tractor tows an array of imaging and
spray devices behind it mounted on a bar on wheels that is 120 feet side-to-
side, covers thirty-six rows of crops at a time, and moves over them at
twelve miles per hour. As it rolls, cameras snap images of every plant
beneath it twenty times per second and map each plant to its unique,
centimeter-square coordinate. Within a second or two the image will be
compared with a vast database of similar plants to determine whether the
plant is a weed or a crop. If it’s a weed, 200 inkjet-like squirters dubbed by
Redden “The Jury” will, in the next second, and as the rig keeps rolling,
deliver a precise, lethal microdose of herbicide (or overdose of fertilizer) to
that centimeter-square location, killing the weed. (This is an example of an
entity recognition precision system as described in chapter 2.)
See and Spray automates a task that farmers have performed by hand
for millennia. Lee Redden’s grandmother was one of those farmers in
Nebraska. “She’d walk her 32 acres during harvest,” Redden says, “check
each plant, harvest the right ones, go through and kill individual weeds.”
Now the same job gets done faster, easier, and better thanks to
supercomputing modules that are mounted right on the tractor itself.
“That’s a ton of compute,” Redden says, “the highest compute capacity
of any moving machine in the world, on par with IBM’s supercomputer
project, Blue Gene. Ruggedized, in a form small enough to embed on a
machine.”
It’s all about what Chris Padwick, Blue River’s director of computer
vision and machine learning, calls visual inferencing. Each See and Spray
towed array is essentially a field robot that must figure out whether it sees a
plant or a weed, decide whether to spray it, then dose it or pass.
“As the machine drives through the field,” Padwick explains, “high-
resolution cameras collect imagery at a high frame rate. We developed a
convolutional neural network using PyTorch to analyze each frame and
produce a pixel-accurate map of where the crops and weeds are. Once the
plants are all identified, each weed and crop is mapped to field locations, and
the robot sprays only the weeds—and all within milliseconds so the tractor
can keep moving.”
The supercomputer manages the whole system, from imaging to
weeding, with a core decision engine of purpose-built software making the
weed/no weed call for each plant in milliseconds. It embeds automated
testing and deep learning so that See and Spray continuously improves,

perfecting the accuracy of the weed/no weed decision across more and more
crop types, season after season.
The benefits of See and Spray capture the value of precision well.
When See and Spray is used, “It sprays weeds, not acres,” Deere boasts.
This is no blunt-force, one-size-fits-all spray operation of yesteryear (think
of the crop duster chasing Cary Grant in Hitchcock’s North by Northwest),
poisoning everything in its mist. See and Spray applies a microdose of weed
killer on every plant it calls a weed, and on no other. Some 911 million acres
of farmland are broadcast-sprayed with chemicals each year in the United
States. When used, See and Spray reduces the total amount of herbicide in
use by 80 percent to 90 percent, saving farmers millions of dollars on
chemical purchases alone while also reducing soil toxicity and increasing
crop yields by up to 100 percent. It generates better yield, less chemical
runoff, healthier water tables and rivers, and money saved by farmers, all
impact areas of classic broadcast spray operations.
“Taking care of each individual plant unlocks a lot of value,” a Blue
River executive told a reporter. “Each individual decision is pretty cheap—
the costs to take an image and predict whether a plant is weed or crop is low,
as is the value you generate. But do that a million times an hour with high
density actions across a whole field, coupled with the ability to take actions
right there on the spot, and you shift the paradigm and generate much higher
value.”
In 2017, John Deere purchased Blue River for $310 million. Being
backward 
compatible—taking 
advantage 
of 
existing 
on-the-farm
infrastructure—helped ease this technology innovation onto the farm. To use
it, Deere owners simply hook the entire rig onto an existing tractor.
“Traditionally, the agricultural community does not like to be
‘disrupted,’ ” Daniel Koppel, an agricultural technology (“agtech”)
entrepreneur, told a reporter. “So the fastest way to prove benefits of our
technology was to partner with a brand that growers already trust and work
with daily. Technology can be smart and innovative. But it’s no good unless
it’s actually used by its intended customer.”
Getting to this point wasn’t easy. At first, Blue River’s computer vision
and John Deere’s spray machines didn’t gel perfectly together. The massive
booms of the sprayers wobbled while tractors were moving, preventing Blue
River’s cameras from taking clear, usable photos. The sprayers’ protective
covers cast shadows, reducing the robots’ accuracy at detecting weeds.

The team had to work directly with the camera manufacturer to build in
several enhancements, including much more powerful capabilities for
eliminating visual noise, so that cameras could stabilize their own images
better. John Deere also had to invent a new version of the boom that
wobbled less.
To make sure the machine-learning models distinguish weeds from
crops as accurately as possible, they need to be constantly trained with the
best possible data. So the combined team has over thirty full-time staff
working solely on the collection, preparation, and management of training
data. Padwick explains: “We have millions of images collected in thousands
of different fields on different conditions. We have images of small cotton
and larger cotton, cotton during the dusk with shadow, cotton that has a bit
of a disease, cotton that has hail damage and cotton that has just been rained
upon and cotton that has lost leaf because it has a fungal infection.” The
team continuously tests the performance of its image recognition models,
more so than any other component of the system. After all, that’s the core of
See and Spray’s value—the “seeing.” Heraud explains how the team does it:
“We go to a field, collect images, run them through the system as if the
system was there and see whether it makes the correct decision or not. We
evaluate how many we got wrong, and how many we got right. On top of
that we go to customer fields, and we use the system like a farmer would.
We have testing that our agronomists do for all sorts of edge conditions. We
have all these levels of testing. Testing is a significant portion of the effort
on developing this system.”
Through years of trial and error and untold hours of work, the team’s
efforts have created a single, generalized model for each crop. The cotton
model, for example, has been trained well enough on so many different
variables, that it can now reliably handle real-life complexity, in what
Heraud calls the N + 1 scenario: every new field—the “1” in the equation—
represents a novel challenge which, when met, becomes part of the “N”
generalizable model.
See and Spray demonstrates what precision systems can do at their
most powerful, namely, achieve precisely the change intended, no more, no
less: every weed destroyed, and no crop. This comprises the true technical
measure of See and Spray’s success. By applying a design, test, and prove
framework that is widely applicable across domains, the team eventually
built a world-changing product and achieved organizational success. By

2020, there was a 10 percent chance that the lettuce on your fork had
survived the roll beneath a John Deere tractor towing See and Spray.
The results are a team success too: they inspire and engage current and
future employees. Heraud reflects: “I would say that somewhere between 70
and 90 percent of our employees have joined because of our mission. We’re
doing something really good. We’re making better food: the food that you
are going to eat will have less chemicals because of this. My son, my
daughter, my parents are going to eat higher quality food. This is farming the
way it should be. And food is important to humans, it’s life and death. We
need to figure out how to do this right.” See and Spray is helping to make
the age-old, all-important art of growing food into a science that is
increasingly safe, heathy, and precise.
Design, Test, and Prove: The Core Steps
Here are the basic steps involved in the design, test, and prove methodology
—steps you should plan to follow whenever you launch a precision project:
• Define the problem and the hypothesis.
• Define success and performance indicators.
• Collect data.
• Build a proof of concept and test it.
• Scale and optimize.
• Launch, maintain, transfer ownership, and reflect.
We’ll discuss each step in more detail next.
Define the Problem and the Hypothesis
Articulating the problem with the current state of things—whatever it is
you’re concerned with improving—is the beginning of the process. It might
be a widely accepted problem or one that only you see; either way, capturing
it in detail will be the basis of effective decision making and
communications through the entire journey.

Taking Blue River as an example, the problem statement might have
been: “Traditionally, farmers distribute weed killer across all crops
uniformly even though it is needed only for weeds. This results in massive
waste of treatments, environmental harm, and unnecessary cost.” This sets
out the See and Spray twin precision goals of producing more goodness—
food—over the same crop land, while at the same time reducing the harms
of blunt force misapplication of pesticides by traditional means. These are
measures of efficiency, effectiveness, and equity, all of which See and Spray
seeks to maximize with its precision system and thus to improve overall
performance without trading off one for the other, as traditional pesticides
applications do.
The beginning of any new project or development is the point in time
when ambiguity is highest and concrete knowledge is lowest. Over time,
those two positions reverse, and certainty rises. For this reason, articulating
the problem itself is a crucial start to any project, especially those involving
trial and error, and multiple people and skill sets—as almost all precision
projects do. A well-articulated problem statement aligns the team: even
when a specific future vision state can’t be defined, a clear current problem
state usually can be. It ensures that team members are focused on the same
challenge and prevents the project from fracturing into as many unique
personal visions as there are members of the team.
The cousin of a good problem statement is a well-formed hypothesis.
The problem statement is simply a description of the current state, while the
hypothesis is a prediction—it proposes a relationship that can be tested and
either proved or disproved. It often begins with “if” and describes a better
future state where the problem is solved. Continuing the Blue River
example, the hypothesis might be: “If we can selectively apply weed killer
only to weeds and spare the crops, we can achieve significant cost savings
on weed treatment, improved crop yields for each acre, as well as the
ecological benefits from reduced treatment application of weed killer.”
A problem statement and hypothesis allow a team to begin working on
a solution—a prescription of what to do next to change to the desired state
away from the predicted one. Team members make sure everybody starts on
the same page about what’s wrong or could be improved and set an initial
direction for research and development to begin pursuing the desired future
state. Description, prediction, and prescription: the foundations of precision
system change.

Define Success and Performance Indicators
The next step is to define the desired future state in concrete terms. This
could take the form of qualitative statements that must be true in order for
the goal to be considered attained, or it could take the form of quantitative
goals or key performance indicators. The point of defining success is to
clarify at the outset of the project, before any solutions are in development,
what it will take to consider the project done. Defining success at the
beginning helps you avoid the tendency to move the goalposts while the ball
is already in the air and, with it, the tendency to bias the definition of success
toward results that have already been met.
Quantitative goals generally provide more value alone than qualitative
ones, although a mix of both can often be successful. John Doerr’s classic
book Measure What Matters introduced the concept of objectives and key
results (OKRs) and heavily emphasized the value of numerical goals. They
leave no room for ambiguity or subjectivity, and they frame the goal in a
way that allows it to be either achieved or not achieved. This is important to
reduce subjective debate and to calibrate expectations.
Following Doerr’s advice in the case of Blue River, precision leaders
might have said: “A successful outcome will be to reduce the average farm’s
cost and distribution of weed killer by 75 percent while maintaining less than
2 percent weed coverage.” This proposes that success entails meeting two
criteria: reducing weed treatment usage without increasing the presence of
weeds in the crops. By specifying a particular amount (75 percent) of
intended reduction, the team has a clear impact goal to aim for. Any higher
and they succeed; any lower and they fail. But this introduces the risk of
selling precision short. The gold standard of technical success for See and
Spray is every weed, and no crop, destroyed. Anything short of that means
there is some systemic failure in See and Spray’s recognition technology or
in its application technology rather than a shortfall of effort or a marginal
cost calculation that further harm reduction is not worth it. For precision
systems, the total addressable universe of plants in a field is possible and
sets the upper limit of performance at the limits of nature and technology.
Alcoa’s legendary CEO Paul O’Neill famously quipped about his staff’s
proposed safety measures (paraphrasing), “Top quartile performance is not
good enough. Anyone can be as good as Dupont. We seek, rather,

performance at the limits of what God and science permit.” See and Spray
founders would likely agree.
“I’m not suggesting that all of John Deere needs to follow,” Heraud told
us. “But on projects that we tackle as the Blue River subsidiary, we don’t go
for singles. We swing for the fences, for the home run. It has happened
several times that we’ve had to choose—do we want the low hanging fruit or
the world-saving problem? We go for the world’s biggest problems, which is
pretty cool.”
Sometimes it is difficult or impossible to measure the actual thing that
matters most over and above mere technical precision, and that is the big-
picture transformational impact. This can happen when the impact seems
too far beyond the team’s control. Continuing the Blue River example, Blue
River has set for itself the goal of reducing water table pollution. “That’s
why we’re called blue river,” Heraud said. “Right from the start, we decided
that one of the biggest impacts of this type of technology was going to be on
rivers. And we were we were looking for a name for that company that
represented what we were wanting to do. A blue river is a clean river.”
But myriad factors influence river pollution, near and far; while the
promise of See and Spray is precision that should deliver clean rivers, no one
farm or farmer might control much of that. If upstream farmers continued to
pollute, the Blue River team would probably not be able to meet its goal,
even if they developed a highly efficient and effective “see and spray”
system that achieved 100 percent of its technical goals (every addressable
crop saved, every weed destroyed). By their own “blue river” measure, See
and Spray would fail in its promised goals of transformation.
This conundrum explains why alternative measures of success known
as proxy metrics can be useful. Proxy metrics focus closely on the
performance of the precision system itself and exclude exogenous factors
that are further beyond control. For example, Blue River could measure the
system’s potential impact on river health by sampling soil for tell-tale
pollutants near and far from its farms on the assumption that this would be a
good proxy metric for river pollution. If the overall measure of success is
whether the system actually reduces river pollution, however, it behooves
See and Spray to search not just for proxy measures of river pollution but
also for direct measures and to inquire further why some rivers seem to be
improved and others not—perhaps to fix See and Spray’s methods further.

Proxy metrics measure what you can control, and impact metrics
measure whether or not the project had the intended impact overall. Thus, a
thoughtful combination of proxy metrics and impact metrics can set a system
up well for measures of both technical and transformational success. (We
pursue further dimension of precision system impacts in chapter 10 of this
book.)
Collect Data
Modern digital precision systems depart from earlier attempts at precision
management in the use of data, often big data, to create analyses and
solutions. This makes data collection an essential part of the precision
process. Data collection can be a surprisingly arduous and lengthy task; it
shouldn’t be underestimated when budgeting time. Chapter 4 will explain in
more detail how to assess the quality, availability, and accessibility of the
data you need. But first, it’s important to simply understand which data you
need in order to do what you’re trying to do.
The Blue River team was developing an entity recognition system using
advanced computer vision to distinguish weeds from crops in real time. It
should come as no surprise that the team required a huge number of images
of both weeds and nonweed plants in order to train their algorithms. By
equipping tractors with cameras, they were able to collect these images and
form a huge, central database that would power the system’s future
decisions.
In machine learning, there is a concept of separating data into two
different sets: a training set and a testing set. The training set is used to teach
the algorithm what to do. For example, the Blue River training set might
have had 50 percent images of weeds and 50 percent images of crops, all of
which were labeled accurately. The testing set is then used to evaluate the
performance of the algorithm: The Blue River testing set would have
included a mixture of crops and weeds, none of the labeled—the system
would have to label them itself. Data scientists are accustomed to handling
data sets very carefully and making sure that no training data and test data
ever mix, which would spoil the validity of the tests.
Similarly, digital marketers are fluent in A/B testing, a scientific process
of optimization that brings the core tenets of experimental design online. For
example, if you were running a website and wanted to test the hypothesis

that “Showing website visitors a 15 percent off purchase coupon will cause
them to make more purchases,” you could test that by showing the coupon to
half the visitors and not showing it to the other half. Comparing the two
groups’ purchase rates would tell you whether or not the hypothesis was true
(more on this methodology shortly).
Those who aren’t data scientists, digital marketers, or other precision
natives can still benefit from understanding the core approach to data. Data
is the fuel that powers accurate and precise systems, and the better the
quality and handling of the input data, the better the results.
Build a Proof of Concept and Test It
One of the most important ideas in the domain of product management is the
value of learning early, iterating rapidly, and failing fast when developing a
new product. Jim Brickman of Y Combinator, one of the most successful
seed-stage investors and start-up incubators in the world, explains the reason
this way: “When you build a product, you make many assumptions. You
assume you know what users are looking for, how the design should work,
what marketing strategy to use, what architecture will work most efficiently,
which monetization strategy will make it sustainable, and which laws and
regulations you must comply with. No matter how good you are, some of
your assumptions will be wrong. The problem is, you don’t know which
ones.” Using real-world testing is the best way to identify and correct those
flawed assumptions. This is why building and testing a proof of concept is
the next step in precision development. Just like any new product, a
precision system benefits from early and frequent feedback and testing.
Defining the scope of a proof of concept requires careful thinking about
what is needed now in order to capture useful feedback and what can be
delayed until later. There is no hard and fast rule that simplifies this decision
across all projects. It can be helpful, however, to assume that the vast
majority of features and most of the functionality and sophistication you
envision for the ideal precision system are not necessary for the proof of
concept. All that matters is the most rudimentary skeleton that allows you to
test the hypothesis.
Another way of making the same point is to recall the concept of the
Ferrari versus the skateboard described in chapter 2. The proof of concept
for a Ferrari is not a miniature, functional car—it is a skateboard. After all,

the core purpose of a Ferrari is to get you from point A to point B. Testing
that ability is the purpose of the proof of concept—and for that, a skateboard
is perfectly adequate.
In the case of Blue River, the team behind See and Spray could not wait
until they had built a fully functioning computer-vision tractor with variable
treatment-dispensing capabilities to find out whether their hypothesis was
correct or not. They had to start much smaller and first prove whether or not
they could correctly distinguish weeds from crops. Their proof-of-concept
tests proved that this was possible before they invested any further. Testing
proof of concept early in the project has another benefit: it establishes a
testing system that you’ll be able to use, perhaps with slight variations,
throughout the rest of the development process. Continuous testing will be
one of the tools that will help keep the entire project on track.
It merits emphasis that not all testing for a precision product should be
quantitative, or model performance, testing. Precision products are used by
people, and their success or failure depends just as much on whether people
like and trust and would use the product as it does on how accurately the
product functions. For example, testing the interactions between human and
machine on a voice-assistant product will yield important insight into
whether users are satisfied with and likely to adopt the assistant into their
day-to-day lives, or whether it’s too clunky, patchy or weak to get traction
with users. This information comes alongside model performance insights
like error rates, accurate response rates, and false positives and negatives.
Quality assurance engineer Debjani Goswami explores the voice-assistant
testing example further and proposes three considerations for usability
testing: defining learning objectives for the assistant, compatibility between
user’s needs and the assistant’s solutions, and continuing learning after real-
world deployment.
Usability testing for precision projects can help to prevent a risk
scenario described later in chapter 10: the last mile problem, where a
performant system is launched that still somehow fails to get traction in the
real world.
Scale and Optimize
Once your proof of concept has passed its initial tests, the next step is to
begin adding incremental functionality and complexity to your precision

system piece by piece, developing the product toward the desired end state
and testing, retesting, and testing again all the way through. In some cases,
this process will involve making the system available more widely—to more
users, or (in the case of Blue River) across more acres. In other cases, it
means introducing new features that will be needed eventually—like the
weed treatment dispensing system that leverages the weed/no weed decision
and turns it into action.
This step can often be the longest one in a precision project because it’s
where the rubber meets the road in a new way. A precision system can’t
simply work; it needs to work well enough to be fully launched and meet the
impact goals set at the beginning of the entire project. Thus, as the team
continues to improve the system by optimizing its performance and readying
it for significantly larger scale of operation, the question becomes, “When
will it be ready?”
By specifying success metrics in advance, you have already provided
yourself with a way to answer that question. Your precision system will be
ready to launch whenever it meets the bar you originally set. For the team
behind See and Spray, the system was ready for launch and sale once it
reduced cost and usage of weed treatment by 75 percent while maintaining a
consistent level of weeds among the crops.
The scale-and-optimize stage is also noteworthy for requiring the
broadest array of multidisciplinary people and skills. While earlier steps in
the precision system process may rely almost entirely on the work of data
scientists, analysts, and researchers, the process of scaling and optimizing
requires many other inputs. Systems engineers rebuild the product with
prime-time scale in mind, turning it from a frail experiment into a robust,
world-ready system. Product managers facilitate user feedback testing,
which helps them prioritize future improvements that will be needed before
they ultimately approve the launch. Marketers and leaders ready the sales
and awareness engine, preparing to get this product out to whoever needs it
—in the Blue River case, the intended buyers of an intelligent tractor.
Launch, Maintain, Transfer Ownership, and Reflect
When the scale-and-optimize process has been completed, your precision
system is ready to launch. Once it is live and in the hands of real users, the
problem has, for all intents and purposes, been solved. Of course, if

unexpected problems emerge after launch, you’ll need to take a step back.
Another round of scale-and-optimize work will probably be needed to
achieve the level of performance you mistakenly thought you’d already
reached. Having to withdraw your system from use, or tolerate less-than-
adequate performance while you scramble to improve it, can be
embarrassing and perhaps politically damaging. But it’s usually not the end
of the world. Once the problems are fixed, the imperfect initial launch is apt
to be forgotten quickly.
When your precision system is up and running as intended, it’s time to
shift into maintenance mode. This means finding a long-term organizational
home for the system itself, assigning roles and responsibilities for its future
maintenance and improvement, and winding down the project without loose
ends. Most teams approach this stage haphazardly, often under the ill-
advised direction of leaders who would like to hurry on to the next problem
as quickly as possible. This approach robs the team of the opportunity to
reflect and distill learnings that would help them to do better next time. What
working assumptions did the team make that proved incorrect? Did they
have the right talent, data, and tools at their disposal to succeed? What
mistakes could have been avoided? How could the work have been
completed more quickly, more easily, and more accurately?
Dedicating time to winding down and reflecting on your success and
failure is a standard practice of the best teams who produce the most
successful products. Many frameworks are available that teams can use to
facilitate structured reflection and yield insights (such as the agile software
development methodology’s concept of a retrospective session), but the
particular framework chosen matters less than that a framework is chosen at
all and that sufficient time is given to work through it. One such framework
from the Lean Startup methodology (figure 3.1) serves as a good example.

3.1 A framework for the steps of a hypothesis-driven entrepreneurship process. From Thomas
Eisenmann, Eric Ries, and Sarah Dillard, “Hypothesis-Driven Entrepreneurship: The Lean Startup,”
HBS No. 812-095 (Boston: Harvard Business School Publishing, 2013).
    ✳✳✳

The design, test, and prove methodology underpins the approach of precision
teams around the world. No matter what industry they’re working in or what
product they’re working on, this straightforward approach can be seen again
and again in successful precision investments.
Douglas Merrill used this methodology when he revolutionized the
payday loan market by creating Zest Cash. He saw a problem in which
people who were underbanked couldn’t access fairly priced loans and
resorted to payday loan sharks, who charged predatory interest rates. He
hypothesized that by collecting a raft of other signals beyond the traditional
credit score, he could reasonably predict whether underbanked customers
were at low or high risk of defaulting on a loan, and offer them more fairly
priced short-term loans. He collected the data—regular or sporadic phone
calls to customer service, presence or absence of a Social Security number,
thorough or hurried reading of the Zest terms of service—and used them to
build a new model for risk prediction. He proved the concept and then scaled
it, launching a new service targeted to that demographic and offering a more
effective alternative to traditional payday loan sharks.
Alex Cholas-Wood and Evan Levine at the New York Police
Department (NYPD) used the same framework when creating Patternizr.
They identified a problem—too many crimes going unprevented and
unsolved due to similarity patterns unrecognized. They hypothesized that
they could group related crimes together algorithmically using historical data
about known crime patterns to build a new prediction system for future
crimes. They collected the data they needed, including thousands of
historical crimes both in patterns and stand alone. They proved that they
could effectively detect relationships between crimes and use that ability to
find new crime patterns. They scaled that into Patternizr, which managers
could (in theory) use to decide how best to deploy police resources and
prevent further crime.
If you’ve ever seriously studied math, science, or statistics, you
probably recognize the design, test, and prove process as a variation of
experimental design and the scientific method. Those who work at tech
companies are so familiar with this way of working that it’s second nature
and barely needs explanation. Companies like Amazon, Facebook, Google,
LinkedIn, Netflix, Airbnb, Uber, and others have mastered the art of
embedding experimental design so deeply into the corporate mindset and

ethos that even staff members who don’t work in quantitative teams know to
test and prove what they do, however they can.
For those who do run the numbers, a book called Trustworthy Online
Controlled Experiments: A Practical Guide to A/B Testing was written by
three leaders from the world of tech and big data: Ron Kohavi (vice
president at Microsoft and Airbnb), Diane Tang (Google fellow) and Ya Xu
(head of data science at LinkedIn). It offers a comprehensive dive into
digital experimentation based on their combined experience at companies
that each run over 20,000 experiments a year. The book opens with a
quotation from Jim Barksdale, former CEO of Netscape: “If we have data,
let’s look at data. If all we have are opinions, let’s go with mine.” It’s a wry
reference to the age-old battle between observation and intuition—and the
way that, in any organization, the highest paid person’s opinion (HIPPO)
tends to dominate decision making unless actively disproved by data.
As for A/B testing, it existed long before the internet, big data, and
digital marketing ever did. Amy Gallo at Harvard Business Review explains
that “A/B testing is a way to compare two versions of something to figure
out which performs better. While it’s most often associated with websites
and apps, the method is almost 100 years old and it’s one of the simplest
forms of a randomized controlled experiment.” Biologist Ronald Fisher
honed the specifics of A/B testing on farmland in the 1920s, when he tested
and documented the effects of applying more or less fertilizer to certain
areas of land and comparing the results. When A/B testing is applied to
product development, it supports the design, test, and prove methodology
that yields precision systems that perform well, are wanted by users, and
have massive impact.
Specifically in the world of models and algorithms, A/B testing or
experimental design is also used to compare models or versions of models to
each other. For example, two versions of a recommendation algorithm for a
music-streaming service may be different: they might have been trained
independently on different training data sets, or they might be leveraging
entirely different types of algorithms (think collaborative filtering versus the
genomic process suggested in chapter 2). They can both be run
simultaneously so that 50 percent of music-streaming users hear
recommendations coming from the first model, and the other 50 percent hear
recommendations coming from the second. Measuring the two against each
other to see which produces the happiest users and highest engagement is

effectively executing an A/B test and leveraging the experimental design
framework within a longer initiative to design, test, and prove the best
possible music recommendation service.
Amazon Web Services suggests a protocol for comparing versions of
models in this way, which includes gradually rolling out new versions,
monitoring performance metrics, and keeping track of versions for control.
This introduces the idea of a “champion” model (the original version that
most users are experiencing) and a “challenger” model (whose task is to
outperform the original and win the main share of users).
Historically, quantitative and scientific expertise resided in pockets
within big organizations, the domain of analysts in ivory towers who were
occasionally called on by executives for their input. Not anymore. In today’s
most successful precision organizations, the mindset of design, test, and
prove has permeated so deeply that it has become an invisible core value.
Everyone, from the intern to the CEO, needs a level of understanding of
experimental design because it’s the way decisions big and small are made.
Just like John Harbaugh in the NFL, those who understand how to use data
for decision making at the highest levels pull ahead, and those executives
who wave it off miss out.
Whoever you are and whatever you do, if the game you’re playing is
precision, then you need to grasp design, test, and prove, and begin to
operate by it. All the sophisticated technology and rich data in the world are
worthless if you aren’t equipped to work with them intelligently. The
methodology of design, test, and prove is an essential tool for the task.

CHAPTER 4
GETTING STARTED WITH DATA AND
PLATFORMS
 The methodology of design, test, and prove underpins precision. But there
are two other key components to precision: the data and the platforms. Data
are the fuel that gets shoveled into the fire of experimentation. Platforms
shape and empower it all. In combination, the methodology, the data, and the
platforms form the three-legged stool of technical precision. (In later
chapters, we draw the important distinction between technical and
transformative precision and describe what you must do to achieve the
latter.)
The First Step in Getting Started: Let the Right Data Flow
Just as a chemist must have the right chemicals, beakers, and lab glasses
before beginning an experiment, so too must anybody embarking on a data-
driven precision project have the right data and tools for analysis. Where are
the data coming from? Are they continuous or batched or manually entered
and error-prone? Do they go stale and need refreshing? The stumble-and-fall
of data projects frequently points to the same culprit. “Data-intensive
projects have a single point of failure,” GSK computational statistician
George Krasadakis asserts. “Data quality.”
Whether in the chemist’s lab or the analyst’s data flows and stores,
hygiene is everything. “The obvious challenge,” writes Krasadakis, “is to
query heterogeneous data sources, then extract and transform data towards

one or more data models. The non-obvious challenge is the early
identification of data issues, which—in most cases—were unknown to the
data owners as well.”
This is the part of the journey where the generalist manager from
departments like strategy, marketing, and product development needs to get
into the weeds. Most incumbent companies that are considering a shift to
precision have access to large amounts of data. But that doesn’t necessarily
mean the data exist in a form that makes them easily available and of high
quality.
As a rule, the further away your work is from the mechanics of
technology systems and the data they produce, the hazier becomes your
knowledge of the true state of the data, and the likelier you are to think that
your organization has access to data that it does not. As a result, it’s easy for
business managers to fall prey to “optimism bias” regarding the quality of
the data on which their own decisions are based. A great example of this
optimism bias comes from Google’s “prediction markets,” built by Bo
Cowgill and colleagues to study information flows among Google office
workers. Google employees could “bet” on the outcomes of everything from
serious stuff, like Google projects or new products, to goofy stuff like which
film would win the Oscar for Best Picture. Cowgill’s team collected data on
80,000 of these so-called bets. Among their many fascinating discoveries:
executives high up in the organization consistently underperformed on bets
made on the serious stuff—questions like, “Will Google open its Russian
office on schedule?” to “Will Gmail users use search more?” Cowgill’s
conclusion: centrally positioned executives were biased toward optimism for
Google’s new products and services by comparison with managers “at the
edge,” who had a more realistic view of the company’s prospects.
Data are subject to the same bias. From the executive who assumes that
the customer personas developed by her product marketing team are founded
on rigorous analysis to the middle manager who hasn’t touched a line of
code since he was promoted but assumes that everything still works just as it
did back then, distance from the details correlates reliably with unfounded
optimism about the feasibility of a precision project. No matter where you sit
in the organization, you will need to bridge the chasm between you and your
data. “Know your data” is a key imperative for any manager and should
come early in any project in the form of a data quality assessment.

Jorge Bernal Mendoza at Pemex
For Jorge Bernal Mendoza (a composite portrait of senior information
executives at Pemex, Mexico’s energy utility) data issues were rife, and all
pointed to one of the biggest problems encountered by Pemex CEO Jose
Antonio Gonzàlez Anaya and his executive team: massive nationwide fuel
theft. It was 2016. Organized crime was stealing its oil, costing Pemex
thousands of barrels a day that were siphoned from pipelines around the
nation and sold on the black market.
The criminal ecosystem was set in motion by gasoline prices inflated by
the government to provide a steady and vital stream of tax revenue. Oil-rich
Mexico was gouging its own citizens, who paid 25 percent more for a gallon
of gas than Americans. Economic inequality and a Robin Hood culture
supportive of “redistribution” opened the spigots on illegal pipeline taps
everywhere—doubling from almost 7,000 taps to 14,910 in two years as
organized crime discovered the wealth within the pipelines. With a
distribution system that was informal but organized and effective, looters
could make up to $50,000 per month. On Highway 150D, which originates
at Pemex facilities in Veracruz and runs through the state of Puebla and on to
Mexico City, you might count hundreds of people standing on the roadside
selling gasoline for half what the Pemex gas stations charged. If you went
into the towns of Puebla, chances were good that in twenty-five of them you
would find groups standing around a pipe someone had slashed open,
splashing around in oil puddles filling up containers. Hauchicol, as the
contraband fuel was known, was everywhere.
The situation was extremely dangerous. That was gasoline they were
sloshing around in, after all, which from time to time enveloped a crowd in
massive fireballs. Days before Christmas 2010, in San Martin Texmelucan, a
city about the size of New Haven, Connecticut, a breached pipeline wreaked
havoc. “Several streets were flooded with fuel. With a spark, there was a
river of fire,” the interior minister reported—killing twenty-eight people, and
destroying thirty-two houses.
And through the systematic hijacking and diversion of fuel from
refineries and pipelines, the organized criminal enterprises known as
huachicoleros were costing Pemex upwards of $2 billion each year. But that
was just a guess. With the pipeline stretching like a spider web over Mexico,
Pemex’s leaders could not say where exactly or even when the attacks were

taking place. Without accurate data, they were unable to measure the exact
scale of the losses, on the one hand, or plug the holes, guard the pipelines,
and fix the problem, on the other.
As a senior information executive, Bernal had been asked to lead the
overall digital transformation of Pemex. Old systems would be replaced or
migrate to the cloud; data analytics would come to the forefront. Harvard
Business School–trained CEO Gonzalez Anaya wanted to see numbers for
everything and expected his executives to get the data to him and the CEOs
of the Pemex sub-businesses. Bernal’s charge was to turn Pemex’s
operations transparent for these heads of all its divisions and for his own
boss, creating one shared truth about Pemex’s financial, operating, and
safety performance. Despite the mandate to lead an overall digital
transformation, there was no mistaking the very tactical nature of Bernal’s
first and most urgent task: find those leaks and stop them.
Bernal knew he had to begin by capturing the data. The pipeline was in
his sights. Raw oil ran from the wells through Pemex’s six refineries to
Pemex’s distribution business, at each stage shifting from control by one of
three separate Pemex businesses: exploration and production, refineries, and
distribution. In the pipelines, the only sensors were pressure gauges that
were built for maintenance, not for detection of fuel theft. They showed
when pressure rose or fell in unexpected ways. If a change in reading
seemed significant, a maintenance crew might go and take a look. But
sophisticated criminals quickly disappeared into the night, as thieves drilled
and then sealed the hole with a collar to make the gouging appear as nothing
more than a momentary blip on system screens that could easily be ignored.
Months later, the gangs would return to do the siphoning in bulk, discreetly,
with little change in pressure noticed.
Bernal crafted a plan. First, new sensors would track the oil flow across
the infrastructure. These sensor signals would be supplemented with motion-
sensitive cameras near crucial distribution points to reveal physical activity
when alarms were triggered. Second, all incoming data would be pushed to a
virtual data room and cleaned of noise that could trigger false alerts. Third,
the pressure gauges’ historical data would be modeled to determine what
meant a legitimate loss in pressure and what seemed to be a criminal assault
—and an algorithm-driven alert system would trigger executive and
operating unit attention to theft events, and with it a local law enforcement
or military response. Finally, all that data would be brought together into the

control system and displayed in various dashboards to managers and
executives, holding them accountable for results that their data would reveal
to all.
In every instance, this plan would involve repurposing infrastructure
and workflows originally installed for maintenance purposes but never
intended to deliver metrics that precision insight to theft required, or to
integrate them to a system that did. The essential work was modeling the
combined sensor data, then using those models to predict whether any given
alarm was a maintenance issue or a potential crime—and send the alerts.
Pemex had no data scientists, leaving Bernal to recruit talented young
economists already on-board at Pemex for classic financial modeling and
repurpose them with the analytics work. Their models proved 80 percent
accurate from the start and, with fine-tuning, into the 1990s. Accurate
models were essential because no one could afford to send local police or
military units scrambling on false alarms. Although Pemex was a first
responder for its own security problems, it had no police powers. In serious
matters, it relied entirely on local law enforcement and Mexico’s army—all
armed—to roll in when called. All of this came at great risk and challenges.
“The effort took us from chasing bad buys to going against the internal
bureaucracy, making them accountable to what happens in between,” Bernal
says. “So you start to close doors on the whole chain, finding and then
closing the margin of error of leakage as the oil flowed between the
companies. It would rely on the subunit CEOs holding people who reported
to them responsible.”
Experimenting with different sensors both along the insides and
outsides of the pipelines, supplemented by drones capturing imagery from
above, Pemex began to build a body of reliable data about pipeline integrity.
There were serious challenges to overcome: gaps in old technology,
bureaucratic and organizational hesitance, and even corruption and threats of
physical violence. But little by little, the truth came to the surface through
the data. When the first pipeline sensors showed large discrepancies between
what was claimed to have been shipped and received, managers denounced
the sensors as inaccurate. “But the numbers were solid,” Bernal says. “They
showed an off-the-charts difference between how much they put in and how
much was lost.” All the loss—what retailers suffering employee theft call
“shrinkage”—was technically within the legal margins of error. That was the

amount of oil Pemex was allowed to lose, by law, in the transfer of “custody
of its product” across its businesses.
“Then there was the day we realized,” Bernal says, “that Pemex had
written its own laws around how much tolerance there is to lose product.”
And its losses fit that tolerated range perfectly.
Early on, Bernal tapped the CEO of Pemex’s petrochemical plants and
cajoled him to be the first to jump on board the digital transformation. His
plants were new and had a relatively large number of sensors already—
although they were not built for the new world of the CEO’s accountability
for financial, operating, and safety performance, of which the antitheft
element was a small part. As a first move toward digital transformation,
Bernal had picked as supportive a target as he could find. Still, there was
mistrust from the start.
“Pemex is run by oil engineers,” Bernal observed. “The guys who
analyze huge data sets to find where to dig are rock stars, like Silicon Valley
developers.” But the bosses were different—lifers who had little patience for
the reformers from Pemex corporate.
“All you IT guys come here and want to tell me the solution to my
problem,” Bernal recalled being told. “We spend a lot of money. You
become a barrel without a bottom. Just money, money, money and nothing
happens. It’s gonna take a while before I trust you.”
Over the years, data quality had crumbled at Pemex, and confusion,
mistrust, and poor decisions all became part of the Pemex culture.
Krasadakis would not have been surprised. “I’ve seen great business
intelligence and data warehousing initiatives fail due to low engagement by
key users,” he wrote—the direct result of a lack of trust in the data. “If users
don’t trust the data, they will gradually abandon the system impacting its
major KPIs [key performance indicators] and success criteria.”
Bernal attacked the data quality issue head on. His analysts needed to
know, for example, whether some outlier data on leaks constituted a critical
discovery or an unknown and poorly handled data issue. There was even
confusion about the confusion—was it accidentally caused by poor data or
intentionally broken by corrupted data fed to the system? This hampered
decision making and suited a hardcore group of corrupt Pemex executives,
managers, and operators who one report described as “working with
transnational criminal organizations in a multi-layered web of corruption,

difficult to untangle.” As part of the problem, they profited from obscuring
the truth and fought transparency, sometimes with violence.
“We actually had people killed,” Bernal recalled. “It happened in the
Salamanca refinery.” Bernal’s team bought digital cameras with
sophisticated motion detector sensors and installed them at the Salamanca
distribution center—having first emptied the refinery with a fire drill. The
cameras were activated, but they were destroyed two days later. The camera
installation team was murdered.
“Nobody knew about it when we did the operation,” Bernal recalled.
“Someone leaked where it was.”
The digital transformation of Pemex to a sensor-based precision system
didn’t happen quickly or easily. It could not have happened without the
cover of a larger digital transformation going on, or without CEO González
Anaya’s demands of his chiefs that they know their business exactly as
Bernal’s data would reveal. By creating an accurate and up-to-date view,
powered by data from this extraordinary sensor network, showing precisely
where oil was being lost and how much, Bernal’s organization would create
a true view into the state of operations and the controls needed to act on it.
“You have to have humility,” Bernal said. “There are no silver bullets
here. But we were able to consolidate all the data from machinery, plants and
people into a one-shared-truth picture of operations for leadership, and make
it actionable.”
Without that insight, Pemex would have continued to be blind to its
vulnerabilities and have no better hope of remediation than by instinct and
pure luck.
Diagnosing Problems with Data Availability and Quality
The Pemex story illustrates some of the challenges leaders face in assessing
the data they have before using it to launch a precision system. As was true
for Bernal and his team, three questions should be top of mind for managers.
Start, first, with the basic question, “What is the business problem we must
solve?” Keep that statement simple in the extreme: a few words should make
the priority clear to every manager. For Pemex, for example, it might be,
“Detect every pipeline leak that involves theft.” That framing embeds the
measure of success—everyone knows what counts as a win. It provides the

basis for testable hypotheses, as we discussed in chapter 2. In this instance,
data scientists and oil engineers can model the leaks that involve theft, then
test current detection systems to see if they can discover those leaks from
among all the leaks Pemex experiences.
Next, move to the second question: “What information do we need?”
Answering it should be a straightforward, intuitive exercise. If you were to
attempt, alone, to evaluate the testable hypothesis you developed earlier,
what information would you need to do it? Err on the side of including rather
than excluding any data you’re unsure about. For Pemex, for example, you’d
certainly want data on all leak events—the where, what, when and how—
together with the unique flow and pressure signatures of each leak. You’d go
through case files and figure out which leak events were actually crimes,
then build models that flagged incoming leaks as likely crimes, too. But
don’t stop your hunt for data there. Large-scale theft should show up in data
elsewhere—for example, in disparities between the gallons of fuel that
arrived for distribution and the gallons actually distributed. The difference
could be fuel that was siphoned off and stolen.
Then move to the third question: “Is the data we need accessible?” An
easy shortcut to the answer is to ask for a sample of each of the data sets
needed or attempt to extract them yourself if you have access.
You’ll have plenty to worry about at the highest level—consistency,
integrity, accuracy, and completeness. But in our experience three such
issues need to be addressed head on:
• One or more of the data sets needed are not instrumented—or
instrumented for another purpose. Data do not exist by default; active
intervention is required to decide what information needs to be
captured, to set up the tools and/or software, harvest it, and make it
available for analysis. This process is known as instrumentation. At
Pemex, for example, the pipeline sensor systems had been instrumented
for controlling flow and pressure in pipeline operations, not for
detecting leaks. Instrumenting for leak detection would require far
different physical placement of sensors and use of different sensors
built to detect those much smaller pressure changes typical of leaks.
These decisions would depend on how sensitive the sensors should be
(set to avoid both false alarms and missed events), how robust (able to
withstand the rough-and-tumble of pipeline operations), and how

accurate (getting the location of the leak exactly right). Bernal’s first
task, then, was to instrument Pemex’s pipeline sensor systems for leak
detection, not just pipeline operations.
• The data are stored in mixed and incompatible formats. A simple
example is when data stored in a structured way, such as in columns
and rows, cannot be merged easily with unstructured data that take the
form of, for example, images unless some way of connecting the two
data sets is established. Data scientists often complain that most of their
time is spent cleaning and preparing data for use in a model and less of
it doing the modeling. It’s a bit like chopping all the ingredients for a
meal before cooking it: the chopping can take a lot longer than the
cooking!
• Some or all the data are corrupted, broken, or otherwise unusable.
Data that are incorrect, erroneous, and/or incomplete are worse than no
data at all. Incomplete data requires significant effort to correct or fill
in. Some data may degrade as they are communicated across systems
whose bandwidth is inadequate. At worst, they can lead analysts on a
wild goose chase where the insights produced from the data are as
flawed as the data themselves. At Pemex, to protect against this, a
variety of different leak detection systems were tested. Many were
ruled out as costly, and it was impossible to discern if the systems
provided data that were any better than the data provided by the
incumbent sensor system. If, on the basis of insights confounded by
poor data, you choose to make decisions of consequence such as
budgeting, investing, hiring, firing and more, those decisions will be
misinformed, and you may not even know it.
The importance of data quality for precision projects cannot be overstated. A
model fed poor data will always produce poor outputs. The ability to get
from starting-point data, which can be rife with the kind of problems
described above and more, to usable data for model input (which is still far
from the final impact goal) is part of what makes data scientists and
engineers so skilled and so in demand. There is a chasm between what
someone can learn in college about data management and what a job in the
industry requires them to be able to do, between what any manager may
believe about the state of the data and its actual issues in use.

Bridging that chasm involves profiling your data and fixing gaps in
what you have, what you need, and what you can get. “There is a long,
painful and never-ending re-alignment of idealized projects against more
real-world work practices,” a data scientist wrote in a post titled “Ten
Fallacies of Data Science.” He might just as well have called it, “Ten
Delusions of Data Science.”
Fortunately, as you bring the special talents of engineering and business
insights to bear on the data challenges you face, you may not be a hostage
with little recourse but to accept compromised data with its serious
implications. You can go ahead, fix some crucial problems, and get precision
going.
Righting the Wrongs in Bone-Age Assessment
In radiology, physicians use bone-age assessments to determine the true age
of a child. “True age” is an important piece of information, but it is often
unknown because many children around the world may have no
documentation of birth. Doctors who are treating illness or developmental
issues need to know their patients’ true age. Police officers, lawyers, and
judges need “true age” to determine whether to treat a young person as a
juvenile or an adult.
Traditionally, the process of doing a bone-age assessment is a
methodical, rather mundane task of comparing an X-ray of a child’s hand
and wrist against textbook examples of bone-age images. But now, scientists
are applying artificial intelligence (AI) to make the process far more
accurate than ever before.
As chief resident in radiology at Columbia University’s Department of
Radiology, Dr. Simukayi Mutasa took on the important challenge of building
an AI-powered model to determine the correct age of a child based on hand
bone structure. It’s easy for AI-enabled image recognition to make that call
if the textbook examples of hand bone structure are any good. That’s where
Mutasa quickly bumped into a problem—not just any problem but a
profound flaw in the reference data set that has been in widest use around the
world for over sixty years.
“We all use this giant book,” Mutasa told us—Greulich and Pyle’s
Radiographic Atlas of Skeletal Development of the Hand and Wrist—where

we compare an X-ray of both hands. It takes about five minutes of our time
and requires no thought. It’s just literally looking at pictures and finding the
correct one.… It is one of those tasks that at high volumes become mind-
numbing,” Mutasa said. “Nobody would miss doing that exam.”
Since its publication in 1959, Greulich and Pyle’s Radiographic Atlas
had become iconic and Stanford University Press’s most profitable title in its
120-year history. Yet it has been prone to unnoticed, undiscovered, and
uncorrected bias every day of its published life. In essence, for sixty years,
physicians who have used the Radiographic Atlas unknowingly risked
providing potentially inaccurate estimates of true bone age in every
courtroom and doctor’s office where it was used, whether to classify a child
truly as a juvenile under the law or to assess how a child was whose growth
appeared stunted.
What was going on in the textbook? The reference data published in the
Radiographic Atlas comprised hand and wrist X-rays of 300 Caucasian
children who grew up in Cleveland in the 1950s. “How can we use their
bone age as a standard for the bone age of, say, a group of Hispanic kids or
black kids or Chinese kids in 2022?” Mutasa asked.
“Back in the 1950s someone went to a school in Cleveland, Ohio, and
took pictures of healthy upper-class white kids’ hands, age zero to eighteen
years,” Dr. Joshua Weintraub recounted. Weintraub is executive vice
chairman of the Department of Radiology at Columbia University and a
practicing interventional radiologist at New York Presbyterian Hospital.
“The medical community decided that was standard bone age. That’s how
we place your bone age and how we always have. But we’re in Washington
Heights—a principally Dominican community,” Weintraub reflected.
“People come to the hospital with developmentally delayed kids—and we’re
trying to figure out how delayed they are and whether we can get them back
on the growth curve. We plug their images into our Gruelich and Pyle Atlas
of healthy white kids from the 1950s Midwest and the AI automatically
brings up the answer, ‘You correspond to six years, six months.’ That
becomes the diagnosis. It couldn’t care less if you’re a kid from Washington
Heights. That’s how it places your bone age.”
Self-trained in coding and equipped with high-resolution imaging and
computers donated for his work—essentially, a physician software engineer
—and working under Weintraub’s general direction, Mutasa set about fixing
the problem. The only solution was to start again.

“We actually redid the entire Atlas,” he explains. “We took thousands of
children from New York City, which represented a diverse population, tons
of Hispanic, Black, Jewish and Asian kids—30,000 of those in a publicly
available data set.” They leveraged another 12,000 bone scans from New
York Presbyterian Hospital and developed a bone-age algorithm based on
that.
As a high-volume, repetitive, time-consuming, simple-to-do task
comparing images, bone scans are something neural networks and deep
learning can be good at. “Well-suited to image classification tasks associated
with screening, triage, diagnosis, and monitoring,” Dr. Eric Topol affirmed.
“Actually, significantly better than humans,” Mutasa says, citing his own
and others’ published research. “When humans do it, there is an element of
subjectivity to it. The intraobserver variability in humans is high. But with
computers, it does not exist.”
    ✳✳✳
The issue of bias baked into reference data sets is not limited to radiology.
The herculean effort to sequence the human genome was finally completed
in 2022, taking nineteen years and nearly $3 billion. Yet the human genome
reference data also had limiting flaws. The original data set was based on
DNA from just eleven individuals—70 percent of it from just one male, 80
percent of it from people of European descent. “All of that information is
nearly worthless for anybody other than those of European ancestry,” Eric
Green, director of the National Human Genome Research Institute, told a
reporter.
Whether in radiology or oncology, new projects are underway that, like
Mutasa’s, reject the concept of a single reference set for all, sequencing
instead diverse populations that reflect the human species more completely.
The value of such efforts cannot be disputed. The Cancer Genome Atlas, for
example, is now based on the sequencing of 20,000 patients across thirty-
three tumor types. “We can measure every mutation, every genetic change
the tumor makes to become cancer,” Nathan Siemens recently told an
audience. “That has changed the paradigm of cancer therapy. Instead of toxic
chemotherapeutic drugs, therapists sequence every patient, find the weak
points in tumors, and treat them with the appropriate therapy, including

unleashing the body’s own immune systems on the tumor. It’s called
precision medicine and it can work remarkably well.”
The same holds true for radiology. With physician software engineers
blazing trails, applications will proliferate—and with them will come
improved effectiveness and greater equity in diagnosis and treatment. “It
used to take four years and a PhD to build one of these systems,” Dr. Curtis
P. Langlotz of Stanford told an audience. “Now, with the right training data,
in a matter of weeks you can build a very accurate model. And we know
bone development is different across different ethnic groups. So rather than
having one model that gives the right answer for Caucasian kids in
Cleveland, in the 1950s, you can build a separate model for each individual
demographic group.”
Moving to higher volume, more accurate AI-enhanced radiology will
no doubt find its way to ubiquitous clinical practice as peer-reviewed studies
show AI-enabled precision systems can equal or exceed the performance of
even experienced radiologists, pathologists, or cardiologists. “If you’re
confident in your diagnosis you probably won’t need it,” Dr. Peter D. Chang
said when he reflected on yet another tool he and his students built—this one
to read chest radiographs, scanning for the smallest indications of
pneumonia (we introduced you to Chang in chapter 2). “But it is useful for
the less trained physician.” In the early days of COVID, that tool let doctors
at the University of California, Irvine (UCI) Medical Center get a jump on
treating likely COVID cases even before formal COVID tests came back.
That’s good news even now, as around the world radiologists are in
short supply but imaging is proliferating. Meanwhile, barriers to uptake and
adoption of AI-enabled medicine are cracking. The Food and Drug
Administration (FDA) approved the first fully autonomous AI-based
diagnostic system in a primary-care setting in 2018. More systems are in the
pipeline today. Medicare is beginning to reimburse for adoptions of such
systems. The dam is bursting: “Every single common, non-serious non-life-
threatening diagnosis, one by one is getting approached by AI,” Topol
asserted in 2020.
For now, Weintraub said that “the places where we’ve gotten to true
clinical diagnoses are de minimis at best.” Rather, AI-enabled enterprise
systems bring intelligence to workflows, surfacing priority images for reads
in the radiologists’ queues—both by urgency of the matter and, in some

cases, having presorted “negative” diagnoses from “positive” ones that
require physicians’ review to be certain.
For the future of these precision innovations, leading physicians peering
over the horizon see possibilities that amaze. Weintraub described the
promise of radiomics, for example, which looks at the pixel relationship of
tumors, determines their pathological correlation, then predicts their
sensitivities to various chemotherapies.
“By looking at that pixel relationship,” Weintraub said, “the computer
will do an algorithm and say, ‘This tumor is sensitive to gemcitabine [a drug
frequently used to treat several cancers].’ As the cancer changes, the pixel
relationship changes, relating either to the pathologic type or the chemo
sensitivity. We will get to the point that my job as an interventional
radiologist disappears because I won’t have to biopsy it anymore. We’ll be
able to look at the relationship of those pixels and say, ‘This is a leiomyoma
sarcoma—just because of the relationship of those pixels, as opposed to
tissue biopsy.’ It’s a whole different field completely.”
New kinds of collaborations will be essential to design and develop
such systems and then place them into the clinical workflow. On the
forefront of radiomics, for example, Dr. Richard Ha at New York–
Presbyterian Hospital is changing the future of breast cancer screening by
stratifying high-risk versus low-risk patients, not by clinical or family
history, which he asserts are poor predictors of future cancer, but by direct
inspection of tumor images for features that may predict an individual’s
precise risk of progression to cancer—sending fewer off for surgical
lumpectomies, today’s one-size-fits-all solution. For the high-resolution
tumor images, Ha collaborated with Dr. Christine Hendon’s biomedical
engineering group, which developed the necessary optical coherence
tomography technology; with surgery and pathology teams to identify the
right surgical specimens to image as a reference set; and even with Dr.
Carolyn Westhoff’s ob/gyn group to learn whether new treatments with
fewer side effects than the standard Tamoxifen could be devised for the
high-risk women once identified. Ha’s final contribution would be to
determine whether any new medication was working—again, by direct
examination of the tumor images.
Change, no doubt, is ahead—but observers are cautious. “Machines will
not replace physicians,” Dr. Antonio di Ieva recently wrote, “but physicians
using AI will soon replace those not using it.” Where it all lands and when

will depend on practitioners’ confidence in the data, the track record of
models in use, new regulatory approaches to continuous learning, and the
gravity of decisions at hand. Above all, Chang cautions, one should never
underestimate the power of the physician bias against change. “It is not
uncommon for physicians to believe the insights they generate can
fundamentally never by replaced by an intelligent machine system.”
Doing Data Due Diligence
Simukayi Mutasa is one of many pioneers of precision medicine. Fixing a
reference set is but one of many levers of change practitioners can pull who
are skilled both in computing and the sciences. But it takes something
special to convert that new transparency to value: the passion to right a
wrong. Mutasa, for example, didn’t stop at simply recognizing the problem.
Keenly aware that somewhere in the world an algorithm that was built on
old, incomplete data was still misstating a child’s true age, and impatient
with waiting another generation, Mutasa went out and fixed the problem.
His on-ramp to the reform of a flawed precision system was the data as he
first wondered about its origins and then set about re-creating the data from
scratch.
As Mutasa’s story suggests, before embarking on a precision project,
the state of the data must be known; its quality understood; and, if need be, it
must be challenged, tested, and proved. Profiling the data can be a valuable
exercise because it might yield discoveries as consequential as the bias of
race and location in a reference set.
From medicine to marketing, whether profoundly flawed or simply
annoying, quality issues can be revealed through summary statistics that
allow domain experts and system engineers to sense-check. For a marketing
project, for example, they can scan the statistics and ask questions like,
“How can the number of new customers within the last thirty days be larger
than the total number of customers overall?” It cannot—a sign that
something is wrong and needs to be investigated.
Similarly, characteristics of the data, like its completeness and sparsity,
can be examined for indicators of quality. If there is a row in a database for
every purchase ever made on a website, but only 90 percent of those records
contain the price of the purchase, what’s wrong with the other 10 percent? If
no attempt to verify the quality of this data is made and someone simply

goes ahead and uses it to calculate the total dollar sum of all purchases, they
will be 10 percent short without knowing it. Any “average price per
purchase” or “average dollars spent per customer” values would also be
wrong. If a manager acts based on these flawed insights, their actions would
be misguided.
Lesson for leaders: data quality assessments can be time consuming and
costly. but they are worth the effort. They can increase confidence in both
the project and its result, and are extremely effective at reducing risk in a
precision project early on. An error in any of these checkpoints—the
availability, accessibility, and quality of the data required—can cause a
precision project to miss its marks.
Platforms
If data is the life blood of precision, platforms are its beating heart. The word
“platform” has many meanings. For the U.S. Navy, a destroyer, a submarine,
or the F-14 Hornet fighter plane is each a combat platform designed for
specific missions of armed defense or attack. For a hospital, an operating
room is a surgical platform. For a school, a K–12 classroom can be thought
of as a platform for teaching and learning. Jorge Heraud and Lee Redden
turned the everyday John Deere tractor into a precision platform for weed
control. For our purposes, platforms are where the work of precision systems
gets done.
Precision platforms share common basic traits. Borrowing from
Thomas Eisenmann’s general framework for platforms, precision platforms
are highly digitized but have a physical footprint and a human interface. All
platforms have rules that govern users’ access, use, and interactions, and
components of hardware, software and service modules. Precision platforms
are often powered by AI and machine learning; handle vast stores of data;
and, if so, have an architecture designed for continuous improvement.
Platforms are designed for a specific purpose; they must have well-defined
workflows and jobs geared to those tasks. A mission-driven and purpose-
built precision platform’s success is measured by whether and how the
platform permits operators not just to find and engage each other (technical
success) but also to change the status quo measurably and precisely as
required.

From ships to surgical theaters, to classrooms, precision platforms
involve other platforms that are central to their performance. Among these
are data platforms that serve up the data comprising the precision system’s
fuel. Data platforms are purpose-neutral and flexible because they are
designed to enable many varied applications comprising the work of the
platform. These include the common types of data applications we described
in chapter 2: pattern finding, personalization, value predicting, entity
recognition, geotracking, and scenario modeling.
Organizations invest in data platforms to automate these challenging
processes. As a result of that prior investment, the users of the data platform
don’t have to figure those things out every time they want to run a new
analysis or train a new model. Today, data platforms are commoditized; in
other words, they are purchasable from a variety of major platform vendors
and don’t usually need to be built in-house. They are durable because they
are long-term investments that can support a variety of applications over
many years. (Splunk, a data platform vendor, offers this definition: “A data
platform is a complete solution for ingesting, processing, analyzing and
presenting the data generated by the systems, processes and infrastructures
of the modern digital organization.” It supports diverse tasks from data
ingestion and preparation to model creation, training, and test, to
deployment, monitoring, and maintenance, all geared to the incorporation of
predictive and prescriptive models into business processes, infrastructure,
products, and applications.)
Early in the life of a precision system, data and platforms can be kept
lean. In many cases, it’s possible to prove complex concepts and achieve
remarkable impact without much investment in the way of data and
platforms. But as precision projects mature and tackle more real-world
complexity, the management of data and platforms almost always becomes
more complicated and crucial. The more people who are involved, the bigger
the network of machines online and the more complex the management of
their output becomes. The broader the scope of the program, the more data
need to be managed.
And when working within the context of an established organization
with preexisting data platforms, another layer of complexity is added: the
challenge of achieving new things with old technology. Existing legacy
platforms can sometimes act as a launch pad for precision ventures, but more
often they are a drag or even a liability. Heavyweight, expensive technology

that requires many teams of engineers to maintain simply isn’t fit for new
and fundamentally different purposes.
It is possible to transform old systems. Data management teams can
sometimes extend legacy systems to meet the ever-evolving demands of
sophisticated precision. But the job can be enormously complicated and
challenging, especially when a big company with a complex history—like
the New York Times—commits itself to the new pursuit of precision.
Replatforming the New York Times
Nick Rockwell joined the New York Times as its CTO in 2015. Word of
change was all around. Since 2011, when the Times launched its first pay-
for-subscription digital model, the Times had been moving toward a new
strategy that would replace ad-driven revenues with subscription revenues.
With forecasts of doom for the future of the print edition all around, the
move to a subscription-based business was a gamble then Times CEO Janet
Robinson was willing to make.
But the venerable “Grey Lady,” as the Times was known, was falling
down and might not get up. When Mark Thompson succeeded Robinson in
2012 as the Times’s CEO, red lights were flashing everywhere, especially for
subscriptions, where growth was not just stalled, but collapsing:
It was something like 74,000 [subscriptions] in my very first
quarter, the last quarter of 2012. By the second quarter of 2013, it
was 22,000 or 23,000. It looked like the model was plateauing. For
a company with four main revenue streams, with print
subscriptions essentially stagnant, print advertising in real decline,
digital advertising had just turned into decline, to be told that your
one hope, digital subscriptions, is plateauing—that’s really bad
news. So the most urgent thing to do was to figure out how to get
the digital-subscription model to work.
If Thompson’s doubters were many, few were sure what the best next step
should be in the digital future. It was unclear even to Rockwell what his role
in the big shift might be. For now, his job was simple enough, standard fare

for CTOs, and big: to make sure that “everything worked.” To Rockwell,
that meant one thing: deliver a computing environment that could “process a
lot of data, run a lot of queries, and do it fast,” same as he’d done as CTO at
Conde Nast and MTV before.
Benchmarking the state of the Times’s systems as Rockwell found them
was easy, eye-opening, and rattling. Times’s rival Bloomberg served up a
million news stories on its platforms every day, with a 100-millisecond
delay. It had developed robust reader metrics and measures, tracking not just
“page views,” or “scroll depth,” or “time spent on page”—but bundles of
metrics in “average revenue per user”—all to know how much money
Bloomberg made on each user and how much a user clicking over from
Facebook was worth versus one from Google Search. “Overall,”
Bloomberg’s global head of digital claimed, “our metrics tell us that our
audience is engaged, educated, affluent, and older.”
The Times, by comparison, was running on fumes. Its servers, software,
and networks were painfully slow. Data analysts stumbled through its data
and systems, clawing to gain insight, and petitioned Rockwell to do
something. “No feedback,” Rockwell said, “wasting vast amounts of time,
moving incredibly slowly. We were flying blind, with nothing to guide us. It
was quick and easy to see that we weren’t anywhere we needed to be with
respect to data.”
Given the state of the Times’s infrastructure transformation would
hardly be possible—certainly not as CEO Mark Thompson had envisioned
it. “Unusable, essentially,” Rockwell found, “without a massive investment.”
Rockwell was clear about his next move. “The very first thing we did was a
broad replatforming—moving our entire data platform to Google’s Cloud
Platform infrastructure,” he said. He’d gone comparison shopping and found
the Times’s incumbent cloud provider, Amazon Web Services, lacking. “We
recognized and wanted the power of Google’s data tools, like ‘Big Query.’ ”
“That was a really good choice,” recalled Katerina Iliakopoulou, a lead
software engineer. “We needed that very high speed when it comes to
querying our user history service—which was in the hot path of every
request we get for recommendations. Google Cloud Product turned out to be
the right tool for that job.”
“Done with literally no effort on our part, creating as low friction as
possible for the whole organization, but particularly for the analysts,”

Rockwell said. “A rare and wonderful case where the impact you have is,
like, two orders of magnitude.”
The gains in performance came fast. “It literally cut queries that would
take a couple of hours to a couple of minutes,” Rockwell said. Vast stores of
the Times’s data were now easily accessible and manipulable—“a single
source of truth, all queryable.” The import was obvious: system reform was
a necessary precursor of strategic transformation as Thompson had laid out.
“We could actually start to use data in an operational way, and really start to
run the business off of it,” Rockwell said. And it confirmed his mantra:
“You’ve got to solve your organization first”—get your platforms right, your
data right, your people and teams right. Nothing transformational is possible
until then; everything is possible afterward.
The breakthrough in platforms and data triggered a dormant “analytics
debt” to pay down—a backlog of analytics jobs to run. Working through it
let the Times build insight into its customers’ journeys as never before—how
people started to use the Times, for example, and how they discovered the
deeper dimensions of its reporting. “It let us gain deeper insight into the
business and particularly the subscription business and conversion dynamics
and the correlated question of reader engagement,” Rockwell said.
Standing at the dawn of enterprise precision, the Times was moving past
mere digital transformation to precision systems that could answer the
questions and reform the practice of a full-on move to subscription-based
revenue. How much precisely to charge to boost revenues without losing
customers? When precisely to drop the paywall—was it after three free
articles, or seven, or ten? How best to segment customers precisely, exciting
potential new subscribers and engaging existing ones even more?
Josh Arak, then the Times’s director of data and insights, would soon
unleash a tsunami of testing new products and innovation that would give
answers. But there was work to do first, “getting the organization right.”
Like Rockwell, Arak found the Times’s platform too fractured to handle the
heavy lifting of a high-functioning enterprise insight engine. There were
multiple data fiefdoms with no central testing platform, no centralized test
result database, and no unified testing protocols or strategy. Five different
channels—desktop web, mobile web, mobile apps, newsroom, and
marketing—each ran their own separate testing operations. Each had its own
methods of tracking and reporting results. Each was a happy band of users
disconnected from the others and each was, potentially, poisoning the others’

work. One team could inadvertently taint another’s results by running
experiments on a cohort of subscribers, for example, while the other was
injecting the very same cohort with a different treatment somewhere else. It
would skew the data—but no one would know. With this blind interference
going on, it was almost impossible for Arak’s team to create a single
coherent picture of reader behavior, gain insight into what to change, or
develop a plan for how.
The future was on hold until this could get sorted. Arak’s best next
move was clear: an investment of time, people, and money that would
simplify and standardize the organization’s entire testing platform—its
infrastructure, applications, and workflows. Breaking apart technology
fiefdoms that are built up around platforms is a third rail for any technology
manager. Going too fast could cost Arak supporters and ruffle the wrong
feathers, while going too slow might mask or minimize the problem’s true
urgency. Losers in the move forward would feel their loss sharply and fast.
The winner would be the Times, but that was diffuse. Up-and-coming
software engineers, data scientists, or product managers eager for new tools
should also favor it, but that could take time.
Arak’s best move now would be a proof of concept that brought the
vague promise of benefits into sharp relief, give winners a taste of the future,
and gain a green light from the top. No other move could trump a proof of
concept. Arak’s proof rolled out two main features. First, it pulled
information from each of the disparate testing platforms concerning which
Times readers had been placed into whose test groups, making sure the
allocation of readers was truly randomized and controlled across
experiments. That would fix the problem of one experiment tainting another.
Second, the proof produced a uniform set of metrics. No matter over
which channel or via which tool a test was run, every team would calculate
success or failure by the same metrics, making them consistent, measurable,
and comparable across all domains. Which article got more engagement
(clicks) and which article caused more subscriptions, for example, were
important metrics for almost every experiment any digital team could run.
On the consolidated platform, the insights could be found in one, clean place
and mean the same thing. That made comparison of alternatives easier.
Proof of concept in hand, Thompson backed Arak’s plan. And why not?
Arak’s proposal sat squarely in the high beams of Thompson’s strategy to
transform the Times’s revenue stream. He had hired smart people like Arak

to tell him how to do it, and that Arak plainly did: build a unified testing
platform and embed it in the workflow and culture of teams across the
Times. Foster systematic experimentation, supporting many more
experiments and improving their quality all at once, and thus obviate
concerns for interference, normalization, or any such data-quality issues.
Achieve new insights into the customer journey from its very start; answer
the questions of when, how, and where to price the subscription and drop the
paywall. Arak described the decision to build a single, unified platform this
way:
It was an interesting path that took us back to the roots of the
decision to rip away the foundations of how we were doing data
and build it from the ground up again, and to be more flexible and
more nimble and more scalable. We would have never been able to
achieve what we achieved if we didn’t do that. And the takeaway
is, “Cut your losses when you’re wrong and stop building upon the
problem” because ultimately, you’re holding yourself back from
building and scaling at the speed that you want.
Arak’s team unlocked new breadth, speed, and effectiveness for the Times’s
transformation from merely digital to enterprise-wide precision. The result
was a strategic correction to a subscription-based business model that set the
Times on a path toward becoming the multibillion-dollar subscription
business it is today. It’s a story we’ll examine further, from other angles,
later in this book.
Getting Out the Democratic Vote in 2020
Let’s conclude this chapter with a glimpse of a precision system project with
greater social and political implications than the digital transformation of the
New York Times. In January 2021, members of the Democratic National
Committee (DNC) reflected on the 2020 presidential election cycle—
unprecedented and chaotic in so many ways—from the vantage point of the
winner’s side. From this view, it is easy to gloss over how hard-fought the

election had been, especially because so much of America was keen to forget
the last four years.
But it should be remembered. The traditional battle of voter
engagement had to be fought under conditions of a global pandemic, socially
distanced campaigning, viral disinformation, cybersecurity threats both
foreign and domestic, and a climate of political division that culminated in
violence and fatalities. In the end, Joe Biden pulled through, and Donald
Trump was denied a second term as president. Hundreds of thousands of
volunteers, making millions of calls and texts over 100 days, delivered the
Democrats a win. But several factors weaving together behind the scenes
helped seal that victory.
One of those little-known factors was the work of Nellwyn Thomas,
CTO of the DNC. Thomas had spent the last three years leading her team to
develop the party’s data stores into an election-winning precision asset,
leveraged into a crucial win on November 4. Her team had developed a new
and improved data platform to be used by numerous campaign teams for
their various strategic purposes. She reflects:
Democrats succeeded because we, as a party, have a shared
foundation made up of high-quality data about voters, reliable data
infrastructure, and scalable tools. This foundation, rebuilt over the
past three years by the DNC… allowed campaigns to be more
nimble and pivot more effectively.
Applying precision strategy to politics poses some unique challenges.
Presidential election cycles happen once every four years, and each cycle is
disconnected from the last, which leads to short-term thinking by campaigns.
They don’t usually need to invest in strategies and tools that last beyond
Election Day, nor do they have the luxury of time nor the capacity to do so.
Every minute of every campaign day is an opportunity that must be
maximized because the outcome is zero-sum; there’s no value gained by
achieving second place in a presidential election. These realities create
intense pressures for technology strategy and for precision systems, which
can involve complex landscapes of databases, transformations, access and
application tools, and more, all stitched together to achieve a specific result

—in this case, to help the DNC find and persuade the segment of American
people most likely to convert to vote for Biden.
To begin, the phone numbers, email addresses, and voter registrations
of millions of citizens were scattered across state, local, and federal
databases. The DNC tech team had the formidable task of synthesizing and
cleaning this data and modeling it into usable insights to influence the
deployment of their limited campaign resources. This goal required hundreds
of hours of data deduplication. For example, registered Democrats who
moved between states could have multiple state registration records, but it’s
only worth spending the time to contact them in the state they live in now.
This was a data quality challenge for the DNC tech team, which invested
precious time into carefully eliminating redundant and outdated voter
records to ensure that each voter had one clear current registration address.
Thomas’s work in developing the data and the platform for an effective
Democratic campaign was only part of the story of the 2020 victory. As
we’ll explore in chapter 8, an equally important factor was the creation,
deployment, and management of a nationwide team of professional staffers
and passionate volunteers who understood how to use the data and the
platform as tools for political persuasion. But none of it would have been
possible without the prior work of Nell Thomas and her team.
What’s more, Thomas and her team went one giant step further than
campaign strategists generally do. They built the DNC data infrastructure to
serve as the foundation for future wins in 2024, 2028, and beyond. They
cleaned up the entire DNC voter registration database from top to bottom,
creating a valuable data asset that would not only help the Biden campaign
win but also those of his successors in years to come.
Thomas calls this “breaking the boom-and-bust cycle.” It involved a
two-pronged strategy: building up the technology platforms required into
lasting, sophisticated engines, and attracting and retaining the best talent in
the game to make it happen. “This work—building data infrastructure;
investing in, acquiring, and cleaning messy data about voters; and
systematically monitoring and tracking disinformation—is not sexy,” she
says. “It is not easy. But it is this work that gives campaigns a strong
technology platform and frees them up to experiment and innovate.” Rather
than spin up one-time analyses and tools for the 2020 election, she built a
precision launch pad for multiple Democratic wins. If Thomas’s vision

comes true, the same launch pad will help create Democratic victories in
2024 and beyond.
Tools for Data Management: Platforms of Precision
As you’ve already seen, data work is different from traditional software
engineering. Among other challenges, data science requires systems to
streamline and maintain the data models that scientists create. Data
platforms for models are more complex than data platforms for regular
analyses and dashboards because they consume more data at finer levels of
granularity and often need to run continuously.
For those building up precision muscles within an organization,
understanding that data platforms take various forms—from old-school
enterprise resource planning (ERP) systems to cutting-edge smartphone
networks—is the first step toward knowing which types of platforms are
right for their unique circumstances. There is a wide variety of data
platforms on the market. Depending on the size of the endeavor, the
financial resources available, the legacy systems in place, and the level of in-
house experience with particular platforms, any number of platforms might
be appropriate. A search for “data platform landscape comparison” will
reveal competitive analyses and countless other guides to the full market. A
cursory introduction to the field of data platforms might include the
following categories: data storage and compute; data analysis, data science,
and machine learning; and data visualization. We’ll discuss each one next.
Data Storage and Compute Platforms
The collection and storage of data is a critical, if comparatively unsexy,
precursor to any data-focused project. Just like the physical warehouses that
keep billions of goods waiting to be sold warm and dry, so do data
warehouses keep your data “warm and dry” until they are ready to be put to
work.
Note that data storage and compute systems work best when
accompanied by a discipline of data governance. Imagine walking into a
warehouse the size of a football field. Hundreds of aisles of racks are neatly
stacked with boxes full of items, but the boxes are unlabeled and there is no

map to the aisles. Some of the boxes are full of flammable items, and some
are full of rotting perishables, but you don’t know which boxes hold which.
You are asked to find girls’ soccer shoes, a pack of sponges, and a copy of
Sun Tzu’s The Art of War. Baffled, you start at aisle one, box one, because
you have no better option.
This is a problem of governance, and it exists in data warehouses, too.
When data stores are poorly maintained, the results can be disastrous.
Missing labels and a lack of descriptive information, known as metadata,
make the right data hard to find. Poor data governance practices also lead to
data that decays in quality. A lack of data governance can even lead to legal
liability. For example, some organizations do not realize that among their
stored data exists personally identifiable information (PII) about individual
people, which carries with it obligations for higher standards of security and
protection.
Data governance is its own microcosm within the broad data universe,
and fortunately a few enterprising companies have developed and offer data
governance as a service, including plug-and-play data search and
cataloguing, metadata management, and PII discovery tools along with
guidance for complying with data privacy laws like Europe’s General Data
Protection Regulation (GDPR) and California’s Consumer Privacy Act
(CCPA). Whether through a purchased service or an in-house function,
organizations find that there’s a direct correlation between the strength of
their data governance effort and their ability to get value out of their data.
Data Analysis, Data Science, and Machine-Learning Platforms
Anybody venturing beyond Microsoft Excel’s analysis tools is in the realm
of data analysis solutions. Here, the volume of companies who can afford to
develop and sell solutions is far greater than in the world of storage because
it is less stupendously expensive to do so. They offer scientists a wealth of
out-of-the box tools to:
• Create and run models with suggested libraries of model templates for
different purposes: “For Beginners: Your First Neural Network” to
classify images of clothing, or “For Experts: Generative Adversarial
Networks” to generate images of handwritten numbers.

• Build, train, launch, and maintain models, including automatic data
labeling to increase the quality of data input to a model, and even
automated value predictions for specific data such as house prices.
• Carry out statistical techniques like Bayesian analysis, categorical
data analysis, causal inference, cluster analysis, descriptive statistics,
uni- and multivariate analysis, and more.
• Manage data streaming and perform real-time analytics on the data as
they stream, including interfaces for easy creation and scaling of
machine-learning models.
• Access open-source, machine-learning libraries suitable for use cases
like computer vision and natural language processing.
If you’re a nontechnical manager, you won’t need to understand to this level
of detail what kind of analysis platform your project needs or what kind of
models the team will need to build with it. This is the domain of data
experts, scientists, and engineers. However, the more you understand about
what tools are out there and what they’re capable of, the better. Even without
technical expertise, you can ask questions and raise issues that will help your
team make smart investments and avoid overly short- or long-term thinking.
One key takeaway is that precision can be accessible to a broad range
of organizations and people, including nontechnologists. Don’t assume that
you need to use high-powered tools such as machine learning or AI. For
example, Microsoft Excel, first released in 1987, is still the most widely
used data analysis program in the world. Having brought concepts like
macros and pivot tables into mainstream understanding and offering an
entry-level bridge to numeracy, Excel has outlasted countless newfangled
competitors and is arguably one of the most impactful software products
ever released. Just recently, the New York Times’s Tiff Fehr and team won a
Pulitzer Prize for journalism that revealed the true extent of the COVID-19
pandemic across the world using Excel spreadsheets as its foundational
application.
As one well-regarded data scientist recently told an audience, “Simple
heuristics are surprisingly hard to beat, and they will allow you to debug the
system end-to-end without mysterious machine-learning black boxes with
hypertuned hyperparameters in the middle. This is also why my favorite data
science algorithm is division.”

Still, new developments in data science are happening all the time, and
it’s useful to be aware of them. For example, a new discipline called model
management is emerging, and it is aimed at using both technology and
process to make the development and ongoing maintenance of data models
easier. Model management is a crucial part of scaling precision systems,
allowing data teams to move on to new challenges without being dragged
back by continual maintenance obligations for older models.
The ways models are built and deployed is also changing rapidly.
Today, complex algorithms that would have been run on large industrial
computers decades ago can now be run on the smartphones sitting in our
pockets. This development is bringing powerful neural networks—
facilitators of a process sometimes called deep learning—within reach of
more and more organizations. Neural networks are an example of the kind of
data science application that demands a lot of data. They facilitate machine
learning by using training data to teach a computer how to perform a task
independently. For example, an entity recognition system might use neural
networks to learn how to detect cancerous growths from medical scan photos
more quickly and accurately than a doctor could manually.
In late 2020, MIT Technology Review’s Karen Hao explained the
challenges that had limited the use of neural networks:
Deep learning is an inefficient energy hog. It requires massive
amounts of data and abundant computational resources, which
explodes its electricity consumption. In the last few years, the
overall research trend has made the problem worse. Models of
gargantuan proportions—trained on billions of data points for
several days—are in vogue and likely won’t be going away any
time soon.
Now that is changing. Hao reported that researchers from IBM had
discovered how a small computer—like the one in a smartphone—could be
used to train powerful neural networks. It’s a breakthrough whose
implications will only become clear in the years to come.
Data Visualization Platforms

Data visualization, often the last step in a project, is when all the effort of
collecting, cleaning, and modeling the data comes to fruition and the
discovered insights are shared with the customer or stakeholder. Those who
work with data daily as analysts know how important storytelling with data
is; it’s how the answer yielded by the data is revealed and communicated to
the nonanalytical masses. Not many of us can look at a spreadsheet full of
sales data and automatically glean the summary, but when it’s packaged into
a neat pie chart or line graph, we can.
If you’ve ever appreciated an infographic that presents complex and
dense information in a compact, visually appealing way, then you’ve
appreciated the power of data visualization. Data visualization is the
difference between saying that the sun is 109 times bigger than Earth and
showing it by drawing a small circle and a 109-times bigger circle next to it.
For communicating an insight powerfully and filtering away extraneous
information for maximum impact, data visualization is a critical skill and
one that many organizations choose to augment via the purchase and
integration of specialized data visualization platforms.
In the world of data visualization tools, the name of the game is
flexibility. You want a platform that can connect to any brand of data
warehouse, create the exact visual needed and customize it, share it with any
other communications platform, and more. This requires speed,
interoperability, and an intuitive user experience with powerful query and
calculation functionality.
It’s a competitive field of offerings, each seeking to dominate the
market and to provide features such as powerful data analysis and
presentation capabilities, speed and flexibility, sleek graphics, and even
machine-learning automated discovery of insights within your data, thus
doing some of the lifting for you. All of them play nicely with many
different data sources and aim to reduce the friction of importing data to be
prepared for storytelling.
The right data visualization platform should be chosen carefully. If your
data storytelling tools fall short, presenting information in a form that is too
complex, too rigid, or too slow, your key message may never get across.
This is a last-mile problem in data that can negate the value of all the
preceding work.
One key take away is this: simplicity is always to be preferred. As this
tweet from Kareem Carr suggests, it may be within easy reach:

One of the most fascinating data science lessons I’ve learned on social media is something like this is
often a much more effective way of communicating information to the general public than a line plot.
Monkeypox cases around the world timeline:
May 6th: 1 case
May 21st: 100 cases
June 6: 1,000 cases
June 14: 2,000 cases
June 21: 3,000 cases
June 23: 4,000 cases
June 28: 5,000 cases
July 12: 10,000 cases
July 20: 15,000 cases
July 27: 20,000 cases
Doubling time: 2 weeks.
Making Smart Platform Investments
The range of technologies available today to wrangle the production,
collection, storage, computation, analysis, governance, and visualization of
data is vast and varied, reflecting the range of different circumstances for
each organization and the unique goals and investments of each. The
assessment, selection, and integration of data platform technology is a
problem native to CTOs and CDOs worldwide, and it continues to be one of
the most important investment decisions they will make.
Where you are on your journey from traditional to digital, or from
digital to precision, should inform the approach you take to data technology.
As with other elements of a precision project, you shouldn’t assume that you
need to invest in the largest-scale, highest-uptime, most avant-garde data
platform options. For some organizations, that will be necessary, but for
many challenges, like the one faced by Simukayi Mutasa, simpler and fewer
tools can be very effective.
Consider the type of precision project you’re embarking upon. Will it
involve mainly one-off analyses that aren’t frequently updated or more
continuous, large-scale machine-learning models? If your first precision
efforts are new, small-scale, and ambiguous, avoid big changes to your
existing data infrastructure. Instead, find a way to prove a concept with
easily available resources. Using open-source software can keep costs lower,
as can the flexibility afforded by trial periods available on most tools.

If you’re a little further down the road—if you’ve already had some
precision wins and now are hitting the ceiling on what can be achieved
without technology change—it may be the time to take a more methodical
approach. Develop a detailed request for information (RFI) process to solicit
proposals and bids from qualified platform suppliers. Spend time to clarify
your current situation in terms of volume of data, expected volume of daily
queries, types of data sources, level of support services needed, uptime
guarantees needed, feature functionality needed, budget, and expected future
growth. Proper research takes time, but not as much time as a rushed
decision takes to unwind.
Build Versus Buy
Every organization with its own team of engineers at some point wonders
whether it wouldn’t simply be easier to build its own data platform rather
than bother with the mammoth hassle of RFIs, vendors, integrations, and
maintenance. The answer is, perhaps unsurprisingly, it depends.
A proliferation of no-code and low-code data management and
machine-learning products have entered the market in recent years, enabling
nontechnical people to build and launch websites, mobile apps, and more
without needing to write a single line of code. This has lowered the barriers
to entry for millions of people worldwide to produce and monetize software
products. The trend has extended to precision, too. No-code machine
learning products have brought the same massive reach to AI. The tech
giants and many smaller vendors have several incredibly competitive and
useful offerings.
Why then would any organization beginning a precision transformation
choose to invest time, money, and irretrievable opportunity cost in building
what could be bought? Buying can sometimes be the best option. According
to Andy Tsao, executive vice president of data and insights at Amazon’s
Audible, the rule of thumb is intuitive: companies should build only when
they have the capacity to do so, and when the product they seek to offer is
inherently differentiating, competitive, or unique to the mission. In other
words, there’s no point in building a product that’s already commoditized,
not unique, or not competitive. Put your precision people where they can get
you ahead of the rest rather than reinventing a wheel everyone already has.
The opportunity cost of building something you could have bought depends

on what else you could have built with the same time and resources, but it
could be the difference between creating a world-changing product or not.
This is what Josh Arak and the Times’s data teams did. Knowing that
their data was running in silos and wasting its potential, they invested in
building a new product to stitch together all the disparate data sources. This
allowed them to standardize testing across all the Times’s customer-facing
digital properties and develop the more advanced experimentation expertise
that contributes to their massively successful digital subscription business
today.
    ✳✳✳
As you can see, getting the data and the platforms right is a big, complex
process. It’s almost inevitable that, once you decide to begin an
organizational journey toward becoming a precision enterprise, you’ll need
to devote a lot of time, energy, money, and creative thinking to these crucial
tasks. Don’t try to cut them short, or you may end up regretting it.

CHAPTER 5
THE PRECISION VANGUARD
 Steven Kelman at Harvard Kennedy School coined the term “change
vanguard” to denote a core group of ready-to-go practitioners that a leader
can mobilize in support of a change initiative. Where the status quo is
formidable, Kelman found, “unleashing change” is key, and the change
vanguard plays a critical role. Typically comprising some 20 percent of any
workforce and part of a larger “reform coalition” that often totals nearly 40
percent, the change vanguard provides frontline blocking for the manager in
her role as quarterback of change.
Kelman drew inspiration from the original models of innovation
proposed by Everett C. Rogers and others in their classic studies of
innovation on the American farm and factory. They proposed the gospel of
“diffusion of innovation” as a framework that segments people into “early
adopters,” “early” and “late” majorities, and “laggards”—bystanders all,
measured by their willingness to adopt someone else’s innovation. Rarely
were they the innovators themselves, who typically numbered about 2.5
percent of the workforce, Rogers claimed.
In the fifteen years since Kelman wrote, a sea change in computing and
telecommunications technologies has shifted power from a few innovators to
many—turning far more, potentially, into leaders of change than the meager
2.5 percent of Rogers’s model. Give this new vanguard a well-framed
business problem; accessible and available data; the right platforms, tools,
and skills, and they will often initiate change themselves, no permission
asked, none granted. If they hit their marks, bringing change precisely
where, when, and how they wish, they can take home handsome paydays,

deliver many-zeroed corporate revenue gains, and sometimes achieve
significant new social and political value at scale.
We identify this new vanguard as the precision vanguard. It comprises
a core group of make-change-happen-now developers of services and
products who design and build precision solutions at scale on a foundation of
data and analysis. This core group includes software engineers, data
scientists, applied mathematicians, marketers, business unit leaders, and
product managers. No longer mere passive recipients of innovation, the
precision vanguard brims with active creators and disturbers, supercharged
and feeling empowered by their talents and systems to take on even the most
wicked of problems. They are practically offended by blunt force solutions
that kill the crops with the weeds and poison the soil with the water, all in
the name of higher yields, or that settle for workplace safety fixes that check
the boxes, placate inspectors and regulators, but leave risks all around. All
feel a great urgency to get in the game now: suited up with data and insight,
they bristle on the sidelines, watching disasters loom, anxious like
Keyshawn Johnson, the legendary National Football League (NFL) receiver
who seethed, “Just give me the damn ball.” Once unleashed, they join the
battle for a vision and with a plan: for Keller Rinaudo and Keenan Wyrobek
at Zipline, to keep millions healthy with perishable medicines; for Nellwyn
Thomas and Nathan Rifkin at the Democratic National Committee (DNC),
to take the election for Biden; for Alex Cholas-Wood and Evan Levine at the
New York Police Department (NYPD), to avert the next violent crime; for
Lee Redden and Jorge Heraud at Blue River, to reduce waste and pollution
when farmers weed their croplands.
The magnitude of the precision revolution—and it is a revolution—is
directly ascribable to the advent of these technologies and the precision
vanguard. In the words of author Cathy O’Neil, armed with “weapons of
math destruction” the precision vanguard cracks open the status quo with
insurgent, breakthrough innovations, counting “hit or miss” as old-school
failure, and overkill as underperformance. Biased to action, the precision
vanguard is impatient to get on with it, as Napoleon supposedly admonished:
“Engage, then see.”
The Precision Vanguard Today

What sort of people make up the precision vanguard today? What makes the
precision vanguard stand out? How can executives or managers spot them,
recruit them, and put their energies to work?
Our experience and research reveal the precision vanguard to be high
achievers, recent graduates with advanced degrees in their fields, often with
formal training in software design and engineering, data science, applied
mathematics, and testing methods. They speak the languages of multiple
professions and are fluent in everything from Python and Scala, the lingua
francas of data science and engineering, respectively, to lean and agile
project methods. They have the tradecraft and artistry to play in many
worlds at once and, at their best, communicate with ease across the
boundaries of guilds and professions.
They have an abiding faith in the power of data to fix even
monumental problems and welcome opportunities to stretch the limits of
what conventional wisdom thinks possible. Inspired by the examples of
born-digital giants like Facebook, Apple, Amazon, and Google, they know
that the very same principles of precision and personalization those firms use
are matters of science rather than mystery. Using these principles, the
precision vanguard believes they can tame the most unruly messes of the
world, bringing about the changes they want where, when, and how they
want them, just as science predicts and business requires, testing and proving
as they go.
They are deeply connected to networks of like-minded and similarly
talented individuals, and they embrace a strong culture of precision built on
widely shared stories of heroes and victories (exemplifying the dynamic of
culture building described by corporate culture guru Edgar Schein). A belief
in the science, the art, and the power of a precision culture is continually
replenished by the flow of graduates from professional schools armed with
the latest tools, techniques, and tales of engineering prowess, data science
success, and business unit victory against the intractable problems of the
day.
The precision vanguard is given to risk-taking—“willing to take a
chance that there’s a new way to think about this,” as Josh Arak of the New
York Times told us. Its brashness and talent empower the precision vanguard
to make first starts with the barest of investment or authority, confident they
can make things work, as they have before, and eager to tweak and build on
the promise of results that no one else can produce.

They are, above all, called to higher purpose and energized by mission
—the prospect of rescuing a nation or a people, strengthening an
organization they love, or delivering health and well-being where poverty
and disease needlessly cripple millions. Give the precision vanguard a
strategic beacon—a north star—and they are easily activated. When strong
leaders manage the members of the precision vanguard correctly, they will
unleash the change that the vanguard holds in its hands. But if they are
managed too tightly, they will wither, leaving bosses scratching their heads
wondering what went wrong.
The fact is that precision solutions do not just happen. Many of the
challenges faced by the precision vanguard today are sea anchors lingering
from past eras, causing trouble—platforms that slow or horde data, people
satisfied with paychecks from good-enough performance, workflows that
look like Rube Goldberg creations and probably were. It takes savvy
managers to take on those headwinds and find the path forward, frame the
right problem, choose the right tools, putt them in the right hands, organize
and lead teams to the joy of achievement and the power of results—proving
the power of precision, unleashed.
The big challenges for the precision vanguard and its managers are
evidenced in the following two accounts of the precision vanguard in action.
One is the story of an experienced manager at Cisco Systems struggling to
predict who among the firm’s many Fortune 500 customers was the most
ready, willing, and able to buy its products next—even without direct contact
with any of Cisco’s customers. The second is the story of a new manager,
younger by a generation or more than senior managers at the media firm
Axel Springer, who sees clearly the prospects for applying artificial
intelligence (AI) and machine learning to the field of programmatic
advertising and is ready to lead the firm to its first dip into this soon-to-be-
billion-dollar pond.
Theresa Kushner at Cisco: Building a Precision System to Beat a
Billion-Dollar Benchmark
Theresa Kushner at Cisco Systems had absolutely no idea who would be her
next customer, which was a problem: Kushner was Cisco’s head of strategic
marketing, and it was her job to know. It was 2012, the dawn of the age of
precision. Data were getting big but weren’t yet considered “big data.” The

cloud was a revolution in progress, and mobile devices were in some pockets
but not in everyone’s. From consumer products to computing, poor data
about customer need and sentiment created great gaps between marketing
and product development. Winners spent much time living, working, and
breathing the customer experience on the factory floor or in consumers’
kitchens and bathrooms, earnestly struggling to get a view to customers’
worlds, to get better products and services designed, built, and sold.
Modeling and predicting customer intent was still a crapshoot. The
tools used were timeworn and blunt. Little had changed since the advent of
the spreadsheet and the word processor—and before that, the pen-and-ink
ledger and green eyeshades. “Half the money I spend on advertising is
wasted,” the department store magnate John Wanamaker once said. “The
trouble is I don’t know which half.”
It was especially frustrating for Kushner that 90 percent of all Cisco’s
sales went through third-party resellers. That meant Cisco had almost no
direct access to its end-use customers. The best Kushner could do was to ask
the resellers, “So, how are things going?” Only the gods of data knew where
those numbers came from. This bugged Kushner. She knew that, with the
right data, the right tools, and the right staff, she could easily model who
among the millions of actual and possible Cisco users was ready, willing,
and able to buy. She believed that a simple propensity-to-buy model could
help do that, and, if married to the emerging trove of real-time data revealing
who among the prone to buy was also ready to buy and had budget to buy,
she could focus Cisco’s sales and marketing teams precisely on the highest
prospect leads. “You can go after ten clients and make the same amount of
money as you could if you’re going after a thousand,” she told an audience
of operations researchers.
Against this were the timeworn job designs, mindsets, and workflows
of legacy Cisco. “If marketing exists at all with high-tech companies,”
Kushner later wrote, “it was in support of the sales teams—the hunter-
gatherers of the corporate world. Marketing was relegated to preparing the
ammunition for the warriors, sharpening their axes with the right
presentations, helping to open doors, the equivalent of Stone Age women
who built barriers in canyons so that men could chase game into the ultimate
trap.”
Kushner set out to blaze a trail and “crack the case” for Cisco CEO
John Chambers. Chambers’s strategy was abundantly clear: meet the

customer at the pass with a new technology offering that meets the
customer’s emerging needs—“even before the customer knows about them,”
as fellow CEO Enrique Lores of HP once said. Learn their plans, build to
them, and get there first with the offering. The strategy would drive revenue,
customer satisfaction, and employee bonuses. “When you are able to merge
these two things,” Lores said, “where technology is going, with needs that
our customers still don’t know they have, is when real innovation—magic—
happens.”
As this case unfolds, we will see Theresa Kushner exemplify a number
of key traits of the precision vanguard. She will challenge the status quo that
accepts low performance as the best anyone can do. Unsatisfied with old-
school guesswork and a do-today-pretty-much-what-we-did-yesterday
mindset, Kushner will fuel new high performance with a mix of structured
and unstructured data available as never before, earning it that new name:
Big data.
She will use new tools, techniques, and talents to work around the
limits of the old methods and unleash higher performance. Rather than
bemoan the lack of direct customer contact, Kushner trains her radar (as she
told one audience) on “the great big wide universe, hoping beyond all hope,
that there is some signal from someone out there that says, ‘Yes, I want your
product and I love what you do.’ ”
She will focus on a clear business problem—boost sales by targeting
leads of highest value—the customer, new or old, who is ready, willing, and
able to buy. Those gems will align perfectly with Chambers’s strategy—and
become Kushner’s north star.
She will launch a discovery project that melds all the data into a
coherent whole, ready for probing and insight. Kushner has no answers in
hand—just the right questions—who is ready, willing, and able to buy? She
will focus on building repeatable models that predict those next best
customers.
She will rework her teams to position talent and tools for the critical
tasks at hand, from engineering the data to building the models and gaining
the insight. That takes collaboration across the boundaries of disciplines and
units, including marketing and sales.
She will focus on delivering end-to-end on the value of precision, never
stopping until her data lead to new sales that Cisco would never have
otherwise had. It’s not enough to get the math right—that’s just the start. The

math must be converted to new sales. That’s the test of Kushner’s precision
system in action and its key metric. At Cisco’s scale, it will need to be in the
billions of dollars.
She is humble yet optimistic. Even not knowing the answers, Kushner is
confident about her process and her path, trusting in both science and
intuition that she can deliver on the promise.
So armed, Kushner set out to discover and predict for Chambers who
among all current and potential Cisco users would soon be ready, willing and
able to buy the newest products Cisco had on the drawing board. She already
had billions of bytes of customer data coming from all sorts of places—
digital traces of visits to chat rooms, help desks, industry surveys and
conferences, the Cisco website, blog and social media posts, support
listening centers, specific industry watering holes, and user comments. Some
of the data was soft and qualitative, some hard and structured in spreadsheet
columns.
About 14 million people visited the Cisco website each month.
Scanning the network addresses of the visitors, Kushner’s team could tell
which visitors had just started their conversation with Cisco. Cisco worked
up detailed profiles on some. It reached out by email and telemarketing to a
subset, combined that with archived and purchased business intelligence data
on the firms, and together computed how much of Cisco’s wares each firm
had already bought, how fat their wallets were now, and how much they
would probably spend on product next year.
That all meant they had budget and propensity to buy. But when? Who
among these firms was also ready to buy? The most intriguing data had still
to be built. Kushner’s team scanned social media for chatter, not about Cisco
but about the target firms. What was the whisper on the street about what
Corporation X or Company Z were getting ready to buy, and when? Linking
the hard, structured, propensity-to-buy data of past sales with the soft,
squishy ready-to-buy data of social media produced nine strong sales leads
—all predictably ready, willing, and able to buy now.
None of this came cheap. Kushner would have to prove that the hours
and days her software engineers and data scientists spent on data preparation
and model building was worth every penny. By Kushner’s account, as much
as 80 percent of their time had been spent cleaning the data, ascribing it to
particular firms, and building and testing the models. All the preparation

work in the world delivered nothing of value to Chambers. Only new sales
would do that.
Kushner offered the nine strong sales leads to Marketing. “Not
interested,” came the reply. Amazing—after all that! It turns out that the
Marketing team’s bonuses were based on activity levels, not results. Kushner
was promising precision targeting and reduced activity. It would be more
efficient and more effective to use her nine, but Marketing’s incentives were
aligned with being busy, not necessarily being efficient or effective.
She’d send those nine leads to Sales instead. They got it: Sales was
given bonuses on results, so the faster and bigger the results, the better. The
best sales leads would now be targeted by the top sales teams in the world, a
perfect match.
“They thought that was the most miraculous thing they had ever seen,”
Kushner quipped, adding with a touch of humility, “They’re easily swayed, I
must admit.”
There was even more value here that was once hidden and was now in
plain view. Sales learned news about its customers. One was getting ready to
install an online marketing system, completely redoing its entire operation.
Sales had had no idea—they’d had their sales apparatus geared up for
networking. Kushner’s nine opened Sales’s eyes to a different view of that
customer, one they could make moves on.
This was Cisco’s precision strategy in action: Be there when the market
or the customer transitioned, with the precise products and services the
customer was ready to buy. Finally, what Kushner gave Cisco was precision
that transformed: reusable models that could be continuously improved,
updated, and customized with machine learning—for fourteen technologies,
twenty countries, and every Cisco sales team. Soon Cisco was running
75,000 models each quarter answering the question, “Who is ready, willing,
and able to buy now?” By Kushner’s estimate, the models produced a $4.2
billion sales uplift—a figure well in excess of the billion-dollar benchmark
Kushner had discovered mattered most at Cisco. The lift reflected sales that,
but for Kushner’s work, would have eluded Cisco.
Kushner was no newcomer to corporate life. As a seasoned
professional, she ran her precision project and team with deep instincts for
the pace and direction of change that she could mobilize and that her bosses
would support. Kushner was not hired to head strategic marketing because
she fit the bill of a highly entrepreneurial manager who would invent new

systems and methods and bring in billion-dollar paydays for Cisco. Yet here
she was, with the curiosity of a detective and the methods of a scientist,
dauntless as an explorer, and leading like a quarterback. As is often the case
with the precision vanguard, she invented her own position as the
opportunity broke for her and exactly as she would have it.
Above all, as a seasoned manager, Kushner was guided by Chambers’s
strategy as her north star. She trained a laserlike focus on the prize: those
very few customers, lurking like needles in a haystack, who were prone to
buy, who budgeted for it, and who were ready to buy. For Kushner, that
meant drilling the data for signals of propensity, budget wherewithal, and
intent, and connecting all those dots and more to see if they predicted
readiness. Then test, fix, retest, and prove they did, and repeat until nine
emerged.
This was definitely a team sport—with position players highly expert in
engineering, analysis, data science, marketing, and business running the
plays Kushner called, no doubt with very good advice on the field and from
the sidelines. But it was her call and her score. Notice that this work crossed
boundaries; Kushner had to collaborate with many units and managers from
across Cisco, few of whom were her direct reports. In fact, Cisco was
famously struggling at the time with a wild experiment in creating a highly
matrixed organization. With all the conflict and the confusion, it’s a wonder
she prevailed.
Remember, too, that one last-mile challenge nearly collapsed the effort.
When it came to the essential task of converting Kushner’s nine leads into
business value, delivering on the promise, Marketing balked. It was people,
wrongly incentivized, who nearly brought the project to its knees. But people
also made it happen in the end. Kushner pivoted smartly, pitching her
findings in the currency the Sales department valued—fewer calls, high-
probability hits. It paid handsomely for Sales to buy what Kushner was
selling.
Kushner’s work was the essence of precision strategy in action. She
used forethought and planning; clarity of purpose; great data across multiple
platforms; the right charter and authorization; and a disciplined team made
up of the right people, asking, probing, modeling, and proving. In the end,
she stuck to the big plan while shifting her tactics as her circumstances
required to sell the win, locking in the powerful incentives for Sales and

sidestepping the blowback from Marketing. It took all that to convert some
big data out there into operations of astounding value.
Maddy Want and the Advent of Programmatic Advertising at Axel
Springer
Today’s tools of AI and machine learning open new vistas, invite new
challenges—and doubts—and offer new wins for the precision vanguard,
often on an astounding scale. Axel Springer’s journey to a powerhouse of
AI-driven programmatic advertising takes us to Berlin in 2015, where the
21st century was poised to deliver a revenue stream to the European
publishing giant that it could barely have conceived. Change would arrive
via a partnership with Samsung, the largest producer of mobile phones in the
world, and a venturesome, courageous twenty-five-year-old product manager
who saw something no one else on either side of the deal did: the value of
new technologies for mass, precision personalization.
The deal was set. Axel Springer agreed to make an app for Samsung
that would be the preinstalled European news app on Samsung’s new S7
flagship mobile phone. It had always been the agreement that Samsung
would not pay for the app, but Axel was free to monetize it. That meant ads.
And that, it turned out, was a tremendous amount of money.
The app would be named upday, and the task of developing it fell to
Madeleine (“Maddy”) Want, one of the coauthors of this book. Want was
product manager for the Axel Springer engineering team responsible for ads.
Their task was to design and build the user interface for showing the user
premium ads between articles and the software engine that would place
them. Axel Springer certainly had a stable of premium clients ready to
purchase ad space on the phone—the BMWs, Mercedes, and Audis of the
world. Those advertisers and the Samsung client were the totality of what
Axel cared about.
What no one saw was that, because of the scale of the S7 phone rollout
(10 million new users in the first thirty days), the opportunities for ad
placements on upday would quickly dwarf Axel Springer’s premium clients’
appetite for buying ad space. Want’s back-of-the-envelope calculation
showed 200 million daily chances to show an ad. The premium ads would
take 5 percent of those, at best.

“We had a surplus of inventory of ad placements so massive that no
manual process could fill it,” she remembers. “It was all very Mad Men.
Digital was just a new place to publish the old-school ad deals the sales guys
made with their premium clients.” With no robust strategy to monetize the
app, Want knew the lost opportunities would soon pile up.
With little permission asked but meeting no objection, Want and her
team brainstormed a precision strategy for programmatic advertising built on
a software engine that would sell the surplus ad space via automated high-
speed auction, then push ads to the phones, targeted precisely to users who
might like the ads best. The more users clicked through ads, the better
machine learning could make the targeting even smarter, increasing click-
throughs and raising upday’s fees and revenue. That was the Jim Collins
“flywheel effect” in action—the same one, in principle, that powered the
monster platforms of digital natives Amazon and Netflix, but adapted by a
talented product manager and product team to the emerging platform of an
old-school media business making its first moves into the precision world.
Want had enough experience to make these moves. “Since I was
already building the user interface and the engine,” she said, “stretching to
incorporate programmatic was still in my court.” But smart as it was and
feasible as Want knew it to be, this was no done deal. She would need to
pitch the executive staff for authorization, staff, and budget. Being a twenty-
five-year old Australian woman in a German organization of “tall men in
gray suits,” Want knew she’d need a bigger, badder voice with her at the
table.
Want briefed the vision and plan to upday’s head of sales, a direct
report to the CEO. They framed their proposal to the executive team as all-
gain, no-threat. “Your premium placements get first preference, and we fill
the rest,” they promised. The Mad Men in sales would cheerily carry on,
making commissions the old-fashioned way, while Want’s app would pull in
millions more in per-click revenues.
With the project getting the green light, Want and her team went to
work. Scoping the engine build, Want knew she’d need engineers. “This was
definitely in-house work,” Want says. “You don’t want to outsource a
proprietary moneymaker that is core to your business. And I knew enough to
know that what we were building is not super-complicated and can be done
incrementally. You can get a minimum viable product out there quickly and
build on it;”

First stop was the CTO’s office for engineers. Two volunteered, looking
to pick up some new experience. Other experts chipped in; data scientists
and product managers in the adjoining cubicles were already personalizing
news stories. “I was there for the ads,” Want recalls, “but they already knew
how to target. They were a godsend.”
Want’s team then launched a two-step attack. First, they built, tested,
and proved the ad placement system on the phones, using pure and simple
sales automation with no personalized targeting. They used a commercially
available engine to run the automated high-speed auctions and to place the
ads. A few weeks in, they tested and proved the engine’s integration. All
systems were go for the proof of concept.
But the second step was the crucial one: adding intelligence to the ad
placement. One simple rule guided the engine: If the customer clicked on a
news story in a particular category like football and there was an ad
available for football, the app would show the football ad before any other.
Click, bang: that did it. That was personalization, and that worked.
Even with the most rudimentary targeting, the number of click-throughs
started rising. Want strolled to the head of sales’ office. She’d already seen
the data for herself.
“Is this doing what I think it’s doing?” Maddy recalls her asking. “I was
in the happy position of being able to say, ‘Unbelievably, yes!’ ”
Revenue from programmatic advertising at Axel Springer soon
overtook the Mad Men’s premium placements, growing 20 percent month
after month. Want’s team continued to roll out upgrades, fine-tuning the
system, chasing higher and higher click rates, and providing a more
satisfying user experience and growing revenue. Precision programmatic
advertising is now the primary revenue stream for upday, and it is now the
single largest ad inventory supplier in Europe, with a reach of 25 million
monthly users across thirty-four countries. Axel Springer’s partnership with
Samsung has expanded to new device types and new marketplaces.
As for Maddy Want, she moved on to Amazon, taking on product
management for the data team at the Audible audio book publisher—a team
that was triple the size of the one at Axel Springer and with exponentially
greater reach. In 2021 Want was named Vice President, Data at Fanatics
Gaming and Betting. “I got what I earned,” she now muses. “But I had to go
get it myself.” Addressing her challenge with humility for what she did not
know, eager to learn and acknowledging her gaps, and equipped with her

energy and vision, Want motivated and mobilized the professional resources
she needed at each step of the way, engaging senior management
incrementally, at the right time and place; getting people above and beyond
her pay grade to do things with her and for her; and supplying her with
talent, buffer, and cover. In the end, she and her team enjoyed a well-earned
victory lap.
“The truth is marketing is being marginalized today,” Theresa Kushner
later wrote. “Gone are the days of Mad Men and large advertising budgets.
Welcome instead to the world of messaging, microsegments, and metrics.
We no longer wonder which half of our advertising budget is working; we
wonder instead if our messaging is hitting the right number of prospects with
the right content at the right time. These capabilities can come from
anywhere within the organization, and do.”
The Lessons of the Precision Vanguard
What lessons can managers take away from these examples of the precision
vanguard in action? We discuss a few in this section.
Exploit whatever technology you have—but seek out promising new
precision systems when you can. Theresa Kushner faced a cumbersome
process of data preparation and crunch. She prevailed, but her overhead just
to make the data ready for analysis was a time and money sink. Maddy Want
had more powerful tools available to help, especially in off-the-shelf
software that could drive the new high-speed auctions. That gave her new
capacity fast.
Use corporate strategy as your beacon, and partnerships for your
power. It’s quite likely that in any formal statement of corporate strategy,
there is nary a mention of “precision.” Nonetheless, you can mine corporate
strategy to put a precision initiative squarely in the high beams. Kushner
drew power for her project from its clear alignment with Cisco’s strategy to
offer new technology that met customers’ emerging needs. Want’s project
was a radical departure from established Mad Men practice: by forming
powerful partnerships, Want made common cause with a senior member of
the firm—and then with her peers. Each contributed uniquely, with her
senior partner navigating the boardroom issues while she managed the nuts
and bolts from the middle. Together they brought Axel Springer forward to
its future.

Turn the world transparent. Precision is impossible without data and
platforms—and then science and art to reveal the essential truths of the
world. In 2012, about 80 percent of the Kushner team’s time was spent
readying the data—before the team even began to mine the data for its
secrets. The essential work of science followed: understanding the secrets
the data held and the truth of the world by framing, testing, and proving
hypotheses and models that revealed which customers were ready, willing,
and about to buy Cisco’s products.
Want’s work was the same exploration, facing the same demand that
she turn the world transparent and reveal its secrets: who among upday’s
millions of users was ready to buy muffins or jogging shoes or sports cars?
Want let the software do the learning and run the high-speed auctions that
converted all that insight into revenues. In the time-honored business of
chasing leads, new technology transformed the game and the gamer: it made
the play smarter, faster, and cheaper.
Precisely engineer the change you want—test it, prove it, and get your
metrics and measures right. Whether at Cisco or at Axel Springer, a well-
turned business problem framed the changes that Kushner and Want,
respectively, were after: create new customers by prying loose the essential
truth of customer preference from the mass of customers before them, then
capturing those wallets with compelling offers. Using traditional tools and
techniques of statistical analysis, Kushner discovered the nine highest value
targets for sales from within the mass of possible targets, ultimately
generating global sales worth more than $4 billion. Her metric was easy:
money Cisco never had before, guided by Kushner’s models, sealed with
Sales’s skills.
Want also recognized a new tantalizing vision of the possible—not to
find “the nine” but to find the millions from an addressable universe of 200
million ad placements. That became the new metric—new money Axel
never had before, easily captured in high-speed auction. That left the Mad
Men way in the dust and powered the new future.
Be ready to lead across boundaries of units and disciplines. As an
executive, Kushner pulled together a multidisciplinary team of experts from
software engineering, data analysis, data science, and business systems.
These were the early days of precision where such teams were first cutting
their teeth. Soon, the Wants of the world would emerge, providing similar
leadership but tapping new skill sets, energized by new challenges and

incentives. Addressing her challenge with humility and curiosity, eager to
learn and acknowledging her gaps, Want motivated and mobilized
professional resources from across her networks.
Treat the process as a practical, tactical journey of discovery. Both
Kushner and Want planned and positioned their teams for discovery,
learning, and improvement. Kushner took a large problem, tightly framed,
and broke it down in to a series of solvable mini-mysteries rather than trying
to solve the whole problem at once. Generating increasingly refined
hypotheses, Kushner moved steadily forward, persisting until she had the
answers to her question: Who is ready, willing, and able to buy?
Want used the discovery process to expand her base of support, and she
used an incremental test-and-learn strategy to demonstrate value from
programmatic moves. As she progressed, she gained legitimacy and
converted her incremental wins to greater commitment to her team and to the
required technology.
Manage through the headwinds of status quo bias and resistance.
Kushner was resilient in the face of setback, even when, on the last mile, she
ran up against the status quo mindsets and practices embodied in marketing’s
performance incentives. Kushner managed the setback deftly, turning
rejection into success and delivering a win for her team and Cisco.
Want combined an ask-no-permission, do-it-yourself mindset with a
sensitive understanding of the need to maintain support from her corporate
sponsors. When she realized how her project might threaten the Mad Men’s
premium ad business, she designed the programmatic advertising workflow
to leave their revenues and relationships untouched.
Be prepared to find new business opportunities by swimming “out of
your lane.” Just as no one at Cisco hired Kushner to find the path to sales
increases of $4 billion by data science and other means, no one at Axel
Springer asked Want in her role as a product manager to develop
programmatic advertising. The company’s marketing and sales executives
were happy making money the old-fashioned way. Only a few knew
programmatic advertising was coming, Want among them.
Managers need not look to their formal job descriptions for specific
authorization to launch a precision initiative because they likely won’t find it
there. Those who hire corporate managers and write position descriptions
rarely understand what precision systems entail. It’s up to those in the
precision vanguard to take the initiative and pull together the talents and

resources needed to take advantage of the precision opportunities they
perceive. In the process, they’ll likely move beyond the limits of their job
descriptions.
Be comfortable in the several roles of precision leadership. As Kushner
and Want both found, there will be days when precision system managers
must wear the admiral’s bicorn—keeping one eye on the strategic goal and
the other on the work of the fleet, assuring it is fed and resourced, engaged
and happy, moving at the right pace, on time and on target. On other days,
the manager is more like an orchestra leader, using a baton with a light touch
to ensure that all the orchestra members are reading from the same score, on
the same page, and harmonizing their many efforts. Still other days, the
manager can find herself in the role of pit boss, managing the day-to-day
slog with hammer, wrench, and screwdriver, working through the nuts and
bolts of the precision work, keeping people on task and on plan, and filling
in gaps left by vacancy or nonperformance.
    ✳✳✳
Here are two final takeaways from this chapter. First, if you are an executive
leading your organization on its first steps toward precision, your challenge
is to energize and sustain the precision vanguard, unleashing the change they
represent. Understanding what motivates them and how they operate is an
essential first step. Use this understanding to encourage their dreams and
passions while keeping them focused on the big goals set by corporate
strategy.
Second, if you are a member of the precision vanguard or aspire to be
one, you’ll need the support of one or more executive sponsors who can
bridge the two worlds of the status quo and the future you see. Their job is to
help you make hard, first progress; supply you with sufficient money and
authority to keep going; and help you interpret and manage worlds in
conflict, whether on your team or all around it. Above all, they should help
you build a coalition for precision that engages friends and holds off foes
while you navigate your journey to success. Purpose-built coalitions, Kanter
wrote in 2022, “connect otherwise disparate spheres of activity that bear on
big problems by aligning powerful actors behind a purpose-driven mission.”
We’ll delve even more deeply into how this works in the chapters that
follow.

CHAPTER 6
THE POLITICAL MANAGEMENT OF
PRECISION
 In the cases and examples we have presented in previous chapters, we have
seen managers navigating bureaucracies and networks to bring about change
they want precisely where, when, and how they need it. In each case, it took
an entrepreneurial manager—the hallmark of the precision vanguard—to
navigate the bureaucracy and right the ship. All spotted opportunities for
vast improvements using precision engineering and performance. Each was
passionate to seize the moment. None had any interest in standing still. Each
was positive of a vision of technology making change happen even in the
unlikeliest of places—between strangers on a street in Singapore, on a farm
in Salinas, or at a 160-year-old newspaper in New York. And to do so on an
astonishing scale, at warp speed, and with massive benefit.
And in each we have seen a special kind of entrepreneurial manager—
one who is adept at technical and business matters of precision systems,
certainly—but reliably, as well, with people and politics, one who can
navigate bureaucracies and networks large and small; rally support; develop,
test, and prove the change; and repeat. That’s a manager’s political
intelligence at work. It’s like emotional intelligence, which helps a manager
lead with empathy. Political intelligence helps managers lead with savvy:
being keenly aware of the resources they will need, the deals they must
make, the buttons they can push to get them, the bargains they can make to
get what they need.
In this chapter, we’ll consider these political practices that the would-be
builder of a precision organization must master if they hope to get the job

done.
The Map and the Compass
As you’ve already begun to see, building a precision system is profoundly
cross-boundary and cross-discipline, touching interests far and wide,
gathering support but sparking opposition as well. The politically savvy
manager starts her journey to precision with a map of the terrain ahead. It
might be a mental image, a back-of-the-envelope drawing, or the printout of
a planning tool. She sees a path marked by the milestone events coming up
—“business problem framed,” for example, then “team built,” “data
gathered,” and beyond.
The savvy manager also has in her mind’s eye or on paper the image of
a bureaucratic compass. Her compass includes everyone who might help or
hinder her moves forward. To the “north” she places her bosses;
subordinates to the “south,” colleagues to the “west;” external supporters
and providers to the “east.” Each controls or influences some essential
resource that the manager may need to start up or stay alive—people,
budgets, authorizations, access to data and platforms, and the like.
Map and compass in hand, the manager will soon forge alliances,
negotiate deals, pitch prospects, make promises—and deliver. Her compass
will begin to look less like a four-pointed star and more like a network map
—because a network of supporters is exactly what she will have built and
what she will need to crack the status quo. That network is crucial.
A savvy manager knows that sooner or later she will need help dealing
with a person or matter in her path, blocking her, over whom she has no
formal power or control. That, in essence, is a political problem. The road to
precision is filled with them, requiring that the manager “borrow” someone
else’s power and influence to stay on track, keep on target. She will
negotiate terms and bargain with her ally, trading for whatever her ally
needs, striking the best deal for whatever she needs. It’s no sign of weakness
that she is negotiating and bargaining. Negotiating, bargaining, and
persuading are part of every manager’s job and are tests of a manager’s
political savvy. “Managers are not self-sufficient,” Robert Kaplan wrote.
“They must engage in ‘foreign’ trade to get what they need. They will get
what they want provided they have what their fellow managers need.”

What You Will Be Shopping For
Your tactics to clear the path range from using hard power threats and
coercion to soft power persuasion and attraction to your cause. You will
likely have on your shopping list crucial “asks” for precision—the power
resources you will need to make precision work. These power resources
include the following:
• Political power: An executive sponsor who likes what you promise,
authorizes it, and can champion it to his or her peers confers legitimacy
and authority for the mission, which is essential. His or her task is help
you get a charter or brief that gives you license to move across units,
broker deals for you with other bosses to gather people and data for the
precision job, keep you on target and on track so you don’t drift
perilously away from your brief, and build moats around your operation
and give you cover from attack by stakeholders who may see in your
initiatives mortal threat to their own paydays.
• People power: Team members who bring needed skill sets to the table
include engineers, data analysts, operations researchers, and marketing
teams. End users, both internal and external, will be involved with you
from the start, designing, testing, and proving the system. Colleagues
will contribute time, staff, and their own voice in support. Managerial
authority and influence will be needed for team members over whom
you have no formal power or control.
• Technical power: There are two kinds of technical power. Hard
systems, like platforms and data, are what you will need to work the
precision levers for change. Soft systems, such as insights into formal
and informal workflows and procedures, will let you know where your
system must link to the way people are getting their work done today.
All their routines, workarounds, and handoffs must be either replaced
and disrupted or left untouched.
Bargaining for Support
The savvy manager knows that she is not the only one with a compass and a
plan—practically everyone at any organization has their own compass and, if
they are navigating change, a plan they are bargaining for. In the upcoming

case about Teach to One, for example, principals, teachers, and school
superintendents all have different compasses—and each is bargaining
constantly with their networks to negotiate for assets of power and influence.
That bargaining could include conversations about you and the
precision system you are stewarding. At the highest levels, executives may
be debating whether the organization needs the system you are touting at all
—is there a strategic fit? What problem will it solve? And what problems
will it cause? Midlevel executives may be debating whether and how to fund
or otherwise support you—where will the resources come from? At the
lowest level, technical professionals, legal shops, and human resources may
chime in about the design and details of execution—its legal sufficiency,
costs, and staffing.
Laurence Lynn described these conversations as elements of “games”
played at all levels of an organization and “in the manner of a chess master
who simultaneously engages several opponents.” The lowest-level games,
Lynn wrote, are especially consequential because decisions there “have
profound effects on the costs and effectiveness of [corporate] activity. No
political executive who purports to be concerned about… performance can
afford to remain aloof from low games.”
Among the most consequential of these conversations are those
occurring on value networks, described by Clayton Christensen as the
organization’s web of suppliers and producers whose exchanges create value
for the organization. No one goes about establishing a value network; you
cannot apply to join. They arise spontaneously over time and keep needed
services flowing, steady, and dependable. Efficient and effective value
networks embed the status quo and anchor it in workflows, procedures, job
designs, and infrastructure.
In a value network supporting the provision of computers to schools,
for example, vendors provide hardware; information technology (IT)
departments design and run networks and hire technicians to keep everything
humming; software developers create applications that teachers use; teachers
develop lesson plans and teach from them, earning rewards of status, pay
and other benefits; students head to the colleges of their choice. Although
they cannot see each other, the computer vendor, the teacher, and everyone
in between are locked into their value network by contracts, procurement
rules, training and certifications, all in service to the status quo, all making
change very difficult. Just try shifting a school system from Apple

computers to Dell (or vice versa) to see how the value network built up
around the incumbent systems resists. Everyone knows their roles in a value
network, has tooled up and staffed up to provide it, knows what is expected
of them, how to make their part of the “deal” work, what others need to do,
and what to expect from performance and pay.
Indeed, behavioral scientists have won Nobel Prizes trying to figure out
just how much it takes to pry a beloved technology out of a user’s hands.
People (and firms and agencies) are really attached to what they have, even
if it’s objectively much worse than what’s being offered. A predilection for
the status quo and a mindset against the new go by several names—“risk
aversion” and “status quo bias” among them.
Just to illustrate: if we were to propose to swap out your email system
for, say, collaboration software like Slack or Teams, many corporate users
would (and did) feel the acute sting of loss as they were psychologically
“endowed” with email as a perk of the job, were averse to trying its
substitute, and were therefore biased for the status quo and against the swap.
That’s the endowment effect at work—a potent component of the status quo
bias.
The status quo bias and components like the endowment effect, as
explicated by Richard Thaler, Amos Twersky, Daniel Kahneman, Richard
Zeckhauser, John Gourville, and others, help explain why so many
innovations die in the hands of managers on a mission to crack the status
quo. The preference for what we already use is so strong that Intel CEO
Andy Grove once guesstimated that, to be successful, any new tech product
or service entering the marketplace had to be ten times better than what
consumers were already using. Handheld calculators compared to slide rules
did that handily, for example—and created a huge global industry (you can
still find slide rules as relics of a bygone era on eBay). But electric cars took
forever to get a toehold in the marketplace because they forced car owners to
give up something they felt entitled to and that they were endowed with—
virtually limitless driving range powered by gas stations from coast to coast.
Electric cars couldn’t promise that for a very long time. Even through 2022
shortages of charging stations persisted, with news sites running headlines
like the Wall Street Journal’s “While Electric Vehicles Proliferate, Charging
Stations Lag Behind,” or MotorBiscuit.com’s “Lack of EV Charging Stations
Creates Range Anxiety in the West.”

The status quo bias and the endowment effect can be bad news for, say,
a school superintendent who wants to switch computer vendors for the
district’s classrooms. Her proposed replacement can’t just be a little bit
better—it has to be stellar to stand a chance with users. And she’ll need a
precision vanguard clamoring for it and designing, testing and proving it in
operation.
The difficulties are even greater for revolutionary change, not just in
technology but in the methodology of teaching itself when based on a
different set of principles, different engineering, and different science.
Writing of such “radical innovation,” Rebecca Henderson of the
Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) and Kim B. Clark of Harvard
Business School cautioned that such change “forces established
organizations to ask a new set of questions, to draw on new technical and
commercial skills, and to employ new problem-solving approaches.” As we
will see later in this chapter, it will take great political power and savvy to
navigate such shifts through the thicket of incumbents standing guard at the
gates to the status quo.
Your Best Moves: Clearing the Path to Yes
The political challenges facing the vanguard manager working to innovate a
precision system into an existing value network is considerable. The status
quo is not just an annoyance managers can scoff at. It is an emotional
predisposition of players on every manager’s compass—a bias against
change, embedded in a Maginot Line–like series of fortresses comprising
today’s value networks.
Sooner or later, the manager will need help dealing with a person
standing at the gate or a problem blocking her progress. Helping to
overcome institutional resistance is where executives and sponsors of
precision systems play a huge role. Even so, threats to value networks can
alarm a CEO who is worried about disruptions to a time-tested way of doing
business and concerned to hold support from her compass—whether from
proven high performers among Mad Men, for example, or physicians who
are influential with peers and hospital board members alike. The CEO also
has a compass and could have a serious case of the status quo bias.
Here are some of the specific moves savvy members of the precision
vanguard make to boost their chances of winning support from the top and

from people around their compass:
• They design for user acceptance and minimize resistance. At Axel
Springer, Madeleine (“Maddy”) Want designed in rules for her high-
speed ad-placement auctions that left marketers and their accounts
untouched. This kept them on the bench and out of the fray, leaving
Want free to plunder the wealth of new programmatic advertising.
• They design to eliminate technical complexity from new platforms, as
Blue River Technologies did by embracing the John Deere brand and
making the See and Spray towed array easy to use, thus minimizing the
need for training or for changing work routines. Although it was
complex, it was in essence like any other tractor attachment a farmer
might use.
• They place the new precision system in the flow of existing
procedures and incentives, streamlining them, making their use easer.
At the New York Times, for example, Josh Arak engineered a new
testing platform that created uniform precision metrics and methods
across all products and services. While it shifted control from multiple
owners to a shared platform, testing itself was part of data science and
product management. Arak’s work streamlined it.
• They exploit crisis or urgency and reframe the move to precision as a
rescue line. The Zipline team brought its precision approach to drone
deliveries to one of the world’s most urgent human problems—
providing lifesaving medical supplies to people in remote villages of
Africa. The circumstances enabled them to get permission and buy-in
from people and organizations that might otherwise have been dubious
about such a radical new innovation.
• They work around the “endowed.” Marketers at Axel Springer, for
example, felt heavily “endowed” by the relationship networks they built
and the compensation they earned from selling direct ads. Want’s plan
worked around the endowed, leaving those relationship networks
untouched while creating tremendous corporate benefits elsewhere.
• They position the precision initiative squarely in the sweet spot of
corporate strategy. People may disagree about the how but not about
the what. By aligning on the CEO strategy and measured by those same

metrics, the precision manager makes it easier for any CEO to get to
yes in her negotiations with senior executives.
Swapping Value for Value
Anyone from whom you seek help will always ask, “What’s in it for me?”
Your answer must be, “I have something you want.” Above we listed power
resources you may have to bargain for. Here’s what you can bargain with—
the “currencies of exchange” that you can offer in trade for the resource you
need for your journey to precision. Always check against the following in
your value proposition:
• At an organizational level, you can promise new high-impact results
exactly where, when, and how your partners want them, without the
usual downsides—impacts they didn’t intend, costs they didn’t have to
pay. Precision systems can have high investment costs, but they also
boast compelling benefits. That all adds up to compelling returns. And
you have a way to measure this, thus proving your case.
• At a unit level, maybe someone’s already at work on the problem:
there’s a pilot or a project already in progress, but it is different.
Perhaps they have to complete it anyway, and you promise getting it
done faster, better, cheaper, and with precision. Maybe bonuses or
rewards are tied to outcomes you can deliver more easily. If you can
pinpoint high-value sales leads, for example—customers ready and able
to buy—you make life easy for sales teams.
• At an individual level, maybe your project gives engineers
opportunities to work with a new programming language they want
some experience with. Data scientists will like being in the forefront of
solving an important business problem. Team members may relish
working closely with C-level sponsors on a high-profile project. Maybe
as CIO, you want to see what it takes to pull a precision operation
together.
What’s emerging here is an image of the precision vanguard operating
like 
those 
Rosabeth 
Moss 
Kanter 
has 
called 
“corporate
entrepreneurs”—“people who test limits and create new possibilities for
organization action by pushing and directing the innovation process.”

Among their traits, Mitchell Weiss writes, entrepreneurial managers are
“more driven by perception of opportunity than by resources at hand… they
commit to those opportunities very quickly and for short periods… they
stage their commitment with minimal exposure at each stage… they use
resources only episodically, often ‘renting’ instead of buying… they tend to
organize with minimal hierarchy.”
In every such instance, the central task of managers to move the
precision disruption forward takes political intelligence to understand
context and terrain, foresight to eliminate likely conflict, and alliances and
friends to manage resistance. Whether change bumps up against a mindset
only or a value network in open revolt, the threat can quickly become
existential, powerful enough to defeat even a CEO’s best efforts at
innovation—and even take down an administration. That means a manager
seeking to build a precision system where an incumbent system is already
delivering reasonable results will need to muster all of his skills of political
management to prevail.
Joel Rose of Teach to One: Navigating a Complex Value Network
Joel Rose, CEO of Newclassrooms.org, thinks of “education debt” as the
most impactful and debilitating drag on children’s K–12 schooling in the
United States. On his account, the industrial model of schooling—one
teacher, twenty-five kids all learning the same thing at the same time—was
fine when public schools were just starting out as “common schools” in the
nineteenth century and unifying curriculum for wave after wave of
immigrants was important.
“And then we just kept doing it,” Rose says. For decades, school
systems across the country were moving millions of kids in lockstep from
childhood to citizenship. Except schools are not assembly lines, and kids are
not cars. Not every child masters the grade-level curriculum right on time. If
you keep the assembly line of schooling moving, some children fall behind.
They build education debt—deeper and more profound each year. The child
who didn’t master fifth-grade skills isn’t ready for sixth grade when it’s
served up; that child then stumbles through sixth and falls even further
behind in seventh.
Schooling so conceived leaks failing children all along the way,
crushing them, Rose believes. The experience crushes teachers, too. “As a

fifth-grade math teacher,” Rose recalls, “I had a classroom full of kids with
second-grade math skills and eighth-grade math skills. I was given a stack of
fifth-grade books and told, ‘Good luck.’ ” Rose leans forward to make sure
we understand:
This is not about optimizing the existing model. The K–12
teacher’s job is just not designed for success. You can train them,
hold them accountable, give them better materials. But if you just
graft that on top of the same delivery model, schools will continue
to leak failed kids. You actually have to change the delivery
model.
If you were going to invent a school system today, Rose doubts you would
ever design it like this. With his cofounder and CTO Chris Rush, Rose has
pioneered Teach to One, a new model of K–12 education focusing on math
skills. It embodies tailored acceleration, which Rose describes as a method
for “matching precisely the skill that the kid is trying to learn with where she
happens to be in her own progress and giving her just enough stretch that the
kid is challenged—not so much that she feels overwhelmed.”
In effect, Teach to One creates individualized “assembly lines,”
personalized for each student in a classroom, each powered by machine
learning enabled by artificial intelligence (AI) and Teach to One’s models,
which test, prove, and prescribe a unique path forward for each child
following a daily diagnostic. Every day, the student proves her progress. If
she stumbles and falls, she goes back and enhances the learning selectively,
where she is weak. Working through the exercises, she reduces her debt
enough to handle the challenges coming up next. Then, and only then, does
she advance.
It all gels around a series of classroom sessions prescribed and modified
during the day, depending on the last session’s exit quiz. Chris Rush
explains:
There are 300 mathematical skills and concepts that a kid needs to know in order to go from basic
numeracy to college readiness. We know each of those 300 skills, the relationships they have to each
other, and we’re using data to figure out, based on where you’re starting, the path you should take to
get where you need to be.

Let’s say you need to learn trinomials. Our skills map tells us there are four predecessor skills.
What if the kid knows none of the four—does that mean he has to learn all four? What is the best skill
to give the student right now? What is the best set of students to be working together? Who is the best
teacher to work next with the student?
These questions make the system smart. It’s widely assumed that when learning fractions, you
should learn adding fractions first, then subtraction, then multiplication, and dividing, and learn that
all as a unit. But what machine learning helps identify is that, oddly enough, after learning adding
fractions, for some kids, you should break from fractions and do something with place value—then
come back to multiply fractions, and then to subtracting.
These are things that humans don’t naturally assume when they’re trying to design good
progressions. Especially for outlier situations, machine learning identifies more efficient pathways for
kids to move forward.
Teach to One accelerates the rate of growth so that kids who appear stuck
can move faster to catch up and stay there. Teach to One’s models, perfected
by its data scientists over time, now predict with 91 percent confidence
whether, at any given point, a student’s education debt will hold him back or
let him keep up with the crowd, given his level of readiness for the things
they are working on.
“If I’m generally functioning on the fifth-grade level,” Rush explains,
“and I start working on something on the seventh-grade level and I am not
prepped for it, I’m not going to be successful, ever. This is where kids start
getting stuck. Teachers say, ‘Don’t work off grade-level stuff. That’s too
advanced.’ Yes, but it turns out there are select predecessors for seventh-
grade work that if the student masters can get him back up to grade-level
speed.”
That’s where Teach to One’s personalization comes in for the low
performers: work for success on the predecessor and catch up on the debt
that matters. Once a student can keep up, getting to that level will accelerate
his development faster than if he remained outside it. In technical terms, it’s
called the “zone of proximal development”—and that’s where every student
needs to be working.
“It’s like the movie Finding Nemo,” Rush says. “They go on this whole
journey. They only make up so much ground—and then, all of sudden, they
tap the East Australian current, and they just go. We see that happening in
K–12 schooling. And it shows us we can close gaps faster by focusing on
prep and stretch—hitting the essential grade-level predecessors and getting
the kid into the flow where the current can carry him faster.”
Moving stuck kids faster is crucial. One of the unbudging metrics in K–
12 education is grade-level tests that come around every year. Everyone

must be ready: those scores matter. Superintendents’ futures and teachers’
tenure decisions are pegged to them. Parents watch scores, eyes on both
college admissions and the Zillow factor: real estate prices rise and fall
depending on the rankings of local schools. Entire school systems can be
seen as one huge value network locked in on test scores. Everyone knows
their role, their expectations, and their rewards—professional promotions,
job security, college acceptances, and vendor contracts.
But failing kids drag down overall test scores. As teachers in
traditional, industrial-model classrooms push forward through the grade-
level curriculum and teach to the test, the casualties of education debt fall
behind. For Rose and Rush, harnessing the classroom’s East Australian
current in the form of tailored acceleration may be the key to engaging
teachers and helping students at every skill level achieve solid performance
on those all-important tests.
The Imperatives for Managers
Winning acceptance for Teach to One from the complex, entrenched value
network of American education—the network of schoolteachers, principals,
school board members, district superintendents, union leaders, textbook
suppliers, state and local legislators, and others who help to shape and run
K–12 schools in this country—is a huge challenge. Rose and Rush have
been engaged in a ten-year effort to overcome resistance and gain adoptions.
Here are some of the strategies they’ve employed (you’ll recognize some of
them from our earlier discussion of the methods used by politically savvy
members of the precision vanguard):
• Hold the mirror to the organization. Use your data to make
underperformance visible. Teach to One’s value proposition is its
promise to close the education debt for underperforming students. For
Teach to One to get its foot in the door, the very notion of learning loss
and education debt must be understood and accepted. Acknowledgment
that there is a problem starts with transparency of the data.
• Shrink the ask for precision. Reduce how much change in business
routines, workflows, and technology is really necessary to achieve the
gains in precision you are touting. Large changes in behavior—teaching
method, for example—coupled with big changes in technology—the

move to precision systems—can be complex, prone to failure, and
highly resisted. Over the years, Rose and Rush designed technical
complexity out of their precision platform and restructured operations
to require less behavior change. They built easy-to-use apps and other
tools. They shifted from unorthodox thirty-five-minute classes to
standard sixty-minute periods. They simplified workflow with an AI-
enabled scheduling engine that prescribed where every kid should move
next in the school day, with what lesson and with which teacher.
• Customize the offering to context. The Teach to One classroom
sometimes held 100 children at a time in a gymnasium-like setting,
causing resentment among some teachers, parents, and students. In
search of a better way, Teach to One customized their modules so the
customer could configure for small, midsized, or large classrooms.
Rush and Rose were hopeful that customizing the modules, when
combined with personalization for the student, would make their
product a winner.
• Shorten the time to a win. Benefits take time to develop. Managers
may not have much time. Managers can shift their approach to deliver
wins faster. With Teach to One, lower-debt students can be targeted—
for example, younger students who may be one-grade level behind for
whom debt is easier to retire faster.
• Know what counts as a win, and to whom. A tenfold improvement in
cost from a new precision system could be highly appealing to
superintendents and finance administrators. A tenfold improvement in
effectiveness for a target segment of low-performing, “debt-ridden”
students could be highly appealing to students, their parents, and their
teachers. Savvy managers can tailor program design to build support
from these important constituencies.
• Design for the unendowed; customize for the endowed. Seek out
stakeholders unendowed by the status quo for whom the current system
is not working—students, for example, who are already deeply in
education debt and for whom major change could be most welcome.
For the highly endowed—parents and their high-performing students,
all college-bound—Teach to One planned to introduce accelerated
learning of their own so that high-performing students would be ready
for high school–level calculus sooner

• Aim for the decision maker’s sweet spot of strategy. The key was the
test. Teach to One marketed itself as offering to bring all children to
grade-level 
performance 
within 
a 
defined 
period 
of 
time,
accommodating the superintendents’ needs and controlling the pace,
timing, and breadth of the initiative. Having executive support was an
essential to their authority to move.
• Shore up legitimacy of the team as innovators, and of the innovation
as effective. Managers at Teach to One used testimonials, independent
evaluations, and research as they battled for support. With the status
quo often in opposition, they faced a constant challenge to show why a
school system should change to the Teach to One system. No progress
was assured merely by research, but none was even possible without
proof that accelerated learning worked as a system for the organization
and for the parents, students, and teachers.
• Be part of the conversations going on at all three levels of the
“game.” At the highest level, this means the rationale for the program
itself; at the middle levels, how it will be resourced; and at the low
levels, how it will operate. Not all managers have the ability or interest
to play at each level. While each is essential, the low game is especially
so, involving what one analyst has called the “fine-resolution, small
motor process of government” that reflects the concerns of teachers and
principals, as well as administrators in procurement, personnel, and
budget.
• Be prepared to bargain for what you need. “Managers are not self-
sufficient,” Kaplan wrote. “They must engage in ‘foreign’ trade to get
what they need.” Managers at Teach to One activated resources across
their networks for political support, financing, and authorizations.
• Diversify away from status quo metrics; loosen their stranglehold on
program shape and design. The current system may operate with a
powerful set of status quo metrics. Standardized test scores are a perfect
example in schools. But precision systems can and must be measured
by so much more. Teach to One can be measured by percentage
reduction in education debt, for example, as measured by multiple
metrics. Managers may prefer to be measured by the existing business
unit metrics of performance, but they should add metrics specific to the
intent and design of the precision system. As an alternative, managers

may seek some “neutral” innovation zone for proving and testing their
systems where they are excused from the status quo metrics.
• Create purpose-built coalitions. Make common cause with those who
share your policy outlook. Who can support valuable investments in
your research and development (R&D)? Who feels a sense of urgency
from an immediate opportunity? Rose and Rush fostered three
coalitions—for example, a policy coalition that helped pave the path to
personalization; a donor coalition to support R&D for data teams; and a
coalition of actual buyers and users of the program, including teachers
as key influencers.
    ✳✳✳
The jury is still out on large-scale uptake and adoption of Teach to One.
Competition has emerged from other providers of accelerated learning
techniques, including the Zearn system. But the evidence is clear: the
COVID-19 pandemic created new education debt for all, new federal funds
became widely available for procurements, and research increasingly
showed that accelerated learning outperforms old-school approaches that
hold back children who are underperforming rather than accelerates them
with precision.
Yet there is no environment in the United States today more politically
volatile than public education. Every dimension of the culture wars—from
critical race theory to vaccine mandates and masks, from sex education to
health, transgender, and LGBTQ issues—plays itself out loudly at meetings
and elections for 15,000 state and local boards of education.
In that environment, third rails abound, frying school superintendents
with their jolts, leaving these leaders among the shortest-serving executives
in public life, easily bounced when a majority on a school board shifts from
election to election. There is no innovation that could not run afoul of
linkage to some broader political strain, no matter how good the idea.
This all puts innovation for precision on the clock, with time always
running out. No one can doubt that moving to grade level fast is a good thing
—everyone can agree on the what. But the how can be highly contentious. It
puts the onus on innovators like Rose and Rush who, in making the great
promise of precision, must concentrate value, deliver fast, activate the
vanguard, move the undecided, engage the unendowed, skip the endowed,

move children into the zone of proximal development, and let the current do
its job.
In this context, building and implementing a successful precision
system is much more than a technical project. It is a deeply human challenge
that requires high levels of managerial savvy, strategic insight,
communication skill, political intelligence—in short, the entire array of
skills that make up political management and leadership for precision.

CHAPTER 7
BOOTSTRAPPING PRECISION
 In making the move to tech-enabled precision, no one has all the power
needed to get the job done. It’s the nature of our work and our world today
that risk and opportunities can start halfway around the world and land on
our doorstep fully massed in an hour, in minutes, or even seconds. Whether
chief executive or senior manager, supervisor or team lead, few among us
can go it alone. We often need to go “out of our lane,” even out of our
immediate network, and get help.
Our networked world is replete with these moments. Volatile weather
makes mincemeat of global airline operations. Cyberattacks take months to
develop—but they are delivered in seconds. Terrorists poke their heads up in
strange places but fade away just as quickly into the surrounding city.
On such days, you are called to action, and you must make fast pivots
away from disaster or toward rising opportunity, from a future you don’t
want toward goodness—even greatness—and create change you do want.
Maybe you don’t have the full complement of resources you’d assemble if
you had a year to think things through and pursue them, but it’s on you to
block the threat or seize the day. The status quo will not hold. Nothing offers
managers greater impact at lower cost to deal with today’s opportunities and
crises than precision systems. Well-designed, well-developed, and well-
managed precision systems let managers find the needle in the haystack of
threat and extract it, bend it to their will, and change the path of history.
It’s a conundrum of the networked world: in the face of light-speed
challenge and threat, precision is best, but neither nature nor markets wait
for us to figure out the full-bore collaboration of technology, people, and

power we’d like, confident we could crush any threat, any opportunity
thrown our way, with precision. The great skill of the precision vanguard
manager comes from cobbling together the precision solution that works
even in that most precarious moment. She draws some platforms and data
from here; some people and expertise from there; duct-tapes them together
in good-enough bonds, weak and strong ties alike; combining resources on
loan, from executive attention and to physical, political, and logical assets,
all shared, all waning or claimed back as soon as the crisis seems to pass.
In this chapter, we’ll look at the essential elements of the art of
bootstrapping the precision solution:
• Bootstrapping a coalition for precision, forging the network of
potential allies you need right now, each ally having something to offer
a precision system that will run at its most basic.
• Bootstrapping the operational capacity for precision, which means
piecing together people, platforms, and data into a working operation
that proves the concept, the point, and your leadership for the move to
scale ahead.
• Bootstrapping authority and legitimacy for precision, which is about
claiming the stature and standing you need to make your precision-
oriented moves, even when nothing in your title or your job description
says you can.
Jason Bay and Contact Tracing in Singapore: Bootstrapping a Precision
Response to COVID-19
In the winter of 2020, COVID-19 was just a whisper in Wuhan, China. It
would soon pummel the world. In Singapore, China’s island-nation neighbor
to the south, leadership recognized the early warning signs of this new
plague. Having battled multiple epidemics in the past, Singapore knew the
drill: everything had to be done right to stop it, and fast—especially in the
holiday season, with thousands of citizens traveling between China and
Singapore for business and leisure, each and every one a potential carrier.
By mid-January, as Washington, Moscow, and London dozed,
Singapore was rolling. Jason Bay, a senior executive in Singapore’s “smart
nation” digital governance initiative, saw an opening he wanted to take.

Trained as an engineer, Bay felt certain that the smartphone could be a
powerful tool that was now ready for its place in Singapore’s pandemic-
fighting toolchest.
In many ways, Singapore was the perfect place to test Bay’s hunch. It is
a digitally savvy nation—80 percent smartphone-enabled, accustomed to
bold talk of digital solutions. In surveys, 75 percent of Singaporeans said
that they trusted the government to handle their data. Just as critically,
Singapore had a battle-tested contact-tracing team ready to track down all
the contacts of anyone diagnosed with COVID—moving fast to nip the
spread in the bud.
Contact tracing was recognized globally as an essential tool for
effective epidemic response. But Bay knew that, if COVID-19 were truly to
break as a pandemic, there was no way even Singapore’s vaunted contact-
tracing team could handle it. He’d heard Singaporean health colleagues
complain about how manual, tedious, time-intensive, and labor-intensive
contact tracing was—and that was with a mere thirty cases of Middle East
respiratory syndrome (MERS) in 2015. How would they deal with hundreds
of thousands of cases of COVID-19?
If the contact-tracing process could be made easier, faster, and more
precise, there was a chance that Singapore could slow the spread of COVID-
19 dramatically. Years earlier, Bay had toyed with the idea of a smartphone-
enabled contact-tracing app—but at the time, he was lower down in the
bureaucracy, the smartphone technology was not yet ripe nor in everyone’s
pocket, and the last contagion had been contained. Now that same vision of
contact tracing would come racing back, this time centered on a smartphone
app.
The idea was this: Bay’s engineering team would build the app. They
would call it TraceTogether. Anyone could download it. With the app
loaded, smartphones in a crowd would continuously ping each other, leaving
a coded, digital log entry on any phone they passed saying, in effect, “I was
here.” If and when an app user fell ill, he would notify the health authorities;
the health authorities would notify anyone whose phone had left its digital
footprint on the sick person’s phone when they had brushed by each other
and advise them to get tested.
The possibility for transformation here was obvious. If mobile app
adoptions went as Bay hoped, every instance of an infected person passing
another would be picked up by the Bluetooth phone-to-phone pinging. That

would create a large new pool of traceable citizens who could be contacted if
one became ill. Only a big data-powered, precision system enabled by
artificial intelligence (AI) could work against a total actual universe of
possibilities like that. In similar fashion, at the Democratic National
Committee (DNC), Nellwyn Thomas worked with data embracing the entire
universe of possible Biden voters; at Blue River, Lee Redden worked with
the entire universe of plants in a field.
There were big ifs to consider. Would everyone download the app?
Would the Bluetooth-powered ping-a-phone system, fully automated, work?
Would in fact Bay’s system detect every instance of an infected person
passing another? Would health authorities be able to keep up with the load—
and could privacy be ensured to build trust in the system right away? The
idea was simple to state but complicated to carry out. Bay contemplated the
requirements, and they were staggering:
• Precision. Exactitude was mission critical. If the app cast its tracing
net too wide, the notifications would become constant, meaningless,
and then ignored. Cast the net too narrowly, and lives would be
needlessly lost—pings that should have been made would not be. To hit
the sweet spot, Bay’s team would leverage Bluetooth—which had an
active pinging range of about thirty feet. With Bluetooth always on,
User A’s smartphone app would ping User B’s smartphone only if they
came within thirty feet of one another. That “handshake” would take
less than a second, and a log of all these pings would be kept on each
phone. If days later, User B contracted COVID-19, anyone who had
brushed by User B and was logged in would be notified to seek care.
• Multiplicity. Bay’s contact-tracing method would have to
complement, not replace, the existing manual system—adding capacity,
not substituting for it. If 60 to 70 percent of smartphone users could be
convinced to download the app, then millions of Singaporeans would
become contact points for the system as the pandemic burst on the
nation. Bay and his team would have to build the app for all devices
and operating systems, including Google’s Android, Apple’s iPhone,
and any other manufacturer’s smartphone.
• Lightness: Bay’s proposed app was, essentially, a software solution to
a real-world, real-life problem. There would be no huge infrastructure
build. No training required. Those 80 percent of Singaporeans with

smartphones had all the gear needed. Each would download the app and
start using it immediately. Everyone in the all-digital nation of
Singapore would know how to do this.
• Privacy: Privacy loomed large as an issue to be addressed.
TraceTogether could be considered just a “back door” for government
to track users from one location to the next. Safeguards would have to
be built into the software design right from the start such that
TraceTogether could reveal providing the proximity of two users to each
other without giving away their location; rules for records retention of
the proximity logs, specifying who would keep them and for how long;
and governance of the whole enterprise. Trust was essential and would
flow from these decisions.
• Quickness. The pandemic was happening right now. Bay needed to
field something fast to beat it. Once in the field, the app would need to
shorten times to notification. That in turn would take massive
coordination with Singaporean hospitals lest the addition of thousands
of new cases overwhelm the existing procedures, infrastructure, and
workflows.
• Consistency. The app would have to work each time. It could not
buckle under the load, work sometimes but not always, or work
differently for some people than others. Consistency would build the
trust essential for widespread adoption.
These were big asks. Taking stock, Bay knew the problem to address,
his goal, and the broad outlines of a plan, but he could not see all the way
through to the end or be sure of the path ahead. Time was of the essence.
The “north, east, south, and west” of his bureaucratic compass teamed with
individuals and groups whose powers, skills, and connections made them
either must-haves for the work ahead, nice-to-haves, or never-haves. Sooner
rather than later, Bay knew he would need help—he would have to summon
his network to action—call a coalition for precision contact tracing into
existence. But for now, his vision and plan were sound. His authority and
legitimacy for action were well within his charter. The capacity for building
the app surely lay within his organization or close by. Cobbled together, Bay
had enough to power up and jump into the fray.
On January 24, Bay texted a friend in the Ministry of Health, which
owned the official Singapore response to COVID-19. “So, here’s the idea.

What if…” and Bay sketched the use case for smartphone-enabled contact
tracing. “In your view, is this doable, technically?”
“Yes,” came the reply from Bay’s friend.
“Is anyone at the Ministry of Health already working on a contact-
tracing app?”
“Not that I know of,” came the reply. “But let me check.”
This initial testing of the waters was critical to Bay’s hopes. By sending
his idea up the flagpole, Bay ensured that if someone else was already at
work on it or if the concept raised a problem for someone powerful, he
would hear about it quickly. Bay did all this in a single flurry of text
messages—a fast, well-targeted, and impactful step, the first on the road to
building a coalition for precision contact tracing.
Bay now began using his well-developed networking skills. To the
north, Bay brought his bosses into the loop. At this early date, he kept his
messaging light, couching his plans with Ping Soon Kok, GovTech’s chief
executive, as just, “Something we’re toying around with,” and getting,
“Sounds interesting, keep me informed” kind of reply. He got the same kind
of noncommittal answer from GovTech’s chairman Chee Khern Ng. This
was enough of a green light for Bay to get going. He would keep these
overseers in the loop, making sure they were never surprised by what he was
doing.
To his south, Bay would source his technical team initially from a
trusted inner circle of collaborators, then expand. His first recruit was Joel
Kek, a software engineer on his staff, to whom he would turn repeatedly
over the coming months. Via his Slack channel, Bay invited other interested
software engineers from his team to participate. He held out the promise of
taking deep dives into the workings of Bluetooth, which would be novel and
interesting to many.
“I had a few people come forward over the next couple of days to hack
away on Android and iOS,” Bay recalls. “They created a prototype app on
the iOS device over that long holiday weekend.” This fast and light proof of
concept was good enough to test the idea and send it up the flagpole.
To his west, Bay further reduced the chances for conflict by sharing his
moves with the internal units with whom he would need to collaborate. He
pinged the Defense Science and Technology Agency and the information
technology (IT) arm of the Ministry of Health. After confirming with these
units that nobody else was doing anything close to what he was suggesting,

he would ask, “Then let’s talk about what you need from the system.” He
consulted with staff from Singapore’s Personal Data Protection Commission,
who would help him frame the privacy architecture for the app. To learn how
to integrate his app into the existing contact tracing workflow while adding
more value, members of Bay’s team sat with Singapore’s contact tracing
teams and observed their process.
Knowing he would need marketing to boost app downloads, Bay
partnered with the Ministry of Culture, Community, and Youth. They could
build grassroots and nongovernmental organization (NGO) support and
reach out to the entire population using languages that included Tamil,
Bengali, and Burmese. And he partnered with the Ministry of Health for
marketing on WhatsApp (used by 86 percent of Singapore’s internet users)
and in print, online, and broadcast news. To broaden his base of support
further, Bay secured the endorsement of Singapore’s foreign minister, who
announced that the TraceTogether app—which by now had been given its
name officially—would be open-sourced and available to the international
community. “Together, we can make the world safer for everyone,” was the
message.
Finally, to his east, Bay surveyed potential end users for feedback on
the user interface, modifying his plans as needed. He leveraged his
Singapore government contacts to engage Apple and Google for permission
to post the app to their app stores. (This was denied by Apple at first because
the TraceTogether app ran continuously in the background, drained batteries,
and violated Apple’s terms of service. Eventually, however, Apple relented.)
Bay connected with hardware engineers from external institutions like
Nanyang Polytechnic, who provided him with much-needed testing capacity
in specialized environments. He consulted university researchers via his own
network at Stanford who had recently published their own Bluetooth
experiments to ask about any pitfalls they had encountered and any code
snippets they had found especially useful. And he engaged data protection
advocates for their views, further modifying his plans based on their input.
On March 20, 2020, just eight weeks after the launch of the project,
Singapore rolled out the TraceTogether app. In its first days, nearly 1 million
Singaporeans downloaded it—16 percent of the target group. Ultimately, 95
percent of Singaporeans signed on to TraceTogether, but only after Bay
further adapted by providing older Singaporeans and those who did not want

the app on their phones with a smaller Bluetooth-enabled token that would
do the same work of pinging when close.
Bay had done it. He had swiftly assembled a coalition for precision,
calling it into existence, mobilized it around his vision and goal, boosted his
operational capacity as required, gained the authority and political support
he needed, and delivered the TraceTogether precision app just as planned—
right where Singapore needed it to be.
The Bureaucratic Compass and the Strategic Triangle
Everything about bootstrapping a precision solution is light, fast, and
impactful—and must be. Even if it doesn’t completely solve a problem, the
cobbled-together solution can and should still go against a problem and
count as a win: light enough to get the job done fast and big enough to make
a difference. The fix—call it a hack—buys you time to breathe, watch the
solution in action, and fix it to last. For now, it blocks a threat or grabs an
opportunity, gets you a clearer view of the terrain ahead, and proves your
approach. For the day, and maybe even forever, it works, works, and works
—for the problem, the customer or citizen, and the team.
Bay’s move forward had two universal components that managers find
quite helpful in navigating the shoals of precision innovations. The first—his
bureaucratic compass—gave Bay a way to visualize quickly the many actors
and forces in his world, some to avoid, many to call on. The second—his
strategic triangle—gave Bay a three-pronged test of readiness to act that he
could use at the outset and at various milestones on the TraceTogether
journey.
Introduced by Mark H. Moore, the concept of the strategic triangle
includes three key components: a vision of value, operational capacity, and
authority and legitimacy. All three are essential to the manager undertaking a
big new initiative. Let’s consider them one by one.
1. Did Bay have a vision of value around which he could mobilize
support for his change? Bay’s vision of value was simple: detect more cases
faster, better, cheaper than a manual system could at the scale needed,
ensuring privacy all the while. It contained a moral imperative, essential for
coalition building, what Kanter calls “a significant, inspiring mission [that]
attracts followers”—protect the nation. His hypothesis was that early

discovery, matched with early intervention, could bring the pandemic to a
halt. His key assumptions were that the technologists could build it, the
public would use it, politicians would support it, and the health system could
carry the load.
Above all, Bay’s vision of value did not entail replacing the manual
system but rather complementing it, extending the range and reach of
Singapore’s total contact-tracing effort. The two systems, working together,
would yield greater results when combined than either system could alone.
This was classic precision system placing: fill gaps left by existing
efforts, doing it at least as accurately, perhaps at much higher volume, faster,
and at lower total cost. Run the precision system concurrently with status
quo systems rather than replace them, at least to start. In fact, leverage the
existing system for the capacities that Bay needed but could not provide,
such as making the actual contacts when notified of an ill user, thus yielding
improved overall performance.
2. Did Bay have the operational capacity to turn vision into action,
deliver on the promise of value, quiet naysayers and satisfy his supporters
with the results? The issue of operational capacity for precision systems
always turns on whether a manager has the right data, software, and
hardware; the right analysts, product managers and software engineers to
design and develop the tools she wants; and the right users positioned to
deliver value on the “last mile” of service. Ultimately, for Bay, the test will
be whether he can discover and identify the entire universe of possibilities—
then touch each with his solution in time, check its ultimate impact, then fix
to perfection. Does he have people with the skills to capture and analyze the
data, and to design and test the proof of concept? His precision “game”
depended on his answers to these questions.
3. Did Bay have the authority and legitimacy he needed to move on the
problem? Bay’s direct line of reports included 500 or so engineers. They
knew the mobile world well and, if it came to it, could hammer out solutions
and test and prove them fast. Clearly, from a technical viewpoint,
TraceTogether was in Bay’s wheelhouse. Although Bay could check that
box, he still needed license to move and support to operate. His charter
would come from his bosses, who would give him the license to find and
deliver a solution. Support would come from his east and west compass
points—his colleagues, and external collaborators. He needed to make them
all believers—or at least to suspend their doubts. Move too fast, and he’d

surely outrun the headlights of his support. Run too slow and it would all be
too late. First steps—quickness, managed with care—would be decisive. The
need for some, more modest initial claims and proofs was paramount, and
Bay delivered in the early proof of concept.
Neither the bureaucratic compass nor the strategic triangle are set in
stone. They are dynamic, just as the world around is, and require checking,
and maybe resetting, as you move forward with precision innovation. Your
progress changes your terrain. As Bay did, you’ll reassess your context.
Should you update your value proposition to engage new support and tune
up product or service designs? Have new prospective winners and losers
emerged whom you must engage? Is the problem still “live” and worthy?
Are staff members, platforms, and funds right for the next stage of work? Do
you have the authorities you need and legitimacy to make the next best
moves?
At the same time, you’ll need to communicate your progress around
your bureaucratic compass—to your bosses, your teams, your colleagues,
and your external collaborators. Each needs to hear different messages. Your
team needs to understand how their contribution matters to the big picture
and they are clear what they need to do next. Your bosses need to hear that
their support is on track for results and any tremors of discontent can be
managed. Your colleagues need to know that you are winning still and that
they should stand ready to assist or, if need be, stay on the bench and out of
your way. Your external collaborators need to know you are on track and
delivering, and that you’ll soon be ready with a next round of asks. Your
goal throughout is to keep your friends engaged, your opposition back on its
heels, and your next round of support teed up. All of it should be guided by
your strategic triangle. Keep that in your back pocket and top of mind.
Bootstrapping Predator, the Precision Drone
It was August 20, 1998, thirteen days after al-Qaeda had destroyed U.S.
embassies in Nairobi and Dar es Salaam. By all rights, Osama bin Laden, the
organization’s already notorious leader, should have been a dead man. He’d
apparently been spotted by the Central Intelligence Agency’s (CIA)
overhead drones at an al-Qaeda encampment in Khost, Afghanistan. Hours
later, on President Bill Clinton’s order, four U.S. Navy ships waiting in the
Arabian Sea off Pakistan sent sixty-six Tomahawk cruise missiles screaming

into Afghanistan to obliterate the encampment. But bin Laden wasn’t there.
Perhaps he’d been alerted and fled, or perhaps he’d never been there at all.
In the aftermath, no one was quite sure.
That near miss, just one of many, would cost the United States and the
world dearly. For the next fourteen years, bin Laden wreaked global havoc,
attacking the USS Cole in Yemen; Khobar Towers in Riyadh; targets in
Mombasa, Bali, Casablanca, and Istanbul; the Jakarta Marriott; trains in
Madrid and London; Northwest Flight 253; the Islamabad Marriott; and, of
course, the World Trade Center and the Pentagon in the United States.
Dozens of attacks, thousands dead, followed bin Laden’s escape at Khost.
If there was fault here it lay at least as much in the design of the drone
as in the entire precision system around it. It was 1998, early yet in drone
warfare. The drone that spotted bin Laden was a simple surveillance aircraft,
unarmed, propeller-driven, not much more than a glider powered by an
Austrian racing snowmobile engine and equipped with a fat underbelly
camera ball. It couldn’t shoot, couldn’t target, couldn’t do much of anything
except stay aloft for hours at a time—what was called “persistent stare”–
flying in areas considered too dangerous for piloted aircraft and transmitting
images of the battlespace below.
Fast-forward to March 1999. The U.S. Air Force was now in a shooting
war over Kosovo. The Predator, as the drone had been named, had been
perfected as an intelligence gatherer, but U.S. Air Force General John
Jumper, commander of all forces in Europe, was deeply dissatisfied with its
capabilities as a weapon. The problem was a simple one: just as at Khost,
Predator’s kill chain was broken. The lag between when the drone spotted a
target and the moment when a lethal weapon could be delivered against that
target represented “a big furball of delay, handoff, and decision,” as Jumper
called it. That lag made the Predator ineffective in engaging battlefield
targets that might pop up for mere minutes or even seconds—then vanish.
“The realities in the battlefield made it evident as to what needed to be
done,” Jumper recalls. “Shorten that kill chain. Scrunch the time lines up to
near real-time.” Or else, as some proposed, just leave it in the hanger. Unless
fixed, Predator was unfit for combat.
On March 24, 1999, Lieutenant Colonel Đorđe Aničić, a Serb missile
battery commander who later boasted that no one had told him that the US
F-117 Nighthawk stealth bomber was invisible, shot one out of the sky using
Soviet era surface-to-air missiles (“SAMs”). That pushed American fighters

above the SAMs’ 15,000 foot ceiling. It also drove relentless development of
laser targeting for the Predator. If Predator could “lase” the ground target—
illuminate it so that high-flying fighters could lock their munitions on to it—
that could prove highly effective, and keep the fighters out of SAM range.
Jumper saw possibilities for addressing the “Khost problem.” He lit a
fire under a network of like-minded partisans to get Predator combat-ready.
They included General Mike Ryan, the Air Force chief of staff; Colonel
James G. (“Snake”) Clark, who knew the military bureaucracies well; and
Colonel Bill Grimes, who ran Big Safari, a program that had been doing
rapid prototyping of highly experimental Air Force craft for years.
Big Safari took on the challenge of fixing Predator. Weeks later, the
program shipped a new Predator equipped with an underbelly ball that added
a global positioning system (GPS) and a laser designator to the camera.
Now, when Predator saw a likely target, it could mark the object with its
laser. Overhead jet fighters, high up and out of ground-based missile range,
could lock on the GPS coordinates, launch a strike, and destroy the target.
The sensor was now also the pointer. Days later, a Predator equipped with
the new combination ball lased a Serbian tank for an A-10 Warthog flying
overhead which destroyed it, giving Predator its first “real time” kill.
Seemingly overnight, the war in Kosovo ended. Jumper packed his bags
and returned to the United States and his office as head of U.S. Air Force
Combat Command. That’s where Jumper learned that the new underbelly
balls were being stripped off the Predators. Why? The war was over, the
exigency passed, and this innovation was not part of the original Predator
design—the program of record, in Pentagon jargon. Off they came.
“I didn’t react well to that,” Jumper said. He immediately sought to
revise the program-of-record specifications for Predator and ordered the
balls reinstalled. Predator would continue to be both sensor and pointer.
Round one in the bureaucratic war over drone innovation went to Jumper.
But this was a heavyweight match with a few rounds to go.
In the spring of 2000, the pressure to find and kill bin Laden was
ramping up. Killing bin Laden had become a top priority of the U.S.
counterterrorism operation. But after multiple tries and misses, there was
nothing but frustration to show for it. Jumper sensed opportunity. This could
be the right moment to upgrade Predator even further by redefining its
mission.

“Let’s go the distance,” Jumper told his staff. “We’re going to
weaponize Predator. We’ll put Hellfire missiles on it—the lightest we have
that can still kill an armored vehicle. When Predator finds a high-value
target, we’ll do something about it right then and there. If we can see it, we
can shoot it.”
The Hellfire missiles seemed perfect for the job. They were available in
quantity immediately from the U.S. Army, and they were light, easily
mounted to Predator’s underwing assembly, and low-priced by Pentagon
standards at $485,000 each.
“Putting a weapon on the Predator wasn’t just a good idea,” Jumper
later told author Richard Whittle. “It was a great idea.” But bureaucratic
opposition quickly surfaced.
“The acquisition community took hold of this,” Jumper says. “ ‘Woah!
We’re incorporating weapons? Now, this is a big deal,’ they said. They still
viewed Predator as a disposable sort of almost model airplane. This made it
a lethal warfighting machine.”
It would take an act of Congress to approve such a change, coming off-
cycle between annual appropriation bills. Till then, Air Force lawyers
proscribed any “touch labor” (i.e., hands-on manufacturing activities) aimed
at arming Predator. Jumper worked with his precision coalition to address
the new challenges. The team now included Chief of Staff Mike Ryan; his
vice chief General William Begert, who would manage congressional
approvals; and Richard Clarke, then counterterrorism chief to Bush, who
was hot on bin Laden’s trail and high on Predator. They realized that, before
they could put a fleet of weaponized Predator drones into service, they
would have to tackle several emerging risks—some typical of many
precision systems projects, some unique to the military.
There was regulatory risk. The shift from surveillance tool to weapon
had already run afoul of the Pentagon’s acquisitions procedures. The Big
Safari team took the wings off Predator so they could develop and test the
underwing Hellfire launcher separately. This meant that, technically,
Predator was still not armed. But once Predator was weaponized with a
Hellfire missile, Jumper told us that the “biggest challenge came when the
policy people said that meant Predator had to be defined as a cruise missile,
in violation of the Missile Technology Control Regime. That would mean
renegotiating an existing international treaty that included the Russians. The
idea that a 100-pound missile with a twenty-pound warhead carried on a

nonstealthy platform that flew at seventy miles per hour posed a leap in
missile technology was ridiculous.”
Clarke stepped in. He’d been personally involved in the treaty
negotiations. He interceded with Navy lawyers, pointing out that Predator
was no missile—it carried missiles, but was itself a mere platform designed
for a return to base and reuse. It took months, but the lawyers bought that
argument and released Predator from its hold.
There was budget risk. Who would pay for the project? As in any large
organization, that was a fundamental question that needed an answer.
Jumper’s innovation fell into a bureaucratic no-man’s-land: the intelligence
community was losing a surveillance asset and was not particularly
interested in its kill-chain benefit. The operator community was gaining an
asset but was not really sure what to make of Predator or how to coordinate
with it. Even the Air Force was reluctant; it bought planes, but Predator was
—well—a drone. “Nobody had something like this to deal with before,”
Jumper recalls.
It was ultimately Ryan who ponied up the $3 million needed to keep
Big Safari in the game. To smooth the administrative path, Clark sent letters
to ten members of Congress stating and explaining the intention to transfer
the funds.
There was operating risk. How would the Air Force adapt to a see
it/shoot it, real-time kill chain after years of experience with a slower
process in which the action was parceled out in stages, first to observers and
only later to shooters? And who would be empowered to authorize a drone
attack: the Air Force? The CIA? The president?
The issue made it all the way to the top. President George W. Bush
decided that authorization would be in the hands of the CIA director (then
George Tenet) or his designee, coordinating with the four-star general in of
U.S. Central Command (then Tommy Franks), or his designee. The Big
Safari team built that command structure into the Predator’s software and
procedures.
There was basing risk. Predators needed to be close to the battle zone.
But no country in the region wanted to host American drone “pilots” sitting
at terminals launching missiles from Predators into Muslim Afghanistan. To
solve this dilemma, the Big Safari technical team engineered a revolutionary
split operation that positioned operators in the United States linked by
satellite communication to drones physically based near Afghanistan. With

just a 250-millisecond delay, stateside pilots would be able to fly, see, and
shoot Hellfires from drones over Afghanistan.
Finally, there was new technical risk. Would the weight of the missile
bring down the drone? Could the Hellfire software be modified from the
Army’s design built for helicopters firing missiles at tanks from 2,000 feet to
fit the design of Predator shooting from 15,000 feet? Would Hellfire’s
exhaust shoot the rear-mounted propeller off Predator? If the missile got
hung up on the launch rail, would it cause the Predator to spin out?
Answering those questions and more would normally take elaborate
testing on a giant range. The acquisition bosses told Jumper to expect a
process that would cost $15 million and take several years. Clark suggested
an alternative. The new Predator could be tested by propping it on top of a
hill on a static stand, starting the engine, putting the Hellfire on the wing,
and firing it at a static target. It worked. Just sixty-one days and $3 million
later, Predator was qualified to use the Hellfire.
On October 7, 2001, four weeks after the attack on the World Trade
Center and the Pentagon, U.S. Air Force Captain Scott Swanson sat in a
control room in a complex of containers built in the woods behind the CIA
campus at Langley, Virginia. Swanson had the authorization to fire at a
moving image from a drone over Kandahar on the screen in front of him. A
bare quarter of a second after the pressing of a trigger at Langley, a Predator
missile 6,900 miles away found its first target, thought to be a team of
bodyguards to Mullah Omar, supreme commander of the Taliban.
Over the winter of 2002, a new fleet of Predators would be armed with
makeshift Hellfire tank missiles prepared not just to hunt but to kill. The
sensor had become the shooter, collapsing the kill chain from hours to
minutes and then seconds. Jumper’s dog was finally in the fight.
It had happened through a masterful job of bootstrapping: Predator’s
weaponry, propulsion, authorities, governance, communications, imaging,
positioning systems, talent and budgets had all once been anchored
somewhere else—designed for some other purpose, owned by sometimes
bitter service rivals. Little by little, each had been pried loose by threat or
promise, modified and repurposed, and cobbled together in Predator,
creating an astonishingly lethal new platform.
The results quickly altered calculations on the ground and transformed
the face of battle. Rather than choose between safety for pilots and aircraft
operating from a distance, or risk all with close-in targeting, generals could

have both safety and precision targeting. Rather than choose between
preserving a village or destroying an adversary in its midst, Army captains
could spare the village, destroy the adversary, keep their own troops safe and
losses low, holding political support for the war on Main Street, USA. That
massive shift from “either/or” to a radical new “and” sidelined opposition,
emboldened leaders, and empowered warfighters. It would transform the
very nature of the combat space, and bend it to U.S. forces’ advantages, for
years. That was smart. That was advantage. That was value. It was precision
strategy in action.
Afterword
In the twenty years since Predator, drones have steadily and completely
altered the face of battle. Proved with precision strikes against insurgents by
American forces in Afghanistan and Iraq, the drone emerged full force in
2020 as a punishing and determining factor in set-piece, open battlefield
warfare. During the conflict in Nagorno-Karabakh, Turkish Bayraktar TB2
drones and Israeli Harop “suicide” drones under Azerbaijani command took
out Armenian tanks, armored vehicles, and artillery pieces, and scores of air
defense systems, served up in what the Economist’s Shashank Joshi called “a
bonfire of armor,” bringing Armenia to its knees and the conflict to an end.
That same Turkish drone—the Bayraktar TB2—is now sold as a
platform with portable command stations and communications equipment,
with months of training as part of the package. Israeli advanced mission-
planning software, replicated by Turkey, has found its way into these
systems, where it steers drones and missiles through gaps in radar coverage
onto defenseless air defense systems below. The Bayraktar TB2 precision
drone system now dominates the skies in many conflicts, making Turkey
both an industrial powerhouse and a player at the diplomatic table.
Yet sophisticated as the aircraft, software, and munitions now are, drone
technologies are particularly amenable, still, to the ingenuity of soldiers
cobbling together precision battlefield solutions on the fly. In late April
2022, a video surfaced on Twitter. It was eye-popping. The camera tracked a
commotion beneath a Ukrainian drone among a squad of Russian troops as
they ran for cover. Two made it into a car. In a few seconds, the drone
released some sort of improvised bomb that plunged straight down through
the car’s sunroof and blew it up.

The accuracy of the dropped-bomb attack was rated by some on Twitter
as “a hole-in-one level of luck,” but that wasn’t quite true. If the first drop
missed, the drone operator could tweak the next to perfection. For it turned
out this latest battlefield drone—a version of one used by Isis over Iraq—
was likely an off-the-shelf octocopter like one you’d buy at Walmart, but
modified for an extended flight time of forty minutes and capable of carrying
three VOG-17 Russian-made fragmentation grenades (plenty of them around
Ukraine those days.) Add a thermal imager for spotting warmed Russian
trucks and tanks at night or hidden in woods by day, and a Canon camera to
record and broadcast every attack, hover at 100 meters where it was invisible
and noiseless, and nothing would prove quite so true as the boast of the
Ukrainian drone units’ uniform patch: “You Shall Not Sleep.”
But it also reflected what one observer called “a start-up” mentality
among Ukrainian troops. “For 8 years,” @nolanpeterson tweeted, “Ukraine’s
military has transformed, allowing front-line personnel to operate creatively
& as autonomously as possible. That is a big change from the strict, top-
down Soviet chain of command—which Russia still employs.” With
terrifying consequence, on May 9, 2022, Ukrainian drones, missiles, and
artillery destroyed seventy Russian tanks, armored vehicles, and even a tug
boat spotted forging the Siverskyi Donets River, killing hundreds of soldiers
—essentially a battalion’s worth. Days later intelligence analysts reported
Russian forces appeared to be trying to forge the river again, tweeting, “It
went about as well as their previous attempts.” Down the road, yet another
improvised Ukrainian drone dropped two $475 bombs on a Russian $3.5
million T-90 tank, the most advanced in the Russian arsenal, destroying it.
In August 2022 the New York Times reported that along the front lines
Ukraine’s experimentation has produced an array of inexpensive, plastic
aircraft, jerry-rigged to drop grenades or other munitions. Off -the-shelf
products or hand-built in makeshift workshops around Ukraine they now
comprise the bulk of Ukraine’s drone fleet.
Whether high-end military drones or nimble off-the-shelf concoctions
with improvised munitions, on both sides of the Ukraine battlefield drones
have taken the place of human eyes in the sky for reconnaissance—and
compressed the kill chain to a moment or two between spotting troops on the
move, or the flash of artillery, and pivoting to shoot, forcing adaptation and
innovation on the ground. Using advanced howitzers that are built to launch
a ferocious salvo in little or no time, for example, artillery teams have

adapted their old “lock and load” routines to “shoot and scoot”—an end-of-
cycle mad dash for cover before the retaliatory drone strike hits. In the duel
between two battlefield precision systems, it is the speed of humans and
machines working in tandem, one attacking, the other escaping, both
learning and adapting to the other that determines who wins. Above all, for
the drone, there is no precision and no outcomes that matter without the
platforms and data, people and politics that bring it all together in the
battlespace. “This war offers a lesson,” Peterson tweeted. “The power of
platforms depends on the character and competency of the personnel who
operate them.”
Finally, we opened this brief history with an account of the historic
miss of Osama bin Laden at Khost in 1998, blaming it on immature drone
technology and a “furball” of indecision in the kill chain of a not-yet-ready-
for-prime time precision system. Two decades later American military
activity in Afghanistan had all but vanished—at least until early July 2022,
when Ayman al-Zawahri, bin Laden’s number 2 and heir to the al-Qaida
organization was tracked to a Taliban safe house in Kabul. On July 31, a
drone had him in its cross hairs—the drones now “tip of the spear” of a fully
evolved precision system—which now meant months of planning,
simulations, and tailoring, waiting for exactly the right moment.
WASHINGTON (AP)—As the sun was rising in Kabul on Sunday, two Hellfire missiles fired by a
U.S. drone ended Ayman al-Zawahri’s decade-long reign as the leader of al-Qaida. The seeds of the
audacious counterterrorism operation had been planted over many months.
U.S. officials had built a scale model of the safe house where al-Zawahri had been located, and
brought it into the White House Situation Room to show President Joe Biden. They knew al-Zawahri
was partial to sitting on the home’s balcony.
[Having] painstakingly constructed “a pattern of life,” as one official put it, [they readied] a
“tailored airstrike,” designed so that the two missiles would destroy only the balcony of the safe house
where the terrorist leader was holed up, sparing occupants elsewhere in the building. They were
confident he was on the balcony when the missiles flew, officials said.
“Clear and convincing,” Biden called the evidence. “I authorized the precision strike that would
remove him from the battlefield once and for all. Justice has been delivered.”
Lessons for Leaders: The Art and Science of Bootstrapping Precision
Bay’s TraceTogether system and Jumper’s Predator illustrate the unique
value of precision systems in addressing the kinds of challenges that arise in
today’s risk-laden, fast-changing, networked world. Whether the enemy is a
quickly spreading pandemic or elusive terrorist targets, moving fast and light

with precision is the order of the day. Yet the very nature of these challenges
also means that the complex job of creating precision systems to respond to
them is particularly daunting. When time, money, official authority, and
other resources are all in short supply, members of the precision vanguard
must apply the art of bootstrapping to create the precision system that
desperate times demand.
What lessons can managers learn from the ways Jason Bay and John
Jumper cobbled together their precision systems? First are five criteria by
which any precision system can be judged, whether cobbled together or
otherwise:
• Will the cobbled-together precision system do what is intended, and
only that? For TraceTogether, will it alert millions of individual users to
their exposure to COVID-19—and only them? For Predator, will it kill
what it sees and shoots—and nothing else?
• Will the cobbled-together precision system draw support for uptake
and adoption in operations? Can TraceTogether work in conjunction
with other tracing systems to quickly tie off the spread of COVID-19?
For Predator, will the U.S. Air Force adapt and adopt unmanned drones
in its warfighting plans?
• Can the cobbled-together system’s performance be measured with
precision-specific metrics in operations? Will TraceTogether correctly
alert its user, and no one but its user, of COVID-19 risk, every time?
Will Predator accurately destroy all targets, for example, and nothing
but its targets, every time?
• Can the cobbled system give managers valuable new choices that they
will use? Will TraceTogether allow health agencies to locate accurately
all those exposed to COVID-19 without intrusively violating citizens’
privacy? Will Predator allow generals to choose both operator safety
and high accuracy in targeting rather than force generals to choose
between keeping pilots safe at high altitudes but bombing
indiscriminately, or improving accuracy but losing pilot safety at lower
altitudes?
• Making those choices, will the precision system, transform the theater
of operations exactly as managers intend? Will TraceTogether keep
COVID-19 minimal and manageable in Singapore, and will it keep
privacy intact? Will Predator bend the combat space to American

advantage for years—and broaden the latitude of decision makers
knowing their choices no longer have as a consequence the blunt-force
trauma of indiscriminate targeting?
Second are four lessons that are specific to leaders who bootstrap precision
systems under conditions of imperfect insight and means, great uncertainty
and risk, and overarching necessity:
• Networks are essential in the provisioning of cobbled-together
elements needed for precision. Neither Bay nor Jumper had all the
assets they needed to move—not authority, data, and platforms, nor
skilled personnel or budget. For that, they turned to their networks and
those of colleagues. Yet each node of a network represents both a
potential asset and a possible source of resistance. The greater the
networking, the greater the power of each to abet or disrupt.
• Bootstrapping is inherently cross-boundary, requiring collaboration,
persuasion, and agreement. Both Jumper and Bay had significant levels
of command-and-control power within their domains. Again and again,
however, their best moves were only possible in someone else’s
domain. Both had to rely heavily on network brokers—colleagues who
spanned several domains through which they could exert influence.
• Engaging the support of existing, trusted institutions is an essential
element in building the legitimacy of a cobbled-together system. The
success of the TraceTogether project derived largely from the fact that
Bay could draw on his own network of skilled engineers to work on its
design and implementation, and on his contacts in the Department of
Health and other key government ministries. The trust these institutions
commanded in Singaporean society went a long way toward giving
TraceTogether legitimacy in the eyes of the community. Similarly,
sending the Predator to the existing Big Safari program for its
development gave the initiative a supportive home in the Air Force
system, conferring sustainability. The leaders of Big Safari knew how
to navigate every convention of procurement, development, and
operations, bending all but breaking none, fielding systems fast, helping
to establish Predator’s viability as a weapon.
• Bootstrapping precision requires adaptive leadership skilled at
political management, effective communication, and technical agility.

Unexpected circumstances prompted the development of both
TraceTogether and Predator. In the case of TraceTogether, the cause
was the sudden emergency of COVID-19; for Predator, it was the
repeated failures to capture and kill bin Laden. The lack of any central
planning or control for these two improvised projects meant that, at
each stage in the process, those in charge had to check and recheck their
strategic triangle and its constantly shifting requirements. When
authority was lacking, the precision vanguard borrowed or begged it.
When capabilities fell short, the vanguard invented them. When the
technology was unavailable, the vanguard brainstormed alternatives.
You may never be called on to create a precision system under the kind
of intense pressure that Jason Bay and John Jumper faced. Your work as a
member of the precision vanguard may never involve consequences that are
literally matters of life and death. But you may well find yourself saddled
with a precision project that must be completed fast and effectively under
circumstances that are far from ideal. When that happens, the stories of
TraceTogether and Predator will offer lessons you’re likely to find valuable.

CHAPTER 8
CREATING AND MANAGING TEAMS
OF PRECISION
 Throughout this book, we have seen people engaged in the hard,
consequential work of moving change precisely where, when, and how they
want. Whether the project has been formally launched from the top of the
organization or bootstrapped under the radar, it must align people with
processes, and platforms with performance to deliver on the promise of
precision. In the quest to make that happen, the most important decisions
may be those regarding people—often comprising cross-discipline teams of
individuals whose talents, energies, commitments, and insights will
determine the success or failure of their precision systems.
The challenge of building and managing a team of precision is one of
the most difficult a manager can face. Given the diversity of professional
talents involved and the range of personal and professional interests that
team members bring to the project, it’s not surprising that conflict and
confusion can bring teams low. Teams that are incorrectly staffed, chartered,
and managed stumble on fixing the right problem. When a team’s decision
making is gummed up, teams suffer miscues, misfires, and delay. All
contribute to performance that falls short of promise and potential. But
correctly staffed, organized, and programmed teams can function as
powerful drivers of change—force multipliers for continuous learning and
institutional reform, even (or perhaps especially) when battling against the
stiff headwinds of the status quo.
No team is perfect, but even an imperfect team can win. Classic studies
of team dynamics enumerate the conditions that foster team effectiveness,

including having what is seen as “a real team,” a compelling direction, an
enabling team structure, a supportive organization context, and expert team
coaching. In this chapter, we’ll see how these and other factors affect
precision teams in particular. What is required for teams of precision to
succeed? What makes precision system teams different from all others?
We turn first to the work of the distributed organizing team of the
Biden-Harris campaign—a team of twenty-eight managing a network of
160,000 all-volunteer partisans aligned on a single purpose, for a single day,
in the race for the presidency of the United States, the most consequential
political contest on the planet.
Distributed Organizing for the Biden-Harris Campaign: Crafting
Victory through a Team of Precision
As we saw in chapter 4, the foundation for Joe Biden’s victory in the
presidential campaign of 2020 was the work done by Nellwyn Thomas of the
Democratic National Committee (DNC) and her team of data specialists.
They invested countless hours in cleaning, organizing, and instrumenting
vast troves of information about voters in thousands of districts in every state
across the country. In the process, they turned otherwise useless raw data
into a priceless flow of content that the Democratic Party could use to
connect with people who might be persuaded to vote Democratic—not just
in 2020 but in many future elections as well.
The Thomas team’s overarching goal was to make Joe Biden president.
That called for a full-on collaboration with other teams, as well as a new
model of coordinated team effort for the digital world known as distributed
organizing. This part of the story begins in July 2020, when Nate Rifkin was
tapped to head up the national distributed organizing team for the Biden-
Harris campaign. Early voting for the general election would start as early as
September—two short months away—and culminate two months later on
November 3. With the Democratic primaries over by June, the campaign had
expanded rapidly from 200 staffers to 6,000, including 28 campaign veterans
who comprised Rifkin’s leadership team. That group and its massively
scaling force of 160,000 volunteers would play a crucial role in the
campaign’s success or failure—and comprise the greatest challenge of
Rifkin’s career.

Rifkin’s top staffers were all handpicked all-stars from several now-
folded Democratic primary campaigns, or on loan from the DNC. They
included Roohi Rustum, relational team director, from the Pete Buttigieg
campaign; Claire Wyatt, call team director, from the Bernie Sanders
campaign; Catherine Vegis, events team director, from the Biden campaign;
Clarice Criss, text team director, from the Tom Steyer campaign; Deputy
Director Spencer Neiman, from the Elizabeth Warren campaign; and Rifkin
himself, also from the Warren campaign. People from DNC included
Distributed Analytics Director Nina Wornhoff and Deputy National Training
Director Lucia Nunez.
Skilled and savvy as team members were, never before had a campaign
team attempted distributed organizing on the scale Rifkin contemplated. The
data platform, cobbled together from many preexisting platforms, was new.
The processes were new. The team’s ability to collaborate and solve
problems together was untested. And within weeks, as the campaign roared
into action, Rifkin’s team would be sending about 10 million texts per day
and making millions of calls to voters in seventeen battleground states using
some of the most advanced technology tools available for a rapidly scaling
service and team.
These big challenges broke down into a host of small, specific
challenges, each potentially crucial, all turning on whether Rifkin’s team
could mesh the technologies and people together for precision results at an
unheard-of scale. Would the “sweepers” function as needed? Would the
“assigners” be able to keep up? Would the “captains” be able to answer all
the questions that would come up in chat on the campaign’s Slack channels?
Would the ROB Bot tool they’d built succeed in moving texters from their
starting channel into the ready-to-go channel? These and other questions
would be answered only under fire.
The basics of distributed organizing for political campaigns have been
known for a while. Distributed organizing most often works as an element of
traditional place-based organizing, part of the local campaign managers tool
kit. It’s all managed top down, with staff, money, and resources sent
wherever campaign headquarters believes they are needed most urgently—
whether to knock on doors, raise money by telephone, or get out the vote.
Digital campaigns came into their own in trailblazing forays on the
internet by Democrats Bill Bradley in 1999, Howard Dean in 2003, and John
Kerry in 2004, all of whom raised big pots of money online in small-dollar

donations with eyebrow-raising ease. Digital campaigns exploded in the
hands of skilled Barack Obama campaign staff in 2008, when they caught
Hillary Clinton napping with too little social media presence until it was too
late, and again in 2012, when they crushed John McCain, who insisted on
holding onto the top-down, command-and-control campaign style he
cherished.
With the advent of twenty-first-century digital platforms, distributed
organizing evolved as a forked offspring of the main digital campaign,
operating across networks, principally handling get-out-the-vote initiatives.
Wikipedia-like, it operates more like a decentralized web of partisans, with a
core of professional staff activating impromptu groups of volunteers. Central
staff members design and develop the decentralized platforms, keep the fuel
of data in the tank, probe for the opposition’s weaknesses, and shape
messaging and targeting with analytics, providing front-line volunteers with
tools and scripts for specific voter outreach and mobilization.
Digital distributed organizing’s secret weapon is the same “flywheel”
principle that powers Amazon’s or Netflix’s sales in e-commerce, where AI-
powered computers learn from every consumer choice how to make their
recommendations even better, boosting sales to the stratosphere. Distributing
organizing counts on the flywheel effect for volunteer recruitment:
volunteers beget volunteers, who beget even more, turning distributed
organizing into a massive campaign power resource. Managers concentrate
the volunteer fire to create the change that matters most—getting prospective
voters off the couch and into the fray, ultimately pulling the lever for their
candidate.
As the 2020 campaign neared, no one on the Democratic side had big
plans for distributed organizing; it was nice to have, but it was less favored
than campaigning the old-fashioned way—in person, on doorsteps, raising
money, changing minds. Then, in March 2020, the COVID-19 pandemic
struck. By July, it was clear that the fall’s voter mobilization would, of
necessity, fall entirely to digital teams. That effort would be led by Jose
Nunez, director of digital organizing for Biden-Harris. Distributed
organizing was led by Rifkin, one of Nunez’s seven direct reports. The fast
pivot to massively distributed organizing was on.
“We had no choice,” Jose Nunez said. “The pandemic hit. We’re not
going anywhere. I told Nate, ‘I want you to go big and don’t stop. Bring in
everybody from California to Idaho to Alaska, point them in a direction of a

state that we need to win,’ ” Nunez said. “My job was to navigate any way
that I could to allow him to be efficient in growing our volunteer base.”
Through July, Rifkin hunted for his own leadership team. He describes
his ideal candidate as the “three-blade-tool distributed organizer,” proven in
the big leagues, a “big structural thinker who could really conceive of
building this process,” and having a “use-your-tools/tech savviness
mentality,” someone who would be undaunted by setbacks and prepared for
challenges that would be “pretty darned technical.”
Little wonder, as platforms, software, and data would be central to the
work of the distributed organizing team. It was fueled by targeting data from
Wornhoff’s analytics shop (itself made possible by Thomas’s massive
overhaul of the DNC data systems), a massive research base of tested and
proved messaging scripts, and a constant stream of polling and surveys.
Rifkin’s volunteers could log onto the distributing organizing team’s Slack
channel to do voter contact from wherever they were, whenever they had a
couple of hours, equipped simply with Wi-Fi, a headset, and a cellphone or
laptop. The second a volunteer showed up, they were assigned to a team and
given texting or calling tasks into high-value voter segments in any of the
seventeen battleground states—Kansas in the morning, for example,
Colorado in the afternoon, and Minnesota in the evening. Experienced
volunteers hovered over newcomers virtually, sometimes watching the
whole team texting or calling from wherever they were, tiled on Zoom.
There were no in-person phonebanks, no boiler rooms, no doorstep visits—
all the traditional team tools of in-person organizing. The volunteers were
anywhere they needed to be, turning on a dime, thrown into the breach,
whether from their favorite Starbucks or a farmhouse kitchen. When finished
they could log off, stroll home, or head downstairs to the dinner table.
The method transformed the campaign. At its peak, for example, Criss’s
texting team would launch a new 100,000-person texting campaigns every
sixty seconds, sending 10 million texts a day and 330 million texts over the
course of the campaign. To handle this massive job, team members designed
and rolled out new tech tools and, with them, new workflows, processes,
metrics, and training. So many new volunteers were streaming into Biden’s
digital ranks that training sessions might need scheduling seven times daily.
Wyatt’s calling enterprise, organized via Slack into teams and supported
by paid staff moderators, made 88 million volunteer-to-voter calls over four
months, using scripts in English and Spanish, all newly drafted for each

battleground state. Every call was person to person—not one robocall was
used. By Election Day, the call crews surged to over 103,000 volunteers,
helped by several new dialing tools to scale their operation nationally.
Thrutalk allowed volunteers to call voters without actually dialing, for
example. Obama organizers in 2008 and 2012 had made forty-five to sixty
calls per hour. Wyatt’s volunteers could make about 300 in the same time.
One Democratic dialer recalls:
Calling swing states is relatively easy. All you need is a computer and a phone, and you can do it at
your convenience in the comfort of your home. One hour of virtual training, and then you’re good to
go, logging into the party’s “Dem Dialer” technology platform…
You follow a script that displays on your computer screen, moving from one section to another
based on the answers you get from the person you’ve contacted. Calls are dished up to you
automatically, and you start talking as soon as you hear a tone generated by the system, indicating that
someone has answered. That person’s name appears in the first line of your script.
It was all “easy peasy”—or made to seem so. With the rate of newbies
coming and going onto the system, it had to be.
None of it would have been possible without Thomas’s powerful new
voter file, all cleaned and deduped—unleashing the cellphone as another
power resource. “We went from 30 percent of people having a cellphone in
our database to 70 percent,” Thomas recalled. The platform and people, data
and workflow all came together for managed precision, Thomas told us:
Where before you had a list of people to call randomly chosen,
now we can give you the hundred that are most likely to be
convinced by that phone call. That leads to huge efficiency.
Instead of targeting “Nell Thomas” in two states, you’re talking to
her in only one, and only the more recent one. You spend that
other time and money on someone else.
Using the tools provided by Thomas, Rustum’s relational team focused
on making connections with voters through friends, family, and community
acquaintances—a method of changing people’s hearts and minds that
research demonstrated could swing results by as much as 8 percent. They
were especially primed and trained to call hard-to-reach supporters: first-
time voters, voters who were unregistered, who were unregistered at their
current address, or whose registrations had lapsed. Even Republicans

thought to be on the fence were included. In the press of time and resources,
traditional campaigns often had to pass on these difficult cases. “Not enough
juice in that lemon,” it was said. “Too hit-and-miss.” But the evidence of
research was plain: so-called relational conversations recurring over time
with such voters could produce double-digit gains in conversion and turnout.
With thousands of volunteers streaming to the distributed team’s digital
ranks, great voter data, and effective platforms, Rustum’s relational team
could go after them all.
Catherine Vegis’s events group helped stitch all the campaign teams
together. Everyone knew the presidential race would be tight. With a
massive digital organizing effort, even adding 1 percent or 2 percent to the
Biden ledger could make all the difference. Vegis’s job was to provide that
spark with over 11,000 virtual events for the volunteers—from parties to
phonebanks, all to foster team identity and solidarity even in a digital-only
world of isolation and pandemic.
It should come as no surprise that Jose Nunez and Rifkin faced
pushback—principally from state party organizations who felt hamstrung by
their own lack of technology and deflated by Rifkin’s consumption of
volunteer power—and usurpation of their turf. “Why are you texting so-and-
so in Missouri to ask them to make calls in to Wisconsin?” Rifkin would
hear. “Rifkin’s operation is big—but it doesn’t work,” Jose Nunez would
hear. He noticed that the traditionalists rarely questioned whether all the
local, in-person canvassing and phonebanks they did was working.
Pressed, Rifkin and Nunez responded with what evidence they had.
Penetration testing proved that the distributed team’s volunteers were
measurably locating more people on the lists, contacting more, and having
longer conversations than anyone else. New digital tools were showing their
impact—certainly compared to no tools. Wornhoff’s postelection analysis
for Higher Ground Labs showed that organizing software like Mobilize,
analytics and planning software like Deck, and friend-to-friend software like
Impactive all helped Democratic campaigns that used them to better manage
the surge of millions of out-of-state volunteers onto digital platforms and
boosted local vote share by solid percentage gains compared to campaigns
that did not. Now that most presidential campaigns have become squeakers,
even small gains loom large: they can easily be the margin of victory or
defeat.

“This is how we’re going to help your state and your campaign win,”
Rifkin promised. And that was enough for most. But the fact was that the
distributed campaign was flying somewhat blind. In the press of a campaign,
there was little time to test, prove, and improve targeted messaging. Instead,
Rifkin’s team imported proven and tested get-out-the-vote scripts from past
efforts and from Democratic libraries of resources like the Analyst Institute.
The intuition and experience of the distributed team’s executives counted
heavily, especially in the absence of actual data from live testing.
“The conventional wisdom on this is extremely well-tested and
extremely data-driven,” Wornhoff asserted. “I’ve been on a lot of campaigns
that have spent time message testing. All come to this exact same
conclusion.”
Traditional polling could do little to verify scientifically the distributed
team’s impact. That’s the nature of politics. No one knows, finally, how
anyone else actually voted. When a company runs a Facebook ad, they can
see whether it results in a sale, then tweak to improve and retest it. But the
impact of campaign activities on individual behavior in the voting booth is
unknowable.
Something clicked, however, for Rifkin and the Democratic team.
Biden won. And the distributed organizing team could claim some credit, if
only by virtue of its massive numbers, a tried-and-true metric of campaigns
that no one could contest. At the very least, it offered a powerful new engine
for recruiting, training, and mobilizing volunteers, all passionate for the
cause. By November 3, 2020, the DNC distributed organizing team had
engaged 160,000 volunteers to text, email, or speak with millions of other
volunteers and voters. The twenty-eight members of the leadership staff and
their 160,000 volunteers had been responsible for one-third of all voter
contacts by the Biden campaign; for 330 million texts; 88 million calls;
11,000 events; and 200,000 relational conversations by voice, text, and
email. Jose Nunez and Rifkin are now convinced that a nationally distributed
organizing campaign will prove invaluable when elections return to the age-
old knock-on-doors, chat-on-the-front-stoop relational organizing.
“I don’t think that’s really clicked with some people I’ve talked to,”
Jose Nunez reflected. “Here we have a dedicated team that does all the
volunteer recruitment for mobilization efforts for an entire field operation.
What if a field organizer on his local turf never had to worry about hopping

on call-time for four hours every night? We’re trying to think about that
holistically and at that scale for 2022, at least.”
On election night, Rifkin had dinner with his partner in the Philadelphia
apartment where he had spent most of the past year, shut in by the pandemic
like everyone else. His one computer monitor tracked the results, as it had
the entire campaign for eighteen hours each day. The voting, which had
started months earlier, was now down to a trickle. Every voter list and nearly
every voter on them had been engaged. There was really nothing left to do.
And then Fox News called the state of Arizona for Biden, and Rifkin knew
that the election was won.
Relaxing in Florida months later, reflecting on the scale, speed, and
power unleashed by the distributed organizing team, a small smile creeps
across Rifkin’s face, visible even over Zoom. “We were definitely punching
above our weight,” he says.
Their work didn’t end on November 3. The distributed organizing team
had its final say in the following days, when Georgia’s secretary of state
provided a list of voters whose mail-in ballots had problems and would be
uncounted if not “cured”—problems like a signature that didn’t match a
signature on file or a box checked incorrectly. Having made many passes
over the Georgia voters, Rifkin had highly accurate contact data on hand. He
texted his volunteers to reach out with one-on-one calls alerting voters there
might be a problem in their ballot and informing them how to fix it.
“Because we were able to do this,” Rifkin said, “there was a much
lower rejection rate for Democratic ballots that needed to be cured than for
the Republicans, who didn’t run a program like this. That’s what a large-
scale volunteer apparatus lets you do. Whereas the GOP program really kind
of stopped on Election Day.” As a result, one more state swung from the red
column to the blue column—yet another bit of evidence of the unexpected
power of precision systems in the hands of capable managers to help change
the course of history.
Lessons for Executives and Managers from the Biden Precision Team
In a presidential political campaign, with a five-month runway and a goal of
victory on one day in November, the need for precision was unforgiving.
Whether by one vote or 1 million, it was win or go home. Rifkin’s precision

team helped deliver the win for Biden. What lessons does it offer for other
managers of precision teams?
First, precision flows from precision data, platforms, and organization
architectures. The data distributed by Thomas’s operation was much more
accurate than any campaign data before. It “stretched the playing field” to 50
million addressable voters in seventeen battleground states. Data scientists
embedded with Rifkin’s team coordinated targeting with the central
organization and helped the distributed teams pivot to new targets morning,
noon, and night. A portfolio of tools and platforms connected the campaign
with millions of people who might not have been contacted otherwise.
Precision-guided texts, calls, and emails to voters who were high in value
wasted a minimum of volunteer time, energy, and spirit.
Second, precision systems are capable of unleashing and channeling
phenomenal human energy that can be properly distributed. The 160,000
Biden volunteers recruited one another using the so-called flywheel effect.
Their energy was great. But the secret of Rifkin’s distributed precision team
was that it was available anywhere, any time, and it required no special
technical skills thanks to a distributed organizing platform using Slack or
Zoom.
Third, a precision distributed organization operates best with a
balanced team structure—one that is loose enough to welcome newcomers
by the thousands every day, train them, and target their energies, and one
that is also structured enough to achieve one shared goal: winning the
election. Rifkin’s vast nationwide team benefited from clear expectations of
nuts-and-bolts results (number of calls made, time spent on calls);
transparency to every team and effort; and constant onboarding and training,
with virtual support just moments away. The relentless coordination made
possible by a powerful infrastructure of platforms and data allowed the
central organization to direct the distributed teams toward targets—people,
districts, and battleground states—deemed essential.
Fourth, a leadership team of three-blade-tool executives is essential—
one that shares culture, capabilities, and outlook, and exemplifies the same
idea of coming together for a purpose that they espouse for the volunteers.
Jose Nunez, Rifkin, and others were veteran campaigners and organizers
who truly believed in the power of groups to change the world. Now, armed
with data and platforms, they were unstoppable in a contest where millions

of messages bolstered by proven content could deliver even small but crucial
change.
Fifth, the ability to communicate the “lift” from distributed organizing
helps managers prove precision’s value. Although direct evidence may be
lacking, proxy metrics of engagement like “time on calls” can be measured.
As a recognized metric for call teams, proxy metrics can help prove
precision when scaled across all 50 million addressable voters, as precision
systems permit.
Sixth, team spirit matters. Rifkin’s precision team flourished thanks in
part to continual efforts to build and maintain solidarity, to strengthen the
ties among network members and overcome the disconnectedness of the
virtual world. As a result, perfect strangers began welcoming each other to
the campaign, providing reserves of energy and morale that helped all the
team members maintain their flat-out efforts through Election Day and
beyond.
Mobilizing Teams of Precision at the New York Times
One-hundred miles up the New Jersey Turnpike from Rikfin in Philadelphia,
New York Times Chief Technology Officer Nick Rockwell had his “eyes on
glass,” too. At the Time’s offices in midtown Manhattan, Rockwell watched
system metrics as pressure on the Times’s servers built over Election Day. It
would be one of the year’s biggest days for news media. For months, twenty
teams of Times engineers had prepared for this moment. Like Rifkin, they
faced a series of unknowns. Would the digital newspaper’s infrastructure and
software hold through days and nights ahead as millions of readers checked
in for the news updates they craved? Would months of stress testing and
proving systems prevail in the heat of battle, in the crunch of Election Day
and later that night?
As discussed in chapter 4, the Times’s broad replatforming onto Google
Cloud Platform had spawned numerous teams on diverse missions. Cross-
disciplinary teams had, in fact, become the beating heart of enterprise
precision at the Times—circulating its data, testing and proving its precision
solutions, continuously learning, sharing its discoveries, and improving the
Times’s performance.

Over the preceding two years, the collaboration between data scientists,
product specialists, reporters and editors, and Rockwell’s engineers
blossomed. Dozens of cross-disciplinary teams flourished, adding people
working in other disciplines as needed, from software engineers and data
scientists, to user interface designers and marketers. Home-page redesign,
meter rule and paywall testing, and ad pattern changes were the three big-
ticket transformational items on the Times’s precision agenda, all squarely in
the spotlight for the move from an ad-based business to subscription. Each
day, newsroom editors tested different headlines on the same article, and
marketing teams tested the best ways to convert casual visitors to
subscribers, probing for the optimal placement of subscribe-now buttons to
drive revenue, even testing the placement of individual stories on an
individual reader’s home page based on their prior reading behavior.
Staffers from the growth mission team, for example, comprised experts
in audience research, brand, data, design, marketing, product, and
technology. Each focused their skills on a narrow slice of precision, a
problem they could crack, all drilling down on CEO Mark Thompson’s goal
of increasing subscriptions.
As a product designer, Nina Marin welcomed the change from serving
as a team jack-of-all-trades. She said, “I am laser focused on just two
sections of the customer journey: optimizing the registration processes, and
subscription flow. I find it really challenging and exciting to be able to have
such clearly defined objectives.” Her colleague Asiya Yakhina, another
product designer, was focused on onboarding users after they subscribed or
created an account. “We think about how to help readers build a meaningful
habit of reading the Times,” she explains.
Conventional wisdom held that cross-functional teams were prone to
bogging down. “Where product teams, engineering, infrastructure,
marketing and operations teams all have different points of view, metrics,
and OKRs [objectives and key results], that’s where you really start seeing
friction in the seams,” a seasoned team manager told a crowd eager to learn
the secrets of team success.
But at the Times, cross-functional teams accelerated project
development. “Before I jump into design exploration,” Yakhina said, “I want
to be aware of technical constraints, and testing requirements, and have the
copywriter from brands weigh in. It’s pretty great to see early collaboration

pay off—avoiding last-minute workarounds because some constraint wasn’t
accounted for.”
Results were in plain view, fast. “Basically, you talk to a member of the
qualitative testing team and you kick off, say, on Monday,” Marin recalled.
“Your prototype is ready Tuesday. A discussion guide is written Wednesday.
Then Thursday, you’re in user testing all day, and then Friday to Monday
you start getting results.”
Benefits could surprise—and go far broader than planned. An intern on
one of Chris Wiggins’s data science teams figured out how to predict the
emotions that readers would feel when reading different stories—from
“inspired” and “happy” to “saddened” or “amused.”
“Sweet,” the marketing people told Wiggins. “We can monetize that.
Suddenly,” Wiggins recalled, “we had a full-on backend team that was going
to go sell premium ads based on how an article makes you feel.”
The shift to a culture of testing was underway, all built on new
infrastructure and standardized practice that made it easy to use, and so easy
to require. The team run by Josh Arak, executive director of data and
insights, figured out how to design a new workflow so analysts on teams like
Yakhina’s and Marin’s could query and communicate findings from user
data faster and easier—“the fine-grained details of user behavior,” his team
wrote, all “to understand how our readers are interacting with the Times
online.”
Shane Murray’s data analytics and platform group reported the
discovery of two new metrics that would supplant classic industry
benchmarks like “page views” and “time spent on articles” as the Times’s
new key performance indicators (KPIs). The best predictors of future
subscription behavior, Murray reported, were instead depth of engagement,
“measured as the number of stories and screens viewed,” and breadth of
engagement, “measured as the distinct number of topics read.” These two
metrics seemed to measure precisely the value of the Times’s experience to
any reader, all with an ultimate, countable outcome of new and renewed
subscriptions.
The Murray team’s findings gave other teams new, sharper focus. Using
the new measures of “depth” and “breadth” of engagement, for example,
Said Ketchman’s meter and marketing technology teams tested and proved
new meter parameters for the paywall—how many free articles an
unsubscribed customer could read before she hit a registration wall.

When combined, experiments in pricing across numerous teams helped
the Times solve a long-standing optimization problem: when to drop the
registration wall and how to price the subscription. The result might be
fewer readers per article and lower ad revenues. But it meant, in fact, more
subscribers and more revenues from that source—just as CEO Mark
Thompson had hoped for—even foreseen. Most important, these models
changed as the systems learned via machine learning, reflecting new market
conditions, new temperaments among customers, and new pricing that
continued to work.
Through this whole process, Rockwell had played an unusual role.
CTOs often focus on making big infrastructure moves in support of
corporate functions and systems. Instead, Rockwell established himself
squarely in the role of executive sponsor and super-manager of precision
initiatives geared to the CEO’s strategy and mission anywhere his engineers
worked—and that was frequently on teams of data scientists, software
engineers, and marketing pros. Each team had a set of OKRs and varied
leadership, depending on whether their task was principally one of product
development or data analytics and engineering. But when rolled up to the
KPIs, the result would always be centered on subscriptions—in other words,
on outcomes from precision for specific corporate goals.
“It’s super-straightforward how this works,” Rockwell explained. “But
tricky, nonetheless. Take funnel conversion through the purchase process.
Once someone’s clicked on a subscribe button, how many people come out
the other end—completing the sign up? That was the teams’ broader goal
context. They would set specific OKRs—one team focusing on the OKR of
‘improved performance of Step 2 by three-tenths of a second,’ for example.
That would be its goal for the quarter.”
The role of precision team leader, Rockwell offered, is to assign these
components, then stitch the disparate OKRs into KPIs, “laddering”
individual tasks to the overall goals, distant as they might seem, so that
every team member can clearly see how even the lowliest task contributed to
the loftiest corporate goal.
“It was hard,” Rockwell admits. “I probably spent more time on
defining, aligning, and measuring goals than anything else at the Times. But
if you want to know what’s happening in the organization, just look at
everybody’s OKRs. They are the lingua franca across the different
functions.”

The collaborations among teams sometimes achieved powerful results
even without fancy software. Tina Fehr, an engineer embedded in the
newsroom with the interactive news team, helped the Times win a Pulitzer
Prize for its COVID-19 coverage, moving reporters from their simple
spreadsheets to fully developed data applications that pulled more than 10
million requests for pandemic data from around the world. “Screen scrapers”
ran software over websites, collecting the data in widely disparate formats,
all requiring cleaning and preparation to be stored, searched, and analyzed
by other teams—all finally published for readers in a clear, understandable
form. But it began and ended with Excel spreadsheets customized for the
precision purpose.
“It’s never an engineering team that ships value,” Rockwell said of the
many team endeavors he sponsored and lead. “It’s always a cross-functional
team, small, typically ‘two-pizza size,’ and technically diverse.” With the
problems of news production, marketing, and platforms so intertwined,
without a cross-functional team, “the best result you might get is good
work,” Rockwell observed. “But you’re going to do it slowly. Without a
cross-functional team, you just can’t innovate technology at the pace that we
need to.”
Perhaps no tactical success was as important, if unheralded, as the work
of Rockwell’s twenty election night teams. Each was small and operated
independently, monitoring its own systems and performance autonomously
after the Times’s move to the cloud. But on election night, all would need to
move together as one, whether battling breaks in data systems or supporting
deft product changes such as lifting the Times’s paywall for the night to
attract even more readers. They needed a general—a “directly responsible
individual” (a term that Steve Jobs made famous for Apple’s products). For
the Times, it would be Rockwell. Coordination was key, and the planning
began months in advance.
Rockwell and his deputies had the teams prioritize the systems that
would keep three essential workflows going on election night: constant
home-page updates, publishing articles, and pushing out alerts. They’d
stress-test them, simulating ten times normal traffic, then fix them as needed
to handle the loads. They built playbooks for recovery they might need and
ran timed drills for every failure scenario they could think of, all forty-three
of them.

Come election night, none of the disasters happened, even with the
Times handling 237 million readers during election week and 120 million on
Election Day alone. The replatforming for precision paid off, coupled with
team management across diverse silos and domains, and Rockwell’s
leadership.
The close of the 2020 election cycle found the Times in an enormously
strengthened business condition. Headlines from May 2020 ran, “The New
York Times Tops 6 Million Subscribers as Ad Revenue Plummets;” then on
November 5, 2020, “New York Times Hits 7 Million Subscribers as Digital
Revenue Rises.” A “Trump bump,” COVID concerns, and data-driven
control over its paywalls and offers added 2.3 million digital subscriptions in
2020 alone, bringing total subscriptions to its digital products and print
newspaper finally to more than more 7.5 million, with revenues of $1
billion. All this built up from the Times’s first paywall of 2011, an altogether
daring move taken in the face of a paltry half million subscribers, when CEO
Mark Thompson first saw that red light flashing of collapsing ad revenues
and plateaued subscriptions.
“A tech org should be evaluated according to the business metrics by
which the company itself is assessed,” Rockwell argued in his farewell post
on Medium. “A tech team that performs masterfully against misaligned
goals is just a terrible situation.” By that standard, Rockwell and the
precision teams he helped to create produced vast amounts of value both for
the Times and for the millions of readers it serves.
Secrets of Managing Teams of Precision at the Times
For the manager of enterprise precision systems, Rockwell’s travails offer
keys to success to all managers of precision systems. First, get your
organization right. For a precision system to work, you’ve got to fix your
hard technologies—tools, data, and platform—and your soft technologies—
job design, workflows, and collaborations. Rockwell made major moves to
fix the hardware first—the teams’ data and platforms. The Times had
fantastic data locked away in silos and cylinders, and bungled up in slow-
moving analytics. For their core business to work, they would have to free it.
Combined with reforms of its soft technologies, the move to Google Cloud
Products enabled the Times’s data science, engineering, and product teams to
flourish.

Second, guide the journey to precision with a single strategic beacon.
There will be plenty of conflict and confusion ahead—fiefdoms challenged,
platforms consolidated, teams in coordination. For the Times, CEO
Thompson’s declared “north star” of building subscriptions gave everyone a
clear idea of purpose against which every project, initiative, and next best
move would be tested.
Third, manage cross-functional precision teams for speed and
accuracy. Engage staff with new job designs, work that sparks employee
energies, autonomy focused on big company goals, and team solidarity.
Assign the teams narrow-band, precision OKRs and KPIs that trigger the
best on-task work of specialists, together. Ladder all on the shared, single
corporate purpose. Deliver tangible wins that gets results in the hands of
professionals fast.
Fourth, build in infrastructure and process for design, test, and prove.
Precision value counts on precision results, whether as OKRs or KPIs.
Fifth, go out of your lane if necessary to manage cross-functional teams
of precision. No one at the Times embraced precision systems per se, and
they might not have understood their work through this lens. But they would
demand solutions that could be achieved only with a level of precision made
possible and built on reform of enterprise soft and hard technologies with
precision in mind if not the goal.
Sixth, measure precision systems by the same business goals as those
used by all your business units. But then go beyond to explore the wealth of
possible unanticipated outcomes.
Seventh, use precision systems to eviscerate and break through the
limits of old trade-offs. Well-managed precision systems can produce new
and better optimizations—for example, lifting both subscription number and
overall corporate revenues even when traditional metrics like page views
decline and ad revenues sag.
Eighth, cultivate a culture of precision as a power resource. Unified
under the single, powerful strategic beacon and shaped by the daily work of
numerous teams employing new infrastructures and workflows, an emergent
culture of precision became a potent resource in the hands of the Times’s
managers. A culture of precision built on the truths of science and on the
possibilities for shaping a better world helped Rockwell and his team of
teams achieve that balance and create a New York Times ready to thrive in
the twenty-first century.

CHAPTER 9
BUILDING THE PRECISION
ENTERPRISE
 Executives can use precision systems in simple, relatively modest ways—
to solve specific problems involving individual departments, for example, or
particular activities within an organization, such as sales, marketing, or
customer service. In this limited role, precision can be highly valuable. But
precision systems are at their most powerful when they are adopted across
the breadth of an entire enterprise, transforming its business model and
enabling a range of new value-creating activities.
Of course, building a precision enterprise is a big job. Whether at the
New York Times or the Biden-Harris campaign, across an enterprise, at scale,
there’s no flying under the radar. From start to finish success calls for a full-
court press, with in-depth awareness and active support at the most senior
level as well as execution carefully planned and monitored at every level,
from middle management to the front lines, all roles laddered and aligned on
a clear guiding purpose, managed through to delivery as promised.
This means that enterprise-wide precision initiatives bring with them
both enormous potential value and significant risk. Stakeholders both inside
and outside the organization may push back against the change, either
through passive resistance or active sabotage. Models that work well in the
pristine lab can falter in the rough-and-tumble real world. Learning loops
can break down so that the system becomes outdated and when relied upon
even dangerous. Seemingly flawless plans can be derailed by both “known
unknowns”—things 
we 
anticipated 
as 
problems—and 
“unknown
unknowns”—problems we never even thought about.

In this chapter, we will explore four enterprise-level precision systems,
explicating their essentials, from conception to execution and sustained
success. As you’ll see, every enterprise move to precision has at least three
requirements.
First, nothing is possible without first gaining insight to the true state of
the world. The great precursor to precision is transparency, whether
behavioral on the street, physical in the office or plant, logical in the cloud,
or social on the digital platform. Transparency requires data from many
sources, cleaned and ready to be joined up. In the hands of data scientists,
software engineers, business users and ultimately smart analysts it must
reveal and describe to managers the true state of the world they face.
Second, the results you want don’t just happen; they must be managed
for. That means resolving any conflicts about what to do and any confusion
about how to do it. That takes a clear beacon—a north star goal that all can
see—clarifying CEO intent and breaking work down into component parts
that roll up into the goals of precision. It requires if/then predictions and
good models that reveal options, expected impacts, and the path forward.
Third, every stage in the work requires constant adjustments for
impacts good and bad—aligning and realigning people, platforms, data, and
performance for precisely the change managers want, where, when, and how
they want it, and no other. As managers bring change forward,
experimenting will reveal what works—teams make discoveries, models get
smarter, and the path that was once hazy becomes clear—until it becomes
hazy again. Precision requires that managers incorporate those insights
continuously with thoughtful experimentation, and frequent adjustments.
Following these resolves, executives and managers can create
impressive precision systems from a few relatively simple ingredients
known to all managers—some new transparency, new accountabilities, new
expectations clearly communicated, a continuous stream of accurate data,
and concerted leadership attention. Advanced technological tools like
artificial intelligence (AI) and machine learning may or may not be required
—most leaders of change through history have had no such tools available,
yet they have still succeeded. In the real world now, with data so important,
technologies like AI and machine learning can be crucial to marketplace
advantage or battlefield success, and to changing the tradeoffs managers
face. But even without that volume of data, leaders can sometimes do what
they do best: play hunches backed up by only rudimentary data and systems.

With single-minded purpose, a clear sense of what should happen next and
how, and some luck, they may prevail.
That’s what happened with Bill Bratton at the New York Police
Department (NYPD)—not once but twice.
Bill Bratton Brings Rough Precision to the NYPD
In 1994, New York’s new police commissioner, Bill Bratton, confronted
crises in crime, disorder, and sinking views of police and policing. Confident
he could get better performance out of police officers and urged on by a new
mayor named Rudy Giuliani who, as a former prosecutor, was used to telling
cops what to do, Bratton embraced a new approach to crime prevention
under the rubric of broken windows theory. Originally articulated in a 1982
article by social scientists James Q. Wilson and George L. Kelling, this
theory held that small signs of disorder—broken windows that go unfixed,
for example—produce a sense of social breakdown that contributes
measurably to the rate of crime in a community.
But perhaps the most important innovation Bratton brought to the
NYPD was a new commitment to precision in the use of crime statistics.
Acting with Bratton’s full authority, two Bratton deputies, Deputy
Commissioner Jack Maple and Chief of Department Louis Anemone, both
tough street cops, relentlessly demanded transparency from commanders to
the true state of crime in their precincts, with data broken down street by
street, block by block. Maple, in particular, pried open the spigot of NYPD
data, forcing precincts to use a standard reporting scheme, schedule, and
platform. The result was week-to-week data and analysis that, while not
much more finely grained than the numbers you’d see on the back of a
baseball card, utterly transformed the game.
Bratton and his top lieutenants processed the data and its use in the
hands of police commanders through a world-famous accountability system
they invented called Compstat. The weekly Compstat hearings became the
basis for regular excoriations (and occasional salutes) of commanders in
front of all their peers, with Maple and Anemone literally pounding the
broad table in the cavernous meeting room until they delivered better results.
Then the commanders returned to their field offices and did the same with
their subordinates, the supervisors, uniformed cops, and detectives.

Sure enough, New York crime rates began to move in the right
direction, falling 10 percent during Bratton’s first year. It was that easy, or
that hard, depending on how you looked at it. But with those results, the
NYPD had little reason to experiment further because it knew what worked:
the rough precision of Compstat- and data-driven policing. All that mattered
was that Bratton got it done, even making the cover of Time magazine. For
that press coverage, two years into his term, in 1995, Bratton was promptly
let go by a mayor who felt upstaged by his police commissioner for taking
credit for reducing crime in New York, as he did.
During this downshift in reported crime, there was something else
going on that would help Bratton manage to a new kind of precision.
Unknown to many, in 1994, the same year Compstat was born, a second data
revolution began under Bratton, this one comprising surveys and focus
groups convened by the NYPD to plumb the basis of resistance or support for
changes Bratton might make among both citizens and rank-and-file cops.
These surveys guided Bratton’s incoming agenda and let him take daring
chances on the path to reform and transformation, knowing exactly how to
stay in the headlights of his support among New York citizens and police
officers, the better to win over both.
Precise as they were, the surveys were expensive to build and deploy,
and they were never adapted for everyday use or married into Compstat as
performance measures. Once the initial probes were completed, no one built
models to test further and prove suggested changes or learn whether some
options worked better than others to move the needle on citizen sentiment
and workforce engagement. Nor was any commander called to account for
such measured progress. Compstat stayed uniquely focused on serious
crime. Although Bratton arguably held in his hands precision solutions at
once scalable, repeatable, sustainable, and enterprise-ready, without building
these metrics into Compstat the opportunity was never securely anchored but
rather subject to change and disuse by subsequent police commissioners.
In 2014, Bratton returned for a second stint as NYPD commissioner,
this time under “reform” Mayor Bill de Blasio. Bratton inherited a
department that, in the intervening decade, had taken Compstat and its
single, crime-busting metric of police success to extremes. For ten years
under the previous mayor, Michael Bloomberg, NYPD officers had
ruthlessly expanded an age-old police tactic called stop and frisk, roughing
up nearly 1 million principally Black and Latino New Yorkers nearly 5

million times. If ever there was an attempt at blunt force change with all its
consequences, stop and frisk was it.
After a decade, stop and frisk had turned many New Yorkers against the
NYPD. Yet untethered to measures of citizen sentiment or workforce
engagement, only the corrosive drip and then a deluge of mutual ill-will and
contempt finally caused change in police practice, brought on not by
introspection or reconsideration of data but by election of a new mayor on a
plank of police reform and his appointment of Bratton as New York City’s
new police commissioner.
As before, Bratton was resolved to achieve his mayor’s wishes.
Bratton’s 2014 surveys of citizen sentiment and workforce engagement
showed the damage done. Middle-aged Black and Latino women, for
example, were especially hostile to the NYPD—not because they themselves
had been stopped but because their male children, friends, and relatives had
been. Police officers, too, were rich with grievance. Even with enviable pay,
benefits, and pensions, many felt unappreciated on the job, even unsafe.
When polled, they said (in alarmingly large numbers) that the department
was on the wrong track, and they would never take the job today if offered
it.
Even with these invaluable insights the two surveys were impossible to
use in daily operations. They were a one-time only affair, describing the
general state of sentiment rather than a dynamic taking of the pulse of citizen
or workforce satisfaction not even block-by-block, or month-by-month, let
alone incident-by-incident. Without that fine-grained, real-time data, it
would be impossible to see what went “wrong” or “right” from patrols the
night before, for example, and fix it or replicate it. The citizen survey was
completed within five months, but the workforce survey took upwards of a
year—Bratton’s first on the job—much to his chagrin and impatience. All
the while, Compstat remained the only performance management game in
town, unchanged to incorporate impacts either on citizens or cops, to be
modified only by Bratton’s order that Compstat track the number of stop-
and-frisk incidents so that they, too, would soon decline.
In Bratton’s second term, Bratton again turned to two long-time cops to
help bring his vision to a reality in his second term. (In the intervening years
Maple had passed away and Anemone had retired.) Dermot Shea, Bratton’s
Deputy Commissioner for Crime Control Strategies (and who in 2019 would
himself become New York City’s police commissioner) ran the numbers side

of Compstat each week with a keen eye for results, pressing for follow-
through on missed opportunities. Philip Banks, NYPD’s chief of department,
would keep his eye on police street conduct. Most importantly, Banks had a
theory of why Bratton’s plan would work, and he regaled officers with it
each week. If officers would ease back on hard-edged tactics, Banks said,
more Black and Latino residents would report crimes, testify in court, and
share their intelligence with police. That would start a virtuous cycle: make
officers more effective, build more trust between officers and citizens,
improve outcomes in court, create safer streets, build more trust… all the
while manifesting the rule of law in every encounter.
The theory made sense. But in reality, everyone was playing hunches.
NYPD never introduced Compstat-ready noncrime metrics that commanders
could report and discuss—how citizens felt about every and any encounter
with officers, for example, and whether they trusted police and policing
more or less, and how officers felt about encounters with citizens and
whether they felt more or less engaged on the job. The department never
systematically tracked witness failures or intelligence gaps, whether to learn
from success or call commanders to account for failures. The NYPD could
have engineered some tools and techniques to measure all these dynamics at
a fine grain to see whether Banks’s “virtuous cycle” was kicking in, as
predicted, but it never did. Without those measures, it would be impossible
to show commanders the way forward to improvement.
Compstat remained a dull-edged, blunt force instrument of change,
“precision” only to the extent that it used some data—any data—to move
deployments and tactics. True precision solutions would only evolve in the
closing days of Bratton’s tenure. Bratton was well aware of innovations in
the corporate world, as he had always trained his eye outward for lessons to
be learned. There, with the cloud, mobile and social technologies and
applications in hand, precision solutions had come into widespread (if early)
use, addressing issues central to Bratton’s own vision—for example, giving
fast insight into customer or citizen sentiment, critical issues in workforce
engagement such as “shock events” that could trigger workplace behaviors
from withdrawal to aggression. In the right hands, they could deliver high-
performance, high-quality services, just as Bratton wanted for citizens and
cops.
None of these tools made it into the NYPD toolkit in time. They were
essentially unknown to Bratton’s inner circle in either of his terms, where

staff and consultants fell back on the proven playbooks of years gone by, and
resisted changes they neither understood nor wanted. Twitter was regarded
by key aides as a frightening security risk—but Bratton liked the prospect of
communicating directly with his cops and the public rather than mediated by
the city’s tabloids. Mobile phones seemed to key aides to put too much
power in the hands of individual cops—but Bratton liked this, too as a
symbol of his trust and his insistence on “arming” his cops with the latest
tools. The cloud was unknown and suspect as somehow more insecure and
less trustworthy than the NYPD’s own systems—even though the
intervening years had left the NYPD’s information infrastructure with
literally no redundancy and highly vulnerable to attack. From advances in
precision polling of workforces and citizens from political campaigns, to
social media tools for recruitment and hiring practices, Bratton alone
appreciated the power of information and communications technologies to
do exactly what Bratton wanted: engage citizens and cops in meaningful
work together and the reform of their relationships.
What Bratton did possess was a keen political intelligence, a belief in
the virtues of building citizen trust and police engagement, a conviction that
a shift in platform was essential and possible for Bratton and the NYPD to
engage its officers and citizens, and a driving sense—optimism, really—that
more could be had than simply dusting off the playbooks of twenty years
earlier.
Overruling doubts of his core team of advisers, for example, Bratton
achieved a revolution in policing by, in fact, moving the NYPD onto social
media—not just the one central Twitter account that he had inherited from
the Bloomberg years, but over 100 accounts that Bratton established for
every command. Against the practice of central control of communications
and contrary to his CIO’s counsel, Bratton approved a policy of smartphones
for every officer—even though he was thwarted at first by a questionable
acquisition of Windows-based mobile phones just weeks before Microsoft
announced it was getting out of the business. But Bratton’s move to
innovative technology solutions took him as well to proving and testing
web-based platforms like Ideascale, where citizens posted and engaged
officers about specific neighborhood issues. Modified for the NYPD’s
peculiar workflows, supervisors could track inbound issues as “jobs” acting
upon these matters and closing them similar to traditional units of police
work.

If Ideascale could tell officers what citizens wanted, Bratton still
needed a measure of how well officers met the needs of citizens—something
trackable and actionable, something that could be managed within the
Compstat process. He commissioned a proof of concept with New York
City’s 311 executives to robocall citizens for satisfaction with 311-
dispatched police services, the same day as service was delivered. With 90
percent or more of police workload being service-oriented rather than
requiring a rapid response to crimes in progress, Bratton saw service
requests as potent, unmined terrain for improving citizens’ views of police.
In the borough of Queens, for example, the NYPD under Bratton’s
successor James O’Neill collaborated with 311 executives to survey by
robocall citizens who had called 311 to report their driveways blocked—a
frequent complaint by homeowners where street parking was tight, and a
personal driveway essential. Using randomized control trials, commanders
were shocked to discover 50 percent of citizens were dissatisfied with the
NYPD response they had received that day—in part triggered by shortages
of commercial tow trucks simply unable to keep up with demand. That
pointed the way to prospects for gain from new towing arrangements.
Throughout Bratton’s tenure, this same tug of war played itself out time
and again—old forms and ways constraining a leader eager for progress on
old problems that persisted, begrudging use of the test-and-prove techniques
among commanders who simply wanted to “check the boxes” off their to-do
lists, new forms of precision made possible by now off-the-shelf
technologies that had emerged but which an old guard of consultants and
managers mistrusted, oblivious to the possibilities for change that precision
systems and technologies offered, precisely as Bratton wanted.
All the same, New York City’s bottom-line crime results continued to
improve. By 2018, even two years after Bratton left the department, the
NYPD made only 11,208 stop and frisks per year, a tiny fraction of what it
had been a few years earlier under Mayor Bloomberg and his police
commissioner. Crime was steadily decreasing, as it was nationwide. The fact
was that no one could say why in a way that would provide guidance that
others could follow. Even the underlying broken windows theory of crime
had withered after years of academic doubt and political attack.
Perhaps the best that can be said is this: a modest recipe of some new
transparency, some rudimentary data, new platforms (like Twitter and
Ideascale) that softened the boundaries between cops, citizens and

commanders, and a proven accountability process worked—led by a senior
executive with the vision, legitimacy, and capacity to pull it off, driven by
his own optimism and political savvy. Yet as it had in 1994–1995, the
possibilities for reform that Bratton grasped and truly believed in passed as
he retired from the NYPD in 2016. Pilots faded, lessons learned evanesced,
staffs left, leaving the NYPD to miss yet another opportunity to institute
durable, sustainable, and effective change, now based on precision systems,
for years to come.
Melissa Gee Kee and the Precision Transformation of Human Resources
As Unilever’s global head of college recruiting, Melissa Gee Kee kept
Unilever’s talent pipeline rich with high-quality prospects; 160,000
employees fueled Unilever’s engine, keeping 2.5 billion consumers in 190
countries coming back for more of its 400 brands. But by 2015 Gee Kee had
become concerned that she could not guarantee future results without major
change. The future was just too uncertain; disruption was everywhere.
Millennials connected by social media in the marketplace for products and
the workplace for jobs had more power to choose—and move—than
members of any other demographic before. In a global world changing fast,
Unilever had to be prepared for anything.
Gee Kee believed that the tools she and other human resources (HR)
professionals relied on in making hiring decisions were no longer adequate.
The typical résumé was backward-looking. But with the future uncertain, it
was unlikely that anything on the résumé of a college graduate predicted
success in an unknown future world. Gee Kee couldn’t afford to keep
priming the talent pump with guesswork. By contrast, the interview was
forward-looking—but rife with potential for bias of all kinds.
The status quo process was locked in on collecting résumés—but then
most were tossed in the circular file. Recruiters were locked in to visiting
only a dozen “surefire” schools and having passing contact with another 200.
Half of the job applicants abandoned the 100-question application or bailed
later in the six-month hiring pipeline. Just one in six final stage survivors
was offered a position. This was a brutal hiring funnel, serving no one’s
purposes well.
Gee Kee needed forward-looking insight that provided precision in
assessing every candidate’s potential for Unilever, matching their attributes

today to qualities that would make them invaluable tomorrow, no matter
what the future brought. She also needed a way to deliver to new employees
a Unilever rich with rewarding, purposeful work. Survey after survey
showed that’s the promise millennials required.
“I was given the great opportunity to refresh our college recruitment
process,” she told an audience recently. “Instead of refreshing, we ripped it
out and decided to start all over again. We were looking for a very different
type of talent to grow our business. To be purposeful.”
Gee Kee was confident in her support—led by two executive sponsors,
one from HR, one from the business units. Both were dissatisfied with HR
and willing to back Gee Kee’s new way. “They flew cover, gave us support,
while we developed in stealth mode,” she recalls.
Gee Kee set to work to create a precision hiring system for Unilever.
She would use some of the new diagnostic tools on the market to discover
the attributes that mattered, cast the net wide to scoop up candidates who
might have them, validate them through a battery of AI-driven assessments
(a Harvard Business School study had found six methods more effective
than résumés), present them for hire, and on-board the chosen few fast.
She was confident in her discovery process. It fleshed out traits that
mattered, pulling data from focus groups, surveys, and performance reviews,
building model personas to search for. One she called Sandy, the other Sam.
And she was confident she’d find and target her Sandys and Sams in the
recruiting pool, using Facebook ads that targeted particular segments.
“Unilever marketing helped us learn how to better segment our recruits,” she
says. “Understanding the different types of people we’re trying to get, and
the different channels to get those people.”
She was also confident in her new platforms—all AI-driven; all self-
service; all easy on, easy off. All were nicely built for the channel of choice
—the smartphone—and the user of choice—millennials. She was confident
in her new applicant process. First, the interested applicant clicked on the
Facebook ad, headed to the Unilever online application, and spent five
minutes importing his or her LinkedIn profile. Gee Kee’s first automated
scan looked there for obvious gaps and disqualifiers.
Survivors went on to the next stage—twelve online minigames built by
the firm Pymetrics, testing for traits like logic, reasoning under pressure, and
appetite for risk. Again, this stage was fully automated.

The survivors of the minigames—the top third of the applicants—
clicked on Unilever’s HireView platform where they provided a video of
themselves. That video would reveal how candidates respond to business
challenges while displaying vocabulary, facial expression, and question
response speed—all clues about the candidate’s talents.
So far, zero human contact.
“It was definitely a weird feeling to know that robots are sitting in
judgment of you,” says Jordan Vesey, twenty-one, a Penn State student who
was one of the early users of the new system. But it filtered out bias; helped
Unilever go wide into the marketplace, hitting tens of thousands of
candidates with highly targeted ads; do it in the channel of choice; and then
narrow down all to a small cohort of seemingly high-value/high-probability
candidates. And do it fast.
Survivors of the video selfie stage made their way to the assessment
center—a daylong session with executives and recruiters. This was the
applicant’s first in-person contact with Unilever. At that stage, the process,
platforms, and precision paid off handsomely. Where formerly one in six had
survived the assessment center, about four in six were now getting passed on
for offers—and 80 percent of those were accepting. They hailed from 2,600
colleges, not 200, and offered an incredible diversity of background and
perspectives.
“That’s what we want,” Gee Kee says. “To be representative of our
consumers and really help us grow in places that we haven’t been before. “
As for the long-term results, Andy McAllister, a Unilever director of
supply chain, was skeptical at first, but soon became a believer, reporting
that the candidates he reviewed were as strong as, or stronger than, the
candidates he had hand-selected the prior year.
That’s as good a start for an AI-assisted precision system in HR as you
could hope for. The new system produced results equal to those generated by
humans while offering, simultaneously, tremendous gains in efficiency,
effectiveness, and equity, saving 75 percent of recruiters’ time and freeing
them up for more complex, interesting tasks. A hiring process that had taken
six months now took two weeks, with far less frustration and abandonment.
And Unilever rose to be the number one employer of choice in over forty
countries—up from number ten.
Precision vanquishes old trade-offs. You no longer have to choose
between speed and accuracy, between scale and quality. With well-managed

precision systems, you get it all—speed and accuracy, scale and quality.
That’s value. And it’s transformational.
The Sensored Enterprise: Burlington Northern Santa Fe’s Sixty-Year
Precision Journey
From the world of smart manufacturing, sensors and big data drive
breakthrough business performance:
• At a Siemens electronics plant in Amberg, Germany, for example,
machines and computers handle 75 percent of the value chain
autonomously—with 1,000 automation controllers in operation from
one end of the production line to the other.
• At General Electric’s (GE) Durathon battery plants, 10,000 sensors
measure temperature, humidity, air pressure, and machine-operating
data.
• At Coca Cola’s orange juice bottling plant in Orlando, Florida, sensors
and computers juggle a quintillion decision variables, mix 600 flavors,
and produce the same crowd-pleasing orange juice in every bottle, no
matter the grove where the oranges originated or the fact that new
oranges are harvested only three months each year.
But as we saw in chapter 4, in the case of fuel theft at Pemex, the industrial
world of sensors is no mere “wave of the wand.” In railroading, too, sensors
are not just nice to have—they are crucial yet difficult to get right for safety
and efficiency in some of the most difficult operating environments on the
planet.
In 2013, just outside Casselton, North Dakota, an eastbound Burlington
Northern Santa Fe (BNSF) train loaded up with grain derailed as a
westbound train carrying crude oil approached on the opposite track.
Derailed cars from the grain train blocked both tracks. The locomotives of
the crude oil train collided with them only seconds later. The locomotives
derailed, along with multiple tank cars. Tank cars ruptured, oil spilled, and a
large fire broke out. An explosion rose ten stories into the air. The crash
scene was horrific in every way, tanker cars exploding, dozens more
derailed, all seared into memories of employees, responders, and residents.
Once extinguished, cleanup and an investigation to find the cause began.

Shortly, a discovery was made within the wreckage. One of the grain cars’
axles had fractured, setting off the entire chain of events. It had been forged
badly in manufacture.
“I am a retired technologist from the aerospace industry,” a citizen told
a hearing. “I retired here and now I’m an environmentalist. I live along your
[BNSF’s] railroad tracks going through Flathead River. I hear them going all
night long. And my concern is derailments. You’re carrying highly toxic,
flammable tar sands all night long, hundreds of trains coming through while
everybody sleeps. It really worries me that you can get a derailment into the
waterways that’s gonna impact thousands of people’s wells and go all the
way down to Flathead Lake. How can you reassure me that you’re going to
prevent a derailment into the waterways?”
BNSF has been laying in sensors since it first patented some in 1956.
They tell managers the locations of all its 6,000 locomotives somewhere
along 32,000 miles of track—and more. If you look today, you’ll see one of
the most remarkable array of sensor technologies imaginable—in the sky, at
trackside, on the rolling stock, and underfoot. They are part of a precision,
sensor-enabled system that converts detectable features of BNSF
infrastructure, equipment, and operations to signal, awareness, and action.
For the trains, trackside acoustic sensors interpret noises from the
vibrations of roller bearings in train wheels. Thermal sensors placed every
thirty miles track changes in bearing temperatures from point to point.
Force-sensing systems detect when wheels begin to flatten and strike the rail
with every revolution rather than rolling with minimal friction. Trackside
cameras image passing trains, checking for cracked wheels, capturing 1.5-
million wheel images per day, 3,000 per train.
For the rails, crewed and uncrewed “geo-cars” travel the lines, using
ultrasound, radar, and machine vision systems that search rails for
microscopic breaks while taking precise measurements of rail geometries.
Drones may fly out 200 miles at a time with microimaging, looking for
broken ties and bolts wrongly angled or missing altogether. A single drone
flight captures a terabyte of imaging data. Ground-penetrating radar looks
for subsurface saturation caused by moisture, poor runoff, and vegetation
that can destabilize the foundations of rails and ties.
For operations, sensors keep track of the location, speed, and
destinations of thousands of cars and locomotives. As trains move toward
their destinations and enter the yards, computers optimize the release and

placement of cars into newly reformed trains, keeping the number of
switches required over the journey of a car to a minimum. They help
managers decide whether to move some cars and locomotives off to
maintenance or bring other cars and engines back into service.
As trains roar past at seventy miles per hour on the open prairies or
creep through congested railyards, all this sensing generates 35 million
readings each day. Data travels over a massive private telecommunications
network, feeding a central data enterprise in Fort Worth, Texas. There,
engineers, data scientists, and operations managers oversee the ingest of
today’s data from every acoustic, thermal, visual, and imaging sensor in the
system, adding it to years of historical data, perfecting models that predict
track and train failure. They search for patterns, test and prove theories, and
build models that learn constantly, crossing off factors, adding new ones.
Their mission is to describe the true state of rails and trains, predict
congestion on the tracks or failures of rolling stock from “imminent” to
“possible,” and prescribe the best next moves that keep things moving and
safe. That’s the quintessence of a mature precision system in action.
“We tested a variety of data points, things like air temperature, whether
the rail ties are wood or concrete, and rail age,” recalled one systems
engineer. “We were looking to see what combination of information best
predicted rail failure mathematically. Air temperature, for example, didn’t
test well. It wasn’t a good predictor, so it is not included in the final
version.”
The more precise the measure, the more precise is the fix. Three cars
per day now trip BNSF’s acoustic bearing sensors and can be flagged for
maintenance or come to a dead stop out on the tracks. In January 2019
BNSF reported that over its first four months in use, the machine vision
system had found cracks in fourteen wheels. Pointing to an image of one, a
BNSF boss said, “That’s pretty much a derailment.”
Even on routine inspections, things go better and faster. Once in the
hands of BNSF’s mechanical department staff (its maintenance group), in
past years technicians would ping a few locomotive wheels and listen—with
human ears—for the right bell-like tone. Now, acoustic measurements are far
more precise and can be applied to all wheels.
When brakes failed, someone had to get under the car, look at the brake
pads, look at the air brakes, and find and fix the point of failure. That’s
dangerous work on a live train. Today, temperature sensors track variation in

every wheel’s heat at it passes trackside sensors. When there’s no heat
increase after braking (there should be some), that flags that car’s brake
system and axles to maintenance.
Instead of replacing sections of rail—all rail—on a fixed timetable,
BNSF scans for and replaces just the highest-risk rails and puts the lower-
risk rails on a watch list. Tracks that are tagged “red” by models in the
system get fast short-term repair and are then taken out of service within
thirty days.
All this is made important by the nature of the business of railroading.
“What railroads have going for them is the ‘coefficient of friction’—how
little rolling resistance there is for steel wheel on steel rail, and therefore
how cheaply freight can be moved across long distance compared with
trucks,” Marty Schlenker told us. Schlenker led 110 analysts and 150
contractors for BNSF’s unified data and advanced analytics team. “But the
other side of that bargain is—you can’t change lanes. And there’s a lot of
miles of single-track mainline left in the country. Bottlenecks cause queues
to form, and they take a while to unwind.”
The investment in sensors out on the main lines mitigates those
breakdowns. “The ideal,” one industry observer told us, “is that the rolling
stock never fails online. It is all maintained proactively in terminals between
runs.” That sensor investment is important as well for the safety of crews,
passengers, and towns because it should mean far fewer human interactions
with dangerous machines and better predictions of failure—provided the
systems can model data from the tracks, locomotives, and boxcars, and send
alerts to operators for just the right intervention precisely where, when, and
how its required.
All of this is enabled by advances in technologies, made possible by
everything from new metals and materials in rails to new control systems
and sensing devices, to AI and machine learning helping make sense of it all.
It is only made possible, however, by well-developed collaborations between
IT, operations, and mechanical teams, from design to the fielding of these
precision systems, changing workflows to gain the promised wins, relying
on increasingly well-trained blue- and white-collar employees to manage it
all.
Call it the move from reactive maintenance to preventive maintenance,
to predictive maintenance. It all costs about $3.5 billion each year to operate.

The value is that BNSF has reduced derailments by 60 percent since 2008
and reduced employee injury rates by 50 percent.
“It might be said that the driver[s] of improved outcomes w[ere]
—‘better steel, fewer track failures’ ” Schlenker said. “But the reality is that
we started with trained employees, augmented that over time with various
degrees of technology, including most recently AI. And as sensors are not
prohibitively expensive, we’re gradually increasing the density of the
coverage on the network with those. The uses of artificial intelligence within
the railroads that have been most successful so far is in this arena of
improving railroad safety, the defect detection realm.” There is, in fact, little
doubt in anyone’s mind that today’s systems would likely have detected the
flawed axle that triggered the Castleton catastrophe and perhaps prevented
the derailment and disaster.
Not so long ago, injury, death, and environmental calamity were
thought to be inherent to railroading—just the cost of doing business.
Precision systems changed that equation. With sensors fully deployed,
managers were able to ring up new wins for safety—now a core part of the
BNSF mission—by driving hard on efficiency in the maintenance shed and
in the yards. Imagine the realization: “The fewer inspections we make in the
yard, the safer we become on the rails and the more profitable.”
As with any precision enterprise project, making it all work is far from
easy. Schlenker and his colleagues helped us understand some of the key
elements that contributed to the success of BNSF’s precision journey.
Getting the Data Right
The variety, velocity, and volume of sensor-sourced data posed real
challenges for BNSF. In addition to issues of storage and communication,
most worrisome, Schlenker told us, is knowing when you’ve got a set of
“bad readings.” Different conditions in the wild—rain, snow, wind, heat,
cold—can lead to different signatures of incorrectness. Each of those
markers of inaccuracy must be recognized and programmed for, and the
system made smarter to deal with them. “The system itself doesn’t magically
know what’s happened,” Schlenker said.
Among other challenges, this requires assembling data sets for use in
training the AI tools that contain all the defects BNSF expects to find. With

precision sensors providing microscopic views of problems like defective
wheels—a handful of images mixed in with billions of nondefective ones—
finding the needle in the haystack is incredibly complex.
“Car wheels can chip, crack, deform, and degrade in myriad ways,”
Schlenker says. “You need multiple simultaneous machine vision models to
detect each of those conditions. If you put the detector out there, turn it on,
and stand up your first model, you’ll get that exact failure, but you’re not
going to get all of the failures.” Continuous improvement is a given, led by
people but executed by machines that learn. System accuracy demands it.
Keeping Humans in the Loop
“There [are] lots of critiques of people as imperfect,” Schlenker observes.
But, he adds, “the automated sensing systems have their own imperfections.
They improve on humans in some ways, not in every way. People are better
at generalized observations: ‘Okay, there’s something wrong here. Hmm.’
Where the machines are better at, ‘I’m looking for exactly this type of
defect.’ ”
A venerable railroad like BNSF has a tremendous wealth of human
talent to supplement and enhance its digital precision tools. “Our
counterparts in the mechanical department have a field education PhD in
undercarriage and wheel defects for cars,” Schlenker says. “They are
invaluable to the education of the people who run the routines to develop
image data sets and train image models.”
Another task for which human input is essential is sorting true alerts
from false ones. A centralized desk monitor at BNSF’s operation center in
Fort Worth monitors the problem detection system. As the system ingests
data, it heads straight to models that can sound alerts.
The system is set to be generous, meaning it will accept a large number
of false positives in order to avoid overlooking true positives. Humans step
in to review all the “presumptive positives” that come back from the image
systems. The operations team alerts train crews only after several levels of
review confirming, “Hey, this is likely a true positive.”
Using Precision Data to Improve Maintenance Regimens

Inspections of track and rolling stock by optical systems, ultrasonic and
force measures, and acoustic and ground-penetrating radars have increased,
making the entire inspection regime faster, safer, and far more effective.
Even when trained maintenance teams have their hands on locomotives in
the yards from time to time, transformed inspection systems generate a much
more voluminous flow of data—which means that repair people have a
much richer report card of everything that’s happened to the engine since it
was last in maintenance. As a result, it’s much easier to define and perform
the work needed to keep the locomotive in service for a longer period of
time.
Using Precision Data to Investigate Failures
Recently, a broken wheel on a loaded BNSF coal car caused a derailment.
That coal car had passed an image system not long before. BNSF
investigators looked at the images and they were inconclusive—it wasn’t an
obvious miss. In the past, the investigation would have ended there. Today’s
far more extensive system for continually monitoring equipment permits a
much more thorough analysis. A BNSF engineer can say, “Here’s the last
place where an automated detection system might have been able to find this
failure. Let’s go back and look at the history of this train and this axle
passing this detection system.” The result may be further improvement of the
system that can make a future failure even less likely.
Maintaining the Precision System in the Field Continually
Sensors in the field are part of a system that has been hardened to withstand
the rigors of weather, vibration, and all manner of disturbance. Keeping
them in good working order is a huge job. At BNSF, the field operations
team consists of tens of thousands of people, most members of craft unions,
many of them out in the field executing maintenance operations each day.
Without this constant vigilance, the reliability of the data and the accuracy of
the decisions based on that data would soon deteriorate.
Using Precision Systems to Solve an Age-Old Railyard Problem

We’ve seen how precision systems are particularly powerful at providing
customized and personalized services and solutions to customers and to the
organizations that serve them. BNSF has found that these benefits can be
used in a unique way to help solve an age-old challenge facing railroads:
how best to balance a railcar’s active service with essential maintenance
downtime. It’s a classic last-mile problem that requires systems designers to
integrate their new precision offerings into the daily workflows of
employees who are accustomed to traditional methods and likely to resist
change.
In railyards like those run by BNSF, train crews have, since the dawn of
railroading, broken down trains and reassembled cars in new combinations
as trains grow closer to their destination, switching some for others until the
right combination ultimately rolls toward each customer. Switching has
always been costly, reliant on guesswork, subject to delay and failure, and
dangerous.
Today, however, BNSF applies AI-enabled optimization techniques to
the recombination of cars, reducing the number of switches required. That’s
good news for customers and for BNSF and, it turns out, for workers.
Turning this potential into a reality is one of the challenges that Schlenker
sponsored in his service planning role.
As in most last-mile problems, the devil is in the details. Every switch
requires what’s called a pin pull, in which a yard crew team must get
between two cars and physically pull the pin that connects them. Thousands
of cars are switched and pin-pulled in the BNSF yards every day—work that
is physically demanding and exposes employees to risk and to the elements.
Reducing the number of pin pulls would offer many benefits. The switch
crews would have more time for other tasks, making the job of sorting the
freight in the yard faster and more efficient. It would reduce the risk of
injury—one of BNSF’s priorities.
But reducing the number of pin pulls is easier said than done. The trick
here, as explained by Dasaradh Mallampati from the BNSF operations
research (OR) team, is to concentrate on empty cars that BNSF itself owns
rather than cars that a shipper owns. Shipper-owned cars have to go to a
specific customer location. Switchers have to couple or decouple them
physically, by hand, then rebuild a new train with other shipper-owned cars
headed in the same direction. But the BNSF-owned cars can be controlled

logically by BNSF yard teams. That eliminates physical switching, including
pin pulls, speeding trains through the yard and reducing the risk of injury.
“The economics of avoiding that sorting in the middle of the route are
compelling,” Schlenker said.
The OR team, led by data scientist Pooja Dewan, devised a plan to use
its optimization methods to make enhanced sorting possible. But they knew
that convincing the yard managers to go along with it would be a hard sell.
For these veteran railroaders, all change is a disruption. Dewan was very
deliberate about how she presented the idea to them. First, she framed the
win around benefits she knew the yard managers would value: faster, better
service to customers; reduced congestion in the yards; less pressure to
expand the yards; fewer headaches for yard managers; and a reduction in
manual effort as well.
Second, the operations team would customize a pilot program for each
railyard based on its unique physical footprint and constellation of cars and
customers. Some yards, for example, were configured so that only one
switch crew could work at a time. Any system that could take work off
switchers’ plates, enabling faster work on the cars that remained, would be
welcome. The customization plans Dewan and her team developed would
make this possible.
Finally, the OR team personalized the appeal to the yard managers.
They showed how the new system would make their lives easier and help
them hit their key performance indicators (KPIs), both by increasing the
number of trains they could push out every day and by reducing the number
of accidents and injuries suffered by their yard crew members.
BNSF piloted the enhanced optimization in five yards for several
months. The new precision switching saved over 20,000 pin pulls. It was
axiomatic that, when scaled, this would translate to reduced workforce
injuries, a corporate priority. The gains to overall efficiency were also
obvious—freight sped to customers faster and reduced system congestion as
promised.
How did managers make this win happen at BNSF? Leadership that
said do both—boost efficiency and boost safety—gave cover to an
opportunistic team manager to go a little out of lane. The project energized a
highly skilled OR team, giving them a chance to do something beneficial to
all while remaining focused on the most important goals of the corporation.
And when it came to implementing the project down to the last mile,

customization of the pilot programs and personalization of the pitches to the
yard managers both paid dividends. The precision system project at BNSF
worked: for the customer, the project, and the enterprise.
Precision at the New York Times: A Unique Recipe for Personalization
For our third example of what it takes to organize an entire enterprise around
precision, let’s return once again to the story of the New York Times. As
you’ll see, personalization would play an important role in this story, in a
significantly bigger and deeper way than in the story about BNSF. Along the
way, personalization would also generate a level of conflict that the leaders
of BNSF never experienced.
As we recounted earlier, the forward-looking report, Journalism that
Stands Apart: The Report of the 2020 Group, crafted by seven reporters and
published in 2017, encouraged the blossoming of the Times’s digital future.
By 2018, a move was well under way toward a new way of building content
for the Times, away from constructing same-for-everyone pages like those
found in the print edition, and instead moving toward collecting stories that
would be drawn from the Times’s many “Desks,” from sports to news, each
commanded by an editorial team and staffed by reporters, with the interests
of individual readers in mind. The initial vision was of a personalized home
page for each reader, just like the print edition front page, but assembled
uniquely for every individual.
As the process began, everything seemed to be going smoothly. But in a
2019 speech taking stock of the moment, the Times’s vice president of
engineering, Brian Hamman, described that moment as, in fact, a calm
before a raging storm. “We succeeded, right?” he asked an audience,
somewhat grimly. “We have blocks, we have programs, we have lists, we
are… done.”
But all was not well. Hamman recalled:
The thing that we did next, which is very, very dangerous, is we
put the names of things on our pages for the first time—“U.S.
Politics,” “Opinion,” “Diversions,” “Editors’ Picks.” And as a
result, we really pissed off the newsroom. We got an angry letter
from the arts desk, which had an entire meeting to make sure that

they had collected their thoughts in the way that was the angriest,
that by putting arts and other content into something called
“Diversions,” we were becoming barbarians. Keep in mind, we
had yet to personalize anything. We were still just in a germination
phase. And yet we created a war within the building.
“We kept hitting a dead end,” recalls Nick Rockwell, Hamman’s boss. “And
we kept finding resistance—legitimate resistance to monkeying with the
layout of this page because it has curatorial value.” The personalization team
seemed to be taking editorial control away from the groups that had
traditionally held it—the various desks at the Times and the editors who ran
them—and to be giving it to algorithms. It had worked for Netflix and for
Amazon. Surely it could work for the Times.
What Netflix and Amazon did not face as digital natives was 160 years
of cultural history embedded in the lore, identity, architecture, and business
model of the Times and its Desks, reporters, and editors. No one at Netflix or
Amazon had ever created content more than a column label. They’d never
made a call about what should be important to movie lovers or music fans—
just who was winning the popularity contest that minute, and even that they
turned over to a machine, as well they should. But for a proud news
organization like the Times, there was 650 volts of cultural current running
through the desks and their decisions. Touch that third rail at your peril.
Complicating matters further (or clarifying them, depending where you
stood), a survey of the Times’s readers suggested that the move to home-
page personalization was off the mark. “The news that you ‘like’ is actually
not the value of the Times in readers’ minds,” said Laura Evans, head of data
and insights for the Times. “ ‘Tell me what’s the most important news that I
should know about.’ That’s the Times’s value proposition. To drive toward a
fully personalized home page would actually fail the reader.”
That was true across all demographics. “It wasn’t like, ‘Oh, the old
newspaper reader wants one thing and the young generation want something
else,’ ” Evans said. “ ‘Tell me what the most important news is, right now
and today.’ This was universally wanted by people.”
Even so, precision insight to paywall behaviors were revealing major
differences among reader segments. Two big groups stood out—
nonsubscribed readers just coming to the Times, and the already subscribed

readers scheduled for renewal. Since the introduction of its paywall, the
Times had treated all readers alike. But now new, precise data would shift the
paper’s thinking. Evans explains it this way:
At the beginning of the ten-article paywall, it was just, “Get them
all to read another article.” But if it’s your first time with us, for
example, even if you read all ten articles right away, you probably
aren’t going to subscribe. The best call to action was not for a
subscription, not to go deep at that one moment. It was really
about getting them to come back again, to broaden engagement.
The implications were clear. For that fist-time reader, the Times would use
“product” to encourage returns—a newsletter sign-up, for example, or a
suggestion that they follow a particular story or author. “We wanted to get
you to ten articles in a way that would make you more likely to subscribe,”
Evans says.
For the already subscribed reader, the strategy was different. In this
case, breadth meant exposing readers to content they never realized was cool
to have—like the cooking section. “You don’t have many unsubscribed
readers seeking out the New York Times for its Cooking section,” Evans says.
“But the people that do get to see it start really engaging.” Other sections,
like the Games section, where the daily crossword puzzle appeared, and
Wirecutter, the paper’s home for consumer product information and
evaluations, brought unique value to the Times’s readers far beyond the
insights provided through breaking news stories.
These data-driven insights let the Times fashion very different offers
based on where readers were on their individual journeys. Evans explains the
approach:
It’s very personal, but not personalized—not full-on machine learning, algorithmically driven at the
individual level. And those insights helped us develop new ways of thinking about cohorts of readers,
the inflection points in their journeys, how we get someone there, the KPIs that count, and what moves
KPIs at each point on that cohort’s journey.
You’d look at return rate for the next day or week, for example. Frequency, depth, and breadth—
how many sections people were consuming, what percent of nonsubscribers were consuming that
many. Those were metrics we’d look at.
These insights didn’t rule out algorithmic personalization. But rather than being targeted to the
home page, it would be based on the article that brought you here. Most people enter the product at the

article. That was the most important screen of the product. Your article page is your home screen. So
how can you rethink that?
The article page could be a very appropriate spot for recommending
additional content—but that content would be mediated by a human curator.
At the time, machine learning-driven recommendations were especially
prone to so-called evergreen blunders—pulling up articles that were “oldies
but goodies” when what the reader wanted was all about right now.
Evergreen content might be good for a media company like Disney, where
50-year-old Mickey Mouse and Snow White were still favorites, but not for
a news organization, whose value lies largely in the ability to change
continually in response to the events of the day.
Evans explains that machine learning (ML) could be ill-suited to
dealing with trends and events that were brand-new. “All of this ML and
algorithms had been developed not for something that you can’t expect,” she
says. “It’s great for a recipe, absolutely. But if we used ML, would the
Harvey Weinstein story have been as big? Because we didn’t have a rich
history of people being extremely interested in things like that. You just have
to be careful because ML uses the past so much. And a lot of people aren’t
careful about that. They’re looking for the silver bullet. This is why there
always has to be a human interlocutor to ensure that the ML call is not the
end game—that should certainly happen before you expose it to the public.”
Armed with this important new insight, the Times rolled out its own
answer to the personalization challenge—one that also served to deescalate
the culture war between the desk editors and the personalization team.
Rather than giving every reader a unique home page, there would be a
separate tab on the Times app called For You. That was an articles page
where all the personalization would live, with stories curated by a
combination of algorithms and humans. Top stories would stay separate
under its own tab, curated by the newsroom in a largely traditional manner.
By 2021, soaring subscription revenues suggested that the Times’s
precision strategy was working, perhaps validating the notion of helping the
Times’s readers to appreciate the full richness of the paper’s contents. In a
midyear presentation to industry analysts, Meredith Kopit Levien, CEO of
the Times, speaks about how readers were engaging across “a broader range
of storylines” than in the past. “We’re leaning into that breadth,” she said,
“both within our core news experience and across our adjacent products like

Cooking, Games, and Wirecutter, by experimenting more aggressively with
programming to expose more of our audience to the full value of the Times.”
All this digital “leaning in” still made the stalwarts nervous, concerned
the Times could yet lose its way. In 2022, retiring executive editor Dean
Baquet told his reporters to turn the Twitter volume down—“Tweet less,” he
insisted in a note to staff, “tweet more thoughtfully, and devote more time to
reporting.” (Baquet himself joined Twitter in 2011, posted two tweets in
2014, but no tweets @deanbaquet since.)
“They spend all that money on editors and then people just write stuff
willy-nilly online?” chided New York Magazine. “Whatever for?!”
Let’s take a step back and consider the decisions that made the Times’s
successful precision transition possible. Everyone knew what the goal was:
CEO Mark Thompson had established the “north star” metric of new and
renewed subscriptions – what Sean Ellis, a pioneer of “growth hacking,”
described as “the single metric that best captures the core value that your
product delivers to customers.” For Airbnb it was “nights booked,” for
example. Facebook’s was “daily active users.” For the New York Times, it
would be “new and renewing subscribers.”
The confusion at the Times centered on how to achieve those metrics.
The technologists believed that readers would become subscribers and renew
as they became engaged by stories targeted by algorithmic recommendation
based on prior clicks. The editors believed that readers would become
subscribers and renew as they became engaged by stories curated by editors
based on their professional judgments.
This disagreement reflected a clash of long-standing cultural values
with new technology values. From the perspective of a veteran news editor,
the technologists lacked legitimacy to challenge the newsroom’s hegemony
over the home page and its content. In this view, the proper role of
technologists was to provide back-office systems that kept the paper and
payroll moving. From the perspective of the technologists, the lessons of
Netflix and Amazon held out fast, proven solutions to personalization.
The conflict at the Times that resulted drew from different impressions
of what customers wanted. But the emotional current of technologists,
reporters, and editors illustrates some major factors that any executive or
manager seeking to build a precision enterprise must consider. One is culture
shock. As suggested by corporate culture guru Edgar Schein, technologists
inherently tend to favor solutions that can be scaled by the millions and

repeated with as little human intervention as possible. “A key theme in the
culture of engineers is the preoccupation with designing humans out of the
systems rather than into them,” Schein writes. That was certainly the promise
of the Times’s personalization by algorithmic recommendation as the
technologists understood it.
By contrast, a core element in the culture of “operators,” as Schein calls
them—in this case, the Times’s editors—is a belief in the essential
involvement of humans in the crucial work of the enterprise. “Because the
action of any organization is ultimately the action of people,” Schein says,
“the success of the enterprise depends on people’s knowledge, skill, learning
ability, and commitment.” Certainly, the reporters and editors of the Times
had those qualities in spades, and they were justly proud of the Times’s
reputation for journalistic quality built and hard won over generations.
The move to bring personalization to the Times based on precision
brought these two cultures into collision. As Schein goes on to explain, when
an organization seeks to “reinvent [itself] because the technologies and
environmental conditions have changed drastically,” as the Times’s Report of
the 2020 Group signaled they had, a clash between technologists and
operators is highly likely. To their credit, the leaders of the Times took the
disagreement seriously and worked hard to find a creative, constructive
solution.
Another crucial factor is status quo bias on both sides. In this book,
we’ve seen a number of examples of status quo bias—the familiar reluctance
of organizational veterans to embrace a change that appears wildly less
valuable than their present way of doing things. The resistance to losing their
control over the content of the newspaper coming from the news desks is a
classic example.
But the technologists also suffered from a form of status quo bias—
what Harvard Business School’s John Gourville calls “the developers’
curse.” Technologists were wedded to the idea of algorithmic
recommendations—that is the kind of tool that digital-first organizations
typically use. But the Times’s technologists likely overestimated the utility of
algorithmic recommendations, perhaps just as much as the editors
underestimated it. The technologists may not have appreciated that the kind
of algorithm Netflix or Amazon uses to recommend superhero movies or
romance novels might not work for a news organization trying to convey

what matters in a world where stories, events, and trends are changing every
day, hour, and minute.
Fortunately for the Times and its readers, the dustup between
technologists and editors was resolved by the Times’s customers who,
research showed, were pretty much as the newsroom suggested—happy with
some algorithmic recommendation but eager for the recommendations of
editors, too. This discovery reinforced the essential elements of the
customers’ engagement with the Times’s brand. In the discovery, it resulted
in a mature, sophisticated withdrawal of the technologists from the fray of
personalization—in effect, a strategic retreat—as the enterprise charted a
path forward toward a unique precision future combining both
personalization and expert curating. Laura Evans reflects on how the Times
achieved this successful bridging:
We had a really great management setup, with Nick [Rockwell]
being head of tech, myself as head of data, and Meredith Kopit
Levien as head of product and revenue. It was a three-spoke stool,
a cross-functional approach at the highest level, this group
working cohesively together. And the newsroom is that person
sitting at the top of our stool—Joe Kahn, with an invaluable
systems perspective for how news works and how we could be
helpful in that. All the spokes of that stool there to support what
news was trying to do. The newsroom is the mission of the
organization.
There’s little doubt that the “war” over the home page has left a lasting
imprint on the Times. Today, the Times has become a news organization
ready for a hybrid future, agile in developing and testing new products and
services, having made the shift to an emergent culture of precision based on
experimentation, continuous testing and learning, collaboration across
disciplines, and personalized engagement. At the same time, the Times
continues to value and elevate the skills and insights of the newsroom and its
editors, no matter what version of the Times readers turn to—whether print,
desktop, or mobile, perused at the suburban breakfast table or on the Choptle
lunch line—the Times’s engineers’ take on the typical new, Gen X, Y, or Z
Times reader.

The business leadership of the CEOs and the collaboration among top
lieutenants mattered. “All were of a mindset of, ‘We should be evidence-
driven and data-driven.’ Without that,” Rockwell said, “nothing would have
been received with the enthusiasm it was.”
Summing Up: Lessons for Leaders of Enterprise Precision
Precision systems that scale up across the enterprise exist above radars rather
than emerging as rogue offshoots or as skunkworks. They are visible, and
they operate across multiple corporate domains and activities. Thus, they
necessarily involve the CEO and senior executive staff members in crucial
decisions about strategy for enterprise precision: its purposes, stewardship,
staffing, readiness, viability, and effectiveness, and what investments to
make next.
The essential work of enterprise precision systems comprises
description, prediction, prescription, and continuous improvement, which
involve the operational activities of scooping up data, analyzing them,
making sense of them, formulating hypotheses about what might happen
next, testing and proving, injecting the components of change, monitoring
for impact, and continuously improving results. Big data, AI, and ML are
central to these operations; in the hands of managers, they make precision
change possible at an unfamiliar speed and scale. It is possible to select,
from among the entire universe of voters, for example, those whom to target
for change; from among all newspaper readers, whom to offer certain
articles and subscription rates; from among millions of seedlings on the
farm, which to select for elimination as weeds and which to nurture.
Precision systems can therefore be understood to offer among the
highest levels of corporate performance possible, offer new gain with far less
pain, and create more winners and fewer losers than status quo systems and
strategy. Precision strategy sets forth the means by which the organization
will achieve these goals and measures its success by whether it achieves
them precisely as intended, hitting precisely the right targets with precisely
the right treatment, achieving just the outcomes intended, nothing more,
nothing less.
Although the advent of big data, AI, and machine learning make such
radical change possible, the reform of enterprise relationships and
capabilities is essential for these potentials to be recognized. Out of

necessity, enterprise precision strategy cuts across and unifies diverse
corporate domains and disciplines of engineering, marketing, and data
sciences on behalf of a single, narrow, and bounded business purpose. Such
transformation therefore requires developing new cross-boundary, cross-
discipline teams and management skills, the reform of workflows and job
design, the institution of tools and technologies for continuous learning, and
laddering all via new team objectives and key results (OKRs) and KPIs on
new performance metrics and outcome measures.
Across an enterprise, snippets of these activities and capabilities may
already exist in pockets and stovepipes. However, leaders or managers of
stovepiped precision systems may not recognize their systems as precision
systems qua precision system or as pieces of a bigger corporate puzzle.
Thus, they may be hampered in making the appropriate investments in that
strategy or in understanding the critical linkages across all for desired
outcomes, and they may in fact operate at cross-purposes.
Thus, the role of leadership of precision becomes paramount. The
central task of the leader of enterprise precision is, first and foremost, to hold
a mirror to the enterprise precision strategy so that all can understand its
essential corporate purposes, the possibilities for precision and its value,
their roles in it, their contributions to it, and overall progress toward it. The
senior executive’s responsibility is to light a beacon that guides all
unequivocally to the goal and resolves conflict and confusion along the way.
It is then to ensure the readiness of units central to the core activities;
manage the collaborations of units and managers toward that end; measure
all by their contribution to the single, shared, and bounded business purpose;
and refresh leadership at all levels with awareness of the precision strategy
and, if need be, with new talent ready, willing, and able to compete on
precision.

CHAPTER 10
RED ZONES OF PRECISION
 For a manager or executive embarking on a precision project today, good
intentions are not enough; a myopic view of the project that fails to consider
broader organizational or even societal impacts is an incomplete view.
Fortunately, discussion of the many risks and challenges that face those who
venture into precision is robust today. Thought leadership on so-called red
zones ranging from bias to privacy abounds, and public understanding of
these issues is rapidly increasing. In this chapter, we touch upon a series of
risks facing those who are launching a precision initiative: what they are,
how to identify them, and how to prevent them.
The impacts of being ill-prepared for or ignorant of the red zones of
precision are normally mild in the scheme of things: a missed quarterly
target, some disappointed customers, or the failure to launch a new product.
But in other cases, the impact can be very significant, in ways that those who
design the system may fail to imagine. Often the impact can be seen only
when looking beyond the data and into the implementation with the real
world.
A cautionary tale comes from the Children’s Hospital of Pittsburgh,
where a shift was underway from doctors giving traditional pen-and pad
prescriptions to a computerized physician order entry (CPOE) system that
promised huge gains in efficiency and significant reductions in adverse drug
events from scribbled instructions and misunderstood dosing. By all
accounts, the transition achieved these goals.
But something else also happened. The new CPOE disrupted the old
workflow, and children arriving via medical helicopter started to die at

higher rates. Why? New delays cascaded from the start. Over the years
hospital staffs had figured out the shortest, fastest path for the child facing
crisis, readying the orders midflight, and having medicines at the ready upon
landing. But the new process, they waited until the child reached the
emergency room and only then started the CPOE process. Doctors went
from taking seconds to minutes and multiple clicks of the mouse to enter the
order. Bandwidth jams over the hospital wireless system froze screens and
clicks. Medications sat in a new centralized dispensary rather than on a cart
in the intensive care unit, where nurses could grab them as needed. The
result was an astounding spike in infant fatalities.
Similar problems have occurred at other medical centers where CPOE
was introduced. “We found that a widely used CPOE system facilitated
twenty-two types of medication error risks,” a University of Pennsylvania
research team wrote of one such case. “Examples include fragmented CPOE
displays that prevent a coherent view of patients’ medications, pharmacy
inventory displays mistaken for dosage guidelines, ignored antibiotic
renewal notices placed on paper charts rather than in the CPOE system,
separation of functions that facilitate double dosing and incompatible orders,
and inflexible ordering formats generating wrong orders. Three quarters of
the house staff reported observing each of these error risks.”
Implementation improvements ultimately fixed the University of
Pittsburgh’s workflow problems, and child fatality numbers decreased. But
some irreversible damage had been done, and learning occurred the very
hard way. The biggest lesson was that simply inserting a new digitized
workflow in place of a carefully developed—albeit imperfect—manual
system without adequately analyzing the changes made at each step doesn’t
always work.
Technology reporter Hayden Field recently asked several leaders in
artificial intelligence (AI) a straightforward question: “What’s the single
biggest challenge that those building and working on algorithms will need to
grapple with in the next five years?” The question itself betrayed some
truths. First, there are many challenges, enough to merit a debate about
which one tops the list. Second, the time period of five years highlights how
quickly things move in AI. Beyond five years, predictions are nothing more
than blind guesses.
The nine interviewees’ answers shared distinct common themes. Six of
them highlighted the powerful and insidious ways human bias can

compromise AI’s potential for good. The other three focused on the
difficulties of scaling and deploying AI solutions in the real world. All
illustrated how precision projects that are thoughtfully conceived,
intelligently planned, and carefully executed can still go wrong because of
unforeseen complications arising from the irreducible complexities of
organizational leadership and of life itself.
For managers of precision systems, each of the common red-zone
failure points that we will discuss merits attention and planning. Sometimes
the mistakes that happen when implementing a precision system bring harm
to your organization, your customers and stakeholders, or society at large;
sometimes they simply prevent a project from ever getting launched, leading
to wasted time, money, talent, and other resources. Beginning a new project
by scrutinizing the failures of others and learning from them in order to
avoid repeating them is a good use of time.
Red Zone 1: Bias and Ethical Problems
In late 2020, a trending topic of conversation about Twitter exploded on the
app itself. Users had discovered some behavior by the app that was
unexpected, reliably reproducible, and apparently racist. Whenever a user
uploaded a photo of multiple people and post it in a tweet, Twitter would
automatically crop the image for presentation in the home screen Twitter
feed thumbnail in a way that selected and centered white faces and cropped
out any nonwhite faces—no matter how the faces were arranged. The app
worked that way even on light- and dark-furred dogs and on black-and-white
cartoon characters.
The photo-cropping tool was an attempt by Twitter to deploy entity
recognition—specifically, 
facial 
recognition—to 
make 
the 
humble
administrative task of creating thumbnails for images slightly easier. The
intention was no doubt to detect a human being automatically in a photo and
center them, on the assumption that the human was the main subject of the
photo. But the intention did not matter because the execution failed.
When the criticism exploded on Twitter, the company responded by
acknowledging the issue while refusing to explain its cause. Otherwise, the
tech giant did not enter the conversation, promising only to fix the problem
—and assuring users that the feature had gone through extensive bias testing
before its release.

Less than six months later, as the COVID-19 vaccination rollout
dominated headlines in the United States and around the world, Stanford
University Medical Center became headline news for the wrong reasons.
Leadership had developed and deployed an algorithm intended to prioritize
which staff members should receive the vaccine first, considering variables
like age, workplace level of exposure to COVID-19, and guidance from the
California Public Health Department. Somehow, the algorithm selected for
early vaccination only seven of the center’s 1,300-plus resident physicians
who worked on the front lines of COVID-19 patient testing and treatment,
instead prioritizing administrators and doctors working from home. The
outrage was swift and justified. And like Twitter, Stanford University
Medical Center apologized and promised to remedy the injustice, but it did
not enter any discussion about how the blatantly inequitable algorithm had
been released to begin with.
In her book Weapons of Math Destruction, Cathy O’Neil refers to this
as the problem of “having hard conversations.” Algorithms, she asserts,
came into use to help us avoid difficult social choices—“Who deserves a
loan?” she asks. “Who deserves homeless shelters? When is a teacher a
‘good’ teacher?” Today those questions are answered by algorithms and, she
asserts, “not for any particularly good reason” and not by any consensus of
values we debate and share. She forecasts, hopefully, that as algorithms
proliferate, the hard conversations needed to address these issues will
become more frequent and cause constructive friction in debate.
O’Neil guides us to ask: when is an algorithm simply being used to
avoid hard discussions? If banks, health-care providers, and other
gatekeepers of important goods and services can calculate individuals’
worthiness for those goods and services via an algorithm (usually under the
guise of process automation), then hide behind the algorithm’s decision
when challenged to explain it, individuals and society collectively suffer.
This is not only an issue of bias but also of explainability.
Researchers at Harrisburg University withdrew a study claiming that
their facial recognition software could predict criminality after it was quickly
criticized in academic circles for several serious problems. As Harvard
fellow and University of Pennsylvania lecturer Momin Malik noted in his
summary of the failings: criminality is not an inherent trait that can be
predicted; it is a judgment imposed on behavior. The study had also
confused data about arrests and convictions with data about actual crimes

perpetrated—which, as Malik notes, does not reliably exist. Finally, claims
made in the study such as “80 percent accurate and with no racial bias” are
simply implausible or categorically impossible.
Commercial applications of AI often don’t extensively dedicate thought
or time to these questions; they’re pursuing other goals. But why don’t
precision projects do what they possibly can to prevent bias every time? The
reasons are often mundane. Transformative projects tend to be developed
under time pressure. Lean project management frameworks are designed to
strip out unnecessary steps in order to ship the product as fast as possible.
Sometimes this emphasis on speed is justified. Whether the goal is to be first
to market with a compelling product, first to society with a lifesaving
vaccine, or first to a crime scene before the perpetrator flees, there’s often
good reason to focus on getting a precision system built quickly so it can
produce value for people rather than sitting on a shelf, gathering dust. But
when the desire for speed leads teams to skip the essential steps of testing for
bias and designing equitable, transparent, accountable systems, the positive
impact may end up overwhelmed by the negative.
Data and systems that produce and perpetuate inequitable treatment can
cause significant harm, often for many years. As we discussed in chapter 4,
this is what Dr. Simukayi Mutasa learned when he investigated the system
powering pediatric bone-age assessments and discovered that only white
children from mid-century Cleveland had been included in the original data
set. Correcting the bias in that data set was impossible, so Mutasa took the
route of creating a new, more representative data set that produced arguably
less biased and more accurate patient evaluations.
In other cases, the best solution may be to abandon the attempt to build
a precision system altogether. Many cities and states are rejecting public
facial recognition and machine-based recidivism predictions. And in 2021,
Twitter released its answer to the problem of racially biased, automatic
thumbnail creation—a revised photo-cropping system in which the user who
uploads the image can design the desired thumbnail themselves, with no help
from AI. Sometimes, simpler is better.
Avoiding the Red Zone
Of course, even better than taking action to fix data or systems that produce
unfair or harmful results is to prevent them from being implemented in the

first place. What are the steps that precision systems managers can take to
avoid this red zone?
A good way to start is by challenging your own assumptions about
which kinds of AI work require investigation through the bias and ethics
lens. People working in or around precision often assume—perhaps
unconsciously—that no such investigation is needed regarding a particular
AI project they are working on. Sometimes, this is because the purpose of
the precision system seems like a fundamentally harmless one. That
assumption can lead to serious problems later on.
The first data scientists and engineers working on Facebook’s news
feed product may have assumed that choosing which posts from a user’s
family, friends, and other sources to show first couldn’t possibly pose
dilemmas of ethics or bias. Because the choice didn’t involve subjecting
users to financial or other direct harm, the system designers felt free to focus
on their core metric of success—engagement measured through clicks,
shares, and likes. Yet somewhere along the line, Facebook’s news feed
became a vehicle for the rapid spread of misinformation, a market shaper for
legitimate news publishers, and a driving force behind the bitter political
polarization of the last decade. Whether that happened deliberately or
through mere negligence, the societal consequences were real.
The people behind Stanford’s botched vaccine rollout surely did not
intend to displace frontline workers from their rightful place at the front of
the vaccine distribution line. Most likely, the team was actually seeking to
achieve greater equity by calculating eligibility according to a consistent
framework rather than having humans—who were themselves also waiting
for the vaccine—make the decisions based on their personal and professional
judgments. But in their rush to implement the plan, they cut corners by
minimizing prerelease testing and review—a mistake that negated the team’s
positive original intentions. In retrospect, prioritizing vaccine recipients was
arguably a scenario in which using an algorithm was inappropriate. Rigorous
ethical discussions incorporating the voices of various affected stakeholder
groups could have achieved a more just outcome and avoided the uproar.
All this may perhaps be subsumed under John Gourville’s concept of
the “developer’s curse,” discussed earlier—a form of status quo bias in
which systems developers who have sweated the hard work of innovation
overvalue their invention, and underweigh its costs.

The lesson is a simple one: Regardless of whether you believe your
precision project has ethical implications, it should undergo ethical
investigation early and often. Twitter’s racist thumbnail problem might have
been avoided with what Desmond Patton calls “social work thinking” for AI.
“Social work thinking underscores the importance of anticipating how
technological solutions operate and activate in diverse communities. Social
workers have long been the trained ‘blind spotters’ that user experience and
AI design needs.” When assembling a team to work on a precision project,
data scientists and engineers are not the only ones needed—considering the
range of users and stakeholders who will be affected is a skill of its own.
The academic arena of data science is also tackling the problem of bias
and how to measure it. Bo Cowgill of Columbia University and Catherine
Tucker of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) have introduced
“counterfactual evaluation” as a new approach to measuring bias in
algorithms, without needing access to the algorithm itself. “If a company
uses a new algorithm, will the change cause outcomes to be more biased or
unbiased?… The question of algorithmic bias is also inherently marginal and
counterfactual. In many settings, the use of a new algorithm will leave lots
of decisions unchanged. [For example, a]… new algorithm for approving
loans may select and reject many of the same candidates as a human process.
For these non-marginal candidates, the practical effect of a new algorithm on
bias is zero. To measure an algorithm’s impact on bias, researchers must
isolate marginal cases where choices would counterfactually change with the
choice of selection criteria.”
Although not all precision is AI, and not all AI is machine learning,
machine learning does occupy an outsized role in discussions of risk because
outputs created by machine-learning algorithms are far removed from human
decisions. An emerging discipline of explainable AI seeks to rein in the
distance by creating processes and methods to explain machine learning
(ML) results. Explainable AI goes hand in hand with its partner
accountability, and together they enable people to understand and trust
machine-learning outputs.
An example of doing both poorly can be found in Apple’s launch of
their credit card product—Apple Card. To assign applicants with a unique
credit limit, Apple used a machine-learning algorithm to predict credit risk.
Applicants weren’t told that this was how their limit would be calculated,
and they weren’t told how the algorithm worked; which factors it

considered; or, most important, why they received the limit that they did.
Curious customers who questioned the company were given stock answers
by customer service agents that they were not responsible for the algorithm’s
output, couldn’t explain it, and there was no appeals process to change it.
Customers felt locked out of a decision that had a great impact on their
personal finances, and they felt the company eschewed responsibility by
hiding behind an algorithm.
To do better than Apple did, there are two main imperatives—even if
you’re not using machine learning. First, assess whether the use case you’re
solving is a low-stakes use case for explainability (for example, explaining
why a certain show was recommended in a list of recommended shows) or a
high-stakes use case (anything affecting people’s health or livelihoods). Use
that to develop appropriate explainability controls or even to change the
approach if you’re in the red zone. In the case of the Apple Card, the
company could have generated a lightweight calculator on their application
page, allowing applicants to enter different inputs and see what their credit
limit would be based on those inputs. At the very least, they could have
explained the different factors contributing to the algorithm and how they
were weighted.
Second, create accountability structures. Just because a prediction,
decision, or other output is made by a system doesn’t mean that humans can
or should be excluded from owning the impact of those outputs. In Apple’s
case, it could have provided an option for applicants to call and discuss or
even appeal their assigned credit limits, giving customer service agents
responsibility to adjust limits within certain ranges.
Red Zone 2: Issues of Privacy and Governance
The world of digital technology has recently been dominated by discussions
of privacy. Companies gather, analyze, and deploy data about us in order to
achieve business results—more precise targeting of advertisements, product
recommendations you’re more likely to click on, service delivery methods
that are more efficient, and so on. Throughout this book, we’ve showcased
these kinds of results to illustrate what can be achieved through the skillful
use of data. But now more than ever, people are becoming aware of how the
data about them is collected and used. They’re demanding more robust rights
and controls regarding these data. They’ve become sensitized to the various

forms of data abuse, ranging from the merely annoying (a custom-selected
advertisement following you around the internet) to the dangerous (a
government agency deploying mass-scale facial recognition to monitor and
control the movements of citizens).
As a result, issues surrounding how privacy protections should be
designed into a precision project have been raised to the highest priority.
Leaders must understand and be held accountable for balancing the
objectives of their organization and the technological projects they pursue to
achieve them with the individual’s right to privacy. In some cases, privacy
concerns may rank very low on the list of priorities. When the subjects and
objects of analysis aren’t human—for example, in the case of Blue River
applying image recognition to differentiate weeds from crops—privacy
rights aren’t at issue.
But at the other end of the scale, some applications involve data about
people that almost anyone would consider highly sensitive. Personally
identifiable information (PII) such as names, phone numbers, email
addresses, Social Security numbers, and more, as well as sensitive personal
information regarding topics like health, religion, and sexuality require high
standards of security. Even when PII is removed, it can still be possible
using statistical techniques to reliably reidentify the person the data
originally referred to. In the case of Patternizr at the New York Police
Department (NYPD), many steps had to be taken in the data preparation
phase to remove not only identifying information about the victims,
perpetrators, and officers involved in each crime but also any secondary
information that could be triangulated to deduce identities too.
In chapter 9, we told the story of Unilever’s AI-based hiring tools. In
early 2021, the HireVue—whose system it was—announced they would no
longer use facial recognition in its predictive hiring practices because of
increasing concerns about the ethical implications and, in fact, a decreasing
need to incorporate it anyway. The system had become accurate enough with
natural language processing (text analysis) alone.
Between the two extremes of data about objects like plants and
personally identifiable data about humans lie data about people or their
behavior that are anonymous and contain no sensitive information. These
types of data are subject to lower privacy demands. For example, in the case
of article recommendations at the New York Times, no PII was kept in the
data stores that scientists used to optimize the product experience. All that

was left behind was pseudonymized clickstream data, unreadable to the
human eye.
Privacy concerns extend not only to the data collected about people but
also to the secondary data products created from them. Machine learning can
be especially adept at creating privacy problems through its superhuman
ability to draw deductions. For example, a software tool with machine-
learning capabilities could observe an individual’s internet-browsing
behavior regarding causes and treatments for HIV/AIDS and deduce that
they likely suffer from the syndrome. Such derived insights, whether
confirmed or mere probabilistic estimates, are also considered sensitive
personal data.
To complicate matters of privacy further, any organization that operates
internationally needs to be familiar with its privacy obligations under
multiple different regional frameworks. These laws, like most, are written in
language that can be vague or interpreted in a variety of ways when applying
them to the reality of any specific situation. Enforcement agencies such as
Data Protection Authorities (DPAs) in the European Union or the Federal
Trade Commission (FTC) in the United States are expected to provide clarity
on how exactly these laws will be enforced, partly through working
examples of actual enforcement. As this book goes to press, such examples
remain sparse; regulators have made less progress in bringing enforcement
action than the law’s authors would have liked. Many companies are taking a
conservative approach, choosing to apply the most stringent requirements to
their businesses globally, to avoid fracturing operations.
The rollout of consumer privacy laws worldwide may be spotty, but
consumer demand for such laws remains strong. People are increasingly
aware, self-educated, and concerned with how data about them is collected
and used, and they increasingly expect organizations to prove that they’re
following the rules. The large and growing public appetite for protection in
the digital world applies to any precision project that concerns itself with
people in any capacity—so precision leaders should give this privacy-by-
design way of thinking center stage from day one.
Avoiding the Red Zone
Organizations that fail to follow strict regulatory guidelines regarding the
use of personal data may find themselves subject to legal sanctions. Of

course, they also run the risk of serious reputational injury. The relevant laws
can be complex, but there is a path to avoiding the red zone that can be more
intuitive than it might seem. Here are four key steps on that path:
• Be aware of relevant laws and comply with them. Different
jurisdictions have varying laws that govern what you can and can’t do
with people’s data. The most widely known is Europe’s General Data
Protection Regulation (GDPR), which mandates an opt-in model under
which people must explicitly consent to the collection and use of their
data. The California Consumer Privacy Act (CCPA) is an American
cousin that allows data processing on a slightly less strict opt-out basis.
Laws specific to certain industries, such as the Health Insurance
Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) in the United States for
health-care data, may apply additionally, as may laws about data
relating to children, like the Children’s Online Privacy Protection Act
(COPPA) or the European GDPR-K. When it comes to legal
compliance, spending money on external counsel is usually a good
investment.
• Develop clear data usage policies and communicate them widely.
Privacy violations can happen unintentionally when employees use data
without understanding their obligations. Developing policies about the
use of data and spending time to train team members on them, in
addition to making these policies publicly available, is an excellent way
to calibrate expectations and prevent costly and dangerous errors. Try
hard to articulate your rules and guidelines in a user-friendly way that’s
easy for everyone to understand.
• Don’t use people’s data in ways they wouldn’t reasonably expect. Even
in a field that involves myriad legal and policy obligations, there’s still
room for common sense. Most consumers understand the concept of
trading some data in return for a service they deem valuable, but data-
handling organizations often forget to hold up their end of the tacit
bargain. Using my click data to predict a book I might want to
purchase? That’s a common paradigm of personalization that most
people find acceptable. Selling that data to another company I have no
relationship with so they can target me with advertisements? That’s
potentially an uncomfortable surprise that could make me want to end
our relationship. It’s also worth remembering that the law and

consumers’ expectations may differ, with the latter being sometimes
more demanding than the former requires. It’s best to stay in touch with
how people actually feel in addition to the legal requirements and
consider meeting whichever bar is higher.
• Upskill on data privacy techniques for analysis. In the relatively new
field of differential privacy, analytical techniques are used to generate
insights while preserving privacy. For example, Google’s advertising
technology framework called the Privacy Sandbox establishes a
minimum size for any interest-based cohort large enough to prevent any
single user from being identified personally, even across multiple
cohorts. You or a team member may want to learn basic concepts of
cryptography like one-way hash functions, which are frequently used to
encrypt data with the goal of improving privacy. Whether or not these
data privacy techniques are appropriate or warranted is a case-by-case
decision (and this certainly does not constitute legal advice), but it is
worth knowing that simply having data or not having it is not the only
way to control for privacy.
The more you and your organization know about how to implement
privacy pragmatically, the more confident you can feel about using precision
systems to work with large amounts of data while still avoiding the red zone
in which basic principles of privacy are violated. Legal, policy, and user
research experts can support technical teams by bringing knowledge about
best-practice privacy preservation to the table, which usually leads to
decreased risk of making bad mistakes and to increased confidence in the
quality of the precision system.
Red Zone 3: Failing to Keep Humans in the Loop
Precision systems offer an advantage that comes with a significant risk:
They allow humans to outsource the hard work of thinking to a technological
tool. The problem is that, once the system is operating, the humans who
made it often stop thinking about it themselves, with consequences that can
be benign or disastrous.
This risk in AI, called automation bias, occurs when humans rely too
heavily on systems to help them make decisions and consequently ask fewer
questions, pose fewer challenges, and generally stop thinking independently.

David Lyell and Enrico Coiera describe this phenomenon: “when users
become over reliant on decision support, which reduces vigilance in
information seeking and processing.” They studied it in health-care settings,
where automation bias was mainly observed in simpler tasks, for example,
diagnoses, rather than more complex tasks, like ongoing monitoring, and
made recommendations for health-care providers to avoid this risk by
decreasing the cognitive load of the health-care workers operating the
decision support.
Laura Evans of the New York Times had to beat the drum about this
problem at the news giant. The product, data, and engineering teams
collaborated over years to develop sophisticated algorithms to personalize
each reader’s experience and thus show each reader articles they’re most
likely to want to read. But that doesn’t mean editors can take their hands off
the wheel completely.
Algorithms can only perform based on what they’ve been taught, either
through supervised training or through autonomous, unsupervised learning.
The training data sets are crucial. If they’re too heavily weighted toward one
user type, other types won’t be well catered to. In the case of news, the
problem is the short-lived nature of the key artifacts—namely, stories. Other
content types, such as Netflix original series or the novels sold on
bookselling sites like Amazon, can be consumed months or years after
production, but news goes stale quickly. That makes it hard for a model to
draw reliable insights from users’ reactions to it.
To cope with this problem, Evans’s team made sure that humans stayed
in the loop the whole time. “Since recommending older news content is
actually not appropriate,” Evans says, “and machine learning is not that great
at handling time, we knew we had to use ML to push recommendations to
the human curator, who could then make sure it’s correct and push it
forward.”
In the world of real estate, Zillow recently faced the repercussions of
overly relying on AI for what is still a mostly human process: home buying.
After its iBuying program went on an automated spree of bidding
aggressively on thousands of homes and buying them on behalf of the
company in order to flip them, the market cooled off more quickly than
Zillow’s iBuying AI had predicted. As a result, the company now owned
overpriced properties and had to begin selling them at a loss to institutional
buyers. Zillow’s CEO publicly attributed the error to inaccurate predictions

about the market’s continued growth, but in reality the failure was in the
management of AI. Why were bots able to make these offers autonomously?
Who was reviewing them, checking for accurate appraisals? Why did Zillow
leadership go all-in on this AI in a way that put the whole company at risk?
When the Zillow stock price dropped 30 percent after the publication of
these troubles and 25 percent of the workforce was subsequently let go,
should there have been leadership accountability for that?
Sometimes the stakes are even higher. At BNSF headquarters, leading
engineers sit side by side with the data folks who are preparing the training
data sets and creating the models, guiding them about what specific
mechanical faults look like. In this way, the railroad’s precision system
combines the best of both worlds—the power of data and the wisdom of
real-world expertise. After train machinery is flagged by the company’s
expansive sensor systems as needing proactive repair, a human engineer
must still be involved to approve the machine before it goes back into
circulation because the safety of BNSF workers and the communities
surrounding the railroad lines may be affected by any error in judgment that
the precision system might commit.
Avoiding the Red Zone
Incorporating human judgment into the preparation, development, testing,
and optimizing of a precision system—whether it relies on AI or not—is
essential to integrating a precision system successfully into the real world. It
helps precision systems gain the acceptance of the practitioner so that the
decision-making power is ultimately hers. It assures that existential
decisions, from the next play the coach calls on a football field to whether an
armed drone will shoot to kill a target, stay in the unique domain and
responsibility of humans. Evans explains the philosophy behind this:
In the creation of [a precision system], there absolutely has to be a
human. You’ve got your training data set. You have your outcome
that you’re trying to optimize. There should be an intercept there
first, certainly before you expose it to the public. There should be
that moment of asking, “Was this what we would have wanted,
what we would have expected, what should have been?” You need

a person looking at the outcomes and telling you, “Success,
failure, success, failure, success, failure.” You continue to apply
that to your training set until you get all successes and no failures.
Only then do you release your system. But people skip that step
too often.
Furthermore, the performance and accuracy of those final decisions
made by humans need to be evaluated continuously. Periodic testing coupled
with user testing and qualitative surveys can help to identify and mitigate
automation bias. In other words, for decisions that matter, humans must be
responsible. That doesn’t just mean they’re clicking the button; it means they
are engaged, understand what’s going on, and take accountability for it.
Red Zone 4: The Last Mile Problem
Andrew Ng, cofounder of Google Brain and deeplearning.ai and a well-
known thought leader in the field of AI, focuses on another red zone
problem—namely, “bridging the gap between proof of concept and
deployment.” Eric Topol calls it the “AI Chasm” problem—“the gulf
between developing a scientifically sound algorithm and its use in any
meaningful real-world application.”
The challenges of bridging this gulf are many: generalizing from an
algorithm that works well on a small data set to other populations “in the
wild,” transforming experimental code produced as proof of concept into
code for production systems that pass regulatory muster, and the financial
and time commitments necessary to mature systems to this next level. Never
mind the difficulty of moving from pristine research labs to rough-and-
tumble hospital settings where a little bit of jiggle in a machine setting can
throw the imaging off. Bad data, old systems, wrong people, poor timing,
insufficient support, invalid conclusions: there are a thousand ways a
precision system can fail in bridging the last mile between a worthy project
and successful deployment. Anyone who’s worked in data can tell you at
least a handful of horror stories.
Landing the last mile means correctly understanding what type of
problem you’ve set out to solve and committing the effort needed to solve it
all the way through, from end to end. “Despite many ‘demos’ and proof-of-

concept implementations,” Ng sums up, “getting an AI system deployed in a
factory, hospital, or farm today is still a labor of love.” But just as hope is
never a strategy, labors of love call for heroes, who can be in short supply.
As we saw in chapter 6, Joel Rose, founder and CEO of
Newclassrooms.org, has witnessed a similar problem in education
technology. School systems around the country are filled with smart,
determined people working hard to fix various problems in children’s
education, but they are failing repeatedly for one reason: No amount of
improvement in the early stages of instruction design can save a system that
fails at the last step—the delivery of precisely the right content, at the right
level, and the right moment to each individual student. He is pursuing
personalized learning as a solution to that biggest and most fundamental
problem, having recognized that, until the last mile of personalized
curriculum is fixed, education debt will continue to mount, and with it
failure for children.
The skills required to build data into value—through AI or otherwise—
are demanding, hard to develop, and rare. The supportive tools required are
not yet fully commoditized, although companies like Amazon, Google, and
others are striving to build them, meaning that data scientists still need to be
part engineer in order to get anything done. When a precision system does
make it live, it still requires ongoing maintenance and optimization in ways
that traditional software engineering companies haven’t been able to support
fully.
As Ng puts it, the tech industry “needs to build out the tools, processes,
and mindsets to turn AI creation and deployment of systems into a
systematic and repeatable process.” As this happens, presumably over the
next few years, AI will become increasingly commoditized, and the gap
between organizations who can bridge the last mile and those who can’t will
continue to shrink. In the future, when AI has been done away with coding
to the extent that traditional software engineering has done already, those
organizations that still haven’t made the transition to precision will have no
excuses left.
Avoiding the Red Zone
If there were a simple way to avoid the perils of the last mile, people like Ng
would already have found it. The obstacles are varied, unavoidable, and big.

In chapter 2, we talked about creating a good-enough precision system,
and we used the analogy of the skateboard versus the Ferrari to explain what
that means. The same analogy helps to explain why the last mile tends to be
bumpy: a skateboard is not really very similar to a Ferrari. It’s not even part
of a Ferrari, ready to be incorporated without changes into the design of a
high-end sports car. It is a totally different solution to the problem of getting
from point A to point B, whose only purpose is to demonstrate that the trip
is, in fact, possible. It will be discarded once it has served that purpose and
you start working on building the full car solution. The path of a precision
system from early proof of concept to real-world-ready system is similar:
very often, the first iteration is not fit for release and must be completely
reimagined.
The differences between the proof-of-concept prototype and the real
system may be quite varied. Perhaps the data you used to power the analysis
was initially pulled from databases as a favor by an information technology
(IT) staffer, and now you need to build the real database export. Perhaps you
tested it on a handful of willing test participants, and now you need to collect
a large number of real-world users who will consent to be part of your next
experiment. Perhaps you hacked together the results into a one-off
PowerPoint, and now you need to create dozens of dashboards reflecting
real-time data. Whatever the reasons, what you built for the proof of concept
won’t get you through the last mile. There’s no quick and easy way to
sidestep the push through the last mile, but there are some predictable
requirements that can be foreseen and planned for:
• Develop a realistic schedule. The move from the lab to the real world
is often harder and more time consuming than the initial win on the lab
workbench. Leave just as much time for last-mile iteration as for the
initial research and development (R&D), if not more.
• Expect to require an array of new skills. Perhaps the initial R&D work
was heavy on pure science, while the journey to production emphasizes
engineering. New models will need to be trained and monitored,
experimental results will need to be evaluated, and fresh data will need
to be pulled in for updates. This helps to explain why an emerging
discipline called machine-learning operations (ML ops) aims to equip
data scientists with traditional engineering skills and tools.

• Focus on metrics-based milestones rather than timelines. Avoid
guaranteeing that you’ll get the new system up and running in four
weeks, three months, or any specific time frame. The deployment
process is fundamentally nonlinear and doesn’t respond well to
traditional linear project management frameworks. Instead, you can
communicate (for example) that the model can go live once it’s reached
80 percent recall accuracy, or a 20 percent click-through rate, or
whatever measure that matters to the goal.
• Train the users. The people who will be using your system need to be
brought along on the journey, whether they are nurses who will use
your system to improve their triage methods, safety inspectors who will
use it to prioritize buildings in need of review, or talent scouts who need
to find new artists to sign. Don’t plan on tossing a finished solution
over the fence and hoping that users will pick it up and use it
successfully. 
Instead, 
plan 
for 
thorough 
training, 
continual
communication, and much advocacy to ensure that the system is
understood, accepted, and implemented effectively.
In a discussion for deeplearning.ai’s YouTube channel, Ng looks into
the future of machine learning and delves further into ML operations,
proposing the heuristic that getting a model to approximately 70 percent
accuracy is easy enough, while getting it above that threshold is significantly
harder. Suggesting that too many practitioners home in on optimizing the
model as a way to increase results, he proposes that instead they should turn
their attention to the data itself. Cleaning, augmenting, and generally
improving the data, Ng says, requires a new way of thinking—a systematic
approach centered on the concept of the life cycle of a machine-learning
project. Over the next few years, knowledge about how best to manage
machine-learning products will continue to expand along with best practices
and architectures, resulting in the eventual conquering of this domain and
significantly easier deployment, optimization, and management of precision
systems.
Until then, the last mile remains fraught. Plan accordingly.
Red Zone 5: The Dangers of Mismanaged Debt

When innovating, whether as a lean start-up or an R&D unit within an
established company, the push to get a good-enough product out the door is
usually the top priority. Teams have to prove that an idea works before
investing heavily in it because the cost of failure rises along with the cost of
sunk effort. In order to prove the concept quickly, teams can and should take
on certain kinds of debt. However, we aren’t referring to financial debt, like
a loan; we’re referring to the deferred cost of decisions made during
technology development in the interests of speed and progress.
Examples include technical debt. When shipping a minimum viable
product, teams often take technical shortcuts. They hack together a quick
workaround to a problem instead of spending the weeks required to build a
solution in a scalable and enduring way—as they should. The lightweight
solution appropriate for the proof-of-concept stage is not suitable for wide
adoption or use. Before the final rollout, the debt must be paid. Leaders who
are unaware of this, or willfully blind to it, will pay the price with crippling
interest costs later—for example, the heightened cost of development for
every new feature due to poorly designed foundational systems or the even
greater costs resulting from outright system failure.
Another example is decision debt, derived from the choice to defer
decisions to later dates. “We can figure that out after milestone X”—does
that language sound familiar? Even worse, sometimes decisions are deferred
so long that the people who have the knowledge required to finalize the
outcome have moved on, leaving those who join the team with an inherited
decision due and no tools to make it. Wisely accruing decision debt is an
important tool for leaders as long as they don’t lose track of all the decisions
awaiting their eventual attention and as long as they maintain the
information and context required to make the decision accessible to those
who will eventually need it. When ignored long enough, deferred decisions
turn to denial, and projects suffer as new decisions rely on old ones that still
haven’t been made.
Finally, there’s organizational debt, which is especially important for
executives. In the interests of an urgent test-and-prove effort, leaders will
often pull skilled people from existing assignments to form a temporary
team. Once the project has proven its value and is up and running, however,
the temporary team is too often simply left in place, the preexisting teams
aren’t made whole, and the new team responsible for maintaining and
improving the precision system isn’t thoughtfully or deliberately rounded

out. This results in all the organizational teams being weaker and less
productive, with cascading negative effects.
Avoiding the Red Zone
Examining technical, decision, and organizational types of debt through the
lens of traditional financial debt yields commonsense insights about how to
manage each one. It starts with recognizing that you’re using debt to move
quickly and understanding exactly what the debt is. Then it requires a plan
for tackling the debt while keeping the original plan in mind throughout your
future resource planning debates. There’s no such thing as a credit score for
technical, decision, or organizational debt, but many companies would be in
for a rude shock if there were. Don’t be one of them.
Jorge Bernal Mendoza reflects on the smart strategies needed to deal
with debt for precision development based on his experiences transforming
the digital organization of Pemex, Mexico’s, nationalized oil company
(discussed in chapter 4):
So often, companies want all the whiz-bang benefits of AI or digital or whatever instantly, but they’re
not willing to pay the price. You must have a payment plan to pay down the technical debt you accrue.
You can decide to prioritize small, consistent payments through dedicated foundational engineering
time, or you can pay it all in a big chunk by doing an all-in rewrite. It doesn’t matter, so long as you
don’t ignore the debt.
And don’t forget about the cash cow—the major legacy business that needs upkeep. For many
companies, the new precision system will not pay the big organizational bills for years to come. So
you need to invest in new technology without neglecting what powers your business today. Allocate
your resources accordingly.
Again, machine learning raises unique concerns when it comes to
technical debt. Researchers at Google examined technical debt in machine-
learning systems, arguing that “ML systems have a special capacity for
incurring technical debt, because they have all of the maintenance problems
of traditional code plus an additional set of ML-specific issues. This debt
may be difficult to detect because it exists at the system level rather than the
code level.” Some of the issues they noted were highly technical and
mathematical risks; others were more accessible to the layperson—like
“changes in the external world.”
The concepts of technical debt apply to any technical system. The level
of debt incurred and its complexity depend on a multitude of factors like the

speed of progress and the number of shortcuts, the choice of technology and
use of machine learning, and dependencies on external frameworks and
tools. Going into a precision project with eyes wide open about how debt is
accrued and having a strategy for servicing that debt are imperative.
Red Zone 6: Problems of Measuring Impact
In November 2020, the one battle that mattered for the Democratic National
Committee (DNC) was won: Democrats triumphed in the presidential
election, and Nellwyn Thomas, Nate Rifkin, and their teams saw their
tireless, data-driven transformation efforts pay off. They had managed
databases of millions of Americans’ contact details, honoring individual opt-
out preferences for each. They had ensured that persistent campaign
outreach did not turn into unwanted harassment while also keeping all those
contact details securely stored to prevent significant privacy breaches. They
had dealt with the last-mile challenges posed by COVID-19, which made
traditional outreach via knocking on real doors impossible. And they had
invested significant resources in dealing with debt, especially technical debt.
Thomas’s decision to devote years of effort to transforming the underlying
infrastructure powering the DNC had been a strategic judgment based on the
estimated cost of continuing to ignore that debt—which would be losses in
2020 and beyond.
Yet after all that, and despite the happy outcome on Election Day,
Thomas and Rifkin’s teams faced one more type of red zone that merits
acknowledgment. There was no way to prove what worked to change hearts
and minds or to hold fast the voters who might have wavered and voted
Republican. National elections are incredibly complex phenomena. They are
swift. There are many variables that help to explain why one candidate wins
and another loses, but it is difficult if not impossible to test them
methodically one by one to find out which ones were decisive. There is
correlation, yes—we can see that people texted by the Tech for Campaigns
(TFC) group, for example, turned out to vote 0.7 percentage points more
than their counterparts in the same districts who did not receive texts. But
can they prove causation? In the end, no one can be certain how any voter
voted or why. That rules out randomized control trials, the gold standard of
measured effect, and makes it “challenging to know if your texts are having
an impact,” TFC wrote. But TFC found that “response rates and sentiment

are a strong proxy for later voter turnout.” The same might be true of other
metrics—the volume of volunteers signing up, the number of qualified
citizens persuaded to register, and the percentage of phone calls resulting in
donations are all, potentially, proxy metrics for what works.
In any political race, those proxies may be as good as it gets. And they
may be good enough. In one highly competitive race, for example, Liz
Snyder, a TFC client candidate in the Alaska House, won her 2020 race by
only eleven votes. Texting could have made all the difference, perhaps
driving even unexpected, unlikely voters or swing voters or younger voters
to cast a ballot. All showed higher turnout rates in 2020 if texted compared
to similar voters who were not. With texting so cheap (some platforms cost
only $.01 per text)—who could afford not to text?
Underneath it all, research points to the risks of confirmation bias in
action. In essence, campaigns have used techniques from direct mail to text
for so long there is little doubt that they must “work.” COVID-19 ultimately
left little choice but to “believe” in online and phone messaging. In the final
three months of the 2020 election, Tech for Campaigns estimated that
Americans received more than 11.6 billion political messages by various
digital and electronic means.
The problem of measuring the impact of precision systems is not
simply knowing what works in the classic and limited sense. For example,
the failure of computer-aided detection systems for mammography was a
large-scale, multidecade disaster, as Eric Topol recounts: it was approved by
the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) in 1998, used broadly, but then
discovered twenty years later to fail utterly at improving diagnostic
accuracy. It was costly to insurers but without “established benefit to
women,” as one major study found.
The problem of measuring the impact of precision systems is also
knowing that precision works to reduce collateral impacts from the old ways
of bringing about change while achieving precision where, when, and how
managers want. That is the promise of precision, for example, for COVID-
19 tracing in Singapore to be swift to develop, easy to deploy and use,
comprehensive across the universe of possible patients, and efficient in
producing scalable outcomes that manual tracing would miss. Did Jason
Bay’s TraceTogether do that—deliver accuracy, privacy, and speed as it
scaled to millions and tied off the pandemic? Those measures count in
assessing whether precision delivered on its full promise.

The same, then, is true for precision policing systems—if they promise
early detection of patterns, as they must and can, did they deliver patterns
accurately, quickly, and to scale? In doing so, did they reap the harvest of
improved perceptions of police and policing from less indiscriminate
policing—and if not, why not? If See and Spray promised reductions in
pesticide use and improved crop yields by applying pesticides more
accurately—did the See and Spray system achieve this optimization? If it did
not, See and Spray managers are leaving value on the table. Did Zipline
deliveries of vaccines mean that immunosuppressed patients would no
longer have to traipse through infected populations to get vaccinated but
could vaccinate in place with far reduced risk? That’s a promise of precision
drone delivery—did Zipline’s system deliver that? If it didn’t, that’s worth
knowing and fixing.
Those new possibilities differentiate precision systems from all others
—the good that comes from achieving better outcomes and less harm—more
of what you do want and less of what you don’t—compared to the systems
they replace. New precision systems must be given new metrics and
measured to account for the harm avoided. In tallying the wins for precision,
do the harms reduced count just as much as the positive gain? Together they
should add up to astounding value. Did they? And note that with fewer
negatives and broad-based positives managers can bring many more
supporters to their side. Did they? Prudent managers can capitalize on that.
Another lens on value measurement and its purpose—continuous
improvement—relates specifically to machine-learning products used in
regulated settings like health care. Regulatory bodies around the world are
just beginning to understand how to regulate AI. As we said in chapter 2, AI
refers to computers programmed to make humanlike decisions. Machine
learning, on the other hand, is enabling computers to learn independently
and make decisions in ways that humans never programmed them to do
originally.
These are the situations where regulation falls short today, and so, as
Pearse Keane and Eric Topol describe, regulations often inhibit machine-
learning systems from actually learning in practice. “Although these systems
typically learn by being trained on large amounts of labeled images, at some
point this process is stopped and diagnostic thresholds are set… after this
point, the software behaves in a similar fashion to non-AI diagnostic
systems. That is to say the auto-didactic aspect of the algorithm is no longer

doing ‘on the job’ learning. It may be some years before clinical trial
methodologies and regulatory frameworks have evolved to deal with
algorithms capable of learning on a case-by-case basis in a real-world
setting.”
This reality forces delays and halting progress on those developing
precision systems for health care: they can only improve the system until it
must be shipped to customers. And even then, the frequency with which
customers update their version may be out of their control too. This means
that improvements made in the lab may remain invisible and unmeasurable
for a long period of time, stretching out the design-test-prove loop.
Avoiding the Red Zone
The reality is that measuring the impact of precision systems can be
technically difficult and operationally challenging. Proxy metrics help where
the direct benefits are in fact unobservable. But expect the breadth of
precision wins to be breathtaking and challenging to grasp, even as they
scale fast and well, but of unparallel value to count, and count well.
The difficulties of measuring the true impact of a precision system
should be considered by leaders when evaluating whether to invest or not,
and whether to invest further in fixes. It’s another reason why those who
hope to be members of the precision vanguard need both strong leadership
skills and a greater-than-average level of personal commitment, even
courage. Precision systems work—but don’t count on finding any single
number that proves the fact beyond a reasonable doubt.
    ✳✳✳
Stumbling into a red zone doesn’t necessarily mean failure. Every successful
case study offered in this book attests to that fact because every precision
system experiences red-zone challenges from time to time. Red zones are to
be recognized, identified, mitigated, and avoided where possible. Failure to
do so can result in failure for the project, but the reverse is also true—
managing red zones well can result in greater success.
Teams embarking on precision projects for the first time will
realistically experience failure risks throughout the course of development.
Most data science efforts fail for want of budget, purpose, data, personnel, or

platform before ever operating as part of a system. A clear business purpose,
talented people, and strong political support are key to making it out of the
lab and onto the field of play. Perseverance, thoughtfulness, and openness to
feedback and change are crucial qualities for anyone seeking success with a
precision system.
Recognize that the very definition of success evolves over time. As we
get better at identifying the systemic shortcomings of today’s precision
systems, we incur a new responsibility to reexamine our old work to see how
it can be improved. This should be a routine part of the ongoing maintenance
of precision systems. As organizations scale and use of their products
increases, no precision project can ever really be considered finished. With
the potential for positive impact growing continually, we should never be
completely satisfied with what we believe we have achieved. We should
instead test and prove that our precision system is hitting its mark, that is,
producing change exactly where, when, and how we want it, nothing more
and nothing less, and ensure such great value again and again, at greater
scale.

CHAPTER 11
SUMMING UP
Some Final Lessons for Leaders
In this book, we’ve recounted stories of a wide range of precision systems.
They were drawn from various industries and served different purposes;
faced many kinds of challenges; and were driven by the talents of people
with diverse backgrounds, personalities, and leadership styles. We chose
these stories because of the lessons they offer for other leaders who hope to
apply the powers of precision systems to the problems and opportunities
they recognize in their own fields of endeavor. We hope you’ve enjoyed
learning about the members of the precision vanguard whose struggles,
successes, and occasional failures we’ve described—and we hope you’ve
gathered some valuable nuggets of practical wisdom along the way.
Now we’d like to leave you with some final lessons. They take the form
of four sets of imperatives that we think all aspiring leaders of precision
systems should take to heart:
• Innovating a technology of precision
• Building to precision: on-ramps
• Managing to precision: the enterprise
• Leading for precision: transformation
We’ll discuss each set of imperatives separately in this chapter.
Innovating a Technology of Precision

If you are or want to be a leader of a precision system, your first imperative
is to innovate what Clayton Christensen has referred to as a new technology
of people, data and platforms, processes, and performance. That technology
should work as a system with a purpose: to achieve precisely the change you
require, where, when, and how you want it.
Data are the fuel of precision. It flows across your platforms. Respect it,
handle it with care—but don’t assume its quality. As must any fuel, data
must be refined, purified, rinsed of bias, blended, and ensured that the data
are the right grade for your systems. Poor data quality can cause precision’s
downfall.
If data are the fuel of precision, platforms are its beating heartbeat.
Whether the platform is a BNSF command center and its sensor network, a
tractor and its imaging setup, a ground control station for drones halfway
around the world, or a K–12 classroom accelerating learning, each one is
mission built. Platforms should start out lean but will inevitably grow more
complex with sophistication. It’s important to remember that developing new
platforms with data isn’t linear—progress can stall or even halt before a
breakthrough.
When it comes to technology, more isn’t always better—all that matters
is whether the platform is fit for its purpose. But that fit can be hard to find.
New technologies are emerging rapidly that offer new ways to solve old
problems, so striking the balance between future-proofing your technology
investments against starting somewhere and diving into real applications is
delicate and crucial.
Leadership for precision ensures that the data and platforms align,
creating a system that will work and work and work—technically, as a
system; operationally, producing results; and for the organization, engaging
teams and achieving value as promised. The data is instrumented, accurate,
and compatible. Data technology powers precision best when it’s usable by
those who should use it, streamlined for those who manage it, and
explainable for those who must pay for it.
It’s a big job. In our ever-changing world. it never gets done once and
for all. It must be continually revisited, reevaluated, and reworked to meet a
continually evolving set of challenges, demands, and needs.
Building to Precision: On-Ramps

As a leader of precision, your second imperative is to understand and master
the complex array of processes involved in conceiving, building,
implementing, and maintaining a precision system. Most often, the journey
to precision begins when you spot an opportunity—a persistent problem, a
looming crisis, an urgent goal, a charge from the boss. You look to your
bureaucratic compass—your bosses, subordinates, colleagues, external
stakeholders. Can you go it alone or, as is usually the case, do you need to
involve others? Your first move is the first call you make around your
network touching each of the four points of your compass as needed,
spreading out across your network to call a coalition into existence. It
includes supporters and sponsors, contributors and givers, customers and
patrons. Above all, there is a problem that needs fixing or an opportunity
that needs seizing. You frame it as a goal, as simple as you can make it,
around which all can rally (or at least refrain from opposing).
Then you set to work with a core group, a few trusted colleagues from
the precision vanguard—risk takers like you who will make common cause,
contribute their ingenuity, excitement, authority, and skill sets. Together, you
define the problem to be tackled and the hypothesis driving the solution, and
begin to set up the framework of design, test, and prove, which you’ll carry
throughout the life of the project. You define success and the specific
measures that must be met to claim victory.
Once the problem and goals are understood, think about the kind of
system you need: Will it focus on pattern matching? Image recognition?
Geotracking? All three and/or others? Is the work doable by spreadsheet and
simple statistics, or do you need artificial intelligence (AI) and machine
learning? Do you have the data? Is the right kind of platform available?
Cobble together a vision that works, a plan that is practical, to be built using
whatever capacity you have on hand or can easily acquire. And connect with
superiors and allies to make sure you have enough authority to move around
the network comfortably, even stepping out of lane or across boundaries as
needed without ruffling too many feathers.
Then the detailed work begins. Assemble technical teams to model
early solutions, then do some early proof-of-concept work. Identify the gaps
between what you have and what you need, define more precisely the
opportunity within reach, and begin to surface your package in anticipation
of scaling. As needed, you reach out for bigger contributions of time, data,
people, and budget.

Take stock of how far and how fast you can move without losing
support and bumping into opposition. Frame the initiative to hit the CEO’s
sweet spot of strategy—and leave everyone whole, creating new well-being
or benefits without diminishing what’s already in hand. Skip the endowed—
those strongly wedded to the status quo—and make it easy for the others to
see the big benefits your plan will offer. Shrink the ask to reduce technical
complexity and operational change so that winning support is easier and
faster. Strive to get value in the hands of users fast, whetting their appetites
and building support for more.
And at every step, keep asking, “Will it work, and work, and work”—
technically as a system, operationally to address the problem, and for the
organization, its people, and its purposes?
Managing to Precision: The Enterprise
When scaling a precision enterprise, your third big imperative is to manage
your precision system so that it integrates seamlessly and powerfully with
the entire organization. The following seven principles will make this
integration easier—although still far from easy:
• Focus obsessively on outcomes. Guided by the CEO’s north star of
strategy, engineer the change—test it, prove it, and get your metrics and
measures right. Manage precision end-to-end, from data to outcomes.
Always ask, Does the precision system in the field and in the hands of
humans work to produce the promised change? Be prepared to rework
the system as needed to produce the promised outcomes.
• Never stop testing and proving. Your operational methods can always
be more streamlined, more efficient, more understandable; your data
can always be more accurate, more thorough, more usable; your
platforms can always be made more user-friendly, more accessible,
more versatile; your assumptions can always be further challenged. The
day after you launch your precision system is the first day to begin
work on identifying its shortcomings and building the improvements
that will evolve it.
• Choose your technologies but keep in mind their limits and their
power. The virtue of AI and machine learning is not that they do a

better job than humans. At best, they do no worse. But they scale to
handle volume, go fast, and standardize treatments—treating like cases
alike, no matter what, for better and for worse. And together, humans
and machines will always do better than either alone. Above all, always
design humans into the decision chain for crucial decisions no machine
can, or ever should, make as well, and know that no decision system is
free of bias because systems are built by humans.
• Keep the user experience of precision systems as simple as you can.
Precision systems change the technology and the routines of work.
That’s the point—they transform if you let them. But if you change
what people do and how they do it all at once you may be in for the
long haul. If you don’t have the time (and sometimes you won’t) shrink
the ask. Use systems that are backward compatible, keep users and
operators winning with systems they are comfortable with and find easy
to use.
• Build better teams. Precision systems can’t happen without cross-
disciplinary teams working together collaboratively and productively—
which means that team composition, team solidarity, and team
management should be topics every precision manager thinks about day
and night. Reset objectives and key results (OKRs) and key
performance indicators (KPIs) to roll up to precision outcomes and hit
targets with their cumulative effect so that every team member is
pulling the right oar and all the oars are pulling in the same direction.
And then, as soon as you think you’ve assembled the best possible
team, start planning how you will reconfigure it and shift the team
leadership to restress the next steps in the process.
• Change your organizational routines and workflows to take advantage
of precision. You can’t simply bolt precision onto your existing
workflows. In most organizations, the processes used for delivering
value—whether through products, services, information, or activities—
can require change—new workflows, job designs, performance metrics,
even new rules and regulations. That may mean stepping out of your
lane to win support from organizational veterans who are comfortable
with the traditional ways of operating. Work around them and with
them as best you can—and make sure that the added value you can
produce through precision is so big and undeniable that even the die-
hard resisters will ultimately have to yield.

• Never forget that the world is dynamic. What makes your precision
system incredibly powerful today may vanish tomorrow—and with it,
whatever advantage today brought. Don’t become a victim of sunk cost
bias by falling in love with the system you just spent months and
countless hours creating. Instead, give your heart to the even better
system you and your team will begin building tomorrow.
Leadership for Precision: Transformation
Precision changes the calculus on the battlefield, in the classroom, in the
ecommerce marketplace, on the farm, on the football gridiron, and in the
newsroom. But transformation is not automatic. It must be foreseen, aspired
to, engineered for, tested, proved, monitored, and supported continuously
with improvements and protections over time. Here’s a list of five principles
to help you become a more effective leader of precision transformation:
• Boldly redefine your goals. Assume today that, without precision, you
are leaving value on table—ad revenues not picked up, for example. Or
you’re causing needless damage with blunt force change—spraying
entire fields instead of one weed at a time. Know that precision systems
can fix that. Open your eyes to a new world of possibilities, a world of
full-spectrum effects in which you can achieve multiple, seemingly
contradictory goals at once; satisfy multiple potential and actual
customers; deliver higher-than-ever direct value; and carry lower-than-
ever overhead. Then go for this new universe of possibilities. The virtue
of precision systems is that they handle a new totally addressable
universe of possibilities—all 50 million potential voters in seventeen
battleground states for Biden, 200 million ad placements possible for
the news app upday, 100 million track geometry measurements every
one kilometer of all 22,000 miles of BNSF-owned track—every weed,
every child, every news reader, one at a time and by the millions. Plan
for it, test it, and prove it. Then do it.
• Reconfigure your performance metrics and delivery systems. Precision
lets managers reach huge new target populations with greater impact
and accuracy than ever. That shifts the denominator and cries out for
new performance metrics that reflect loftier goals than you ever dared
to set. Then re-form your value delivery systems to match the new

goals, managing all for end-to-end outcomes and impacts in which
there are new definitions of what counts as a win.
• Hold fast to the new future as it emerges. Deliberately look for ways
to define the organizational culture as a culture of precision. Consider
what you measure and control; how you react to critical incidents and
crises; how you allocate budget, rewards, and status; how and what you
teach and coach; how you define and communicate organizational
values and beliefs; and the stories of success (and failure) that you
choose to tell and retell. Use the new culture of precision as a power
lever to keep change progressing.
• Be comfortable in the several roles of leadership for precision. As an
admiral, you may lead a fleet of initiatives; your principal task will be
allocating scarce resources across all. As an orchestra leader, you’ll
lead a single complex project involving many specialists; your central
task will be to ensure that everyone is in tune and playing from the
same score. And as a pit boss, you’ll lead your own team through its
day-to-day challenges; your core responsibility will be to keep the
group focused and on task, executing against the plan as required.
Recognize how these roles differ from one another, and learn to move
adroitly from one role to the next as the demands of the work evolve.
• Remember that change means cultures in conflict. Engineers,
operators, and managers will all react differently to the pressures
generated by the move to precision. Know the third rails of status quo
bias; recognize the realities of who will win and who will lose; and be
clear about your theory of change: how do things work for the change
you want, and who has to do what to achieve it?
Above all, refine your strategy to be a precision strategy, aligning
people, platforms, and processes on new performance possibilities. Prove,
test, and scale. Then relight your beacon for precision; keep that north star
brightly lit and in your sights. It will guide all, and they will need it.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
 Early on, before there was ever a book, we asked colleagues Lewis
Shepherd, Christopher Tucker, James Waldo, James Ledbetter, James Mintz,
and Thomas H. Davenport whether a book about precision systems made
sense. Having clarified its theme and message for all, each said, “Yes, write
it.” We are grateful for this invaluable support, as their vote was the green
light that set us on our path.
Getting to a finished book was a challenge because in March 2020, all
travel and in-person contacts ceased as the COVID-19 pandemic blanketed
the world. That changed the entire approach to collaboration for us and to
the research we would conduct. Everything and everyone became pixilated;
but it also meant that a new norm of research emerged that was entirely
digital—no in-person interviews, at-conference workshops, or other face-to-
face work. And there was power in that because the technologies of Zoom,
the web, email, Teams, and the internet gave us quick and global entrée to an
astounding array of practitioners and their data, all of which we engaged
digitally.
We are therefore grateful to our researchers Rebeca Juarez and Lorenzo
Leon, who worked from Mexico City and then Strasbourg to provide a
backbone of data before and after interviews. Cody Want of London helped
get us started and on course as our first editor; Karl Weber followed as our
principal editor, closer to us in New York—but still we never once met in
person. Karl helped us construct the book, chapter by chapter, and unified
the voices throughout. We could not have put one foot in front of the other
and end here, with this finished book, without him. Nick Glynn gave us
insights to the publishing world. Ian Botts, Mike McNeeley, and Jason
Cicchetti reminded us of the power of stories and our great opportunity to
tell them here. We are grateful to Alice Martell, our authors’ representative;

Brian C. Smith, our editor at Columbia Business School Publishing; and
Myles Thompson, our publisher who, with reassuring confidence, said, “Yes,
definitely,” to our proposal for Precisely.
We interviewed many for this book and transcribed speeches, panels,
webcasts, and podcasts of many more whom we never met but who we
quote. We are grateful to all our interview subjects and, from afar, all
presenters, panelists, and participants whom we may know only from
YouTube. But among the interview subjects, some stand out for the time and
patience they extended, making simple their complex tales. They include
Nathan Rifkin, Nellwyn Thomas, Jose Nunez, and Nina Wornhoff for the
DNC accounts; Dean Wise, Allan Zarembski, and Marty Schlenker for
BNSF; Daniel Stern and Eric Eager for the sports analytics account (Eric
warned us the NFL would be hard to crack, and it was); Jason Bay for
Singapore and tracebacks; and General John Jumper for Predator’s oft-told
tale, now updated and reset for the precision world. Laura Evans, Josh Arak,
Nick Rockwell, and Tiff Fehr of the New York Times helped us see their
world as we never would have otherwise. Dr. Joshua Weintraub and Dr.
Alexander Baxter anchored our radiology accounts. A special thank-you
goes to Brett Danaher, David Boyle, Sameer Modha, and Nolan Gasser,
whose time and insight to music and the arts benefited us profoundly; to Lori
Pollock and James Byrne of the New York Police Department (NYPD), and
on reflection and with great respect to the NYPD’s William J. Bratton,
Dermot F. Shea, and Philip Banks III. Ben Singleton, then of JetBlue; Alex
Dichter of McKinsey; and Charles Cunningham of Southwest Airlines
shared with us their great insight into precision systems in airline operations.
We owe a great debt and gratitude to teachers and colleagues at
universities along the way, notably Mark H. Moore, Stephen Goldsmith,
Steven Kelman, and Jerry Mechling of Harvard Kennedy School, Mitchell
Epstein and John Gourville of Harvard Business School, and William
Eimicke of Columbia University’s School of International and Public
Affairs. We hope that, in writing Precisely, we have paid forward some of
this debt so that others can benefit from their great wisdom, as we have.

CHAPTER NOTES
1. Introduction: From Digitization to Precision
For the Ravens’s analytical edge, we drew principally from our background
interview with Eric Eager, of PFF Sports, then stories reported by Kapadia
(2019), Brock (2019), Oyefusi (2019), Hartley (2020), Hensley (2019, 2020,
2021), Dubow (2021a, b) and McLaughlin (2019) (See National Football
League [NFL], below, for additional sources.). The New York Police
Department (NYPD) account draws principally from our interviews with
Alexander Cholas-Woods, Lori Pollock and Michael Lipetri, and others, and
from news accounts reported by Dorn (2019), Moore (2019), Kilgannon
(2019), Lampden (2020), Fondren (2022), and Miller (2020). Chung (2020)
references “the first day is the worst” for machine-learning models—they
improve over time and with use. Korea’s preparation for COVID relied on
Watson (2020), McCurry (2020), Sohn (2020), Sternlicht (2020), Japan
Times (no author; 2020), Gottlieb (2021), the editorial board of the
Washington Post (2022), Worldometers (2022), and Fisher (2020). SailGP
was drawn principally from Schmidt’s (2021), Smith’s (2019). and
Springer’s (2022) accounts.
We draw the reference to “technologies of people, processes and
platforms” from Clayton Christensen’s use of “technology” as he defined it
in The Innovators Dilemma (2011)—“the processes by which an
organization transforms labor capital, materials, and information into
products and services of greater value. All firms have [such] technologies.”
Tom Davenport’s “The Need for Analytical Service Lines” (2011) is
essential reading. Michael Tushman’s The Ambidextrous CEO (2011) gave
us further insight into the embrace of tensions between new and old
corporate job design, workflows, and teams as impactful for innovation.

Ackoff (2001) and Meadows (2008) on systems, and Kotter (2012) and
Kanter (1985) on change are foundational. The “big data/small data”
discussion is based on Ng (2021), Chahal (2021), Ravishankar (2018), Ray
(2022), Macaulay (2022), Kaye (2022), and Waddell (2018). “Nudge” and
its issues can be found in Thaler and Sunstein (2008), Thaler (2017), and
Chater and Lowenstein (2022).
Zipline
We relied on Zipline’s own accounts, including statements by its cofounders
Rinaudo and Wyrobek (Zipline, 2021a-c). Khanna and Gonzalez’s Harvard
Business School case (2021) and article (2018) helped set the stage further.
Reporting by Farley (2020), Peters (2020), Dijkstra (2021), and Toor (2016)
helped us fill out the picture. We drew data and insights from reports by
Greve et al. (n.d.), Guerin et al. (n.d.), Stokenberga and Ochoa (2021),
Droneblogger (2021), Reuter and Liu (2021), Zhu’s interview of Nick Hu
(2021) and Flyzipline.com (n.d.)
Zest
Zest caught reporters’ eyes early. We benefited from Crosman’s (2012) work
and from reporting by Fuscaldo (2019), Rao (2010, 2012), and Zax (2012).
We learned about Zest-like FinTech startups like Mahindra Finance and FIA
Global from Mishra (2018) and Sharma (2022) respectively. Zest’s
subsequent legal troubles were well documented by Aquino (2020) and
Brueggemann (2019), among others.
National Football League (NFL)
In addition to the sources cited above, we drew from Siefert (2021) on NFL
fourth-down offenses; NFL clock measures in Sault (2019) and Silverman
(2018); Hayhurst (2020) on RFID chips in uniforms; EdjSports on Staley
(2021); Cosentino (2021) on “think like a coach”; Fortier (2020), O’Connell
(2022) on the NFL move to analytics; Joyce (2019) on Gettleman;
McLaughlin (2019) on Daniel Stern; Tomlinson’s quote is from Hensley
(2021); Schatz (2022) on the aggressiveness index; Lundberg (2021) on

Jackson’s offensive style; Fox (2021), and Walder (2021) comparing NFL
analytics units. The Cooper Kupp account is from Bishop (2021). Pagnetti’s
account is from Fox (2021). We drew additionally from reporting by
Hayhurst (2020), Levin (2021), McCaskill (2021), and Togerson (2022).
NFL valuations are on Kurt Badenhausen’s beat (2022).
Why We Wrote This Book
Kara Swisher’s reporting on Silicon Valley has long proved itself invaluable.
Her coinage (2021) pronouncing the digitized future inevitable is timeless.
Marc Andreessen’s notion of liquifying markets is offered in Morris (2013).
Tom Davenport’s “Artificial Intelligence for the Real World” (2018) inspired
our hunt for precision system types. From our interviews, Alex Dichter’s
insights (2021) to “bolting old systems onto new” at airlines, and Dr. Joshua
Weintraub’s at hospitals (2021), were eye-opening, further buttressed by
Coiera on clinical disengagement (2018), and Han (2005), Sittig (2006), and
Koppel (2005) on medical error from disrupted routines. Davenport’s
exhortation to try fixing broken processes first, squarely put in his 2018
Harvard Business Review (HBR) article, gave us courage to suggest the
same when designing precision systems. The concept of brand equity,
mentioned here, recurs throughout the book. It is Kevin Lane Keller’s
(2001). The fourth Industrial Revolution is sourced to the World Economic
Forum’s Klaus Schwab (2015). The “magic bullet” theory of information
technology (IT) transformation is Markus and Benjamin’s (1997). The
“precision chasm” borrows from Keane and Topol’s “AI chasm” (2018).
Tom Goodwin’s brilliant capture of our times is from his Techcrunch blog
(2015).
2. Six Kinds of Precision Systems
Sources of insight and inspiration include Sara Brown’s machine-learning
writings for MIT Sloan’s Ideas Made to Matter blog (2021), Paul Ford’s
thoughts on what “real” programming is (or isn’t) for Wired (2020), and
Khodabandeh, Ransbotham and Shervin’s study of Gina Chung’s account of
artificial intelligence (AI) development at DHL (Chung, 2020). Malone,

Rus, and Laubacher (2020) offer a very accessible definition of what AI is
and the other disciplines it builds from that are used to illustrate what
precision systems broadly can do. Davenport on AI journeys (2021) was
invaluable, as were calls to action for a move to precision ecosystems in
medicine by Gruen and Messinger (2021), and Bloomfield (2021).
Dima Shulga’s list of most important data science must-knows for
Towards Data Science (2018) further illustrates how multidisciplinary the
field of data science really is, and goes some way to explaining why good
data scientists are in short supply and in high demand. Kate Crawford and
Vladan Joler’s “Anatomy of an AI System” for Virtual Creativity (2019) and
Vincent Granville’s (2016) extensive list of quantitative techniques for Data
Science Central informed the mathematical components of the six kinds of
precision systems framework and demonstrate why a framework for
grouping these techniques into useful buckets was necessary.
More generally, Donald Schon’s writings on teaching and education
(1990), Russell Ackoff’s approach to solving societal problems through
systems (1974), and Churchman’s editorial “Guest Editorial: Wicked
Problems” for Management Science (1967) offered sage connections back to
the world before and beyond data—the technology may be new, but the
problems are not.
Patternizr at the NYPD
The reference to Jack Maple’s Compstat is from Bratton and Tumin’s
“Collaborate or Perish” (2012). Contemporary content came from invaluable
interviews with Chief Lori Pollock, Chief Michael Lipetri, Evan Levine,
Alex Cholas-Wood, and Zach Tumin, all currently or formerly of the New
York Police Department (NYPD). In sharing their experiences with data
science in the police force, they shed light on challenges both unique and
shared across industries.
Other material was drawn upon, for example, reporting from New York
Magazine, NBC Connecticut, and Spectrum News on Compstat, pattern
recognition, and the operationalization of Patternizr. These were primarily
used to fact check the Patternizr story and to include third-party perspectives
on its rollout and impact.

Critique of predictive policing, both as a concept and regarding specific
applications and their respective failures, was highly valuable in moderating
the breathless enthusiasm of its proponents. We referenced writings by Will
Douglas Heaven (2020), and Levine and Cholas-Wood’s published paper
about Patternizr (2019), which offers substantial perspectives on the
limitations of Patternizr both built in deliberately and incidental.
Systems for Finding Patterns, Personalization
Allen Yu’s study of Netflix’s expertise in AI and machine learning for the
blog Becoming Human (2019), as well as Lucia Moses’s reporting for
Digiday about the Washington Post’s robot reporter (2017), gave us crisp
and tangible examples of how content gets shaped and surfaced by precision
systems today in ways one may not be aware of.
General background on recommendation systems that informed the
inclusion of this archetype into our list of six included Schrage’s
“Recommendation Engines” (2020) and Google’s publicly available
introduction to recommendation systems (2022). Schrage’s book sheds light
on not only how recommendation systems work and what they are used for
but also touches on the risks that they can create when mismanaged—
including creating echo chambers of information that can have broad societal
implications.
The reference to “genomic approach” as an alternative to collaborative
filtering in the instance of the cold start problem was derived from Deldjoo,
Dacrema, Constantin, et al.’s writings for the journal User Modeling and
User-Adapted Interactions (2019).
Systems for Predicting Values
Ben Singleton (then of JetBlue Airways) was generous with his time and
taught us about the myriad potential applications of AI within air travel,
especially for purposes of dynamic pricing and customer experience. Further
insight into airline dynamic pricing practices was found in Altexsoft’s blog
post about the topic, which clarified in useful terms the distinction between
rule-based and dynamic pricing.

Dr. Peter Chang of the Center for Artificial Intelligence in Diagnostic
Medicine (CAIDM) at the University of California, Irvine, also shared his
time and insight about the early days of the COVID-19 pandemic and how
he was able to triage patients quickly based on likely mortality using a
straightforward algorithm. That work is also publicly referenced by the
Radiological Society of North America online (2020), which was used for
verification.
The power and breadth of application for prediction algorithms was
introduced to us thoroughly through Agrawal’s “Prediction Machines”
(2018), which posits that all machine-learning endeavors can be essentially
boiled down to continuous, large-scale efforts at prediction—no matter the
specifics or the application. HBS Online’s “What Is Predictive Analytics?”
(2021) added helpful introductory definitions for the topic.
Systems for Entity Recognition
Marty Schenkler of BNSF Railway taught us much about predictive railroad
maintenance, informing our account of the railway’s transformation from
“old industry” to cutting-edge deployment of machine learning and effective
use of big data. Jessica Holdman’s account of BNSF’s camera flaw detection
for the Jamestown Sun (2019) provided extra details.
We had several teachers on the topic of AI in medicine, including Dr.
Simukayi Mutasa, who is cited in a later chapter, and the writings of Dr.
Peter Chang. But on the topic of image recognition in cardiography
specifically, we found riches in Dr. Eric Topol’s conversation with Daphne
Keller for the Stanford AIMI Symposium (2020).
Mozur and Clark’s illuminating account about facial recognition
deployment by the Chinese government against citizens for the New York
Times (2020) offered a sober warning about the risks of AI. Finally, Health
Imaging (2020) summarized how an AI-powered pathology system
personalizes cancer patient care today.
Systems for Geotracking
Gillette Stadium’s advanced networking system, and the New England
Patriots’ strategy for optimizing home-viewing experience through

technology, illustrate best-in-class geotracking precision systems. This
account was sourced from publicly available information on the topic,
including publications from Matthias (2012, 2013), Huang (2013), and
NECN (2014).
The account of how cellphone tracking was used by the U.S. Justice
Department to track down and prosecute the January 6 insurrectionists came
from publicly available information including Klippenstein and Lichtblau
(2021); Warzel and Thompson’s (2021) unmissable reporting for the
Intercept; Timberg, Harwell, and Hsu’s reporting for the Washington Post
(2021); and Madison Hall’s work for Business Insider (2021).
During the writing of this book, many of the leads that originated from
social media content that the insurrectionists uploaded themselves turned
into actual justice impacts, including imprisonment. Trials are still ongoing
as this book goes to press, but the power of precise geolocation data for
geotracking and justice enforcement has already been proven.
Systems for Modeling Scenarios
Sohrabi et al.’s “An AI Planning Solution to Scenario Generation for
Enterprise Risk Management” (2018) discusses private sector applications of
scenario modeling that were referenced for budgeting and planning and was
also recapped by the same authors on IBM’s own blog, referenced for
summary (2018).
The description was informed by Digit’s description of increasingly
sophisticated combat simulation within the Defense Advanced Research
Projects Agency (DARPA). DARPA’s own blog describes the combat
simulation trials, and Digit’s reporting (2020) was used as a reference.
The concept of computer generated forces and the way they can be used
to expedite various combat scenario simulations came from the Netherlands
Aerospace Centers information about their artificial intelligence for military
simulation (AIMS) product offering, which sells this as a service to military
purchasers.
References to DeepMind, Google AI’s AlphaZero chess simulator, were
sourced through DeepMind’s publicly available blog, which contains riches
for those interested in creative and ethical pursuits of artificial intelligence.

Shared Principles Across Precision Systems
The structure of this section is based on insights derived from Madeleine
Want’s own experience. Steven Miller’s framework of three types of
precision systems for Singapore Management University (2018) is
referenced as an alternative; it groups precision system types purely by the
type of benefit offered to humans rather than by the nature of the
technological application.
Chris Liu’s perspective on engineering and data science for Coursera
Engineering via Medium (2019) substantiated the part focused on how data
science and traditional engineering differ—as did Peter Skomoroch’s must-
knows for AI product management (2019, 2020). Skomoroch focuses on the
nonlinearity of data science development in contrast to traditional software
engineering.
Roman Yampolskiy’s account of incident 43 for the Intelligence
Incidence Database (1998), and Joy Buolamwini and Timnit Gebru’s
unmissable research on gender bias in classification (2018) provided much-
needed perspective when we looked at the risks of bias in AI. The twenty-
year gap between those two publications only serves to highlight the
similarity of the concerns they both raise, which offers a lesson on how bias
persists throughout technological advancements because it originates with
humans.
3. Design, Test, and Prove: Key Steps in Building a Precision System
Blue River, John Deere, and Precision Agriculture
Jorge Heraud of John Deere (formerly of Blue River) gave a firsthand
account of his and Lee Redden’s journey to bring machine learning to the
ancient field of agriculture. Everything from the initial idea through the
design, testing, proving, and scaling of the See and Spray system was
covered in these interviews.
Many publicly available sources bolstered and offered further
perspective about this remarkable achievement: Data Collective’s account of
the acquisition (2017), Louisa Burwood-Taylor’s podcast AFN (2017), Scott
Martin’s account for the NVIDIA blog (2019), Redden’s own interview

recordings on Soundcloud (2021), Paul Schrimpf’s description of See and
Spray for PrecisionAg (2021), Caroline Osterman’s reporting for the
Berkeley Masters of Engineering Blog (2019), Mike Murphy’s Future of
Farming for Protocol (2020), Chris Padwick’s study of how PyTorch that
was used by BlueRiver for the Robot Report (2020) and in general how the
implementation of computer vision for See and Spray took place (primarily
for a technical audience), as well as Forbes articles by Bernard Marr (2019)
and Jennifer Kite-Powell on Daniel Koppel; (2019).
Terry Picket for John Deere Journal (2015); Peter Fretty for Industry
Week (2020); and Leslie, Siegelman, and Kiesseg for Stanford School of
Business (2013) rounded out an in-depth understanding of the topic. General
perspective on precision farming came from the National Museum of
American History archives (2018).
Design, Test and Prove: The Core Steps
John Doerr’s classic Measure What Matters (2018), which introduced the
concept of objectives and key results (OKRs); Jim Brikman’s account of
what a minimum viable product is (2021); and Henrik Kniberg’s attempt to
capture the same (2020): all these sources fundamentally offer proposals for
how precision project leaders can get focused and stay focused on the most
important objectives.
Ron Kohavi, Diane Tang, and Ya Xu wrote Trustworthy Online
Controlled Experiments: A Practical Guide to A/B Testing (2020), which
offers the best and most thorough capture of corporate digital
experimentation. Wilhem Kornhauser’s adaptation of success measurement
to machine learning for Towards Data Science (2021) helped bridge the gap
between building for predefined outcomes and building for undefined or
variable outcomes, as artificial intelligence (AI) often necessitates. This was
supported by Amy Gallo’s summary of A/B testing, where it came from and
how it’s used today, for the Harvard Business Review (2017), as well as a
more statistical summary of the five steps involved in hypothesis definition
and testing that came from the National EMSC Data Analysis Resource
Center (NEDARC) (2011).
Agraal, Gans, and Goldfarb’s “A Simple Tool to Start Making
Decisions with the Help of AI” (2018) as well as Thomke and Manzi’s
summary of business experimentation for the Harvard Business Review

(2015) helped lay the foundation for the discussion of experimentation that
follows.
This section also references the cases of New York Police Department’s
(NYPD) Patternizr and Douglas Merrill’s Zest Cash, which are cited in
chapter 2 and chapter 1, respectively. The example of usability testing for AI
products focused on a hypothetical voice assistant was informed by Debjani
Goswami’s writing for Qualitest via Medium on the topic (2021).
Sylvia Engdahl’s introduction to dynamic A/B testing for machine-
learning models for Amazon Web Services’ (AWS) blog (2008) is an
invaluable and early description of what the practice is and why it’s useful,
and dives deeper into the techniques and measurement frameworks that
power it at AWS.
4. Getting Started with Data and Platforms
Eisenmann’s framework is discussed in “Platform Envelopment” (2011).
Sources for comparing various data science platforms and commercially
available technology included “Gartner’s Magic Quadrant for Data Science
and Machine Learning Platforms” (2021), and subjective musings like
Altexsoft’s comparison of Microsoft, Google, and IBM’s cloud machine-
learning offerings. For a broad yet accessible introduction to all concerns
related to beginning machine-learning projects, Veronika Megler’s paper for
Amazon Web Services (2019) is invaluable. For the importance of habit for
digital newsrooms, see Jacob (2019). Brand equity, as before, is Keller’s
(2001). Hamman (2019) discusses a photo of senior Times editors debating
headline graphics. Schaufeli (2012) is foundational for research into work
engagement. “Walk Through Walls” is John Linder’s characterization of
cops in Bratton’s thrall in 1994–1995 (Smith, 1996).
Replatforming the New York Times
Nick Rockwell’s introduction to the Times is sourced to his interviews with
us. Thompson’s recollections are found in Taqqu (2020) and Pulley (2011),
Bloomberg’s data in Patterson (2017), and Iliakopoulou’s assessment in her
authored article (2020). Josh Arak, formerly of the New York Times,

generously provided a firsthand account of his time developing and scaling
an experimentation framework for the digital arm of the business over
several years. He also published some of his work, through the NYT Open
blog, about ABRA (Araka and Kaji 2017)—the name of the experimentation
framework, which we used to verify the account. Hassan (2018) gave
additional insight to the Times’s effort to match its readers’ interests to
stories, and Heideman (2017) on tweaking the Times’s page performance.
Mill (2018) offered detail on measuring the Times’s readers’ subscription
behavior; Marin and Yakhina (2019) on testing while “designing for growth”
at the Times; Feinberg (2019) on design for better product at the Times;
Gayed et al. (2019) on reengineering the Times’s paywall; Locke and More
(2021) on reengineering mobile A/B testing; and Podigil, Arak, and Murray
(2017) on technology moves to streamline the Times’s workflows.
The First Step in Getting Started: Assess the Data
Kirk Semple’s (2017) reporting on fuel thefts jump-started our PEMEX
inquiry. Jorge Bernal Mendoza recounted the challenges and successes
he/she/they experienced as senior information executives of PEMEX,
including the development of a sophisticated oil pipeline sensory network to
detect and prevent oil theft (2020). Huawei (n.d.) and BNAmericas (2020b)
give background on PEMEX digitization initiatives. PEMEX describes the
risks facing its business due to theft in its publicly available Securities and
Exchange Commission (SEC) filings (2018); Wadlow and Pepper (2018)
offer complimentary insight. For perspective on energy insecurity and
politics and their implications for PEMEX, see Agren (2019), Avendano
(2016), and Payan and Correa-Cabrera (2014). PEMEX’s war on fuel theft
and its toll on Mexico is profiled by Cunningham (2019), Jones and Sullivan
(2019), McDonnell (2017), Navarro (2017, 2015), Ralby (2017), and
BNamericas (2020a). Avelino, Paiva, and Silva (2009) help us count the
ways and costs of fuel theft. Rucker (2010) reported the “inferno” of San
Martin Texmelucan.
For outstanding technical and operational overviews of leak detection
systems, see Baroudi, Al-Roubaiey, and Devendiran (2019) and Duhalt
(2017). Emerson’s paper on best practices in leak and theft detection (2016)
cannot be surpassed. Similar overviews with different perspectives can be
had from Geiger, Werner, and Matko (2015); Grey Owl Engineering (2018);

and Fiedler (2016). Technical papers of interest included Sandberg, McCoy,
and Koppitsch (1989), and Schneider Electric (2018).
Diagnosing Problems with Data Availability and Quality
Information about best-practice data quality management abounds. For
issues in pipeline industries, including outstanding technical and operational
overviews of data management in leak detection systems, see Baroudi, Al-
Roubaiey, and Devendiran (2019); Duhalt (2017); and Emerson’s paper
(2016). Among the best of our many non-PEMEX sources were Evan
Kaplan’s “The Age of Instrumentation Enables Better Business Outcomes”
(2018), and Laura Sebastian-Coleman’s “Data Quality Assessment
Framework” for the Fourth MIT Information Quality Industry Symposium
(2013). Both aided us in conveying the importance and nuances of data
quality to precision, as were Krasadakis’s thoughts on data quality
assessments for the Innovation Machine via Medium (2017) and Brennan’s
summary of “The Ten Fallacies of Data Science” (2021). “Division” is
@mrogati’s “favorite data science algorithm” (2014). See Cook (2019),
among others, for an account of the New York Times’s use of Excel for
pandemic tracking.
Righting the Wrongs in Bone Age Assessment
Dr. Simukayi Mutasa, Dr. Peter Chang, and Dr. Joshua Weintraub spoke with
us about these matters. Mutasa and Chang’s unique perspectives as both
physician and self-taught “physician software engineer” and data scientist
were invaluable. Mutasa’s published work on deep learning for bone-age
assessment (2018), Pan et al.’s (2020) challenge of the old Greulich and Pyle
method, and Larson et al. (2018) on the equivalence or better of machine
reads of pediatric bone-age X-rays contributed to our understanding.
Davenport and Dreyer’s “AI Will Change Radiology, but It Won’t Replace
Radiologists” (2018) was additionally helpful. Topol’s assessments are
sourced to Keane and Topol (2018), Topol (2019 a,b), and Park (2019). The
assessment of the superiority of machine learning for some diagnostics is
Topol’s (2020); see also Ridley (2020). Di Ieva is quoted by Topol (2020)
and sourced to di Ieva’s correspondence (2019). Chang and Chow’s research

was reported by Bassett (2020). See also peer-reviewed studies by
McGuinness (2021); Ha, Chin, and Karcich (2109); and Ha, Mutasa, et al.
(2019). Data and views of the Human Genome Project are sourced to
Molteni (2022). See also Johnson (2018) for Chang’s work at the Center for
Artificial Intelligence in Diagnostic Medicine (CAIDM) at the University of
California, Irvine; ColumbiaRadiology.com (2020) for questions and
answers with Richard Ha; and Cannavo (2021) and Ridley (2021c) for
regulatory and insurance reimbursement issues. The assessment that ancestry
and clinical histories are poor predictors of future breast cancers is Ha’s
(2021). For models of organization decision making in the era of artificial
intelligence generally, see Shrestha, Ben-Menahem, and von Krogh (2019).
Yee (2021) reporting on advances in AI and radiology was on point for us.
Gruelich and Pyle’s standing as Stanford University Press’s most profitable
title in its 120-year history was mentioned to us by Mutasa and sourced to
Shashkevich (2017).
Tools for Data Management
Nell Thomas, CTO of the Democratic National Committee (DNC), spoke to
us directly over multiple interviews and educated us about the mammoth
task of strengthening the DNC’s data platform and strategy in the run-up to
the 2020 election. We learned as well from her Medium.com articles (2020,
2021, 2022). Many other publicly available sources bolstered the account
and generalized the insights to be drawn for modern campaigning, including
Catalin Cimpanu’s study of campaign dark patterns for ZDnet, Gabriel
Debenedetti’s recount of the election night for Intelligencer, and Reid
Epstein’s reporting for the New York Times. Also referenced were Green,
Gerber, and Nickerson’s 2003 writings on door-to-door canvassing for the
Journal of Politics; Tate Ryan-Mosley’s account of the 2020 election for
MIT Technology Review (2020); and Schipper, Burkhard, and Hee Yeul
Yoo’s writings about political microtargeting for the Quarterly Journal of
Political Science (2019). The PhD dissertation that Thomas relied on to de-
duplicate the DNC voter file is Wortman’s (2019).
5. The Precision Vanguard

Steven Kelman’s Unleashing Change: A Study of Organizational Renewal in
Government (2005) is an indispensable guide to research on change and on
conceiving the “change vanguard” as a cadre of ready-to-go activists.
Together with the foundational work of authors from Rogers (2003) to
Berwick (2003) (and see Gourville [2005]), it sets the stage for our own
thinking on the precision vanguard. The status quo bias is amply discussed
in Gourville (2006). We borrow the notion of “creators and distributors”
from Bernard Rosenberg and Ernest Goldstein’s book of that same name
(1982), and the notion of “wicked problems” from Rittell and Webber (1973)
and Churchman (1967). We misapply Cathy O’Neil’s title Weapons of Math
Destruction (2017) to the general problem of insurgency triggered by data
analytics, inspired also by Marc Andreessen’s notion of liquefying markets
(Morris, 2013) as essential to gaining power and insight from data loosened
from its origins and moorings. Shirky (2009) and Anderson (2008) write
wonderfully of the sea change in technology and its sociotechnical
implications that has given rise to the power of billions. Hubert (2015)
provides eye-opening explication of Scratch/Viacom’s Millennial Disruption
Index. Duggan’s Napoleon’s Glance: The Secret of Strategy (2004) gives
further insight to Napoleon’s oft-repeated adage, “Engage, then see,” which,
although never (apparently) fully authenticated, is useful all the same.
The Precision Vanguard Today
We were helped in describing the makeup of the precision vanguard by
speeches, articles, and presentations of many, including Davenport (2018),
Rockwell and Wiggins (2019), Siddhartha and Rockwell (2021), Schmidt
(2015), Goldsmith (2017) and Hansen’s interview of IDEO’s Tim Brown
(2011). The notions of Python and Scala as the precision vanguard’s lingua
francas, and lean and agile as its project method were suggested, further, by
Blue River Technology’s Chris Padwick (2020); Eric Reis (2011); and
AltexSoft’s best-in-class guide (2020), “How to Structure a Data Science
Team: Key Models and Roles to Consider.” The abiding faith in data to fix
all, referred to now as technosolutionism, is amply critiqued by Morozov
(2013) and Cegłowski (2016). We studied and learned from cases and
articles on firms recruiting from and for the precision vanguard, including
LinkedIn (Shaw and Schifrin, 2015), Netflix (McCord 2014), Google
(Garvin and Wagonfeld, 2013), and many others published by Harvard

Business Review, MIT Sloan Management Review, Harvard Business School,
and Stanford Graduate School of Business. We base our explication of
culture here on Schein’s foundational work (2016). We borrow the construct
“unruly messes” from Ackoff (2001). For our concepts of “beacons” and
“north stars” of strategy, we draw from Rumelt (2011), Man (2020), Sull and
Eisenhardt (2016), and Beck (2001).
Theresa Kushner at Cisco, Maddy Want at Axel Springer
We drew from Theresa Kushner’s INFORMS conference presentation
(2102) and our several interviews with her over the years, as well as many
published reports of Cisco’s trials and tribulations under CEO John
Chambers, including Blodget (2011), Bent (2014), Chambers (2016), and
Ebersweiler (2018). The concept of “humble yet optimistic” leadership is
Spear’s (2010). Madeleine Want’s account of her moves at Axel Springer for
the upday product development were further buttressed by Nowobilska
(2018) and Caspar (2018, 2019). Davis (2017), Kedet (2021), Quinn (2021),
Tse (2017), and Chokshi (2019) all provided further background on
programmatic advertising. Kushner and Hayirli (2022) discuss purpose-built
coalitions.
6. The Political Management of Precision
Gourville (2006) discusses “backwards compatibility” as a workaround to
status quo headwinds. Bos (2003) gives a fuller description of “backwards
compatibility.” See Whitaker (2012) for how Google tests its software.
Henderson and Clark (1990) discuss “radical innovations” and its
challenges. Mark Moore and Archon Fong’s concept of calling a public into
existence (2012), itself borrowed from John Dewey (1954), buttresses our
accounts of coalition building that begins chapter 6. Throughout Precisely
we are guided by the work of Kahneman and Tversky (1979); Kahneman,
Knetch, and Thaler (1990); Knetch (1989); Thaler (1980); Thaler and
Sunstein (2009); Samuelson and Zeckhauser (1988); and others, each
describing different traps in decision making, together explaining why
innovation is fraught, and all best summarized by Gourville (2003, 2006).

Grove’s (2003) explanation of his 10X formulation was later amplified by
Andy McAfee’s wonderful account of what he called “the 9X email
problem” (McAfee, 2006). We borrow the concepts of different kinds of
intelligence from Goleman (2004), who describes many, among them
emotional; from Joseph Nye (2010), who focuses on contextual; and from
Joel R. DeLuca (1999), on political savvy. Kanter (1986) always has
important formulations—“corporate entrepreneurs” is a good example.
Weiss (2019) offers his perspective on the entrepreneurial manager,
acknowledging his debt to Stevenson (2006).
Joel Rose of Teach to One: Navigating a Complex Value Network
The maps and the compass of managers are best described by Richard Haass
(1999) and do important work for us here. The importance of networks is
based on Burt’s (2007) work on social capital, and Goldsmith and Eggers’s
(2004), incorporated here. The notion of three conversations comprising the
political game being played in a bureaucracy as “like 3-dimensional chess”
is Lynn’s (1982). Christensen’s value network concept (2016) helps explain
the great power of the status quo to confound innovators.
Our interviews with Teach to One’s Joel Rose and Chris Rush (all via
Zoom, 2021) were essential to our account, as were their numerous
presentations and publications, and Teach to One’s monograph series on
Medium.com (2020a–2020f)
Many reporters, writers, and scholars aided our understanding of the
politics of education and innovation. Evaluations by Ready (2013), Rockoff
(2015), and TNTP/Zearn (2021) showed us the power of an idea—“don’t
remediate, accelerate”—when backed by data and analysis. Accounts by
Haimson (2019), Fleisher (2014), Johnson (2017), Reich (2020), and Woo
(2017) helped show why such initiatives can be controversial. Smith’s
(2005) account of Anthony Alvarado’s time as a reformer in New York,
Ravitch’s (2011) account of Alvarado in New York and San Diego, and
Litow’s Brookings report on the politics of big city education (1999) were
instructive on the forces at play for superintendents who are intent on
reform. The notion of “education debt,” specifically attributed to COVID-19
by Dorn (2021), Hawkins (2021), Rose (2021), and Larrier (2021) helped us
understand the argument for acceleration. Heymann (1987) kept our eyes
open to the issues of legitimacy that Joel Rose and his team battled

throughout. We teased apart other cases on education reform to divine their
truths, and learned from them, especially Honan, Childress, and King’s
(2004) account of superintendents’ reforms in San Diego.
Getting to Yes/Imperatives for Managers
The subtitle “Getting to Yes” is borrowed from Fisher, Ury and Patton’s
book of the same name (2011). “Holding the mirror” to an organization is an
essential diagnostic tool for any change measure. Among the best we know
is Cameron and Quinn’s competing values assessment framework (2011).
“Shrink the ask” is a “Gourvillian” concept—although it finds expression in
many shapes and forms throughout the literature on organization change.
“Customize the offering” is Christensen’s admonition (2016)—to customize
the system to the environment, then personalize the offering to the
individual. “Know what counts as a win” is basic marketing advice—the
currencies of payment (Bratton and Tumin, 2012) are many and varied
depending on your target segments. Our discussion of the “endowed” versus
“unendowed” is again drawn from Gourville (2006) and by implication and
reference, Knetsch (1989). The superintendent’s “sweet spot of strategy” is
borrowed in part from Sull and Eisenhardt’s various writings on “simple
rules” (2012, 2016). Shoring up legitimacy is derived from Heymann (1987),
and Moore and Fong (2012), as voiced repeatedly in their writings. “Be part
of the conversation” is drawn from Hill and Lynn (2015). Kaplan and
Mazique’s observations come from Trade Routes: The Manager’s Network
of Relationships (1987), which has shaped our thinking since its publication
nearly three decades ago. “Diversify metrics” is John Doerr and Larry Page
(2018), through and through, among others, and evident every day in news
accounts like Esquivel’s (2021) of teachers sifting through the wreckage of
past practice to find meaningful new measures of their students’
achievements besides letter grades.
7. Bootstrapping Precision
The notion of a manager on a change mission having a “hunting license” that
is in limited scope and expires is Neustadt’s (2000), mentioned also in

Heymann (1987). Michael Krieger introduced us to the importance of taking
first steps; “going against a problem” rather than solving it; and formulating
a good problem statement, “simple in the extreme,” as among a
collaborations greatest and most difficult efforts. The strategic triangle is
central to Mark H. Moore’s conception of the task of managers, public and
private, over and above the merely administrative (1995).
Jason Bay and Contact Tracing in Singapore
We were introduced to Jason Bay from Mitchel Weiss’s Harvard Business
School case (2010), and Weiss’s book (2021) on similar topics. We
interviewed Jason Bay, reviewed his many presentations, read his copious
Medium.com blog posts, all to get the fullest picture we could of the person
and the task. We built the six characterizations of his requirements of a
foundation provided by Calvino in his extraordinary Norton Lecture series,
Six Memos for the Next Millennium (1988) and, in a more technical vein,
Bert Bos’s design principles for the World Wide Web Consortium (W3C;
2003).
Throughout, we drew from numerous published accounts, blog posts,
and GovTech Singapore government documents (2020, a-f). Among them,
Alkhatib (2020) presents the best technical explanation we have seen for
generalists of how Bluetooth contact tracing works. Dehaye offers an even
deeper dive (2020). Ball (2020) explains what could—and, for the United
Kingdom, did—go wrong with contact-tracing apps. Bourdeaux (2020)
shares cautions on limits and possibilities for contact-tracing apps. Brown
(2020) worries about digital divides in the pandemic for half the world’s
inhabitants who have no internet access. Landau (2020) cautions against the
gilded promises of technosolutionism. Newton (2020) worries about the
risks of government overreliance on Apple-Google for such critical
infrastructure. O’Neill (2020) cautions against the “flood” of coronavirus
apps tracking people. Rotman (2020) probes more deeply to the fundamental
causes of technology failures in containing COVID-19. Nan, Ang, and
Miller’s Singapore Management University case study (2022) provided
further detail.
Bootstrapping Predator, the Precision Drone

We began our investigation of drone warfare in 2008 with a three-day
session of twenty-five senior military commanders and industry leaders at
Harvard on the future of “unmanned” and robotic warfare after Iraq, reported
by Tumin and Oelstrom (2008). Our foundational sources comprise a series
of interviews we subsequently ran with General John Jumper (2012–2021),
coupled with accounts by Walter J. Boyne (2009), Richard Whittle (2015), P.
W. Singer (2009), Jane Mayer (2009), Mitt Regan (2022), Dario Leone
(2020), Arthur Holland Michel (2015), and others. We relied further on
reporting by Detsch (2022), Fahim (2020), and Witt (2022) for their broad
sweep of analysis. We relied further on reporting by Detsch (2022), Fahim
(2020), and Witt (2022) for their broad sweep of analysis.
Telenko (2022) introduced us to the importance of software mapping
for drone guidance. Cramer (2021) and Hoppe (2021) alerted us to the use of
autonomous drones. Owen (2022) described the drone-through-a-sunroof
event. Altman (2022), Jimmy (2022), Kilner (2022), Parker (2022), and
Pleasance (2022) provided details of the several other attacks described.
Peterson (2022) offered lessons on the war. Kramer (2022) reported on
Ukrainian innovations in fast and light drone warfare. Miller (2022)
concluded the brief history of drone warfare with the account of Ayman al-
Zawahri’s assassination.
8. Creating and Managing Teams of Precision
Distributed Organizing for the Biden-Harris Campaign: Crafting Victory
with Teams of Precision
From Hackman and Walton (1986) to Wageman (1997) and Weich (1999),
Katzenbach (2015) to McChrystal (2015), the literature on teams is vast. For
Precisely, our sources comprised interviews, presentations, articles, and
books—essentially the body of current knowledge on making change happen
—by seasoned technologists, business leaders, product managers, and data
scientists in this age of artificial intelligence (AI), machine learning, and
precision.

Foundational.  Our multiple interviews of Rifkin, Thomas, Nunez, and
Wornoff (all by Zoom, in 2021) were foundational, and all amplified by
articles they wrote, presentations they gave, and panels they joined. Books
giving us rich insight included Bond and Exley’s Rules for Revolutionaries:
How Big Organizing Can Change Everything (2016); Green and Gerber’s
Get out the Vote: How to Increase Voter Turnout (2019); Teachout and
Streeter’s Mousepads, Shoe Leather, and Hope: Lessons from the Howard
Dean Campaign for the Future of Internet Politics (2007); and Issenberg’s
essential The Victory Lab: The Secret Science of Winning Campaigns (2013),
among others.
Technical Matters.  We learned from numerous articles, including by
Alaniz (2018) on polling place locator apps, James (2020) on testing new
data products at the Democratic National Committee (DNC), McDonald
(2020a, b) on building the DNC data science clearinghouse, Kravitz (2021)
on tech for relational teams, Leonard (2022) on Ossoff’s relational
campaign, Woods (2021) on AI used in the Biden campaign, Wortman and
Reiter (2019 on deduping the DNC data file, and others—including Matt
Hodges’s tweets.
People Issues of Recruitment, Training, and Development.  We were
helped by Marx (2017) on “Calling All Data and Tech Innovators: We Have
Elections to Win,” Mates (2020) on her decision to join the DNC tech team,
Dillon (2020) on managing the DNC’s remote tech teams, and Cardona
(2020) on developing the cultures of the DNC tech teams.
Strategic Decisions, Including Tools and Tactics.  Leighninger (2020)
provided research on relational organizing in the 2020 Buttigieg campaign,
Krasno and Green (2008) on television and voter turnout, Khanna (2020) on
building tools for rapid response to voter suppression incidents, Broockman
and Kalla (2014) on campaign ground games, O’Keefe (2018) on P2P
texting in campaigns, Sankin (2016) on the Hustle text app, and Kalla and
Broockman (2018) on tools and technologies of political persuasion.

Operations Issues.  DeMartini (2020) offered a first-person account of a
“Dem Dialer.” Goh (2020) defined Zoom best practices for campaigns.
Nunez (2020) discussed building a grassroots organization in the middle of
the pandemic. Somaiah (2018) shed light on keys to the game for “deep
canvassing.” Tarsney (2021) gave insight into engaging voters remotely
during pandemic. Issenberg (2016) wrote powerfully on Sanders’s team
bringing the lessons learned about distributed organizing to his campaign,
among others. Wornhoff evaluations of the tech tools is in Shomikdutta
(2021). See also Augustine-Obi (2022).
Mobilizing Teams of Precision at the New York Times.  Our interviews
of Rockwell, Evans, Hamman, Arak, Bauer, Fehr, and Young (all 2021, by
Zoom) were foundational. We supplemented these with their numerous
presentations and panel discussions and with the articles they wrote. Chris
Wiggins’s panels and presentations were equally foundational.
Reforming the Times’s Core Strategy, Digital Platform, Product Offerings,
and Technology Organization.  Sources included Doctor (2017, 2019) on
Mark Thompson reforming the Times’s strategy; Lee (2012) on the outlook
for print at the Times; Moss (2021) on the Times’s move to the cloud;
Pownall (2018) on the redesign of the Times’s website chasing its mobile
offering; Prabhat (2020) customizing the Times’s programmatic advertising;
Sverdlik (2017) and Podojil (2021) on the Times’s move to the cloud;
Benton (2014) on the leaked Times innovation report; Benton (2017) on the
Times’s digital strategy; Motley Fool (2020a) for Meredith Kopit Levien’s
Q3 Earnings Call comments; Johnson, Howard, and Sandlin (2021) on
building the Times’s subscription-first strategy; Edmund (2012) on the loss
of advertising revenues; Fischer (2021) and Lee (2020) on the results of the
Times’s subscription-first strategy; Owen (2021) on plans to move the
Times’s Wirecutter behind a paywall; Edmonds (2019 a, b) on the Times’s
readying newsroom expansion plans; Mullen (2021) on the Times’s “Project
Feels”; Alpert (2017) on the future of the Times’s newsroom; LaForme
(2018) on reversing decline of the Times’s home page; Doeland (2019) on
the Times’s digital transformation generally; Spayd (2017) on the move to
personalization at the Times; Sullivan (2014) on personalization at the Times;
Fehr (2019), Fehr and Williams (2021), and Cook (2019) on collaboration

for COVID reporting and a Pulitzer; Smith (2017), Pulley (2011), and Peters
(2011) on new subscription plans, making the paywall tighter, and lifting
revenues; Scire (2020b) on Thompson’s industry forecast; Scire (2020c) on
the Times’s 2020 revenue performance; and Lupesko (2021) on the
challenges of personalization at scale, generally.
The Times’s Teams in Action Optimizing Ads, Subscriptions, Paywalls, and
Product for Revenue Performance.  Sources included Coenen (2019) on
the Times’s experiments with recommendation algorithms; Iliakopoulos
(2019) on engineering for news recommendations and Iliakopoulos (2020)
for developing the Times’s messaging platforms; Yew (2018) on pitching
new projects; Donohoe (2020) on managing the Times’s huge store of
publishing assets; Douglas et al. (2018) on improving performance of the
Times’s home page; Hassan (2018) on improving matching the Times’s
readers’ interests to stories; Heideman (2017) on tweaking the Times’s page
performance; Locke and More (2021) on the Times’s mobile testing; Mill
(2018) on measuring the Times’s readers’ subscription behavior; Tameez
(2021) on the Times’s exploration of Slack to personalize news; Bambha
(2017) on using “T-shirt size” project estimations; Ciocca (2018) and Ciocca
and Sisson (2019) on engineering collaborative editing, Marin and Yakhina
(2019) on “designing for growth” at the Times; Feinberg (2019) on design
for better product at the Times; Nayak (2018) on the Times’s teams
management; Burke (2021) on engineering for site reliability at the Times;
Gayed et al. (2019) on reengineering the Times’s paywall; Locke and More
(2021) on reengineering mobile A/B testing; Podigil, Arak, and Murray
(2017) on tech moves to streamline the Times’s workflows; Ferrazzi (2014)
on getting teams right; Ellis (2020) on the north star metric; Goldsmith
(2017) on “the perfect team;” Mandel (2020) on building data science teams;
Skomoroch (2019) on product management for AI; Siddhartha and Rockwell
on team design, performance, and laddering (2021); Olavson (2012) on
Google data science teams; AltexSoft (2020) on building great data science
teams; and Liu (2019) on data science and engineering collaborations, and
numerous NYT Open Teams Medium postings (2021a–f).
Election Day Preparation.  We turned to the following articles and
authors for insight into preparing for Election Day at the Times: Scire

(2020a); Khanna (2020); Mamet (2018); Merten (2019); Patel (2019);
Shaheen, Araula, and Bower (2021a, b); and Dolias and Wan (2019).
9. Building the Precision Enterprise
Bill Bratton Brings Rough Precision to the NYPD  For the foundation of
chapter 9, we built upon numerous interviews, conversations, and personal
communications of Bratton and Tumin (2008–2021); Bratton and Tumin’s
Collaborate or Perish (2012); Bratton’s Turnaround (1998); and Buntin’s
Harvard Kennedy School case (2000).
Gladwell’s (1996) concept of the “tipping point” typifies magical
thinking in speaking of crime. Guzman (2018) accurately describes Bratton’s
regrets. Additional historical accounts of interest are Kilgannon (2010) on
squeegees, Lardner and Reppetto (2001) on the New York Police
Department (NYPD) in “the bad old days,” Levitt (2010) on NYPD history
and culture, and Maple (1999) on being a cop. Pooley (1996) typifies
reporting of the day explaining crime drops, Sparrow (2015) critiques
Compstat for what it is and is not, while Wesburd (2004) tracks Compstat’s
“me too” embrace by other police departments. Berger and Neuhaus (1989)
developed the idea of “mediating institutions” of civil society as essential to
order-making, and hence vital to protect.
Bratton in Los Angeles (LA).  The Associated Press (2016) sums up
Bratton’s tenure at the Los Angeles Police Department (LAPD), the Los
Angeles Times (2007) interviews a cross section of Angelinos as Bratton
announces his resignation. The Los Angeles Times (2007) and Sousa and
Kelling (2010) review (favorably) the impact of the LAPD under Bratton on
a troubled public park, and Wood (2007) further assesses Bratton’s tenure.
Bratton at NYPD (Second Round).  O’Brien (2019) sorts through the
mythology and facts of broken windows theory and practice. Rayman (2017)
reports on NYPD rank-and-file opposition to DeBlasio, Rose (2020b) reports
on Michael Bloomberg’s embrace of stop and frisk and its political
consequences, Sisak (2021) describes the federal monitor’s oversight of stop

and frisk, Smith (2018) describes the nuts and bolts of a Compstat session,
Weichselbaum (2016) sums up the “Bratton era” at the NYPD. Susan
Crawford’s Harvard Law School report on Bratton and technology (2016)
was enormously helpful. The New York Civil Liberties Union counted the
number of NYPD stop-and-frisk incidents (2012). Lillis (2022) reported on
the State Department polling for sentiment.
NYPD Post-Bratton.  DeStefano (2021) wonders about the simultaneous
drop in crime and the number of stop-and-frisk incidents since 2013,
Kennedy (2017) offers a popular treatment of his sophisticated crime
reduction methods, Moore and Braga (2003) review and reimagine an
improved Compstat, CS360 (n.d.) reports on a new Compstat method,
NYPD Project Management Office (2017a, 2017b) shows how the NYPD
learned to track citizens’ responses to individual police officers’ work
incident by incident.
Melissa Gee Kee at Unilever.  Tom Davenport’s body of work in human
resources (HR) analytics is foundational, starting with his 2010 Harvard
Business Review article (with Harris and Shapiro) “Competing on Talent
Analytics.” Nesterak (2014) provides a useful overview of behavioral
science and “people analytics.” Bock (2014) previews the changing nature of
work and people management at Google. Human Resources Online (2014)
shares Kee’s emerging view of “employee branding” as essential to
recruitment. Recruiter.com (2017) reports on shifting tides of recruiting
millennials. Useem’s panelists (2015) comment on “the biggest mistakes
I’ve made in people analytics.” Shaw and Schifrin (2015) and Yemen and
Davidson (2009) discuss LinkedIn and JP Morgan Chase efforts,
respectively, to shift to new modalities of recruitment. Shellenbarger (2019)
reports on the dangers of hiring for cultural fit.
The Tools of Precision.  Skillroads.com (2021) discusses the impact of
artificial intelligence (AI) and facial recognition as “game changers” for
recruitment. Feloni (2017) and Gee (2017) report on Unilever’s embrace of
“brain games” and AI in recruitment. Bestpractice.ai (n.d.) reports favorably
on the introduction of a new process at Unilever; Lemouche (2021)

describes how to “game” the new process. More considerations of predicting
employee performance can be found in Dullaghan (2015).
Making Her Moves/Shifting to Precision.  Melissa Gee Kee discusses the
Unilever initiative in Bailie (2018). HireVue (n.d., 2020) offer fact sheets
and Melissa Gee Kee comments. Vlastelica further assesses all in light of
emerging diversity requirements (2021). Schellmann (2021) discusses
potential for bias in hiring algorithms. Hirevue (n.d.) and Maurer (2021)
report on Hirevue discontinuing facial analysis screening.
Sensored Precision—BNSF Section.  Authors’ interviews (2021) with
Dean Wise, Martin Schlenker, and Dasaradh Mallampati are foundational, as
are BNSF’s Annual Safety Review (BNSF 2019a) and maintenance strategy
(2019b), Norfolk Southern’s (2020) use of predictive data for customer
service, Garcia (2018) on BNSF’s use of the Internet of Things (IoT),
Ghanci (2020) on BNSF sensor use, Hickins (2012) on Union Pacific using
software to predict and prevent train derailments, Reilly (2018) on how IoT
is making railways safer, Zarembksi (2019) on big data trends in railroading,
Baillargen (2018) on the FRA’s predictive analytics program, Stern (2017)
on the rail sector’s move to digital in maintenance operations, and Alawad
(2019) on machine learning from accidents at railway stations. The orange
juice account is found in Lariviere (2013).
Technical Challenges of Streaming Sensor Data.  Sources included
Holdman (2019) on imaging to detect rail flaws, Yin (2016) on deep learning
for fault diagnosis on high-speed trains, Zhou (2020) on using multisensory
arrays for “flat wheel” recognition, Bladon (2015) on the challenge of
integrating multiple monitoring technologies, Lederman (2017) on data
fusion in track monitoring, Larionov (2019) on “multiphysical systems” that
monitor track condition, Wang (2018) on big data fusion for track geometry
inspections, Zarembksi (2014) on using data to address track geometry
impacts on rail defects, Al-Jarrah (2019) on the challenge of sensors sending
data to a fusion center, Jardine (2006) on implementing condition-based
maintenance, Lee (2017) on anomaly detection in air leakage from train

braking pipes, Li (2014) on using machine learning to improve rail network
velocity, and Xu (2011) on predicting track quality.
Operating Challenges.  Sources included Williams and Betak (2018) on
using text and data analytics in railroad operations, McKay (2018) on
integrating human intelligence and expertise, McKinsey (n.d.) on the
benefits of digital maintenance activities, Popke (2019) on rail systems using
data analytics for predictive maintenance, Thompson (2018) on using AI on
ERP data, and Dewan (2019) on automated train identification requirements.
Optimization for Safety and Efficiency.  See Sashihara (2011) and Poona
Dewan on Houlgin-Vera (2018) panel.
Precision at the New York Times
Authors’ interviews of Nick Rockwell, Laura Evans, and Brian Hamman;
and Rockwell’s and Hamman’s numerous podcasts, presentations, writing,
and panel discussions were essential and foundational. Additional insight
came from Schein (1996) on three cultures of management, Gourville (2006)
on the status quo bias, and Motley Fool (2020) for the Times’s CEO’s
commentary. On Baquet pushback on Twitter at the Times, see the articles by
Benton (2022) and Sicha (2022), and Bacquet’s Twitter account.
10. Red Zones of Precision
The works of O’Neil (2017), Thomas (2022), and Malik (2020) are
foundational for us. Risks and issues in computerized physician order entry
(CPOE) insertions are detailed in Del Beccaro (2006), Han (2006), Leape
(1995), Koppel (2005), and Bates (1995). Field (2021) interviewed artificial
intelligence (AI) leaders.
Red Zone 1: Bias and Ethical Problems

Twitter’s disastrous foray into autocropping thumbnails was reported
publicly by the BBC, and Twitter’s own engineering leader Rumman
Chowdhury shared their perspective on the company’s engineering blog
(2021). Desmond Patton’s “social work thinking” (2020) is introduced as a
countermeasure. Cathy O’Neil on algorithms as substituted for “difficult
conversations” is quoted in Field (2021). Stanford Health Care’s botched
vaccine rollout prioritization algorithm was first reported by Massachusetts
Institute of Technology’s MIT Technology Review (2021), which we
referenced along with Drew Harwell’s reporting for the Washington Post
(2020). Harrisburg University’s withdrawn report is discussed in Malik
(2020) Dr. Simukayi Mutasa is referenced again here, from the same
interviews that was mentioned for chapter 4 (2021). General musings on the
topic of bias in AI that we found helpful include Manyika et al. (2019) for
Harvard Business Review and Richard Waters for the Financial Times, as
well as Jacob Grotta’s keynote for Moody’s Analytics (2018) for a deeper
focus on how algorithm performance, degradation, and bias contributed to
inaccurate house prices, problematic loans, and later the 2008 financial
crisis.
Red Zone 2: Issues of Privacy and Governance
The European Union’s (EU) General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR)
offers a description of “privacy by design” on its website (accessed 2021),
and Deloitte has developed material on the same topic for commercial
application (accessed 2021)—both were referenced for this section.
Cameron Kerry’s writing about the implications of AI on privacy for the
Brookings Institution (2020) and Kashmir Hill’s reporting for the New York
Times (2021) on mass facial recognition tracking provided real-world
examples of problems often still thought of as theoretical. Finally, Christian
Rudder’s delightful book Dataclysm: Who We Are (When We Think No One’s
Looking) (2015) was a useful source on the inference of private information,
and Google’s Privacy Sandbox blog provided information about the
company’s efforts to reshape internet advertising for more privacy (2021).
Zeynep Tufekci’s “Engineering the Public: Big Data, Surveillance, and
Computational Politics” and her general thought leadership on this topic
were formational influences and highly recommended reading (2014).

Red Zone 3: Failing to Keep Humans in the Loop
Laura Evans, formerly of the New York Times, shared with us her experience
leading data for the institution and the importance of curation and human
input in digital news consumption (2021). The Index hack is reported by
Beam (2022). Marty Schlenker of BNSF was cited in chapter 2, and his
insights were used again here, along with a piece by BNSF about smart rail
safety (2019a). Lyell and Coiera’s research on automation bias (2017) helped
introduce us to that crucial topic and balance the risk of bad model decisions
with bad human decisions.
Red Zone 4: The Last Mile Problem
Topol on the “AI Chasm” is quoted from Keane and Topol (2018). Andrew
Ng’s response to Field’s question forms the basis of this section (2021) and
is bolstered by Joe Williams’s description of Ng’s strategic guidance for AI
published by Protocol (2021). Grubhub’s troubled promotion was reported
by Weekman (2022), Carman (2022), and Chan (2022).
Red Zone 5: The Dangers of Mismanaged Debt
Debt in machine learning was treated by Holt, Golonic, Davydov, Phillips,
Ebner, Chaudhary, Young, Crespo, and Dennison for the International
Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems; their work offers a
comprehensive dive into the topic (2015). Also used were Alexandra
Shaheen’s reporting (with Araula and Bower) about the New York Times data
science organization for Nieman Lab (2021a, b) and Martin Zinkevich’s
writing about the rules of machine learning for Google (2021).
Red Zone 6: Problems of Measuring Impact
For politics see Tech for Campaigns’s texting report (2020), Miller (2021)
for studies on the impact of texting, Datres (2020) for GOTV messages
“proven to work,” the Institution for Social and Policy Studies (2021) on the
survey of GOTV research, Green and Gerber for the fundamental GOTV
research (2004), and Nornhoff’s research in Shomikdutta (2021). See Bill

Franks’s summary of the risks of measuring analytics programs for LinkedIn
(2020), Simon Schreiber’s advice on measuring AI products for The Startup
on Medium (2020), and Agrawal et al.’s “How to Win with Machine
Learning” for the Harvard Business Review (2020); all contributed concepts
to this section. For Topol on AI and the Food and Drug Administration
(FDA), see Keane and Topol (2018).

BIBLIOGRAPHY
Abbeel, Pieter. April 2021. “Keenan Wyrobek Discusses How Zipline’s AI-Drones Are Reshaping
Africa.” The Robot Brains Podcast. Accessed January 25, 2022. https://shows.acast.com/the-robot-
brains/episodes/keenan-wyrobek-discusses-how-ai-drones-are-reshaping-africa.
Ackerman, Spencer. 2020. “It’s Probably Too Late to Use South Korea’s Trick for Tracking
Coronavirus.” Daily Beast, March 26, 2020. https://www.thedailybeast.com/too-late-to-use-south-
koreas-coronavirus-tracking-technique.
Ackoff, Russell L. 1974. Redesigning the Future: A Systems Approach to Societal Problems. New
York: John Wiley.
Ackoff, Russell L. 2001. “Brief Guide to Interactive Planning and Idealized Design.”
https://pdfs.semanticscholar.org/f252/3e87a10a7385248573e174f766d45f67ee61.pdf.
Agrawal, Ajay, Joshua Gans, and Avi Goldfarb. 2018. Prediction Machines: The Simple Economics of
Artificial Intelligence. Boston, Massachusetts: Harvard Business Review Press.
Agrawal, Ajay, Joshua Gans, and Avi Goldfarb. 2018. “A Simple Tool to Start Making Decisions with
the Help of AI.” Harvard Business Review, April 17, 2018. https://hbr.org/2018/04/a-simple-tool-
to-start-making-decisions-with-the-help-of-ai.
Agrawal, Ajay, Joshua Gans, and Avi Goldfarb. 2020. “How to Win with Machine Learning.” Harvard
Business Review, September 2020. https://hbr.org/2020/09/how-to-win-with-machine-learning.
Agren, David. 2019. “Mexico Explosion: Scores Dead After Burst Pipeline Ignites.” The Observer,
January 19, 2019, sec. World News. https://www.theguardian.com/world/2019/jan/19/mexico-
explosion-deaths-burst-pipeline-gasoline.
Alaniz, Mica. 2018. “Data-Driving over 2.3 Million Voters to the Polls.” DNC Tech Team (blog),
Medium, November 27, 2018. https://medium.com/democratictech/data-driving-over-2-3-million-
voters-to-the-polls-cc0d1523b18c.
Alawad, Hamad, Sakdirat Kaewunruen, and Min An. 2019. “Learning From Accidents: Machine
Learning for Safety at Railway Stations.” IEEE Access PP (December 2019): 1–1.
https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2019.2962072.
Al-Jarrah, Mohammad A., Arafat Al-Dweik, Mohamad Kalil, and Salama S. Ikki. 2019. “Decision
Fusion in Distributed Cooperative Wireless Sensor Networks.” IEEE Transactions on Vehicular
Technology 68, no. 1 (2019): 797–811. https://doi.org/10.1109/TVT.2018.2879413.
Alkhatib, Ali. 2020. “We Need to Talk About Digital Contact Tracing.” Ali Alkhatib (blog), May 1,
2020. https://ali-alkhatib.com/blog/digital-contact-tracing.
Allegretti, Aubrey. 2020. “Coronavirus: ‘World-Beating’ Track and Trace System Ready for Schools
to Reopen, PM Promises.” Sky News, May 21, 2020. https://news.sky.com/story/coronavirus-world-
beating-track-and-trace-system-ready-for-schools-to-reopen-pm-promises-11991606.

Allison Marsh. 2018. “John Deere and the Birth of Precision Agriculture—IEEE Spectrum.” February
28, 
2018. 
https://spectrum.ieee.org/tech-history/silicon-revolution/john-deere-and-the-birth-of-
precision-agriculture.
Alpert, Lukas I. 2017. “New York Times Lays Out Plans to Restructure Newsroom.” Wall Street
Journal, 
January 
17, 
2017. 
https://www.wsj.com/articles/new-york-times-lays-out-plans-to-
restructure-newsroom-1484676531.
AltexSoft. 2020. “How to Structure a Data Science Team: Key Models and Roles to Consider.”
AltexSoft (blog), June 30, 2020. https://www.altexsoft.com/blog/datascience/how-to-structure-data-
science-team-key-models-and-roles.
AltexSoft. 2021. “Comparing Machine Learning as a Service: Amazon, Microsoft Azure, Google
Cloud 
AI, 
IBM 
Watson.” 
AltexSoft 
(blog), 
April 
25, 
2021.
https://www.altexsoft.com/blog/datascience/comparing-machine-learning-as-a-service-amazon-
microsoft-azure-google-cloud-ai-ibm-watson.
Altman, Howard. 2022. “Debacle on the Donets: How Russian Forces Got Obliterated Trying to Cross
a River.” The Drive, May 12, 2022. https://www.thedrive.com/the-war-zone/debacle-on-the-donets-
russian-forces-got-obliterated-trying-to-cross-a-river.
Alvarado, Anthony. 2005. District Wide Reform: San Diego, CA. “Making Schools Work with Hedrick
Smith.” PBS. http://www.pbs.org/makingschoolswork/dwr/ca/alvarado.html.
Alves, Bruna. n.d. “Number of Fossil Fuel Thefts in Mexico 2019.” Statista. Accessed June 19, 2020.
https://www.statista.com/statistics/709121/number-fuel-theft-detect-mexico/.
Anderson, Chris. 2008. The Long Tail: Why the Future of Business Is Selling Less of More, rev. ed.
New York: Hachette.
Andreessen, Marc. 2013. Marc Andreessen on the Age of Context (Er, the Future of the Tech
Industry). Interview by Robert Scoble. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YiQyDhXiU4s.
AndroidGuys. 2020. “Teach to One Builds Math Proficiency with Tailored Approach Offering Digital
Personalized 
Roadmaps.” 
AndroidGuys 
(blog), 
November 
17, 
2020.
https://www.androidguys.com/promoted-news/teach-to-one-builds-math-proficiency-with-tailored-
approach-offering-digital-personalized-roadmaps.
Apple Developer. n.d. “Exposure Notification: Implement a COVID-19 Exposure Notification System
That 
Protects 
User 
Privacy.” 
Accessed 
July 
17, 
2020.
https://developer.apple.com/documentation/exposurenotification.
Aquino, Alyssa. 2020. “Ex-Google Exec’s Co. to Pay $18.5M to End Payday Loan Suit.” Law 360,
February 11, 2020. https://www.law360.com/articles/1242920/ex-google-exec-s-co-to-pay-18-5m-
to-end-payday-loan-suit.
Arak, Josh. 2021. Interview by Zachary Tumin and Madeleine Want.
Arak, Josh, and Kentaro Kaji. 2017. “ABRA: An Enterprise Framework for Experimentation at The
Times.” NYT Open (blog), Medium, August 30, 2017. https://open.nytimes.com/abra-an-enterprise-
framework-for-experimentation-at-the-times-57f8931449cd.
Arnold, Amanda, Claire Lampen, and Brooke LaMantia. 2020. “Everything We Know About the
Tessa Majors Murder Case.” Cut, February 19, 2020. https://www.thecut.com/2020/02/tessa-
majors-barnard-student-death.html.
Arumilli, Gautham. 2020. “What Is the Voter File?” DNC Tech Team (blog), August 31, 2020.
https://medium.com/democratictech/what-is-the-voter-file-a8f99dd07895.
Associated Press. 2016. “Former LAPD Chief William Bratton to Resign as New York Police
Commissioner.” Los Angeles Times, August 2, 2016. https://www.latimes.com/nation/nationnow/la-
na-nypd-bill-bratton-resigns-20160802-snap-story.html.

Augustine-Obi, Sean and Russell Mindich. 2022. “Political Tech Landscape Report 2021.” Higher
Ground Labs. https://docsend.com/view/bbcj4j3g98bcqnb2.
Avelino, Álvaro, Jose Paiva, Rodrigo Silva, et al. 2009. “Real Time Leak Detection System Applied to
Oil Pipelines Using Sonic Technology and Neural Networks.” In 35th Annual Conference of IEEE
Industrial Electronics, 2009, 2109–14. https://doi.org/10.1109/IECON.2009.5415324.
Avendaño, L. L. 2016. “The Political, Economic, and Social Roots of Energy Insecurity in México.”
Journal 
of 
Economics, 
Business 
and 
Management 
4, 
no. 
7 
(2016).
doi:10.18178/joebm.2016.4.7.435.
Awbrey, Jake. 2020. “The Future of NFL Data Analytics.” Samford.Edu. June 9, 2020.
https://www.samford.edu/sports-analytics/fans/2020/The-Future-of-NFL-Data-Analytics.
Badenhausen, Kurt. 2022. “NFL Team Valuations 2022: Cowboys Rule at $7.6B as Average Tops $4B
– 
Sportico.Com.” 
Sportico.Com. 
August 
1, 
2022.
https://www.sportico.com/valuations/teams/2022/nfl-team-valuations-2022-cowboys-1234684184/.
Bailie, Ian, Bernard Marr, Laszlo Bock, and Mel Gee Kee. 2018. “CogX 2018—The Impact of AI on
HR and Recruitment.” Panel discussion at the CogX Festival in June 2018, Tobacco Dock, London.
Published June 26, 2018. YouTube. https://youtu.be/06-Fc2K3YFY.
Baillargeon, Jay P. 2018. “Update on FRA’s Predictive Analytics Program.” Presentation at the Big
Data in Railway Maintenance Planning Conference, University of Delaware, December 2018.
Ball, James. 2020. “The UK’s Contact Tracing App Fiasco Is a Master Class in Mismanagement.”
MIT 
Technology 
Review, 
June 
19, 
2020.
https://www.technologyreview.com/2020/06/19/1004190/uk-covid-contact-tracing-app-fiasco.
Bambha, Abhishek. 2017. “Project Estimation Through T-Shirt Size.” Radius Tech Blog (blog),
Medium, September 22, 2017. https://medium.com/radius-engineering/project-estimation-through-t-
shirt-size-ea496c631428.
Baquet, Dean (@deanbaquet). n.d. Twitter. Accessed May 5, 2022. https://twitter.com/deanbaquet.
Baroudi, Uthman, Anas A. Al-Roubaiey, and Abdullah Devendiran. 2019. “Pipeline Leak Detection
Systems 
and 
Data 
Fusion: 
A 
Survey.” 
IEEE 
Access 
7 
(2019): 
97426–97439.
https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2019.2928487.
Barshay, Jill. 2019. “New Study Casts Doubts on Effectiveness of Personalized Learning Program.”
Hechinger Report, February 25, 2019. http://hechingerreport.org/new-study-casts-doubts-on-
effectiveness-of-personalized-learning-program-in-new-jersey.
Bartells, Lynn. 2014. “In Colorado, the GOP Shifted the Ground Game.” Denver Post, November 8,
2014. https://www.denverpost.com/2014/11/08/in-colorado-the-gop-shifted-the-ground-game.
Bassett, Mike. 2020. “Radiologists Develop AI Tool to Identify Risk of COVID Complications.”
Radiological 
Society 
of 
North 
America. 
Last 
modified 
August 
27, 
2020.
https://www.rsna.org/news/2020/august/ai-predictive-tool.
Bates, David W., et al. 1995. “Incidence of Adverse Drug Events and Potential Adverse d\Drug
Events: Implications for Prevention. ADE Prevention Study Group.” JAMA 274, no. 1 (1995): 29–
34.
Bauer, Anne, and Anna Coenen. 2020. “AI in Action E142: Anne Bauer, Director of Data Science and
Anna Coenen, Lead Data Scientist at New York Times.” In Alldus Podcast. Published November 3,
2020. Anchor podcast. https://alldus.com/blog/podcasts/aiinaction-anne-bauer-anna-coenen-new-
york-times.
Baxter, Alexander. Interviews by Zachary Tumin and Madeleine Want.
Bay, Jason. 2019. “Leading Through Crises of Reputation.” Medium (blog). April 29, 2019.
https://medium.com/gsbgen317s19/leading-through-crises-of-reputation-a2e83e54f5a9.

Bay, Jason. 2020a. “Automated Contact Tracing Is Not a Coronavirus Panacea.” Medium (blog). April
10, 
2020. 
https://blog.gds-gov.tech/automated-contact-tracing-is-not-a-coronavirus-panacea-
57fb3ce61d98.
Bay, Jason. 2020b. “One Month On.” Medium (blog). April 20, 2020. https://blog.gds-gov.tech/one-
month-on-6c882875b9ba.
Bay, Jason. 2020c. “TraceTogether at One.” Medium (blog). March 20, 2020. https://blog.gds-
gov.tech/tracetogether-at-one-7ed20de20df0.
Bay, Jason, Joel Kek, Alvin Tan, Chai Sheng Hau, Lai Yongquan, Janice Tan, and Tang Anh Quy.
2020. “BlueTrace: A Privacy-Preserving Protocol for Community-Driven Contact Tracing Across
Borders.” White Paper, Government Technology Agency, Singapore, April 9, 2020.
https://bluetrace.io/static/bluetrace_whitepaper-938063656596c104632def383eb33b3c.pdf.
BBC News. 2021. “Twitter Finds Racial Bias in Image-Cropping AI.” May 20, 2021.
https://www.bbc.com/news/technology-57192898.
Beam, Christopher. 2022. “The Math Prodigy Whose Hack Upended DeFi Won’t Give Back His
Millions.” Bloomberg.com, May 19, 2022. https://www.bloomberg.com/news/features/2022-05-
19/crypto-platform-hack-rocks-blockchain-community.
Beck, Martha. 2001. Finding Your Own North Star: Claiming the Life You Were Meant to Live. New
York: Three Rivers.
Behr, Michael. 2020. “AI Pilot Defeats Human in DARPA Fighter Combat Simulation.” Digit, August
24, 2020. https://digit.fyi/ai-pilot-defeats-human-in-darpa-fighter-combat-simulation.
Bent, Kristin. 2014. “Cisco’s Big Challenge: Will Chambers Stay to See It Through?” CRN, August 7,
2014. https://www.crn.com/news/networking/300073623/ciscos-big-challenge-will-chambers-stay-
to-see-it-through.htm.
Benton, Joshua. 2014. “The Leaked New York Times Innovation Report Is One of the Key Documents
of This Media Age.” Nieman Lab (blog). May 15, 2014. https://www.niemanlab.org/2014/05/the-
leaked-new-york-times-innovation-report-is-one-of-the-key-documents-of-this-media-age.
Benton, Joshua. 2017. “This Is the New York Times’ Digital Path Forward.” Nieman Lab (blog).
January 17, 2017. https://www.niemanlab.org/2017/01/this-is-the-new-york-times-digital-path-
forward.
Benton, Joshua. 2022. “The New York Times Would Really Like Its Reporters to Stop Scrolling and
Get Off Twitter (at Least Once in a While).” April 7, 2022. Nieman Lab (blog).
https://www.niemanlab.org/2022/04/the-new-york-times-would-really-like-its-reporters-to-stop-
scrolling-and-get-off-twitter-at-least-once-in-a-while/.
Berger, Peter L. and Richard John Neuhaus. 1989. To Empower People: The Role of Mediating
Structures in Public Policy. Ex-Seminary Library edition. Washington: AEI Press.
Bergman, Artur. 2018. “Open Questions: A Conversation with Fastly CEO Artur Bergman.” Interview
by Nick Rockwell. NYT Open (blog), Medium. September 7, 2018. https://open.nytimes.com/open-
questions-a-conversation-with-fastly-ceo-artur-bergman-9c5e023baf57.
Bernal Mendoza, Jorge. 2020. Transcript: Interview by Zachary Tumin and Madeleine Want.
Berwick, Donald M. 2003. “Disseminating Innovations in Health Care.” Journal of the American
Medical Association 289, no. 15 (2003): 1969–1975. https://doi.org/10.1001/jama.289.15.1969.
BestPractice.ai. n.d. “Unilever Saved 50,000 Hours in Candidate Time over 18 Months.” Accessed
November 
16, 
2021. 
https://www.bestpractice.ai/studies/unilever_saved_over_50_000
_hours_in_candidate_interview_time_and_delivered_over_1m_annual_savings_and
_improved_candidate_diversity_with_machine_analysis_of_video_based_interviewing.
Best Practice Institute Staff. 2015. “The Unique Challenges of HR in Asia.” BPI Modern Talent
Magazine, May 12, 2015. https://www.bestpracticeinstitute.org/blog/the-unique-challenges-of-hr-

in-asia.
Bhatia, Katy, A. M. Gaythorpe, et al. 2020. Report 25: Response to COVID-19 in South Korea and
Implications for Lifting Stringent Interventions. May 29, 2020. London: Imperial College London.
https://doi.org/10.25561/79388.
Bishop, Greg. 2022. “Inside Cooper Kupp’s Unique Origin Story and Training.” Sports Illustrated.
January 21, 2022. https://www.si.com/nfl/2022/01/21/cooper-kupp-unique-origin-story-of-unlikely-
superstar-daily-cover.
Bladon, Paul, Kim Bowling, Hark Braren, Jean Deslauriers, and Denis D’Aoust. 2015. “The
Challenges of Integrating Novel Wayside Rolling Stock Monitoring Technologies: A Case Study.”
Paper presented at the International Heavy Haul Association Conference, Perth, Australia, June
2015. https://docplayer.net/100232156-The-challenges-of-integrating-novel-wayside-rolling-stock-
monitoring-technologies-a-case-study.html.
Blodget, Henry. 2011. “The Truth About Cisco: John Chambers Has Failed.” Business Insider, May
13, 2011. https://www.businessinsider.com/cisco-csco-john-chambers-has-failed-2011-5.
Bloomfield, Claire. 2021. “Ecosystem Approach Will Bring AI Benefits to the Clinical Front Line.”
Healthcare IT News, June 18, 2021. https://www.healthcareitnews.com/news/emea/ecosystem-
approach-will-bring-ai-benefits-clinical-front-line.
BNamericas. n.d. “Mexico’s PEMEX Steps Up War on Fuel Theft.” BNamericas.com. Accessed June
19, 2020a. https://www.bnamericas.com/en/news/mexicos-pemex-steps-up-war-on-fuel-theft.
BNamericas. n.d. “PEMEX Launches Digitization Drive.” BNamericas.com. Accessed June 19,
2020b. https://www.bnamericas.com/en/news/pemex-launches-digitization-drive1.
BNSF. 2019a. “Artificial Intelligence: A Look at How BNSF Creates a Safer, Smarter Railroad.”
Safety. Last modified March 27, 2019. https://www.bnsf.com/news-media/railtalk/safety/artificial-
intelligence.html.
BNSF. 2019b. “BNSF 2019 Annual Review.” Safety. https://www.bnsf.com/about-bnsf/bnsf-
review/2019/safety.html.
BNSF. 2019c. “Making the Grade: How BNSF Maintenance Is Planned and Performed.” Last
modified 
June 
26, 
2019. 
https://www.bnsf.com/news-media/railtalk/service/maintenance-
planning.html.
Bock, Laszlo. 2014. “Laszlo Bock on How Google Is Changing the Nature of Work.” Speech at the
2014 Re:Work with Google event. Published November 10, 2014. YouTube video, 20:10.
https://youtu.be/QOXpajH89hw.
Bond, Becky, and Zack Exley. 2016. Rules for Revolutionaries: How Big Organizing Can Change
Everything. White River Junction, VT: Chelsea Green.
Borchers, Callum. 2013. “Patriots Aim to Enhance Stadium Experience as Home Viewing Keeps
Getting 
Better.” 
Boston.com. 
Last 
modified 
January 
18, 
2013.
http://www.boston.com/business/2013/01/19/patriots-aim-enhance-stadium-experience-home-
viewing-keeps-getting-better/rvA34GcIlWh5PN6spfu5LI/story-1.html.
Bos, Bert. 2003. “What Is a Good Standard: An Essay on W3C’s Design Principles—Backwards
Compatibility.” W3c.Org. https://www.w3.org/People/Bos/DesignGuide/compatibility.html.
Bourdeaux, Margaret, Mary L. Gray, and Barbara Grosz. 2020. “How Human-Centered Tech Can Beat
COVID-19 
Through 
Contact 
Tracing.” 
The 
Hill, 
April 
21, 
2020.
https://thehill.com/opinion/technology/493648-how-human-centered-technology-can-beat-covid-
19-through-contact-tracing.
Bourgeois, L. J., and Kathleen M. Eisenhardt. 1988. “Strategic Decision Processes in High Velocity
Environments: Four Cases in the Microcomputer Industry.” Management Science 34, no. 7 (1988):
816–835.

Boyne, Walter J. 2009. “How the Predator Grew Teeth.” Air Force Magazine, June 29, 2009.
https://www.airforcemag.com/article/0709predator.
Braga, Anthony A., and David M. Kennedy. 2021. A Framework for Addressing Violence and Serious
Crime: Focused Deterrence, Legitimacy, and Prevention. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Brandom, Russell. 2019. “The NYPD Uses Altered Images in Its Facial Recognition System, New
Documents Show.” Verge, May 16, 2019. https://www.theverge.com/2019/5/16/18627548/nypd-
facial-recognition-altered-faces-privacy.
Bratton, William. 1998. Turnaround. New York: Random House.
Bratton, William, and Zachary Tumin. 2012. Collaborate or Perish!: Reaching Across Boundaries in
a Networked World. First edition. New York: Crown Business.
Breaking Defense. 2021. “Predicting the Unpredictable: How Raytheon Technologies Uses Modeling
and 
Simulation 
to 
Prepare 
for 
UAS 
Threats.” 
October 
4, 
2021. 
https://breaking
defense.sites.breakingmedia.com/2021/10/predicting-the-unpredictable.
Breer, Albert. 2017. “How All 32 NFL Teams Handle Analytics vs. Old School.” Sports Illustrated,
June 28, 2017. https://www.si.com/nfl/2017/06/28/nfl-analytics-front-office-old-school-approach-
draft-game-planning-charting.
Brennan, Shane. 2017. “The Ten Fallacies of Data Science.” Towards Data Science, September 17,
2017. https://towardsdatascience.com/the-ten-fallacies-of-data-science-9b2af78a1862.
Bright, Julian. 2021. “Dynamic A/B Testing for Machine Learning Models with Amazon Safe-Maker
MLOps 
Project.” 
AWS 
Machine 
Learning 
Blog, 
July 
9, 
2021.
https://aws.amazon.com/blogs/machine-learning/dynamic-a-b-testing-for-machine-learning-models-
with-amazon-sagemaker-mlops-projects/.
Brikman, Jim. n.d. “A Minimum Viable Product Is Not a Product, It’s a Process.” Y Combinator.
Accessed November 26, 2021. https://www.ycombinator.com/library/4Q-a-minimum-viable-
product-is-not-a-product-it-s-a-process.
Brock, Todd. 2019. “Garrett on Analytical Decisions: ‘We Don’t Use Those Stats Within the Game’.”
Cowboys Wire (blog), November 25, 2019. https://cowboyswire.usatoday.com/2019/11/25/garrett-
on-analytical-decisions-we-dont-use-those-stats-within-the-game.
Broockman, David, and Joshua Kalla. 2014. “Experiments Show This Is the Best Way to Win
Campaigns. 
But 
Is 
Anyone 
Actually 
Doing 
It?” 
Vox, 
November 
13, 
2014.
https://www.vox.com/2014/11/13/7214339/campaign-ground-game.
Brown, Deborah. 2020. “Closing the ‘Digital Divide’ Critical in COVID-19 Response.” Human Rights
Watch (blog), March 25, 2020. https://www.hrw.org/news/2020/03/25/closing-digital-divide-
critical-covid-19-response.
Brown, Eliot. 2017. “Why Big Data Hasn’t Yet Made a Dent on Farms.” Wall Street Journal, May 15,
2017, sec. Business. https://www.wsj.com/articles/why-big-data-hasnt-yet-made-a-dent-on-farms-
1494813720.
Brown, Sara. 2021. “Machine Learning, Explained.” Ideas Made to Matter (blog), MIT Sloan School
of Management, April 21, 2021. https://mitsloan.mit.edu/ideas-made-to-matter/machine-learning-
explained.
Brueggemann, Brian. 2019. “Former Google Exec’s Company Gets Caught in ‘Rent-A-Tribe’ Class
Action Lawsuits; Interest Rates Allegedly as High as 490 Percent.” Legal Newsline, April 2, 2019.
https://legalnewsline.com/stories/512366003-former-google-exec-s-company-gets-caught-in-rent-a-
tribe-class-action-lawsuits-interest-rates-allegedly-as-high-as-490.
Bruno, Giancarlo, Abel Lee, Matthew Blake, Jesse McWaters, Rob Galaski, and Hwan Kim. 2015.
The Future of Financial Services. Final Report, June 2015. Geneva: World Economic Forum.
https://www3.weforum.org/docs/WEF_The_future__of_financial_services.pdf.

Buffett, Howard W., and William B. Eimicke. 2018. Social Value Investing: A Management
Framework for Effective Partnerships. Illustrated ed. New York: Columbia University Press.
Buntin, John, and Carol A. Chetkovich. 2000. “The NYPD Takes on Crime in New York City. (A) and
(B).” Harvard University, John F. Kennedy School of Government Case HKS1557.1, January 1,
2000.
Buolamwini, Joy, and Timnit Gebru. 2018. “Gender Shades: Intersectional Accuracy Disparities in
Commercial Gender Classification.” Proceedings of the First Conference on Fairness,
Accountability 
and 
Transparency 
81 
(2018): 
77–91.
https://proceedings.mlr.press/v81/buolamwini18a.html.
Burke, Tim. 2021. “We Don’t Get Bitter, We Get Better.” Medium, April 15, 2021.
https://open.nytimes.com/we-dont-get-bitter-we-get-better-b5d2783d5cd3.
Burt, Ronald S. 2007. Brokerage and Closure: An Introduction to Social Capital. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Burwood-Taylor, Louisa. 2017. “How an Artificial Intelligence and Robotics Startup Got Acquired by
John 
Deere 
[Interview 
of 
Jorge 
Heraud.] 
Agfundernews.com. 
October 
3, 
2017.
https://agfundernews.com/artificial-intelligence-robotics-startup-got-acquired-john-deere.html.
Calvino, Italo. 1988. Six Memos for the Next Millennium. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Cameron, Kim S., and Robert E. Quinn. 2011. Diagnosing and Changing Organizational Culture:
Based on the Competing Values Framework. 3rd ed. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Cannavo, Michael J. 2021. “Can Radiology AI Win with a Bad Hand?” AuntMinnie.com, June 21,
2021. https://www.auntminnie.com/index.aspx?sec=ser&sub=def&pag=dis&ItemID=132698.
Cantwell, Houston R. 2012. “RADM Thomas J. Cassidy’s MQ-1 Predator: The USAF’s First UAV
Success 
Story.” 
Master’s 
diss., 
Air 
Command 
and 
Staff 
College, 
Maxwell, 
AL.
https://www.amazon.com/RADM-Thomas-Cassidys-MQ-1-Predator/dp/1288230230.
Cao, Longbing. 2017. “Data Science: Challenges and Directions.” Communications of the ACM 60,
no. 8 (2017): 59–68.
Cardona, Pam. 2020. “Developing Cultural Infrastructure.” DNC Tech Team (blog), Medium, August
4, 2020. https://medium.com/democratictech/developing-cultural-infrastructure-569e2fc72d3f.
Carman, Tim. 2022. “Grubhub Apologizes for ‘Free Lunch’ Promo That Slammed NYC Restaurants.”
Washington Post, May 20, 2022. https://www.washingtonpost.com/food/2022/05/18/grubhub-nyc-
promo/.
Carroll, Diane. 2021. “List of Platform Integrations.” Civis Analytics. Last modified May 5, 2021.
https://civis.zendesk.com/hc/en-us/articles/115004269763-List-of-Platform-Integrations.
“Case Study: Unilever.” Human Resources Online. August 27, 2014. https://www.human
resourcesonline.net/case-study-unilever.
Caspar, 
Stephanie. 
2018. 
“We 
Want 
to 
Have 
Influence.” 
Interview 
by 
Inside.mag.
https://www.axelspringer.com/data/uploads/2018/11/Interview-EN.pdf.
Caspar, Stephanie. 2019. “Axel Springer Head of Data and Tech: Media Culture Overhaul Needed to
Save Journalism.” Presentation at FIPP, March 26, 2019. //www.fipp.com/news/media-culture-
overhaul-needed-save-journalism/.
Cavaretta, Michael. 2021. “It’s Deceptively Easy to Use AI for Business Insights. It Can Be Done with
Descriptive, Predictive and Prescriptive Analytics, but Let’s Start with a Simple Descriptive
Example.” LinkedIn, February 19, 2021. https://www.linkedin.com/posts/michael-cavaretta-ph-d-
795a965_ai-artificialintelligence-datascience-activity-6768521841276440576-wd2b.
Cegłowski, Maciej. 2016. “Remarks at the SASE Panel on the Moral Economy of Tech.”
Idlewords.com, June 26. https://idlewords.com/talks/sase_panel.htm.

Chahal, Husanjot, and Helen Toner. 2021. “ ‘Small Data’ Are Also Crucial for Machine Learning.”
Scientific American, October 19, 2021. https://www.scientificamerican.com/article/small-data-are-
also-crucial-for-machine-learning/.
Chambers, John. 2016. “Cisco’s John Chambers on the Digital Era.” Interview by Rik Kirkland,
March 
18, 
2016. 
https://www.mckinsey.com/industries/technology-media-and-
telecommunications/our-insights/ciscos-john-chambers-on-the-digital-era.
Chan, Wilfred. 2022. “ ‘This Can’t Be Real’: Grubhub Promotion Turns New York City Restaurants
into a ‘War Zone.’ ” TheGuardian.Com. May 19, 2022. https://www.theguardian.com/us-
news/2022/may/18/this-cant-be-real-grubhub-promotion-turns-new-york-city-restaurants-into-a-
war-zone.
Chang, Peter. 2021, various dates. Interviews by Zachary Tumin and Madeleine Want.
Chater, Nick, and George F., Loewenstein. (2022). “The i-Frame and the s-Frame: How Focusing on
Individual-Level Solutions Has Led Behavioral Public Policy Astray.” March 1, 2022.
https://ssrn.com/abstract=4046264 or http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.4046264.
Chee, Kenny. 2021. “COVID-19 Tech Heroes Recognised for Racing Against the Clock to Help Fight
Pandemic in S’pore.” Straits Times, March 18, 2021. https://www.straitstimes.com/tech/tech-
news/covid-19-tech-heroes-recognised-for-racing-against-the-clock-to-help-fight-the.
Chen, Andrew. n.d. “How to Build a Growth Team—Lessons from Uber, Hubspot, and Others.”
Accessed May 23, 2021. https://andrewchen.com/how-to-build-a-growth-team.
Chokshi, Sonal, Ryan Caldbeck, and Jeff Jordan. 2019. “A16z Podcast: Who’s Down with CPG,
DTC? (And Micro-Brands Too?).” February 15, 2019. https://a16z.com/2019/02/15/cpg-dtc-
microbrands-grocery-online-offline-commerce/.
Cholas-Wood, Alex. 2021. Interview by Zachary Tumin and Madeleine Want.
Cholas-Wood, Alex, and E. S. Levine. 2019. “A Recommendation Engine to Aid in Identifying Crime
Patterns.” 
Journal 
on 
Applied 
Analytics 
49, 
no. 
2 
(March 
2019): 
154–166.
https://doi.org/10.1287/inte.2019.0985.
Chowdhury, Rumman. 2021. “Sharing Learnings About Our Image Cropping Algorithm.” Insights
(blog), 
Twitter 
Engineering, 
May 
19, 
2021.
https://blog.twitter.com/engineering/en_us/topics/insights/2021/sharing-learnings-about-our-image-
cropping-algorithm.
Christensen, Clayton M. 2011. The Innovator’s Dilemma: The Revolutionary Book That Will Change
the Way You Do Business. New York: Harper Business.
Christensen, Clayton M. M., Jerome H. Grossman, and Jason Hwang. 2016. The Innovator’s
Prescription: A Disruptive Solution for Health Care. New York: McGraw-Hill Education.
Chung, Gina. 2020. “ ‘The First Day Is the Worst Day’: DHL’s Gina Chung on How AI Improves over
Time.” Interview with Sam Ransbotham and Shervin Khodabandeh. Transcript included. MIT Sloan
Management Review, October 27, 2020. https://sloanreview.mit.edu/audio/the-first-day-is-the-
worst-day-dhls-gina-chung-on-how-ai-improves-over-time.
Churchman, C. West. 1967. “Guest Editorial: Wicked Problems.” Management Science 14, no. 4
(December 1967): B141–B142. http://www.jstor.org/stable/2628678.
Cimpanu, Catalin. 2020. “Political Campaign Emails Contain Dark Patterns to Manipulate Donors,
Voters.” ZDNet, October 17, 2020. https://www.zdnet.com/article/political-campaign-emails-
contain-dark-patterns-to-manipulate-donors-voters.
Ciocca, Sophia. 2018. “Building a Text Editor for a Digital-First Newsroom.” NYT Open (blog),
Medium, 
April 
12, 
2018. 
https://open.nytimes.com/building-a-text-editor-for-a-digital-first-
newsroom-f1cb8367fc21.

Ciocca, Sophia, and Jeff Sisson. 2019. “We Built Collaborative Editing for Our Newsroom’s CMS.
Here’s How.” NYT Open (blog), Medium, August 1, 2019. https://open.nytimes.com/we-built-
collaborative-editing-for-our-newsrooms-cms-here-s-how-415618a3ec49.
Clark, Kevin. 2018. “The NFL’s Analytics Revolution Has Arrived.” The Ringer, December 19, 2018.
https://www.theringer.com/nfl/2018/12/19/18148153/nfl-analytics-revolution.
Coenen, Anna. 2019. “How The New York Times Is Experimenting with Recommendation
Algorithms.” NYT Open (blog), Medium, October 17, 2019. https://open.nytimes.com/how-the-
new-york-times-is-experimenting-with-recommendation-algorithms-562f78624d26.
Cohen, Jackie. 2020. “Good for What? Humans vs. Computers.” DNC Tech Team (blog), Medium,
May 
28, 
2020. 
https://medium.com/democratictech/good-for-what-humans-vs-computers-
eb3a644fed81.
Cohen, Julie E., Woodrow Hartzog, and Laura Moy. 2020. “The Dangers of Tech-Driven Solutions to
COVID-19.” 
Brookings 
TechStream 
(blog), 
June 
17, 
2020.
https://www.brookings.edu/techstream/the-dangers-of-tech-driven-solutions-to-covid-19.
Coiera, Enrico. 2018. “The Fate of Medicine in the Time of AI.” The Lancet 392 no. 10162 (2018).
https://www-clinicalkey-com.ezproxy.cul.columbia.edu/#!/content/journal/1-s2.0-
S0140673618319251.
Coiera, Enrico. 2019. “On Algorithms, Machines, and Medicine.” Lancet Oncology 20, no. 2 (2019):
166–167.
ColumbiaRadiology.com. 2020. “Q & A with Dr. Richard Ha: Deep Learning and Breast Cancer Risk
Assessment.” 
Columbia 
Department 
of 
Radiology, 
October 
15, 
2020.
https://www.columbiaradiology.org/news/q-dr-richard-ha-deep-learning-and-breast-cancer-risk-
assessment.
CompStat360. n.d. “Implementing CompStat360.” CS360. Accessed November 16, 2021.
https://www.compstat360.org/implementing-compstat360-2.
Cook, Lindsey Rogers. 2019. “How We Helped Our Reporters Learn to Love Spreadsheets.” NYT
Open (blog), Medium, June 12, 2019. https://open.nytimes.com/how-we-helped-our-reporters-learn-
to-love-spreadsheets-adc43a93b919.
Cosentino, Dom. 2021. “How to Think About Football and Analytics Like a Coach, Not a Fuddy-
Duddy.” TheScore.com, December 2021. https://www.thescore.com/nfl/news/2250074.
Cowgill, Bo, and Catherine Tucker. 2017. “Algorithmic Bias: A Counterfactual Perspective.” Bitlab.
https://bitlab.cas.msu.edu/trustworthy-algorithms/whitepapers/Bo%20Cowgill.pdf.
Cramer, Maria. 2021. “A.I. Drone May Have Acted on Its Own in Attacking Fighters, U.N. Says.”
New York Times, June 3, 2021, sec. World.
Crawford, Kate, and Vladan Joler. 2019. “Anatomy of an AI System.” Virtual Creativity 9, no. 1
(December 1, 2019): 117–120. https://doi.org/10.1386/vcr_00008_7.
Crawford, Susan P., and Laura Adler. 2016. “Culture Change and Digital Technology: The NYPD
Under Commissioner William Bratton, 2014–2016.” SSRN Scholarly Paper ID 2839004.
Rochester, NY: Social Science Research Network. https://papers.ssrn.com/abstract=2839004.
Crosman, Penny. 2012. “ZestFinance Aims to Fix Underwriting for the Underbanked.” American
Banker, November 19, 2012. https://www.americanbanker.com/news/zestfinance-aims-to-fix-
underwriting-for-the-underbanked.
Cunningham, Charles. 2021. Interviews by Zachary Tumin.
Cunningham, Nicholas. 2019. “Fuel Feuds in Mexico: Reviving Mexico’s Oil Industry Will Require a
Crackdown on Fuel Theft in Mexico. What Are the Implications for López Obrador’s Progressive
Mandate?” 
NACLA 
Report 
on 
the 
Americas 
51, 
no. 
2 
(2019): 
119–122.
https://doi.org/10.1080/10714839.2019.1617466.

Cwalina, Alex, Christine Griffin, Jacob Haan, Nathan Kahn, Shehnaz Mannan, Alessandra Sauro,
Ellen Shepard, Sterling Wiggins, Courtney Radcliff Gill, Timothy Reuter, and Harrison Wolf. 2021.
Medicine from the Sky: Opportunities and Lessons from Drones in Africa. Insight Report, March
2021. 
Geneva: 
World 
Economic 
Forum. 
https://www.updwg.org/wp-
content/uploads/2021/04/WEF_Medicine_from_the_Sky_2021.pdf.
Danaher, Brett. 2021. Interview by Zachary Tumin and Madeleine Want.
Darius, Sebastien. 2021. “Basketball Analytics, Part 2: Shot Quality.” Medium, July 16, 2021.
https://towardsdatascience.com/part-2-shot-quality-5ab27fd63f5e.
Datta, Shantanu, and Shibayan Sarkar. 2016. “A Review on Different Pipeline Fault Detection
Methods.” Journal of Loss Prevention in the Process Industries 41 (May 2016): 97–106.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jlp.2016.03.010.
Davenport, Thomas H. 2011. “The Need for Analytical Service Lines.” International Institute for
Analytics 
(blog), 
October 
28, 
2011. 
Archived 
at 
the 
Wayback 
Machine.
https://web.archive.org/web/20160623030702/http://iianalytics.com/research/the-need-for-
analytical-service-lines.
Davenport, Thomas H. 2016. “Analytics and IT: New Opportunity for CIOs.” Harvard Business
Review, October 14, 2016. https://hbr.org/webinar/2016/09/analytics-and-it-new-opportunity-for-
cios.
Davenport, Thomas H. 2018. The AI Advantage: How to Put the Artificial Intelligence Revolution to
Work. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Davenport, Thomas H., and David Brain. 2018. “Before Automating Your Company’s Processes, Find
Ways to Improve Them.” Harvard Business Review, June 13, 2018. https://hbr.org/2018/06/before-
automating-your-companys-processes-find-ways-to-improve-them.
Davenport, Thomas H., Abhijit Guha, and Dhruv Grewal. 2021. “How to Design an AI Marketing
Strategy.” Harvard Business Review (July–August 2021).
Davenport, Thomas H., Jeanne Harris, and Jeremy Shapiro. 2010. “Competing on Talent Analytics.”
Harvard Business Review, October 1, 2010. https://hbr.org/2010/10/competing-on-talent-analytics.
Davenport, Thomas H., and Rajeev Ronanki. 2018. “Artificial Intelligence for the Real World.”
Harvard Business Review, February 12, 2018. https://hbr.org/2018/01/artificial-intelligence-for-the-
real-world.
Davis, Ben. 2017. “Ask the Experts: What’s the Best Way to Target Programmatic Ads?”
Econsultancy (blog), October 31, 2017. https://econsultancy.com/ask-the-experts-what-s-the-best-
way-to-target-programmatic-ads/.
Davis, Lynn E., Michael J. McNerney, and Michael D. Greenberg. 2016. Clarifying the Rules for
Targeted Killing: An Analytical Framework for Policies Involving Long-Range Armed Drones.
Santa Monica, CA: RAND. https://www.rand.org/pubs/research_reports/RR1610.html.
DCVC. 2017. “John Deere Acquires Blue River Technology for $305 Million, Bringing Full Stack AI
to Agriculture.” Medium (blog), September 6, 2017. https://medium.com/@dcvc/john-deere-
acquires-blue-river-technology-for-305-million-bringing-full-stack-ai-to-agriculture-7ca8c25a5fe1.
Debenedetti, Gabriel. 2020. “Election Night with Biden’s Data Guru.” New York Magazine
Intelligencer, November 18, 2020. https://nymag.com/intelligencer/2020/11/election-night-with-
bidens-data-guru.html.
Dehaye, Paul-Olivier. 2020. “Inferring Distance from Bluetooth Signal Strength: A Deep Dive.”
Medium (blog), May 19, 2020. https://medium.com/personaldata-io/inferring-distance-from-
bluetooth-signal-strength-a-deep-dive-fe7badc2bb6d.
Del Beccaro, Mark A., et al. 2006. “Computerized Provider Order Entry Implementation: No
Association with Increased Mortality Rates in an Intensive Care Unit.” Pediatrics 118, no. 1 (2006):

290. https://doi.org/10.1542/peds.2006-0367.
Deldjoo, Yashar, Maurizio Ferrari Dacrema, Mihai Gabriel Constantin, et al. 2019. “Movie Genome:
Alleviating New Item Cold Start in Movie Recommendation.” User Modeling and User-Adapted
Interaction 29, no. 2 (2019): 291–343. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11257-019-09221-y.
Delport, Jenna. 2020. “Personalisation: Differentiation Done Right.” ITNewsAfrica.com (blog),
February 1, 2020. https://www.itnewsafrica.com/2020/02/personalisation-differentiation-done-
right/.
DeLuca, Joel R. 1999. Political Savvy: Systematic Approaches to Leadership Behind the Scenes. 2nd
ed. Berwyn, PA: Evergreen Business Group.
De Martini, Garey. 2020. “Confessions of a Dem Dialer.” Marina Times, November 10, 2020.
https://www.marinatimes.com/2020/10/confessions-of-a-dem-dialer.
DeStefano, Anthony M. 2021. “Report: Stop and Frisks Fell 93 Percent After ‘13 Settlement.’ ”
Newsday, September 1, 2021. https://www.newsday.com/long-island/crime/nypd-stop-and-frisk-
peter-zimroth-1.50349874.
Detsch, Jack. 2022. “Drones Have Come of Age in Russia-Ukraine War.” Foreign Policy (blog), April
27, 2022. https://foreignpolicy.com/2022/04/27/drones-russia-ukraine-war-donbas/.
Dewan, Pooja. 2019. “2018 IAAA Finalist: Automatic Train Identification.” Presentation at the
INFORMS Innovative Applications in Analytics Award. Published January 8, 2019. YouTube.
https://youtu.be/cyQx66Of73s.
Dewey, John. 1954. The Public and Its Problems. Athens, GA: Swallow.
Dichter, Alex. 2021. Interviews by Zachary Tumin.
“Difference Between Direct-Sold and Programmatic Advertising.” 2017. DV Publisher Insights
(blog), November 6, 2017. https://pub.doubleverify.com/blog/differences-between-direct-sold-and-
programmatic-advertising/.
Dighe, Amy, Lorenzo Cattarino, et al. 2020. “Response to COVID-19 in South Korea and Implications
for Lifting Stringent Interventions.” BMC Medicine 18 (1): 321. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12916-
020-01791–8.
“Digital Disruption on the Farm.” 2014. The Economist/Schumpeter (blog), May 24, 2014.
https://www.economist.com/business/2014/05/24/digital-disruption-on-the-farm.
di Ieva, Antonio. 2019. “AI-Augmented Multidisciplinary Teams: Hype or Hope?” The Lancet 394,
no. 10211 (2019): 1801. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(19)32626-1.
Dijkstra, Andrea. 2021. “Africa’s Flying Chemists.” NewsAfrica.net, March 23, 2021.
https://www.newsafrica.net/sections/business-economy/africa-s-flying-chemists.
Dillon, Emily. 2020. “DNC Tech Team Guide to Remote Work.” DNC Tech Team (blog), Medium,
March 
16, 
2020. 
https://medium.com/democratictech/dnc-tech-team-guide-to-remote-work-
723507ff2e44.
Doctor, Ken. 2017. “Inside The New York Times’ Digital Subscription Machine.” TheStreet (blog),
December 15, 2017. https://www.thestreet.com/investing/stocks/inside-the-new-york-times-digital-
subscription-machine-14419255.
Doctor, Ken. 2019. “Newsonomics: CEO Mark Thompson on Offering More and More New York
Times 
(and 
Charging 
More 
for 
It).” 
Nieman Lab 
(blog), 
November 
13, 
2019.
https://www.niemanlab.org/2019/11/newsonomics-ceo-mark-thompson-on-offering-more-and-
more-new-york-times-and-charging-more-for-it.
Doeland, Denis. 2019. “The New York Times Leader in the Digital Transformation.” Medium (blog),
September 13, 2019. https://medium.com/digital-assets-the-power-force-and-potential-of/the-new-
york-times-leader-in-the-digital-transformation-611577f855a7.

Doerr, John, and Larry Page. 2018. Measure What Matters: How Google, Bono, and the Gates
Foundation Rock the World with OKRs. New York: Portfolio.
Dolias, Kriton, and Vinessa Wan. 2019. “How We Prepared New York Times Engineering for the
Midterm Elections.” NYT Open (blog), Medium, February 15, 2019. https://open.nytimes.com/how-
we-prepared-new-york-times-engineering-for-the-midterm-elections-2a615fe4196e.
Donahue, John D., and Mark H. Moore, eds. 2012. Ports in a Storm: Public Management in a
Turbulent World. Washington, DC: Brookings Institution Press/Ash Center.
Donoho, David. 2017. “50 Years of Data Science.” Journal of Computational and Graphical Statistics
26, no. 4 (2017): 745–766. https://doi.org/10.1080/10618600.2017.1384734.
Donohoe, Doug. 2020. “Published Assets? We Had a Few.” NYT Open (blog), Medium, July 31, 2020.
https://open.nytimes.com/publishing-assets-we-had-a-few-c3a844e98bac.
Dorn, Emma, Bryan Hancock, Jimmy Sarakatsannis, and Ellen Viruleg. 2021. “COVID-19 and
Education: The Lingering Effects of Unfinished Learning.” Last modified July 27, 2021.
https://www.mckinsey.com/industries/public-and-social-sector/our-insights/covid-19-and-
education-the-lingering-effects-of-unfinished-learning.
Dorn, Sara, and Ruth Weissmann. 2019. “Spiraling Morningside Park Crime Stats Show a
Neighborhood Gripped by Violence.” New York Post (blog), December 14, 2019.
https://nypost.com/2019/12/14/spiraling-morningside-park-crime-stats-show-a-neighborhood-
gripped-by-violence.
Dorner, Dietrich. 1997. The Logic of Failure: Recognizing and Avoiding Error in Complex Situations.
Rev. ed. Cambridge, MA: Basic Books.
Douglas, Matt, Kristen Dudish, Elena Gianni, et al. 2018. “A Faster and More Flexible Home Page
That Delivers the News Readers Want.” NYT Open (blog), Medium, August 8, 2018.
https://open.nytimes.com/a-faster-and-more-flexible-home-page-that-delivers-the-news-readers-
want-1522ff64aa86.
DroneBlogger. 2021. “On Our Way: Zipline’s Quest to Be the Medical Drone Logistics Company of
Choice.” Last modified January 16, 2021. https://dronenews.africa/on-our-way-ziplines-quest-to-
be-the-medical-drone-logistics-company-of-choice.
Dubow, Josh. 2021a. “The Analytics Behind Fourth Down Play Calls in the NFL.” Berkshire Eagle.
Accessed November 28, 2021. https://www.berkshireeagle.com/the-analytics-behind-fourth-down-
play-calls-in-the-nfl/article_c453b528-5c2a-11eb-93c8-c7b4329d6db0.html.
Dubow, Josh. 2021b. “4th Down Aggressiveness Increasing Rapidly Across NFL.” AP News,
November 
12, 
2021. 
https://apnews.com/article/nfl-sports-los-angeles-chargers-joe-lombardi-
brandon-staley-a78f2cde1b8e1daac3ff4f78b9ef2d1f.
Duda, Richard O., Peter E. Hart, and David G. Stork. 2012. Pattern Classification. New York: John
Wiley.
Duggan, William. 2004. Napoleon’s Glance: The Secret of Strategy. 2nd ed. New York: Bold Type.
Duhalt, Adrian. 2017. “Issue Brief: Looting Fuel Pipelines in Mexico.” Houston, TX: Rice
University’s Baker Institute for Public Policy.
Dullaghan, Ryan, Andrew Biga, Angela Duckworth, Amy Wrzesniewski, and Maryellen Reilly Lamb.
2015. “Case Studies: Predicting Employee Performance.” Presentation at the Wharton People
Analytics Conference in Philadelphia, PA. Published December 13, 2015. YouTube.
https://youtu.be/Ob7J9T5QBnM.
Dunlap, Charles. 2003. “It Ain’t No TV Show: JAGs and Modern Military Operations.” Chicago
Journal 
of 
International 
Law 
4, 
no. 
2 
(Fall 
2003): 
479–491.
https://chicagounbound.uchicago.edu/cjil/vol4/iss2/15.
Eager, Eric. 2021. Interviews by Zachary Tumin.

Ebersweiler, Cyril, and Benjamin Joffe. 2018. “10 Key Lessons About Tech Mergers and Acquisitions
from 
Cisco’s 
John 
Chambers.” 
TechCrunch 
(blog), 
December 
23, 
2018.
https://techcrunch.com/2018/12/23/twelve-key-lessons-about-tech-mergers-and-acquisitions-from-
ciscos-john-chambers.
Editorial Board of the Washington Post. 2022. “Opinion: As the Pandemic Exploded, a Researcher
Saw the Danger. China’s Leaders Kept Silent.” Washington Post, April 22, 2022.
https://www.washingtonpost.com/opinions/interactive/2022/china-researcher-covid-19-coverup/.
EdjSports (@edjsports). 2021. “Brandon Staley and the #Chargers Getting in on the Action and Put
Together 
an 
Outstanding 
TD 
Drive…” 
Twitter, 
October 
10, 
2021.
https://twitter.com/edjsports/status/1447323641100869635.
Edmonds, Rick. 2019a. “The New York Times Sells Premium Ads Based on How an Article Makes
You Feel.” Poynter (blog), April 10, 2019. https://www.poynter.org/business-work/2019/the-new-
york-times-sells-premium-ads-based-on-how-an-article-makes-you-feel.
Edmonds, Rick. 2019b. “Profitable New York Times Co. Readies Big Expansion Plans as Most
Newspaper 
Companies 
Continue 
to 
Contract.” 
Poynter 
(blog), 
February 
6, 
2019.
https://www.poynter.org/business-work/2019/profitable-new-york-times-co-readies-big-expansion-
plans-as-most-newspaper-companies-continue-to-contract.
EdSurge. 2016. “Teach to One: Math’ Model Expands to 10 States.” August 17, 2016.
https://www.edsurge.com/news/2016-08-17-teach-to-one-math-model-expands-to-10-states.
Eisenmann, Thomas, Geoffrey Parker, and Marshall Van Alstyne. 2011. “Platform Envelopment.”
Strategic Management Journal 32, no. 12 (2011): 1270–1285.
Eisenmann, Thomas, Eric Ries, and Sarah Dillard. “Hypothesis-Driven Entrepreneurship: The Lean
Startup.” Harvard Business School Background Note 812–095, December 2011. Revised July 2013.
Ellis, Sean. 2017. “Growth Needs a North Star Metric.” Growth Hackers (blog), June 5, 2017.
https://blog.growthhackers.com/what-is-a-north-star-metric-b31a8512923f.
Elluri, Lavanya, Varun Mandalapu, and Nirmalya Roy. 2019. “Developing Machine Learning Based
Predictive Models for Smart Policing.” https://doi.org/10.1109/SMARTCOMP.2019.00053.
Emerson. 
2016. 
“Best 
Practices 
in 
Leak 
and 
Theft 
Detection.”
https://www.emerson.com/documents/automation/white-paper-best-practices-in-leak-theft-
detection-en-68294.pdf.
Epstein, Reid J. 2020. “Democrats Belatedly Launch Operation to Share Information on Voters.” New
York 
Times, 
September 
6, 
2020. 
Updated 
September 
11, 
2020.
https://www.nytimes.com/2020/09/06/us/politics/Presidential-election-voting-Democrats.html.
Esquivel, Paloma. 2021. “Faced with Soaring Ds and Fs, Schools Are Ditching the Old Way of
Grading.” Los Angeles Times, November 8, 2021. https://www.latimes.com/california/story/2021-
11-08/as-ds-and-fs-soar-schools-ditch-inequitable-grade-systems.
Evans, Benedict. 2022. “TV, Merchant Media and the Unbundling of Advertising.” Benedict Evans
(blog), 
March 
18, 
2022. 
https://www.ben-evans.com/benedictevans/2022/3/18/unbundling-
advertising.
Evans, Laura. 2021. Interview by Zachary Tumin and Madeleine Want.
Fahim, Kareem. 2020. “Turkey’s Military Campaign Beyond Its Borders Is Powered by Homemade
Armed 
Drones.” 
Washington 
Post, 
November 
29, 
2020.
https://www.washingtonpost.com/world/middle_east/turkey-drones-libya-nagorno-
karabakh/2020/11/29/d8c98b96-29de-11eb-9c21-3cc501d0981f_story.html.
Farley, Amy. 2020. “Zipline Mastered Medical Drone Delivery in Africa—Now It’s Coming to the
U.S.” Fast Company, March 10, 2020. https://www.fastcompany.com/90457727/zipline-most-
innovative-companies-2020.

Fehr, Tiff. 2019. “How We Sped Through 900 Pages of Cohen Documents in Under 10 Minutes.” New
York Times, March 26, 2019. https://www.nytimes.com/2019/03/26/reader-center/times-documents-
reporters-cohen.html.
Fehr, Tiff, and Josh Williams. 2021. “10 Million Data Requests: How Our Covid Team Tracked the
Pandemic.” New York Times, June 24, 2021. https://www.nytimes.com/2021/06/24/insider/covid-
tracking-data.html.
Feinberg, N. K. 2019. “To Design Better Products, Write Better UX Copy.” NYT Open (blog),
Medium, October 10, 2019. https://open.nytimes.com/to-design-better-products-consider-the-
language-f17b923f8bae.
Feloni, Richard. 2017. “Consumer-Goods Giant Unilever Has Been Hiring Employees Using Brain
Games and Artificial Intelligence—and It’s a Huge Success.” Business Insider, June 28, 2017.
https://www.businessinsider.com/unilever-artificial-intelligence-hiring-process-2017-6.
Fendos, Justin. 2020. “How Surveillance Technology Powered South Korea’s COVID-19 Response.”
Brookings TechStream (blog), April 29, 2020. https://www.brookings.edu/techstream/how-
surveillance-technology-powered-south-koreas-covid-19-response.
Ferrazzi, Keith. 2014. “Getting Virtual Teams Right.” Harvard Business Review, December 1, 2014.
https://hbr.org/2014/12/getting-virtual-teams-right.
Fiedler, Jonathan. 2016. “An Overview of Pipeline Leak Detection Technologies.” American School
of Gas Measurement Technology. https://asgmt.com/wp-content/uploads/2016/02/004.pdf.
Field, Hayden. 2021. “Nine Experts on the Single Biggest Obstacle Facing AI and Algorithms in the
Next Five Years.” Emerging Tech Brew (blog), Morning Brew, January 22, 2021.
https://www.morningbrew.com/emerging-tech/stories/2021/01/22/nine-experts-single-biggest-
obstacle-facing-ai-algorithms-next-five-years.
Fink, Olga, Enrico Zio, and Ulrich Weidmann. 2013. “Predicting Time Series of Railway Speed
Restrictions with Time-Dependent Machine Learning Techniques.” Expert Systems with
Applications 40, no. 15 (2013): 6033–6040. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eswa.2013.04.038.
Finnie, William, and Robert Randall. 2002. “Loyalty as a Philosophy and Strategy: An Interview with
Frederick 
F. 
Reichheld.” 
Strategy 
& 
Leadership 
30 
(April 
2002): 
25–31.
https://doi.org/10.1108/10878570210422120.
Fischer, Sara. 2021. “Trump Era Pushes New York Times to New Heights in Digital Subscriptions.”
Axios, February 5, 2021. https://www.axios.com/new-york-times-digital-subscriptions-9be49fa1-
3310-41d9-becb-2e77b18cd77e.html.
Fisher, Max, and Choe Sang-Hun. 2020. “How South Korea Flattened the Curve.” New York Times,
March 23, 2020. https://www.nytimes.com/2020/03/23/world/asia/coronavirus-south-korea-flatten-
curve.html.
Fisher, Roger, William L. Ury, and Bruce Patton. 2011. Getting to Yes: Negotiating Agreement Without
Giving In. 3rd rev. ed. New York: Penguin.
Fleisher, Lisa. 2014. “Big Data Enters the Classroom.” Wall Street Journal, March 23, 2014.
https://online.wsj.com/article/SB10001424052702304756104579451241225610478.html.
Flix, Nicolas. 2018. “Acquisition, Processing & Storage of RS CBM Data.” Presentation at the Big
Data in Railway Maintenance Planning Conference, University of Delaware, December 2018.
Flyzipline.com. n.d. “Protecting Ghana’s Election: Instant Agility with Zipline’s Autonomous
Delivery 
Network.”
https://assets.ctfassets.net/pbn2i2zbvp41/3yrQaMNdJ1u1J2aSEucjzt/4412ea5d12896d15b7eb41a22
12d0295/Zipline_Ghana_PPE_Global_Healthcare_Feb-2021.pdf.
Ford, Paul. 2020. “ ‘Real’ Programming Is an Elitist Myth.” Wired, August 18, 2020.
https://www.wired.com/story/databases-coding-real-programming-myth.

Fortier, Sam. 2020. “The NFL’s Analytics Movement Has Finally Reached the Sport’s Mainstream.”
Washington Post, January 16, 2020. https://www.washingtonpost.com/sports/2020/01/16/nfls-
analytics-movement-has-finally-reached-sports-mainstream/.
Fountaine, Tim, Brian McCarthy, and Tamin Saleh. 2019. “Building the AI-Powered Organization.”
Harvard Business Review, July 1, 2019.
Fournier, Camille. 2019. “Camille Fournier on Managing Technical Teams.” Interview by Craig
Cannon. Published July 17, 2019. YouTube. https://youtu.be/oxgfehnJ7GE.
Fox, Liam. 2021. “How the NFL Uses Analytics, According to the Lead Analyst of a Super Bowl
Champion.” Forbes, August 12, 2021. https://www.forbes.com/sites/liamfox/2021/08/12/how-the-
nfl-uses-analytics-according-to-the-lead-analyst-of-a-super-bowl-champion/.
Franks, Bill. 2020. “Pitfalls When Measuring the Success of Analytics Programs.” LinkedIn, June 12,
2020. 
https://www.linkedin.com/pulse/pitfalls-when-measuring-success-analytics-programs-bill-
franks.
Free Management Ebooks. n.d. “Richard Hackman’s ‘Five Factor Model’.” Free Online Library for
Managers. 
Accessed 
November 
23, 
2021. 
http://www.free-management-
ebooks.com/faqld/development-03.htm.
Fretty, Peter. 2020. “This Is Not Your Pappy’s Farm.” IndustryWeek, August 17, 2020.
https://www.industryweek.com/technology-and-iiot/article/21139221/this-is-not-your-pappys-farm.
Fuscaldo, Donna. 2019. “ZestFinance Using AI to Bring Fairness to Mortgage Lending.” Forbes,
March 19, 2019. https://www.forbes.com/sites/donnafuscaldo/2019/03/19/zestfinance-using-ai-to-
bring-fairness-to-mortgage-lending.
Gallo, Amy. 2017. “A Refresher on A/B Testing.” Harvard Business Review, June 28, 2017.
https://hbr.org/2017/06/a-refresher-on-ab-testing.
Garcia, Cardiff, and Stacey Vanek Smith. September 11, 2020. “The Science of Hoops.” The Indicator
from Planet Money. https://www.npr.org/2020/09/11/911898347/the-science-of-hoops.
Garcia, Mike. 2018. “2018 FVCC Honors Symposium—Mike Garcia: ‘The Internet of Things at
BNSF Railway.’ ” Presentation at Flathead Valley Community College, February 27, 2018.
Published May 1, 2018. YouTube. https://youtu.be/-HpD-pHMH7A.
Garey, Lorna. 2013. “New England Patriots’ Winning Technology Plan.” InformationWeek (blog),
January 17, 2013. http://www.informationweek.com/mobility/muni-wireless/new-england-patriots-
winning-technology/240146529.
Garvin, David A., and Alison Berkley Wagonfeld. 2013. “Google’s Project Oxygen: Do Managers
Matter?” Boston: Harvard Business School Publishing. https://hbsp.harvard.edu/product/313110-
PDF-ENG.
Gayed, Jeremy, Said Ketchman, Oleksii Khliupin, et al. 2019. “We Re-Launched The New York Times
Paywall 
and 
No 
One 
Noticed.” 
NYT 
Open 
(blog), 
Medium, 
August 
29, 
2019.
https://open.nytimes.com/we-re-launched-the-new-york-times-paywall-and-no-one-noticed-
5cd1f795f76b.
Gee, Kelsey. 2017. “In Unilever’s Radical Hiring Experiment, Resumes Are Out, Algorithms Are In.”
Wall Street Journal, June 26, 2017. https://www.wsj.com/articles/in-unilevers-radical-hiring-
experiment-resumes-are-out-algorithms-are-in-1498478400.
Geiger, Gerhard, Thomas Werner, and Drago Matko. 2015. “Leak Detection and Locating: A Survey.”
Pipeline 
Simulation 
Interest 
Group.
https://web.archive.org/web/20151129074144/http://fhge.opus.hbz-
nrw.de/volltexte/2003/8/pdf/Paper_0301_for_FH.pdf.
Ghanchi, Asim. 2019. “BNSF Women in Stem.” Presentation at the DisruptWell summit, September
2019. Published September 8, 2019. Vimeo. https://vimeo.com/455861938.

“Gigabytes Fly at Gillette Stadium.” 2014. NECN. https://www.necn.com/news/business/gigabytes-
fly-at-gillette-stadium_necn/43538/.
Gladwell, Malcolm. 1996. “The Tipping Point: Why Is the City Suddenly So Much Safer?” New
Yorker, June 3, 1996, 32–38.
Glassdoor. n.d. “The New York Times Deputy Editor for Homescreen Personalization Job in New York,
NY.” Accessed July 19, 2021. https://www.glassdoor.com/job-listing/deputy-editor-for-homescreen-
personalization-the-new-york-times-JV_IC1132348_KO0,44 _KE45,63.htm?jl=4043959453.
Global 
Guerrillas. 
“DRONENET 
How 
to 
Build 
It.” 
Accessed 
November 
5, 
2021.
https://globalguerrillas.typepad.com/globalguerrillas/2013/01/dronenet-how-to-build-it.html.
Goh, Alison. 2020. “Zoom Video Meeting Best Practices.” DNC Tech Team (blog), Medium, April 16,
2020. https://medium.com/democratictech/zoom-video-meeting-best-practices-fd255120bd0.
Goldsmith, Kevin. 2016. “Infoshare 2016: How Spotify Builds Products.” Speech given May 19,
2016, in Gdańsk, Poland. Published June 29, 2016. YouTube. https://youtu.be/7B-qKT2sHDo.
Goldsmith, Kevin. 2017. “The Right Ingredients for Your Perfect Team.” Presentation at the Lead
Developer, New York, March 17, 2017. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JnCYxM9z1dE.
Goldsmith, Stephen, and William D. Eggers. 2004. Governing by Network: The New Shape of the
Public Sector. Illustrated ed. Washington, DC: Brookings Institution Press/Ash Center.
Goldsmith, Stephen, and Donald F. Kettl, eds. 2009. Unlocking the Power of Networks: Keys to High-
Performance Government. Washington, DC: Brookings Institution Press/Ash Center.
Goleman, Daniel. 2004. “What Makes a Leader?” Harvard Business Review, January 1, 2004.
https://hbr.org/2004/01/what-makes-a-leader.
Goleman, Daniel. 2005. Emotional Intelligence: Why It Can Matter More Than IQ. New York:
Random House.
Goodwin, Tom. 2015. “The Battle Is for the Customer Interface.” TechCrunch (blog), March 3, 2015.
https://social.techcrunch.com/2015/03/03/in-the-age-of-disintermediation-the-battle-is-all-for-the-
customer-interface/.
Google Developers. “Recommendations: What and Why? | Machine Learning.” 2022. August 5, 2022.
https://developers.google.com/machine-learning/recommendation/overview.
Goswami, Debjani. 2021. “How to Do Usability Testing for Your AI Assistant?” Qualitest (blog),
February 9, 2021. https://medium.com/qualitest/how-to-do-usability-testing-for-your-ai-assistant-
a36887e1bbcb.
Gottlieb, Scott. 2021. Uncontrolled Spread: Why COVID-19 Crushed Us and How We Can Defeat the
Next Pandemic. New York: Harper.
Gourville, John T. 2003. “Why Consumers Don’t Buy: The Psychology of New Product Adoption.”
Harvard Business School Background Note 504–056, November 2003. Revised April 2004.
https://www.hbs.edu/faculty/Pages/item.aspx?num=30597.
Gourville, John T. 2005. “Note on Innovation Diffusion: Rogers’s Five Factors.” Harvard Business
School 
Background 
Note 
505–075, 
May 
2005. 
Revised 
April 
2006.
https://www.hbs.edu/faculty/Pages/item.aspx?num=32314.
Gourville, John T. 2006. “Eager Sellers and Stony Buyers: Understanding the Psychology of New-
Product Adoption.” Harvard Business Review, June 2006, 98–106. https://hbr.org/2006/06/eager-
sellers-and-stony-buyers-understanding-the-psychology-of-new-product-adoption.
Government of the Republic of Korea. 2020. “Flattening the Curve on COVID-19: How Korea
Responded 
to 
a 
Pandemic 
Using 
ICT.” 
Last 
modified 
July 
17, 
2020.
http://www.undp.org/content/seoul_policy_center/en/home/presscenter/articles/2019/flattening-the-
curve-on-covid-19.html.

GovTech Singapore. 2020a. “Before You #TraceTogether, the Team First #TestsTogether.” Last
modified 
October 
15, 
2020. 
https://www.tech.gov.sg/media/technews/20201015-before-
tracetogether-you-have-to-testtogether.
GovTech Singapore. 2020b. “Improving TraceTogether Through Community Engagement.” Last
modified July 6, 2020. https://www.tech.gov.sg/media/technews/2020-07-06-tracetogether-token-
teardown.
GovTech Singapore. 2020c. “9 Geeky Myth-Busting Facts You Need to Know About TraceTogether.”
Last modified March 21, 2020. https://www.tech.gov.sg/media/technews/geeky-myth-busting-facts-
you-need-to-know-about-tracetogether.
GovTech Singapore. 2020d. “6 Things About OpenTrace, the Open-Source Code Published by the
TraceTogether Team.” Last modified April 9, 2020. https://www.tech.gov.sg/media/technews/six-
things-about-opentrace.
GovTech Singapore. 2020e. “TraceTogether—Behind the Scenes Look at Its Development Process.”
Last modified March 25, 2020. https://www.tech.gov.sg/media/technews/tracetogether-behind-the-
scenes-look-at-its-development-process.
GovTech Singapore. 2020f. “Two Reasons Why Singapore Is Sticking with TraceTogether’s
Protocol.” Last modified June 29, 2020. https://www.tech.gov.sg/media/technews/two-reasons-why-
singapore-sticking-with-tracetogether-protocol.
Granville, Vincent. 2015. “Building Blocks of Data Science.” Vincent Granville’s Blog (blog),
February 27, 2015. https://www.datasciencecentral.com/profiles/blogs/building-blocks-of-data-
science.
Granville, Vincent. 2016. “40 Techniques Used by Data Scientists.” Vincent Granville’s Blog (blog),
July 
4, 
2016. 
https://www.datasciencecentral.com/profiles/blogs/40-techniques-used-by-data-
scientists.
Granville, Vincent. 2017. “Difference Between Machine Learning, Data Science, AI, Deep Learning,
and 
Statistics.” 
Vincent 
Granville’s 
Blog 
(blog), 
January 
2, 
2017.
https://www.datasciencecentral.com/profiles/blogs/difference-between-machine-learning-data-
science-ai-deep-learning.
Green, Donald P., and Alan S. Gerber. 2019. Get Out the Vote: How to Increase Voter Turnout. 4th ed.
Washington, DC: Brookings Institution Press.
Green, Donald P., Alan S. Gerber, and David W. Nickerson. 2003. “Getting Out the Vote in Local
Elections: Results from Six Door-to-Door Canvassing Experiments.” Journal of Politics 65, no. 4
(November 2003): 1083–1096. https://doi.org/10.1111/1468-2508.t01-1-00126.
Green, Donald P., Mary C. McGrath, and Peter M. Aronow. 2013. “Field Experiments and the Study
of Voter Turnout.” Journal of Elections, Public Opinion and Parties 23, no. 1 (February 2013): 27–
48. https://doi.org/10.1080/17457289.2012.728223.
Greulich, William Walter, and S. Idell Pyle. 1959. Radiographic Atlas of Skeletal Development of the
Hand and Wrist. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.
Greve, Ashley, Scott Dubin, and Ryan Triche. n.d. “Assessing Feasibility and Readiness for Cargo
Drones in Health Supply Chains.” United States Agency for International Development.
https://www.updwg.org/wp-
content/uploads/2021/06/Assessing_Feasibility_and_Readiness_for_Cargo_Drones_in_Health_Sup
ply_Chains.pdf.
Grey Owl Engineering Ltd. 2018. “Best Management Practice: Pipeline Leak Detection Programs.”
Canadian 
Association 
of 
Petroleum 
Producers. 
https://www.capp.ca/wp-
content/uploads/2019/12/Best_Management_Practice__Pipeline_Leak_Detection_Programs-
310502.pdf.

Grotta, Jacob. 2019. “Rev 1 ‘Data Science in the Banking World.’ ” July 29, 2019.
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=iXxwlPzIBrg.
Grove, Andy. 2003. “Churning Things Up.” Fortune Magazine, August 11, 2003, 115–118.
Gruen, David and Jonathan Messinger. 2021. “How to Bridge the Imaging AI Adoption Gap with an
Ecosystem 
Approach—3 
Learnings.” 
Webinar, 
December 
1, 
2021.
https://www.beckershospitalreview.com/healthcare-information-technology/how-to-bridge-the-
imaging-ai-adoption-gap-with-an-ecosystem-approach-3-learnings.html.
Guerin, David, Manon Taylor, Charles Matemba, et al. n.d. “Drone Evidence Generation Toolkit.”
UAV 
for 
Payload 
Delivery 
Working 
Group. 
Accessed 
November 
27, 
2021.
https://www.updwg.org/wp-content/uploads/Drone-Evidence-Generation-Toolkit.pdf.
Guo, Eileen, and Karen Hao. 2020. “This Is the Stanford Vaccine Algorithm That Left Out Frontline
Doctors.” 
MIT 
Technology 
Review, 
December 
21, 
2020. 
https://www.technology
review.com/2020/12/21/1015303/stanford-vaccine-algorithm.
Guszcza, James, Iyad Rahwan, et al. 2018. “Why We Need to Audit Algorithms.” Harvard Business
Review, November 28, 2018. https://hbr.org/2018/11/why-we-need-to-audit-algorithms.
Guzman, Zack. 2018. “Bill Bratton Reveals What His ‘Biggest Mistake’ Taught Him About
Ambition.” CNBC, July 13, 2018. https://www.cnbc.com/2018/07/12/bill-bratton-reveals-what-his-
biggest-mistake-taught-him-about-manag.html.
Ha, Richard, Christine Chin, and Jenika Karcich. 2019. “Prior to Initiation of Chemotherapy, Can We
Predict Breast Tumor Response? Deep Learning Convolutional Neural Networks Approach Using a
Breast MRI Tumor Dataset.” Journal of Digital Imaging 32, no. 5 (2019): 693–701.
Ha, Richard, Simukayi Mutasa, et al. 2019. “Accuracy of Distinguishing Atypical Ductal Hyperplasia
from Ductal Carcinoma in Situ with Convolutional Neural Network–Based Machine Learning
Approach Using Mammographic Image Data.” American Journal of Roentgenology 212, no. 5
(2019): 1166–1171. https://doi.org/10.2214/AJR.18.20250.
Haas, Martine, and Mark Mortensen. 2016. “The Secrets of Great Teamwork.” Harvard Business
Review, June 1, 2016. https://hbr.org/2016/06/the-secrets-of-great-teamwork.
Haass, Richard N. 1999. The Bureaucratic Entrepreneur: How to Be Effective in Any Unruly
Organization. Washington, DC: Brookings Institution Press.
Hackman, J. Richard. 2002. Leading Teams: Setting the Stage for Great Performances. Boston:
Harvard Business Review Press.
Hackman, J. Richard. 2004. “What Makes for a Great Team?” Psychological Science Agenda.
https://www.apa.org/science/about/psa/2004/06/hackman.
Hackman, J. Richard, and Richard E. Walton. 1986. “Leading Groups in Organizations.” In Designing
Effective Work Groups, ed. Paul S. Goodman, 72–119. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Haimson, Leonie. 2019. “NYC Public School Parents: The Reality vs the Hype of Teach to One.”
NYC 
Public 
School 
Parents 
(blog), 
February 
28, 
2019.
https://nycpublicschoolparents.blogspot.com/2019/02/the-reality-vs-hype-of-teach-to-one.html.
Hall, Madison. 2021. “The DOJ Is Mapping Cell Phone Location Data from Capitol Rioters.”
Business Insider France, March 24, 2021. https://www.businessinsider.com/doj-is-mapping-cell-
phone-location-data-from-capitol-rioters-2021-3.
Hamman, Brian. 2018a. “How We Hire Front-End Engineers at The New York Times.” NYT Open
(blog), Medium, August 10, 2018. https://open.nytimes.com/how-we-hire-front-end-engineers-at-
the-new-york-times-e1294ea8e3f8.
Hamman, Brian. 2018b. “Part I: An Interview with Brian Hamman, VP of Engineering for News
Products at The New York Times.” Medium (blog), June 3, 2018. https://medium.com/enigma-

engineering/part-i-an-interview-with-brian-hamman-vp-of-engineering-for-news-products-at-the-
new-york-times-f3f59fe18d69.
Hamman, Brian. 2018c. “Part II: An Interview with Brian Hamman, VP of Engineering for News
Products at The New York Times.” Medium (blog). June 5, 2018. https://medium.com/enigma-
engineering/part-ii-an-interview-with-brian-hamman-vp-of-engineering-for-news-products-at-the-
new-york-times-db14bb89641c.
Hamman, Brian. 2019. “From Designing Boxes to Designing Algorithms: How Programming the
News Has Evolved at The New York Times.” Summary of talk presented at the Computation +
Journalism Symposium, Miami, FL, February 2, 2019. http://cplusj.org/keynote-speaker-brian-
hamman.
Han, Yong Y., Joseph A. Carcillo, Shekhar T. Venkataraman, et al. 2005. “Unexpected Increased
Mortality After Implementation of a Commercially Sold Computerized Physician Order Entry
System.” Pediatrics 116 (2005):1506–1512.
Hansen, Morton T. 2011. “IDEO CEO Tim Brown: T-Shaped Stars: The Backbone of IDEO’s
Collaborative 
Culture.” 
ChiefExecutive.net, 
March 
29, 
2011.
https://web.archive.org/web/20110329003842/http://www.chiefexecutive.net/ME2/dirmod.asp?
sid=&nm=&type=Publishing&mod=Publications::Article&mid=8F3A7027421841978F18BE895F
87 F791&tier=4&id=F42A23CB49174C5E9426C43CB0A0BC46.
Harlan, Chico. 2021. “Highly Vaccinated Countries Thought They Were over the Worst. Denmark
Says the Pandemic’s Toughest Month Is Just Beginning.” Washington Post, December 18, 2021.
https://www.washingtonpost.com/world/2021/12/18/omicron-variant-denmark/.
Hartley, Jon. 2020. “The Baltimore Ravens Fell Short of the Super Bowl, but Their NFL Analytics
Revolution 
Is 
Just 
Beginning.” 
National 
Review 
(blog), 
February 
2, 
2020.
https://www.nationalreview.com/2020/02/baltimore-ravens-nfl-analytics-data-driven-strategies-
transform-football.
Harwell, Drew. 2020. “Algorithms Are Deciding Who Gets the First Vaccines. Should We Trust
Them?” 
Washington 
Post, 
December 
23, 
2020.
https://www.washingtonpost.com/technology/2020/12/23/covid-vaccine-algorithm-failure.
Hassan, Norel. 2018. “Announcing a New York Times iOS Feature That Helps Readers Find Stories
Relevant 
to 
Them.” 
NYT 
Open 
(blog), 
Medium, 
August 
3, 
2018.
https://open.nytimes.com/announcing-a-new-ios-feature-that-helps-readers-find-stories-relevant-to-
them-a8273f8fcca4.
Hawkins, Beth. 2021. “A Better Equation: New Pandemic Data Supports Acceleration Rather Than
Remediation to Make Up for COVID Learning Loss.” The 74, May 24, 2021.
https://www.the74million.org/a-better-equation-new-pandemic-data-supports-acceleration-rather-
than-remediation-to-make-up-for-covid-learning-loss.
HBS Online. 2021. “What Is Predictive Analytics? 5 Examples.” Business Insights Blog (blog).
October 26, 2021. https://online.hbs.edu/blog/post/predictive-analytics.
Heaven, Will Douglas. 2020. “Predictive Policing Algorithms Are Racist. They Need to Be
Dismantled.” MIT Technology Review. Accessed February 22, 2021. https://www.technology
review.com/2020/07/17/1005396/predictive-policing-algorithms-racist-dismantled-machine-
learning-bias-criminal-justice/.
Hebert, Adam J. 2003. “Compressing the Kill Chain.” Air Force Magazine, March 1, 2003.
https://www.airforcemag.com/article/0303killchain.
Heideman, Justin. 2017. “Quick and Statistically Useful Validation of Page Performance Tweaks.”
NYT Open (blog), Medium, February 6, 2017. https://open.nytimes.com/quick-and-statistically-
useful-validation-of-page-performance-tweaks-39ecce4328d7.

Henderson, Rebecca M., and Kim B. Clark. 1990. “Architectural Innovation: The Reconfiguration of
Existing Product Technologies and the Failure of Established Firms.” Administrative Science
Quarterly 35, no. 1 (1990): 9–30. https://doi.org/10.2307/2393549.
Henry, Vincent E. 2005. “Compstat Management in the NYPD: Reducing Crime and Improving
Quality of Life in New York City.” Paper presented at the United Nations Asia and Far East
Institute for the Prevention of Crime and Treatment of Offenders 129th International Seniors
Seminar, Tokyo, Japan, January–February 2005. Resource Material Series no. 68 (2005), 100–116.
Hensley, Jamison. 2019. “Ravens’ John Harbaugh Being Lauded as ‘Prince’ of Football Analytics.”
ESPN 
(blog), 
September 
25, 
2019. 
https://www.espn.com/blog/baltimore-
ravens/post/_/id/50798/ravens-john-harbaugh-being-lauded-as-prince-of-football-analytics.
Hensley, Jamison. 2020. “Baltimore Ravens DC Unhappy with Late Cincinnati Bengals Field Goal to
Avoid Shutout.” ESPN, October 15, 2020. https://www.espn.com/nfl/story/_/id/30121047.
Hensley, Jamison. 2021. “Ravens’ John Harbaugh on Decision to Go for 2 Instead of Game-Tying
PAT in Loss to Steelers—‘We Were Pretty Much out of Corners.’ ” ESPN.com, December 6, 2021.
https://www.espn.com/nfl/story/_/id/32800759/ravens-john-harbaugh-decision-go-2-game-tying-
pat-loss-steelers-were-pretty-much-corners.
Heraud, Jorge. 2017. “How an Artificial Intelligence & Robotics Startup Got Acquired by John
Deere.” Interview by Louisa Burwood-Taylor. Published October 3, 2017. Simplecast podcast.
https://agfundernews.com/artificial-intelligence-robotics-startup-got-acquired-john-deere.html.
Hess, Rick. 2017. “Straight Up Conversation: Teach to One CEO Joel Rose.” Education Week,
September 18, 2017. https://www.edweek.org/education/opinion-straight-up-conversation-teach-to-
one-ceo-joel-rose/2017/09.
Heymann, Phillip B. 1987. The Politics of Public Management. New Haven, CT: Yale University
Press.
Hickins, Michael. 2012. “Union Pacific Using Predictive Software to Reduce Train Derailments.”
Wall Street Journal, April 2, 2012. https://www.wsj.com/articles/BL-CIOB-102.
Hill, Carolyn J., and Laurence E. Lynn. 2015. Public Management: Thinking and Acting in Three
Dimensions. 2nd ed. Los Angeles: CQ Press.
Hill, Kashmir. 2021. “What Happens When Our Faces Are Tracked Everywhere We Go?” New York
Times 
Magazine, 
March 
18, 
2021.
https://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2021/03/18/magazine/facial-recognition-clearview-ai.html.
Hiller, Jennifer. 2022.“While Electric Vehicles Proliferate, Charging Stations Lag Behind.” Wall Street
Journal. May 30, 2022. https://www.wsj.com/articles/electric-vehicles-proliferate-while-charging-
stations-lag-behind-11653903180.
HireVue. n.d. “Bias, AI Ethics and the HireVue Approach.” HireVue. Accessed November 13, 2021.
https://www.hirevue.com/why-hirevue/ai-ethics.
HireVue. 2020. “Unilever Finds Top Talent Faster with HireVue Assessments.” Unilever + HireVue.
https://webapi.hirevue.com/wp-content/uploads/2020/09/Unilever-Success-Story-PDF.pdf?
_ga=2.14249143.1021990485.1637083562–1312617268.1637083562.
Hodges, Matt (@hodgesmr). 2020. “2012 was known for reimagining what campaign tech and data
could do. 2016 was known for an armada in-house team. 2020 should be known for the sweeping
role tech vendors played across the ecosystem. The future of Democratic tech is distributed. That’s
investing 
in 
infrastructure.” 
Twitter, 
December 
7, 
2020.
https://twitter.com/hodgesmr/status/1336012756563050496.
Hofstadter, Douglas. 2022. “Artificial Neural Networks Today Are Not Conscious, According to
Douglas 
Hofstadter.” 
The 
Economist, 
June 
9, 
2022. 
https://www.economist.com/by-

invitation/2022/06/09/artificial-neural-networks-today-are-not-conscious-according-to-douglas-
hofstadter.
Holdman, Jessica. 2019. “BNSF Explains New Cameras Able to Detect Rail Flaws at 70 mph at ND
Capitol 
Exhibit.” 
Jamestown 
Sun, 
January 
23, 
2019.
https://www.jamestownsun.com/business/technology/956943-BNSF-explains-new-cameras-able-to-
detect-rail-flaws-at-70-mph-at-ND-Capitol-exhibit.
Holguín-Veras, Jose, Saif Benjaafar, Pooja Dewan, et al. 2018. “Transportation Panel at INFORMS
2018 Government & Analytics Summit.” Panel discussion. Published May 24, 2018. YouTube.
https://youtu.be/7Daebc9B4wo.
Holmes, Aaron. 2020. “South Korea Is Relying on Technology to Contain COVID-19, Including
Measures That Would Break Privacy Laws in the US—And So Far, It’s Working.” Business Insider,
May 
2, 
2020. 
https://www.businessinsider.com/coronavirus-south-korea-tech-contact-tracing-
testing-fight-covid-19-2020–5.
Honan, James P., Stacey Childress, and Caroline King. 2004. “Aligning Resources to Improve Student
Achievement: San Diego City Schools.” Boston: Harvard Business Publishing, September 13,
2004. https://hbsp.harvard.edu/product/PEL003-PDF-ENG?Ntt=san%20diego*.
Hoops Geek. 2021. “The History and Evolution of the Three-Point Shot.” The Hoops Geek (blog),
February 10, 2021. https://www.thehoopsgeek.com/history-three-pointer/.
Hoppe, Anisha. 2021. “ ‘Fire, Forget, and Find’: Kamikaze Drones Are Already a Thing in Libya.”
TAG24. https://www.tag24.com/tech/fire-forget-and-find-kamikaze-drones-are-already-a-thing-in-
libya-1988433. June 3, 2021.
Hu, Nick, 2021. “Zipline, on the Future of Healthcare Supply Chains.” Interview with Dandi Zhu. In
Digital 
Health 
Forward. 
Published 
January 
13, 
2021. 
Spotify 
podcast.
https://open.spotify.com/episode/3rZtHOBfBcgsKa3APYOm1U.
Huang, Gregory T. 2013. “Xconomy: Enterasys, Boston Sports Teams Talk Future of Stadium Tech at
Gillette.” Xconomy. January 16, 2013. https://xconomy.com/boston/2013/01/16/enterasys-and-
boston-sports-teams-talk-future-of-stadium-tech/.
Huawei. n.d. “Digital PEMEX Raises Efficiency and Profits.” Huawei Enterprise. Accessed June 19,
2020. https://e.huawei.com/mx/case-studies/leading-new-ict/2018/201810171521.
Hubert, Anne. 2015. “Millennial Disruption Index.” Presentation at the 2015 Yale Customer Insights
Conference, 
Center 
for 
Customer 
Insights 
at 
Yale 
SOM, 
May 
19, 
2015.
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=85kIjWp74NI.
Human Resources Online. 2014. “Case Study: Unilever.” Humanresourcesonline.net. August 27,
2014. https://www.humanresourcesonline.net/case-study-unilever.
Huntsberry, William. 2015. “Meet the Classroom of the Future.” NPR, January 12, 2015.
https://www.npr.org/sections/ed/2015/01/12/370966699/meet-the-classroom-of-the-future.
Iliakopoulou, Katerina. 2019. “Architecting for News Recommendations: The Many Hidden Colors of
the Gray Lady.” Presentation at the O’Reilly Software Architecture Conference 2019, New York,
February 
3, 
2019. 
Video. 
https://www.oreilly.com/library/view/oreilly-software-
architecture/9781492050506/video323974.html.
Iliakopoulou, Katerina. 2020. “Building for Rapid Scale: A Deep Dive into The New York Times’
Messaging Platform.” Presentation at the O’Reilly Software Architecture Conference 2020, New
York, 
February 
23, 
2020. 
Video. 
https://www.oreilly.com/library/view/oreilly-software-
architecture/0636920333777/video329403.html.
Ingram, David, and Jacob Ward. 2020. “Behind the Global Efforts to Make a Privacy-First
Coronavirus Tracking App.” NBC News, April 7, 2020. https://www.nbcnews.com/tech/tech-
news/behind-global-efforts-make-privacy-first-coronavirus-tracking-app-n1177871.

Institution for Social and Policy Studies. 2021. “Lessons from GOTV Experiments.” 2021.
https://isps.yale.edu/node/16698.
Intersoft Consulting. n.d. “GDPR: Privacy by Design.” Key Issues. Accessed October 22, 2021.
https://gdpr-info.eu/issues/privacy-by-design.
Issenberg, Sasha. 2013. The Victory Lab: The Secret Science of Winning Campaigns. Reprint ed. New
York: Crown.
Issenberg, Sasha. 2016. “The Meticulously Engineered Grassroots Network Behind the Bernie
Sanders 
Revolution.” 
Bloomberg, 
February 
24, 
2016.
https://www.bloomberg.com/news/features/2016-02-24/behind-bernie-sanders-revolution-lies-a-
meticulously-engineered-grassroots-network.
Jacob, Mark. 2019. “Building Habit—Not Pageviews—Matters Most for Keeping Subscribers, Data
Analysis 
Finds.” Poynter 
(blog), 
February 
5, 
2019. 
https://www.poynter.org/business-
work/2019/building-habit-not-pageviews-matters-most-for-keeping-subscribers-data-analysis-
finds/.
James, Sarah. 2020. “User Testing for a Niche Product.” DNC Tech Team (blog), Medium, May 19,
2020. https://medium.com/democratictech/user-testing-for-a-niche-product-12d53dd1bca1.
Japan Times. 2020. “South Korea Crushed a Huge Coronavirus Outbreak. Can It Beat a Second
Wave?” June 15, 2020. https://www.japantimes.co.jp/news/2020/06/15/asia-pacific/south-korea-
coronavirus-second-wave.
Jardine, Andrew K. S., Daming Lin, and Dragan Banjevic. 2006. “A Review on Machinery
Diagnostics and Prognostics Implementing Condition-Based Maintenance.” Mechanical Systems
and Signal Processing 20, no. 7 (2006): 1483–1510. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymssp.2005.09.012.
Jimmy (@JimmySecUK). 2022. “According to Ukrainian Sources the Russians Once Again
Attempted to Ford the Siverskyi Donets River, near Bilohorivka, Earlier This Afternoon. It Went
about 
as 
Well 
as 
Their 
Previous 
Attempts.” 
Twitter.
https://twitter.com/JimmySecUK/status/1524783663908634624.
Johnson, Lynne D., Lisa Howard, and Eden Sandlin. 2021. “Building a Successful Advertising
Business from a Subscription-First Model.” Presentation at the AdMonsters’ Publisher Forum
Virtual, 2021. Published May 7, 2021. YouTube. https://youtu.be/NIi-Xdd-sx8.
Johnson, Sydney. 2017. “Pulling the Plug on a Personalized Learning Pilot.” EdSurge, January 19,
2017. 
https://www.edsurge.com/news/2017-01-19-pulling-the-plug-on-a-personalized-learning-
pilot.
Jones, Nathan P., and John Sullivan. 2019. “Huachicoleros: Criminal Cartels, Fuel Theft, and Violence
in Mexico.” Journal of Strategic Security 12, no. 4 (2019): 1–24. https://doi.org/10.5038/1944-
0472.12.4.1742.
Joyce, Greg. 2019. “Dave Gettleman’s New Giants Promises: ‘Computer Folks’ and Eventual
Success.” New York Post (blog), December 31, 2019. https://nypost.com/2019/12/31/dave-
gettlemans-new-giants-promises-computer-folks-and-eventual-success/.
Jumper, John. (2012–2021). Interviews with Zachary Tumin.
Kahneman, Daniel, Jack L. Knetsch, and Richard H. Thaler. 1990. “Experimental Test of the
Endowment Effect and the Coase Theorem.” Journal of Political Economy 98, no. 6 (December
1990): 1325–1348.
Kahneman, Daniel, and Amos Tversky. 1979. “Prospect Theory: An Analysis of Decision Under
Risk.” Econometrica 47, no. 2 (March): 263–291.
Kalla, Joshua L., and David E. Broockman. 2018. “The Minimal Persuasive Effects of Campaign
Contact in General Elections: Evidence from 49 Field Experiments.” American Political Science
Review 112, no. 1 (February 2018): 148–166. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0003055417000363.

Kanter, Rosabeth Moss. 1985. Change Masters. New York: Free Press.
Kanter, Rosabeth Moss, and Tuna Cem Hayirli. 2022. “Creating High Impact Coalitions.” Harvard
Business Review, March-April 2022.
Kanter, Rosabeth Moss, Barry A. Stein, and Todd D. Jick. 1992. The Challenge of Organizational
Change: How Companies Experience It and Leaders Guide It. New York: Free Press.
Kapadia, Sheil. 2019. “Analytical Edge: How John Harbaugh and Ravens Have Gained an Advantage
with 
Fourth 
Down 
Aggressiveness.” 
The 
Athletic, 
November 
22, 
2019.
https://theathletic.com/1396091/2019/11/22/analytical-edge-how-john-harbaugh-and-ravens-have-
gained-an-advantage-with-fourth-down-aggressiveness.
Kaplan, Evan. 2018. “The Age of Instrumentation Enables Better Business Outcomes.” Upside (blog),
Transforming Data with Intelligence, May 30, 2018. https://tdwi.org/articles/2018/05/30/arch-all-
age-of-instrumentation-better-business-outcomes.aspx.
Kaplan, Robert E., and Mignon Mazique. 1987. Trade Routes: The Manager’s Network of
Relationships. Greensboro, NC: Center for Creative Leadership.
Kasinitz, Aaron. 2019. “Baltimore Ravens Make Hires for Analytics Department.” PennLive, June 19,
2019. 
https://www.pennlive.com/baltimore-ravens/2019/06/baltimore-ravens-make-hires-for-
analytics-department.html.
Kaste, Martin. 2020. “NYPD Study: Implicit Bias Training Changes Minds, Not Necessarily
Behavior.” 
NPR, 
September 
10, 
2020, 
sec. 
Hidden 
Brain.
https://www.npr.org/2020/09/10/909380525/nypd-study-implicit-bias-training-changes-minds-not-
necessarily-behavior.
Katzenbach, Jon R., and Douglas K. Smith. 2009. The Discipline of Teams. Boston: Harvard Business
Review Press.
Katzenbach, Jon R., and Douglas K. Smith. 2015. The Wisdom of Teams: Creating the High-
Performance Organization. Reprint ed. Boston: Harvard Business Review Press.
Kawaguchi, Akihito, Masashi Miwa, and Koichiro Terada. 2005. “Actual Data Analysis of Alignment
Irregularity Growth and Its Prediction Model.” Quarterly Report of Railway Technical Research
Institute 46, no. 4 (2005): 262–268. https://doi.org/10.2219/rtriqr.46.262.
Kaye, Kate. 2022. “Big Data Is Dead. Small AI Is Here.” Protocol, January 13, 2022.
https://www.protocol.com/newsletters/protocol-enterprise/manufacturing-ai-salesforce-shay-banon.
Keane, Pearse A., and Eric J. Topol. 2018. “With an Eye to AI and Autonomous Diagnosis.” NPJ
Digital Medicine 1, no. 1 (2018): 1–3. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41746-018-0048-y.
Kedet. 2021. “Programmatic Direct vs Real-Time Bidding: What’s the Difference?” War Room Inc
(blog), May 10, 2021. https://www.warroominc.com/institute-library/blog/programmatic-direct-vs-
real-time-bidding/.
Keller, Kevin Lane. 2001. “Building Customer-Based Brand Equity: A Blueprint for Creating Strong
Brands.” Marketing Science Institute Working Paper Series, Report 01–107, Cambridge, MA,
January 1, 2001. https://www.msi.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/06/MSI _Report_01-107.pdf.
Kelman, Steven. 2005. Unleashing Change: A Study of Organizational Renewal in Government.
Washington, DC: Brookings Institution Press.
Kendrick, Tom. 2012. Results Without Authority: Controlling a Project When the Team Doesn’t Report
to You. 2nd ed. New York: AMACOM.
Kennedy, David. 2017. “What Cops Need to Do If They Want the Public’s Trust.” Oprah (blog), May
2017. https://www.oprah.com/inspiration/what-cops-need-to-do-if-they-want-the-publics-trust.
Kerr, William R., Mark Roberge, and Paul A. Gompers. 2017. “The Entrepreneurial Manager, Module
I: Defining and Developing the Business Model.” Harvard Business School Module Note 817–108,
February 2017. Revised December 2018.

Kerry, Cameron F. 2020. “Protecting Privacy in an AI-Driven World.” Brookings. Last modified
February 10, 2020. https://www.brookings.edu/research/protecting-privacy-in-an-ai-driven-world.
Khan, Zainub. n.d. “Teach to One Math with Ms. Khan.” Elevate Chicago (blog). Accessed February
6, 2019. https://chartersforchange.org/teach-to-one-math-with-ms-khan.
Khanna, Harry. 2020. “Tools for Rapid Response on Election Day.” DNC Tech Team (blog), Medium,
July 
20, 
2020. 
https://medium.com/democratictech/tools-for-rapid-response-on-election-day-
2feb7a38579f.
Khanna, Tarun. 2018. “When Technology Gets Ahead of Society.” Harvard Business Review 96, no. 4
(July–August 2018), 86–95.
Khanna, Tarun, and George Gonzalez. 2020. “Zipline: The World’s Largest Drone Delivery Network.”
Harvard 
Business 
School 
Case 
721–366, 
November 
2020. 
Revised 
January 
2021.
https://www.hbs.edu/faculty/Pages/item.aspx?num=59187.
Kilgannon, Corey. 2010. “With a Squeegee and a Smile, a Relic of an Unruly Past Wipes On.” New
York Times, October 3, 2010. https://www.nytimes.com/2010/10/04/nyregion/04squeegee.html.
Kilgannon, Corey. 2019. “A Park Shed Its Reputation. Then Came the Tessa Majors Murder.” New
York Times, December 14, 2019. https://www.nytimes.com/2019/12/14/nyregion/tessa-majors-
columbia-morningside.html.
Kilner, James. 2022. “ ‘Invincible’ Russian Tank Equipped with Exploding Armor Destroyed by
Ukrainian 
Troops.” 
Telegraph, 
May 
7, 
2022. 
https://www.telegraph.co.uk/world-
news/2022/05/07/invincible-russian-tank-equipped-exploding-armour-destroyed/.
Kim, Eugene. 2015. “Google’s Former CIO Was Deaf and Dyslexic as a Kid—Now He’s Helping
Millions 
of 
Americans 
Get 
Emergency 
Loans.” 
Business Insider, 
July 
18, 
2015.
https://www.businessinsider.com/zest-finance-douglas-merrill-2015-7.
Kim, June-Ho, Julia Ah-Reum An, SeungJu Jackie Oh, Juhwan Oh, and Jong-Koo Lee. 2020.
“Emerging COVID-19 Success Story: South Korea Learned the Lessons of MERS.” Our World in
Data. Last modified June 30, 2020. https://ourworldindata.org/covid-exemplar-south-korea.
Kingsmill, Sylvia, and Ann Cavoukian. n.d. Privacy by Design: Setting a New Standard for Privacy
Certification. 
Toronto: 
Deloitte 
Canada 
and 
Ryerson 
University.
https://www2.deloitte.com/content/dam/Deloitte/ca/Documents/risk/ca-en-ers-privacy-by-design-
brochure.PDF.
Kite-Powell, Jennifer. 2019. “How to Transform 60,000 Irrigation Pivots into Autonomous Growing
Machines.” Forbes, March 19, 2019. https://www.forbes.com/sites/jenniferhicks/2019/03/19/how-
to-transform-60000-irrigation-pivots-into-autonomous-growing-machines/.
Kizilcec, Rene F., Justin Reich, Michael Yeomans, Christoph Dann, Emma Brunskill, Glenn Lopez,
Selen Turkay, Joseph Jay Williams, and Dustin Tingley. 2020. “Scaling Up Behavioral Science
Interventions in Online Education.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 117, no. 26
(June 2020): 14900–14905.
Klippenstein, Ken, and Eric Lichtblau. 2021. “FBI Seized Congressional Cellphone Records Related
to Capitol Attack.” Intercept, February 22 2021. https://theintercept.com/2021/02/22/capitol-riot-
fbi-cellphone-records.
Knetsch, Jack L. 1989. “The Endowment Effect and Evidence of Nonreversible Indifference Curves.”
American Economic Review 79, no. 5 (December 1989): 1277–1288.
Kniberg, Henrik. 2016. “Making Sense of MVP (Minimum Viable Product)—and Why I Prefer
Earliest 
Testable/Usable/Lovable.” 
Crisp’s 
Blog 
(blog), 
January 
25, 
2016.
https://blog.crisp.se/2016/01/25/henrikkniberg/making-sense-of-mvp.
Kohavi, Ron, Thomas Crook, and Roger Longbotham. 2009. “Online Experimentation at Microsoft.”
Microsoft. https://doi.org/10.1.1.147.9056.

Kohavi, Ron, Diane Tang, and Ya Xu. 2020. Trustworthy Online Controlled Experiments: A Practical
Guide to A/B Testing. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Koppel, Ross, et al. 2005. “Role of Computerized Physician Order Entry Systems in Facilitating
Medication 
Errors.” 
JAMA 
293, 
no. 
10 
(2005): 
1197–1203.
https://doi.org/10.1001/jama.293.10.1197.
Korea Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 2020. “Coronavirus Disease-19: Summary of
2,370 Contact Investigations of the First 30 Cases in the Republic of Korea.” Osong Public Health
and Research Perspectives 11, no. 2 (2020): 81–84. https://doi.org/10.24171/j.phrp.2020.11.2.04.
Kornhauser, Wilhem. 2021. “Measuring Success of Machine Learning Products.” Towards Data
Science (blog), Medium, January 4, 2021. https://towardsdatascience.com/measuring-success-
ef3aff9c28e4.
Kosslyn, Stephen M. 2019. “Integrating the Science of How We Learn into Education Technology.”
Harvard Business Review, October 11, 2019. https://hbr.org/2019/10/integrating-the-science-of-
how-we-learn-into-education-technology.
Kotter, John P. 2012. Leading Change, with a New Preface by the Author. Boston: Harvard Business
Review Press.
Kramer, Andrew E. and David Guttenfelder. 2022. “From the Workshop to the War: Creative Use of
Drones 
Lifts 
Ukraine.” 
The 
New 
York 
Times, 
August 
10, 
2022, 
sec. 
World.
https://www.nytimes.com/2022/08/10/world/europe/ukraine-drones.html.
Krasadakis, George. 2020. “Data Quality in the Era of A.I.” Innovation Machine, October 11, 2020.
https://medium.com/innovation-machine/data-quality-in-the-era-of-a-i-d8e398a91bef.
Krasno, Jonathan S., and Donald P. Green. 2008. “Do Televised Presidential Ads Increase Voter
Turnout? Evidence from a Natural Experiment.” Journal of Politics 70, no. 1 (January 2008): 245–
261. https://www.jstor.org/stable/10.1017/s0022381607080176.
Kravitz, Joshua. 2021. “Using Tech and Data to Supercharge Relational: Principles, Highlights and
Challenges.” Google Docs. March 21, 2021.
Krensky, Peter, Carlie Idoine, and Erick Brethenoux. 2021. “Magic Quadrant for Data Science and
Machine 
Learning 
Platforms.” 
Gartner, 
March 
1, 
2021.
https://www.gartner.com/en/documents/3998753/magic-quadrant-for-data-science-and-machine-
learning-pla.
Krikorian, Raffi. 2017a. “The Democrats’ Tech Team Is Hiring.” DNC Tech Team (blog), Medium,
July 
11, 
2017. 
https://medium.com/democratictech/the-democrats-tech-team-is-hiring-
f5a66f0a714f.
Krikorian, Raffi. 2017b. “Want to Change the World?: Here’s How.” DNC Tech Team (blog), Medium,
July 
31, 
2017. 
https://medium.com/democratictech/want-to-change-the-world-heres-how-
e486f0992d69.
Krikorian, Raffi. 2017c. “We Need Everyone to Pitch In; We’ve Got Elections to Win.” DNC Tech
Team (blog), Medium, November 9, 2017. https://medium.com/democratictech/we-need-everyone-
to-pitch-in-weve-got-elections-to-win-2ed8ace719df.
Kroll, Andy. 2020. “The Best Way to Beat Trumpism?: Talk Less, Listen More.” Rolling Stone,
September 
15, 
2020. 
https://www.rollingstone.com/politics/politics-news/2020-presidential-
campaign-tactic-deep-canvassing-1059531.
Kushner, Theresa. 2012. “Connecting the Stars: Applying Social Media Understanding to a Structured
Marketing Data Environment.” Presentation at the INFORMS Conference on Business Analytics
and 
Operations 
Research, 
April 
2012. 
Published 
September 
10, 
2012. 
YouTube.
https://youtu.be/6uX2yVVT54c.
Kushner, Theresa. 2012–2020. Interviews by Zachary Tumin and Madeleine Want.

Kushner, Theresa. 2021. “The Marketing Database Is Dead, So, Now What?” Medium (blog), May 19,
2021. 
https://theresakushner.medium.com/the-marketing-database-is-dead-so-now-what-
2e630eb2e3da.
LaForme, Ren. 2018. “The New York Times Homepage Is Far from Dead: Its Growing.” Poynter
(blog), August 23, 2018. https://www.poynter.org/tech-tools/2018/the-new-york-times-homepage-
is-far-from-dead-its-growing.
Lampen, Amanda Arnold, Claire. 2020. “Everything We Know About the Tessa Majors Murder
Case.” The Cut, February 19, 2020. https://www.thecut.com/2020/02/tessa-majors-barnard-student-
death.html.
Landau, Susan. 2020. “Location Surveillance to Counter COVID-19: Efficacy Is What Matters.”
Lawfare (blog), March 25, 2020. https://www.lawfareblog.com/location-surveillance-counter-covid-
19-efficacy-what-matters.
Lardner, James, and Thomas Reppetto. 2001. NYPD: A City and Its Police. New York: Holt
Paperbacks.
Larionov, Daniil, Natalia Romantsova, and Roman Shalymov. 2019. “Multiphysical System of
Operational Monitoring of the Condition of the Railway Track.” Paper presented at the Fourth
International Conference on Intelligent Transportation Engineering, Singapore, September 2019.
https://doi.org/10.1109/ICITE.2019.8880225.
Lariviere, Marty. 2013. “The Process of Orange Juice.” Operations Room, February 4, 2013.
https://operationsroom.wordpress.com/2013/02/04/the-process-of-orange-juiced/.
Larrier, Travis. 2021. “Stop Learning Loss in Its Tracks: Part 1 with Joel Rose & Travis Larrier.”
Webinar presentation May 1, 2021. Transcript included. Published May 14, 2021. YouTube.
https://newclassrooms.org/2021/05/14/webinar-part-1-stop-learning-loss-in-its-tracks-with-joel-
rose-travis-larrier.
Larson, David B., Matthew C. Chen, Matthew P. Lungren, et al. 2018. “Performance of a Deep-
Learning Neural Network Model in Assessing Skeletal Maturity on Pediatric Hand Radiographs.”
Radiology 287, no. 1 (2018): 313–22. https://doi.org/10.1148/radiol.2017170236.
Leape, Lucian L., et al. 1995. “Systems Analysis of Adverse Drug Events.” JAMA 274, no. 1 (1995):
35–43.
Lederman, George, Siheng Chen, James H. Garrett, Jelena Kovačević, Hae Young Noh, and Jacobo
Bielak. 2017. “A Data Fusion Approach for Track Monitoring from Multiple In-Service Trains.”
Mechanical 
Systems 
and 
Signal 
Processing 
95 
(October 
2017): 
363–379.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymssp.2017.03.023.
Lee, Edmund. 2012. “Newspapers Lose $10 in Print for Every Digital $1.” Bloomberg.com, March
19, 2012. https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2012-03-19/newspapers-lose-10-dollars-in-
print-for-every-digital-1.
Lee, Edmund. 2020. “New York Times Hits 7 Million Subscribers as Digital Revenue Rises.” New
York Times, November 5, 2020. https://www.nytimes.com/2020/11/05/business/media/new-york-
times-q3-2020-earnings-nyt.html.
Lee, Wan-Jui. 2020. “Anomaly Detection and Severity Prediction of Air Leakage in Train Braking
Pipes.” International Journal of Prognostics and Health Management 8, no. 3 (November 2020):
1–12. https://doi.org/10.36001/ijphm.2017.v8i3.2662.
Lee, Yoolim. 2020. “Singapore App Halves Contact-Tracing Time, Top Engineer Says.” Bloomberg,
December 8, 2020. https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2020-12-08/singapore-app-halves-
contact-tracing-time-leading-engineer-says.
Leighninger, Harrison J. 2020. “Evaluating the Effectiveness of Relational Organizing: The Buttigieg
2020 
Campaign 
in 
New 
Hampshire.” 
Senior 
diss., 
Haverford 
College, 
2020.

http://hdl.handle.net/10066/22744.
Lemouche, Patrick. 2021. “Unilever HireVue Interview: Questions and Strategy.” Voomer Blog (blog),
July 
9, 
2021. 
https://blog.tryvoomer.com/unilever-hirevue-interview-questions-answers-and-
strategy.
Leonard, Davis. 2022. “How We Built a Relational Network of 160k Voters in Less than a Month.”
Medium (blog). April 11, 2022. https://medium.com/@davisleonard/how-we-built-a-relational-
network-of-160k-voters-in-less-than-a-month-92262926fdb0.
Leone, Dario. 2020. “An In-Depth Analysis of How Serbs Were Able to Shoot Down An F-117
Stealth Fighter during Operation Allied Force.” The Aviation Geek Club. March 26, 2020.
https://theaviationgeekclub.com/an-in-depth-analysis-of-how-serbs-were-able-to-shoot-down-an-f-
117-stealth-fighter-during-operation-allied-force/.
Leslie, Mark, Russell Lewis Siegelman, and Austin Kiesseg. 2013. “Blue River Technology (A).”
Stanford 
Graduate 
School 
of 
Business 
Case 
E480A, 
August 
26, 
2013.
https://www.gsb.stanford.edu/faculty-research/case-studies/blue-river-technology.
Levitt, Leonard. 2010. NYPD Confidential: Power and Corruption in the Country’s Greatest Police
Force. New York: St. Martin’s.
Li, Hongfei, Dhaivat Parikh, Qing He, Buyue Qian, Zhiguo Li, Dongping Fang, and Arun Hampapur.
2014. “Improving Rail Network Velocity: A Machine Learning Approach to Predictive
Maintenance.” Transportation Research Part C: Emerging Technologies 45 (August 2014): 17–26.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.trc.2014.04.013.
Li, Oscar. 2017. “Review: Artificial Intelligence Is the New Electricity—Andrew Ng.” SyncedReview,
April 28, 2017. https://medium.com/syncedreview/artificial-intelligence-is-the-new-electricity-
andrew-ng-cc132ea6264.
Li, Yu-Sheng, Hong Chi, Xue-Yan Shao, Ming-Liang Qi, and Bao-Guang Xu. 2020. “A Novel
Random Forest Approach for Imbalance Problem in Crime Linkage.” Knowledge-Based Systems
195 (May 11, 2020): 105738. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.knosys.2020.105738.
Lillis, Katie Bo, and Natasha Bertrand. 2022. “US Intelligence Community Launches Review
Following 
Ukraine 
and 
Afghanistan 
Intel 
Failings.” 
CNN, 
May 
13, 
2022.
https://www.cnn.com/2022/05/13/politics/us-intelligence-review-ukraine/index.html.
Lipetri, Michael. 2021. Interviews by Zachary Tumin.
Litow, Stanley S., Michael Casserly, Bruce MacLaury, and Joseph P. Viteritti. 1999. “Problems of
Managing a Big-City School System.” Brookings Papers on Education Policy no. 2 (1999): 185–
230. http://www.jstor.org/stable/20067209.
Liu, Chris. 2019. “An Engineer’s Perspective on Engineering and Data Science Collaboration for Data
Products.” Medium, May 20, 2019. https://medium.com/coursera-engineering/an-engineers-
perspective-on-engineering-and-data-science-collaboration-for-data-products-84cf9b38cd52.
Liu, Cui-wei, Yu-xing Li, Yu-kun Yan, Jun-tao Fu, and Yu-qian Zhang. 2015. “A New Leak Location
Method Based on Leakage Acoustic Waves for Oil and Gas Pipelines.” Journal of Loss Prevention
in the Process Industries 35 (May 1, 2015): 236–246. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jlp.2015.05.006.
Locke, Julian, and Sameer More. 2021. “How We Rearchitected Mobile A/B Testing at The New York
Times.” NYT Open (blog), Medium, March 4, 2021. https://open.nytimes.com/how-we-
rearchitected-mobile-a-b-testing-at-the-new-york-times-78eb428d9132.
Lores, 
Enrique. 
2021. 
“Conversations 
with 
Mike 
Milken.” 
Podcast.
https://mikemilken.com/podcast/Conversations-with-Mike-Milken-Enrique-Lores-1-26–21.pdf.
Lorica, Ben. 2021. “Applications of Reinforcement Learning: Recent Examples from Large US
Companies.” Gradient Flow, May 19, 2021. https://gradientflow.com/applications-of-reinforcement-
learning-recent-examples-from-large-us-companies/.

Louque, Jake. 2019. “Ravens Bolster Their Analytics Department with New Front Office Additions.”
Baltimore 
Beatdown, 
June 
19, 
2019.
https://www.baltimorebeatdown.com/2019/6/19/18684490/ravens-to-beef-up-analytics-department-
with-new-front-office-additions-eric-decosta-john-harbaugh.
Luckin, Rose. 2020. “Turing Lecture: Is Education AI-Ready?” Lecture for The Alan Turing Institute.
Published August 6, 2020. YouTube. https://youtu.be/PqQWQr4V-JE.
Lundberg, Brandon. 2021. “The Ravens Aggressive Offensive Style Cultivated by Lamar Jackson,
Analytics 
& 
Early 
Down 
Success.” 
Football 
Scout 
365, 
September 
25, 
2021.
https://www.footballscout365.com/post/the-ravens-aggressive-offensive-style-cultivated-by-lamar-
jackson-analytics-early-down-success.
Lupesko, Hagay. 2019. “Personalization at Scale: Challenges and Practical Techniques.” Presentation
at the O’Reilly Artificial Intelligence Conference 2019, San Jose, CA, September 9, 2019. Video.
https://www.oreilly.com/library/view/personalization-at-scale/0636920371144/video329159.html.
Lyell, David, and Enrico Coiera. 2017. “Automation Bias and Verification Complexity: A Systematic
Review.” Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association 24, no. 2 (2017): 423–431.
Lynch, Matthew. 2019. “Chronicling the Biggest Edtech Failures of the Last Decade.” Tech Edvocate.
Last modified July 10, 2019. https://www.thetechedvocate.org/chronicling-the-biggest-edtech-
failures-of-the-last-decade.
Lynn, Lawrence E. 1982. “Government Executives as Gamesmen: A Metaphor for Analyzing
Managerial Behavior.” Journal of Policy Analysis and Management 1, no. 4 (1983): 482–495.
Lyons, Keith. n.d. “Pattern Recognition.” Sport Informatics and Analytics. Accessed December 19,
2021. https://sites.google.com/site/ucsportinformaticsandanalytics/pattern-recognition.
Macaulay, Thomas. 2022. “Meta’s Free GPT-3 Replica Exposes the Business Benefits of AI
Transparency.” TNW Neural, May 4, 2022. https://thenextweb.com/news/meta-new-ai-model-opt-
replicates-gpt-3-and-researchers-can-download-it-free.
Mahesh, C. K. 2021. “New Orleans Educators Share How Teach to One Helps Save Students from the
Iceberg 
Problem.” 
RecentlyHeard 
(blog), 
November 
8, 
2021.
https://recentlyheard.com/2020/06/22/new-orleans-educators-share-how-teach-to-one-helps-save-
students-from-the-iceberg-problem.
Mahnken, Kevin. 2021. “Study: Chicago Tutoring Program Delivered Huge Math Gains;
Personalization 
May 
Be 
the 
Key.” 
The 
74 
Million, 
March 
8, 
2021.
https://www.the74million.org/study-chicago-tutoring-program-delivered-huge-math-gains-
personalization-may-be-the-key.
Maier, Maximilian, František Bartoš, et al. 2022. “No Evidence for Nudging after Adjusting for
Publication Bias.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 119 (31): e2200300119.
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2200300119.
Malik, Momin. 2020 “Types of a Hierarchy of Limitations in Machine Learning: Data Biases.” UOC
2020, Universitat Oberta De Catalunya, 2020, https://www.mominmalik.com/uoc2020.pdf.
Mallampati, Dasaradh. 2021. Interviews by Zachary Tumin.
Malone, Thomas, Daniela Rus, and Robert Laubacher. 2020. “Artificial Intelligence and the Future of
Work.” 
Research 
Brief 
RB 
17–2020. 
MIT 
Work 
of 
the 
Future. 
MIT.
https://workofthefuture.mit.edu/research-post/artificial-intelligence-and-the-future-of-work/.
Mamet, Matthew. 2016. “Directly Responsible Individuals.” Medium (blog), November 13, 2016.
https://medium.com/@mmamet/directly-responsible-individuals-f5009f465da4.
Man, Romeo. 2020. “Sean Ellis on Successful Growth Teams & The North Star Metric.” StartUs
Magazine, January 29, 2020. https://magazine.startus.cc/sean-ellis-on-the-backbone-of-successful-
growth-teams-the-north-star-metric.

Mandel, Eugene. 2016. “Data Science for Product Managers (DS4PM).” Medium (blog), October 31,
2016. https://medium.com/@eugmandel/data-science-for-product-managers-fbd2036536a0.
Manyika, James, Jake Silberg, and Brittany Presten. 2019. “What Do We Do About the Biases in AI?”
Harvard Business Review, October 25, 2019. https://hbr.org/2019/10/what-do-we-do-about-the-
biases-in-ai.
Maple, Jack. 1999. The Crime Fighter. New York: Broadway Books.
Marin, Nina, and Asiya Yakhina. 2019. “What It Means to Design for Growth at The New York
Times.” 
Interview 
by 
Sarah 
Bures. 
NYT 
Open 
(blog), 
Medium, 
June 
13, 
2019.
https://open.nytimes.com/what-it-means-to-design-for-growth-at-the-new-york-times-
2041e0f5e64a.
Markus, M. Lynne, and Robert I Benjamin. 1997. “The Magic Bullet Theory in IT-Enabled
Transformation.” Sloan Management Review 38, no. 2 (Winter 1997): 55.
Marr, Bernard. 2019. “The Amazing Ways John Deere Uses AI And Machine Vision to Help Feed 10
Billion 
People.” 
Forbes, 
March 
15, 
2019.
https://www.forbes.com/sites/bernardmarr/2019/03/15/the-amazing-ways-john-deere-uses-ai-and-
machine-vision-to-help-feed-10-billion-people/.
Marsh, Allison. 2018. “John Deere and the Birth of Precision Agriculture.” IEEE Spectrum, February
28, 
2018. 
https://spectrum.ieee.org/tech-history/silicon-revolution/john-deere-and-the-birth-of-
precision-agriculture.
Marson, James, and Brett Forrest. 2021. “Armed Low-Cost Drones, Made by Turkey, Reshape
Battlefields 
and 
Geopolitics.” 
Wall 
Street 
Journal, 
June 
3, 
2021.
https://www.wsj.com/articles/armed-low-cost-drones-made-by-turkey-reshape-battlefields-and-
geopolitics-11622727370.
Martin, Scott. 2019. “Blue River Harvests AI to Reduce Herbicides.” NVIDIA Blog (blog), May 2,
2019. https://blogs.nvidia.com/blog/2019/05/02/blue-river-john-deere-reduce-herbicide/.
Marx, Sally. 2017. “Calling All Data and Tech Innovators: We Have Elections to Win.” DNC Tech
Team (blog), Medium, November 27, 2017. https://medium.com/democratictech/calling-all-data-
and-tech-innovators-we-have-elections-to-win-28893599ea21.
Mates, Stacey. 2020. “Why I Joined the DNC Tech Team.” DNC Tech Team (blog), Medium, July 15,
2020. https://medium.com/democratictech/why-i-joined-the-dnc-tech-team-e1bfad994bb9.
Mathias, Craig. 2012. “A Really, Really Big Wireless LAN: Gillette Stadium and the New England
Patriots.” 
Nearpoints 
(blog), 
Network 
World, 
November 
6, 
2012.
http://www.networkworld.com/community/blog/really-really-big-wireless-lan-gillette-stadium-and-
new-england-patriots.
Mathias, Craig. 2013. “Returning to Gillette Stadium: Implications for the Enterprise.” Nearpoints
(blog), Network World, January 16, 2013. http://www.networkworld.com/community/node/82169.
Mathieu, John E., John R. Hollenbeck, Daan van Knippenberg, and Daniel R. Ilgen. 2017. “A Century
of Work Teams in the Journal of Applied Psychology.” Journal of Applied Psychology 102, no. 3
(2017): 452–467. https://doi.org/10.1037/apl0000128.
Maurer, Roy. 2021. “HireVue Discontinues Facial Analysis Screening.” SHRM, February 3, 2021.
https://www.shrm.org/resourcesandtools/hr-topics/talent-acquisition/pages/hirevue-discontinues-
facial-analysis-screening.aspx.
Mayer, 
Jane. 
2009. 
“The 
Predator 
War.” 
New 
Yorker, 
October 
19, 
2009.
http://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2009/10/26/the-predator-war.
Mayfield, Bob. 2016. “John Deere Hands-Free Guidance System Continues Its Evolution.” March 29,
2016. https://johndeerejournal.com/2016/03/terry-picket-first-gps-unit/.

Mays, Robert. 2014. “What Is the NFL’s ‘Corner 3’?” Grantland (blog), August 21, 2014.
https://grantland.com/features/nfl-corner-3-nba-offense-success-strategy-run-game-screen-pass-
play-action/.
McAfee, Andrew. 2006. “The 9X Email Problem.” Andrew McAfee’s Blog (blog), September 29,
2006. 
Archived 
at 
the 
Wayback 
Machine.
https://web.archive.org/web/20120606073022/http://andrewmcafee.org/2006/09/the_9x_email_prob
lem.
McCaskill, Steve. 2021. “NFL Using Data Analytics to Monitor Excitement Level of Each Game.”
SportsProMedia.Com (blog). November 23, 2021. https://www.sportspromedia.com/news/nfl-data-
analytics-excitement-engagement-paul-ballew/.
McChrystal, Gen. Stanley, Tantum Collins, David Silverman, and Chris Fussell. 2015. Team of Teams:
New Rules of Engagement for a Complex World. Illustrated ed. New York: Portfolio.
McCord, Patty. 2014. “How Netflix Reinvented HR.” Harvard Business Review, January 1, 2014.
https://hbsp.harvard.edu/product/R1401E-PDF-ENG.
McCurry, Justin. 2020. “Test, Trace, Contain: How South Korea Flattened Its Coronavirus Curve.”
Guardian, April 23, 2020. https://www.theguardian.com/world/2020/apr/23/test-trace-contain-how-
south-korea-flattened-its-coronavirus-curve.
McDonald, Drew. 2020a. “Introducing DNC Blueprint!” DNC Tech Team (blog), Medium, April 9,
2020. https://medium.com/democratictech/introducing-dnc-blueprint-3d0abc161c23.
McDonald, Drew. 2020b. “Our Data Science Clearinghouse.” DNC Tech Team (blog), Medium,
August 24, 2020. https://medium.com/democratictech/our-data-science-clearinghouse-e9f12fd4a86.
McDonnell, Patrick J. 2017. “Clashes Between Soldiers and Gasoline Smugglers Leave 10 Dead in
Mexico—LA 
Times.” 
Los 
Angeles 
Times, 
May 
4, 
2017.
https://web.archive.org/web/20170505014014/https://www.latimes.com/world/mexico-americas/la-
fg-mexico-gas-smugglers-20170504-story.html. 
https://www.latimes.com/world/mexico-
americas/la-fg-mexico-gas-smugglers-20170504-story.html.
McGowan, Candace. 2019. “Police Investigate Robbery Pattern near Scene of Barnard Student’s
Murder.” ABC 7 New York, December 18, 2019. https://abc7ny.com/5764879.
McGuinness, Julia E., Vicky Ro, et al. 2021. “Abstract PR-04: Effect of Breast Cancer
Chemoprevention on a Convolutional Neural Network-Based Mammographic Evaluation Using a
Mammographic Dataset of Women with Atypical Hyperplasia, Lobular or Ductal Carcinoma in
Situ.” Clinical Cancer Research 27, no. 5 (2021): PR-PR-04. https://doi.org/10.1158/1557-
3265.ADI21-PR-04.
McKay, Daniel. 2018. “BNSF Combining Technology, Human Expertise to Improve Operations.”
Transport Topics, March 9, 2018. https://www.ttnews.com/articles/bnsf-combining-technology-
human-expertise-improve-operations.
McLaughlin, Corey. 2019. “Meet the Ravens’ 25-Year-Old, Number-Crunching Whiz Who Has John
Harbaugh’s 
Ear.” 
Baltimore 
Magazine, 
December 
30, 
2019. 
https://www.baltimore
magazine.com/section/sports/meet-daniel-stern-the-ravens-25-year-old-number-crunching-whiz-
who-has-john-harbaughs-ear.
Meadows, Donella H. 2008. In Thinking in Systems: International Bestseller, ed. Diana Wright. White
River Junction, VT: Chelsea Green.
Megler, Veronika. 2019. “Managing Machine Learning Projects” Scribd, February 2019, Amazon Web
Services. https://www.scribd.com/document/451227438/aws-managing-ml-projects.
Merten, Paxtyn. 2019. “Newsroom Automation, Election Forecasting and UX at The New York Times:
Keynotes at C+J 2019.” Storybench (blog), March 8, 2019. https://www.storybench.org/newsroom-
automation-election-forecasting-and-u-x-at-the-new-york-times-keynotes-at-cj-2019.

Meyer, Christopher, and Julia Kirby. 2010. “Leadership in the Age of Transparency.” Harvard
Business Review, April 1, 2010.
Michel, Arthur Holland. 2015. “How Rogue Techies Armed the Predator, Almost Stopped 9/11, and
Accidentally 
Invented 
Remote 
War.” 
Wired, 
December 
17, 
2015.
https://www.wired.com/2015/12/how-rogue-techies-armed-the-predator-almost-stopped-911-and-
accidentally-invented-remote-war/.
Mill, Daniel. 2018. “Measuring What Makes Readers Subscribe to The New York Times.” NYT Open
(blog), Medium, November 15, 2018. https://open.nytimes.com/measuring-what-makes-readers-
subscribe-to-the-time-fa31f00a3cdd.
Miller, Kerry. 2022. “The Newest Trend Taking over MLB in 2022 and Beyond.” Bleacher Report,
April 27, 2022. https://bleacherreport.com/articles/2955675-the-newest-trend-taking-over-mlb-in-
2022-and-beyond.
Miller, Lisa. 2020. “The Stabbing in Morningside Park.” New York Magazine Intelligencer, March 16,
2020. https://nymag.com/intelligencer/2020/03/tessa-majors-murder-morningside-park.html.
Miller, Myles. 2019. “NYPD Software Credited with Helping to Spot Crime Patterns.” Spectrum News
NY1, March 20, 2019. https://www.ny1.com/nyc/all-boroughs/news/2019/03/20/nypd-software-
credited-with-helping-to-spot-crime-patterns.
Miller, Sean J. 2021. “New Studies Show the Impact Texting Can Have on Voter Turnout.”
Campaigns 
& 
Elections 
(blog), 
June 
9, 
2021.
https://campaignsandelections.com/campaigntech/new-studies-show-the-impact-texting-can-have-
on-voter-turnout/.
Miller, Steven M. 2018. “AI: Augmentation, More So Than Automation.” Asian Management Insights
5, no. 1 (2018): 1–20. https://ink.library.smu.edu.sg/ami/83.
Miller, Zeke and Aamer Madhan. 2022. “Watching Al-Qaida Chief’s ‘pattern of Life’ Key to His
Death.” AP NEWS. August 2, 2022. https://apnews.com/article/al-qaida-biden-ayman-zawahri-
covid-health-595c6bda6d17fdd0c1c936137fe1e7c6.
Mishra, Ashwani. 2018. “How Gururaj Rao, CIO, Mahindra Finance Is Using Tech to Drive Business
Outcomes.” ETCIO, December 24, 2018. https://cio.economictimes.indiatimes.com/news/strategy-
and-management/how-gururaj-rao-cio-mahindra-finance-is-using-tech-to-drive-business-
outcomes/67218997.
Mistry, Ravi, and Richard Battle. 2021. “Analytics & Data Science in Sports Interview by Alan
Jacobson.” 
Webinar. 
https://pages.alteryx.com/analytics-and-data-science-in-sports-on-demand-
ty.html?aliId=eyJpIjoiZXkybWJhblFLa0tGek9KbyIsInQiOiJTNnJxRFF
CQStRcDE3V0l3RTJEM3pnPT0ifQ%253D%253D.
Molteni, Megan. 2022. “For Patients, Seeing the Benefits of the New, Fully Sequenced Genome Could
Take Years.” StatNews (blog), April 8, 2022. https://www.statnews.com/2022/04/08/for-patients-
seeing-the-benefits-of-the-new-fully-sequenced-genome-could-take-years/.
Monkeypoxtally [@Monkeypoxtally]. 2022. “Monkeypox Cases around the World &#1F30D;
Timeline. 
Tweet. 
Twitter. 
https://twitter.com/Monkeypoxtally/status/1553430250805133312.
Retweeted by Carr, Kareem [@kareem_carr]. 2022. “One of the Most Fascinating Data Science
Lessons 
I’ve 
Learned 
on 
Social 
Media… 
” 
Tweet. 
Twitter.
https://twitter.com/kareem_carr/status/1553775608664031236.
Montal, Tal, and Zvi Reich. 2016. “I, Robot. You, Journalist. Who Is the Author?: Authorship, Bylines
and Full Disclosure in Automated Journalism.” Digital Journalism 5 (August 2016): 1–21.
https://doi.org/10.1080/21670811.2016.1209083.
Moon, Grace. 2020. “South Korea’s Return to Normal Interrupted by Uptick in Coronavirus Cases.”
NBC News, April 5, 2020. https://www.nbcnews.com/news/world/south-korea-s-return-normal-
interrupted-uptick-coronavirus-cases-n1176021.

Moore, Geoffrey A. 2006. Crossing the Chasm: Marketing and Selling High-Tech Products to
Mainstream Customers. Rev. ed. New York: HarperBusiness.
Moore, Mark H. 1995. Creating Public Value: Strategic Management in Government. Rev. ed.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Moore, Mark H. 2013. Recognizing Public Value. Illustrated ed. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press.
Moore, Mark H., and Anthony A. Braga. 2003. “Measuring and Improving Police Performance: The
Lessons of CompStat and Its Progeny.” Policing: An International Journal of Police Strategies &
Management 26, no. 3 (2003): 439–453. https://doi.org/10.1108/13639510310489485.
Moore, Mark H., and Archon Fong. 2012. “Calling Publics into Existence: The Political Arts of Public
Management.” In Ports in a Storm: Public Management in a Turbulent World, ed. John D. Donahue
and Mark H. Moore, 180–210. Washington, DC: Brookings Institution Press/Ash Center.
Moore, Tina, Larry Celona, Olivia Bensimon, and Bruce Golding. 2019. “Barnard Student Tessa
Majors’ Suspected Killer in NYPD Custody.” New York Post (blog), December 26, 2019.
https://nypost.com/2019/12/26/barnard-student-tessa-majors-suspected-killer-located-by-nypd.
Moran, Max. 2019. “Freddie Mac Using Shady AI Company for Mortgage Loans.” American
Prospect, 
October 
7, 
2019. 
https://prospect.org/api/content/71c641a2-e6f3-11e9-9f97-
12f1225286c6.
Morozov, Evgeny. 2013. To Save Everything, Click Here: The Folly of Technological Solutionism.
New York: PublicAffairs.
Morris, Bob. 2013. “Scoble Interviews Marc Andreessen on What’s Coming.” Politics in the Zeros,
February 22, 2013. https://polizeros.com/2013/02/22/scoble-interviews-marc-andreessen-on-whats-
coming/.
Morrissey, Janet. 2020. “Using Technology to Tailor Lessons to Each Student.” New York Times,
September 
29, 
2020. 
Updated 
November 
4, 
2021.
https://www.nytimes.com/2020/09/29/education/schools-technology-future-pandemic.html.
Morse, Ben. 2021. “How Steph Curry ‘Revolutionized’ the NBA.” CNN, December 15, 2021.
https://www.cnn.com/2021/12/14/sport/steph-curry-ray-allen-three-point-record-spt-intl/index.html.
Moses, Lucia. 2017. “The Washington Post’s Robot Reporter Has Published 850 Articles in the Past
Year.” Digiday (blog), September 14, 2017. https://digiday.com/media/washington-posts-robot-
reporter-published-500-articles-last-year.
Moss, Sebastian. 2017. “For The New York Times, a Move to the Cloud.” Data Center Dynamics. Last
modified April 19, 2017. https://www.datacenterdynamics.com/en/news/for-the-new-york-times-a-
move-to-the-cloud.
Motley Fool. 2021a. “New York Times Co (NYT) Q1 2021 Earnings Call Transcript.” Motley Fool.
Last modified May 5, 2021. https://www.fool.com/earnings/call-transcripts/2021/05/05/new-york-
times-co-nyt-q1-2021-earnings-call-transc.
Motley Fool. 2021b. “The New York Times Company (NYT) Q2 2021 Earnings Call Transcript.”
Motley 
Fool. 
Last 
modified 
August 
4, 
2021. 
https://www.fool.com/earnings/call-
transcripts/2021/08/04/the-new-york-times-company-nyt-q2-2021-earnings-ca.
Mozur, Paul, and Don Clark. 2020. “China’s Surveillance State Sucks Up Data. US Tech Is Key to
Sorting 
It.” 
New 
York 
Times, 
November 
22, 
2020. 
Updated 
January 
20, 
2021.
https://www.nytimes.com/2020/11/22/technology/china-intel-nvidia-xinjiang.html.
Mullen, Benjamin. 2018. “New York Times Adapts Data Science Tools for Advertisers.” Wall Street
Journal, February 15, 2018. https://www.wsj.com/articles/new-york-times-adapts-data-science-
tools-for-advertisers-1518714077.

Mullin, Benjamin. 2016. “Meet Beta, the Team That Brings The New York Times to Your
Smartphone.” Poynter (blog), March 25, 2016. https://www.poynter.org/tech-tools/2016/meet-beta-
the-team-that-brings-the-new-york-times-to-your-smartphone.
Mullin, Emily. 2019. “IVF Often Doesn’t Work. Could an Algorithm Help?” WSJ.com, April 4, 2019.
https://www.wsj.com/articles/ivf-often-doesnt-work-could-an-algorithm-help-11554386243.
Mulvenney, Nick. 2021. “Sailing: America’s Cup Yachts Close on Speeds of 100 Kph.” Reuters,
March 9, 2021. https://www.reuters.com/article/us-sailing-americas-cup-idUSKBN2B105E.
Murphy, Mike. 2020. “The Future of Farming Is One Giant A/B Test on All the Crops in the World at
Once.” 
Protocol—The 
People, 
Power 
and 
Politics 
of 
Tech, 
August 
11, 
2020.
https://www.protocol.com/the-future-of-farming-is-math.
Mushnick, Phil. 2021. “How a Tired Aaron Boone Tactic Doomed the Yankees.” New York Post,
October 9, 2021. https://nypost.com/2021/10/09/tired-aaron-boone-bullpen-tactic-dooms-yankees-
yet-again/.
Mutasa, Simukayi. 2021, various dates. Interviews by Zachary Tumin and Madeleine Want.
Mutasa, Simukayi, Peter D. Chang, Carrie Ruzal-Shapiro and Rama Ayyala. 2018. “MABAL: A
Novel Deep-Learning Architecture for Machine-Assisted Bone Age Labeling.” Journal of Digital
Imaging 31, no. 4 (February 2018): 513–519. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10278-018-0053–3.
Nagendran, Myura, and Hugh Harvey. 2020. “How Good Is the Evidence Supporting AI in
Radiology?” Interview by Brian Casey and Philip Ward. https://www.auntminnie.com/index.aspx?
sec=rca&sub=rsna_2020&pag=dis&ItemID=130976.
Nan, Wong Yuet, Jovina Ang, and Steven Miller. 2022. “Digital Product Management Under Extreme
Uncertainty: The Singapore Tracetogether Story for COVID-19 Contact Tracing.” Singapore
Management University.
Narcisi, Gina. 2013. “Stadium vs. the Couch: High-Density Wireless Improves Fan Experience.”
TechTarget 
(blog), 
January 
21, 
2013. 
Archived 
at 
the 
Wayback 
Machine.
https://web.archive.org/web/20190728194845/https://searchnetworking.techtarget.com/news/22401
76377/Stadium-vs-the-couch-High-density-wireless-improves-fan-experience.
Narisetti, Raju and Yael Taqqu. 2020. “Building a Digital New York Times: CEO Mark Thompson.”
Interview 
by 
McKinsey 
& 
Company. 
Last 
modified 
August 
10, 
2020.
https://www.mckinsey.com/industries/technology-media-and-telecommunications/our-
insights/building-a-digital-new-york-times-ceo-mark-thompson.
National Museum of American History. n.d. “Precision Farming.” American Enterprise. Accessed
October 24, 2021. https://americanhistory.si.edu/american-enterprise/new-perspectives/precision-
farming.
Navarro, Carlos. 2017. “Fuel Thefts Increase Significantly in the Triángulo Rojo Region of Puebla
State.” SourceMex, March 15, 2017. https://digitalrepository.unm.edu/sourcemex/6332.
Navarro, Carlos. 2015. “Mexican Consumers Pay More at the Pump Despite Sharp Drop in Global Oil
Prices.” SourceMex, January 7, 2015. https://digitalrepository.unm.edu/sourcemex/6129.
Nayak, Akhilesh. 2018. “Growing a Successful and Collaborative Team.” NYT Open (blog), Medium,
September 
27, 
2018. 
https://open.nytimes.com/growing-a-successful-and-collaborative-team-
4e4c608ab2fc.
NEDARC. 2019. “Hypothesis Testing.” August 5, 2019. https://aws.amazon.com/blogs/machine-
learning/dynamic-a-b-testing-for-machine-learning-models-with-amazon-sagemaker-mlops-
projects/.
Nesterak, Evan. 2014. “Google Re:Work: Shaping the Future of HR.” Behavioral Scientist, December
2, 2014. https://behavioralscientist.org/google-rework-shaping-future-hr.

Netroots Nation. n.d. “Proven Persuasion and Inoculation: Breakthroughs in Deep Canvassing.”
Presented 
at 
Netroots 
Nation. 
Accessed 
May 
11, 
2021.
https://www.netrootsnation.org/nn_events/nn19/proven-persuasion-and-inoculation-breakthroughs-
in-deep-canvassing.
Neustadt, Richard E. 2000. Preparing to Be President: The Memos of Richard E. Neustadt, ed. Charles
Jones. Washington, DC: AEI Press.
New Classrooms. 2019. “The Iceberg Problem: How Assessment and Accountability Policies Cause
Learning Gaps in Math to Persist Below the Surface… and What to Do About It.” Panel discussion.
Published September 25, 2019. YouTube. https://youtu.be/re3RVNauC7M.
New Classrooms. 2021. “Webinar: ‘Stop Learning Loss in Its Tracks’: Part 2 with Teacher Panelists.”
New Classrooms, May 14, 2021. https://newclassrooms.org/2021/05/14/webinar-part-2-stop-
learning-loss-in-its-tracks-with-teacher-panelists.
Newton, Casey. 2020. “Why Countries Keep Bowing to Apple and Google’s Contact Tracing App
Requirements.” 
Interface 
(blog), 
Verge, 
May 
8, 
2020.
https://www.theverge.com/interface/2020/5/8/21250744/apple-google-contact-tracing-england-
germany-exposure-notification-india-privacy.
New 
York 
Civil 
Liberties 
Union. 
2012. 
“Stop-and-Frisk 
Data.” 
January 
2, 
2012.
https://www.nyclu.org/en/stop-and-frisk-data.
New 
York 
Times. 
2018. 
“Meet 
Our 
New 
Home 
Page.” 
August 
8, 
2018.
https://www.nytimes.com/2018/08/08/homepage/meet-our-new-home-page.html.
New York Times Company. 2018. “The New York Times Introduces First Personalized Editorial
Newsletter, 
‘Your 
Weekly 
Edition.’ ” 
Last 
modified 
June 
13, 
2018.
https://www.nytco.com/press/the-new-york-times-introduces-first-personalized-editorial-newsletter-
your-weekly-edition.
Ng, Andrew. 2017. “Artificial Intelligence Is the New Electricity—YouTube.” Presentation at the
Stanford MSx Future Forum, Stanford Graduate School of Business, Stanford, CA, January 25.
https://www.youtube.com/watch?
v=21EiKfQYZXc&ab_channel=StanfordGraduateSchoolofBusiness.
Ng, Andrew. 2021. “AI Matches Patients to Drugs, Robots Crawl Sewers, New Voices for Atypical
Speech, Graph Neural Networks Go Deep.” The Batch, DeepLearning.AI, December 1, 2021.
https://read.deeplearning.ai/the-batch/issue-120/?hss_channel=tw-992153930095251456.
Nielsen, Jakob. 2012. “How Many Test Users in a Usability Study?” Nielsen Norman Group, June 3,
2012. https://www.nngroup.com/articles/how-many-test-users/.
Nieman Lab. 2017. “The New York Times Is Experimenting with Personalization.” Outriders,
December 4, 2017. https://outride.rs/en/the-new-york-times-is-experimenting-with-personalization.
“1999 F-117A Shootdown.” 2022. In Wikipedia. https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=1999_F-
117A_shootdown&oldid=1092041414.
Norfolk Southern Corp. 2019. “NS Uses Predictive Data Analytics to Improve Customer Service.”
Published March 29, 2019. YouTube. https://youtu.be/DBf7pM_c5MQ.
Norfolk Southern Corp. 2020. “Pioneering a New Way to Inspect Track That Enhances the Safety and
Efficiency 
of 
Railroad 
Operations.” 
Published 
March 
5, 
2020. 
YouTube.
https://youtu.be/vpa85Vx9JTc.
Novet, Jordan. 2020. “No Emails Have Leaked from the 2020 Election Campaigns Yet—Tiny USB
Sticks 
May 
Be 
One 
Reason 
Why.” 
CNBC, 
December 
23, 
2020.
https://www.cnbc.com/2020/12/23/physical-security-keys-protected-2016-election-campaigns-
against-leaks.html.

Nowobilska, Aneta. 2018. “Three Key Tech Drivers to Monetise a Premium News App.” Presentation
at 
Scale18, 
November 
2018. 
Published 
November 
6, 
2018. 
YouTube.
https://youtu.be/Y6J55hQLMGc.
Nunez, Jose. 2020. “Grassroots Organizing During a Pandemic.” Medium (blog), December 1, 2020.
https://josenuneziv.medium.com/grassroots-organizing-during-a-pandemic-99847b7d6916.
Nunez, Jose. 2021. Interviews by Zachary Tumin.
Nye, Jr., Joseph S. 2010. The Powers to Lead. Reprint ed. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
NYPD Project Management Office. 2017a. ReBoot 311: Current States and Discoveries. New York:
New York Police Department.
NYPD Project Management Office. 2017b. ReBoot 311: Proposed TEA Proof of Concept. New York:
New York Police Department.
NYT Open Team. 2020. “Meeting… Katerina Iliakopoulou, Lead Software Engineer.” NYT Open
(blog), Medium, August 20, 2020. https://open.nytimes.com/meeting-katerina-iliakopoulou-lead-
software-engineer-82b1dec8cc18.
NYT Open Team. 2021a. “Meeting… Alexandra Shaheen, Program Manager at The New York Times.”
NYT Open (blog), Medium, March 30, 2021. https://open.nytimes.com/meeting-alexandra-shaheen-
program-manager-at-the-new-york-times-2450946576f6.
NYT Open Team. 2021b. “Meeting… Charity Garcia, Software Engineer at The New York Times.”
NYT Open (blog), Medium, March 22, 2021. https://open.nytimes.com/meeting-charity-garcia-
software-engineer-at-the-new-york-times-a7f6defa0bde.
NYT Open Team. 2021c. “Meeting… Cindy Taibi, Chief Information Officer at The New York Times.”
NYT Open (blog), Medium, March 8, 2021. https://open.nytimes.com/meeting-cindy-taibi-chief-
information-officer-at-the-new-york-times-795022c3428f.
NYT Open Team. 2021d. “Meeting… Kathleen Kincaid, Executive Director for Development &
Engagement at The New York Times.” NYT Open (blog), Medium, June 15, 2021.
https://open.nytimes.com/meeting-kathleen-kincaid-executive-director-for-development-
engagement-at-the-new-york-times-39ceb00c1137.
NYT Open Team. 2021e. “Meeting… Véronique Brossier, Lead Software Engineer at The New York
Times.” NYT Open (blog), Medium, March 29, 2021. https://open.nytimes.com/meeting-
v%C3%A9ronique-brossier-lead-software-engineer-at-the-new-york-times-52088bb534ac.
NYT Open Team. 2021f. “Meeting… Vicki Crosson, Software Engineer at The New York Times.” NYT
Open (blog), Medium, March 26, 2021. https://open.nytimes.com/meeting-vicki-crosson-software-
engineer-at-the-new-york-times-2ed88e1743ab.
O’Brien, Dan. 2019. “Break the ‘Broken Windows’ Spell: The Policing Theory Made Famous in New
York City Under Giuliani and Bratton Doesn’t Hold Up to Scrutiny.” New York Daily News, May
26, 
2019. 
https://www.nydailynews.com/opinion/ny-oped-break-the-broken-windows-spell-
20190526-ulwcdd7fnjg4fgv6dnskls6vhi-story.html.
O’Connell, Robert. 2022. “In the N.F.L., It’s Fourth-and-It-Doesn’t-Matter.” New York Times,
February 9, 2022, sec. Sports. https://www.nytimes.com/2022/02/09/sports/football/nfl-analytics-
super-bowl.html.
O’Connor, Matt. 2020. “Revolutionary AI-Powered Digital Pathology Algorithm Customizes Cancer
Care.” Health Imaging, 
July 27, 2020. https://www.healthimaging.com/topics/advanced-
visualization/ai-digital-pathology-cancer-care.
O’Keefe, Patrick. 2018. “How P2P Texting Is Revolutionizing Politics.” Political Moneyball (blog),
Medium, 
August 
26, 
2018. 
https://medium.com/political-moneyball/how-p2p-texting-is-
revolutionizing-politics-bfe697c2abb8.

Olavson, Thomas. 2012. “High-Impact Analytics Teams: Defining Choices and Timeless Lessons—
Google.” Presentation at the INFORMS Analytics Conference, Huntington Beach, CA, April 2012.
Published September 10, 2012. YouTube. https://youtu.be/A1piSz1rqbU.
O’Neil, Cathy. 2017. Weapons of Math Destruction: How Big Data Increases Inequality and
Threatens Democracy. Reprint ed. New York: Crown.
O’Neil, Cathy, and Hanna Gunn. 2020. “Near-Term Artificial Intelligence and the Ethical Matrix.” In
Ethics of Artificial Intelligence, ed. S. Matthew Liao. New York: Oxford University Press.
O’Neill, Patrick Howell, Tate Ryan-Mosley, and Bobbie Johnson. 2020. “A Flood of Coronavirus
Apps Are Tracking Us. Now It’s Time to Keep Track of Them.” MIT Technology Review, May 7,
2020. 
https://www.technologyreview.com/2020/05/07/1000961/launching-mittr-covid-tracing-
tracker.
O’Neill, Paul. 2021. Interviews by Zachary Tumin. Appeared originally in William Bratton and
Zachary Tumin, Collaborate or Perish!: Reaching Across Boundaries in a Networked World. New
York: Crown Business.
Osterman, Caroline. 2019. “Blue River Technology: How Robotics and Machine Learning Are
Transforming the Future of Farming.” Berkeley Master of Engineering (blog), April 19, 2019.
https://medium.com/the-coleman-fung-institute/blue-river-technology-how-robotics-and-machine-
learning-are-transforming-the-future-of-farming-f355398dc567.
Owen, Chris (@ChrisO_wiki). 2022. “For the Attack, a Modified VOG-17 Grenade Was Used. A Fin
and a Front Part, Created on a 3D Printer, Are Added. The VOG-17 Is a Soviet-Era 30x120 Mm
Fragmentation Grenade with a Claimed Effective Radius of 7m, Covering an Area of about 150
M2. Twitter. https://twitter.com/ChrisO_wiki/status/1520561974127603712.
Owen, Laura Hazard. 2021. “Wirecutter, Which Makes Money When You Shop, Is Going Behind The
New 
York 
Times’ 
Paywall.” 
Nieman 
Lab 
(blog), 
August 
31, 
2021.
https://www.niemanlab.org/2021/08/wirecutter-which-makes-money-when-you-shop-is-going-
behind-the-new-york-times-paywall/.
Oyefusi, Daniel. 2019. “Ravens’ John Harbaugh Claims Analytics Back Up Aggressive Decisions vs.
Chiefs. 
Here’s 
What 
the 
Numbers 
Say.” 
Baltimore 
Sun, 
September 
23, 
2019.
https://www.baltimoresun.com/sports/ravens/bs-sp-ravens-john-harbaugh-analytics-chiefs-
20190923-oajueu7eqzcztj5aisldofntu4-story.html.
P2016.org. 2016. “Organization of Bernie 2016—Staff, Advisors and Supporters on Sen. Bernie
Sanders’ 
Presidential 
Campaign.” 
Bernie 
2016. 
Accessed 
January 
28, 
2021.
http://www.p2016.org/sanders/sandersorg.html.
Padwick, Chris. 2020a. “AI for Agriculture: How PyTorch Enables Blue River’s Robots.” Robot
Report, August 6, 2020. https://www.therobotreport.com/ai-for-agriculture-how-pytorch-enables-
blue-rivers-robots.
Padwick, Chris. 2020b. “The Future of Farming Is One Giant A/B Test on All the Crops in the World
at Once.” Interview by Mike Murphy. Protocol, August 11, 2020. https://www.protocol.com/the-
future-of-farming-is-math.
Pan, Ian, Grayson L. Baird, Simukayi Mutasa, et al. 2020. “Rethinking Greulich and Pyle: A Deep
Learning Approach to Pediatric Bone Age Assessment Using Pediatric Trauma Hand Radiographs.”
Radiology: 
Artificial 
Intelligence 
2, 
no. 
4 
(July 
2020): 
1–9.
https://doi.org/10.1148/ryai.2020190198.
Papadopoulos, Anna. 2020. “CEO Spotlight: Joel Rose, CEO of Teach to One.” CEOWORLD
Magazine, February 26, 2020. https://ceoworld.biz/2020/02/26/ceo-spotlight-joel-rose-ceo-of-teach-
to-one.

Park, 
Andrea. 
2019. 
“5 
Key 
Quotes 
About 
How 
AI 
Will 
Transform 
Healthcare.”
Beckershospitalreview.com, July 1, 2019. https://www.beckershospitalreview.com/innovation/5-
key-quotes-about-how-ai-will-transform-healthcare.html?utm_campaign=bhr&utm
_source=website&utm_content=related.
Parker, Charlie. 2022. “Russian Battalion Wiped Out Trying to Cross River of Death.” The Times,
May 12, 2022, sec. News. https://www.thetimes.co.uk/article/russian-battalion-devastated-as-it-
crosses-river-989vvnj9v.
Patel, Shesh. 2019. “Stress Testing in Production: The New York Times Engineering Survival Guide.”
Presentation at the 2019 Dash Conference in Chelsea, NY, July 17, 2019. Published August 5, 2019.
YouTube. https://youtu.be/Ga9UxGRgtEE.
Patterson, Jessica. 2017. “How Great Companies Analyse and Act on Data.” Insights/Innovation
Media Consulting (blog), September 3, 2017. https://innovation.media/insights/how-great-
companies-analyse-and-act-on-data.
Patton, Desmond Upton. 2020. “Social Work Thinking for UX and AI Design.” Interactions 27, no. 2
(March–April 2020): 86–89. https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/3380535.
Payan, Tony, and Guadalupe Correa-Cabrera. 2014. “Issue Brief: Energy Reform and Security in
Northeastern Mexico.” Houston, TX: Rice University’s Baker Institute for Public Policy.
PEMEX. 2018. “Annual Report Pursuant to Section 13 or 15(D) of the Securities Exchange Act of
1934.” 
Form 
20-F.
https://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/932782/000119312519129698/d632951d20f.htm.
Peters, Adele. 2020. “Zipline Will Bring Its Medical Delivery Drones to the U.S. to Help Fight the
Coronavirus.” Fast Company, March 30, 2020. https://www.fastcompany.com/90483592/zipline-
will-use-its-medical-delivery-drones-to-the-u-s-to-help-fight-the-coronavirus.
Peters, Jeremy W. 2011. “The Times Announces Digital Subscription Plan.” New York Times, March
17, 2011. https://www.nytimes.com/2011/03/18/business/media/18times.html.
Peterson, Nolan (@nolanwpeterson). 2022. “For 8 Years, Ukraine’s Military Has Transformed,
Allowing Front-Line Personnel to Operate Creatively & as Autonomously as Possible. There’s a
‘Start-up’ Mentality Among Many Troops. That’s a Big Change from the Strict, Top-down Soviet
Chain 
of 
Command—Which 
Russia 
Still 
Employs.” 
Twitter.
https://twitter.com/nolanwpeterson/status/1520686581157449730?lang=en.
Petróleos Mexicanos. 2018. Form 20-F: Annual Report Pursuant to Section 13 or 15(D) Of the
Securities Exchange Act of 1934. United States Securities and Exchange Commission. Accessed
November 
27, 
2021.
https://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/932782/000119312519129698/d632951d20f.htm.
Pickett, 
Terry. 
2015. 
“The 
Payoff 
from 
Precision 
Agriculture.” 
August 
7, 
2015.
https://johndeerejournal.com/2015/08/the-payoff-from-precision-agriculture/?cid=LNK_JDJ_enUS
_ReadMore_TerryPicket.
Pleasance, Chris. 2022. “Ukraine ‘Destroys £3million Russian T-90 Tank.’ ” Mail Online, May 11,
2022. 
https://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-10805727/Ukraine-destroys-4million-Russian-T-
90-tank.html.
Podojil, Edward. 2021. “How The New York Times Built an End-to-End Cloud Data Platform.” Google
Cloud (blog), January 27, 2021. https://cloud.google.com/blog/products/data-analytics/how-the-
new-york-times-build-an-end-to-end-cloud-data-platform.
Podojil, Edward, Josh Arak, and Shane Murray. 2017. “Designing a Faster, Simpler Workflow to
Build and Share Analytical Insights.” NYT Open (blog), Medium, May 23, 2017.
https://open.nytimes.com/faster-simpler-workflow-analytical-insights-ae6c7055e187.

Politics in the Zeros. 2013. “Scoble Interviews Marc Andreessen on What’s Coming,” February 22,
2013. https://polizeros.com/2013/02/22/scoble-interviews-marc-andreessen-on-whats-coming/.
Pollock, Lori. 2021. Interviews by Zachary Tumin and Madeleine Want.
Pooley, 
Eric. 
1996. 
“One 
Good 
Apple.” 
Time, 
January 
15, 
1996.
http://content.time.com/time/subscriber/article/0,33009,983960,00.html.
Popke. Michael 2019. “Rail Insider-Data Analytics Is Giving Rail Asset Owners New Ways to
Improve Their Predictive Maintenance Practices. Information for Rail Career Professionals from
Progressive 
Railroading 
Magazine.” 
Progressive 
Railroading, 
May 
2019.
https://www.progressiverailroading.com/internet-digital/article/Data-analytics-is-giving-rail-asset-
owners-new-ways-to-improve-their-predictive-maintenance-practices—57544.
Potcner, Kevin, and Bill Griffin. 2020. “The Predictive Modeling Workflow.” INFORMS Webinar,
October 
19, 
2020. 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?
v=SRRGKAenyUc&list=PLuvtfhwcPzCRcAlS77SSEFh1wtsEMz3s9&index=3&ab_channel=INF
ORMS.
Pownall, Augusta. 2018. “New York Times Redesigns Website to Catch Up with Mobile Offering.”
Dezeen, 
August 
17, 
2018. 
https://www.dezeen.com/2018/08/17/new-york-times-newspaper-
website-redesign-news-design.
Prabhat, Pranay. 2020. “To Serve Better Ads, We Built Our Own Data Program.” NYT Open (blog),
Medium, December 17, 2020. https://open.nytimes.com/to-serve-better-ads-we-built-our-own-data-
program-c5e039bf247b.
Press, Gil. 2013. “A Very Short History of Data Science.” Forbes, May 28, 2013.
https://www.forbes.com/sites/gilpress/2013/05/28/a-very-short-history-of-data-science/.
Prime Tide Sports. “Why NBA Teams Are Shooting More 3 Pointers.” n.d. Accessed November 28,
2021. 
YouTube. 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=uGCRzuWIoN8&ab
_channel=PrimeTideSports.
Privacy Sandbox. n.d. “Building a More Private, Open Web.” Google. Accessed November 26, 2021.
https://privacysandbox.com.
Pulley, Brett. 2011. “New York Times Fixes Paywall to Balance Free and Paid.” Bloomberg, January
28, 
2011. https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2011-01-28/new-york-times-fixes-paywall-
glitches-to-balance-free-vs-paid-on-the-web.
Quinn, Colleen. 2021. “3 Reasons You Should Be Using Site Direct vs. Programmatic.” Accessed
November 24, 2021. https://www.meredithconnecticut.com/blog/3-reasons-you-should-be-using-
site-direct-vs.-programmatic.
Ralby, Ian M. 2017. “Downstream Oil Theft: Global Modalities, Trends, and Remedies.” Atlantic
Council of the United States, and Global Energy Center. 2017. http://www.atlantic
council.org/images/publications/Downstream_Oil_Theft_web_0106.pdf.
Ramaswamy, Poornima. 2021. “How Data Can Help Fast Followers Close the Gap Faster.”
LinkedIn/Pulse (blog), February 2, 2021. https://www.linkedin.com/pulse/how-data-can-help-fast-
followers-close-gap-faster-poornima-ramaswamy/.
Rao, Leena. 2010. “Former Google CIO Douglas Merrill Wants to Reform Payday Loans with
ZestCash.” TechCrunch (blog), October 12, 2010. https://social.techcrunch.com/2010/10/12/former-
google-cio-douglas-merrill-wants-to-reform-payday-loans-with-zestcash.
Rao, Leena. 2012. “ZestFinance Debuts New Data Underwriting Model to Ensure Lower Consumer
Loan 
Default 
Rates.” 
TechCrunch 
(blog), 
November 
19, 
2012.
https://social.techcrunch.com/2012/11/19/zestfinance-debuts-new-data-underwriting-model-to-
ensure-lower-consumer-loan-default-rates.

Ravishankar, Hariharan, Prasad Sudhakar, Rahul Venkataramani, et al. 2017. “Understanding the
Mechanisms of Deep Transfer Learning for Medical Images.” ArXiv:1704.06040 [Cs], April 2017.
http://arxiv.org/abs/1704.06040.
Ravitch, Diane. 2011. The Death and Life of the Great American School System: How Testing and
Choice Are Undermining Education. New York: Basic Books.
Rayman, Graham, Jillian Jorgensen, and Larry McShane. 2017. “Hundreds of NYPD Cops Turn
Backs to de Blasio in Protest as He Speaks at Funeral for Slain Officer Miosotis Familia.” New York
Daily News, July 11, 2017. https://www.nydailynews.com/new-york/scores-nypd-cops-turn-backs-
de-blasio-officer-funeral-article-1.3318292.
Ready, Douglas, Ellen Meier, et al. 2013. Student Mathematics Performance in Year One
Implementation of Teach to One: Math. November 2013. New York: Center for Technology and
School Change at Teachers College, Columbia University.
Reagan, Mitt. 2022. “Do Targeted Strikes Work? The Lessons of Two Decades of Drone Warfare.”
Modern War Institute. June 2, 2022. https://mwi.usma.edu/do-targeted-strikes-work-the-lessons-of-
two-decades-of-drone-warfare/.
Reagan, Mitt. 2022. Drone Strike–Analyzing the Impacts of Targeted Killing. 2022 edition. Cham,
Switzerland: Palgrave Pivot.
Recruiter.com. 2017. “Outdated Recruiting Methods Don’t Work on Millennials.” Fox Business,
October 5, 2017. https://www.foxbusiness.com/features/outdated-recruiting-methods-dont-work-on-
millennials.
Redden, Lee. 2017. “Growth Opportunity—How AI Puts Lettuce in Your Salad Bowl.” The AI
Podcast, 
Episode 
13, 
April 
4, 
2017. 
https://soundcloud.com/theaipodcast/ep-16-growth-
opportunity-how-ai-puts-lettuce-in-your-salad-bowl.
Reich, Justin. 2014. “Teach to One Blended Math Study Results Similar to Other Computer-Assisted
Math 
Instruction.” 
Education 
Week, 
December 
5, 
2014.
https://www.edweek.org/leadership/opinion-teach-to-one-blended-math-study-results-similar-to-
other-computer-assisted-math-instruction/2014/12.
Reich, Justin. 2020. Failure to Disrupt: Why Technology Alone Can’t Transform Education.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Reilly, Patrick. 2018. “How IoT Is Making Private Railways Safer.” GovTech, March 2, 2018.
https://www.govtech.com/fs/transportation/How-IoT-Is-Making-Private-Railways-Safer.html.
“Restrictions on Geographic Data in China.” 2018. Wikipedia. https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?
title=Restrictions_on_geographic_data_in_China&oldid=862085456.
Reuter, Timothy, and Peter Liu. 2021. “Medicine from the Sky: Opportunities and Lessons from
Drones 
in 
Africa.” 
World 
Economic 
Forum. 
https://www.updwg.org/wp-
content/uploads/2021/04/WEF_Medicine_from_the_Sky_2021.pdf.
Ridley, Erik L. 2020. “Can AI Interpret Chest X-Rays as Well as Rad Residents?” AuntMinnie.com,
October 
9, 
2020. 
https://www.auntminnie.com/index.aspx?
sec=sup&sub=aic&pag=dis&ItemID=130443.
Ridley, Erik L. 2021a. “AI Applications Progress in Musculoskeletal Applications.” AuntMinnie.com,
December 
1, 
2021. 
https://www.auntminnie.com/index.aspx?
sec=rca&sub=rsna_2021&pag=dis&ItemID=134400.
Ridley, Erik L. 2021b. “AI Captures Bone Mineral Density Data on Hip X-Rays.” AuntMinnie.com,
November 
29, 
2021. 
https://www.auntminnie.com/index.aspx?
sec=rca&sub=rsna_2021&pag=dis&ItemID=134308.
Ridley, Erik L. 2021c. “Report: Reimbursement Drives Adoption of AI Software for Stroke.”
AuntMinnie.com, 
November 
15, 
2021. 
https://www.auntminnie.com/index.aspx?

sec=sup&sub=aic&pag=dis&ItemID=134111.
Ridley, Erik L. 2021d. “How Will AI Affect Radiologist Productivity?” AuntMinnie.com, November
18, 2021. https://www.auntminnie.com/index.aspx?sec=sup&sub=cto&pag=dis&ItemID=134178.
Ries, Eric. 2011. The Lean Startup: How Today’s Entrepreneurs Use Continuous Innovation to Create
Radically Successful Businesses. Illustrated ed. New York: Currency.
Rifkin, Nathan. 2020a. “How Team Warren Organized Everywhere.” Medium (blog), July 30, 2020.
https://nfrifkin.medium.com/how-team-warren-organized-everywhere-3a08d66fa126.
Rifkin, Nathan. 2020b. “160,000 Organizers.” Distro List (blog), December 15, 2020.
https://nathanrifkin.substack.com/p/160000-organizers.
Rifkin, Nathan. 2020c. “160,000 Organizers: The 2020 Biden-Harris National Distributed Organizing
Program.” Medium (blog), December 15, 2020. https://nfrifkin.medium.com/160-000-organizers-
the-2020-biden-harris-national-distributed-organizing-program-bef8b0a6ea88.
Rifkin, Nathan. 2021. Interviews by Zachary Tumin.
Ripston, Ramona. 2007. “Does Bratton Deserve Five More Years?” Los Angeles Times, May 6, 2007.
https://www.latimes.com/la-op-bratton06may06-story.html.
Rittell, Horst W. J., and Melvin M. Webber. 1973. “Dilemmas in a General Theory of Planning.”
Policy 
Sciences 
4, 
no. 
2 
(June 
1973): 
155–169.
https://archive.epa.gov/reg3esd1/data/web/pdf/rittel%2bwebber%2bdilemmas%2bgeneral_theory_o
f_planning.pdf.
Roberts, Paul. 2013. “At MIT Conference, Warnings of Big Data Fundamentalism.” The Security
Ledger with Paul F. Roberts, October 10, 2013. https://securityledger.com/2013/10/at-mit-
conference-warnings-of-big-data-fundamentalism/.
Rockoff, Jonah E. 2015. Evaluation Report on the School of One i3 Expansion. September 2015. New
York: 
Columbia 
Business 
School. 
https://www.classsizematters.org/wp-
content/uploads/2019/02/Rockoff-evaluation-of-the-school-of-one-Sept.-2015.pdf.
Rockwell, Nick. 2017a. “Develop Your Culture Like Software.” NYT Open (blog), Medium,
November 26, 2017. https://open.nytimes.com/develop-your-culture-like-software-a1a3c1acfd6e.
Rockwell, Nick. 2017b. “Inside Election Night at the NYT.” Talk at the 2017 Altitude NYC Summit,
New York, March 21, 2017. Published April 7, 2017. Vimeo. https://vimeo.com/212296243.
Rockwell, Nick. 2017c. “The Resistance to Serverless.” Medium (blog), October 7, 2017.
https://nicksrockwell.medium.com/the-futile-resistance-to-serverless-9f0303ba2b24.
Rockwell, Nick. 2017d. “What If Serverless Was Real?—Nick Rockwell (The New York Times).”
Presentation at the O’Reilly Velocity Conference 2017, New York, October 2017. Published
October 20, 2017. YouTube. https://youtu.be/6zNpkZF9z9U.
Rockwell, Nick. 2018. “Cindy Taibi Named Chief Information Officer of The New York Times.” NYT
Open (blog), Medium, April 19, 2018. https://open.nytimes.com/cindy-taibi-named-chief-
information-officer-of-the-new-york-times-fe3f74cfa2bf.
Rockwell, Nick. 2019a. “Fireside Chat: Nick Rockwell, CTO of The New York Times (FirstMark’s
Data Driven NYC).” Interview by Matt Turck at the 2019 Data Driven NYC in New York.
Published January 16, 2019. YouTube. https://youtu.be/PxYlyv_HM_8.
Rockwell, Nick. 2019b. “News in the Age of Algorithmic Recommendation: The New York Times.”
Presentation at the 2019 Data Council Conference, New York. Published November 20, 2019.
YouTube. https://youtu.be/rgIYxpjXpPc.
Rockwell, Nick. 2019c. “New York Times’ CTO Nick Rockwell on How Tech Drives Subscription
Goals.” Interview by Pia Frey. Published April 24, 2019. OMR Media podcast.
https://omrmedia.podigee.io/24-mit-nick-rockwell.

Rockwell, Nick. 2020. “Looking Back on Four Years at The Times.” Start It Up (blog), Medium, April
5, 2020. https://medium.com/swlh/looking-back-on-four-years-at-the-times-e158ec3a5936.
Rockwell, Nick. 2021. Interviews by Zachary Tumin.
Rockwell, Nick, and James Cunningham. 2018. “The Evolution of The New York Times Tech Stack.”
Interview 
by 
Yonas 
Beshawred. 
Published 
April 
26, 
2018. 
SoundCloud 
podcast.
https://stackshare.io/posts/evolution-of-new-york-times-tech-stack.
Rockwell, Nick, and Chris Wiggins. 2019. “Open Questions: Carlos A. Gomez-Uribe.” Medium,
January 
15, 
2019. 
https://towardsdatascience.com/open-questions-carlos-a-gomez-uribe-
980c1af1195c.
Rodriguez, Mauricio. 2019. “Analytics: Too Late for Cowboys to Buy In?” Inside The Star, December
1, 2019. https://insidethestar.com/analytics-too-late-for-cowboys-to-buy-in.
Rogati, Monica (@mrogati). 2014. “My favorite data science algorithm is division. Seriously: over-
represented X in group Y is a beat blog-post generator and cheap classifier.” Twitter. June 25, 2014.
https://twitter.com/mrogati/status/481927908802322433.
Rogati, Monica. 2017. “The AI Hierarchy of Needs.” Hackernoon (blog). June 12, 2017.
https://hackernoon.com/the-ai-hierarchy-of-needs-18f111fcc007.
Rogers, Everett M. 2003. Diffusion of Innovations. New York: Free Press.
Rose, Joel. 2020a. “The Grade-Level Expectations Trap.” Education Next (blog), May 12, 2020.
https://www.educationnext.org/grade-level-expectations-trap-how-lockstep-math-lessons-leave-
students-behind.
Rose, Joel. 2020b. “Mike Bloomberg Can’t Shake the Legacy of Stop-and-Frisk Policing in New
York.” NPR, February 25, 2020. https://www.npr.org/2020/02/25/809368292/the-legacy-of-stop-
and-frisk-policing-in-michael-bloombergs-new-york.
Rose, Joel. 2021. “Addressing Significant Learning Loss in Mathematics During COVID-19 and
Beyond.” Education Next (blog), January 29, 2021. https://www.educationnext.org/addressing-
significant-learning-loss-in-mathematics-during-covid-19-and-beyond.
Rosenberg, Bernard, and Ernest Goldstein. 1982. Creators and Disturbers: Reminiscences by Jewish
Intellectuals of New York. New York: Columbia University Press.
Roth, Brian, Anantaram Balakrishnan, Pooja Dewan, et al. 2018. “Crew Decision Assist: System for
Optimizing Crew Assignments at BNSF Railway.” Interfaces 48, no. 5 (December 2018): 436–448.
https://doi.org/10.1287/inte.2018.0963.
Rotman, David. 2020. “Why Tech Didn’t Save Us from COVID-19.” MIT Technology Review, June
17, 2020. https://www.technologyreview.com/2020/06/17/1003312/why-tech-didnt-save-us-from-
covid-19.
Rouhiainen, Lasse. 2019. “How AI and Data Could Personalize Higher Education.” Harvard Business
Review, October 14, 2019. https://hbr.org/2019/10/how-ai-and-data-could-personalize-higher-
education.
Rucker, Patrick, and Armando Tovar. 2010. “Oil Blast Causes Inferno in Mexican Town, 28 Dead.”
Reuters, December 20, 2010, sec. World News. https://www.reuters.com/article/us-mexico-
explosion-idUSTRE6BI1DT20101220.
Rudder, Christian. 2015. Dataclysm: Who We Are (When We Think No One’s Looking). London:
Fourth Estate.
Rumelt, Richard. 2011. Good Strategy/Bad Strategy: The Difference and Why It Matters. Illustrated
ed. New York: Currency.
Russell, Jon. 2019. “India’s ZestMoney Raises $20M to Grow Its Digital Lending Service.”
TechCrunch (blog), April 22, 2019. https://social.techcrunch.com/2019/04/22/zestmoney-raises-
20m.

Ryan-Mosley, Tate. 2020. “The Technology That Powers the 2020 Campaigns, Explained.” MIT
Technology 
Review, 
September 
28, 
2020.
https://www.technologyreview.com/2020/09/28/1008994/the-technology-that-powers-political-
campaigns-in-2020-explained.
Sailthru. 2018. “Personalization Failure, New York Times Paywall.” Sailthru (blog), January 2, 2018.
https://www.sailthru.com/marketing-blog/price-personalization-failures-paywall-changes-new-
york-times-wired.
Samuelson, William, and Richard Zeckhauser. 1988. “Status Quo Bias in Decision Making.” Journal
of Risk and Uncertainty 1, no. 1 (March 1998): 7–59. https://www.jstor.org/stable/41760530.
Sandberg, C., J. Holmes, K. McCoy, and H. Koppitsch. 1989. “The Application of a Continuous Leak
Detection System to Pipelines and Associated Equipment.” IEEE Transactions on Industry
Applications 25, no. 5 (September 1989): 906–909. https://doi.org/10.1109/28.41257.
Sankin, Aaron. 2016. “This Text Messaging App Is Bernie Sanders’s Secret Weapon.” Daily Dot,
April 18, 2016. https://www.dailydot.com/debug/hustle-app-bernie-sanders-texting.
Sashihara, Stephen. 2011. The Optimization Edge: Reinventing Decision Making to Maximize All Your
Company’s Assets. New York: McGraw-Hill Education.
Sashihara, Stephen. 2020. “The Princeton 20 for AI Projects: Framework to Manage Project Risks &
Successfully Deploy Solutions.” INFORMS Webinar. Published September 10, 2020. YouTube.
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fgmoBM-Niks&list=PLuvtfhwcPzCRc
AlS77SSEFh1wtsEMz3s9&index=3&ab_channel=INFORMS.
Sault, Spring. 2019. “How Many Minutes of Game Play Does the Average NFL Game Have?” Texas
Hill Country (blog), October 1, 2019. https://texashillcountry.com/minutes-play-average-nfl-game/.
Schatz, Aaron. 2022. “Staley Leads NFL in Re-Calibrated Aggressiveness Index: Football Outsiders.”
FootballOutsiders.com, 
February 
28, 
2022. 
https://www.footballoutsiders.com/stat-
analysis/2022/staley-leads-nfl-re-calibrated-aggressiveness-index.
Schaufeli, Wilmar B. 2012. “The Measurement of Work Engagement.” In Research Methods in
Occupational Health Psychology: Measurement, Design and Data Analysis, ed. Robert R. Sinclair,
Mo 
Wang, 
and 
Lois 
E. 
Tetrick, 
138–153. 
New 
York: 
Routledge.
https://doi.org/10.4324/9780203095249.
Schein, Aaron. 2021. “Assessing the Effects of Friend-to-Friend Texting on Turnout in the 2018 US
Midterm Elections.” April 11. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bi3VDktL7Y4.
Schein, Edgar H. 1996. “Three Cultures of Management: The Key to Organizational Learning.” MIT
Sloan Management Review, October 15, 1996. http://sloanreview.mit.edu/article/three-cultures-of-
management-the-key-to-organizational-learning.
Schein, Edgar H., and Peter A. Schein. 2016. “How Leaders Embed and Transmit Culture.” In
Organizational Culture and Leadership. 5th ed., 228–253. Hoboken, NJ: Wiley.
Schellmann, Hilke. 2021. “Auditors Are Testing Hiring Algorithms for Bias, but There’s No Easy
Fix.” 
MIT 
Technology 
Review, 
February 
11, 
2021.
https://www.technologyreview.com/2021/02/11/1017955/auditors-testing-ai-hiring-algorithms-bias-
big-questions-remain.
Schenkler, Martin. 2021. Interview by Zachary Tumin.
Schiller, Joe. 2019. “Late for Work 11/25: How John Harbaugh and the Ravens Gained an Analytical
Edge.” Baltimore Ravens, November 25, 2019. https://www.baltimoreravens.com/news/late-for-
work-11-25-how-john-harbaugh-and-the-ravens-gained-an-analytical-edge.
Schipper, Burkhard C., and Hee Yeul Yoo. 2019. “Political Awareness, Microtargeting of Voters, and
Negative Electoral Campaigning.” Quarterly Journal of Political Science 14, no. 1 (2019): 41–88.
https://doi.org/10.1561/100.00016066.

Schmidt, David. 2021. “SailGP Teams, Back at Full Strength, Power to the $1 Million Prize.” New
York 
Times, 
October 
8, 
2021. 
https://www.nytimes.com/2021/10/08/sports/sailing/sailgp-
catamaran.html.
Schmidt, Eric. 2015. “Blitzscaling 08: Eric Schmidt on Structuring Teams and Scaling Google.”
Interview by Reid Hoffman on October 15, 2015. Published October 23, 2015. YouTube.
https://youtu.be/hcRxFRgNpns.
Schneider Electric. 2018. “Solutions for Gas Management System.” Schneider Electric.
https://download.schneider-electric.com/files?p_enDocType=Customer+success+story&p
_File_Name=SCADA+Industrial.pdf&p_Doc_Ref=SCADA+International.
Schön, Donald A. 1987. Educating the Reflective Practitioner: Toward a New Design for Teaching
and Learning in the Professions. New York: Jossey-Bass.
Schrage, Michael. 2020. Recommendation Engines. Cambridge, Massachusetts: The MIT Press.
Schreiber, Simon. 2020. “How to Measure AI Product Performance the Right Way.” Start It Up (blog),
Medium, June 30, 2020. https://medium.com/swlh/how-to-measure-ai-product-performance-the-
right-way-2d6791c5f5c3.
Schrimpf, Paul. 2021. “Deere Launches See & Spray Select Technology.” PrecisionAg (blog), March
2, 2021. https://www.precisionag.com/market-watch/deere-see-spray-select-release/.
Schwab, Klaus. 2015. “The Fourth Industrial Revolution: What It Means and How to Respond.”
Foreign Affairs, December 12, 2015. https://www.weforum.org/agenda/2016/01/the-fourth-
industrial-revolution-what-it-means-and-how-to-respond.
Scire, Sarah. 2020a. “How The New York Times Prepared for the Ultimate Stress Test—the 2020
Election.” Nieman Lab (blog), December 3, 2020. https://www.niemanlab.org/2020/12/how-the-
new-york-times-prepared-for-the-ultimate-stress-test-the-2020-election.
Scire, Sarah. 2020b. “Outgoing New York Times CEO Mark Thompson Thinks There Won’t Be a Print
Edition 
in 
20 
Years.” 
Nieman 
Lab 
(blog), 
August 
11, 
2020.
https://www.niemanlab.org/2020/08/outgoing-new-york-times-ceo-mark-thompson-thinks-there-
wont-be-a-print-edition-in-20-years.
Scire, Sarah. 2020c. “Readers Reign Supreme, and Other Takeaways from The New York Times End-
of-Year 
Earnings 
Report.” 
Nieman 
Lab 
(blog), 
February 
6, 
2020.
https://www.niemanlab.org/2020/02/readers-reign-supreme-and-other-takeaways-from-the-new-
york-times-end-of-year-earnings-report.
Sculley, D., Gary Holt, Daniel Golovin, et al. 2015. “Hidden Technical Debt in Machine Learning
Systems.” In Proceedings of the 28th International Conference on Neural Information Processing
Systems—Volume 
2, 
2503–11. 
NIPS’15. 
Cambridge, 
MA: 
MIT 
Press.
https://papers.nips.cc/paper/2015/file/86df7dcfd896fcaf2674f757a2463eba-Paper.pdf.
Sebastian-Coleman, Laura. 2010. “Data Quality Assessment Framework.” Presentation at the Fourth
MIT 
Information 
Quality 
Industry 
Symposium, 
Cambridge, 
MA, 
July 
2010.
http://mitiq.mit.edu/IQIS/Documents/CDOIQS_201077/Papers/03_08_4B-1.pdf.
Sebastian-Coleman, Laura. 2013. Measuring Data Quality for Ongoing Improvement: A Data Quality
Assessment Framework. Waltham, MA: Morgan Kaufmann.
Seegene. n.d. “Rising to Global Challenges.” Access Seegene. Accessed November 18, 2021.
https://sponsorcontent.cnn.com/int/seegene/rising-to-global-challenges.
Semple, Kirk. 2017. “In Mexico, an Epidemic of Fuel Thefts Becomes a Crisis.” New York Times,
April 26, 2017, sec. World. https://www.nytimes.com/2017/04/26/world/americas/mexico-fuel-
theft-crisis.html.
Seifert, Kevin. 2021. “Fourth-down Offense Is at an All-Time High: Why NFL Teams Are Following
the 
Analytics 
and 
Going 
for 
It.” 
ESPN.Com. 
September 
24, 
2021.

https://www.espn.com/nfl/insider/insider/story/_/id/32264153/what-changed-fourth-why-nfl-
headed-golden-era-analytically-driven-four-offense.
Seto, J.L. 2022. “Lack of EV Charging Stations Creates Range Anxiety in the West.” MotorBiscuit
(blog). June 10, 2022. https://www.motorbiscuit.com/lack-ev-charging-stations-creates-range-
anxiety-west/.
Setty, Prasad. 2014. “HR Meets Science at Google.” Speech at the 2014 Re:Work with Google event.
Published November 10, 2014. YouTube. https://youtu.be/KY8v-O5Buyc.
Shaheen, Alexandra, Megan Araula, and Shawn Bower. 2021a. “Failover Plans, Outage Playbooks
and Resilience Gaps.” NYT Open (blog), Medium, July 30, 2021. https://open.nytimes.com/failover-
plans-outage-playbooks-and-resilience-gaps-35047aed6213.
Shaheen, Alexandra, Megan Araula, and Shawn Bower. 2021b. “How The New York Times Assesses,
Tests, and Prepares for the (UN)Expected News Event.” Nieman Lab (blog), July 2021.
https://www.niemanlab.org/2021/07/how-the-new-york-times-assesses-tests-and-prepares-for-the-
unexpected-news-event.
Shaheen, Alexandra, Megan Araula, and Suman Roy. 2020. “How The New York Times Technology
Teams Prepared for the 2020 Election.” Interview by Sara Bures. NYT Open (blog), Medium,
November 
20, 
2020. 
https://open.nytimes.com/how-the-new-york-times-technology-teams-
prepared-for-the-2020-election-3928ce7f923c.
Sharma, Shradha and Jarshad NK. 2022. “Banking on the Bottom of the Pyramid.” YourStory.Com
(blog). July 29, 2022. https://yourstory.com/2022/07/financial-inclusion-unbanked-fia-global-
seema-prem/amp.
Shashkevich, Alex. 2017. “10 Notable Books Published by Stanford University Press.” Stanford News,
November 9, 2017. https://news.stanford.edu/2017/11/09/10-notable-books-published-stanford-
university-press/.
Shaw, Kathryn, and Debra Schifrin. 2015. “LinkedIn and Modern Recruiting (A).” HR41A-PDF-
ENG, 
Palo 
Alto, 
CA: 
Stanford 
Graduate 
School 
of 
Business.
https://hbsp.harvard.edu/product/HR41A-PDF-ENG.
Shea, Stephen. n.d. “The 3-Point Revolution.” ShotTracker. Accessed November 28, 2021.
https://shottracker.com/articles/the-3-point-revolution.
Shellenbarger, Sue. 2019. “The Dangers of Hiring for Cultural Fit.” Wall Street Journal, September
23, 2019. https://www.wsj.com/articles/the-dangers-of-hiring-for-cultural-fit-11569231000.
Shirky, Clay. 2009. Here Comes Everybody: The Power of Organizing Without Organizations. Reprint
ed. New York: Penguin.
Shomikdutta. 2021. “How Tech Helped Democrats Win: By the Numbers.” Higher Ground Labs,
March 31, 2021. https://highergroundlabs.com/how-tech-helped-democrats-win-by-the-numbers/.
Shrestha, Yash Raj, Shiko M. Ben-Menahem, and Georg von Krogh. 2019. “Organizational Decision-
Making Structures in the Age of Artificial Intelligence.” California Management Review 61, no. 4
(2019): 66–83.
Shulga, Dima. 2018. “5 Reasons ‘Logistic Regression’ Should Be the First Thing You Learn When
Becoming 
a 
Data 
Scientist.” 
Medium, 
Towards 
Data 
Science, 
April 
21, 
2018.
https://towardsdatascience.com/5-reasons-logistic-regression-should-be-the-first-thing-you-learn-
when-become-a-data-scientist-fcaae46605c4.
Shulman, Robyn D. 2017. “The Top 5 Reasons EdTech Startups Fail and How to Avoid Them.”
Forbes, June 13, 2017. https://www.forbes.com/sites/robynshulman/2017/06/13/the-top-5-reasons-
edtech-startups-fail-and-how-to-avoid-them.
Sicha, Choire. 2022. “Journalism’s Twitter Problem Is the Journalists.” Intelligencer, April 7, 2022.
https://nymag.com/intelligencer/2022/04/new-york-times-journalists-are-terrible-on-twitter.html.

Siddhartha, Sasha, and Nick Rockwell. 2021. “The Secret Advantage of Goal Setting with Sasha
Siddhartha, Co-founder and CTO of Thrive Market and Nick Rockwell, Senior VP of Engineering
and Infrastructure at Fastly.” In CIO Classified. Published February 24, 2021. Spotify podcast.
https://ciopod.com/podcasts/the-secret-advantage-of-goal-setting.
Silverman, Steve. 2018. “How Much Time Is Played During a Football Game?” SportsRec, December
5, 2018. https://www.sportsrec.com/6879403/how-much-time-is-played-during-a-football-game.
Simonite, Tom. 2020. “A Clever Strategy to Distribute Covid Aid—with Satellite Data.” Wired,
December 17, 2020. https://www.wired.com/story/clever-strategy-distribute-covid-aid-satellite-
data.
Singer, P. W. 2009. Wired for War: The Robotics Revolution and Conflict in the 21st Century. Reprint
ed. New York: Penguin.
Singleton, Ben. 2020–2021, various dates. Interviews by Zachary Tumin and Madeleine Want.
Sisak, Michael R. 2019. “Modern Policing: Algorithm Helps NYPD Spot Crime Patterns.” NBC
Connecticut, 
March 
10, 
2019. 
https://www.nbcconnecticut.com/news/national-
international/modern-policing-algorithm-helps-nypd-spot-crime-patterns/172511.
Sisak, Michael R. 2021. “Monitor: NYPD Officers Underreporting Use of Stop-and-Frisk.” AP News,
September 1, 2021. https://apnews.com/article/business-race-and-ethnicity-police-reform-nyc-state-
wire-273a0d430d3d4ccfe172ba367ac3d44f.
Sittig, Dean, Joan Ash, Jiajie Zhang, Jerome Osheroff, and M. Shabot. 2006. “Lessons from
‘Unexpected Increased Mortality After Implementation of a Commercially Sold Computerized
Physician 
Order 
Entry 
System.’ ” 
Pediatrics 
118 
(September 
2006): 
797–801.
https://doi.org/10.1542/peds.2005-3132.
Skillroads. n.d. “AI and Facial Recognition Are Game Changers for Recruitment.” Skillroads.
Accessed November 22, 2021. https://skillroads.com/blog/ai-and-facial-recognition-are-game-
changers-for-recruitment.
Skomoroch, Peter. 2019. “Product Management for AI.” Presentation at the Rev 2 Data Science
Leaders’ 
Summit, 
New 
York, 
May 
2019. 
Published 
June 
21, 
2019.
https://www.slideshare.net/pskomoroch/product-management-for-ai.
Skomoroch, Peter, and Mike Loukides. 2020. “What You Need to Know About Product Management
for AI.” Radar (blog), O’Reilly, March 31, 2020. https://www.oreilly.com/radar/what-you-need-to-
know-about-product-management-for-ai.
Smith, Brittany. 2019. “Behind the Scenes with U.S. SailGP Team: Tech, Training, and Teamwork.”
Men’s Journal (blog), June 7, 2019. https://www.mensjournal.com/health-fitness/mens-journal-x-u-
s-sailgp-team-strength-conditioning-workout/.
Smith, Chris. 1996. “The NYPD Guru.” New York Magazine, April 2, 1996.
Smith, Chris. 2018. “The Controversial Crime-Fighting Program That Changed New York Forever.”
New York Magazine Intelligencer, March 2, 2018. https://nymag.com/intelligencer/2018/03/the-
crime-fighting-program-that-changed-new-york-forever.html.
Smith, Gerry. 2017. “NY Times Scales Back Free Articles to Get More Subscribers.” Bloomberg,
December 1, 2017. https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2017-12-01/n-y-times-scales-back-
free-articles-to-get-readers-to-subscribe.
Smith, Hedrick. 2005. “District-Wide Reform: Anthony Alvarado Interview.” Making Schools Work
with Hedrick Smith, PBS. Accessed November 20, 2021. http://www.pbs.org/making
schoolswork/dwr/ca/alvarado.html.
Smith, Shelley. 2021. “Week 5 Takeaways and Big Questions: Chaos in Packers-Bengals, Lions
Heartbreak, 
Cardinals 
5–0.” 
ESPN, 
October 
10, 
2021.

https://www.espn.com/nfl/story/_/id/32355896/nfl-week-5-takeaways-learned-big-questions-every-
game-future-team-outlooks.
Snyder, Gabriel. 2017. “How The New York Times Is Clawing Its Way into the Future.” Wired,
February 12, 2017. https://www.wired.com/2017/02/new-york-times-digital-journalism.
Sohn, Soopum. 2020. “The Real Reason South Korea Was Able to Stop COVID-19.” GEN (blog),
Medium, May 19, 2020. https://gen.medium.com/the-real-reason-south-korea-was-able-to-stop-
covid-19-2742afaea400.
Sohrabi, Shirin, Anton Riabov, et al. 2018. “An AI Planning Solution to Scenario Generation for
Enterprise Risk Management.” In AAAI 2018. https://research.ibm.com/publications/an-ai-planning-
solution-to-scenario-generation-for-enterprise-risk-management.
Somaiah, Jasmine. 2018. “Everything You Need to Know About Deep Canvassing.” CallHub (blog),
June 25, 2018. https://callhub.io/deep-canvassing.
Sousa, William H., and George L. Kelling. 2010. “Police and Reclamation of Public Places a Study of
MacArthur Park in Los Angeles.” International Journal of Police Science and Management 12, no.
1 (2010): 41–54. https://doi.org/10.1350/ijps.2010.12.1.156.
Sparrow, Malcolm K. 2015. Measuring Performance in a Modern Police Organization. New
Perspectives in Policing Bulletin. Washington, DC: US Department of Justice, National Institute of
Justice. NCJ 248476. https://www.ojp.gov/pdffiles1/nij/248476.pdf.
Sparrow, Malcolm K. 2016. Handcuffed: What Holds Policing Back, and the Keys to Reform.
Washington, DC: Brookings Institution Press.
Spayd, Liz. 2017. “A ‘Community’ of One: The Times Gets Tailored.” New York Times, March 18,
2017. 
https://www.nytimes.com/2017/03/18/public-editor/a-community-of-one-the-times-gets-
tailored.html.
Spear, Steven J. 2010. The High-Velocity Edge: How Market Leaders Leverage Operational
Excellence to Beat the Competition. New York: McGraw-Hill Education.
Springer, Bill. 2022. “Team Australia Wins SailGP Championship—and $1 Million Prize—in San
Francisco.” Forbes, March 28, 2022. https://www.forbes.com/sites/billspringer/2022/03/28/team-
australia-wins-sailgp-championship-and-1-million-prize-in-san-francisco/.
Stern, Sebastian, Andreas Behrendt, Elke Eisenschmidt, et al. 2017. The Rail Sector’s Changing
Maintenance Game: How Rail Operators and Rail OEMs Can Benefit from Digital Maintenance
Opportunities. 
Digital 
McKinsey, 
December 
2017.
https://www.mckinsey.com/~/media/mckinsey/industries/public%20and%20social%20sector/our%2
0insights/the%20rail%20sectors%20changing%20maintenance%20game/the-rail-sectors-changing-
maintenance-game.pdf.
Sternlicht, Alexandra. 2020. “South Korea’s Widespread Testing and Contact Tracing Lead to First
Day 
with 
No 
New 
Cases.” 
Forbes, 
April 
30, 
2020.
https://www.forbes.com/sites/alexandrasternlicht/2020/04/30/south-koreas-widespread-testing-and-
contact-tracing-lead-to-first-day-with-no-new-cases.
Stevenson, Howard H. 2006. “A Perspective on Entrepreneurship.” Harvard Business School
Background Note 384–131, October 1983. Revised April 2006.
Stokenberga, Aiga, and Maria Catalina Ochoa. 2021. “Unlocking the Lower Skies: The Costs and
Benefits of Deploying Drones Across Use Cases in East Africa.” The World Bank.
https://doi.org/10.1596/978-1-4648-1696-3.
Strobel, Gordon and Warren P. Lubold. 2019. “Secret U.S. Missile Aims to Kill Only Terrorists, Not
Nearby Civilians.” Wall Street Journal, May 9, 2019. https://www.wsj.com/articles/secret-u-s-
missile-aims-to-kill-only-terrorists-not-nearby-civilians-11557403411.

Stuart, Mark, David Angrave, Andy Charlwood, et al. 2016. “HR and Analytics: Why HR Is Set to
Fail the Big Data Challenge.” Human Resource Management Journal 26, no. 1 (2016): 1–11.
Sull, Donald, and Kathleen M. Eisenhardt. 2012. “Simple Rules for a Complex World.” Harvard
Business Review 90, no. 9 (September): 68–75. https://hbr.org/2012/09/simple-rules-for-a-complex-
world.
Sull, Donald, and Kathleen M. Eisenhardt. 2016. Simple Rules: How to Thrive in a Complex World.
Boston: Mariner.
Sullivan, Margaret. 2014. “Is There Any Escape from ‘Recommended for You’?” Public Editor’s
Journal 
(blog), 
New 
York 
Times, 
February 
21, 
2014.
https://publiceditor.blogs.nytimes.com/2014/02/21/is-there-any-escape-from-recommended-for-you.
Sverdlik, Yevgeniy. 2017. “The New York Times to Replace Data Centers with Google Cloud, AWS.”
Data 
Center 
Knowledge, 
April 
18, 
2017.
https://www.datacenterknowledge.com/archives/2017/04/18/the-new-york-times-to-replace-data-
centers-with-google-cloud-aws.
Svingen, B⊘rge. 2017. “Publishing with Apache Kafka at The New York Times.” NYT Open (blog),
Medium, September 6, 2017. https://open.nytimes.com/publishing-with-apache-kafka-at-the-new-
york-times-7f0e3b7d2077.
Swisher, Kara. 2021. “Another Big Step Toward Digitizing Our Lives.” New York Times, March 19,
2021. https://www.nytimes.com/2021/03/19/opinion/NFTs-beeple-crypto.html.
Taibi, Cindy, and Brian Hamman. 2019. “New York Times Fireside Chat: The Changing Role of IT.”
Interview by Larry Dignan. Published July 30, 2019. YouTube. https://youtu.be/L3sfA2q9wiA.
Tameez, Hannaa’. 2021. “The New York Times’ New Slack App Aims to Deliver (Non-Depressing)
Times Stories to You While You Work.” Nieman Lab (blog), February 18, 2021.
https://www.niemanlab.org/2021/02/the-new-york-times-new-slack-app-aims-to-deliver-non-
depressing-times-stories-to-you-while-you-work.
Tarnoff, Ben, and Moira Weigel. 2018. “Why Silicon Valley Can’t Fix Itself.” Guardian, May 3, 2018.
https://www.theguardian.com/news/2018/may/03/why-silicon-valley-cant-fix-itself-tech-humanism.
Tarsney, Catherine. 2021. “Knock, Knock.” DNC Tech Team (blog), Medium, January 28, 2021.
https://medium.com/democratictech/knock-knock-5cfbe84c3b25.
Teachout, Zephyr, and Thomas Streeter. 2007. Mousepads, Shoe Leather, and Hope: Lessons from the
Howard Dean Campaign for the Future of Internet Politics. Boulder, CO: Routledge.
Teach to One. 2020a. “How ‘Teach to One’ Personalizes Math Learning.” Medium (blog), May 16,
2020. https://teachtoone.medium.com/how-teach-to-one-personalizes-math-learning-a8d7a0a8c977.
Teach to One. 2020b. “New Orleans Educators Share How Teach to One Helps Save Students from
the Iceberg Problem.” Medium (blog), June 22, 2020. https://teachtoone.medium.com/new-orleans-
educators-share-how-teach-to-one-helps-save-students-from-the-iceberg-problem-450cc0c6cbb6.
Teach to One. 2020c. “NWEA’s MAP Growth and New Classrooms’ Teach to One Roadmaps Launch
New Partnership.” PR Newswire, October 19, 2020. https://www.prnewswire.com/news-
releases/nweas-map-growth-and-new-classrooms-teach-to-one-roadmaps-launch-new-partnership-
301155010.html.
Teach to One. 2020d. “Star Charts, Students, and Staying Connected at Sacajawea Middle School with
Teach to One: Math.” Medium (blog), June 22, 2021. https://teachtoone.medium.com/star-charts-
students-and-staying-connected-at-sacajawea-middle-school-with-teach-to-one-math-
9cba2e595974.
Teach to One. 2020e. “Teach to One Addresses Educational Gaps with a Personalized Learning
Experience.” Medium (blog), May 18, 2020. https://teachtoone.medium.com/teach-to-one-
addresses-educational-gaps-with-a-personalized-learning-experience-5b349ab6c624.

Teach to One. 2020f. “Teach to One’s Advanced Math Algorithms Map Personalized Learning Routes
for All Students.” Medium (blog), October 24, 2020. https://teachtoone.medium.com/teach-to-ones-
advanced-math-algorithms-map-personalized-learning-routes-for-all-students-827641045ca.
Tech for Campaigns. “2020 Political Texting Report” n.d. Accessed November 29, 2021.
https://www.techforcampaigns.org/impact/2020-texting-analysis.
Tegelberg, Erland. 2018. “Effective Asset Management and Exciting New Big Data Sources.”
Presentation at the Big Data in Railway Maintenance Planning Conference, University of Delaware,
December 2018.
Telenko, Trent (@TrentTelenko). 2022. “If You Want to Understand Why Russian Missiles Are Not
Always Able to Kill Ukrainian Drones, This Map Is a Very Good Start in Understanding Why. If
Your Radio Energy Direction Finding Gear Locates an Enemy Radar Accurately. Good Digital
Terrain 
Maps 
Can 
Predict 
Where 
1/.” 
Twitter.
https://twitter.com/TrentTelenko/status/1507837884266856449.
Tetlock, Philip E., and Dan Gardner. 2016. Superforecasting: The Art and Science of Prediction. New
York: Crown.
Thaler, Richard H. 1980. “Toward a Positive Theory of Consumer Choice.” Journal of Economic
Behavior and Organization 1 (1980): 39–60.
Thaler, Richard H., and Cass Sunstein. 2009. Nudge: Improving Decisions About Health, Wealth, and
Happiness. New York: Penguin.
Thomas, Nellwyn. 2020. “One Year as DNC CTO.” DNC Tech Team (blog), Medium, June 11, 2020.
https://medium.com/democratictech/one-year-as-dnc-cto-76fa813b7836.
Thomas, Nellwyn. 2021a. “Breaking the Boom & Bust Cycle: What Made the Difference in DNC.”
DNC Tech Team (blog), Medium, January 25, 2021. https://medium.com/democratictech/breaking-
the-boom-and-bust-cycle-955643e48949.
Thomas, Nellwyn. 2022. “We’re Bringing Advanced Data Infrastructure to Thousands of Midterm
Campaigns.” DNC Tech Team (blog). March 23, 2022. https://medium.com/democratictech/were-
bringing-advanced-data-infrastructure-to-thousands-of-midterm-campaigns-2bfb32f400bc.
Thomas, Nellwyn. 2021b. Interviews by Zachary Tumin and Madeleine Want.
Thomas, Owen. 2010. “Ex-Googler Douglas Merrill Takes on Payday Lenders with ZestCash.”
VentureBeat (blog), October 12, 2010. https://venturebeat.com/2010/10/12/douglas-merrill-
zestcash.
Thomas, Rachel. 2022. “7 Great Lightning Talks Related to Data Science Ethics.” Fast.AI, March 14,
2022. https://www.fast.ai/2022/03/14/ADSN-ethics/.
Thomke, Stefan, and Jim Manzi. 2014. “The Discipline of Business Experimentation.” Harvard
Business 
Review, 
December 
10, 
2014. 
https://hbr.org/2014/12/the-discipline-of-business-
experimentation.
Thompson, Timothy. 2018. “Utilizing Artificial Intelligence on ERP Data to Increase Rolling Stock
Maintenance Efficiency.” Presentation at the Big Data in Railway Maintenance Planning
Conference, University of Delaware, December 2018.
Tiersky, Howard. 2017. “The New York Times Is Winning at Digital.” CIO Magazine, June 8, 2017.
https://www.cio.com/article/3199604/the-new-york-times-is-winning-at-digital.html.
Timberg, Craig, Drew Harwell, and Spencer S. Hsu. 2021. “Police Let Most Capitol Rioters Walk
Away. But Cellphone Data and Videos Could Now Lead to More Arrests.” Washington Post,
January 8, 2021. https://www.washingtonpost.com/technology/2021/01/08/trump-mob-tech-arrests.
TNTP and Zearn. 2021. Accelerate, Don’t Remediate: New Evidence from Elementary Math
Classrooms. May 23, 2021. New York: TNTP. https://tntp.org/publications/view/teacher-training-
and-classroom-practice/accelerate-dont-remediate.

Togerson, Derek. 2022. “Exploring NFL Analytics: The Brandon Staley Conundrum.” NBC 7 San
Diego (blog), January 24, 2022. https://www.nbcsandiego.com/news/local/exploring-nfl-analytics-
the-brandon-staley-conundrum/2847169/.
Toor, Amar. 2016. “This Startup Is Using Drones to Deliver Medicine in Rwanda.” Verge, April 5,
2016. 
https://www.theverge.com/2016/4/5/11367274/zipline-drone-delivery-rwanda-medicine-
blood.
Topol, Eric. 2019a. Deep Medicine: How Artificial Intelligence Can Make Healthcare Human Again.
Illustrated ed. New York: Basic Books.
Topol, Eric J. 2019b. “High-Performance Medicine: The Convergence of Human and Artificial
Intelligence.” Nature Medicine 25, no. 1 (2019): 44–56. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41591-018-0300–
7.
Topol, Eric. 2020. “The Future of Clinical Machine Intelligence: A Multi-Disciplinary Discussion.”
Presentation at the Stanford AIMI Symposium, Stanford University, August 5, 2020.
https://aimi.stanford.edu/news-events/aimi-symposium/2020-symposium/agenda.
Tracy, Marc. 2020. “The New York Times Tops 6 Million Subscribers as Ad Revenue Plummets.” New
York Times, May 6, 2020. https://www.nytimes.com/2020/05/06/business/media/new-york-times-
earnings-subscriptions-coronavirus.html.
Trautman, Erik. 2018. “The Virtuous Cycle of AI Products.” Erik Trautman, June 12, 2018.
https://www.eriktrautman.com/posts/the-virtuous-cycle-of-ai-products.
Tse, Kane. 2017. “Direct Versus Programmatic Sales: Which Is Better For Your Website?”
WIRED_MESH (blog), January 30, 2017. https://medium.com/wired-mesh/direct-vs-programmatic-
sales-which-is-better-for-your-website-9fda0ea3a65a.
Tufekci, Zeynep. 2014. “Engineering the Public: Big Data, Surveillance and Computational Politics.”
First Monday 19, no. 7 (July 2014). https://doi.org/10.5210/fm.v19i7.4901.
Tumin, Zachary, and Tad Oelstrom. 2008. “Unmanned and Robotic Warfare: Issues, Options, and
Futures.” Unpublished manuscript. Summary from the Harvard Executive Session of June 2008.
Harvard University, John F. Kennedy School of Government.
Tushman, Michael L., Wendy K. Smith, and Andy Binns. 2011. “The Ambidextrous CEO.” Harvard
Business Review, June 1, 2011. https://hbr.org/2011/06/the-ambidextrous-ceo.
Tzachor, Asaf, Jess Whittlestone, Lalitha Sundaram, and Seán Ó hÉigeartaigh. 2020. “Artificial
Intelligence in a Crisis Needs Ethics with Urgency.” Nature Machine Intelligence 2 (June 2020): 1–
2. https://doi.org/10.1038/s42256-020-0195–0.
Useem, Michael, Prasad Setty, Sean Waldheim, et al. 2015. “Panel Discussion: The Biggest Mistakes
I’ve Made in People Analytics.” Presentation at the Wharton People Analytics Conference in
Philadelphia. Published December 13, 2015. YouTube. https://www.youtube.com/watch?
v=B0LtjlhveCw.
van Elsland, Sabine L., and Deborah Evanson. 2020. “Identifying Clusters Central to South Korea’s
COVID-19 
Response.” 
Imperial 
College 
London 
News, 
May 
29, 
2020.
https://www.imperial.ac.uk/news/197837/identifying-clusters-central-south-koreas-covid-19.
Velsey, Kim. 2021. “Why Did So Many Homeowners Sell to Zillow This Summer? Because It
Overpaid.” Curbed, November 4, 2021. https://www.curbed.com/2021/11/zillows-i-buying-
algorithm-house-flipping.html.
Vlastelica, John. 2021. “Diversity Recruiting Efforts Won’t Significantly Improve Until We Address
These 
2 
Barriers.” 
LinkedIn 
Talent 
Blog 
(blog), 
January 
12, 
2021.
https://www.linkedin.com/business/talent/blog/talent-acquisition/remove-these-barriers-to-improve-
diversity-recruiting.

Waddell, Kaveh. 2018. “Today’s Best Artificial Intelligence Advancements Are One-Trick Ponies.”
Axios, October 17, 2018. https://www.axios.com/2018/10/17/narrow-ai-small-data.
Wadlow, Tom, and James Pepper. 2018. “Technology and the 2017–2021 Business Plan.” Mexico
City: PEMEX. https://issuu.com/businessreviewasia/docs/bro-pemex?e=26716553/60843559.
Wageman, Ruth. 1997. “Critical Success Factors for Creating Superb Self-Managing Teams.”
Organizational Dynamics 26, no. 1 (1997). https://doi.org/10.1016/S0090-2616(97)90027-9.
Walder, Seth. 2021. “Which NFL Teams Are Most, Least Analytics-Advanced? We Surveyed 22 Team
Staffers.” ESPN.com, October 6, 2021. https://www.espn.com/nfl/story/_/id/32338821/2021-nfl-
analytics-survey-most-least-analytically-inclined-teams-future-gm-candidates-more.
Wall Street Journal. 2012. “The Daily Start-Up: ZestCash Nabs $73M To Disrupt Payday Loans.”
January 19, 2012. https://www.wsj.com/articles/BL-VCDB-11816.
Wang, Yuan, Ping Wang, Xin Wang, and Xiang Liu. 2018. “Position Synchronization for Track
Geometry Inspection Data via Big-Data Fusion and Incremental Learning.” Transportation
Research 
Part 
C: 
Emerging 
Technologies 
93 
(August 
2018): 
544–565.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.trc.2018.06.018.
Want, Madeleine. 2020–2021. Interviews by Zachary Tumin.
Warzel, Charlie, and Stuart A. Thompson. 2021. “They Stormed the Capitol. Their Apps Tracked
Them.” New York Times, February 5, 2021. https://www.nytimes.com/2021/02/05/opinion/capitol-
attack-cellphone-data.html.
Waters, Richard. 2018. “Why We Are in Danger of Overestimating AI.” Financial Times, February 4,
2018. https://www.ft.com/content/4367e34e-db72-11e7-9504-59efdb70e12f.
Watson, Ivan, Sophie Jeong, Julia Hollingsworth, and Tom Booth. 2020. “How This South Korean
Company Created Coronavirus Test Kits in Three Weeks.” CNN, March 13, 2020.
https://www.cnn.com/2020/03/12/asia/coronavirus-south-korea-testing-intl-hnk/index.html.
Webber, Jude. 2017. “PEMEX Chases Fuel Thieves with Big Data.” May 24, 2017.
https://www.ft.com/content/8d830426-3f01-11e7-9d56-25f963e998b2.
Weekman, Kelsey. 2020. “Grubhub Was Getting 6,000 Orders A Minute During Its Promo Today That
Left Restaurant Workers Stressed and Customers Hangry.” BuzzFeed News. May 17, 2020.
https://www.buzzfeednews.com/article/kelseyweekman/grubhub-free-lunch-nyc-promo-chaos.
Weichselbaum, Simone. 2016. “The End of the Bratton Era.” Marshall Project, August 2, 2016.
https://www.themarshallproject.org/2016/08/02/the-end-of-the-bratton-era.
Weick, Karl E., Kathleen M. Sutcliffe, and David Obstfeld. 1999. “Organizing for High Reliability:
Processes of Collective Mindfulness.” In Research in Organizational Behavior, vol. 21, ed. R. I.
Sutton and B. M. Staw, 81–123. Cambridge, MA: Elsevier Science.
Weintraub, Joshua. 2021. Interviews by Zachary Tumin.
Weisburd, David, Stephen D. Mastrofski, Rosann Greenspan, and James J. Willis. 2004. The Growth
of 
CompStat 
in 
American 
Policing. 
Washington, 
DC: 
Police 
Foundation 
Reports.
https://www.policefoundation.org/wp-content/uploads/2015/06/Weisburd-et-al.-2004-The-Growth-
of-Compstat-in-American-Policing-Police-Foundation-Report_0.pdf.
Weiss, Mitchell. 2017. “Public Entrepreneurship.” Harvard Business School Course Overview Note
818–006, July 2017. Revised July 2021.
Weiss, Mitchell. 2021. We the Possibility: Harnessing Public Entrepreneurship to Solve Our Most
Urgent Problems. Boston: Harvard Business Review Press.
Weiss, Mitchell, and Benjamin Henkes. 2019. “An (Abbreviated) Perspective on Entrepreneurship.”
Harvard Business School Background Note 820–083, December 2019.

Weiss, Mitchell B., and Sarah Mehta. 2020. “TraceTogether.” Harvard Business School Case 820–111,
June 29, 2020. Revised July 2020. https://www.hbs.edu/faculty/Pages/item.aspx?num=58357.
Whittaker, James, Jason Arbon, and Jeff Carollo. 2012. How Google Tests Software. Upper Saddle
River, NJ: Addison-Wesley Professional.
Whittle, Richard. 2015. Predator: The Secret Origins of the Drone Revolution. New York: Picador.
Whittle, Richard. 2018. “Predator Started Drone Revolution, and Made Military Innovation Cool.”
Breaking 
Defense, 
March 
9, 
2018.
https://breakingdefense.sites.breakingmedia.com/2018/03/predator-started-drone-revolution-and-
made-military-innovation-cool.
Wiggins, Chris. 2015. “Keynote: Data Science at The New York Times.” Presentation at the 2015 SciPy
Conference, 
Austin, 
TX, 
July 
2015. 
Published 
July 
9, 
2015. 
YouTube.
https://youtu.be/MNosMXFGtBE.
Wiggins, Chris. 2019. “Data Science at The New York Times.” Presentation at the Rev 2 Data Science
Leaders’ 
Summit, 
New 
York, 
May 
2019. 
Published 
July 
9, 
2019. 
Video.
https://blog.dominodatalab.com/data-science-at-the-new-york-times.
Wiggins, Chris, and Anne Bauer. 2020. “Data Science at The New York Times: A Mission-Driven
Approach to Personalizing the Customer Journey.” Presentation at the 2019 PyData Conference,
New York, November 2019. Published January 2, 2020. YouTube. https://youtu.be/n07q-rZTLTw.
Wikipedia. “Douglas Merrill.” Last modified October 24, 2020. https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?
title=Douglas_Merrill&oldid=985137850.
Willens, Max. 2017. “The New York Times Now Has 13 Million Subscriptions to 50 Email
Newsletters.” Digiday (blog), May 30, 2017. https://digiday.com/media/new-york-times-now-13-
million-subscribers-50-email-newsletters.
Willens, Max. 2018a. “From Hard Paywalls to Meters to Dynamic Paywalls: Why New York Media Is
Taking a Flexible Approach to Subscriptions.” Digiday (blog), November 13, 2018.
https://digiday.com/media/new-york-media-paywall-subscriptions-flexible.
Willens, Max. 2018b. “How The New York Times Is Using Interactive Tools to Build Loyalty (and
Ultimately Subscriptions).” Digiday (blog), January 24, 2018. https://digiday.com/media/new-york-
times-enlisting-interactive-news-desk-subscription-drive.
Williams, Joe. 2021. “Andrew Ng Thinks Your Company Is Doing AI Wrong.” Protocol, May 18,
2021. https://www.protocol.com/enterprise/andrew-ng-ai-strategy.
Williams, Josh, and Tiff Fehr. 2021. “Tracking COVID-19 from Hundreds of Sources, One Extracted
Record at a Time.” NYT Open (blog), Medium, June 17, 2021. https://open.nytimes.com/tracking-
covid-19-from-hundreds-of-sources-one-extracted-record-at-a-time-dd8cbd31f9b4.
Williams, Trefor P., and John F. Betak. 2018. “Using Text and Data Analytics to Study Railroad
Operations.” Presentation at the Big Data in Railway Maintenance Planning Conference, University
of Delaware, December 2018.
Wise, Dean. 2021. Interviews by Zachary Tumin.
Witt, Stephen. 2022. “The Turkish Drone That Changed the Nature of Warfare.” The New Yorker, May
9, 
2022. 
https://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2022/05/16/the-turkish-drone-that-changed-the-
nature-of-warfare.
Woo, Stu. 2017. “What’s Better in the Classroom—Teacher or Machine?” Wall Street Journal, January
30, 
2017. 
https://www.wsj.com/articles/whats-better-in-the-classroomteacher-or-machine-
1485772201.
Wood, Daniel B. 2007. “William Bratton: Lauded Chief of Troubled LAPD.” Christian Science
Monitor, July 6, 2007. https://www.csmonitor.com/2007/0706/p01s05-usju.html.

Woods, Dan. 2021. “Artificial Intelligence on the Biden Campaign.” Medium (blog), February 4,
2021. https://danveloper.medium.com/artificial-intelligence-on-the-biden-campaign-e704a656d956.
Woods, Tim. 2016. “8 Principles of the Innovator’s Solution.” Hype (blog), April 10, 2016.
https://blog.hypeinnovation.com/8-principles-of-the-innovators-solution.
Worldometers.info. 2022. “Coronavirus Death Toll and Trends.” Worldometers, May 11, 2022.
https://www.worldometers.info/coronavirus/coronavirus-death-toll/.
Wornhoff, Nina. 2021. Interviews by Zachary Tumin and Madeleine Want.
Wortman, Joan Pearson Heck. 2019. “Record Linkage Methods with Applications to Causal Inference
and 
Election 
Voting 
Data.” 
PhD 
diss., 
Duke 
University, 
2019.
https://dukespace.lib.duke.edu/dspace/handle/10161/18657.
Wortman, Joan Pearson Heck, and Jerome P. Reiter. 2018. “Simultaneous Record Linkage and Causal
Inference with Propensity Score Subclassification.” Statistics in Medicine 37, no. 24 (2018)): 3533–
3546. https://doi.org/10.1002/sim.7911.
Wurster, Thomas S., Derek Kennedy, and Jason Zajac. 2015. “Insight to Outcome: A Note on Strategy
Development and Implementation.” Stanford Graduate School of Business Case SM238, 2015.
Xu, P., Q. Sun, R. Liu, and F. Wang. 2011. “A Short-Range Prediction Model for Track Quality
Index.” Proceedings of the Institution of Mechanical Engineers, Part F: Journal of Rail and Rapid
Transit 225, no. 3 (2–11): 277–285. https://doi.org/10.1177/2041301710392477.
Yale Institution for Social and Policy Studies. n.d. “Lessons from GOTV Experiments.” Field
Experiments Initiative. Accessed November 23, 2021. https://isps.yale.edu/node/16698.
Yampolskiy, Roman. n.d. “Artificial Intelligence Incident Database (for Incident Number 43 (Incident
Date 1998-03-05).” Partnership on AI. Accessed October 24, 2021. incidentdatabase.ai/cite/43.
Yee, Kate Madden. 2019. “AI May Help Women with Ductal Hyperplasia Avoid Surgery.”
AuntMinnie.com, 
March 
15, 
2019. 
https://www.auntminnie.com/index.aspx?
sec=sup&sub=aic&pag=dis&ItemID=124904.
Yee, Kate Madden. 2021. “Deep Learning: A New Frontier for Musculoskeletal MRI.”
AuntMinnie.com, 
September 
6, 
2021. 
https://www.auntminnie.com/index.aspx?
sec=sup&sub=aic&pag=dis&ItemID=133396.
Yemen, Gerry, and Martin N. Davidson. 2009. “Diversity at JPMorgan Chase: Right Is Good Enough
for Me (A) and (B).” Darden Business Publishing, Teaching Note UVA-OB-0975TN.
Yew, Lauren. 2021. “4 Steps to Win Advocates and Implement a Technical Change.” NYT Open
(blog), Medium, May 13, 2021. https://open.nytimes.com/4-steps-to-win-advocates-and-implement-
a-technical-change-b2a9b922559b.
Yin, Jiateng, and Wentian Zhao. 2016. “Fault Diagnosis Network Design for Vehicle On-Board
Equipments of High-Speed Railway: A Deep Learning Approach.” Engineering Applications of
Artificial 
Intelligence 
56 
(November 
2016): 
250–259.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.engappai.2016.10.002.
Young, Michael, and Anne Bauer. 2021. Interview by Zachary Tumin and Madeleine Want.
Yu, Allen. 2019. “How Netflix Uses AI and Machine Learning.” Becoming Human (blog), Medium,
February 
27, 
2019. 
https://becominghuman.ai/how-netflix-uses-ai-and-machine-learning-
a087614630fe.
Zarembski, Allan M. 2014. “Some Examples of Big Data in Railroad Engineering.” 2014 IEEE
International 
Conference 
on 
Big 
Data 
(Big 
Data) 
(2014): 
96–102.
doi:10.1109/BigData.2014.7004437.
Zarembski, Allan M. 2019. “Big Data Drives Big Results.” Railway Age, February 11, 2019.
https://www.railwayage.com/news/big-data-drives-big-results.

Zarembski, Allan M., Daniel Einbinder, and Nii Attoh-Okine. 2016. “Using Multiple Adaptive
Regression to Address the Impact of Track Geometry on Development of Rail Defects.”
Construction 
and 
Building 
Materials 
127 
(November 
2016): 
546–555.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.conbuildmat.2016.10.012.
Zax, David. 2012. “Fast Talk: How a Former Google Exec Plans to Transform Loans.” Fast Company,
February 2, 2012. https://www.fastcompany.com/1813256/fast-talk-how-former-google-exec-plans-
transform-loans.
Zhou, Chenyi, Liang Gao, Hong Xiao, and Bowen Hou. 2020. “Railway Wheel Flat Recognition and
Precise Positioning Method Based on Multisensor Arrays.” Applied Sciences 10, no. 4 (2020):
1297. https://doi.org/10.3390/app10041297.
Zinkevich, Martin. 2021. “Rules of Machine Learning.” Google Developers, Last modified September
27, 2021. https://developers.google.com/machine-learning/guides/rules-of-ml.
Zipline. n.d. “How It Works.” Accessed December 16, 2020. https://flyzipline.com/how-it-works.
Zipline. 2021a. Protecting Ghana’s Election: Instant Agility with Zipline’s Autonomous Delivery
Network. 
February 
2021.
https://assets.ctfassets.net/pbn2i2zbvp41/3yrQaMNdJ1u1J2aSEucjzt/4412ea5d12896d15b7eb41a22
12d0295/Zipline_Ghana_PPE_Global_Healthcare_Feb-2021.pdf.
Zipline. 2021b “Walmart Teams with Zipline to Launch Autonomous Aircraft Delivery Service in
Northwest 
Arkansas.” 
GlobeNewswire, 
November 
18, 
2021.
https://www.globenewswire.com/news-release/2021/11/18/2337193/0/en/Walmart-Teams-with-
Zipline-to-Launch-Autonomous-Aircraft-Delivery-Service-in-Northwest-Arkansas.html.
Zipline. 2021c. “Zipline Celebrates Five Years in Flight.” Flyzipline.com. Last modified October 28,
2021. https://flyzipline.com/press/zipline-celebrates-five-years-in-flight.

INDEX
Page numbers refer to the print edition but are hyperlinked to the appropriate location in the e-
book.
A/B testing, 53; Gallo on, 58–59
Aggressiveness Index, 17–18
agriculture. See precision agriculture
AI. See artificial intelligence
Airbnb, 18
algorithms: bias in, 177; natural language processing, 34; O’Neil on, 175; performance of, 182
Alibaba, 18
AlphaZero, 41
Amazon, 6, 34, 85, 95, 135, 164–165, 168
Amazon Web Services, 15, 59, 75
Andreessen, Marc, 18
Anemone, Louis, 149
Aničić, Đorđe, 123
anomaly detection, 31–32
Apple, 6, 104, 178
Apple Card, 178
apps, 23; for contact tracing, 116
Arak, Josh, 76–77, 85–86, 89, 106, 141
artificial intelligence (AI), 1, 148; AI Chasm problem, 184; bias in, 173; for entity recognition, 37–38;
Field on, 173; flywheel effect of, 25; in precision systems, 22–23, 37; regulation of, 191; virtuous
cycle of, 25. See also algorithms
Athletic, The, 14, 18
Audible, 34, 85
audiences, 33
authority, 121
Axel Springer, 90, 212; programmatic advertising at, 94–97
Axiz, 33
Baidu, 6
Baltimore Ravens, 1
Banks, Philip, 151
Barksdale, Jim, 58
Barnard College, 1–2

baseball, 32
basing risk, 125
Bay, Jason, 115–120, 121, 129–131, 190, 215
Begert, William, 124
Belichick, Bill, 17
Bernal Mendoza, Jorge, 61–65, 188
bias, 105, 221–222; in AI, 173; in algorithms, 177; British Medical Journal on, 43–44; in data, 61; in
facial recognition, 44; in machine learning, 44; optimism, 61; in precision systems, 43; red zones,
174–178
Biden, Joe, 19, 78, 133, 147
Biden-Harris campaign, 147, 216–217; team management in, 133–140
big data, defining, 5–6
Big Safari, 123, 124–125
bin Laden, Osama, 122, 124, 128
Bishop, Greg, 16
Blue River, 45–47, 50, 51–52, 106, 207; John Deere purchase of, 48; precision agriculture and, 46–49;
proof of concept for, 54
Bluetooth, 116, 117
BNSF Railways, 19, 37, 156–163, 183, 220; data at, 160–161; enterprise-level precision at, 165–169;
failure investigations, 161–162; history of, 157; human operators at, 160–161; KPIs at, 163;
maintenance regimens, 160–161; operations research team at, 162–163; precision systems at, 156–
163; rail replacement, 158–159
bone-age assessment, 67–71, 210
bootstrapping precision, 214–216; bureaucratic compass in, 120–122; in COVID-19 response, 115–
120; cross-boundary nature of, 130; drones and, 122–126; lessons for leaders, 129–131; networks
in, 130; strategic triangle in, 120–122
born-digitals, 6, 95, 165
Bradley, Bill, 134
Bradshaw, Terry, 17
Bratton, Bill, 26, 148, 218–219
Brickman, Jim, 53
British Medical Journal, on bias, 43–44
budget risk, 125
Buolamwini, Joy, 44
bureaucratic compass, 102; in bootstrapping precision, 120–122; defining, 120
burglary, 30–31
Burlington Northern Santa Fe. See BNSF Railways.
Bush, George W., 125
Buttigieg, Pete, 133
Cadiz, 4–5
CAIDM. See Center for Artificial Intelligence in Diagnostic Medicine
Caldbeck, Ryan, 35
California’s Consumer Privacy Act (CCPA), 81, 180
Cancer Genome Atlas, 68–69
captchas, 37
Carr, Kareem, 84
CCPA. See California’s Consumer Privacy Act

Center for Artificial Intelligence in Diagnostic Medicine (CAIDM), 36
Central Intelligence Agency (CIA), 122
challenger model, 59
Chambers, John, 91–92
champion model, 59
Chang, Peter, 36, 70, 71
change, conflict and, 198
change vanguard, 87
Children’s Hospital of Pittsburgh, 172–173
Children’s Online Privacy Protection Act (COPPA), 180
China, 3–4
Cholas-Wood, Alex, 26–29, 58, 88
Christensen, Clayton, 104, 201
Chun, Jong-Yoon, 3–4
CIA. See Central Intelligence Agency
CircleUp, 35
Cisco Systems, 90–94, 98–99, 212
Clark, James G., 123
Clark, Kim B., 105
Clarke, Richard, 124
Clinton, Bill, 122
Clinton, Hillary, 134
cluster analysis, 32–33
Coca Cola, 156
Coiera, Enrico, 182
collaborative filtering, 34
Collins, Jim, 25, 95
combat simulation, 41
competitive sports, entity recognition in, 38
Compstat, 25, 28, 149, 150, 151–152
computerized physician order entry (CPOE), 172
Conde Nast, 75
consistency, in contact tracing, 117
contact tracing, 215; apps for, 116; consistency in, 117; multiplicity in, 117; precision in, 117; privacy
in, 117; in Singapore, 115–120
contrarian signals, 11
COPPA. See Children’s Online Privacy Protection Act
corporate entrepreneurs, 107
corporate strategy, 97, 106
corruption, of data, 67
counterfactual evaluation, 177
counterterrorism, 38
Coutts, Russell, 4
COVID-19, 3–4, 70, 113, 129, 190; bootstrapping precision in, 115–120; CAIDM on, 36–37; in
Ghana, 9; predicting values and, 36–37; vaccination, 174–175, 176–177
Cowgill, Bo, 61, 177
CPOE. See computerized physician order entry

credit scores, 10–11; machine learning and, 177–178
crime, 2–3; patterns of, 26–27, 149–150
Criss, Clarice, 133, 136
cryptography, 181
cyberattacks, 114
Cyber Monday, 35
Dallas Cowboys, 1, 17
data, 208–211; analysis platforms, 81–83; assessment of, 209; bias in, 61; at BNSF, 160–161;
collection for precision systems, 52–53; corruption of, 67; due diligence, 71–72; governance, 80–
81; instrumentation of, 66; for maintenance regimens, 160–161; platforms and, 72–74; profiling,
72; science platforms, 81–83; storage of, 66–67; storage platforms, 80–81; tools for management
of, 211; usage policies, 181; visualization platforms, 83–84
Data Protection Authorities (DPAs), 180
data quality: diagnosis of problems with, 65–67, 209–210; Krasadakis on, 60–61
Davenport, Thomas H., 5, 23
Dean, Howard, 134
de Blasio, Bill, 150
debt: decision, 187; education, 108, 113; mismanaged, 187–189, 223; organizational, 187–188;
technical, 187–188
decision debt, 187
DeepLearningAi, 186
Deep Medicine (Topol), 38
Defense Science and Technology Agency, 119
delivery systems, reconfiguration of, 198
Dell, 104
Delport, Jenna, 34
Democratic National Committee (DNC), 78–79, 88, 116, 133, 189
developers’ curse, 168
Dewan, Pooja, 163
digital experimentation, 58
digital natives, 6, 95, 165
diligence, 11
Dillard, Sarah, 57
DNC. See Democratic National Committee
Doerr, John, 51
DPAs. See Data Protection Authorities
drones, 7–8, 215–216; Predator, 122–126. See also precision drones
dynamic pricing, 36
education debt, 108, 113
Eisenmann, Thomas, 57, 73
endowed, 106, 111
engagement, breadth and depth of, 141
enterprise-level precision, 196–197, 218–221; at BNSF, 165–169; leadership and, 170–171; lessons
for, 169–170; at New York Times, 165–169
enterprise resource management (ERP), 80
entity recognition, 205; AI for, 37–38; in competitive sports, 38; precision systems for, 37–38

entrepreneurship, hypothesis-driven, 57
Equinox, 39
ERP. See enterprise resource management
ESPN.com, 13–14
ESRI, 39
European Union, 40
Evans, Benedict, 18
Evans, Laura, 165, 182; on human responsibility, 183–184; on ML, 166; on personalization, 169
Facebook, 6, 32; misinformation on, 176
facial recognition, 38; bias in, 44. See also entity recognition
Fanatics Gaming and Betting, 96
FDA. See Food and Drug Administration
feature data, 39
Federal Trade Commission (FTC), 180
Fehr, Tina, 143
Ferraris, 43
FICO, 10–11
Field, Hayden, on AI, 173
Fischer, Ben, 15
Fisher, Ronald, 58–59
flywheel effect, 25, 95, 135
FooballOutsiders.com, 17–18
Food and Drug Administration (FDA), 70, 190
Fox, Liam, 14
Fox News, 139
Franks, Tommy, 125
FTC. See Federal Trade Commission
Gallo, Amy, on A/B testing, 58–59
game theory, 41
Garrett, Jason, 1, 17
GDPR. See General Data Protection Regulation
GE. See General Electric
Gebru, Timnit, 44
Gee Kee, Melissa, 219–220; HR transformed by, 154–156
GE Global Researchers, 6
General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR), 81, 180
General Electric (GE), 156
geotracking, 205–206; precision systems for, 39–40
Gettleman, David, 17
Ghana, 8; COVID-19 in, 9
Giuliani, Rudy, 149
global positioning systems (GPS), 8–9, 23, 39–40, 45, 123
Gmail, 61
goals, redefining, 197–198
go-for-it plays, 14

Gonzàlez Anaya, Jose Antonio, 61–62
Goodwin, Tom, 18
Google, 6, 34
Google AI, 41
Google Brain, 6, 184
Google Cloud, 75, 141, 145
Google Earth, 39
Goswami, Debjani, 54
Gourville, John, 168
governance, 222; red zones, 178–181
GovTech, 118
GPS. See global positioning systems
GPT-3, 6
Grand Larceny, 30–31
Green, Eric, 68
Greulich, William, 68
Grimes, Bill, 123
Grove, Andy, 105
Ha, Richard, 71
hacks, 120
Hamman, Bruce, 164
Harbaugh, John, 1, 13–14, 15, 18, 59
Harvard Business Review, 23, 58
Health and Safety Committee, NFL, 16–17
Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA), 180
Heineken, 35
Heliograf, 34
Henderson, Rebecca, 105
Hendon, Christine, 71
Heraud, Jorge, 46, 49, 51, 88
herbicide, 46–47
Higher Ground Labs, 137–138
HIPAA. See Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act
HireView, 155, 179
Holder, Stephen, 18
HR. See human resources
huachicol, 62
huachicoleros, 62
human resources (HR): Kee transforming, 154–156; precision systems, 154–156
iBuying, 182–183
Ideascale, 153
di Ieva, Antonio, 71
Iliakopoulou, Katerina, 75
ImageNet, 6
impact measurement, 223; red zones, 189–192

impression opportunities, 35
Indianapolis Colts, 17
information technology (IT), 104
innovation: in political management, 112; for precision, 194
Innovators Dilemma, The (Christensen), 201
Instacart, 35
instrumentation, of data, 66
Intel, 105
investments, in platforms, 84–86
IT. See information technology
Jackson, Lamar, 14, 15, 18
January 6 U.S. Capitol insurrection, 40
JetBlue Airways, 36
John Deere, 24, 45–46, 51, 207; Blue River purchased by, 48; precision agriculture and, 46–49
Johnson, Keyshawn, 88
Journalism that Stands Apart, 164
Jumper, John, 123–126, 129–131
Just So Stories, 35
Kahn, Joe, 169
Kahneman, Daniel, 104–105
Kanter, Rosabeth, 5, 100, 107, 120
Kapadia, Sheil, 14
Kaplan, Robert, 102, 112
KCDA. See Korea’s Disease Control and Prevention Agency
Keane, Pearse, 191
Kek, Joel, 118
Kelling, George L., 149
Kelman, Steven, 87
Kerry, John, 134
Ketchman, Said, 141
key performance indicators (KPIs), 170; at BNSF, 163; at New York Times, 141; resetting, 196–197
Kigali, 8
Kohavi, Ron, 58
Kok, Ping Soon, 118
Koppel, Daniel, 48
Korea, 3–4
Korea’s Disease Control and Prevention Agency (KCDA), 3
Kotter, John, 5
KPIs. See key performance indicators
Krasadakis, George, 64; on data quality, 60–61
Kupp, Cooper, 16
Kushner, Theresa, 90–94, 98–99, 212
Landing AI, 6
Langlotz, Curtis P., 70

last mile problem, 184–187, 223
leadership, 9; enterprise-level precision and, 170–171; multiple roles in, 198; for precision, 194; in
team management, 140; transformation for, 197–198
Lean Startup, 56
legitimacy, 121
Levien, Meredith Kopit, 167, 169
Levine, Evan, 27–28, 58, 88
lift, 140
LightGBM, 36
linear regression, 31–32; multivariate, 36; univariate, 36
logistic regression, 31–32
Long, Howie, 17
Lopez, Michael, 13–14
Lores, Enrique, 91
Lyell, David, 182
Lynn, Laurence, 103–104
machine learning, 186; accountability structures, 178; credit scores and, 177–178; technical debt and,
188
machine learning (ML), 22–23; bias in, 44; L. Evans on, 166; no-code, 85; for Patternizr, 27–28, 30; in
precision systems, 37
machine learning platforms, 81–83
Maginot Line, 105–106
Mahindra Finance, 12
Majors, Tessa, 1–2
Malik, Momin, 175
Mallampati, Dasaradh, 162–163
Maple, Jack, 28, 149
Marin, Nina, 141–142
marketing management, 32
mass change, 5
McAllister, Andy, 156
McCain, John, 134
Measure What Matters (Doerr), 51
Medicare, 70
Merrill, Douglas, 10–12, 18, 56
MERS. See Middle East respiratory syndrome
metrics-based milestones, 186
Microsoft, 44
Middle East respiratory syndrome (MERS), 116
Miller, Steven, 41
Ministry of Culture, Community, and Youth, 118
mismanaged debt, 187–189, 223
ML. See machine learning
modeling scenarios, 206. See scenario modeling
Monahan, Terrance, 25
Moore, Mark H., 120

MotorBiscuit.com, 105
MTV, 75
multiplicity, in contact tracing, 117
multivariate linear regression, 36
Murray, Shane, 141
Mutasa, Simukayi, 68, 71–72, 84, 175–176
Mutimutuje, Alice, 8
Nanyang Polytechnic, 119
National Football League (NFL), 1, 88, 202; go-for-it plays in, 14; Health and Safety Committee, 16–
17; Next Gen Stats, 15; Player Tracking System, 15; precision systems for, 12–18
natural language processing (NLP) algorithms, 34
Nazario, Betania, 25
Neiman, Spencer, 133
Netflix, 6, 25, 34, 95, 135, 164–165, 168
New England Patriots, 39
New York City, 2–3
New York Police Department (NYPD), 2, 148, 204; Bratton at, 149–153; history of, 28; Patternizr at,
25–29; on social media, 152
New York Times, 19, 147, 217–218; enterprise-level precision at, 165–169; history of, 164–165; KPIs
at, 141; paywall, 165; personalization at, 164–169; precision at, 221; replatforming, 74–78, 208–
209; team management at, 140–146; For You app, 167
NFL. See National Football League
Ng, Andrew, 6, 184, 185, 186
Ng, Chee Khern, 118
Nielsen home scanning, 35
NLP algorithms. See natural language processing algorithms
no-code machine learning, 85
nonlinear design, of precision systems, 42–43
Novant, 9
Nudge, 5
nudges, defining, 5–6
Nunez, Jose, 135, 137
Nunez, Lucia, 134
NYPD. See New York Police Department
Obama, Barack, 134
objectives and key results (OKRs), 170; resetting, 196–197
Olympics, 4
O’Neil, Cathy, 88; on algorithms, 175
O’Neill, Paul, 51
one-way hash functions, 181
operating risk, 125
operational capacity, 121
optimism bias, 61
optimization, of precision systems, 55
organizational debt, 187–188

outcomes, 196
Padwick, Chris, 47
Paganetti, Ryan, 14
Patternizr, 2, 58, 179, 204; challenge of, 30–31; historical data in, 29; interface of, 29; machine
learning for, 27–28, 30; at NYPD, 25–29; pattern finding systems for, 31–33; random forests used
by, 29; trustworthiness of, 29
patterns: of crime, 26–27; precision systems for finding, 31–32, 190, 204
Patton, Desmond, 177
payday loans, 10–11
Pederson, Doug, 14
Pemex, 61–65, 156
Peña Nieto, Enrique, 62
people power, 103
performance indicators: in precision systems, 50–52; reconfiguration of, 198. See also key
performance indicators
personalization: defining, 24; L. Evans on, 169; at New York Times, 164–169; precision systems for,
33–34; Reeves on, 33; of Teach to One, 109–110
personally identifiable information (PII), 179
Philadelphia Eagles, 14
photo-cropping tool, Twitter, 176; on Twitter, 174
pick-and-pack systems, 8–9
PII. See personally identifiable information
Pittsburgh Steelers, 18
platforms, 208–211; data analysis, 81–83; data and, 72–74; data science, 81–83; data storage, 80–81;
investments in, 84–86; machine learning, 81–83; precision, 80–83
political intelligence, 101
political management, 212–216; diversification from status quo metrics, 112; imperatives in, 110–112,
214; at individual level, 107; innovation in, 112; at organizational level, 107; path clearing in, 105–
106; precision gains in, 111; purpose-build coalitions in, 112; shopping targets, 102–103; at unit
level, 107; value swapping in, 107–108
political power, 103
Pollock, Lori, 28
precision: in contact tracing, 117; defining, 24; innovation for, 194; leadership for, 194; management
of, 196–197; at New York Times, 221; on-ramps to, 194–195; political management and gains in,
111; sources of, 139–140; workflow for, 197. See also specific topics
precision agriculture, 207; Blue River and, 46–49; John Deere and, 46–49
precision customer shaping, 19
precision drones, 122–126
precision marketing campaigns, 19
precision matching, 19
precision pattern search, 19
precision platforms, 80–83; traits of, 73
precision products and services, 19
precision scheduling, 19
precision sensor systems, 19
precision strategy, 198

precision systems: AI in, 22–23, 37; bias in, 43; at BNSF, 156–163; building, 207–208; core
challenges in design of, 43; core steps in design of, 49–59; data collection for, 52–53; defining, 5–
6, 22–24; for entity recognition, 37–38; goals of, 195; under the hood of, 24–25; HR, 154–156; in
human and organizational context, 42; launching, 55–56; lessons for, 193–194; machine learning
in, 37; maintaining, 55–56, 162; for NFL, 12–18; nonlinear design of, 42–43; optimization of, 55;
for pattern finding, 31–32, 190, 204; performance of, 43; for personalization, 33–34; for predicting
values, 34–37; problem definition in, 49–50; proliferation of, 18–19; proof of concept of, 53–54;
scaling, 55; shared principles across, 41–44, 206–207; in stadiums, 16; success and performance
indicators in, 50–52; technologies of, 23–24; types of, 203–207; user experience of, 196
precision vanguard, 195, 211–212; contemporary, 88–90; defining, 88; high achievers in, 88–89;
lessons of, 97–100; optimism of, 92; risk-taking of, 89; status quo challenged by, 91; team
reworking, 91–92
Predator, 122–126, 130, 215–216
predicting values, 204–205; COVID-19 and, 36–37; precision systems for, 34–37
privacy, 222; in contact tracing, 117; red zones, 178–181
privacy sandbox, 181
programmatic advertising, at Axel Springer, 94–97
proof of concept, 77, 185; for Blue River, 54; of precision systems, 53–54; scope of, 54; testing, 53–54
propensity-to-buy models, 90–91
proxy metrics, 52, 189–190
public education, 113
purpose-build coalitions, 100; in political management, 112
Pyle, S. Idell, 68
Pymetrics, 155
Python, 89
PyTorch, 47
al-Qaeda, 122
QR codes, 8
racing, 4–5
Radiographic Atlas of Skeletal Development of the Hand and Wrist (Greulich and Pyle), 68
radiology, 67–71
Ramos-Luna, Randy, 2–3
random forests, Patternizr use of, 29
raster data, 39
Redden, Lee, 46–47, 88, 116
redistribution, 62
red-zones, 172
red zones: avoiding, 176–178, 180–181, 183–184, 185–186, 188, 191–192; bias, 174–178; failure
points, 173–174; failure to keep humans in the loop, 182–184, 222; governance, 178–181; impact
measurement, 189–192, 223; last mile problem, 184–187, 223; mismanaged debt, 187–189, 223;
privacy, 178–181
Reeves, Patrick, on personalization, 33
regression: linear, 31–32; logistic, 31–32
regulation, of AI, 191
regulatory risk, 124–125
Reich, Frank, 17

replatforming, of New York Times, 74–78, 208–209
request for information, 85
retrospective session, 56
RFID chips, 15
Ries, Eric, 57
Rifkin, Nathan, 88, 133, 137, 189
Rinaudo, Keller, 7–8, 88
risk: basing, 125; budget, 124–125; operating, 125; regulatory, 124–125; technical, 126
risk-taking, of precision vanguard, 89
robbery, 30–31
Robinson, Janet, 74
Rockwell, Nick, 74–78, 140, 141–145, 164
Rogers, Everett C., 87
Roman, Greg, 1
Rose, Joel, 108–110, 184, 213–214
Rush, Chris, 108–110
Russia, 127–128
Rustum, Roohi, 133, 137
Rwanda, 8, 40
Ryan, Mike, 124
S7 phone, 95
SailGP campaign, 4
Salamanca refinery, 65
Samsung, 94–95
Sanders, Bernie, 133
San Francisco, 4–5
San Martin Texmelucan, 62
satellite imagery, 39
Scala, 89
scaling, of precision systems, 55
scenario modeling, precision systems for, 40–41
Schein, Edgar, 89, 168
Schlenker, Marty, 159–161, 163
screen scrapers, 143
See and Spray, 46–49, 51, 106, 190
Seegene, 3–4
Seifert, Kevin, 12–13
Shea, Dermot, 25–26
Shein, 18
Siemens, Nathan, 68–69
Singapore, 190, 215; contact tracing in, 115–120
Singapore Management University, 41
Singleton, Ben, 36
Sky News, 37
Slack, 104, 134
small data, 6

smartphones, 23
Smith, Chris, 25
Snyder, Liz, 189–190
social media, NYPD on, 152
Social Security, 10
speech-to-text, 34
Sports Business Journal, 15
stadiums, precision systems in, 16
Staley, Brandon, 17
Stanford, 119
Stanford University Medical Center, 174, 176–177
static pricing, 36
Stella, 35
Stern, Daniel, 1, 13
strategic triangle: in bootstrapping precision, 120–122; defining, 120
sub-Saharan Africa, 7–8
success indicators, in precision systems, 50–52
Sunstein, Cass, 5
supply and demand modeling, 36
Swanson, Scott, 126
Swisher, Kara, 18
Tamoxifen, 71
Tang, Diane, 58
target states, 42–43
TB2, 127
Teach to One, 103, 113, 213–214; personalization of, 109–110; value networks at, 108–110
team management, 132, 216–218; in Biden-Harris campaign, 133–140; cross-functional teams, 145;
leadership in, 140; at New York Times, 140–146; optimal, 196–197; strategic beacons in, 145; team
spirit in, 140
Teams, 104
Tech for Campaigns (TFC), 189
technical debt, 187; machine learning and, 188
technical power, 103
technical risk, 126
technology, defining, 201
terrorism, 114
testing sets, 53, 196
text-to-speech, 34
TFC. See Tech for Campaigns
Thaler, Richard H., 5, 104–105
Thomas, Nellwyn, 78–79, 88, 116, 133, 166, 167, 189
Thompson, Mark, 74–75, 77, 141, 145
three-blade-tool executives, 140
Times’s Report of the 2020 Group, 168
Tomlin, Mike, 18
Topol, Eric, 38, 68, 70, 184, 190, 191

TraceTogether, 116, 119, 129–131, 190
training sets, 53
transparency, 97–98
true age, 67–68
Trump, Donald, 78
Trustworthy Online Controlled Experiments (Kohavi, Tang, & Xu), 58
Tsao, Andy, 85
Tucker, Catherine, 177
Tumin, Zach, 26–29
Turkey, 127
Twersky, Amos, 104–105
Twitter, 127, 153; photo-cropping tool on, 174, 176
Uber, 18, 45
Ukraine, 127–128
unendowed, 111
Unilever, 154–156, 179, 219–220
univariate linear regression, 36
upday, 95–96, 98
user experience, of precision systems, 196
value measurement, 191
value networks, 104; at Teach to One, 108–110
values, predicting. See predicting values
Vegis, Catherine, 133, 137
Vesey, Jordan, 155
virtuous cycle, 25
visual inferencing, 47
Vulnerability Scoring System, 37
Wall Street Journal, 105
Wanamaker, John, 90
Want, Maddy, 94–97, 98–99, 106, 212
Warren, Elizabeth, 133
water pollution, 51–52
Weapons of Math Destruction (O’Neil), 175
Weinstein, Harvey, 166
Weintraub, Joshua, 68–69, 70–71
Weiss, Mitchell, 107
Weiyuan Gene Technology, 3
Westhoff, Carolyn, 71
What3Words, 9
WhatsApp, 119
Wiggins, Chris, 141
Wilson, James Q., 149
workflow, 197
Wornhoff, Nina, 134, 137

Wuhan, 3
Wyatt, Claire, 133, 136
Wyrobek, Keenan, 8, 9, 88
XGBoost, 36
Xu, Ya, 58
Yakhina, Asiya, 141
Y Combinator, 53
Zackhauser, Richard, 104–105
Zawahri, Ayman al-, 128
Zearn system, 113
Zest Cash, 10–12, 18, 56, 202
Zillow, 182–183
Zipline, 7–10, 40, 106, 190, 202

