 
WASTE MANAGEMENT
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
Selected Titles in ABC-CLIO’s
CONTEMPORARY 
WORLD ISSUES
Series
Adoption, Barbara A. Moe
Campaign and Election Reform, Glenn H. Utter and Ruth Ann
Strickland
Chemical and Biological Warfare, Al Mauroni
Childhood Sexual Abuse, Karen L. Kinnear
Corporate Crime, Richard D. Hartley
Domestic Violence, Margi Laird McCue
Emergency Management, Jeffrey B. Bumgarner
Energy Use Worldwide, Jaina L. Moan and Zachary A. Smith
Euthanasia, Jennifer Fecio McDougall and Martha Gorman
Food Safety, Nina E. Redman
Gangs, Karen L. Kinnear
Globalization, Justin Ervin and Zachary A. Smith
Illegal Immigration, Michael C. LeMay
Intellectual Property, Aaron Schwabach
Internet and Society, Bernadette H. Schell
Mainline Christians and U.S. Public Policy, Glenn H. Utter
Mental Health in America, Donna R. Kemp
Nuclear Weapons and Nonproliferation, Sarah J. Diehl and James
Clay Moltz
Policing in America, Leonard A. Steverson
Renewable and Alternative Energy Resources, Zachary A. Smith
and Katrina D. Taylor
Rich and Poor in America, Geoffrey Gilbert
Sentencing, Dean John Champion
U.S. Military Service, Cynthia A. Watson
U.S. National Security, Cynthia A. Watson
U.S. Social Security, Steven G. Livingston
For a complete list of titles in this series, please visit 
www.abc-clio.com.
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
Books in the Contemporary World Issues series address vital
issues in today’s society, such as genetic engineering, pollution,
and biodiversity. Written by professional writers, scholars, and
nonacademic experts, these books are authoritative, clearly
written, up-to-date, and objective. They provide a good starting
point for research by high school and college students, scholars,
and general readers as well as by legislators, businesspeople,
activists, and others.
Each book, carefully organized and easy to use, contains an
overview of the subject, a detailed chronology, biographical
sketches, facts and data and/or documents and other primary-
source material, a directory of organizations and agencies,
annotated lists of print and nonprint resources, and an index.
Readers of books in the Contemporary World Issues series will
find the information they need to have a better understanding
of the social, political, environmental, and economic issues
facing the world today.
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
WASTE MANAGEMENT
A Reference Handbook
Jacqueline Vaughn
CONTEMPORARY 
WORLD ISSUES
Santa Barbara, California 
Denver, Colorado 
Oxford, England
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
Copyright 2009 by ABC-CLIO, Inc.
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced,
stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any
means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise,
except for the inclusion of brief quotations in a review, without prior
permission in writing from the publishers.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Vaughn, Jacqueline.
Waste management : a reference handbook / Jacqueline Vaughn.
p. cm. —  (Contemporary world issues)
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 978-1-59884-150-3 (alk. paper) — ISBN 978-1-59884-151-0 
(e-book)
1. Refuse and refuse disposal.
I. Title. 
TD791.V38 2009
363.72'8—dc22
2008019139
13
12
11
10
9
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
ABC-CLIO, Inc.
130 Cremona Drive, P.O. Box 1911
Santa Barbara, California 93116–1911
This book is also available on the World Wide Web as an eBook.
Visit www.abc-clio.com for details.
This book is printed on acid-free paper 
Manufactured in the United States of America
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
For Terry Trumbull, 
for introducing me to waste management
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
ix
Contents
List of Tables, xv
Preface, xvii
1
Background and History, 1
Problems in Defining and Measuring Waste, 4
Types and Sources of Waste, 5
Household Waste, 5
Commercial Waste, 5
E-Waste, 6
Hazardous Waste, 6
Industrial Waste, 7
Building Waste, 7
Medical Waste, 7
Agricultural Waste, 8
Universal Waste, 9
Waste Management Options, 10
Collection, 10
Composting, 10
Incineration, 11
Integrated Waste Management, 12
Landfills, 12
Mechanical Biological Treatment, 13
Phytoremediation, 13
Recycling, 14
Source Reduction, 15
Waste Transfer Stations, 16
History of Waste Management, 16
Federal Legislation and Regulation, 22
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
Environmental Justice and Waste Management, 31
References, 34
2
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions, 37
Paper or Plastic? 37
So Which Bag Do You Choose? 40
Reducing the Amount of Waste, 41
Enhancing and Improving Recycling, 43
Dealing with Beverage Cans and Bottles, 47
More Trash, Shrinking Landfills, 52
Paying for the “Real” Cost of Waste, 54
Specialized Waste Management Challenges, 55
Super Problems, Superfund, 56
Radioactive Waste and Yucca Mountain, 60
Debris from Disasters, 64
Siting Waste Management Facilities, 68
Is Help on the Way? 72
Technological Advances, 74
References, 77
3
Worldwide Perspective, 83
Global Waste Management Efforts, 85
Africa, 85
Asia, 87
European Union, 91
Latin America, 96
Middle East, 98
Oceania and Micronesia, 100
International Waste Management Regimes, 102
Hazardous Waste Trading, 102
Basel Convention, 103
Regional Agreements on Hazardous Waste, 106
Radioactive Waste, 107
Continuing Waste Management Issues, 108
Electronic Waste, 108
Shipbreaking, 110
Uncontrolled Landfills and Scavenging, 111
References, 112
4
Chronology, 117
5
Biographical Sketches, 143
x
Contents
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
Robert Bullard, 143
Dean Buntrock, 144
Joseph R. Cerrell, 145
Rev. Benjamin Chavis Jr., 146
Yvon Chouinard, 147
Barry Commoner, 148
Paul Connett, 149
Lois Gibbs, 150
Pete Grogan, 151
Kenny Guinn, 152
Alice Hamilton, 153
H. Wayne Huizenga, 154
Mary McDowell, 155
Martin Melosi, 156
Penny Newman, 157
Paul Palmer, 158
William Rathje, 159
Florence Robinson, 160
Elizabeth Royte, 161
William Sanjour, 161
Wilma Subra, 163
Terri Swearingen, 163
Mike Synar, 164
Will Toor, 165
Jean Lacey Vincenz, 166
George E. Waring Jr., 167
Craig E. Williams, 168
6
Data and Documents, 171
Early Efforts to Manage Waste, 171
Excerpts from a Special Message to the Congress 
on Conservation, “To Renew a Nation,” President
Lyndon B. Johnson (March 8, 1968), 172
Waste Management Legislation, 175
The Resource Conservation and Recovery Act 
of 1976 (excerpts), 175
Municipal Solid Waste Recycling, 176
Creating a Market for Recycled Products, 178
EPA Comprehensive Procurement Guidelines 
Products, 179
Global Municipal and Hazardous Waste Generation,
Collection, and Treatment, 180
Contents
xi
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
The Basel Convention, 180
Preamble to the Basel Convention on the Control of
Transboundary Movements of Hazardous Wastes 
and Their Disposal (March 1989), 182
Hazardous Waste Dumping, 185
Speech by Achim Steiner to the Opening of the Eighth
Conference of the Parties to the Basel Convention,
Nairobi, Kenya (November 27, 2006), 186
National Priorities List of Waste Site Actions, 187
“Seven New (Garbage) Wonders of the World,” 187
World’s Most Polluted Places, 2006, 190
How Much Paper Is Recycled? What Happens 
to Old Newspapers? 195
What Do You Do with Waste Carpet? 195
Recycling Fun Facts, 196
U.S. Beverage Container Recycling Scorecard, 198
The Nuclear Waste Debate, 199
Yucca Mountain, 200
Excerpts from a Letter from the President to the Speaker
of the House of Representatives and the President of
the Senate, February 15, 2002, 201
Excerpts from the Statement of Kenny G. Guinn,
Governor of the State of Nevada, before the U.S. House
of Representatives, Committee on Transportation and
Infrastructure Subcommittees on Railroads and
Transportation and Hazardous Materials, April 25,
2002, 202
Nye County Resolution No. 2004-25, 204
Nuclear Age Peace Foundation’s Top Ten Reasons to
Oppose the DoE’s Yucca Mountain Plan, David Krieger
and Marissa Zubia, August 23, 2002, 205
7
Directory of Organizations, Associations, 
and Agencies, 209
U.S. Government Agencies, 209
State Agencies, 215
Industry and Trade Associations and Nongovernmental
Organizations, 225
8
Resources, 253
Print Resources, 253
xii
Contents
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
Books and Monographs, 253
Articles, 277
Journals, 286
Nonprint Resources, 288
CD-ROMS/DVD-ROMS/DVDs/Videos, 288
Glossary, 293
Index, 299
About the Author, 311
Contents
xiii
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
List of Tables
6.1
Scope of Materials Included in the Standard MSW
Recycling Rate, 177
6.2
Municipal Waste Collection, by Selected Country, 181
6.3
Municipal Waste Treatment, by Selected Country, 182
6.4
Hazardous Waste Generation, by Selected Country, 183
6.5
National Priorities List Site Actions, by Year, 188
6.6
Supply and Recovery of Paper and Paperboard,
1993–2006, 195
6.7
Use Statistics for Old Newspapers, 2006, 196
6.8
Postconsumer Carpet Recycling and Diversion, 
2002–2006, 196
6.9
U.S. Beverage Container Recycling Scorecard and 
Report, 2006, 199
6.10
Locations of U.S. Independent Spent Fuel Storage
Installations, 200
xv
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
Preface
“Paper or Plastic?”
Since 1977, when the first plastic bags were introduced to the gro-
cery industry as an alternative to paper sacks, consumers have had
a choice about the type of waste they produce. After more than
three decades of debate over which type of shopping bag is better
for the environment, people are still not sure which one to choose.
The more the population grows, the more goods that are con-
sumed, and packaging, whether paper or plastic, becomes an im-
portant part of the waste stream—usually referred to as garbage or
trash.
Waste, and how we manage it, typically ends up toward the
bottom of the environmental policy agenda. Problems like air
quality, global climate change, and energy are often the focus of
policy makers’ attention, with issues related to waste either ig-
nored or deferred. But waste is actually an integral part of the
overall environmental management picture. Increased consumer
consumption of goods means more natural resources, such as
forest products and fossil fuels, are used for packaging. More
waste, in turn, means that more space is used for landfills or
more particulate matter is emitted by incinerators. As the de-
mand for electricity increases, nuclear power plants expand, cre-
ating more high-level radioactive waste. The paper versus plastic
debate is used as a theme throughout the eight chapters of this
book that follow. The controversy illustrates the shifting nature
of the debate as technology advances, environmental conscious-
ness is raised, population and consumption increase, and policies
are created to mandate how waste is managed both in the United
States and on a global level.
xvii
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
Chapter 1 provides an overview of the background and his-
tory of waste and explains that although trash has been a part of
human existence since the very beginning of time, deciding what
to do about it is a relatively recent phenomenon. The “problem”
of waste focuses on the concerns raised by urban dwellers about
disease and odors before the turn of the 20th century. The public
health-oriented sanitarian movement and progressive reform
(led in large part by women in major cities) brought attention to
open-dumping practices, the use of swine as a refuse manage-
ment tool as late as the 1960s, and use by residents of 55-gallon
barrels as homemade backyard incinerators. The development of
the sanitary landfill and the compaction of trash dates from the
late 1930s and early 1940s. Chapter 1 also recounts the history of
packaging consumer goods, one of the primary components of
municipal solid waste.
Chapter 2 deals with current problems and controversies over
waste management on the domestic level. The chapter continues
with the issue of what type of container is “best” for consumers to
use for carrying items such as groceries, and it introduces new is-
sues such as the recycling of plastic, which often ends up in poor re-
gions of China. Problems that have recently arisen, such as what to
do with disaster debris from the attacks at the World Trade Center
in 2001 or the ravaged remains of houses destroyed by Hurricane
Katrina, are also explored. Among the solutions considered are new
technologies such as phytoremediation to clean up waste sites and
new uses for old waste sites as brownfield development.
The global perspective on waste management is covered in
Chapter 3. In addition to discussing regional analyses of waste
management, the chapter profiles the trash pickers who are a
common sight in cities in developing countries, from Cairo to
Buenos Aires. Segments are presented on efforts by groups such
as Greenpeace to force Dow Chemical to clean up the toxic waste
from the deadly gas leak in Bhopal, India, in 1984; on attempts to
develop Australia’s first national nuclear waste dump on aborig-
inal land; and on accusations that Japan has breached agreements
on toxic waste trading among Asian countries.
Chapter 4 is an annotated chronology of events in waste
management, beginning in the mid-18th century when Benjamin
Franklin tried to organize workers to clean the city streets in
Philadelphia. The chronology covers both domestic and inter-
national events. The individuals profiled in Chapter 5 are con-
siderably less well known than the leaders who have sought to
xviii
Preface
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
solve other environmental and social problems. Key figures in
environmental history such as John Muir and Aldo Leopold were
not unaware of the trash around them, but they focused on other
issues related to wilderness, scenic preservation, and the use of
natural resources, so they are not part of this chapter. Instead, in-
cluded are brief snapshots of the lives of early refuse pioneers
such as Jean Lacey Vincenz, who established the first sanitary
landfill in the United States in Fresno, California, and sociologist
Robert Bullard, who is widely regarded as the first scholar to de-
velop the concept of environmental justice and hazardous waste
facility siting.
Chapters 6, 7, and 8 provide various types of resources for
the reader who wants to do further research and understand
waste management as a policy issue. Chapter 6 includes facts, sta-
tistics, documents, and information that are not included in pre-
vious chapters. Included are materials that outline the different
points of view, such as those surrounding the Yucca Mountain fa-
cility in Nevada and a list of the world’s most polluted waste
sites. Chapter 7 is an alphabetized, annotated directory of gov-
ernment agencies, both U.S. federal and state, that deal with the
various types of waste, as well as nongovernmental organiza-
tions. The latter group includes industry trade associations, advo-
cacy groups, and information clearinghouses that provide
additional resources about waste. Chapter 8 concludes the book
with a list of print and nonprint resources, organized by books, ar-
ticles, and videotapes that are generally available. Finally, the
book contains a glossary of key terms for those readers just de-
veloping an interest in and knowledge of waste management.
The goal of this book is to provide readers with background
information and an overview of waste that has not been available
in a single volume. The book represents an interdisciplinary ap-
proach combining history, political science, environmental sci-
ence, engineering, sociology, and public health literature that
weaves a story of how policy makers are finding new ways to
deal with an old problem: trash.
Preface
xix
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
1
Background and History
M
ost of us are introduced to the issues related to waste man-
agement as children when we are asked to carry out the
family garbage. Usually, that garbage consists of refuse con-
tained in a paper or plastic bag, sometimes used as a liner for a
metal or plastic trash receptacle. According to the U.S. Environ-
mental Protection Agency (EPA), more than a third of the waste
generated in the United States comprises paper and product
packaging. Sometimes, our trash includes items like aluminum
cans, bottles, plastic milk jugs, and newspapers that we have put
into a separate container or bin for curbside pickup and recycling
by the trash collection service. Another 13 percent of municipal
solid waste (MSW) comes from organic matter such as lawn clip-
pings and food scraps (12 percent); rubber, leather, and textiles 
(7 percent); and wood (6 percent); with 3 percent of miscella-
neous origin (U.S. EPA 2007a). But the journey of garbage from
our homes to a place where it is buried in a landfill, incinerated,
or recycled is a process that most of us know little about.
In the early history of humanity, containers for packaging
were not required, as food was immediately consumed and
human waste was just left on the ground to biodegrade naturally.
Later, grass and reed fibers and clay were used to make pottery,
which was in turn used to hold food and grains or items for
barter and trade. Other natural products, such as hollowed-out
gourds and animal hides, were used for such items as well. Pot-
tery and similar vessels were reused and repaired until they wore
out or were broken. Eventually, pit toilets were dug as primitive
latrines for human waste, primarily because of unpleasant odors
and concerns that menacing animals might follow the scent.
1
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
Paper was used as “flexible packaging” as early as the first
and second centuries BCE, when the Chinese used treated mul-
berry bark to wrap foods. The technique of paper making ad-
vanced over the next 1,500 years, when the process was
introduced to England in 1310 and to America in 1690. In those
times, paper was made from flax and, later, linen rags; wood
pulp was not used for paper until 1867 (Hook 2007). But paper
was very scarce, and store owners asked their customers to bring
their own tote bags—typically made of jute—when they shopped
at the general store, where they could buy items from food and
alcohol to sewing notions, clothing, and hardware. Little was
wasted and almost nothing was thrown away. Parts from broken
items were used to create other items or melted down.
The first paper bag was made in Bristol, England, in 1844, by
the paper bag–making machine invented by Francis Wolle, who
patented the process in 1852 and founded the Union Paper Bag
Machine Company in Savannah, Georgia, in 1869 (Forest Pre-
serve District of Cook County, Illinois 1971). A year later, Mar-
garet Knight refined a machine to cut, fold, and paste square
paper bag bottoms. Charles Stilwell was recognized for his im-
provement upon the paper bag bottom when he was issued a
patent for a square bottom paper bag with pleated sides in 1883,
called the S.O.S., or self-opening sack. It proved to be the model
for today’s paper bags, and its sales soared into the 1930s because
the bags were strong and inexpensive to make.
The owner of a small grocery store in St. Paul, Minnesota,
Walter H. Deubner, took the paper bag idea a bit further. He re-
alized that his customers only purchased what they could carry
home, and in an attempt to increase his business, he tried a new
tactic to get them to buy more. He took the traditional paper bag
and ran a cord through it to serve as a handle, which created a
bag capable of carrying up to 75 pounds of groceries, and named
the product the Deubner Shopping Bag. He sold each bag for 5
cents, he patented the method, and by 1915, he was selling more
than a million shopping bags per year (Great Idea Finder 2007).
No one knows exactly who invented plastic bags; we do
know that low-density polyethylene, the material of plastic, was
invented in 1942. Canadian inventor Harry Wasylyk is credited
with the invention of the green-colored garbage bag in 1950,
when it was used for commercial use and first sold to Winnipeg
General Hospital. Wasylyk and another Canadian inventor, Larry
Hansen, sold the patent for the plastic garbage bag to Union 
2
Background and History
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
Carbide Company, which began selling garbage bags for home
use in the late 1960s. Another small commercial version, this one
made of clear plastic, was packaged and sold in paper boxes;
these “baggies” began to appear in bakeries, in grocery stores,
and at produce stands in 1957. Consumers began to use a differ-
ent bag to separate each type of purchase they made, one for
tomatoes, another for bread, still another for peaches, and so on.
The baggies kept the produce from rolling around in the grocery
cart, and because they were translucent, shoppers could see what
they had selected, unlike the opaque paper bags they had used
previously.
Although paper and plastic materials are the most com-
monly used for containers, metal and rigid metal packaging now
comprises almost 8 percent of the municipal waste stream. Al-
though tin plating was discovered in Bohemia in 1200 CE and
used to make cans in the 14th century, metal was not used for
food storage until the early 1800s; metal containers were used to
sell snuff in pre–Revolutionary War America, and in 1809, Em-
peror Napoleon Bonaparte of France offered a large reward to
anyone who could successfully preserve food for his armies. A
year later, a British inventor, Peter Durand, received a patent for
a sealed cylindrical can. But today’s model of aluminum cans did
not appear until 1959, about the same time as did the pop-top lid
for cans. The pop-top was used initially for beer and soda and in
the 1980s and 1990s was expanded for use with items such as
potato chips and peanuts. In response to complaints from con-
sumers about the need for a readily available can opener, the
pop-top lid could be used by anyone, even children, to gain ac-
cess to a product. Campers could open up a can of ready-to-eat
spaghetti and meatballs, and the idea of opening up a beer with
the whooshing sound of the air being released was popular. For
older consumers with less strength in their hands and for those
living alone, pop-top cans and their single-serving-size packag-
ing make meals of canned soup, tomato sauce, and fruit cocktail
easier to prepare.
Glass, which makes up about 5 percent of the waste stream,
was industrialized in Egypt about 1500 BCE and made from raw
materials such as silica and soda ash that are combined and
heated and then molded into shapes for glasses, bowls, and con-
tainers for storage. Over the next millennium, processing meth-
ods changed to allow the production of bottles, with the first
automatic rotary bottle-making machine patented in 1889. Glass
Background and History
3
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
was sturdier than other types of packaging and could be reused
and refilled, making it cost effective to produce.
The most recent major addition to the waste stream is plas-
tics, which make up nearly 12 percent of municipal solid waste.
Originally used mostly for military purposes, plastics were dis-
covered in the 19th century but not refined until 1933 by German
manufactures. Various forms of plastic, such as celluloid, vinyl
chloride, and foam, were developed for commercial uses by the
mid-1950s, although some plastic compounds were reserved
purely for military applications. Today’s most common plastic
container is made of polyethylene terephthalate, or PET, a type of
resin. The beverage container industry introduced PET to the
consumer market in 1977, and other industries began packaging
their products in PET in abundance by 1980.
To make them more lightweight, less expensive to produce,
and reusable, most plastics are now designed to be disposable,
meaning that they are used once and then thrown away. Their
disposable nature is one of the major reasons why industrialized
countries are dealing more with waste management problems
than they did in the 19th and 20th centuries; more products are
available for purchase, and they are wrapped in containers and
packaging that are disposable and of little value to consumers,
which means more refuse ends up in the waste stream, needing
to be disposed of in one of several different ways described later
in this chapter.
Problems in Defining and Measuring Waste
As the categories below indicate, waste can be identified in many
ways. Various disciplines define the term waste differently, so
what a public official may call a certain type of waste may be dif-
ferent from the perspective of an engineer or city planner. Even
more important, questions have emerged about the accuracy of
statistics that show how much waste is both generated and dis-
posed of each year. Some state regulations, for instance, include
materials such as construction debris under the category of mu-
nicipal solid waste, while in other states, that debris might be
placed in a separate category. Some states consider medical waste
and contaminated soil as hazardous waste; others use terms like
biohazard for these materials. Some wastes that are managed at
the site where they are generated (such as a manufacturing facil-
4
Background and History
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
ity) are not considered part of the total because they never go
through the collection and disposal process. The lack of agree-
ment about definitions and lack of accurate data make it difficult
for policy managers to determine how serious the problem might
be and how best to deal with it.
Local, state, and federal legislation and regulations require
leaders to know what is in the waste stream, the costs of collect-
ing and disposing of those wastes, and any health and safety is-
sues that might be raised. However, concerns about waste
management tend to fall toward the bottom end of the policy
agenda and are less visible than other environmental issues such
as water or air pollution. Waste management becomes important
to many policy makers only when health or environmental issues
reach the crisis stage.
Types and Sources of Waste
The term community waste is sometimes used interchangeably
with municipal solid waste, although there is no standardized or
accepted definition of what types of waste fit into which cate-
gories. But generally, the types and sources of waste are consid-
ered to be part of the flow of materials in society and a function
of land use, zoning, and consumption. The following categories
are those that are usually recognized by both policy makers and
waste managers.
Household Waste
The unwanted materials produced by single- and multifamily
homes, apartment complexes, and other dwellings consist of
food and other types of organic waste; paper products and card-
board; plastics; textiles; leather; yard clippings; wood; glass;
metal; ashes; and various bulky items such as tires, televisions,
furniture, and appliances. The latter group of products may also
be called bulky waste or white waste.
Commercial Waste
Retail establishments such as restaurants, stores, hotels and mo-
tels, office buildings, and similar businesses create commercial
waste, which includes food scraps, paper and cardboard, glass,
Types and Sources of Waste
5
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
metal, plastic, wood, and other items similar to those produced
by households. These wastes are often commingled with resi-
dential waste products when they are collected, although the
costs of collecting commercial waste may be higher.
E-Waste
Waste from electronics such as computers, cell phones, and tele-
visions is a growing concern because of the short life span of the
products and the lack of consumer knowledge about what to do
with them when they become obsolete or stop functioning. In the
past, most items were simply tossed into the regular trash with-
out any consideration for the materials from which they are made.
But these products’ components, ranging from lead to cadmium
to mercury to various plastics used in circuit boards, cables, cov-
ers, and connectors, pose a number of risks. The waste is not suit-
able for incineration because some components form toxic
substances when burned. When placed in landfills, they can leach
into the soil. The issue of how best to handle this specialized type
of waste is outlined in Chapter 2.
Hazardous Waste
The EPA has defined waste as hazardous if it exhibits at least one
of four characteristics: ignitability, reactivity, corrosivity, or toxic-
ity. Sometimes, these wastes are listed by name, although the list
is not exhaustive, and sometimes, they are regulated by several
agencies. In other cases, consensus has not been reached among
agencies as to whether or not a waste is hazardous. Hazardous
waste is a problem not only because of those four characteristics
but also because of other factors such as the quantity of waste
and its mobility. Today, waste managers also look at the types of
sites that receive specific hazardous waste, such as their proxim-
ity to human populations, containment integrity, local ground-
water hydrology, potential impact on flora and fauna through
transmission, geological integrity, and the ultimate level of con-
trolling the waste. The more that is known about the characteris-
tics of the waste, the better informed decision makers can be
about how to treat it. In areas and at times where awareness is
lacking about the negative impact of hazardous waste, as was the
case in the United States in the 1940s and 1950s, little motivation
exists for implementing expensive treatment options or protect-
6
Background and History
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
ing workers and the public. These issues are covered in chapters
2 and 3.
Industrial Waste
Industrial waste emanates from trade processes, such as the mak-
ing of steel and automobiles, the building and construction in-
dustry, coal mining, food processing, metal finishing, petroleum
refining, and utility power plant operation. During the first half of
the 20th century, the creation of industrial waste was considered
part of the cost of economic growth and development. In 1914,
George Price suggested that noxious industrial waste could be
controlled in two ways: removing and destroying it or storing it
and related materials in closed and tight vessels. Another recom-
mendation was that industrial waste be isolated by segregating it
at remote and public locations. Engineered solutions included
using metal fencing material to contain industrial waste (Colten
and Skinner 1996, 13). Generally, industrial waste became an issue
much later than that of organic material and other forms of refuse.
Because it was assumed that industrial waste contains no bacteria
and therefore poses little threat of disease, many substances were
routinely dumped into watercourses or sewers. This theory
proved to be erroneous. Other assumptions included the belief
that the components of industrial waste acted as effective bacteri-
cides, another misconception.
Building Waste
Construction and demolition create waste when roads are built,
houses are torn down, pavement is repaired, and new develop-
ments are created in communities. These wastes include dirt,
wood, steel, concrete, asphalt, and other materials used in build-
ing and renovation. These materials also become debris, which
must also be dealt with when accidents, emergencies, and nat-
ural or human-caused disasters occur, such as a major earth-
quake in which buildings are destroyed. Disaster debris is
discussed further in Chapter 2.
Medical Waste
Medical waste (which includes wastes generated from human ac-
tivity) is important because it involves multiple federal, state,
Types and Sources of Waste
7
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
and local agencies; laboratories; blood suppliers; universities
conducting research and patient care; transporters and disposal
firms; and medical facilities ranging from doctors’ offices to hos-
pitals. In 1968, the U.S. Public Health Service divided hospital
waste into six categories, warning that legal implications were at-
tached to the handling of these types of waste and that precau-
tions should be taken to ensure the safety of staff, collectors, and
the public (Turnberg 1996). The EPA provided guidelines for hos-
pital waste in 1974 and advised medical providers of the diffi-
culty of segregating these wastes from other nonhazardous
wastes, so all hospital waste must be considered potentially con-
taminated and must receive special handling and treatment. The
EPA’s Guide for Infectious Waste, published in 1982, recommends
six categories of medical waste for special management, along
with specific categories for consideration as infectious waste.
After years of study, the EPA has now established definitions in
the medical waste category to differentiate medical waste that
consists of an infectious substance, termed regulated medical waste,
from regular medical waste. The differentiation reflects the need to
treat medical waste containing an infectious substance differ-
ently from regular medical waste in treatment, packaging, and
transportation. The former type of waste requires special proce-
dures for handling that are consistent with requirements estab-
lished by the United Nations’ World Health Organization in 1999
(WHO 1999). Regulated medical waste is now defined as a waste
or reusable material known to contain or suspected of containing
an infectious substance and generated in the diagnosis, treat-
ment, or immunization of animals; research on the diagnosis,
treatment, or immunization of animals; or production or testing
of biological products.
Agricultural Waste
Crops, orchards, vineyards, livestock operations, and farms cre-
ate waste when food spoils, trees are pruned, fields are culti-
vated and produce is picked, animals are fed and produce
manure, and chemicals are used. This category, agricultural
waste, is also known as biomass; it differs from similar types of
waste that are generated by households. Most agricultural waste
is handled on-site, such as burning a field after a crop has been
harvested.
8
Background and History
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
Woody Biomass
Logging and milling operations produce organic materials that
can be used for the production of energy. This category includes
tree limbs, slash piles, sawdust, needles and tops, and small-
diameter trees that are unmerchantable and are removed as a
part of forest-thinning operations. A 2005 study conducted by the
U.S. Department of Agriculture and the U.S. Department of En-
ergy estimated that more than 369 million tons of woody biomass
are available for energy use in the United States every year
(Bryant 2007).
Universal Waste
In 1995, the EPA finalized regulations for universal waste (UW),
a descriptive term applied to wastes that are widely generated by
both businesses and households. The new regulations allowed a
wider range of wastes to be managed under less stringent re-
quirements than under hazardous waste rules. The four cate-
gories of UW include unused hazardous waste pesticides that
have been recalled under federal laws or collected in waste pes-
ticide programs; mercury-containing thermostats; lamps; and
spent batteries, including those made of nickel-cadmium and
lead-acid alloys.
The regulations were created for two reasons. First, the EPA
wanted to streamline the handling and management of these
products, which previously were considered only as hazardous
waste. Requirements for labeling, employee training, shipping,
and tracking were changed by the regulations, and businesses
were allowed to accumulate and store materials on-site, relieving
them of having to hire a hazardous waste shipper to handle the
materials. Second, the new definition, adopted in part because of
requests by both industry groups and environmental organiza-
tions, was designed to encourage retailers and other entities to
collect these types of items for recycling or treatment. This new
definition of waste covers widely generated materials and re-
duces the quantity that would otherwise end up in the municipal
waste stream and perhaps in landfills. States are permitted to cre-
ate additional categories of universal waste if they choose to do
so. While individual households are encouraged to participate in
UW recycling programs, they are not required to do so, and the
items can still be included in household trash.
Types and Sources of Waste
9
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
Waste Management Options
State and local governments can choose from a limited suite of
technologies and programs to deal with waste, from simply col-
lecting trash and dumping it to highly technical processes that
are being used in pilot studies to determine their effectiveness.
This section identifies the options that are available, in alphabet-
ical order.
Collection
Most communities rely on compaction trucks or other types of
vehicles to bring waste from the location where it is created or
produced to another site for sorting and treatment. Collection is
the most expensive element of waste management, accounting
for between 50 and 70 percent of the costs for operations. These
costs include those associated with hauling the waste to a dis-
posal location, where it may be dumped or processed. Some of
the wastes are commingled and may not be separated out by
type. In most communities, residential trash is collected by large
vehicles that pick up waste that has been placed in some type of
bin. Trash trucks cost from $100,000 to $150,000 each and may be
operated with a crew of from one to four people, depending on
the type of vehicle used. Some waste is noncontainerized and is
picked up by a different type of vehicle with a claw-like appara-
tus designed to pick up bulky items such as tree limbs. Collection
may be a function of a municipal government as part of the ser-
vices it provides or it may be a service provided by a private
company that is contracted to collect the waste.
Composting
Composting is a method of dealing with organic waste and can
be done by both individuals and municipalities. Composting is
considered a valuable strategy because the volume of waste can
be reduced by as much as half by breaking down easily degrad-
able plant and animal tissue, such as yard waste and food scraps.
The most common type of composting involves seasonal leaf col-
lection and Christmas tree pickups. Some composting is done
through the use of sheltered or unsheltered windrows, which are
periodically turned to speed decomposition, or through in-vessel
systems whereby the material is placed in an enclosed drum,
10
Background and History
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
tank, or silo in which conditions to maximize the breakdown of
nutrients can be closely controlled.
A number of considerations may limit composting on a large
scale, but they primarily involve odor and fly and rodent attrac-
tion, consequences of composting that cause problems for waste
managers and residents alike. Odors are not normally a health
concern, but they do affect the quality of life in a community
where a facility is located or where outdoor transfers and com-
posting occur. Enclosed facilities can help to eliminate the odor
issue, but they are seldom cost effective. Organic residues in-
evitably attract vectors (insects and animals that may transmit
diseases), especially food waste and sewage sludge; enclosure of
the facility does reduce this problem but is costly. An additional
issue is making sure that no hazardous substances, such as pesti-
cides, are present in the compost when it is initially collected. The
problem occurs when humans or animals eat food that was
grown on ground where compost is deposited after processing.
Heavy metals can pass through the food chain, as can pathogens.
The problem is less apparent when the compost program in-
volves only yard waste and the products are used primarily for
landscaping (mulch) or in industrial boilers as fuel.
Incineration
One of the common ways in which the volume of waste is re-
duced is through combustion or incineration, a controlled burn-
ing process used by both governments and private companies
around the world. Some facilities convert the heat with water to
produce steam, which can then be used to generate electricity,
called waste-to-energy. In recent years, operators started separat-
ing the recyclable components of waste, such as glass and metals,
and then shredding the remaining materials before burning. The
process is used by more than one-fifth of U.S. municipal solid
waste incinerators to produce refuse-derived fuel, which can
then be used in facilities such as power plants.
Incineration works best for nonhazardous waste, because
destroying chemical compounds and disease-causing organisms
is sometimes difficult, even when burning material at very high
temperatures. The residual ash that is created, consisting of the
elements originally present in the waste, can often be used for
beneficial purposes, such as in constructing roads or building
parking lots. The EPA samples the ash to determine whether or
Waste Management Options
11
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
not it contains any traces of hazardous material; if so, it must be
treated as hazardous waste with special handling procedures.
While some consider incineration a renewable power re-
source because it burns material, such as wood, paper, tires, food
waste, and yard clippings, that would otherwise be sent to land-
fills, it does have drawbacks. For instance, the process of inciner-
ating municipal solid waste creates pollutants that are controlled
by federal Clean Air Act regulations. Facilities must secure emis-
sions permits because, depending on what is being burned, they
may emit nitrogen oxide, carbon dioxide, sulfur dioxide, and
trace amounts of toxic pollutants such as dioxin.
Integrated Waste Management
Some states have adopted a process for selecting which types of
techniques, technologies, and management programs they
should use for achieving waste management objectives, includ-
ing four methods identified by the EPA: source reduction, recy-
cling and composting, combustion, and landfills. Many states
and communities then prioritize these options in order of prefer-
ence because of the environmental impacts of each one. Califor-
nia, for instance, has chosen a hierarchical process that gives
preference to source reduction, followed by recycling and com-
posting, waste transformation, and landfilling. Combustion has
been replaced by waste transformation as an option in that state,
although the process still requires that recycling be considered
only after the maximum amount of source reduction has been
achieved (Tchobanoglous and Kreith 2002, 1.8).
Landfills
Early landfills, or dumps, were simply open trenches, sometimes
called tips, in which trash was heaped into piles and sometimes
covered with 12 to 15 inches of soil and then layered with other
refuse such as ash. Several large urban communities, including
Seattle, New Orleans, and San Francisco, built landfills during
the early 1900s, and the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers also ex-
perimented with landfills on military bases.
Today’s landfills are totally different from those built a hun-
dred years ago. Technology and sophisticated design are now ap-
plied to make landfills one of the most frequently used ways of
dealing with waste. The term sanitary landfill originally applied to
12
Background and History
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
facilities where waste was covered at the end of each day’s opera-
tion, but today, it refers to an engineered facility for municipal
solid waste operated to minimize environmental and public health
concerns. A secure landfill is one specializing in the management of
hazardous waste (Tchobanoglous and Kreith 2002, 14.2).
In most facilities, a deep trench, canyon, or depression with
an earth embankment is excavated. Sometimes these sites are
naturally occurring, such as an old quarry, but they are usually
purpose built for the location. Landfills are now usually built
with a flexible liner, made of clay or a synthetic material, that is
used to cover the bottom and sides of the facility. The liner helps
to keep any gases or liquid (known as leachate) from migrating
out of the landfill. Some materials may be banned from landfills,
including paints and solvents, motor oil, batteries, and pesti-
cides, unless the facility is permitted to handle these types of
products using specialized treatment (U.S. EPA 2007b).
Mechanical Biological Treatment
Waste management by way of mechanical biological treatment
involves both the mechanical sorting of waste and the biological
treatment of organic waste. In facilities where this strategy is
used, a bulk handling machine sorts out the recyclable compo-
nents of garbage, and that portion which is biodegradable is then
broken down through anaerobic digestion or composting. Some
of these treatments produce biogas, used to generate energy, and
others produce soil amendments that may be used by consumers
to augment poor soil conditions.
Phytoremediation
In the early 1990s, researchers began testing the use of green
plants and their associated microorganisms to stabilize or reduce
the contamination in waste soils, sludges, and other materials.
Since then, the process, known as phytoremediation, has been
used at more than 200 hazardous waste sites. It manages waste
that does not involve human-made chemicals, and it works espe-
cially well on sites with low concentrations of contaminants over
large cleanup areas. The plants take up contaminated waste
through their root systems, along with water that may or may not
be contaminated. Along with native plant species, trees such as
poplars and plants such as sunflowers are among those used 
Waste Management Options
13
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
because they grow quickly. These plants can adapt to local cli-
mates, are easy to plant and maintain, and have the ability to take
up large quantities of water through their roots, facilitating the
process (U.S. EPA 2007c).
Recycling
Recycling generally refers to the separation of materials in the
waste stream so that some of those materials can be reused. Re-
cycling is highly dependent on two factors: the availability of re-
cycled goods supplies and the market for those goods. From 1994
to 1997, for instance, the United States experienced a glut of
paper that had been collected for recycling; the market for old
newspapers dropped off, as did prices, and some communities
even had to store paper in warehouses as they waited for the
prices to rise again. Recycling is considered one of the best types
of waste management because it can stretch the capacity and life
of landfills by reducing the volume of materials considered as
trash, while reducing the amount of virgin material that is
needed for products and packaging. According to the Bureau of
International Recycling, without recycling, a substantial number
of end-of-life goods would end up in landfills, representing an
environmental and economic loss because the materials they con-
tain would be lost to the production cycle forever (Bureau of In-
ternational Recycling 2007).
Three types of recycling methods are used:
• Source separation: Households and businesses separate
their recyclable items from other waste at the source
where they are created, placing material into small con-
tainers or bins by type (paper, glass, plastic). Processing
is usually conducted by scrap dealers or taken to a con-
solidation site for sale to another processor.
• Container separation: Large bins or containers are used
to separate waste into three categories: nonrecyclable
waste, organic waste, and recyclables. Once at the col-
lection facility, the recyclables are separated out by type,
sometimes by manual sorting. Some communities rely
on a bag system, with all recyclables placed in a visually
distinct blue bag for collection (blue bags differentiate
recyclables from trash and yard waste, the bags for
which are usually black or green).
14
Background and History
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
• Commingled collection: All waste is commingled and
collected by a single truck. Recyclable materials are
sorted and processed by mechanical means including
magnets and shredders. This method is sometimes called
front-end processing or refuse-derived fuel processing.
Most recycling efforts focus on homeowner or community
involvement, such as the provision of bins by the local govern-
ment to home dwellers so that items can be picked up at the curb-
side as a regular part of trash collection services. Other areas
have experimented with drop-off stations for items such as paint,
appliances, consumer electronics, and Christmas trees, which are
then recycled and processed depending on the type of material.
Another strategy is a buy-back program, a low-cost, centralized
operation whereby items such as aluminum cans or glass bottles
can be given to a recycler for a fixed amount of payment, such as
by the pound. This method is most successful in states that have
bottle deposit laws, which encourage recycling and reduce the
amount of waste that must be landfilled or incinerated.
Source Reduction 
One of the more recent strategies is to reduce the volume of
waste, or alternatively, to reduce the level of waste toxicity. A va-
riety of ways exist in which source reduction, also known as pol-
lution prevention or waste prevention, can be accomplished,
such as designing packaging in such a way that the product can
be refilled, as, for example, with shampoo. Maintaining and re-
pairing durable products, such as bicycle and automobile tires,
can increase their use and alleviate the need for more frequent re-
placement. Other methods of source reduction include develop-
ing more concentrated products, such as laundry detergent, or
packaging products in larger bulk sizes. Much of the emphasis in
source reduction is placed on consumer choice—making buyers
take responsibility for the amount of waste they produce. For ex-
ample, offices and universities might reduce paper waste by
telling their employees or students to print documents on both
sides of paper; electronic messaging can reduce paper consump-
tion even more. Providing linen napkins in a restaurant cuts
down on the use and disposal of paper napkins. Source reduction
may also require a change in behavior that cannot be legislated
or regulated by government, only by societal or peer pressure.
Waste Management Options
15
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
Consumers might be encouraged to reuse containers rather than
throwing them away and buying new ones, to rent or borrow
supplies, and to share items such as catalogs and magazines.
Other techniques are to request being taken off of bulk mailing
lists, receive statements and bills electronically rather than by
paper copies, and donate unwanted items to charities.
Not every strategy can be used in every situation, however.
Urban dwellers may find it difficult to set up a backyard com-
posting bin, and some documents must be printed on paper for
legal reasons. Garage and yard sales are prohibited in some resi-
dential areas, and not every community has set up a hazardous
waste collection program. But these forms of resourceful living
allow for a mixture of programs and ideas that can be adapted to
a household or commercial operation rather than requiring a
one-size-fits-all approach.
Waste Transfer Stations
In many communities, both urban and rural, municipal solid
waste goes through another processing point called a waste
transfer station. A garbage collection truck may take its load to
one of these facilities, where the waste is stored temporarily until
it can be loaded onto a larger truck or transport vehicle for ship-
ment to a disposal site, such as a landfill. Using a transfer station
can reduce the number of vehicle miles traveled to and from the
landfill, allowing smaller trucks to make shorter trips or maneu-
ver through urban streets more easily than large vehicles. Trans-
fer stations can also be located outside of residential areas to
avoid the problems of odor and flyaway waste that become a
neighborhood nuisance. Waste transfer stations may also include
loading docks, parking areas, or storage facilities.
History of Waste Management
Any history of waste management in the United States begins in
colonial America, where farmers simply cast off organic waste re-
sulting from agricultural production. Recycling was a common
element of a society in which manufactured goods were rare and
costly. If something was broken, it was not tossed into a waste bin
but was reconfigured in some way to make it useable for some
other purpose. Old, tattered clothes, for instance, were ripped
16
Background and History
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
into long strips and used as bandages, for curling hair, or for
tying up garden vegetables on poles. Scrap dealers traveled the
countryside buying up unwanted or broken items that could
later be sold to someone else who found a use for them.
As urban centers began to develop in the 18th and early 19th
centuries, the waste stream consisted primarily of animal ma-
nure, food scraps, and human waste. By the mid-19th century,
those wastes (along with fireplace ash and street sweepings)
were used as fertilizer on fields or as a soil amendment. Human
waste, also called night soil, was picked up by laborers paid by
households wealthy enough to hire someone else to take care of
an odorous problem. Even small communities had crews to clean
up horse manure on streets and thoroughfares, since the animals’
owners took no responsibility for the waste they created. “Refuse
is primarily an urban blight,” notes historian Martin Melosi.
“Agrarian societies generally avoided refuse pollution, while
cities and towns faced the gravest dangers” (2001, 93).
The Industrial Revolution led to wondrous inventions and
discoveries, but the affluence of the United States also led to an
increasingly serious problem in the form of solid waste. During
most of the 19th century, municipalities focused primarily on the
collection of food waste and horse manure. Horse-drawn carts
were used to gather waste from piles in the street, with putrefac-
tion in trenches and piles the primary method of disposal. In
some areas, refuse was simply dumped into the ocean or other
bodies of water. Organic materials, once disposed of, were
treated with the naive attitude of “out of sight, out of mind.”
Melosi notes, “As more was learned over time about the chang-
ing nature of the waste stream, older collection and disposal
methods came into question and were sometimes modified, but
they were rarely abandoned” (2001, 71).
In many cities, scavenging through refuse bins and piles of
garbage on the streets was a way to make a living. Cart men, scow
trimmers, ragpickers, and urban residents were often exposed to
filth and disease, and reformers attempted to clean up urban cen-
ters and slaughterhouses as part of the Progressive Era at the turn
of the 20th century. Groups like the Citizens Association of New
York, the Civic Improvement League of St. Louis, and the
Philadelphia Municipal Association organized not only to clean
up the trash but also to seek ways of ensuring that it was treated,
despite some unscrupulous city contractors who sometimes just
dumped barge loads of refuse into rivers and lakes (Rogers 2005).
History of Waste Management
17
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
Documentary film producer and author Heather Rogers
makes an interesting observation about the development of
waste management as a social and political problem:
Garbage as we know it is a relatively new invention
predicated on the monumental technological and social
changes wrought by industrialization. Until mass pro-
duction became the norm in the United States, manu-
factured commodities were always expensive and not
always available; most ready-mades were imported
from Europe. Such items were too dear to use once, then
discard. The waste of pre-industrial and early industrial
societies was comparatively minimal and for the most
part could be absorbed back into the earth.
That’s not to say there weren’t serious health prob-
lems due to a lack of organized refuse management in
cities, but the contents of the rubbish bin were relatively
benign. (2005, 31)
George E. Waring, a Civil War veteran who became commis-
sioner of the New York Street Cleaning Department in 1895, was
the first U.S. sanitarian, responsible for setting up a municipal
trash collection and street-cleaning office for the city. Waring,
who is profiled in Chapter 5, pioneered new methods of both col-
lecting and treating municipal waste, and he developed a corps
of workers known as the White Wings because of their starched
white uniforms. Waring put an end to the scavenging and illegal
dumping of waste by developing a system whereby residents
presorted their trash and licensed haulers loaded it onto barges,
which were taken to a small island for processing.
One popular method for dealing with waste, the incinerator
or combustor, was brought to the United States from Europe in
the late 19th century. The first garbage incinerator was built by
the U.S. Army on Governor’s Island, New York, in 1885 to cre-
mate solid waste; an estimated 180 additional incinerators were
constructed over the next 25 years. By 1910, however, incinera-
tion was no longer considered a waste panacea because Ameri-
can garbage tended to be wetter (meaning that it contained more
organic material such as food scraps) than European trash, and it
took much more fuel to burn. The facilities were capital intensive
and relied on skilled labor, making incineration more expensive
than other reliable methods for disposing of waste.
18
Background and History
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
Waring’s reforms in waste disposal led to the growth of the
public health movement in the United States. The discovery of
bacteria as vectors for disease and the spread of virulent illnesses
in Europe, and urban population growth in American cities led
to the development of urban sanitation departments and acade-
mic programs focusing on waste disposal. Municipal govern-
ments dealt with both the collection and the disposal of waste,
recognizing that what was once merely a nuisance was now a se-
rious problem that had been neglected for too long. Public works
departments took over the task of dealing with household refuse,
some of which was collected by contractors, and lucrative agree-
ments emerged at the same time as complaints about corruption
among city officials. By the early 20th century, local governments
also began separating street cleaning, which was easy and cheap,
from garbage collection, which was expensive and complex and
considered a more technical problem as sanitation engineering
emerged as a profession. The first organized curriculum in sani-
tary engineering was offered at the Massachusetts Institute of
Technology in 1894.
Waterway dumping became an expedient method of dealing
with garbage, especially for communities adjacent to rivers and
along coastlines before the turn of the 20th century. In Seattle, for
instance, residents complained about poor trash management in
the 1890s, so city officials began off-loading garbage and ash into
Puget Sound. Chicago trash was dumped into Lake Michigan,
even though the lake also served as the city’s water supply and
commercial fishery. Louisiana officials justified the practice of
dumping garbage into the Mississippi River by rationalizing that
dumping trash into such an immense body of water that was in
constant motion would result in only a limited impact (Rogers
2005, 67–68).
Another popular method for getting rid of garbage was feed-
ing it to swine. Organic waste was commonly separated out from
other types of trash, and hog feeding was even recommended as
a food producing and waste conservation method by the U.S.
Food and Drug Administration during World War I. Major swine
feedlots, sometimes called piggeries, were built in cities such as
Los Angeles and Kansas City, Missouri, and in the 1930s, feeding
swine organic refuse was the most prevalent method of food
waste disposal. By 1939, the U.S. Public Health Service estimated
that 52 percent of cities were feeding garbage to swine.
History of Waste Management
19
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
With industrialization, the American Water Works Associa-
tion focused on a different problem in the 1920s, claiming that
most industrial wastes were detrimental to water supplies. Con-
sumers were aware that industrial waste contaminated local wa-
terways, imparting an offensive taste, discoloration, and odor,
but they knew little about the issue beyond turbidity, or cloudi-
ness of the water. Gradually, incidents throughout the United
States focused attention on the health problems. In the early
1930s, public health officials found that a municipal garbage
dump near Indianapolis had tainted local water supplies. Simi-
larly, Southern California officials began monitoring groundwa-
ter supplies, looking for industrial waste contamination. In the
“Montebello Incident” of 1945, they found evidence of an organic
chemical from a weed killer manufacturing facility that had trav-
eled more than 15 miles to contaminate public water wells. As
the incidence of contamination increased, public health officials
took a second look at using the ground to dump waste (Colten
and Skinner 1996, 24–25).
Prior to the 1930s, only a few industries, such as smelters
and some refineries, created waste that was considered danger-
ous, and even those produced relatively small volumes. As the
chemical industry grew during the 1930s and 1940s, the amount
of waste produced grew astronomically, especially synthetic or-
ganic chemicals used as pesticides and fungicides. Added to the
mix were chemical warfare agents. Disposal of the wastes ranged
from incineration to burial in landfills, open dumping, and de-
positing in waterways and quarries. Short-term considerations
appeared to determine what type of disposal method was used,
and where (Colten and Skinner 1996, 5–7).
Waste management was almost always considered a local
government problem, and between World War I and World War
II, municipalities were usually able to handle the trash generated
by residents. Gradually, however, the amount of solid waste
began to increase; the National League of Cities estimated that
the rate of increase after World War I was five times the rate of
population growth (Luton 1996, 122). Cities began operating
sewage treatment plants during the 1930s as they sought ways to
differentiate among the various types of waste and how to treat
them. Prior to World War II, however, the practice of separating
organic materials and putting them back into the soil was aban-
doned, as was the idea that waste services should pay for them-
selves through salvaged materials. Trash was seen as material
20
Background and History
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
that no longer had use value. In the hands of the sanitation engi-
neer, garbage was handled as an innocuous and unavoidable
class of debris. But by the 1930s, all U.S. cities with populations
of more than 100,000 adopted some form of organized refuse col-
lection and disposal (Rogers 2005).
Sanitary landfills were almost universally praised as the so-
lution for garbage and municipal waste through the 1940s, al-
though professional organizations noted the need for safeguards.
Dumps, which were considered the least expensive form of dis-
posal for nonorganic garbage, were no longer isolated in the
countryside, but instead were purpose-built sanitary facilities
that made it less expensive to transport trash away from the city.
The first landfill was built outside the city limits of Fresno, Cali-
fornia, in 1934 using compaction and then covering the trash
with dirt to keep rodents out. Ironically, the facility would later
be added to the nation’s Superfund list (see below) as a haz-
ardous waste site needing remediation and cleanup.
Over the next 25 years, landfill operations were improved to
maximize compaction and operate with fewer workers, becom-
ing more cost effective than incineration; by the mid-1960s, only
about 10 percent of solid waste in the United States was being in-
cinerated, with the majority of the remainder buried in landfills.
But as environmental concerns surrounding landfills began to
grow, pressure was placed on the federal government to examine
the consequences of using landfills, such as groundwater conta-
mination, harmful air emissions (especially with the growth in
the plastics industry and products), and odor control. The emerg-
ing environmental movement provided better solutions to deal-
ing with trash, which had not only become a visual blight but
also had a negative impact on the quality of life.
Those concerns were exacerbated by the growth of disposable
packaging that became the norm after World War II. Procter and
Gamble introduced the first disposable diaper in 1961, and new
products like disposable razors and single-use aluminum contain-
ers that could be thrown away became commonplace. Throwaway
containers and attractive packaging increased the amount of trash
that needed to be disposed of, especially synthetics. By 1960, plas-
tics surpassed aluminum as one of the largest industries in the
United States, but also seen was an increase in toxins entering the
waste stream. Polyethylene containers, a major source of toxic ma-
terials, were used for nearly every conceivable consumer need. In
the 1960s, there were concerns that some plastics might potentially
History of Waste Management
21
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
be dangerous, especially if burned, producing toxic fumes. The de-
bate about the safety of plastic continues, with some studies warn-
ing of potential health risks.
Consumers gravitated toward purchasing beverages in con-
tainers made of polyethylene terephthalate. Bottled water sales,
for instance, increased from 3.8 billion units sold in 1997 to 27.9
billion in 2005. These bottles frequently end up as litter and have
only a 23 percent recycling rate, lower than any of the other most
common packaging materials. This becomes a waste manage-
ment problem because the bottles that do end up in the trash do
not degrade. The Recycling Institute estimates that about 18 bil-
lion barrels of crude oil equivalent were consumed in 2005 to re-
place the 2 million tons of PET bottles that were wasted instead
of recycled (Groff 2007). The problem was exacerbated as the era
of refillable glass bottles ended, an issue described in more detail
in Chapter 2.
By the turn of the 21st century, waste management was 
almost a nonissue, compared with other environmental prob-
lems. Global climate change, wildfires, droughts,  drinking water
shortages, and endangered species crowded virtually everything
else off the political agenda. Occasionally, a news report would
cover a new development at the Yucca Mountain nuclear waste
repository, or a press release was featured about the 10 most pol-
luted places in the world (detailed in Chapter 6). But scholarly ar-
ticles and books and government funds for waste researchers
appear to have dried up, along with the public’s perception of ur-
gency. Dealing with garbage became an issue no one seemed to
think about; much the same way it was out of sight, out of mind
earlier in U.S. history.
Federal Legislation and Regulation
In reviewing federal waste legislation from a chronological per-
spective, it might seem as if the U.S. Congress and the executive
branch of the federal government moved back and forth from
one type of waste or management strategy to another, and in-
deed, this is largely the case. During the early 20th century, for in-
stance, the federal government began to regulate some types of
materials while seemingly ignoring others. In 1908, the transport
of hazardous materials and waste was regulated by the Explo-
22
Background and History
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
sives and Combustibles Act, which focused on the rail transport
of explosives used in mining. Officials agreed that certain opera-
tions that used hazardous materials needed to be monitored so
that the waste from those operations was handled properly. But
since waste management was considered primarily a local prob-
lem, the federal government seldom stepped in unless the issue
involved national security or interstate commerce.
In contrast, radioactive waste developed as an issue in the
1950s and 1960s as government officials attempted to find ways to
deal with the accumulation of materials that were the by-products
of the military’s buildup of weapons after World War II and dur-
ing the Cold War with the Soviet Union. The focus was on na-
tional security and the nonproliferation of nuclear technology and
materials to other countries. After passage of the Atomic Energy
Act in 1954, businesses partnered with the government to com-
mercialize nuclear power plants, although the amount of waste
from these facilities was only about one-quarter of the waste pro-
duced from weapons research and production. The Atomic En-
ergy Commission (AEC) realized that eventually some sort of
large storage alternative would need to be developed, and in
1955, it asked the National Academy of Sciences to explore op-
tions for disposal. In 1957, the Academy issued a report recom-
mending that the most promising method for disposal would be
burial in underground salt mines through which no water could
pass; such mines are located on the south rims of the Great Lakes,
which range from New York to Michigan (McCutcheon 2002).
The government, however, chose a salt mine near Lyons,
Kansas, to begin studies of radioactive waste disposal, spending
10 years in research there before abandoning the site as unac-
ceptable in 1972. Residents and political leaders in Carlsbad,
New Mexico, decided that they had a perfect site 26 miles east of
the city and heavily lobbied state and federal officials to consider
the location for a repository. Their motivation was almost purely
economic, as they sought a replacement for the jobs lost in the de-
clining potash mines. The AEC accepted the proposal and an-
nounced plans to study the site as a potential $25 million nuclear
waste storage facility. In 1979, Congress authorized the Waste
Isolation Pilot Plant (WIPP) as a repository for disposing of ra-
dioactive waste resulting from defense activities.
Thus began a political battle between environmental groups
and critics of the plan that delayed the facility’s opening for more
Federal Legislation and Regulation
23
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
than a decade as officials tried to determine whether safety and
other concerns were being adequately addressed. It was not until
1991 that the secretary of the Department of Energy informed the
secretary of the Interior that the WIPP was ready to begin ac-
cepting wastes for a five-year test period. President George H. W.
Bush then named the EPA as the WIPP’s independent regulator,
setting the stage for the development of operating criteria. In
1998, the EPA announced its certification of compliance with the
criteria, and a year later the first shipments of nuclear waste were
sent from New Mexico’s Los Alamos National Laboratory.
The federal government’s role in managing other forms of
waste has shifted from one that was purely a local function ini-
tially to one that requires the participation of public entities at all
levels. Statutory control began in 1965 with the Solid Waste Dis-
posal Act (SWDA), which was enacted as part of the Clean Air
Act amendments. Congress realized that state and local govern-
ments were no longer capable of handling waste on their own as
the nature of the waste stream changed. It gave the Department
of Health and Human Services (then known as the Department
of Health, Education, and Welfare, or HEW) advisory authority
over municipal waste programs and the funding of research and
development. Policy makers believed that scientists could find
technology to “fix” the garbage problem (such as the addition of
toxic materials to household trash) by coming up with new meth-
ods of disposal. The Public Health Service was given jurisdiction
over municipal waste, and the Bureau of Mines was tasked with
the disposal of utility plant waste. The legislation also encour-
aged regional solid waste management planning and directed
the secretary of HEW to provide 50 percent matching grants to
states to survey their solid waste practices and to develop solid
waste disposal plans. At this point, the federal government’s pri-
mary goal was providing financial and technical assistance, not
regulatory authority.
Air pollution concerns related to incinerators were ad-
dressed with the 1967 Air Quality Act, which required facilities to
place pollution-control devices called scrubbers on the stacks
that released smoke and fine particulate matter. The devices were
expensive and led to the closure of many incinerator plants, even
those that had benefited from new technology designed to re-
duce odors and smoke. Although incineration was considered a
useful technology for dealing with waste, especially in urban
areas, the concern over air quality was greater than its utility.
24
Background and History
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
Three years later, the Resource Recovery Act was passed, re-
flecting the wave of public support for environmental protection
that marked the 1970s. This time, Congress focused on recycling
and hazardous waste—topics that had previously gone unrecog-
nized as worthy of federal attention. The newly created EPA as-
sumed responsibility for most issues through its Office of Solid
Waste. The law moved beyond the 1965 statute by increasing the
federal share of grants for planning and development of solid
waste facilities from 50 to 75 percent. Funding was primarily tar-
geted at refuse-derived fuel systems and demonstration projects.
The EPAalso began developing definitions and guidelines for han-
dling specialized types of waste, such as hospital wastes that were
difficult to segregate but were considered potentially contami-
nated. The statute also called for the EPA to study ways for imple-
menting a system of national repositories for the storage and
disposal of hazardous wastes, although the term hazardous wastes
was not explicitly defined. The report, submitted to Congress in
1973, indicated that current efforts to manage hazardous waste
were inadequate, with the EPA recommending that a national haz-
ardous waste regulatory program be established (Davis 1993, 19).
Congress began its deliberations over the nation’s waste poli-
cies in 1974, with hearings that emphasized the serious nature of
the problems, especially the increase in the number of open
dumps in the United States. But other issues, such as the oil crisis
that started in 1973 with the embargo imposed by the Organiza-
tion of the Petroleum Exporting Countries and energy production
concerns, kept waste management from advancing further on the
governmental agenda. With the resignation of President Richard
Nixon and Democratic majorities seated in Congress, legislators
returned to the business of environmental protection with two
statutes that represented a change in policy direction. In 1975,
Congress passed the Hazardous Materials Transportation Act,
which was implemented by the federal Department of Trans-
portation. The statute was enacted in part to address the illegal
dumping of waste as many landfills refused to accept hazardous
materials and as the habit of “midnight dumping” of waste be-
came commonplace. Waste brokers found it relatively easy (and
much cheaper) to just dump waste along roadsides or in rural
areas rather than pay for disposal. Federal agencies were unpre-
pared to handle both the amount and types of waste, but they
were under pressure from environmental organizations to take a
stronger role in dealing with disposal issues.
Federal Legislation and Regulation
25
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
Responding once again to public opinion, Congress enacted
the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA) in 1976 as
the environmental movement’s advocacy for pollution control
grew stronger. RCRA, an amendment to the 1965 SWDA, divided
the management of waste into two categories, hazardous and
nonhazardous, and directed the EPA to develop regulations to
determine which facilities should be classified as sanitary land-
fills and which should be categorized as open dumps. The legis-
lation was important because it provided a definition for
household waste as “any solid waste [including garbage, trash,
and sanitary waste in septic tanks] derived from households [in-
cluding single and multiple residences, hotels and motels,
bunkhouses, ranger stations, crew quarters, campgrounds, picnic
grounds, and day-use recreation areas].” To the surprise of some,
RCRA’s definition of solid waste included liquids and contained
gaseous material. Under this statute, most household waste
could be disposed of in landfills, along with sewage sludge, mu-
nicipal solid waste incinerator ash, agricultural wastes, and some
mining wastes. Another important feature of RCRA was the de-
velopment of a “cradle to grave” system that required manage-
ment of wastes from the time they are created until they are
safely disposed of, a concept that is an important element of haz-
ardous waste management today.
The energy crisis of the early 1970s opened a window of op-
portunity for an improved form of incinerator called waste-to-
energy (WTE), or mass-burn plants. By burning trash and other
solid waste (even excess watermelons that could not be sold) at
high temperatures, and excluding noncombustible materials
such as appliances and dirt, water could be heated, turned into
steam, and used to generate electricity. Because fossil fuels were
in short supply and prohibitively expensive, engineers redevel-
oped the older type of combustion plants to produce power and
reduce the amount of waste being sent to landfills. In order to
provide an incentive for building new WTE facilities, Congress
enacted the 1978 Public Utility Regulatory Policies Act. Local
utilities were required to purchase a certain portion of their
power from WTE, ensuring a market for the producers. The fa-
cilities were welcomed in areas of the country where landfills
were rapidly filling up as the population density increased, such
as California and the East Coast.
The deregulation policies of the Reagan administration, which
began in 1981, led to a greater emphasis on privatizing solid waste
26
Background and History
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
management, rather than assigning the task to municipal govern-
ment. Contractual services, provided by private companies, be-
came more prevalent, especially in urban areas such as New York
City. In 1980, approximately 60 of the new WTE incinerators were
running and 200 were operational by 1985. But as quickly as the
phenomenon and accompanying tax incentives had been created,
the number of incinerators appeared to reach a plateau, with about
200 operational in 1990 (Walsh, Warland, and Smith 1997, 6–7).
As the price of oil dropped and public opposition to inciner-
ation developed, the issue of hazardous waste resurfaced. Haz-
ardous waste issues (referred to as hazardous substances in the
legislation) and radioactive wastes were addressed by Congress
in 1980 with passage of the Comprehensive Environmental Re-
sponse, Compensation, and Liability Act (CERCLA), also known
as Superfund. The federal government was given the lead role in
establishing a program to assess liability in cleaning up sites, and
remediation was to be accomplished through creation of a $1.6
billion fund, which was expected to finance cleanup operations
for five years. The monies were derived from a tax on chemical
feedstock producers and from federal revenues. The EPA was
also directed to develop the National Priorities List (NPL) of the
most hazardous waste sites in the United States, which was to in-
clude at least one site from each state. The measure made its way
through Congress and was signed by President Gerald Ford just
before President Jimmy Carter took office.
The EPA attempted to meet a 1978 deadline for promulgating
interim hazardous waste regulations, but the agency’s failure to
do so led to widespread criticism from Congress. Constituents
concerned about sites in their neighborhoods put pressure on
their elected representatives, who felt the EPA was devoting too
few resources to hazardous waste programs. Despite these reser-
vations, Congress reauthorized CERCLA in 1980. Its concerns
were magnified throughout the early 1980s and were highlighted
by a 1983 Office of Technology Assessment report indicating that
problems were encountered in the collection of data about the
amount and types of waste generated and the lack of incentives
available to waste producers to consider pretreatment of recycling
of wastes in lieu of land-based containment. A similar study by
the National Academy of Sciences in 1983 pointed to a need for a
clear definition of hazardous waste and training on waste reduc-
tion practices for companies generating hazardous waste (Davis
1993, 31–32).
Federal Legislation and Regulation
27
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
The political momentum for policy change grew with the dis-
covery of soil contaminated with dioxin from waste oil sprayed
on roadways near Times Beach, Missouri, in late 1982. The EPA
began taking samples of the soil and later warned residents about
potential health effects from exposure. The problem became so se-
rious that the community was evacuated, and eventually, the fed-
eral government purchased all of the homes and property in the
area. While stories about hazardous waste dumping had ap-
peared periodically in the media, they seemed to be isolated prob-
lems in the minds of most Americans. But Times Beach made
headlines nationwide, focusing attention on the problem and
again putting pressure on Congress to do something.
That “something” took the form of the 1986 Superfund
Amendments and Reauthorization Act (SARA), which provided
$8.5 billion through 1991 to clean up the most dangerous sites, set
strict standards and timetables for their cleanup, and required
companies to provide communities with information on the haz-
ardous chemicals they used or emitted. Like the original Super-
fund legislation, funding for SARA came from a tax on petroleum
and chemical feedstocks, a broad-based business tax, and federal
revenues, plus cleanup expenses recovered from firms responsible
for polluting a site on the NPL. The EPA was directed to work on
375 sites within five years, with an emphasis on some form of per-
manent cleanup that did not involve storing waste in landfills.
The public’s concerns about energy and fossil fuels then
began to eclipse concerns about solid waste management, and
much of the EPA’s interests shifted as well. Congress reautho-
rized the 1976 legislation in the form of the Hazardous and Solid
Waste Amendments of 1984, expecting that technology-forcing
methods of regulation (such as new standards for sanitary land-
fills) would lead to solutions that were more cost effective. The
EPA, however, placed its faith in source reduction as a way of ex-
tending the life of landfills; this issue is discussed in more detail
in Chapter 2.
A series of widely publicized events in the 1980s focused
public attention on infectious and medical waste for a short pe-
riod of time. The New York City Fire Department was responding
to a warehouse fire in 1986, when officials discovered about 1,400
bags of medical waste that had been illegally dumped there. The
company had submitted documents to the state’s Department of
Environmental Conservation stating that the wastes had been in-
cinerated. A year later, a barge called the Mobro 4000 left Islip,
28
Background and History
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
New York, with more than 4,000 tons of garbage, headed for a
landfill in North Carolina. Officials were tipped off that the barge
carried medical waste, including hospital gowns, syringes, and
diapers, and was looking for a place to unload. Once its mission
was discovered, the barge headed back to sea, moving along the
East Coast and finally traveling more than 6,000 miles before offi-
cials allowed it to dock to incinerate the waste. That same year,
children playing in a trash bin in Indianapolis found vials of
blood infected with the AIDS virus that had been improperly dis-
posed of by a medical office. These events worried the public and
led to the initial momentum for legislative action.
The most notable instances involving medical waste took
place in 1988, when needles, syringes, and empty prescription
bottles with New York addresses wound up on the shores of the
Atlantic Ocean in New Jersey. Two months later, 10 miles of Long
Island, New York, beaches were closed when medical waste
washed ashore, and later that summer, similar incidents were re-
ported along the coastlines from Maine to the Gulf of Mexico and
along the Great Lakes. Congress responded with the Medical
Waste Tracking Act, which mandated that the path of medical
waste be followed for two years in participating states. The
statute defined the term medical waste; established a “cradle-to-
grave” tracking system; required standards for segregating,
packaging, labeling, marking, and storing medical waste; and es-
tablished record-keeping requirements and penalties that could
be imposed for mismanagement.
RCRA was amended in 1996 with the Land Disposal Pro-
gram Flexibility Act, which exempts hazardous waste from
RCRA if it is treated to the point where it no longer exhibits the
characteristics that make it hazardous. The flexibility component
of the statute also applies to landfills that receive less than 20 tons
of MSW and exempts small landfills in arid areas from ground-
water monitoring requirements if no evidence exists of ground-
water contamination.
Regulation of emissions from solid waste management facil-
ities began in 1990 with passage of the Clean Air Act Amend-
ments (CAA), requiring the EPA to develop rules to regulate
sources, including landfills and hazardous waste incineration fa-
cilities, and the open burning of solid waste. The changes in the
law were a result of studies showing that landfills and other fa-
cilities can be a major source of emissions that contribute to am-
bient ozone pollution, global warming, and concerns about toxic
Federal Legislation and Regulation
29
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
air pollution. Under the CAA, facilities must achieve the greatest
degree of emission reduction possible through the application of
best available control technologies and procedures. The EPA’s
regulations, finalized in 2000, apply to particulate matter, sulfur
dioxide, hydrogen chloride, nitrogen oxides, carbon monoxide,
lead, cadmium, mercury, dioxins, and dibenzofurans. Another
set of regulations was issued in 1996 for existing municipal solid
waste facilities, requiring the installation of landfill gas collection
and control systems, which affected about 300 of the nation’s
largest landfill facilities. These regulations focused on methane
gas, which also contributes to global warming and traps heat
more effectively than carbon dioxide. Even though U.S. landfills
are the smallest source of methane emissions created through the
decomposition of organic refuse, the growth of developing coun-
tries is likely to increase landfill development. Perhaps more im-
portant, landfills are one of the few sources of methane gas that
can be controlled, in comparison with those connected with do-
mestic animals, rice production, and naturally occurring sources
such as swamps and bogs (Tchobanoglous and Kreith 2002,
2.24–2.35).
As part of an integrated approach to waste management, the
federal government has also attempted to encourage voluntary
source reduction, mostly through financial support of pilot pro-
grams. In 1996, Congress enacted the Bill Emerson Good Samari-
tan Food Donation Act, which protects businesses, organizations,
and individuals who donate food in good faith from any legal li-
ability that may arise. Donations to food banks from restaurants,
for instance, may not only feed hungry people but also reduce the
mass of organic material that would otherwise be dumped into a
landfill. Most source-reduction initiatives are regulated by the
EPA, and some states and local governments provide technical or
financial support, such as grants.
Since 1965, the states have played a secondary role to the
federal government in waste management, primarily because
they have been the recipients of funding (grants) and have been
reactive in responding to federal regulations. Programs such as
matching grants for planning and demonstration projects made
states reliant on federal direction, and it was not until the passage
of RCRA in 1976 (reinforced by the 1984 RCRA amendments) that
the government provided legislative guidance on the prepara-
tion of state solid waste management plans. The EPA was dele-
gated the authority for approving state plans according to six
30
Background and History
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
requirements for compliance, including the identification of au-
thorities responsible for plan implementation, the prohibition of
new dumps, and the closing and upgrading of existing dumps.
Environmental Justice and 
Waste Management
Opposition to incineration was loosely organized in the early
1980s, driven by residents who did not want a facility in their
neighborhood, an issue that would also be faced by municipal
governments seeking sites for new landfills. Concerns were
raised about the dangers posed by toxic air emissions when trash
was burned and over the issue of what to do about incinerator
ash. Critics argued that incinerator operators could not effec-
tively separate hazardous waste from MSW and that carcinogens
such as furans and dioxins were being released into the air. A de-
bate erupted over whether the ash produced from burning
processes should be classified as hazardous and sent to specially
designed landfills, rather than mixed in with other waste, which
would significantly increase the cost of incineration.
In 1984, a 90-page study, the Cerrell Report, was written for
the California Waste Management Board, identifying ways to
overcome the political obstacles to siting waste-to-energy facili-
ties. The report suggested that facility proponents look at com-
munity demographics to determine which areas would be the
least resistant to projects, noting that facilities would be likely to
be accepted in rural areas with politically conservative residents
who were above middle age, had an education level of high
school or less, and would receive significant economic benefits
from the facility (Walsh, Warland, and Smith 1997, 13–14).
When a copy of the Cerrell Report was obtained by anti-
incineration forces, opposition to various types of waste manage-
ment treatment really began to coalesce. The industry acronym
LULU (locally unwanted land uses) was used to describe facilities
that no one wanted; the acronym describing these residents’ sen-
timents is known as NIMBY (not in my backyard). Opposition de-
veloped throughout the United States in the mid-1980s, built
around what has been referred to as an “equity movement”—a
gradual mobilization around long-standing grievances among
members of a culturally identifiable collectivity, such as African
Environmental Justice and Waste Management
31
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
Americans, Native Americans, or women—which depends for its
success on the appropriate combination of political opportunities
and internal organization among those involved (Walsh, Warland,
and Smith 1997, 45).
Sociologist Robert Bullard, who has authored numerous
books on the issue of environmental equity, or environmental jus-
tice, as the concept is more commonly known, identified this
issue after studying the spatial location of all MSW facilities in
Houston as part of a class-action lawsuit. The litigation stemmed
from an attempt to site a municipal landfill in a suburban, mid-
dle-class neighborhood of single-family homeowners. The neigh-
borhood, Northwood Manor, was made up of more than 82
percent African American families, and Bullard determined that
it was not randomly selected for the landfill, as was the case
throughout the South. He found that garbage dumps, hazardous
waste landfills, incinerator operations, smelters, paper mills,
chemical plants, and other polluting facilities were being im-
posed on specific types of neighborhoods: “These industries
have generally followed the path of least resistance, which has
been to locate in economically poor and politically powerless
African American communities” (Bullard 2000, xiv–xv).
The first national protest on the issue of hazardous waste fa-
cility siting took place in 1982, when black residents in Warren
County, North Carolina, united in opposition to a proposed
dump for 32,000 cubic yards of soil contaminated with highly
toxic polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs). The soil had been ille-
gally dumped along roadsides by a waste hauler in 1978, collec-
tively constituting the largest spill ever documented in the
United States. The decision to bury the soil in Warren County
was made by the state’s governor, James Hunt, and the site was
later referred to by residents as “Hunt’s Dump.” Warren County
had the highest percentage of black residents in the state and had
one of the lowest levels of median family income. Local grass-
roots groups joined with national organizations to oppose the fa-
cility. During protests, hundreds of protesters were arrested,
marking “the first time anyone in the United States had been
jailed trying to halt a toxic waste landfill” (Bullard 2000, 31).
Environmental justice issues involving waste management
gained credibility with two critical reports issued in the 1980s.
The first was a 1983 report by the U.S. General Accounting Office
(now called the Government Accountability Office) that found a
strong relationship between the siting of four hazardous waste
32
Background and History
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
landfills and the race and socioeconomic status of surrounding
communities in Alabama, South Carolina, and North Carolina.
The second study was a 1987 publication of the United Church of
Christ’s Commission for Racial Justice titled Toxic Wastes and Race
in the United States: A National Report on the Racial and Socioeco-
nomic Characteristics of Communities with Hazardous Waste Sites. It
further documented the relationship between race and siting,
calling upon organizations to unite against the problem of envi-
ronmental racism.
Numerous examples exist of how environmental justice and
waste management issues intersect. For instance, in 1990, 
Browning-Ferris Industries (BFI) began siting studies for a
garbage transfer and recycling facility in the predominantly
black neighborhood of Titusville in Birmingham, Alabama. The
company wanted to build on vacant property owned by a snack
foods company, which operated on an adjacent lot. Although BFI
followed the letter of the law in obtaining the necessary permits
for the facility, the nearby residents were never informed of the
nature of the operation. Once they learned about the trash facil-
ity, opponents raised concerns about drinking water quality and
the umbrella of secrecy under which the plant had quickly been
built. In 1994, activists marched on Birmingham’s City Hall to
protest the siting of the BFI plant, resulting in a confrontation be-
tween police and protesters. Although the company was later
found to have acted improperly, the city refused to stop the plant
from operating (Westra 2001).
Bullard (2000) notes that the mission of the EPA never in-
cluded addressing issues of environmental policies and practices
that result in unfair, unjust, and inequitable outcomes. The fed-
eral government took action in the 1990s, he says, only because
of mounting scientific evidence and prodding by grassroots or-
ganizations and educators. The federal government’s role be-
came solidified only when President Bill Clinton signed
Executive Order 12898, “Federal Actions to Address Environ-
mental Justice in Minority Populations and Low-Income Popula-
tions,” in 1994. The measure reinforced sections of the 1964 Civil
Rights Act and encompassed the 1970 National Environmental
Policy Act by requiring government agencies to consider envi-
ronmental justice concerns in assessing the impact of their pro-
jects and programs. The EPA went a step further in 1997 by
establishing the National Advisory Council on Environmental
Policy and Technology to examine facility permitting.
Environmental Justice and Waste Management
33
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
Since that time, environmental justice issues have arisen oc-
casionally, but they have been a part of overall concerns about
how to manage waste, especially when sites are selected in areas
with a large minority population, a topic that is addressed in
more detail in Chapter 2.
References
Bryant, Chris. 2007. “Fuels from the Forests.” Forest Magazine (Spring):
32–37.
Bullard, Robert D. 2000. Dumping in Dixie: Race, Class, and Environmental
Quality. Boulder, CO: Westview.
Bureau of International Recycling. 2007. “About Recycling.” [Online ar-
ticle; retrieved 4/16/07.] www.bir.org/aboutrecycling/.
Colten, Craig E., and Peter N. Skinner. 1996. The Road to Love Canal: Man-
aging Industrial Waste before EPA. Austin: University of Texas Press.
Davis, Charles. 1993. The Politics of Hazardous Waste. Englewood Cliffs,
NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Forest Preserve District of Cook County, Illinois. 1971. “Paper Bags.” Na-
ture Bulletin No. 438-A. [Online article; retrieved 4/29/07.] www.new-
ton.dep.anl.gov.
Great Idea Finder. “Shopping Bag.” [Online article; retrieved 4/29/07.]
http://www.ideafinder.com/history/inventions/shopbag.htm.
Groff, Rod. 2007. “A Greener Way to Hydrate.” Arizona Republic, July 7,
B-3.
Hook, Paula, and Joe E. Heimlich. 2007. “A History of Packaging.” Ohio
State University Fact Sheet. [Online information; retrieved 4/29/08.]
http://ohioline.osu.edu/cd-fact/0133.html.
Luton, Larry. 1996. The Politics of Garbage. Pittsburgh: University of Pitts-
burgh Press.
McCutcheon, Chuck. 2002. Nuclear Reactions: The Politics of Opening a Ra-
dioactive Waste Disposal Site. Albuquerque: University of New Mexico
Press.
Melosi, Martin. 2001. Effluent America: Cities, Industry, Energy and the En-
vironment. Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press.
Rogers, Heather. 2005. Gone Tomorrow: The Hidden Life of Garbage. New
York: New Press.
Tchobanoglous, George, and Frank Kreith. 2002. Handbook of Solid Waste
Management, 2nd ed. New York: McGraw-Hill.
34
Background and History
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
Turnberg, Wayne L. 1996. Biohazardous Waste: Risk Assessment, Policy, and
Management. New York: John Wiley & Sons.
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). 1982. Guide for Infectious
Waste. Washington, DC: EPA.
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). 2007a. “Basic Information:
Municipal Solid Waste.” [Online information; retrieved 4/17/07.]
http://www.epa.gov/msw/facts/htm.
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). 2007b. “Solid Waste Land-
fills.” [Online information; retrieved 4/17/07.] http://www.epa.gov/
garbage/landfill/sw_landfill.htm.
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). 2007c. “Using Phytoreme-
diation to Clean Up Sites.” [Online information; retrieved 7/5/07.]
http://www.epa.gov/superfund/accomp/news/phyto.htm.
Walsh, Edward J., Rex Warland, and D. Clayton Smith. 1997. Don’t Burn
It Here: Grassroots Challenges to Trash Incinerators. University Park: Penn-
sylvania State University Press.
Westra, Laura. 2001. “The Faces of Environmental Racism: Titusville, Al-
abama and BFI.” In Faces of Environmental Racism: Confronting Issues of
Global Justice, edited by Laura Westra and Bill E. Lawson. Lanham, MD:
Rowman and Littlefield.
World Health Organization (WHO). 1999. Safe Management of Wastes from
Health-Care Activities. Geneva: World Health Organization.
References
35
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
2
Problems, Controversies, 
and Solutions
Paper or Plastic?
The question “Paper or plastic?” is illustrative of the problem
that many consumers face as they deal with waste management
issues. As they approach the checkout counter of the typical gro-
cery store, they realize that they must make a decision as to
which kind of bag they will choose to contain their purchases. A
customer may consider whether or not a bag is made from a sus-
tainable source, or whether or not it is biodegradable, or the ease
of handling, or reuse, or any one of more than a dozen issues that
are both environmentally and politically sensitive. So which is
the “greener” choice for consumers?
Producers of both types of products argue that the facts are
on their side and that their product is better for the environment
than the other. A plastic bag begins its ubiquitous life as a form of
fossil fuel, made from crude oil, natural gas, or some other pe-
troleum derivative. Molecules are formed into polymers that are
heated, cooled, and then flattened to just a few millimeters in
thickness. Trillions of plastic bags are made every year; about
one-quarter of all plastic bags are produced in Asia, while North
America and Europe account for nearly 80 percent of their use.
Consumers use them for hauling away trash and garbage, for
carrying groceries and produce, for carrying retail items from the
store to the car, and for other routine purposes. The Worldwatch
Institute estimates that Americans throw away some 100 billion
37
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
polyethylene plastic bags each year, with less than 1 percent of
them recycled (Worldwatch Institute 2007).
One reusable bag company estimates that the average fam-
ily accumulates 60 plastic bags in only four trips to the grocery
store. The bags are lightweight, do not tear as easily as paper
bags, are distributed freely throughout the produce section of
stores, and can be reused for purposes ranging from an im-
promptu ice pack to making water balloons. Most of them end
up being thrown away, although that does not mean that they be-
come part of the waste stream. They are flimsy and easily held
aloft by winds that can carry them for miles across the landscape,
where they catch on trees and other vegetation; get trapped along
fence lines; become tucked into niches in rocks; clog sewers,
drainage ditches, and waterways; or worse yet, are ingested by
wildlife. Plastic bags do not biodegrade—they photodegrade
when they are exposed to sunlight, although no one is quite sure
how long that may take, as plastic bags have been a part of the
waste stream for less than 50 years. To estimate how long it
would actually take, researchers use respirometry tests. They
place a sample of a substance, such as a banana peel, in a vessel
containing microbe-rich compost, and then aerate the mixture.
Over the course of several days, the microorganisms assimilate
the sample bit by bit and produce carbon dioxide as an indicator
of degradation.
While the process works for organic matter such as banana
peels (which take several days to break down), nothing happens
when the tests are run on plastic bags. No carbon dioxide is pro-
duced and no degradation takes place because polyethylene is a
human-made polymer that microorganisms do not recognize as
food. But when plastic bags are exposed to ultraviolet radiation,
as they would be when exposed to sunlight, the polyethylene’s
polymer chains become brittle and start to crack. This result sug-
gests that they eventually will break down into microscopic
pieces, but no precise estimates are yet available on how long
that process will take (Lapidos 2007).
A new plastic bag–related problem has developed in the sub-
tropical oceans of the world, where currents move in a clockwise
spiral, or gyre, which traps debris that originates on land. The five
major subtropical gyres on Earth are created by airflows from the
tropics toward the polar regions. In these deep ocean regions,
trash and debris accumulate and are trapped in the maelstrom
38
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
and cannot be broken down by bacteria or other marine microor-
ganisms. One area of floating plastic debris is estimated to be as
large as the size of Texas, with objects in the gyre circulating for 16
years or more. A single ton of debris collected by researchers in-
cluded a drum of hazardous materials, an inflated volleyball half
covered in gooseneck barnacles, a plastic coat hanger, a cathode-
ray tube for a television, an inflated truck tire, polypropylene net
lines, and pieces of plastic and glass. Plastic resin pellets collected
indicate that they accumulate toxic chemicals such as DDT
(dichloro-diphenyl-trichloroethane), an insecticide banned in the
United States; the pellets are ingested by jellyfish, which are then
eaten by fish, and so on up the food chain. One study estimates
that the plastic polymers commonly used in consumer products
are indigestible by organisms, and ecologists believe it may take
as long as 500 years for degradation by sunlight to offset the slow
oxidation of their constituent parts (Moore 2003).
Other types of packaging containers, such as paper bags, have
been a part of society for a much longer period of time. The paper
industry of the late 1600s and early 1700s relied on fiber from re-
cycled cotton and linen, but rag shortages at that time led to a
search for a different source and ways to make paper. The answer
came in the mid-1800s with the discovery of a reliable way to make
paper from tree pulp. The process allowed manufacturers to make
bags that were relatively inexpensive, stored easily, and could be
made wherever a source of wood was readily available.
Because trees are considered a sustainable natural resource,
paper is perceived as a more environmentally sound way of deal-
ing with consumer demand for bags. Paper biodegrades even
when placed in landfills, unlike plastic. The same type of
respirometry tests used on banana peels have an effect on news-
papers and other paper products (newspapers take two to five
months to biodegrade in a compost heap, for instance). Paper can
be de-inked and reprocessed into pulp, which can then be made
into another paper product, although the life cycle is not infinite.
Consumers routinely recycle paper products, including paper
bags, but especially newspapers, so paper bags are less likely to
end up in landfills or on the landscape. They are less harmful if
swallowed or eaten by wildlife and are less likely to clog
drainage ditches or other waterways because the fibers in paper
break down in water. But paper bags take more energy to pro-
duce, making them more expensive than plastic bags, and are
Paper or Plastic?
39
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
being phased out of use by some retailers, who have opted for
the lighter weight (and less expensive) plastic bags.
So Which Bag Do You Choose?
Studies that look at the life cycle energy analyses of paper versus
plastic consider several factors, such as the total energy used to
manufacture the bag and the energy of its physical materials
(transportation, electricity, fuel extraction, and processing), the
amount of pollutants produced (airborne and waterborne), car-
rying capacity, recycling rates, and bagging techniques. If the pri-
mary consideration is solid waste, bigger definitely is not better.
Compared with paper grocery bags, plastic grocery bags (Film
and Bag Federation 2007):
• consume 40 percent less energy than paper
• generate 80 percent less solid waste
• produce 70 percent fewer atmospheric emissions
• release up to 94 percent fewer waterborne wastes
Some retailers have attempted to deal with the issue by de-
veloping and selling alternatives so that consumers will not have
to make the hard decisions on which bag to choose. In July 2007,
Whole Foods markets in the New York area started selling $15
cotton bags designed by Anya Hindmarch, who was previously
better known for her $1,500 purses. The company ordered 20,000
of the Hindmarch bags and had to limit sales to three to a cus-
tomer while supplies lasted because of demands by savvy shop-
pers. In Taiwan, sales of her “I’m not a plastic bag” bags caused
a stampede of would-be purchasers that sent 30 people to the
hospital and brought out riot police (Burros 2007).
While the paper versus plastic debate is ongoing, it is just
one facet of a growing international problem. After centuries of
dealing with waste, humanity could be expected to have devel-
oped numerous successful strategies that would eliminate the
problems waste causes, or eliminate waste entirely. However,
that is not the case. As the population grows, so, too, does the
amount of waste created, especially waste packaging like paper
and plastic. The next section identifies some of the key issues
being addressed by governments, trade associations, and non-
governmental organizations and discusses how well new strate-
40
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
gies are working. The chapter’s discussion is limited to issues
that face the United States; the international perspective is cov-
ered in Chapter 3.
Reducing the Amount of Waste
The amount of trash being created can be reduced in many ways,
but waste management experts believe that the first way to ad-
dress the mountains of waste being created is through source re-
duction, sometimes called pollution prevention, described in
detail in Chapter 1. Source reduction, defined as a net reduction
in the generation of waste compared with the previous amount of
waste generated, is almost always at the top of the waste man-
agement hierarchy. Strategies include developing products that
are durable, reusable, and remanufactured; products with no, or
reduced, toxic constituents; and products marketed with no, or re-
duced, packaging.
The last option is that which many consumers recognize as
source reduction. One of the early examples of this strategy is the
transition that occurred after record companies began releasing
music compact discs (CDs) in bulky cardboard packaging called
longboxes. These containers were designed to fit into the same size
retail slots as vinyl record albums, and took up a similar amount
of space. The longbox allowed music producers to use the same
approach to artwork and graphics featured on record album cov-
ers, along with liner notes that included song lyrics, information
about the artist and musicians, and marketing material. The long-
box was often twice the size of the product itself, and although the
extra packaging was unnecessary, it did give customers the per-
ception that they were getting more for their money.
The CD packaging that consumers purchased was usually
thrown away somewhere between the cash register and the car
stereo with virtually no possibility of being reused. Pressure by
environmental groups during the 1990s resulted in the longbox
being abandoned by the end of the decade in favor of the same
hinged polystyrene jewel cases that had been introduced in the
1980s. A single media tray contains the disc, and the hinged lid
makes for easy access. The two-part design of the jewel box keeps
the disc from being scratched yet allows visibility for making a
music selection. A slimline version of the jewel case is also in use
now, as are digipacks, a generic term used for cardboard CD
Reducing the Amount of Waste
41
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
cases that are less durable but considered more environmentally
sound, and CD sleeves similar to envelopes.
Compact discs (and their relatives, such as DVDs) illustrate
the way source reduction often works. Changes can be made in
both industrial production methods and in packaging, and some-
times a product can be totally eliminated. Since 1977, for in-
stance, the weight of two-liter plastic soft drink bottles has been
reduced from 68 grams each to 51 grams, resulting in a reduction
of 250 million pounds of plastic per year in the waste stream (U.S.
EPA 2007b). In Alameda County, California, the General Service
Agency eliminated the cost of printing new letterhead by switch-
ing to a word processing program that uses templates. Employ-
ees type their letters and memos on the appropriate computer
template, which can be customized for every office.
Another source reduction strategy is to look for ways to use
different types of materials from the perspective of ownership
cost, or a product’s entire life cycle. The city of Berkeley, Califor-
nia, bought single-polymer plastic lumber benches for city streets
and parks because of their durability. They are made of compos-
ites that make it easier to clean off graffiti and to repair holes and
damage. Initially, the benches cost the city more than it would
have paid for wood benches, but they are much less expensive to
maintain because they never need to be sanded or painted. Sim-
ilarly, purchasing rubber playground surfaces is initially more
expensive than using sand or other loose fill material, but the
rubber equipment eliminates the need to continually clean and
replace the loose fill. Rubber surfaces have the added benefit of
making playgrounds more accessible for children with disabili-
ties (Conservatree 2007).
In a modified version of source reduction, California has
adopted a “zero waste” philosophy that is based on the concept
that wasting resources is inefficient, and efforts should focus on
environmental stewardship and redefining the concept of waste
in society. As the California Integrated Waste Management Board
describes it:
California is a state rich in natural resources and has an
environment unlike any other, and those resources need
to be protected. In that effort, zero waste California
stretches beyond our previously imagined goals. It is
the ultimate in environmental stewardship—and a goal
we can all work together to accomplish.
42
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
Californians know how to “reduce, reuse, and re-
cycle.” We have been living it and have come to make it
part of our everyday lives. Now, with recycling and
conservation programs in every city, we are able to em-
brace the zero waste concept as our guiding principal
and goal for the future. (California Integrated Waste
Management Board 2006b)
Enhancing and Improving Recycling
Recycling initially became popular in the 1960s as a way to re-
duce the amount of trash going to landfills and incinerators just
as the environmental movement was gaining momentum. It was
also driven by the grassroots, anti-incineration pressures of the
late 1980s, indicative of the ebb and flow pattern of support for
recycling over the last 40 years. Curbside recycling was estab-
lished in many communities during the 1980s as residents started
using different colored receptacles for paper, plastic, and glass re-
cyclables. By the 1990s, industries jumped on the recycling band-
wagon, primarily because they could promote their products and
their green image at the same time.
In 2005, the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) re-
ported that nearly 40 percent of containers and packaging were
recycled, led by steel packaging (mostly cans) at 63 percent,
paper and paperboard at 50 percent, and aluminum at 36 per-
cent, with 45 percent of all aluminum beverage cans recycled.
Approximately 25 percent of glass containers; 15 percent of wood
packaging, mostly pallets; and 9 percent of plastic containers and
packaging, mostly from soft drink, milk, and water bottles, were
recycled. The most recycled materials were paper products, such
as newspapers (89 percent), high-grade office papers (63 per-
cent), and magazines (39 percent). Unwanted “junk” mail was re-
covered at a rate of 36 percent and 18 percent of telephone
directories were recycled (U.S. EPA 2007a).
But the fact that material is collected for recycling does not
necessarily mean that it is reprocessed, one analyst notes. “Al-
most half of discarded newspapers and office paper is buried or
burned, while two-thirds of glass containers and plastic soda and
mile bottles are trashed instead of recycled” (Rogers 2005,
176–177). Reprocessing can be expensive, and it can also become
Enhancing and Improving Recycling
43
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
less feasible the more often the material goes through the process.
Plastic, for instance, is the least recyclable of materials because it
loses its flexibility when made molten again. Paper fibers begin
to get shorter with each successive use, making them less able to
hold together. The U.S. Food and Drug Administration prohibits
the use of old food packaging to make new food containers; stud-
ies show that even when heated at very high temperatures, it is
impossible to sterilize the packaging. A second problem deals
with contamination; one type of plastic can contaminate an entire
truckload of another type, such as mixing soda bottles with
mixed plastics, causing new bottles to be yellowed or to have
black streaks. In that sense, technical issues place limits on what
can be done with old newspapers or plastic water bottles that ac-
tually have a finite life span.
Even if recycled under the best of conditions, a plastic
bottle or margarine tub will probably have only one ad-
ditional life. Since it can’t be made into another food
container, your Snapple bottle will become a “durable
good” such as carpet or fiberfill for a jacket. Your milk
bottle will become a plastic toy or the outer casing of a
cell phone. Those things, in turn, will eventually be
thrown away. “With plastics recycling, we’re just ex-
tending the life of a material.” (Gurnon 2003)
In addition, not all recyclables stay where they are collected.
It is estimated that at least 20 to 30 percent of plastic recyclables
leave the United States for Asia, a journey that requires addi-
tional energy for transport and material management. An analy-
sis of what happens to plastics in Humboldt County, California,
shows that consumers may not fully understand what happens
when they toss their plastic soda bottle into the recycling bin. The
items collected at two sites there are routinely baled and stored
for about a month until they collectively make up a 12-ton truck-
load. The bales are transported to a facility in Sacramento, Cali-
fornia, where they are sold to brokers in Hong Kong, who pay to
transport them by container ship from the Port of Oakland (an-
other truck trip) to China. Once in China, the bales go to recyclers
in Shanghai and Guangdong Province, the closest province to
Hong Kong. The facilities where the bales are processed range
from “mom and pop” operations to large, comparatively modern
facilities. Worker safety standards are virtually nonexistent in
that region of China, according to the Basel Action Network,
44
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
cited in Gurnon, and materials are processed in workplace con-
ditions that are often dirty and primitive (2003).
Despite the fact that household recycling is a relatively sim-
ple procedure, the practice has not been universally accepted by
the public. But although some operational problems occur in ex-
panding consumer recycling, as explained previously, studies in-
dicate that programs can be successful in those areas where the
practice is coupled with public education. Once consumers be-
come aware of how to recycle used goods, they also need to un-
derstand the benefits of changing their behavior. Sometimes, the
benefit might be a cash incentive (such as collecting aluminum
cans with a bounty priced per pound) or environmental protec-
tion (not mixing hazardous waste with household trash so that
no additional environmental damage occurs). Consumers must
also have confidence in the quality of products made from recy-
cled materials and be prepared to pay extra for them, as they are
usually more expensive than their counterparts made from vir-
gin materials.
Some items that consumers routinely throw into recycling
bins cause problems when attempts are made to reprocess them.
An example is pressure-sensitive adhesives (PSAs) or self-
adhesives such as stamps, sticky notes, and labels. They do not
require moisture to activate them (just peel and stick). But most
paper recycling systems use water as a medium to transform re-
covered paper back into pulp, which is then reprocessed into
paper. The PSAs do not dissolve in water and deform under heat
and pressure, making it difficult to screen them out from the
pulp. They can become lodged on the papermaking equipment,
causing serious mechanical damage, and can create holes or
weak spots in paper that can jam copiers and printers. As is the
case with mixed bales of plastic recyclables, paper can be conta-
minated by an excessive amount of PSAs (California Integrated
Waste Management Board 2006a).
To solve this “sticky” problem, the U.S. Postal Service is
working with researchers to develop a universally recyclable
PSA. The Postal Service, itself a major supplier of PSA products
(accounting for about 14 percent of U.S. consumption, mostly
postage stamps) notes that consumers prefer the moisture-free
versions of stamps, so its operations, too, would need to change
in order to reduce the amount of PSAs in the waste stream. In-
deed, consumers can use numerous alternatives to PSAs, such as
printing addresses directly on labels, hand printing addresses on
Enhancing and Improving Recycling
45
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
large mailing envelopes, avoiding the use of sticky notes, such as
Post-it brand notes, and requesting and purchasing moisture-ac-
tivated postage stamps (California Integrated Waste Manage-
ment Board 2006a).
Recycling participation rates vary considerably from one
neighborhood to another, based on factors such as whether trash
and recyclables are collected on a weekly or monthly basis,
whether trash and recyclables are picked up at the same time or
on the same day, if the recycling program is voluntary or manda-
tory, and whether residents pay extra for borrowing a recyclable
bin for collection. In a truly sustainable recycling economy, for
each truckload of recyclable commodities leaving a region, a
truckload of recycled goods must enter (Tchobanoglous and Kre-
ith 2002). When consumers must pay extra for the loan of a recy-
cling container or bins (typically about $5 more per month), any
incentive to recycle may be lost in simple pocketbook economics.
It becomes cheaper, and thus easier, simply to toss recyclables in
with the rest of the household’s trash.
Multifamily dwelling units pose a special problem for recy-
cling advocates, especially as housing costs increase and pur-
chasing a home becomes less feasible for many people. The
United States has about 100 million occupied residential units,
about 16 million of which are located in buildings or complexes
with five or more units. Residents in these buildings may be left
out of curbside recycling programs because the nature of their
homes may not allow them to leave their recyclables at the curb
for collection. In some apartment complexes, for example, build-
ing layouts require residents to take their trash to a centralized
collection shoot or trash dumpster rather than separating it out
(De Young, 1995).
Another aspect of recycling involves incorporating materials
that are not generally recycled by consumers, and many of the ef-
forts involve partnerships between the government and industry.
For example, the Carpet America Recovery Effort (CARE) was
established by members of the carpet industry, representatives of
government agencies, and nongovernmental organizations in
January 2002. It is an attempt to reduce the amount of old carpet
going to landfills and to increase the reuse of postconsumer car-
peting. The organization monitors the progress made toward na-
tional goals for carpet recovery and provides technical assistance
in recovering value from discarded carpet. The voluntary agree-
ment involves enhancing ways of collecting postconsumer carpet
46
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
and developing market opportunities for recovered carpet. The
agreement, which took two years to negotiate, is considered a
model for future product stewardship initiatives (CARE 2007b).
Carpet represents a unique challenge for recycling and reuse.
In 2002, an estimated 4.7 billion pounds of waste carpet was dis-
carded, with about 96 percent going to landfills. This becomes a
problem as landfill disposal capacity shrinks, especially consider-
ing carpet’s bulk, which also makes it difficult and expensive to
handle. These are just two reasons why the industry has teamed
with government agencies to find ways to divert carpet from
landfills or other means of disposal, such as waste-to-energy
(WTE) facilities. The group’s goal is to increase the amount of car-
pet that is recycled from 3.8 percent in 2002 to 20 to 25 percent in
2012, and to increase the number of pounds of carpet that are
reused from 0 in 2002 to 203 million to 339 million pounds in 2012
(Minnesota Office of Environmental Assistance 2007).
According to CARE’s May 2007 Annual Report, 261 million
pounds of postconsumer carpet were diverted from landfills in
2006, a 16 percent increase over diversion in 2005, and 240 mil-
lion pounds were recycled, a 23 percent increase over 2005. But
the effort resulted in less diversion and recycling than the orga-
nization expected for this phase of the recovery effort. Two fac-
tors appear to be the causes of the missed goals: a dramatic drop
in sales in the residential carpet sector due to the drop in new
housing starts and a reduced responsiveness in the results used
to generate the survey (CARE 2007a).
Dealing with Beverage Cans and Bottles
Source reduction and recycling take many forms, but one of the
easiest ways consumers can participate in reducing waste is by
cutting back on the number of plastic beverage bottles and drink
cans that end up in landfills. According to the Container Recy-
cling Institute, Americans spent more than $270 billion on foun-
tain and packaged beverages in 2005, about the same amount
they spent on gasoline that year. In simple terms, the number of
packaged beverages sold increased by one extra bottle or can
each week for every man, woman, and child in the United States
(Gitlitz and Franklin 2007).
Prior to the 20th century, beverages like beer were served
from draught (on tap) in bars and restaurants. Producers then
Dealing with Beverage Cans and Bottles
47
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
began selling beer in glass bottles, which could be purchased,
brought back to the seller, and then refilled. Local and regional
breweries dominated the marketplace, shipping their beer in
kegs and refillable containers. The development of containers for
beverages was revolutionized in 1930 with the introduction of
the first one-way, throwaway can and the popularity of packaged
beer. During World War II, U.S. companies shipped millions of
cans of beer to military personnel stationed overseas. One-way
glass bottles made their appearance on the market in the 1940s;
in 1947, refillable glass bottles had a 100 percent market share,
but by 2000, the market share was less than 1 percent. The Air
Force used one-way bottles to ship beer to the military toward
the end of World War II, creating a new class of consumers: vet-
erans. Canned soft drinks could be found on grocery store
shelves in the 1950s, but they were primarily private-label soft
drinks produced in steel cans that some consumers complained
had a metallic aftertaste. In 1957, the aluminum cans began to re-
place steel containers; the aluminum can had actually been in-
vented during the Great Depression, but consumers did not
accept an item designed to be thrown away during a period
when all resources were considered valuable. From 1959 to 1969,
Coca-Cola and Pepsi promoted one-way glass bottles for their
products and instilled in consumers a habit of discarding bever-
age containers, resulting in declining return rates for refillable
containers. The replacement of steel cans with aluminum cans
and the introduction of plastic bottles in the 1970s further dimin-
ished the popularity of the refillable glass bottle for beer and soft
drinks. “The one way container not only liberated consumers
from returning bottles, but also liberated retailers from the bur-
den of managing deposit-return systems and bottlers from hav-
ing to wash and inspect returned bottles” (GrassRoots Recycling
Network 2002).
Similarly, milk was historically distributed to consumers in
glass bottles, which were delivered to each home, picked up
again when empty, returned to the dairy, and then refilled. In
1906, milk suppliers began delivering their product in one-way
paper cartons instead of glass bottles, with plastic-coated cartons
appearing in the mid-1930s. The one-way plastic jug debuted in
1964, made of high-density polyethylene (HDPE). Another type
of plastic used for refillable milk containers, polycarbonate, ap-
peared in the late 1970s, and during the 1980s and 1990s, U.S.
dairies provided milk in these types of containers to schools and
48
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
other large institutions. When home delivery ended and con-
sumers began buying their milk at grocery stores, one-way con-
tainers were used only to sell private-label milk, usually from
local dairies.
Since that time, one-way containers have become the norm,
with refillables the exception. Massachusetts leads the rest of the
nation in the use of refillable bottles, with 16 percent of the beer
sold in the state. Home delivery of milk in refillable glass bottles
is still available in some portions of the United States, and in
some retail chains and natural foods markets, refillable milk bot-
tles are available for purchase. However, the beverage market is
changing dramatically, and bottled water sales are among the
highest in growth. These bottles (now mostly plastic) result in
mounting litter and waste problems across the country.
To understand the magnitude of this problem, consider the
follow statistics. Nonsparkling bottled water sales doubled in
three years, from 15 billion units sold in 2002 to 29.8 billion sold
in 2005, which is almost seven times the 3.8 billion units sold in
1997. Sales of plastic water bottles one liter or less increased more
than 115 percent, from 13 billion in 2002 to 27.9 billion in 2005. Al-
though soft drinks are a critical part of the beverage sector’s
overall sales, bottled water and other nonalcoholic, noncarbon-
ated drink sales (such as tea) are likely to surpass soda by the end
of this decade (Gitlitz and Franklin 2007).
The scale of beverage waste (bottles and cans that are not re-
cycled and end up in landfills and incinerators) is staggering. In
2005, an estimated 146 billion containers ended up as litter along-
side streets and highways, on beaches and riverbanks, in parks
and fields, and in vacant lots. This figure includes approximately
54 billion aluminum cans; 52 billion plastic bottles and jugs; 30
billion glass bottles; and 10 billion pouches, cartons, and drink
boxes (Gitlitz and Franklin 2007).
One contentious policy option has been the shift from refill-
able bottles to container deposit legislation. The first deposit law in
the United States was enacted in 1934 by the National Recovery
Administration, which required deposits of two cents for small
bottles and five cents for large ones after bottlers had been using
the noncollection of deposits as a competitive weapon. The pub-
lic’s concerns about litter during the 1950s led to the first statewide
restriction on beverage containers, Vermont’s ban on nonrefillable
beer bottles, which was enacted in 1953. But because the public
perceived that the ban did not, in fact, reduce littering, the ban was
Dealing with Beverage Cans and Bottles
49
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
not renewed in 1957 and was allowed to lapse. By the late 1960s
and early 1970s, when the environmental movement became most
active, the issue reemerged because one-way containers made up
60 percent of the volume of soda pop containers sold in the United
States and about 75 percent of those for beer. More than 350 bans
or taxes on nonrefillable containers were introduced at the federal,
state, and local levels (GrassRoots Recycling Network 2002). The
antilittering campaigns were led by Lady Bird Johnson, first lady
and wife of Lyndon B. Johnson, who took over the presidency after
the assassination of John F. Kennedy in 1963. She was considered
one of the earliest advocates of highway beautification after she
mounted a nationwide campaign against littering.
Oregon enacted a bottle bill in 1972, and during the 1970s,
four other states did so. In the 1980s, the antiregulation mood of
the country seemed to dampen consumer enthusiasm for manda-
tory beverage deposit legislation. Thus far, 11 states have imple-
mented bottle bills that provide a cash rebate for deposits
consumers pay at purchase when they return and recycle cans
and bottles: California, Connecticut, Delaware, Hawaii, Iowa,
Maine, Massachusetts, Michigan, New York, Oregon, and Ver-
mont. In 2007, campaigns to enact bottle bills were underway in
Arkansas, Illinois, Maryland, North Carolina, South Carolina,
Tennessee, and West Virginia. Three states were considering leg-
islation to expand their existing legislation: Connecticut, Massa-
chusetts, and New York. Only one bottle bill has ever been
repealed: that enacted by the city of Columbia, Missouri (Con-
tainer Recycling Institute 2007).
With the exception of Delaware, which exempts aluminum
cans, the states with bottle bills require refundable deposits,
ranging from 1.5 cents in California to 10 cents in Michigan, on
all beer and carbonated soft drink cans and bottles. In 8 of the 11
states, deposits cover beer and soda only; California, Hawaii, and
Maine also cover carbonated juices, iced teas, sports drinks, and
bottled water. In five states (California, Hawaii, Massachusetts,
Michigan, and Maine) some or all unclaimed deposits become
the property of the state and are used for recycling education, to
fund environmental programs, to administer the deposit system,
or as a supplement to the state’s general fund. Bottlers and dis-
tributors in the other states keep the unredeemed deposits. Re-
search indicates that container deposit laws do have an impact
on recycling rates. In states with bottle bills, an average of 490
50
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
containers per capita are recycled, compared with only 190 con-
tainers per capita in the remaining 39 states, or 150 percent fewer
containers (Center for Policy Alternatives 2007).
Efforts to increase beverage container recovery have ex-
panded in the 21st century, due in part to concerns raised by 
cooperative coalitions such as the group Businesses and Environ-
mentalists Allied for Recycling (BEAR). The group warns that in
the absence of new recovery and market development initiatives,
beverage container recycling rates are likely to steadily decline in
future years. In 1999, an estimated 193 billion aluminum, polyeth-
ylene terephthalate, HDPE, and glass beverage containers were
generated in the United States, equivalent to 11.1 million tons, or
684 containers per capita. Of this amount, 78.1 billion containers
were recycled (3.4 million tons, or 277 containers per capita) and
114.4 billion containers were disposed of (7.7 million tons, or 407
containers per capita).
A 2002 study by BEAR notes that significant environmental
benefits can be realized by recycling beverage containers. Energy
use is reduced, as are greenhouse gas emissions. The energy
saved is equivalent to more than 32 million barrels of oil per year,
dominated by the benefits associated with recycled aluminum
cans. The use of land for disposal of waste and for the extraction
of virgin materials is reduced, and litter is reduced, leading to re-
duced human injuries and avoided harm to farm machinery and
animals. In addition, the development and operation of a bever-
age container recycling infrastructure creates a significant num-
ber of jobs and has been shown to improve U.S. competitiveness
(BEAR 2002).
A report to the U.S. Congress by the Government Account-
ability Office (GAO) in December 2006 found that the policy op-
tion cited second most frequently by stakeholders as a top priority
for federal action was to enact a national bottle bill. Respondents
in the study said that the federal government would need to set
its deposit amount sufficiently high to provide a measurable in-
centive for recycling, with 10 cents mentioned as the minimum
amount necessary to accomplish this goal. The GAO also reported
that retailers would likely oppose any redemption system that im-
posed significant additional costs on their operations, although
support might be gained for an alternative redemption program,
such as allowing consumers to return their used beverage con-
tainers to certified redemption centers (U.S. GAO 2006).
Dealing with Beverage Cans and Bottles
51
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
More Trash, Shrinking Landfills
During the Great Depression in the 1930s, most large communi-
ties established refuse collection programs and were trying vari-
ous methods to dispose of the increasing amount of urban trash.
One popular method was reduction, also known as the Merz
process, which had been developed in the late 1880s and was used
for organic wastes. Food, grass and yard clippings, and other ma-
terials were cooked for 8 to 10 hours and then compressed to
make grease and fertilizer. But the process was expensive in com-
parison with dumping municipal trash into pits, so cities
switched to landfills or incineration. Many of the waste sites were
natural canyons, swamps, gullies, or abandoned mining pits that
were virtually free for the taking. Garbage could be dumped into
an earthen depression, compacted with earth-moving equipment,
and then covered with soil. Sometimes chemical solutions were
sprayed on the soil to kill insects or vermin.
This waste disposal option worked well into the mid-1980s,
when the tipping cost paid by trash haulers to unload or “tip”
their trucks into waste sites suddenly more than doubled. In
Minneapolis, for instance, the tipping fee jumped from $5 to $30
per ton. Enforcement of the Resource Conservation and Recovery
Act and one of its provisions, Subtitle D, led to the implementa-
tion of costly landfill safety standards under federal law. The
problem was that landfills had routinely accepted, and commin-
gled, hazardous waste with municipal solid waste, contaminat-
ing the soil and groundwater. By the late 1980s, so many landfills
had been declared toxic that they comprised half of all Superfund
sites (see below). Facilities were being forced to either clean up or
shut down, with the majority doing the latter. The closures came
at the same time that garbage output was exploding, putting
pressure on the facilities that were still open (Rogers 2005).
Although some municipalities turned to incineration, that
method of disposal, too, has problems. The emerging environ-
mental movement had to make hard choices between the filthy
air emissions of the combustors or the potential health hazards
and environmental damage caused by landfills. Community op-
position to both methods was widespread, as was the NIMBY
(not in my backyard) syndrome. Recycling became more popular,
but it was slow to gain acceptance as the amount of packaging
waste increased faster than curbside recycling programs.
52
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
In 1988, nearly 8,000 landfills were operating in the United
States, but that number began to decrease rapidly. By 1990, the
number was about 6,300; by 1994, just over 3,500 were in opera-
tion; and by 1998, 2,300 facilities were operating. In 2005, the
most recent year for which information is available, the total
stood at 1,654, only about a fifth of the number of landfills that
existed in 1988 (U.S. EPA 2006a). In response, local governments
began looking for ways of expanding landfill capacity by consid-
ering other strategies, including enhanced recycling efforts.
One of the unanticipated consequences of the landfill clo-
sures is the effort to remake municipal landfills into parks and
recreation areas, especially in parts of the United States where
open land is at a premium. In most instances, the closed landfill
sites are large mounds of dirt over yards of compacted trash. As
the garbage below decays, some settling of the dirt above occurs,
making the landscape less desirable for hard surfaces that could
potentially crack. Most “reclaimed” landfills are also not used as
football and soccer fields to avoid activities that could penetrate
the cap on top. Cities are usually required to monitor the site for
at least 30 years to make sure that the decaying garbage does not
seep into the groundwater below. Any methane gas that is cre-
ated from the buried trash is often burned off in an area that is
not accessible to the public so it will not interfere with activities
at the site.
Some of these reclaimed sites are small municipal dumps
that are considered eyesores when their life as a landfill is over.
In Chandler, Arizona, for instance, the planned Paseo Vista
Recreation Area will sit on 2.2 million tons of compacted trash
that is 38 feet deep. The original 64-acre city facility was opened
in 1981 and closed in 2005, when its capacity was reached and the
community’s growth brought homes closer to the site. Even be-
fore it closed, voters approved $12.8 million in general obligation
bonds to remake the landfill into a park, which will include a
playground, picnic areas, equestrian trails, an archery range, and
other amenities when it opens in 2009 (Fehr-Snyder 2007).
One of the most ambitious projects involves New York’s
Fresh Kills Landfill Complex, 2,200 acres of Staten Island that
opened in 1948. Planners and designers have been examining the
site for years in an attempt to determine how it could be reused
after more than 50 years as a facility for dumping household
waste. The western boundary lies along a waterway, and the
landfill is part of a unique ecological area and watershed. The
More Trash, Shrinking Landfills
53
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
city conducted a two-stage international design competition to
find innovative uses for the land and, in December 2001, selected
three teams (two from the United States and one from the United
Kingdom) whose proposals involved developing a park and
recreational facilities while restoring the ecology of the site. The
result is the Fresh Kills Lifescape, a 21st-century reclamation pro-
ject that is expected to be completed by 2016. The four-part park
will include a boat launch, meadows, an event lawn, marshes,
and an activity center. This dramatic transformation will serve as
a model of what can be done in other settings. As the landscape
architect for the project notes, “It is the contemporary sense of
healing the Earth as a technological notion” (Lange 2006).
Paying for the “Real” Cost of Waste
Most municipal governments and private companies that collect
waste charge a fixed fee for picking up household trash, usually
on a monthly basis. The cost may be part of a utility fee or
charged separately. But environmental organizations argue that
with a single, fixed fee, a household has no incentive to reduce or
recycle its waste, as the volume to be collected has no bearing on
the fee charged. The fee is the same whether the trash is sepa-
rated into recycled waste and regular household waste or
whether a household has one garbage can or five. In some com-
munities, residents actually have to pay for the privilege of recy-
cling trash because of extra fees charged for borrowing recycling
containers or bins.
One way of providing an incentive for waste reduction is to
implement “pay as you throw” programs, used to give residents
options for managing household waste. Four basic types of these
programs, also known as unit pricing, are in operation:
• Can systems allow customers to choose how many
waste containers they want to set out for collection, with
each can’s size representing a size or weight limit,
which then becomes the basis for collection fees.
• Bag systems require users to put their waste into a spe-
cial bag with a distinctive color, tag, sticker, or logo that
indicates it has been purchased at a store or recognized
location. The customer prepays for the bag, which is
guaranteed to be collected. The more bags the consumer
54
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
buys, the more they cost, serving as an incentive to re-
duce waste.
• Two-tier systems require payment of a flat fee for waste
collection services, sometimes as part of a monthly
charge or property tax, with one tier representing a
basic cost for services and a second tier for waste col-
lected beyond the basic service. Limitations may be im-
posed on how much trash can be collected each time,
and fees may be based on volume.
• Weight-based systems assess charges contingent on the
number of pounds of trash that are put out for collec-
tion. These programs are considered to be the most fair
because they charge consumers for the amount of trash
collected (with the weight based on the size of the con-
tainer), rather than encouraging the compression of
garbage into cans or bags (Tchobanoglous and Kreith
2002, 6.12).
Specialized Waste Management Challenges
Another major waste management issue relates to specialized dis-
posal problems. For example, in the United States, communities
routinely provide collection bins for items like newspapers, plas-
tic, and glass. But electronic waste, or e-waste, is an emerging
problem as computers, cell phones, and other electronic products
become obsolete or stop working efficiently. California’s Take-It-
Back Partnership includes legislation that bans placing batteries,
electronic devices, and fluorescent lightbulbs in regular trash. In-
stead, state and local governments are developing free, convenient
ways for residents to recycle these items, as are cell phone compa-
nies. ReCellular, Inc., is the largest recycler and reseller of used
wireless telephones and accessories in the industry, collecting, re-
furbishing, and reselling or recycling 3 million wireless handsets in
2004. It is a partner with the wireless industry’s national organiza-
tion, the Cellular Telecommunications and Internet Association,
and has managed the group’s national recycling foundation since
its inception in 1999. The foundation works with more than 2,000
grassroots organizations and national charitable groups such as
the March of Dimes and Goodwill Industries to collect wireless
phones and support the groups’ activities (ReCellular 2007). How-
ever, even if it is possible for e-waste like cell phones to be reduced
Specialized Waste Management Challenges
55
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
or recycled on the domestic level, the problems electronic devices
cause are not solved, as is illustrated in detail in Chapter 3 in the
discussion on the international transport of e-waste.
Super Problems, Superfund
Chapter 1 provides definitions of the terms toxic waste and haz-
ardous waste, two of the many types of refuse created in both resi-
dential and industrial settings. They include common household
items such as cleansers, lawn care products, pesticides, and paint;
waste created at manufacturing and mining operations; and
refuse derived from the operations of other industries and com-
panies such as metal plating facilities, chemical plants, furniture
finishers, automotive dealers and gasoline service stations, dry
cleaners, printers, and petroleum production facilities. Another
type of waste is contamination that results from a slow leak from
an underground storage tank or from an accidental spill.
Sites where toxic waste contamination is present pose nu-
merous environmental and health concerns. Long-lived toxic
substances, such as heavy metals like lead and mercury, and or-
ganic chemicals may be present for lengthy periods without de-
grading, creating problems even if no additional contamination
is created. Chemicals may migrate through various pathways
into groundwater or soil, or may bioaccumulate in the food
chain. If they remain in the ground, they may not be exposed to
the natural degradation that occurs when they are exposed to
sunlight or oxygen. In addition, they may accumulate in envi-
ronmental sinks, such as wetlands and river sediment.
The health impacts of many substances commonly found in
hazardous wastes are not fully known or understood. Acute toxi-
city refers to effects that are intense and immediate, such as an in-
dividual being poisoned by ingesting a toxic substance. Some
toxic waste can cause cancer even when the exposure is only a few
parts per billion or less, as in the case of the waste generated and
dumped by Hooker Chemical Company in New York. The own-
ers operated a facility from 1942 to 1953 and legally buried 22,000
tons of chemical waste in canals on property they owned. Later,
the company filled the canals with dirt and began to subdivide
the land, which was purchased by developers, who built a resi-
dential neighborhood, Love Canal, New York. In the mid-1970s,
56
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
residents began to complain of strange health problems, and re-
searchers found an increased rate of cancer, birth defects, and
spontaneous abortion, along with findings of cell aberrations. In
August 1978, the government determined the area was unsafe
and eventually evacuated more than a thousand households; it
spent more than $30 million to purchase homes in the most con-
taminated areas. But as this example indicates, “the most difficult
part of determining the toxicity of environmental contaminants is
estimating the lifetime human health effects of exposure to low
concentrations of toxins,” which is the most common type of ex-
posure from contaminated waste sites (Page 1997, 45).
The process of cleaning up hazardous waste is called reme-
diation, which refers to a variety of actions that can be taken once
a hazardous site is identified. Sometimes, cleanup involves con-
tainment in place, where a cap is placed on a site, such as a quarry
where waste has been dumped, or a waste site may be fenced off
and closed to the public. In some cases, the waste is excavated and
removed to a secure facility off-site, usually where it is managed
and then buried. This technique is often used when a large popu-
lation is located near the site and the potential health risk is high.
The term treatment denotes a way of attempting to remove or de-
stroy the contamination and may involve thermal remediation
(incineration to destroy organic compounds or to vaporize conta-
minants from mixtures of solids and water such as sewage
sludge). Extraction, in contrast, uses filtration, ultraviolet, or
ozone treatment or precipitation to remove contaminated waste.
Recycling is possible when a concentration of a contaminant is
sufficiently high in value to justify removing it from the site.
Bioremediation and phytoremediation use microorganisms, such
as bacteria, and plants, such as sunflowers, to degrade the waste
and take the contaminated substances up through their roots, re-
spectively (Page 1997).
Ideally, hazardous waste would be reduced or eliminated by
the party responsible for creating it under the “polluter pays”
principle. This is a legal tool whereby private parties that create
hazardous waste must pay for any subsequent environmental
cleanup of the site. The argument is that this principle deters ad-
ditional contamination, and most people believe it is fair for pol-
luting parties to bear the cost of cleanup, which is considered
part of the cost of doing business. But incentives for companies
to deal with waste in this manner appear to be insufficient, so the
Super Problems, Superfund
57
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
government instead operates under the “command and control”
approach. This approach involves certain types of restrictions
that regulate how a polluting company can operate, such as lim-
iting the amount of hazardous waste that can be generated or re-
quiring new factories and facilities to operate under the best
technology available.
Another type of command-and-control restriction regulates
toxic substances by controlling the entire life cycle of a product,
such as a chemical, from “cradle to grave.” In this approach, gen-
erators must determine whether substances are hazardous, based
on qualities such as ignitability, corrosivity, reactivity, and toxic-
ity. They must also obtain a firm identification number and per-
mit for the generating facility. During shipment, this permit must
accompany the materials in appropriate shipping containers and
with a shipping manifest that tracks the material’s movements
from the time it leaves the generating facility until final disposal.
Governments use this policy approach to minimize illegal dis-
posal of hazardous wastes, sometimes referred to as “midnight
dumping” (Page 1997, 61).
In the United States, the primary legislation dealing with
hazardous waste cleanup is the 1980 Comprehensive Environ-
mental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act (CERCLA),
which established the Hazardous Substance Response Trust
Fund, better known as Superfund. The initial objective of the law
was to provide funding to clean up only the most seriously con-
taminated sites, arbitrarily set at 400 locations (based on the
number of congressional districts), which were placed on the Na-
tional Priorities List (NPL). The CERCLA legislation requires that
the EPA analyze sites upon completion of the Hazard Ranking
System screening and receipt of public comments. The list guides
the agency in determining which sites warrant further investiga-
tion to assess the nature and extent of the human health and en-
vironmental risks associated with a site; identifying what
remediation actions may be appropriate; notifying the public of
affected sites; and serving as notice to potentially responsible
parties that the EPA may initiate CERCLA-financed remedial ac-
tion. The NPL is not, however, a statement of legal liability but
rather serves an informational purpose.
The initial list of sites, announced in 1983, identified 406 lo-
cations; by June 2007, 1,243 sites were on the list, with another 61
sites proposed for listing, but only 319 sites had been deleted
58
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
from the list (U.S. EPA 2007b). The trust fund was initially set at
$1.6 billion, with revenues collected primarily from the assign-
ment of the liability for cleanup costs. Specific liability stems
from four classes of “potentially responsible parties”:
1. The current owner or operator of a site
2. Any person who formerly owned or operated the site at
the time of disposal of any hazardous waste
3. Any person who arranged for disposal or treatment of
hazardous substances at the site
4. Any transporter of hazardous substances at the site
The question of who is liable and responsible for cleanup be-
comes even more complicated, however. A party can be strictly li-
able (extending the responsibility for the cost of cleanup beyond
the requirement for culpable behavior), retroactively liable (ex-
tending to past actions, even if the activities were legal at the time
they occurred), or jointly and severally liable (making any of the
parties that can be identified liable for the entire cleanup costs or
making the parties responsible for the proportional share of their
contribution to the contamination event). Sometimes, the party
with the greatest capacity to pay the cost of the cleanup, such as
a large corporation with “deep pockets,” will be held liable.
When the responsible party is a local government, as is the case
when the municipality operates a landfill, officials may be re-
quired to pay a much larger share because municipal solid waste
(MSW) was the largest proportion of the total waste deposited at
the site. In some cases, no one can determine how much of the
waste that was contributed by each party was actually toxic (usu-
ally less than 1 percent of all MSW is thought to consist of haz-
ardous material). In California, local governments have been
sued for doing nothing more than issuing business licenses to
private waste haulers who are paid directly by residents to pick
up their trash (Page 1997, 83).
Although progress on cleaning up Superfund sites has been
slow, there seems to be agreement that federal action is the only
realistic way to make sure that cleanup occurs and public health
is protected. Because other international priorities and issues
have eclipsed most domestic concerns about the environment,
the legislation establishing the Superfund program has lapsed
and has not yet been reauthorized by Congress.
Super Problems, Superfund
59
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
Radioactive Waste and Yucca Mountain
During World War II, the United States engaged in several re-
search projects related to atomic power and nuclear reactors, re-
sulting in the need to find a way to dispose of spent fuel. Some
of the high-level radioactive waste was reprocessed, initially at
the Hanford, Washington, site, where plutonium production re-
actors were operating as part of the Manhattan Project, and later,
at West Valley, New York. In 1957, a committee from the National
Academy of Sciences recommended that the government con-
sider permanent disposal in deep salt formations, and in 1969,
the government unsuccessfully experimented with an aban-
doned salt mine in Lyons, Kansas. Later proposals to develop a
long-term retrievable surface storage facility were dropped due
to opposition by environmental groups and the EPA. In 1970, the
Atomic Energy Commission established a policy that the federal
government would accept high-level waste for disposition (Cot-
ton 2006).
Today, most of the reprocessed high-level waste that exists is
part of national defense programs and is now stored in Idaho,
South Carolina, and Washington State; the United States does not
currently operate a reprocessing facility of its own. Other sources
of spent fuel include nuclear power reactors that have been built
across the country. Government officials have examined numer-
ous storage alternatives for nuclear waste, including sending the
waste into outer space, submerging it under ice caps and
seabeds, and reprocessing the spent fuel, which is highly radio-
active, into other types of fuel. The focus is now on two strate-
gies: geological disposal (where the waste is buried for an
indefinite period of time) and long-term storage at reactors
where the waste is actually created. The decision about how and
where to store nuclear waste has a long history that has pitted
state and local officials and environmental groups against the
federal government and the majority of Congress. As interest in
nuclear power has been rekindled, the problem of what to do
with the waste is receiving renewed attention.
The most controversial domestic project is the Yucca Moun-
tain nuclear waste depository currently under construction in
Nevada. The site is about 90 miles northwest of Las Vegas, at the
edge of the Nevada Test Site, where nuclear weapons had been
tested for years. A concerted effort to find a suitable place to store
waste began in 1978, when President Jimmy Carter established
60
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
the Interagency Review Group on Nuclear Waste Management.
Four years later, Congress ordered the development of a perma-
nent national disposal site for waste from commercial nuclear
power reactors by enacting the Nuclear Waste Policy Act of 1982,
directing the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) to nominate at
least five sites in a first round of repository selection and to rec-
ommend three of them to the president for further study. Initially,
the DOE developed a list of nine sites; in 1986, the agency nar-
rowed the list of potential sites to three: Yucca Mountain,
Nevada; Deaf Smith County, Texas; and the Hanford facility in
Washington State. A second round of recommendations exam-
ined 17 states in the eastern United States to mollify western state
leaders who felt they had been singled out unfairly despite a re-
quirement for a regional distribution of repositories. But the sec-
ond round of selections was later cancelled, leaving the initial
three locations for further study and evaluation.
After only a year, the Yucca Mountain site was designated as
the only site that would be studied further under the provisions
of the Nuclear Waste Policy Amendments Act. Plans were made
to place up to 77,000 tons of high-level nuclear waste in perma-
nent storage in a geologic repository. Currently, radioactive waste
is being stored at 131 locations throughout the country. Officials
estimated that the waste stored at Yucca Mountain would remain
radioactive for a minimum of 10,000 years. Studies of the site’s
suitability, required under law, included mapping the mountain’s
geologic structure, collecting 75,000 feet of core samples, and col-
lecting more than 18,000 geologic and water samples. More than
six miles of tunnels were built to map the interior features of the
locations where the radioactive material would be deposited. By
1989, the DOE concluded that because of their complexity, the
studies were taking longer than anticipated, making it unlikely
that the site would be available before 2010. The studies facility it-
self was not completed until 1996 (Cotton 2006).
Pressure to move more quickly developed in 1994, when util-
ity companies sued the DOE because it was clear that the agency
would not meet a 1998 deadline for accepting nuclear waste. A
federal court judge sided with the companies and ruled that the
government would be liable if it failed to meet the deadline. The
Clinton administration vetoed a bill that would have allowed
storage to begin after construction had been authorized, and
most Democrats opposed the plan. But when George W. Bush
was elected president in 2000, the mood in Washington, D.C.,
Radioactive Waste and Yucca Mountain
61
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
changed toward political support, except for representatives of
Nevada, who began to mount strong opposition to any site in
their state.
Proponents of the facility contended that a compelling na-
tional interest exists to complete the depository and that the fa-
cility is critical for national security and energy security as well.
More than 161 million people live within 75 miles of one or more
nuclear waste sites, which were intended to be temporary. The
need to consolidate the waste in a single site deep underground
was essential, they argued, in the face of the September 11, 2001,
terrorist attacks. Because nuclear power provides 20 percent of
the country’s electricity, supporters noted that it was essential to
find a site to secure the waste from one of the cheapest forms of
power generation available. They criticized opponents for what
they termed “scare tactics” even though radioactive materials
have been transported for more than 30 years without any harm-
ful release of radiation (Abraham 2002).
Opponents argued that Yucca Mountain is unsuitable because
of questions related to the geologic integrity of the site, the poten-
tial that groundwater below will be contaminated, and the dura-
bility of the containers that would hold the waste. They sought to
keep existing radioactive waste in storage where it is already lo-
cated, near nuclear power plants. Many environmental organiza-
tions, in addition to their fears about environmental damage, felt
that the risk of uncertainty was too great for such an experiment
and that placing all the nation’s radioactive waste in one state was
inequitable.
The state of Nevada, which has no nuclear plants of its own,
has gone to extraordinary measures to try to stop the facility from
being operated in its backyard, using a variety of strategies. In
early 2002, when the state was lobbying members of Congress to
eliminate Yucca Mountain as a possible depository site, television
advertisements were run in five states focusing on 10 senators
whose votes on the project were considered to be uncertain: Mis-
souri, Oregon, Utah, Vermont, and Wyoming. Environmental
groups and a personal donation from the state’s governor helped
the state pay for the air time, combining the ads with an e-mail
and postcard campaign and meetings with congressional staffers.
Their primary argument was that nuclear waste shipments
would travel through 43 states on highways and railroad tracks
on their way to Nevada, with the shipments vulnerable to acci-
dents or terrorist attacks (Grove 2002). Environmental groups
62
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
called the planned waste shipments “mobile Chernobyl”—a ref-
erence to the 1986 nuclear disaster in Ukraine (CNN.com 2002).
Nevada’s congressional delegation also released a videotape
showing a missile piercing a canister used to store radioactive
material to show that transporting the waste is not safe.
Other anti–Yucca Mountain strategies were less politicized.
In April 2002, for instance, the state engineer banned the Depart-
ment of Energy from drawing water from state wells by invali-
dating a temporary permit that allowed the federal government
to draw up to 140 million gallons of water a year. State officials
hoped they might shut the project down by cutting off the water
supply to the site. But the DOE simply switched to a newly built
1-million-gallon tank that would allow scientists to continue
their work. The state had shut off the water once before in 2000,
but the federal government successfully sued to keep the water
flowing (Associated Press 2002).
In 2001, the DOE reported that no “showstoppers” arose in
a scientific review of the Yucca Mountain site, which at the time
was estimated to cost $58 billion over 10 years for construction,
operation, and monitoring. Secretary of Energy Spencer Abra-
ham approved the site, noting that the project had benefited from
24 years of scientific study, at a cost of $4 billion, showing that
Yucca Mountain was suitable and safe. The 1982 Nuclear Waste
Policy Act allowed the governor of Nevada to veto the presi-
dent’s decision, which he did in April 2002. Gov. Kenny Guinn
cited three reasons for the state’s opposition.
Nevada strongly opposes the designation of Yucca
Mountain for nuclear waste disposal because the project
is scientifically flawed, fails to conform to numerous
laws, and the policy behind it is ever-changing and non-
sensical. The Department of Energy has so compro-
mised this project through years of mismanagement
that Congress should have no confidence in any repre-
sentation made by DOE about either its purpose or its
safety. (Guinn 2002)
Nevada officials called the Yucca Mountain project “legally
dead” because of the governor’s veto. The mayor of Las Vegas
was less sanguine about the state’s chances. “If we don’t prevail
in the House, we will prevail in the Senate. And if we don’t pre-
vail in the Senate, we will definitely prevail in the courts because
might is right” (Neff 2002). But only a few weeks later, the U.S.
Radioactive Waste and Yucca Mountain
63
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
House of Representatives voted 306 to 117 to override Nevada’s
attempts to stop it from moving forward through a veto override.
The Senate, which was under a July 26 deadline to act, also voted
to override the state’s objections and protests in its 60 to 39 deci-
sion to proceed to a voice vote.
President Bush subsequently signed legislation designating
Yucca Mountain as the government’s preferred site, noting the
administration would seek an operating permit from the Nuclear
Regulatory Commission (NRC). The state filed several lawsuits
in federal appeals court challenging various rules issued by fed-
eral agencies related to the facility. Nevada also filed a petition
with the NRC seeking rule changes to its licensing procedures
that would require the DOE to prove the site will be safe and that
geology, rather than waste containers, would be the main protec-
tion against leaking. Thus far, the NRC has not made a final de-
cision on whether the DOE will be allowed to proceed with
construction and then licensed to operate the Yucca Mountain fa-
cility. The NRC must conclude that the repository will meet its
reasonable expectation that the safety and health of workers and
the public will be protected. No date for an announcement of the
decision has been set.
Debris from Disasters
The volume of waste resulting from natural and human-caused
disasters can be virtually impossible to comprehend. Two major
disasters in the United States created debris that called for im-
mediate removal responses that were unprecedented. Some-
times, the desire to deal with the problem immediately has led to
solutions that may have unintended consequences later on.
The human tragedy of the September 11, 2001, terrorist at-
tacks on the World Trade Center in New York City is a haunting
memory that cannot be erased from American society’s collective
memory. But in order to move beyond the physical damage at the
site, officials had no choice but to deal with the waste manage-
ment nightmare of 1.2 million tons of building debris from the
center complex. The Federal Emergency Management Agency
(FEMA) and the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers worked jointly
with the City of New York in dealing with debris removal, a task
made more difficult because of the need to search for human re-
mains. The debris was also contaminated with jet fuel from the
64
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
two airliners that crashed into the buildings, as well as petro-
leum, Freon, and other chemicals. The 12-square-block site was
different than most disaster areas, where the two agencies have
typically dealt with downed trees and residential debris caused
by natural disasters like floods, earthquakes, and hurricanes.
This type of waste management posed numerous challenges. Ini-
tially, officials had to decide where to take the debris and how to
get it there. This decision making was complicated by the fact
that the entire site was considered a crime scene because it was
attacked by terrorists.
A decision was made to take the debris to the Staten Island
landfill, a 2,200-acre facility also known as the Fresh Kills Land-
fill Complex (discussed above). The city’s Department of Sanita-
tion and the New York Police Department took on responsibility
for managing the Fresh Kills facility, which had been closed in
March 2001, about 20 miles by roadway from the World Trade
Center. FEMA funded the removal project, while the Army Corps
of Engineers developed the debris management plan; helped de-
velop contract specifications; monitored the removal project op-
erations; and facilitated the loading of 240 trucks, 70 barges, and
more than 250 pieces of heavy equipment (Stroupe 2001).
Because the debris pile consisted of urban building materi-
als, decisions had to be made about what could be recycled or
salvaged from the site. The estimated 300,000 tons of structural
steel that was recovered was sold by the city and sent to two re-
cycling yards, where it was later sold to scrap companies for
about $120 per ton, considered a reasonable fee in comparison
with the usual $150 per ton rate for scrap steel. About 50,000 tons
of steel was purchased by a Shanghai company to be melted
down and reprocessed into new items such as kitchenware and
other household goods (China.org.cn 2002). The rest of the debris
went to Fresh Kills for sorting and examination, including exten-
sive searches for human remains. Controversies over the thor-
oughness of the searches continue.
When hurricanes Katrina and Rita ravaged the U.S. Gulf
Coast in 2005, they left behind an inestimable loss of human life
and environmental damage. Of immediate concern to officials
seeking to expedite the region’s recovery was the demolition of
damaged houses and other buildings, along with the removal of
other types of waste generated from massive flooding after the
storm surge. As was the case with the World Trade Center disas-
ter, FEMA asked the Army Corps of Engineers to perform debris
Debris from Disasters
65
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
removal in September 2005 on behalf of various cities and
parishes, including New Orleans. The Corps then contracted
with various vendors to conduct the cleanup and to take the
waste to properly permitted landfill sites. FEMA provided funds
for eligible debris removal costs through December 21, 2006; after
that time, the city would incur 10 percent of the costs, providing
an incentive for a timely cleanup process.
In Louisiana, the Department of Environmental Quality
(DEQ) estimated that more than 95,000 houses would need to be
torn down as a result of hurricane damage and flooding, with the
demolition resulting in more than 20 million cubic yards of waste
in Orleans Parish. It is almost impossible to imagine how local of-
ficials might deal with handling this amount of debris, especially
because the government infrastructure had been destroyed or
damaged and officials were unable to mobilize employees and
equipment to speed recovery. There was also a desire to expedite
the process, as recovery would be dependent, in large part, on
how quickly the waste could be removed so rebuilding could
begin. More than 400 sites were approved for the staging, chip-
ping, grinding, burning, and disposing of hurricane debris
within Louisiana (Louisiana DEQ 2006).
Although New Orleans had regional landfills that could ac-
commodate some of the debris, most were designed to handle
hazardous materials, not demolished houses. Normally, the
process of siting and opening a landfill at the edge of a major city
would be a lengthy process punctuated with years of planning,
public hearings, and environmental reviews to determine
whether potential hazards or negative impacts might arise. Mayor
C. Ray Nagin, who had invoked emergency powers after Katrina
to waive the city’s zoning ordinances, determined that New Or-
leans did not have the time and resources to develop a new site,
so instead, the city converted a deep pit amid the wetlands east of
the city into a landfill in April 2006. The pit had been created
when construction companies excavated sand to use in their pro-
jects. Officials received emergency authorization under the fed-
eral Clean Water Act to have the pit accept the waste, with a
potential for taking in as much as 6.5 million cubic yards of debris.
The Chef Menteur landfill sits across from a canal and the
largest urban wildlife refuge in the United States, the 23,000-acre
Bayou Savage, which is used by migratory birds. It is also less
than a mile from a community of 1,000 Vietnamese American
families in the Village de l’Est neighborhood who were rebuild-
66
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
ing after the storm. Not unexpectedly, opposition to the landfill
operation stemmed from local residents who worried about tox-
ins that might leach out from the pit and from environmental or-
ganizations that voiced similar fears about the creation of the
dump. An attorney who worked with the Louisiana Environ-
mental Action Network to oppose the landfill noted that it made
“a second disaster out of the first one” (Curtis 2006). A local
Catholic priest said the mayor’s decision to place a landfill in the
neighborhood would hurt the community’s rebuilding efforts.
“This will have a chilling effect on our recovery. It’s certainly a
black eye to us as the people trying to recover. We thought we
could reason with them to show them all the compelling reasons
not to put a landfill in a wetland area. There seems to be a disre-
gard for human safety as well as recovery” (Russell 2006).
Unlike sanitary landfills, whose sides and bottom are lined
with clay for another barrier layer to prevent the leaching of tox-
ins into the water table, the Chef Menteur site was unprotected
and did not have a leach detection system installed when it
opened. Officials for the operator noted that the site was natu-
rally clay lined and had been used successfully for years as a
landfill for household waste. Another unlined landfill that had
been closed in 1986, Old Gentilly, had also been hastily reopened
for demolition waste. One of the serious problems related to the
demolition and construction waste was the sorting of hazardous
materials from hurricane-damaged sites. The order creating the
landfill allowed everything within the four walls of a house to be
dumped into the pit, and that debris included cleansers, pesti-
cides and paints, petroleum products, degreasers and solvents,
and any other materials inside. Although spotters at the landfill
were supposed to look for hazardous materials as trucks full of
debris unloaded, only some of those items were likely to be di-
verted, officials warned. As rain fell on the site, leaching chemi-
cals mixed with the water and would eventually flow into the
canals in the city.
Leaders within the Vietnamese community argued that the site
had been selected because New Orleans officials anticipated little
opposition to the dumping, but local residents framed the issue as
a question of environmental justice, gaining the media spotlight.
Both the state and the Army Corps of Engineers had argued that if
the dump was not used, the cleanup of the city would take much
longer, and waste would have to be shipped farther away. One of-
ficial noted that the community’s opposition did not take into 
Debris from Disasters
67
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
consideration the scale of the emergency. “Some people can’t seem
to understand that this is not business as usual” (Eaton 2006).
The mayor had an additional incentive to move quickly to
open the dump site. The company hired to operate it, Waste Man-
agement, Inc., pledged to give 22 percent of the revenue it re-
ceived from tipping fees back to the city, estimated at $860,000. A
review of the agreement conducted by the U.S. Department of
Homeland Security, completed late in the decision-making
process at the request of a member of Congress, found that the fa-
cility was not the most cost-effective landfill in the region and
that Waste Management’s tipping fees were significantly higher
than other operators. The report found that the landfill operator
had passed the cost of the “donations” to the Corps’ contractors,
which were then passed along to FEMA. The agency did not re-
quire New Orleans to pay for debris removal from the two hur-
ricanes, but the report noted that the city should not profit from
the operations (U.S. DHS 2006).
Originally, the Chef Menteur landfill was expected to oper-
ate for 12 months, but it was closed in August 2006, ostensibly be-
cause the landfill operator had failed to apply for a conditional
use permit. Waste Management subsequently filed a lawsuit in
federal court to reopen the facility, but in an October 2006 deci-
sion, a civil district judge ruled against the company, saying that
it should have applied for the permit to operate the landfill on a
long-term basis well before the closure order had been issued by
Mayor Nagin.
Although these two cases are at the extreme end of the waste
management problems faced by government officials, they
demonstrate an increasing awareness of the battle over landfill
use from various perspectives. In addition to the NIMBY battles
of residents who do not want facilities located nearby, environ-
mental concerns factor into every siting decision. Even after
emergencies like the World Trade Center attacks and the Gulf
Coast hurricanes, decisions on how to deal with debris become
complex and highly politicized.
Siting Waste Management Facilities
Waste management typifies the NIMBY, NIMTOO (not in my term
of office), and BANANA (build absolutely nothing anywhere near
anything) syndromes arising during times of political decision
68
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
making about siting waste facilities. Even when government offi-
cials have efficient technologies to work with, such as WTE plants,
they often are reluctant to initiate projects because of a fear of voter
backlash. The founder of a Texas-based company that owns land-
fills throughout the eastern part of the United States put it this
way: “Landfills in the United States are not environmental issues.
They are strictly political” (Associated Press 2005).
Operational issues associated with waste management have
created a multitude of problems but few solutions, especially
where landfills are concerned. One of the issues is the odor and
air pollution that are produced, either from the trash and organic
matter itself or during collection. In urban areas, for instance, res-
idents often complain about the smell that emanates from waste
transfer stations, described in Chapter 1. In New York City, trans-
fer stations are a way for collection trucks to “tip,” or unload, res-
idential and commercial trash until it is picked up by larger
trucks. A 2004 study by the nongovernmental organization Envi-
ronmental Defense found that transfer facilities were being
placed in a small number of New York City’s neighborhoods,
where hundreds of trucks moved through the area each day. The
odors from the garbage are coupled with the diesel exhaust from
the trucks, especially as they idle while waiting to unload. Resi-
dents nearby have complained not only about the smells but also
about the increases in respiratory illnesses such as asthma (Cruz,
Outerbridge, and Tripp 2004).
New York City mayor Michael Bloomberg has proposed
closing the residential waste transfer stations and reopening four
city-owned marine transfer stations so that the garbage would be
loaded onto barges and sent to an incinerator facility in New Jer-
sey or to landfills in Virginia and Pennsylvania. The facilities al-
ready exist but were closed in 2001, when New York stopped
using the Fresh Kills landfill on Staten Island except for the
World Trade Center debris. The stations will need to be re-
vamped at a cost estimated at $85 million each. The problem is
not just the cost involved, however. A New York City study
found that 91 percent of the trash headed for landfills is con-
trolled by one of three companies, raising questions about trash
monopolies. New York’s residents have also refused to support
building a landfill in their own state and voted down a proposal,
eventually abandoned in the 1990s, to build an incinerator in the
Brooklyn Navy Yards, both now considered “unspeakably bad
ideas” (Brustein 2004).
Siting Waste Management Facilities
69
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
Some progress is being made to deal with the city’s trash
problems. In April 2007, the eight-mile-long Staten Island Rail-
road was reopened for the first time since 1991. It allows garbage
to be transported directly to sealed containers on railcars. City of-
ficials said the reopening of the line would cut out thousands of
truck trips on Staten Island each year, easing traffic, reducing air
pollution and odors, and minimizing the impact on communities
(Rivera 2007).
But when landfills close in big cities like New York, the trash
has to be sent somewhere, and that “somewhere” is often far
away from the businesses and residences where it was created.
Long hauls from urban centers to rural areas are now common-
place, and the Congressional Research Service estimated in 2003
that one-quarter of all municipal trash in the United States
crossed state lines for disposal. Ten states imported at least 1 mil-
lion tons of trash in 2003, up from only two states in 2001. New
York, for instance, transports more than 1,300 tons of garbage
each day to Fox Township, Pennsylvania, about 130 miles north
of Pittsburgh. Virginia imported an estimated 7.8 million tons of
garbage in 2005. Some communities get financial benefits from
charging waste haulers tipping fees for every ton of garbage that
is brought in; in Fox Township, for instance, the fees for import-
ing garbage have enabled officials to purchase new police vehi-
cles and fire trucks in a community of less than 4,000 people
(Associated Press 2005).
Waste haulers and handlers have focused on rural areas for
several reasons. Many rural communities are experiencing eco-
nomic decline, reductions in business activity, and population de-
creases. New projects, such as incinerators, represent the promise
of increased levels of employment, but they also represent the
problems associated with providing government services and the
potential for immigration, or the act of waste projects being sited
in areas far from where the waste is generated. The project facili-
ties that generate most of the new public-sector revenues may be
located in one county, for instance, while most of the project-
related people live in a different school district or county. “In gen-
eral, the effects are most positive for those whose interests
[through business sales or employment] are most directly tied to
the development. They are least positive for those who have no
direct link to the development” (Murdock, Krannich, and Leistritz
1999, 37).
70
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
One study of the impacts of waste projects in 15 communi-
ties in five states in the western United States, however, found lit-
tle indication that waste-affected communities have experienced
extensive economic growth as a result of waste projects or that
the fiscal conditions of the areas have been substantially en-
hanced due to such projects. Nor did the study find any indica-
tion that the use of government services increases or that the
population declines in waste-affected rural communities. But a
substantial difference was seen in rural areas between those who
support and those who oppose siting a waste facility, the study
reports. Leaders, who are older, are better educated, have higher
incomes, and are more likely to own property, are more likely to
support a facility being built, in comparison with residents (Mur-
dock, Krannich, and Leistritz 1999).
The challenges of siting landfills have led to controversial ex-
changes and debates, with some waste management companies
taking extreme measures to gain approval for projects by offering
incentives to decision makers. For example, in 1990, the Halle
Companies filed requests to build a rubble landfill on property
the firm owned in Maryland’s Chesapeake Terrace area. The re-
quests were denied by local officials and appealed by the com-
pany over the next three years, when a county board of appeals
finally granted approval with a series of conditions related to road
improvements, hours of operation, fencing, and a provision that
the landfill could only be operated for 12 years. Local residents
and organizations appealed the proposed project, and in 1994, the
decision was reversed by the circuit court. That decision was then
overturned by the court of appeals, and over the next several
years, the matter wound its way through more administrative
and judicial hearings. In 2002, the company, now called National
Waste Management, made an agreement with the Delaware Na-
tion of Oklahoma to take over the property where the landfill was
planned, placing its operations under the federal government and
the Bureau of Indian Affairs. Because the federal regulations on
landfills on Native American lands are much less strict than those
of the state of Maryland, the permitting process was assumed to
be much easier.
Two years later, two civic organizations that had originally
been a part of the opposition to the facility agreed to support the
Chesapeake Terrace landfill after the company agreed to donate
money to community organizations, set up ball fields, and build
Siting Waste Management Facilities
71
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
a new high school for the county. Another local organization had
successfully negotiated the building of a swimming pool and
clubhouse and a donation to a high school athletic booster club,
while a third group, made up of residents closest to the proposed
landfill, continued its opposition. In 2007, one of the groups that
had pledged its support withdrew from the agreement, with one
leader calling it “not worth the paper it is printed on” (Stewart
2007). The company continues to pursue the project, estimated to
cost $560 million, with an expectation that construction would
take 15 to 20 years to complete.
Is Help on the Way?
New technology, policies, and changing attitudes may be on the
horizon in many communities and in industries grappling with
waste management challenges. Some solutions rely on partner-
ships between government, nongovernmental organizations,
and private-sector businesses, while others represent advances in
how waste is reduced at the source or how it is handled, or
changes in how people feel about trash and recycling.
The problems of dealing with hazardous waste, described
earlier, have led to several sector-based initiatives with the sup-
port of the EPA. Sites that once might have been considered in-
appropriate for further development or use are now being
reclaimed. Brownfields, for instance, are areas within a commu-
nity where potential land use is complicated by the fact that a
hazardous substance, pollutant, or contaminant is present or po-
tentially present. The EPA works with state and local govern-
ments and tribal nations to provide grants to clean up and
revitalize brownfields to turn them into productive community
use. Since the beginning of the brownfields program, the EPA has
awarded more than a thousand assessment grants totaling more
than $262 million, 217 revolving loan fund grants totaling $202
million, and 336 cleanup grants totaling $61 million. Other grant
programs provide training and technical assistance. In addition,
federal tax incentives are available to allow environmental
cleanup costs to be deducted from a company’s yearly tax liabil-
ity (U.S. EPA 2007a).
A typical example of a Superfund brownfields project is the
Solitron Microwave Site in Port Salerno, Florida. The 20-acre site
had been used for plating and manufacturing processes from
72
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
1963 to 1987. After the facility was shut down, local health de-
partment officials discovered 12 privately owned local wells in
which contaminant levels were higher than federal drinking
water standards allow, and in 1998, the EPA added Solitron to the
NPL. The Army Corps of Engineers, working with the EPA, ex-
cavated soil near the rear of the building, and as a part of rede-
velopment, the developer demolished the building. Additional
hazardous soil was excavated from beneath the building. The
city now has a 20-acre industrial park instead of an abandoned
facility considered an eyesore to the community, and an addi-
tional 150,000 square feet of warehouse and light industrial space
to revitalize the community by providing new jobs and cleaning
up an old, dilapidated building (U.S. EPA 2007c).
Similar sector-based initiatives are underway to clean up
and reuse other types of sites that are similar to brownfields that
may have had different types of uses. Portfields, for instance, are
a type of brownfield located in port communities. Three cities
were chosen for a pilot program for cleanup in 2003: Bellingham,
Washington; New Bedford, Massachusetts; and Tampa, Florida.
The program helps communities assess environmental and
health concerns, leverage resources to revitalize waterfront areas,
improve marine transportation, and protect and restore critical
habitat. Similarly, the federal programs designed to reclaim rail-
fields, mine-scarred lands, and areas where waste soil from un-
derground storage tanks exist help restore areas through an
interagency approach.
Agencies are also turning to innovative technological strate-
gies to deal with various types of waste. Among the newer efforts
is the use of phytoremediation—the direct use of green plants
and their associated microorganisms to stabilize or reduce conta-
mination in soils, sludges, sediments, or water. The process has
been used at more than 200 waste sites nationwide since the early
1990s. The plant species that are used are selected on the basis of
their ability to extract or degrade the contaminants in the waste,
sometimes through their root systems. An example of the use of
phytoremediation is the Oregon Poplar Site in Clackamas, Ore-
gon. This site is a three-acre, abandoned grassy field in an area
that was primarily designated for commercial and light indus-
trial use. Contaminants that included volatile organic com-
pounds had been illegally dumped there, and the area was
particularly important because it paralleled a small stream. Al-
though no risk to human health was evident because of the low
Is Help on the Way?
73
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
level of contamination, the groundwater beneath the site is shal-
low and in hydraulic contact with the stream. Hybrid poplar
trees were planted there as part of an effort to phytoremediate
the area in 1998, and four years later, the trees not only had sur-
vived but had shown considerable growth. Tissue samples taken
from the roots of four of the larger trees indicated that they were
actively removing the chemical contamination from the waste
soil (U.S. EPA 2007d).
The EPA has developed several other innovative programs,
many of which involve public outreach and education. Waste-
Wise, for instance, encourages companies to conduct a waste as-
sessment to help employees identify waste-reduction strategies
and establish a baseline for measuring progress. Participants,
called partners, include large and small businesses; hospitals;
universities; nonprofit organizations; and state, local, and tribal
governments. The EPA provides free technical assistance and co-
ordinates regional and national events to help partners network
to find solutions. The program is free, voluntary, and, the EPA
says, flexible and cost effective.
Some of the smaller-scale programs are inexpensive and eas-
ily replicated, such as the Schools Chemical Cleanout Campaign.
The goal of the program is to ensure that schools are free from the
hazards associated with mismanaged chemicals, which are
found in sources such as maintenance facilities, chemistry labs,
and nurses’ offices on school grounds. While concern exists
about the risk from spills, fires, and other accidental exposure
caused by chemical accidents, an awareness also exists that these
problems lead to school disruptions and closures, as well as
thousands of dollars spent in repairs. The EPA program provides
administrators and parents with the resources needed to develop
a successful chemical management program that also involves
chemical suppliers and waste handlers.
Technological Advances
As this chapter illustrates, the problem of waste management in-
cludes not only reducing the amount of waste created and devel-
oping strategies to increase the amount of waste that is recycled
but also finding ways to deal with waste that must be treated.
Technological advances are having an enormous impact on waste
management treatment options, although the solutions do not fit
74
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
every type of waste. For instance, St. Lucie County, Florida, an-
nounced in 2006 that it was planning a 100,000-square-foot facil-
ity that would allow it to close its dump, generate electricity, and
help build roads by using lightning-like plasma arcs to vaporize
garbage. The facility would be privately built and would be the
largest of its kind in the world if plans to operate it by 2011 are fi-
nalized. It would vaporize 3,000 tons of trash per day and would
incinerate trash from the existing dump as well, allowing officials
to close it within 18 years. Synthetic, combustible gas produced
by the plant would run turbines to create electricity that would
be sold, along with steam that would power a neighboring juice
plant. The sludge from the county’s wastewater treatment facil-
ity would also be vaporized and then sold for use in road and
other construction projects. The company would absorb the en-
tire cost of building and operating the $425 million facility, at no
cost to the county (Associated Press 2006).
Similar changes are affecting other waste operations.
Throughout most of U.S. history, the debris from logging and
milling operations has been burned as useless waste. But using
biomass as fuel, especially woody biomass such as small tree
limbs and sawdust, is now the number one form of renewable
energy in the United States. Although biomass contributes only
about 3 percent of the nation’s energy needs, wood waste can be
burned to generate steam and electricity. Biofuel development is
becoming especially important in the U.S. West as a way of uti-
lizing the waste created as a result of thinning forest vegetation
and trees to reduce the danger of wildfires, especially in the
wildland-urban interface. The U.S. Forest Service has made thin-
ning and forest restoration a major priority, but until recently, lit-
tle economic value has been realized in the woody biomass that
results from new policies such as the Healthy Forests Restoration
Act of 2003. Aggressive goals for hazardous fuels reduction are
only now being coupled with finding ways to reduce the coun-
try’s reliance on fossil fuels (U.S. Department of Agriculture
2008).
Most of the woody biomass applications involve small geo-
graphical areas, usually in rural communities where wood chips
are readily available. The Forest Service has created a program
called Fuels for Schools to encourage schools to replace heating
systems that burn fossil fuels with those that use wood chips. The
program has more than a dozen projects operating in four states,
with others in the design or construction phase. In addition to its
Technological Advances
75
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
use in rural schools, woody biomass heating is being used in a
correctional facility, in a hospital, and at the University of Mon-
tana’s campus in Dillon. In states like Minnesota, woody biomass
is used as an industrial-scale fuel to replace coal; in research pro-
grams, the cellulose in forest debris is being studied to determine
whether it can be turned into liquid fuel similar to ethanol. These
projects utilize material that would otherwise be sent to a landfill
or burned on the ground (Bryant 2007).
Consumers can also make changes, many of which involve
lifestyle changes but some of which are oriented toward innova-
tive practices. In 2003, the practice of “freecycling” was started as
a way of helping individuals find new uses for unwanted items.
The first program began with Deron Beal of Tucson, Arizona,
who was working for a nonprofit organization, Downtown Don’t
Waste It, a recycling program that collected unwanted office fur-
niture and supplies. The group was hoping to reduce the amount
of materials going to local landfills or being dumped in the
desert. Other nonprofit organizations he was working with were
willing to take some items, such as computers, and others needed
items such as office supplies. He decided to start a computer list-
serv to bring the parties together, and then he expanded it to
cover any free item anyone wanted to just give away. He sent out
a notice on May 1, 2003, starting out with a posting for a queen-
size bed he no longer needed. As the project grew, individuals
started listing items they needed as well as ones they wanted to
give away, and an article in the local newspaper helped add more
members to the group. Various environmental organizations
began publicizing freecycle groups, which began to spread across
the country. The listservs have a moderator and a handful of
rules, such as keeping all items free, legal, and appropriate for all
ages. They discourage trading, politicking, and off-topic e-mail
messaging. Most groups suggest that nonprofit organizations be
the first ones to be offered items, but supporters note that freecy-
cling often finds homes for items that charitable groups do not
want. Now, nearly 4,000 local freecycling groups are in operation,
with a membership of more than 3.5 million people in countries
around the world (Nijhuis 2004).
The system is not a perfect solution. The group uses as its
tagline “Changing the world one gift at a time,” but some critics
believe the organization sold out to greed when it accepted two
grants of corporate support of $230,000 from the trash collection
company Waste Management, Inc., in 2005. Additional criticism
76
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
came from a deal to accept advertisements for the search engine
Google on the network’s Web site. The original group has also
been criticized for staunchly defending its trademark and for im-
posing unnecessarily strict rules on members (Walker 2007).
What is abundantly clear is that waste management prob-
lems will not be solved by any single solution. Public officials
must work cooperatively with waste haulers, who must work
with the public. Government regulators must deal with indus-
tries and business organizations in order to develop rules that
will meet the needs of both. Citizens, as consumers, will need to
rethink their behaviors and attitudes about the trash they pro-
duce and must take responsibility for what becomes of each item.
As long as waste management stays near the bottom of the polit-
ical agenda, however, there are few incentives for new solutions
or change.
References
Abraham, Spencer. 2002. “One Safe Site Is Best.” Washington Post, March
26. [Online article; retrieved 4/18/02.] http://pqasb.pqarchiver.com/
washingtonpost/access/111518545.html?dids=111518545:111518545&
FMT=ABS&FMTS=ABS:FT&fmac=&date=Mar+26%2C+2002&
author=Spencer+Abraham&desc=One+Safe+Site+Is+Best.
Associated Press. 2002. “State Shuts Off Water to Yucca Mountain; Re-
search Continues.” KVBC.com, April 10. [Online article; retrieved
4/18/02.]  http://www.kvbc.com/Global/story.asp?S=738840.
Associated Press. 2005. “As Landfills Close in Big Cities, Garbage Trav-
els Farther.” USA Today, July 12. [Online article; retrieved 6/1/07.]
http://www.usatoday.com/news/nation/2005-07-12-trash-diaspora_
x.htm?loc=interstitialskip.
Associated Press. 2006. “Florida County Plans to Vaporize Landfill
Trash.” USA Today, September 9. [Online article; retrieved 4/17/07.]
http://www.usatoday.com/news/nation/2006-09-09-fla-county-
trash_x.htm.
Brustein, Joshua. 2004. “The Mayor’s New Garbage Plan.” Gotham
Gazette, October 18. [Online article; retrieved 4/11/07.] http://www.
gothamgazette.com/article/20041018/200/1151.
Bryant, Chris. 2007. “Fuels from the Forests.” Forest Magazine (Spring):
33–37.
Burros, Marian. 2007. “Just the Thing to Carry Your Conscience In.” New
York Times, July 18. [Online article; retrieved 10/7/07.] http://www.
References
77
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
nytimes.com/2007/07/18/dining/18bags.html?_r=1&scp=1&sq=%22
just+the+thing+to+carry+your+conscience+in%22&st=nyt&oref=slogin.
Businesses and Environmentalists Allied for Recycling (BEAR). 2002.
Understanding Beverage Container Recovery: A Value Chain Assessment.
[Online report; retrieved 7/7/07.] http://www.globalgreen.org/bear/
Projects/index.html#files.
California Integrated Waste Management Board. 2006a. “Pressure-Sensi-
tive Adhesives: A Sticky Recycling Problem.” [Online article; retrieved
7/9/07.] http://www.ciwmb.ca.gov/BizWaste/OfficePaper/PSAFacts.
htm.
California Integrated Waste Management Board. 2006b. “What Is a Zero
Waste California?” [Online article; retrieved 2/7/07.] http://www.
zerowaste.ca.gov/WhatIs.htm.
Carpet America Recovery Effort (CARE). 2007a. Annual Report. [Online
report; retrieved 7/10/07.] http://www.carpetrecovery.org/annual.php.
Carpet America Recovery Effort (CARE). 2007b. “About CARE.” [Online
information; retrieved 4/16/07.] http://www.carpetrecovery.org/about.
php.
Center for Policy Alternatives. 2007. “Bottle Bill.” [Online article; re-
trieved 7/7/07.] http://www.stateaction.org/issues/issue.cfm?issue=
BottleBill.xml.
China.org.cn. 2002. “Baosteel Will Recycle World Trade Center Debris.”
China Internet Information Center. [Online article; retrieved 6/24/07.]
http://www.china.org.cn/english/2002/Jan/25776.htm.
CNN.com. 2002. “Senate Approves Yucca Mountain Nuclear Waste
Site.” [Online article; retrieved 7/21/02.] www.cnn.com.
Conservatree. 2007. “Source Reduction: Using Your Buying Power.”
[Online information; retrieved 7/11/07.] http://www.conservatree.
org/paper/Choose/SRpurchasing.shtml.
Container Recycling Institute. 2007. “Bottle Bill Resource Guide.” [On-
line information; retrieved 7/7/07.] www.bottlebill.org.
Cotton, Thomas. 2006. “Nuclear Waste Story: Setting the Stage.” In Un-
certainty Underground: Yucca Mountain and the Nation’s High-Level Nuclear
Waste, edited by Allison M. Macfarlane and Rodney C. Ewing, 29–44.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Cruz, Ramon J., Thomas Outerbridge, and James T. B. Tripp. 2004. Trash
and the City: Toward a Cleaner, More Equitable Waste Transfer System in
Manhattan. New York: Environmental Defense.
Curtis, Wayne. 2006. “A Heap of Sorrows.” Grist, August 10. [Online ar-
ticle; retrieved 6/1/07.] http://www.grist.org/news/maindish/2006/
08/10/curtis/index.html.
78
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
De Young, Raymond, Sally Boerschig, Sarah Carney, Anne Dillenbeck,
Mark Elster, Susan Horst, Brad Kleiner, Bruce Thomson. 1995. “Recy-
cling in Multi-Family Dwellings: Increasing Participation and Decreas-
ing Contamination.” Population & Environment, January. [Online article;
retrieved 4/29/07]. http://www.springerlink.com/content/81151726u
10769ul/?p=3dc0eeb6f52b41caa6976d488cd2c0cf&pi=0.
Eaton, Leslie. 2006. “A New Landfill in New Orleans Sets Off a Battle.”
New York Times, May 8. [Online article; retrieved 6/24/07.] http://
www.nytimes.com/2006/05/08/us/08landfill.html?scp=1&sq=%22a+
new+landfill+in+new+orleans%22&st=nyt.
Fehr-Snyder, Kerry. 2007. “Chandler Aims to Turn Closed Dump into
Park by 2009.” Arizona Republic, September 24, B1.
Film and Bag Federation. 2007. “Environmental Issues.” [Online infor-
mation; retrieved 4/26/07.] http://www.plasticsindustry.org/about/
fbf/environment.htm.
Gitlitz, Jennifer, and Pat Franklin. 2007. Water, Water Everywhere: The
Growth of Non-Carbonated Beverages in the United States. Washington, DC:
Container Recycling Institute.
GrassRoots Recycling Network. 2002. “Reduce, Reuse, Refill!” [Online
article; retrieved 7/7/07.] http://www.grrn.org/beverage/refillables/
index.html.
Grove, Benjamin. 2002. “Yucca Ads Focus on a Handful of States.” Las
Vegas Sun, April 17. [Online article; retrieved 4/18/02.] http://www.las
vegassun.com/news/2002/apr/17/yucca-ads-focus-on-a-handful-
of-states/.
Guinn, Kenny. 2002. “Statement of Reasons Supporting the Governor of
Nevada’s Notice of Disapproval of the Proposed Yucca Mountain Pro-
ject.” April 18.
Gurnon, Emily. 2003. “The Problem with Plastics.” North Coast Journal
Weekly, June 5. [Online article; retrieved 7/9/07.] http://www.northcoast
journal.com/060503/cover0605.html.
Halwell, Brian. 2007. “Good Stuff? Plastic Bags.” [Online article; re-
trieved 4/26/07.} http://www.worldwatch.org/node/1499.
Lange, Alexandra. 2006. “Fresh Kills in 2016.” New York Magazine, June
5. [Online article; retrieved 4/11/07.] http://nymag.com/realestate/
features/2016/17149/.
Lapidos, Juliet. 2007. “Will My Plastic Bag Still Be Here in 2507?” Slate,
June 27. [Online article; retrieved 7/11/07.] http://www.slate.com/id/
2169287/.
References
79
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
Louisiana Department of Environmental Quality (DEQ). 2006. “Letter to
Mayor Ray Nagin Regarding the Chef Menteur C & D Disposal Facility.”
July 21. [Online article; retrieved 7/1/07.] www.deq.louisiana.gov.
Minnesota Office of Environmental Assistance. 2007. “A National Agree-
ment on Carpet Recycling.” [Online information; retrieved 7/10/07.]
www.pca.state.mn.us/oea/carpet.
Moore, Charles. 2003. “Trashed.” Natural History (November). [Online
article; retrieved 4/11/07.] http://nhmag.com/search.html?keys=%22
trashed&sitenbr=157877211&bgcolor=%23C7E0B0.
Murdock, Steven H., Richard S. Krannich, and F. Larry Leistritz. 1999.
Hazardous Wastes in Rural America: Impacts, Implications, and Options for
Rural Communities. Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield.
Neff, Erin. 2002. “Yucca Project Believed to Be ‘Legally Dead.’” Las Vegas
Sun, April 9. [Online article; retrieved 4/18/02.] http://www.lasvegas
sun.com/news/2002/apr/09/yucca-project-believed-to-be-legally-
dead/.
Nijhuis, Michelle. 2004. “Give It Away, Give It Away, Give It Away
Now.” Grist, May 17. [Online article; retrieved 7/11/07.] http://www.
grist.org/news/maindish/2004/05/17/nijhuis-freecycle/index.html.
Page, G. William. 1997. Contaminated Sites and Environmental Cleanup.
San Diego: Academic Press.
ReCellular, Inc. 2007. “About Us.” [Online information; retrieved
6/27/07.] http://www.recellular.com/about/index.asp.
Reusable Bags.com. “The Numbers . . . Believe It or Not.” [Online arti-
cle; retrieved 7/11/2007.] http: www.reusablebags.com/facts.
Rivera, Ray. 2007. “City Reopens Old Rail Line for Staten Island Trash
and Freight.” New York Times, April 18. [Online article; retrieved
4/19/07.] http://www.nytimes.com/2007/04/18/nyregion/18staten.
html?scp=2&sq=%22city+reopens+old+rail+line%22&st=nyt.
Rogers, Heather. 2005. Gone Tomorrow: The Hidden Life of Garbage. New
York: New Press.
Russell, Gordon. 2006. “Storm Debris Landfill is OK’d.” New Orleans
Times Picayune, April 14. [Online article; retrieved 6/24/07.] http://
www.huongduong.org/giaoxu/tintuc/timespicayune%20041406.htm.
Stewart, Joshua. 2007. “Crofton Civic Group Dumps Landfill Deal.” The
Capital, April 17. [Online article; retrieved 4/17/07.] www.hometown
annapolis.com.
Stroupe, Wayne. 2001. “Debris Removal Is Biggest Mission in New
York.” U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. November. [Online article; re-
trieved 6/24/07.] http://www.hq.usace.army.mil/cepa/pubs/nov01/
story20.htm.
80
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
Tchobanoglous, George, and Frank Kreith. 2002. Handbook of Solid Waste
Management, 2nd. ed. New York: McGraw-Hill.
U.S. Department of Agriculture. Forest Service. 2008. “Woody Biomass
Utilization.” [Online information; retrieved 6/14/08.] http://www.fs.
fed.us/woodybiomass.
U.S. Department of Homeland Security (DHS). 2006. Congressional In-
quiry, Landfill Cost Issues Relating to Disposal of Debris in the City of New
Orleans. Report DD-07-03, December 15. http://www.dhs.gov/xoig/
assets/auditrpts/OIG_DD-07-03_Dec06.pdf.
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). 2006a. Municipal Solid
Waste Generation, Recycling, and Disposal in the United States: Facts and Fig-
ures for 2005. Washington, DC: EPA.
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). 2007. “Source Reduction
and Reuse.” [Online information; retrieved 7/11/07.] http://www.epa.
gov/garbage/sourcred.htm.
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). 2007a. “Brownfields
Cleanup and Redevelopment: South Central Planning and Development
Commission, LA.” [Online article; retrieved 7/5/07.] www.epa.gov/
swerosps/bf.
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). 2007b. “National Priori-
ties List (NPL).” [Online information; retrieved 7/5/07.] http://www.
epa.gov/superfund/sites/npl/index.htm.
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). 2007c. “The Solitron Mi-
crowave Site: From Groundwater Contamination to Economic Revital-
ization.” [Online information; retrieved 7/5/07.] http://www.epa.
gov/superfund/accomp/news/solitron.htm.
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). 2007d. “Using Phytore-
mediation to Clean Up Sites.” [Online information; retrieved 7/5/07.]
http://www.epa.gov/superfund/phyto.htm.
U.S. Government Accountability Office (GAO). 2006. Recycling: Addi-
tional Efforts Could Increase Municipal Recycling. December. Washington,
DC: GAO.
Walker, Rob. 2007. “Unconsumption.” New York Times, January 7. [On-
line article; retrieved 7/11/07.] http://www.nytimes.com/2007/01/07/
magazine/07wwln_consumed.t.html?scp=1&sq=%22unconsumption
%22&st=nyt.
References
81
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
3
Worldwide Perspective
I
n July 2007, the Republic of Ireland raised its tax on plastic
shopping bags, known as the plastax, from 15 to 22 cents after
a study found that bag use had risen from 21 to 30 per capita in
a single year. The Plastic Bag Environmental Levy—a charge that
applies at the point of sale at about 19,000 retail outlets such as
grocery stores, shopping centers, and gas stations—was first en-
acted in 2002 to discourage the use of plastic bags by consumers;
an estimated 1.2 billion were handed out every year in Ireland. A
national study published in 1999 presented the government with
several options; researchers concluded that a tax on each plastic
bag would best epitomize the “polluter pays” principle that tar-
gets end consumption, rather than trying to expand litter control
measures by local authorities (Republic of Ireland 1999).
Almost immediately after the tax was implemented, per
capita plastic bag use decreased from an estimated 328 bags to
21—along with a 95 percent decrease in plastic bag litter. Surveys
showed that up to 90 percent of shoppers used life-long bags in
2003, compared with 36 percent in 1999. The levy brought in rev-
enues of nearly US$100 million in its first five years, with pro-
ceeds going into the Environment Fund to support civic
recycling centers, enforcement of Ireland’s Waste Management
Acts, waste awareness campaigns, the Green Schools Initiative,
and efforts to manage used refrigerators and freezers. The 2007
increase was designed to bring per capita use back down to 2002
levels or lower (Republic of Ireland 2007).
The legacy of plastic bag litter is not limited to industrialized
nations or large urban areas. In March 2002, Bangladesh banned
polyethylene bags after researchers found they had blocked
83
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
drainage systems and were a major cause of the floods that dev-
astated the country in 1988 and 1998. South Africa, which calls
plastic bags “the national flower” because they can be seen
caught in bushes and along fences, began requiring manufactur-
ers to make bags more durable and expensive in 2002, resulting
in a 90 percent decrease in their use. Taiwan has adopted a law
requiring restaurants, convenience stores, and supermarkets to
charge customers for plastic bags and utensils, causing a 69 per-
cent drop in plastic products, and in Australia, an estimated 90
percent of retailers are cooperating with the government’s vol-
untary plan to limit plastic bags. In southwestern Great Britain,
shopkeepers in the town of Modbury, population 1,500, agreed to
stop giving out plastic bags to their customers and also declared
a bag amnesty for those whose bags had piled up at home. In
Paris, a law banning plastic bag use went into effect in 2007, to be
followed in 2010 by a nationwide ban.
Like plastic bag litter, waste and its management is a prob-
lem that affects every society, from the most developed countries
to those considered part of the Third and Fourth worlds. The
issue is complicated because waste involves those countries that
produce waste, those that recover and reuse waste, and those
that trade waste among themselves. Another factor is the wide
variation in waste disposal methods, depending on a country’s
resources. In the United Kingdom, for instance, a lack of readily
available space for landfills makes incineration one of the most
used methods for eliminating waste, a situation that is similar to
that of Japan. In Yokohama, the 3.5 million residents sort their
trash based on a 27-page booklet that details instructions for 518
items. Garbage must be sorted into 10 categories as a way to re-
duce incinerated trash by 30 percent over the next five years in a
country where space for landfills is almost impossible to find
(Onishi 2005). In Australia, the population is less dense and more
dispersed, making landfills the most common strategy for waste
disposal. Other countries, especially those in Scandinavia, em-
ploy waste-to-energy both as a waste disposal method and to
produce needed heat or power for local communities. Just out-
side Toronto, for example, a subsidiary of Algonquin Power In-
come Fund burns 500 tons of waste per day and generates 15
megawatts of electricity.
This chapter outlines the primary problems facing waste
managers from a worldwide perspective and the solutions that
are being attempted to solve them. It does not address the waste
84
Worldwide Perspective
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
issues of every country, but it does provide a snapshot of what is
being done from one point on the waste continuum to another.
Global Waste Management Efforts
Africa
Progress toward environmental sustainability in Africa has been
slow because of the need to prioritize basic human needs for
housing, food, and security. But in some African countries, envi-
ronmental consciousness is gradually being raised as the stan-
dard of living increases and the amount of pollution and waste
created mounts. The “poverty-environment-growth nexus” is be-
coming better understood as the paradigm shifts from taking ac-
tion after waste is generated to finding ways to prevent pollution
through waste minimization (Ekelund and Nystrom 2007).
Waste management in most of Africa centers on two prob-
lems: the lack of accurate data on solid waste generation and
characterization and a corresponding lack of information about
waste collection, processing, and disposal. Thus, even the most
recent studies are unable fully to determine how much progress
is being made. A July 2002 report by the African Development
Bank found, for instance, that no country has specific waste man-
agement legislation, although some statutes are being drafted,
and virtually no integrated waste management programs are
being implemented. The lack of information about what is being
done officially is, to some extent, supplemented by research on
the informal trash economy (scavenging and privatization). But
overall, education and communication channels between the
government and civil society are considered inefficient and inad-
equate. “A lack of a right to know, secrecy and misinformation
has also been major contributory factors to poor waste manage-
ment in many African countries” (African Development Bank
2002).
Case studies of four cities with a population of 1 million or
more show major differences in efficiency and practices in Africa.
In Cairo, for instance, the government has established modern
composting plants that have the potential to serve as a model for
other African countries because of their modern design, low cost,
high efficiency, and satisfactory operation records. But engi-
neered landfills are only in the planning stages, and a need exists
Global Waste Management Efforts
85
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
for a long-term waste management plan and a focused public ed-
ucation campaign. One serious problem in Nairobi, in contrast, is
the lack of regular collection of municipal solid waste, with only
20 to 30 percent of waste collected. Trash pickup vehicles are
often unavailable because of mechanical problems and a lack of
spare parts, so some portions of the city’s streets are swept man-
ually; mechanical street sweeping is unavailable. Some trash is
picked up by private companies, which transport it to an un-
fenced dumping area that is open to scavenging and cattle grow-
ers. Accra, Ghana, operates a composting plant (although it does
not work at full capacity) and a regional dump. Based on strate-
gic objectives outlined in a 1999 sanitation policy, the govern-
ment of Accra hopes to have all solid waste generated in urban
areas collected and adequately disposed of by 2020. In Cape
Town, South Africa, more than 95 percent of domestic, trade, and
hazardous waste is landfilled, the most widely used and cheap-
est option in the country. South Africa has transfer stations, pri-
vately owned landfills, recycling programs (about 7 percent of
waste is recycled), and plans for an integrated waste manage-
ment approach (African Development Bank 2002).
South Africa held its first National Waste Summit in Septem-
ber 2001, bringing together representatives from government,
business, and nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) to find
ways to reduce waste. The resulting Polokwane Declaration called
for a vision of zero waste by 2022. One of the strategies considered
by officials was composting, because it has the most considerable
environmental benefit. Municipalities can reduce the amount of
waste going to landfills, which in turn reduces the environmental
impact of the remaining waste by limiting the amount of organic
waste that can lead to methane gas production, leachate, and the
risk of fire. Because compost can also be used as a fertilizer, it has
other benefits to local residents.
But in most major African cities, informal waste recycling is
still an important, if unrecognized, aspect of waste management.
More than 50,000 zabbaleen—an informal network of trash 
scavengers—recover and recycle between 70 and 80 percent of all
collected recyclables in Cairo, for instance. Swine operations, in
which pigs are fed garbage, produce food and a secondary income
source for their owners, who can sell the organic waste. Most ex-
perts believe this scavenging system is efficient and innovative,
but waste picking is seldom recognized by the central govern-
86
Worldwide Perspective
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
ment, and the health problems and poor working conditions that
result are often ignored (African Development Bank 2002).
A 2007 United Nations (UN) Environment Programme
study of poor countries in Africa found that a lack of zoning and
inadequate enforcement of existing laws often lead to the growth
of slums surrounding dumps in cities. The 30-acre Dandora
dump, for instance, located five miles from Nairobi, pollutes the
entire region with toxic smoke from burning trash. An estimated
2,000 tons of garbage, including industrial and medical waste,
are taken to the dump site every day. Residents wash their
clothes and bathe in the Nairobi River adjacent to the dump;
downstream residents are exposed to hazards from runoff and
leaching. Medical tests and soil samples found that children in
the area had high levels of lead in their systems, and many also
suffer from respiratory problems from scavenging in the odorous
trash for items they can sell. Asthma, anemia, and skin infections
are common; officials said “the actual results are even more
shocking than we had imagined at the outset” (Muhumed 2007).
Asia
In July 2000, environmental activists from 12 Asia-Pacific nations
met in Bangkok, Thailand, to found a regional alliance, Waste
Not Asia, to oppose waste incineration and promote ecological
methods of waste management. The group’s goal is to achieve a
sustainable society with zero waste through programs that em-
phasize clean production, materials recovery, and community-
based solutions. The anti-incineration emphasis is the result of
allegations that Japan and Europe have forced toxic technologies
on Asian nations, “which seeks to make Asia the toilet bowl of
the industrialized world. We are here to let the world know we
no longer intend to become the dumping ground for their dis-
carded technologies,” according to one group member (Grass-
Roots Recycling Network 2000). Subsequent meetings were held
in Taipei, Taiwan, in 2001; in Penang, Malaysia, in 2003; in Seoul,
Korea, in 2004; and in Kerala, India, in 2006.
Particular attention has been focused on China, whose envi-
ronmental record has not been consistent with its industrial
growth, and concerns about how the world’s most populous na-
tion is dealing with its own waste. China was one of the first coun-
tries to join the Basel Convention on the Control of Transboundary
Global Waste Management Efforts
87
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
Movements of Hazardous Wastes and Their Disposal, described in
more detail later in this chapter. In 1995, the National People’s
Congress adopted the Law on the Prevention and Control of Envi-
ronmental Pollution by Solid Wastes of the People’s Republic of
China. The goal of the legislative action was to minimize haz-
ardous wastes to the greatest extent possible, setting down man-
agement systems such as a system of waste registration, a
hazardous waste permitting system, and transport monitoring. In
1998, China’s State Environmental Protection Administration, re-
sponsible for implementing the Basel Convention, issued a na-
tional catalogue of hazardous waste comprising 47 types, listing
their sources and the hazardous substances they contain. Other
regulations have been developed to implement a permit system
for waste imports, although officials note that China itself pro-
duces some hazardous wastes for which it has no treatment facili-
ties, necessitating that those wastes be exported to other countries
for disposal (Zhenhua 2007).
China’s stance on the disposal of radioactive waste is im-
portant because the government plans to boost its current nu-
clear power generation capacity by 20 times by the end of 2030.
Ten nuclear reactors were generating power in 2007; those plants
produce about 8 million kilowatts of power. By 2020, the govern-
ments wants to increase generation to 40 million kilowatts, and
between 120 million and 160 million kilowatts 10 years after that.
To achieve these goals, China would have to build in excess of
100 nuclear reactors, each capable of generating 1 million kilo-
watts over 20 years. If accomplished, these efforts would make
China the world’s largest generator of nuclear power, surpassing
Japan, France, and the United States. Although these plants
would be new, and it could be decades before they would be de-
commissioned, the amount of waste they would create is of con-
cern to other countries in the region.
India’s waste management issues are much different from
those of neighboring China. Because of cultural and economic
conditions, only about 60 percent of solid waste is collected na-
tionwide, with the remaining 40 percent just dumped on the
waysides and in urban streets. The country has no comprehen-
sive resource management plan and no laboratory to test for the
presence of chemicals such as dioxins that are produced from
waste incineration. In 2000, the Indian Supreme Court ruled that
municipal waste agencies should set up waste processing and
88
Worldwide Perspective
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
disposal facilities by December 2001 and identify future landfill
sites by December 2002. All local governments were expected to
have door-to-door collection systems and have segregated waste
programs for recyclables and organic waste in place by Decem-
ber 2003. But compliance with the Municipal Solid Waste Man-
agement Rules (MSWMR) 2000 has been only partially
successful, studies show. Some municipal governments still have
not developed waste services at all, while others depend on
NGOs working independently to provide collection of waste.
Most programs exist on a very small scale despite the size of the
population, as is the case in Mumbai. Companies attempting to
build capacity for recycling plastic bottles have had to import
bottles from the United States in order to make their operations
financially profitable (Sule 2004).
Like many poor countries, India is also home to thousands of
ragpickers—the term used to describe trash scavengers—who are
trying to become more organized and to be integrated into the na-
tion’s developing waste management programs. Some have cre-
ated trade unions by quantifying their contribution to solid waste
management and using collective bargaining power to create state
recognition of their efforts. Some groups have been hired by con-
tractors, although many companies discriminate against women.
The creation of the MSWMR has resulted in the elimination of jobs
for many, leaving ragpickers destitute (Sule 2005). Some critics
have argued that municipal governments have ignored the plight
of the ragpickers and of residents in the poorest areas of India. In
June 2007, for instance, 25 trucks carrying garbage from a city cor-
poration rolled into a small village with a police escort to dump
waste at a 37-acre site where a waste treatment plant was pro-
posed. Although the local residents tried to stop the trucks, they
were beaten by police; more than 200 people had to flee the area
because they became sick from the garbage stench, and some had
to be hospitalized. The corporation had secured a permit to oper-
ate a waste facility, but not for open dumping that contaminated
the soil and water. A member of an independent fact-finding com-
mittee called the dumping, which continued for five days, “a bla-
tant human rights violation” (Suchitra and Venugopal 2007).
Although some ambivalence about building on the site had been
encountered, environmental and health concerns have gained in-
creased attention, since the facility is to be built near a water source
used by both residents and a host of industrial users (Basheer
Global Waste Management Efforts
89
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
2007). The city corporation did not have an alternative plan for
dealing with the waste from a densely populated area after years
of just dumping it in open areas or along roadsides.
While some might perceive India to be decades behind the
rest of the world in its waste management practices, success sto-
ries can be found. In Suryapet, a town in the Nalgonda district in
Andhra Pradesh, the city’s inhabitants generate more than 48
tons of garbage per year. Each resident is given two bins—a red
one for dry garbage and a green one for wet garbage (food, flow-
ers, etc.)—which are collected in a door-to-door system each
morning. The city has no need for a landfill because all waste is
either composted or recycled (Krishna 2006). But these programs
are in the minority, evidence of the difficulties of trying to create
a waste management infrastructure in areas that are already ex-
periencing industrial or residential growth.
At the other end of the scale is Japan, which has a long his-
tory of municipal waste management. Rapid post–World War II
industrialization resulted in a flurry of environmental legislation
during the late 1960s and early 1970s, paralleling activity in the
United States. The 1967 Basic Law for Pollution Control and the
1970 Pollution Diet forced officials to balance out the conditions
associated with a densely populated country, with typical urban
problems, such as waste, and the government’s desire to build a
strong economy. Responsibility for waste management is decen-
tralized and fragmented among numerous centralized agencies
and mostly privatized or in public-private partnerships. About
half of all hazardous waste is dealt with on-site by manufactur-
ers, so disposal firms tend to be small and owned by domestic
companies. Landfills are scarce; about half of the country’s toxic
wastes are disposed of through incineration—the highest rate in
the world (O’Neill 2000).
Its more serious problem is radioactive waste. Japan began
its commercial nuclear power plant operations in 1966, and now
nuclear power accounts for about one-third of Japan’s electricity
production. Low-level waste generated by nuclear power plants
has been buried at the Rokkasho-mura facility since 1992, and
spent nuclear fuel is routinely stored on-site at reactors in pools
until it is sent to France or the United Kingdom for reprocessing
and then returned to Japan. High-level radioactive waste is vitri-
fied (converted to a solid form) and stored on-site for cooling,
with the intention that it will eventually be placed in some sort of
deep geologic disposal facility as Japan’s first option for long-
90
Worldwide Perspective
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
term storage. Dry storage is also being developed at the
Rokkasho-mura site. Facility development falls under the aus-
pices of the Nuclear Waste Management Organization, which
plans to begin construction in the 2030s.
Over the last 25 years, Japan’s government has focused its
attention on the technical capacity of its research and develop-
ment programs to store high-level radioactive waste, while the
public debate has centered around concerns over siting of a facil-
ity. Japan’s active tectonic setting and complex geology make the
issue problematic, as was demonstrated when a 6.8-magnitude
earthquake struck the world’s largest nuclear power plant at
Kashiwazaki-Kariwa in July 2007. The plant, on the coast of
Japan about 135 miles north of Tokyo, was ordered closed after it
was reported that the damage to the facility was much greater
than was originally announced. Japanese officials have prided
themselves on the transparency of their nuclear program, but the
incident did little to calm public fears about how an earthquake
might damage an underground depository.
European Union
Waste management is not usually front-page news in Europe, but
when it does make headlines, it is for good reason. Naples, Italy,
suffered what could only be described as a garbage crisis in 2004,
when uncollected trash began piling up on the city’s streets and
then showed up throughout the picturesque countryside, where
it was dumped. The scene was repeated in May 2007, when al-
leyways became blocked by piles of trash and plastic bags full of
debris began showing up on beaches on the Amalfi Coast and the
islands of Capri and Ischia. Even though residents protested, lit-
tle was done to alleviate the growing mounds of trash that pro-
vided homes for rats, cockroaches, and swarms of flies. Officials
in the tourist city said that tourists were encountering waste-
filled streets as they attempted to see ancient sites like Pompeii
and Mount Vesuvius.
The problem was more than just visual, however. City health
inspectors began testing the air quality around some of the
largest piles of garbage, and many of the city’s school children
were given masks because of the stench. Local officials urged res-
idents and tourists to avoid the large packs of stray dogs seen
scavenging through the trash heaps, and banks, hotels, and
restaurants faced closure if the air quality risk continued. The
Global Waste Management Efforts
91
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
mayor of Naples estimated that more than 3,000 tons of garbage
choked city streets by the start of the summer tourist season, with
no resolution in sight. Italy’s president called the situation
“tragic” and noted, “This is as bad an emergency as Naples has
ever had” (Nadeau 2007).
The Naples garbage problem is a result of two forces: in-
fighting among the organized crime syndicates of the Italian
Mafia that controls the waste management industry and the “not
in my backyard” attitude of residents opposed to the siting of four
proposed landfills. Italy produces an estimated 80 million tons of
waste a year, of which 35 million tons are estimated to be handled
by criminal organizations. More recently, the estimated 158 fami-
lies that make up the “eco-mafia” moved into the collection and
handling of toxic waste material. Trafficking in toxic waste did not
become a crime until 2001, years after waste dumps were being
found throughout the country. According to one organization,
nearly 12 tons of toxic garbage “disappeared” in 2001 in Italy.
Sometimes, the waste is camouflaged as loads of fertilizer or
mixed with cement or asphalt. In 2002, the police discovered a
clandestine business engaged in waste collection, transport, and
elimination in which six municipal officials and two local busi-
ness executives were involved—a common way for organized
crime to operate with virtual impunity (Colombo 2003).
One proposed site for a new Italian waste facility is near a
World Wildlife Federation Park and another is adjacent to a rail line
used by tourists visiting the Amalfi Coast. Local residents decided
to take matters into their own hands by starting fires to burn the
trash, and officials had to place signs on dumpsters asking people
not to burn rubbish because of concerns about releases of airborne
toxins. The combination of summer heat, decomposing garbage,
and foul odors even led to a threatened resignation by Italy’s
“garbage czar.” Trash was transformed from a product of urban ex-
istence to an ecological crisis that made international headlines.
Italy is not unusual. An estimated 1.3 billion tons of waste are
created each year in the European Union (EU), of which 40 million
tons are believed to be hazardous. The European Environment
Agency estimates that each person in the EU generates about 3.5
tons of solid waste and 700 million tons of agricultural waste each
year. The Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Develop-
ment contends that by 2020, the EU could be generating 45 per-
cent more waste than in 1995 (European Commission 2007).
92
Worldwide Perspective
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
The EU’s waste management approach is based on three prin-
ciples: waste prevention, recycling and reuse, and improving final
disposition and monitoring. These principles are codified in Direc-
tive 2006/12/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of
5 April 2006 on Waste. The framework agreements require mem-
ber states to prohibit the abandonment, dumping, or uncontrolled
disposal of waste. The measures also call for cooperation among
member states with a view to establishing an integrated network
of disposal facilities to enable the EU to become self-sufficient in
waste disposal. The EU countries also have agreed to support the
polluter-pays principle, requiring the cost of disposing of waste to
be borne by the entity that creates the waste or has it handled by a
waste collector (Europa 2007).
The standards for dealing with hazardous waste vary con-
siderably from one country to another within the EU, however.
At one end of the spectrum is the Netherlands, where the gov-
ernment’s regulations concerning toxic soil contamination are
strictly enforced, regardless of the financial burdens involved in
cleaning up the waste. The Interim Soil Cleanup Act was enacted
in 1981 as a response to contamination in the city of Lekkerkerk,
a situation whose circumstances were similar to Love Canal in
the United States. This act was followed by legislation that made
the national government responsible only for major instances of
waste remediation. Because the number of cleanups turned out
to be much higher and the cost more expensive than had been
originally anticipated, the government established a tax on com-
panies that treat, store, or dispose of chemical waste, an action
that had the unintended consequence of providing an incentive
for firms to export hazardous waste or dump it illegally. The tax
was replaced by a fuels tax in 1988 (Page 1997, 150).
In the United Kingdom, in contrast, land contaminated by
waste soil is less likely to be seen as a hazard, and the govern-
ment appears to have taken a less cautious approach. The 1995
Environment Act sought to establish an optimum balance be-
tween environmental protection and the economy, which is more
similar to the approach of the United States. The standard that
was established for contaminated land was whether significant
harm was being caused or a significant possibility existed of
harm being caused, a threshold that removes a large proportion
of former industrial sites from the contaminated category (Cair-
ney and Hobson 1998).
Global Waste Management Efforts
93
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
Along with the variations in how hazardous waste is catego-
rized are the differences in approach to liability. Although the EU
countries have agreed to support the polluter-pays concept of as-
signing the responsibility for remediation to the party that caused
the contamination, similar to the method used in the United
States, the EU’s approach has one major difference: If the govern-
ment is unable to find a polluter capable of paying for the
cleanup, the European countries generally use government funds
to pay; in the United States, extreme legal powers are used to
force private parties to pay for the damage, even when the liabil-
ity is only for potential responsibility or retroactive responsibility.
In Western Europe, major efforts are now being made to re-
turn formerly contaminated sites, or brownfields, to productive
use. One major reason for this effort is the fact that these coun-
tries are more densely populated than the United States and
fewer alternative sites are available. In addition, in most Euro-
pean countries, more strict controls on land use are in place, and
the government can broker deals and assist companies in rede-
velopment. The use of place-based subsidies allows governments
to provide incentives for private parties to develop previously
contaminated sites. The United Kingdom has backed into envi-
ronmental cleanup of wastes, doing so not because of environ-
mental concerns but rather because of concerns connected to the
economic revitalization of blighted urban areas (Page 1997).
In Central and Eastern Europe, where the hazardous waste
sites are considered the worst in the world, civilian and military
operations caused spills, leaks, and improper disposal of almost
every type of chemical and contaminant known to exist. Former
industrial facilities, military bases, and energy producers were not
regulated by a central authority, and little concern was given to en-
vironmental degradation. Even with the gradual transition to mar-
ket economies and democratic governments in the countries of this
region, many of the sites in Central and Eastern Europe are not
being cleaned up because of a lack of technology and cash. Coun-
tries such as Hungary, for instance, have a limited budget for re-
mediation, thus, much of the effort is focused on containing the
spread of contamination rather than cleaning it up (Page 1997).
Some of these countries face the additional problem of being the
disposal site for hazardous waste shipped there from abroad. Prior
to 1990, the bulk of waste from Germany was exported to what
was then East Germany; Germany now exports its waste to France
and the United Kingdom, consistent with its position as a net ex-
94
Worldwide Perspective
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
porter of hazardous waste even though it offers high-quality, state-
of-the-art facilities to treat toxic waste (O’Neill 2000).
In the former Soviet Union, additional concerns have arisen
about radioactive waste. In 1993, for instance, Western observers
had already estimated that radioactive materials had been stored
in 320 cities and 1,548 other locations within Russia, along with
more than 200 tons of radioactive waste stored at research centers
in Moscow (Feshbach 1995). Since that time, new discoveries con-
tinue to be made of sites where radioactive materials were buried
in subsoils or in leaky containers that may be contaminating
groundwater. Much of the country is still off limits to foreign
monitors and researchers, so no accurate accounting is available
of what may lie undiscovered in dumps there.
Radioactive waste has been a subject of great public interest
in Europe because nuclear power is a significant source of energy
in many countries. Only five EU states have active nuclear power
programs (Finland, France, Spain, Sweden, and the United King-
dom); two large reprocessing facilities, one in Sellafield in the
United Kingdom and the other in La Hague, France, are operat-
ing. All high-level waste is stored in surface or near-surface facil-
ities because no permanent facility has been developed in any of
the five nations. The issue is complicated because no new nuclear
reactors were built in Europe for 15 years, and after such a
lengthy lapse in development, technological expertise is lacking.
In Finland, where about one-third of the energy comes from
nuclear generation, waste was routinely shipped to the Soviet
Union until 1996, when the Finnish government ruled that its nu-
clear waste must be handled within Finland itself. The Finnish
parliament approved the siting of an underground laboratory for
a deep geological disposal site in 2002, and construction on the
site began in 2004. It is expected to be operational by 2020. In
France, nuclear energy is the main source of electrical power,
comprising about 75 percent of the nation’s energy production
through 58 reactors. Officials have been studying deep disposal,
but enormous public opposition to investigating potential sites
for storage has been encountered. Spain, which has an abun-
dance of reasonably priced uranium, had planned to develop its
own reprocessing facilities for spent nuclear fuel but canceled its
plans to do so in 1983. Its present policy for high-level nuclear
waste is continued interim storage; in 1999, the Spanish govern-
ment approved a plan that would delay any decision on what to
do about deep geologic disposal until after 2010. The process of
Global Waste Management Efforts
95
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
choosing a site for a deep repository in Sweden is now underway,
with a final decision due in 2010 and shipments of radioactive
waste expected to begin in 2015. The United Kingdom has con-
ducted numerous studies on what to do about the 10,000 tons of
radioactive waste currently stored there, including the 250,000
tons of waste that is expected to need some type of storage solu-
tion as existing nuclear power plants reach the end of their work-
ing lives. Various options have been considered over the years,
along with a proposal that a strong, independent, authoritative
body be established to make recommendations, and that a
lengthy public consultation process take place.
Germany, which is backing away from nuclear power by an-
nouncing it will shut down all nuclear reactors in the country by
2020, identified a massive underground salt chamber for storage
in 1977, but research there was halted in 2000 because of political
challenges. Several other underground sites for the indefinite
storage of highly radioactive waste were identified in 2007, but
antinuclear activists are unconvinced that the scientific and tech-
nological issues have been solved (Hawley 2007).
The European Commission adopted a proposal dealing with
the management of spent nuclear fuel and radioactive waste as
part of its five-document “nuclear package” in 2003. The pro-
posal is part of the attempts to harmonize standards and prac-
tices within the countries of the EU. An estimated 40,000 cubic
meters of radioactive waste are produced each year in the EU, the
majority of which comes from nuclear power generation. How-
ever, no European Union–wide policy is in place for storing or
disposing of the waste, so each country is responsible for devel-
oping its own policies and solutions. But even if a site were to be
approved today, at least a 20-year-long wait would ensue before
a facility is ready to accept shipments. As one official notes, “That
is simply a different time scale than we are used to in political
life. There is not a very big motivation for politicians to make a
decision” (Hawley 2007).
Latin America
Considerable differences can be seen in how waste management
services are provided in Latin America, where more than 70 per-
cent of the people live in urban areas. According to the U.S.
Agency for International Development (USAID), the quantity of
waste generated per person in Latin America is increasing, and the
96
Worldwide Perspective
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
composition of household and business waste has shifted from
being almost entirely degradable to being considerably less so.
There are also variations in how well solid waste is managed. In
the cities and maquiladoras (industrial facilities) along the U.S.
border with Mexico, the waste materials from the factories are rou-
tinely collected by companies with formal contracts that pick up
the waste for recycling. In large cities such as Caracas, Venezuela;
Brasilia, Brazil; La Paz, Bolivia; and Medellin, Colombia, collection
rates are as high as 90 percent, with rates in medium-size cities at
about 57 percent, and in smaller cities and towns, coverage is lim-
ited. While solid waste is collected at high rates in cities, rapid ex-
pansion has created underserved populated areas where the
situation is more daunting. This is especially true in tropical areas
(USAID 2003).
Collection is just one phase of waste management, however,
and the disposal practices are not as well developed. Very little of
Latin America’s solid waste goes into sanitary landfills; most is
deposited in open dumps or landfills where groundwater is eas-
ily contaminated by leachate. Almost no source separation takes
place at these sites, and treatment of organic waste is nearly
nonexistent. Although more than a dozen large-scale composting
facilities have been built, all or most are not operational. One suc-
cessful element of waste management deals with recycling,
where recovery is higher in Latin America than in many indus-
trialized countries; in Brazil, for instance, 87 percent of all alu-
minum cans are recycled.
The political and institutional arrangements for waste man-
agement range from highly structured to almost nonexistent.
Some cities have formal contracts with companies to collect and
dispose of trash, and others utilize concession-type schemes. In
still other communities, garbage pickup and disposal are viewed
as municipal services and are provided by city employees. In
Guatemala, all service is contracted privately. Most urban areas
also utilize some form of informal scavenging. In Buenos Aires,
Argentina, the city government passed a law in 2003 that requires
trash pickers to register with authorities and to receive an official
license to scavenge. The scrap workers (or cartoneros, who prefer to
be called recuperadores) are somewhat legitimized and have been
integrated into the city’s sanitation system. Those who register
may have access to a health plan, receive vaccinations, and benefit
from other government services. In Paraguay, a loan and grant
program for the families who scavenge dumps at the capital city of
Global Waste Management Efforts
97
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
Asunción is designed to raise their income and reduce poverty lev-
els. The NGO Alter Vida assists the gancheros (another name for
scrap workers) by promoting sustainability through the donation
of trash collection trucks and the building of a collection and sort-
ing facility to give the scavengers a healthier and safer place to
work (Constance 2005).
Special wastes (hazardous, medical, industrial) are inade-
quately or improperly handled throughout Latin America. Waste
collected from hospitals or other medical facilities, including
pathogenic materials, is routinely deposited along with house-
hold waste in dumps, or is burned. Some industrial waste is de-
posited along the roadside or dumped illegally, with exceptions
in countries like Brazil, which has licensed incineration facilities.
Chile has a hazardous waste and treatment facility in Santiago,
and Peru, Colombia, and Ecuador have designated segregated
areas for depositing hazardous and medical waste. But the real-
ity is that the waste must be collected and transported to the
landfill for disposal, steps that often are not undertaken in favor
of illegal dumping (USAID 2003).
Middle East
The political and civil unrest that has typified the Middle East for
decades has made basic services such as waste management a
symptom of government collapse. Piles of trash are a frequent
sight in the region, as refuse pickup is one of the lower-prioritized
services provided. In some densely populated cities, such as
Baghdad, trash collectors’ lives are at stake because insurgents
frequently use piles of garbage in which to hide bombs. Most of
the municipal workers who have been killed in the city are trash
collectors who make only a few dollars per day. Before the fall of
Iraq’s dictator, Saddam Hussein, in 2003, 1,200 trash collection
trucks were operating in Iraq; by 2007, only a third that many
were operating in a city of 6 million people. The mounds of refuse
are seldom collected, even in affluent neighborhoods, because
workers fear being out in the open and lack security. The buildup
of trash has led to public health concerns over flies, mosquitoes,
and odors from poor sanitation. Residents who once disposed of
their trash in municipal bins now dump it alongside roadways,
where it may never be hauled away (Luo 2006).
The exception in this region is Israel. In 2005, each person gen-
erated an average of 3.37 pounds of waste per day, translating into
98
Worldwide Perspective
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
more than 6 million tons of solid waste (domestic, commercial, and
industrial). Israel’s population has been increasing at about 2 per-
cent per year, but solid waste volume has grown about 5 percent
annually, because of the rising standard of living. Israel has limited
land resources for dealing with solid waste and has implemented
an integrated waste management plan similar to that of the United
States, featuring source reduction, reuse, recycling, energy recov-
ery, and landfilling. In 2004, the Israeli recycling rate was about 20
percent, up from 3 percent 10 years earlier. The target is a 50 per-
cent rate by 2010. To reach this target, policy makers have adopted
several important steps, from closing old dumps and replacing
them with alternative, environment-friendly sites farther from
population centers to building new sorting plants as an alternative
to landfilling (Israel Ministry of the Environment 2007).
Israel enacted its Hazardous Substances Law in 1993, which
encompasses a “cradle to grave” system that requires companies
to track and monitor substances from the point where they are
created through waste disposal. This system includes licenses,
regulations, and supervision of some aspects of production, use,
handling, marketing, transport, import, and export. In 1994, the
government promulgated hazardous waste regulations as a legal
basis for implementing the Basel Convention discussed later in
this chapter. Another series of regulations was adopted in 2002,
dealing with radioactive waste by setting prohibitions, obliga-
tions, and limitations on the disposal of these wastes.
More recently, a private Israeli company has developed a
process using plasma gasification melting technology that com-
bines high temperatures and low-radioactive energy to trans-
form radioactive, hazardous, and municipal waste into inert
by-products such as glass and clean energy. The process was de-
veloped in conjunction with Russian researchers by Environ-
mental Energy Resources (EER) in 2007, and its supporters note
that it produces no surface water, groundwater, or soil pollution.
The solid material that is produced by the process can be used by
the construction industry for tiles and blocks. EER has used the
process, which costs about $3,000 per ton in comparison with
$30,000 per ton for treating and burying low-level radioactive
waste, in the United States and Ukraine. The company was ap-
proached by officials looking for a way to treat low-level waste
resulting from the 1986 meltdown at the Chernobyl nuclear facil-
ity. The process operates turbines to generate electricity, about a
third of which can then be sold (Kloosterman 2007).
Global Waste Management Efforts
99
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
Oceania and Micronesia
This Pacific Island region represents a mix of both wealthy and
highly industrialized countries and poor, developing nations. For
instance, Australia, like Japan, has a well-integrated municipal
waste management program. The system is privately run, with
involvement by large multinational companies such as Waste
Management International. A major controversy erupted in the
late 1980s over a national waste disposal facility and a high-
temperature incinerator that was to be publicly owned but pri-
vately managed. The plans for the incinerator were opposed by
NGOs such as Greenpeace, and the proposal was dropped in
1997.
Australia’s two primary waste-related problems are haz-
ardous waste and the issue of low- to medium-level nuclear
waste storage. Australia’s federal constitution, which was en-
acted in 1900, does not mention environmental issues, and until
the early 1970s, environmental problems were handled by the six
states and two commonwealth territories, rather than by the cen-
tral government. States have jurisdiction over environmental
problems within their boundaries, and until recently, few institu-
tions or mechanisms were in place to deal with transboundary is-
sues. Hazardous waste is generated and disposed of in only two
states, with the cities of Sydney and Melbourne accounting for 70
percent of Australia’s industrial waste production. In 1992, the
government announced a two-year moratorium on the export of
hazardous waste to less developed countries, and the extension
became a total ban in 1996 (O’Neill 2000).
The bulk of Australia’s radioactive waste comes from two re-
search reactors and facilities where individuals are treated for ill-
nesses and includes items such as contaminated clothing, gloves,
glassware, and soil. If proposals to store the waste were accepted,
spent fuel from the reactors that previously was sent overseas
would be brought back and stored in aboveground containers.
Commonwealth officials have considered several locations for a
facility to dispose of this waste, including three government-
owned defense sites. The most controversial proposal, however,
comes from an offer from Aboriginal landowners in the Northern
Territory who have agreed to allow the facility to be located on
their land for 200 years under a long-term lease. In exchange, the
government would give the land back to the traditional owners
after it was declared safe, along with $10 million to be managed
100
Worldwide Perspective
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
by a charitable trust. Some indigenous leaders believe the money
will go a long way toward improving living conditions and edu-
cational opportunities for clan members, while others feel the
dump would poison the land, which was given back to the clan in
1995 after bitter disputes and court fights. One elder of the 70-
member Ngapa clan said that the deal would “create a future for
our children with education, jobs, and funds for our outstation
and transport.” Another clan member said the facility would
“change our dreamings,” while a member of the Australian Con-
servation Foundation said the facility was not selected on a scien-
tific basis, and turning the sparsely vegetated land into a dump
would be “environmentally irresponsible and socially divisive.”
A government official contended, “This potential facility could
compromise the social, cultural, and traditional ties of Aboriginal
people to their country” (Murdoch and Afianos 2007).
If the nominated site is approved, Australia’s nuclear industry
would be the ultimate beneficiary. The prime minister has envi-
sioned up to 25 nuclear generating stations within the next 20
years, but the primary barrier has been the refusal of state govern-
ments to allow either the facilities or the waste site to be built on
their land. Having the indigenous people of the Northern Territory
offer their land allows the federal government to move forward
despite state government objections. The facility is scheduled to
begin operation in 2011 (Earthtimes 2007).
Throughout the rest of Micronesia, the situation varies from
one island group to another. Saipan, which became part of the
U.S. Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands in 1978,
has a population of about 80,000 and falls under the jurisdiction
of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). The island is
remote and home to a thriving garment industry that is respon-
sible for about a third of Saipan’s solid waste stream. Because
Saipan is subject to U.S. regulations and is developing its tourist
industry, it has implemented one of the most technologically sim-
ple but efficient waste management strategies in Micronesia. Of-
ficials closed an old military dump along a lagoon that had been
used as a landfill and built a $9.4 million solid waste facility to re-
place it. The island also has a refuse transfer station, solid waste
diversion and recycling programs, and a public outreach pro-
gram that is considered a model for the rest of the region (Hiney
and Hawley 2005). But Saipan’s successes could not have come
without funding (80 percent comes from the U.S. Department of
the Interior) and the regulatory force of the EPA.
Global Waste Management Efforts
101
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
Most of the other islands in Micronesia face major pollution
hazards and lack regular garbage collection systems and land-
fills. Dumps are overflowing, and shipping garbage is not a rea-
sonable option. In Guam, the 50-year-old municipal dump is
unlined and uncontrolled, and trash collection trucks have fre-
quent breakdowns. Residents have complained of having to wait
four weeks to have their trash picked up, resulting in illegal
dumping of trash in the woods or along beaches. But the gov-
ernment of Guam does not have the financial resources to sup-
port a new municipal dump, and change is unlikely unless it
comes from the private sector.
International Waste 
Management Regimes
Although each country is responsible for managing its own
waste, several attempts have been made to find a global solution
to problems that cross sovereign borders. Some of these efforts
take the form of international agreements, or regimes, while oth-
ers are activities coordinated by NGOs. One of the factors that
makes the international control of waste difficult is that every
country has its own definitions about the universe of waste, so
statistics for comparison are difficult to come by. There is no
doubt that the volume of waste is increasing, but the attention
has not been sufficient to put pressure on international bodies to
develop significant new controls to better manage waste.
Hazardous Waste Trading
The issue of hazardous waste trading gained salience in the late
1980s as the industrialized countries developed their own envi-
ronmental protection legislation and regulations. The result was
a tremendous increase in the cost of hazardous waste disposal,
and “toxic traders” began looking for cheaper ways of disposing
of their wastes. The primary destination for hazardous waste ex-
ports was Eastern Europe and other developing countries. Media
coverage and action by NGOs, especially Greenpeace, led to a se-
ries of international and regional agreements designed to pro-
hibit hazardous waste trading and, later, to efforts to reduce
hazardous waste at the source of production.
102
Worldwide Perspective
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
Basel Convention
After two years of negotiations involving 116 countries, the in-
ternational regime known as the Basel Convention on the Con-
trol of Transboundary Movements of Hazardous Wastes and
Their Disposal was adopted in Basel, Switzerland, on March 22,
1989, as a response to the surge in international waste trafficking
that began in the late 1980s. The convention regulates the move-
ment of transboundary waste and requires the parties to the
agreement to ensure the waste is managed and disposed of in an
environmentally sound manner. The convention entered into
force on May 5, 1992, with 170 nations currently listed as parties,
from Albania to Uruguay, although the United States has not yet
ratified the convention. Because the United States is a nonparty,
many countries that are parties to the convention are prohibited
from exporting their waste to or importing waste from the
United States. The member states of the European Union are sub-
ject to the ban because of agreements related to international
trade, which actually increases the number of implementing
countries. In 1995, the Basel Convention was amended to ban the
shipment of wastes destined for disposal or recovery from de-
veloped to less developed countries. The Basel Ban Amendment
is extremely controversial and has not yet entered into force.
Under the initial agreement, wastes are defined as “sub-
stances or objects which are disposed of or are intended to be dis-
posed of or are required to be disposed of by the provisions of
national law.” The convention also considers “disposal” as de-
posit into or onto land, land treatment (such as biodegradation),
deep injection, incineration on land or at sea, permanent storage,
repackaging, recycling, and recovery. “Hazardous” wastes are
those stemming from particular manufacturing processes and
hazardous constituents of wastes such as copper compounds,
lead, and organic solvents, or wastes that are defined as or con-
sidered to be hazardous under the domestic legislation of the
country of export, import, or transit. Precise definitions of what
are considered hazardous waste are found in the various annexes
to the agreement.
The convention also places conditions on the export and im-
port of waste, as well as strict notice, consent, and tracking re-
quirements for the transboundary movement of wastes. Each
party is required to develop a national reporting system, which is
reviewed by the secretariat to the convention, located in Geneva.
International Waste Management Regimes
103
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
The parties are prohibited from importing or exporting waste if
there is reason to believe the wastes would not be managed in an
“environmentally sound manner,” defined as “taking all practi-
cable steps to ensure that hazardous wastes or other wastes are
managed in a manner which will protect human health and the
environment against the adverse effects which may result from
such wastes,” which some critics believe is open to considerable
interpretation (Hunter, Salzman, and Zaelke 2002). This defini-
tion makes the agreement highly subjective and difficult to 
enforce.
Although any illegal trafficking in hazardous waste is con-
sidered a criminal offense, one of the weaknesses of the Basel
agreement is the lack of any enforcement capacity. The regime in-
cludes an extensive definition of what is considered illegal waste
trade and requires the initiating party to take waste back if it is
found to be in violation of the agreement or if the receiving party
is unable to manage the waste. Any efforts to take action must be
initiated by the parties themselves through their own legislative,
administrative, or judicial institutions and processes.
The convention has also been criticized because, despite an
initial burst of momentum when the agreement was first adopted
in 1989, ratification was considerably less enthusiastic. Of the six
largest waste-producing countries—the United States, Canada, the
United Kingdom, Australia, Japan, and Germany—only Canada
and Australia ratified the convention before the end of 1992; Japan
ratified in late 1993; and Germany and the United Kingdom signed
on in late 1994. Developing countries also delayed the ratification
efforts, especially the African states that sought their own, stronger
agreement (Clapp 2001).
One of the most recent controversies surrounding the Basel
Convention deals with Japan and its efforts to use bilateral trade
agreements that eliminate tariffs on hazardous waste. The NGO
Basel Action Network (BAN) submitted a Basel Non-Compliance
Report (a type of formal complaint) against Japan in March 2007
alleging that the country was violating international law. In a let-
ter to the UN Environment Programme, BAN accused Japan of
“throwing its economic weight around among developing na-
tions to force them to take Japanese hazardous waste” (Environ-
mental News Service 2007). The group cited three partnership
agreements with Singapore, Malaysia, and the Philippines that
would allow Japan to send its hazardous waste abroad by pro-
104
Worldwide Perspective
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
viding the three nations with financial and economic assistance.
Characterized as “waste colonialism” by detractors, the eco-
nomic partnerships are also being planned for Thailand, Indone-
sia, India, Australia, Vietnam, and Chile. A representative of the
Global Alliance for Incinerator Alternatives noted, “It is both an
affront to international law and morally repugnant for a rich
country such as Japan to bully poorer nations with its money into
accepting its toxic effluent” (Environmental News Service 2007).
One of the NGOs that has been actively seeking solutions is
the International Solid Waste Association (ISWA), based in
Copenhagen, Denmark. The organization includes members in
32 countries and works in cooperation with the UN Environment
Programme, the World Bank, and the European Union. Many of
the group’s objectives are based on the 2002 Johannesburg World
Summit on Sustainable Development and specifically on the 
Johannesburg Plan of Implementation (JPI). At the meeting, the
JPI established a three-stage hierarchy to guide nations in man-
aging their waste:
1. Prevention and minimization
2. Reuse and recycling
3. Environmentally sound disposal facilities, including
technology to recapture the energy contained in waste
The JPI also agreed on the objective of enhancing environ-
mentally sound management of chemicals and hazardous
wastes, implementing multilateral environmental agreements,
raising awareness of issues, and encouraging the collection and
use of additional scientific data in line with the Basel Convention.
The plan also seeks to promote efforts to prevent illegal traffick-
ing of hazardous chemicals and hazardous wastes and to prevent
damage resulting from the transboundary movement and dis-
posal of hazardous waste (ISWA 2005).
Although the ISWA supported the overall objectives of the
JPI, its leaders noted that the waste problem was being viewed
from a narrow perspective in relation to sustainable development.
“It is important to not only focus on prevention of waste from the
end-of-life products, but also try to prevent the so-called hidden
flows left behind in other countries.” The organization noted that
European countries “are increasingly exporting environmental
problems, and this trend should be reverted” (ISWA 2005).
International Waste Management Regimes
105
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
Regional Agreements on Hazardous Waste
Numerous regional agreements have been adopted to stem the
flow of hazardous waste in addition to the Basel Amendment. In
1991, the 51 members of the Organization for African Unity, now
known as the African Union, signed the Ban of Import into Africa
and the Control of Transboundary Movement and Management
of Hazardous Wastes within Africa, also known as the Bamako
Convention, after the city in Mali where it was developed. The
agreement bans all waste generated outside of Africa and came
into force in 1998. It was enacted because of perceived weak-
nesses in the Basel Amendment, which many nations believed
was not stringent enough. Implementation occurs only if the par-
ties to the convention develop laws prohibiting the importation
of hazardous waste from outside Africa through domestic legis-
lation. The Bamako Convention does exceed the provisions of the
Basel Amendment in the area of ocean dumping of waste, and it
broadens the definition of waste by including radioactive waste
and those substances that have been banned, canceled, refused
registration by government regulatory action, or voluntarily
withdrawn from registration in the country of manufacture for
human health and environmental reasons. Enforcement comes
from internal regulations and staffing by each party to the agree-
ment, with violators and their accomplices subject to criminal
penalties. One of the loopholes in the convention is that it does
not ban import into Africa the hazardous waste created by an-
other African nations. It does, however, call for developed na-
tions to transfer hazardous waste processing technology to
developing nations, as does the Basel Convention.
The 1990 Lome Convention, in contrast, is a trade agree-
ment. It prohibits the export of hazardous waste from the Euro-
pean Community (EC) to the African, Caribbean, and Pacific
(ACP) states. It bans both the direct and indirect export of any
hazardous or radioactive waste from European nations to the de-
veloping countries within the ACP, who in turn agree not to ac-
cept wastes from states outside the EC.
Although it has not ratified the Basel Convention, the United
States is a participant in several other international waste activi-
ties. In 1986, the United States and Canada signed an agreement
to provide both countries with safe, low-cost options for manag-
ing waste for which there is either a lack of domestic capacity or
the technology to appropriately manage the waste. Another 1986
106
Worldwide Perspective
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
U.S. agreement with Mexico deals with hazardous waste ship-
ments between the two countries. More limited bilateral agree-
ments have been developed between the United States and
Malaysia (1995), Costa Rica (1997), and the Republic of the
Philippines (2001) that provide only for the export of hazardous
wastes from these countries to the United States (U.S. EPA 2007).
Radioactive Waste
In the 1940s, several nations began using the ocean as a dumping
ground for radioactive waste with little concern about the dura-
bility of containment vessels. Russia has admitted dumping large
amounts of high-level radioactive waste, including nuclear reac-
tors, into the sea since the 1950s. Concerns have also been raised
about the aging fleet of Soviet-era nuclear submarines, which
have been stored or dismantled with little attention to corrosion
and damage to the marine environment. But it took decades after
World War II for international regimes on radioactive waste to be
approved and implemented.
The Oslo Convention was the first regional treaty to control
dumping at sea, negotiated in 1972 by countries bordering the
Northeast Atlantic. However, participating countries success-
fully blocked efforts to include radioactive waste in the agree-
ment. A second treaty, the London Convention on the Prevention
of Pollution by Dumping of Wastes and Other Matter, concluded
several months later, was the first global dumping agreement,
and it did prohibit the dumping of high-level radioactive waste.
Dumping is defined as the deliberate disposal of wastes and
other matter at sea by ships, aircraft, and man-made structures.
The convention covers sewage sludge, dredged materials, con-
struction and demolition debris, explosives, and other materials
loaded on a vessel for dumping. Although it is considered one of
the most successful treaties covering marine pollution, it has
been criticized because it uses the classification of radioactive
waste (high, medium, or low level) developed by the Interna-
tional Atomic Energy Commission (IAEA). That system applies
to the handling of waste by workers, not its disposal, and con-
cerns have been raised that the classification system might not be
applicable at sea.
A 1996 Protocol to the London Convention extensively
changed the treaty, banning the incineration of wastes at sea. It
Radioactive Waste
107
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
also included a provision that intended to prohibit all dumping
unless a particular substance was listed in an annex to the agree-
ment and unless a permit was obtained. Parties must show that
they attempted to reduce waste at the source, considered other
waste management options, and examined environmental effects
of dumping. Also required is a duty to manage all waste locally
through the prohibition of waste exports to other countries for
dumping or incineration at sea.
The dumping of low-level radioactive waste was allowed
under the original 1972 agreement if the party obtained an ap-
propriate permit. In 1983, the parties to the convention adopted
a nonbinding resolution establishing a moratorium on all marine
dumping of radioactive materials while scientific studies were
undertaken. Initially, several nations opted out of that portion of
the convention, including the United States, the Russian Federa-
tion, China, Belgium, France, and the United Kingdom. When
the ban was formally implemented in 1994, only the Russian Fed-
eration opted out (Hunter, Salzman, and Zaelke 2002, 735).
The 1989 Basel Convention on the Transboundary Move-
ments of Hazardous Waste, while important, did not include
radioactive waste. At the time, the IAEA, the UN agency respon-
sible for dealing with radioactive products, did not have any reg-
ulations in place for handling waste. It began drafting new
guidelines, which were adopted in 1990 by the General Confer-
ence of the IAEA, known as the Code of Practice on the Interna-
tional Transboundary Movement of Radioactive Waste. This
agreement filled the gap in the Basel Convention that had ex-
empted radioactive waste shipments, and although it is advisory,
it does guide parties in taking appropriate steps necessary to en-
sure radioactive waste is safely managed and disposed of to pro-
tect human health and the environment. The code also
recognizes the rights of states to prohibit the movement of ra-
dioactive waste into, from, or through their territory.
Continuing Waste Management Issues
Electronic Waste
One recent issue involving the waste trade is electronic waste, or
e-waste, that is sent abroad. The Basel Action Network and other
organizations have addressed the problems that develop when
108
Worldwide Perspective
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
recycling companies in industrialized nations send materials
abroad, where it is estimated that 80 percent ends up in poverty-
stricken small towns in Asia and Africa that are ill equipped to
deal with the waste. Guiyu, China, is considered the center of 
e-waste recycling; dumping and burning has rendered the local
water not potable for drinking, and the river there has 200 times
the acceptable levels of acid and 2,400 times the acceptable level
of lead. One out of 10 students in the local school has severe res-
piratory problems.
Although China has banned the import of e-waste, the resi-
dents of Guiyu depend on discarded toner cartridges, computers,
and printers to earn an average of $1.50 per day. Illicit trade and
a lack of enforcement allow recyclers to ship e-waste abroad,
where components are taken apart, scavenged, and destroyed.
Items like toner cartridges, made of industrial-grade plastic, are
almost impossible to melt down and are not biodegradable. Old
computers are piled up on top of one another and used as fences,
while toxic smoke fills the air as keyboards and cartridges are
burned. Although consumers believe that the computer monitor
they take back to a store will be recycled in an environmentally
safe way, they have no way of knowing that an exporting recy-
cler can make money by sending the equipment to another coun-
try. EPA rules and international agreements fail to regulate this
type of trade, which means that although e-waste may be di-
verted from landfills, it still can end up in Africa, Eastern Europe,
or Latin America (Judge 2004).
In Africa, much of the e-waste is processed through Lagos,
Nigeria, the continent’s largest port. The Basel Action Network
estimates that 500 shipping containers loaded with secondhand
electronic equipment pass through Lagos each month, each
packed with a load equal in volume to 800 computer monitors or
processors, or 350 large television sets. Although estimates of
how much of this equipment is useless waste vary from 25 to 75
percent, it can be assumed that the volume of products entering
Lagos equals at least 100,000 computers or 44,000 television sets
each month. Other e-waste comes through the port cities of
Mombasa, Kenya; Dar es Salaam, Tanzania; and Cairo (Schmidt
2006).
The waste enters Africa for purely economic reasons. Scrap
components can be reused by reassembling them, and the cost of
shipping a container is less than what the scrap will bring on the
African market. Rather than importing computers directly, which
Continuing Waste Management Issues
109
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
requires the payment of a trade tariff, scrap classifications are
usually measured in pounds, which are much less expensive. An
exporter may sell a container that is full of junked electronics
with a few high-value items thrown in, requiring importers to
take everything. The leftover materials that cannot be recycled
include toxic metals and plastic casings that, when burned, emit
carcinogenic chemicals. Some of the equipment is used to fill in
swamps in Lagos, resulting in ecological damage. Other equip-
ment, even when refurbished, may have a short life before it, too,
becomes obsolete or ceases working. At that point, most recipi-
ents of e-waste do not have the capacity to properly dispose of
used monitors, cell phones, and television sets (Limo 2007).
Shipbreaking
Shipbreaking is the process of dismantling ships at the end of
their useful life, usually about 25 to 30 years. In the last 20 years,
this practice has become a growing concern because of media
coverage, the activities of groups such as Greenpeace, and the
market for scrap metals. This continuing issue is one that has be-
come more acute as the number of vessels being taken apart in-
creases and because of the role of developing countries,
especially India, Bangladesh, Pakistan, and Turkey.
The practice usually involves dismantling ships to recover
the steel used in building them. But recycling metal is secondary
to concerns about the disposal of toxic contaminants such as as-
bestos, mercury, lead, and other compounds that make up about
5 percent of the ship’s weight. Prior to the 1970s and the advent
of hazardous waste as a major environmental issue, most ship-
breaking occurred in the United Kingdom, Taiwan, Spain, Mex-
ico, and Brazil. Dismantling was primarily a mechanized
process. But in recent years, shipbreaking has moved to poor
Asian countries where more worker exposure to toxins takes
place but fewer concerns are voiced about safety and waste dis-
posal (Clapp 2001).
Greenpeace estimates that out of the 62,000 ships in the
world fleet in 2000, about 600 to 700 larger sea vessels are taken
out of service each year and brought to Asia for scrap. Some of the
ships are single-hull oil tankers that are being phased out by the
International Maritime Organization after an oil tanker collapsed
in 1999 and leaked heavy oil along the French coast. Another in-
110
Worldwide Perspective
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
cident took place in 2002 that polluted the coast of Spain and
France, causing the European Union to accelerate the phaseout of
single-hull tankers. More tonnage is being scrapped each year,
mostly by the more than 100,000 workers worldwide who earn
between $1.50 and $2.00 per day cutting the metal with torches
and carrying heavy loads on their back (Greenpeace 2007).
Uncontrolled Landfills and Scavenging
The environmental and public health issues associated with open
dumping are serious problems in developing countries. They
pose risks ranging from the contamination of groundwater and
soil to injuries related to scavenging. Critics note the detrimental
health effects of scavenging, the reduction of efficiency in overall
waste management, and the involvement of children in a dan-
gerous activity.
Garbage scavenging can be viewed from several perspec-
tives. In developing countries, a lack of capital for high-tech waste
management solutions makes scavenging or trash picking an ac-
cepted practice that reduces the amount of waste that needs to be
processed and provides an income source for the poor. Some local
industries are dependent upon the availability of secondary raw
materials for processing, especially metals and fiberboard. In
urban areas, scavenging often occurs before waste collection
trucks arrive, as residents seek out items like aluminum cans or
metal. More commonly, scavenging is done at the disposal site,
which is likely to be an open dumping area where some people
also live. Martin Medina of the Colegio de la Frontera Norte in
Mexico contends that scavenging has existed for centuries and is
not a new phenomenon resulting from expanding urban centers.
What has changed is the magnitude and visibility of scavenging,
especially in cities that do not have the means to collect, process,
and dispose of garbage (Constance 2005).
Garbage picking is considered hazardous because individu-
als seldom work with companies or contracts and do not have
health coverage or safety equipment. Criminal elements, the
“garbage Mafia,” control garbage and recycling in some cities,
and many use intimidation or violence to control their territories
and services to residents. Some are illegal immigrants, others are
not educated, and little police protection is available for those
who live and work in the dumps.
Continuing Waste Management Issues
111
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
Despite these problems, the majority of governments have
looked the other way and have allowed or tacitly supported
scavenging. In countries such as Egypt, where ragpicking is con-
sidered an important part of the informal economy, outlawing
the practice would increase poverty levels among those who are
already poor. For Malaysia and Thailand, scavenging is an ac-
cepted part of the country’s culture and one way to assist com-
munities in dealing with the increasing mountains of waste that
go hand in hand with emerging development.
References
African Development Bank. 2002. Study on Solid Waste Management Op-
tions for Africa. July. [Online report; retrieved 8/12/07.] www.afdb.org/
pls/portal/url/ITEM/F5F4CC9E2105E31EE030A8C0668C631A.
Basheer, K. P. M. 2007. “Hostility to Garbage Plant Brewing.” The Hindu,
July 12. [Online article; retrieved 8/3/07.] http://www.hindu.com/
2007/07/12/stories/2007071259110300.htm.
Cairney, T., and D. M. Hobson, eds. 1998. Contaminated Land: Problems
and Solutions, 2d ed. London: E & FN Spon.
Clapp. Jennifer. 2001. Toxic Exports: The Transfer of Hazardous Waste from
Rich to Poor Countries. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
Colombo, Francesca. 2003. “Mafia Dominates Garbage Industry.” Tierr-
america, June 23. [Online article; retrieved 6/10/07.] http://www.tierr
america.info/nota.php?lang=eng&idnews=1613&olt=224.
Constance, Paul. 2005. “The Transfiguration of Trash Pickers in Brazil and
Latin America.” Brazzil Magazine, May 30. [Online article; retrieved
5/29/07.] http://www.brazzil.com/2005-mainmenu-79/129-may-2005/
9293.
Earthtimes. 2007. “Australia Finds Dump Site for Nuclear Waste.” Earth-
times, May 25. [Online article; retrieved 6/1/07.] http://www.earthtimes.
org/articles/show/66232.html.
Ekelund, Lotten, and Kristina Nystrom. 2007. Composting of Municipal
Waste in South Africa. Uppsala, Sweden: Uppsala University Technical
Study.
Environmental News Service. 2007. “Japan Accused of Breaching Toxic
Waste Trade Treaty.” March 14. [Online article; retrieved 5/22/07.] http://
www.ban.org/ban_news/2007/070314_accused_of_breaching.html.
Europa. 2007. “Waste Management.” [Online information; retrieved
5/22/07.] http://europa.eu/scadplus/leg/en/s15002.htm.
112
Worldwide Perspective
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
European Commission. 2007. “Waste.” [Online information; retrieved
5/22/07.] http://ec.europa.eu/environment/waste.
Feshbach, Murray. 1995. Ecological Disaster: Cleaning Up the Hidden Legacy
of the Soviet Regime. New York: Twentieth Century Fund.
GrassRoots Recycling Network. 2000. “Waste Not Asia.” August. [Online
article; retrieved 5/22/07.] http://www.grrn.org/zerowaste/articles/
waste_not_asia.html.
Greenpeace. 2007. “Shipbreaking.” [Online information; retrieved
6/7/07.] www.greenpeaceweb.org/shipbreak.
Hawley, Charles. 2007. “Europe’s Nuclear Waste Conundrum.” Spiegel
Online, April 19. [Online article; retrieved 8/11/07.] http://www.spiegel.
de/international/germany/0,1518,,478309,00.html.
Hiney, Steve, and Ted Hawley. 2005. “Saipan’s Solid Waste Management
System.” Government Engineering (November/December): 13–15.
Hunter, David, James Salzman, and Durwood Zaelke. 2002. International
Environmental Law and Policy, 2nd ed. New York: Foundation Press.
International Solid Waste Association (ISWA). 2005. ISWA 10 Years Per-
spective on Waste Management. Copenhagen, Denmark: ISWA.
Israel Ministry of the Environment. 2007. “Solid Waste.” [Online article;
retrieved 8/12/07.] http://sviva.gov.il/bin/en.jsp?enPage=e_Blank
Page&enDisplay=view&enDispWhat=Zone&enDispWho=waste&
enZone=waste.
Judge, Tricia. 2004. “Guiyu Revisited: Exposing the Fraud . . . 18 Months
Later.” Imaging Spectrum Magazine (January): 1–8.
Kloosterman, Karin. 2007. “Israeli Discovery Converts Waste into Clean
Energy.” Israel21c. [Online article; retrieved 8/12/07.] http://www.israel
21c.org/bin/en.jsp?enZone=Technology&enDisplay=view&enPage=
BlankPage&enDispWhat=object&enDispWho=Articles%5El1586.
Krishna, Gopal. 2006. “Burning Biomass Is Not Green.” India Together, Oc-
tober 4. [Online article; retrieved 8/7/07.] http://www.indiatogether.
org/2006/jul/env-timarpur.htm.
Limo, Andrew. 2007. “Dangers of Increasing Electronic Waste Dumping
by Rich Nations.” The Nation (Nairobi), May 19. [Online article; retrieved
5/29/07.] www.allafrica.com.
Luo, Michael. 2006. “The Danger in the Trash of Baghdad.” International
Herald Tribune, October 11. [Online article; retrieved 5/29/07.]
http://www.iht.com/bin/print_ipub.php?file=/articles/2006/10/11/
newstrash/php.
Muhumed, Malkhadir M. 2007. “Kenya Dump Poisons Kids, U.N. Study
Says.” Arizona Republic (October 6): A23.
References
113
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
Murdoch, Lindsay, and Jasmin Afianos. 2007. “Nuclear Dump for NT
under $12M Deal with Aboriginals.” Brisbane Times, May 26. [Online ar-
ticle; retrieved 6/1/07.] http://www.brisbanetimes.com.au/news/
national/nuclear-dump-for-nt-under-12m-deal-with-aboriginals/2007/
05/25/1179601710887.html.
Nadeau, Barbie. 2007. “Italy: Naples’s Stinky, Dirty Trash Crisis.”
Newsweek, May 23.
O’Neill, Kate. 2000. Waste Trading among Rich Nations: Building a New The-
ory of Environmental Regulation. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Onishi, Norimitsu. 2005. “How Do Japanese Dump Trash? Let Us Count
the Myriad Ways.” New York Times, May 12. [Online article; retrieved
4/11/07.] http://www.nytimes.com/2005/05/12/international/asia/
12garbage.html?scp=1&sq=&st=cse.
Page, G. William. 1997. Contaminated Sites and Environmental Cleanup: In-
ternational Approaches to Prevention, Remediation, and Reuse. San Diego:
Academic Press.
Republic of Ireland. 1999. “Consultancy Study on Plastic Bags Recom-
mends Tax on Plastic Bags.” [Online news release; retrieved 4/28/07.]
www.mindfully.org/Plastic/Laws/Plastic-Bag-Levy-Ireland.
Republic of Ireland, Department of the Environment, Heritage & Local
Government. 2007. “The Plastic Bag Levy Will Increase to 22 Cent on Sun-
day 1 July 2007.” February 21. [Online news release; retrieved 4/29/07.]
http://www.environ.ie/en/Environment/Waste/PlasticBags/.
Schmidt, Charles. 2006. “Unfair Trade: E-Waste in Africa.” Environmental
Health Perspectives (April): A232–A235.
Suchitra, M., and P. N. Venugopal. 2007. “The Environmental Refugees
of Brahmapuram.” India Together, July 24. [Online article; retrieved
8/7/07.] http://www.indiatogether.org/2007/jul/env-bpuram.htm.
Sule, Surekha. 2004. “Municipalities Overruling the SC.” India Together,
July. [Online article; retrieved 8/7/07.] http://www.indiatogether.org/
2004/jul/env-muniswm.htm.
Sule, Surekha. 2005. “Whose Garbage Is It, Anyway?” India Together, Jan-
uary 7. [Online article; retrieved 8/7/07.] http://www.indiatogether.
org/2005/jan/env-ragpick.htm.
U.S. Agency for International Development (USAID). 2003. Environmen-
tal Issues and Best Practices for Solid Waste Management. [Online report; re-
trieved 8/13/07.] http://www.usaid.gov/locations/latin_america_
caribbean/environment/docs/epiq/chap5/lac-guidelines-5-solid-
waste-mgmt.pdf.
114
Worldwide Perspective
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). 2007. “International Waste
Agreements.” [Online information; retrieved 6/26/07.] http://www.
epa.gov/epaoswer/osw/internat/agree.htm.
Zhenhua, Xie. 2007. “Being in Earnest.” UN Environment Programme.
[Online article; retrieved 6/26/07.] http://www.unep.org/OurPlanet/
imgversn/104/zhen.html.
References
115
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
4
Chronology
1757
Ben Franklin institutes the first municipal street-cleaning
service to deal with trash in Philadelphia.
1833
Farmers are told that manure is an excellent soil amend-
ment to help make crops grow.
1835
The first bottled soda water is sold in the United States.
1842
A report by the English Poor Law Commission in En-
gland concludes that disease is caused by unsanitary en-
vironmental conditions, setting the stage for government
officials to respond to the problems of urban waste.
1849
New York City police begin a crackdown on residents
who own pigs and feed them household garbage despite
strict antiswine laws. The “hog problem”—freely wan-
dering swine that eat trash—becomes a symbol of social
decay in Manhattan.
1852
Francis Wolle, a botanist, invents and patents a paper
bag–making machine, founding the Union Paper Bag
Machine Company in 1869.
1863
Dr. Ezra Pulling, a volunteer sanitation inspector in New
York City, describes the heinous recycling of city wastes.
Rotting food scraps and dead animals are being made
into sausage and served at sailors’ boardinghouses.
117
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
1874
A “destructor” built in Nottingham, England, becomes
the first technological garbage incinerator in the world.
1880
An estimated 24 percent of American cities offer some
kind of refuse and disposal system.
1885
The first U.S. trash incinerator, called a cremator, is built
on Governors Island, New York, by U.S. Army lieutenant
H. J. Reilly.
1886
The country’s first reduction plant opens in Buffalo, New
York, to cook and compress organic wastes using the
Merz process, turning them into grease and fertilizer.
1887
The American Public Health Association appoints its
Committee on Garbage Disposal.
1888
The U.S. Congress enacts the first federal ban on ocean
dumping by passing the Marine Protection Act.
1894
The Massachusetts Institute of Technology offers the first
curriculum in sanitary engineering.
1895
George E. Waring is named commissioner of New York’s
Street-Cleaning Department and is placed in charge of all
city street sweeping and trash collection.
1899
The U.S. Patent Office issues the first patent for a glass-
blowing machine to produce glass bottles to Michael
Owens of the Libby Glass Company.
1906
Dairy owners introduce a one-way paper milk carton to
replace glass bottles.
1913
Scrap dealers form the National Association of Waste
Materials Dealers (now known as the Institute of Scrap
Recycling Industries).
1923
Scarsdale, New York, opens a municipal composting fa-
cility where anaerobic bacteria break down organic
wastes, transforming them into humus, which is then
bagged and sold as fertilizer.
118
Chronology
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
Six-pack soft drink cartons called “Hom-Paks” are cre-
ated by Ernest Woodruff of the Coca-Cola Company,
adding to the packaging of products for home 
consumption.
1925
A study by the American Child Health Association shows
that 10 percent of the cities surveyed still charge their
health departments with waste management as municipal
governments shift toward street cleansing divisions.
1929
Neighborhood protesters successfully halt the operation
of a waste incinerator in San Francisco through a court
ruling that deems the facility a public nuisance.
1930
Civil engineers report that all 44 cities in Los Angeles
County dispose of their organic waste by selling it to 
piggeries.
1931
The first International Conference on Public Cleansing is
held in London, urging local governments to consider
waste management as a recognized technical service.
1932
Milk producers begin providing their product in a one-
way, plastic-coated paper carton for consumer use.
1933
The U.S. Supreme Court rules against New York City, de-
ciding that the ocean dumping of municipal wastes is il-
legal because it creates a public nuisance.
1934
The National Recovery Administration requires a two-
cent deposit for small bottles and a five-cent deposit for
large ones after bottlers use the noncollection of deposits
as a competitive weapon.
The United States’ first sanitary landfill is built on the
outskirts of Fresno, California, which develops a system
whereby garbage is compacted and then covered by dirt
to reduce disease transmission and odors.
1935
A brewer in Newark, New Jersey, develops the first alu-
minum can as a rival to the refillable bottle, but it is not
used extensively until the 1950s because of the Great 
Chronology
119
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
Depression, which emphasizes reusing and saving re-
sources, not throwing them away.
1937
John W. Hammes invents the In-Sink-Erator, the United
States’ first kitchen garbage grinder. Some municipal
governments, including New York City, ban the devices
for fear they will overtax aging sewage systems.
1939
The U.S. Public Health Services reports that 52 percent of
U.S. cities are feeding municipal garbage to pigs.
1941
The American Public Works Association, formed in 1937
with the merger of the American Society of Municipal
Engineers and the International Association of Public
Works Officials, publishes the first manual devoted to
refuse collection. It represents the first serious effort in
the United States to consider both the basic collection re-
quirements and the economic considerations in estab-
lishing a foundation of best practices in the field.
1943
The U.S. Public Health Service recommends the use of
sanitary landfills to municipal governments as a wartime
labor and resource conservation measure.
1948
New York City opens Fresh Kills landfill on Staten Island
to dispose of the city’s household refuse in an efficient,
sanitary, and unobjectionable manner pending the build-
ing of incinerators. The facility is considered a model for
other landfills in the United States.
The U.S. Public Health Service Division of Sanitation in-
cludes among its programs departments on air quality,
water supply, sewage/wastewater, and radiation, which
will eventually be moved to the newly established Envi-
ronmental Protection Agency in 1970.
1950
Henry Wasylyk, a Canadian inventor from Winnipeg,
Manitoba, invents the green plastic garbage bag made
from polyethylene, initially intended for hospital use
rather than residential use.
120
Chronology
1935
(cont.)
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
1951
Marion Donovan, a mother, receives a patent for the dis-
posable diaper, one of the least recycled items found in
municipal solid waste.
1953
Vermont’s legislature bans the sale of all throwaway beer
bottles in the state. The law is rescinded in 1957, when
the state legislature fails to renew the bottle ban, appar-
ently because it did not reduce litter.
1955
Life magazine heralds the advent of the “throwaway 
society.”
1957
The National Academy of Sciences, in a study commis-
sioned by the U.S. Atomic Energy Commission (AEC),
recommends that highly radioactive waste be stored in
deep geologic formations.
Ermal Cleon Fraze invents the pop-top aluminum can
and sells the concept to Alcoa Aluminum four years later.
1961
Procter and Gamble introduces the first paper disposable
diaper to consumers.
The American Public Works Association’s Committee on
Refuse Disposal publishes the manual of practice, Mu-
nicipal Refuse Disposal. It includes the term solid waste and
sections on sanitary landfills, incineration, grinding food
wastes, composting, swine feeding, salvage and recla-
mation, and management practices.
1962
The Pittsburgh Brewing Company markets a pull-ring
top for consumer beverages in cans.
1964
One-way plastic jugs made of high-density polyethylene
are introduced for milk containers.
1965
The Solid Waste Management Act is passed by the U.S.
Congress to stimulate research on waste disposal and re-
duction of the waste stream by providing technical and
financial support for solid waste planning.
Chronology
121
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
U.S. president Lyndon B. Johnson creates the Commis-
sion on Natural Beauty as part of the effort to control lit-
ter and promote community beautification.
1967
The U.S. Air Quality Act requires older incinerators to add
air pollution controls to reduce soot and fine particles.
1968
Dean Buntrock starts the United States’ largest waste
hauler, Waste Management, Inc., in Chicago, joining the
roster of the New York Stock Exchange in 1971 as one of
the first garbage companies to go public.
The U.S. Public Health Service publishes guidelines on
hospital waste, warning that legal implications and pre-
cautions should be taken to ensure the safety of staff, col-
lectors, and the public.
President Johnson’s Scientific Advisory Committee rec-
ommends that the federal government take a leadership
role in solid waste policy.
1969
The U.S. Atomic Energy Commission conducts experi-
ments to store radioactive waste in an abandoned salt
mine in Lyons, Kansas.
Browning-Ferris Industries begins hauling waste in Hous-
ton after the company’s founder grows disgruntled with
his local garbage service. It becomes the first refuse com-
pany to expand across North America and the second-
largest waste handler in the United States. It is purchased
in the late 1990s by Allied.
The New York Sanitation Department demonstrates that
the curbside pickup of plastic trash bags is cleaner, safer,
and quieter than metal can pickup, leading to a shift to
plastic trash can liners by consumers.
1970
The U.S. Resource Recovery Act amends the Air Quality
Act and shifts the emphasis from waste disposal to recy-
cling and reuse of materials.
122
Chronology
1965
(cont.)
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
The U.S. Atomic Energy Commission establishes a policy
whereby the federal government will accept high-level
radioactive waste for long-term disposition, but genera-
tors of the waste will be responsible for paying for the
full costs once the waste is delivered to the government.
The U.S. Department of Transportation creates the Haz-
ardous Materials Information System to monitor safety
issues involving hazardous waste. The system is de-
signed to implement parts of the Hazardous Materials
Transportation Control Act of 1970.
Gary Anderson designs a logo for the Container Corpo-
ration of America, a paper products manufacturer, that
becomes the national symbol for recycling.
1972
After a decade of study, the Atomic Energy Commission
determines an underground salt mine near Lyons,
Kansas, is unacceptable for use as a repository for ra-
dioactive waste. Kansas officials raise technical concerns
over the suitability of the site. AEC officials announce
they will examine a site in southeastern New Mexico as
a potential site, with a goal of opening the facility by
1980. The site was proposed by a group of leaders from
Carlsbad, New Mexico.
After 18 months of difficult negotiations under the aus-
pices of the United Nations’ (UN) Inter-Governmental
Working Group on Marine Pollution, the London Con-
vention on the Prevention of Marine Pollution by Dump-
ing of Wastes and Other Matter is enacted, prohibiting
the disposal of both low-level and high-level radioactive
wastes and other radioactive matter at sea.
The Oslo Convention (Convention for the Prevention of
Marine Pollution by Dumping from Ships and Aircraft)
is adopted by 13 Northeast Atlantic Ocean countries to
regulate the dumping of wastes along the coastline from
Portugal to Norway; it does not cover radioactive
wastes.
Chronology
123
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
Oregon passes the first measure imposing a five-cent re-
fundable deposit on all beer and soda bottles and cans. It
also bans pull tabs, effectively making all standard drink
cans illegal.
1973
Minnesota’s state legislature passes the Packaging Review
Act, noting that although recycling is one alternative for
conserving natural resources, source reduction is also in the
public interest. The state’s Supreme Court upholds the law
after a concerted effort by container makers to argue the
law unconstitutionally interferes with interstate commerce.
Nathaniel Wyeth, brother of artist Andrew Wyeth, cre-
ates the polyethylene terephthalate plastic bottle after ex-
perimenting with a plastic detergent bottle in his home
refrigerator.
1974
The Association of State and Territorial Solid Waste Man-
agement Officials is incorporated to support state-level
environmental agencies and affect national waste man-
agement policies.
The Energy Reorganization Act establishes the U.S. Nu-
clear Regulatory Commission, directing the agency to
develop policies for the civilian use of nuclear energy
and its waste disposal.
The EPA warns that wastes from medical patients are
often hazardous and that difficulties are involved in seg-
regating these wastes from other, nonhazardous, hospital
waste, so all such wastes must be considered potentially
contaminated and receive special handling and treatment.
The federal government chooses a location 30 miles east
of Carlsbad, New Mexico, for exploratory work and field
investigations as a possible nuclear waste repository.
California defeats a bottle bill similar to Oregon’s after a
strong public relations campaign is mounted against it.
The stay-on tab for canned beverages is invented and 
introduced by the Falls City Brewing Company of
124
Chronology
1972
(cont.)
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
Louisville, Kentucky. The stay-on tab is considered more
environmentally sound because the tabs do not end up
littering the environment, as is the case with pop-top or
pull tabs.
1975
Concerns about human exposure to toxic chemicals are
raised by residents at the former site of the Hooker Chem-
ical Company disposal site at Love Canal, New York.
The Hazardous Materials Transportation Act is enacted
to deal with increasing concern over accidents involving
the transport of hazardous waste in the United States.
The European Commission develops regulations for the
transport, treatment, and disposal of hazardous wastes
to avoid harm to human health or the environment. Each
member state, however, is given the opportunity to de-
fine “hazardous waste” and to develop its own set of
regulations.
1976
The U.S. Congress enacts the Resource Conservation and
Recovery Act (RCRA) to protect the public from the haz-
ards of waste disposal.
California prohibits the siting of any new nuclear reac-
tors until the federal government demonstrates a means
of disposal for high-level radioactive waste.
McDonald’s restaurants announce a shift away from
paper-based packaging.
The American Can Company opens a facility in Milwau-
kee named Americology, to separate municipal solid
waste into recoverable components. The plant closes be-
cause of financial problems from a failed plan to sell
processed trash to local utilities as a substitute for coal.
1977
The plastic grocery bag is introduced to the supermarket
industry as an alternative to paper sacks.
The U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission states that the
agency will no longer license nuclear reactors if it does
Chronology
125
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
not have reasonable confidence that the waste can and
will in due course be disposed of safely.
1978
The U.S. Public Utility Regulatory Policies Act requires
local utilities to purchase electricity generated by waste-
to-energy plants. Subsidies are offered to incinerator
firms to allow the United States to move toward “energy
independence.”
The Minnesota legislature requires that all packaging
proposals be filed with a state agency for evaluation as
part of state solid waste reduction goals.
The National Recycling Coalition is founded to eliminate
waste and promote recycling programs as the U.S. envi-
ronmental movement highlights promotion of sustain-
able economies.
U.S. president Jimmy Carter establishes the Interagency
Review Group on Nuclear Waste Management to de-
velop federal policy.
The U.S. Supreme Court rules in Philadelphia v. New Jer-
sey that garbage is to be treated like any other commer-
cial commodity under the Commerce Clause of the U.S.
Consitution, which gives Congress the authority to regu-
late interstate commerce.
The first test hole is dug at Yucca Mountain, Nevada, as
part of a nationwide search for a nuclear waste site.
1979
The U.S. Congress authorizes the Waste Isolation Pilot
Plant (WIPP) as a research and development facility to
demonstrate the safe disposal of radioactive wastes re-
sulting from defense activities.
1980
Seattle develops a program to encourage composting
among city residents as one way to reduce waste.
1981
New Mexico’s attorney general files suit in U.S. district
court alleging violations of federal and state laws in con-
nection with the WIPP facility.
126
Chronology
1977
(cont.)
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
1982
The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) pub-
lishes guidelines for infectious waste management.
The U.S. Nuclear Waste Policy Act seeks long-term per-
manent storage, rather than retrievable storage, of nu-
clear waste, and Congress directs the Department of
Energy to nominate at least five sites for repository selec-
tion, with three sites to be recommended to the president.
The U.S. Department of Energy lays out a detailed
process and schedule for geologic repositories for spent
nuclear fuel and high-level radioactive waste.
1983
A study by the National Academy of Sciences recom-
mends on-site source reduction by chemical companies
and treatments to reduce the toxicity of hazardous chem-
ical waste.
In response to passage of a bottle bill exempting alu-
minum cans, the beverage industry establishes the
$20,000 Bovine Trust Fund to reimburse a farmer for any
cow or horse certified to have died from eating an alu-
minum can.
The U.S. Department of Energy identifies nine potentially
acceptable sites for long-term storage of radioactive waste;
six are located in the West and three in the South.
The U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission promulgates
high-level radioactive waste regulations.
1984
The member states of the Organisation for Economic Co-
operation and Development (OECD) agree to the Deci-
sion and Recommendation on Transfrontier Movements
of Hazardous Waste, the first international agreement re-
garding the international trade of hazardous waste to en-
sure authorities in countries affected by shipments are
provided adequate and timely information on waste
movements.
In amending and reauthorizing RCRA, the U.S. Congress
declares its intention to promote recycling, waste 
Chronology
127
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
reduction, and environmentally sound waste manage-
ment practices.
1985
The Ocean Conservancy conducts a study for the Envi-
ronmental Protection Agency and finds plastics are the
number one marine debris hazard.
The EPA sets generally applicable environmental stan-
dards for high-level radioactive waste disposal.
The California Waste Management Board warns that the
state will run out of landfill space by 1997 and recom-
mends increased use of incineration as the solution, with
a minimal role for recycling.
1986
The Citizens’ Clearinghouse for Hazardous Wastes,
founded by Lois Gibbs, starts its Solid Waste Action 
Project.
U.S. president Ronald Reagan signs the Superfund
Amendments and Reauthorization Act (SARA) as a bi-
partisan measure to set up an $8.5 billion fund to clean
up waste sites.
In an attempt to rid the city of its incinerator ash,
Philadelphia loads up a cargo ship, the Khian Sea, in what
would later be called an incident of “waste imperialism.”
The ash apparently is dumped somewhere at sea.
The GSX waste handling company refuses to pick up
waste from eight Boston hospitals because area landfills
will no longer accept them. The incident focuses atten-
tion on commingled waste issues.
Prior consent guidelines on the transboundary ship-
ment of hazardous waste are extended to OECD mem-
bers and nonmember states. The guidelines extend to
non-OECD states that lack proper hazardous waste dis-
posal facilities.
Responding to a warehouse fire, New York City officers
discover 1,400 bags of medical waste that have been ille-
128
Chronology
1984
(cont.)
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
gally dumped there despite documents showing the
waste had been incinerated.
The U.S. Department of Energy identifies three sites as
suitable for the storage of nuclear waste: Hanford, Wash-
ington; Yucca Mountain, Nevada; and Deaf Smith
County, Texas.
1987
The UN Environment Programme’s Governing Council
approves the nonbinding Cairo Guidelines on Environ-
mentally Sound Management of Hazardous Wastes, a
precursor to a global convention on waste.
A garbage barge, the Mobro 4000, sails from Long Island,
New York, in an unsuccessful 164-day effort to find a
place to unload more than 3,100 tons of waste cargo from
the city of Islip, New York. The trash odyssey takes the
barge on a 6,000-mile journey before it returns to New
York, where the trash is incinerated and buried where it
began.
Greenpeace officially launches a campaign to end the in-
ternational trade in hazardous waste.
Children in Indianapolis are found playing with vials of
blood infected with AIDS that they found in a trash bin
outside a health clinic. Officials report the practice of
dumping medical waste in bins is legal.
The Nuclear Waste Policy Amendments Act directs the
U.S. Department of Energy to study only one site as a
repository for nuclear waste: Yucca Mountain, Nevada.
A federal Circuit Court of Appeals decision directs the
EPA to modify its regulations for high-level radioactive
waste, established in 1985, to ensure they are consistent
with existing environmental laws; standards are not re-
vised, however, until 1993.
The mayor and members of the Los Angeles City Coun-
cil cancel plans to build three trash incinerators after lob-
bying by the Concerned Citizens of South Central Los
Chronology
129
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
Angeles, who are concerned about the health effects of
toxins released by the plant.
A report by the United Church of Christ Commission on
Racial Justice documents that an area’s racial composi-
tion is the single most reliable factor in determining the
location of waste disposal sites.
1988
A garbage slick nearly a mile long is discovered along the
shore of Ocean County, New Jersey, as needles, syringes,
and empty prescription bottles wash up on local beaches.
Six weeks later, 10 miles of Long Island, New York,
beaches are closed when medical wastes wash ashore, and
similar incidents are reported throughout the summer.
The U.S. Office of Technology Assessment releases a report
that finds inconsistencies in federal guidelines for states
regarding the definitions and management options for
medical and infectious waste. The report notes that no fed-
eral regulations comprehensively address the handling,
transportation, treatment, and disposal of medical waste.
President Reagan signs the Medical Waste Tracking Act
as an important step forward in the protection of the en-
vironment and public health.
African nations meet in Monrovia, Liberia, with UN offi-
cials and representatives of nongovernmental organiza-
tions to recommend a ban on the movement of toxic
waste to Africa. The meeting leads to the adoption of
Resolution 1153 by the Organization of African Unity to
condemn waste imports.
Delays in opening the WIPP in New Mexico prompt
Idaho’s governor to impose a ban on out-of-state waste
shipments to the Idaho National Engineering Labora-
tory, although the state subsequently agrees to allow
shipments to resume temporarily.
The EPA submits a report to Congress on the adequacy
of the agency’s solid waste guidelines and criteria for
130
Chronology
1987
(cont.)
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
protecting human health and the environment, conclud-
ing that current federal, state, and local regulations are
not addressing the problem.
1989
The first International Coastal Cleanup is held to collect
trash from coastal states in the United States, Canada,
and Mexico.
A U.S. firm ships 200 barrels of hazardous waste to Zim-
babwe using false labels that describe it as “dry cleaning
fluids and solvents,” in a well-publicized case that shows
exports of hazardous waste are becoming routine.
U.S. Department of Energy secretary James Watkins an-
nounces an indefinite delay in opening the WIPP, saying
the project will open when DOE’s safety concerns are ad-
dressed and other key reviewers are satisfied.
1990
The McDonald’s restaurant chain abandons polystyrene
(Styrofoam) containers in favor of quilt-wrap to reduce
criticism of its environmental practices. The fast-food
restaurant chain had been the object of nationwide
protests, including a “send it back” campaign of used
clamshell-style food containers. The company had de-
scribed Styrofoam as “basically air” that was good for
landfills because it aerated the soil.
African, Caribbean, and Pacific states, including former
colonies of Western European powers, sign the Lome
Convention, prohibiting the export of hazardous or ra-
dioactive waste from the European Community to the
countries within these regions. The parties agree not to
accept waste imports from any other states outside the
European Community, effectively halting developed
country waste shipments, the parties believe.
The General Conference of the International Atomic En-
ergy Agency adopts the Code of Practice on the Interna-
tional Transboundary Movement of Radioactive Waste to
fill the gap that exempted radioactive waste shipments
from coverage under the Basel Convention.
Chronology
131
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
1991
Germany enacts a landmark packaging ordinance that
shifts the burden of collecting, sorting, recycling, and dis-
posing of waste away from consumers and onto manufac-
turers in a version of “extended producer responsibility.”
Twelve African countries meeting in Bamako, Mali, sign
the Bamako Convention to ban the importation of haz-
ardous waste from any country; the convention comes
into force in 1998.
The EPA adopts new regulations for municipal incinera-
tors, requiring operators to use New Source Performance
Standards and issuing guidelines for existing facilities.
U.S. regulations developed under the Medical Waste
Tracking Act of 1988 expire after pilot programs establish
a “cradle to grave” tracking system.
The Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic
Treaty (Madrid Protocol) is adopted to regulate the incin-
eration and removal of waste materials from the continent.
The U.S. Department of Transportation publishes a final
rule to define and control regulated medical waste and
medical waste to distinguish waste consisting of an in-
fectious substance.
The first National People of Color Environmental Lead-
ership Summit is held, with toxic waste dumping and
waste disposal facility siting as its key issues.
Secretary of Energy Watkins notifies the Department of
Interior that the WIPP is ready to begin accepting ra-
dioactive wastes for a five-year test phase. New Mexico,
Texas, and environmental organizations file suit asking
that the DOE first receive congressional approval before
wastes are sent to the WIPP, and a judge agrees, granting
an injunction.
The EPA announces new regulations governing land-
fills, requiring operators to monitor nearby ground-
132
Chronology
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
water for the presence of 70 pollutants, to use double
liners of flexible materials, and to have a leachate collec-
tion system.
1992
The Basel Convention on the Control of Transboundary
Movements of Hazardous Wastes and Their Disposal,
convenes under the auspices of the UN Environment
Programme, enters into force to deal with the issue of
waste trading among nations.
The Convention for the Protection of the Marine Envi-
ronment in the North East Atlantic replaces the Oslo and
Paris conventions and requires parties to show that no
harm to the environment will be caused by dumping
waste into the North Sea and that no adequate disposal
alternative exists.
Six Central American countries sign the Agreement on
the Transboundary Movement of Hazardous Wastes in
the Central American Region following a strong cam-
paign by environmental organizations.
The National Energy Policy Act requires the U.S. Depart-
ment of Energy to continue to oversee the Yucca Moun-
tain nuclear waste site to prevent activities that could
adversely affect the repository. The statute also directs
the EPA to prepare a high-level waste standard specifi-
cally for Yucca Mountain and provides for the National
Academy of Sciences to make recommendations to the
EPA on the scientific basis for the health and safety stan-
dards for Yucca Mountain.
In Fort Gratiot Landfill v. Michigan Department of Natural
Resources, the U.S. Supreme Court rules that the goals of
solid waste management plans can be attained without
discriminating against interstate commerce.
U.S. president George H. W. Bush signs legislation estab-
lishing conditions for initial receipt and permanent dis-
posal of waste at WIPP, designating the EPA as the site’s
independent regulator.
Chronology
133
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
1993
Nineteen countries in the Mediterranean region negoti-
ate an agreement to ban hazardous waste trading under
the framework of the 1975 Barcelona Convention for the
Protection of the Mediterranean Sea against Pollution.
The first criminal prosecution under the 1980 RCRA in-
volves the conviction of two men for knowingly export-
ing hazardous waste from the United States to Pakistan
without the required consent and without notifying the
EPA prior to shipment.
The Environmental Defense Fund criticizes plastic man-
ufacturers, charging that the rate of recycling does not
even come close to the increased production of virgin
plastic.
The EPA reports that domestic recycling has tripled by
weight, from 7 percent in 1970 to 22 percent, with more
cities passing voluntary and mandatory recycling 
measures.
Browning-Ferris Industries releases first contract bids to
haul trash in New York City. Shortly thereafter, a com-
pany executive opens the door to his home to find the
severed head of a German shepherd with a note in its
mouth that reads, “Welcome to New York,” allegedly left
there by the Mafia as a warning.
The Oregon Supreme Court rules that a statute authoriz-
ing higher fees for disposal of out-of-state waste does not
on its face violate the Commerce Clause; the U.S.
Supreme Court overturns the Oregon decision a year
later in a 7-2 decision calling the surcharge discrimina-
tory on its face.
1994
The North American Free Trade Agreement goes into ef-
fect and includes provisions related to hazardous waste,
including agreement that relaxed environmental stan-
dards will not be used to attract foreign investment.
1995
The Waigani Convention is adopted in Waigani, Papua
New Guinea, to address the dumping of waste in the
134
Chronology
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
South Pacific region. It bans the import of hazardous
waste and radioactive waste from outside the convention
area to developing countries in the convention area.
The Smoky Mountain Garbage Dump, home to an esti-
mated 150,000 people and the source of fires and land-
slides, is closed in Manila, Philippines, after international
pressure makes the facility an embarrassment to the 
government.
The U.S. Congress enacts legislation to provide a storage
facility for spent nuclear fuel near the Nevada Test Site,
because an expected repository at Yucca Mountain is not
yet available.
The Ocean Conservancy produces a report on ship waste
and discharge at sea to call attention to the problems of
oceanic trash.
The U.S. Department of Transportation publishes a final
rule dealing with requirements for packaging and label-
ing regulated medical waste in response to waste man-
agement industry concerns about regulatory burdens.
The National Research Council publishes recommenda-
tions on health and safety standards for the Yucca Moun-
tain nuclear waste repository.
The New York Police Department completes an exten-
sive undercover operation that officially wipes out the
city’s garbage cartel with a 114-count indictment, and
every individual named and charged either pleads or is
found guilty.
1996
The Izmir Protocol of the Barcelona Convention is signed
by Mediterranean coastal states to regulate waste trade
in the Mediterranean region. The agreement is based on
a draft proposal developed by Greenpeace.
The Protocol to the Convention on the Prevention of Ma-
rine Pollution by Dumping of Waste and Other Matter is
adopted, revising most of the provisions of the 1972 
Chronology
135
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
London Dumping Convention. It bans the incineration at
sea of wastes and requires parties to keep records show-
ing the nature and quantities of permitted dumping as
well as the location, time, and method used.
New York City Mayor Rudolf Giuliani establishes the
Trade Waste Commission, giving city officials sweeping
powers to reject waste handling licenses, whether a firm
is criminally charged or not. The action further trans-
forms the city’s trash business.
1997
A South African government inquiry finds that the mer-
cury waste facility operated by Thor Chemicals is “out of
control” as waste is improperly stored in warehouses at
the plant site.
New York City legalizes the use of in-sink garbage
grinders for disposing of food waste.
The coordinator of the Greenpeace campaign against
hazardous waste trading establishes the Basel Action
Network to develop a grassroots network of locally
based groups to persuade governments to ratify the
Basel Convention.
The Joint Convention on Safety of Spent Fuel Manage-
ment and on the Safety of Radioactive Waste is adopted
in Vienna, relying on the International Atomic Energy
Agency for its secretariat.
1998
The EPA announces its certification of the WIPP and
compliance with federal standards for disposal.
Unable to get a permit for disposal, a Taiwanese plastic
firm ships mercury-contaminated waste to Cambodia.
The sacks of waste are mislabeled as polyester chips and
cement cake and are looted by local residents, resulting
in several deaths. The waste is eventually shipped back
to Taiwan.
After a two-year study, the U.S. Department of Energy
concludes that Yucca Mountain remains a promising site
136
Chronology
1996
(cont.)
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
for a nuclear waste repository. The department fails,
however, to meet a deadline for being able to accept
spent nuclear fuel; lawsuits are subsequently filed by
utilities and states with reactors.
New York repeals its one-cent tax on nonrefillable con-
tainers of carbonated soft drinks, mineral water, and
soda water.
1999
The Declaration and Decision on Environmentally
Sound Management of Hazardous Wastes is adopted in
Geneva as an outgrowth of the Basel Convention, setting
priorities for the agreement and focusing attention on
waste management within member countries.
The Philippine government announces that a Japanese
firm has shipped hazardous and medical waste, labeled
as paper for recycling, for disposal in Manila in direct vi-
olation of the Basel Convention. An embarrassed Japa-
nese government removes the waste; the owner of the
Japanese company commits suicide.
U.S. Department of Energy secretary Bill Richardson
sends the first shipments of radioactive waste to the
WIPP from the Los Alamos National Laboratory.
2000
U.S. presidential candidate George W. Bush tells Nevada
governor Kenny Guinn that “sound science, not politics”
would guide his decision on Yucca Mountain as a site for
a nuclear waste repository.
Twenty-six Greenpeace activists are arrested in Manila
after they deliver a container filled with poisonous
chemical waste collected in residential areas near Clark
Air Force Base to the U.S. Embassy. The protesters called
upon the U.S. government to clean up its military waste;
the United States withdrew from the Philippines in 1992,
leaving its bases in their current state.
Russia’s Atomic Energy Ministry wins preliminary ap-
proval from the lower house of parliament to import spent
nuclear fuel rods. The spent fuel is to be sent by armored
Chronology
137
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
train to a facility in the Ural Mountains for reprocessing,
earning the country as much as $20 billion.
2001
The Fresh Kills landfill on New York’s Staten Island re-
ceives its final shipment of household garbage on March
22, responding to citizen complaints and government re-
ports about the environmental impact of the landfill’s
operation and a 1996 state law requiring closure of the fa-
cility by January 1, 2002.
Debris from the September 11 terrorist attack on the
World Trade Center in New York City is sent to Fresh
Kills landfill to be sifted for human remains.
The EPA sets safety standards for the Yucca Mountain
nuclear waste facility. An interim agency report finds
that no “showstoppers” arose in its scientific review of
the site. The estimated cost for construction, operation,
and monitoring over 100 years is put at $58 billion.
The U.S. Department of the Interior’s National Park Ser-
vice moves to make the Fresno, California, municipal
landfill the first to use a trenching method of covering
trash with dirt every day, a national historic landmark.
On the same day, the site is placed on the EPA’s list of
federal Superfund sites for cleanup.
2002
Waste management targets are included as part of the 
Johannesburg Plan of Implementation at the World Sum-
mit on Sustainable Development.
Ireland institutes a 20-cent-per-bag tax on plastic bags,
leading to a 95 percent reduction in their use as con-
sumers bring their own bags for shopping.
U.S. secretary of energy Spencer Abraham recommends
Yucca Mountain to President George W. Bush as suitable
for further development as a nuclear waste repository.
President Bush then recommends the site to Congress as
qualified for application for construction authorization.
The state of Nevada vetoes the recommendation as it is
138
Chronology
2000
(cont.)
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
permitted to do under the Nuclear Waste Policy Act, but
Congress overrides Nevada’s veto and approves the site.
The state of Nevada bans the U.S. Department of Energy
from drawing water from wells at the Yucca Mountain
nuclear waste facility in an attempt to shut the project
down. Federal officials counter that the project will draw
instead from a 1-million-gallon water tank. The state im-
plemented a similar shutoff in 2000, but the federal gov-
ernment successfully sued to keep the water flowing.
Greenpeace activists are arrested when they attempt to
clean up toxic waste in Bhopal, India.
The U.S. Department of Transportation publishes a final
rule that adopts the World Health Organization defini-
tions on hazardous materials for packaging and transport
to standardize U.S. regulations with those recommended
by the United Nations.
2004
The National Commission on Energy Policy issues a report
urging completion of a national underground repository
for nuclear waste but also recommends the government
move ahead on a parallel path of building at least two cen-
tralized dry cask storage facilities at reactor sites.
The U.S. Court of Appeals sets aside an EPA regulation
that established a 10,000-year standard for high-level nu-
clear waste because it differs from a National Academy
of Sciences finding that no scientific basis exists for that
time limit.
2005
San Francisco enters into voluntary agreement with lob-
byists for grocery stores to stop using plastic bags.
The EPA issues draft regulations establishing a two-tier
standard for radiation protection at the Yucca Mountain
nuclear waste site.
Department of Energy officials admit that a U.S. Geolog-
ical Survey scientist fabricated documents related to the
Chronology
139
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
Yucca Mountain nuclear waste site, jeopardizing the op-
erating license application before the Nuclear Regulatory
Commission.
The Nevada Commission on Nuclear Projects declares
the Yucca Mountain repository a “dead man walking”
and predicts the project can be killed.
2006
The U.S. Department of Energy announces it intends to
relocate a 130-acre, 12-million-ton pile of radioactive
waste in southeastern Utah where it sits 750 feet from the
Colorado River, the water source for 25 million people.
The waste began piling up in the 1950s, when uranium
was mined in the area.
California implements a ban on placing batteries, elec-
tronic devices, and fluorescent lightbulbs in household
trash because of concerns the wastes will leak toxic sub-
stances, mostly metals, into landfills.
2007
San Francisco outlaws plastic checkout bags at large su-
permarkets and chain pharmacies after a voluntary sys-
tem proves to be insufficient.
An Israeli firm announces it has developed a new tech-
nology for reducing waste, including radioactive waste,
and turning it into glass blocks and energy, which can be
sold. The company plans to use the technology to dis-
pose of radioactive waste from the Chernobyl nuclear
waste accident.
Greenpeace activists dump poisonous waste collected
from the site of the 1984 Bhopal, India, gas leak disaster
at the European headquarters of Dow Chemical Com-
pany to bring attention to the company’s failure to clean
up the facility.
An Indian firm claims that cleaning up the 350 tons of
tarry hazardous waste from the Bhopal gas leak in 1984
is “child’s play” despite environmental groups’ con-
cerns that the company is not equipped to incinerate the
material.
140
Chronology
2005
(cont.)
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
Naples, Italy, faces a garbage crisis as uncollected trash
piles up on city streets and washes up on beaches. Plans
to build four new dumps in the city are stymied by resi-
dents who do not want incinerators in their neighbor-
hoods and local crime syndicates who do not want the
new facilities to cut into their illegal dumping profits.
Garbage collectors contend they have no place to take
the trash.
Lady Bird Johnson, the former first lady, dies. During
Lyndon B. Johnson’s administration, she became one of
the nation’s first advocates for highway beautification,
introducing stop-littering campaigns across the United
States.
Los Angeles and San Francisco ban city-financed pur-
chases of bottled water in an effort to cut down on plas-
tic waste.
2008
Scotland’s government issues plans for a zero-waste
strategy in order to rid itself of the “dirty man of Europe”
label.
Chicago becomes the first city in the United States to tax
bottled water, levying a 5-cent-per-bottle tax that is ex-
pected to raise nearly $11 million a year in revenue for
the city. The International Bottled Water Association files
suit to overturn the tax, arguing the city’s ordinance un-
lawfully taxes a food product, a violation of state law.
The government of China bans the production, sale, and
use of ultrathin plastic bags after June 1, 2008, and en-
courages shoppers to use fewer bags or use cloth bags in-
stead. Supermarkets and shops are banned from giving
free plastic bags to customers but are allowed to sell
them.
Chicago ends its controversial blue bag recycling pro-
gram amid complaints from citizens concerned about the
durability of the bags. City officials announce they will
begin distributing blue plastic carts for recycling as an 
alternative.
Chronology
141
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
5
Biographical Sketches
Robert Bullard (b. 1946)
As “the father of environmental justice,” Robert Bullard is both an
academician and an activist who is known for his pioneering work
in studying the siting of hazardous waste facilities in communities
of color and poverty. He is Ware Professor of Sociology and direc-
tor of the Environmental Justice Resource Center at Clark Atlanta
University. Previously, he taught at the University of California,
Riverside, and was visiting professor in the Center for African
American Studies at the University of California, Los Angeles.
A native of Alabama, Bullard attended Alabama A&M Uni-
versity, receiving a bachelor’s degree in government in 1968, then
joining the U.S. Marine Corps for a four-year stint as a commu-
nications specialist. He went to graduate school at Clark Atlanta
University, where he earned a master’s degree in sociology in
1972, and in 1976, he earned a PhD in sociology from Iowa State
University. His work as a sociologist became focused when he
completed graduate school and his wife, an attorney represent-
ing a group of homeowners, asked him to help collect data about
a company that had decided to build a landfill in a predomi-
nantly black neighborhood in Houston. Bullard was an assistant
professor in Houston and familiar with the area. His research
found that 100 percent of all the city-owned landfills, and six of
its eight incinerators, were in black neighborhoods, even though
Houston’s population was only 25 percent black.
Bullard’s best-known book is Dumping in Dixie: Race, Class
and Environmental Quality, which has become a classic text on en-
vironmental racism and justice issues. He served as one of the
143
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
planners for the First National People of Color Environmental
Leadership Summit and served in President Bill Clinton’s transi-
tion team and on the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
(EPA) National Environmental Justice Advisory Committee.
Since his first book appeared, dozens of law centers specializing
in environmental justice have been developed, and hundreds of
grassroots organizations have formed to oppose the types of haz-
ardous waste sites and landfills Bullard initially described in
1990. He has helped organizations to network on strategies and
information to collaborate against discrimination in many forms.
In 1994, he founded the Environmental Justice Research Center at
Clark Atlanta University, bringing together the expertise that has
developed since his initial work on hazardous waste siting began
in 1979.
Dean Buntrock (b. 1931)
Dean Buntrock was born in Columbia, South Dakota, a town that
had a population of 250 at the time of his birth. At age nine, he
started working for his father’s local farm equipment dealership,
which included a hardware store and gas station. By the time he
was 13, he was driving a grain hauling truck and earned money
raising chickens and growing potatoes for local restaurants. He
attended a one-room Lutheran school and graduated from a high
school class of eight. He joined the army in 1952 and attended fi-
nance school at Fort Benjamin Harrison. When he was dis-
charged, he attended St. Olaf’s College and graduated in 1955,
majoring in business and history.
He and his wife moved to Boulder, Colorado, where he sold
life insurance. In 1956, when his father-in-law died, he helped
manage the family’s garbage truck business. In 1968, he joined
Wayne Huizenga and Larry Beck in forming Waste Management,
Inc., taking the company public in 1971 and leading it to become
a major U.S. and global corporation. In the course of a decade,
Waste Management had acquired hundreds of garbage hauling
companies, making it the largest waste management company in
the world. In 1993, Waste Management, Inc., became WMX Tech-
nologies; Buntrock retired as chief executive officer in 1997.
Buntrock has a history of public and philanthropic service.
He has served on the boards of directors of numerous organiza-
tions, including the Chicago Symphony Orchestra, St. Olaf 
144
Biographical Sketches
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
College, and the First National Bank of Chicago. His honors in-
clude an honorary degree from Knox College and membership in
the Horatio Alger Association of Distinguished Americans. In a
controversial 1987 move that drew protests from activists en-
raged that an industry insider would be named to the board of
directors of the National Wildlife Federation, charges were made
that Buntrock had bought his company’s way into environmen-
tal respectability. Despite its financial successes, Waste Manage-
ment has had a troubled history that includes accusations and
lawsuits alleging price fixing and a federal antitrust case.
Joseph R. Cerrell (b. 1935)
In 1966, Joseph R. Cerrell and his wife, Lee, founded a company
that is now one of the United States’ oldest government affairs,
public relations, and campaign management firms, Cerrell Asso-
ciates of Los Angeles. In 2007, he was inducted into the American
Association of Political Consultants Hall of Fame as one of the
most respected and admired figures in the profession. Cerrell As-
sociates has a unique place in the annals of waste management
that is rarely mentioned in biographical profiles, but it is impor-
tant because of a controversial report he authored dealing with
the siting of hazardous waste facilities.
Joe Cerrell was born in New York City and attended the Uni-
versity of Southern California; he also studied at Columbia Uni-
versity. Prior to starting his company, he was the youngest-ever
director for the California Democratic Party and worked for nu-
merous political candidates from the local level to the presiden-
tial level. In his lengthy career, he has served as an officer in
organizations ranging from the Public Relations Society of Amer-
ica to the National Italian American Federation. He cofounded
the Jesse M. Unruh Institute of Politics and is a Distinguished
Visiting Professor at Pepperdine University.
In 1984, the California Waste Management Board commis-
sioned a $33,000 study by Cerrell Associates to identify the politi-
cal difficulties inherent in siting waste-to-energy plants. The report
found that all socioeconomic groupings tend to resent the siting of
nearby waste facilities, but that middle- and higher-income neigh-
borhoods are better able to resist these types of projects. The rec-
ommendation of the infamous Cerrell Report was what some refer
to as class targeting in siting waste facilities. Ideally, the report
Biographical Sketches
145
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
noted, officials and companies should look for lower socioeco-
nomic neighborhoods in order to minimize opposition to facilities.
The study also said that political criteria were as important as en-
gineering factors in determining the outcome of a project, and that
political problems could be avoided if supporters and opponents
could be identified before a site for an incinerator was selected.
The report even identified a personality profile of those likely to
offer the least resistance to siting decisions: older people, people
with a high school education or less, and those who adhere to a
free market orientation. In January 1988, the Los Angeles Times
broke the story of the previously unpublicized Cerrell Report, trig-
gering a backlash against the waste industry and charges that the
87-page document was the “smoking gun” that proved environ-
mental racism among officials.
Rev. Benjamin Chavis Jr. (b. 1948)
Benjamin Chavis Jr., who was born in Oxford, North Carolina,
represents a family tradition of social activism. His parents were
teachers at a school for black orphans and taught him about racial
injustice at an early age. When he was 13, he tried to integrate the
all-white library where he lived and became the first black person
to obtain a library card there. After high school, he went to Saint
Augustine College in Raleigh, North Carolina, where he became
active in the Southern Christian Leadership Conference as a
youth coordinator. He received a bachelor’s degree in chemistry
from the University of North Carolina, Charlotte, in 1969 and was
appointed Southern Regional Program Coordinator of the United
Church of Christ (UCC) Commission for Racial Justice.
His civil rights activism continued throughout the 1970s
after he was sent to Wilmington, North Carolina, to desegregate
the public school system. He was arrested and convicted on
charges of arson and conspiracy as part of the “Wilmington 10”
in 1972 after a local grocery store was firebombed. He was sen-
tenced to 34 years for the crime and spent nearly a decade in
prison, during which time he wrote two books. The charges were
proved false, and he was released after a U.S. district court ruling
in 1980. While in prison, Chavis was escorted to Duke Univer-
sity’s divinity school to attend classes as part of a study-release
program, obtaining a master of divinity degree there and a PhD
in ministry from Howard University in 1981.
146
Biographical Sketches
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
In 1983, Chavis went back to work for the UCC, where he
was named executive director in 1985. He is credited with being
one of the people who coined the term environmental racism after
he participated in the protests over a hazardous waste dump in
Warren County, North Carolina, where the population was 75
percent black. The landfill was constructed, but the protesters
successfully stopped the state’s plan to put another landfill and
an incinerator there. As head of the UCC’s Commission for
Racial Justice, he was one of the authors of the landmark report
on toxic waste siting that showed landfills and other facilities
were predominantly located in communities of color. The first
National People of Color Environmental Leadership Summit was
held in 1987, where Chavis made an address that focused on en-
vironmental devastation facing minority communities. In 1993,
he became the youngest person ever named as director of the Na-
tional Association for the Advancement of Colored People
(NAACP), where he served until he was fired by the organiza-
tion’s board of directors in 1994 over claims he diverted funds for
a sexual harassment case in which he was involved. He con-
verted to the Nation of Islam in 1997, becoming Benjamin Chavis
Muhammad, and was ousted as a minister by the UCC. In 2001,
as Minister Benjamin Muhammad, he cofounded the Hip-Hop
Action Summit, which is dedicated to fighting the war on
poverty and injustice.
Yvon Chouinard (b. 1938)
Although the founder of Patagonia calls his outdoor clothing and
equipment company “an experiment,” Yvon Chouinard has ex-
panded his business to the point where he gives some of it
away—1 percent of his gross revenues, to be exact. Known for re-
cycling discarded plastic bottles and turning them into fleece
jackets, he is also an expert rock and mountain climber, writer,
and surfer. His 2005 book, Let My People Go Surfing, is part auto-
biography and part business guide.
He was born in Lewiston, Maine, the son of a blacksmith fa-
ther. His family moved to Burbank, California, in 1946, and he
joined the Sierra Club and founded the Southern California Fal-
conry Club in 1953. In order to save money, he began forging his
own climbing equipment in 1957, and he started Chouinard
Equipment for Alpinists, selling gear out of the back of his car. In
Biographical Sketches
147
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
between adventures, he spent two years at a community college
and two years in the military in Korea. In 1972, he began selling
rugby shirts through a new company he founded, Patagonia,
which has become a leader in both enhancing the workplace en-
vironment and protecting the natural environment. In 1993, the
recycled plastic fleece products were added to the company’s cat-
alogue, and more recently, the efforts have expanded to include
unusable second-quality fabrics and used clothing, becoming the
world’s first garment recycling firm, called Common Threads, in
2005. Recycling polyester clothing, Chouinard says, uses 76 per-
cent less energy than if the product were made out of virgin 
petroleum.
Although the recycled soda bottle fleece is a company staple,
Patagonia is working to “green” the company at every level. It be-
came the first California company to use renewable energy to
power all its buildings. Patagonia was also the first textile com-
pany in the world to print its commercial catalogue on recycled
paper. Chouinard’s son Fletcher is crafting a line of surfboards
made of nontoxic materials, and the elder Chouinard has a new
vision, called the Ocean Initiative. In 2001, he created One Percent
for the Planet, an alliance of 500 businesses that pledge to donate
1 percent of their gross revenues to environmental protection. For
Patagonia, the tithe now amounts to about $2.7 million per year.
Barry Commoner (b. 1917)
Barry Commoner was among the first scientists to become active
in the nascent environmental movement, long before many of the
environmental problems such as air and water pollution, nuclear
waste, and toxins made headlines. He was born in New York
City, and like many who later joined the movement, credits his
family with encouraging his interests in science when he was
given a microscope. He attended Columbia College, receiving a
degree in zoology in 1937, and then received a master’s degree
and a PhD in biology from Harvard, where he completed his
graduate work in 1941. He taught at Queen’s College in New
York City and was drafted by the Naval Reserve.
After being discharged, he worked as an associate editor at
the magazine Science Illustrated and then taught at Washington
University in St. Louis, where he became chair of the department
of botany in 1965. He received a federal grant to set up the Center
148
Biographical Sketches
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
for the Biology of Natural Systems (CBNS) at the university, cre-
ating one of the first interdisciplinary programs to look at envi-
ronmental problems. In 1970, at the height of the environmental
movement, Time magazine called him “the Paul Revere of Ecol-
ogy” because of his early warnings about pollution and the need
for finding alternative sources of energy.
In the early 1980s, Commoner began studying the role of
dioxins that were released when trash was burned, and he be-
came an outspoken opponent of incineration projects when the in-
dustry was experiencing rapid growth in the United States. He
ran for president of the United States as the representative of the
Citizens Party in 1980, receiving 235,000 popular votes in the elec-
tion, in which Ronald Reagan was chosen as president. He re-
turned to Queens College in 1981, as did the CBNS. Although
Commoner retired from teaching in 1987, he remained on the col-
lege’s staff as director of the Center until 2000 and is now its di-
rector emeritus and a senior scientist.
Paul Connett (b. 1940)
Paul Connett’s name is not well known outside the circle of anti-
incineration activists and academicians who are familiar with his
role in opposing incineration facilities in the Northeast. He de-
serves more credit, many have argued, for bringing science to
policy debates over these issues. He was born in Sussex, En-
gland, and graduated from Cambridge University in 1962, ma-
joring in natural science. He taught school for four years and
became active in a group he and his wife, Ellen, founded, Oper-
ation Omega, to oppose the war in Bangladesh. They left the
United Kingdom in 1979 so Paul could attend Dartmouth Col-
lege, where he received his PhD in chemistry in 1983.
They moved to Canton, New York, where he worked at St.
Lawrence University. From friends and colleagues, he heard
about a proposed municipal waste incineration facility in
Ogdensburg, about 17 miles from their home. Although he ini-
tially thought the project had some clear benefits because of the
energy that would be produced and the level of government reg-
ulation that would be applied, his research on the plant’s opera-
tions led to a turning point in his life in 1985. Connett was able to
use his skills as a researcher and chemist to investigate some of
the issues citizens were questioning on several projects that were
Biographical Sketches
149
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
being proposed. In one community, the issue of noise from a fa-
cility was being used by opponents, and he brought in informa-
tion about the health risks from exposure to dioxins. He began to
work with Barry Commoner in taking on industry representa-
tives at public forums, and they formed the National Coalition
against Mass Burn Incineration and for Safe Alternatives in Oc-
tober 1985. He also became part of the Citizens Conferences on
Dioxins. In April 1988, his wife took on responsibility for pro-
ducing a newsletter, Waste Not, and they helped produce a series
of videotapes that presented the evidence against incineration
that were distributed nationwide. He and Ellen were named the
Conservationists of the Year from the Environmental Planning
Lobby in 1990, and Paul received a Leadership Award from the
National Campaign against the Misuse of Pesticides in 2000. He
has shifted his interests to studying the effects of fluoride as part
of the Fluoride Action Network. He is now an emeritus professor
at St. Lawrence University, where his initial anti-incineration in-
terests began.
Lois Gibbs (b. 1951)
Lois Gibbs’s name is synonymous with community activism, al-
though most people are unaware that she started out as a shy
housewife before she became embroiled in the battle to clean up
her neighborhood near Niagara Falls, New York. She was born in
Buffalo, New York, and married a chemical worker; they moved
to a new development called Love Canal. It was built on the site
of the old Hooker Chemical Company, which had been covered
with dirt in 1953 to be used for home sites and a school. A local
reporter had written a series of articles in 1978 about chemicals
that were found leaking from the ground there, and when her
son began experiencing various illnesses, Gibbs started contact-
ing her neighbors to see if they were concerned about any health
problems that might be connected to the contamination.
After a series of public hearings by the New York State De-
partment of Public Health, an elementary school that had been
built at Love Canal in 1955 was closed in 1978. That same year,
federal officials declared the site to be an emergency area, and the
governor signed an order to relocate 239 families, many of whom
had experienced miscarriages and children with birth defects.
150
Biographical Sketches
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
Gibbs organized local homeowners who had not been relocated,
seeking to have the government purchase their houses at a fair
market value. State officials stalled on implementing the gover-
nor’s relocation orders, and in 1980, angry residents protested
and held two EPA officials hostage until the government agreed
to relocate 810 families. Despite a $15 million federal authoriza-
tion to buy their houses, some residents decided to stay.
Gibbs and her family moved to Washington, D.C., where she
founded the Citizen’s Clearinghouse for Hazardous Waste. The
group was renamed the Center for Health, Environment and Jus-
tice in 1997 and moved to Falls Church, Virginia. With more than
27,000 members, it is one of the most prestigious coalitions of
grassroots-level hazardous waste groups in the world.
Pete Grogan (b. 1949)
Pete Grogan is an example of a baby boomer who is convinced
that it is possible to work at both the grassroots level and within
a large corporation to deal with the issues of waste. He was born
in Newark, New Jersey, and says his interest in trash grew out of
his parents’ encouragement of recycling and, as a child, seeing
bits of incinerated garbage on the beach. He graduated with a
bachelor’s degree in psychology from the University of Colorado,
Boulder, in 1974. He began working with juvenile offenders and
started a recycling program to help pay for sports equipment, and
he and a friend started a grassroots recycling effort, EcoCycle, in
1976. Volunteers collected recyclables and then sold what they
could to reprocessors. His university contacts helped the group
get student volunteers. The organization also received funding
from the city of Boulder, the county, and the EPA.
Grogan left EcoCycle in 1987 to serve as an international con-
sultant with R. W. Beck and Associates, assisting companies and
government agencies in both the United States and abroad seek-
ing to develop their own recycling and sold waste planning pro-
grams. He also began working with industry groups to increase
the percentage of their waste that could be recycled. In 1994, he
joined Weyerhauser and is now manager of Market Development
for the company’s recycling division. The company collects and
sorts 50 grades of recovered paper at its U.S. facilities. In 2006, in
recognition of his 30 years of effort to promote recycling, Grogan
Biographical Sketches
151
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
was given the Lifetime Achievement Award and Recycler of the
Year award from the National Recycling Coalition.
Kenny Guinn (b. 1936)
Kenny Guinn held no elected office prior to becoming the Re-
publican governor of Nevada in 1998. After serving two terms,
he stepped down from the state’s highest office in 2007, but he re-
mains active as one of the most powerful, and strident, oppo-
nents to the Yucca Mountain nuclear waste depository in his
state. He is described as a RINO, or “Republican in Name Only,”
because of his moderate stance on most issues and his appeal to
Democratic voters. He was named one of the nation’s five best
governors by Time magazine in 2005.
Guinn was born in Garland, Arkansas, but grew up in the
central California town of Exeter. He received his bachelor’s de-
gree in physical education from Fresno State University in 1957,
followed by a doctorate in physical education from Utah State
University in 1970. He and his family moved to Las Vegas in
1964, where he served as the superintendent of education for the
Clark County School District from 1969 to 1978. He next served
as vice president of Nevada Savings and Loan (NSL) from 1978
to 1987; he was named president and chairman of the board
when the organization changed its name to PriMerit Bank. From
that position, Guinn moved on to serve as chairman and chief ex-
ecutive officer of Southwest Gas Corporation and, from 1993 to
1997, was chairman of the board of directors of Southwest Gas.
He briefly served as interim president of the University of
Nevada, Las Vegas, from 1994 to 1995.
Guinn was an early opponent of the Yucca Mountain facility,
which was designed to hold as many as 77,000 tons of highly ra-
dioactive material at a site about 90 miles northwest of Las Vegas.
He led other state officials and the Nevada congressional delega-
tion in questioning the suitability of the site and the potential for
groundwater contamination there. Fears about the durability of
waste containers, interstate transport, and geologic safety united
Guinn with environmental groups and activists and with Presi-
dent Bill Clinton, who also opposed the plan for the storage site
at the edge of the former Nevada Nuclear Test Site. In April 2002,
Guinn used his veto power under special congressional rules and
the Nuclear Waste Policy Act to reject the U.S. Department of 
152
Biographical Sketches
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
Energy’s recommendation that Yucca Mountain be the nation’s
long-term depository for nuclear waste. The Republican-
controlled House of Representatives and Senate later voted to
override Guinn’s veto, paving the way for the Yucca Mountain
project to move forward. President George W. Bush approved the
site in 2004. Guinn countered by taking the federal government
to court, contending that Nevada, which has no nuclear plants of
its own, was bearing an unfair burden. Guinn also challenged
EPA and Nuclear Regulatory Commission rules related to the
plant’s licensing and operation, a process that could take at least
five more years. When he left office in January 2007, Guinn’s
postgubernatorial life shifted considerably; he is now a member
of the board of directors for the MGM Mirage Hotel in Las Vegas.
Alice Hamilton (1869–1970)
Alice Hamilton grew up as one of five children in New York City,
where she was born into a family that was well off financially. She
attended the private and prestigious Miss Porter’s School and de-
cided to enter the field of medicine, an occupation that would
allow her to work almost anywhere. She attended the Fort Wayne
College of Medicine and the University of Michigan, and although
she did not complete an undergraduate degree, she received her
medical degree in 1893. She had extensive training at several hos-
pitals and laboratories in both the United States and Europe, and
after deciding she wanted to be a researcher rather than a physi-
cian, she accepted a position as professor of pathology at North-
western University’s Women’s Medical School in 1897. She made
a study of the typhoid epidemic that was raging in Chicago and
determined that the disease was being spread by flies, one of many
discoveries that would lead her to investigate workplace condi-
tions and the role of chemicals and toxic waste. She began a life-
long effort to “treat the excesses of industrialization.”
In 1911, Hamilton accepted a position as a special investiga-
tor for the new U.S. Department of Labor, which required her to
do field work at many high-risk work sites. Over the years, she
would investigate the steel and high-explosives industries,
where she found the chemicals used and the failure to deal with
industrial waste properly were responsible for many deaths. She
became Harvard University’s first female faculty member in 1919
in the industrial medicine program, although she was subjected
Biographical Sketches
153
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
to widespread gender discrimination. Her 1925 book, Industrial
Poisons in the United States, was the first textbook on the topic at
a time when little attention was being paid to industrial practices
and what would later be known as industrial waste. Another
book, Exploring the Dangerous Trades, published in 1943, marked
the end of her work on toxins in the workplace, but it did not end
her social activism. She fought against child labor, supported the
League of Nations and the Equal Rights Amendment, became a
pacifist, and opposed the war in Vietnam. She died at her home
in Connecticut at age 101 and was commemorated by a U.S.
Postal Service stamp in 1995.
H. Wayne Huizenga (b. 1937)
A flamboyant entrepreneur, billionaire H. Wayne Huizenga has
an important place in the history of waste management, having
built three Fortune 500 corporations. Despite his financial suc-
cesses, critics argue that his alleged ties to organized crime and
unfair business practices have given the industry a black eye that
refuses to go away.
He was born in Evergreen Park, Illinois, and spent part of his
youth in Chicago until his family moved to Florida in 1953, where
he graduated from Pine Crest High School in Ft. Lauderdale. He
moved back to Chicago and in 1956 entered Calvin College in
Grand Rapids, Michigan, but left after three semesters. He en-
listed in the U.S. Army reserve in 1959, and in 1960 returned with
his wife to Ft. Lauderdale. He started working for a local garbage
hauler and in 1962 started his own garbage company, Southern
Sanitation Service. In 1970, he merged his business with Dean
Buntrock’s Chicago garbage company, forming Waste Manage-
ment, Inc. He stepped down as vice chairman of Waste Manage-
ment at age 46 to move on to other business interests, but in 1995,
he purchased Republic Industries, which grew to be the third-
largest waste management company in the United States.
Although waste management was the initial source of his
wealth, Huizenga expanded his business interests in the 1980s
and 1990s. He bought out the Blockbuster Video chain of stores
for $18 million, and he began buying up small video stores, tak-
ing the company public in 1989. He also started a hotel chain, Ex-
tended Stay America, and started the first nationwide auto
dealer, AutoNation. In 1990, he bought an interest in the National
154
Biographical Sketches
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
Football League’s Miami Dolphins, and in 1991, he brought the
Florida Marlins, a Major League Baseball expansion team, to
Miami, followed by the National Hockey League’s Florida Pan-
thers in 1992.
Huizenga has a controversial public persona, which was ig-
nited in 1994, when a newspaper article made allegations about
his assault of a sales prospect who refused to do business with
him, and stories arose about spousal abuse, ties with organized
crime, illegal political contributions, unfair competition prac-
tices, and a disregard of environmental laws. Despite the charges,
he has been named Financial World’s CEO of the Year; has been
named Ernst & Young’s U.S. Entrepreneur of the Year; and in
2007, joined presidential candidate Mitt Romney’s Florida
statewide finance committee. As a noted Florida philanthropist,
he has supported many projects, including the Huizenga Busi-
ness School at Nova Southeastern University in Ft. Lauderdale.
Mary McDowell (1854–1936)
“Fighting Mary” McDowell is also known as “The Angel of the
Stockyards.” She was born in Cincinnati and raised in Chicago, the
daughter of a steel-rolling mill owner who had also served in the
Union Army during the Civil War. Her history of social activism
began with the Methodist Church, and in the 1880s, when her fam-
ily moved to Evanston, Illinois, she joined the Young Women’s
Christian Temperance Union. The group was starting the kinder-
garten movement for young children, and McDowell became a
teacher in New York City for a short time. Her work with the Uni-
versity of Chicago Settlement House helped those living near the
stockyards and immigrant families. McDowell lived there for the
rest of her life; it was renamed the Mary McDowell Settlement in
her honor.
McDowell became active in garbage-reform activities as part
of her work in the Packingtown neighborhood adjacent to
Chicago’s open pit dumps. Sanitation was almost nonexistent in
Packingtown, so she organized various cleanup campaigns. She
also worked to reform the municipal garbage collection system,
which was controlled by powerful political officials. In 1911, she
toured Europe to see the various sanitation and waste manage-
ment systems being used there. When she returned, she started a
public campaign to organize garbage committees using women’s
Biographical Sketches
155
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
clubs as the base of membership. The city’s first garbage reduc-
tion plant was built in 1913, although McDowell did not live to
see a modern waste treatment facility. The remainder of her life
was spent in trying to improve race relations, the inspection of
packing plants, and the building of city parks and community
gardens.
Martin Melosi (b. 1947)
One of the most prolific historians and authors on the subject of
trash, landfills, urban sanitation, and waste management, Martin
Melosi has a resume 23 pages long and combines academic re-
search with public service and litigation support. He was born in
San Jose, California, and received a bachelor’s degree in 1969 and
a master’s degree in 1971 from the University of Montana, where
he majored in history. In 1972, he received the George P. Ham-
mond Prize for the best paper written by a graduate student from
Phi Alpha Theta, the national history honorary society. He went
on to receive a PhD in history from the University of Texas at
Houston, followed by a series of academic appointments in
Texas; Paris; Helsinki, Finland; and Odense, Denmark. He is now
the Distinguished University Professor of History at the Univer-
sity of Houston, where he has taught since 1984.
Studying garbage represents a unique academic niche, and
Melosi has researched the problem from every conceivable per-
spective, with a brief stint as a biographer of Thomas Edison and
author of a study of the attack on Pearl Harbor. His 1980 book,
Pollution and Reform in American Cities, 1870–1930, is considered
to be one of the finest historical treatments of early waste man-
agement, followed in 1981 by Garbage in the Cities: Refuse, Reform,
and the Environment 1880–1980. The two books provide an out-
standing overview of how the United States transformed its
waste practices as it changed from an agrarian to an industrial
nation, and the role of issues such as recycling during the devel-
opment of the environmental movement.
Melosi has served as president of several national organiza-
tions, including the American Society for Environmental History,
the National Council on Public History, and the Public Works
Historical Society. Besides being a prolific author, Melosi is
known for public service activities, ranging from serving as a
156
Biographical Sketches
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
consultant to the Tempe, Arizona, Historical Museum and as a
member of the Advisory Board of the Environmental Institute of
Houston to being an exhibit adviser to the Smithsonian Institu-
tion and serving as a film consultant. He has also worked as an
expert witness in litigation involving Shell Oil Company.
Penny Newman (b. 1947)
In the 1980s, Penny Newman was called a superwoman for her
activism at the Stringfellow Acid Pits, California’s top-priority
Superfund site. As the West Coast organizer for the Citizen’s
Clearinghouse for Hazardous Waste, founded by Love Canal ac-
tivist Lois Gibbs, Newman would become one of the waste in-
dustry’s most feared antagonists.
Her life has focused on the rural California community of
Glen Avon, about 60 miles east of Los Angeles. Newman attended
Riverside City College and California State University, Fullerton,
where she received a bachelor’s degree in communicative disor-
ders in 1981. She worked as an instructional aide for a local school
district and as a substitute teacher, later working as a special edu-
cation teacher for children with severe language disorders. 
In 1969, heavy rains caused a local earthen dam to overflow,
carrying waste from a toxic dump into the small community
where she and her family lived. Her son began having bouts of
asthma-related breathing problems and dizzy spells, as did many
other residents. Newman became one of the leaders of Con-
cerned Neighbors in Action (CNA), a group formed in 1979 to
protest the lack of federal attention to the Stringfellow Acid Pits,
which had opened in 1956 as a dump for more than 34 million
gallons of hazardous liquid waste. Newman became a full-time
employee at CNA in 1986. In 1987, the group brought suit before
the U.S. Supreme Court to try to force the government to clean
up the site, a process that has taken nearly two decades of New-
man’s life.
Newman is now the executive director for the Center for
Community Action and Environmental Justice, a nonprofit orga-
nization. Her honors include awards from the South Coast Air
Quality Management District, the California Senate, U.S. Senator
Barbara Boxer, the Environmental Protection Agency, and the
American Public Health Association.
Biographical Sketches
157
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
Paul Palmer (b. 1938)
The idea of “zero waste” has joined the lexicon of industrial de-
signers, activists, and policy makers. The man credited with first
using the phrase zero waste publicly is Paul Palmer, whose name
is much less familiar in waste management history. The concept
has been interpreted in numerous ways, but it is generally de-
fined as changing and redesigning the production of goods to
consider the entire life cycle of resources. It is endorsed by state
legislators and city councils and embraced by state waste man-
agers and entire communities. The term is associated with words
and phrases such as vision, design principle, philosophy, systems ap-
proach, producer responsibility, and true cost accounting.
Palmer was born in the Bronx, New York, in 1938, and was
awarded his bachelor of science degree in chemistry at Queens
College in New York City in 1959. He went on to receive a PhD
in physical chemistry from Yale University in 1966. He took a job
teaching chemistry at the Middle East Technical University in
Ankara, Turkey, for two years, then taught for a year as a visiting
scientist at Oersted Institute in Copenhagen, Denmark. When he
returned to the United States, Palmer served as a lecturer in the
chemistry department of Indiana University in Bloomington. His
relatively placid academic career changed when he moved to
California and founded Zero Waste Systems (ZWS), Inc., in 1973
in Berkeley. The company initially sought to find new uses for
chemicals that were left over from the electronics industry, offer-
ing to take them for free. New and usable laboratory chemicals
were added to ZWS’s huge inventory and then sold at half price
to scientists, companies, and those conducting experiments. ZWS
also collected developer/rinse solvent produced by various com-
panies, which was put into small cans as lacquer thinner, and re-
flow oil created by printed circuit makers that was filtered and
remarketed for use in oil well production. The company was
termed an “active waste exchange” by the EPA.
Palmer’s book Getting to Zero Waste, published in 2005, ex-
plains how in his ideal model, individuals and businesses would
have to find creative ways to deal with waste, rather than relying
on garbage haulers and dumps. Consumers could go to large fa-
cilities, where they could refill containers or bottles with the
items they needed. If manufacturers are held responsible for the
waste they create, he expects they would change the way their
158
Biographical Sketches
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
products are manufactured. He established the Zero Waste Insti-
tute in Sebastopol, California, and continues to try to convince
others of the need to use resources more intelligently.
William Rathje (b. 1945)
Imagine being called “The Indiana Jones of Solid Waste.” That is
the informal title that has been bestowed on William Rathje,
emeritus professor of archaeology from the University of Ari-
zona, who is better known as the founding director of the
Garbage Project.
Born in South Bend, Indiana, he grew up in Wheaton, Illinois,
the son of a teacher and an air traffic controller. At age 11, his
grandparents gave him a copy of the book The Wonderful World of
Archaeology, a defining experience in his young life. When he left
Wheaton in 1963 to study archaeology at the University of Ari-
zona in Tucson, he decided to focus his attention on Mayan cul-
ture, and after he received his bachelor’s degree in 1967, he went
to Harvard, where he was awarded a PhD in 1971. He returned to
Tucson to teach at his alma mater and continued to study Mayan
society by excavating various burial sites. In the process, he de-
veloped a theory that during the Late Classic period, Mayan soci-
ety became more aristocratic and developed particular hereditary
groups. He also theorized that prehistoric burial practices were
linked to contemporary ones in how the dead are treated, and he
studied trading zones in prehistoric societies.
The Garbage Project had its beginnings in 1971, when Rathje
taught an anthropology class at the University of Arizona that
was designed to teach archaeological methods. Students under-
took independent projects that were to show the links between
various kinds of artifacts and various kinds of behavior. Two of
the students explored the relationship between mental stereo-
types and physical realities by collecting garbage from two
households in an affluent part of Tucson, and two others in a
poor part of town. Their goal was to determine whether garbage
samples could be used to gauge behavior. The following year,
students began “borrowing” and sorting household garbage
from different parts of Tucson; in 1973, when the Garbage Project
became more structured, the city’s sanitation division delivered
randomly chosen household pickups to an analysis site at a
Biographical Sketches
159
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
maintenance yard. The operations were shifted to a site where
the university’s dumpsters were parked in 1984, across from the
school’s stadium. Later, the Garbage Project shifted its base of op-
erations to municipal landfills for excavation.
Florence Robinson (b. 1937)
Florence Robinson, who was born in northern Louisiana, has
been called a “reluctant warrior,” and although she is not nearly
as well known as Love Canal activist Lois Gibbs, she and Gibbs
share two things in common. Both have been active as “ordinary
citizens” in trying to focus attention on the problems of haz-
ardous waste, and together, they shared the 1998 Heinz Award
for the Environment.
Robinson lived in the small community of Alsen, Louisiana,
near Devil’s Swamp, where industrial waste was routinely
dumped in a pit opened there in 1964. Alsen is also home to 11
petrochemical plants. She attended Southern University, major-
ing in biology, and later returned to teach there in the 1970s. In
1981, Alsen’s residents, who are mostly poor and black, filed suit
against Rollins Environmental Services, one of the worst pol-
luters in the area. The company decided to expand in 1986, and
Robinson and her neighbors held demonstrations in protest. She
purchased a computer so she could track emissions from indus-
trial plants through the federal Toxic Release Inventory. She
began testifying at various hearings on at-risk communities near
waste sites and joined activists who had developed the “Peo-
ple’s Agenda on Superfund” in 1993 and 1995. In 1997, her ef-
forts convinced one of the area’s major polluters to stop burning
hazardous waste in an incinerator, and the facility was disman-
tled a year later. She helped found the North Baton Rouge Envi-
ronmental Association, and in 1999, she joined activists in
protesting the incineration of napalm; in 2001, she and her stu-
dents participated in the Greenpeace Celebrity Tour of Cancer
Alley, the 85-mile strip of land along the Mississippi River in
Louisiana.
Her anti–toxic waste activism has come at a price; she has
been diagnosed with chronic fatigue syndrome and anxiety, and
she has lost her sense of smell. In 1998, she left Alsen for Baton
Rouge after she said she had difficulty breathing and worried
about the health of her dogs. She believed that her exposure to
160
Biographical Sketches
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
the petrochemical companies’ toxic fumes and waste had dam-
aged her health, although she did not sell her home because she
said she did not want anyone else exposed to the risks.
Elizabeth Royte (b. 1960)
The idea of spending the weekend reading about garbage may
not sound appealing to most people, but if the author being read
is Elizabeth Royte, the time is likely well spent. Her book Garbage
Land: The Secret Trail of Trash was named one of the New York
Times’s 100 Notable Books of 2005. Royte’s style of investigative
journalism appeals to those who want information and a witty
writing style, such as her notation that maggots found in garbage
are known as “disco rice” by sanitation workers.
She was born in Boston and says she spent a lot of time out-
doors when she was growing up. She graduated from Bard Col-
lege in 1981 and started her writing career as an intern at The
Nation. At the time, she hoped to get a job as an editor, but her free-
lance writing gradually developed into a science/environmental
journalism niche. In 1999, she was named an Alicia Patterson
Foundation fellow and spent a year of funded research at a bio-
logical research station. Now based in New York City, she has writ-
ten several books and contributes to Harper’s, Outside, National
Geographic, the New York Times Magazine, and Life.
Although she has written about numerous environmental
topics, her work on waste is unique among nonfiction books. In
one article, Royte follows her own household garbage to see
where it goes after it leaves her home and is surprised at how
much organic waste she and her family produce. In a subsequent
article, she writes about the waste and debris from Hurricane Ka-
trina, and in Huffington Post blogs, she has dealt with topics
such as paper versus plastic and compost in ways that have
given new meaning to “talkin’ trash.”
William Sanjour (b. 1933)
Now retired, William Sanjour was one of the best-known career
staff members of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency be-
cause of his role as an agency whistle-blower. In 1979, he was
transferred from a position of influence at the EPA to one where
Biographical Sketches
161
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
his position had no assigned duties. He has been the subject of
harassment and is considered by many to be the driving force
behind the 1976 Resource Conservation and Recovery Act
(RCRA).
He was born in New York City and served in the U.S. Army
before attending the City College of New York, where he majored
in physics and graduated with a bachelor’s degree in 1958, fol-
lowed by a master’s degree in physics from Columbia University
in 1960. One of his first jobs was as an operations analyst for the
U.S. Navy at its think tank, the Center for Naval Analysis. From
there he worked for the American Cyanamid Company from
1964 to 1966, and then in 1967 as a management consultant for
Ernst and Ernst. His job was to develop computer simulations for
reducing air pollutants, and from there he became a consultant
for the EPA from 1972 to 1974, when he joined the agency full
time.
He accepted a position with the EPA’s Hazardous Waste Di-
vision, supervising studies to assess the scope of the problem and
how sites might be cleaned up. The studies conducted under his
leadership were sufficient to convince Congress to enact RCRA at
a time when the environmental movement was combining advo-
cacy with scientific analysis. He helped draft the rules that would
eventually implement the provisions of RCRA, although little
support for enforcement was provided under the administration
of President Jimmy Carter. His efforts to publicize the EPA’s lack
of compliance with the law resulted in his transfer to a position
with no duties. He fought the transfer and, after a year-long legal
battle, won appointment as head of the Hazardous Waste Imple-
mentation Branch while continuing to expose fraud and abuse
within the EPA. In his nonworking hours, he began assisting
grassroots environmental groups and testified numerous times
before Congress.
In 1984, he voluntarily accepted a transfer to the Office of
Technology Assessment and wrote a critical report on the EPA’s
Superfund efforts, an action that cost him his position as branch
chief when he returned to the EPA. Reassigned as a policy ana-
lyst, he fought efforts to silence whistle-blowers and was suc-
cessful in a landmark court decision on his complaints about
treatment at the agency. He retired in 2001, although he contin-
ues his activism as a member of the North Carolina Waste Aware-
ness and Reduction Network and the National Whistleblower
Center.
162
Biographical Sketches
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
Wilma Subra (b. 1943)
Although some call her “St. Wilma” and one writer called her a
“genial grandmother,” Wilma Subra, a native of Louisiana, has
worked tirelessly, and in some cases has taken on major corpo-
rations as “a top gun for the environmental movement,” to help
the residents of her state. She has been rewarded not only with
international awards but also with the sense of accomplishment
that typifies her upbringing in the small town of Morgan City.
During the summers while she was in high school, she worked
for her father, who ran a small laboratory grinding oyster shells,
which she says was the source of her interest in chemistry. She
attended the University of Southwestern Louisiana in Lafayette,
where she earned a bachelor’s degree in 1965 and a master’s de-
gree in 1966 in chemistry and microbiology. She joined the Gulf
South Research Institute in 1967 as a microbiologist and biosta-
tistician, where she worked for 14 years. At Gulf South, she and
her colleagues conducted toxicological studies and projects with
the National Institute of Cancer Research at a time when the
field was just developing. They also worked on quick-response
projects for the EPA to study why a high rate of disease was oc-
curring in certain communities, including New York’s Love
Canal.
Her top-gun reputation comes from working with more than
800 communities over the last 25 years, assisting residents who
are concerned about toxic waste contamination in their neigh-
borhoods. She has focused her attention on Cancer Alley because
of the illnesses reported there.
Most of her work is done for free, paid for by the chemical
consulting work she does for food companies and other clients as
president of the Subra Company in New Iberia, Louisiana. In
1999, she was awarded a $370,000 MacArthur Foundation “ge-
nius grant” that helps fund her activities. The award specifically
mentioned her work in Morgan City against the Marine Shale Fa-
cility, which was a hazardous waste incinerator that claimed to
be a recycler and was finally shut down in 1996.
Terri Swearingen (b. 1956)
Terri Swearingen was born in the small, rural Appalachian com-
munity of East Liverpool, Ohio, the daughter of a steelworker 
Biographical Sketches
163
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
father and a mother who worked in a school cafeteria. In 1978,
she received a nursing degree from the Ohio Valley Hospital
School of Nursing and also was trained as a dental technician.
She worked in her husband’s dental office, where in 1982, a pa-
tient mentioned that the world’s largest hazardous waste incin-
erator was being planned for the town. Waste Technologies
Industries, which began its plans in 1980, was to be built within
1,100 yards of an elementary school in a low-income minority
neighborhood and 320 feet from a nearby house.
Swearingen and her neighbors began writing letters in op-
position to the incinerator and believed that the EPA would
never grant a permit to the company, which was slated to be built
on the banks of the Ohio River. But construction began in 1989,
and a year later, Swearingen committed herself full time to fight
the plant’s operation, founding a grassroots group, the Tri-State
Environmental Council. She believed that the siting of the facil-
ity was an example of environmental racism, because the com-
munity in which it was located was poor and had been chosen
for that reason. Of the 13,000 residents of East Liverpool, 500
were black, and all of them lived in the vicinity of the incinerator.
In 1997, she was named a winner of the Goldman Environ-
mental Prize for North America, and she also received the 1999
William E. Gibson Award from the General Assembly of the Pres-
byterian Church. Swearingen has been named a Women at Their
Best winner by Cover Girl and Glamour magazine and was
named one of six “ecowarriors” by marie claire magazine in 1997.
In 1994, she was named one of the 50 most promising leaders in
the United States by Time magazine, and she is a member of the
Citizens Clearinghouse for Hazardous Waste Grassroots Hall of
Fame.
Mike Synar (1950–1996)
Rep. Mike Synar of Oklahoma, who served 16 years in Congress,
was known for taking on political challenges, whether the foe in-
volved the tobacco industry, the gun lobby, Oklahoma’s energy
interests, or his own Democratic party. In 1987, he took on the
U.S. Department of Defense (DOD) in a frustrating attempt to
find out how the military was dealing with hazardous waste.
Michael Lynn Synar was born in Vanity, Oklahoma, attended
local schools in Muskogee, and had been named the nation’s top
164
Biographical Sketches
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
4-H club member; his family had been named the “outstanding
family in the U.S.” by the All-American Family Institute. He at-
tended the University of Oklahoma, Norman, where he was
awarded a bachelor’s degree in 1972, and was named a Rotary In-
ternational Scholar, attending the University of Edinburgh Grad-
uate School of Economics, in Scotland, in 1973. His master’s
degree was completed in 1974 at Northwestern University, and he
returned to the University of Oklahoma to attend law school,
which he completed in 1977. He ran for the U.S. House of Repre-
sentatives in 1978 and served there until he lost reelection in 1994.
Synar served as chair of the congressional Subcommittee on
Environment, Energy and Natural Resources in 1987, and in No-
vember that year held hearings on the efforts of the DOD to ad-
dress its environmental problems. The issue had been one of
special interest to him, and one on which he staked his political ca-
reer. Tinker Air Force Base was in his home state, and his staff had
conducted considerable research in the four years since the mili-
tary’s previous report before Congress. An official from the Gen-
eral Accounting Office (now the Government Accountability
Office) testified that these investigations had found that the mili-
tary had problems with waste storage and disposal, record keep-
ing and tracking of hazardous waste shipments, hazardous waste
container management, and ground water management, with nu-
merous environmental violations the previous year. Synar’s tena-
cious questioning of Defense officials and his prodding of the
Pentagon to clean up military installations was one factor leading
to his receipt of the Profiles in Courage award from the John F.
Kennedy Library Foundation on May 8, 1995. Synar developed a
reputation as one of the most knowledgeable members of Con-
gress on the issue of the military’s waste remediation efforts. He
also was active in other waste management issues, introducing
legislation to amend the Solid Waste Disposal Act to ensure that
any waste exported from the United States to foreign countries is
managed to protect human health and the environment. Synar
died of brain cancer in Washington, D.C., in January 1996.
Will Toor (b. 1961)
As a native of Pittsburgh, Will Toor grew up in a highly charged
academic world, the son of two university professors. At the age
of 17, he graduated from Carnegie Mellon University with a
Biographical Sketches
165
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
bachelor of science degree in physics. He treated himself to a
cross-country hitchhiking tour and ended up in Boulder, Col-
orado, in 1980, where he decided to stay. Boulder is also the city
where his early work at a recycling center led to a political career
that has allowed him to expand his initial agenda to one encom-
passing local sustainability.
As an activist against nuclear weapons testing at the nearby
Rocky Flats facility, he became friends with the area’s environ-
mental leaders and joined the community nonprofit recycling
group EcoCycle, founded in 1976. He began by working on Sat-
urdays riding around in the back of an old school bus helping
pick up recyclables, then working full time in the recycling yard.
Toor helped develop Boulder’s curbside recycling program, turn-
ing it into one that would be a model for the rest of the United
States. It is now the largest nonprofit recycler in the nation.
He decided to go back to school and enrolled at the Univer-
sity of Chicago, receiving a master’s degree in physics in 1987
and a PhD in 1992. As a graduate student, he coordinated the
university’s recycling program and then returned to Boulder in
1992 as director of the University of Colorado’s Environmental
Center, where he served until 2004. He was also an instructor in
the university’s environmental studies program, teaching
courses on environmental leadership and transportation policy.
Toor’s leadership of Boulder’s recycling programs has been the
subject of several awards, as has his work with the Environmen-
tal Center. The EPA honored the university with awards for recy-
cling, green power, and its student bus program, and the
National Recycling Coalition awarded the university with its
Outstanding School Recycling Program award. His political ca-
reer started in 1997, when he ran successfully for the Boulder
City Council, and in 1998, he became mayor. Toor was elected to
the Boulder County Board of Commissioners in 2004, and has
spearheaded the county’s sustainability initiative.
Jean Lacey Vincenz (1894–1989)
Jean Lacey Vincenz was born in Enfield, Illinois, in 1894, and at-
tended junior college in Fresno, California. He received a bache-
lor’s degree in civil engineering from Stanford University in
1918, and over a 10-year period served as commissioner of pub-
lic works, city engineer, and manager of public utilities in Fresno.
166
Biographical Sketches
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
While this might not seem especially notable, Vincenz’s life is re-
markable because he was responsible for the development of the
United States’ first sanitary landfill.
As commissioner of public works for Fresno, he recom-
mended that the city not renew an existing franchise contract
with the Fresno Disposal Company, which operated an incinera-
tor for burning trash. He had studied the British system of con-
trolled tipping techniques, visited other California cities to see
how they dealt with municipal waste, and talked to engineers
about how best to operate a landfill. Vincenz believed that dif-
ferent strategies needed to be implemented to build trenches,
compact the waste, and cover it with a deeper layer of dirt than
was normally used elsewhere. No one had ever placed an em-
phasis on compaction, and he believed this would create a land-
fill that was more efficient. He helped develop a waste system for
Fresno’s trash and opened the city’s sanitary landfill in 1937.
In 1941, he joined the Army Corps of Engineers Repairs and
Utilities Division as assistant chief in Washington, D.C., where he
worked until 1947. He helped the military adopt the sanitary
landfill as a standard disposal method after World War II. He
then was selected as the City of San Diego’s Public Works direc-
tor, a position he held until 1962. His honors included being
named the president of the American Public Works Association
in 1960.
George E. Waring Jr. (1833–1898)
George E. Waring Jr., a Civil War veteran known as “The
Colonel,” began work as an engineer, designing and constructing
municipal sewer systems. When the leaders of the civic reform
movement were able to defeat New York City’s Tammany Hall
and elect William Strong as mayor, Waring was made commis-
sioner of New York’s City Street Cleaning Department, which was
responsible for sweeping more than 400 miles of city streets and
collecting trash from businesses and residences. Initially, he tried
to work with the employees who were already part of the depart-
ment, but he recognized almost immediately that he would have
to reorganize it completely. He set up a model, military-style
garbage management system in the United States, employing
2,000 “White Wings,” as his workers were called, because they
wore starched white uniforms. Each day, the workers participated
Biographical Sketches
167
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
in a morning roll call, and they were expected to follow an exten-
sive set of written rules. His wife designed collection cans for
picking up garbage, and the workers participated in city parades
on holidays, marching in formation and accompanied by a band.
He increased worker salaries, instituted an eight-hour work day,
and established a formal grievance procedure.
Waring was among the first to set up a specialized system for
handling and treating municipal waste, banning independent
scavenging and cart haulers who went from door to door picking
up refuse, and prohibiting city employees from sorting through
garbage. Secondhand dealers had to be licensed to operate and
worked under supervision, and residents had to presort their
garbage in what would become the beginnings of modern recy-
cling and source separation. Trash was not to be left at the curbside;
residents put an elegant “call card” in their front window so that li-
censed handlers could retrieve it and haul it to one of the city’s
piers, where it was loaded onto barges. The barges were taken to
Barren Island in Jamaica Bay, where the refuse was processed by
Waring’s new Sanitary Utilization Company. The “Apostle of
Cleanliness” is credited with setting up the first comprehensive
public-sector waste management and sewer systems in the United
States. He served as commissioner of the city’s Street Cleaning De-
partment for three years and was ousted when Tammany Hall took
back control of New York City in the 1898 elections.
Craig E. Williams (b. 1948)
The Goldman Environmental Prize is awarded each year to six
grassroots environmental heroes representing each continent,
and in 2006, the North American winner was Craig E. Williams,
director of the U.S. Chemical Weapons Working Group (CWWG).
Williams was given the prize for his work in guiding a citizens’
coalition in opposition to the incineration of stockpiles of chemi-
cal weapons by the Pentagon. He founded the CWWG in 1990 as
a coalition of grassroots groups on the regional and national lev-
els who support the destruction of U.S. chemical weapons, but
not through the process of incineration, which is more commonly
used for burning municipal waste. The organization argues that
in the United States, the incineration process is plagued with
technical problems, lawsuits, growing citizen opposition, and
gross mismanagement.
168
Biographical Sketches
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
Williams was born in Flushing Meadows, Queens, New
York, in 1948 and attended Central Florida Junior College. He
went to the Defense Language Institute in Washington, D.C., in
1968, studying Vietnamese. After serving in the army in Vietnam
from 1968 to 1969, he joined the steering committee of Vietnam
Veterans against the War and then completed his education at
Eastern Kentucky University, where he received a bachelor of
arts degree in philosophy in 1978.
He became involved in the anti-incineration campaign in
1985, when he found out that the U.S. Department of Defense
planned to build a facility at the Blue Grass Army Depot just
eight miles from his home in Kentucky. Initially, he was a co-
founder and member of the steering committee for Common
Ground–Kentuckians for Safe Disposal of Chemical Weapons,
and in 1990, he cofounded the Kentucky Environmental Founda-
tion, the same year that he cofounded the CWWG. Williams and
his family lived near the 6.2-mile radius around Blue Grass,
known as the “immediate response zone,” that would be under
the greatest threat from a chemical accident there. He began at-
tending scoping meetings required under the National Environ-
mental Policy Act and designed to involve the public in the
decision-making process. The army outpost is in Madison
County, near Richmond, Kentucky, where 523 tons of chemical
weapons were stored in underground bunkers.
In 1996, Williams claimed success when the funding for the
Kentucky plant and another in Colorado was suspended.
Williams has organized citizen summits on chemical weapons
disposal, both in the United States and in Russia; served as a wit-
ness before congressional committees; and is an adviser on mili-
tary toxic materials. His numerous commendations and awards
range from groups such as the National Toxics Campaign Fund
and Common Cause to the Sierra Club; Berea College; and the
Union for Chemical Safety, Saratov, Russia.
Biographical Sketches
169
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
6
Data and Documents
T
his chapter seeks to put the issue of waste management in con-
text by providing some examples of the important documents,
speeches, data, facts, and legislation that have shaped this crit-
ical environmental policy problem. The sections are arranged in
both a topical and chronological manner and include both do-
mestic and international perspectives. In some cases, the material
provided is in the form of excerpts that explain key ideas and in-
formation. Sources are provided so that it is possible to examine
the original material in more depth. Public documents, such as
statutory material, are widely available in public libraries or on
the Internet.
Early Efforts to Manage Waste
The 1970s are usually considered the period in which the United
States made its most notable efforts to insure the protection of the
environment. When Earth Day was first observed on April 22,
1970, Americans were beginning to feel a sense of urgency about
cleaning up and protecting the nation’s air, water, and public
lands. Although President Richard M. Nixon is often credited
with being “the environmental president” because of his admin-
istration’s efforts to work with Congress to enact legislation for
the protection of the environment, his predecessor, Lyndon B.
Johnson, also has a noteworthy place in environmental history. In
early 1968, he sent a special message to Congress that identified
some of the nation’s most compelling environmental problems
and the need to solve them. Johnson’s widely cited commentary
171
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
on conservation, “To Renew a Nation,” is noteworthy for two rea-
sons. First, Johnson called for “The New Conservation” that
would deal with the dangers of technology. Second, in addition to
outlining the major challenges facing the country—water pollu-
tion control, safe community water supplies, oil pollution abate-
ment, air pollution, noise control, surface mining, the protection
of natural areas, and the development of marine sciences—he was
among the first to focus on the issue of solid waste as one of the
country’s major issues. Congress would eventually heed John-
son’s message with passage of the Resource Recovery Act of 1970,
which shifted waste management away from simply disposing of
waste and toward recycling and the reuse of materials, and a sub-
sequent statute in 1976 that focused more attention on this prob-
lem. In these excerpts from his Message to the Congress from
1968, Johnson speaks vividly of the nation’s conservation heritage
and the need to manage its waste.
Excerpts from a Special Message 
to the Congress on Conservation, 
“To Renew a Nation,”
President Lyndon B. Johnson 
(March 8, 1968)
To the Congress of the United States:
Theodore Roosevelt made conservation more than a political issue
in America. He made it a moral imperative. More than half a century
ago, he sounded this warning:
“To skin and exhaust the land of using it so as to increase its use-
fulness, will result in undermining in the days of our children the very
prosperity which we ought by right to hand down to them amplified
and developed.”
The conservation work that Roosevelt began was protection of
our natural heritage for the enjoyment and enrichment of all the fami-
lies of the land. That is work which never ends. It must be taken up
anew by each succeeding generation, acting as trustees for the next.
But the conservation problems Theodore Roosevelt saw are
dwarfed by new ones of our own day.
An unfolding technology has increased our economic strength
and added to the convenience of our lives.
But that same technology—we know now—carries danger with it.
172
Data and Documents
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
From the great smoke stacks of industry and from the exhausts of
motors and machines, 130 million tons of soot, carbon and grime settle
over the people and shroud the Nation’s cities each year.
From towns, factories, and stockyards, wastes pollute our rivers
and streams, endangering the waters we drink and use.
The debris of civilization litters the landscapes and spoils the
beaches.
Conservation’s concern now is not only for man’s enjoyment—but
for man’s survival.
Fortunately, we have recognized the threat in time, and we have
begun to meet it.
Through the landmark legislation of the past few years we are
moving to bring a safe environment both to this generation, and to the
America still unborn.
But the work of the new conservation, too—like the task we in-
herited from an earlier day—is unending. Technology is not something
which happens once and then stands still. It grows and develops at an
electric pace. And our efforts to keep it in harmony with human values
must be intensified and accelerated. Indeed, technology itself is the
tool with which these new environmental problems can be conquered.
In this Message I shall outline the steps which I believe America
must take this year to preserve the natural heritage of its people—a
broad heritage that must include not only the wilderness of the unbro-
ken forest, but a safe environment for the crowded city.
In 1965, I recommended and the Congress approved a national
planning, research and development program to find ways to dispose
of the annual discard of solid wastes—millions of tons of garbage and
rubbish, old automobile hulks, abandoned refrigerators, slaughter-
house refuse. This waste—enough to fill the Panama Canal four times
over—mars the landscapes in cities, suburbia and countryside alike. It
breeds disease-carrying insects and rodents, and much of it finds its
way into the air and water.
The problem is not only to learn how to get rid of these substances—
but also how to convert waste economically into useful materials. Millions
of dollars of useful byproducts may go up in smoke, or be buried under
the earth.
Already scientists working under the 1965 Act have learned much
about how soils absorb and assimilate wastes. States and local commu-
nities have drawn up their plans for solid waste disposal. That Act ex-
pires in June, 1969.
To continue our efforts, I recommend a one-year extension of the
Solid Waste Disposal Act.
In addition, I am directing the Director of the Office of Science and
Technology working with the appropriate Cabinet officers to undertake
Early Efforts to Manage Waste
173
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
a comprehensive review of current solid waste disposal technology. We
want to find the solutions to two key problems:
How to bring down the present high cost of solid waste disposal.
How to improve and strengthen government-wide research and
development in this field.
Three years ago, I said to the Congress, “. . . beauty must not be
just a holiday treat, but a part of our daily life.”
I return to that theme in this message, which concerns the air we
breathe, the water we drink and use, and oceans that surround us, the
land on which we live.
These are the elements of beauty. They are the forces that shape
the lives of all of us—housewife and farmer, worker and executive,
whatever our income and wherever we are. They are the substance of
The New Conservation.
Today, the crisis of conservation is no longer quiet. Relentless and
insistent, it has surged into a crisis of choice.
Man—who has lived so long in harmony with nature—is now
struggling to preserve its bounty.
Man—who developed technology to serve him—is now racing to
prevents its wastes from endangering his very existence.
Our environment can sustain our growth and nourish our future.
Or it can overwhelm us. History will say that in the 1960s the Nation
began to take action so long delayed.
But beginning is not enough. The America of the future will re-
flect not the wisdom with which we saw the problem, but the determi-
nation with which we saw it through.
If we fail now to complete the work so nobly begun, our children
will have to pay more than the price of our inaction. They will have to
bear the tragedy of our irresponsibility.
The new conservation is work not for some Americans—but for
all Americans. All will share in its blessings—and all will suffer if the
work is neglected. The work begins with the family. It extends to all
civic and community groups. It involves city hall and State capitol.
And finally it must engage the concern of the Federal Government.
I urge the Congress to give prompt and favorable consideration to
the proposals in this Message.
Source: American Presidency Project. “Papers of Lyndon B. Johnson.”
[Online information; retrieved 10/1/07.] http://www.presidency.
ucsb.edu/ws/index.php?pid=28719.
174
Data and Documents
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
Waste Management Legislation
The issue of solid waste management that was officially recog-
nized in the 1960s with President Johnson’s efforts to control lit-
ter alongside the nation’s roadways continued with passage of
the nation’s primary solid waste law, the Resource Conservation
and Recovery Act (RCRA) in 1976. The legislation was driven by
the momentum of the environmental movement and concerns
about the need to recycle more products to conserve natural re-
sources. Solid waste management had traditionally been the
purview of local governments, which were considered the re-
sponsible agencies for cleaning up this “local” problem. With
passage of RCRA, it appeared that the federal government
would take a more centralized role in dealing with this perennial
environmental problem; the legislation authorized federal
grants that would pay for up to 75 percent of demonstration pro-
jects. But the law also encouraged newly enhanced disposal
techniques such as incineration rather than reducing the amount
of waste or recycling, and the Environmental Protection Agency
began to shift its emphasis to hazardous, rather than municipal,
waste.
As these excerpts from the statute show, Congress was con-
cerned about the combined effects of population and economic
growth, the aesthetic and health effects of open dumps and land-
fills, and risks attributed to uncontrolled pollution. The passage
of earlier legislation dealing with air quality and water pollution
opened the door for Congress to turn its attention to solid and
hazardous waste, as it did in this measure.
The Resource Conservation and 
Recovery Act of 1976 (excerpts)
The Congress finds with respect to solid waste—
(1) that the continuing technological progress and improvement in
methods of manufacture, packaging, and marketing of consumer prod-
ucts has resulted in an ever-mounting increase, and in a change in the
characteristics, of the mass material discarded by the purchaser of such
products;
(2) that the economic and population growth of our Nation, and
the improvements in the standard of living enjoyed by our population,
Waste Management Legislation
175
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
have required increased industrial production to meet our needs, and
have made necessary the demolition of old buildings, the construction
of new buildings, and the provision of highways and other avenues of
transportation, which, together with related industrial, commercial,
and agricultural operations, have resulted in a rising tide of scrap, dis-
carded, and waste materials;
(3) that the continuing concentration of our population in expand-
ing metropolitan and other urban areas has presented these communities
with serious financial, management, intergovernmental, and technical
problems in the disposal of solid wastes resulting from the industrial,
commercial, domestic, and other activities carried on in such areas;
(4) that while the collection and disposal of solid wastes should
continue to be primarily the function of State, regional, and local agen-
cies, the problems of waste disposal as set forth above have become a
matter national in scope and in concern and necessitate Federal action
through financial and technical assistance in the development, demon-
stration, and application of new and improved methods and processes
to reduce the amount of waste and unsalvageable materials and to pro-
vide for proper and economical solid waste disposal practices.
Source: U.S. Government Printing Office. [Online information; re-
trieved 2/13/08.] http://www.access.gpo.gov/uscode/title42/chapter
82_.html.
Municipal Solid Waste Recycling
The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency’s (EPA) Office of
Solid Waste is responsible for coordinating efforts to measure
and characterize municipal solid waste (MSW) in a way that pro-
vides tools for comparison and improved implementation. The
agency publishes a report on U.S. MSW every two years (www.
epa.gov/epaoswer), along with various publications that pro-
vide guidance for local governments seeking to increase their re-
cycling rate. In order to standardize statistics, the EPA has also
developed a list that outlines the scope of what is and what is not
MSW, as seen in Table 6.1. The development of standards makes
it possible to gauge more closely what types of wastes are being
collected as part of the MSW stream and to determine how much
recycling is actually taking place.
176
Data and Documents
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
Municipal Solid Waste Recycling
177
TABLE 6.1
Scope of Materials Included in the Standard MSW Recycling Rate
Material
What Is MSW?
What Is Not MSW?
Food Scraps
Uneaten food and food preparation; wastes from 
Food processing waste from
residences and commercial establishments 
agricultural and industrial 
(restaurants, supermarkets, and produce stands); 
operations
institutional sources (school cafeterias); and 
industrial sources (employee lunchrooms)
Glass Containers
Containers; packaging; and glass found in 
Glass from transportation
appliances; furniture; and consumer electronics
equipment (automobiles) and 
construction and demolition 
(C&D) debris windows
Lead-Acid 
Batteries from automobiles; trucks; and motorcycles
Batteries from aircraft; military 
Batteries
vehicles; boats; and heavy-duty 
trucks and tractors
Tin/Steel Cans  
Tin-coated steel cans; strapping; and ferrous metals
Ferrous metals from C&D debris
and Other  
from appliances (refrigerators); consumer 
and transportation
Ferrous Metals
electronics; equipments; and furniture
Aluminum Cans  
Aluminum cans; nonferrous metals from
Nonferrous metals from industrial
and Other  
appliances; furniture; and consumer electronics;
applications and debris
Nonferrous 
and other aluminum items C&D (foil and lids 
(aluminum siding; wiring; and
Metals
from bimetal cans)
piping)
Paper
Old corrugated containers; old magazines; old 
Paper manufacturing waste (mill
newspapers; office papers; telephone directories; 
broke) and converting scrap not
and other paper products, including books, 
recovered for recycling
third-class mail, commercial printing, paper 
towels, and paper plates and cups
Plastic
Containers; packaging; bags and wraps; and 
Plastics from transportation and
plastics found in appliances; furniture; and 
equipment
sporting and recreational equipment
Textiles
Fiber from apparel; furniture; linens (sheets and 
Textile waste generated during
towels); carpets and rugs; and footwear
manufacturing process (mill 
scrap) and C&D projects
Tires
Tires from automobiles and trucks
Tires from motorcycles; buses; and 
heavy farm and construction 
equipment
Wood
Pallets; crates; barrels; and wood found in 
Wood from C&D debris (lumber
furniture and consumer electronics
and tree stumps) and industrial 
process waste (shavings and 
sawdust)
Yard Trimmings
Grass; leaves; brush and branches; and tree stumps
Yard trimmings in C&D debris
Other
Household hazardous waste (HHW); oil; filters; 
Abatement debris; agricultural
fluorescent tubes; mattresses; and consumer 
waste; combustion ash; C&D
electronics
debris; industrial process waste; 
medical waste; mining waste; 
municipal sewage and industrial 
sludges; natural disaster debris; 
used motor oil; oil and gas 
waste; and pre-consumer waste
Source: U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. Office of Solid Waste. 2007. “Scope of Materials Included in the Stan-
dard New Recycling Rate.” [Online article or information; retrieved October 6, 2007.] www.epa.gov/epaoswer/.
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
Creating a Market 
for Recycled Products
In the mid-1970s, at the height of the environmental movement’s
efforts to rethink waste management strategies, recycling was
poised to become an entrenched part of American life. There
were expectations that recycled products would become com-
monplace both in the home and the business sector as technology
revealed more ways of reusing products from paper and plastics
to glass and tires. One of the reasons why recycling did not fulfill
its early promise was the lack of a market for recycled goods.
Consumers found that common household recycled content
products, such as toilet paper and paper towels, were much more
expensive and not as absorbent or soft as the products they were
used to using. Paper products, among the most widely available
recycled-content items, were often found only in specialty nat-
ural foods stores rather than markets and grocery stores. The
niche market did not seem especially attractive to producers of
these goods.
The federal government responded in 1995, when the EPA
issued the first Comprehensive Procurement Guide (CPG) as
part of the effort to promote materials made from recycled solid
waste. RCRA requires the agency to consider several criteria in
determining which items will be listed, and the list applies to
procuring agencies (local, state, and federal agencies and their
contractors that use federal funds) that spend more than $10,000
a year on that item. In addition, Executive Order 13101 requires
the EPA to issue guidance on buying “environmentally prefer-
able products” that have a lesser or reduced effect on human
health and the environment when compared with other products
and services with the same purpose. The EPA, however, is not
authorized to enforce the legislation and its own guidelines.
The initial CPG included five procurement guidelines and 19
products; the November 1997 list added 12 more items, and in
January 2000, it designated 18 more. The next update, in April
2004, added seven more items to the procurement list, and there
are now eight categories that include recycled-content recom-
mendations for each item.
178
Data and Documents
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
EPA Comprehensive Procurement 
Guidelines Products
Construction Products: building insulation productions; polyester carpet;
carpet cushion; cement and concrete containing coal fly ash, ground
granulated blast furnace slag, cenospheres, silica fume; consolidated
and reprocessed latex paint; floor tiles; flowable fill; laminated paper-
board; modular threshold ramps; nonpressure pipe; patio blocks; rail-
road grade crossing surfaces; roofing materials; shower and restroom
dividers and partitions; structural fiberboard.
Landscaping Products: compost made from yard trimmings or food waste;
garden and soaker hoses; hydraulic mulch; lawn and garden edging;
plastic lumber landscaping timbers and posts.
Nonpaper Office Products: binders, clipboards, file folders, clip portfolios,
and presentation folders; office furniture; office recycling containers; of-
fice waste receptacles; plastic desktop accessories; plastic envelopes;
plastic trash bags; printer ribbons; toner cartridges.
Paper and Paper Products: commercial/industrial/sanitary tissue products;
miscellaneous papers; newsprint; paperboard and packaging products;
printing and writing papers.
Park and Recreation Products: park benches and picnic tables; plastic fenc-
ing; playground equipment; playground surfaces; running tracks.
Transportation Products: channelizers; delineators; flexible delineators;
parking stops; traffic barricades; traffic cones.
Vehicular Products: engine coolants; rebuilt vehicular parts; re-refined lu-
bricating oils; retread tires.
Miscellaneous Products: awards and plaques; bike racks; blasting grit; indus-
trial drums; manual-grade strapping; mats; pallets; signage; sorbents.
Source: U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. “Comprehensive Pro-
curement Guidelines (CPG).” [Online information; retrieved 10/16/07.]
www.epa.gov/epaoswer/non-hw/procure/.
Creating a Market for Recycled Products
179
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
Global Municipal and Hazardous Waste
Generation, Collection, and Treatment
Environmental stakeholders are becoming increasingly aware of
the magnitude of waste generated on the global level as record
keeping and statistical analysis become more technologically ad-
vanced. The scale of municipal solid waste generated and collected
is especially important because it becomes one of the competing
needs for municipal services, considered part of a nation’s quality
of life. Hazardous waste generation is also a growing problem be-
cause of the export and import of materials ranging from toxic by-
products of manufacturing to electronic waste (e-waste) and
radioactive materials. The amount of waste a country generates
depends on numerous factors, including its gross domestic prod-
uct, the extent of urbanization, family structures, and lifestyles.
The tables below show trends in municipal and hazardous waste
generation, collection, and treatment. Although the United Na-
tions compiles statistics on an international basis, only a sampling
of results from represented countries with the most complete in-
formation is included here in Tables 6.2, 6.3, and 6.4. The indicators
are for the latest year available, generally between 2002 and 2005.
Caution should be used in comparing countries, as these statistics
represent waste collected by or on behalf of municipalities. Waste
collected by the informal sector or waste generated in areas not
covered by the municipal waste collection system is not included.
Hazardous waste statistics include some breaks in time series be-
cause of new legislative initiatives and may include figures for bio-
medical waste and contaminated soil in some countries’
inventories, but generally figures are reported according to Basel
Convention categories. Wherever possible, like data have been
used to make comparisons more reliable.
The Basel Convention
Globalization has come with increased benefits for many nations,
and disastrous consequences for others. Among the numerous
problems affecting poorer nations, especially those in the South-
ern Hemisphere, hazardous waste trading is perhaps one of the
most insidious. Illegal shipping and transport operations fre-
quently target poor countries in Africa and the Caribbean for
180
Data and Documents
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
dumping extremely hazardous wastes of foreign origin, as ex-
plained in Chapter 3. Since the 1980s, attempts have been made
to create and secure ratification of international agreements to
monitor the waste trade, usually because of pressures from inter-
national nongovernmental organizations, such as Greenpeace.
The result has been some success, but only in piecemeal
fashion. Developed countries usually have some sort of regula-
tory schemes in place, but the primary regime is the Basel Con-
vention, initially signed in 1989 and entered into force in 1992. As
the Preamble to the Convention below illustrates, the agreement
attempts to find a middle ground between state sovereignty and
local capacity to deal with this growing problem.
Waste Generation, Collection, and Treatment
181
TABLE 6.2
Municipal Waste Collection, by Selected Country
MSW Collected
MSW Collected
Population Served
Per Capita Served
Country
(1000 tons)
(Percentage)
(kg/person)
Algeria
8,500
80.0
334
Austria
4,588
100.0
562
Belarus
2,661
85.0
319
Belize
86
51.2
655
Brazil
57,563
76.0
441
Canada
13,375
99.0
423
Cuba
4,416
75.6
519
Denmark
3,618
100.0
675
France
33,963
100.0
561
Greece
4,710
100.0
429
Guatemala
604
30.5
165
Iceland
147
100.0
503
Ireland
2,847
76.0
903
Japan
54,367
99.8
427
Martinique
340
100.0
863
Monaco
40
100.0
1,180
Peru
4,740
75.0
240
Romania
6,865
90.0
341
Singapore
5,088
100.0
1,176
Tunisia
1,316
65.0
203
UK
35,077
100.0
588
US
222,863
100.0
747
Source: United Nations. Department of Economic and Social Affairs, Statistics Division [Online information; retrieved
February 15, 2008] http://unstats.un.org/unsd/ENVIRONMENT/municipalwaste.htm.
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
Preamble to the Basel Convention on the
Control of Transboundary Movements
of Hazardous Wastes and Their Disposal
(March 1989)
The Parties to this Convention,
Aware of the risk of damage to human health and the environment
caused by hazardous wastes and other wastes and the transboundary
movement thereof,
Mindful of the growing threat to human health and the environ-
ment posed by the increased generation and complexity, and trans-
boundary movement of hazardous wastes and other wastes,
Convinced that States should take necessary measures to ensure
that the management of hazardous wastes and other wastes including
182
Data and Documents
TABLE 6.3
Municipal Waste Treatment, by Selected Country
Collected
Country
(1000 tons)
Landfilled
Incinerated
Recycled
Composted
Algeria
8,500
99.9%
0.0%
0.1%
0.0%
Austria
4,588
6.7
21.1
26.5
44.7
Belarus
2,661
100.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
Belize
86
100.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
Brazil
57,563
62.7
0.3
1.4
4.1
Canada
13,375
73.3
0.0
26.8
12.5
Cuba
4,416
84.1
0.0
4.8
11.1
Denmark
3,618
5.1
54.0
25.6
15.3
France
33,963
36.0
33.8
15.8
14.3
Greece
4,710
91.9
0.0
8.1
0.0
Iceland
147
72.1
8.8
15.6
8.8
Ireland
2,847
66.1
0.0
33.9
0.0
Japan
54,367
3.4
74.0
16.8
0.0
Martinique
340
67.4
31.9
0.0
0.0
Monaco
40
56.5
n/a
3.7
n/a
Peru
4,740
65.7
n/a
14.7
n/a
Romania
6,865
97.5
0.0
2.5
0.0
Singapore
5,088
15.8
44.8
39.4
0.0
Tunisia
1,316
99.9
0.0
0.0
0.1
UK
35,077
64.3
8.4
17.4
9.3
US
222,863
54.3
13.6
23.8
8.4
Source: United Nations. Department of Economic and Social Affairs, Statistics Division [Online information; retrieved
February 15, 2008] http://unstats.un.org/unsd/ENVIRONMENT/wastetreatment.htm.
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
their transboundary movement and disposal is consistent with the pro-
tection of human health and the environment whatever the place of
disposal,
Noting that States should ensure that the generator should carry
out duties with regards to the transport and disposal of hazardous
wastes and other wastes in a manner that is consistent with the protec-
tion of the environment, whatever the place of disposal,
Fully Recognizing that any State has the sovereign right to ban the
entry or disposal of foreign hazardous wastes and other wastes in its
territory,
Recognizing also the increasing desire for the prohibition of trans-
boundary movements of hazardous wastes and their disposal in other
States, especially developing countries,
Convinced that hazardous wastes and other wastes should, as far
as compatible with environmentally sound and efficient management,
be disposed of in the State where they were generated,
Aware also that transboundary movements of such wastes from the
State of their generation to any other State should be permitted only
when conducted under conditions which do not endanger human
health and the environment, and under conditions in conformity with
the provisions of this Convention,
Waste Generation, Collection, and Treatment
183
TABLE 6.4
Hazardous Waste Generation, by Selected Country 
(1990–2005, in 1,000 tons)
Country
1990
1995
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
Armenia
—
—
2.0
1.6
1.2
420.4
544.7
—
Austria
316.8
595.0
1,034.8
1,025.7
920.2
—
1,014.0
—
Belarus
—
90.3
73.0
99.1
116.9
118.5
154.2
—
China
—
—
8,300.0
9,520.0
10,010.0
11,700.0
9,950.0
11,620.0
Denmark
—
179.0
183.4
200.1
247.5
328.3
342.0
340.5
Greece
450.0
350.0
391.0
326.4
352.7
353.8
—
—
Iceland
—
6.0
7.0
8.0
8.0
8.0  
8.0
—
Ireland
66.0
248.0
—
491.7
—
—
673.6
—
Italy
3,246.0
2,708.0
3,911.0
4,279.2
5,024.5
5,439.7
5,365.4
—
Monaco
—
0.3
0.3
0.3
0.6
—
—
—
Norway
200.0
650.0
673.0
655.0
—
825.0
940.0
939.0
Singapore
2.3
23.8
29.7 
38.4
42.4
43.0
38.2
37.1
Spain
1,708.0
3,394.0
3,063.4
3,222.9
3,222.9
3,222.9
3,534.3
—
UK
2,936.0
2,160.0
5,419.0
5,526.4
5,370.0
4,991.0
5,285.5
—
US
277,339.0
194,225.0 
—
37,033.2
—
27,375.0
—
34,788.4 
Source: United Nations. Department of Economic and Social Affairs, Statistics Division [Online information; retrieved
February 15, 2008] http://unstats.un.org/unsd/ENVIRONMENT/hazardous.htm.
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
Considering that enhanced control of transboundary movement of
hazardous wastes and other wastes will act as an incentive for their en-
vironmentally sound management and for the reduction of the volume
of such transboundary movement,
Convinced that States should take measures for the proper ex-
change of information on and control of the transboundary movement
of hazardous wastes and other wastes from and to those States,
Noting that a number of international and regional agreements
have addressed the issue of the protection and preservation of the en-
vironment with regard to the transit of dangerous goods,
Taking into account the Declaration of the United Nations Confer-
ence on the Human Environment (Stockholm, 1972), the Cairo Guide-
lines and Principles for the Environmentally Sound Management of
Hazardous Wastes adopted by the Governing Council of the United Na-
tions Environment Programme (UNEP) by decision 14/30 of 17 June
1987, the Recommendations of the United Nations Committee of Ex-
perts on the Transport of Dangerous Goods (formulated in 1957 and up-
dated biennially), relevant recommendations, declarations, instruments
and regulations adopted with the United Nations system and the work
and studies done within other international and regional organizations,
Mindful of the spirit, principles, aims and functions of the World
Charter for Nature adopted by the General Assembly of the United
Nations at its thirty-seventh session (1982) as the rule of ethics in re-
spect of the protection of the human environment and the conservation
of natural resources,
Affirming that States are responsible for the fulfilment of their in-
ternational obligations concerning the protection of human health and
protection and preservation of the environment, and are liable in accor-
dance with international law,
Recognizing that in the case of a material breach of the provisions
of this Convention or any protocol thereto the relevant international
law of treaties shall apply,
Aware of the need to continue the development and implementa-
tion of environmentally sound low-waste technologies, recycling op-
tions, good house-keeping and management systems with a view to
reducing to a minimum the generation of hazardous wastes and other
wastes,
Aware also of the growing international concern about the need for
stringent control of transboundary movement of hazardous wastes and
other wastes, and of the need as far as possible to reduce such move-
ment to a minimum,
Concerned about the problem of illegal transboundary traffic in
hazardous wastes and other wastes,
Taking into account also the limited capabilities of the developing
countries to manage hazardous wastes and other wastes,
184
Data and Documents
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
Recognizing the need to promote the transfer of technology for the
sound management of hazardous wastes and other wastes produced
locally, particularly to the developing countries in accordance with the
spirit of the Cairo Guidelines and decision 14/16 of the Governing
Council of UNEP on Promotion of the transfer of environmental pro-
tection technology,
Recognizing also that hazardous wastes and other wastes should be
transported in accordance with relevant international conventions and
recommendations, 
Convinced also that the transboundary movement of hazardous
wastes and other wastes should be permitted only when the transport
and ultimate disposal of such wastes is environmentally sound.
Source: Secretariat of the Basel Convention. [Online information; re-
trieved 2/16/08.] www.basel.int.
Hazardous Waste Dumping
Late at night on August 19, 2006, the vessel Probo Koala illegally
dumped hazardous waste at various sites in Abidjan, Cote
d’Ivoire, including areas close to water sources and a lagoon,
killing several persons and sickening thousands of residents. An
investigation by the government’s antipollution laboratory later
found that the dumped material included volatile pollutants that
reach humans and animals through the air and drinking water and
accumulate in the food chain. Several reports indicated that the
dumping had been authorized by public authorities who believed
it was sewage, resulting in a political crisis that led to the dissolu-
tion of the African nation’s cabinet. Officials announced that they
did not have the capacity to deal with the damage, requesting in-
ternational assistance estimated to reach more than $13.5 million
for the short- and medium-term response to the dumping.
Three months later, the United Nations under-secretary gen-
eral, who also serves as the director of the United Nations Envi-
ronment Programme, spoke at the opening of the Eighth
Conference of the Parties to the Basel Convention about the inci-
dent. The international agreement, outlined in Chapter 3, is con-
sidered to be an initial effort to curb hazardous waste dumping,
especially among poor countries that are not equipped to deal
with this problem. In this excerpt from the opening address, the
incident is raised in the context of both the convention and the
growing problem of electronic waste.
Hazardous Waste Dumping
185
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
Speech by Achim Steiner to the 
Opening of the Eighth Conference of 
the Parties to the Basel Convention, 
Nairobi, Kenya (November 27, 2006)
This week’s meeting will address many issues not least the rising tide
of electronic or e-waste, but it would be impossible for me not to refer
to the tragic events in Cote D’Ivoire.
This case of hazardous waste dumping in one of the poorest coun-
tries on the globe serves as a reminder of the importance of the Basel
Convention and the need to re-invigorate and re-new its vital regional
and global role.
It also serves as a reminder that even the best laws are only as
strong as the enforcement mechanisms and willingness of governments
to act.
Ladies and gentlemen, the need for Basel is ever more evident in
this globalized world and not just because of Cote D’Ivoire.
Accelerating trade in goods and materials across borders and
Continents is one of the defining features of the early 21st century.
Another is the globalized phenomenon of consumerism and what
one might call “built in obsolescence”—the relative cheapness of high
technology products like mobile phones and computers—the way fash-
ion is driving the purchasing and discarding of products in a way un-
known a generation ago.
Consumerism is driving economies but also drives a growing
mountain of e-waste not only from North to the South but South-
South—waste with a wide range of pollutants from heavy metals to
chlorine compounds. . . .
One of the great challenges of our time is to collectively agree on
what is waste and what are second-hand products—this question ex-
tends to end-of-life ships as much as to electronic goods.
Unless we get to grips with this, we are always going to be like
the proverbial dog chasing its tail. . . .
I sincerely hope that the tragedy in Cote D’Ivoire and the chal-
lenges of e-waste will serve as a wake up call to the Parties of the Basel
Convention and other related treaties.
The failings in the Cote D’Ivoire underscores the need for the in-
ternational environmental and development community to echo to the
High Level Panel’s conclusions by focusing and intelligently deploying
the legal and other instruments at our disposal. . . .
We have this instrument called Basel. Let us support it practically,
politically and financially to achieve its full potential in our common
pursuit of overcoming poverty and achieving sustainability on this
wonderful planet Earth.
186
Data and Documents
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
Source: United Nations Environment Programme. [Online article; re-
trieved 10/16/07.] http://www.unep.org/Documents.Multilingual/
Default.print.asp?DocumentID=495&ArticleID=5433&1=en.
National Priorities List 
of Waste Site Actions
The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency is responsible for de-
veloping a list of hazardous waste sites under the Superfund pro-
gram established by the Comprehensive Environmental Response,
Compensation and Liability Act in 1980. The EPA conducts a re-
view under the Hazard Ranking System and addresses public
comments to determine whether the site warrants further investi-
gation to assess the nature and extent of human health and envi-
ronmental risks prior to any remedial actions. The National
Priorities List (NPL) includes three types of locations: sites pro-
posed for listing, sites finalized on the list, and sites deleted from
the NPL. The data in Table 6.5, covering the fiscal years 1995
through 2007, show that far more sites have been proposed and
then finalized on the NPL than have been deleted through com-
pletion of Superfund remediation projects.
“Seven New (Garbage) 
Wonders of the World”
Many lists identify what are considered the “wonders of the
world,” both ancient and modern. Most represent architectural
achievements such as the pyramids of Giza, the only structure
still standing from the original list of seven wonders, or in con-
temporary lists, sites such as the Sydney Opera House or the
Statue of Liberty in New York. Writer Aaron Labaree has devel-
oped his own list of the seven wonders of the garbage world in
conjunction with Ann Leonard, an anti-incinerator advocate who
has traveled widely over the last 20 years visiting trash and
waste sites. The following list is extracted from Labaree’s 2006 ar-
ticle on the world’s waste.
“Seven New (Garbage) Wonders of the World”
187
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
1. The Eastern Garbage Patch, Pacific Ocean
Turning and turning in a widening gyre is a field of floating plas-
tic trash bigger than Texas. Probably the world’s largest dump,
the EGP is about halfway between San Francisco and Hawaii, an
area where weak winds and sluggish currents cause flotsam and
jetsam from around the Ocean to collect. The trash comes mostly
from land but also from loads lost or jettisoned by ships. One re-
searcher recounts sailing for a week and being able to see plastic
trash floating from horizon to horizon.
2. Fresh Kills Landfill, Staten Island, USA
As every schoolboy knows, there are two man-made structures
visible from space: one kept the Mongol hordes out of China, one
received New York’s garbage for fifty years. Fresh Kills is now
sealed up and the City of New York plans to turn it into a park, but
its sheer size earns it a place on this list. It is one of the largest man-
made structures on the planet, 225 feet at its highest point and 
188
Data and Documents
TABLE 6.5
National Priorities List Site Actions, by Year 
(1995–2007)
Partial
Construction
Year
Proposed
Finalized
Deleted
Deletions*
Completions
1995
9
31
25
0
68
1996
27
13
34
0
64
1997
20
18
32
6
88
1998
34
17
20
7
87
1999
37
43
23
3
85
2000
40
39
19
5
87
2001
45
29
30
4
47
2002
9
19
17
7
42
2003
24
20
9
7
40
2004
26
11
16
7
40
2005
12
18
18
5
40
2006
10
11
7
3
40
2007
5
5
6
3
11
*These statistics represent the total number of partial deletions by fiscal year and may include multiple partial dele-
tions at a site.
Source: U.S. Environmental Protection Agency [Online information; retrieved September 11, 2007.] http://
www.epa.gov/superfund/sites/query/queryhtm/nplfy.htm.
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
covering 2,200 acres; during its peak intake in the mid-eighties, it
received 29,000 tons of garbage a day.
3. Roro Asbestos Dump, Jkarkhand, India
Asbestos mines in the Roro hills in central India closed down in
1983, and since then a gigantic pile of mining waste has lain there
unattended, slowing spreading downhill into nearby paddy
fields. About 700,000 tons of leftover asbestos and the rock it was
mined from form a toxic mini-mountain on the hills. While Roro
can’t compete with the other Wonders for scale, the striking image
it presents of an open geologic-formation-size heap of a substance
which in this country is handled by people in full-body suits puts
it on the list. Preliminary studies show major health effects on the
local population, although the results are complicated by the fact
that many of them used to work in the mine itself.
4. Smoky Mountain, Manila, Philippines
Officially shut down in 1995, this garbage dump (its picturesque
name comes from the clouds of methane that rose above it when
it was active) for decades provided a livelihood for thousands of
people who lived on or near it. Smoky Mountain makes the list
because of its fame; it has probably been surpassed in size and
relevance by other sites in Manila, where as many as 150,000 peo-
ple, many of them migrants from the provinces, make their living
scavenging trash. Men, women, and children alike live by the
dumps in some of the world’s worst slums. In the year 2000, over
three hundred people were killed when one of the faces of Pay-
atas dump collapsed.
5. Shipbreaking Yards, Alang, India
Every year hundreds of big ships are retired and sent to Asia for
scrap. They are often dismantled on what were once pristine
beaches, by workers with no protection from toxic materials.
Conditions at Alang have somewhat improved in the last few
years and it may soon lose its place on this list to an enormous
planned shipbreaking site on Vodarevu Beach, which would
cover an area of over 160 football fields. But it’s still impressive.
Leonard says of her visit a few years ago, “It is the closest thing I
have ever seen to what I picture hell to look like. Miles of filthy
shoreline, gigantic tankers beached and being stripped of any
valuable parts. There is smoking oil, huge chunks of metals,
flames all over. Thousands of barely clad workers crawl all over
“Seven New (Garbage) Wonders of the World”
189
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
these hulking ships with flame torches or primitive tools. Big
pieces of metal fall and many [workers] lose their limbs. Some of
these sites average a worker death a day.”
6. Yucca Mountain, Nevada, USA
Exploratory work has begun on this repository for nearly all of
the U.S.’s nuclear waste, which if completed would be a wonder
that no living thing would ever see. Over 70,000 tons of radioac-
tive material must be isolated for at least 10,000 years to avoid a
potential toxic cataclysm. To do this, canisters of waste would be
carried into the mountain by rail car, and remote-controlled
equipment would put the canisters on supports in the under-
ground tunnel. . . . 1,000 feet below the mountain’s surface. The
project is set to be completed by 2017, and costs are estimated in
the tens of billions. Nevadans are not happy about the idea and
have not been won over by the cartoon character used to promote
the plan to children, Yucca Mountain Johnny.
7. Electronic Waste Dumps, Guiyu, China
This small area near China’s East Coast is a major destination for
North America’s electronic waste. While not as visually impres-
sive as some of the other Wonders, the villages in the area process
an incredible amount of computer waste. As many as 100,000
people are employed in this way, most of them rural migrant
workers. In every neighborhood, in back streets, outside the
town by the river, piles of electronic waste are dismantled by
hand. In one small village, the residents make their living en-
tirely by burning wires to recover copper. Such huge quantities of
toxic e-waste have passed through the area that sediment sam-
ples taken near the river show levels of dangerous metals like tin
and lead at hundreds of times the EPA threshold.
Source: Labaree, Aaron. 2006. “Seven New (Garbage) Wonders of the
World.” New York Inquirer. [Online article; retrieved 4/11/07.] http://
www.nyinquirer.com/nyinquirer/2006/11/seven_new_garba.html.
World’s Most Polluted Places, 2006
In 2006, the Blacksmith Institute issued the first-ever list of the
world’s most polluted places, identifying the top 10 locations
where toxic waste severely affects human health, especially that
190
Data and Documents
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
of children. The list was compiled from more than 300 sugges-
tions that had been submitted to the group, which were then re-
duced to 35 sites for further research. The environmental and
health experts who serve on the organization’s technical advi-
sory board used a scoring system developed for this purpose to
weigh pollution conditions in terms of their impact on health, in-
cluding the size of the affected population. With the exception of
Chernobyl, Ukraine, most Americans are not likely familiar with
any of these waste sites, which represent the “Brown Agenda” of
long-term pollution.
The final list, in alphabetical order, includes the following lo-
cations and a brief explanation of why they were selected and
what is being done.
Chernobyl, Ukraine
The site of the world’s worst nuclear disaster on April 26, 1986,
was selected because of its residual environmental impact, as
well as its potential to further affect such an extensive region and
population. An estimated 5.5 million people were initially af-
fected when testing at the nuclear power plant triggered a melt-
down of the reactor’s core. Currently, a 19-mile, uninhabited
exclusion zone surrounds the facility, where the reactor is buried
in a concrete casing designed to absorb radiation and contain the
remaining nuclear fuel. Implementation of an integrated radio-
active waste management program to ensure consistent manage-
ment and facility capacity needs to be assessed before further
development can take place. Remediation costs have been esti-
mated at hundreds of billions of dollars.
Dzerzhinsk, Russia
Cold War–era chemicals and toxic by-products used in chemical
weapons manufacturing have led to a reduction in life ex-
pectancy in this area, where an estimated 300,000 people may be
affected. The average life expectancy for men is 42 years and for
women is 47 years. Almost 300,000 tons of chemical waste were
improperly disposed of from 1930 to 1998, leading to ground-
water contamination. The chemicals have turned the water into a
white sludge containing dioxins and high levels of phenol that
are reportedly 17 million times the safe limit. Efforts are being
undertaken to install new water systems and to evaluate the ex-
tent of groundwater contamination; the city’s residents are still
employed in factories that produce toxic chemicals.
World’s Most Polluted Places, 2006
191
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
Haina, Dominican Republic
Also known as Bajos de Haina, this closed-down automobile bat-
tery recycling center is a waste hot spot where lead poisoning po-
tentially affects 85,000 people. Birth deformities; eye damage;
learning and personality disorders; and, in some cases, death
from lead poisoning have been reported at a higher than normal
rate because of past contamination from the Metaloxa company’s
operations, which ended in March 1997. Cleanup activity is in the
early planning stages; the nation’s Secretary of Environment and
Natural Resources post was not created until 2000.
Kabwe, Zambia
Nearly a quarter of a million people are potentially affected by
the lead and cadmium waste and dust in Kabwe, the second-
largest city in Zambia. It is situated in the country’s copper belt,
where rich deposits of lead were discovered in 1902 and smelters
were built to process the ore. Until 1994, the operations were not
regulated by the government, during which time heavy metals
were released into the air as dust particles and slag heaps of min-
ing wastes were created. Children still play in the contaminated
soil, and young men scavenge the mines for scraps of metal. The
levels of lead found in residents’ blood are as much as 20 times
higher than permissible blood levels in the United States. The
cleanup of the area is still in the primary stages and must begin
with educating the community about the risks of lead poisoning.
Residents in some parts of the area may need to relocate; the
World Bank has approved a $20 million grant to clean up the city.
La Oroya, Peru
The Missouri-based Doe Run Corporation owns a poly-metallic
smelter in this town in the Peruvian Andes, home to about 35,000
people. The plant began operating in 1922, and since that time, res-
idents have been exposed to toxic levels of lead. An estimated 99
percent of the children in La Oroya have blood lead levels that ex-
ceed acceptable amounts, the government reports, a condition that
can cause diminished mental development. Sulfur dioxide con-
centrations also exceed the World Health Organization’s emissions
standards by 10-fold. Vegetation in the area has been destroyed by
acid rain created by these emissions, and lead and other metals are
still being deposited while the plant is in operation. The extent of
soil contamination has not been studied, and no plan for reduction
of emissions has been agreed upon or implemented.
192
Data and Documents
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
Linfen, China
Linfen, located in Shanxi Province in the heart of China’s coal belt,
provides about two-thirds of the nation’s energy. China’s urgent
need for coal has resulted in hundreds of illegal and unregulated
mining operations. The waste and emissions from the coal mines,
steel factories, and tar factories produce choking dust that has
fouled waterways; water is rationed to the extent that even the
provincial capital receives water for only a few hours each day.
Linfen is considered the city with the worst air quality in China,
with local clinics seeing a growing number of cases of bronchitis,
pneumonia, and lung cancer. Arsenicosis, an environmental dis-
ease caused by drinking water with elevated concentrations of ar-
senic that results in skin lesions, peripheral vascular disease,
hypertension, blackfoot disease, and a high risk of cancers, is also
being seen in epidemic proportions. No information is available
indicating whether this site is being cleaned up at this time.
Mailuu-Suu, Kyrgyzstan
Scattered throughout this area are 23 tailing dumps and 13 waste
rock dumps, where a uranium plant was in operation from 1946
to 1968. More than 10,000 tons of uranium ore were produced
and processed to build the former Soviet Union’s first atomic
bomb. An estimated 1.96 million cubic meters of radioactive min-
ing waste threatens one of Central Asia’s most fertile and densely
populated valleys. Compounding the waste problem is the fact
that this is an area of high seismic activity, and natural hazards
such as landslides and mudflows could potentially exacerbate
the failure of waste containment. It is feared that an earthquake
or other event could disturb one of the dumps to expose ra-
dioactive material; in 2002, a huge mudslide blocked the course
of the Mailuu-Suu River near the mine tailings. A similar event
could contaminate water sources, affecting hundreds of thou-
sands of people. The World Bank estimates the cost of isolating
and protecting the uranium waste at $11.76 million.
Norilsk, Russia
In 1935, Norilsk was founded as a slave labor camp. It is the
northernmost city in Russia, with a population of about 135,000,
and the second-largest city above the Arctic Circle. It is home to
the world’s largest heavy metal smelting complex and the
world’s largest producer of nickel. Because of its location, which
is off-limits to foreigners, it has been difficult for researchers to
World’s Most Polluted Places, 2006
193
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
know much about the facilities there, although the site is consid-
ered one of the most polluted in Russia. It has been shut down to
outside visitors since November 2001, one of 90 “closed towns”
in Russia where Cold War–era secrecy persists.
Ranipet, India
Ranipet is a medium-size town in an area where 3.5 million peo-
ple are at risk from a facility that manufactures sodium chromate,
chromium salts, and chromium sulfate powder used in local tan-
ning operations. The Tamil Nadu Pollution Control Board esti-
mates that about 1.5 million tons of solid wastes accumulated
over two decades of plant operations, stacked in an open yard, 3
to 5 meters high on 2 hectares of land. The facility was closed
down by the government in 1996 after farmers complained the
fields were toxic to agriculture and that they became sickened
when they came into contact with the water they used to irrigate
their fields. Studies show the solid waste could be dealt with by
encapsulating it to prevent further leaching into the soil and
groundwater, and plans are underway to design a remediation
program for the site.
Rudnaya Pristan/Dalnegorsk, Russia
These two towns are located in the Russian Far East and are
home to an old lead smelter and mining activities that have pro-
duced dangerous levels of lead in the soil, dust, air, and drinking
water. Since 1930, no attempts have been made to address the
90,000 residents’ health concerns, and most are unaware of the
risks they face. Some use old casings from submarine batteries
that were recycled by the smelter in order to collect rain to water
their gardens. The site has now been voluntarily shut down, and
children in the towns have had their blood tested to look for ex-
cessive lead concentrations. Funding has also been obtained to
support a public education program.
Source: Blacksmith Institute. 2006. “World’s Worst Polluted Places.”
[Online information; retrieved 6/21/07.] www.blacksmithinstitute.org.
194
Data and Documents
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
How Much Paper Is Recycled? 
What Happens to Old Newspapers?
Although the statistics on recycling of many materials shows a
general decline, paper and paperboard recovery reached record
levels in 2006, increasing to more than 53 percent. The U.S. figures
are nearly 8 percent higher than a decade before, when levels were
less than 50 percent. Old newspapers can have a second life, too,
according to the American Forest & Paper Association (http://
stats.paperrecycles.org), which studies recycling patterns. They
can be used to produce a variety of new products, as shown in
Table 6.6 and Table 6.7. About one-fourth of the nation’s old news-
paper is exported, while one-third is made back into newsprint.
What Do You Do with Waste Carpet?
Chapter 2 explores the problems of dealing with a unique type of
recyclable—waste carpet—and the efforts that began in 2002 to
increase the amount of carpet that was recycled or diverted from
What Do You Do with Waste Carpet?
195
TABLE 6.6
Supply and Recovery of Paper and Paperboard, 1993–2006 
(in 1,000 tons)
Year
Supply 
Recovered
Recovery Rate
1993
91,538 
35,460
38.70%
1994
95,718
39,691
41.50
1995
95,971
42,189
44.00
1996
94,529
43,076
45.60
1997
99,557
43,989
44.20
1998
101,183
45,076
44.60
1999
105,316
46,818
44.50
2000
102,810
47,311
46.00
2001
97,395
46,996
48.30
2002
98,949
47,645
48.20
2003
98,016
49,255
50.30
2004
101,882
50,287
49.40
2005
99,618
51,272
51.50
2006
100,198
53,488
53.40
Source: American Forest and Paper Association [Online article; retrieved September 11, 2007.] http://stats.paper-
recycles.org.
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
landfills by 2012. The industry admits that the first five years of
the project, the Carpet America Recovery Effort, have not met its
expectations, but the agreement that was reached by the parties
does indicate the potential for stewardship of this bulky and ex-
pensive-to-handle waste product. Table 6.8 indicates the project’s
goals and successes thus far.
Recycling Fun Facts
The Can Manufacturers Institute (CMI) is a national industry
trade group that represents the metal and composite can manu-
196
Data and Documents
TABLE 6.7
Use Statistics for Old Newspapers, 2006
(in 1,000 tons)
Product
Consumption by Share of End Use
Share of Total
Containerboard
1
0.00%
Recycled paperboard
1,172
12.30%
Tissue
698
7.40%
Newsprint
3,213
33.60%
Printing-Writing
353
3.70%
All Other
1,615
16.90%
Net Exports 
2,513
26.30%
TOTAL
9,565
100.00%
Source: American Forest & Paper Association [Online information; retrieved September 11, 2007.] http://stats.pa-
perrecycles.org/index.php?graph=oldnews&x=70&y=11.
TABLE 6.8
Postconsumer Carpet Recycling and Diversion, 2002–2006 
Millions of Pounds
Percent of Total Discards
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
Total 
4,678
4,828
4,537
5,038
5,261
—
—
—
—
—
Discards
Recycled
46.2
86.8
98.4
194.3
239.5
1.0%
1.8%
2.2%
3.9%
4.6%
Diverted
57.2
93.7
108.2
224.6
260.9
1.2%
1.9%
2.4%
4.5%
5.0%
Source: Carpet America Annual Report, May 17, 2007 [Online information; retrieved July 10, 2007.]
http://www.carpetrecovery.org/pdf/annual_report/06_CARE-annual-rpt.pdf.
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
facturing sectors of business. The group was formed in 1938 to
serve as the voice of its members in influencing legislative, regu-
latory, and administrative policy, including environmental
awareness. CMI also promotes community recycling involve-
ment and provides statistical information on can production.
This list of 15 interesting tidbits about cans and recycling pro-
vides the context for understanding the role of aluminum and
metal cans in the waste stream.
1. Recycling aluminum cans saves 95 percent of the en-
ergy used to make aluminum cans from virgin ore.
2. Aluminum cans are the most recycled beverage con-
tainer in the world, with 105,800 cans recycled every
minute in the United States.
3. Used aluminum cans are recycled and returned to a
store shelf as a new can in as few as 60 days.
4. Americans earn about $1 billion a year recycling alu-
minum cans.
5. The aluminum can recycling rate is better than one out
of two cans.
6. Using recycled aluminum beverage cans to produce
new cans allows the aluminum can industry to make up
to 20 times more cans for the same amount of energy.
7. Since 1972, an estimated 1,099 billion aluminum cans
have been recycled, which, if placed end to end, could
stretch to the moon and back about 174 times.
8. The average employee consumes 2.5 cans of soda each
day at work.
9. Recycling one aluminum can saves enough energy to
run a television for three hours.
10. A baby is born every three seconds, and in that same
time, 140 cans are produced.
11. The average American family recycles 150 six-packs of
aluminum cans a year.
12. Americans drink an average of 380 beverages in alu-
minum cans each year.
13. Recycling 1 ton of aluminum cans saves the equivalent
in energy of 2,350 gallons of gasoline.
14. Recycling 1 ton of aluminum cans saves the equivalent
of the amount of electricity used by the typical home
over a period of 10 years.
Recycling Fun Facts
197
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
15. Recycling aluminum creates 97 percent less water pol-
lution than producing new metal from ore.
Source: Can Manufacturers Institute. “Recycling Fun Facts.” [Online in-
formation; retrieved 9/11/07.] http://www.cancentral.com/funFacts.
cfm.
U.S. Beverage Container Recycling Scorecard
Containers and packaging form the largest segment of municipal
solid waste and beverage containers comprise nearly 15 percent
of all packaging. The nonprofit Container Recycling Institute
(CRI) and the social change organization As You Sow produced a
report, Waste and Opportunity, U.S. Beverage Container Recycling
Scorecard and Report, that analyzes the recycling loop from the
production, sale, and recovery of beverage containers. The report
notes that increased recycling efforts have been unable to match
the increases in beverage sales, resulting in a decline in recycling
from 53.5 percent in 1992 to 33.5 percent in 2004. These numbers
are important because organizations are trying to promote cor-
porate accountability, social justice, and environmental protec-
tion. Groups such as the CRI are also attempting to shift the costs
associated with manufacturing, recycling, and disposing of con-
tainer and packaging waste (both social and environmental) from
government and taxpayers to producers and consumers.
The organizations’ October 2006 study, authored primarily
by Nishkita Bakashi, the research director of As You Sow’s Cor-
porate Social Responsibility Program, graded efforts by bever-
age producers on four core criteria: the inclusion of recycled
content in beverage containers; involvement in beverage con-
tainer recovery; involvement in container recycling; and source
reduction of plastics, aluminum, and glass. Twelve beverage
companies were graded using publicly available information
from annual reports and Web sites and on the basis of a survey
used in the study, as seen in Table 6.9. PepsiCo led the compa-
nies because it met its goal of using 10 percent recycled content
in its plastic carbonated soft drink and water bottles in the
United States by the end of 2005. But overall, virtually no action
is being taken to significantly increase beverage container re-
covery and reduce waste.
198
Data and Documents
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
The Nuclear Waste Debate
Although nuclear power has a number of advantages in helping
the world deal with its demand for energy, controversies over how
to deal with nuclear waste have limited its use and development
in many nations, including the United States, as explained in
Chapter 3. Nuclear waste is stored in a variety of facilities, such as
independent spent fuel storage installations in 30 states. The Nu-
clear Regulatory Commission deals with these sites, and the U.S.
Department of Energy manages another group of sites that handle
low-level waste from hospitals, universities, and power plants that
fall into the lowest-hazard class (waste that decays to nonradio-
active levels within 100 years). Three active, low-level-designated
waste sites are in operation in the United States: Richland, Wash-
ington; Barnwell, South Carolina; and Clive, Utah. These facilities
are controversial because they accept low-level waste from other
states through multistate compacts. The site in Washington accepts
waste from 11 northwestern and Rocky Mountain states; the South
Carolina facility has been accepting waste from 38 states and
Washington, D.C., but in July 2008 began limiting the waste it ac-
cepted to shipments from New Jersey, Connecticut, and in-state
The Nuclear Waste Debate
199
TABLE 6.9
U.S. Beverage Container Recycling Scorecard and Report, 2006
Recycled
Recovery and
Source Grade
Company
Content
Recycling
Reduction
GPA
PepsiCo
B
C+
D+
2.3
Coca-Cola
D
C+
B
2.1
Miller Brewing
D
D–
D
0.9
New Belgium Brewery
C
F
F
0.7
Coors
D+
D–
F
0.7
Anheuser-Busch
F
D
D
0.7
Polar Beverages
F
D
F
0.6
Starbucks
D
F
F
0.3
Nestle Waters
F
F
F
0.1
Cadbury Schweppes
F
F
F
0.0
Cott
F
F
F
0.0
National Beverage
F
F
F
0.0
Source: U.S. Beverage Container Recycling Scorecard and Report, October 2006 [Online information; retrieved Sep-
tember 11, 2007.] http://www.container-recycling.org/assets/pdfs/reports/2006-scorecard.pdf.
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
sources. This means that the privately owned Utah facility will be
the only one accepting waste from nuclear generators in 36 states.
Yucca Mountain
One of the milestones in the development of U.S. nuclear waste
policy was a decision by President George W. Bush to designate
Yucca Mountain, Nevada, as a repository for spent nuclear fuel
and waste, as seen in the February 15, 2002, White House mes-
sage that follows. The action, although not unexpected at the
time, came as the result of contentious debate over the Nuclear
Waste Policy Act and efforts by Nevada’s political leaders to stop
the facility from being sited in their state. Gov. Kenny Guinn,
who testified frequently before Congress on the Yucca Mountain
issue, has been one of the harshest critics of the project. In the se-
lection excerpted from his April 25, 2002, statement before two
congressional subcommittees (appearing below the president’s
200
Data and Documents
TABLE 6.10
Locations of U.S. Independent Spent Fuel Storage Installations
(by State, as of February 2008)
Alabama: Brown’s Ferry, Farley
Minnesota: Prairie Island
Arizona: Palo Verde
Mississippi: Grand Gulf
Arkansas: Arkansas Nuclear
Nebraska: Ft. Calhoun
California: Diablo Canyon, Rancho Seco, 
New Jersey: Hope Creek, Oyster Creek
San Onofre, Humboldt Bay
New York: James A. FitzPatrick
Colorado: Fort St. Vrain
North Carolina: McGuire
Connecticut: Haddam Neck, Millstone
Ohio: Davis-Besse
Georgia: Hatch
Oregon: Trojan
Idaho: Department of Energy, Idaho Spent Fuel Facility
Pennsylvania: Susquehanna, Peach Bottom
Illinois: GE Morris, Dresden, Quad Cities
South Carolina: Oconee, H. B. Robinson
Iowa: Duane Arnold
Tennessee: Sequoyah
Louisiana: River Bend
Utah: Private Fuel Storage
Maine: Maine Yankee
Virginia: Surry, North Anna
Maryland: Calvert Cliffs
Washington: Columbia Generating Station
Massachusetts: Yankee Rowe
Wisconsin: Point Beach
Michigan: Big Rock Point, Palisades
Source: U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission [Online article or information; retrieved February 15, 2008.] www.nrc.
gov/waste/spent-fuel-storage/locations.html.
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
message), Guinn makes clear his disagreements with both the
science behind the project and the long-term issues it poses. He
calls upon Congress to allow his gubernatorial veto of the site se-
lection to stand. Political leaders in Nye County, Nevada, in con-
trast, have been among the few who have favored the Yucca
Mountain site. The July 20, 2004 resolution, of the Nye County
Board of County Commissioners (the third excerpt in this sec-
tion) portrays an entirely different perspective of the repository
and the officials’ support for the project. The Nuclear Age Peace
Foundation in Santa Barbara, California, provides still another
view of the Yucca Mountain project and reasons why it opposes
the Department of Energy’s plan to transport waste to the facility
(the final selection).
Excerpts from a Letter from the 
President to the Speaker of the House 
of Representatives and the President 
of the Senate, February 15, 2002
Dear Mr. Speaker:
In accordance with section 114 of the Nuclear Waste Policy Act of
1982, 42 U.S.C. 10134 (the “Act”), the Secretary of Energy has recom-
mended approval of the Yucca Mountain site for the development at
that site of a repository for the geologic disposal of spent nuclear fuel
and high level nuclear waste from the Nation’s defense activities. As is
required by the Act, the Secretary has also submitted to me a compre-
hensive statement of the basis of his recommendation.
Having received the Secretary’s recommendation and the compre-
hensive statement of the basis of it, I consider the Yucca Mountain site
qualified for application for a construction authorization for a reposi-
tory. Therefore I now recommend the Yucca Mountain site for this pur-
pose. In accordance with section 114 of the Act, I am transmitting with
this recommendation to the Congress a copy of the comprehensive
statement of the basis of the Secretary’s recommendation prepared
pursuant to the Act. The transmission of this document triggers an ex-
pedited process described in the Act. I urge the Congress to undertake
any necessary legislative action on this recommendation in an expe-
dited and bipartisan fashion.
Proceeding with the repository program is necessary to protect
public safety, health, and the Nation’s security because successful com-
pletion of this project would isolate in a geologic repository at a remote
The Nuclear Waste Debate
201
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
location highly radioactive materials now scattered throughout the Na-
tion. In addition, the geologic repository would support our national
security through disposal of nuclear waste from our defense facilities.
A deep geologic repository, such as Yucca Mountain, is important
for our national security and our energy future. Nuclear energy is the
second largest source of U.S. electricity generation and must remain a
major component of our national energy policy in the years to come.
The cost of nuclear power compares favorably with the costs of elec-
tricity generation by other sources, and nuclear power has none of the
emissions associated with coal and gas power plants.
This recommendation, if it becomes effective, will permit com-
mencement of the next rigorous stage of scientific and technical review
of the repository through formal licensing proceedings before the Nu-
clear Regulatory Commission. Successful completion of this program
will also redeem the clear Federal obligation safely to dispose of com-
mercial spent nuclear fuel that the Congress passed in 1982.
This recommendation is the culmination of two decades of intense
scientific scrutiny involving application of an array of scientific and
technical disciplines necessary and appropriate for this challenging un-
dertaking. It is an undertaking that was mandated twice by the Con-
gress when it legislated the obligations that would be redeemed by
successful pursuit of the repository program. Allowing this recommen-
dation to come into effect will enable the beginning of the next phase
of intense scrutiny of the project necessary to assure the public health,
safety, and security in the area of Yucca Mountain, and also to enhance
the safety and security of the Nation as a whole.
Sincerely,
George W. Bush
Source: White House. [Online press release; retrieved 4/17/07.] www.
whitehouse.gov/news/releases/2002.
Excerpts from the Statement of Kenny C.
Guinn, Governor of the State of Nevada,
before the U.S. House of Representatives,
Committee on Transportation and
Infrastructure Subcommittees on 
Railroads and Transportation and 
Hazardous Materials, April 25, 2002
As is well known by this time, Nevada considers the Yucca Mountain
project to be the product of extremely bad science, extremely bad law,
202
Data and Documents
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
and extremely bad public policy. Moreover, implementing this ill-
conceived project will expose tens of millions of Americans to unneces-
sary nuclear transport risks. For these reasons we in Nevada believe,
and ask, that Congress should take no further action with respect to
the Yucca Mountain project.
I would like to briefly call the Committee’s attention to a new doc-
ument, a key document, which has now appeared from within the sci-
entific community that excoriates the scientific work of the Department
of Energy (DOE) in connection with Yucca Mountain. Numerous inde-
pendent scientific reviewers have now evaluated the project during the
past year, and all have reached the same conclusion: There is nowhere
near enough information to certify the suitability of the Yucca Mountain
site for high-level nuclear waste disposal, and the information that is
available suggests the site is woefully unsuitable geologically.
This latest report, however, reaches shocking new conclusions. It is a
peer review report commissioned by DOE from the International Atomic
Energy Agency and the Nuclear Energy Agency (IAEA) of the Organiza-
tion for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD). These agen-
cies assembled some of the world’s leading scientists to evaluate, over
several months, the total system performance of Yucca Mountain as rep-
resented by DOE and its computer models. Among other things, these
leading scientists concluded that DOE lacks sufficient information even to
build a model to predict the suitability and hydrogeologic performance of
the proposed repository. According to the peer review group, the water
flow system at Yucca Mountain is “not sufficiently understood to propose
a conceptual model for a realistic transport scenario.”
It is truly amazing to me, as an elected official, that DOE commis-
sioned this peer review report many months ago, and then made a
final “site suitability” determination to the President and the Congress
in spite of its stunning conclusions. It shows once again, in my view,
that politics has long prevailed over science when it comes to Yucca
Mountain. This is another reason for Nevada to redouble its efforts to
stop this project—government bureaucrats seem unable to pull the
plug, even in the face of shocking independent evidence that the sci-
ence is bad or nonexistent.
Today, the President’s recommendation to move forward with
Yucca Mountain is heading down the path to finality, and only the
Congress can stop it by choosing not to override my recent, Congres-
sionally-authorized, site veto. If the matter of site suitability really
were up to the NRC, Nevada and the scores of independent scientists
alarmed by DOE’s premature and falsely based site recommendation
would be considerably reassured. But such is not the case.
If Congress overrides my veto and simply punts to the NRC, the
suitability of the Yucca Mountain site will never be independently re-
viewed by any government authority, barring a court order. We will
The Nuclear Waste Debate
203
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
seek that court order, but we believe Congress should accept its re-
sponsibility, recognize that the Yucca Mountain project is fatally flawed
on numerous fronts, and not act to override my veto.
Source: Office of Governor Kenny Guinn. [Online press release; retrieved
5/1/02.] http://gov.state.nv.us.
Nye County Resolution No. 2004-25 
RESOLUTION CONCERNING THE INTENT OF NYE COUNTY TO
TAKE ACTION TO MAXIMIZE THE SAFETY, ECONOMIC OPPOR-
TUNITY AND SUCCESSFUL OUTCOME OF THE YUCCA MOUN-
TAIN REPOSITORY AND TRANSPORTATION SYSTEM BY ACTIVELY
AND CONSTRUCTIVELY ENGAGING ALL RELEVANT PARTIES.
WHEREAS the Nuclear Waste Policy Act of 1982 as amended des-
ignates Yucca Mountain, located in Nye County, Nevada, as the only
site for consideration as the nation’s repository for high-level nuclear
waste and spent fuel; and
WHEREAS the site has been determined to be a suitable location
for a repository, the U.S. Court of Appeal dismissed all challenges to
the site selection of Yucca Mountain, the scientific basis for the selec-
tion process and the constitutionality of the resolution approving Yucca
Mountain; and
WHEREAS the Department of Energy is preparing a license appli-
cation for the repository and expects to begin operation beginning in
2010; and
WHEREAS the Department intends to use rail transportation, the
mode of transportation Nye County prefers, to the maximum extent
possible and the Department has made progress in planning the trans-
portation by selecting the Caliente route; and
WHEREAS the Department is beginning the process of identify-
ing repository and transportation facilities which could be located off-
site and is considering other means of maximizing local economic
opportunity; and
WHEREAS the Nye County “Community Protection Plan” has es-
tablished a vision for protecting the community and for the local devel-
opment of synergistic economic, scientific and education activities for
management and possible future reuse of material which will be stored
at Yucca Mountain; and
WHEREAS it is just such a vision for the Yucca Mountain Project
that offers the best long term prospect for converting long-standing re-
sistance and mistrust within the state of Nevada to constructive en-
gagement and cooperation; and
204
Data and Documents
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
WHEREAS Nye County intends to work cooperatively with com-
munities along the Caliente route, the Department of Energy, and any
other appropriate group for the purpose of achieving this vision.
NOW THEREFORE, BE IT RESOLVED that Nye County intends
to fully, constructively and energetically support:
1.
Development of a safe repository at Yucca Mountain,
2.
Development of policy that empowers the County concerning
repository and transportation safety and health,
3.
Creation of synergistic scientific, engineering, education and
entrepreneurial economic opportunities in the County,
4.
Assisting the United States of America in fulfilling the com-
mitment to provide a geologic repository for spent nuclear
fuel and high-level waste to protect the health, safety and wel-
fare of the citizens of the United States,
5.
Assisting the United States Department of Energy in meeting
their timeline for the reception of spent nuclear fuel and high-
level waste at Yucca Mountain,
6.
Maximizing jobs and economic opportunities for Nye County
citizens,
7.
Working cooperatively with appropriate federal entities, rural
Nevada communities along the transportation route and other
parties willing to constructively engage in the development of
a repository that is safe and offers significant economic benefit
to Nye County and others most affected by the operation of a
repository and related transportation systems.
APPROVED this 20th day of July 2004.
Source: Nye County Board of Commissioners. [Online press release; re-
trieved 7/30/04.] http://www.nei.org/FileFolder/yucca_nye_county_
resolution_7-20-04.pdf.
Nuclear Age Peace Foundation’s Top Ten
Reasons to Oppose the DoE’s Yucca Mountain
Plan, David Krieger and Marissa Zubia, 
August 23, 2002
1. Accomplishes No Reasonable Objective.
Yucca Mountain does not eliminate on-site storage of nuclear
waste. After Yucca Mountain is full, there will still be 44,000 tons
of high-level nuclear waste stored on-site at reactors throughout
the country. There will also be 77,000 tons of such waste moving
around the U.S. over the next 30 years, traveling from one of 131
The Nuclear Waste Debate
205
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
sites an average of 2,000 miles per shipment to Yucca Mountain.
If the purpose of the Yucca Mountain project is to consolidate
the wastes, that goal will clearly not be achieved.
2. Provides Minimal Protection.
Yucca Mountain itself only provides a small portion of the
“protection” that the proposed site promises. The casks that
hold the waste are the actual protection, so why Yucca Moun-
tain at all?
3. Creates More Nuclear Waste.
Shipping the waste off-site will allow for the nuclear reactors
to continue creating more waste long after the contracts for
those sites were set to expire, thus continuing the cycle of pro-
ducing extremely dangerous waste that no one knows how to
safely dispose of. The nuclear industry has economic incen-
tives for moving the waste off-site from the reactors.
4. Adverse Effects on Future Generations.
The project is a distinct danger to defenseless citizens—not
just in this generation, but thousands of generations to come
will be affected by this decision. Plutonium-239, for example,
has a half-life of 24,400 years, which means that the wastes
will remain lethal for some 240,000 years.
5. Earthquake Danger.
Yucca Mountain is directly above an active magma pocket
and is the third most seismically active area in the United
States, with over 600 earthquakes of magnitude 2.5 or greater
on the Richter scale in the last 25 years alone. One such earth-
quake did over a million dollars worth of damage to the US
Department of Energy’s own testing facility! The most recent
earthquake on July 14, 2002 had a magnitude of 4.4.
6. Fifty Million People Endangered.
Routes will move through 734 counties across the United
States. The high-level radioactive waste contained in the casks
will endanger 50 million innocent people who live within 3
miles of the proposed shipment routes. Hospitals, schools,
businesses, emergency personnel, commuters, travelers and
passers-by will also cross paths with the shipments that will
move through the country at an average rate exceeding six
shipments per day. Community health facilities are not ade-
quately prepared or equipped to deal with mass exposure to
radioactive matter. To find out how close your residence or
place of work is to the proposed routes, enter your address at
www.mapscience.org.
7. Terrorist Attacks.
The proposed shipments to Yucca Mountain would move along
predictable routes through 44 states, and many metropolitan
206
Data and Documents
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
areas such as Atlanta (daily shipments), Chicago (every 15
hours), Denver (every 13 hours), and Salt Lake City (every 7
hours). They would provide tempting targets for terrorists.
8. Costly Accidents and Limited Liability.
For each spill that may occur (one out of every 300 shipments
is expected to have an accident) the cost of the clean-up is es-
timated conservatively at $6 billion. Thanks to Congress pass-
ing and repeatedly renewing the Price-Anderson Act, the
nuclear industry’s liability is limited. Taxpayers will pay the
bill for accidents even if they occur on reactor property.
9. Adverse Impact on Water Sources.
Yucca Mountain sits above the only source of drinking water
for the residents of Amargosa Valley. The aquifer below Yucca
Mountain provides water to Nevada’s third largest dairy
farm, which supplies milk to some 30 million people on the
west coast.
10. Violates Treaties.
Yucca Mountain is located on Native American land, belong-
ing to the Western Shoshone by the treaty of Ruby Valley. The
Western Shoshone National Council has declared this land a
nuclear free zone and demanded an end to nuclear testing
and the dumping of nuclear wastes on their land.
It defies reason that to expect that radioactive wastes will sit
for tens of thousands of years undisturbed by unpredictable
nature, by vengeful terrorists, or by human or technological
errors in the design of the containment structure itself. The
problem of what to do with high-level nuclear wastes war-
rants additional consideration and resources, including inves-
tigation of alternatives to Yucca Mountain. As an interim
solution, the wastes should be converted to dry-cask storage
and remain on-site where they were created.
Source: Krieger, David, and Marissa Zubia. [Online article; retrieved
9/22/07.] http://www.wagingpeace.org/articles/2002/08/23_
krieger_yucca-top10.htm.
The Nuclear Waste Debate
207
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
7
Directory of Organizations, 
Associations, and Agencies
T
his chapter includes entries from government agencies, in-
dustry and trade associations, and other nongovernmental
organizations involved in the broad spectrum of waste man-
agement activities. These organizations may focus on a specific
type of waste, such as hazardous waste, or on several types of
waste that are relevant to a business sector, such as nuclear
power plants or pulp and paper operations. The directory covers
U.S., Canadian, European, and globalized groups that deal with
international waste issues, such as toxic waste trading. Entries
exclude international telephone numbers because calling accessi-
bility varies from one country to another. Except for federal and
state agencies, each entry is accompanied by a brief description
of the group’s mission, activities, membership, or other identify-
ing notes. Although the information in this section was fact
checked prior to publication, it is important to remember that
with the growth of the Internet, Web sites change frequently and
suffixes and uniform resource locators (URLs) change often. Sim-
ilarly, organizations may change offices, area codes, suites, and
zip codes without warning, so some detective work may be re-
quired if contact information does not appear to be accurate.
U.S. Government Agencies
Numerous agencies deal with various types of waste at the 
federal level, although primary responsibility rests with the 
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). The EPA has regional
offices throughout the United States, and all have jurisdiction
209
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
over solid and hazardous waste. Radioactive waste issues are
usually handled by the U.S. Department of Energy, which also
deals with biomass waste. Other departments, such as Trans-
portation, deal with waste transfer issues, often in concert with
related programs under the Nuclear Regulatory Commission.
This brief listing identifies some of the major operations of fed-
eral agencies, although every department deals with waste in
some way, if only in implementing programs to handle in-house
waste.
U.S. Department of Energy
Biomass Program
1000 Independence Avenue, SW
Washington, DC 20585
Telephone: (202) 586-5188
Web site: www.eere.energy.gov/biomass/
Federal energy policy includes increasing the role of biomass
technologies that decrease U.S. dependence on foreign oil. Bio-
mass is considered a renewable form of energy that utilizes
residues from forests and mills that can be substituted for fossil
fuels. Biomass can also be used as fuel additives (such as ethanol)
and can help reduce greenhouse gases from the decomposition of
unused agricultural waste and wood.
U.S. Department of Energy
Office of Civilian Radioactive Waste Management
1000 Independence Avenue, SW
Washington, DC 20585
Telephone: (202) 586-4251
Web site: www.ymp.gov/
This program was established in 1982 under the Nuclear Waste
Policy Act to develop and manage a federal system for disposing
of spent nuclear fuel from commercial nuclear reactors and high-
level nuclear waste from national defense activities. Its opera-
tions include the Yucca Mountain site in Nye County, Nevada, a
science and technology program, and a waste acceptance and
transportation program headquartered in Washington, D.C.
210
Directory of Organizations, Associations, and Agencies
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
U.S. Department of Energy
Office of Environmental Management
1000 Independence Avenue, SW
Washington, DC 20585
Telephone: (202) 586-5363
Web site: www.em.doe.gov/
Risk reduction and cleanup of the U.S. nuclear weapons program
is the responsibility of this organization within the Department
of Energy. The staff operate under a mission completion philoso-
phy, working to close existing radioactive waste sites; secure and
store nuclear material in a stable, safe configuration in secure lo-
cations to protect national security; and transport and dispose of
transuranic and low-level wastes.
U.S. Department of Energy
Waste Isolation Pilot Plant
4021 National Parks Highway
Carlsbad, NM 88220
Telephone: (800) 336-9477
Web site: www.wipp.energy.gov/
The Waste Isolation Pilot Plant (WIPP) is a facility used to dis-
pose of defense-related radioactive waste located in the Chi-
huahuan Desert in New Mexico. The storage site began its waste
and disposal operation in March 1999. The site itself is not open
to public tours, but an exhibit at an information center in nearby
Carlsbad, called “The WIPP Experience,” features informative
displays and a documentary about the project.
U.S. Department of Transportation
Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration
1200 New Jersey Avenue, SE
Washington, DC 20590
Telephone: (800) 832-5660
Web site: www.fmcsa.dot.gov/
Established in 2000 as part of the U.S. Department of Transporta-
tion, this administration’s primary mission is to reduce incidents
involving large trucks and buses. The agency also serves as the
repository for information on nonradioactive hazardous material
and radioactive material routes.
U.S. Government Agencies
211
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW
Washington, DC 20460
Telephone: (202) 272-0167
Web site: www.epa.gov/
The Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) has numerous divi-
sions dealing with the many types of waste products, from mu-
nicipal solid waste and hazardous waste to recycling and
pollution prevention; waste treatment and control; programs im-
plementing the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act; and
specialized wastes such as batteries, electronic waste (e-waste),
scrap tires, used oil, and medical waste. Specialized programs
have been developed in partnership with other agencies, schools,
and industries, including the GreenScapes Alliance, National
Partnership for Environmental Priorities, and the Schools Chem-
ical Cleanout Campaign. Many activities are handled through re-
gional EPA offices.
U.S. EPA
Region 1 (CT, MA, ME, NH, RI, VT)
1 Congress Street, Suite 1100
Boston, MA 02114-2023
Telephone: (617) 918-1111
Web site: www.epa.gov/region01/
U.S. EPA
Region 2 (NJ, NY, PR, VI)
290 Broadway
New York, NY 10007-1866
Telephone: (212) 637-3660
Web site: www.epa.gov/region02/
U.S. EPA
Region 3 (DC, DE, MD, PA, VA, WV)
1650 Arch Street
Philadelphia, PA 19103-2029
Telephone: (215) 814-5000
Web site: www.epa.gov/region03/
U.S. EPA
Region 4 (AL, FL, GA, KY, MS, NC, SC, TN)
212
Directory of Organizations, Associations, and Agencies
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
Atlanta Federal Center
61 Forsyth Street, SW
Atlanta, GA 30303-3104
Telephone: (404) 562-9900
Web site: www.epa.gov/region04/
U.S. EPA
Region 5 (IL, IN, MI, OH, WI)
77 West Jackson Boulevard
Chicago, IL 60604-3507
Telephone: (312) 353-2000
Web site: www.epa.gov/region05/
U.S. EPA
Region 6 (AR, LA, NM, OK, TX)
Fountain Place, 12th Floor, Suite 1200
1445 Ross Avenue
Dallas, TX 75202-2733
Telephone: (214) 665-2200
Web site: www.epa.gov/region06/
U.S. EPA
Region 7 (IA, KS, MO, NE)
901 North Fifth Street
Kansas City, KS 66101
Telephone: (913) 551-7003
Web site: www.epa.gov/region07/
U.S. EPA
Region 8 (CO, MT, ND, SD, UT, WY)
1595 Wynkoop Street
Denver, CO 80202-1129
Telephone: (303) 312-6312
Web site: www.epa.gov/region08/
U.S. EPA
Region 9 (AZ, CA, HI, NV)
75 Hawthorne Street
San Francisco, CA 94105
Telephone: (415) 947-8000
Web site: www.epa.gov/region09/
U.S. Government Agencies
213
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
U.S. EPA
Region 10 (AK, ID, OR, WA)
1200 Sixth Avenue
Seattle, WA 98101
Telephone: (206) 553-1200
Web site: www.epa.gov/region10/
U.S. Geological Survey
12201 Sunrise Valley Drive
Reston, VA 20192
Telephone: (703) 648-4000
Web site: www.usgs.gov/
Although it has numerous non-waste-related responsibilities, the
U.S. Geological Survey manages an interdisciplinary team of geol-
ogists, hydrologists, technicians, and other professionals provid-
ing support for the Yucca Mountain project in Nevada. Although
the branch is under the direction of the Virginia office of the
agency, other staff work on the project in California and Nevada.
U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission
11555 Rockville Pike
Rockville, MD 20852-2738
Telephone: (301) 415-7000
Web site: www.nrc.gov/
The Nuclear Regulatory Commission’s responsibilities include the
regulation of radioactive waste, administered through four re-
gional offices and the states. The agency handles three types of
waste: low-level waste, including radioactively contaminated pro-
tective clothing, tools, filters, and rags; high-level waste, including
used nuclear reactor fuel; and uranium mill tailings that remain
after the processing of ores to extract uranium and thorium.
U.S. Nuclear Waste Technical Review Board
2300 Clarendon Boulevard, #1300
Arlington, VA 22201
Telephone: (703) 235-4473
Web site: www.nwtrb.gov
This agency was created in 1987 as part of the amendments to the
Nuclear Waste Policy Act. Its mission is to review the technical
214
Directory of Organizations, Associations, and Agencies
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
and scientific validity of Department of Energy activities related
to the disposal of radioactive waste, including the evaluation of
the Yucca Mountain site. It is an independent federal agency
composed of 11 part-time members who are eminent in the field
of science or engineering, recommended by the National Acad-
emy of Sciences.
State Agencies
The management and administration of waste-related activities
vary considerably from one state to another. Some states, for in-
stance, place all of the responsibilities under a single “little EPA”
that encompasses the entire spectrum of environmental problems
and issues. Other states have separate agencies for different types
of waste, such as solid waste, radioactive waste, and medical
waste. Still another model is to divide responsibility by the type
of activity involved, such as finance, compliance, or public edu-
cation and outreach. Some states also divide environmental man-
agement by one of three categories: air, water, and land, which is
where waste activities and projects generally are situated from an
organizational perspective.
The list below includes the primary agency for waste man-
agement in each state; where multiple agencies are involved, the
listing reflects the agency with the broadest mandate for waste
control, which usually means solid waste. Larger states have sev-
eral regional offices for waste management, and in these cases, the
contact information for the main state office is listed, which is
usually at the state capitol. Consider this list a starting point for
further research, as waste jurisdictions and organizational struc-
tures are subject to change and sometimes overlap. This guidance
is important in understanding the waste hierarchy, because only a
small handful of states, such as California, approach the problem
from the perspective of integrated waste management.
Alabama
Department of Environmental Management
1400 Coliseum Boulevard
Montgomery, AL 36110-2059
Telephone: (334) 271-7700
Web site: www.adem.state.al.us/
State Agencies
215
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
Alaska
Department of Environmental Conservation
410 Willoughby Avenue, Suite 303
Juneau, AK 99811-1800
Telephone: (907) 465-5066
Web site: www.dec.state.ak.us/
Arizona
Department of Environmental Quality
1110 West Washington Street
Phoenix, AZ 85007
Telephone: (602) 771-2300
Web site: www.azdeq.gov/
Arkansas
Department of Environmental Quality
8001 National Drive
Little Rock, AR 72209
Telephone: (501) 682-0744
Web site: www.adeq.state.ar.us/
California
Integrated Waste Management Board
1001 I Street
Sacramento, CA 95812-2815
Telephone: (916) 341-6000
Web site: www.ciwmb.ca.gov/
Colorado
Department of Public Health and Environment
700 South Ash Street, Building B
Denver, CO 80246
Telephone: (303) 692-3300
Web site: www.cdphe.state.co.us/
Connecticut
Department of Environmental Protection
Materials and Waste Management
79 Elm Street
Hartford, CT 06106-5127
Telephone: (860) 424-3000
Web site: www.ct.gov/dep/cwp/
216
Directory of Organizations, Associations, and Agencies
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
Delaware
Department of Natural Resources and Environmental Control
Division of Air and Waste Management
89 Kings Highway
Dover, DE 19901
Telephone: (302) 739-9403
Web site: www.awm.delaware.gov/
Florida
Department of Environmental Protection
Division of Waste Management
2600 Blair Stone Road
Tallahassee, FL 32399-2400
Telephone: (850) 245-8705
Web site: www.dep.state.fl.us/waste/
Georgia
Department of Natural Resources
Environmental Protection Division
2 Martin Luther King Drive
Atlanta, GA 30334
Telephone: (404) 656-7802
Web site: www.gaepd.org/
Hawaii
Department of Health
Solid and Hazardous Waste Branch
919 Ala Moana Boulevard, #212
Honolulu, HI 96814
Telephone: (808) 586-4226
Web site: www.hawaii.gov/health/environmental/waste/
Idaho
Department of Environmental Quality
Waste Management and Remediation Division
1410 North Hilton
Boise, ID 83706
Telephone: (208) 373-0502
Web site: www.deq.idaho.gov/
Illinois
Environmental Protection Agency
State Agencies
217
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
Bureau of Land, Waste Management Programs
1021 North Grand Avenue East
Springfield, IL 62794-9276
Telephone: (217) 782-3397
Web site: www.epa.state.il.us/land/waste-mgmt/
Indiana
Department of Environmental Management
100 North Senate Avenue
Indianapolis, IN 46204-2251
Telephone: (800) 451-6027
Web site: www.in.gov/idem/
Iowa
Department of Natural Resources
Waste Management
502 East Ninth Street
Des Moines, IA 50319-0034
Telephone: (515) 281-5918
Web site: www.iowadnr.com/waste/
Kansas
Bureau of Waste Management
1000 SW Jackson Street, Suite 320
Topeka, KS 66612-1366
Telephone: (785) 296-1600
Web site: www.kdheks.gov/waste/
Kentucky
Division of Waste Management
14 Reilly Road
Frankfort, KY 40601
Telephone: (502) 564-6716
Web site: www.waste.ky.gov/
Louisiana
Department of Environmental Quality
P.O. Box 4301
Baton Rouge, LA 70821-4301
Telephone: (225) 219-5337
Web site: www.deq.louisiana.gov/
218
Directory of Organizations, Associations, and Agencies
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
Maine
Department of Environmental Protection
Bureau of Remediation and Waste Management
17 State House Station
Augusta, ME 04333-0017
Telephone: (207) 287-7688
Web site: www.maine.gov/dep/rwm/
Maryland
Department of the Environment
1800 Washington Boulevard
Baltimore, MD 21230
Telephone: (410) 537-3000
Web site: www.mde.state.md.us/
Massachusetts
Department of Environmental Protection
Waste and Recycling
One Winter Street
Boston, MA 02108
Telephone: (617) 292-5500
Web site: www.mass.gov/dep/
Michigan
Department of Environmental Quality
Waste and Hazardous Materials Division
P.O. Box 30241
Lansing, MI 48909-7741
Telephone: (517) 335-2690
Web site: www.michigan.gov/deq/
Minnesota
Pollution Control Agency
520 Lafayette Road
St. Paul, MN 55155-4194
Telephone: (651) 296-6300
Web site: www.pca.state.mn.us/waste/
Mississippi
Office of Pollution Control
Solid Waste Policy, Planning and Grants Branch
State Agencies
219
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
515 Amite Street
Jackson, MS 39201
Telephone: (601) 961-5171
Web site: http://deq.state.ms.us/MDEQ.nsf/page/epd_
SolidWasteandMining
Missouri
Department of Natural Resources
Division of Environmental Quality
P.O. Box 176
Jefferson City, MO 65102
Telephone: (573) 751-5401
Web site: www.dnr.mo.gov/env/
Montana
Department of Environmental Quality
1520 East Sixth Street
Helena, MT 59620-0901
Telephone: (406) 444-5300
Web site: www.deq.state.mt.us/
Nebraska
Department of Environmental Quality
1200 N Street, #400
Lincoln, NE 68504
Telephone: (402) 471-2186
Web site: www.deq.state.ne.us/
Nevada
Division of Environmental Protection
Bureau of Waste Management
901 South Stewart Street, #4001
Carson City, NV 89701-5249
Telephone: (775) 687-4670
Web site: http://ndep.nv.gov
New Hampshire
Department of Environmental Services
29 Hazen Drive
Concord, NH 03302-0095
Telephone: (603) 271-3503
Web site: www.des.state.nh.us/
220
Directory of Organizations, Associations, and Agencies
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection
Bureau of Solid and Hazardous Waste
401 East State Street
Trenton, NJ 08625
Telephone: (609) 633-1418
Web site: www.state.nj.us/dep/dshw/
New Mexico
Environment Department
1190 St. Francis Drive
Santa Fe, NM 87502
Telephone: (505) 827-0197
Web site: www.nmenv.state.nm.us/
New York
Department of Environmental Conservation
Division of Solid and Hazardous Materials
625 Broadway
Albany, NY 12233-1010
Telephone: (518) 402-8549
Web site: www.dec.ny.gov/
North Carolina
Department of Environment and Natural Resources
Division of Waste Management
1646 Mail Service Center
Raleigh, NC 27699-1646
Telephone: (919) 508-8400
Web site: www.wastenotnc.org/
North Dakota
Department of Health
Division of Waste Management
918 East Divide Avenue, Third Floor
Bismarck, ND 58501-1947
Telephone: (701) 328-5166
Web site: www.health.state.nd.us/wm/
Ohio
Environmental Protection Agency
50 West Town Street, Suite 700
State Agencies
221
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
Columbus, OH 43215
Telephone: (614) 644-3020
Web site: www.epa.state.oh.us/
Oklahoma
Land Protection Division
P.O. Box 1677
Oklahoma City, OK 73101-1677
Telephone: (405) 702-5101
Web site: www.deq.state.ok.us/
Oregon
Department of Environmental Quality
Land Quality Division
811 S.W. Sixth Avenue
Portland, OR 97204-1390
Telephone: (503) 229-5696
Web site: www.oregon.gov/DEQ/LQ/
Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection
Bureau of Waste Management
P.O. Box 8471
Harrisburg, PA 17105-8471
Telephone: (717) 783-2388
Web site: www.depweb.state.pa.us/landrecwaste/
Rhode Island
Department of Environmental Management
Office of Waste Management
235 Promenade Street
Providence, RI 02908-2797
Telephone: (401) 222-2797
Web site: www.dem.ri.gov/programs/benviron/waste/
South Carolina
Environmental Quality Control
Bureau of Land and Waste Management
2600 Bull Street
Columbia, SC 29201
Telephone: (803) 896-4000
Web site: www.scdhec.net/lwm/
222
Directory of Organizations, Associations, and Agencies
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
South Dakota
Department of Environment and Natural Resources
Waste Management Program
523 East Capitol
Pierre, SD 57501
Telephone: (605) 773-3153
Web site: www.state.sd.us/DENR/
Tennessee
Department of Environment and Conservation
Solid and Hazardous Waste Management
401 Church Street, First Floor
Nashville, TN 37243-0435
Telephone: (615) 532-0109
Web site: www.state.tn.us/environment/
Texas
Commission on Environmental Quality
12100 Park 35 Circle
Austin, TX 78753
Telephone: (512) 239-1000
Web site: www.tceq.state.tx.us/
U.S. Virgin Islands
Division of Environmental Protection
Department of Planning and Natural Resources
8100 Lindberg Bay, Suite 61
St. Thomas, U.S. Virgin Islands 00802
Telephone: (340) 774-3320
Web site: www.dpnr.gov.vi/dep/
Utah
Division of Solid and Hazardous Waste
P.O. Box 144880
Salt Lake City, UT 84114-4880
Telephone: (801) 538-6170
Web site: www.hazardouswaste.utah.gov/
Vermont
Waste Management Division
103 South Main Street
Waterbury, VT 05671-0404
State Agencies
223
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
Telephone: (802) 241-3888
Web site: www.anr.state.vt.us/dec/
Virginia
Department of Environmental Quality
629 East Main Street
Richmond, VA 23218
Telephone: (804) 698-4000
Web site: www.deq.state.va.us/
Washington
Department of Ecology
P.O. Box 47600
Olympia, WA 98504-7600
Telephone: (360) 407-6000
Web site: www.ecy.wa.gov/
West Virginia
Division of Water and Waste Management
601 57th Street
Charleston, WV 25304
Telephone: (304) 926-0495
Web site: www.wvdep.org/
Wisconsin
Department of Natural Resources
Waste and Materials Management Program
P.O. Box 7921
Madison, WI 53707-7921
Telephone: (608) 266-2621
Web site: www.dnr.state.wi.us/
Wyoming
Department of Environmental Quality
Solid and Hazardous Waste Division
122 West 25th Street
Cheyenne, WY 82002
Telephone: (307) 777-7937
Web site: http://deq.state.wy.us/shwd/
224
Directory of Organizations, Associations, and Agencies
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
Industry and Trade Associations and
Nongovernmental Organizations
Waste generation is common to every business sector, whether the
major component of the waste stream is solid waste that can eas-
ily be recycled, hazardous waste that requires special handling
and treatment, or radioactive waste subject to strict federal rules
for disposal. This is why only a sampling of major industry orga-
nizations is presented in this directory. Some trade associations
have a task force or committee to deal with industry-specific
waste issues, such as the Synthetic Organic Chemical Manufac-
turers Association. Nongovernmental organizations in this list in-
clude those that advocate on issues related to specific types of
waste processing such as composting, and others that seek the
elimination of waste altogether. Among the most active groups
are those seeking the end of hazardous waste trading and incin-
eration and enhanced recycling.
100% Recycled Paperboard Alliance
1331 F Street NW, Suite 800
Washington, DC 20004
Telephone: (202) 347-8000
Web site: www.rpa100.com/
The alliance serves as an information resource on the benefits of
recycled paperboard and licenses products for labeling. It is an in-
dependent, nonprofit organization that actively promotes 100
percent recycled paperboard as a comparable alternative to virgin
papers and promotes companies’ conversion to these products.
Air & Waste Management Association
One Gateway Center, Third Floor
420 Fort Duquesne Boulevard
Pittsburgh, PA 15222-1435
Telephone: (412) 232-3444
Web site: www.awma.org/
As a professional development organization, this group, founded
in 1907, serves to enhance knowledge and expertise by providing
a neutral forum for the exchange of information, networking op-
portunities, public education, international outreach to environ-
mental professionals, and the promotion of global environmental
Industry and Trade Associations and Nongovernmental Organizations
225
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
responsibility. The organization’s membership includes more
than 9,000 environmental professionals in 65 countries, making it
one of the most influential organizations in the field. Its flagship
publication, The Journal of the Air & Waste Management Association,
in print since 1951, is the oldest continually published, peer re-
viewed, technical environmental journal in the world. Another
publication, EM, is targeted at environmental managers and fo-
cuses on regulatory and government policies and management
issues. The association also sponsors specialty conferences on
topics such as global climate change and offers continuing edu-
cation courses. One of its current efforts is to build an interna-
tional network of environmental professionals, and it has
established sections in Brazil, Europe, Hong Kong, Mexico, the
Philippines, Taiwan, and Saudi Arabia.
Alliance of Foam Packaging Recyclers
1298 Cronson Boulevard, Suite 201
Crofton, MD 21114
Telephone: (410) 451-8340
Web site: www.epspackaging.org/
The alliance works with manufacturers and recyclers of ex-
panded polystyrene (EPS) foam packaging, a light-weight mate-
rial that is often thrown away. EPS recycling usually focuses on
commercial waste generators and customers within a 100- to 200-
mile radius. The original materials (identified as no. 6 plastic
resin) are collected, then used to make new foam packaging or re-
pelletized and remanufactured into products such as plastic lum-
ber. Postconsumer EPS is currently recycled at the rate of 10 to 12
percent each year.
Aluminum Association
1525 Wilson Boulevard, Suite 600
Arlington, VA 22209
Telephone: (703) 358-2960
Web site: www.aluminum.org/
The 200 aluminum plants represented by this group form a trade
association for primary producers, recyclers, and makers of semi-
fabricated aluminum products, along with companies that pro-
vide supplies for the industry. It has offices in Washington, D.C.,
and Detroit and is governed by a board of directors. Numerous
226
Directory of Organizations, Associations, and Agencies
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
committees provide the structure for the organization, including
committees focused on the environment and recycling. The asso-
ciation seeks to strengthen aluminum’s market position in com-
parison with competitive materials and provides research and
education to actively address community and environmental
concerns.
American Forest & Paper Association
1111 19th Street NW, Suite 800
Washington, DC 20036
Telephone: (800) 878-8878
Web site: www.afandpa.org/
Founded in 1993 as a result of the merger of the National Forest
Products Association and the American Paper Institute, the asso-
ciation is the national voice of the forest, pulp, paper, paper-
board, and wood products industry. Member companies
represent the manufacturers of more than 75 percent of the prod-
ucts produced in the United States. One of the group’s strengths
is that its members represent the entire spectrum of producers,
including small, nonindustrial, private landowners; family-run
mills; and large, multiproduct producers. Its mission is to influ-
ence successfully public policy that benefits the U.S. paper and
forest products industry. The group notes that it has a “big tent”
philosophy of inclusion to unite various sectors of the forest
products industry.
Appliance Recycling Information Center
1111 19th Street NW, Suite 402
Washington, DC 20036
Telephone: (202) 872-5955
Web site: www.aham.org/
The Center was established in 1993 as a project of the association
of Home Appliance Manufacturers to serve as an information
clearinghouse on the environmentally responsible disposal and
recycling of appliances. Its focus is on industry coordination, in
conjunction with the Major Appliance Resource Management Al-
liance, and on information and education. In 2005, the group
began conducting research into major appliance and portable/
floor care appliance recycling at the end of product life, typically
10 to 18 years. Discarded appliances are second only to old auto-
mobiles as a source of recycled metals, particularly steel.
Industry and Trade Associations and Nongovernmental Organizations
227
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
Asphalt Recycling and Reclaiming Association
#3 Church Circle, Suite PMB 250
Annapolis, MD 21401
Telephone: (410) 267-0023
Web site: www.arra.org/
Because of the continuing need for infrastructure development
and road building, this trade association represents an ongoing
resource. Members work with the Federal Highway Administra-
tion in developing an official policy on recycling and have been
responsible for keeping millions of tons of asphalt out of North
American landfills. They are also actively involved with the
Foundation for Pavement Preservation and the National Center
for Pavement Preservation. A cornerstone of the group’s efforts is
to increase the market share for recycled asphalt.
Association of Postconsumer Plastic Recyclers
2000 L Street NW, Suite 835
Washington, DC 20006
Telephone: (202) 316-3046
Web site: www.plasticsrecycling.org/
This national trade association represents companies that ac-
quire, reprocess, and sell more than 90 percent of North Amer-
ica’s postconsumer plastic. It seeks to expand the industry by
developing protocols for the design of packaging so it can be
more easily recycled, improving the quality of postconsumer
plastics entering the system and promoting a cooperative testing
program for new packaging. It establishes and updates guide-
lines for the design of recyclability and standards for good recy-
cling practices. The group’s operations include its Technical
Committee, which establishes and updates guidelines for the de-
sign of recycling practices for recyclability; the Market Develop-
ment Committee, which actively promotes postconsumer plastic
collection and recycled content to end-use markets; and coali-
tions with other industry organizations such as the American
Plastics Council and the National Recycling Coalition.
Association of State and Territorial Solid Waste 
Management Officials
444 North Capitol Street NW, Suite 315
Washington, DC 20001
228
Directory of Organizations, Associations, and Agencies
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
Telephone: (202) 624-5828
Web site: www.astswmo.org/
A 14-member board of directors governs this organization, incor-
porated in 1974 to focus on the needs of state and territorial solid
waste managers who deal with hazardous waste programs, mu-
nicipal solid waste and industrial waste, recycling and waste
minimization, Superfund and state cleanup sites, and under-
ground storage tanks. It has maintained a Washington, D.C., of-
fice since 1980 and has a staff of seven. The group holds two
membership meetings each year and has a long list of services
available to members. Nearly 30 task forces review issues and
topics of interest to the association’s members, including haz-
ardous waste, underground storage tanks, training and informa-
tion exchange, and pollution prevention. The association’s axiom
is, “States learn best from other States.”
Basel Action Network
122 South Jackson, Suite 320
Seattle, WA 98104
Telephone: (206) 652-5555
Web site: www.ban.org/
To combat the rising level of trade in toxic waste, the Basel Action
Network (BAN) opposes the export of toxic products and tech-
nologies from rich to poorer countries. Although the group is not
officially connected to the multilateral Basel Convention, it does
serve as an information clearinghouse, advocates for interna-
tional toxic waste policy, and conducts field investigations and
campaigns in conjunction with nongovernmental organizations.
It works at both the domestic and international level, with a par-
ticular focus on Europe (because of its strong leadership in global
environmental initiatives), Asia (the primary “victim area” for
toxic trade), and the United States (which the group says has a
poor record of global stewardship). BAN is recognized by the
United Nations Environment Programme as a leading organiza-
tion dealing with toxic trade issues, and it also works with other
groups such as the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and
Development. Currently, its campaigns focus on e-waste, green
shipbreaking, zero mercury pollution, and ratification of the
Basel Ban Amendment.
Industry and Trade Associations and Nongovernmental Organizations
229
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
Battery Council International
401 North Michigan Avenue, 24th Floor
Chicago, IL 60611-4267
Telephone: (312) 644-6610
Web site: www.batterycouncil.org/
Founded in 1924, the council is the trade association for the lead
acid battery industry, with more than 175 members worldwide. It
is a not-for-profit organization representing businesses that are
involved in the lead acid battery life cycle, including manufac-
turers and recyclers, marketers and retailers, suppliers of raw
materials and equipment, and industry consultants. Among its
accomplishments are the development of model lead acid battery
recycling legislation and a record of recycling 97 percent of all
battery lead.
Biodegradable Products Institute
331 West 57th Street, Suite 415
New York, NY 10019
Telephone: (888) 274-5646
Web site: www.bpiworld.org/
This multistakeholder organization represents the interests of
government agencies, industry, and university researchers to
promote the use of biodegradable and compostable materials.
Products that meet specific standards based on at least eight
years of research in an approved laboratory are awarded the
Compostable logo. The group’s members work on a global level,
seeking the harmonization of standards for biodegradable prod-
ucts. It also works to further the use and recovery of biodegrad-
able materials.
Blacksmith Institute
2014 Fifth Avenue
New York, NY 10035
Telephone: (646) 742-0200
Web site: www.blacksmithinstitute.org/
Using the metaphor of a blacksmith who makes practical items in
a dirty environment, this nonprofit organization was founded in
1999 to assist in pollution remediation. The group is known for
its creation of a highly polluted places list and for supporting
230
Directory of Organizations, Associations, and Agencies
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
local partners with financial assistance and grants, technical re-
search, strategic assistance, and networking capability develop-
ment assistance. The emphasis is on cleaning up toxic waste and
contamination where the pollution is ongoing and complex. It
works with local nongovernmental organizations to raise aware-
ness about pollution, to create a sound knowledge based on en-
vironmental quality, and to strengthen legislation and legal
frameworks to curb polluting practices. The primary method for
accomplishing this mission is putting resources in the hands of
local leaders to build capacity in the developing world. The
process begins by identifying polluted places, assessing the
health risks at the site, conducting site assessments to enable the
design of an intervention, and designing and implementing a re-
mediation strategy. Some projects involve small-scale cleanups,
while others deal with ongoing pollution, usually from a specific
industrial activity.
Bureau of International Recycling
24 Avenue Franklin Roosevelt
1050 Brussels
Belgium
Web site: www.bir.org/
An international trade federation representing 600 companies
from more than 60 countries, the bureau promotes recycling to
conserve natural resources. Members are encouraged to do busi-
ness together, to learn about the most recent advances in technol-
ogy and market developments, and to learn about international
legislative developments. The bureau deals primarily with repre-
sentatives from the ferrous and nonferrous metals industries,
paper, and textiles. Some members also study and trade plastic,
rubber, and scrap tires. A new emphasis for the group is China,
one of the biggest markets for the association’s members.
Can Manufacturers Institute
1730 Rhode Island Avenue NW, Suite 1000
Washington, DC 20036
Telephone: (202) 232-4677
Web site: www.cancentral.com/
The association was initially chartered in 1938 with a membership
of 39 manufacturers and suppliers; its members now account for
Industry and Trade Associations and Nongovernmental Organizations
231
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
more than 81 percent of annual production of 133 billion cans and
employ 22,000 people in 33 states, Puerto Rico, and American
Samoa. Its mission is to foster the prosperity of the industry by
promoting the can and communicating its benefits to customers,
consumers, the media, and trade analysts. It promotes commu-
nity recycling, sponsors recycling events, and distributes educa-
tional materials about environmental awareness.
Cefic
Avenue E. Van Nieuwenhuyse, 4 Box 1
B-1160 Brussels
Belgium
Web site: www.cefic.org/
Incorporated in 1972, Cefic is an international association that
represents 29,000 chemical companies that employ about 1.3 mil-
lion people, accounting for nearly a third of the world’s chemical
production. It represents European chemical companies, Euro-
pean national federations, and sectoral businesses with a pro-
duction base in Europe. The group works toward sustainable
development and has programs dealing with health, safety, and
the environment; international trade and economics; education;
transport; and logistics.
Center for Health, Environment and Justice
P.O. Box 6806
Falls Church, VA 22040
Telephone: (703) 237-2249
Web site: www.chej.org/
Love Canal activist Lois Gibbs founded this organization in 1981,
originally called the Citizens Clearinghouse for Hazardous Waste.
Now the group’s name has changed and its agenda has broad-
ened to include all aspects of environmental justice through com-
munity organizing and empowerment. The group works with
local organizations in an attempt to bring industry and govern-
ment to work toward an environmentally sustainable future.
Chartered Institution of Wastes Management
9 Saxon Court
St. Peter’s Gardens
Marefair
232
Directory of Organizations, Associations, and Agencies
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
Northampton NN1 1SX
United Kingdom
Web site: www.iwm.co.uk
This professional body sponsors the world’s largest annual event
devoted to waste management, with participants representing its
more than 7,000 members in the United Kingdom and abroad. It
operates 10 regional offices to advance the scientific, technical,
and practical aspects of waste management to safeguard the en-
vironment. The group has a commercial subsidiary, IWM Busi-
ness Services Limited, that provides support for conferences,
exhibitions, training, and technical publications.
Composting Association
3 Burystead Place
Wellingborough
Northampstonshire NN8 1AH 
United Kingdom
Web site: www.compost.org.uk/
The association works on behalf of its members to promote the
sustainable management of biodegradable resources. It promotes
the benefits of composting and other biological treatment tech-
niques and represents its members’ views before policy makers.
The group’s core principles are the development of a diverse,
competitive, innovative, profitable industry that promotes good
practice and sound environmental management. Members sup-
port dialogue with local communities and government authori-
ties to promote a sustainable, financially viable marketplace.
Composting Council of Canada
16 rue Northumberland Street
Toronto, ON M6H 1P7
Canada
Web site: www.compost.org/
The council is a national, nonprofit organization that advocates
for composting and compost usage in Canada. It serves as an in-
formation clearinghouse and provides networking opportunities
for its members. Among the group’s initiatives is an effort to de-
velop a national standard for compostable plastic bags to set the
criteria for product performance.
Industry and Trade Associations and Nongovernmental Organizations
233
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
Container Recycling Institute
1776 Massachusetts Avenue NW, Suite 800
Washington, DC 20036-1904
Telephone: (202) 263-0999
Web site: www.container-recycling.org/
Founded in 1991, this nonprofit organization focuses on educating
government leaders, elected officials, and members of the public
on the impact of beverage containers. Its goal is to shift the social
and environmental costs of manufacturing, recycling, and dispos-
ing of bottles and packaging waste from government and taxpay-
ers to producers and consumers. The group’s Web site provides a
guide to no-deposit, no-return beverage containers and bottle bill
legislation.
Dangerous Goods Advisory Council
1100 H Street NW, Suite 740
Washington, DC 20005
Telephone: (202) 289-4550
Web site: www.hmac.org/
This organization, also known as the Hazardous Materials Advi-
sory Council, was incorporated in 1978. It is an international,
nonprofit educational organization with a goal of promoting
safety in domestic and international transportation of dangerous
goods. Members include shippers, carriers, container manufac-
turers and reconditioners, emergency and waste cleanup compa-
nies, and trade associations. It works with the U.S. Department of
Transportation and regulatory counterparts in Mexico and
Canada.
Electronic Industry Alliance
2500 Wilson Boulevard
Arlington, VA 22201
Telephone: (703) 907-7500
Web site: www.eia.org/
The alliance represents U.S. electronics manufacturers as a part-
nership of associations and 1,300 companies. Its organization in-
cludes an environmental issues council that assists members in
dealing with national and international policies and regulations
affecting the industry, including those related to electronic waste.
The organization is directed by a board of governors that brings
234
Directory of Organizations, Associations, and Agencies
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
together the common interests of various sectors of the industry
while preserving the autonomy of member companies.
Environmental Services Association
154 Buckingham Palace Road
London SW1W 9TR
United Kingdom
Web site: www.esauk.org/
Waste management and secondary resources industries through-
out the United Kingdom are represented through this London-
based association. Representing both public- and private-sector
agencies and companies, the group works with the government
and regulators to bring a sustainable system of waste manage-
ment to the United Kingdom. The organization deals with issues
ranging from climate change and energy to the development of
waste protocols, composting, and sustainability.
Environmental Working Group
1436 U Street NW, Suite 100
Washington, DC 20009
Telephone: (202) 667-6982
Web site: www.ewg.org/
The Environmental Working Group uses a team approach utiliz-
ing scientists, engineers, policy experts, lawyers, and computer
programmers to analyze legal documents, scientific studies, gov-
ernment data, and laboratory tests to review health and environ-
mental risks. Its work is divided into three categories: health and
toxics, farming, and natural resources. It has produced reports on
the transport of nuclear waste and the environmental impact of
hazardous waste.
European Compost Network
Postbox 22 29
D-99403 Weimar 
Germany
Web site: www.compostnetwork.info
This collaborative group promotes sustainable practices in com-
posting, anaerobic digestion, and other treatment procedures for
organic residues across Europe. It operates through working
groups for the development of a common European strategy for
Industry and Trade Associations and Nongovernmental Organizations
235
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
biowaste, standards and quality monitoring, composting mar-
keting and application, the development of industry practices,
and support for Mediterranean and Eastern European countries.
The organization is a collaborative and is part of the ORBIT As-
sociation, a not-for-profit organization that promotes the scien-
tific development of environmental technology worldwide.
Fibre Box Association
25 Northwest Point Boulevard, Suite 510
Elk Grove Village, IL 60007
Telephone: (847) 364-9600
Web site: www.fibrebox.org/
This nonprofit organization serves North American manufac-
turers of corrugated containers. It compiles and disseminates 
statistical information, represents members’ interests before gov-
ernment and regulatory boards, monitors regulation and legisla-
tion, and supports the safety of industry employees. It also
promotes the container market at both the national and interna-
tional levels and seeks to advance technical developments for the
industry.
Film and Bag Federation
1667 K Street NW, Suite 1000
Washington, DC 20006
Telephone: (202) 974-5215
Web site: www.plasticbag.com/
As part of the Society of the Plastics Industry, the federation
serves as the voice of plastic film and bag manufacturers and de-
velops positions on regulatory and legislative issues related to
energy, health, worker safety, recycling, and the environment. It
works with its counterparts in other countries such as Australia
and provides services to its members. The organization’s goal is
to increase its membership to represent a greater proportion of
the industry segment and to provide an inclusive forum to dis-
cuss and take action on issues important to the film and bag 
industry.
Glass Packaging Institute
700 North Fairfax Street, Suite 510
Alexandria, VA 22314
236
Directory of Organizations, Associations, and Agencies
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
Telephone: (703) 684-6359
Web site: www.gpi.org/
North American and Mexican glass container manufacturers are
represented by this trade association, which advocates industry
standards, promotes sound environmental policies, and educates
packaging professionals. The members produce glass containers
for food, beverage, cosmetic, medicine, and other products. Deci-
sions are made by a board of trustees consisting of one represen-
tative from each member company and one representative from
associate members, closure manufacturers, and foreign-member
companies. The Institute’s work is also delegated to several com-
mittees and issue task forces.
Global Anti-Incinerator Alliance
Unit 320 Eagle Court Condominiums
26 Matalino Street
Quezon City 1101
Philippines
Web site: www.no-burn.org/
Also known as GAIA, this international alliance was formed in
2000 to collaborate and end incineration of waste and to promote
safe, economical alternatives to waste management. The organi-
zation focuses on three waste streams: municipal discards, haz-
ardous waste, and medical waste (in conjunction with the group
Health Care Without Harm). It also works to stop the World Bank
from funding incinerators around the world. The group’s work is
carried out through regional networks and issue workgroups to
deal with issues that transcend national and regional borders.
Industry Council for Electronic Equipment Recycling
6 Bath Place
Rivington Street
London EC2A 3JE
United Kingdom
Web site: www.icer.org/
Designed primarily for companies operating in the United King-
dom, this lobbying organization also runs accreditation pro-
grams for waste equipment recyclers and refurbishers, carries
out research, and provides members with information on regula-
tions and other legislation affecting the industry.
Industry and Trade Associations and Nongovernmental Organizations
237
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
Institute for Recyclable Materials
1419 CEBA
Louisiana State University College of Engineering
Baton Rouge, LA 70803
Telephone: (504) 388-8650
Web site: www.laregents.org/
Operating primarily as a research program, the institute seeks to
prevent, minimize, or recycle municipal solid waste through new
and improved technologies. The core staff of engineers and sci-
entists conducts multidisciplinary investigation at various sites
on the Louisiana State University campus. It also operates the
Transcontinental Materials Exchange for waste generators seek-
ing to sell or give away by-product materials.
Institute of Packaging Professionals
1601 Bond Street, Suite 101
Naperville, IL 60563
Telephone: (630) 544-5050
Web site: www.iopp.org/
By providing global leadership in packaging, the group’s mem-
bers offer education and training for packaging professionals for
career enhancement and promote the idea that packaging is a
positive, environmentally responsible, and economically efficient
force in a modern society. The organization is managed by a
small staff and volunteers at its Chicago-area headquarters. It
provides a speakers’ bureau, technical committee assistance, a
journal, and a newsletter, and it operates a career center.
Institute of Scrap Recycling Industries
1615 L Street NW, Suite 600
Washington, DC 20036-5610
Telephone: (202) 662-8500
Web site: www.isri.org/
The scrap industry was initially represented by the National As-
sociation of Waste Material Dealers and the Institute of Scrap
Iron and Steel, which merged to become the Institute of Scrap Re-
cycling Industries because of the overlap of their membership.
The institute is organized by chapters representing more than
1,200 companies that process, broker, and consume scrap com-
modities, providing advocacy, education, and compliance train-
238
Directory of Organizations, Associations, and Agencies
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
ing. Members represent firms engaged in the recycling of metals,
paper, plastics, glass, rubber, electronics, and textiles. The
group’s activities are driven by policy statements on issues such
as design for recycling, tax relief, and marketable credits for sec-
ondary lead recycling.
Integrated Waste Services Association
1331 H Street NW, Suite 801
Washington, DC 20005
Telephone: (202) 467-6240
Web site: www.wte.org/
Formed in 1991, the association encourages the use of waste-to-
energy facilities and technology as part of a comprehensive
waste management policy. Waste-to-energy plants serve munici-
pal governments through the combustion of household trash at
the 87 facilities now in operation. By advocating integrated solu-
tions to waste management, the members of the group seek to
provide an alternative to conventional power plants and disposal
in landfills.
International Association of Electronics Recyclers
P.O. Box 16222
Albany, NY 12212-6222
Telephone: (888) 989-4237
Web site: www.iaer.org
As the first trade association for the electronic recyclers industry,
established in 1998, this not-for-profit group seeks the develop-
ment of an effective and efficient infrastructure for managing the
life cycle of electronics products. Its members represent a cross-
section of industry sectors, including recyclers and industry as-
sociations. It is governed by a board of directors responsible for
oversight and guidance.
International Bottled Water Association
1700 Diagonal Road, Suite 650
Alexandria, VA 22314
Telephone: (703) 683-5213
Web site: www.bottledwater.org/
With the public’s increasing attention on recycling of beverage
containers, this trade association is becoming more active in 
Industry and Trade Associations and Nongovernmental Organizations
239
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
environmental issues. The group was founded in 1958 to repre-
sent the interests of U.S. and international bottlers, distributors,
and suppliers. Members also include the manufacturers of small
equipment; original family-owned and -operated water bottlers;
and large, diversified food corporations with bottled water as
part of their product lines. One of the organization’s activities is
the development of a model code, used as a regulation in many
states, that addresses requirements for the production and sale of
bottled water. The association notes that it is committed to ac-
tively participating in recycling and educating the public about
the importance of recycling.
International Corrugated Case Association
25 Northwest Point Boulevard, Suite 510
Elk Grove Village, IL 60007
Telephone: (847) 364-9600
Web site: www.iccanet.org/
Formed in 1961, this trade association promotes the general wel-
fare of the world’s corrugated container industry by collecting
and disseminating information and serving as the global plat-
form for addressing the needs of members that can be more ef-
fectively addressed by an association rather than by individual
members. It has six work groups and sponsors a biennial man-
agement conference. The group is managed by a board of direc-
tors and helps create a worldwide network for problem solving,
information sharing, and a best practices arena.
International Solid Waste Association
Vesterbrograde 74, Third Floor
DK-1620 Copenhagen
Denmark
Web site: www.iswa.org/
The International Solid Waste Association (ISWA) is an indepen-
dent, nongovernmental organization whose mission is to expand
the exchange of information and expertise on solid waste man-
agement on a global level. The ISWA conducts its activities
through working groups and a scientific and technical committee
examining both public- and private-sector waste management
throughout the world. Members include individuals and organi-
zations from the scientific community, public institutions, and
240
Directory of Organizations, Associations, and Agencies
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
public and private companies worldwide that are interested in
waste management issues. The group provides members with ac-
cess to publications and newsletters, conferences and meetings,
and the opportunity to work with international organizations
such as the United Nations Environment Programme.
Keep America Beautiful
1010 Washington Boulevard
Stamford, CT 06901
Telephone: (203) 323-8987
Web site: www.kab.org/
Keep America Beautiful was founded in 1953 as the United States’
largest nonprofit community improvement and educational organi-
zation. The group’s three areas of focus are litter prevention, beau-
tification and community improvement, and waste reduction. Each
year, its members participate in the Great American Cleanup, work-
ing to improve the local environment and encourage recycling.
Mid-Atlantic Consortium of Recycling and 
Economic Development Officials
1504 South Street
Philadelphia, PA 19146
Web site: www.macredo.org/
This organization brings together recycling and economic devel-
opment officials from Delaware, Maryland, Pennsylvania, Vir-
ginia, Washington, D.C., and West Virginia to identify, promote,
and implement projects on a regional basis. Its goal is to stimulate
the demand for postconsumer materials; promote economic
growth and create jobs; and develop an efficient regional recycling
infrastructure by researching recycling market issues, offering a
forum for exchange among members, and providing region-wide
publications. Unlike local or state-based projects, this group seeks
to combine individual and local recycling and job creation efforts
to maximize regional success.
Municipal Waste Management Association
1620 Eye Street NW, Suite 300
Washington, DC 20006
Telephone: (202) 861-6775
Web site: www.usmayors.org/uscm/mwma/
Industry and Trade Associations and Nongovernmental Organizations
241
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
The association, formed in 1982, is affiliated with the Washing-
ton, D.C.–based U.S. Conference of Mayors. Its goal is to promote
operational efficiencies, facilitate information, foster innovation,
and promote legislative advocacy dealing with waste manage-
ment issues. The group focuses on Superfund implementation,
brownfields redevelopment, clean air, clean water, and waste-to-
energy programs. Members represent municipal solid waste
managers and directors, environmental commissioners, and pub-
lic works professionals.
National Association for PET Container Resources
P.O. Box 1327
Sonoma, CA 95476
Telephone: (707) 996-4207
Web site: www.napcor.com/
Polyethylene terephthalate (PET) plastics are those commonly used
in bottling and other packaging industries. The organization was
founded in 1987 and serves both the United States and Canada. Its
members promote the introduction and use of PET packaging
through its life cycle and educates the public and officials about its
value as an environmentally sustainable package. Among the
group’s goals is public education about PET products and packag-
ing and the use of single-serve containers and recycling.
National Association of Manufacturers
1331 Pennsylvania Avenue NW
Washington, DC 20004-1790
Telephone: (202) 637-3000
Web site: www.nam.org/
One of the most powerful trade associations in the United States,
the National Association of Manufacturers advocates for the
competitiveness of manufacturers by shaping a legislative and
regulatory environment conducive to U.S. economic growth. It
has a pro-growth, pro-manufacturing agenda and seeks to be the
primary source for information on manufacturers’ contributions
to innovation and productivity. Two of its waste-related projects
involve the recycling of electronic products and a manual on
waste reduction for members.
National Office Paper Recycling Project
1620 Eye Street NW
242
Directory of Organizations, Associations, and Agencies
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
Washington, DC 20006
Telephone: (202) 293-7330
Web site: http://www.usmayors.org/uscm/uscm_projects_
services/environment/national_paper_recycling_project.html
Launched publicly in September 1990, this project is a long-term
collaboration of the U.S. Conference of Mayors with private cor-
porations and public interest groups. This national campaign
sponsors efforts to create office paper recycling programs and en-
courages the purchase of recycled office products. The group
provides cities with technical assistance, market information,
data, and guidebooks for setting up programs. The group spon-
sors the National Office Paper Recycling Challenge for city of-
fices and conducts research on the supply of and demand for
waste paper and office paper recycling.
National Recycling Coalition
1325 G Street NW, Suite 1025
Washington, DC 20005
Telephone: (202) 347-0450
Web site: www.nrc-recycle.org/
As a charitable, nonprofit organization composed of recycling
professionals and advocates, the National Recycling Coalition
(NRC) was founded in 1978 to eliminate waste and promote sus-
tainable economies through advancing sound management
practices for raw materials in North America. It is often consid-
ered the leading national voice on recycling and includes state
and regional recycling organizations as affiliates. The NRC’s
strategic plan includes five goals: being recognized as the lead-
ing national voice on recycling, serving as a catalyst for con-
structive dialogue on sustainable raw material management,
advancing members’ understanding of current and emerging re-
cycling issues, fostering new and innovative recycling solutions,
and maximizing its resources to ensure the group’s organiza-
tional health and vitality.
National Solid Wastes Management Association
4301 Connecticut Avenue NW, Suite 300
Washington, DC 20008-2304
Telephone: (202) 244-4700
Web site: www.nswma.org/
Industry and Trade Associations and Nongovernmental Organizations
243
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
The association represents companies that provide solid, haz-
ardous, and medical waste collection in North America. The
group was founded in 1962 with a mission of promoting the
management of waste in an environmentally responsible, effi-
cient, profitable, and ethical manner. Activities include education
and training opportunities, research, and federal and state issue
advocacy. It is managed through a board of governors, chapter
officers, and a women’s council.
National Waste Prevention Coalition
201 South Jackson Street, #701
Seattle, WA 98104-3855
Telephone: (206) 296-4481
Web site: www.metrokc.gov/dnrp/swd/nwpc/
Solid waste management professionals who work for state and
local governments, nonprofit organizations, universities, and
consultants dedicated to the prevention of waste creation and the
reduction of the use of resources are members of the coalition,
which was founded in 1994. Their projects have included the Na-
tional Junk Mail Reduction Campaign; the Model Cleaners Pro-
ject, which recognizes leaders in the dry cleaning and “wet
cleaning” industry; and a telephone book reduction program.
North American Hazardous Materials Management Association
11166 Huron Street, Suite 27
Denver, CO 80234
Telephone: (877) 292-1403
Web site: www.nahmma.org/
The association was established in 1993 to reduce the hazardous
materials constituents entering the waste stream and to prevent
pollution. Members include manufacturers, government regula-
tors, waste-handling businesses, nonprofit environmental orga-
nizations, and government officials. The focus is on hazardous
materials not otherwise covered by regulations that enter the mu-
nicipal waste stream from households and small businesses. Ac-
tivities are directed by a board of directors elected from the
membership, which sets policy and is responsible for the work of
the corporation.
Northeast Recycling Council
139 Main Street, Suite 401
244
Directory of Organizations, Associations, and Agencies
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
Brattleboro, VT 05301
Telephone: (802) 254-3636
Web site: www.nerc.org/
The council is one of the largest regional organizations in the
United States, promoting packaging waste, recycling, compost and
organics management, and green procurement. The 10 Northeast
states that are members promote recycling market development
through business assistance and legislative advocacy. Specific pro-
grams have been developed to deal with issues such as compost
and organics management, procuring green electronics, and ma-
rine shrink-wrap recycling.
Plastic Loose Fill Council
P.O. Box 21040
Oakland, CA 94620
Telephone: (510) 654-0756
Web site: www.loosefillpackaging.com/
Commonly known as packaging “peanuts,” polystyrene loose fill
can be recycled and reused. This trade organizations helps con-
sumers find their nearest drop-off center for leftover plastic
peanuts, with more than 1,500 centers now in operation for col-
lection. The council operates the Peanut Hotline to inform con-
sumers and answer environmental questions about plastic loose
fill recycling.
Plastics Foodservice Packaging Group
1300 Wilson Boulevard
Arlington, VA 22209
Telephone: (703) 741-5647
Web site: www.polystyrene.org/
This group is made up of 10 major resin suppliers and manu-
facturers of polystyrene and plastic food service products.
Working at both the domestic and global levels, the aim is to ed-
ucate the public on how these items benefit the environment
and on the important benefits they provide for health and safety.
Formerly known as the Polystyrene Packaging Council, this is a
business group of the American Chemistry Council. It is now
working with similar groups in Asia, Europe, and North and
Latin America to facilitate communication across international
boundaries.
Industry and Trade Associations and Nongovernmental Organizations
245
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
Product Stewardship Institute
137 Newbury Street, Seventh Floor
Boston, MA 02116
Telephone: (617) 236-4855
Web site: www.productstewardship.us/
Created in 2000 as part of the first forum where government offi-
cials could discuss product stewardship policies, this group ini-
tially dealt with five product categories: electronics, paints,
mercury-containing products, pesticides, and tires. Product
Stewardship Action Plans were created for each product, starting
with electronic management, with plans for seven categories
now being developed.
Rechargeable Battery Recycling Corporation
1000 Parkwood Circle, Suite 450
Atlanta, GA 30339
Telephone: (678) 419-9990
Web site: www.rbrc.org/
To reduce the number of products entering the waste stream, this
organization collects used cellular telephones and portable
rechargeable batteries, develops drop-off sites, and conducts ed-
ucational outreach. It also works with community organizations
to find uses for cellular phones rather than disposing of them.
The organization operates more than 30,000 drop-off sites in the
United States.
Reuse Development Organization
2 North Kresson Street
Baltimore, MD 21224
Telephone: (410) 558-3625
Web site: www.redo.org/
The Reuse Development Organization was established as a non-
profit organization in 1995 after a conference identified partici-
pants’ desire to form a group whose members advocate the
redistribution of materials from one entity that cannot use them
to one that can do so. It is one way for suppliers to conserve nat-
ural resources, reduce greenhouse gases, and get materials to dis-
advantaged people and organizations. It provides education,
training, and technical assistance to initiate and implement reuse
programs.
246
Directory of Organizations, Associations, and Agencies
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
Sierra Club
85 Second Street, Second Floor
San Francisco, CA 94105
Telephone: (415) 977-5500
Web site: www.sierraclub.org/
Although the Sierra Club is most frequently associated with the
protection of wilderness areas, endangered species, and outdoor
recreation, it also has a major campaign concerning nuclear
waste. The group has developed several policies dealing with is-
sues such as nuclear waste transportation, low-level radioactive
waste, radioactive scrap, and problems specific to Colorado.
Silicon Valley Toxics Coalition
760 North First Street
San Jose, CA 95112
Telephone: (408) 287-6707
Web site: www.etoxics.org/
One of the oldest groups working with the high-tech industry,
the coalition’s members work to shift industries toward greater
sustainability. In 1982, the organization responded to the discov-
ery of groundwater contamination in the Silicon Valley of Cali-
fornia and advocated legislation to keep the community
informed about the identification of Superfund sites and subse-
quent cleanup activities.
Society of the Plastics Industry
1667 K Street NW, Suite 1000
Washington, DC 20006
Telephone: (202) 974-5200
Web site: www.plasticsindustry.org/
This trade association, founded in 1937, represents the entire
plastic industry supply chain, from processing and raw materials
suppliers to machinery and equipment manufacturers. The plas-
tics industry employs 1.1 million workers and provides more
than $341 billion in annual shipments. The association works
through regional offices and offers programs for members on the
local, national, and international level. It develops codes and
standards, organizes committees around topics such as the envi-
ronment and international trade, and has programs for outreach
and education.
Industry and Trade Associations and Nongovernmental Organizations
247
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
Solid Waste Association of North America
1100 Wayne Avenue, Suite 700
Silver Spring, MD 20910
Telephone: (800) 467-9262
Web site: www.swana.org/
An association of more than 7,600 members throughout North
America, the Solid Waste Association of North America
(SWANA) has a mission of education, innovation, and communi-
cation. Its nearly 50 local chapters provide forums for members,
advocate on solid waste policy, provide training, host confer-
ences, and provide certification in the various stages of solid
waste management. The organization is governed by an inter-
national board and has eight technical sections dealing with is-
sues ranging from waste collection and transfer to landfill
management. Training opportunities, including electronic course
work, are coupled with event training, home study classes, and
on-site training for those seeking careers in solid waste manage-
ment. Another SWANA associated group is the Applied Research
Foundation, which leverages research dollars for issues address-
ing solid waste concerns.
Steel Recycling Institute
Iderson Drive
Pittsburgh, PA 15220-2700
Telephone: (412) 922-2772
Web site: www.recycle-steel.org/
Established in 1988 as the Steel Can Recycling Institute, this non-
profit trade organization promotes steel can recycling. In 1993, the
group expanded its focus to encompass the recycling of all steel
products, including automobiles, appliances, and construction
materials. Recycled steel can be used to make other steel products,
and current steel recycling rates exceed 50 percent. Its activities in-
clude a grassroots effort to work directly with the public and pri-
vate sectors to implement recycling.
Synthetic Organic Chemical Manufacturers Association
1850 M Street NW, Suite 700
Washington, DC 20036-5810
Telephone: (202) 721-4100
Web site: www.socma.com/
248
Directory of Organizations, Associations, and Agencies
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
The 275 member companies of this association represent specialty,
batch, and custom chemical manufacturers at 2,000 sites with
more than 100,000 employees. Founded in 1921, the group in-
cludes small specialty producers and large multinational corpora-
tions. Products include pharmaceuticals and cosmetics, soaps,
plastics, industrial products, and other materials using refined
chemicals. It is managed by a board of governors and includes an
environmental committee dealing with hazardous waste. Mem-
bers can participate in conferences and training on subjects such
as compliance, stewardship, and business development.
Tire Industry Association
1532 Pointer Ridge Place, Suite G
Bowie, MD 20716-1883
Telephone: (301) 430-7280
Web site: www.tireindustry.org/
The association and its members host the Tire and Rubber Recy-
cling Advisory Council, which promotes the reuse and recovery
of tires and tire-derived materials. It works to enhance the recy-
cling of tires and recyclable rubber products and promotes the in-
dustry’s position in the legislative, judicial, and regulatory
arenas. More than 4,500 members are in the group, which was
formed in July 2002 with the merger of the International Tire and
Rubber Association and the Tire Association of North America.
U.S. Composting Council
4250 Veterans Memorial Highway, #275
Holbrook, NY 11741
Telephone: (631) 737-4939
Web site: www.compostingcouncil.org/
This nonprofit organization is a nationally based group commit-
ted to the advancement of the composting industry. It has about
200 members who are dedicated to the development, expansion,
and promotion of composting through research, promoting best
practices, establishing standards, educating the public and pro-
fessionals, and enhancing product quality and markets. It also
directs the Composting Council Research and Education Foun-
dation, a nonprofit charitable foundation that administers pub-
lic and private research and education grant activities.
Industry and Trade Associations and Nongovernmental Organizations
249
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
WASTE
Nieuwehaven 201
2801 CW Gouda
The Netherlands
Web site: www.waste.nl/
The Netherlands-based nonprofit organization WASTE is active
in providing technical assistance in solid waste management and
resource recovery, low-cost sanitation and liquid waste manage-
ment, community-based environmental improvement, and
micro- and small enterprise development through local partner-
ships in developing nations. It is currently active in Peru, Costa
Rica, Mali, the Philippines, India, and Bulgaria. The organization
has a multidisciplinary team of consultants and experts on urban
environment, solid waste management, urban planning, sanita-
tion, and environmental economy based in Gouda, the Nether-
lands. Short-term assistance is provided to organizations that are
responsible for running their own projects. Training, planning,
and management support are provided to increase capacity and
to strengthen project sustainability.
Waste Equipment Technology Association
4301 Connecticut Avenue NW, Suite 300
Washington, DC 20008-2304
Telephone: (202) 244-4700
Web site: www.wastec.org
Founded in 1972 as the Waste Equipment Manufacturers Insti-
tute, and renamed in 1993, this group is a quasi-independent
trade association representing companies that design, build, dis-
tribute, and service equipment for, or consult with businesses in
this field dealing with solid and hazardous waste and recyclable
materials. It consists of four program divisions: technical, execu-
tive, market enhancement, and education and information.
Waste management professionals, manufacturers, distributors,
recyclers, consultants, equipment leasing companies, and for-
profit companies that provide solid and medical waste collection
services are represented by this group, which provides informa-
tion to its members on industry trends and developments; land-
fill design, operation, and maintenance; vendors; and safety
standards for waste management equipment. Public officials can
become affiliate members, and the association also has a mem-
250
Directory of Organizations, Associations, and Agencies
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
bership category for international members that do not have op-
erations in the United States and Canada.
Waste Watch
56–64 Leonard Street
London EC2A 4LT
United Kingdom
Web site: www.wastewatch.org.uk/
Waste Watch is an independent British charity that promotes the
sustainable use of resources. Its goal is to increase awareness
about waste from the perspective of reducing, reusing, and recy-
cling. Funded by the central government, charitable trusts, cor-
porations, individuals, local government, and the national
lottery, the group focuses on changing attitudes through com-
munication, education, information, and research.
Zero Waste America
217 South Jessup Street
Philadelphia, PA 19107
Telephone: (215) 629-3553
Web site: www.zerowasteamerica.org/
Lynn Landes, a journalist, founded Zero Waste America (ZWA),
an Internet-based environmental research organization that pro-
vides information on legislative, legal, technical, environmental,
health, and consumer issues and specializes in waste disposal is-
sues. A nonprofit organization, it focuses attention on the regula-
tory enforcement of the Resource Conservation and Recovery
Act. Landes contends that the United States lacks a federal waste
management plan and says the group is “non-profit and uncon-
ventional. We accept no money. ZWA has no membership, regu-
lar meetings, or conventional office holding.” ZWA is not
associated with any business or government.
Industry and Trade Associations and Nongovernmental Organizations
251
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
8
Resources
Print Resources
Books and Monographs
Ackerman, Frank. 1996. Why Do We Recycle? Markets, Values,
and Public Policy. Washington, DC: Island Press. 222 pages.
When municipal governments began massive recycling pro-
grams in the 1980s and 1990s, most officials had no idea that
there would soon be a drop-off in the market for recyclable goods
that would not reappear until the next decade. The author pro-
vides pro and con arguments for recycling, with most of the op-
posing views based on the question of whether recycling is
economically feasible. He critiques those who base their deci-
sions primarily on economic issues, rather than environmental
ones, and notes that a need exists to think about recycling from
ethical and social perspectives as well.
Addis, Bill. 2005. Building with Reclaimed Components and
Materials. London: Earthscan. 224 pages.
Recycling involves more than just putting paper, cardboard, and
aluminum cans in bins at the curb. Green and sustainable design
also involves finding ways to recycle components and materials
in buildings. This book reviews the ways in which construction
practices can be integrated to consider recycled products, using
case studies and advice on how to reduce the amount of waste
going to landfills.
253
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
Allen, Barbara L. 2003. Uneasy Alchemy: Citizens and Experts in
Louisiana’s Chemical Corridor Disputes. Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press. 224 pages.
The hazardous waste disputes that are common in Louisiana’s
petrochemical corridor and Cancer Alley are rooted in a historical
context that is the subject of this book. Former plantations are
now home to toxic waste, and otherwise valuable lands are near
Superfund sites. The author identifies rural communities that are
experiencing “environmental injustice” because the land in south-
ern Louisiana is cheap and degraded by huge corporate interests.
Applegate, John S., and Jan G. Laitos. 2005. Environmental
Law: RCRA, CERCLA, and the Management of Hazardous
Waste. New York: Foundation Press. 318 pages.
The authors contend that by understanding hazardous waste
law, policy makers can see how science and policy sometimes
conflict and how waste management legislation has become in-
creasingly complex. When waste is mismanaged, the resultant li-
ability affects entire communities, as seen in the example of Love
Canal, New York.
Bagchi, Amalendu. 2004. Design, Construction, and Monitoring
of Landfills. Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley. 712 pages.
This book provides an overview of each of the types of waste
management used today, from incineration and composting to
recycling and reuse. While the focus is on landfills, the issues pre-
sented are common to many waste management options, such as
site selection, construction, and health and safety problems. The
author discusses the role of integrated solid waste management,
with new material on medical waste management, wetlands mit-
igation, and landfill remediation.
Basel Action Network. 2005. The Digital Dump: Exporting Re-
Use and Abuse to Africa. Seattle: Basel Action Network. Avail-
able at www.ban.org.
This is a follow-up report on the problems associated with elec-
tronic waste (e-waste). The authors identify the primary ex-
porters of e-waste and the countries to which it is routinely sent.
It cautions consumers about the need to research whether a recy-
cling company actually deals with the materials and products or
254
Resources
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
ships them to developing countries where environmental con-
trols are less stringent.
Basel Action Network and Silicon Valley Toxics Coalition.
2002. Exporting Harm: The High-Tech Trashing of Asia. Seattle:
Basel Action Network. Available at www.ban.org.
The Basel Action Network joins with the Coalition in this pio-
neering exposé of the export of electronic waste. The report is
coupled with a film by the same name that shows children play-
ing on piles of e-waste with no protection against the chemicals
and metallic parts of used computers, monitors, and keyboards.
Bayliss, Colin, and Kevin Langley. 2003. Nuclear Decommis-
sioning, Waste Management, and Environmental Site Remedia-
tion. Boston: Butterworth Heinemann. 330 pages.
One of the most vexing problems associated with nuclear power
is what to do with the waste created in the operation of nuclear
facilities. This somewhat technical book covers global regulators
and agreements, such as the International Atomic Energy
Agency, the International Commission on Radiological Protec-
tion, and the Oslo/Paris Convention. It explains the historical in-
volvement of government and current challenges as older
facilities are decommissioned.
Blackman, William C. 2001. Basic Hazardous Waste Manage-
ment. 2nd ed. Boca Raton, FL: Lewis Publishers. 468 pages.
For an extensive analysis of hazardous waste, this volume pro-
vides almost everything a reader could ever want, from the defi-
nition and generation of waste to treatment and disposal
methods to how hazardous waste sites can be cleaned up. Also
included are sections on more diverse topics such as phytoreme-
diation, medical and biological wastes, radioactive waste, and
worker health issues.
Brummet, Dave, and Lillian Brummet. 2004. Trash Talk: An In-
spirational Guide to Saving Time and Money through Better
Waste and Resource Management. Frederick, MD: Publish
America. 192 pages.
By explaining how North Americans account for 8 percent of the
world’s population and 50 percent of its garbage, the authors
Print Resources
255
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
have compiled a manual to change those percentages. The book
identifies ways that household trash can be reused with simple
strategies that change our habits about throwing things away.
Buclet, Nicholas, ed. 2007. Municipal Waste Management in Eu-
rope. Berlin: Springer. 216 pages.
European waste management is viewed not so much as a techni-
cal matter but as a political and social one. The book is targeted
toward those interested in economics and politics rather than sci-
ence, concluding that a real need exists for standardization and
harmonization among municipal entities.
Bullard, Robert D. 2000. Dumping in Dixie: Race, Class, and En-
vironmental Quality. Boulder, CO: Westview. 234 pages.
This classic explanation of environmental justice is written by an
environmental sociologist who examines the widening socioeco-
nomic disparities that create environmental discrimination, best
viewed through the lens of the siting of municipal landfills, in-
cinerators, hazardous waste facilities, and other noxious land
uses in African American communities.
Burns, Loree Griffin. 2007. Tracking Trash: Flotsam, Jetsam, and
the Science of Ocean Motion. Boston: Houghton Mifflin. 58 pages.
This book provides a short, simple introduction to understand-
ing how human debris is moved through ocean currents and
ends up on beaches. The author profiles oceanographer Dr. Cur-
tis Ebbesmeyer, who tracks trash and looks for ways to preserve
the marine environment and habitats.
Cairney, T., and D. M. Hobson, eds. 1998. Contaminated Land:
Problems and Solutions, 2nd ed. London: Routledge. 369 pages.
The cover of this book depicts a skull and crossbones, indicative
of the types of issues raised in this edited volume. The authors
note that when hazardous waste was first identified as a problem
in the late 1970s, very little was known about the risks, and there-
fore, little concern was raised about what to do with it, especially
in comparison with water and air pollution. Although this book
is more technically oriented than others, it does provide some
background on the response by the United Kingdom and the
256
Resources
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
Netherlands, with limited commentary on other European coun-
tries and sections on the United States.
Chapman, Neil A. 2003. Principles and Standards for the Dis-
posal of Long-Lived Radioactive Wastes. Boston: Pergamon.
277 pages.
Part of a series on waste management issues, this book is more tech-
nical than most readers might need, but it does help to illustrate the
complexity of dealing with radioactive waste. In-ground disposal is
suggested as the most desirable method for dealing with waste cre-
ated through energy production, although it is clear that this is not
the only method that should be considered by officials.
Cheremisinoff, Nicholas P. 2003. Handbook of Solid Waste
Management and Waste Minimization Technologies. Boston:
Butterworth-Heinemann. 477 pages.
Unlike some books that focus only on technology, this volume is
notable for some limited coverage of the policy drivers and envi-
ronmental laws that regulate solid waste. Large sections of the
book cover biosolids and waste minimization methods, but most
of the book deals with the technology of operating a landfill and
handling municipal solid waste.
Church, Thomas W. 1993. Cleaning Up the Mess: Implementation
Strategies in Superfund. Washington, DC: Brookings. 209 pages.
When Superfund legislation was initially enacted by Congress, it
was assumed that it would be a panacea for all of the country’s
hazardous waste site cleanups. The case studies in this early
analysis of the program’s operation show, however, that estab-
lishing liability for cleanup has always been a problem that
equals the costs associated with the pollution itself.
Clapp, Jennifer. 2001. Toxic Exports: The Transfer of Hazardous
Wastes from Rich to Poor Countries. Ithaca, NY: Cornell Uni-
versity Press. 178 pages.
The author exposes how international firms in industrialized
countries have routinely engaged in shipping hazardous waste
to poor countries that are ill equipped to deal with the materials.
She argues that the 1989 Basel Convention is too weak to control
Print Resources
257
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
the waste trade and notes that the practice is too lucrative for ei-
ther business interests or poor countries to stop doing it. One ex-
ample is the use of labels identifying materials destined for
“recycling” as a way to circumvent regulations that prohibit the
transfer of hazardous waste.
Colten, Craig E., and Peter N. Skinner. 1996. The Road to Love
Canal: Managing Industrial Waste before EPA. Austin: Univer-
sity of Texas Press. 217 pages.
The environmental disaster known as Love Canal is a story about
a hazardous waste dump that operated before much concern was
raised about industrial waste practices. Prior to 1970, waste pro-
ducers commonly dumped chemicals and other toxic substances
into local waterways and open pits. These practices were consid-
ered acceptable and even recommended after World War II, with
little thought as to any adverse consequences. Contemporary de-
bates and litigation over liability are complicated by the fact that
almost no regulations were in effect at the time.
Commission for Racial Justice. 1987. Toxic Wastes and Race in
the United States: A National Report on the Racial and Socio-
economic Characteristics of Communities with Hazardous
Waste Sites. New York: United Church of Christ.
The Commission’s landmark study heightened public awareness
of the siting of hazardous waste facilities and other locally un-
wanted land uses in neighborhoods. The study determined that
race was the most potent variable in predicting where commer-
cial hazardous waste facilities were located in the United States.
Crooks, Harold. 1993. Giants of Garbage. Toronto: James Lorimer
& Company. 300 pages.
The names of the key players are not well known, but the men
who developed companies such as Browning Ferris Industries,
Laidlaw, and Waste Management, Inc., are part of a global cor-
porate presence that Crooks accuses of collusion, unfair pricing,
and monopolizing the waste trade. While the companies have
paid millions of dollars in fines, Crooks writes that the waste in-
dustry routinely violates and skirts the law, is linked to orga-
nized crime, and has enormous economic and political power
that results in little, if any, consequences.
258
Resources
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
Davis, Charles E. 1993. The Politics of Hazardous Waste. Engle-
wood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall. 156 pages.
The public’s fears about the dangers of hazardous waste make it
difficult for policy makers to develop programs for dealing with
it, even though many experts believe it is not the most serious en-
vironmental problem officials face. Davis provides an overview
of the problem and how finding ways to deal with hazardous
waste is complicated by emotion and controversy.
Duffy, John. 1990. The Sanitarians: A History of American Pub-
lic Health. Urbana: University of Illinois Press. 330 pages.
The early beginnings of the U.S. Public Health Service and of san-
itary engineering as a profession are not well known. This book
outlines the development of concerns about the relationship be-
tween urban growth and health, and of the individuals who pro-
moted the idea that a city could be cleaned up using both theory
and technology.
El Haggar, Salah. 2007. Sustainable Industrial Design and Waste
Management. Amsterdam: Elsevier. 416 pages.
Industry-generated waste is now a part of the development of
corporate environmental responsibility. The author suggests that
all waste can be treated from “the cradle to the grave” as a way
of conducting sustainable business practices and reducing the
impact on the depletion of natural resources.
Engler, Mira. 2004. Designing America’s Waste Landscapes. Bal-
timore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press. 279 pages.
The author begins by noting that landfills, more commonly
called dumps, need to be viewed in terms of space, rather than as
“lost” areas of little to no value. She shows that the areas can be-
come a part of landscape design, transformed from areas of
waste commerce to gardens and resource parks.
Ferrell, Jeff. 2006. Empire of Scrounge: Inside the Urban Under-
ground of Dumpster Diving, Trash Picking, and Street Scaveng-
ing. New York: New York University Press. 222 pages.
Those who live on the margins of society must use every strategy
possible to survive, Ferrell notes, including raiding dumpsters
Print Resources
259
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
looking for scraps of food and salvaging usable items from trash
cans outside buildings and homes. This view is written by a crim-
inologist who provides an alternative, noncriminal view of street
life.
Feshbach, Murray. 1995. Ecological Disaster: Cleaning Up the
Hidden Legacy of the Soviet Regime. New York: Twentieth Cen-
tury Press. 157 pages.
This book was written not too long after the records of the former
Soviet Union began to be opened up and provides a snapshot of
some of the massive problems facing this region. Hazardous waste
from the Cold War and the military buildup within the country led
to highly secretive programs to bury contamination, including
high-level nuclear waste, throughout the Soviet Union. Feshbach
provides insight into how serious the problem will be; even though
the book is more than a decade old, still little is known about waste
sites and disposal methods, especially in the Arctic region.
Fletcher, Thomas H. 2003. From Love Canal to Environmental
Justice: The Politics of Hazardous Waste on the Canada-U.S. Bor-
der. Peterborough, Ontario, Canada: Broadview Press. 239 pages.
Using the frame of environmental justice, the author begins by
examining a waste management crisis in Toronto that involved a
proposal to ship municipal garbage by rail to a rural area in On-
tario that was home to First Nations peoples who did not want
the garbage dumped there. He also covers the infamous Love
Canal incident and its role in the development of environmental
policy, and Canada’s efforts to avoid becoming a “waste haven”
for other countries. Border regions such as Detroit and Niagara,
New York, are used as case studies.
Fullerton, Don, and Thomas C. Kinnaman, eds. 2002. Econom-
ics of Household Garbage and Recycling Behavior. North Hamp-
ston, MA: Edward Elgar. 224 pages.
The editors of this book have compiled a series of studies to show
what needs to be done to make recycling economically feasible
and politically acceptable. The econometric techniques and theo-
retical solutions provided are a bit difficult for the average reader
to understand, but the book also provides clear recommenda-
tions for municipal governments that are looking at new ways to
260
Resources
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
make recycling a regular part of waste management in American
households.
Garbutt, John. 2005. Waste Management Law: A Practical
Handbook. London: Sweet & Maxwell. 312 pages.
The focus of this book is the United Kingdom, which provides a
valuable comparison to U.S. and Canadian practices. The back-
ground information is primarily historical, providing the reader
with a more extensive analysis than most reference books. This
book is useful for those readers looking for a comparative ap-
proach to waste management and for updated material on a
rapidly changing technology.
Gephardt, R. E. 2003. Hanford: A Conversation about Nuclear
Waste and Cleanup. Columbus, OH: Battelle Press. 384 pages.
Washington State’s Hanford site provides a case study in nuclear
waste storage and site remediation. The author focuses on the en-
vironmental aspects of radioactive waste and its disposal in a neu-
tral tone without obvious bias. While the book does not go into
great depth in explaining the plight of the Downwinders and oth-
ers who were exposed to nuclear production, it does provide an
explanation of the key issues that policy makers need to address.
Girdner, Eddie J., and Jack Smith. 2002. Killing Me Softly: Toxic
Waste, Corporate Profit, and the Struggle for Environmental Jus-
tice. New York: Monthly Review Press. 162 pages.
Mercer County, Missouri, is used as a case study to illustrate how
the citizens of one community fought the efforts of Amoco Waste-
Tech to build a hazardous waste landfill there between 1990 and
1993. The authors contend that the residents successfully opposed
the project despite the fact that they were poor and politically mar-
ginalized because they were determined not to let their community
become a “sacrifice zone” for the waste of the rest of the world.
Hamblin, Jacob Darwin. 2008. Poison in the Well: Radioactive
Waste in the Oceans at the Dawn of the Nuclear Age. New
Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press. 320 pages.
The demise of the former Soviet Union has produced revelations
about that country’s environmental policies, including disclo-
sures about decades of dumping radioactive waste into the
Print Resources
261
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
ocean, rivers, and streams. This historical treatment of radioac-
tive waste begins with the end of World War II and continues
through the Cold War until the 1970s. It emphasizes  the reasons
why military strategy and political game playing allowed Soviet
leaders to criticize the United States for its practices while at the
same time covering up blatant abuses of international law.
Imhoff, Daniel. 2005. Paper or Plastic? Searching for Solutions
to an Overpackaged World. San Francisco: Sierra Club Books.
168 pages.
The modern consumer choice between paper and plastic sym-
bolizes what the author believes is the underlying question of
sustainability. Do we make the decision based on cutting down
trees or supporting the petrochemical industry? The statistics
cited on the amount of municipal waste that is composed of
packaging make clear that an equal amount of responsibility is to
be shared among product designers, retailers, and consumers.
The book presents numerous case studies of ways in which prod-
ucts can be packaged to reduce or eliminate waste and the role of
packaged goods in society.
Jacobson, Timothy C. 1993. Waste Management: An American
Corporate Success Story. Washington, DC: Gateway Business
Books. 340 pages.
Most of the books that have been written about the refuse dis-
posal industry are negative in their appraisal of the financial as-
pects of waste management. This book is different because it uses
cases within the United States to show how companies have used
their expertise to find new ways of disposing of waste to make
practices more profitable.
Justice and Witness Ministries. 2007. Toxic Wastes and Race at
Twenty: 1987–2007. New York: United Church of Christ. 175 pages.
The follow-up to the 1987 United Church of Christ study uses
census data from 2000 and a database of commercial hazardous
waste facilities to assess the extent of disparities in facility siting.
The report found that people of color make up most of the resi-
dents living in host neighborhoods within 3 kilometers (1.8
miles) of the United States’ facilities and that poverty rates are 1.5
times greater than in nonhost areas.
262
Resources
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
Kinnaman, Thomas C. 2003. The Economics of Residential Solid
Waste Management. Burlington, VT: Ashgate. 423 pages.
This book is part of a series on environmental economics and pol-
icy, using refuse disposal within the United States as the case
study. Although it provides a substantial amount of discussion
about the advent of the refuse industry, it also deals with recy-
cling and waste minimization and the impact of those practices
on the industry.
Louka, Elli. 1994. Overcoming National Barriers to Interna-
tional Waste Trade: A New Perspective on the Transnational
Movements of Hazardous and Radioactive Wastes. Boston: Gra-
ham & Trotman. 226 pages.
In developing an overview of a subject, it is often useful to look
at older books that provide context for what is going on now.
This book on hazardous waste identifies the early laws on inter-
national waste trade and explains how difficult it is to work with
developing countries that view waste only in terms of dollars
and cents.
Luton, Larry S. 1996. The Politics of Garbage. Pittsburgh: Uni-
versity of Pittsburgh Press. 307 pages.
Luton may be overly optimistic about the role of solid waste
management, which he terms “one of the largest economic, eco-
logical, and intellectual challenges faced in the United States
today,” as he tries to make a case why garbage should matter. He
uses the case of Spokane, Washington, to show how the history
and structure of local government affect decisions regarding
solid waste management, and the role of other stakeholders and
citizen participation.
Macey, Gregg P., and Jonathan Z. Cannon. 2007. Reclaiming the
Land: Rethinking Superfund Institutions, Methods and Prac-
tices. New York: Springer. 265 pages.
This provocative book contends that while federal agencies are
cleansing toxic waste sites of dangerous substances, they are also
involved in what one researcher calls an unfortunate exercise of
cultural and historical amnesia. Reclaiming brownfields, for in-
stance, may provide opportunities for redevelopment, but at the
Print Resources
263
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
cost of eliminating important landmarks where residents lived
and have important memories of what took place.
Manser, A. G. R. 1996. Practical Handbook of Processing and
Recycling Municipal Waste. Boca Raton, FL: CRC/Lewis Pub-
lishers. 557 pages.
This lengthy volume covers virtually every conceivable way that
municipal waste can be handled. It discusses composting in the
greatest depth, from simple window composting systems to me-
chanical composting and combined compost/recycling facilities.
It also provides a rationale for the development of national stan-
dards legislation, although the ideas are somewhat dated.
Mason, Leonora G. 2007. Focus on Hazardous Materials Re-
search. Hauppauge, NY: Nova Science Publishers. 234 pages.
This is one of a series of books from this publisher that highlights
the studies and findings on the most recent issues in science. The
other books are much more technical than this one, which has six
chapters by international researchers from Spain, India, Italy, and
Japan on technological advances in dealing with hazardous
waste. The most accessible chapters are the ones dealing with
risk assessment and the use of seaweed in phytoremediation.
McCutcheon, Chuck. 2002. Nuclear Reactions: The Politics of
Opening a Radioactive Waste Disposal Site. Albuquerque: Uni-
versity of New Mexico Press. 231 pages.
Little material is available on the Waste Isolation Power Plant
(WIPP) in southeastern New Mexico, in part because of the empha-
sis on controversies surrounding the Yucca Mountain facility in
Nevada. The author uses a chronological approach in explaining
how the WIPP was proposed, the opposition that arose, the decades
spent in testing and study, and the eventual opening of the facility.
McDonough, William, and Michael Braungart. 2002. Cradle to
Cradle: Remaking the Way We Make Things. New York: Farrar,
Strauss and Giroux. 208 pages.
The title of this book comes from the concept of tracking materials
from the cradle to the grave, meaning from the creation to the dis-
posal of the substance. The authors contend that this approach still
is wasteful and does not consider the option of designing products
264
Resources
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
so that after their useful life is over, they can become biological nu-
trients or technical nutrients. Ideally, all materials could be used in
perpetuity as part of an industrial re-revolution.
McFarlane, Allison, and Rodney C. Ewing, eds. 2006. Uncer-
tainty Underground: Yucca Mountain and the Nation’s High-
Level Nuclear Waste. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 431 pages.
The 24 chapters in this edited volume are primarily science
based, offering an analysis of the various issues under consider-
ation for the operation of the Yucca Mountain nuclear waste
repository in Nevada. Factors include the site’s geologic stability
and volcanism, hydrology, thermohydrology, waste packaging,
and the difficulties of coping with uncertain models of operation.
Medina, Martin. 2007. The World’s Scavengers: Salvaging for Sus-
tainable Consumption and Production. Lanham, MD: AltaMira
Press. 318 pages.
One of the most telling statistics in this book is that 2 percent of
the world’s population, an estimated 64 million people, survives
by scavenging. The author uses case studies from Mexico, Brazil,
Columbia, Argentina, Egypt, and the Philippines to show that
scavenging is not a marginal economic activity relegated to the
poor, and that it is an adaptive response to poverty. The coverage
is both historical and contemporary, evidence that an informal
economy is a part of the ingrained culture in many nations.
Melfort, Warren S. 2003. Nuclear Waste Disposal: Current Issues and
Proposals. Hauppauge, NY: Nova Science Publishers. 150 pages.
Many supporters of nuclear power as a source of clean energy
admit that the issue that poses the biggest problem is what to do
with the waste that results. Since many U.S. nuclear facilities are at
or near the end of their original licensing periods or operating life,
the topic of how to decommission the plants and dispose of their
nuclear components is becoming increasingly important. A second
problem, the disposal of nuclear waste from weapons, is also dis-
cussed in this book, as are innovative cleanup technologies.
Melosi, Martin V. 2001. Effluent America: Cities, Industry, En-
ergy, and the Environment. Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh
Press. 325 pages.
Print Resources
265
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
Melosi attempts to cover an especially broad range of urban is-
sues, building on past articles and book chapters he has written
over nearly 25 years of research on the urban environment. Some
of the material is slightly dated and repetitive, but the book’s 12
chapters provide a good overview of the subject from a historical
perspective.
Miller, Benjamin. 2000. Fat of the Land: The Garbage of New
York—The Last Two Hundred Years. New York: Four Walls Eight
Windows. 414 pages.
The author is the former head of the policy division of the New
York Department of Sanitation and brings both a historical and a
political eye to the topic of the city’s trash. Although he begins
with the stories behind the city’s incineration program and the
Fresh Kills landfill, he brings in the contemporary view of how
municipal politics have influenced decision making and garbage
services. Much depends, he notes, on how the problem of waste
is framed as a policy problem, rather than technical solutions.
Mogren, Eric W. 2002. Warm Sands: Uranium Mill Tailings in the
Atomic West. Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press.
241 pages.
The atomic age has left an ugly legacy in the states of the Col-
orado Plateau—hundreds of acres of piles of uranium waste tail-
ings that remain near the mines used to fuel nuclear plants. Most
sites have now been cleaned up, but the author explains how the
health and environmental aspects of mining waste continue to
plague residents and mine workers.
Moore, Emmett B. 2000. An Introduction to the Management and
Regulation of Hazardous Waste. Columbus, OH: Battelle Press.
139 pages.
The author has produced an excellent, short introduction that
covers pertinent legislation, the chemistry of hazardous waste,
an overview of various substances, pollution-control technolo-
gies and cleanup techniques, risk assessment, and other related
statutes and regulations. He concludes with a section on liability
for violations of federal environmental laws and the issues in-
volved with siting hazardous waste facilities.
266
Resources
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
Murdock, Steven H., Richard S. Krannich, and F. Larry
Leistritz. 1999. Hazardous Wastes in Rural America: Impacts,
Implications, and Options for Rural Communities. Lanham,
MD: Rowman and Littlefield. 233 pages.
Six chapters in this book represent the results of a multisite and
multistage analysis of the impacts of hazardous waste siting. The
authors collected data on 15 communities in five states to exam-
ine what factors (economic, demographic, public service, fiscal,
and social and special) impacted the siting of facilities in the Great
Plains and Intermountain West. Although they admit to the limi-
tations of the sample, they conclude that substantial resistance is
likely in every community when these facilities are proposed.
Myers, Garth Andrew. 2005. Disposable Cities: Garbage, Gover-
nance, and Sustainable Development in Urban Africa. Alder-
shot, UK: Ashgate. 204 pages.
This study of three cities—Dar es Salaam and Zanzibar, Tanzania
and Lusaka, Zambia—provides an analysis of the United Na-
tions’ Sustainable Cities Programme, focusing on solid waste
management. The author, from the University of Kansas, con-
cludes that waste policies are influenced largely by the cultural
and political histories of the urban landscape in the region.
National Research Council, Committee on Disposition of
High-Level Radioactive Waste through Geological Isolation,
Board on Radioactive Waste Management. 2001. Disposition of
High-Level Waste and Spent Nuclear Fuel: The Continuing Soci-
etal and Technical Challenges. Washington, DC: National Acad-
emies Press. 212 pages.
This publication is a nontechnical summary of the issues facing
government leaders in dealing with high-level radioactive waste.
The major recommendation is that disposition in a deep geolog-
ical repository is a sound approach as long as it progresses
through a stepwise decision-making process that takes advan-
tage of technical advances, public participation, and inter-
national cooperation.
National Research Council, Committee on Separations Tech-
nology and Transmutation Systems. 1996. Nuclear Wastes:
Print Resources
267
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
Technologies for Separations and Transmutation. Washington,
DC: National Academies Press. 592 pages.
This document was produced before the geologic depository at
Yucca Mountain, Nevada, was chosen by the George H. W. Bush
administration for the disposal of high-level nuclear waste, but it
provides information on other options that were being consid-
ered prior to that decision. Its emphasis is on plutonium extrac-
tion for commercial reactor spent fuel in a time when the United
States was concerned about issues of health, safety, and nuclear
proliferation.
Nemerow, Nelson. 2006. Industrial Waste Treatment. Oxford,
UK: Elsevier. 568 pages.
This lengthy book is targeted more to engineers and managers of
industrial waste treatment facilities than to a general audience. It
does, however, provide a thorough, if technical, overview of the
changes that the U.S. government regulatory system is making
on facilities. It begins by providing a summary of the history of
environmental waste in the 20th century and practices such as
volume reduction and neutralization. The second part of the
book covers 21st century issues, such as zero waste, municipal-
industrial complexes, and cost-benefit analyses for industrial
waste facilities.
O’Brien, Martin. 2007. A Crisis of Waste? Understanding the
Rubbish Society. New York: Routledge. 210 pages.
The author’s perspective in this book is both historical and cul-
tural. It attempts to determine why waste is spoken of in terms of
crisis. He explains that what society considers to be waste is
based in part on the level of industrialization that takes place.
Kitchen grease, for instance, is used in many households as the
basis for sauces or reused for lubrication, while in other homes it
is thrown out as worthless.
Oh, Chang H. 2001. Hazardous and Radioactive Waste Treatment
Technologies Handbook. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press. 792 pages.
Despite the book’s title, this volume has useful information for
nontechnicians on the regulation of hazardous chemical and ra-
dioactive waste. Although it is primarily a reference book, it does
268
Resources
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
provide an overview of recent waste technologies and remedia-
tion strategies, research, and development. It covers the role of
the U.S. Department of Energy and the U.S. Department of De-
fense and the regulation of nuclear waste.
O’Neill, Kate. Waste Trading among Nations: Building a New
Theory of Environmental Regulation. 2000. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press. 298 pages.
This award-winning book outlines the crisis in hazardous waste
management—waste trading—more than 80 percent of which
takes place among industrialized nations. Unlike the activities
controlled by international regimes, which ban the export from
developed countries to developing ones, this type of trade is, for
the most part, entirely legal. The author focuses attention on the
United Kingdom, Germany, France, Australia, and Japan.
Onibokun, Adepoju G., ed. 1999. Managing the Monster: Urban
Waste and Governance in Africa. Ottawa, Canada: International
Development Research Center. 270 pages.
The authors of the chapters in this volume show how growing
urbanization in Africa has led to challenges in the ways officials
manage waste. The conflict between the costs charged to users
and the need for increasing urban revenues makes it difficult for
the major cities that are used as case studies by the researchers to
keep pace with waste deposits and disposal.
Page, G. William. 1997. Contaminated Sites and Environmental
Cleanup: International Approaches to Prevention, Remediation,
and Reuse. San Diego: Academic Press. 212 pages.
The title of the book implies that it covers a broader sample than
it actually does, as only countries within the European Union are
discussed. The major focus is on how countries approach sites
contaminated with toxic waste, analyzing efforts at remediation
from the public health, liability, and cleanup standpoints. A small
section of the book is devoted to developing countries, and in-
formation is provided about Superfund cleanup process in the
United States. The primary conclusion is that no international
uniformity of policy exists toward toxic contamination and envi-
ronmental cleanup, with some countries having no policy at all.
Print Resources
269
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
Pellow, David N. 2004. Garbage Wars: The Struggle for Environ-
mental Justice in Chicago. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 256 pages.
The garbage industry makes for an interesting social, political,
and historical story, especially when the setting is in Chicago.
The author covers the period from 1880 to 2000, explaining how
the health risks and environmental burden of waste fall dispro-
portionately on communities of color and poverty. Also included
are segments covering the efforts of residents to resist the siting
of hazardous waste facilities, incinerators, and landfills.
Pellow, David N. 2007. Resisting Global Toxics: Transnational
Movements for Environmental Justice. Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press. 336 pages.
The topic of dumping wastes in developing countries has in-
spired a large number of recent books, all of which condemn the
practice. This author explores the idea that hazardous waste
dumping is becoming increasingly racialized and is now the
focus of environmental justice groups that seek transnational so-
lutions to reverse the practice. The emphasis on race and class is
what distinguishes this book from others.
Peterson, Thomas V. 2002. Linked Arms: A Rural Community
Resists Nuclear Waste. Albany: State University of New York
Press. 266 pages.
This book on low-level nuclear waste facilities reads more like a
novel than a scientific review, outlining the struggles of a com-
munity in New York that used civil disobedience in an attempt to
stop the creation of a disposal facility there. It covers both the en-
vironmental protection arguments related to siting such a facility
and the role of citizen participation in decision making, including
the actions that led to community members’ arrest.
Pezzullo, Phaedra C. 2007. Toxic Tourism: Rhetorics of Pollu-
tion, Travel, and Environmental Justice. Tuscaloosa: University
of Alabama Press. 265 pages.
The author writes about the phenomenon of using tourism for
politically progressive ends, contending that noncommercial
tours can help mobilize public sentiment and dissent. The exam-
ples used are places where tours of toxic sites are provided by in-
dustries (also called plant tours), but more commonly,
270
Resources
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
expeditions into places that are polluted by toxins. Local resi-
dents can educate outsiders about the proximity of homes and
schools to industrial sites and can personalize poverty for those
who do not see it on a regular basis. Toxic tourism has become an
element of the environmental justice movement, focusing atten-
tion on accountability and public relations.
Piasecki, Bruce W., and Gary A. Davis, eds. 1987. America’s Fu-
ture in Toxic Waste Management: Lessons from Europe. New
York: Quorum. 325 pages.
This edited volume has 10 essays, some of which compare the
U.S. system of waste management with cross-cultural studies
from Europe. The emphasis is on hazardous and toxic waste, al-
though some references are made to waste reduction, technolog-
ical innovation, and risk management.
Porter, C. Richard. 2002. The Economics of Waste. Washington,
DC: Resources for the Future. 240 pages.
As a natural resource issue, the way in which economics affects
waste management is not a topic many politicians would like to
think about. The author contends that ways of dealing with both
municipal and industrial waste are available that are influenced
by market forces. The chapters cover issues such as hazardous
waste trading in an international setting, recycling, the Super-
fund program, nuclear waste, and hazardous materials. The ter-
minology is sometimes difficult to comprehend unless the reader
has a background in economics.
Probst, Katherine N., and Thomas C. Beierle. 1999. The Evolu-
tion of Hazardous Waste Programs: Lessons from Eight Coun-
tries. Washington, DC: Resources for the Future. 102 pages.
This World Bank–funded study explains how four developed
countries (Germany, Denmark, the United States, and Canada)
and four developing countries (Malaysia, Hong Kong, Thailand,
and Indonesia) have dealt with the problem of hazardous waste.
This cross-country comparison shows the importance of clear
rules and adequate enforcement and explains why companies
have little incentive to comply with regulations without those
factors. The authors conclude with one clear lesson: It takes a
long time to develop an effective hazardous waste program.
Print Resources
271
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
Rahm, Dianne, ed. 2002. Toxic Waste and Environmental Policy
in the 21st Century United States. Jefferson, NC: McFarland &
Co. 184 pages.
The seven chapters in this short volume deal with a variety of
toxic waste issues, from chemical and nuclear weapons disposal
to the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) and haz-
ardous waste. The weakness of the book is that the topics are not
tied together well, with some (such as community-based water-
shed remediation) seeming out of place.
Rathge, William, and Cullen Murphy. 1992. Rubbish! The Ar-
chaeology of Garbage. New York: HarperCollins. 263 pages.
The Garbage Project at the University of Arizona, which started in
1972, is the basis for this book, which provides a unique insight
into the garbage collected in family trash cans as well as landfills
as a way of chronicling American life. The book covers more than
just the dumping of trash, however, explaining why some com-
munities recycle while others do not, and what the students in the
project found as they sifted through municipal dumps.
Riley, Peter. 2004. Nuclear Waste: Law, Policy, and Pragmatism.
Aldershot, UK: Ashgate. 300 pages.
The author intends to provide a neutral framework for under-
standing the complexity of dealing with decades of nuclear
waste. He focuses on government policies, both at the U.S. and
international level, and explains the sources of laws and how
they have been affected by stakeholders. The case studies deal
with the United Kingdom, the United States, France, Finland,
and Korea, with a heavy emphasis on court cases.
Ringius, Lasse. 2001. Radioactive Waste Disposal at Sea: Public
Ideas, Transnational Policy Entrepreneurs, and Environmental
Regimes. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 261 pages.
While dumping low-level radioactive waste in the oceans may
seem like an idea whose time should never come, it is one option
that has been seriously considered for decades. This book is use-
ful because it not only explains the environmental aspects and
science of marine disposal but also reviews the way in which in-
ternational agreements (regimes) are developed. The author calls
272
Resources
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
for international cooperation in changing global ocean dumping
strategies.
Rogers, Heather. 2005. Gone Tomorrow: The Hidden Life of
Garbage. New York: New Press. 288 pages.
The author’s chronology of the history of garbage covers the de-
velopment of the modern landfill, the concept of waste manage-
ment and environmental harm, the successes and failures of
recycling, and how garbage has become corporatized. The book
was written as a follow-up to the author’s 2002 documentary
film, Gone Tomorrow: The Hidden Life of Garbage, and is written in
a highly readable style for any audience interested in an
overview of municipal waste.
Scanlan, John. 2005. On Garbage. London: Reaktion Books. 
208 pages.
The philosophical side of trash is explored in this book, which
looks at how humans view the artifacts they throw away. The au-
thor contends that Western culture has a unique perspective on
what is “broken” in their lives, and how we see many of the ob-
jects we possess as useless debris. The writing style is quite dif-
ferent from most technical treatments of waste, but the book does
provide insightful essays on culture.
Schwartz, Stephen C. 1983. Energy and Resource Recovery from
Waste. Park Ridge, NJ: Noyes Data Corp. 272 pages.
The publication date of this book limits its applicability for con-
temporary discussion, but it does provide an excellent perspec-
tive on the refuse-to-fuel movement of the early 1980s. At that
time, using garbage to produce energy was considered one of the
most practical ways to recycle waste products, and the technol-
ogy was available to make it a profitable enterprise. The author
had no way of knowing that the idea of incinerating trash would
become so controversial.
Smith, Paul G. ed. 2005. Dictionary of Water and Waste Man-
agement, 2nd ed. Boston: Butterworth-Heinemann. 480 pages.
This reference book was written, the author notes, for contractors,
consultants, and professional engineers as well as academics and
Print Resources
273
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
students. Although it is not especially technical, it is more suited
for professional libraries than for daily use.
Smith, Ted, David A. Sonnenfeld, and David Naguib, eds. 2006.
Challenging the Chip: Labor Rights and Environmental Justice
in the Global Electronics Industry. Philadelphia: Temple Uni-
versity Press. 376 pages.
The impact of electronics manufacturing is global, the authors
contend, with the negative consequences borne largely by the
poor, women, immigrants, and minorities. The authors in this
edited volume provide solutions for dealing with computer com-
ponents and their waste, which contaminate and pollute the en-
vironment worldwide.
Stein, Kathy. 1997. Beyond Recycling. Santa Fe, NM: Clear Light
Publishers. 166 pages.
This book may seem dated, but in fact, not much has happened
to change the recommendations she makes since the book was
published. This is a guide for those who want to locate compa-
nies that reuse products and others that have developed innova-
tive ways of reducing waste. She explores the ways that
consumers can find low-cost alternatives to disposables and how
our choices to recycle can affect sustainability.
Strasser, Susan. 1999. Waste and Want: A Social History of
Trash. New York: Metropolitan Books. 368 pages.
This is a social history of discarded items, from the colonial pe-
riod to the time when scraps and rags were saved and sold, to
mass production, marketing, and consumerism. Unlike more
technical books that talk about the treatment of waste from a sci-
entific or an engineering perspective, this one deals with the is-
sues of waste and poverty, urban blight, ethnicity, and hoarding.
The author also discusses the phenomenon of recycling and how
it became emblematic of the counterculture but turned into a
mainstream practice throughout society.
Tammemagi, Hans Y. 1999. The Waste Crisis: Landfills, Inciner-
ators, and the Search for a Sustainable Future. New York: Ox-
ford University Press. 294 pages.
274
Resources
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
Although one reviewer calls the topic of this book “unappeal-
ing,” its historical coverage makes the book valuable for some-
one who needs an introduction to waste management. The
discussion is limited to solid waste, focusing on the development
of integrated waste management and recycling programs
through seven case studies and proposed solutions. Perhaps the
best chapter is the last one, which envisions the way garbage
might be handled in the year 2032.
Tchobanoglous, George, and Frank Kreith, eds. 2002. Handbook
of Solid Waste Management, 2nd ed. New York: McGraw-Hill.
950 pages.
This massive volume is somewhat uneven because, while some
of its 16 chapters are written in a readable style, most are so tech-
nical that only an engineer or a waste professional would under-
stand the terminology and graphics. It does cover the entire
spectrum of waste practices, from landfilling and source reduc-
tion to recycling and specialized waste such as scrap tires, bat-
teries, and used oil. It includes an introductory section on federal
and state waste management legislation and regulations.
Thompson, Ken. 2007. Compost: The Natural Way to Make
Food for Your Garden. New York: DK Publishing. 192 pages.
The idea of starting a household compost system can be daunt-
ing, but this book offers practical ideas on how to deal with or-
ganic waste that can be used for the garden. The author writes for
organic gardening magazines and shows how the best compost
can be made out of ordinary household items.
U.S. General Accounting Office (GAO). 1983. Siting of Haz-
ardous Waste Landfills and Their Correlation with Racial and
Economic Status of Surrounding Communities. Washington,
DC: General Accounting Office.
The issue of environmental justice was brought to the attention of
policy makers with this report on four hazardous waste landfills
in the U.S. South. The study showed that poor blacks comprised
the majority of the population in all four communities where the
facilities were sited. The GAO study generated protests at one of
the sites in Warren County, North Carolina, in 1983.
Print Resources
275
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
Vallero, Daniel. 2003. Engineering the Risks of Hazardous
Wastes. Amsterdam: Elsevier. 306 pages.
While numerous books are available on the operation of haz-
ardous waste facilities, this is one of the few that discusses the
risks of managing the wastes themselves. The focus is primarily
on chemical wastes, but sections are also provided on dealing
with employee perceptions of waste, emergency responses, and
site remediation.
Vandenbosch, Robert, and Susanne E. Vandenbosch. 2007. Nu-
clear Waste Stalemate: Political and Scientific Controversies.
Salt Lake City: University of Utah Press. 464 pages.
Advocates for the increased use of nuclear power as part of the
goal of reducing U.S. reliance on imported fossil fuels will find
this book valuable because of its emphasis on technological ad-
vances. It includes an excellent discussion of the political debate
over nuclear waste as it applies to Yucca Mountain, the use of Na-
tive American reservations as host sites for spent nuclear fuel,
and the use of incentives for accepting nuclear waste. Also pro-
vided is a sizeable section on long-term storage problems, devel-
opments in on-site versus geological storage, and the problems
associated with seismic events.
Walsh, Edward J., Rex Warland, and D. Clayton Smith. 1997.
Don’t Burn It Here: Grassroots Challenges to Trash Incinerators.
University Park: Pennsylvania State University Press. 292 pages.
The authors seek a sociological explanation for the grassroots
anti-incineration movement that developed in the 1970s and
1980s as communities sought new ways of dealing with munici-
pal waste. Trash incineration and waste-to-energy facilities were
proposed as a way of saving landfill space, but many were never
built as a result of local protests.
Weingart, John. 2007. Waste Is a Terrible Thing to Mind: Risk,
Radiation, and Distrust of Government. New Brunswick, NJ:
Rutgers University Press. 448 pages.
Although the title of this book is sarcastic, the author deals with
deadly serious topics: radioactive waste and disposal. He looks at
a variety of siting controversies and the role of local community
276
Resources
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
groups and officials, some of whom have considered a voluntary
siting process that involves regional and state-level agreements.
Westra, Laura, and Bill E. Lawson, eds. 2001. Faces of Environ-
mental Racism: Confronting Issues of Global Justice. 2nd ed.
Lanham, MD: Rowman and Littlefield. 266 pages.
The 12 chapters in this edited book provide an overview of envi-
ronmental justice issues both in the United States and globally.
The book emphasizes inequities in environmental and health
threats, which various authors contend is a result of policies that
result in regressive patterns of costs and benefits. 
Zimring, Carl A. 2006. Cash for Your Trash: Scrap Recycling in
America. New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press. 224 pages.
While most people are familiar with residential recycling and
curbside bins for their trash, industrial recycling predates con-
temporary recycling campaigns by decades. The author provides
an analysis of the historical and practical development of recy-
cling of items such as tires and rubber, metal, and glass.
Articles
Atlas, Mark. 2002. “Few and Far Between? An Environmental
Equity Analysis of the Geographic Distribution of Hazardous
Waste Generation.” Social Science Quarterly 83 (1): 365–378.
The research on environmental justice has traditionally focused
on commercial facilities located in poor and minority neighbor-
hoods, and this author contends that this focus ignores cases
where facilities generate and manage their own waste. He be-
lieves that these operations, which account for 98 percent of the
volume of hazardous waste, do not fit that pattern when popula-
tion demographics are aggregated in concentric geographic rings
around generating facilities.
Bae, Young-Ja. 2005. “Environmental Security in East Asia: The
Case of Radioactive Waste Management.” Asian Perspective 29
(2): 73–97.
Economic growth in East Asia has been accompanied by in-
creases in energy demand and an expansion of nuclear energy,
Print Resources
277
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
which accounts for nearly a third of the production in Japan,
Korea, and Taiwan. This article ties nuclear power to issues of en-
vironmental security, identifying the tensions that have devel-
oped over incidents such as nuclear waste dumping in the Sea of
Japan and Taiwan’s efforts to export nuclear waste to North
Korea. Environmental security is, the author notes, a question of
regional approaches where the prospects for cooperation must be
addressed.
Biggert, Judy. 2006. “Nuclear Waste Standoff.” Issues in Science
and Technology 23 (1).
In the Forum section of this issue, the author provides an
overview of the Global Nuclear Energy Partnership (GNEP) and
the issues of restarting the U.S. nuclear energy industry. The key
problem remains how nuclear waste can be dealt with on both an
interim and a long-term basis.
Black, George. 2007. “Waste Not, Want Not: American Hospi-
tals Are Charter Members of Our Throwaway Society.” 
OnEarth (Winter): 26–32.
An estimated 2,000 tons of medical equipment and supplies in
perfectly good condition are tossed into the trash each year by
U.S. hospitals. Hazardous waste goes to special incinerators, but
the remainder goes to landfills, creating a specialized environ-
mental problem. One organization, Global Links, began redis-
tributing medical surplus and diverting it from the waste stream
in 1990. Participating hospitals in Pennsylvania and West Vir-
ginia transfer supplies before they go to the dump, taking them
to a warehouse for sorting before they are shipped to countries
where the equipment and supplies are badly needed.
Clapp, Jennifer. 2002. “Seeping through the Regulatory
Cracks.” SAIS Review 21 (1): 141–155.
An expert on hazardous waste trading, Clapp provides a history
of the international trade in hazardous waste that began in the
late 1980s up through the Basel Convention. She explains that
key stakeholders are not parties to the convention (including the
United States) and that this situation allows rich-country to poor-
country exports of waste for recycling to continue. The lack of
participation by industrialized nations is coupled with poor en-
278
Resources
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
forcement and the limited scope of the Basel agreement, with
countries taking advantage of loopholes to export waste to de-
veloping countries.
CQ Researcher. 2006. “Momentum Stalls.” CQ Researcher 16
(10): 229–230.
This short piece explains why the momentum to build nuclear
power plants in the United States seemed to stall despite the 1973
Arab oil crisis. This historical article covers the enactment of en-
vironmental laws, the growth of the environmental movement,
waste management concerns, safety, and controversial incidents
that stalled the momentum of nuclear power plant development.
Davidson, Pamela. 2000. “Demographics of Dumping II: A Na-
tional Environmental Equity Survey and the Distribution of
Hazardous Materials Handlers.” Demography 37 (4): 461–466.
The author examined the facilities governed by the Resource
Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA) throughout the United
States to determine whether patterns occur in how these facilities
are sited. The study found that although no evidence exists of
stark environmental inequities, RCRA-governed facilities are
more likely to be sited in working-class neighborhoods with
lower percentages of minority residents but are also sited close to
neighborhoods with a higher percentage of minority residents.
Friess, Steve. 2006. “A New ‘Joe Camel’?” Newsweek 147 (April
24): 9.
Officials in Nevada are outraged that the U.S. Department of En-
ergy has created a cartoon figure to raise support for the storage
of nuclear waste at the Yucca Mountain nuclear waste facility.
They compare the attempt to promote the agency’s project with
the tobacco industry’s use of the Joe Camel character to get chil-
dren to smoke. Nevada’s political leaders, who have overwhelm-
ingly opposed the Yucca Mountain project, are venting their fury
on the department.
Goldberg, Jessica. 2007. “The Nuke Waste Around Us.” E: The
Environmental Magazine 18 (5): 24.
Radioactive contamination is now being found in U.S. landfills,
according to a report by the Nuclear Information and Resource
Print Resources
279
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
Service. This article notes that radioactive materials from nuclear
weapons production is ending up in municipal landfills, either
directly released by the U.S. Department of Energy or by brokers
and processors of the waste. The public is generally unaware of
this problem, according to the author, and needs to become edu-
cated in order to tell the federal government to shift from the dis-
persal to the isolation of radioactive waste.
Hadjilambrinos, Constantine. 2006. “The High-Level Radioac-
tive Waste Policy Dilemma: Prospects for a Realistic Manage-
ment Policy.” Journal of Technology Studies 32 (2): 95–105.
Tremendous increases in the amount of high-level radioactive
waste being generated in the United States require a coherent na-
tional policy, the author contends. The growth of nuclear power
plants has resulted in waste that has the capacity to diminish the
human species. Long-term containment policies have not yet re-
solved technical issues that still plague the nation.
Hickman, H. Lanier, and Richard W. Eldredge. n.d. “A Brief
History of Solid Waste Management in the US, 1950–2000.”
Municipal Solid Waste Management. [Online article; retrieved
7/1/07.] http://www.mswmanagement.com/msw.html.
A series of articles that attempts to bring together the results of
interviews with industry “elders,” these recollections provide
background material for a field that lacks many historical docu-
ments. It begins with a brief summary of the eradication of com-
municable diseases by the U.S. Public Health Service and moves
through the development of sanitary landfills, the waste man-
agement infrastructure, waste-to-energy facilities, and the cur-
rent status of solid waste as a profession and science.
Holton, W. Conrad. 2005. “Power Surge: Renewed Interest in
Nuclear Energy.” Environmental Health Perspectives 113 (11):
742–750.
Although the nuclear power industry appears to have stalled for
the last three decades, interest in developing nuclear plants
seems to be renewed because of worldwide demands for energy.
The U.S. Energy Policy Act, initiated by the George W. Bush ad-
ministration, supports more research and development of nu-
280
Resources
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
clear power, and some environmental groups are taking a second
look at this energy source. Despite potential benefits in slowing
global climate change, nuclear power advocates must still come
up with solutions to deal with the problems associated with nu-
clear waste.
Jenkins, R., Kelly B. Maguire, and Cynthia L. Morgan. 2004.
“Host Community Compensation and Municipal Solid Waste
Landfills.” Land Economics 80 (4): 513–528.
One of the newer incentives for convincing communities to ac-
cept landfills is payment by developers in exchange for permis-
sion to construct, expand, or operate facilities. This study finds
that citizen participation in host fee negotiations, experience in
hosting a landfill, state requirements for minimum hosting com-
pensation, and firms with greater resources lead to great host
compensation. Somewhat surprisingly, neither the racial makeup
nor the income level of the community appears to be a factor in
host siting decisions.
Kaufman, Scott, Nora Goldstein, Karsten Millrath, and Nicko-
las J. Themelis. 2004. “The State of Garbage in America.” 
BioCycle 45 (1): 31–41.
One of the difficulties encountered in solid waste management
policy making is getting an accurate accounting of how much
waste is actually generated in the United States. These authors
examine two of the most frequently cited studies: the BioCycle
State of Garbage in America survey and research conducted by
Franklin Associates for the U.S. EPA. In order to deal with differ-
ences in the findings of the two studies, researchers collaborated
to create a report on waste management from 1989 to 2002.
Kelly, Timothy M. 2005. “Can Hazardous Waste Sites be
Breached as a Result of Future Climate Change?” Journal of En-
vironmental Engineering 131 (5): 810–814.
Among the many problems attributed to potential climate change
is whether increasing precipitation will lead to serious conse-
quences for the integrity of hazardous waste disposal facilities.
This study shows that large-scale changes in rainfall have occurred
over the Northern Hemisphere, and landfills have the potential for
Print Resources
281
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
failure because they were designed for less precipitation. The
problem may also apply to abandoned or closed hazardous waste
sites, where little research has been conducted on the potential for
breaching.
Kloosterman, Karin. 2007. “Israeli Discovery Converts Waste
into Clean Energy.” Israel21c (March 18). [Online article; re-
trieved 8/12/07.] http://www.israel21c.org/bin/en.jsp?enZone=
Technology&enDisplay=view&enPage=BlankPage&enDisp
What=object&enDispWho=Articles%5El1586.
Israeli and Russian scientists have been working for years to find
a new, cost-effective way to deal with radioactive and hazardous
waste, and this article contends that they have developed a po-
tential new way of reducing tons of waste to energy and glass.
The process uses plasma gas melting technology to convert waste
by treating it in a noncombustion manner that actually produces
excess electric power.
Louis, Garrick E. 2004. “A Historical Context of Municipal
Solid Waste Management in the United States.” Waste Man-
agement and Research 22 (4): 306–322.
This historical overview begins by noting that American cities
lacked systems for street cleaning, refuse collection, waste treat-
ment, and human waste removal until the early 1800s. The de-
velopers of the public works infrastructure did not turn their
attention to solid waste until the 1880s, when refuse management
was deemed a municipal responsibility, where it remains today.
Macauley, Molly, Karen Palmer, Jhih-Shyang Shih, Sarah
Cline, and Heather Holsinger. 2001. “The Environment and the
Information Age: The Costs of Coping with Used Computer
Monitors.” Resources (Fall): 6–9.
The authors identify the issues raised by the “information econ-
omy” and the growing use of personal computers. Although this
article is now somewhat outdated, it does do a good job of ana-
lyzing disposal practices and the environmental concerns raised
by computer monitor displays. It also recommends what might
be done to develop electronic waste disposal policies based on
various goals such as eliminating negative health effects and the
costs of encouraging recycling.
282
Resources
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
Marxsen, Craig S. 2001. “Potential World Garbage and Waste
Carbon Sequestration.” Environmental Science and Policy 4
(December): 293–300.
The emission of fossil fuels is just one way in which carbon diox-
ide is released into the atmosphere, exacerbating the problems of
global climate change. This author contends that strategies are
available for dealing with waste carbon, including that portion
produced by garbage dumps, which involve sequestering it.
Melosi, Martin V. 2002. “The Fresno Sanitary Landfill in Ameri-
can Cultural Context.” The Public Historian 24 (Summer): 17–35.
Melosi, one of the United States’ top garbage historians, explains
the controversies surrounding the designation of the Fresno San-
itary Landfill as a National Historic Landmark on August 27,
2001. At issue was the fact that Secretary of the Interior Gale Nor-
ton rescinded the designation the following day because it was
also a Superfund site. To some, the listing of the landfill was a na-
tional joke, while to others, it marked an appropriate way of hon-
oring public works engineering.
Murphy, J. D., and E. McKeogh. 2004. “Technical, Economic and
Environmental Analysis of Energy Production from Municipal
Solid Waste.” Renewable Energy 29 (7): 1043–1057.
This study examines the production of energy from four tech-
nologies used to dispose of municipal solid waste: incineration,
gasification, generation of biogas used to generate heat and
power, and generation of biogas and conversion to transport fuel.
The researchers conclude that biogas technologies are less expen-
sive to operate than other methods and require lower initial in-
vestment fees.
Natural Resources Defense Council. 2006. “Toxic Pentagon.”
Earth Island Journal 20 (Winter): 8.
The U.S. Department of Defense has been under fire for decades
for its environmental policies, especially the cleanup of toxic and
hazardous wastes. The Government Accountability Office has re-
ported that the agency has failed to grant requests from both Cali-
fornia and Texas to test sites for perchlorate contamination
resulting from military activities. The chemical waste is especially
Print Resources
283
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
dangerous to infants and is found in an estimated 35 states at 395
defense sites.
Nussbaum, Neil J. 2006. “Radiation Risk to Future Generations
from Long-Lived Radioactive Waste.” Journal of Community
Health 31 (5): 363–368.
This article provides an overview of the growth of the U.S. in-
ventory of nuclear waste and the revision of storage standards by
the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. The delays in devel-
oping a permanent storage facility at Yucca Mountain, Nevada,
present a significant radiation risk for future generations 10,000
years into the future.
Olivares, Cristina. 2007. “Laying Groundwork for Campus
Composting.” BioCycle 48 (June): 35.
Ohio University students from a sustainable agriculture class
embarked on a project to conduct a waste audit at the university
as part of an effort to implement a full-scale composting program
there. The university created the Office of Resource Conservation
in 2006 to help organize the project. The initial findings show that
the school will be able to divert 2.5 to 3 tons of food waste to com-
posting each day on a campus with a population of about 17,000.
Peretz, Jean H., Bruce E. Tonn, and David H. Folz. 2005. “Ex-
plaining the Performance of Mature Municipal Solid Waste Re-
cycling Programs.” Journal of Environmental Planning and
Management 48 (5): 627–650.
Recycling programs began to be implemented in cities during the
1970s and 1980s, and this study evaluates how well they have
worked. The researchers found that recycling participation rates
were higher in cities that offered more convenient recycling pro-
grams and whose residents had a higher mean household in-
come. Cities with a larger nonminority population that imposed
sanctions on improper sorting of recyclable materials had a
higher participation rate, and in small cities, higher participation
was attained by mandating household participation.
Roach, John. 2003. “Are Plastic Grocery Bags Sacking the Envi-
ronment?” National Geographic News (September 2). [Online
284
Resources
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
article; retrieved 4/26/07.] http://news.nationalgeographic.com/
news/2003/09/0902_030902_plasticbags.html.
This update on the use of plastic bags explains why they have be-
come such an environmental problem around the world. The au-
thor identifies the pros and cons of using plastic bags, including
the fact that they are more economical. But he also notes how the
bags end up in the marine environment where the debris is in-
gested by wildlife. The article concludes with the plastic bag levy
adopted by the Republic of Ireland and whether it might be
adapted to the United States.
Schultz, Max. 2006. “Power Is the Future.” Wilson Quarterly 30
(4): 59–64.
Advantages and disadvantages accompany the use of nuclear
power, with critics saying that it is dangerous, and advocates, in-
cluding environmental leader Patrick Moore, contending that it
is the only large-scale, cost-effective energy source that can be
implemented while the world looks at other ways of reducing
greenhouse gas emissions. Global power demands are at odds
with the problem posed by nuclear waste and the potential for
the proliferation of nuclear material.
Slack, R. J., J. Gronow, and N. Voulvoulis. 2004. “Hazardous
Components of Household Waste.” Critical Reviews of Envi-
ronmental Science and Technology 34 (5): 419–445.
Hazardous waste is being found in increasing proportions of mu-
nicipal solid waste, but little research is being conducted on
methods used to dispose of this component of the waste stream.
Because different countries classify household hazardous wastes
differently, it is difficult to quantify how much is sent to landfills
and the extent of the potential risks these wastes pose to both
human health and the environment.
Wagner, Travis. 2004. “Hazardous Waste: Evolution of a Na-
tional Environmental Problem.” Journal of Policy History 16
(4): 306–331.
The author explains that although hazardous waste has always
been perceived as a major environmental problem and public
health risk, no one took it seriously until 1978. Despite the U.S.
Print Resources
285
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
military’s controversial program to dispose of outdated nerve
gas weapons in the Atlantic Ocean in August 1970, called Opera-
tion CHASE, the public perceived the dumping as an isolated in-
cident that really did not affect their backyards. This lack of
awareness was one of the reasons why hazardous waste did not
become a serious issue until Love Canal was widely covered by
the media.
Journals
CIWM Journal
Chartered Institution of Wastes Management
9 Saxon Court
St. Peter’s Gardens, Marefair
Northampton NN1 1SX
United Kingdom
Web site: www.ciwm.co.uk
EM
One Gateway Center, Third Floor
420 Fort Duquesne Boulevard
Pittsburgh, PA 15222-1435
Telephone: (412) 232-3444
Web site: www.awma.org
International Journal of Environment and 
Waste Management
Inderscience Enterprises
World Trade Center Building
29 Route de Pre-Bois
Case Postale 896
CH-1215 Geneva 15
Switzerland
Web site: www.inderscience.com
Journal of the Air & Waste Management Association
One Gateway Center, Third Floor
420 Fort Duquesne Boulevard
Pittsburgh, PA 15222-1435
Telephone: (412) 232-3444
Web site: www.awma.org
286
Resources
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
Journal of Packaging
Institute of Packaging Professionals
1601 Bond Street, Suite 101
Naperville, IL 60563
Telephone: (630) 544-5050
Web site: www.iopp.org
Journal of Solid Waste Technology and Management
Department of Civil Engineering
Widener University
One University Place
Chester, PA 19013-5792
Telephone: (610) 499-4042
Web site: http://www2.widener.edu/~sxw0004/solid_waste.html
MSW Management
Forester Communications, Inc.
P.O. Box 3100
Santa Barbara, CA 93130
Telephone: (805) 682-1300
Web site: http://www.mswmanagement.com/msw.html
Tribal Waste Management
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
Municipal and Industrial Solid Waste Division (5306P)
Ariel Rios Building
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue NW
Washington, DC 20460
Telephone: (866) EPA-WEST or (415) 947-8000
Web site: www.epa.gov/tribalmsw
Waste and Resource Management
Institution of Civil Engineers
Thomas Telford Journals
One Great George Street
London SW1P 3AA
United Kingdom
Web site: www.thomastelford.com/journals
Waste Management and Research
Sage Publications
Print Resources
287
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
1 Oliver’s Road, 55 City Road
London EC1Y 1SP
United Kingdom
Web site: www.iswa.org
Waste Management World
International Solid Waste Association
Vesterbrogade 74, Third Floor
1620 Copenhagen V
Denmark
Web site: www.iswa.org
Nonprint Resources
CD-ROMS/DVD-ROMS/DVDs/Videos
Approaches to Onsite Management: Community Perspectives
Type:
Videorecording
Length:
17 minutes
Date:
2002
Source:
National Environmental Services Center, 
West Virginia University, Morgantown, WV
Narrated by Harlan Hogan, this documentary video provides an
introductory overview of the concept of community on-site/
decentralized waste management and sewage disposal under the
auspices of the Environmental Protection Agency’s Office of
Wastewater Management.
Borderline Cases: Environmental Matters at the 
U.S.–Mexico Border
Type: 
Videorecording
Length: 65 minutes
Date: 
1997
Source: Bullfrog Films, Oley, PA
The growth of factories, known as maquiladoras, along the U.S.
border with Mexico has created problems when solid and haz-
ardous wastes are dumped by companies that fail to comply with
environmental regulations.
288
Resources
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
Crapshoot: The Gamble with Our Wastes
Type: 
Videorecording
Length: 52 minutes
Date: 
2004
Source: Bullfrog Films, Oley, PA
This global tour of waste and sewage sites provides reasons why
the world needs to rethink its perspective on waste management.
Laid to Waste
Type: 
Videorecording
Length: 52 minutes
Date: 
1996
Source: University of California Extension Center for Media, 
Berkeley, CA
One of the most important battles in the history of U.S. waste
management took place in Chester, Pennsylvania, when commu-
nity leaders and activists sought to stop the siting of a waste
treatment facility in their city.
Radioactive America
Type: 
Videorecording
Length: 29 minutes
Date: 
2000
Source: Center for Defense Information, Washington, DC
The United States is still dealing with the problems of leftover
nuclear waste from the research conducted at the Oak Ridge Na-
tional Laboratory in Tennessee and the Hanford site in Washing-
ton State.
Radioactive Reservations
Type: 
Videorecording or DVD
Length: 52 minutes
Date: 
1995
Source: Filmmakers Library, New York, NY
Native Americans must choose whether they want to try to es-
cape impoverished living conditions by agreeing to have their
lands serve as the repositories for radioactive waste, even though
tribal councils, rather than tribal members, may profit. Four reser-
vations are profiled in negotiations with the U.S. government.
Nonprint Resources
289
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
Ships of Shame
Type: 
Videorecording or DVD
Length: 28 minutes
Date: 
2001
Source: Filmakers Library, New York, NY
In India, shipbreaking—the scrapping of older vessels—exposes
poor laborers to environmental hazards and accidents, as seen in
this documentary produced for the Association for Asian Stud-
ies. Thousands of exploited workers risk their lives to deal with
the hazardous and dangerous waste of industrialized nations in
what investigators believe is a case of international injustice.
The Ash Barge Odyssey
Type:
Videorecording
Length:
57 minutes
Date:
2001
Source:
Michael Thomas Productions, Montgomeryville, PA
In 1986, the world was captivated by the story of a barge loaded
with 14,000 tons of incinerated trash that left Philadelphia look-
ing for a landfill that would accept the waste. Although most of
it was apparently dumped at sea, some was dumped in Haiti be-
fore the barge eventually returned to the United States.
The Trash Trade: Selling Garbage to China
Type: 
Videorecording or DVD
Length: 49 minutes
Date: 
2004
Source: Filmakers Library, New York, NY
Japan sends its trash to China, where scrap dealers disassemble
it and make it into new goods that are then shipped back to Japan
in an international recycling program that contributes to Chinese
pollution.
Toxic Waters
Type: 
Videorecording
Length: 58 minutes
Date: 
2000
Source: Michael Thomas Productions, Montgomeryville, PA
290
Resources
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
Delaware County, Pennsylvania, is the unlikely venue for protest
when citizens begin to rally around the issue of toxic waste in
their neighborhood.
Two Square Miles
Type: 
Videorecording or DVD
Length: 52 minutes
Date: 
2006
Source: Filmakers Library, New York, NY
The citizens of Hudson, New York, are profiled in this award-
winning documentary that explores how a community responds
to a proposed multinational coal-fired cement plant that threat-
ens to generate environmental waste in a small town.
Nonprint Resources
291
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
Glossary
aerobic digestion
A process for breaking down organic material using
bacteria to reduce the volume of municipal solid waste, producing water
and carbon dioxide.
anaerobic digestion
The process used in landfills to reduce the vol-
ume of organic waste by serving as a medium for the growth in the ab-
sence of oxygen, converting the waste to methane and carbon dioxide.
ash
The noncombustible material that remains after incineration, com-
posed of fine powders, small parts of partially burned materials, and
burned matter.
back-end process
A technological action that changes the chemical
properties of waste or converts its components into energy or compost,
such as a waste-to-energy facility that converts biomass into electricity.
baler
A device used in processing municipal solid waste or at similar
facilities that compresses loose material into rectangular blocks. Retail-
ers sometimes use balers to process cardboard boxes to make the mate-
rial easier to handle and to avoid taking up space in trash receptacles.
biodegradable
A product or substance that can be broken down or de-
composed into basic organic materials, such as gases and acids.
biomedical waste
Pathological or infectious waste, such as animal car-
casses, bacteria and viruses, blood, or tissue.
bioremediation
The use of natural microbial treatments (such as
plants or microorganisms) to remediate toxic waste contamination.
blunt policy instruments
Policies that indirectly influence potentially
polluting activities, such as the dumping of waste, by establishing a tax
on inputs that, after some industrial activity, will generate toxic wastes.
brownfields
Sites for potential redevelopment that have been previ-
ously used but are not now in productive use, often within urban areas.
293
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
bypassed waste
Waste received at a waste-to-energy facility that is not
burned because it is noncombustible, unacceptable, or too large, such as
automobile batteries or discarded refrigerators.
clinker
Material that is formed as a result of a fire that is usually hard and
fused together, such as glass or metal, that cannot be completely burned.
cogeneration
The process by which the heat released from one opera-
tion serves as a source of energy for another operation, such as the steam
that is produced in a boiler that is captured and used to power an electri-
cal generator.
combustion
Combining oxygen with a substance to produce heat,
such as fire or light.
command and control
The most common means of regulating the use
and disposal of hazardous materials and wastes. This often includes
policies and restrictions that specify a maximum allowable level of pol-
lution or toxicity.
compaction garbage collection
The use of a collection truck that was
designed to hydraulically compress household waste inside the closed
portion of the vehicle, requiring fewer workers and allowing a vehicle to
collect more trash in each trip before unloading at the landfill.
composting
The controlled biological decomposition of waste. Com-
post is made of materials such as food; leaves, grass, and other yard
waste; paper; and cardboard. If produced under controlled conditions, it
can be used to enrich garden soil.
contaminated sites
Parcels of land on which or under which haz-
ardous and toxic substances exist under conditions that do not effec-
tively confine their movement.
cradle to grave
A policy approach that uses manifests to control haz-
ardous wastes from the point of generation to the final disposal sites.
The controls apply to hazardous waste generators and transporters as
well as those that store, treat, or dispose of the wastes.
cullet
Pieces of used glass broken up for recycling that are sometimes
melted to make new glass products or combined with other products.
deep pockets
In litigation over which parties are legally responsible
for hazardous waste cleanup, the one or more litigants who have the
greater capacity to pay for the costs involved.
de-inking
The process of removing ink, filler, and other extraneous
material from printed or unprinted recovered paper to produce pulp,
which can be used in the manufacture of new paper or tissue.
densification
A process that lowers the volume-to-weight ratio of
waste in order to reduce shipping costs. Baling is the most common form
of densification, although some handlers of postconsumer plastics grind
materials up for recycling.
294
Glossary
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
dump
A generic name for the indiscriminate depositing of waste ma-
terials without monitoring or regulation. Dumps are usually open sites
where waste is buried or left to decompose.
extraction treatments
The physical removal of contaminated soil, sur-
face water, or groundwater from a site and then confining or treating it.
fly ash
Finely divided carbon particles, cinders, dust, soot, or other
partially burned materials that rise with hot combustion gases and are
trapped at the back end of waste-to-energy plants.
front-end recovery
Methods used to reduce the size of solid waste by
separating or physically modifying components so they can be used or
reused, such as separating glass bottles before they are landfilled.
handler
A person or group that prepares recyclable plastics or other
materials by sorting, densifying, or storing the material until a sufficient
quantity is on hand.
hauler
A person or company that delivers trash and postconsumer
materials to a transfer station or processing facility, such as a landfill or
an incinerator. Waste haulers may be public or private entities that con-
tract to the public to provide trash services.
hazardous
Describing a substance, such as waste, that has one or more
of the following characteristics: toxicity, corrosivity, flammability, or re-
activity.
incineration
A form of waste disposal that involves burning refuse at
extremely high temperatures for treatment.
integrated solid waste management
The use of a combination of waste
management techniques that ranks options in order of their preference as
ways of dealing with waste. The common preference order is source re-
duction, recycling and composting, combustion, and landfilling.
joint and several liability
A component of hazardous waste cleanup
responsibility whereby any one of the potentially responsible parties can
be liable for the entire cleanup cost at a site. This concept allows the gov-
ernment to collect the costs of cleanup with a powerful tool when it is
not possible to find all of the parties.
landfill
A large land area designed, operated, and maintained for de-
positing solid waste. Landfills in the United States are regulated by the
Environmental Protection Agency.
landfill gas
The emissions of decomposing waste that occur in landfill
operations, usually consisting of highly flammable methane, a major
contributor to global climate change. It may also include the airborne
wastes from adhesives, household cleaners, plastics, and paints.
leachate
Types of liquids that pass through solid waste, picking up
dissolved or suspended particles. Landfills trap leachate by using a liner
Glossary
295
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
as a barrier to minimize the possibility that it will mix with ground or
surface water.
materials recovery
The separation of resources such as paper, glass,
and metals with the purpose of processing the waste for beneficial use
or reuse. Materials recovery facilities are plants that use this strategy to
separate and sort municipal solid waste.
mega-fills
Underground waste sites that range in size from 10 to 100
acres across and hundreds of feet deep.
methane
An odorless, colorless, nonpoisonous, flammable, and explo-
sive gas formed when organic waste decomposes. Methane is often pro-
duced at landfills, where it can be recovered and used as fuel to avoid
having it enter the atmosphere.
midnight dumping
Illegal disposal of hazardous or other types of
waste in nonapproved disposal sites. This practice often occurred before
the government adopted the cradle-to-grave policy to track the final dis-
position of wastes, and included trucks that would spray hazardous
waste oil on country roads or dump waste in a pit or river in the dark of
the night to avoid detection.
mine-scarred lands
Areas and their associated waters and surround-
ing watersheds where extraction, beneficiation, or processing of ores
and minerals has occurred. These properties may be on public or private
land and involve complex environmental and social issues. Some mine-
scarred lands may be reused as landfills.
municipal solid waste
Any household waste or garbage, street litter,
or solid waste produced by businesses, institutions, and schools. It does
not include materials separated out for recycling, infectious or haz-
ardous waste, waste from industrial processes, demolition or disaster
debris, mining or agricultural waste, ashes, or sewage sludge.
National Priorities List
A list of the most dangerous hazardous waste
sites in the United States that will receive an environmental cleanup
under the Superfund program.
open burning
The combustion of solid waste without controls on air
emissions. This is often a method for waste disposal in rural areas where
trash collection is unavailable or expensive.
orphan site
Commercial land contaminated by hazardous waste for
which no responsible party can be identified or is capable of remediat-
ing the site.
packaging
The wrapping, covering, or container used to store, carry,
or display a product. The majority of solid waste comes from packaging,
especially paper and plastic wrapping.
296
Glossary
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
percolation
The movement of water downward through solid waste
into the soil below. Landfills use liners and drainage pipes to prevent
percolation.
petroleum brownfields
Areas where underground storage tanks are
found on abandoned or underused industrial and commercial proper-
ties. These plots are being cleaned up with funds from the Leaking Un-
derground Storage Tank Trust Fund for reuse.
phytoremediation
The direct use of green plants and their associated
microorganisms to stabilize or reduce contamination in soils, sludges,
sediments, surface water, or ground water. This process was first used in
the 1990s to clean up hazardous waste sites.
polluter-pays principle
The concept that the party responsible for
causing the pollution should bear the cost of efforts to reduce or reme-
diate the pollution, used as a way of distributing the costs of environ-
mental cleanup or protection.
portfields
Brownfields (contaminated industrial areas) near port com-
munities. Cleanup of these waste sites in the United States is led by the
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration and the Environ-
mental Protection Agency, with support from the Army Corps of 
Engineers.
potentially responsible parties
Term used under the U.S. Compre-
hensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act to
determine who may be responsible for the cost of cleanup of a haz-
ardous waste site.
proximity principle
The concept that wastes should be transferred or
transported to the nearest, best disposal facility, regardless of jurisdiction.
pyrolysis
An industrial process involving the destructive distillation
of a solid material using heat, and, in the absence of oxygen, sometimes
used for solid waste disposal.
railfields
Lands that have been abandoned with the decline of the rail-
road industry during the 20th century that have been contaminated with
waste, especially hazardous waste. Railfields in the United States are
being cleaned up and redeveloped by the Environmental Protection
Agency.
remediation
The process of environmental cleanup on a contaminated
site and the techniques to decrease or eliminate contamination from soil,
surface water, or groundwater.
resource recovery
The burning of wastes to create steam power and
electricity from combustion using materials that would otherwise be dis-
carded. Resource recovery facilities are also called waste-to-energy
plants.
Glossary
297
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
retroactive liability
Alegal principle used under the Superfund program
that makes parties liable to pay the cost of environmental cleanup for acts
that were legal at the time they occurred but that caused contamination.
sanitarians
Professionals within the refuse collection and disposal
management systems during the late 19th and early 20th centuries.
sanitary landfill
An engineered facility for the disposal of municipal
solid waste where efforts are made to minimize the negative environ-
mental and health impacts.
self-sufficiency principle
The concept that individual nations should
take responsibility for waste management in their own country.
sludge
A semiliquid mixture of solids, dissolved materials, and water
that accumulates in tanks, basins, and sewer pipes from wastewaters or
other fluids. Sludge is a component of the waste stream.
solid waste
Garbage, refuse, rubbish, sludge, trash, and other dis-
carded material.
source reduction
Strategies used to cut down the size, volume, and
toxic content of material that is discarded as waste, such as reusing re-
turnable bottles.
source separation
Removing recyclable materials from municipal
solid waste at the point of origin, considered a front-end process.
thermal treatment
The incineration of contaminated soil to destroy or-
ganic compounds, one of the most widely used remediation techniques
for dealing with hazardous waste.
tipping fee
The charges levied to deposit waste at a landfill, waste-to-
energy plant, or compost site. Tipping fees are calculated by the ton.
transfer station
Acentral unloading point for municipal solid waste that
is partway to its final destination. A transfer station is often the location
where local garbage haulers deposit their waste into a large hopper, where
it may be compressed to reduce its volume before it is loaded onto a semi-
truck trailer, barge, railroad car, or other vehicle to transport it.
vector theory
The belief that rats and other vermin were responsible
for disease transmission, used as a reason for covering garbage dumps
with layers of dirt to keep rodents out.
waste stream
The flow of refuse that gets processed through a lengthy
and complex system of municipal waste management.
waste-to-energy plant
A trash facility that burns waste as fuel through
high-temperature combustion, producing electrical energy and steam.
zero waste
The elimination of waste before it gets made, at the front
end of the production process, rather than treating trash after it already
exists, by maximizing recycling; minimizing waste; reducing consump-
tion; and ensuring that products are made to be reused, repaired, or re-
cycled back into nature or the marketplace.
298
Glossary
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
Abraham, Spencer, 63
Accra, Ghana, 86
Africa, 85–87
Bamako Convention, 106
and e-waste, 108–110
agricultural waste, 8–9
Air & Waste Management
Association, 225–226
Air Quality Act of 1967, 24
Alabama, 33
Department of Environmental
Management, 215–216
Alang, India, 189–190
Alaska Department of Environmental
Conservation, 216
Alliance of Foam Packaging
Recyclers, 226
Alter Vida, 98
Aluminum Association, 226–227
aluminum cans, 3, 47
numbers in waste stream, 49
recycling statistics, 197–198
American Forest & Paper Association,
227
American Water Works Association,
20
Appliance Recycling Information
Center, 227
Arizona, 76–77
Department of Environmental
Quality, 216
Arkansas Department of
Environmental Quality, 216
As You Sow, 198
Asia, 87–91
and e-waste, 108–109
and shipbreaking, 110–111, 189–190
Asphalt Recycling and Reclaiming
Association, 228
Association of Postconsumer Plastic
Recyclers, 228
Association of State and Territorial
Solid Waste, 228–229
Atomic Energy Act of 1954, 23
Atomic Energy Commission (AEC), 23
Australia, 100–101
and landfills, 84
and plastic bags, 84
bacteria, 19
Baghdad, Iraq, 98
Bakashi, Nishkita, 198
Bamako Convention, 106
BANANA (build absolutely nothing
anywhere near anything), 68–69
Bangladesh, and polyethylene bags,
83–84
Barnwell, South Carolina, 199–200
Basel Action Network, 229
Basel Convention on the Control of
Transboundary Movements of
Hazardous Wastes and Their
Disposal, 103–105, 180–181, 812
and China, 87–88
Eighth Conference of the Parties to,
185
on e-waste, 108–109
and Israel, 99
299
Index
Note: t. indicates table.
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
Basel Convention on the Control of
Transboundary Movements of
Hazardous Wastes and Their
Disposal (cont.)
preamble (text), 182–185
speech by Achim Steiner (text),
186–187
batteries, 9, 55
Battery Council International, 230
Beal, Deron, 76
beverage containers, 47–49, 198
and deposit legislation, 49–51
numbers in waste stream, 49
one-way, 48–49
recycling rates and statistics, 51,
199t.
Bill Emerson Good Samaritan Food
Donation Act of 1996, 30
Biodegradable Products Institute, 230
biofuels, 75
biohazards, 4
biomass, 8, 75
Birmingham, Alabama, 33
Blacksmith Institute, 230–231
Bloomberg, Michael, 69
Bonaparte, Napoleon, 3
Brazil, 97
brownfields, 72–73
European Union, 94
Browning-Ferris Industries, 33
Buenos Aires, Argentina, 97
building waste, 7
bulky waste, 5
Bullard, Robert, 32
biographical sketch, 143–144
Buntrock, Dean, 144–145
Bureau of International Recycling, 231
Bush, George H. W., 24
Bush, George W., and administration
letter to House and Senate re Yucca
Mountain (excerpts), 201–202
and radioactive waste, 61–62, 64
and Yucca Mountain, 200
Businesses and Environmentalists
Allied for Recycling (BEAR), 51
Cairo, Egypt
composting, 85–86
scavenging, 86
California, 19
first landfill, 21
Integrated Waste Management
Board, 42–43, 216
Take-It-Back Partnership, 55
Waste Management Board, 31
and water pollution, 20
Can Manufacturers Institute, 196–197,
231–232
“Recycling Fun Facts,” 197–198
Canada, 106, 233
and waste-to-energy, 84
Cape Town, South Africa, 86
Carlsbad, New Mexico, 23
Carpet America Recovery Effort
(CARE), 46–47, 196
carpeting, 46–47, 195–196
recycling statistics, 196t.
Carter, Jimmy, 27
and radioactive waste, 60–61
Cefic, 232
cell phones, 55–56
Cellular Telecommunications and
Internet Association, 55
Center for Health, Environment and
Justice, 232
CERCLA. See Comprehensive
Environmental Response,
Compensation, and Liability Act
of 1980
Cerrell, Joseph R., 145–146
Cerrell Report, 31
Chartered Institution of Wastes
Management, 232–233
Chavis, Benjamin Jr., 146–147
Chef Menteur landfill (New Orleans),
66–68
chemical waste, 20
Chernobyl, Ukraine, 191
Chesapeake Terrace (Maryland)
landfill, 71–72
Chicago, Illinois, 19
China, 87–88, 190, 192
and e-waste, 109
Chouinard, Yvon, 147–148
Citizens Association of New York, 
17
Civic Improvement League of St.
Louis, 17
Civil Rights Act of 1964, 33
Clackamas, Oregon, 73–74
300
Index
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
Clean Air Act Amendments of 1990,
29–30
Clinton, Bill, and administration, 33
and radioactive waste, 61
Clive, Utah, 199, 200
cloth bags, 40
collection, 10
Colorado Department of Public
Health and Environment, 216
commercial waste, 5–6
Commoner, Barry, 148–149
community waste, 5
compact discs, 42
composting, 10–11, 12
Egypt, 85–86
India, 90
See also European Compost
Network; U.S. Composting
Council
Composting Association, 233
Composting Council of Canada, 233
Comprehensive Environmental
Response, Compensation, and
Liability Act of 1980 (CERCLA),
27
Hazard Ranking System, 58
and National Priorities List, 58
See also Superfund
“Comprehensive Procurement
Guidelines,” 178
text, 179
computers, 55
Connecticut Department of
Environmental Protection, 216
Connett, Paul, 149–150
Container Recycling Institute, 198, 234
cradle to grave, 26
Dangerous Goods Advisory Council,
234
Deaf Smith County, Texas, 61
Delaware Department of Natural
Resources and Environmental
Control, 217
Deubner, Walter, and Deubner
Shopping Bag, 2
dioxin, 28, 31
disaster debris
from hurricanes Katrina and Rita,
65–68
from 9/11, 64–65
disposable diapers, 21
Dominican Republic, 192
Durand, Peter, 3
Dzerzhinsk, Russia, 191
e-waste. See electronic waste
Earth Day, 171
Eastern garbage patch, Pacific Ocean,
188
Electronic Industry Alliance, 234–235
electronic waste, 6, 55–56
dumps in Guiyu, China, 190
international movement of, 108–109
emissions control, 29–30
Environmental Energy Resources, 99
environmental justice, 31–34
Environmental Protection Agency
(EPA). See U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency
Environmental Services Association,
235
Environmental Working Group, 235
European Compost Network, 235–236
European Union, 91–96
Executive Order 12898, “Federal
Actions to Address
Environmental Justice in
Minority Populations and Low-
Income Populations,” 33
Explosives and Combustibles Act of
1908, 22–23
Federal Emergency Management
Agency (FEMA)
and debris from hurricanes Katrina
and Rita, 65–66
and 9/11 debris, 64–65
fertilizer, 17
Fibre Box Association, 236
Film and Bag Federation, 236
Finland, 95
Florida, 72–73, 75
Department of Environmental
Protection, 217
Ford, Gerald, 27
France, and plastic bags, 84
freecycling, 76–77
Fresh Kills Landfill Complex (New
York City), 69, 188–189
Index
301
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
Fresh Kills Landfill Complex (New
York City) (cont.)
and 9/11 debris, 65
reclamation project, 53–54
Fresno, California, and first landfill,
21
furans, 31
“Garbage Wonders of the World.” See
“Seven New Garbage Wonders
of the World”
Georgia Department of Natural
Resources, 217
Germany, 94–95, 96
Gibbs, Lois, 150–151
glass bottles, 47–49
glass containers, 3–4
Glass Packaging Institute, 236–237
Global Anti-Incinerator Alliance, 237
Goodwill Industries, 55
Google, 76–77
Grogan, Pete, 151–152
Guam, 102
Guatemala, 97
Guide for Infectious Waste, 8
Guinn, Kenny, 63, 200–201
biographical sketch, 152–153
statement to House of
Representatives re Yucca
Mountain (excerpts), 202–204
Guiyu, China, 190
Haina, Dominican Republic, 192
Halle Companies, 71
Hamilton, Alice, 153–154
Hanford, Washington, 60, 61
Hansen, Larry, 2–3
Hawaii Department of Health, 217
Hazardous and Solid Waste
Amendments of 1984, 28
Hazardous Materials Transportation
Act of 1975, 25
hazardous waste, 6–7, 26, 56
Australia, 100
and CERCLA and Superfund,
27–28, 58–59
and China, 87–88
cleanup liability, 59
“command and control” approach,
57–58
“cradle to grave” approach, 58
EPA definition, 6
and EPA responsibility, 25
European Union, 92, 93–95
extraction, 57
generation, by country, 183t.
Israel, 99
Latin America, 98
and National Priorities List, 27
“polluter pays” principle, 57, 93
recycling, 57
remediation, 57
trading, 102–105
treatment, 57
U.S. as importer of, 107
hogs and pigs, and organic refuse
disposal, 19
Hooker Chemical Company, 56–57
household waste, 5
defined, 26
Houston, Texas, 32
Huizenga, H. Wayne, 154–155
Hungary, 94
Hunt, James, 32
Hurricanes Katrina and Rita, debris
from, 65–68
Idaho Department of Environmental
Quality, 217
Illinois, 19
Environmental Protection Agency,
217–218
incineration, 11–12
and Air Quality Act, 24
early development, 18
and environmental justice, 31–32
problems with, 52
United Kingdom, 84
waste-to-energy, 11, 26–27
India, 88–89, 90, 189–190, 194
Indiana Department of Environmental
Management, 218
industrial waste, 7, 20
and Explosives and Combustibles
Act, 22–23
industry and trade associations,
225–251
Industry Council for Electronic
Equipment Recycling, 237
Institute for Recyclable Materials, 238
302
Index
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
Institute of Packaging Professionals,
238
Institute of Scrap Recycling
Industries, 238–239
integrated waste management, 12
Integrated Waste Services Association,
239
Interagency Review Group on
Nuclear Waste Management,
60–61
International Association of
Electronics Recyclers, 239
International Atomic Energy
Commission (IAEA), 107, 108
International Bottled Water
Association, 239–240
International Corrugated Case
Association, 240
International Maritime Organization,
110
International Solid Waste Association,
105, 240–241
Iowa Department of Natural
Resources, 218
Iraq, 98
Ireland, and plastic bags, 83
Israel, 98–99
Italy, 91–92
Japan, 84, 90–91
and Basel Convention, 104
Jkarkhand, India, 189
Johannesburg World Summit on
Sustainable Development and
Plan of Implementation, 105
Johnson, Lady Bird, 50
Johnson, Lyndon B., 171–172, 175
“To Renew a Nation” (excerpts),
172–174
Kabwe, Zambia, 192
Kansas, 23, 60
Bureau of Waste Management, 218
Kansas City, Missouri, 19
Keep America Beautiful, 241
Kentucky Division of Waste
Management, 218
Kenya, 86
Knight, Margaret, 2
Krieger, David, 205–207
Kyrgyzstan, 193
La Oroya, Peru, 192
Labaree, Aaron, 187–190
lamps, 9
Land Disposal Program Flexibility Act
of 1996, 29
landfills, 12–13
Australia, 84
and debris from hurricanes Katrina
and Rita, 66–67
decreasing numbers of, 53
development of, 21
and disposable packaging, 21–22
first (Fresno, 1934), 21
and increased tipping fees, 52
as park and recreation sites after
closure, 53–54
and RCRA provisions, 52
and reduction disposal method
(Merz process), 52
sanitary, 12–13
secure, 13
seepage from, 53
settling of, 53
siting issues, 68–72
as Superfund sites, 52
Latin America, 96–98
Linfen, China, 192
Lome Convention, 106
London Convention on the
Prevention of Pollution by
Dumping of Wastes and Other
Matter, 107–108
Los Angeles, California, 19
Louisiana, 19
and debris from hurricanes Katrina
and Rita, 65–68
Department of Environmental
Quality, 218
Love Canal, New York, 56–57
LULU (locally unwanted land uses),
31
Lyons, Kansas, 23, 60
Mailuu-Suu, Kyrgyzstan, 193
Maine Department of Environmental
Protection, 218
Malaysia, 112
Manhattan Project, 60
Index
303
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
Manila, Philippines, 189
manure, 17
March of Dimes, 55
Maryland, 71–72
Department of the Environment,
219
Massachusetts Department of
Environmental Protection, 
219
Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
19
McDowell, Mary, 155–156
mechanical biological treatment, 13
medical waste, 7–8
EPA, WHO, and U.S. Public Health
Service on, 8
incidents of 1980s, 28–29
regular, 8
regulated, 8
Medical Waste Tracking Act, 29
Melosi, Martin, 156–157
mercury, 9
Merz process, 52
metal packaging, 3
Mexico, 97, 106–107
Michigan Department of
Environmental Quality, 219
Micronesia, 100–102
Mid-Atlantic Consortium of Recycling
and Economic Development
Officials, 241
Middle East, 98–99
“midnight dumping,” 25, 58
Minnesota Pollution Control Agency,
219
Mississippi Pollution Control Agency,
219–220
Missouri, 17, 28
Department of Natural Resources,
220 
Montana, University of, 75–76
Montana Department of
Environmental Quality, 220
municipal solid waste (MSW), 5
collection, by country, 181t.
components of, 1
exporting of, 70
facility siting issues, 68–70
global picture, 180
treatment, by country, 182t.
Municipal Waste Management
Association, 241–242
Nagin, C. Ray, 66–68
Nairobi, Kenya, 86
and Dandora dump, 87
Naples (Italy) garbage crisis, 91–92
National Academy of Sciences, 23
National Advisory Council on
Environmental Policy and
Technology, 33
National Association for PET
Container Resources, 242
National Association of
Manufacturers, 242
National Environmental Policy Act of
1970, 33
National Office Paper Recycling
Project, 242–243
National Priorities List (NPL), 27, 58
site actions by year, 187, 188t.
National Recycling Coalition, 243
National Solid Wastes Management
Association, 243–244
National Waste Prevention Coalition,
244
Nebraska Department of
Environmental Quality, 220
Netherlands, 93
Nevada
Division of Environmental
Protection, 220
See also Yucca Mountain, Nevada
“New Garbage Wonders of the
World.” See “Seven New
Garbage Wonders of the World”
New Hampshire Department of
Environmental Services, 220
New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection, 221
New Mexico, 23
Environment Department, 221
and Waste Isolation Pilot Plant
(WIPP), 23–24, 211
New Orleans, Louisiana, 65–68
New York City
and 9/11 debris, 64–65 
trash problems, 70
See also Fresh Kills Landfill
Complex
304
Index
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
New York State, 17, 60
Department of Environmental
Conservation, 221
Love Canal, 56–57
medical waste incidents of 1980s,
28–29
Newman, Penny, 157
night soil, 17
NIMBY (not in my backyard), 31,
68–69
NIMTOO (not in my term of office),
68–69
9/11 debris, 64–65
Nixon, Richard, 25, 171
nongovernmental organizations,
225–251
nonhazardous waste, 26
Norilsk, Russia, 193–194
North American Hazardous Materials
Management Association, 244
North Carolina, 32
Department of Environment and
Natural Resources, 221
North Dakota Department of Health,
221
Northeast Recycling Council, 244–245
Nuclear Age Peace Foundation, 201
“Top Ten Reasons to Oppose the
DOE’s Yucca Mountain Plan,”
205–207
Nuclear Regulatory Commission. See
U.S. Nuclear Regulatory
Commission
Nuclear Waste Policy Act of 1982, 63,
200
Nuclear Waste Policy Amendments
Act, 61
Nye County, Nevada, 201
resolution regarding Yucca
Mountain (text), 204–205
ocean dumping, 107–108
Oceania, 100–102. See also Pacific
Ocean garbage patch
Ohio Environmental Protection
Agency, 221–222
Oklahoma Land Protection Division,
222
Old Gentilly landfill (New Orleans),
67
100% Recycled Paperboard Alliance,
225
Oregon
Department of Environmental
Quality, 222
Poplar Site (Clackamas), 73–74
Oslo Convention, 107
Pacific Ocean garbage patch, 188
Palmer, Paul, 158–159
paper
history of use as packaging, 2
as large component of waste
stream, 1
recycling levels, 195, 195t.
use statistics for recycled paper,
195, 196t.
paper bags, 2, 39–40
vs. plastic, 37, 40–41
paper milk cartons, 48
Paraguay, 97–98
Paseo Vista Recreation Area
(Chandler, Arizona), 53
“Pay as you throw” programs, 54–55
Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection, 222
Peru, 192
pesticides, 9
Philadelphia Municipal Association, 17
Philippines, 189
phytoremediation, 13–14, 73–74
plastic bags, 2–3, 37–39
and Australia, 84
Bangladeshi ban on, 83–84
and Great Britain, 84
Irish tax on, 83
vs. paper, 37, 40–41
Parisian ban on, 84
and South Africa, 84
and Taiwan, 84
plastic benches, 42
plastic bottles and jugs, 22, 47, 48–49
numbers in waste stream, 49
Plastic Loose Fill Council, 245
plastics, 4, 21–22
Plastics Foodservice Packaging
Group, 246
“polluter pays” principle, 57, 93, 94
pollution. See water pollution;
“World’s Most Polluted Places”
Index
305
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
pollution prevention. See source
reduction
Polokwane Declaration, 86
Polyethylene terephthalate (PET), 4,
22
pop-top cans, 3
Port Salerno, Florida, 72–73
portfields, 73
pressure-sensitive adhesives (PSAs),
45–46
Procter and Gamble, 21
Product Stewardship Institute, 246
public health movement, 19
Public Utility Regulatory Policies Act
of 1978, 26
radioactive waste, 23, 60
Australia, 100–101
China, 88
disposal in underground salt
formations, 23, 60
Europe, 95–96
international agreements, 107–108
Israel, 99
Japan, 90–91
locations of storage installations,
200t.
ocean dumping, 108
Russia, 95
storage locations, 60–62
transformation to inert by-products
and clean energy, 99
and Waste Isolation Pilot Plant
(WIPP), 23–24
Ranipet, India, 194
Rathje, William, 159–160
RCRA. See Resource Conservation
and Recovery Act of 1976
Reagan, Ronald, and administration,
26–27
ReCellular, Inc., 55
Rechargeable Battery Recycling
Corporation, 246
recycling, 12, 14–15
and actual reprocessing, 43–44
of beverage containers, 51
can statistics, 197–198
and carpeting, 46–47, 195–196, 196t.
in colonial U.S., 16–17
commingled collection, 15
and consumer acceptance, 45, 178
container separation, 14
development of, 43
fees for, 54
and multifamily housing, 46
participation rates, 46
percentages of materials recycled,
43
and pressure-sensitive adhesives
(PSAs), 45–46
quantities and uses of recycled
paper, 195, 195t., 196t.
and Resource Recovery Act, 25
shipping of materials to other
countries, 44–45
slow acceptance of, 52
source separation, 14
technical limits to continuous
processing, 43–44
See also freecycling
“Recycling Fun Facts,” 197–198
Resource Conservation and Recovery
Act of 1976 (RCRA), 26, 29, 30
effect on landfills, 52
excerpts, 175–176
Resource Recovery Act of 1970, 172
Resource Recovery Act of 1972, 25
Reuse Development Organization, 246
Rhode Island Department of
Environmental Management, 222
Richland, Washington, 199
Robinson, Florence, 160–161
Roro Asbestos Dump, Jkarkhand,
India, 189
Royte, Elizabeth, 161
rubber playground surfaces, 42
Rudnaya Pristan/Dalnegorsk, Russia,
194
Russia, 95, 191, 193–194
Saipan, 101
sanitary engineering, 18
sanitary landfills, 12–13
Sanjour, William, 161–162
SARA. See Superfund Amendments
and Reauthorization Act of 1986
Scandinavia, and waste-to-energy, 84
scavenging, 17, 111–112
Africa, 86–87
India, 89
306
Index
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
Latin America, 97–98
Schools Chemical Cleanout
Campaign, 74
“Scope of Materials Included in the
Standard MSW Recycling Rate,”
177t.
Seattle, Washington, 19
secure landfills, 13
“Seven New Garbage Wonders of the
World,” 187
excerpt, 188–190
shipbreaking, 110–111
yards, Alang, India, 189–190
Sierra Club, 247
Silicon Valley Toxics Coalition, 247
Smoky Mountain, Manila,
Philippines, 189
Society of the Plastics Industry, 247
Solid Waste Association of North
America, 248
Solid Waste Disposal Act of 1965
(SWDA), 24, 26
Solitron Microwave Site (Florida),
72–73
source reduction, 12, 15–16, 41
in CD packaging, 41–42
and EPA, 28, 30
and materials selection, 42
and zero waste concept, 42–43
South Africa, 105
and plastic bags, 84
waste management, 86
South Carolina, 199–200
Environmental Quality Control,
222
South Dakota Department of
Environment and Natural
Resources, 223
Spain, 95
St. Lucie County, Florida, 75
state waste management agencies,
215–224
steel cans, 48
Steel Recycling Institute, 248
Steiner, Achim, 186–187
Stilwell, Charles, 2
street cleaning, 18, 19
Subra, Wilma, 163
Superfund, 58–59
establishment of, 27
and first landfill, 21
Solitron Microwave Site, 72–73
and toxic landfills, 52
Superfund Amendments and
Reauthorization Act of 1986
(SARA), 28
Suryapet (India)
composting/recycling program,
90
SWDA. See Solid Waste Disposal Act
of 1965
Swearingen, Terri, 163–164
Sweden, 95–96
Synar, Mike, 164–165
Synthetic Organic Chemical
Manufacturers Association,
248–249
Taiwan, and plastic bags, 84
Tennessee Department of
Environment and Conservation,
223
Texas, 32, 61
Commission on Environmental
Quality, 223
Thailand, and scavenging, 112
Times Beach, Missouri, 28
Tire Industry Association, 249
“To Renew a Nation,” 171–172
excerpts, 172–174
Toor, Will, 165–166
“Top Ten Reasons to Oppose the
DOE’s Yucca Mountain Plan,”
205–207
toxic waste, 56–57
Toxic Wastes and Race in the United
States, 33
trade associations, 225–251
Tucson, Arizona, 76–77
U.S. Army Corps of Engineers
and debris from hurricanes Katrina
and Rita, 65–66
and 9/11 debris, 64–65
and Solitron Microwave Site
(Florida), 72–73
U.S. Bureau of Mines, 24
U.S. Composting Council, 249
U.S. Department of Energy, 24
Biomass Program, 210
Index
307
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
U.S. Department of Energy (cont.)
and nuclear waste, 199
Office of Civilian Radioactive
Waste Management, 210
Office of Environmental
Management, 211
Waste Isolation Pilot Plant (WIPP),
211
and Yucca Mountain, 63, 64
U.S. Department of Health and
Human Services, 24
U.S. Department of Health,
Education, and Welfare. See U.S.
Department of Health and
Human Services
U.S. Department of Transportation,
25, 211
U.S. Environmental Protection
Agency, 212
and CERCLA activities, 58
“Comprehensive Procurement
Guidelines,” 178–179
and environmental justice, 33
Guide for Infectious Waste, 8
on integrated waste management,
12
National Priorities List site actions
by year, 187, 188t.
Office of Solid Waste, 25, 176
regional offices, 212–214
Schools Chemical Cleanout
Campaign, 74
“Scope of Materials Included in the
Standard MSW Recycling Rate,”
177t.
and source reduction, 28, 30
and state waste management plans,
30–31
and Superfund responsibilities,
27–28
on universal waste, 9
WasteWise program, 74
and Waste Isolation Pilot Plant
(WIPP), 24
U.S. Food and Drug Administration,
19
U.S. Forest Service, 75–76
U.S. General Accounting Office, 
32–33
U.S. Geological Survey, 214
U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission,
64, 199, 214
U.S. Nuclear Waste Technical Review
Board, 214–215
U.S. Public Health Service
on hog feeding, 19
hospital waste categories, 8
jurisdiction over municipal waste,
24
U.S. Virgin Islands Division of
Environmental Protection, 223
Ukraine, 191
Union Carbide Company, 2–3
Union Paper Bag Machine Company,
2
United Church of Christ, Commission
for Racial Justice, 33
United Kingdom
brownfields, 94
and hazardous waste, 93
and incineration, 84
and plastic bags, 84
radioactive waste, 96
United States
and Basel Convention, 103
international waste agreements,
106–107
universal waste, 9
Utah, 199, 200
Division of Solid and Hazardous
Waste, 223
vaporizing of garbage, 75
Vermont Waste Management
Division, 223–224
Vincenz, Jean Lacey, 166–167
Virginia Department of
Environmental Quality, 224
Waring, George E., Jr., 18–19
biographical sketch, 167–168
Warren County, North Carolina, 32
Washington State, 19, 60, 61, 199
Department of Ecology, 224
waste
agricultural, 8–9
building, 7
commercial, 5–6
308
Index
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
defining, 4–5
e-waste, 6
glass container development, 3–4
historical management of, 1–2
household, 5, 26
industrial, 7
medical, 7–8
metal packaging development, 3
nonhazardous, 26
paper and packaging as one third
of, 1
paper development, 2
plastic bag development, 2–3, 4
plastics development, 4
as recent development, historically,
18
types and sources, 5–9
universal, 9
See also hazardous waste
WASTE, 250
Waste and Opportunity, U.S. Beverage
Container Recycling Scorecard and
Report, 198
Waste Equipment Technology
Association, 250–251
Waste Isolation Pilot Plant (WIPP),
23–24, 211
waste management
Africa, 85–87
Asia, 87–91
collection, 10
composting, 10–11
cradle to grave, 26
European Union, 91–96
federal legislation and regulation,
22–31
history of (U.S.), 16–22
incineration, 11–12
integrated, 12
international regimes, 102–107
landfills, 12–13
Latin America, 96–98
as low priority for policy makers,
5, 22
mechanical biological treatment, 
13
Middle East, 98–99
Oceania and Micronesia, 100–102
options, 10–16
“pay as you throw” programs,
54–55
privatization of, 26–27
recycling, 14–15
source reduction, 15–16, 30
technological advances, 74–77
waste transfer stations, 16
See also phytoremediation
waste management facilities
and rural areas, 70–71
siting issues, 68–72
Waste Management, Inc.
and debris from hurricanes Katrina
and Rita, 68
grant to freecycling program, 76
Waste Not Asia, 87
waste reduction. See source reduction
waste transfer stations, 16
siting issues, 69
Waste Watch, 251
Waste-to-energy (WTE), 11, 26–27
and biomass, 75–76
Canada, 84
and environmental justice, 31–32
plant siting issues, 69
Scandinavia, 84
vaporizing of garbage, 75
WasteWise, 74
Wasylyk, Harry, 2–3
water pollution, 20
waterway dumping, 19
West Valley, New York, 60
West Virginia Division of Water and
Waste Management, 224
white waste, 5
White Wings, 18
Whole Foods, 40
Williams, Craig E., 168–169
WIPP. See Waste Isolation Pilot Plant
Wisconsin Department of Natural
Resources, 224
Wolle, Francis, 2
woody biomass, 9, 75–76
World Health Organization (WHO), 8
“World’s Most Polluted Places,”
190–191
excerpt, 191–194
Wyoming Department of
Environmental Quality, 224
Index
309
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
Yokohama, Japan, 84
Yucca Mountain, Nevada, 22, 60–64,
190, 200–201
K. Guinn’s statement to House of
Representatives re Yucca
Mountain (excerpts), 202–204
letter to House and Senate from 
G. W. Bush (excerpts), 
201–202
and Nye County, 201
Nye County resolution regarding
Yucca Mountain (text), 204–205
“Top Ten Reasons to Oppose the
DOE’s Yucca Mountain Plan,”
205–207
Zambia, 192
Zero Waste America, 251
zero waste concept, 42–43
Zubia, Marissa, 205–207
310
Index
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
About the Author
Jacqueline Vaughn is professor of political science at Northern
Arizona University; she received her PhD from the University of
California, Berkeley. She is the author of Environmental Politics:
Domestic and Global Dimensions; Green Backlash; and George W.
Bush’s Healthy Forests.
311
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

