WATERPROOF YOUR ROOF 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
If you are scared of heights don't attempt to repair your 
roof. If, however, you are confident at working from ladders 
and lightweight scaffolding towers, then the jobs described 
here aren't difficult.  
  
 
 
Ladders or scaffolding must be tied into the building and 
placed on firm ground. Get someone to support the bottom 
until you have tied the top. Use a ladder stay to give a good 
point of contact with the building. Warn everyone that you 
will be working on the roof, and erect barriers to keep 
people away. Anyone working below should have a hard hat.
  
 
 
Leaking roofs can damage the interior of your home. 
Fortunately there are lots of user-friendly products which will
help to keep the weather out. 
  
Repairing leaks in roofs is normally the easy part. Finding 
out exactly where the leak is can be more difficult. Water 
can travel along the underside of beams and creep between 
close-fitting layers of roofing material, so the damp patch 
won't always appear directly below the leak. Eliminate all the
possible causes one by one, rather than jumping to 
conclusions.  
 
2  - Detecting leaks  
The most difficult place to detect leaks is on a flat roof. 
Often, the only answer is to completely coat the roof with a 
waterproofing solution.  
 
 
 
On pitched roofs the job of 
detection should be easier 
since you can identify slipped 
slates and tiles from the 
outside. Remove and replace 
broken tiles by carefully 
lifting them clear of the nibs 
on which they rest. It can 
sometime help to insert 
wooden wedges under the 
overlapping tiles first (1).  
 
 
 
Use a pair of binoculars to inspect your roof every year.  
 
 
 
Leaks around chimney stacks are notoriously difficult to 
diagnose. The most obvious cause is rain coming in from the 
top, or leaking flashings letting rain in around the sides. 
However, this might not turn out to be the case. Often the 
cause of the damp is condensation within the flue. By the 

time this is discovered, a great deal of time, effort and 
money might have been wasted sealing the flashing and 
capping the pots.  
 
3 - Condensation 
the house (which travels through 
, 
Flat roofs must have enough 
ree 
 
 
 
isused chimneys must be ventilated with an air inlet at the 
 
 
 cold spot often found in the corner of bedrooms with 
 
ht 
ne cure for condensation is to remove airborne moisture 
 - Flat felt roofing  
vel. The water should run away 
 
uddles and low spots  
 
 the water collects on one part of the roof it is likely to leak
 
f moisture vapour from 
I
ceilings) is trapped in an unventilated space it will cause 
dampness through condensation. This can happen in lofts
disused chimneys or above the ceilings in flat roofs.  
 
 
 
ventilation to keep the space 
above the insulation and 
below the waterproof felt f
of airborne moisture (2). If
moisture builds up it will 
cause damp patches on the 
ceiling and blisters in the 
roofing felt.  
 
D
bottom and an outlet at the top. If this isn't done airborne 
moisture from the house will find its way into the chimney 
and condense on the colder inside. This results in damp and
soot being drawn through the brickwork to form damp 
patches on the chimney breast.  
 
 
A
sloping ceilings, is due to the loft insulation being pulled
back to keep the loft ventilated. In some cases, there mig
be no insulation at all in the short sloping part of the ceiling, 
which means it is a natural place for condensation to form.  
 
 
 
O
through better ventilation using extractor fans or a 
dehumidifier.  
 
4 
lat roofs should never be le
F
quickly. 
 
 
P
 
 
If
 
through. If you can't fill the low spots with trowelling-grade 
mastic, or build it up with two or three layers of felt, create 

a small section of new roof over the old one. Use a sheet of 
polystyrene stuck to the existing felt with bitumen.  
 
 
 
Cover the top of the felt with plywood and lay felt over the 
Make sure the felt is long enough to run down the 
plywood. 
sides and at least 150mm (6in) onto the roof. Stick the felt 
onto the existing roof with cold-lay adhesive or hot mastic to 
create a watertight seal.  
 
 
 
Blisters 
 
 you have small blisters on a flat roof that aren't leaking, 
our best option is to leave them alone and use a solar-
 
C t back the felt with four 
diagonal lines to create 
 
 
hesive and lay the cut 
 
Tack the flaps with 
galvanized felt nails, 
clout 
has 
 
r 
 
5 - Repair tape 
 
 
If
y
reflective coating to keep the surface cool during the 
summer. If the felt has broken or looks like it might soon
break, then it must be repaired.  
 
 
 
u
envelope flaps. Gently peel 
back the felt and expose the
underlayer of roof decking 
(3). 
Apply a generous coating of
felt ad
edges into the adhesive, 
squeezing out any excess.  
 
 
otherwise known as 
nails. When this layer 
dried, apply more adhesive
and stick a patch of felt ove
the top so it overlaps the 
repair by 150mm (6in) on all 
sides (4). To help it stick 
down, place some slabs on it 
for a few days.  
 

Flashing and joins to vertical 
upstands can be covered by 
flashing repair tape. Be sure 
to apply enough pressure 
when pressing it in place in 
order to get rid of any 
trapped air underneath (5).  
 
6  - Stopping heat damaging felt  
Dark-coloured felt will attract 
a great deal of heat in the 
summer and if the flat roof 
has insulation underneath, 
the temperature can only 
escape upwards. To 
counteract this white stone 
chippings are often used to 
reflect the sun. The problem 
with chippings however, is 
that if anyone walks on the 
roof, the chippings can get 
pressed through the felt and 
can cause leaks. Another w
of protecting the felt is to use solar-reflective paint which is 
made specifically for this purpose (6).  
ay 
 
 
 
The paint can be applied by brush or roller in a single coat. 
Any flat roof regardless of whether it leaks or not, will have 
its life extended by the application of solar-reflective paint.  
 
7  - Applying waterproofer  
Waterproofers come as water-based emulsions for use in 
fine weather and solvent-based paints, which are suitable for
use in the winter months, or when it looks like it's going to 
rain before the coating is dry.  
 
 
 
Before applying waterproofer clear all traces of algae and 
moss off the roof using a fungicide and moss killer. It can 
take several days to kill off the roots.  
 
 
 
Brush the roof with a stiff broom and apply the first coat of 
waterproofer. If you are applying a bitumen emulsion, it is 
best to dip the brush in water from time to time to improve 
the flow. When the first coat is dry, apply a second coat in 
the opposite direction.  
 
8  - Laying new felt  
If you are re-felting part of your home use a high-
performance polyester felt. If you are felting a shed or 
garage you can use cheaper traditional felts. These don't 

have such a good life expectancy.  
 
 
 
The traditional way to felt a roof is with three layers laid on 
top of each other. Each layer must start from the lowest part
of the roof so the laps are stepped in the right direction to 
shed the rain on to the next sheet. Over timber decks the 
first layer should be nailing preparation-layer felt specially 
made for this purpose.  
 
 
 
Make sure that the joins in each layer are not directly above 
each other. They should be at least 150mm (6in) apart.  
 
 
 
Stick the second layer of felt onto the first with a continuous 
layer of hot bitumen or cold-lay adhesive.  
 
 
 
Where the roof meets a vertical wall, you will need to cut 
strips of felt to lay over the top of the horizontal layer and 
up the wall. You will then need a piece of felt or flashing to 
insert into a chiselled-out mortar joint in the brickwork. If 
you can't do this, use repair tape (Flashband) stuck over the 
top.  
 
9  - Mastic sealants  
Gun-applied mastic sealants can be used to stick down the 
edges of roofing felt and reseal flashings around chimneys. 
Make sure the surfaces to be stuck are clean and dry.  
 
 
 
Wedge loose flashing by hammering small strips of lead into 
the brick courses.  
 
 
 
Use flashing repair tape to cover splits and gaps.  
 
 
 
1 0 - Applying self-adhesive roofing felt  
Apply a two-layer high-quality roofing felt with a self-adhesive 
backing. Once laid the heat from the sun helps to stick the felt 
down. Make sure the surface is clean and dry. The roof board 
should be run with a slope to shed the water. Use triangular 
wooden fillets at the edges next to walls so the felt doesn't have
to run into an acute corner (7).  
 
 

 
Apply the sealer/primer to the roof board with a brush or roller. 
 
 
Once dry lay the first layer of felt onto the roof. Roll back to 
halfway and cut the backing paper so you can peel it off.  
 
 
Gently tread the felt down as y
pull off the paper. When the first 
half is stuck down, repeat for th
second half, then stick down the 
drip edge pieces. These will run 
over the edge of the roof and int
the gutter. They should be na
face down and then folded 
upwards to form a double 
thickness drip over a wooden 
batten (8). If you aren't sure how 
this is done, look at a few flat 
roofs in your area.  
ou 
e 
o 
iled 
 
 
When the drip edge is in place, the top layer of felt can be run 
down over the existing felt. Stagger the joins in the second 
layer so they are not in the same place as the joins in the first 
layer.  
 
 
If you have lapped felt over the green mineral dressing, use 
mastic to fill the granular surface so the felt has an even bed to 
stick to.  
 

