After discovering this you too will say... 
"Before I Knew The Key To 
Effortless Hypnosis, Influencing 
And Persuading People Felt Like 
A Cage Fight... 
But Not Anymore!" 
Read below to find out: 
 Milton Erickson's strategy for convincing more people 
in less time  
 Princeton University study reveals how to make 
suggestions stick  
 5 master secrets of hypnotic compliance and ethical 
"mind control" 
Dr. Milton Erickson was the "World's Greatest Hypnotist"... 
I often wondered what made him so effective at putting people in a deep 
hypnotic trance. 
What gave him the ability to present suggestions that were 
accepted without resistance? How was he able to spellbind subjects 
who... at first... were pre-occupied and inattentive? 
Which of the many hypnotic techniques allowed him to convince 
others to: improve their lives with ease, change bad habits and comply with just about any notion he proposed? 
The answer came from an unlikely source... 
Dr. Sidney Rosen had studied Erickson since the 1950s. He witnessed Erickson's 
rise from obscurity to the pre-eminent hypnosis expert on the planet. 
The two collaborated on a book which revealed a simple hypnotic technique. 
Within the pages of this book Rosen answered my question. 
You see, according to Erickson, the most effective and permanent way to 
change anyone's mind -- whether that means agreement with your point of view, 

deciding to buy a certain product or service... or... lavishing their admiration upon you -- is by... 
Influencing A Subject's 
Unconscious Patterns 
As Dr. Rosen explains in the first chapter of the book... 
Toward the end of his life he [Milton Erickson] developed a very effective approach to 
accomplish this goal... 
The last time I saw him, he explained to me how this approach had developed. 
"I had to spend too much time on one patient. I would rather teach a lot of people how 
to think, how to handle problems. I have dozens and dozens of letters saying, 'You have 
completely changed my way of treating patients.' 
I get a lot of patients, but I treat them less. I see more patients and I see them for 
shorter times." 
I [Rosen] questioned, "And this is the result of... ?" 
  
Milton Erickson's response was rather unexpected... 
Thinking it over... it was clear to me the genius behind his strategy. 
I considered my own results as the foremost authority on conversational hypnosis. I can tell you in no 
uncertain terms that after... 
 Treating thousands of patients in my private hypnotherapy practice... 
 Developing numerous training programs for corporate executives 
and Fortune 500 companies... 
 Launching the number one best-selling hypnosis program in the 
world...and 70 other ground-breaking trainings 
 Becoming a Certified Master Hypnosis Trainer, Accredited and Certified 
NLP Master Trainer and Certified Success Life Coach and Trainer... 
 Building successful multi-million dollar businesses... 
 Training thousands of hypnotists, hypnotherapists, sales people, 
business owners and every day folks at my seminars to become proficient 
at hypnotic influence... 
 And watching my students transform their lives... and... the lives of 
others around them... 
It clicked! 
This was (bar none)... 

"The Ultimate Hypnotic Technique  
For Foolproof Influence" 
However, I wanted to be sure. 
I'm rather conservative. Before claiming I had found the "holy grail" of hypnotic influence... I needed even 
more evidence. 
After all, as a graduate of Exeter University in England... and a former lawyer at a prestigious law firm... I was 
taught to gather all the proof I could get my hands on. 
So I began to research. 
My objective was to either refute or confirm Milton Erickson's assertion. 
I wanted to go beyond (way beyond) mere personal experience... or... subjective anecdotes from other world-
class hypnotists, hypnotherapists, star sales reps, business tycoons and hypnosis enthusiasts. 
Bottom line... I wanted scientific proof! 
And that's when things got really interesting... 
Princeton University is an Ivy League research university with a 
long and storied history. It is one of the original nine Colonial 
Colleges founded in 1746 prior to the American Revolution. 
This bastion of higher education holds the distinction of having... 
... 35 Nobel Prize Laureates! 
... 17 National Medal of Sciences winners! 
... and 3 National Humanities Medal winners! 
According to the National Association of College and University Business Officers... on a per-student basis... 
Princeton has the largest university endowment in the world. 
Within its walls, some of the most intelligent minds in humanities, business, engineering and social sciences 
labor away to find answers to our most pressing problems. 
You will also find the... 
Scientific Research To 
Captivating And Convincing People 


The scientists compared the MRI scans of the woman with 
the volunteers. 
When her insula (an emotional region of the brain) was activated as she performed the simple verbal task... 
the same region was activated in the listeners. 
When her frontal cortex was activated... so was theirs. 
In other words, what she was saying allowed her brain... and the brain of her listeners (even though they were 
listening to an audio recording of her)... to get in sync. 
  
"Experiences Transferred Directly  
To Listener's Brain" 
Scientists also noticed... due to what was said... the people listening to the recording experienced the exact 
same brain pattern as the speaker. 
They felt what she felt. 
They empathized with her emotions. 
They... in effect... became mentally and emotionally mesmerized by her words. 
"Stimulated Favorable Responses" 
In addition to feeling what the speaker felt, listeners turned her comments into their own idea and personal 
experience. 
They got involved with her "spiel"... and... responded in the appropriate manner. 
As the lead researcher admitted... 
"[This] Is The Only Way To Plant Ideas 
Into Other People's Minds." 
Dr. Uri Hasson, Ph.D., Princeton University 
Science vindicates Milton Erickson once again. 

I've come to this conclusion... 
The secret I'm about to reveal is the key to effortless hypnotic persuasion. 
It alone allows you to unlock the five "doors" to anyone's mind. Unless you open these mental doors... then... 
your attempts to influence will falter. 
Which brings me to... 
 
The first thing you must do in order to hypnotically "control" someone is... 
Build unshakeable trust and rapport. 
You must do this even if your subject (or prospect... or student... or spouse... or whoever) is resistant, 
skeptical and uncooperative at first. 
Milton Erickson relied on this technique to establish rapport almost instantly... and... with 
anyone... and... in any situation. 
At one point, Erickson was called upon to help a man dying of cancer. 
The man was suffering from severe pain. Part of one side of his face and neck was missing. A malignant 
cancer had developed on his face. Doctors were forced to surgically remove the affected area. 
In the process, his vocal chords were also removed. 
The man, a former florist, was in constant agony despite taking prescribed narcotics. 
His family had called Erickson in as a last resort. 
But from the "get-go", Erickson faced an uphill battle. The man viewed hypnosis with disdain. One of his kids 
was studying psychiatry and believed hypnosis held no medical value whatsoever. The odds were certainly 
against Erickson. 
Imagine you were in that situation. 
Can you think of a tougher set of circumstances to influence someone? 
How would you establish common ground with someone who was pre-occupied with extreme pain... and... 
disregarded hypnosis wholesale? 
Erickson was shrewd. He used this technique to tie into the man's interests. Rapport happened rather 
spontaneously. Which allowed Erickson to continue to... 
 

Once you establish a bit of rapport... the next thing is... you must fix the subject's attention squarely on 
you and what you're saying. 
Otherwise, you'll "lose" them. 
Before seeing this man, Erickson found out a little about him. Again, the man was a florist. Erickson was not. 
However, Erickson grew up on a farm and liked growing tomatos. 
So... in order to distract the man from his pain and steady his attention... Erickson began talking about a 
tomato plant. 
If you're a student of hypnosis, you may have heard or read this account. 
Regardless... what's important here is... by using this technique he focused the man's mind. Instead of being 
preoccupied with pain (or other worries) the man listened with almost single-minded focus to Erickson. Leading 
us to... 
 
Now that Erickson had built rapport within a hypnotic context... and... riveted his subject's attention... the next 
thing he did was... 
Pierce Through The Barrier Of 
The Conscious Mind Without A Fight 
As the story goes, Erickson was talking to the man. 
In the adjacent room, the man's wife was listening in. After awhile she became impatient. She tiptoed into the 
room where Erickson was speaking to her husband. 
She thrust a piece of paper in front of Erickson. 
It read: "When are you going to start the hypnosis?" 
Erickson ignored her and continued. She looked over at her husband and noticed he had "tranced out." 
Erickson kept on. She quickly scampered out of the room. 
You see, Erickson used this technique to put the man in a deep trance. 
The hypnosis had been going on since he had walked into the room. In this state, the man was open to 
Erickson's suggestions. 
So Erickson continued the session by using... 
 
Now that the man's mind was unlocked -- unfettered from the grip of his critical factor -- Erickson was able 
to plant suggestions of health and well-being. 

Throughout this seemingly innocent and casual conversation, Erickson emphasized certain words and 
phrases like: comfortably... bring peace and comfort... feeling very good... all is getting better, etc. 
This technique primed the man's mind for hypnosis to "take." 
He was receptive to suggestions he would have otherwise disregarded. 
By the end of the session, the man's distressing pain lessened. He seemed pleased. 
Happy. And relieved. 
Erickson had also masterfully used... 
 
The man's condition was severe. 
Doctors had given him about a month to live. 
So Erickson wanted his suggestions to have the greatest impact possible. He wanted the man to enjoy his 
last days with dignity... and... without pain. 
To make that happen, Erickson used this amazing technique to impress a serious of post-hypnotic 
suggestions. These also focused on the themes of comfort, freedom from pain, enjoyment of family, good 
appetite, etc. 
One month after the first session, the man had gained weight and strength. Pain occurred infrequently and 
was easily controlled. 
By using this technique, Erickson helped this desperate man. He lived longer than doctors had anticipated. 
And he lived in relative comfort despite suffering from a painful and terminal disease. 
The "icing" on the cake is this technique... 
Makes All Other Hypnotic Principles More 
Effective And Easier To Implement  
You might be wondering what is this technique that... 
...allows for seamless hypnotic compliance? 
...researchers have proven is the only way to make suggestions stick? 
...and the "World's Greatest Hypnotist" used to convince more people in less time? 
Well, I'll let Dr. Milton Erickson answer those questions himself. 
When Dr. Rosen asked Erickson what allowed him (and his students) to see more patients... but... effectively 
treat them in less time... Erickson said: 
"Their coming here and letting me tell them stories." 

Ahhh... but not just any kinds of stories. 
The stories that allow you to convince, influence and persuade must be laced with certainhypnotic patterns. 
The problem is almost no one teaches the art of hypnotic storytelling correctly. 
I know. 
I spent the better part of a decade (and over $120,000 of my own money) finding and studying under master 
hypnotists. 
So far, I've only found one person who really knows how to... 
Weave A Spellbinding Tale That 
Puts People In A Trance In Minutes 
...and how to teach this skill of expert influences to others! 
Milton Erickson believed hypnosis was too powerful to teach to "lay people." He only taught professionals: 
physicians, psychologists, psychotherapists and the like. 
The foundation that bears his name continues that tradition to this day. 
Unless you meet their stringent guidelines... then I'm afraid... you can not learn Dr. Erickson's hypnotic 
techniques. 
There's one more problem few people know or admit. 
As good as Dr. Erickson was at hypnotizing people... he was what I call a semi-covert hypnotist. People he 
dealt with knew he was hypnotizing them. 
I became the world's foremost authority on conversational... or true covert... hypnosis. 
Dr. Erickson's methods... while excellent if you can study them... are at least somewhat obvious to subjects. I 
searched far and wide to find someone who knew how to teach the art of storytelling... but... within the shroud of 
totally undetectable covert hypnosis. 
Finally, I found the one person I believe is... 
“Hands Down The BEST Hypnotic 
Storyteller I Have Ever Come Across!” 
Let me introduce you to... Robin Manuell. 

Robin is an unusual "chap" as the English like to say. 
He came to the field of hypnosis in a rather roundabout way. Psychology and computer models were his focus 
of study at Sussex University in England. In his final year, he specialized in psycho drama and shamanism. 
During his twenties, Robin ran a theatre company. He began practicing hypnosis to improve his acting... and... 
came across NLP sometime in 1996. 
Shortly thereafter, John Grinder (one of the co-founders of NLP) invited Robin to work with him personally. 
Robin studied directly under the watchful eye of both Grinder and Richard Bandler. 
Over the years, Robin developed a unique approach to hypnotherapy using hypnotic storytelling. His approach 
is easily applied to any situation requiring influence. 
Best of all... 
Robin's approach is the answer to helping you become an amazing hypnotist... even if... you're just getting 
started. 
Through trial and error... working with hundreds of his own hypnotherapy patients... Robin discovered how 
to make hypnosis easy using stories. He found out that hypnotic stories are like a ferry boat taking you across 
frigid waters to safe harbor. 
Hypnotic stories... told using my conversational hypnosis principles... turn both raw rookies... and seasoned 
hypnotists... into a powerful force of hypnotic persuasion. 
You might be wondering "how" you can take advantage of Robin's secrets. 
Until recently, you would of had to pay a pretty penny studying with him one-on-one. The financial sacrifice 
was simply too much for most people. 
But not anymore. 
Because I convinced Robin to combine his secrets along with mine... and... let me record everything as part of 
the... 

How To Be A World Class  
Hypnotic Storyteller  
Home Study Video Course 
The Key To Effortless Hypnosis For Instant Influence 
 
I guarantee you'll never... and I mean never... find these practical secrets in any hypnosis training anywhere in 
the world. 
Why do I say that? 
Well, because no one teaches what Robin knows. What's more, he and I teamed up on this project. Our 
objective was to combine his storytelling process... with... my covert hypnosis principles. 
What you get is: 
 8 DVDs of step-by-step instruction: Watch as Robin and I teach you 
the nuances of hypnotic storytelling. You will absorb all of the critical 
strategies and techniques to using stories for influence in any situation. 
 Hypnotic storytelling exercises: Each DVD session contains a number 
of exercises to help develop your ability to tell stories. In addition, the 
exercises show you how to come up with stories that allow hypnosis to 

happen naturally. As you practice the fun assignments, the skills you 
learn will become part of your psyche. 
 CDrom with complete transcripts: Every word of each DVD session is 
available for you to read in the PDF that comes with the course. Exposing 
yourself to the videos... practicing the exercises... and... reinforcing each 
session by reading the transcripts gives you the ultimate advantage to 
becoming a master of hypnotic storytelling. 
The result: A surefire system for easy hypnosis that leads to total compliance. 
"I found that storytelling become so much more 
natural and easy and it became like an organic process 
rather than something I had to think about." 
Cindy Stone, 
Canada,  
Author/Hypnotherpist.  
  
Here's a small (very small) taste of what I mean: 
DVD 1: Hypnotic Storytelling Foundations 
And The "Johari Window" 
 Where to find the 
most influencial, transformative and seductive stories... hidden where 
you're least likely to look.  
 Connect with people at a deep emotional level and compel them to take 
action in the moment. (Evoke any emotional state needed to get the 
response you seek.) 
 Why the entire world is nothing more than a story in our minds. (And 
how knowing this allows you to influence anyone you want.)  
 5 reasons hypnotic storytelling is at the heart of human interaction. (And a 
sixth reason which proves people will do almost anything when told the 
right story... in the right way.) 
 Think you don't know how to weave a persuasive tale? Baloney! 
Here's how you've "engineered" compliance from parents, siblings, 
teachers and bosses... but... just didn't catch on to what you were 
doing. Now you'll know how to ethically direct others on purpose!  
 Guarantee your suggestions sneak past the mind's critical factor. (Tired of 
telling others what to do and getting nowhere? This is how you by-pass the 
natural skeptic in everyone who is waiting to shoot your suggestions down.) 

 The truth behind how things really get done in the world. Proof from 
English anthropologist, Margaret Mead, of what it takes 
to motivate people into action to achieve even the most "impossible" 
of tasks.  
 The "cloak of story": A little-known technique for relating personal 
anecdotes while making an important point... without... exposing yourself. 
(Great for shy and reserved people who want to influence the "hard cases" 
in their lives.) 
 How to "soup up" your conversational and social skills so people find 
you fascinating and absolutely irresistible.  
 The "Johari Window": A simple little-known technique (developed in 1955) 
which gives you deep insight into how people think. And once you know 
how they think... it's easy to come up with just the right hypnotic story. 
Why "Reasoning" With Someone Is 
The Surest Path To Non-Compliance 
 A startling revelation I had while on a silent meditation retreat. (Listen 
to this account and you will NEVER be afraid of engaging other 
people in conversation again.)  
 What companies like Nike and Coca Cola are really selling... and... why 
you and I buy into it hook, line and sinker. (Hint: It's not sneakers and soda. 
Follow their example and you'll have no trouble getting your ideas accepted 
too.) 
 Exploit this quirk of human nature and people will cling to your every 
word... and then... do exactly as you say.  
 Bonding with total strangers so fast you'd think they were a long-lost friend. 
(And how to avoid breaking social "norms" and scaring people away.) 
 Natural storytelling talents you've suppressed almost your entire life. 
(Plus... how to build your storytelling "muscles" so you start crafting 
tales that inspire, motivate and induce trance without even trying.)  
 When it's okay to take "artistic license" with your stories... and... when to 
stick to the truth, the whole truth and nothing but the truth. 
 Strange New World: A fun exercise for getting your creative juices 
flowing. (I often practice this first thing in the morning. It focuses the 
mind on finding storytelling fodder.)  
 Why remembering a story word-for-word is useless when trying to 
hypnotically influence someone. I'll reveal a better alternative used by 
master hypnotists. 
Click Here To Get Started Now  

DVD 2: Provoking Emotions And The 5 
Key Elements Of A Story That Impacts The 
Unconscious Mind 
 Spinning boring life events into a compelling plot people can't get 
enough of when they hear it. (The result? Hypnotic influence happens 
effortlessly!)  
 How to change moods by reframing someone's mental and emotional 
reference point. (Robin recounts a meeting he had with an accountant who 
hated his job. That is... until he was shown how to "look at it" from a 
different point of view.) 
 Feedback Loops: A secret way to lock people into a frame of mind 
that leads naturally to compliance. (If they did this more in schools 
kids would probably love to learn.)  
 A simple story format for building trust and rapport. (It's also a "gateway" to 
ethical emotional and mental control.) 
 Afraid you'll run out of stories? I'll show you the easy way to tell a 
hypnotic story that spawns other hypnotic stories. Believe me, you'll 
have more "ammunition" than you'll know what to do with.  
 How to suck people into your thrilling sagas without even trying. I figured 
this out when I was coaching "tough-as-nails" Fortune 500 executives who 
were twice my age and didn't want to listen to a young buck like me. (Never 
failed me yet.) 
Secrets Of Spontaneous Story Creation 
Almost  
No One In The Hypnosis Industry Knows 
 Robin's memory trick ensures you never forget a great story you 
came up with. (Now, the stories you create will stick in your mind like 
crazy glue.)  
 Another memory trick I like to use that'll instantly recall your favorite "yarns 
of influence." (By the way, both of these tricks work when you want to 
remember... anything!) 
 The Mental Stash Technique: Yet another secret for mentally storing 
all of your hypnotic stories for immediate access.  
 The "golden thread" woven into all stories and myths from the beginning of 
time. 
 How to tell a gripping story in 30 seconds... 30 minutes... or any time 
frame you choose. (Expand or collapse any story depending on how 
much time you have tomastermind a paradigm shift in your subject.)  

 What Aristotle said 2,500 years ago about the purpose of a drama... and... 
why his advice is critical if you want to hypnotize more people in less time. 
 5 elements every hypnotic story must include for maximum 
transformative impact. (Miss one and you're finished.)  
 When's the best time to end a story meant to influence? Here's the exact 
moment to stop talking and let the hypnotic process take over. (If you keep 
going, it may actually work against you and undo everything up to that 
point.) 
Click Here To Get Started Now  
DVD 3: The 7 Most Influential Stories 
Revealed And How To Tell Your Own 
Version 
 The Ultimate Ice Breaker: A wonderful story structure for meeting new 
people and reconnecting with old friends. (Let's you break down the 
emotional barriers most people put up.)  
 Why there's no substitute for total honesty... if... influencing others with 
ease is your priority. (And the only time honesty can "backfire.") 
 How to make people who question your motives totally comfortable 
with you in just a few minutes. (Hint: Tell them this story and watch 
their resistance melt like ice cream in the summer sun.)  
 A low-key, indirect way to make an indelible and positive impression about 
your character as a person. (So subtle and so effective at dropping 
someone's "guard" so they accept you into their lives.) 
 The Bee Story: Use this when you want to look like a hero without 
doing any conceited chest-pounding. (You'll have people wrapped 
around your little finger.)  
 An easy way to show people you are "harmless" and there to help. Fear 
holds a lot of people back from making decisions or accepting your ideas. 
But that won't happen to you any more. 
 7 master stories of influence... and... how to rattle any one of them off 
at just the right time... and... without memorizing them word-for-word.  
 When losing a sale or an argument works in your favor. 
 3 kinds of teaching tales proven to change moods, minds and 
actions.  
 A formula for coming up with your own teaching tales. (Works like a charm 
when someone objects to a product, idea or piece of advice. Try it. You'll 
like it.) 

 Practical Mind Reading: A simple way to show someone you've been 
in their shoes and understand their feelings. (Quite possibly the most 
effective way toconnect with people on an emotional level. They'll 
trust you with their first born if you do this right.)  
 How to respond to someone who refuses to "play ball" and comply with 
your requests. (In a matter of minutes, they'll forget the objection and follow 
your commands on cue. It's as if you've turned into the Pied Piper and they 
can't help doing as you say.) 
Click Here To Get Started Now  
DVD 4: How To Turn Any Story Into 
A Truly Transformational Tale 
 How to deliver a story so it seems like a perfect fit for the person 
you're addressing. You'll say the right things at the right time without 
giving it a second thought.  
 Open closed minds with this simple story structure. (Unskilled hypnotists 
who don't know this make a serious mistake when faced with reluctant 
subjects and the entire hypnotic context collapses.) 
 Why the act of storytelling is nothing more than plain lying. And how 
to use this bit of info to mold someone's reality to your way of 
thinking. (Nothing underhanded about this by the way.)  
 Lock your hypnotic stories deep in the reservoir of your mind... and... 
reinforce them within seconds so they're always available and can never be 
forgotten. (It's the secret tocementing permanent memories that are almost 
impossible to erase.) 
 Keep people on the "edge of their seat" and immersed in every word 
you say. All it takes is this simple technique that glues people to your 
story, drops their critical mind defenses and leaves them open to your 
impressions.  
 Examples of transformational stories that change people's lives. (Milton 
Erickson was an expert at telling these kinds of tales laced with hypnotic 
suggestions... and... helping people overcome all sorts of personal 
problems.) 
 A three-phase storytelling formula anyone can follow!  
 My first public speaking gig as a junior lawyer... why I consider it a total 
disaster... and how I became an able storyteller with the confidence to deal 
directly with hypnosis subjects, coaching clients... and eventually... present 
training seminars to thousands of people around the world. 
 Perhaps the laziest way to become a superb storyteller in no time. Sit 
back, listen to this and... before you know it... stories that influence 
and transform will just pour out.  

 How I convinced my father that leaving a prestigious law firm -- after years 
of schooling, sacrifice and hard work -- to venture into hypnosis was not 
only a good idea... but... the best thing I could do with my life. (I didn't even 
have to say anything directly to him and he changed his mind.) 
 The secret to refining stories until they pack the greatest influencial 
impactpossible.  
 How to design a clear hypnotic message in as little as a three-line story. 
Click Here To Get Started Now  
DVD 5: How To Combine 
Transformational 
Stories With Open And Nested Loops 
 How to leave someone else with the same mental and emotional 
impression you're experiencing. (Big key to "breaking through" 
natural defenses like skepticism.)  
 Fun exercises for amplifying different parts of your story. (This is how a 
story comes alive and mesmerizes people until they're like putty in your 
hands.) 
 Hypnotic Non-Verbal Cues: How to "sync" body language with the 
content of a story... and... keep anyone's attention fixed on you.  
 Different ways to use voice inflection and tonality to hold the interest of one 
person or an entire roomful of people. 
 Why Milton Erickson told the same stories in different ways 
depending on the situation. (You can learn a lot from this strategy... 
which... was perfected by the greatest hypnotist who ever lived.)  
 Calibrating the emotional response coming from your subject -- while 
making subtle changes to the story to increase it's influential impact. 
 Why people "trance out" during a really good story... even if... the 
storyteller is not intentionally trying to hypnotize them. (Which is also 
why becoming proficient at telling stories turns you into a genius at 
hypnosis.)  
 Curiosity-provoking "lead-ins" and how they force people to beg for more. 
 Quick and easy way to cut out all the "ums"... "ahs"... "likes"... "you 
knows" and other nervous chatter while talking.  
How To Hide Post-Hypnotic Suggestions 
Within Innocent Stories 

 The "curiosity factor" you can build into any story that is so powerful 
everyone you speak with will remain focused with rapt attention until you're 
done. (You'll see this technique used by high-level fiction writers... which... 
is one reason their novels sell like crazy.) 
 Transitions to shift from story to story without breaking the flow... 
and... the perfect point at which to begin hypnotic work.  
 Diabolical secret for controlling anyone's unconscious mind by "story 
skipping". (I can't believe this technique isn't considered "illegal." Because 
it allows you to establish and maintain almost total control of a subject until 
you're through with them.) 
 Sneaky way to overload conscious attention so you can slip 
suggestions into the unconscious without detection.  
 Mind Warp: How to throw anyone into total "mental disarray" and drop 
covert commands they can't help but accept. 
 Little-known strategies to control conversations from start to finish.  
 The "Columbo Approach" to dealing with overbearing Alpha-types. 
 What a referential index is and how it helps pull people into your 
story. (They now become a character you shape and mold.)  
 How to lead people through a series of useful states as you tell a story of 
transformation. 
Click Here To Get Started Now  
DVD 6: Creating Picaresque Adventures 
And How To Scale Stories Depending  
On Your Environment 
 A popular story told in Medieval Times perfectly suited for creating a 
hypnotic trance. (When you take people on these "mini-escapades" 
they get lost and become susceptible to hypnosis.)  
 Shape "pointless" anecdotes into epic tales that sway others to your point 
of view. 
 How to enjoy learning anything by making a story out of the 
experience. (One guy from India taught his students how to memorize 
all the bones in the body by plotting out a fun narrative.)  
 Why parts of your saga must stay the same... and... when it's okay to take 
a little add some "spice" to make it more absorbing. 
 What to say or do when you reach a "peak of emotion" during a 
conversation.  

 How to covertly "seed" a key phrase or gesture you can use to transition 
into hypnosis. (So elegant not even a trained hypnotist will notice what 
you're doing.) 
 Two proven and super-effective models for telling stories that 
influence.  
 The seven step influence formula that never fails. 
 How to gauge a subject's interest in the conversation... and... intensify 
it to the point where they must listen to your every word.  
 Why you must distract the conscious mind immediately after finishing a 
hypnotic story. (Don't mess up here!) 
 How to uncover the "code words" and personal trance stories looping 
around in another person's mind. (And how to use that discovery to 
design stories that enter the conversation in their head.)  
Click Here To Get Started Now  
DVD 7: How To Find Your Own Internal 
Metaphors And Make Them Into  
Stories Others Love 
 The importance of becoming conscious of how 
people naturally communicate. 
 Relaxing subjects: A quick way to "lighten the mood" and make 
others feel comfortable with you. The door is now open to drop them 
into a trance.  
 How to "trigger" any emotional state you choose in subjects. They won't be 
able to help themselves. 
 How Robin changed himself from a dull bloke into a funny "life-of-the-
party" kind of guy. (The little exercise he did might do the trick for you 
regardless of what change you're after.)  
 Unconscious responses: How to recognize and work them into your story 
so it feels like the story they've already been telling themselves. (Very few 
hypnotists know this.) 
 Why you lose people during a conversation -- they're attention 
wandering elsewhere -- and how to reel them back in.  
 The four elements of a story that is congruent with the other person's 
experience. Essential to keep them actively listening and completely 
engaged. 
 A stealthy way to get people to reveal what's relevant to them in this 
moment. And now that becomes the thrust of your story.  

 Keywords people say without thinking that expose their inner world. They're 
like little emotional "trip wires" ideal for peppering throughout a story. 
Before you know it, the other person will comply with any request. 
 The "magic three-word question" which lets people give you a 
glimpse into their world view. You'll see how they think about a 
problem or opportunity... and... then be able to discuss it on their 
terms. (Advanced stuff anyone in the influence game would love to 
know.)  
 How to handle a person who does not give you the right (a.k.a. their 
unconscious) answer to the magic three-word question. (Three tactics 
for luring out the metaphorical images lurking in the unconscious.) 
 How to avoid triggering a defense mechanism when dealing with 
people. A general rule of thumb... but... one you must never break.  
 A polite way to prod for the unconscious symbols most of us don't even 
know we hold in mind. (Plus... how to use these symbols and create a 
perfect hypnotic context.) 
 Why you must loop "yes sets" within hypnotic stories.  
Click Here To Get Started Now  
DVD 8: Symbolic Realities, Symbolic 
Influence And Putting Hypnotic 
Storytelling All Together 
 A therapy model for exploring the symbolic framework someone operates 
from! (Nothing to it. Just a few well-placed questions give you a nice 
overview of their "unconscious landscape.") 
 Universal symbolic metaphor themes: A short list of common themes 
to look for, isolate and add to a story.  
 How to speak the "lingo" of any specific group of people. (Want to fit in like 
you've been part of a group for years? Then develop this skill -- it's easy -- 
and your influence will jump off the charts.) 
 The true story of how General Motors changed a two-word metaphor 
in their presentation before Congress... and... secured billions of 
dollars in funds from the federal government. (Amazing what's 
possible when you know how to phrase things just right.)  
 Another true story of how a media technology company changed a two-
word description in how they related to prospects... and... within four 
months... almost all of the prospects they contacted were on board with 
them. 
 What you can learn from the metaphors used by corporations. And a 
book on the subject you might want to read.  


A Copy Of This Amazing 
Training Is Waiting For You 
Look, if you're in the "hypnotic influence game" in any way, shape or form... then... looking this program over is 
simply in your best interest. 
Besides, it's not like you're taking a chance or anything. 
My company, is a pillar of the industry. I offer hypnosis training to thousands upon thousands of people every 
year. The products I create are raved about world wide. 
What I'm saying is: When you invest in your skills through me, you have a reputable companywith years of 
experience... dedicated customer support... and proven products standing behind you every step of the way. 
Here's the deal: 
A copy of How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller is here with "your name on it." 
You won't have to stump up seminar fees, take time off work and travel. 
When you get this package... it's like a seminar-in-a-box you can always attend. 
Which is great. 
Because that means you won't miss a shred of proprietary instruction Robin and I doled out. You can rewind 
the videos for clarification. You can refer to the written transcripts. You can do any of the exercises over and over 
again as needed. 
Once you get the program it's yours... forever! 
And, I'll give it to you for an investment so low it'll make your heart sing. 
I was planning on releasing the program for $697 + shipping. In my opinion, that's a bargain. 
I mean you can't find these secrets in any other hypnosis training of its kind. 
However, for a limited time (I'm only offering this on the remaining copies in 
stock)... I'm going to slash the investment with a 60% Discount. On top of that... to 
make this opportunity even sweeter... I'll cover the shipping and handling charge 
anywhere in the world! 
If you get one of the limited copies before the remaining stock runs out... you get 
the program for just three simple monthly installments of only $97 + Worldwide 
FREE SHIPPING. 
Plus... I'm also going to put my money where my mouth is and give you a... 
100% MONEY BACK GUARANTEE 
You can order this program and review the entire thing at your leisure. 
And if you don't believe this is the most cutting-edge instruction on hypnotic storytelling... then... you have 
nothing to risk. 

Because you can return the entire package within 60 days and get every penny you paid back. No questions 
asked. No problems. 
Basically, you can look everything over... for free. 
In the highly unlikey event you don't like it, just send it back. 
  
 
But I doubt that'll happen. See, after providing hypnotists with the best training in the world for about a decade 
now... I've learned one thing... 
As long as my programs deliver on my promises... 
As long as the instruction is easy to learn and implement... 
As long as people can experience results quickly then... 
We both win! 
In this case... I guarantee you... the video training delivers on all of my promises and then some... what Robin 
and I teach is easy as pie to learn and use... and you'll see results the very first day after you go through the 
videos. 
I'll leave you with some food for thought... 
8 Reasons Why Hypnotic Stories  
Motivate People To Respond  
Positively To Your Requests  
Throughout this web page I've made the case that hypnotic stories are the key to effortless influence and 
transformation. I've shown you how the "World's Greatest Hypnotist" used stories to convince and treat more 
people in less time. 
I've shown you the cutting-edge scientific proof that stories are the only way to plant suggestions in the mind... 
and... make them stick. 
I've shown you why stories are the gateways to compliance. 
Now, let's wrap this up... 
Jeffrey K. Zeig, Ph.D. is the founder and CEO of the Milton H. Erickson Foundation. He has edited or authored 
more than 20 books on psychotherapy and hypnosis. 
One of those books is A Teaching Seminar With Milton H. Erickson. 
The book is actually a transcript of a seminar Erickson held for professional therapists. 
Dr. Zeig notes eight benefits of using stories as part of therapy. 







being persuasive or to learn things that are very 
important about yourself to get the dvds" 
Randle Priser, 
Flordia, USA,  
Exective Coach/Hypnotherpist. 
  
"Storytelling to me is what life is all about... What are 
the stories they are going to say about me after I'm 
gone... and I want to leave a packet of stories!" 
Mercedes Herman, 
New Jersey, USA  
  
"Robin and Igor are both wonderful teachers, they 
have a very different style... they work together and its 
very very effective what they do. " 
Stuart Elliot, 
China,  
English Teacher.  
  
"Both Robin and Igor are phenomenal storytellers, 
trainers and have really helped me to access even more 
stories. I absolutely recommend getting these dvds. Its 
an awesome program!" 

Sarah Carson, 
New York, USA,  
NLP Teacher.  
  
"Through this course I've learned how to turn very 
simple things I've experienced into interesting stories 
with meaning and I think that's just fantastic." 
Gwen Leo Allen, 
Germany,  
Singer/Song writer hypnotist.  
  
"I remember having told them [stories] and they just 
didn't make an impact. Now I realize why that 
happened and I also realize how I will do much much 
better next time." 
Oresztesz Murgacs, 
Mexico,  
Hypnotherapist.  
  
  $697.00 Today Just $97 x 3 + FREE Shipping 
Sorry, Out Of Stock... 
  
 
  
  
 

 
 
  
Terms & Conditions | Terms Of Use | Privacy Policy | Earnings & Income Disclaimer 
 
 
Copyright © 2014 - StreetHypnosis.com 
  
 

