 
 
 
By Igor Ledochowski & Robin Manuell 
 
 
How To Be A World Class 
Hypnotic Storyteller 
Transcript Manual 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
2 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
Table of Contents 
DVD 1 – Hypnotic Storytelling Foundations & The “Johari Window” ............................. 4 
Introduction ................................................................................................................. 4 
Johari Window ........................................................................................................... 20 
Exercise Debrief ......................................................................................................... 24 
Storytelling Games ..................................................................................................... 31 
DVD 2 – Provoking Emotions & The 5 Key Elements Of A Story That Impacts The 
Unconscious Mind......................................................................................................... 51 
Emotional Stories ....................................................................................................... 51 
Mnemonic Journey .................................................................................................... 55 
5 Elements Of Story ................................................................................................... 62 
DVD 3 – The 7 Most Influential Stories Revealed & How To Tell Your Own Version .... 77 
Who Am I (Connection) Stories .................................................................................. 77 
Why Am I Here (Trust) Stories.................................................................................... 79 
Values In Action (Integrity) Stories ............................................................................. 81 
Teaching Tales ........................................................................................................... 86 
Mind Reading (Empathy) Stories ................................................................................ 90 
Transformational Stories ........................................................................................... 91 
DVD 4 – How To Turn Any Story Into A Truly Transformational Tale ......................... 102 
Q&A Session ............................................................................................................ 102 
Monastery & Cat Stories Part 1 ................................................................................ 107 
Transformational Stories ......................................................................................... 113 
DVD 5 – How To Combine Transformational Stories With Open & Nested Loops ...... 128 
Monastery & Cat Stories 2 ....................................................................................... 128 
Story Crafting Exercise ............................................................................................. 132 
Exercise Debrief ....................................................................................................... 137 
Monastery & Cat Stories 3 ....................................................................................... 145 
Nested Loops ........................................................................................................... 148 
DVD 6 – Creating “Picaresque Adventures” & How To Scale Stories Depending On Your 
Environment ............................................................................................................... 167 
Monastery & Cat Stories 4 ....................................................................................... 167 
How To Scale Your Stories ....................................................................................... 173 
The Influence Formula ............................................................................................. 180 
Group Double Induction .......................................................................................... 184 
DVD 7 – How To Find Your Own Internal Metaphors And Make Them Into Stories That 
Others Love ................................................................................................................. 191 
Q&A Session ............................................................................................................ 191 
How To Make Stories Relevant ................................................................................ 197 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
3 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
DVD 8 – Symbolic Realities, Symbolic Influence & Putting Hypnotic Storytelling All 
Together ...................................................................................................................... 215 
Symbolic Realities .................................................................................................... 215 
Practical Use Of Symbols ......................................................................................... 225 
Symbolic Influence ................................................................................................... 233 
Final Exercise ........................................................................................................... 238 
Final Thoughts ......................................................................................................... 240 
 
 
World Class Hypnotic Storyteller is the sole property of Hypnosis Training Academy & Robin Manuell 
(including, but not limited to text, content, graphics, video and audio) and is protected by copyright as 
a collective work or compilation under U.S. copyright and other laws. You must abide by all additional 
copyright notices or restrictions contained in this law. 
YOU MAY NOT POST ON A WEB SITE OR CREATE A WEB FRAME AROUND ANY PART OF THIS SERVICE 
(INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, TEXT, CONTENT, PHOTOGRAPHS, VIDEO AND AUDIO). 
YOU MAY NOT COPY, REPRODUCE, DISTRIBUTE, PUBLISH, DISPLAY, PERFORM, MODIFY, CREATE 
DERIVATIVE WORKS, TRANSMIT, OR IN ANY WAY EXPLOIT ANY PART OF THIS SERVICE, EXCEPT 
THAT YOU MAY DOWNLOAD MATERIAL FROM THIS SERVICE FOR YOUR OWN PERSONAL, 
NONCOMMERCIAL USE AS FOLLOWS: YOU MAY MAKE ONE MACHINE READABLE COPY AND/OR ONE 
PRINT COPY THAT IS LIMITED TO OCCASIONAL ARTICLES OF PERSONAL INTEREST ONLY. 
WITHOUT LIMITING THE GENERALITY OF THE FOREGOING, YOU MAY NOT DISTRIBUTE ANY PART OF 
THIS SERVICE OVER ANY NETWORK, INCLUDING A LOCAL AREA NETWORK, NOR SELL NOR OFFER IT 
FOR SALE. IN ADDITION, THESE FILES MAY NOT BE USED TO CONSTRUCT ANY KIND OF DATABASE. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
4 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
DVD 1 – Hypnotic Storytelling Foundations & 
The “Johari Window” 
 
 
Introduction 
 
Igor: 
Good morning, everyone. Welcome to the Hypnotic Storytelling for influence 
seminar. Are you excited? I’m sitting here with my good friend and fellow 
hypnotist, Robin Manuell. You will come to adore him. He’s hands down one 
of the best storytellers I’ve ever met. Give him a round of applause. 
 
Robin: 
Thank you. 
 
Igor: 
Over the next three days, our job is going to be to show you how easy and 
how enjoyable it is to find powerful and persuasive stories inside yourself that 
you can share with your friends, family, work colleagues, clients and so on. 
 
Robin: 
It’s great being here. As I look around the sea of faces, I’ve spent the last week 
kind of going out and getting to meet some of you and I realize there are still 
so many more people that I haven’t had a chance to connect with properly. 
When I flew in – how long ago was it? It seems like a million years ago now. 
 
Igor: 
In your mind. 
 
Robin: 
Last Friday getting on that plane, as soon as I stepped on the plane and knew 
that I was leaving life behind, I just could feel my whole body start to relax, 
because I knew that I was going to be sitting with my friend Igor and spending 
time with a group of people who – if I don’t know any of you, one thing that I 
do know about all of you is that you’re dedicated to your own personal 
development and to your own learning and growth.  
 
 
Personally I find being in a room with people with that commitment always 
very inspiring. It’s been wonderful, I have to say, over the last week and a bit 
to see clearly just how dedicated Igor is to your learning and the complete 
focus and attention. 
 
Igor: 
You know what the next announcement will be, don’t you? 
 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
5 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
Robin: 
He has.  
 
Igor: 
That’s right, all the way now. 
 
Robin: 
Over the week, I’ve been listening and watching you guys, and I’ve had a 
chance to connect with you, and I’ve heard so many amazing stories. I’ve 
laughed at stories of people’s mistakes turned into drama and comedy 
routines. I’ve had shivers sent down my spine over pictures of grizzly bears, 
stories of grizzly bears and kangaroos that can kill you with a single punch. I’ve 
seen the real passion and commitment that some of you have to ideas, to 
making connections out there with other people and to getting things 
happening in the world. 
 
 
I’ve seen the way that you’ve taken your own personal challenges and the 
lessons that you’ve learned, and not just stopped there but you’ve taken the 
next step and started to find ways in which you can begin to share what 
you’ve learned with other people and help them too. 
 
 
I’ve heard stories of the future, the sound of music and I’ve seen heroic 
journeys and demonstrations of courage over fear that have made me proud 
to know you.  
 
 
One master storyteller in this room told me a story that was so beautiful and 
resonated so directly with my own immediate experience and where I am in 
my own life. Standing out there in the lobby, I was moved to tears.  
 
 
I want to share that story with you because it’s very simple, very powerful and 
I think it encapsulates in it a really important lesson about how stories add 
value to the world, and how much of the world we live in right now is built 
out of those simple stories. 
 
 
It’s a really simple story. It’s about a wedding gift. It’s about the gift a mother 
gave to her son for his wedding. After I heard this story, it moved me really 
profoundly and deeply.  
 
 
That night as I dreamt, I remembered that I’d been to Holland before. Now 
I’ve been here a few times as an adult. About 10 years ago, I came to 
Amsterdam with my girlfriend and her family. That kind of turned into an 
extended shopping trip. I only have one shopping calorie, so I spent most of 
the time in a café.  

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
6 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
 
Then before that, when I was about 16, I came here with an orchestra playing 
trumpet in an orchestra. We went around Holland playing at different venues 
and places, and that was great. 
 
 
But then I remembered also when I was nine or 10 years old, I came here on a 
school trip. Back in those days – I don’t know whether it’s still true – but our 
parents and teachers believed that it was important for us to come out. We 
took a coach trip through Belgium and Holland, and they wanted us to see for 
ourselves and remember. 
 
 
 
They wanted us to stand in fields of blood and fire and witness stretching out 
as far as the eye could see rows and rows and rows of grave stones, each one 
a silent witness to a life cut short, young men and women from every country 
on Earth. We’re older and wiser now and we know that nobody wins that kind 
of war. 
 
 
Standing in those fields reflecting on those lives – the lives of people, heroes 
who came to these shores knowing they probably wouldn’t come back, but 
they came anyway. It’s a really powerful and important thing for us to do. 
That’s what I believe. 
 
 
But at age nine, I had more pressing worries. You see, before my mom sent 
me off on holiday, she took me aside and she gave me my pocket money – 13 
pounds for the eight-day trip. She said there you go. Don’t spend it all at once. 
I remember she said don’t just think of yourself. Think of other people. 
 
 
So, I went off and joined everyone else. I went on the coach and everyone 
was really excited and chatting, but I soon realized that everyone else has 
about three times as much money as I have.  
 
 
When I get to Holland, I realize everything’s really expensive. I’m looking at 
my money and I don’t know how I’m going to make it through the week. The 
week becomes just a nightmare of anxiety. I’m looking in the gift shops and 
even back then at age nine I have to say I was quite cynical about consumer 
tact and tourist rubbish. 
 
 
I’m looking at stuff and how am I going to afford anything that’s worthwhile? 
That next seven or eight days was a torment because every time we’d go to a 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
7 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
shop, I’m having to find excuses why no I don’t want a pop, I don’t need an ice 
cream. I don’t need to buy a souvenir, some silly key ring. 
 
 
Every night I’m going back counting my money, checking in the gift shops – 
have I got enough money? Will I be able to buy something worthwhile and 
give everyone a gift that they’ll really appreciate when I get back? 
 
 
So, the end of the week comes and by this time I’ve spent a few pounds on a 
packet of crisps when I was really hungry. I bought a key chain or something 
for my brothers. I finally go into the gift shop. We’d been to see a windmill 
and I come out with one of those porcelain Dutch-style blue on white bits of 
tourist tat, but it’s the best I can afford. 
 
 
I’d managed to save nine pounds of my 13 pounds and I spent it all on this 
silly little windmill. I take it back and mom goes oh thanks a lot and sticks it on 
a shelf somewhere.  
 
 
I wanted to check before we go any further. How many of you here have 
actually heard the Master Class in Hypnotic Storytelling that Igor and I did 
about three years ago? Put your hands up. Okay, great. You can catch the 
hypnoticstorytelling.com master class. 
 
 
How many of you would consider that yourselves fairly competent 
storytellers? You’re confident telling stories and you’re happy doing that? Put 
your hands up. Take a look around everyone. We have models and inspiration 
in the room. 
 
Igor: 
The interesting this is that some of those competent storytellers are a little bit 
shy. I used to tell some stories, I was going no yeah, I can tell stories. 
 
Robin: 
How many of you have ever felt like any kind of storytelling or let’s say public 
speaking is really a big cringe-making? Is it so cringe-making that you couldn’t 
even put your hands up? 
 
Igor: 
We’ve got one. 
 
Robin: 
How many of you would identify with being creative and would be happy to 
say yes I’m a creative person? Excellent. Good. You’re learning. How many of 
you wouldn’t? Okay, great. I’m going to prove you wrong. I hope you don’t 
mind. 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
8 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
Igor: 
How many of you have spent time with friends and just chatted about 
whatever? One or two of you are lying to me right now. The reason I say that 
is because when you’re feeling comfortable, when you know the person, 
they’re your friend, you hang out, you laugh, you share a glass of wine and 
sometimes one too many, after a while you can only talk about the news so 
often.  
 
 
There’s only so much gossip you can catch up on. What do you do with the 
rest of the time? (You just drink. I know a hypnotherapist that can help you.) If 
you really think about it, when we are feeling comfortable and we have that 
close connection with someone, when we get the chance to pause our day-to-
day function in the world, every single one of you has very comfortably told 
stories. 
 
 
They’ve been funny sometimes. They’ve been sad sometimes. They’ve made 
you think sometimes. They’ve made you feel a lot of times. I doubt there’s a 
single person in this room who hasn’t told quite a fulfilling story at one point 
or another without even realizing it because you are all human beings, and I 
think storytelling is one of the most fundamental things that we do as people. 
 
 
We’ve seen it from cave paintings all the way through the Hollywood movie-
making machine. This is the reason why I really hope you’ll get a lot out of the 
next three days here because I think storytelling – hypnotic storytelling in 
particular – is fundamentally at the heart of that human interaction. 
 
 
It’s how we store knowledge. It’s how we ensure it doesn’t vanish long after 
we’ve gone. In fact, you go back in history when kind of Nordic Viking land 
area going towards Denmark and up further from here, and for the longest 
time of course the only thing that ensured your immorality was how long your 
story would be told, so you had to live a life worth telling. 
 
 
Of course, our attitudes have changed now but really the idea is still there. 
People talk about leaving a legacy behind and about doing things for future 
generations. What they’re really talking about is what stories will be told 
when I’m gone? Who will remember me? 
 
 
That memory is really tied into the whole idea of storytelling. It’s also one of 
the most efficient ways of providing information to someone. There have 
actually been studies on this that a five-minute story is not only more 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
9 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
memorable but the content of the story – the information – is more compact 
than just the pure data facts, and people actually use it more. 
 
 
You can tell someone what to do or you can tell them a story. The story will 
always have a much richer understanding. You’re more likely to get the result 
that you want from that.  
 
 
That’s really one of the things that we want to focus on here, which is how do 
you tell those stories already, which is something you do naturally, but even if 
you think that you’re not particularly creative and even if you think you’re not 
particularly good at telling stories, realize that if you are a human being – and 
I could be mistaken about that part, it’s true, but if you’re fooling me that 
way, well done. 
 
 
If you’re a human being, then you fundamentally tell stories. It’s just that you 
may not recognize the story that you tell as stories because they don’t begin 
with the phrase once upon a time. 
 
Robin: 
Think of the first utterances that young children make. Think of a baby 
drinking milk from a bottle. It empties and she shakes it and goes all gone and 
then she burps. Is she satisfied? She may be satisfied – all gone – or she may 
be like angry, frustrated, she may want some more, but that is a story. 
 
 
Wrapped up in there is a fact. It’s gone. It’s wrapped in an emotion with a call 
to action. Come on mom, come on dad, because Plan B you will not like. 
 
Igor: 
Parents, is that not implied threat sometimes? 
 
Robin: 
Margaret Mead was an English anthropologist. She was married to Gregory 
Bateson for a while. She famously said never underestimate the power of a 
small group of people to accomplish great things. That’s the only way 
anything ever gets done. 
 
 
Everything around us came into being because somebody had an idea and 
they told a story with enough conviction and enthusiasm that a group of 
people decided to come together around that story and make it happen, to 
put their energy into building it. 
 
Igor: 
One of the things that we’re going to ask of you over the next few days to 
make the most out of this is that there are ways you can tell stories that will 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
10 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
be of great benefit to you, and there are ways that you’ll not realize all the 
stories that you have inside you. 
 
 
The first thing I’m going to ask you to do is to remember this is still an adult 
learning environment. It’s not school. You don’t have to ask permission for 
things. You get to experiment with things. Please treat it as such. 
 
 
That means you have both rights and responsibilities with that as an adult. 
You have the right to tell all kinds of stories about yourself, about the people 
around you and so on, but you also have the responsibility to make sure that 
you’re happy with the consequences of whatever stories you tell. 
 
 
Let me give you an example of what I mean by that. If you’re a very private 
person, you have the absolute right to keep that private, but the 
consequences of that may be that others will find it hard to warm up to you 
because they don’t know who you are. 
 
 
How can they know who you are unless they’ve either spent a long time with 
you – in which case they know your stories without being told them – or you 
compress all that time into a few stories that they really can understand 
about you. 
 
 
You absolutely have the right to keep as much private as you wish. Many of 
those things will be appropriate, absolutely, but just bear in mind are you 
happy with the consequence you’re getting? 
 
 
The flipside is also true. There are some who will basically be an open book, 
and that’s great up to a point, but there are some stories that you don’t want 
to be telling everyone because there are consequences you may not like.  
 
 
A police officer stops you on the road and says what are you doing sir? Well, I 
had an argument with my wife and I spent the last half hour really thinking I 
would murder that woman. You don’t mean it. You’re just expressing. You’re 
venting. Everyone’s done that, right? 
 
 
However, there are times to vent. There are people that are worth venting 
with and there are some where you’d think let’s test the relationship first.  
Over the course of today we’ll be talking more about that as we get into, but 
just bear the golden rule in mind.  
 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
11 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
You’re an adult. You have a lifetime of experiences being with people, so you 
get to choose how much or how little about yourself you share. Just bear in 
mind that there are consequences for everything.  
 
 
If you share too little, you may not make the impact that you want. If you 
share too much – or should we say too much of the wrong things – again you 
may not get the impact that you want. Does that make sense to everyone? 
 
Robin: 
Whether you are interested in learning to tell stories simply so you can kind of 
improve your conversational skills and meet people… 
 
Igor: 
Or if you want to do it because you want to use it as a tool in your own 
practice or business to actually influence people in a positive way… 
 
Robin: 
You’ll find that everything that you learn over the next few days will have an 
impact on your ability in therapy. 
 
Igor: 
And actually as a human being too because it’s something that’s so 
fundamental in terms of how people communicate. 
 
Robin: 
I know you are all hypnotists in this room. Is that correct?  
 
Igor: 
And I suspect most of you have been in a formal trance at one point or 
another. 
 
Robin: 
You may feel something… 
 
Igor: 
Of importance… 
 
Robin: 
Beginning now.  
 
Igor: 
And really it doesn’t matter how it starts or where it goes. 
 
Robin: 
Or whether you close your eyes straightaway. 
 
Igor: 
Because one way or the other, your unconscious will start to think about all 
the stories you’ve heard in your life. 
 
Robin: 
While you prepare now to make the most… 
 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
12 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
Igor: 
And really consider… 
 
Robin: 
Of your learning… 
 
Igor: 
How you understood those things… 
 
Robin: 
Over the next three days… 
 
Igor: 
To be stories… 
 
Robin: 
Just take a moment… 
 
Igor: 
That you can respond to… 
 
Robin: 
To relax… 
 
Igor: 
Something to learn from… 
 
Robin: 
And to begin to enjoy… 
 
Igor: 
Or to take action on… 
 
Robin: 
Those feelings… 
 
Igor: 
And who hasn’t been inspired by a story? 
 
Robin: 
You know you can enjoy. 
 
Igor: 
Who hasn’t been outraged or charmed by one? 
 
Robin: 
It’s easy… 
 
Igor: 
Who has been comforted? 
 
Robin: 
To realize… 
 
Igor: 
Warmed… 
 
Robin: 
You can trust… 
 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
13 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
Igor: 
By something heartfelt. 
 
Robin: 
Yourself now… 
 
Igor: 
And everyone has the experience… 
 
Robin: 
Noticing the changing… 
 
Igor: 
Of recalling events in their lives… 
 
Robin: 
Sensations… 
 
Igor: 
And those events… 
 
Robin: 
As you begin to attend… 
 
Igor: 
Have a certain significance… 
 
Robin: 
To only good feelings…. 
 
Igor: 
Importance to you… 
 
Robin: 
And only those experiences… 
 
Igor: 
Some… 
 
Robin: 
Sensations… 
 
Igor: 
Are important enough… 
 
Robin: 
That will assist you now… 
 
Igor: 
To share with others… 
 
Robin: 
In making the best and really of your learning today… 
 
Igor: 
Allow them to experience something that you did. 
 
Robin: 
And if you have any challenges… 
 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
14 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
Igor: 
We all have that drive… 
 
Robin: 
It’s time for you 
 
Igor: 
To share our inner world with others. 
 
Robin: 
To just realize, to let them, there’s plenty of time… 
 
Igor: 
Really enjoy the highlights… 
 
Robin: 
That you can just sit back… 
 
Igor: 
And have a really unique experience. 
 
Robin: 
There’s a path… 
 
Igor: 
That leads somewhere of importance… 
 
Robin: 
That you’ll be taking now… 
 
Igor: 
Because over the next few days there’s so much that you’ve experienced. 
 
Robin: 
Isn’t there? 
 
Igor: 
It’s important to know that. There’s an old tale… 
 
Robin: 
About Truth. 
 
Igor: 
And she’s standing outside a village… 
 
Robin: 
And she walks through the village… 
 
Igor: 
Naked as the day she was born. 
 
Robin: 
And half the villagers hide away in shame at her nakedness. 
 
Igor: 
And the other half look on at her beauty. 
 
Robin: 
And because the way of the world is as it is, some people throw stones and 
chase her from the village. 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
15 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
Igor: 
Shouting angry words – how dare you… 
 
Robin: 
Ashamed and afraid of her nakedness. 
 
Igor: 
Be this way. 
 
Robin: 
And in tears, Truth runs from the village. Exhausted she finds a place to 
sleep… 
 
Igor: 
And a person comes to her… 
 
Robin: 
And during the night… 
 
Igor: 
Discusses things. 
 
Robin: 
The forest weaves for her. 
 
Igor: 
And lets her realize… 
 
Robin: 
From her dreams… 
 
Igor: 
That there is another way… 
 
Robin: 
From the branches and the thinnest roots of the forest… 
 
Igor: 
To be yourself… 
 
Robin: 
From the dew-hung gossamer threads… 
 
Igor: 
And not be recognized… 
 
Robin: 
… that coats its branches, a cloak of story… 
 
Igor: 
In the same way. 
 
Robin: 
… And the next morning… 
 
Igor: 
Wearing that cloak… 
 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
16 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
Robin: 
She walks unseen and unnoticed… 
 
Igor: 
Through the village. People do not recognize her but they all greet her like an 
old friend. 
 
Robin: 
Now it’s time… 
 
Igor: 
To really do something with all this because we can wax lyrical about why we 
like to tell stories, or we won’t. 
 
Robin: 
You might notice that. 
 
Igor: 
Yes, and there will be much more waxing as we go along. Wax on, wax off. 
That is not a story, is it? Really it’s not so much about what we do in terms of 
our storytelling or anything like that. What really matters is what you do when 
you leave here so that you appreciate that you can tell stories.  
 
Robin: 
I’m probably right in thinking that even though you’ve spent so much time 
together, would it be correct to say that there are probably people in this 
room who you still haven’t met? There are probably still people in this room 
who if you have met, you haven’t actually spent much time with them or 
done exercises with them. 
 
Igor: 
Of course, there are a whole bunch of new people who have arrived. If you 
look around you’ll notice that they weren’t here before. What’s this other 
person doing in this room? That’s because you’re right. There are new people 
in this room, it’s not a hallucination.  
 
 
What do we do when we meet people that we don’t know yet? You introduce 
yourselves, right? We ask questions like: hello, who are you? What do you do? 
Why are you here? This kind of standard stuff and these are important things 
to discuss with people. However… 
 
Robin: 
We don’t want you to do that.  
 
Igor: 
In this way.  
 
Robin: 
We want you to do it, but we want you to do it in a story. 
 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
17 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
Igor: 
The gossamer veil of storytelling is something you can really share with 
people. So you can hear all this information in a short little anecdote that says 
to people, who are you? If that’s as simple as your name that’s fine.  
 
Robin: 
There’s an important element about this anecdote. We’d like you to lie quite 
a lot.  
 
Igor: 
Oh yeah. It doesn’t have to be the gospel truth it can just be a half truth or a 
complete lie.  
 
Robin: 
Shall we give them an example? 
 
Igor: 
This is a bad example, just because it’s actually more true than not, but I’ll use 
it. At the last seminar I was in the Bahamas teaching business skills to 
hypnotherapists. Of course Robin is a good friend of mine and I thought, you 
know, Robin really deserves a break. He’s a phenomenal hypnotic storyteller 
and he really should be able to build this massive business for himself. I think 
it will be good for him to come experience this business training, so I called 
him up and said come on over, join us there.  
 
Robin: 
Yes. What actually happened, I was at home and Igor called me from the 
Bahamas and he sounded a bit desperate. Maybe a little lonely and he said 
Robin, please, please come out to the Bahamas. I said you know well, I’m 
busy, there’s a crazy cat next door, the neighborhood cat. He’s going to be 
lonely without me.  
 
 
Those tomato plants don’t water themselves, you know. Eventually, he said 
please, please come I really need you. So I got on a plane and went out to the 
Bahamas and it was great to see him. 
 
Igor: 
It was fun seeing Robin. When he turned up he said, thank you so much Igor 
for this opportunity. I respect… 
 
 
Do you get the idea? 
 
Robin: 
Keep going. 
 
Igor: 
I’ll be there in a minute. I laugh, but it was a very sad time.  
 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
18 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
Robin:  
[Laughter] So, I got to the Bahamas and it was wonderful to be there with 
everyone. We were having such a great time and I think Igor was just so 
pleased to see me, his little face lit up like a little boy’s, he was just so 
pleased.  
 
Igor: 
So, you know, we got towards the end of the training and clearly Robin was 
impressed. You could see himself using those wonderful skills we develop for 
people and really making a life for himself at last.  
 
Robin: 
But I just sensed that there was something missing and halfway through the 
seminar Igor came up to me and said Robin, I’ve missed training with you. It’s 
been 8-9 years now and I just can’t find a co-trainer who can cut the mustard. 
When you’ve have champagne, sparkling wine just doesn’t taste the same.  
 
Igor: 
So of course Robin comes up to me at the end and says, I really would love to 
do a storytelling event with you, you’re a clear and masterful trainer and 
there’s so much I could learn from you. 
 
Robin: 
So, I mean, I was really reluctant but in the end I said Igor get up, let go of my 
jacket you’re embarrassing yourself. Okay, I’ll do a training with you, all right.  
 
Igor: 
It was fortunate because my heart goes out to his daughter.  
 
Robin: 
Yeah, my poor daughter.  
 
Igor: 
Yeah. She should be proud of her father shouldn’t she? So I figured what 
better than to invite him on my stage and he can show the family a snap and 
say look, I did share a stage with Igor. I like to think of myself as being humble, 
enough to be able to help out a fellow human being who’s going through a 
rough patch. 
 
Robin: 
So yeah, basically I figured at least if I was here than he couldn’t steal my 
ideas and pass them off as his own, like he has before.  
 
Igor: 
I reminded Robin, because he got a bit nervous about this whole idea of being 
in front of 150 people, so I reminded him look, it doesn’t matter Robin, I’ve 
done this before and I’ll prepare it all. I’ll carry you. Just turn up and share a 
couple stories that’s all you have to do. Don’t think about it too much for 
now. 
 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
19 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
Robin: 
It was so lucky that he had me over here for a week, because he was so busy 
with preparing the whole Ericksonian thing and he was a bit ill, so he really 
hasn’t had enough time to do anything and I’ve been obviously listening to 
you all and preparing so much stuff. I mean, I’m not really sure we’ll have time 
to get it all out. I just hope Igor shuts up for long enough to let me give you 
some of the best stuff. Hey, if he doesn’t then you can always go to 
HypnoticStorytelling.com.  
 
Igor: 
So, there are many ways you can answer those three questions aren’t there? 
We’ll do an exercise now where you’ll get up and you’ll have an opportunity 
to meet everyone in the room. However, I would like for none of you to ask a 
single question, and for all of you to get answers to all these three things, just 
in terms of the stories you’re being told. Does that make sense? 
 
Guest: 
No. 
 
Igor: 
Very good. We’re going to start that again are we? So tell a story, any story, as 
outrageous as you like, it doesn’t have to be true.  
 
Robin: 
It’s okay, you can make sense or you can make nonsense. 
 
Igor: 
The only thing the story has to revolve around is a sense of who you are, that 
could just be your name, like Robin saying Igor thank you so much for letting 
me come here this week. 
 
Robin: 
You are my inspiration. 
 
Igor: 
You’re welcome. What do you do? We teach seminars. What do you do? Why 
are you here? Clearly I’m helping out his daughter to have a father she can be 
proud of. What are you doing here, Robin? 
 
Robin: 
I’m rethinking that right now. I’ll get back to you. 
 
Igor: 
Do you understand the exercise? Keep the stories short, but outrageous. Let’s 
take 7 minutes, that should be enough time for everyone to meet everyone 
right? So you have 7 minutes and I’d like for you to gather the stories of every 
person in this room that you can get. The more stories you gather the more 
brownie points you get.  
 
Guests: 
Whoa. 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
20 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
Igor: 
I know, and brownie points means? Nothing at all. Everyone stand up and let’s 
start now. [Exercise starts] 
 
Johari Window 
 
Robin: 
Welcome back. I thought I’d use a diagram. It’s the only one you’ll see for the 
next three days.  
 
Gabe: 
What is it? 
 
Robin: 
It’s called the Johari Window, Gabe. Has anyone come across that before? I 
know Randy has. Rita. Dennis. 
 
 
On the vertical axis we have… known by others, what other people know 
about you and on the horizontal axis we have… what you know about 
yourself. On the Temple of Apollo at Delphi, there were three inscriptions in 
fact, and the first one said… Know thyself… It seems to me we’re all on a 
journey through our lives and part of that journey is discovering who we are.  
 
 
There are three ways, I think, that we come to know ourselves. First, through 
our behavior, through time. We find ourselves in new situations, we behave a 
certain way and we see ourselves behaving like that and make conclusions 
about ourselves from it. 
 
 
People tell us things about ourselves and we tell other people, we share 
things about ourselves with other people. This area in the quadrant here, the 
public arena is sometimes called the area of freedom, the area of choice, 
because it’s the space in which I know what you want, you know what I want. 
We’re free to play whatever rolls we’re playing. We know what the script is, 
there are no hidden agendas. 
 
 
The way information gets into that area is through these processes of 
feedback and disclosure. We hear things from other people and we tell 
people things about ourselves, and you always get to choose who. You’re 
responsible for that. In a really important way, who we choose to receive 
feedback from determines our reality. 
 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
21 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
You’ve probably got friends who, of course nobody in this room, will hear 
some stories, they’ll hear some things about themselves and others they will 
block it out, to the extent sometimes that they’ll go choose other friends 
when they hear things they don’t want to hear. I’ve realized that those two 
arrows… see that blind spot, that area; I’ve called it the flaws. That’s the bad 
breath area. 
 
 
Nobody likes to hear that they have bad breath, but they probably want to 
know. If you think about the heroes that you’ve resonated with in fiction in 
movies, they have flaws. If they were perfect they’d be plastic. They’d have no 
struggle. We wouldn’t be able to identify with them. We need our flaws. 
Heroes need flaws.  
 
 
In that area, those things that you don’t know about yourself that other 
people know, other people always know in a really important way so much 
more about us than we do. They know things we’ll never know, and that’s not 
just our faults it’s our gifts too. Other people recognize the gifts we have. 
Sometimes it’s important that they tell us. Sometimes I think people like us 
because of our flaws, not in spite of them.  
 
 
In that hidden area, I’ve called that the mask. That’s the stuff I know about 
myself, but in order to play certain rolls in business, in our social lives think 
about it. Has anyone here been on a date? We all put on a mask. We show 
our best face. At work there are certain things we’re happy talking about and 
other things we hide behind. It’s important that we do that because you know 
what, there are some people we can’t trust. There are some people who 
won’t understand and aren’t ready to allow us to be fully authentically who 
they are, because that would challenge them to do the same thing. That’s 
okay 
 
 
That area in the other corner, I just called that the manifest, nobody knows 
that yet. I don’t know it. You don’t know it. In exploring doing some things 
differently over the next few days, some of that space will become manifest. 
You’ll discover something more about yourself. I wanted to present this to 
you simply because I think the reason that stops many people sharing and 
engaging with people on this level, is that fear of telling too much.  
 
 
How are people going to take this?  
 
What are they going to think about me? 
 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
22 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
There’s a story though that I think relates both to the process of feedback and 
disclosure that I’ll tell you quickly. It’s an absolutely true story. Most of the 
stories that I tell you about myself using the word ‘I’ will be true. Some of the 
stories that I tell you about other people will also be true, and about me. It’s 
amazing the freedom you can get from simply making the story about 
somebody else, changing the details, change the gender, the location and the 
name.  
 
 
Suddenly you’re free because it’s not about you anymore. You’ve put the 
cloak of story around yourself and you can talk freely and find the truth. You 
can convey the emotional truth of the story without compromising your 
safety. I was at the passionate meditation workshop, anybody ever heard of 
it, any kind of Buddhist meditation? This was like a noble silent retreat. 
 
 
For 10 days we’d get up at 5:00 o’clock in the morning meditate and have 
breakfast. Meditate some more, eat lunch, meditate, have a glass of juice, 
meditate some more and go to bed. Wake up at 5:00 the next morning, 
meditate, have some breakfast. Meditate have some lunch. Meditate some 
more, glass of water. Meditate sleep. Get the picture.  
 
 
It’s noble silent so you can’t talk to anyone. On the first day there’s this guy, 
this young man at this workshop and I immediately get a little bit of a thing, I 
don’t like him. There’s something about him that seems stuck up to me, a 
little bit arrogant. He’s also dating the best looking girl at the seminar. I don’t 
know that that had anything to do with it. I’m watching this guy and thinking, 
asshole.  
 
 
So we’re meditating and going through the week, all kinds of experiences, 
revelations and so on. About the middle of the seminar, I’m looking out over 
the exercise yard… this place is in the UK on the England/Welsh border and 
you can walk round this exercise yard and look out over the fields and hills 
into Wales one way and Shropshire the other… and there’s this guy standing 
in the center of the exercise yard. 
 
 
He’s doing some warm-ups. I’m standing there going… phone rings hi yeah I’m 
busy now can I call you back. Just joking, it’s an alarm… I’m thinking and then 
it hits me, sudden revelation. It’s me. He’s like I am. That’s the kind of thing I 
would do. Just do a bit of warm-up, stretches, it’s me. I’m looking at myself 
and getting annoyed.  
 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
23 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
I’m looking at myself and thinking, what an a-hole. What an arrogant stuck up 
guy that is. I’m shaking my head, it’s a great epiphany. It’s fantastic. This is the 
reason you come to a course like this. This is the reason you do a 10 day noble 
silent retreat is to have these kinds of revelations.  
 
 
The great thing, the thing that made it for me was that on the last day guess 
who the first person to come up to me was? This guy. He comes up to me and 
says you know what, I really didn’t like you at first but then I realized you 
were me.  
 
 
On that note and before you do the next exercise, because there’s something 
I didn’t tell you. I went home with that windmill, put it on the shelf and didn’t 
really think about it since. This was how long ago? Thirty some years. I forgot 
about it really. It wasn’t until that master of storytelling whose in this room 
right now, told me a story about the gift she gave to her son that I 
remembered something important.  
 
 
 
I realized something important and probably wouldn’t have realized it 
actually, if I hadn’t, in the last couple of years become a dad. If you go to my 
mom and dad’s house my mom has got to where she’s collected all kinds of 
China plates, thimble collection worth thousands of pounds, China teapots 
and all kinds of things. There in the cabinet in the living room in pride of place 
with her thimble collection, is that windmill. 
 
 
So, the story I was told was about a wedding gift that a mother gave to her 
son. If you’d see that gift it doesn’t have any intrinsic value it’s a simple print, 
framed, don’t know how much the frame was worth but if you saw it in a 
thrift sale or charity shop you’d probably pass it over, but when you hear the 
story attached to it you’ll realize why that gift was priceless, where it was 
worth all the Mona Lisa’s and Rodin’s and all the famous paintings in the 
galleries in all the world put together.  
 
 
It was a print of her son’s hand at age 5. She’d been playing when her son 
when he was five years old. She’s taken a print of his hand and told him she 
was going to save it for him. She’d kept it as he grew up, went to school all the 
way through exams and education and when he got married she gave it back 
to him.  
 
 
Something that has very little material value can be made infinitely precious 
by the story you wrap around it. This is what brands like Nike and Coca Cola 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
24 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
do. They do not sell you fizzy sugary water, they sell you a dream and when 
you buy their product you buy into their dream.  
 
 
Now, a quick exercise. What I’d like you to do is to consider when you have 
heard stories from people it might have been a personal story or that you 
heard something from a leader at work or a great speaker, or it might be a 
more personal thing.  
 
 
When you heard a story where somebody disclosed something about 
themselves that made you feel more connected to them, that made you feel 
motivated to help them, to respond, that helped you buy into their story and 
conversely when somebody told you something that put you off. That made 
you think you know what, I’m not playing, because the power of vulnerability 
is incredible.  
 
 
Being prepared to take a risk, to reveal something about yourself is one of the 
most powerful things you can do as a storyteller. It’s a risky strategy but guess 
what, people like heroes who take a risk and get through. People like to know 
that you are a human being. Before they do business with you in any way they 
need to connect with you as a human being.  
 
 
So you know what you have to do? Again, mingle and try to talk with three or 
four people. Share some experiences. I’ll tell you to come back in 5-10 
minutes. Thank you. Go. [Exercise started] 
 
Exercise Debrief 
 
Igor: 
All right guys, how did that go? Did you enjoy it? Are you enjoying the stories 
that are coming out? Here’s a question for you. What kinds of things did you 
experience or did they tell you about that were off-pudding, in terms of 
people sharing too much or the wrong sort of things? What kinds of 
experiences were coming out? 
 
Student: I just love this story and I never really knew what it was an example of, but it 
was my biology teacher in fifth grade when he started to tell us, I didn’t know 
he was making a reference to something, he said and you know this is just like 
that when you are a young boy and you’re laying on your bed and trying to 
piss so hard that it reaches the ceiling.  
 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
25 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
[Great laughter] 
 
 
I couldn’t really connect with that.  
 
Igor: 
That would do it. There are whole levels of wrong on that one.  
 
Student: I can’t make such a nice story, but the experiences that when you try to be 
agitated at first in the exercise that you try to get irritated by what the others 
are saying, but nevertheless you try to find connections. That’s what I noticed 
and that you’re feeling what they feel and your experience and nevertheless 
relate to them. 
 
Igor: 
The exercise wasn’t so much to try and irritate someone else although I guess 
we could go down that road if we want to. The point of the exercise is this. 
You can clearly tell the difference between the kinds of stories that people 
have told you when you’ve warmed up to them. And you can tell the kinds of 
stories that people have told you that made you take a second look and go 
yeah, maybe I’ll start keeping my distance now. I think biology may not be the 
most important thing in my academic career.  
 
 
To see that there are some common themes there, there’s something about a 
social context isn’t there? There’s something about the violation of a social 
contract in this particular example that was unpleasant and on the flip side on 
the warmer stories, there is something that fits that social context. Or, it 
brings an expectation, if you expect someone to be cold or less pleasant that 
somehow they were willing to be vulnerable, there is something which was 
very charming about that.  
 
Robin: 
Who would like to share some examples of those kinds of stories, those that 
warm people up? 
 
Arthur: 
I would just say that I found the exercise difficult and I couldn’t think of 
anything to say. I couldn’t think of any story except, I could have given a litany 
of things, but I couldn’t really think of any stories and I tend to listen. 
 
Robin: 
I’m a little confused because you said you could have given a litany of stories 
and you couldn’t think of anything to say. 
 
Arthur: 
I couldn’t give a litany of stories, I could have given a litany of things I’ve done 
in my past but I couldn’t really give any stories that would introduce me. 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
26 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
Igor: 
The first thing I would say is that’s actually a very nice story. That honesty, 
refreshed honesty… I was trying to get a story but I couldn’t quite get one that 
would say anything… I’d rather listen. Doesn’t that help you understand who 
Arthur is a bit more?  
 
Robin: 
I was running a training a while back and I asked people to go away and come 
up with five stories from their past that they could use in the exercise. This 
guy comes up to me and says, do you know what it’s like when somebody 
puts you on the spot like that and you can’t think of anything to say? I said 
great, now what’s your second story?  
 
 
I think also it’s important to note that some of you do prefer to listen and 
watch.  
 
Igor: 
That’s going to be an important skill we will be developing. In fact, you’ll find 
stories you didn’t know you had by doing exactly that, but we’ll refine that as 
we get across that segment.  
 
Robin: 
Each of you has a particular style, a particular kind of presence that you’ve 
developed over the years and that’s who you are. That’s great. We want you 
to keep that. Put your hands together like this… this isn’t the first stage in a 
stage hypnosis show… 
 
Igor: 
… but if you really want to glue them together, glue them together.  
 
Robin: 
Now just swap the thumbs around so they’re intertwined the other way. Does 
that feel weird? It should feel strange, because it’s different. Now if you do 
that a few times over the course of the day you’ll find it starts to feel normal. 
So expect to feel a little bit of that strangeness over the next few days and 
remember that you can always go back to holding your hands like this.  
 
Igor: 
The reason I say of importance really goes back to the very charming story 
Arthur just shared with us. The reason that’s important is because like many 
other things in life we undervalue things we’re good at. There’ll be a lot of 
stories that you’re telling naturally and there are great stories and people will 
be charmed by them.  
 
 
It’s just they’re so natural to you; you don’t realize that they’re there. One of 
our jobs will be to find them and how to appreciate those stories that are 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
27 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
there, because it may feel odd at first but that’s where your natural storyteller 
lives. Until you can appreciate that, something as simple as saying, I was doing 
this exercise and I was meant to tell a story and I found it difficult. They give 
me all these things I could do and I prefer to listen, you know what I mean? 
 
 
In how many cocktail parties would someone get a sense of like yeah, I like 
this guy Arthur he’s nice. I hang out with him. In fact, if nothing else I can 
vent. So thank you for that Arthur, I appreciate that.  
 
 
A couple more feedbacks now. 
 
Student: I found while doing the exercise that one of the stories I had to tell was about 
a fellow who I know and he’s very big on stories himself. He always has stories 
of everything, his childhood and all these things. You really warm up to him 
and feel quite comfortable with him, and feel you can tell him anything 
because he’s told you all sorts of things. Then you realize that that’s a 
different story for the scar on his hand and that wrecks it.  
 
Igor: 
That’s something we will also be addressing which is, very importantly, there’s 
a cloak of story which allows you to reveal very personal things in a way that 
won’t be harmful to yourself. But there’s a balancing act which is, how much 
truth is in your stories?  
 
 
Let’s put it this way, there are two kinds of stories.  
 
1. Stories that are clearly just a story that people get entertained by, but 
actually have a lot of you in them. 
 
2. Stories that are supposed to be about you, but if they didn’t actually 
occur to you people get upset by it. 
 
 
There’s a famous storyteller, Doug Lipman, who tells a story about a story that 
he told. He gets hired by storytelling events at schools or talks or whatever 
and he tells a story about how he’ll sit there and he knows what kind of event 
it is so he’ll tell different stories at a bar mitzvah than he will at a social place 
or whatever.  
 
 
He’ll start the story saying, these are just stories this didn’t happen to me, but 
I’m taking some artistic license to present it in a particular way for the story. 
He says it up front as clearly and lucidly as this. Then he tells the story like, 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
28 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
when I was a boy this happened and that and people get so sucked into the 
story, they get so emotional about the story that at the end they come up and 
say I’m so sorry this happened to you.  
 
 
That was a terrible thing and something similar happened to me once as well. 
He has to apologize and say look I’m sorry, but I need to remind you that this 
wasn’t something that happened to me it’s just a story I made up and 
presented in a particular way for the artistry of it. People get so annoyed with 
him.  
 
 
Because, whilst you can vale some things about yourself in a particular story, 
if they think it’s about you or if you presented it as though it’s about you and 
you get them too emotional about it. This is one of the fundamental ways we 
get to know people and if you tell a story about yourself, a scar where the 
story changes then you don’t know the person and you don’t know if you can 
trust them.  
 
 
So it’s an important lesson to figure out. When do you double wrap a cloak or 
story so it has a lot of personal stuff, but is presented in a way that’s safe for 
you and when don’t you? Does that make sense? So thank you for that that’s 
a very important thing.  
 
 
We’ll have a couple quick ones still and then do an exercise.  
 
Student: I found that some of my stories, even if it was the same story when I shared it 
with different people, it didn’t feel the same. Some of them actually enthused 
and excited me, so I’m feeding off their feedback and I get more details into it 
and then other times it’s just like I think I’m telling the wrong story. How do I 
get out of this? 
 
Igor: 
You know what, imagine the story… we will come onto that so thank you for 
sharing.  
 
Robin: 
I think that’s really important and we will be showing you ways in which you 
can encourage other people to tell their stories.  
 
Pamela:  What I noticed about the storytelling was that, for example, when Robin 
started to tell his story and I was sitting in my chair. Before he got to the lady 
and what she did, something about frames, I was seeing an image in my mind 
of a round plaster thing that I had for 55 years that sits beside my bed. I tell 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
29 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
myself a story in France if my house was on fire what would I take from the 
house. It’s only that that I would take. It’s a handprint that I did in Vacation 
Bible School that I have of me.  
 
 
That’s nice and what I noticed in each of the stories that I listened to, was that 
there would come a moment and someone would say something and for me 
it’s like a gear shifting, tumblers tumbling together. My sister was getting 
ready to be homeless on the verge of my arrival here and someone told me 
they were homeless. I was sharing a room and someone told me they were 
sharing a room. It was very nice, very interesting.  
 
Igor: 
That’s a powerful way for people to bond, over stories like that, isn’t it? We 
have a lifetime and in that lifetime you have something called a human 
experience, unless you’re a cyborg from 2048 who’s come here to destroy me. 
 
But Robin… we collect these stories and because we’re all human beings we 
all have similar things. They may not be the exact same story but we have 
loss, grief, happiness and we get stuck at a point when we don’t know what to 
do. That’s one of the levels in which we fundamentally bond with each other. 
Thank you for sharing that because that’s going to be an important thing.  
 
Robin: 
Pamela, that tumbler moment, what was it can you say a little more about 
that? 
 
Pamela: I don’t know exactly how to tell it. It happens to me a lot. It’s some kind of 
experience I have where everything is whole or something is connected. It 
happens to me a lot. 
 
Robin: 
Okay. So it’s the feeling of suddenly feeling connected.  
 
Pamela: Yes, it goes together. Like the gears are not grinding.  
 
Robin: 
Thank you. Before you go can I ask you one more question? The handprint 
that you keep with you. Why? 
 
Pamela: Well, the actual reason I keep it is because I think it’s a 5-year old who’s still 
talking to me.  
 
Robin: 
Thank you very much for sharing.  
 
Igor: 
Thank you.  

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
30 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
Robin: 
I’d like to suggest just how such a simple thing contains within it the seeds of 
so many different stories and ways of connecting to other people on a heart 
to heart level.  
 
Igor: 
We have an exercise, in three parts. I’ll describe all three parts and then we’ll 
do it is that okay? The first part will be very easy. It will involve you standing 
up and moving all the chairs to one side. The second part will be quite 
enjoyable because it involves taking a 15 minute break. The third part is what 
occurs during that 15 minute break.  
 
 
You will tell each other some stories. Now, bear in mind all the things we’ve 
heard here, the challenge is this. I would like you to include within those 
stories, one that’s about someone else that actually was really you or about 
generally someone else or maybe about someone that is a figment of your 
imagination. 
 
Robin: 
We’re asking you to draw the veil and use the cloak of story. 
 
Igor: 
The thing is, they’ll never know if you’re telling a story about your friend, John 
or Jane, whether you’re talking about yourself or you’re talking about your 
friend or something… 
 
Robin: 
They won’t know whether that was a real person, male or female. 
 
Igor: 
It could be a figment of your imagination that actually just conveys some 
important information, something that you find important even though it 
never occurred in the world you’ve lived in. Does the exercise make sense to 
you all? 
 
Robin: 
And just one final thing, if you think back to that Johari window that I 
mentioned earlier, that the people you choose to listen to and seek out help 
to determine your reality. 
 
 
One of the things I did for myself this week, because I started to notice early 
on that I have preferences. There are certain people I’m attracted to first, that 
I go speak to. If I’m not careful I get locked into that group of people and that 
click, so I’ve been trying to stretch myself over the last few days and actually 
go reach out to those people I haven’t connected with to see what happens. 
 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
31 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
Igor: 
Let’s be back in 15 minutes. [break] 
 
Storytelling Games 
 
Igor: 
All right, a very quick exercise.  
 
Robin: 
Yes. We’re going to mingle and do something really simple, step-by-step. You 
can all clap can’t you?  
 
Igor: 
Off you go. 
 
Robin: 
Find a partner. I’m going to tell you to change partners while you’re doing it, 
but go and find somebody now.  
 
 
That’s great, and you can all say a random word out of the top of your head 
can’t you? Fish. 
 
Igor: 
Fingers. 
 
Robin: 
Cheese. 
 
Igor: 
Toast. 
 
Robin: 
Purple. 
 
Igor: 
Milton. 
 
Robin: 
Great, it’s coming back. Now what I’d like you to do is fish clap… 
 
Igor: 
Fingers clap… 
 
Robin: 
Loopy clap… 
 
Igor: 
Dog clap… 
 
Robin: 
Cat clap… 
 
Igor: 
Eight clap… 
 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
32 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
Robin: 
Nine clap… 
 
Igor: 
Ten clap… 
 
Robin: 
That one can run and run.  
 
Igor: 
Easy. 
 
Group: 
Yes. 
 
Igor/ 
Robin: 
Go. [Exercise starts] 
 
Igor: 
Excellent. Very good. Was that fun?  
 
Group: 
Yes. 
 
Igor: 
Was that easy?  
 
Group: 
Yes. 
 
Igor: 
The next one is going to be at an even faster pace. You’ll be moving around all 
the different people in the room. It’s like a mingling exercise, you’re going to 
meet them and all you’re going to do is, as soon as you meet someone you’ll 
ask them… what do you see? 
 
Robin: 
I see a blue dolphin. 
 
Igor: 
Done. Then he’ll ask me. 
 
Robin: 
What do you see? 
 
Igor: 
An orange. Off you go [exercise started] 
 
 
Who’s having fun, anyone? 
 
Group: 
Yes. 
 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
33 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
Igor: 
Which hands haven’t been up yet? A very simple thing. Now, all we’re going 
to do is the same exercise but essentially you’ll come up to someone and say, 
I have a box, you pour something out, ask them what is this? 
 
Robin: 
Oh my God, thank you just what I’ve always wanted, a little puppy. 
 
Igor: 
Now, so far that’s pretty much you’ve done but you’re going to add 
something. You’re going to take the puppy from him. The key is you present 
something and they’ll tell you what it is and you’ll take it from them and say 
that’s right it is a puppy, where does it belong? 
 
Robin: 
There.  
 
Igor: 
Thank you very much, and that’s where I put it. Then he will do the same to 
me. 
 
Robin: 
Look a magic box.  
 
Igor: 
Oh it’s a book. It’s a wonderful book of magic.  
 
Robin: 
It is it’s a magic book. Where does it belong? 
 
Igor: 
On the table. Easy?  
 
Group: 
Yes. 
 
Igor: 
Off you go. [Exercise begins] 
 
Robin: 
You can all spin round can’t you?  
 
Igor: 
Everyone can turn in a circle, show me? Just once will do you don’t have to go 
crazy on this one.  
 
Robin: 
So that nobody comes to any physical harm I’d just like to give you a little bit 
of coaching. Find a spot on the wall in front of you, spin round and look at it 
again. [Go] 
 
 
I know you’re thinking, how could this possibly help? Believe me it’s a 
mind/body thing.  
 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
34 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
Igor: 
It is. 
 
Robin: 
Your unconscious mind and your body are spinning into strange worlds.  
 
Igor: 
Strange new worlds. 
 
Robin: 
What I’d like you to do is to get with a partner and taking turns, spin round, 
open your eyes and begin describing a place that has never existed before you 
imagined it. Understand? 
 
Igor: 
Importantly, as the coach is doing the spinning, when they describe it, 
acknowledge it and start seeing it with them. Would you like to have a quick 
demonstration of that? 
 
Group: 
Yes. 
 
Igor: 
Do you want to be the coach? 
 
Robin: 
Let’s do both.  
 
Igor: 
Fine, be that way.  
 
Robin: 
Spins. 
 
Igor: 
What do you see? 
 
Robin: 
Oh, I see a corn field stretching out in front of me.  
 
Igor: 
There is a corn field, what else happens? 
 
Robin: 
There’s a sun, it’s like blood red. It’s coming up above the corn. 
 
Igor: 
So there’s a sun and a corn field, what else do you see? 
 
Robin: 
I see crows flying across. 
 
Igor: 
Where are they going? 
 
Robin: 
They’re going to that castle on the hill over there.  
 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
35 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
Igor: 
Wonderful. One way around.  
 
 
[Spins] 
 
Robin: 
What do you see? 
 
Igor: 
I see a tall mountain with a castle on top. 
 
Robin: 
Yes, I see it too. What else do you see? 
 
Igor: 
I see a fire signal on the top of the mountain, it’s a castle thing and there are 
people with bows and arrows. 
 
Robin: 
Wow, there is a fire signaling and there’s people with bows and arrows. Who 
are they signaling to? 
 
Igor: 
They were shooting you. 
 
Robin: 
Why thank you, you saved my life. 
 
 
[Exercise starts] 
 
Robin: 
So, a simple exercise right? Don’t get attached to things. When we ask you to 
change partners, even if you’re in the middle of a story, let it go and move on 
to the next one.  
 
Igor: 
You see, you have an immense capacity for creativity, so why on earth would 
you get stuck on something that’s already passé?  
 
Robin: 
So, a few extra little questions. What were we using, the word? 
 
Igor: 
Coach and imagineer. 
 
Robin: 
An imagineer, what a fantastic word. We’re all imagineers… fantastic. 
 
Igor: 
Unless we’re coaches. 
 
Robin: 
Some coaching questions. 
 
→ What can you see? 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
36 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
→ What else can you see? 
→ What can you hear? 
→ What can you feel? 
 
 
Think about sensory modalities from your hypnotic and NLP background. 
Some of you will understand that. We want to build some rich sensory 
descriptions.  
 
→ What about the details what colors can they see? 
→ What textures can they see? 
→ What shapes can they see? 
→ What temperature is it? 
→ Is there a wind? 
 
 
Some other questions… 
 
→ What’s that like? 
 
 
 
Go [Exercise starts] 
 
Igor: 
All right, good. So, a strange new world. Now what you’re going to do as a 
coach, you’re going to do something into that scene that is totally irrelevant 
and random that’s going to throw them for a loop. Would you like to see an 
example? 
 
Robin: 
Incongruence. 
 
Igor: 
Okay Mr. Imagineer turn, turn and tell me about the world you see. 
 
Robin: 
I see a little puddle. 
 
Igor: 
What is the puddle like? 
 
Robin: 
It’s kind of, oh there’s a little puppy. 
 
Igor: 
There’s a puppy in the puddle. 
 
Robin: 
I think the puppy made the puddle. 
 
Igor: 
There is a tank in here, where is it? 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
37 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
Robin: 
Oh my God, there’s a tank coming around the corner just there and it’s 
bearing… 
 
Igor: 
What’s happening? 
 
Robin: 
… it’s bearing down towards the puppy. 
 
Igor: 
Do you get it? 
 
Group: 
Yes. 
 
Igor: 
Go [Exercise starts] 
--- 
Robin: 
As you’re doing these exercises you may be noticing that some things make it 
easier and some things make it harder. Some experiences feel one way and 
some feel the other. Keep those in mind as we’re going along.  
 
 
What I’d like you to do this time we’re looking the coach and imagineer 
distinction here. Now, you’re both imagineers. 
 
Igor: 
On a voyage of discovery. 
 
Robin: 
Taking it in turns. 
 
Igor: 
To find things inside each other’s minds.  
 
Robin: 
So, for example… 
 
Igor: 
Oh my God it’s beautiful. It’s a crystal palace. There are icicles hanging down, 
but they look like jewels. 
 
Robin: 
That’s right, I can see a crystal palace full of jewels and there in front of us is 
an orchestra. 
 
Igor: 
And it’s playing the most beautiful Viennese waltz. There are people dancing 
in long slow lazy circles.  
 
Robin: 
And suddenly over there, through the door walks the most beautiful puppy 
I’ve ever seen.  

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
38 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
 
Get the idea?  
 
Igor: 
Go [Exercise started] 
--- 
Robin: 
So you can see we’re moving into co-creation now, and we’re going to 
continue with this phase. What I’d like you to work on is maintaining 
relevance. I broke the frame there with the puppy didn’t I? Maintain 
relevance and see how small you can make each move and each offering. An 
improvisation, we call each of your moves a gift.  
 
 
When you imagine something in front of you and share it with someone, 
you’re offering them a gift and I’d like you to see how small you can make the 
gift, and it still be relevant and logical within the frame of the world you’re 
creating together.  
 
Igor: 
So as an example, if Robin were to spin in a circle, he might describe a 
particular scene. 
 
Robin: 
It’s an office. 
 
Igor: 
Yes it is an office and I see a secretary sitting by a telephone over there.  
 
Robin: 
I can see the secretary with the telephone and she’s just about to make a call.  
 
Igor: 
She picks up the phone and has a very unhappy expression on her face.  
 
Robin: 
She pauses… 
 
Igor: 
Thank you. … to compose herself as a little tear starts in the corner of her eye. 
I think she might be talking to an ex-lover.  
 
 
Do you get the exercise? 
 
Robin: 
She puts the phone down. 
 
Igor: 
Oh of course, how silly, I apologize I forgot that it wasn’t the end yet 
because… 
 
Robin: 
She puts the phone down… 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
39 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
Igor: 
She puts the phone down and she grabs her stuff and hangs her head as she 
slowly walks out of the office. 
 
Robin: 
Take it away. [Exercise starts] 
--- 
Igor: 
Who’s having fun, yes? 
 
Group: 
Yes. 
 
Igor: 
Good. Who’s finding themselves getting more creative they’re not having to 
really think about it too much, it’s just enjoyable? This is the essence of their 
creativity in storytelling. For example, A… 
 
Robin: 
Woman. 
 
Igor: 
Leaves her office. 
 
Robin: 
And… 
 
Igor: 
Her…. 
 
Robin: 
Desk… 
 
Igor: 
Is bare. The… 
 
Robin: 
Puppy… 
 
Igor: 
She… 
 
Robin: 
Rescued… 
 
Igor: 
From… 
 
Robin: 
In front… 
 
Igor: 
Of… 
 
Robin: 
The… 
 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
40 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
Igor: 
Office… 
 
Robin: 
Comes… 
 
Igor: 
And… 
 
Robin: 
Comforts… 
 
Igor: 
Her… (My go?) 
 
Robin: 
They know what to do don’t they? 
 
Group: 
Yes. 
 
Igor: 
One cycle that satisfies and move on to someone else please. Off you go. 
[Exercise starts] 
---- 
Robin: 
Same exercise… one word at a time, except this time I’d like you to get into 
groups of three and one extra rule, if at any point you don’t like, for whatever 
reason, the way it’s going your next word is ‘discard’ and the next person 
starts again.  
 
Igor: 
With a fresh story that has nothing to do with the one that came before. One 
warning folks, when we say you don’t like the way it’s going. In other words, 
something about the story isn’t pleasing to you, if you merely don’t know 
what to say next that is not a reason for it. [Exercise starts] 
---- 
Robin: 
Very good. Some of you are already doing this I notice. Same exercise except 
this time make sure you’re actually looking at your partners and seeing 
whether they’re pleased, whether it’s working. 
 
Igor: 
Off you go. [Exercise starts] 
---- 
 
Who’s having fun? Is it good?  
 
Group: 
Yes. 
 
Igor: 
Excellent. All right. So this time I’d like you to get into groups of between 
three and five people. Same exercise, you’re still going around on the same 
stories and you really want to see how the other people are responding, 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
41 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
because that will determine how well the story is going to go. For this next 
exercise, do not change partners once you’re in the group. You can change 
stories by discarding them, but not partners.  
 
 
Off you go. [Exercise starts] 
--- 
 
Stay in the groups you’re in and you’ll carry on the same exercise, only all of 
you need to be twice as fast. Off you go [Exercise starts] 
--- 
Robin: 
So, what I’d like you to do now is get back into pairs and, you know, 
essentially what the exercise is except you have three words at a time or 
more. 
 
Igor: 
The main idea is you present about half a sentence but do not complete the 
sentence, that’s their job.  
 
Robin: 
So, for example, you could… 
 
Igor: 
Begin in the middle of a story where there’s a puppy. 
 
Robin: 
And that little puppy… 
 
Igor: 
Likes to pee on floors, because… 
 
Robin: 
He hasn’t been trained properly.  
 
Igor: 
But, his owner has a plan. You see, 
 
Robin: 
She knows that if… 
 
Igor: 
She gets the treats out and then she lays them… 
 
Robin: 
Down in a trail all the way… 
 
Igor: 
To the backdoor… 
 
Robin: 
Than… 
 
Igor: 
The puppy will follow it and… 
 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
42 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
Robin: 
Take it outside.  
 
Igor: 
Off you go. [Exercise starts] 
--- 
 
For the next exercise. 
 
Robin: 
What we’d like you to do. 
 
Igor: 
Is get into groups of five. 
 
Robin: 
And each of you. 
 
Igor: 
Will take a turn to stand in the middle of that group. 
 
Robin: 
And spin round. 
 
Igor: 
And describe the strange new world that you’ve discovered. 
 
Robin: 
For one minute. 
 
Igor: 
Exactly 60 seconds.  
 
Robin: 
And 
 
Igor: 
Then. 
 
Robin: 
You’re 
 
Igor: 
Please… 
 
Robin: 
And your job as you’re listening. 
 
Igor: 
Is to just give loud enthusiastic approval. 
 
Robin: 
To everything 
 
Igor: 
That they say. (Groups of five, off you go) We’ll tell you when the minute is 
up. [Exercise starts] 
---- 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
43 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
Okay guys so, it’s a fun place to be in the middle isn’t it, when people are 
cheering, clapping and so on? So this time we’ll have the same kind of energy, 
the same kind of enthusiasm only, stay in the same groups because it’ll be 
easier for you this time. The person in the middle will carry on in describing 
the strange new world, except the people around you, if they like what you’re 
saying will be over enthusiastic. 
 
 
If it’s not pleasing to them they’ll look sad. It’s important that you don’t get 
stirred up, just really sad. Everyone show me a sad face. Some of you are way 
too happy people, be sad. Whenever you see the awe thing going on, best 
change track quickly, because you only have 60 seconds in this game. Do you 
understand the exercise? Same groups. 
 
 
[Exercise starts] 
---- 
Robin: 
Okay, how are you doing? Right. For this next exercise and this is the final one 
in this series. It’s the same exercise, strange worlds. Stay in your group. Pull 
up a chair in your groups. 
 
Igor: 
So bring the chairs now and we’ll add the second bit in a moment. Are you 
sitting comfortably? 
 
Robin: 
We’re still doing strange worlds and before we take this round I would like 
you to take a moment, close your eyes. Take a nice deep breath in and 
breathe out and relax. Allow your mind to drift for a moment. Before you 
open your eyes, something will occur to you, some experience, some feeling 
or event. Something that has happened to you in the last week, month or 
year. 
 
Igor: 
It doesn’t matter what it is  
 
Robin: 
Or how long ago it was 
 
Igor: 
Doesn’t matter how trivial or profound 
 
Robin: 
Just that some memory 
 
Igor: 
A genuine element from your personal history 
 
Robin: 
Arises 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
44 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
Igor: 
And once you have something like that, no matter how small, large, significant 
or insignificant that it may be. 
 
Robin: 
Then simply take a deep breath in, open those eyes and return to the room.  
 
Igor: 
Please keep that little piece of memory stored in the back of your mind until 
it’s your turn to be in the middle, so to speak. 
 
Robin: 
You’re still doing strange worlds. It’s still just using your imagination. 
 
Igor: 
It’ll still be a world no one has seen before; however,  
 
Robin: 
and as you take your turn this time, what I’d like you to do as an audience is 
simply listen genuinely. 
 
Igor: 
And when you are being the presenter of a strange new world, simply 
contemplate in the back of your mind the memory that arose, trivial or 
profound the matter, whilst you’re busy describing a new world that you’ve 
never seen before.  
 
Robin: 
Is everyone clear?  
 
Igor: 
It will be a minute each. We’ll call your timing, so we’ll ask you to rotate. 
Whenever you’re ready. 
 
Robin: 
Take it away folks. [Exercise starts] 
---- 
 
I’d just like to say well done. That was amazing.  
 
Igor: 
Give yourself a round of applause.  
 
 
[Applause] 
 
 
First of all, who surprised themselves with the stuff coming out of your 
mouth? What kinds of things did you notice over the course of the last session 
or so? What kinds of things were happening? What kinds of things did you 
learn from, surprised you? 
 
Student: We have a much better flow. 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
45 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
Robin: 
You have a much better flow. Can you expand on that? Do you mean you 
personally feel you have a better flow? 
 
Student: I mean in order to tell stories, at the beginning maybe I was like searching for 
things, events and connecting to tell a story and now everything is going much 
easier. Things are flowing better.  
 
Robin: 
Fantastic. 
 
Igor: 
So you’re finding the content you want more easily, the words and 
descriptions are there? It seems more natural to you right? 
 
Student: Exactly. 
 
Igor: 
Why do you think that is? 
 
Student:  Because of the exercises we did. 
 
Igor: 
Because you’re warming up your mind to get into the storytelling frame of 
mind. Very good. 
 
Student: We noticed that the rapport went up massively. So basically, whereas you 
might start off as four or five individuals at some level, as they quickly start to 
tell their story, especially when they added sensory richness, color, a 
particular feeling what have you, that really built a connection within the 
group, a dynamic. The group also started to develop a little bit of energy of its 
own. 
 
Igor: 
So, are you suggesting that the more you can experience the story that your 
storyteller is telling the more you can get involved in their world, the more 
rapport you build, is that what you’re suggestion? 
 
Student: Yes, and another step, which is the more you can include then in terms of 
whatever they’re responding to in your story, the more they will get sucked 
in, involved and dynamically… 
 
Igor: 
Very powerful. Thank you. 
 
Robin: 
Thank you.  

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
46 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
Student: I just noticed there’s a lot more plausibility in the stories. They may not be 
real but they could be and you’re bound to lose the difference between made 
up and reality. 
 
Igor: 
This is an important point. Who noticed how you started off random and not 
really thinking about it, but your stories shaped themselves more and more 
towards possible reality, as opposed to strange unreality. Anyone notice that 
sort of thing happening? 
 
 
What other things did you notice? 
 
Student: There came a point when I was feeling so exhausted from the high energy and 
from rapidly not having time to think that it almost like compounded the 
exhaustion, not having time to think, until you’re in an unconscious state of 
you’re not aware of what’s coming out of your mouth. You’re completely 
relaxed and in the zone.  
 
Robin: 
A little hint… that was deliberate. 
 
Igor: 
Well done by the way. 
 
Robin: 
Thank you. Well done.  
 
Student: I notice I’m now paying more attention to how the person is looking at me 
when I’m talking to them. 
Igor: 
Thank you. 
 
Student: I notice that the slower I talk the more aware I can be of how they’re looking 
at me.  
 
Igor: 
It’s similar to what you’re saying here, are you noticing that overall you’re 
starting to incorporate your audience into your story more? Not necessarily to 
say you’re in the story with me, but more okay, I see where they are and how 
they’re reacting. Maybe I’ve gone too far in the description maybe I should 
step back a little and give them more background before I can do that step. 
 
 
Are you getting a nuance of that? Yeah.  
 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
47 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
Student: I find it much easier to put emotions into the story when there is something I 
can relate to. 
 
Igor: 
You mean this last exercise? How was that by the way, because this is 
important? You had a particular memory an experience that happened to you, 
big or small is irrelevant. Do you notice how the story just told now was 
different somehow than the other stuff we were making up throughout the 
day, as a result? Yeah. 
 
Student: It’s back to do with the 80/20 stuff, which is basically 80% is non-verbal and 
20% is verbal. So whatever you’re telling them at that 20% level with words, 
that 80% intent in energy of your personal experience, colors effectively the 
flow of the story. 
 
Igor: 
So in some ways you could say that last exercise really taught you the value of 
wearing the cloak of story? Because they all have shared your memory, 
whatever it was, small trivial or large and important, but they still have no 
idea what it was. For lack of a better word they have a felt sense of that, 
would that be fair to say? 
 
Robin: 
I think my experience when we do this kind of training and these exercises, 
and by the way, did anyone notice that certain themes tend to crop up when 
you do this kind of work? You tend to go through basically scatological humor, 
a phase. Shitting, peeing things like that and references to bodily parts, they 
just come up.  
 
 
Then it’s often sex and death, God, spiritual themes come up and then it gets 
interesting, but there’s kind of a phase of garbage that we go through, 
because our minds are pathological. When you dream at night it’s not always 
fluffy puppies. 
 
Igor: 
Clearly. 
 
Robin: 
Our dreams can be disturbing, because our unconscious mind obviously 
contains both pleasurable and painful experiences.  
 
Igor: 
In fact, there’s research on this very matter. Did you know that most of the 
dreams that people have are actually unpleasant? The mind is just trying to 
process things whilst your consciousness is a little more absent or more open.  
 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
48 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
And really, the bigger the taboo is on something, the less you’re allowed to 
consciously engaged with it; hence, scatology, death, sex, things like that, the 
more likely it’s going to merge in other places before we get to feel the 
creativity. 
 
Robin: 
But the purpose of doing this kind of quick work and just getting you into the 
flow like this, I think, is that your senses start to come down. You stop 
resisting consciously and that puts you naturally into a state that’s more 
responsive.  
 
Igor: 
Which is key as a storyteller, you don’t memorize a story and then repeat it 
word-for-word. In some ways books have done us a great service, but in some 
ways a great disservice because people think I have to read a book or novel to 
them to make it interesting and you do not.  
 
Robin: 
Any other questions, feedback or comments? 
 
Student: I guess the next question is, how do we create that state very easily? 
 
Igor: 
That’s a very good question.  
 
Robin: 
I would ask, how do you not create that state? 
 
Student: I don’t know.  
 
Robin: 
If you don’t know how you don’t not create it, than that sounds good to me, 
because if you forget how you didn’t, than you can continue to do it, right.  
 
Igor: 
Isn’t that my line? Just bear this possibility in mind, this idea. The person you 
wake up as in the morning and the person you think you should be. For 
example, when you’re telling stories and you’re on fire and it’s all going well, 
are usually different people just because you’re in different psychological 
states of energy, arousal and so on. 
 
 
There’s nothing to say that you have to be that more charismatic person 
straight away. All you need consciously is to know how to begin. That’s the 
important part. Everything else flows from that point.  
 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
49 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
Student: I found that I forgot the memory immediately and when I started telling the 
story I made an interesting emphasis on exactly how the feeling was 
portrayed. I didn’t actually plan that out at all. 
 
Igor: 
That’s why it works. 
 
Student: It came out very, it fit the story perfectly but it was portraying so many other 
meanings beyond that. It was interesting. 
 
Robin: 
Thank you. 
 
Igor: 
Thank you. So some interesting things happening, no?  
 
Robin: 
I would like to draw your attention to the fact that the creation of stories, the 
creation of any kind of artwork and perhaps, I would say the essential 
element of that word artistry, wherever it’s used and in whatever context is 
fundamentally 
about 
the 
interplay 
between 
consciousness 
and 
unconsciousness and the dance of those two things in your experience. 
 
 
Sometimes, when you’re just conversing with people, when you’re meeting 
them. When I’ve been talking to you all out there and the opportunities that 
we’ve had to connect, we just throw stories at each other. One story reminds 
you of another one and another one and we give each other strokes by 
sharing these stories with each other.  
 
 
Sometimes, in a therapeutic context. Sometimes in a sales or persuasion 
context, we have a deliberate intention that we want to set. There’s 
something we want to set and my experience is that often time is required for 
these two things to begin to play together properly. For example, I’ve got this 
crazy cat that lives next door and I had to leave it for a while, because 
obviously I had to go to the Bahamas to see Igor. 
 
Igor: 
You needed to come, really. 
 
Robin: 
Something happened with this cat which is so funny. I got into that state 
where this was happening in my life, and I’ll tell you the story, eventually. I 
knew, I was thinking this will make a good story, so as I’m going through my 
life I’m thinking about it and trying it out on different people and playing with 
it and just developing the material. 
 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
50 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
Because the story in itself was fun. It was fun to think about. It seemed like it 
would go somewhere, but I didn’t know what it was for at all, until a while 
later somebody, a friend came and presented a problem to me and I suddenly 
realized what the story was for.  
 
 
So be aware that those processes, those unconscious and conscious processes 
are dancing together and will be for the next three days. I hope that at the 
very least, you’ll realize over the course of the next three days, just how easy 
it is to stay in that flow, and that you are all naturally gifted storytellers right 
from the beginning.  
 
 
I looked around and didn’t see anyone in the middle there, all I saw was 
people getting excited, animated and in the experience. I didn’t see anyone 
going… 
 
Igor: 
I see a great tree and nothing else. 
 
Robin: 
… no, nothing.  
 
Igor: 
Gray, really gray. 
 
Robin: 
No. So yeah, bear in mind you already have this in you, we’re just going to 
give you some frameworks and hopefully show you how good you are. 
 
Igor: 
The key thing to the whole process, and think about this as you share over 
lunch, is can you enjoy your own stories? Be back at 2, we’ll start at 10 past 2. 
 
Robin: 
Please, before you go, give yourself a clap. You’ve done a lot of work this 
morning. Well done. Thank you. 
 
Igor: 
Thank you. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
51 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
DVD 2 – Provoking Emotions & The 5 Key 
Elements Of A Story That Impacts The 
Unconscious Mind 
 
 
Emotional Stories 
 
Igor: 
If everyone could just make sure that you have lots of stories to tell please, 
that will make life easier for everyone. The simplest way of doing that 
particular thing is to realize that you’ve had a life. You haven’t just popped out 
of a box this instant, and that means you have a lifetime of very rich and 
rewarding experiences.  
 
Robin: 
And if frankly every time you open your mouth you tell a story, unless you’re 
giving a list of facts and that’s not much of a conversation, right? 
 
Igor: 
Right.  
 
Robin: 
Has anyone, do you have any follow up from this morning? Anything just to…? 
 
Igor: 
I think the basic rules from this morning were… Stop thinking and let the stuff 
come out. Be aware of the layer of muck you have to go through and be 
willing to go through that initially, and know that your stories clean up very 
well afterwards. 
 
 
Hopefully you’ll notice, a lot of you are starting to mention things like, it starts 
getting easier, the story starts getting better and so on. That’s basically you 
warming up that storytelling muscle, which is pretty much what we’ll be doing 
for the rest of the day isn’t it? 
 
Robin: 
That’s right. We’re going to be focusing on personal stories. On the stories we 
tell. Can I give an example? 
 
Igor: 
I think that would be nice.  
 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
52 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
Robin: 
My friend Steve, when I first met him it was at a networking event. I asked 
him what he did and he said, I’m an accountant and the way he said it, his 
whole demeanor, told me that he wasn’t very thrilled about that aspect. He 
didn’t feel that what his work was; was particularly exciting or interesting.  
 
 
Over time I got to talk to him a bit more and asked him a few questions about 
it. I said who are your clients? He’s based in Brighton which is a very creative 
town and it turns out that quite a few of his clients are musicians and bands. 
So I asked him, have you got some famous named clients? He said yes, there 
are a couple bands who you’ve heard of, but you know what really excites 
me? The new bands, the guys who have been putting the effort in for years 
and finally they have a break, a recording contract and record on the charts. 
 
 
Then suddenly they start getting offers and the money starts coming in and 
unless they’re prepared for that, they can spend it all at once on the wrong 
things.  
 
 
I said Steve, so what you’re telling me is that you help future rock stars 
prepare for financial success. He smiled and laughed at that. He’s like yeah I 
know what you did just then. There’s a way of framing what we do and 
finding the positive in it. Finding the passion, the excitement and spin, and 
there’s a thin line between spinning and spinning.  
 
Igor: 
One of the things we want you all to get used to now is how to appreciate the 
stories you don’t think you have, more, so that when you start recognizing the 
value in what you have then others can see that more clearly also.  
 
 
I think the best way to do that is to start with an exercise, don’t you? 
 
Robin: 
Yes, and you can help each other in this context. Because as you’re hearing 
each other’s stories it might help the person who’s telling the story. If you 
reflect back to them, only that which works… 
 
Igor: 
Only… 
 
Robin: 
Do you enjoy… 
 
Igor: 
… that which you enjoy.  
 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
53 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
That’s a very important point, because whatever we repeat back, you know 
where attention goes energy flows. So do you want to feed back what you 
want to have more of or the things you want to have less of? Unfortunately 
now, especially in school, what do they do? They feed back on all the things 
you didn’t do well, red mark, red mark, change this, do this, do the other. That 
really worked for you didn’t it? 
 
 
Right now we’re only interested in putting attention on those elements of 
what people are already doing that are already working, so we can build on 
that foundation. 
 
Robin: 
So if you find an element of somebody’s story that particularly moves you or 
something in the way they perform it engages you or makes you laugh or just 
stands out for you. Then give them the feedback and let them know. 
 
Igor: 
I really enjoyed hearing Steve’s story about how he went from boring 
accountant to preparing rock stars for success. That was a really nice way of 
seeing the whole thing differently. 
 
Robin: 
It’s kind of an example of what I call the ‘who I am’ story. If you think about 
the story I told in the beginning, that’s a who I am story. I wanted to share 
something with you and in doing so you learned a whole load of things about 
me, some of which I have no clue what they were. But, there were other 
things that were intentional.  
 
 
I often tell stories about my family, because my family is really important to 
me and I want people to know that.  
 
Igor: 
There are many different types of stories you can tell. We will explore what 
we’ve come to think are some of the more important ones. 
 
Robin: 
We’re going to start with probably the easiest category and one which you 
will be familiar with, many of you who have been here the last eight days.  
 
Igor: 
The stories we’ll focus on now are very simple ones. They are the ones that 
have some sort of strong emotion involved. They can be strong negative 
emotions as well as positive ones. For a moment though, just for the fun of it. 
Let’s stick to relatively positive events. It will help you to find the gold in it 
more easily, although both will be valuable to you in time.  
 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
54 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
Robin: 
We’re thinking about, when were you most excited?  
 
Igor: 
Did you ever fall in love? 
 
Robin: 
When were you most scared, in a good way? 
 
Igor: 
What sort of charmed you in a way that you still haven’t forgotten? 
 
Robin: 
There are a whole bunch of emotions and experiences, states of mind, that 
are useful for you to be able to elicit in the people you speak to.  
 
Igor: 
The secret is not to say, you know when you’ve been really excited, you get 
really excited and it’s a really exciting story for you, which is the way the 
conscious mind tells stories. But more, to recall being very excited and sharing 
the events so that inviting those people into your brave new world, they get 
to feel the excitement that you did, to some degree anyway. That makes 
sense doesn’t it? 
 
Robin: 
So the way we’re going to do this is to start off, you’ve already practiced 
mingling today, and I’d like you to take a minute or two in pairs to each share 
a story about some experience you had in which you felt a strong emotion. 
 
Igor: 
Once you’ve told that story for your minute and of course heard yours in 
return from the other person, you’ll probably notice something interesting 
happening. Have you ever noticed when someone tells you a story, especially 
one that’s meaningful to them, it makes you think of another story. It’s like 
oh, that reminds me of a story. Have you ever noticed that? 
 
 
Whatever that story is that you’ve been reminded of… 
 
Robin: 
... it will just make it easier for you to think of the next one that you’ll share 
when you change partners, right?  
 
Igor: 
So you’ll use each partner as a sounding board so you realize what the next 
story will be without having told it yet.  
 
Robin: 
Our intention over the course of the week this weekend is that you generate 
lots and lots and lots of different stories and experiences. This is why we’ve 
been practicing the whole discarding, remembering discarding. 
 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
55 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
Igor: 
And when we say discarding that doesn’t mean you forget about them 
forever, it just means you don’t get attached to them. You can have one story, 
another story and another story, and just find them wherever they happen to 
arise.  
 
Robin: 
One of the things that I find handy as I’m working on stories, and in order to 
remember them, is that I give the story a name. So like the crazy cat story is 
something easy to remember.  
 
Igor: 
It’s funny you say that because I do something completely different. For me 
the stories always revolve around some person, object, thing or event and just 
by seeing that in my mind’s eye I remember the whole story. If you want to 
think of Snow White you could have Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs or you 
can think of an apple with a piece missing. That to me reminds you of the 
whole story. 
 
Robin: 
It’s kind of like you could create a house or a room in a house and have a 
whole set of drawers and just store those pictures and images. 
 
Igor: 
Something we might actually explore at some point. So, for the moment, 
that’s just us waxing lyrical about all kinds of crazy events. Really, all that’s 
required right now is if you were to stand up and start chatting with each 
other. Spend about a minute each, telling an emotional story and then moving 
on to someone else. Off you go [Exercise starts] 
 
 
Hands up if you told at least one story in that round of exercises. At least one, 
one plus. Hands up if you told at least two stories in the whole exercise. 
Three. Four. Not a single hand for four, wow okay. That will be the new goal, 
the Olympic storytelling championships are here. We have silver and bronze 
lining up, but gold, I think we need at least four for gold, don’t we?  
 
Mnemonic Journey 
 
Igor: 
What I’d like to invite you to do for a moment is to put things down so that 
you can close your eyes. I would like you to begin to think about a place that’s 
very familiar to you. The easiest one to take up would be your home. You 
have many different locations in your home. You have a kitchen, bathroom, 
some kind of hallway and you probably have some kind of living area and 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
56 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
bedroom. There may be many more rooms in this particular home, but those 
are the typical things that you’d expect to find. 
 
 
I’d like for you to choose, of all those rooms, one particular room that you are 
quite familiar with. Could be the kitchen, bedroom, the bathroom, and I 
would like for you to take a mental inventory of this room. For example, if this 
were a kitchen you’d probably have a refrigerator, an area to cook in, a sink 
with a tap and you no doubt would have a set of pots and pans in a drawer 
somewhere or maybe standing out. 
 
 
You’d have utensils. Maybe you have a drawer full of knives. Maybe the 
knives are in a special board that you can move them in and out of. Most 
people have a cutlery drawer. They’ll have drawers where the dishes go and 
glasses, different kinds of glasses. Some people, who enjoy drinking wine for 
example, might have a wine rack. You might have something different.  
 
 
I’d like for you to take inventory of the space you’re thinking about, whether 
it’s the kitchen or somewhere else and find 10 such locations that are easy for 
you to recall. Then walk around them in sequence. If you start at the fridge, of 
course, right next to the fridge may be the freezer or the dryer. Right next to 
that might be a table top and next to that might be a sink, next to that might 
be something else. Just mentally take a tour from one logical step to the other 
until you’ve collected 10 locations that are quite distinct from each other.  
 
 
Try to get some variety into this. Once you’ve chosen your 10 locations and 
you’ve taken a little tour of all those 10 in a particular sequence, repeat the 
sequence maybe two or three times, just so you’re sure you’ve taken the 
same path around this particular room each and every time. You can take 
your time doing that there’s no hurry.  
 
 
We’ll wait here quite comfortably until you’ve completed that sequence and 
found 10 locations that look at little different each time. Run through them 
three or four times.  
 
 
I know you’re ready to continue for the next step because your eyes will open 
once you’ve done all that, but there’s no hurry for it right now, just enjoy 
recalling the features of this particular room in this particular way. Once 
you’ve gone through it three or four times then you can open your eyes and 
look up front.  
 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
57 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
We have most of you back now with one or two still rehearsing. As the last 
few people make their way back, who wants to share a little about the room 
they were in and the different locations they found and the journey they took, 
anyone? This is the interactive portion. 
 
Robin: 
Thank you Pamela. 
 
Pamela: I was using your bedroom. It’s just one big room with walls completely like 
this with stuff everywhere.  
 
Igor: 
Excellent. So, lots of different stuff on the walls, yes? 
 
Pamela: Yes, but it’s extremely well organized.  
 
Igor: 
Oh, we like that.  
 
Pamela: In increments.  
 
Igor: 
Well organized is good for this.  
 
Pamela: So it’s a lamp and then ESL books. 
 
Igor: 
Wonderful. 
 
Pamela: Then it’s a section of papers, because papers stick to me like magnets. 
 
Igor: 
Right. 
 
Pamela: Then it’s a piece of plywood with computers on sawhorses and then more 
genealogy notebooks and things.  
 
Igor: 
Very good.  
 
Pamela: Then a TV set. 
 
Igor: 
May I pause you there for a second?  
 
Pamela: Yes. 
 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
58 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
Igor: 
If you’re not actually looking at Pamela right now you’re probably missing it. 
Can you carry on describing this? I apologize for the attention but you’ll enjoy 
this.  
 
Pamela: I know what you’re talking about.  
 
Igor: 
I know. You can start from the beginning if you want or you can start from the 
middle.  
 
Pamela: Next is a TV set and all the things to hear, to make the TV set louder and stuff. 
Then it’s journals, 50 journals that I wrote and then it’s jewelry boxes, 
because I don’t have a special place for them they’re just on the floor on a 
thing that slides. Then it’s a pantry, a chrome closet because there are no 
closets in my house.  
 
Igor: 
Wonderful. 
 
Pamela: So there are clothes and too many shoes.  
 
Igor: 
Would you say that Pamela is in her memory right now?  
 
Group: 
Yes. 
 
Igor: 
Very firmly located. One of the things our brains do the best is store locations. 
That’s one of the things that we’ve been predisposed to do, because 
otherwise we’d get lost in next to no time everywhere. Pamela, you did an 
excellent job of demonstrating that, so thank you for that Pamela.  
 
 
Does anyone else want to talk about their location? 
 
Student: One thing that I found as I went around the room once or twice is I 
remembered things that I didn’t remember the first time.  
 
Igor: 
You started getting extra details as you go along right?  
 
Student: Yes. 
 
Igor: 
And you can add them in or skip them it doesn’t matter. The point is at the 
end of the whole process do you have a clear root of some 10 locations that 
you can go round.  

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
59 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
Student: We call it our sitting or music room, because it’s used for both purposes.  
 
Igor: 
Sure. 
 
Student: There’s an upright piano. 
 
Igor: 
Yes, very nice.  
 
Student: There are some bookends on top of the piano, some pieces of music. 
 
Igor: 
Once again let me pause you briefly, once again do you hear how she’s 
stepping into her memory very fully there? This will be very important in a 
moment, carry on. 
 
Student: On the other side of the doorway there’s a nice stand with some drawers in it 
with a television on top of that and in front of that there’s a storage cabinet 
where my son used to keep his video games, and he would sit watching the 
video and TV. Then there’s a window with a bench beneath it. You come 
around the room and there’s a bookcase with glass doors and on top of the 
bookcase I have my Hummel collection and Arthur has his collection of special 
signed books inside.  
 
 
As you come around the room we have a table and a lamp. Then another 
sitting chair. One thing I did forget coming around the room is that there’s a 
fireplace with a fireplace insert. I forgot that fireplace was there.  
 
Igor: 
But you remembered now right? 
 
Student: There’s a music stand and there are some guitars hanging on the wall. 
 
Igor: 
Wonderful. 
 
Student: Coming around there, there’s a magazine rack and another sitting area.  
 
Igor: 
So you have the makings of an incredible storyteller right now, because you 
have so many locations. That’s excellent.  
 
 
Does everyone have one room with a similar sort of familiarity as these two 
people have just talked about, yes? Here’s what we’re going to do and Verna, 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
60 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
I’ll give you some special instructions in a moment. In a moment we’ll do the 
same thing again, we’ll sit down and mentally go through that room, but 
before we do that I would like for you to think about the two, three or so 
stories that you told just now during the exercise. 
 
 
I’d like you to select from those two or three stories one element that 
encapsulates it for you. It could be the title as Robin was saying. For me it 
would usually be something I could see. For example, a person that may be 
dressed in a particular way. Maybe it’s located somewhere. For example, if I 
think of a story about in my law firm I might just think of the front doors of 
the law firm to remind me this is what this story is about.  
 
 
Verna, for you, I would recommend however you remember things, whether 
it’s through sounds that are familiar to you or feelings, a sense of touch in 
feeling a particular object that you select something like that, just one simple 
sense that encapsulates the story for you. If you think of one you instantly 
think of the other. Can you all do that now?  
 
 
Go through the three stories you told and select some portion of that that 
epitomizes that particular story, something unique about it. So when you 
think of that particular object, event, person or whatever, that story comes to 
mind. Is that easy to do? As soon as you’ve done that you might as well close 
your eyes again.  
 
 
The following journey will be really easy for you because you want to locate 
yourself back in the room you thought about a moment ago. Take a few 
moments to reorient yourself and quickly zip through those 10 locations, 
where you start, where was the second or third, fourth, fifth, sixth point? You 
don’t have to remember the number you just remember they’re in a 
sequence.  
 
 
Eventually you get to the 10th location and when you’ve done that I would like 
to come back to the first location and really think about that place, have a 
look at it. Then consider your first story and that item, person or icon that 
really reminds you of that first story. If someone were to take a photograph of 
it or a cardboard cutout and stick it to that first location, what would that look 
like? 
 
 
It’s an odd image to have in your bedroom, living room, kitchen wherever, but 
consider that. Then move on to the second location, the one right after and 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
61 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
do the same with your second story, whatever the thought, image, idea, 
person, whatever icon really symbolizes that story for you and again create a 
mental cardboard cutout that you would stick there and have a look at that 
scene being a little odd.  
 
 
You can superimpose on top of each other, some way to connect the two so 
they’re touching. If you had a third story you can do that a third time with the 
third location. That’s simple is it not? As soon as you’ve had all your stories 
covered this way I’d like you to mentally review them again. Go to the first 
location and notice how that picture is there is it not? Second location, third 
location… 
 
 
Just be sure and go to the first location, oh there it is again. Second location, 
yep that’s odd but there it is. Third location, one more time. When you’re 
ready come on back.  
 
 
Who found that relatively easy to do? Very quickly, mentally scan the room 
right now and see if you can list the three stories like that in their right order. 
Can you do that? Easy right? We’re going to go through the process of 
generating many stories over the next hour or so.  
 
 
Each time a story comes out we may ask you to put it to one side, discard it or 
go to another story and so on, but what we’re really saying is, find something 
within that story that is unique, a picture, item or some type of icon, and stick 
it on the next location. Then mentally rehearse all the ones that came before 
it up to that point and when the chain is complete go great, forget about it, 
new story. Can you all do that?  
 
 
Any questions?  
 
 
You simply need to repeat the same process that you did. Right now you 
mentally walk through your room. Go to the first location and have a thought 
about whatever the icon was there. Then go to the second location and put 
an icon there. Then go to the third location if you have one, do the same. You 
have at least seven other locations if not more, so as you’re telling stories 
now as we go into some storytelling exercises, as soon as you finish that 
particular story take a moment, find some icon in that story that reminds you 
of the story.  
 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
62 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
Let’s say you only have three stories in your room there, stick the fourth icon 
on the fourth location, same as you did a moment ago. Then when you go into 
your fifth story get another icon, go to your fifth location and stick it there. 
From time to time mentally walk through the room again to make sure 
everything is where it’s supposed to be and that’s it. Simple, straightforward? 
 
 
I think it’s time they collected some things to decorate their rooms with, don’t 
you? 
 
Robin: 
Absolutely. Whichever way you choose to remember, this is a good process to 
begin that. You’ll find, because it happens anyway, that when you need a 
story it will be there. They tend to pop up when you need them.  
 
Igor: 
Yep. 
 
Robin: 
It’s like that crazy cat story I was telling you about.  
 
Igor: 
The crazy cat. 
 
5 Elements Of Story 
 
Robin: 
Have you guys noticed, by the way, that films always have the title and they 
have a nice tagline and then there’ll be another bit of text that kind of 
describes and summarizes what the plot is? Then there’s the movie itself. One 
of the things we’re going to be practicing over the next couple of days is how 
you tell the same story in 30 seconds and how you tell it in 30 minutes. 
 
 
The key for that is working out what’s the tagline of this. If this was a movie 
what would the tagline be? That’s how I do it. One of the simplest examples 
of a title that’s also the tagline is ‘Snakes on a Plane’.  
 
Igor: 
Anyone hear the cross talk? We’re going fishing I think. 
 
Robin: 
So just have a thought about it as you’re working on your stories. What’s the 
tagline for this story? How could I tell this in a sentence or two sentences? 
There are so many different kinds of stories and structures to the stories we 
tell, what I’d like you to do for the next couple of exercises is to choose one or 
two, let’s say two, of the stories that you’ve just generated, to work on them 
and to refine.  

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
63 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
 
I’m going to introduce a couple ideas to you about how stories are structured 
and the important elements they have, so that over the next few hours and 
days as you continue to tell stories you can begin to focus and pull out 
essential elements of what you’re telling. You’ll also find this really helps you 
to remember them. 
 
 
Have any of you heard of Joseph Campbell? Okay. He wrote a book called The 
Hero with a Thousand Faces. He looked at stories throughout history, 
mythologies of different cultures and more modern literature and films, TV 
programs, all the different ways we receive stories. He showed that basically 
they’re all the same. They all have an essential element. It’s the struggle of 
the hero through adversity to victory and triumph. 
 
 
I should say in advance that Joseph Campbell isn’t a personal inspiration of 
mine. I love his stuff. He has lots of ideas, but in my own history of learning 
this stuff he’s not someone who had a great impact on my particular way of 
working. If you look at his model there are loads of different kinds of stages 
and people have refined that.  
 
 
So, if you want to follow up and read more on the Internet about this kind of 
thing then do. I’ll give you the simple version, one that you can remember 
with five fingers or three. What’s the essential element of a story that allows 
us to connect with it?  
 
Group: 
The hero. 
 
Robin: 
The character, the hero, thank you. Here’s a question for you.  
 
Pamela: Or heroine. 
 
Robin: 
Yes, thank you. I’ll ask you a little aside. Think about the story of your life. Are 
you the hero? When you watch a movie, like a James Bond movie, you know 
the henchman that gets bumped off in the first act? Guess what? He was the 
hero of his own story too. Nobody thinks about the henchman’s family.  
 
 
Everyone is the hero of their own stories and if you read a lot and watch 
movies, you often find that the believable characters, the believable stories, 
are the ones in which even though, we’re being fed a line of this guy is the 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
64 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
hero and this guy is the villain, the best stories recognize the fact that that 
villain is the hero in his own story. 
 
1. Your story needs a hero or heroine.  
 
 
That hero doesn’t always have to be a human being. It can be an animal. 
 
Igor: 
Like a puppy. 
 
Robin: 
Like a puppy. It could be a community or tribe or a nation. It could be a car. 
 
Igor: 
Or a tank. 
 
Robin: 
Your hero is that character with which we identify and relate. Aristotle wrote 
2500 years ago the purpose of drama, of tragedy, was that the audience 
experienced a catharsis by seeing their story told through on the stage. By 
identifying with the hero they got to have a release and catharsis through that 
experience. So, number one your thumb hero.  
 
 
Second element I’ll introduce is perhaps not quite as obvious so I won’t ask 
you what it is.  
 
2. Passion 
 
 
 
More specifically, where is your passion for this story or in this story. What’s 
the thing about this story that touches your heart and makes you feel? What 
else do we need? 
 
Igor: 
Ooh. 
 
Group: 
A challenge or problem. 
 
Robin: 
Yes. A challenge or a problem, the journey, the struggle. 
 
3. The antagonist 
 
 
Again, the antagonist can be a person, a situation or the weather or a 
mountain or your own internal blockage or barrier. There has to be something 
for the hero to strive against.  
 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
65 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
What do you think is next?  
 
Group: 
Redemption, struggle, some sort of routine… tri-tagonist… right the best 
friend, yeah. A turning moment. This is all great stuff. Thank you. An outcome. 
A learning. A mentor. A woman.  
 
Igor: 
Spoken like a true Frenchman. 
 
Robin: 
I like the tri-tagonist, I hadn’t heard that before, but it reminds me of a story.  
 
Igor: 
No. 
 
Robin: 
My friend and I were… I used to be an actor and gave it up a while ago, but all 
my friends are still actors… standing around outside a pub one night and my 
friend is a big chap with scars on his cheeks because he’s a rugby player. He 
looks beefy. He was basically moaning that he only got cast as thugs or the 
cuddly chap. 
 
 
Our other friend was standing there and he has dark hair, basically looks like 
either an Italian gangster or a policeman and that’s how he gets cast. They 
started going Robin, what would you be? Oh I know. They decided I wasn’t 
good looking enough to be the hero, so I would be best friend of hero, gets 
killed halfway through movie. Thanks. 
 
 
All of those are great ideas and to sum them up, I propose in this simple 
model we have the first three and the fourth should be… 
 
4. Awareness 
 
 
This would be the epiphany, the moment of change, the realization; the 
discovery of this is how I’m going to solve this problem. It’s the light that gets 
turned on. It’s that aha moment that leads to five.  
 
5. Transformation 
 
 
How the person, the situation or the issue is resolved as a result of that 
moment of awareness.  
 
 
So, we have our own personal passion for the story. We have the hero in the 
story with whom we identify with. We have the antagonist/struggle we’re 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
66 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
faced with. We have the realization, epiphany and awareness that enables us 
to transform and move through the situation. Is that clear? 
 
 
I’d like you to take two of the stories you were telling earlier, and bear in 
mind these are generalizations, boxes we’re fitting reality into and not the 
other way around. Have a moment in pairs to reflect on what are the five 
different elements and how do they map into those two stories. Make sense? 
 
Igor: 
So you’re not telling the story yet you’re just going to discuss with them that if 
you were to tell the story who or what would you make the hero? Where 
would be the antagonist? How do you feel about this story that makes you 
want to tell it in the first place? At what point does the awareness come that 
lets the story come to an end? How have things changed as a result of 
everything? The transformation. 
 
 
Discuss those things a little so we can take the next step in a moment’s time.  
 
Robin: 
Take about five minutes, coach each other through that so you’re clear on 
how it works and then we’ll do a Q&A.  
 
Igor: 
Off you go [Exercise started] 
 
 
Some useful food for thought there right? Enjoying the conversations you’re 
having. Now that you’ve had some ideas around these five elements of a 
story, it’s time you actually did them. So find someone you haven’t spoken to 
yet or shared a story with and retell the same story. This time we’ll give you 3 
minutes apiece, so you have three times as long to tell the same story, but 
you get to dwell a little more on each of these five points. Make sense? Off 
you go. [Exercise starts] 
 
 
How did that go? How did the story go the second time around?  
 
Glen: 
Hey. As you were explaining what you needed with the five elements I was 
thinking, the stories I just told didn’t have any of those, apart from a hero and 
some passion, they didn’t seem to have the other points in it. When I was 
retelling it I surprised myself in finding that they were there after all.  
 
Robin: 
Great. Thank you. Can I ask a further question? When you had your little 
coaching thing, did that help to find where those elements were? 
 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
67 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
Glen: 
Yes. They became more apparent about what the antagonist actually was in 
the story that I didn’t think existed beforehand.  
 
Igor: 
Right.  
 
Robin: 
Often we tell stories unconsciously all the time and often they don’t have 
simple things like a beginning, middle and end because we’re just starting and 
we’re relating an experience. Some of our stories have those things explicitly, 
but they’re always there implicitly and part of the idea of giving you these 
simple structures is to tighten and focus your storytelling ability, so they pack 
that extra punch. Thank you. 
 
Glen: 
One other thing. The awareness and transformation part was probably 
missing the first time I told it, but the story kind of petered out, but having 
that in the picture meant there could have been a conclusion to draw from 
and there was the second time around.  
 
Igor: 
As a storyteller, how much more satisfying was it telling the story a second 
time around with the conclusion that the awareness and transformation 
brings. Then fading it out and going yeah, um.  
 
Glen: 
That was it. It worked better.  
 
Igor: 
Excellent, thank you. 
 
Robin: 
Often stories have a point and we’ll get onto that in a minute. You have a 
choice about when you’re explicit about that. You’ll notice quite often that I 
tell stories and I don’t tell you what the point is.  
 
Igor: 
That’s the point.  
 
Robin: 
There is one.  
 
Student: When I was telling my story before doing the exercise, I had a clear picture in 
my mind who the hero was, what the passion was, the antagonist all that and 
when I retold it the second time, I had a hard time figuring out, am I the hero 
or is the other person the hero? It was kind of ambiguous at that point. I felt it 
was fun, now that I had to rethink it, that it could have been either way and 
how those lines are blurred.  
 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
68 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
Igor: 
And you just found one of the secrets of storytelling. The great storytellers 
don’t have a grab bag of a thousand stories, and even Robin knows more 
because if you hang out with these people they may only have like 5-10 
stories, but they retell them differently each time depending on what is 
necessary at the time.  
 
 
People used to accuse Erickson of making up his case studies, because every 
time he told the same story it would be different, so they would say he’s 
obviously making it up. All he was doing was taking a little bit of artistic 
license to emphasize elements of a story that would be applicable to the 
particular audience he’s talking to.  
 
 
That was a very nice bit of realization. 
 
Robin: 
I’d just like to respond and elaborate on that a little bit. There are some 
situations in which it’s really useful to change who the hero is and to frame it 
differently. 
For 
example, 
I 
put 
a 
few 
videos 
on 
my 
website 
HypnoticStorytelling.com recently about David Niven, who was one of my 
favorite storytellers. He was an English actor and gentleman. He would always 
make himself the butt of the joke.  
 
 
Quite often if you’re telling a story for comic effect, the hero is actually the 
butt of the joke and it’s very useful sometimes, if that’s you. Like, sometimes 
if I want to deliver some feedback to someone about what they’re doing then 
I will describe a situation in the story but I’ll make sure I’m the loser or I’m the 
guy who had to learn the lesson, because that means I’m not preaching I’m 
learning the lesson and they can choose to learn the lesson or not.  
 
Student: We made an interesting discovery, that the story that was told had two 
heroes, each with their own passion but the antagonist was where the two 
heroes met. They had the same antagonist and then they went away again. 
The awareness and transformation were different but that was interesting 
too.  
 
 
The person who told the story said I don’t know who the hero is and so from 
the story we got that there were two heroes.  
 
Igor: 
And you’ve seen lots of stories where that happens. It gets more complex 
then, but remember, everything we’re putting up here isn’t so much that you 
must do it this way it’s just food for thought to assist you in making what you 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
69 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
have become richer and more pertinent to the situation. Then, in time as we 
go to the other stories in a moment, to allow you to use the stories that will 
have the effect and impact that you want.  
 
 
It will be almost artificial. There are some unconscious rules we have and by 
tweaking the emphasis points we get to have a different effect, which is really 
where you are right now and what you’re exploring at this point.  
 
Robin: 
Thank you, it sounds like a fascinating story. 
 
Student: It was very fascinating.  
 
Student: The thing that I found was it gives you, as well as a set of coordinates if you 
like within the story and allows you to change the emotion within the story. 
Obviously at certain points you may be going through different experiences in 
terms of what you’re engendering in that person. So, dare I say it’s sort of 
fractionation. 
 
Robin: 
Interesting. Thank you. 
 
Igor: 
Okay. Yeah. 
 
Student: I just need some clarification regarding passion. What I heard said was, what 
is your passion for telling the story, but what I heard just now is what is the 
passion of the hero? Would you clarify that? 
 
Robin: 
Sometimes they’ll be the same thing. I’d like you to consider though that if a 
story is a bunch of facts wrapped up in emotion you have to have the emotion 
that will carry it, the connection. The heart to heart connection that you make 
with people when you tell a story depends on you having heart and passion.  
 
 
I could tell the story of Tom Cruise in ‘Top Gun’, for example, and there would 
be conflict and the hero would have passion and all of that, but I don’t have 
passion for that story. It doesn’t move me or touch my heart. That’s what I’m 
thinking about when I ask you to consider the passion. It’s how are you going 
to be moved by this story so that you can emotionally connect with other 
people, so you can move other people. If you’re moved by it than other 
people will be.  
 
 
Does that make sense? Does it help clarify? 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
70 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
Student: Yes.  
 
Robin: 
Thank you.  
 
Student: So basically, the second time I said the story the partner and me realized that 
my story was actually broken up into two different stories, so I could have 
very well made it more concise and ended one story at a certain point and 
then started another topic all together.  
 
 
That’s when I realized that it’s testing if you have these five coordinates, you 
can extend and make two stories into one entire thing with having that as a 
final transformation or, you can leave it to that much. I was wondering, how 
do you decide when is a good time to end your story and keep it as it is? 
 
Igor: 
Well, one idea is thinking about when your story has had the impact you need 
it to that’s the point you end it. So, if you could extend it to another story on 
top of that, will that second story just detract or add to it? Sometimes telling 
one pithy story initiated in just a few seconds and going on is the perfect thing 
to do, whereas, other times you may tell story after story after story and all 
on a similar theme.  
 
 
It depends on how much time you have, context and so on, but for me the 
main thing is, has it done its job and you have lots of choices about that.  
 
Robin: 
I’d like to suggest you reflect on what I said earlier about artistry. You have a 
conscious tool.  
 
Student: I find that when I told my story there’s more than one hero and more than 
one passion and more than one antagonist, it’s the whole thing but not just 
one of each and maybe there’s more than one transformation. 
 
Igor: 
Yes.  
 
Robin: 
If your story is consistent and powerful than chances are that those 
individuals, those different heroes, antagonists and heroines have something 
that unites them, so they’re representative of a higher element in the story. 
Does that make sense? Does it make sense for the story you’re thinking 
about? 
 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
71 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
Student: Not just the story I told but also the stories I heard. They all had more than 
one hero.  
 
Robin: 
Did they have more than one character?  
 
Student: They had more than one character.  
 
Robin: 
Without knowing anymore detail that’s great. There are so many stories I 
want to hear now.  
 
Igor: 
Consider one other thing. If you have lots of characters in a story, you can 
always focus on you may actually have five stories there, like if you have five 
heroes then you can tell the same story from five different perspectives, 
having a different story, different emotion and different transformation each 
time.  
 
 
It’s the same story but it’s not the same story. Of course, I could tell you about 
being in the Bahamas and inviting an impoverished friend of mine who really 
needs my help. 
 
Robin: 
And I can tell a story about what it’s like to have a desperate and lonely friend 
who needs some company on stage.  
 
Igor: 
It’s the same story isn’t it? It’s just told from two different points of view. 
There’s different antagonists. There are different points of transformation. 
There are different heroes. Robin is quite rightly the hero of his story. I am of 
course, absolutely correctly the hero of my story. Did that help? 
 
Student: Yes. Just wonder where the cat fits in. 
 
Igor: 
That cat is its own hero. 
 
Robin: 
Well, it’s a funny thing about the cat, because I’ve lived in this garden flat for 
a while now and I’ve actually lived in this neighborhood and in this building 
for about 5-6 years. The last couple of years I started noticing this cat around 
and in the last six months it had been hanging around in my back garden 
basically and shitting there.  
 
 
It doesn’t help that I have white gravel in a large part of my garden, so it looks 
like an extended cat litter tray. I love cats as much as I love puppies, but I also 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
72 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
love songbirds, frogs and hedgehogs, not compatible with cats. But anyway 
this cat was hanging around right, and it doesn’t have a collar. It’s really 
skinny and a bit mangy.  
 
 
One of my friends was round and started stroking the cat and she was like this 
thing is so skinny it’s practically starving, did you not notice that? What are 
you doing? How come you’re not feeding this cat was how the story started? 
 
Arthur: 
I have a different kind of question. I must have had lots of stories in the past 
and I don’t seem to be able to remember them as well as others who can 
easily call upon many stories before. Of the stories that I have lots would be 
interesting, but I tend to forget them and move on to the future, forgetting 
what’s happened in the past.  
 
 
Some years ago I wrote a book of stories… 
 
Igor: 
Nice.  
 
Arthur: 
I was able to remember some of those stories so I could tell those, but just to 
call up experiences… there must be some way, people are different in how 
they can remember what’s happened to them.  
 
Igor: 
Here are a couple things. The first is those “natural storytellers” tell a lot of 
stories and part of their social skills and how they interact with the world is 
through storytelling. Because that’s how their minds have adapted to 
connecting with people, because it’s important to them they’re doing it 
constantly than they’re constantly looking for more stories, so it’s keeping it 
fresh. Every time you tell a story it reinforces it so you’ll have it again.  
 
 
Every time you tell a story as well and you allow it to change, evolve and stuff 
like that, then you’re basically telling your mind, I need more of this stuff and 
then it starts becoming more sensitive to remembering it. The exercise we did 
at the start of this session is a way for you to start collecting some stories and 
follow that as a model for you to be able to have a long list of stories that will 
be around whenever you need them.  
 
 
Really, the simplest way to remember a story is to become a storyteller. 
Here’s a promise I’ll make and it’s an absolute promise. Most of those stories 
that you wrote in the book that you should probably call, memories from the 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
73 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
forgotten realm, will easily come back to you once you start telling different 
stories without thinking about it.  
 
 
Just by enjoying them. So the fact that you’re enjoying telling stories tells you 
you’re in that storytelling stage and when you’re in a storytelling state your 
mind goes hunting for more because that’s part of its job. Where is it going to 
look? Among the stories you already have.  
 
Robin: 
The experience you’re having right now or until you got here is an effective 
future orientation. It’s a useful orientation to have for someone who wants to 
get things done in the world. That’s important. The other side of things is it’s 
probably those offline moments when you’re just daydreaming and as you 
sleep and dream important things happen. Keep the future focus it’s good.  
  
 
Student: Something about what I’m hearing, hearing several things that seem, that I 
relate to a lot. An example is that I find a lot of musicians that I tend to work 
with in my hometown will start feeling the music as they’re singing it, but the 
more they sing it the more they focus on the technical side and the technique, 
they slowly diminish the emotional content of the song bit by bit.  
 
 
I actually notice this a lot in myself too, so part of my journey now is learning 
how to play and bring that emotion back as I’m playing. I’m also hearing some 
echoes of that in what I hear others saying where they’re talking about… you 
were saying it’s your emotional content that you currently are in that you 
initiate the story from, because without that emotional continuity the story is 
empty. 
 
Robin: 
As a musician, when the music works it’s because it becomes a vehicle for the 
emotional content right? 
 
Student: Right.  
 
Robin: 
In the process of getting there you practice scales and all this stuff, and what 
we’re doing with these five different elements is scales, and over the rest of 
the afternoon and tomorrow you’ll be playing scales on those themes. And 
yes absolutely, the power and artistry comes when you get that balance of 
conscious/unconscious.  
 
 
When you let go of having structure… I probably go too far the other way. My 
conscious mind has nothing to do with much of what happens in my life.  

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
74 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
Student: The only thing I wanted to bring out was basically that, just to remind because 
of my own mistakes I know how easy it is to get trapped in that technical 
place. I’m hearing technical questions, so I’m offering a reminder based on my 
own experience focus on the emotional state first because everything else will 
come after.  
 
 
We’re in hypnotic storytelling and that’s what it’s all about isn’t it? 
 
Robin: 
That’s a great lesson thank you. 
 
Igor: 
Yes, it is. 
 
Robin: 
Let’s take one more question. 
 
Student: I just realized that in my story the transformation was really hard to put my 
finger on. It’s a story that easily connects with someone who had that kind of 
experience and I would have a lot of trouble describing all the different layers 
of transformations that happened when I went through the birth of my child.  
 
 
Would that be a good story to tell someone who has not had that kind of 
experience or would it be a better vehicle to connect with someone who 
already has? 
 
Igor: 
Yes.  
 
Student: Thank you.  
 
Igor: 
The longer, unconscious version of course is…  
 
Robin: 
I chose to tell you two stories to introduce myself, one of which was about 
this master storyteller here, Mercedes, who told me the story of the frame 
she gave to her son. I told you a story about a present that I gave to my mom. 
I really wouldn’t have understood what that windmill sitting in the living room 
meant until I had a daughter. It meant that she really cared about the fact 
that I bought her a windmill. 
 
Igor: 
Remember also, some of the stories you tell may be for the future.  
 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
75 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
Student: I would like some reflection on two things please. The first is something that 
just came to me when someone else was talking. It was two lines… a song is 
not a song until you sing it. A story is not a story until you tell it… 
 
Robin: 
Yes, thank you.  
 
Student: The second thing I want to say is, how about journalists like my sister, who is a 
journalist, but when she writes her stories I don’t think she looks for these 
kinds of things, I think she looks for something completely different. 
 
Robin: 
That would depend on what kind of journalist or paper she’s writing for, 
partly. Are there any journalists in the room? Quite often the formula is like, 
say what happened in one sentence at the beginning, say the same thing 
again in five sentences and then say it all again at the end.  
 
Igor: 
The thing to bear in mind with journalists, and you have two kinds who could 
be the same person, there are the pieces that are there just to inform and you 
make up your own mind and there are the pieces that are designed to 
influence you to vote one way or the other, to choose one path or another 
and so on.  
 
 
The ones that are designed to try and influence you will follow this much 
more than those who are designed just to inform you and you can make of it 
what you will.  
 
Randy: 
That’s an important point. I was a journalist in the military. There’s a 
distinction as you mentioned, between fact giving which is journalism in a way 
and making a commentary, which is a narrative. What we’re talking about is 
narrative stories. It occurs to me that the elements or structure of a narrative 
story like what we’re talking about, typically has the two points, plot point 
one and plot point two.  
 
 
 
So in the beginning of the story, a very small part we introduce the hero or 
protagonist, we make him rootable, which means we like him and we 
establish rapport. There’s something about him we like. We see his flaw which 
makes him more likable and then as he’s going along we see a little bit of his 
life and then something happens where he’s going one way and in one way 
he’s going down a different way much faster.  
 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
76 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
Then two or three things happen where he’s challenged, his success or 
survival and he uses his strengths to overcome them and then the last 
challenge which would be plot point two, he’s overcome by the antagonist, 
who is his foil either an individual or challenge. That foil then brings him to 
the ultimate where his/her survival is threatened which creates the dynamic 
tension. 
 
 
Then, through developing the flaw which is what Ericksonian hypnosis teaches 
us, through using the weakness becomes the strength and then he overcomes 
the foil and the story is resolved. That structure, plot point one introduction 
to plot point two, eventually the threat and in the end resolution.  
 
 
That seems to be the structure you’re teaching us and that would be the 
distinction between a journalistic point of view and the other.  
 
Igor: 
Okay. 
 
Robin: 
What Randy has given you there… that in itself is a concise and condensed 
version of the very elaborate set of journey points that Joseph Campbell talks 
about. Thank you.  
 
 
Let’s take a break and as you go for your break I’d like you to mingle as you 
will, and we’re looking at another classic story. We’ve done emotional and 
elicitation stories, I want you to think about your ‘who I am’ stories. You 
heard the examples I gave at the beginning. To make it simple I’ll give you a 
simple process… think of something that’s important to you, family, hobby, 
career, place, anything.  
 
Igor: 
And talk about that.  
 
Robin: 
Tell a story about it.  
 
Igor: 
Let’s be back in 15. Thank you. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
77 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
DVD 3 – The 7 Most Influential Stories Revealed 
& How To Tell Your Own Version 
 
 
Who Am I (Connection) Stories 
 
 
Igor: 
Welcome back, everyone. Did you have an interesting break? Did you share 
some stories about who you are? I think a starting point for us right now is to 
start to collect lots of stories. Everyone please stand up.  
 
 
Here’s how this is going to work. You’re going to do a regular mingling exercise 
like we’ve done before. This time as you meet someone, you’ll tell your story as 
quickly as you can. You’ll hear their story and it might remind you of some 
other who are you stories. Then you’ll move onto someone else.  
 
 
By the time we come on and say change partners, move to someone else and 
tell a different story again about who you are, something that you like, 
something that you enjoy doing, something that is important to you. Just keep 
doing that as we change partners. Once we’ve done that for a little while, we’ll 
come back and see if we can tease out some useful versions of their stories.  
 
Robin: To be clear, the ‘who I am’ story is the story that establishes human contact, 
that lets the other person know you’re a human being.  
 
Igor: 
Which means you are a person that has motivation. You have things that you 
aspire to, things that you enjoy and things that your life is about. It can be small 
moments like watching your children sleep, it can be large moments like 
watching them being born, and it can be all kinds of things in between.  
 
→ Do you have a rough idea of what I mean? It will get better as you talk to 
people, so you may as well start now.  
→ How did that go?  
→ Did you have fun with that?  
→ Who had at least one story? It should be all of you.  
→ Who had two stories?  
→ Who had three? That’s good. Still no gold winner but we’re getting close. 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
78 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
 
What I want you to do is quickly review the two or three stories that you had, 
and I’d like you to pull out some little event within it, an icon, a person or 
something that will remind you of it. When you have it, just close your eyes, 
think of the room, start at the beginning and review the first story you told 
today. There’s the second story. If you had a third one, of course you go to the 
third location and there it is.  
 
 
Then go onto whichever your fourth location was. Go to the next location and 
place the icon for the first of your stories just now, your first ‘who am I’ story. 
Just place like a cardboard cutout of it or just imagine a version of that touching 
on the object – whatever it is. 
 
 
Then go onto the next location and do the same with the second icon, with your 
second story. Just see the icon and the location just touching it in some way, 
creating a shape. If you had a third story of course repeat it one more time to 
the next location and the final story. 
 
 
When you’ve finished all that, you can go right back to the beginning again and 
just review all four or five stories or however many you had, so you can review 
them in a sequence. Just think about the icon and the location, and say oh yeah 
that’s the one. I remember that story. Oh yeah the story where this happened. 
Just quickly go through. 
 
 
Go through that routine three or four times just so that you can remember oh 
yeah that’s it, that’s it and you just recognize it. When you’re finished, open 
your eyes. Just do a quick mental review, and when you’re finished just open 
your eyes. 
 
 
How many of you remember all of the stories you’ve been telling so far? It’s 
pretty easy when you place them in certain locations. It’s probably worth 
putting a few more stories in here, isn’t it? What shall I do for that? 
 
Robin: Influence – that’s kind of what we’re working on here, the ways in which what 
we tell people about ourselves, the kind of picture that that gives people. 
Imagine the sales situation, which is probably the most focused example of 
influence and the situation in which we have the most distrust. 
 
 
Human connection is the first thing. People do business with other human 
beings and if you can demonstrate that, you’re halfway there.  

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
79 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
Why Am I Here (Trust) Stories 
 
 
Robin: The second thing people want to know is why are you here? What are you 
getting out of this? Can they trust you? What’s your motivation? 
 
Igor: 
If they don’t know what you want, if they don’t know what your angle is, how 
can they possibly trust you, because they can’t predict how you’ll respond to 
whatever situation the two of you might get into? 
 
Robin: Why are you here? What’s your motivation? Right now that’s our context. For 
example, for those of you who are hypnotherapists or hypnotists who see 
clients formally, how did you get into it? Why are you doing that? 
 
 
For many people it’s because they experienced the benefits of hypnosis in their 
own life and were motivated by that to help others. In a sales situation, you can 
be honest. You’re getting a commission on what you sell. Say you’re making a 
pitch for building a big retail park or something like that. You could be honest 
about your motivation. You can say look, I want to make as much money as 
possible in this situation.  
 
 
If you say I want to make money, what’s the message you’re sending? I want to 
make money and I don’t care what happens to you. If you can demonstrate why 
you’re there and be honest about it, people don’t mind that you need stuff and 
that you want something for yourself. That is an accepted part of human nature 
and human transactions. 
 
Igor: 
Provided it doesn’t clash with what they need. 
 
Robin: Absolutely. Particularly if you can demonstrate to people why you’re here and 
how you can both win in the situation, that’s a very powerful thing.  
 
Igor: 
For example, take two police officers. One is there because they want to serve 
and they genuinely want to keep the streets a safe place in the neighborhood. 
The other one is there because it’s a good job, they get a good pension at the 
end of it all and it’s a respectable job. 
 
 
You will interact with the two officers, who actually have the same role or 
function, differently would you not? 
 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
80 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
Robin: Take two trainers. One of them is there to genuinely serve and help other 
people. The other just wants to be on a pedestal and have everyone worship 
him. 
 
Igor: 
The other one is humble enough to realize that someone must sit on the 
pedestal.  
 
Robin: And to have observed that it’s clearly working for loads of people. 
 
Igor: 
There you go, quite right. Do you understand the nature of the next ‘why am I 
here’ stories. Once again, please stand up and spend a minute each just telling 
stories about your purpose. To give you a context – because that’s going to 
make it a lot easier for you to find motivation because you’ll be motivated 
differently in different scenarios – you have a choice of two things.  
 
 
 
The first context, which I would recommend most, is think about some part of 
your life where you would like to have some influence over others, maybe as 
parents of children, maybe as a teacher teaching, maybe whatever your career 
is.  
 
 
Of course if you’re a hypnotherapist, why are you a hypnotherapist? That’s 
really the simplest place to put yourself into and to tell a story about. The 
alternative, which will be more immediate but not as universal or as useful to 
you, is simply to think why are you here literally in this room taking this 
training? Those are two viable options. I prefer the first just because it fits your 
life more practically, but you have a choice. With that idea stand up, find a 
partner and off you go. 
 
 
Hopefully all of you had one story. Who had two stories? Three? Four?  
 
Robin: Yes, a winner. 
 
Igor: 
Four? That’s fantastic. Give him a round of applause. Congratulations. Very 
quickly review your two, three or four stories and just assign it an icon, 
something that happened within that story that will remind you of that 
particular story. 
 
 
Once you have two, three or four icons for it, just close your eyes and begin 
with a mental review. Start with the first story that you told today. Look at the 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
81 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
first location and say oh yeah I remember that. Then look at the second 
location, then the third, then the fourth.  
 
 
If you had more, of course you can go to the fifth and sixth as well if that was 
relevant to you. Whenever you get to the final location, the one just before the 
one that was empty, just take your first icon and go to the next location and 
place that one there.  
 
 
Make sure it touches and alters the shape of the object so that it’s a carbon 
cutout or an image on top of it. Really think about it there. Then move onto the 
next location and put your second icon there.  
 
 
By now you’ve collected anywhere between six and eight stories. If you have 
another story, then of course go to the next location and do that too. Some of 
you will have six stories. Some of you will have eight or nine stories, maybe 
even 10 stories, but just fill in the spaces. 
 
 
When those spaces have been filled up with these icons, then just go back to 
the beginning again and just quickly mentally review them – first location, 
second, third, fourth. Just a flash of an image is enough. You don’t need to 
make sense of it yet.  
 
 
It just lets you know that oh yeah with that drawer comes that image, with that 
desk comes that image, with the knives comes another image and so on and so 
forth. Just go all the way through all the locations, and then repeat it again. Just 
do it two or three times just to lock that little journey inside your mind. 
Whenever you’re ready just open your eyes again. 
 
 
Out of curiosity, how many here have at least six stories located there? That 
should hopefully be all of you. How many of you have seven? Eight? Nine? Okay 
eight it is. 
 
Values In Action (Integrity) Stories 
 
Igor: 
Let’s do some more filling, shall we? What should we usefully put into the next 
one? 
 
Robin: We’ve made a human connection. We’ve addressed the issue of trust – why am 
I here? Those of you who follow my blog at HypnoticStorytelling.com will have 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
82 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
already heard the Bee Story, the story about the bee. I’m strong and kind and I 
look after things that are weaker than me.  
 
Igor: 
There, there. It’s okay. 
 
Robin: If I tell you that straight out, you may or may not believe me. You may think I’m 
a little conceited, or you may have a reaction to such a blatant statement about 
my values and what’s important to me.  
 
 
 
This summer has been a terrible summer in the U.K. It’s been really, really rainy 
and the bees are really confused and they keep turning up. Like early on in the 
summer this little bee came buzzing by and landed on the stairs. I saw this bee 
on the stairs. I was just walking up the stairs and I thought oh that’s a bit sad. 
 
 
I went into the kitchen and got a bit of cardboard. I ripped off a bit of cardboard 
from a cereal packet, dipped it in some water and soaked it, and then I dipped 
it in some honey. I took it out, picked up the bee on the bit of cardboard and 
put it on the windowsill.  
 
 
I just left it there and I watched it. If you check out the blog at 
HypnoticStorytelling.com, you’ll see there’s a picture of the bee with its little 
tongue coming out. They love it. He sits there and first he’s like buzzing, and 
then he starts to wake up. Have you seen a bee’s tongue? They’re huge. He sits 
there for ages sucking up the honey, sitting in the windowsill.  
 
 
After a bit, he’s like this. Windowsill, freedom. He zooms off into the distance 
and crashes straight into a wall on the opposite side. He picks himself up again 
and flies into freedom. It’s a funny story about a bee, but without saying 
anything I’ve just told you that I think it’s worth taking the effort to save a little 
bee. I’m demonstrating values in action. 
 
 
The classic example of this in the sales context for example is hey listen, this car 
is alright and it’s great for the price, but I had another customer come in here 
the other day and she was looking at this, and I said to her for what you want 
you probably need a bigger boot size, so I suggest you go and get that car over 
there. (Why am I looking at you? Who knows?) I suggest you go and get that car 
over there from that dealer. 
 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
83 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
What have I just demonstrated? Integrity. I’ve demonstrated that I’m prepared 
to lose the sale to do the right thing for the customer. Do you understand 
values in action? I don’t have to do the bee thing again? 
 
Igor: 
Just wait until you hear the monkey story. Do you get the idea of the values in 
action? Put yourself in a context where the stories will be of use to you. In 
other words, you’re interacting with someone specific. Imagine the people 
you’re meeting here are going to be those people, and then just present them 
with a story where you are living embodying whatever values you hold in that 
context.  
 
 
Let’s put it this way.  
 
 
You can all think of a context where you want to be more influential. Is that 
correct? You can think of a specific context where you want to influence 
someone else – be it selling cars, be it influencing your kids, being a 
salesperson, a manager, a teacher, a trainer or hypnotherapist. You all have 
that, right? 
 
 
People coming into that context – whether it’s your children, your students, 
your customers or clients – will have some kind of concern about whether or 
not you will be ethical.  
 
 
So, consider a story where you were ethical, where you did something that was 
important although not necessarily easy, or where it would be easier to not do 
it but you made the effort anyway, and then tell that story. Does that become 
easier now? Stand up, a minute each, find a partner, off you go. 
 
Robin: That is quiet. 
 
Igor: 
Yes, that’s nice. How did that go? It seemed like you had a lot more to say than 
you realized, didn’t it? Who had one story? Two? Three? Four? Fantastic. Once 
again, you know the drill. Review your three or four stories and see if you can 
find something within each story that is an icon that represents the whole story 
for you. 
 
 
Whenever you’re ready, just close your eyes. Some of you have already started 
doing so. For those of you who are about to run out of locations, that’s okay. 
You can either choose a few extra things in the room that you hadn’t focused 
on before, or in a minute we’ll actually add an extension.  

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
84 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
 
For now just review whatever you did in the previous sessions. You’ve got 
about six to eight different stories there. Just review the locations, see the icon 
and say oh I remember. Two, oh yeah I remember. Three, oh yeah I remember, 
and then four and five. 
 
 
Work your way through all the locations until you get to your first free location, 
at which point just insert your first icon from this last set of stories. You already 
know how. Once you get it set there, go to the next location and insert another 
icon.  
 
 
If you run out of places, just find something else in that room that you’d not 
focused on before and add it on that. It could be something like the middle of 
the room, just the carpet in the middle of the room. You can place something 
there. You can put something on the ceiling if you need extra space. You won’t 
need that many extra slots. 
 
 
Of course when you’ve put it there, if you have any stories left put one more in 
there, again on the next location. If you haven’t got a next location, just find 
something that’s easy to find, like the floor or the ceiling or a particular corner.  
 
 
Make sure that all the stories you told – whether it’s two, three or four – have 
somewhere in that room to go. Then do a fast mental review. Literally just look 
at each item in turn and recall the icon that comes with it – first location, 
second location, third location and all the way through to the end. 
 
 
Do that two or three times and then come back with your eyes open. When 
you’ve reviewed them two or three times, come back with your eyes open. Just 
make sure that you recall all the stories you’ve been collecting today. They’ll be 
of use to you tomorrow. 
 
 
As the last few people finish their mental review, put your hands up if you got 
between six and 10 stories collected so far. Hands up if you’ve got more than 10 
stories collected so far. That’s impressive. That’s very good. Give yourselves a 
round of applause.  
 
 
Would it be fair to say it’s easy to recall them all at the moment? These stories 
will continue to develop and you can use the same method to recall more 
stories.  
 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
85 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
The point right now is that you get to have a stable amount of stories to begin 
with, and they will function as your seven key stories of influence, so you’ll have 
that at your beck and call, at your disposal whenever you want. 
 
 
What I’d like to do now is help you to build that extension I promised you. It’s 
going to be exactly the same process you did a moment ago. Just treat it as a 
different room in your house.  
 
 
You’ve chosen one room – bedroom, living room, kitchen or whichever it is. 
Mentally just choose another room. Then close your eyes, locate yourself there 
and then mentally just do an initial scouting. Just look around the room very 
quickly and just remember all the things that are there. 
 
 
You don’t have to do it in any particular order. If you’re in the bedroom, it will 
be things like the bed, cupboards, desk, windows, curtains, carpet and stuff like 
that. In the kitchen, it will be a fridge, oven, sink, cabinets and stuff like that. 
 
 
If you’re a minimalist and things aren’t really out on display that much, feel free 
to look inside the drawers.  You might have your sock drawer. You may have 
your videotape drawer. You may have a drawer with other things in it. You can 
just open the drawers mentally and say oh yeah I remember the stuff that goes 
in this one. 
 
 
Again, once you’ve got a mental review of what’s available to you, just choose a 
simple path. Start somewhere obvious. Choose a simple path and find at least 
10 locations in that room, 10 distinct things that look different. Then trace that 
path – first one, then two, then three, all the way through to 10. 
 
 
Just take a mental tour as if you were pointing it out to a friend. This is my sock 
drawer. This is my shirt drawer. This is my DVD drawer. Once you’ve found all 
10 locations, repeat the same circuit two or three times just to make sure you 
clearly recall the path that you took.  
 
 
First you start in this place, then the second location and then the third and so 
on. Take all the time you need to review that inside your mind. Whenever 
you’re ready, just open your eyes. There’s no hurry. Make sure you’ve reviewed 
it two or three times. 
 
 
We have about three-quarters of you back. The last few are just doing a quick 
mental review. It’s a simple process, is it not, to build your extensions? It’s a 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
86 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
very simple process and it’s a really simple process to recall relatively large 
amounts of information because you have your first six to 10 stories or more 
and you can recall them very easily. 
 
 
You can expand those stories and you can contract those stories. You’ve told 
them in short versions and longer versions. Tomorrow we’ll really play with that 
idea. For now you have an extension, a second room. 
 
 
Some of you haven’t entirely filled the first room. That’s fine. You can finish 
doing that. Some of you need extra space. You need to have a mental living 
room, so let’s find some things to put in there. What would you put in the 
extension? 
 
Robin: One of my friends and clients is a composer, a musician. She’s actually one of 
the top 10 biggest selling artists of the 1990’s in her genre, which is dance 
music. She has more than 350 published songs. 
 
Igor: 
That’s a lot. 
 
Robin: Yes, and something like 17 of those make 80% of her income, but she has to 
create a lot of stuff and she never knows which particular song is going to be 
successful, and when one song is successful she never knows why, but it’s a 
numbers game. She says she just keeps churning them out.  
 
Teaching Tales 
 
Robin: Which brings us onto our next category of teaching tales. That story was a 
teaching tale with an implicit unconscious teaching related to your current 
situation and why we’re getting you to tell all of these stories. You saw that. 
How many people got that? Thank you. 
 
Igor: 
If you were to spell it out for them at the end of the story, the implicit or the 
unconscious part of the teaching tale becomes explicit or conscious, and there 
are times when that’s also useful. 
 
Robin: Obviously Milton Erickson had lots of teaching tales, and you can read all about 
them. Zen Cohen and Sufi stories and Christian parables are all examples of 
kinds of teaching tales.  
 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
87 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
One of my favorites – simply because it illustrates this in a very simple way – is 
the tale of two monks who are traveling to get to their night hostile. It’s raining 
and they come to a river. Waiting by the side of the river is a beautiful maiden 
with a nice kimono on, and she doesn’t want to get the kimono wet.  
 
 
So, one of the monks say here you go, love. He picks her up in his arms, wades 
through the river to the other side and puts her on the side of the bank. Then 
the two monks carry on the rest of their journey to the hostile.  
 
 
The other monk is sulking a bit. He’s a bit irritated and just as they’re getting 
ready to go to bed, he bursts out to the first monk how could you do that? You 
know we’re not meant to associate with women. They encourage us in wicked 
ways. 
 
 
The first monk says I left her behind at the river, but you still seem to be 
carrying her. There’s a clear sense there in which the metaphor of carrying 
something physically is also a metaphor for carrying something emotionally or 
mentally. 
 
Igor: 
A man comes out of a bar and stumbles across his friend. His friend is a little 
worse for wear. He’s just crawling on his hands and knees around the lamp 
post, just desperately scrapping around. The man says hey George, what are 
you doing? What’s up? 
 
 
George is a little worse for wear having been in the bar a bit too long, and he 
says it’s terrible. I’ve lost my house door keys. I can’t get in the house. The man 
gets down on all fours to help his friend and they start scrapping around for 20 
or 30 minutes. They’re looking everywhere. Eventually, in frustration he turns 
to his friend and says George, are you sure you dropped your keys here? 
George says oh no, I dropped them in that dark alley over there, but there’s not 
enough light there to look.  
 
 
For whom might these sorts of stories be useful? Clients? Have you ever tried to 
give someone advice and they won’t listen? Just let it go, man. Let it go.  
 
Robin: One of the simplest ways of coming up with a teaching tale is to consider 
something that happened to you, a mistake you made or something that you 
had a struggle with and the experience you went through to solve or resolve 
that issue. 
 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
88 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
Igor: 
So, do you understand the idea of a teaching tale? It either presents the 
situation – and humor is kind of useful. You have two humorous examples of 
people being stuck in one way or another. It can be a personal example – yes, I 
went through that same experience essentially and I got bitten because I didn’t 
change, or I did change and therefore I managed to draw a victory. 
 
 
I think most cultures have stories that include the jester, the fool, the clown or 
something like that. They’re wonderful stories because they poke fun at society 
when society gets too rigid, and it makes fun of those things to show us that it’s 
good to have some rules, but sometimes it’s good to be able to go beyond them 
as well. 
 
 
At this point, it’s useful for you again to think of a specific context. If you’re a 
salesperson, for example, and you come across the same kind of objection over 
and over again – I’ll give you a hint, the one that a lot of people always get 
frustrated by is that it costs too much – what story could you tell to teach the 
clients that it doesn’t cost too much? It might cost them too much to get 
something cheaper.  
 
 
If you’re a hypnotherapist or a therapist, what kinds of stories can you tell that 
will help the problems that you will be facing? What are some of the things? I 
don’t know if I can do this? I don’t know if I’ve got it in me to change this way. 
 
 
Already I suspect you’re thinking of some things. If you’re a teacher or a parent 
and your kids aren’t doing so well in school, what kind of teaching tale will help 
them to persevere despite possible frustrations so that they can triumph? What 
is a specific context in which you want to influence? Think of a story within that. 
 
 
Once you start the storytelling, you’ll hear others, which you can borrow or 
adapt to fit your own circumstances and tell the next person in line. That’s one 
of the ways that stories grow. We hear them and either we share those stories 
or we adapt them to fit ourselves, and then share the spirit of the story in a 
different cloak.  
 
 
Are you ready for the exercise? I guess the only thing left to do is to stand up. A 
minute each, off you go. 
 
 
How did that go? Did you enjoy that? Too short? You start off saying I’ve got no 
stories to tell. Now it’s like stop interrupting me, I’m telling a story. By this 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
89 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
stage, you’ve collected somewhere between 10 to 15 stories, which is pretty 
impressive, isn’t it?  
 
 
Make sure that we have them at our beck and call, especially tomorrow when 
we start doing some refinement with these things in terms of how to use them 
in different ways.  
 
 
Let’s get some icons. Just take a few minutes to think about three or so stories 
that you just told. Tease out an icon that will represent each one. This time 
rather than me guiding you through it, you know what to do.  
 
 
Begin by reviewing all the other stories and the locations you’ve placed them in, 
and then carry on by placing one item at a time until you can go for a full 
mental review of everything, all 10 to 15 of them.  
 
 
Make sure you review them three or four times so that you’re sure that they’re 
all set nice and simply. When you’ve done all of that, feel free to come back 
with your eyes open. Seeing as we have most of you back, you have five 
categories of stories and you know how to use them. Is that correct? You have a 
decent idea of where to use them or what their purpose is. 
 
 
The next category is interesting. We could do it the same way we did a moment 
ago, which creates more stories, but actually we’d like to do something slightly 
differently. We’d like to show you how every story actually has multiple 
purposes and can be used in many different ways. 
 
 
For the next category of stories, we’re not going to ask you to make up any new 
stories. You have quite a nice repertoire – 10 to 15 is a decent number. All 
we’re going to ask you to do is to reuse the stories that you already have in a 
way that will fit the constraints that we’re about to give you. What would those 
constraints be? 
 
Robin: We have stories that introduce you and tell people who you are, why you’re 
here, that demonstrate your values in action, that provide metaphors and 
teaching tales that help people to reframe their experience.  
 
 
 
 
 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
90 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
Mind Reading (Empathy) Stories 
 
Robin: I know that you’ve covered a lot of information since the beginning of today, so 
you’re probably tired and probably feeling a little bit overloaded. That’s okay 
because we’ll be finishing up soon and we’ll be giving you a chance to integrate 
properly and to get a chance to process everything that we’ve done today. 
 
 
The last category of stories that we’re going to be talking about is mindreading 
stories, stories that let other people know you understand their situation, that 
you feel their pain, that you understand the difficulty of a particular context or 
situation or challenge that they face, that you’re able to put yourself in their 
shoes and understand how the world looks from their point of view.  
 
 
Before you begin to tell a story, you may think there’s a mismatch. Something’s 
missing. Don’t worry about it. Just choose one of those stories that you’ve 
already come up with and start to tell it and see what happens. The way that 
we’d like you to do this is again in pairs. One of you is going to present a 
problem or situation. 
 
Igor: 
It could be a child refusing to do homework. It could be a potential buyer 
objecting about the price. It could be real or imagined. It could be anything you 
want, just something that could be considered a communication problem or a 
block. 
 
Robin: What we’d like you to do is simply respond by saying I know what you mean 
because [story], or I know how you feel because [story].  
 
Igor: 
Use one of the stories you’ve already told today, one of the 10 to 15 that you’ve 
collected. All you’ll do is you’ll review your memory route and say for some 
reason that one appeals. Start telling it. Even if you don’t quite know why it fits, 
just notice what comes out. It’s a little ambiguous, I know, but you’ll enjoy it. 
Stand up and find a partner.  
 
 
And you thought you didn’t have any stories in you. Now you’ve got a lot of 
stories. You’ve got 10 to 15 stories, and really the usefulness of those 10 to 15 
stories is beyond just the five or six categories that we’ve talked about so far 
because that sixth category – mindreading – shows you how one story can 
serve many functions depending on what you emphasize and so on. You’ve had 
an experience of that, haven’t you? 
 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
91 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
There’s a seventh story, which we’ll come onto in a little bit, but before we do 
that I’d like for you to get an experience of just cementing in the stories you’ve 
got already.  
 
 
Of course you’ve heard Robin tell stories about the accountant, the rock star, 
the little bee that could. You’ve heard him tell you about a cat, although you’re 
not quite sure what the cat story is all about yet because it’s not finished yet. 
 
 
Notice these little titles that instantly summarize each of those stories and you 
can recollect them. I’d like you to sit next to a partner and over the next minute 
or so – no more than that – just rattle through all 10 or 15 stories you have in 
the same format.  
 
 
I have a story about the accountant, the rock star. I have a story about the little 
bee that could. I have a story about the cat. I have a story about windmills. I 
have a story about the monk and the woman at the water. 
 
 
They don’t need to understand your story. You do, but I want you to verbalize 
all the stories and just literally go through your rooms reciting them with a little 
headline for each one. Does that make sense to you? 
 
 
You have one minute to go through all 10 or 15 stories, and then they’ll have 
one minute to go back, and then we’ll come back and do something. Off you go. 
 
 
Did you enjoy that? Did you enjoy speaking about your 10 or 15 stories? Were 
you curious about everyone else’s stories? We’ll be doing more of that 
tomorrow.  
 
Transformational Stories 
 
Igor: 
For now there’s a seventh story that we haven’t covered yet. The seventh story 
in some ways touches a little bit on all of them, but actually goes beyond them 
all at the same time.  
 
Robin: It’s a story that’s the kind of thing you find in dreams. 
 
Igor: 
It’s the kind of thing that you will have experienced many times in your life 
often without realizing. 
 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
92 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
Robin: And myths and your personal heroic journey. 
 
Igor: 
You’ll have been moved by it in other people’s experiences, their lives, and it 
has a lot to do with going inside. 
 
Robin: And just taking the time... 
 
Igor: 
To really appreciate… 
 
Robin: You know what comes next… 
 
Igor: 
That there are many ways to… 
 
Robin: Make yourself feel comfortable now. Put your feet together on the floor… 
 
Igor: 
And really everyone has the capacity… 
 
Robin: To make yourself comfortable… 
 
Igor: 
And focus inside… 
 
Robin: Take a deep breath in… 
 
Igor: 
And allow the mind to just drift, roll, float. 
 
Robin: You’re aware of the room around you, even as your eyes are closed. 
 
Igor: 
And there are many thoughts only you do not need to think them all. 
 
Robin: Today has stirred up feelings. 
 
Igor: 
It’s stirred up ideas. 
 
Robin: Begun the process… 
 
Igor: 
Experiences… 
 
Robin: Of creating within you… 
 
Igor: 
A real sense… 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
93 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
Robin: Of your own innate ability… 
 
Igor: 
A purpose for being here… 
 
Robin: To simply create. 
 
Igor: 
And there’s a feeling that goes with that. 
 
Robin: A feeling that brought you here. 
 
Igor: 
It’s much like… 
 
Robin: The feeling that will take you forward… 
 
Igor: 
The way you fall asleep at night. 
 
Robin: That’s right. 
 
Igor: 
And the thoughts of the day just lazily drift around. 
 
Robin: I don’t know if you remember the last thing you remember just before you go 
to sleep. 
 
Igor: 
Become part of your dreams landscape. 
 
Robin: You do, don’t you? 
 
Igor: 
Things occur… 
 
Robin: Just dream… 
 
Igor: 
Experiences… 
 
Robin: Sometimes as you lie there… 
 
Igor: 
Coming together… 
 
Robin: Preparing for sleep… 
 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
94 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
Igor: 
So nice. 
 
Robin: Images, sensations… 
 
Igor: 
And there’s no particular thought or idea or image to attach to it. 
 
Robin: It’s just that as you… 
 
Igor: 
Drift and go to sleep… 
 
Robin: Sitting there… 
 
Igor: 
And simply have the experience of… 
 
Robin: You’ve been on a journey, haven’t you? 
 
Igor: 
Being in that dream. In a dream you could be walking on a path. 
 
Robin: You could open a door… 
 
Igor: 
You could be in a lovely place with flowers and nature. 
 
Robin: Into another world… 
 
Igor: 
And stand and appreciate the sights around you… 
 
Robin: As you stand… 
 
Igor: 
The sense, the sounds… 
 
Robin: You begin to feel lighter. 
 
Igor: 
A place like this would be marvelous to walk in. 
 
Robin: It’s almost like you begin to drift. 
 
Igor: 
A path… 
 
Robin: Up and up… 
 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
95 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
Igor: 
Would suggest a direction in which to go. 
 
Robin: So that you can take wing… 
 
Igor: 
Forwards… 
 
Robin: Looking down… 
 
Igor: 
Surrounded by those pleasant… 
 
Robin: Landscapes stretching out… 
 
Igor: 
Natural scenes… 
 
Robin: Around you… 
 
Igor: 
A plant, a rock… 
 
Robin: The wind catches under your wings. 
 
Igor: 
An animal… 
 
Robin: Rising higher… 
 
Igor: 
And the ease with which you can travel this path. 
 
Robin: You begin to simply… 
 
Igor: 
Going deeper and deeper… 
 
Robin: Feel yourself guided… 
 
Igor: 
Finding over there in the distance… 
 
Robin: Towards a special place… 
 
Igor: 
A green dense area… 
 
Robin: You see in the distance a forest… 
 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
96 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
Igor: 
Like a forest, a wood… 
 
Robin: Looking down the clearing… 
 
Igor: 
Trees upon trees upon trees… 
 
Robin: Whether you drift on a wind or… 
 
Igor: 
And the curious thing is… 
 
Robin: Simply feel yourself drawn there… 
 
Igor: 
The path leads straight through that. 
 
Robin: Looking down, you move over the landscape, seeing the path… 
 
Igor: 
The rolling hills or the flat plains… 
 
Robin: From that place, you can see so far. 
 
Igor: 
Can be walked with comfort and ease. 
 
Robin: Just float and drift until that feeling of being drawn seems to grow… 
 
Igor: 
A person finds themselves at the edge of a forest… 
 
Robin: More and more you’re drawing to that forest… 
 
Igor: 
And knowing that stepping through the limits that delineate the outside world 
and the forest path… 
 
Robin: Or floating above… 
 
Igor: 
There will be some changes that occur… 
 
Robin: Drifting down until a clearing… 
 
Igor: 
It’s cooler in the forest, darker, the sounds more intimate. 
 
Robin: You sense the forest around you breathing… 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
97 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
Igor: 
The sound of the trees with a slight breeze… 
 
Robin: And you come to stand again… 
 
Igor: 
And there a clearing in the middle of it all… 
 
Robin: A clearing in the middle of it all. 
 
Igor: 
And a house… 
 
Robin: Waits for you there… 
 
Igor: 
With a step… 
 
Robin: You step up… 
 
Igor: 
And a door… 
 
Robin: And open the door moving… 
 
Igor: 
Inside… 
 
Robin: Deep inside… 
 
Igor: 
The house… 
 
Robin: Welcomes you… 
 
Igor: 
Friendly… 
 
Robin: With that familiar feeling… 
 
Igor: 
Something important here… 
 
Robin: Is waiting for you… 
 
Igor: 
Find the right room… 
 
Robin: And in that room what waits for you… 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
98 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
Igor: 
Is a person… 
 
Robin: A storyteller… 
 
Igor: 
Of great renown… 
 
Robin: And great importance for you… 
 
Igor: 
There’s a comfortable chair… 
 
Robin: Because they have… 
 
Igor: 
Right over there. 
 
Robin: A story for you now as you sit down comfortably in that chair… 
 
Igor: 
And really listen… 
 
Robin: To the story… 
 
Igor: 
Really listen… 
 
Robin: The storyteller has to tell you. 
 
Igor: 
And understand… 
 
Robin: And whether you hear the story completely… 
 
Igor: 
Sense it… 
 
Robin: Or drift into a dream in which you see it… 
 
Igor: 
Or just know… 
 
Robin: And feel that you’re… 
 
Igor: 
And experience this… 
 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
99 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
Robin: Receiving the gift of the seed, the beginning of something that can continue to 
grow… 
 
Igor: 
So rest comfortably… 
 
Robin: In that place… 
 
Igor: 
And as we’re silent for a while, really experience that story… 
 
Robin: You’re told… 
 
Igor: 
In the right way… 
 
Robin: By the right person… 
 
Igor: 
Now. And you can experience anything you wish with great comfort. 
 
Robin: And whether you know what you’ve heard, or whether you forget for now to 
remember… 
 
Igor: 
Like a dream… 
 
Robin: The message the storyteller tells… 
 
Igor: 
Things can fade… 
 
Robin: Will continue to resonate within you… 
 
Igor: 
Or be clear, a comfortable chair in a room… 
 
Robin: To work inside… 
 
Igor: 
To remind you of an experience… 
 
Robin: As you begin to hear the call… 
 
Igor: 
The fading memory of a dream… 
 
Robin: You know the way home, don’t you? 
 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
100 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
Igor: 
Out the door, down the steps, a clearing in a forest… 
 
Robin: And all the way back home  
 
Igor: 
Path or…. 
 
Robin: A flight… 
 
Igor: 
Because you’ve had… 
 
Robin: Just as much time as you need… 
 
Igor: 
To realize that every night you dream… 
 
Robin: And sleep… 
 
Igor: 
And in those dreams, things of importance happen. 
 
Robin: And everything you’ve learned today… 
 
Igor: 
Gets to be reviewed… 
 
Robin: And repeated… 
 
Igor: 
Integrated… 
 
Robin: In new and starling ways… 
 
Igor: 
So that each morning when you awaken… 
 
Robin: You won’t know how… 
 
Igor: 
Something important did occur… 
 
Robin: And you won’t know when… 
 
Igor: 
You’ll realize what that was… 
 
Robin: But you can… 
 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
101 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
Igor: 
As a person awakens… 
 
Robin: Imagine just how good you’ll feel… 
 
Igor: 
When those eyes finally do open… 
 
Robin: And you begin to realize that you can… 
 
Igor: 
Come back and awaken all over now… 
 
Robin: In the satisfaction of having done a great job of getting through a lot of work 
today. I don’t know about you, but we thought we had a lot of material to cover 
today and we weren’t sure whether we were going to be able to deal with all of 
that.  
 
 
I know that you’re all going to have questions, and there are some things that 
won’t be clear for you yet, but as you process over the next 12 hours, you can 
ask us tomorrow when you return. 
 
Igor: 
Thank you very much everyone. See you in the morning. 
 
Robin: Give yourselves a round of applause. Well done. I’m very impressed. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
102 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
DVD 4 – How To Turn Any Story Into A Truly 
Transformational Tale 
 
 
Q&A Session 
 
 
Robin: 
Good morning. I was just going to stay asleep until you poked me. 
 
Igor: 
Now that we’ve woken the beast, can we have some assistance with 
microphones? As we promised you yesterday, we want to start off today with 
a Q&A session.  
 
 
You can reflect on the experiences you had yesterday or any questions you 
have about it, realizing of course we’re just starting the second day of a three 
day training. What have noticed? 
 
Student: I noticed that as I was reflecting on the stories this morning and last night that 
my memories that I turned into stories, the stories all have a different point of 
view, a different narrative than it was when it was just a memory. That’s very 
interesting because now I can see my parents’ views on some things or my 
friends’ views or whatever. 
 
Igor: 
There are a couple of things to address there, which I think are of great 
importance. The first one is now you really understand what we mean by re-
membering something. That’s really what a memory is. You remember it. 
You’re pulling it together out of constitutional parts. However you are as a 
person when you recall something or actually remember it, you’ll alter the 
memory to fit that. 
 
 
That also brings up the second part of it, which is as you remember stories, 
both tragedies and comedies – in the technical sense, comedies being happy 
stories and tragedies being sad ones – you’ll alter them. They’ll change for you 
and that’s a very useful thing.  
 
 
Doug Lipman, the storyteller, has a very wise comment that there are 
essentially two or three kinds of stories you will tell.  

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
103 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
1. You tell stories that you need to hear. 
 
 
You know those are stories you need to hear because when you tell them – 
and it doesn’t matter if you tell it to one friend or to a group – you’ll find 
strong emotions coming out of you. At times you may even have to pause the 
story to be able to complete it.  
 
2. Then there are the stories that they need to hear. 
 
 
You never quite know why you know they need to hear it but you do. Recall 
Doug Lipman is a great storyteller. He’s not a therapist and he has no 
therapeutic training experience or anything like that.  
 
 
Whenever he tells a story to a group, invariably he either changes something 
he had already planned – either the story or the way he defines a story – and 
invariably at the end of the evening someone comes up to him and says how 
did you know that I needed to hear that story, or how did you know that story 
was about me – or words to that effect. 
 
 
I have no idea how that works. I’ve had lots of examples of that in my own 
therapeutic practice, although of course I try to get to the point where they 
say how did you know?  
 
 
I know that Robin has had the same kind of experiences, but those are the 
two most important stories you’ll tell – the ones you tell for yourself because 
you grow, and the ones you tell for other people because somehow you have 
a sense that this is an important story to tell at this point. You won’t always 
know which type of story it is until you’ve finished. 
 
Robin: 
I hear quite a few examples of people saying I had this experience, but it’s not 
really a story, like the most exciting thing that happened to me was I jumped 
off a really high cliff and it was just an amazing experience to feel that fear 
and then to jump and hit the water 80 feet below, not knowing what I was 
going to feel like. 
 
 
That’s an experience. As an emotional elicitation story, you can imagine 
eliciting fear and anticipation and all of those things through that story. 
However, in the sense that we’re talking about stories here – stories that have 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
104 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
a beginning, a  middle and an end, having a hero and an antagonist, etc. – it 
doesn’t have those. Not immediately obviously.  
 
 
The tool that we gave you yesterday and the tools that we’ll give you today 
are ways of taking that memory and transforming it and giving it a different 
shape. If I just relate that experience, then it’s just an experience. If I frame it 
like I was always afraid of heights until XYZ, and then showing me how ABC – 
as Igor said, it’s not what happened. It’s what we make of it and how we use 
it. 
 
 
The act of storytelling is lying. Memory is lying because we can never capture 
the whole truth of an experience. Even if we could capture our whole truth, 
that would still only be one perspective on it and other people would see and 
hear it differently.  
 
 
Like for some psychotic reason, Igor has no ability to see the truth of the 
Bahamas.  
 
Igor: 
It saddens me that Robin really doesn’t understand what a dire position I 
helped him out of. 
 
Robin: 
It’s like he just has a mental block that stops him from seeing... 
 
Igor: 
I’m a good friend. And as long as I see him succeed after all the efforts I put 
into it. 
 
Robin: 
… what he really needs. There you go. 
 
Igor: 
I can accept that. Thank you. Who’s next?  
 
Student: When we were anchoring stories into the roots, I tried it before and it was 
very hard to visualize, but this time it was much easier to visualize and really 
play with these concepts. Why was it easier this time?  
 
Igor: 
I have one word for you – hypnosis. You have become a very capable hypnotic 
subject. You’ve done a lot of training in that sense, and your unconscious 
mind is going oh I get it, sure I’ll do this.  
 
 
Memory is fundamentally an unconscious process. Even if you use memory 
tricks, all those memory tricks are designed to do is to stimulate the 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
105 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
unconscious mind into recalling it by a mechanism that it’s predisposed to 
recall.  
 
 
For example for survival reasons, all human beings – and some will challenge 
this to some degree – but as a rule people have an excellent spatial memory 
so that you can go running around in the forest and understand that this tree 
and that tree are different and orient because of it.  
 
 
Otherwise we would just be lost and saying all right I went for a pee, and 
where the heck is everyone now. I don’t know. We have a very strong 
memory for locations, and by using locations to attach things to, we’re just 
basically going into a sub-routine, a program that the unconscious already 
runs and says okay you’re running this show anyway, so let’s just put 
something useful there too. 
 
 
As a rule, the more you develop that relationship with your unconscious mind, 
the more powerful your memory will be. At some point, I may actually do a 
whole week seminar just on memory stuff, but if you really want to see that 
you have to send lots of emails in because the more people ask for stuff, the 
more likely I can get it through my conscious filter called Cliff. 
 
Robin: 
And also he’ll remember to do it. 
 
Igor: 
Yes, my memory is terrible. 
 
Robin: 
Just as a follow-on from that, if you really want to make these memories 
something that’s automatic for you that you can just bring to life as you’re 
inspired to do so by people, and then it’s about translation between sense 
systems. Take the visual memory and talk about it. Take what you can tell and 
see it. Make sure you feel both of those things.  
 
Igor: 
And tell the stories. As a rule of thumb in terms of how to go from short-term 
memory to medium-term memory to long-term memory, right now all the 
stories you did yesterday are medium-term memory, so they’re not locked in 
there yet. 
 
 
Those stories that you wish to lock in there follow a simple reset schedule. 
When you add a memory, 10 minutes later you review it. An hour later you 
review it and a day later, a week later, a month later, six months later and a 
year later.  

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
106 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
 
By the six-month to a year mark, that will become a permanent memory. In 
other words, it will no longer erase. You have to do a lot of distraction to 
erase those kinds of memories. That’s a very useful way of doing it. By 
reviewing it, I don’t mean you have to spend hours looking at it. It’s just 
literally mentally you can spend about five seconds just going yes, yes, yes and 
that little pause I had, that tells me that’s the one that I have to reinforce 
slightly. Then that’s it. You’re good to go. 
 
 
That’s the beauty of using the visual system as a starting point because it’s the 
fastest one. Then you add all the layers like Robin was talking about to enrich 
it. Are there any other questions or comments? 
 
Student: As you were talking this morning, we were talking about telling stories to one 
another. What occurred to me was a story that I told myself in the early 
1990’s because I had a situation.  
 
 
My mother killed herself. She shot herself in the head in a closet, and after 
that happened people always say if a child died – which I thank you for the 
child dying story – that you don’t have a future. You can’t imagine a future. 
 
 
In my case it was the same feeling, so I’ve told myself a story. We didn’t talk 
too much about the stories you tell yourself, but I told a story that I couldn’t 
see the future, but I was sure there were all these people with pinstripes 
shirts and white shirts with these really cool collars wearing jeans and loafers. 
 
 
They were like totally clear about the future. They were going to do the 
future. So I said what I’ll do is I’m just going to grab a hold of the back of one 
of their shirts and in five years I’ll wake up and I’ll be in a future. I didn’t know 
which one it was going to be or what it would look like, but the story worked 
really well and I did wake up.  
 
Igor: 
Thank you for sharing that. It’s a very powerful story. In fact, the story you 
just shared with us is probably one of the most powerful that you can tell. It’s 
the kind of story that shape the very fabric of our reality, and you’ve actually 
foreshadowed something that we’ll be coming onto tomorrow, which is these 
stories that we tell ourselves and these stories that people tell each other in 
groups and so on that fundamentally shape the fabric of our lives and the 
societies that we live in.  
 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
107 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
That’s something that we’ll come onto tomorrow, so thank you for sharing 
that. Just for everyone else, of course you can appreciate the story that you 
just heard is literally a life-changing one. It’s literally life and death for many 
people.  
 
 
Storytelling can be chit-chat, storytelling can be influential and storytelling can 
be something that starts and stops wars. It can be a very powerful thing, so 
thank you for sharing that. Are there any other questions?  
 
Monastery & Cat Stories Part 1 
 
Igor: 
In that case, let’s do some storytelling. There’s a man. He’s an advertising 
executive. He’s very busy and very good. He’s easily the top-ranking sales guy 
in the advertising agency. By that I mean clients are always lining up to work 
with this guy. People really love him. 
 
 
As things happen, he ends up becoming very busy. There’s a lot of work. For 
whatever reason, he gets consumed by working. He really loves it and he’s 
passionate about it, but then work starts developing a life of its own and 
sucking him further and further into it. 
 
 
At one point in time, he starts to get to the point where he starts burning out. 
He’s just feeling like something’s missing in his life. Years have passed and 
he’s lost touch with his friends. He’s been through two marriages. Something 
is missing here. 
 
 
His boss, who’s actually a good friend now because he’s the only person he’s 
been hanging out with really, comes in one day and says you’re a great 
advertising executive. You really are good at what you do, and I can tell that 
of late your work has been suffering. It’s still genius compared to everyone 
else we’ve got, but I can see that you’re not in a good place right now. 
 
 
He says I think as a friend I’m going to do something that is going to be useful 
to you, but you’re not going to like it very much. I’m going to force you to take 
a sabbatical. You’re going to take off three or four weeks. You may not come 
to work. You may not take anything from work. You’re just going to go and 
live life. Go crazy. Go on a world tour. Go join a rock band. Do something. 
 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
108 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
Of course the man doesn’t like this idea at all. He’s lost. He’s like one of these 
prisoners who spend their entire life in prison and when they get released 
they don’t know how to make sense of the world. He’s a little frightened but 
his boss being true to his word as a security guard standing by his desk so that 
he can’t collect any work.  
 
 
The security guard escorts him out and he drives home. The first night he’s 
sitting at home thinking what the heck do I do with myself? First he does all 
the things he told himself he would do. He watches late night TV. He drinks 
beer. He watches some more TV and drinks some more beer. He wakes up the 
next day with hangover saying what the heck do I do with myself? 
 
 
 
Somewhere along the lines he gets the idea that he ought to just get in his car 
and just drive and just see where he ends up. So, he gets into his car and he 
starts driving. He’s got a big bottle of water and a sandwich in case something 
happens. He has a tank full of gas and he’s got a little sports bag in the back 
with some clothing and that’s it – no phone, no laptop, nothing. He just 
drives. 
 
 
He’s playing music on the radio and he’s starting to enjoy himself. He’s driving 
all day and it starts getting towards evening and the sun is starting to set. He’s 
starting to get really tired because he’s been driving all day. He’s having a 
good time but now the adventure is starting to wear a bit thin.  
 
 
He can’t turn back – although he wants to – because it would take just as long 
to get back. So, he starts to look out for a motel or a town where he can stay, 
but there’s nothing. He’s in the middle of open country and there’s really 
nothing around.  
 
 
As the sun starts to set, he starts to get a little desperate because he really 
needs to stay somewhere and the last thing he wants to do is sleep in a 
cramped car in the middle of nowhere. 
 
 
As he’s driving, he sees a little hillside, like a small mountain or a tall hill – take 
you pick of what you call it – and on top of this there’s this old ramshackled 
building, kind of like a monastery or something. There’s a light sparkling 
because now it’s starting to get towards nighttime. 
 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
109 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
He thinks to himself, maybe it’s a hotel. Maybe it’s one of those freaky retreat 
type places. I’ll take a risk. At the very least, they’ll have a parking lot I can 
stay in.  
 
 
So, he drives around all the winding roads and gets lost a few times, but 
there’s that light up on the hill. Luckily it’s right at the top of the hill, so he 
backtracks and goes around the other side. He’s a little bit lost and after 
about an hour or so, he gets to this monastery and it’s now pitch black. 
 
 
The stars are out. There’s no moon. It’s dark. It’s probably around 10:00 or 
11:00 o’clock at night. He gets out of his car and goes up to this huge wooden 
gate. You know those gates with a little gate inside of it, a little door like man-
sized and then the other one is for very big people? 
 
 
He knocks on this door and there’s no response, so he bangs on the door and 
you can hear the booming sound of the wood going through what is obviously 
a very large corridor or a hallway behind it. 
 
 
There’s no reply, so he bangs again. He’s just about to turn around to get back 
in his car and just crash in the back seat, when he hears a little shuffling 
coming along and some clanking of keys. It takes a while but eventually 
there’s the clanking of keys and the door clicks open, and there’s a little old 
monk in his brown habit. 
 
 
He looks up with kindly eyes and says yes my son, what can I do for you? The 
man explains his situation and says I’ve been driving all day and I’m trying to 
look for a place to stay. There’s nothing around here.  
 
 
The monk is nodding his head and he’s very sympathetic. The man says can I 
just stay for one night here? I’m sorry to intrude but I’ll pay you lots of cash. 
The monk says oh no, payment is not important to us, but really it’s not the 
way of our order to allow strangers to stay here. 
 
 
The man says oh please just one night, I’ll be gone tomorrow and you won’t 
even know I’ve been here. The old man says all right but I have to talk to the 
father abbot first, so please give me a moment. He shuts the door and there’s 
this loud noise. Slowly he shuffles off again. 
 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
110 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
The man’s waiting for ages and thinking maybe the old man has fallen asleep 
somewhere, but eventually he hears the shuffling again and the keys start 
clinking again and he gets a little excited.  
 
 
The door clicks open and the old man opens the door again and next to him is 
standing another man who’s also old – not quite as old as the doorkeeper. 
He’s kind of that age that is dignified. There’s strength to it. He introduces 
himself as the abbot of this Abbey. He says I understand that you want to stay 
here for the night. I know that Father Gregory here explained to you that we 
don’t normally let strangers into our order.  
 
 
We’re a very special order and we have a very unique task in this world, and 
really it’s not for most people but we can’t turn people away in need, that’s 
part of our mandate is to help those in need. So, you may stay here for one 
night but there is a condition and you must accept this condition without 
reserve; otherwise, you may as well just turn around, get in your car and drive 
somewhere else. 
 
 
The man’s a little desperate now, so he says anything, whatever you say. The 
abbot says all right, we’ll give a room. It will be a simple room. It will just be a 
monk’s room, with a palette, a bed and a pitcher of water. You must promise 
that when you get into this room, you will not leave it until the sun rises. You 
may not leave this room for any reason until the sun rises. 
 
 
The man says of course, I’ll happily do that. The abbot says there’s one other 
thing. No matter what you hear tonight, no matter what it is, no matter what 
you think it is, you need to know two things.  
 
 
The first thing is you will always be safe. No matter what you hear and no 
matter what happens, you are 100% safe. Do not leave your room, and please 
do not ask us about that because not being part of our order and not being a 
monk like us, I cannot tell you. 
 
 
The man says okay that’s no problem, that’s fine, whatever you say. So, he 
gets led to his sleeping quarters. It’s a simple palette. There’s a little table 
with a pitcher of water and an old-fashioned bed pan underneath the bed in 
case he has to go to the loo in the middle in the night. 
 
 
The man is exhausted and falls asleep. Just as he’s falling asleep he hears a 
little click locking the door that he’s just come in, which he thinks is very 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
111 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
strange. At one minute past midnight, there is the most disturbing sound. It’s 
impossible to describe. It’s as though a soul is being tortured. It sounds sad 
and mad. It sounds like all the grief in the world combined with all the terror. 
 
 
The man sits bolt upright in spite of how tired he is and he’s sweating. The 
sound continues for six hours until just when the first rays of sun peek over 
the hill and kind of crack over the monastery. Literally the moment that first 
little crack of sunlight strikes the monastery, it just turns off like someone 
switched off a light switch. The man is exhausted and terrified. He’s shaking in 
his bed but eventually fatigue takes over and he falls asleep.  
 
Robin: 
That’s funny. That reminds me of something.  
 
Igor: 
I thought it would. 
 
Robin: 
We’ll get started on the seventh category of story. Actually, what it reminds 
me of is that feeling of being trapped in a room. I had that just a couple of 
weeks ago.  
 
 
How it started was there was this cat and it’s been hanging out in my back 
garden for ages. I was kind of ignoring it because I was hoping it would stop 
pooping in my garden and stop killing the birds and stuff like that. Are there 
any cat lovers in the room?  
 
Igor: 
No puppies were harmed in the making of this video. Cats I don’t know about. 
 
Robin: 
I like cats. To be honest I’ve started to feel quite affectionate towards this cat 
because it was always around my house. It kept coming in. But at the same 
time I was putting down chili powder and throwing catnip into the neighbor’s 
garden just to try to get the cat to move on. 
 
 
Anyway my upstairs neighbor comes down to visit and we’re sitting out in the 
garden. She’s stroking this cat and she says oh my God this cat is starving. 
Have you noticed how thin it is? She said you can feel its bones through its 
fur. It’s all fur basically and the fur isn’t in good condition. It was obviously a 
black cat at some point, that kind of dark, very brown, almost black color but 
it’s kind of gone ginger, which is apparently a sign of bad nutrition. 
 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
112 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
It hasn’t got a collar on. I know that it’s been hanging around the back garden 
for at least the last couple of years. My neighbor, Anna, was going you have to 
feed this cat. Why aren’t you feeding it? It’s clearly starving.  
 
 
I said no because then it will just keep coming back. In the end, I think about it 
for a couple of days and decide to buy it a tin of Kit-Kat, oh no Whiska’s, cat 
food. You can tell I’m a big animal lover. I like the wild ones. So I opened the 
can of cat food and lay it out for it. It’s straight there wolfing it down, clearly 
starving, the poor thing. I thought obviously it’s a starving cat.  
 
 
I was passing a pet shop a bit later and I don’t know why but I found myself 
back home with a hair brush and a little mouse for it to play with. Anyway I 
suppose I’m adjusting to the new life. It seems like I’ve adopted this cat now. 
 
 
The next day there’s a knocking on my door. I go to the front door and there’s 
this huge guy dressed in motorcycle leathers standing there saying did you 
feed my cat? Are you trying to steal my cat? That cat has got diabetes. You 
could kill it. Oops. You really don’t want to feed diabetic cats food that is rich 
in sugar and carbohydrates because for one thing they can’t digest it, and 
secondly their blood sugar levels start going up and down and they could die. 
 
 
I’m not feeling too bad about this to be honest because I fed a starving cat 
that looked like a stray. I subtly suggest that perhaps a collar that says don’t 
feed me because I’m diabetic might be useful.  
 
 
But his attitude is we’ve never had any problems around here. That cat’s 19 
years old, I’ve looked after it for 19 years. Don’t you understand? Would you 
like me to bring my vet bills round for you is that what you want? Maybe you 
want to share them with me? I’m thinking I’m really sorry I fed your cat. I 
didn’t understand the situation. I won’t do it again.  
 
 
So, I get back to work but now I’ve got this really uncomfortable feeling 
because the cat’s not going away. It’s still sitting in my back garden and now 
I’m thinking oh my God, now this big motorcycle guy is attached to the cat. If I 
reach out to stroke the cat, he’ll say did you stroke my cat? Did you?  
 
 
Now I’m starting to feel a bit tense in my own place about using my back 
garden. This is really unfair. We really don’t have time for this now, do we? 
That was just indulgent of me. Please forgive me.  
 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
113 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
Transformational Stories 
 
Robin: 
So, you were asking about the seventh category of stories. The seventh 
category that we’re going to look at today is: 
 
→ Transformational stories, stories about transformation, stories that 
inspire transformation. 
 
 
You may have noticed that these categories that we’re giving you are not 
clear cut and obviously, as Milton Erickson demonstrated so effectively, one 
story can serve many purposes.  
 
 
The situations and the events that you’ve been describing in your stories, 
when you apply that model of five elements to them, that’s one way that that 
memory kind of gets shaped and morphed and changed more towards that 
shape that we recognize unconsciously as the shape of the story. 
 
 
Today I’m going to give you another model. It’s really simple. There are three 
phases: 
 
1. Beginning 
2. Middle  
3. End 
 
 
 
In the beginning was the word. The word made flesh. Oh, that’s a different 
story.  
 
 In the beginning section, you clearly articulate the problem or 
challenge or question.  
 
 In the middle section, you demonstrate or explain the struggle. You 
get them feeling the struggle, the journey.  
 
 In the end, you present the moment of awareness that leads to 
transformation. 
 
 
Someone was asking me about this yesterday. Somebody was pointing out 
that if you look at a film, what typically happens is somewhere in the 
beginning section they will outline the hero’s flaw, what it is that the hero 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
114 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
needs to overcome. Then they’ll leave it and there will all kinds of other things 
going on, other elements, and they play jeopardy right until the end.  
 
 
Then right at the end, you’ll have a success against the antagonist, and then 
the big villain will come back and Spider Man will be just about to get it and 
then suddenly right at the end there will be the moment where the hero 
overcomes his flaw and that’s the strength, the awareness that enables him 
then to be the victor, to triumph, to transform. 
 
 
Any story that you have can become that kind of story ultimately. It’s in the 
passion that you tell it, in the way that you tell it and in the way that you draw 
people in. It’s in the relevance of the story you choose to the audience that 
you tell. Do you have an example of one of those? 
 
Igor: 
Well, I never used to be very good at telling stories. I didn’t think I was. Of 
course going through things like hypnosis, NLP, my own trance training and so 
on, stories are kind of demanded of you. It’s part of what you’re supposed to 
do.  
 
 
 
I remember before I chose this sort of thing as a career, believe it or not if you 
take every possible element of uselessness as far as public speaking goes and 
put it in one person, that pretty much defines me.  
 
 
I recall as a junior lawyer I was sent to the Frankfurt office. They had a thing 
with a time at a local university where one of the lawyers would go in every 
year and present two segments on English law. Of course the office gets very 
busy and there’s a lot of stuff going on, so invariably it gets delegated to the 
most junior member who can’t really say no, because you can see the ball 
tumbling- no, no, no you do it. All right. 
 
 
Of course, they said it should be very easy because the lecture’s already been 
outline by a previous lawyer who’d been there a few years ago. They said 
don’t worry. He’s written the two lectures out for you already word for word. 
He’s even put the jokes in, so you’ve just got to turn up and read. You can see 
where this is going, right? So, I turn up and there’s this room full of students 
and they have an open-ended square, boardroom style, and they’re all very 
serious sitting there looking at me. 
 
 
In Germany, of course, students tend to be a lot older than in England 
because their law program gets extended. So, they’re all pretty much my age 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
115 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
and some are actually a little older than me because they’re all doing their 
Master’s and stuff like that. They’re very serious about understanding British 
law because they’ll have to deal with international at some point, right? 
 
 
So, here I am reading my notes and going through it and trying my best, 
because this was the first time I’d actually read this stuff and I’m doing my 
best to actually make sense of the sentence. Okay, there’s a joke and there’s 
the punch line. Then I carry on reading. I’m sweating profusely. At the end of 
the seminar, they’re polite enough to knock on the table. That’s the way they 
applaud goes – I hope. Maybe it’s just get out.  
 
Robin: 
Did they put a black cat on at the same time? 
 
Igor: 
Yes, they got the sticks and started dipping them in pitch. 
 
Robin: 
Grab the feathers. 
 
Igor: 
It wasn’t my proudest moment. Really, my career as a presenter pretty much 
ended there. Something happened. I started doing hypnosis trainings and 
NLP, training to be a professional presenter. Somewhere along the lines, I 
heard many different hypnotic stories, training stories and all kinds of stuff, 
and they kind of seeped in. 
 
 
I used to love just hearing them. I could sit there for hours. In fact I did. As 
part of my learning process – this will date me a little bit – I would get the 
audio tapes of my favorite instructors or the people I was admiring, and I 
would listen to those audio tapes. Some of them actually wore out. 
 
 
This also dates me. This is when mini discs became the hot new thing. I was 
one of the first people to actually have a mini disc player. I’d transcribe these 
fading tapes onto mini discs. They’ve long since died in case anyone’s 
wondering. 
 
 
I would listen to them and my favorite part would always be the stories, 
which is ironic because it’s the bit that I didn’t think I could do. I did my 
trainer’s training and of course part of it is you’ve got to create lots of stories 
to prepare people for whatever training segments you’re doing and so on, and 
I always thought my stories were a bit weak. 
 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
116 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
I kind of did them perfunctorily. I just say yeah they’re on the checklist that 
they’re looking for, so I’ll just throw them out. I won’t really think much of it. 
People were very nice, but then of course they’re taught to be nice in terms of 
feedback, so I didn’t think much of it. I still didn’t think I was doing much in 
terms of storytelling. 
 
 
Anyway I did pretty well in the trainer’s training. I enjoyed it and got my 
certificate. I’m actually allowed to stand on a stage now. I have permission. 
Then at some point not long after this, I got it into my head that maybe this 
would be an alternative career that I’d like to get into, the idea of teaching 
people things – either as a hypnotherapist, a coach or a trainer.  
 
 
They were all kind of tumbling around in my mind, so I experimented with all 
sorts of approach. The very first thing that I did after coming back to the U.K. 
was I arranged for one of these practice groups.  
 
 
You know how they have hypnosis practice groups and NLP practice groups? I 
arranged to go there and teach an evening class, like an hour and a half hour 
class for free, just to get my training skills going. 
 
 
Of course part of those training skills is telling stories and whatnot. I figured 
I’d invite my father down so that he could see what I was planning to do 
because he already knew I’d handed my resignation in, so he knew I was in 
my notice period. 
 
 
He was very concerned but also very supportive. He always said go for it, do it 
if you really need to. Of course I suspect the fact that my law firm said that my 
job is open to me if I ever needed to come back did help matters. It definitely 
helped me. 
 
 
So, I turned up and I started doing this thing. It was a very simple seminar on 
flow states and states of peak performance. Of course to bring it all out, I had 
to tell lots of stories to get people into the mood and to really understand 
what it would feel like. It went pretty well. People clapped. There were about 
20 people in the room, including my dad. 
 
 
They clapped and they were very nice. They shook my hand afterwards and 
said thank you very much. I thought that’s nice. It was better than the last 
time I’d stood on a stage. 
 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
117 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
That night I went to dinner with my father. It was a simple dinner, and he said 
something to me that really charmed me and that really actually made me 
feel very good.  
 
 
He said Igor, when you told me that you were leaving the law firm to find 
another career, I’ve always supported you but I’ll tell you right now that I was 
a little concerned. I thought you were a little bit nuts but after seeing the 
looks on those people’s face tonight, I have no more doubts. I don’t think it 
was until then that I realized I could tell stories. Did you mean something like 
that? 
 
Robin: 
Yes, fantastic. Thank you. It was not bad for a beginner. One of the things that 
I’m really clear on in my coaching is that if you want to tell extraordinary 
stories that touch people’s lives, then you have to be extraordinary.  
 
 
You have to go out and do extraordinary things. Put yourself in situations 
where you take risks, where you allow the universe to present you with the 
opportunities to transform. 
 
 
Many of the stories that I tell are moments like that. However, they’re not all. 
We don’t always go through life having those moments every day, and it’s 
useful to be able to construct a story because you know you want to say 
something, and you have something to say that will be useful. 
 
 
You think how can I tell this? How can I explain this journey that I’m going on, 
and make it into a transformational story? I’ve had a running joke with Randy, 
who’s just left the building, so let’s talk about him while he’s gone.  
 
 
Basically I started a few days ago telling a story. It was the one about my mate 
ringing me up just before he went to the poker game. This was a genuine 
thing that happened. He came to see me before he went to a poker game. I 
had a conversation with him. I did a little bit of messing. He’s a friend and it’s 
what I do for a living. 
 
 
He came back the next week and he said I won 50 quid. I haven’t won 
anything for two years and I won 50 quid that night. Please can I come round 
again before I go play poker tonight? I told that story to the assistants. That’s 
right, I told it to you first a while back? I did the one sentence version of the 
story and it got a laugh from Igor because he’s quick enough to get it 
straightaway. 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
118 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
 
I wanted to illustrate that it goes back to this idea of artistry, the interplay 
between conscious mind and unconscious mind. What I will do a lot with 
stories is tell them and fail and not worry about it. I just say oh well that one 
didn’t work, so I’ll try it again on somebody else or maybe if I tried this.  
 
 
I’ll just try it and see what responses I get. Sometimes I get a laugh, and 
sometimes I don’t and then I never talk to them again. Not really. That’s just 
part of the process of refining and telling stories.  
 
What I’m going to do is I’m going to very quickly see if I can create one of 
these live from something that I’ve never thought about before.  
 
Igor: 
Let’s give him a round of applause for that, folks. 
 
Robin: 
I have a sense of something that I want to articulate, and it’s actually about 
being on stage and going out there and training and being successful. That’s 
the general area, and I’ve got some thoughts about the journey but it’s not 
very clear. 
 
 
The beginning is when Igor finally persuaded me after much cajoling and 
frankly bribery and flattery, and blackmail at one point – you did delete those 
images, didn’t you? 
 
Igor: 
Maybe. 
 
Robin: 
I better make this a good story. So, I flew into the Bahamas and the thing is 
for the last three or four years I’ve very much been kind of just running my 
little private clinic, seeing clients who were referred to me, and keeping a low 
profile. 
 
 
The thing is back when I was in my 20’s when I was much younger, I ran a 
theater company that was very successful doing what it did. It wasn’t 
nationally successful or anything like that, but in the town where I live it was 
the biggest thing going and hundreds of people came through that theater 
company and got their start in theater, and I realized that what I was good at 
was creating a safe space for people to learn from each other and from their 
mistakes, and have a good time going it.  
 
 
But there were elements of my success that I really didn’t like. While I love it 
when you laugh and I love it when you clap and come up and tell me how 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
119 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
great I am, at the same time I was Mr. Shakespeare in the park in those days 
and that meant that everyone and anyone involved in the town thought they 
could say what they liked about me. 
 
 
They thought that they knew me because I had a public face, and that meant 
that I attracted all kinds of weirdo’s. It meant that I attracted stories that were 
inspired by jealousy and envy. Oh he’s this and he’s that.  
 
 
That’s all this kind of dark. My friend calls it an egregore. It’s like a dark spirit 
made up of all the gossip and the bad rumors that people spread about you 
and these can kind of follow you around. You’ve notice that, right Igor? 
 
Igor: 
It comes with the territory. 
 
Robin: 
Then there was the other thing, whenever I would start a relationship with 
somebody; I never knew whether it was me they really liked or whether it was 
because I was that guy and could help them in their career or something like 
that. 
 
 
Those things bothered me because I’m actually quite a private person in lots 
of ways. I like my family. I like spending time in my garden, hanging out with 
my daughter and going for walks. I didn’t really have the energy or the 
motivation to want to go out there and do that. 
 
 
 
As Igor said, I spent a lot of time just saving the world one person at a time, 
and this was a real struggle for me. Check. I spent a lot of time practicing 
Buddhist meditation and trying to become unattached from my ego, and I 
always thought that you needed a lot of ego to be that guy who stands up on 
that pedestal and says look at me, I’m great, I can teach you all what to do. 
 
Igor: 
No bearing on me. 
 
Robin: 
In the Bahamas, I talked to Igor. I talked to the guys who were there. I was still 
really struggling with this and struggling just for a way to see my way clear to 
being able to go out there and be more energetic and productive in my work 
because I have a daughter now, so that’s extra motivation. 
 
 
It wasn’t until coming here actually that things really changed. It wasn’t 
anything that Igor said or did, although seeing just how focused he was the 
entire time on your learning and just how dedicated he keeps his state of H++ 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
120 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
when dealing not just one-on-one but with the whole aspect the way he runs 
his training. 
 
 
Well, that might have given me a little idea that you could do these things 
without being too egotistical, but what really transformed it for me actually 
was listening to you guys and your stories and hearing not just the skills that 
you’ve learned, but hearing from so many people how what you’d learned 
had touched your lives individually in a deeply personal way and helped you 
to make transformations in your lives. 
 
 
And that had come about through learning this stuff and through doing it. It 
wasn’t because Igor sat you down and did a session with you or anything like 
that. It was because he introduced you to some ideas and some ways of 
thinking that you were then able to take and apply in your own lives.  
 
 
 
I suddenly realized that there was a way that you can affect people really 
deeply by the message that you share with people. There is a teacher called 
Ramdas, who was originally a college professor at Harvard or MIT. Anyway he 
was Timothy Leary’s boss when Timothy Leary was still an acceptable 
established member of the scientific community, rather than the most 
dangerous man in the world. 
 
 
Ramdas went off to India and became a guru, and I’ve got a tape of him in 
1979 standing up in front of a group of people. He says it’s my karma to do 
this. What you make of it, that’s your karma. 
 
 
So, transformational stories – beginning, middle and end – it’s time for an 
exercise, wouldn’t you say? I think so. 
 
Igor: 
Do you get the idea?  
 
Robin: 
Find a partner and either come up with a new experience, something that’s 
happened to you, or take one of the stories that you’ve already come up with, 
and see how just pulling out those five elements and looking at that structure 
there helps to just really shape that into a transformational story. 
 
Igor: 
If it helps you to do this, you may find it easier if you think of a specific 
context. In particular think of a specific person that you would like to 
transform or inspire in some way and think about your own experiences in 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
121 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
life. What have you been through that if they had gone through something 
similar might give them a sense of where to take things next in their own life? 
 
 
The more specific you make it, the easier it is to actually attach content to it. 
If you want to just see where your mind takes you, then that’s fine too. Does 
everyone understand what to do? Let’s give you five minutes apiece, so 10 
minutes in total, to explore the idea a little bit. 
 
 
Just note one thing. It doesn’t matter where it ends up. It doesn’t matter if 
you make it through this whole structure. At this point the journey’s more 
important than the destination. We’ll play with the destination more in due 
course. Off you go. 
 
 
How did the exercise go? Was it interesting? Who had a little more to say 
than they thought they would? Are there any comments or questions in terms 
of the exercise?  
 
Student: Gwen was giving me an amazing story and we got to the point where there 
was the struggle and it was a very long struggle. 
 
Igor: 
Sometimes they really are, aren’t they? 
 
Student: Yes, and it was struggling to the point where she basically said – if you don’t 
mind me sharing – she had a friend that was closed off and didn’t want to 
keep walking going to a restaurant.  
 
 
She couldn’t find one and she wanted to turn back, and she said wouldn’t it 
have been nice if she just made the decision and turned away but she didn’t? 
It felt like it was a huge hang and I let her know that. Then she closed it up 
with they found the restaurant and everything was okay. 
 
Igor: 
What you just experienced is your unconscious storyteller in action. It’s saying 
it’s not complete yet. There’s something missing here. That’s one of the 
reasons we tell stories out loud because they sound very different once we 
actually open our mouths and put them out there than they sound in our 
heads. 
 
 
I’ve told some phenomenal stories in my head. They don’t really work so well 
in real life. This is a useful thing. By the way, it’s not that the actual story 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
122 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
doesn’t work so well. It’s just that you need to adapt it to fit other people as 
well along the way. 
 
 
Well done. That’s really how you build stories from just events into something 
more powerful. Thank you. 
 
Robin: 
I have a follow-up question about that actually. It’s to you, Gwen. It’s your 
story, if you don’t mind. There was a moment there where you were faced 
with a decision. Do I turn my back and walk away and just say this isn’t worth 
the effort, or do you keep going? What is in there that makes her keep going? 
What is her process? 
 
Student: The process was that she wasn’t really aware of having a choice about it at 
that moment, and so she kept going but unwillingly.  
 
Robin: 
Did she have a good time at the end of it? Was it a happy story? 
 
Student: She had a hard time but it was totally unnecessarily so because the positive 
solution came at the end. 
 
Robin: 
Is the awareness and the realization, the fact that she has a choice about who 
she hangs out with? 
 
Student: Yes. 
 
Robin: 
When you’re clear about that, it makes it much easier to structure the story. 
Thank you. 
 
Igor: 
Who else? Suddenly there are no stories left in the room.  
 
Robin: 
You’re all so good. 
 
Student: I’d just like a bit of clarification. Yesterday you presented a model with five 
steps. This is another version. Is it just a simplification of yesterday’s model? 
 
Robin: 
Yesterday’s model had five elements, which I believe exist in most stories or 
certainly you can find them when you go looking. This is more time-based. 
This is more a time structure, so it’s different to that extent.  
 
Student:  Would you modify it to do the three steps? 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
123 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
Igor: 
They can occur at any and all three of those steps. Some will of course lend 
themselves more to the five elements. For example, awareness and 
transformation fit awareness and transformation quite nicely, but the hero 
will go throughout. 
 
Robin: 
And will be introduced in the beginning. The first step beginning hero creates 
empathy for… 
 
Igor: 
Yes, think of these as overlapping structures that you can put together and 
there will elements that will be one-to-one and there will be elements that 
just go across. 
 
Robin: 
They’re heuristics. They’re tools designed to get you thinking about the 
structure, but just go out and watch some movies and listen to some stories. 
People break the structure all the time, but it’s like with a great work of art.  
 
 
If Picasso had turned up at his first art class and said look, eyes on the side of 
their heads, people would have said oh dear no, be a lawyer. The famous 
lawyer Picasso. 
 
Igor: 
Or Gandhi. 
 
Robin: 
Yes. You can master some rules and then break them. 
 
Igor: 
Is everyone good with that exercise? What we want to do now is take this 
essence and help you to scale things. You’ve told your transformation story 
and it took about five minutes to get it out. Sometimes you rambled a bit 
more and sometimes it was relatively easy to get out and you just chit-
chatted afterwards. 
 
 
What we’d like you to do is tell the same story again to the same person, only 
do it in 30 seconds. We’re going to use this to help you to scale it down.  
 
Robin: 
One sentence. 
 
Igor: 
One sentence per beginning, middle and end. For example, I used to think 
that I as a terrible storyteller. (That’s my preframe.) I actually taught a law 
seminar to German students and it didn’t go very well. I used to listen to my 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
124 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
teachers and my trainers tell their stories. I loved them and felt totally 
inadequate that I couldn’t actually copy them and do the same thing as them. 
 
 
I went to a training and eventually I taught my very first live seminar to the 
paying public. My father turned up and he said some very nice things about 
me afterwards. Simple, 30 seconds, maybe an extra sentence or two.  
 
Robin: 
When I was younger, I experienced the downside of fame. I struggled to find a 
way to reach out to more people. Listening to your stories convinced me 
there was a way that I could do it that would be worth it. 
 
Igor: 
That was almost like Haiku. Do you get the idea? Just spend 30 seconds 
apiece. What we’d like you to do is with the same partner tell your story in 30 
seconds. Give them a chance to tell their story in 30 seconds.  
 
 
Then spend no more than a minute or so talking about what you just did, and 
then do it again based on the feedback you just got from the other person. So, 
that’s another 30 seconds to do the refined version. You’ll basically have three 
minutes in total. Off you go. 
 
 
Welcome back, everyone. How did that go? Was it easy? Who understands 
their story better now that you’ve been able to give a 30-second or a three-
sentence version, but you also have a five-minute or a longer version, right? 
Excellent. 
 
 
This idea of scaling up and down is another tool that you have to actually 
understand your stories, as well as being a tool for you to be able to fit the 
stories to the context that you’re in. Do you have a question? 
 
Student: I found out that both of us had the same experience, trying to squeeze it 
down into a 30-second sound bite, we just completely missed the emotional 
pull in the story. 
 
Igor: 
Yes it does. You’re right.  
 
Student: We just really couldn’t relate to each other’s story as well without some 
crucial details. 
 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
125 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
Igor: 
There are ways that you can scale down and still maintain that. There’s a 
famous story. Was it Hemmingway who did the three-word stories or 
something like that?  
 
 
I’ll have to paraphrase because I forget the actual version, but there was a 
competition amongst writers for who could write the shortest story. It was 
something like an ad in the paper – baby shoes, never worn.  
 
Robin: 
Yes, it was Hemmingway. 
 
Igor: 
There is strong emotion in that story, isn’t there? But it requires an immense 
amount of skill to bring that out. We don’t expect that of you at this level. All 
we expect you to be able to do is to be able to scale it up and down.  
 
 
Yes, the more you scale it down, the more the emotional components start 
eroding, but then you get other advantages like speed and timing, so you can 
throw a nice little pithy thing out there. 
 
 
If you really focus on it and really want to play with scaling stories up and 
down, you may well be able to create things like Hemmingway did, but it 
takes a lot of effort. I’m sure it took him a lot of effort to be able to create 
that very pithy little story, but yes it was a good thing to realize. 
 
Robin: 
Blaise Pascal originally wrote the famous quote that has been attributed to 
many people. “I’m sorry I didn’t have time to write you a shorter letter.” What 
we’ll be doing for the rest of the day after the morning session is looking at 
what you identified there. It’s all the hypnotic elements that create 
connection that help to build powerful sensory representations in your 
audience. 
 
 
Yes, by scaling down the structure, you’re losing all of that but what you’re 
creating and what you’re getting is the through line. Actors and writers talk 
about this a lot. What’s the through line of a character? What’s their 
narrative? What’s their drive? 
 
 
When you have that in place, then you’ve got that energy in the story and it’s 
a lot easier to then add in those elements that add emotional connection. 
Thank you for your question.  
 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
126 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
Igor: 
Really it’s having that clarity that allows you to realize which points to 
emphasize. 
 
Student: The young man here, I just love the way he took his story and brought it 
down, but it reminded me that when I was younger I had a minister who 
taught how to be able to take an idea or a story and bring it down to a minute 
to three minutes.  
 
 
He used to say I may never have another chance to impact our life, so you had 
to learn how to do those stories and to have the emotion in it. I was just so 
happy that it’s being taught here. 
 
Igor: 
It’s an important step. 
 
Robin: 
Listen to what this woman has to say. She’s a phenomenal storyteller.  
 
Student: I’m finding that with some people that I’ve spoke to, when they tell their 
stories they’re accessing the state and they’re in it while they’re telling it, 
whereas some people aren’t. How do you begin to enter the state? 
 
Igor: 
That is a great question. If you want to know the answer to that, then come 
back after the break. We’re going to do an exercise first, but that’s what we’ll 
be addressing after the break. That was a very important question. 
 
 
Let’s do this last exercise we promised you before the break. You’ve taken 
your transformational story and you’ve condensed it down into a 30-second 
sound bite or an overview.  
 
 
What I’d like you to do now is to choose one or two of the stories you told 
yesterday. Just scan them through your mind quickly. Select one or two of 
those and again put them through this structure and see if you can condense 
it down to about 30 seconds, three sentences each. 
 
 
Just present it very quickly. They’ll present theirs. You’ll present another one 
and they’ll present another one. Then we’ll take a break and then we’ll look at 
the performance elements that will allow you to take that and build it back up 
again with a glorious impact. 
 
Robin: 
Remember, these are scales. These are drills that help to train a way of 
thinking. It’s a conscious tool that you let go of as you gain more artistry. 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
127 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
Igor: 
Let’s take two minutes apiece, four minutes in total. Off you go. 
 
 
How did that go? Who understands some of the stories you told yesterday a 
bit better now? The value of scaling is 
 
 
1. When you only have a minute, you can tell it in a minute.  
 
2. It allows you to really understand the essence of what you’re trying to 
communicate so that when you start building it up again, you can 
actually build it up in the right direction rather than just foundering 
around and getting confused by your own facts. 
 
 
Unless there’s something you want to add, I think it’s time for a break. 
 
Robin: 
You have a whole bunch of stories now. You probably understand the 
mechanism of creating them. Don’t be surprised if you find yourself 
remembering stories, other relevant situations. Remember, this is an artificial 
situation. We’re asking you to generate stuff for no reason and in life that’s 
not how it works.  
 
 
We tell stories that are directly relevant to our immediate ongoing 
experience. Don’t be surprised if the stories that you’ve come up with 
become relevant somewhere along the line. 
 
Igor: 
That reminds me of something.  
 
Robin: 
Oh really? 
 
Igor: 
It’s time for a break. Let’s take 15 minutes. Thank you very much. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
128 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
DVD 5 – How To Combine Transformational 
Stories With Open & Nested Loops 
 
 
Monastery & Cat Stories 2 
 
Igor: 
For my next story, there’s a man who’s sitting in a monastery and he’s 
exhausted, falling asleep. When he wakes up it’s probably about mid-day now 
because he’s a nervous wreck. The door is unlocked. He finds it’s a beautiful 
sunny day and he’s walking through this monastery, and there’s a very 
peaceful vibe to the place.  
 
 
I don’t know if you’ve ever walked through a building that has that sort of 
experience, but he gets into this mood and he hears the sounds of monks 
outside where there’s a little patch of garden where they’re growing herbs 
and simple foods and so on. There are some monks working there while 
others are dealing with normal day-to-day routines like mopping the floors 
and cleaning up and so on. 
 
 
They all smile and are very friendly, and it feels like such a contrast to the 
craziness from the night before, but he made a promise to the father abbot, 
so he contains himself. Curiosity gets him and he can’t help it. The morning 
stretches out, actually the afternoon stretches out and it starts getting 
towards evening and the father abbot comes out and starts making the polite 
noises that it’s time to go now son. 
 
 
Of course the man full of awareness decides to ignore all the polite noises 
that are being made and pretends he’s not getting the hint. After a while the 
abbot comes out and says look son, you’ve been here now it’s time for you to 
move on we’re not a hotel. Get your stuff and peace be with you, enjoy your 
journey and enjoy your life.  
 
 
The man is desperate to find out and is using any angle he can get. He says 
look, I’ve told you my story I’ve been an executive and was close to burning 
out. My life is falling apart. My boss kicked me out for a month and I’m not 
even allowed back to work and not even allowed to touch anything related to 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
129 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
work. He said I should go out and find inner peace again and I have to say this 
place is so peaceful. 
 
 
This is healing to me. This is the best therapy I could have. Please, please let 
me stay just a little bit longer. This is good for my spirit. Of course the father 
abbot gets the saddest eyes and expression on his face. He looks at the man 
and knows what’s going on. He says it seems like you’ve thought about it my 
son, but remember our rules. You do not leave the room you’ve been 
assigned and no matter what you hear, no matter what happens, just 
remember you’re always safe.  
 
 
Please don’t ask us what’s happening because I can’t tell you, you’re not a 
monk. You’re not one of us. So the man makes his absolute promise, it’s fine 
and he’s allowed to stay. He’s excited now. Terrified but excited. He watches 
the sun lights sliding down the wall in the refectory window as it heads 
towards sunset and there’s a little ray of sunshine, which is when the monks 
go to bed.  
 
 
Notice there’s a curious thing that as the sunshine starts setting there’s a 
scurrying like people are in a hurry to get somewhere. The first monk, the old 
man who met him at the door, father Gregory, approaches him and says son 
the sun is setting it’s time for you to return to your chambers for 
contemplation and sleep. It is our way in this monastery. 
 
 
He goes okay, gets back to his cell and tries to go to sleep but he can’t. He 
can’t do it. Sure enough night carries on and he forgets and starts dozing a 
little bit away and catching himself. He needn’t have worried because at 
exactly one minute past midnight the craziest sound reverberates through the 
entire monastery. It sounds like agony and pain. It sounds like grief and 
despair.  
 
 
The man is terrorized. There are shivers going down his spine, a cold sweat 
breaks out on him and figments of his imagination start to rise and take life of 
their own. He’s wondering what the heck this thing could be. It reverberates 
he feels it in his bones. Six hours of this. Eventually the craziness ends and the 
first crack of dawn lifts above the mountainside and just as soon as it strikes 
the side of the monastery, silence. Complete peace.  
 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
130 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
The man is still shaking and terrified, burning with curiosity but terrified. It 
takes him an hour to calm down and then of course he’s so exhausted he falls 
asleep.  
 
Robin: 
I had a nice sleep once. I woke up the next day and I was making my coffee in 
the kitchen and what do I hear outside my backdoor?  
 
Group: 
Meow. 
 
Robin: 
Thank you.  
 
Igor: 
Integrated storytelling. 
 
Robin: 
Meow. Meow. Meow. Meow. Meow. Meow. Meow. This cat is back for more. 
He’s outside the door in the garden. I’m feeling a bit nervous to go in my own 
back garden, because not only have I got the cat now but then I’m frightened 
that if I stroke the cat that guy will get jealous basically, is what it amounts 
too. I’m in two minds. 
 
 
On the one hand this guy has managed to keep his cat alive for 19 years, 
which if you know cats is quite a result, especially a diabetic cat. On the other 
hand it’s an underweight cat, I’ve done the research. The first thing I hear this 
I go on the Internet and I’m typing away, cat diabetes, finding out and making 
sure I’m treating the cat right.  
 
 
I realize I can actually give it some water because they get very thirsty and 
he’s always licking water from the plant parts and things like that. It’s a bit of 
a quandary and I don’t quite know what to do. Every time I go back to the 
kitchen, meow. So this goes on for a bit and it gets quite intense because for a 
start, at the time, my kitchen ventilator was broken. So whenever I cooked, 
which is daily because I like good wholesome food every day, I had to open 
the kitchen door.  
 
 
I’d open the kitchen door, stick my chicken in the oven and the smells of 
roasting chicken would start to waft out through the neighborhood, and sure 
enough it was like I was inviting the cat round for dinner. If you were a cat 
that’s what you would assume, right? He’s clearly cooking chicken. He’s 
opened the door for me. So the cat comes in every time.  
 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
131 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
This guy and his visit round he’s going it’s very simple, you shouldn’t have fed 
it for a start. Anything you get from now on is your fault, because you 
shouldn’t have fed it. All you have to do is lift it up, put it out the door and 
he’ll soon get the message he’s not getting fed again. I’m like okay fine.  
 
 
After 15 times a day I’m thinking, this cats just not getting the message right? 
Maybe I’m not communicating with it right, I don’t know. That evening I’m in 
my house sitting in my living room doing a bit of work. The kitchen is off to 
the side and I hear a noise. I have a cat flap in my backdoor and I’ve taped it 
up. I keep hearing the noise. Meow.  
 
 
The cat is poking its head around the corner in the living. Hi cat, how you 
doing? I quite like this cat you know. It’s touched my affections. I’m feeling 
like there’s a little bit of a telepathic connection between us. He knows I like 
it. He knows I like it really and that I don’t want it to go. I just turn to it and 
say I’m sorry but you’re going to have to leave. The cat looks up at me, turns 
around and heads out of the kitchen out the cat flap. Great result! 
 
 
I’m communicating with this cat, we’re getting somewhere. I go back to the 
kitchen and tape up the cat flap multiple times. I just lost myself again, I’m 
sorry I’m being so indulgent. We have to do some… 
 
Igor: 
Exercises.  
 
Robin: 
… exercises. Sorry about that. We need to change the energy, change the 
mood.  
 
Igor: 
We do. 
 
Robin: 
You guys don’t want to sit here and listen to us tell stories all day. You have 
work to do.  
 
Igor: 
No, we’re in a workshop here. We have to do some work.  
 
Robin: 
Things to change. Have to get moving. Active. 
 
Igor: 
What’s all this wasted time telling stories? 
 
Robin: 
Get some energy there.  
 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
132 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
Gabe: 
What happened? 
 
Robin: 
Nice one Gabe. 
 
Igor: 
I think what we need to do now is to have everyone stand up and move their 
chairs to one side and then we’ll come back again. 
 
Story Crafting Exercise 
 
 
Robin: 
Let’s move those chairs. Storytelling is a performance skill, like hypnosis. I 
noticed watching some of you during the week that it was great, even though 
your subject or client had their eyes closed. Some of you were being really 
dramatic with your gestures and emphasizing those physical aspects of your 
communication, which is what we want to do now.  
 
 
Give your hands a little shake out to warm up a bit. Let your arms come into 
it. Roll your shoulders a bit. Do you know that sketch on The Big Bang Theory? 
There’s a bit in that where one of the actresses says to one of the geeks, no 
just move about, go in the flow, do what comes naturally and the guy is 
standing there. I am doing what comes naturally. This feels good. That feels 
weird.  
 
 
Arms shake a bit. Roll your shoulders. Just give your hips a bit of a wiggle. 
Come on bloaks, having some flexibility in your spine does not make you gay. 
Believe me the women in the audience will approve. Nicely warmed up. 
 
 
We’re going to do the first exercise that takes some of the games that we 
were playing yesterday but approaching it in a different way. What I’d like you 
to do; you remember the magic box right? You were taking things out of it, if I 
just passed Igor some thing and if he passed it back to me, some thing back to 
me. Meow. You get it?  
 
 
So, find a partner, start taking turns. I will interrupt you and ask you to change 
partners as you’re doing it, go. 
 
Igor: 
I think we need a bit more energy in the room so what we’re going to do now 
is to please walk around the room, point at things and in a loud and magical 
voice make them exist by telling them what they are. This is a carpet. This is a 
stage. This is a light. As fast, furious and as loud as you can be, go. 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
133 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
Robin: 
And stop. This time walk around the room pointing at things and saying what 
they are not. That’s a lobster. That’s a potato.  
 
Igor: 
Quick and speedy. 
 
Robin: 
That’s the sky. As fast as possible folks.  
 
 
Now, this time I’d like you to get into a group of three or four and take it in 
turns to mime out some action. One of you might begin… very simple. I want 
the next person to then come in and add something to it. That’s fine. That’s 
all. Go. 
 
Igor: 
Off you go. [Exercise starts] 
 
 
The next one will be quite a lot of fun. In this one you’re going to stay in the 
same groups, but you’re going to imagine that you’re a cat burglar in the most 
bizarre and unique museum in the world. There’s stuff in there that you 
would never expect to see in a museum or in a collectible store or whatever. 
You have to somehow clamor over the furniture, the obstacles in the way and 
the death rays which are very important to miss.  
 
 
From time to time you’ll find an interesting object that you can pass to 
someone else in the group, who is of course your fellow cat burglar, that has 
to first get to you to be able to take the object and re-appreciate it.  
 
Robin: 
You may add in an iteration. 
 
Igor: 
In other words, you can talk. 
 
Robin: 
If it helps.  
 
Igor: 
Off you go. [Exercise starts] 
 
Robin: 
Okay, so now what we’d like for you to do is to choose one of the stories, 
preferably one that you’ve gone through that process with and in a minute. 
 
Igor: 
Sixty seconds is crazy long. 
 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
134 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
Robin: 
Tell that story and simply be aware of your physical gestures as you’re telling 
it. Whatever you do, simply do it bigger and with more exaggeration and force 
than you usually would. Yes! Go. [Exercise starts] 
 
Igor: 
Very good. Who enjoyed doing that, hands up? Good.  
 
 
For the next exercise, again get into small groups of two or three people. 
 
Robin: 
Different people.  
 
Igor: 
Choose a different story. Whether you’ve put it through this simplification 
process or not doesn’t matter, you can put it through that now or you can 
choose one you’ve already done so. A different story than the one you’ve just 
told. The only thing you’re going to add there now is you let your mannerisms 
come out normally, maybe accentuate them a little bit not doubling them a 
bit more than you would normally do. 
 
 
The thing to focus on is stretching the story out a little bit by giving 
descriptions of things you can see within it, anything visual. The sunlight 
glittering on a leaf. Watching someone’s facial expressions. You can make it as 
well, but describe how the eyebrows came down, their jaw dropped and their 
fist came flying towards your nose and you didn’t see it coming, until an 
explosion of stars.  
 
Robin: 
Colors, textures, shapes… 
 
Igor: 
Get the idea. Anything visual. Verna, of course, use whatever your primary 
experience is to create the same experience with other people so use 
whatever comes to you as the stronger sense.  
 
 
Do you all understand the exercise? Let’s take a minute and a half each to do 
that and we’ll come back for another exercise. Different story, different 
partners. [Exercise starts] 
 
Robin: 
Fantastic. I’m seeing some great things. I can see the story from way over 
here. It’s fantastic. What we’d like to add in now is… you can use the same 
story or a different one, you’re going to change partners and this time we’d 
like you to focus on auditory descriptions, descriptions of what you can hear.  
 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
135 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
Igor: 
You get to include everything you’ve done so far, so you can still use gestures 
and accentuate a bit more. You still describe things that you’re seeing visual 
experiences and you can de-emphasize them in terms of putting all the 
emphasis on auditory, but still have them in there as part of that story. Then 
lavish yourself on the sound of their voice, barking, the sound of flesh striking 
flesh. For some reason I’m stuck on that one and don’t know why. 
 
Robin: 
Meow. 
 
Igor: 
Get the idea. Let’s give them another 30 seconds… so 2 minutes apiece. 
[Exercise starts] Off you go. 
 
 
Having fun yes? Good. Are your stories getting better yet? Have you noticed 
how putting stuff into it starts enriching them? Again, you’re going to change 
partners or groups again.  
 
Robin: 
That bits important. 
 
Igor: 
It is important.  
 
Robin: 
You need to have an experience of doing this with many different kinds of 
people.  
 
Igor: 
Switch your story out again. Have one of the other stories in your repertoire 
and you still have the body language and visual and auditory descriptions. 
Now I want you to include the kinesthetic, which basically means emotions, 
things you’ve felt inside and physical touch the textural things.  
 
 
Is everyone clear? We’ll give you an extra 30 seconds, so 2 ½ minutes apiece. 
Enjoy that. Off you go. [Exercise starts] 
 
Robin: 
That’s great, how was that are you enjoying that still? Some great stories 
coming out.  
 
Igor: 
Are you noticing you’re breathing new life into your stories now that you’re 
putting fluff, filler, but somehow the stories are coming more to life and you 
start thinking of different things of reference and presentations that are more 
powerful. Would that be fair to say?  
 
Group: 
Yes. 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
136 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
Robin: 
For the next exercise I’m sure you will have discovered that you’ll have been 
doing this anyway naturally and we’d just like to round off this part of the 
exercise by emphasizing it and what we’d like you to do is what we call in 
hypnosis and NLP as synesthesia switches, so you begin with a visual 
description, then move to touch, then move to sound and then back to visual. 
 
 
Begin to move and glide between the different sense systems and notice 
sometimes the change in sense system will take you away to another part of 
the story. Sometimes it will focus you in on building a rich representation of 
something that’s right in front of you.  
 
 
We will add another 30 seconds.  
 
Igor: 
So three minutes apiece.  
 
Robin: 
You may choose a story you’re working up or use a different one. Change 
partners again. 
Igor: 
Fresh partners and off you go. [Exercise starts] 
--- 
Robin: 
Off you go.  
 
 
So, you’ll have probably noticed how, when you change the content you’ll 
already have noticed the non-verbal elements of your communication are 
popping out naturally anyway. Just to round off this section we want to add in 
the final element. You’ll probably have noticed when you’re talking to people 
and listening to stories that there’s one really important element of how they 
talk. 
 
 
Because, you can use your voice.  
 
Igor: 
In some ways they’re very incongruent and in other ways that have a different 
kind of experience as well.  
 
Robin: 
You can use speed to punch energy into the situation and zip people up.  
 
Igor: 
And you can use something else to get energy into them also. Sometimes it 
sounds like one of these and sometimes it’s just one of these. 
 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
137 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
Robin: 
And you can draw people in closer. And you can also use deep voice or high 
pitched voice. Sometimes I’ve noticed that when you really play around with 
being completely silly and taking things to the furthest and strangest extreme, 
when you rein things back in it gives you more choices in just how you use 
your voice.  
 
Igor: 
Do you all understand the exercise? Different partners, same or different 
stories. Three minutes apiece. Off you go. [Exercise starts] 
 
Exercise Debrief 
 
Igor: 
Welcome back, how did that go?  
 
Group: 
Brilliantly. 
 
Igor: 
Who had fun with that, hands up? Lots of enthusiasm. What did you learn 
from all these things? What did you experience? What surprised you? 
 
Robin: 
Questions/comments/observations.  
 
Igor: 
Praise.  
 
Student: I found that even if I told the same story to different people there were 
different elements that I emphasized for the different people. It felt like they 
connected and resonated with that more and then I took, like some of the 
stories I started one way and ended it completely different just because of the 
people around me.  
 
Igor: 
Absolutely. Now you understand why Erickson told the same story differently 
each time. How did you know to do that? 
 
Student: It’s mostly unconscious but I think what I’m doing is that I’m looking at their 
responses and calibrating it and then feeding it. 
 
Igor: 
Exactly. That helps right? If you just say I’m going to tell you a story and I don’t 
care if you like it or not. That’s not useful. If you get a sense of reaction what 
points to tense, to lean in and what points are like starting to look around the 
room for a desperate escape, they start padding their pockets for a pocket 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
138 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
knife so they can cut their arms off and leave. Then you know your story 
needs working on. Well done. Thank you for that.  
 
Student: This is a quick one. I notice when I add in all these different elements my 
personality changed.  
 
Igor: 
Yes, or rather you’re getting more of your personality out there.  
 
Student: I’m not myself when I tell the story, so if I have this new personality when I 
tell the story and then the others see me, then they haven’t met the real me. 
 
Robin: 
A really simple question. If you’re not yourself when you tell that story who 
do you think you are? 
 
Student: I’m a storyteller.  
 
Igor: 
Very good.  
 
Robin: 
You’re a storyteller and who is that storyteller?  
 
Student: That’s me. Because I’ve already improved the caliber of my story, now I use 
more hand signals, movements and I’m so much more aware of modalities 
and so on. Whereas previously I didn’t use them and I thought that was me, 
that’s how I talk and people accept me.  
 
Robin:  
So you’re actually saying you’ve expanded your flexibility and choice and you 
have new ways of… you have a bigger personality now. 
 
Student: Yes I have a bigger personality, a changed personality now. When I go back I 
think my wife can’t recognize me.  
 
Robin: 
There’s a very important point there as well which relates back to something 
we were talking about before the course began wasn’t it, which is that often 
our personalities, what we choose to express about ourselves are very much 
constrained by our environment, our choices, our cultural upbringing and 
things like this.  
 
 
We all develop a particular style within that environment. Knowing that you 
have more choices and that you can be a bigger personality. You can be more 
flexible in your behavior is a wonderful thing, and there’ll be a process of 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
139 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
relating that back to how you are in everyday life as well. As you say, if you 
suddenly come back and your wife doesn’t recognize you. 
 
Igor: 
Have an affair with your wife.  
 
Robin: 
Yeah. Hopefully she’ll enjoy discovering you all over again. And, there are 
certain environments that you work in, for example, corporate environments 
and things like that, traditional family gatherings where people have an 
expectation of you. I’m confident that you’re all smart and subtle enough to 
find a way to begin to integrate those new choices into that environment.  
 
 
Respectfully enough that you don’t scare other people off and that they have 
time to absorb the new changes. Also bear in mind that if you’re used to being 
a certain way. For example, if you’re used to not using gestures a lot or voice 
a lot, than introducing those elements at the right moment can be very 
powerful.  
 
Student: I just wanted to say I’m curious about the form of feedback while the stories 
are being told, something feeling like the urge to provide verbal responses as 
the story was being told.  
 
Igor: 
So, as you’re listening to the story as the audience member you actually want 
to encourage the storyteller by saying oh yes that’s cool. Really? Well do it, 
that’s what a normal conversation is like isn’t it? You don’t just have someone 
telling you in a theater you have a person up front talking. 
 
 
In all conversations there are usually signs of encouragement like, no you 
don’t say. I do say. You don’t say. I do say. And then you carry on with the 
story a little further and they’ll go really. They go yes really. Yes. These are 
parts of a normal conversation, so by all means feedback. 
 
Student: I guess it’s also possible to really trance people out when you’re telling the 
story. 
 
Igor: 
Well, that would be the idea. This is hypnotic storytelling for influence, so yes 
after lunch we’ll add the more overt hypnotic elements.  
 
Student: I’m finding that I have a great time telling good stories to people who want to 
hear them, but if they’re not responding the way I’d like them to I fail in 
having the right tools to get that kind of response.  

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
140 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
Igor: 
Right. So is your question more about how to get responses of people or more 
about how to warm them up to give you permission to tell the stories you 
want to? 
 
Student: Probably the latter.  
 
Igor: 
I suspect too and we’ll be covering this evening a whole influence formula 
using storytelling to get the kind of permission we’re talking about and always 
work at the level of the audience. Sometimes you just start at the first step of 
the formula and it may not be until later meetings when they allow you to 
take it further.  
 
 
That’s a relationship and like every relationship you don’t just walk up into a 
bar and go oh, you look nice let’s go home and have sex. It’s not a normal 
relationship and hopefully you realize that right? 
 
Student: It took me some time.  
 
Igor: 
Like other relationships… 
 
Robin: 
That strategy works but it’s a numbers game.  
 
Igor: 
It is a numbers game exactly, which is kind of what you’re describing in some 
ways. So there is a warm-up act required before that conversation is had and 
the same is true in business, therapy and all kinds of things. There is a warm-
up act. Some people need a longer warm-up act, some people need less but 
we’ll get into that.  
 
Robin: 
I have a very simple answer.  
 
1. Don’t tell stories to people who don’t want to hear them  
 
 
2. That damn crazy cat…  
 
Igor: 
What? 
 
Robin: 
Nothing.  
 
Student: Got it.  

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
141 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
Robin: 
Hook. That’s one of the reasons why I like coming up with nice simple catchy 
little titles, because you can refer to something and then you can just leave it 
and people will be… in one of the videos on my blog David Nivens does that, 
he goes oh yeah no, I kind of got thrown out of the army and well I went to a 
fancy dress ball dressed as a goat.  
 
Igor: 
Makes you curious right? 
 
Student: Yes, I’m curious. 
 
Robin: 
Elicit curiosity. 
 
Igor: 
Thank you for the question, we’ll talk more about that as we go on.  
 
Student: I was describing a swimming experience and I noticed my heartbeat increased 
from 65 to 79.  
 
Igor: 
That’s very precise. So there I was doing the backstroke… no, no, no… that’s 
it… 
 
Robin: 
Do you have like a little LED in your eye? 
 
Student: I’m good. I was wondering can you use a story to change your state? Basically, 
in this situation everybody can stop drinking coffee by just remembering their 
sport activities.  
 
Igor: 
First of all, I suspect you’ve already answered your own question. Secondly, 
there are people, have you ever noticed there are some people whose 
heartbeat never goes below 100? It doesn’t take caffeine, they’re just nervous 
and tense all the time, like oh my gosh what if this happens or that happens? 
They’re high strung. It’s because of all the stories they’re telling themselves 
constantly.  
 
 
How is the world?  
 
Is the world a safe or not a safe place? 
 
What has happened to them constantly? 
 
How do they perceive it? 
 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
142 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
They put themselves in that state through the personal stories they tell 
themselves, something again we’ll engage in and then finally the hypnotic 
answer is to recall that Milton Erickson after he had polio at the age of 17 or 
so, he taught himself how to walk. He was paralyzed from the neck down. He 
taught himself to move his arms, his legs, his fingers and toes, everything 
from scratch from zero. 
 
 
First they thought he was going to die and then they said he would never walk 
again and now he’s running around walking with a cane and canoeing up and 
down the Mississippi like a healthy young man. He started all that by the 
stories he told himself, by remembering climbing a tree and jumping from 
branch to branch and noticing that there was a response his body was 
making. 
 
 
So yes nicely done.  
 
Robin: 
You’ve demonstrated that you change your state as a storyteller, particularly 
as you associate into the story right? You’re revivifying the memory in 
hypnotic terms and if you’re not doing it than why not, because that’s the 
whole point right, is to make the emotional heart to heart connection, body 
to body connection and that’s what you’re doing. Well done.  
 
Igor: 
Very nice. Anymore? 
 
Robin: 
If there are no more questions or comments specifically I’d like to ask if 
anyone has some feedback that they’d like to share about what they saw that 
they really enjoyed.  
 
Igor: 
In other words, you as an audience member, listening or watching a story 
being told, what is it about those that you went yeah I like that? Get the idea.  
 
Student: I already gave that storyteller the feedback but I would like to give it to all of 
you. He’s telling a story about going back to the country where he used to live 
and meeting his old friends. It was all animated and beyond the words I could 
already see all those friends and everything. Then he said that his focus 
shifted inside and he did this with his voice much more, so the next little while 
he was going on about the reflections. 
 
 
Then his voice changed and for me it was like okay, now he’s back with the 
group again. I could really follow that with the voice and then in the end he 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
143 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
did the loop back again and he said, I had this moment and that was really 
amazing.  
 
Robin: 
That’s great. He’s doing something naturally which we’ll return to in the next 
session.  
 
Igor: 
Excellent. You are ahead of the game, very nice. I like that. For the rest of you, 
you can puzzle as to what all that means. 
 
Robin: 
Did no one else see anything they enjoyed?  
 
Gabe: 
I noticed that people who use less uhs and ums and who are able to have 
more of a flow in their story it’s easier for me to go with that story. It’s the 
flow that I find and a bit of a logical build-up that helps in captivating my 
attention. 
 
Igor: 
Would you like to have a simple trick to cut out the uhs, ums, and so ons, 
from your story?  
 
Gabe: 
Yes. 
 
Igor: 
It’s a very simple trick.  
 
Robin: 
Deep inhale/exhale.  
 
Igor: 
That was it. Two versions… so the man was in the monastery on the bed and 
he’s sleeping soundly kind of, you know… as opposed to so there’s a man and 
he’s in the monastery. And he’s on his bed. He’s terrified. Does that help? 
 
Robin: 
It’s okay to pause. An um just means I’m still talking but I haven’t got there 
yet.  
 
Igor: 
It’s basically filling sound so that people, because all the ums, you knows, ah 
and stuff like that is telling people, please don’t walk away yet because I 
haven’t finished. Have the courage to know they aren’t going to walk away 
because they’re hanging on a thread going what? Your mannerisms will tell 
them.  
 
 
If I go so there’s a man in a monastery, I’m done. It’s strange to end there but 
I’m done. If I make eye contact and say so there’s a man in a monastery, and 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
144 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
you know, he’s got something on his mind. Do I give you any signals that I’m 
finished yet? So why on earth would you leave? It’s okay to pause. Is that 
helpful? 
 
Gabe: 
Yes. 
 
Student: One piece of feedback. I enjoyed it when people looked at me. Some people I 
found would look all around me as they’re telling their story, but some people 
looked right at me and when they looked at me I felt more connected to it. 
The other thing that I enjoyed more was when I got a sense that some people 
were telling their story and some were feeling their story. 
 
Igor: 
Yes. 
 
Student: The people who were feeling their story, I got a much better connection to. 
 
 
 
Robin: 
Thank you. 
 
Pamela: I noticed that I was the most engaged by the stories when people were talking 
to me about something they loved, either a hobby was frequent and then 
also, people who spoke about their children. Then I would just like to say in 
opposition to James’ remark that actually one of the things I missed most 
greatly with my mother was someone who tells me stories who’s not looking 
at me.  
 
 
I really like being told stories in a dark room, from one end of the house to the 
other where a story commences and then a bunch of things happen in the 
middle and then it continues. All of those are exciting for me, so I don’t 
necessarily have to have someone looking at me.  
 
Robin: 
This is down to… if a storyteller is looking all around, chances are they’re 
associated into it and they’re telling you what they see if you think back to the 
strange world exercise. If you’re doing that and if you find yourself looking 
out, like creating the space around you, keep checking back with the person 
you’re talking to that they’re either sharing that with you or keeping eye 
contact with you.  
 
 
Maintain some eye contact always and some people prefer to process things 
differently, so some people if they’re processing what you’re saying, visually 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
145 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
they aren’t going to be looking at what you’re describing they’re going inside 
and making pictures. Does that make sense?  
 
 
People will respond differently in these situations. Eye contact is essential to 
bring people in and be aware that people have different thinking and 
processing styles, so just because they aren’t looking at you doesn’t 
necessarily mean they’re not listening. Quite often, if I’m listening to someone 
I’ll actually put my head down and get my ear closer and I’m making pictures 
and feeling my response to what I’m hearing.  
 
Igor: 
The way to tell these things is just through experience. You do glance at them 
even if it’s from the corner of your eye to see that they’re still there. There 
should be a felt sense, a sense of yeah, I’ve got this audience interested 
versus something isn’t quite right and I don’t know what it is. So play around 
with it and you’ll get the varieties.  
 
Robin: 
I’d like to invite you for the rest of the course, if you haven’t begun to do this 
already, whenever you’ve heard someone telling you a story simply feedback 
to them just anything that you noticed you enjoyed or liked about what they 
did. 
 
Igor: 
And only what you enjoyed and liked about what they did, because we’re 
watering plants and where attention goes energy flows. Let’s only water the 
plants we actually want to come up. Otherwise you will get choked by weeds 
and that’s not useful.  
 
 
With that happy little story let’s take 90 min for lunch… 
 
Robin: 
Meow. 
 
Igor: 
Let’s do lunch and be back here to start at 10 till 2. Thank you. 
[Lunch break] 
 
Monastery & Cat Stories 3 
 
 
Robin: 
Meow. So I wake up the next morning and I was still thinking about this guy 
coming round and feeling a bit intimidated about going into my back garden 
and there’s the cat again meowing at the door. Now my door has gotten really 
attached to it as well.  

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
146 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
Igor: 
So there’s this man waking up in the middle of the afternoon because he fell 
asleep exhausted, second time in a row. He is beside himself with curiosity as 
to what’s happening here, what is this thing. He tries his best to keep his 
promise because he’s going round and digging in the garden with the monks 
and he’s helping prepare the meals and so on. 
 
 
This question is burning inside his mind. What is going on? His curiosity gets 
the better of him so he starts dropping heavy hints. Tell me how was your 
night, sleep well? He’s keeping his promise but all the monks can look at him 
and shut up very quickly. Suddenly all the chatty ones become concerned, so 
that’s not working very well. 
 
 
The day draws to an end and he’s locked back in his cell, his cubicle and lies 
down in bed. He’s been working hard all day so of course he falls asleep very 
quickly. He wakes up to this intense crazy sad noise that sounds like all the 
grief in the world, the terror and panic in the same place. It really shakes the 
foundation of the monastery.  
 
 
The man is lying in bed and he’s terrified. He tries to get to sleep... 
 
Robin: 
You know what that reminds me… because that day the cat meowed outside 
the door and I’m getting ready and eventually I look out the back door and 
the cat’s gone I can’t see it anywhere, so I think great. I have the chicken I 
roasted the day before. I really enjoy cooking and I think I’ll get the bones on 
the boil to make a nice chicken stock to have chicken soup later in the day. 
 
 
So I start the pan going, start it boiling and check out the window and there’s 
no cat so I open the door so the kitchen doesn’t get too steamed up. It’s still 
morning and I have to start work so I have to think right quick jump in the 
shower. There I am in the shower. Isn’t this what you do in the shower? Oh no 
wait a minute, this is the Ericksonian hypnosis, go into trance…  
 
 
Yes I’m taking a shower and having a great time and suddenly there’s 
knocking on my door. It’s a bit rude and loud, what’s going on? What’s that? 
Oh it’s a loofah, and it starts off again, knocking on the door. Okay I get the 
message I’m wrapping a towel around me and getting out the door. I don’t go 
to answer the door I just look out the front window. 
 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
147 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
Igor: 
So there’s this guy, middle of the night and he’s terrified. He’s thinking what’s 
going on? He starts looking out the window to see if he can pick something 
out. He looks through the keyhole. He looks through the gap in the door to 
see if there are any shadows and there’s nothing going on.  
 
 
This insane noise is going on and it lasts all night. Once again the crack of 
dawn, that first little finger of sunlight rising up over the hillside and when it 
touches the cornerstone of the abbey silence, peace, tranquility like nothing 
ever happened.  
 
Robin: 
And that’s exactly the opposite of what was going on in my house, because I 
was standing there in front of the bay windows, and you know who it is right, 
it’s the bloody guy in the motorcycle gear whose cat keeps coming into my 
house. He’s standing there going, have you got my cat again? I’m like no of 
course I haven’t got your cat. Meow.  
 
 
I think oh shit. Yes it is here but it’s just here. Do I have to tell you again? Am I 
going to have to bring you my vet bills? That cat has an owner you know. You 
can’t just steal it. I don’t want your cat. Why are you coming with this 
attitude? I’m trying to help you. I’ve given you my phone number so you can 
call me if the cat is ill.  
 
 
I’ll just get rid of the cat but if you don’t mind I need to put some clothes on.  
 
Igor: 
Meanwhile, the man wakes up the next afternoon and is still shaken. He 
works the grounds and tries to corner the odd monk or two and this happens 
for two or three days. Each time they turn pale as a sheet. You couldn’t have 
seen people paler than this and they scurry off and try to avoid eye contact.  
 
 
After a week or so of doing this, trying to corner people and talk to them, he’s 
got no friends left. No one wants to talk to him anymore because they know 
what’s going to come. One day the father abbot sits down with him and says I 
understand you’ve been working hard in the fields. The man says yes. You’ve 
done good work in the refectory. The man says yes. I hope you’ve been 
feeling the peace and tranquility of this place. The man says yes.  
 
 
You’ve been asking some rather curious questions of our brethren here, the 
monks. The man gets sheepish and says yes. I understand your curiosity but 
you made us a promise and I’m going to have to ask you to keep it. The man 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
148 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
can’t contain himself he just starts grabbing him by the shirt like he’s wearing 
a motorbike jacket and he says you have to tell me, it’s driving me crazy.  
 
 
Each night I go to sleep when the sun goes down and after a few hours sleep 
suddenly this crazy noise comes, it’s terrifying. It’s sad. It’s all the pain in the 
world.  
 
Robin: 
I know exactly what you mean I do. By now you can imagine, I’m just like 
getting ready, the cat snuck in while I was taking a shower. This guy doesn’t 
realize that I’ve been chucking the cat out 15 times a day and it’s not learning 
the lesson. He’s gone off angry at me. He probably thinks I have a little bowl 
of cream laid out for the cat and a nice little home for it and we’re going 
around stroking it and kidnapping it, saying no come play with us, not with 
him.  
 
 
I’m just so frustrated, because he keeps coming round with all this bad 
energy. I’ve tried to be nice to him and tried to explain to him that I 
understand about his cat. He’s anxious about his cat because it’s old and has 
diabetes. He might have mentioned that earlier.  
 
Igor: 
So the man of course, is almost frantic at this point. He grabbed the father by 
the coat and said please, please tell me… 
 
Robin: 
And I’m frantic, I’m completely frantic by this point. I’m wondering around my 
house… 
 
Igor: 
… and the father is saying what the hell are you talking about you made a 
promise, the only reason you stayed here was because you promised you 
wouldn’t ask anything. Please stop asking I cannot tell you, you’re not a monk. 
The man shuts up in frustration. 
 
Robin: 
Yeah you know what, should we get on with the next exercise? Yes, probably 
best.  
 
Nested Loops 
 
Igor: 
So there’s a particular thing you do with your stories that can create a 
tremendous amount of curiosity for starters. It’s like a man leaving an office in 
a monastery, shaking his head at the frustration of… anyway, it’s a way of 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
149 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
using a story so people really basically sit around and ask you more please, tell 
me more.  
 
Robin: 
There’s a wonderful example of this that I remember from Tanzania, because I 
was born there and I go back there as often as I can. There’s a traditional of 
oral storytelling in the Sakuma culture. At night by a full moon in front of a fire 
people gather round and the old lady who makes the cassava whiskey, the 
local legal brew, she keeps it hidden in the leaves of the banana tree.  
 
 
Whenever you go round her house, my friend is a doctor and when we go 
from his surgery to his farm we’re going up the hill and he always goes, shall 
we do a lefty? We go visit the old lady who sells the cassava whiskey. She 
always has to drink some of it first to prove it’s not poison. 
 
Igor: 
It would be rude not to. 
 
Robin: 
She’s always off her trolley. I remember one night one of the storytellers, 
Juma, a witch doctor, did the absolute classic. He went that reminds me… no 
you don’t want to hear me and everyone goes… 
 
Igor: 
Oh but please tell us.  
 
Robin: 
He’s like well, oh no you don’t want to hear this. 
 
Igor: 
You really should tell us. Please. I would really like to hear.  
 
Robin: 
Really? Okay. Well, then he gets up and starts his story and there’s a lovely 
way they have, a certain rhythm to the way they talk. The audience is listening 
and getting into the rhythm as well because they’ll be sitting there and they’ll 
go, dao which means it is so… they’ve heard the story before so they’re all like 
yes, that’s the way it goes, dao. 
 
 
So you get this marvelous kind of counter pointful rhythm between the 
storytellers speech and the response of the audience. Yeah. 
 
Igor: 
So there’s a skill in here that might be of use to you. The easiest way of 
getting it is experiencing it for yourself. You have a stock of stories, whether 
or not you wish to change them out over time that’s your call. What I’d like 
you to do is to get in pairs and then tell three of your stories. When it starts 
getting interesting move onto the next one without actually finishing it.  

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
150 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
Robin: 
When you start seeing interest and they start going oh really, go, that’s where 
the most important part, there’s this other one where this happened.  
 
Igor: 
All you’re looking for is the cue of when to switch. It’s very simple. They’ll give 
it to you and you’ll go yeah that’s the one, oh yeah because on another time I 
had this other experience and off you go on the other one.  
 
 
They’ll be like what, hello. First they’ll think this must have something to do 
with the first story so they’ll listen carefully and then they’ll go what, I’m 
confused and then they’ll forget one and go really, and that’s when you go on 
to the third one.  
 
 
It’s a simple process, you just observe your partner for your cues of when to 
move on. It should only take you about three minutes but I’ll give you five 
minutes apiece so you should have more than plenty of time. Of course 
everything you’ve done so far still counts.  
 
Robin: 
By the way, there are some simple phrases you can use to switch stories, like 
by the way, that reminds me, while I’m thinking about it, oh yeah it’s just like 
when… 
 
Igor: 
There’s another time… it’s a little bit like or well, the best one is if you don’t 
even make a transition and you just start telling the other story and they’ll 
think you’re talking about one story and it takes them about 30 minutes to 
figure out it’s the other. That’s called the hard loop and they’re lots of fun to 
do.  
 
 
 
We’ll let you experiment with that for now, just to have the different affects 
and experiences. Five minutes apiece, ten total, find a new partner, off you 
go. [Exercise starts] 
 
Robin: 
By the way, this would be the worst marriage guidance counseling service in 
the world wouldn’t it? Change partners. Change partners.  
 
Igor: 
Welcome back from the exercise, how did you enjoy that, good?  
 
Group: 
Yes. 
 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
151 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
Igor: 
Who here is sitting at the edge of their seats going I need them to finish, don’t 
leave me hanging? What do you think might be one use for these nested or 
open loops? What might be a use for keeping loops open? 
 
Student: With the nested loops your conscious mind only focuses on one story but the 
other story is still simmering just below the surface.  
 
Igor: 
Exactly, so there’s a lot of unconscious stuff going on which creates a lot of 
curiosity. How do you feel right now when you have to suddenly leave 
halfway through the stories? Who feels like they want me to shut up so they 
can get back to finishing the story? 
 
 
In psychology this is known as the zygarnick effect, which is when you leave 
an unfinished task or open question and the unconscious mind keeps running 
until that connection is made and is closed. So sometimes it’s useful to leave 
the loop open because they’ll keep looking for a better answer maybe for the 
rest of their life.  
 
Robin: 
Another thing that zygarnick noticed, because she actually started researching 
this because she noticed the waiters at her local restaurant had a phenomenal 
memory for open tickets. As soon as the bill had been paid they couldn’t 
remember a thing. 
 
Igor: 
No face, no name, nothing.  
 
Robin: 
Unless they went through a transdurivational search where they went 
through a trance experience and returned to state. It’s also a useful way of 
embedding post hypnotic suggestions. 
 
Igor: 
That’s something we’ll play with later today. Meanwhile, what were other 
experiences? 
 
Student: What was the question again? It does that too. It makes you forget.  
 
Robin: 
It overloads conscious attention, like seven plus or minus two.  
 
Student: Yes. As a storyteller I noticed that if you just allow the states to carry your 
stories unplanned it just flowed naturally to go from one to the next.  
Igor: 
Exactly. Don’t make it a mechanical process it’s an organic process. A lot of 
people learn about nested loops and they start going okay, I shall pause 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
152 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
precisely at 5 minutes 34 seconds, good, now we go to the next story. 
Whereas actually what you’re doing is looking for the signals from the person 
going gotcha, time to go on.  
 
Robin: 
I’d like to point out also that the nested loop effect is also the same technique 
that people use to bore you to death with the stories you don’t want to hear. 
Bear that in mind. Actually, the interview that Igor and I did together, the 
Master Class and Hypnotic Storytelling… 
 
Igor: 
Is one big loop. 
 
Robin: 
Yes. There are quite a few loops in there. My favorite quote from a guy I met 
in the Bahamas, he said he trained himself to listen to trance tapes while he 
was driving a car. He has one of those tractors that he mows lawn with and he 
crashed it listening to my tapes.  
 
Igor: 
Gotcha. Thank you for mentioning that.  
 
Student: I was just going to mention that this sounds eerily similar to hypnotic 
fractionation.  
 
Igor: 
Exactly. That’s exactly what’s going on, you’re getting people experiences and 
they’re popping out and back in and back out. This is one of the ways that 
Erickson used to do a lot of his trance work. He would tell story after story. He 
tended to complete his stories more, but I think he was also aware of leaving 
things dangling so people would keep grasping whilst another thing is coming 
in this way. 
 
Robin: 
By the way, all these hypnotic techniques are used throughout literature and 
movie making as a matter of course.  
 
Igor: 
Meanwhile, at the other end of town… 
 
Robin: 
Just think of all those stories that begin with… I discovered a secret book and 
in that book was… the story. Here’s the adventure that happened to me. 
There’s a book called Cloud 9 in the last few years by David Mitchell. It’s six 
stories, the first starting in the past, the one in the middle in the future and 
it’s a perfect set of six nested loops. The movie ‘Inception’. 
 
Igor: 
Beautiful. 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
153 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
Robin: 
This is also the works of Robert Anton Wilson and Robert Shea, the 
Illuminati’s Trilogy. They used what’s called a Sufi Scatter Technique, because 
this technique is also used in Sufi teachings a lot. I use it in workshops as well 
because it confuses the hell out of people.  
 
Igor: 
No, surely not.   
 
Robin: 
Just moving from one thing to another and back to this one and over to that 
one and back to that one. 
 
Igor: 
Did any of you experiment with the idea of not actually telling them when you 
transitioned to the other story and just telling the other story? Wasn’t that 
impact a little mind warping, where at first you go yeah that makes it… 
doesn’t make sense anymore and suddenly you realize you’re in a completely 
different story so you have to back track the whole start of the story to figure 
out what this new story is about.  
 
 
Did you notice that sort of thing happening?  
 
Group: 
Yes. 
 
Igor: 
That’s a great point at which, if you want to do anything hypnotic to begin.  
 
Student: I just noticed as you’re telling the story and the person is getting in and in, you 
keep switching and if you were to say embed a lesson just about there they 
are in a yes set. They don’t even remember they’re doing it.  
 
Robin: 
Excellent thank you. 
 
Igor: 
That’s an excellent realization, you’ll probably teach the rest of the day for us. 
I think we should take a break. Anyone else? 
 
Robin: 
I’ve just wet myself.  
 
Igor: 
Is your drinking problem coming back? 
 
Student: That reminds me of a story. 
 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
154 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
Student: It’s not related directly to the exercise here, but it’s an observation because 
some time ago I just told a story to a neighbor. That is I started to tell the 
story and we had to stop because my family went away. We didn’t meet for 
about half a year and after that half a year he said, I’m so glad to see you 
again, I was wondering how the story ends.    
 
 
 
 
Igor: 
Fantastic! That’s a great example of that.  
 
 
I think Amir was asking how to get someone interested in his stories. Imagine 
you open loops like that and then you walk away.  
 
Student: Perhaps a question about something you discussed previously. It seems that 
some people are on a mission, not here, but to sabotage your story and that 
it’s like the pause as you mentioned, sometimes you need half a second and 
they start pushing through their story. 
 
Igor: 
It can happen.  
 
Student: Again the story is very hard. Perhaps you all met those kinds of people. How 
do you win the authority to get your pauses right?  
 
Igor: 
There are a couple ideas, one being just to recognize that most people aren’t 
that way, which helps. Second is to ask yourself which kind of conversation do 
you have? Is it a one to one conversation or are you in a group? If you’re in a 
group you can basically carry on with your conversation anyway and if they’re 
hooked into your story they’ll ignore his, it’s an unwelcome interruption. 
 
 
If it’s one to one than you have to ask yourself whether it’s appropriate for 
you to force your story on him as he’s forcing it on you, if you see what I 
mean. There’s a social context there and of course there are social cues. For 
example, if I heard Robin do a cat-like noise like meow, I can always add 
something to remind him that there’s a monastery and the man has to get 
back to his room because it’s getting late. No one is allowed out after dark 
because stuff happens, right? 
 
Robin: 
Yeah, I know what you mean because I was really worried about this cat it was 
keeping me up all night.  
 
Igor: 
So… So… So… there he is going to sleep. You have other mechanisms to take 
control of the conversation, but before you use them ask yourself if it’s 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
155 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
appropriate. Maybe he desperately needs to get this story out and then his 
ears will be open enough to listen some more. Don’t be in a rush to block 
them just because they’re blocking you. Get a sense of where the context is 
at. 
 
Robin: 
I suspect that your experience with men and women in that kind of 
environment would be different and let’s face it, often when we meet people 
your experience with men and women would also be different in a different 
way, I wasn’t making comment about gender. I’m making a comment about 
competition and ego and space, and a lot of time when we meet people when 
we’re in social groups, there’s a competition for the alpha position, whether 
male or female.  
 
Igor: 
Of course, there is the… people do this don’t they?  
 
Robin: 
In our civilized world, typically the alpha controls the group not through 
physical force but by controlling the ongoing story of the group. Another little 
element is a book called Games People Play by Eric Byrne. He also wrote I’m 
Okay You’re Okay. He was a transactional analyst. 
 
 
He talks about strokes. The way I approach those kinds of situations with a 
new group is every communication I give is like a stroke. If it’s about me, if I’m 
talking about myself, my audience is giving me a stroke. It’s like okay there 
you go some attention for you. When I’m listening to them it’s like oh yeah, 
here’s some attention for you and we trade strokes.  
 
 
If I’m telling a story that’s actually about you that’s reversed because I’m 
stroking you. Please don’t get this the wrong way it’s not that kind of seminar. 
So there’s an interplay of strokes and as we reveal things about ourselves we 
give permission for others to do the same and vice versa, it’s a tradeoff. If I 
find myself in a situation where that’s not happening, I leave.  
 
 
I don’t want to be around people who are self obsessed. Well, not all the time 
anyway.  
 
Igor: 
Does that help?  
 
Rita: 
My storyteller was giving me five or six nested loops. I was really interested in 
all of them and suddenly I went berserk, like stop it I’m going to strangle you 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
156 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
now, because I want to hear one of them. It put my conscious mind back 
because it was like a blowout or something.  
 
Igor: 
There is something called too much of a good thing. It’s true. People have 
come up to me and said so how many nested loops do I have to tell before 
someone goes totally unconscious? If you take this seven plus minus two 
thing, what if I tell like nine stories will that totally blow out consciousness? 
Quite possibly. What about 15 or 25?  
 
 
It reminds me of when I was a kid and with my dad arguing in the car scene, 
who would win a bear or a wolf? A bear. What about three wolves and a 
bear? Maybe the wolves. What about five wolves and five bears and a jaguar? 
It’s one of those stories that have no ending to it. How much is enough? You 
look and when that frown or frustrations comes in a little crinkle there and a 
fist starts forming, that’s why I was thinking about it earlier. That’s the sign 
that you’ve had enough. 
 
 
Does that help? 
 
Rita: 
It helps me not strangling him. 
 
Robin: 
It really depends on context. You can get away with much more in a hypnotic 
environment. In the Master Class I think we got up to 10-11 loops.  
 
Igor: 
But we do close them as well in the middle.  
 
Robin: 
Some of them. Some of them are still open.  
 
Igor: 
I know. It’s a good learning to have because it’s all context dependent and if 
you observe your partner you’ll get a sense when good things start 
deteriorating, at which point you want to close some loops or do something 
else.  
 
Robin: 
Bear in mind, you’ll possibly get the reaction that I imagine. I’m imagining Rita 
wasn’t probably actually expressing like that but was actually getting more 
tense and more frozen, would that be accurate? 
 
Rita: 
No, I really went for the neck.  
 
Robin: 
Up until that point? 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
157 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
Rita: 
I got more tense.  
 
Robin: 
You were getting tense but you weren’t actually expressing it… 
 
Igor: 
It’s a show of attention immobility, pulling back, looking away… 
 
Robin: 
People will go into that response rather than an active one, so watch out for 
paralysis.  
 
Igor: 
No always a good thing.  
 
Student: When you were talking about the alpha person who was speaking when 
you’re a storyteller, sometimes I’ve learned that you allow the alpha person 
to tell their story that way they can do their marking, and when you can see 
where the point is that you want to enter the story and support their story 
and learn how you can intertwine their story with yours and sometimes you 
also find out, maybe I don’t want to be in part of his/her story. 
 
Igor: 
Exactly.  
 
Robin: 
That’s the beater strategy. If you’ve seen the rutting stags or whatever it is 
and there’ll be a couple fighting it out and while they’re having a fight, one of 
the other stags will zip round and take her away.  
 
Igor: 
I call it the Colombo approach. Remember the TV show who was like a 
bumbling idiot. Just one more question and everyone thinks he’s an idiot but 
of course he’s a genius who solves it all. That’s a good way to work with 
alpha’s if you have to, which is to make it seem as though it’s all to their credit 
and of course they’ll go sure you can tell your story. It’s all about how good I 
am. Then of course, everyone is going great story well done and by then it’s 
too late. Thank you for sharing that.  
 
Student: I was just going to say that I was the stranglee and I’m not sure, but she did 
have a definite fixation of attention and I think I might have gotten beyond 
the attention part of ABS.  
 
Igor: 
Did you go into stimulating unconscious response. Not a necessarily useful 
one although I guess it can be converted. It just shows the value of paying 
attention to people and see how they’re responding.  
 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
158 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
Robin: 
In public and social situations, I rarely nest more than two or three deep.  
 
Student: In this room people are predisposed to listening to you as an active event. I 
noticed in your Power of Conversational Hypnosis when you talked about 
waiting for the metro or something and trying to talk with an individual and 
you had to go first and give them the time to get there with you. 
 
Igor: 
Yes, this is a slightly different strategy. This is talking more about how do you 
warm people up to have a conversation if they’re strangers? 
 
Student: Exactly, but they could be in your own house and be far away. 
 
Igor: 
Absolutely. You could have a shy person at a party but then this works even 
better because they basically don’t know what to say so they wish you’d keep 
talking because they’re too embarrassed to add. It’s actually the opposite 
problem which now is a no-brainer for us because we can be polite enough to 
keep the conversation going until they have warmed up enough to contribute.  
 
 
This stuff helps, especially with the open loops. They’ll go oh tell me more 
about this and suddenly they feel like they’re contributing because they have 
something to talk about.  
 
 
Let’s do something useful with what we’ve been doing so far. Let’s add an 
extra element.  
 
Robin: 
A couple of examples. I was called in by a company I hadn’t actually worked 
with before. In fact, I hadn’t even met the guy but a mutual colleague put us 
in touch. He rang me up and said I’m going to do this pitch for an away day, a 
training weekend, can you come help us? I had some skills that they were 
looking for, for that pitch and experience.  
 
 
I turned up and shook hands with the guy I’d never met before. We sat down 
in the room and the interview panel started off and said tell us about yourself. 
I was completely in the dark. I had a rough idea of what we were doing, but 
was in the dark about what this guy was going to say. So I start with the truth. 
I said do you know what, we’ve only just met, but I have this friend Pamela 
and she’s one of those women who, she’ll turn around a company, develop a 
new product line and then have breakfast.  
 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
159 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
She’s so on top of her game and she said to me, you have to work with these 
guys, so here I am.  
 
Igor: 
Do you get a hint of what this might be about? 
 
Robin: 
It’s a personal pronoun switch. The story is using the word you, she is saying 
you to me, in that you have to work with these guys. I am turning that around 
so you have to work with these guys. That’s one way of doing it.  
 
Igor: 
At the end of the whole desert island survival thing you get tested. We get 
picked up by helicopter and it flies out to the islands and is beautiful oceans 
and so on, lots of little picturesque islands that are hell holes when you 
actually get there. Then halfway through the flight is an announcement over 
the intercom.  
 
 
There are just two of you in the back with the pilot in the front and it’s like 
when the intercom things coming through flashing, mayday mayday, abandon 
ship. The helicopter hovers a bit lower so we don’t die, but you have to jump 
out and swim to shore. I don’t know whether you have a thing for heights or 
not but you can imagine standing at the edge of a helicopter with a rail just 
outside the helicopter that you put your feet onto. 
 
 
You shouldn’t jump from inside because all kinds of unpleasant things can 
happen. So you actually stand on the rail and you have to time it with the 
other person because if you jump too soon, as a commercial helicopter it has 
less balance and weighs less. If one of you jumps too soon it’s like a food 
blender.  
 
 
So you’re standing there looking down, you’re looking at your partner and 
looking down and the call comes, go-go-go, so you have to look at your 
partner and time it just right… 
 
Robin: 
So you’re looking down there and you know what it’s like when, so I’m just 
about to jump off the cliff and you know what it’s like when you’re looking 
down. 
 
Igor: 
You’re looking down. Get the idea. I’d like you to find a new partner. Tell your 
nested loops again. You can make new ones if you want or use the ones 
you’ve already used. Only within them I would like for you to pause within 
moments and actually switch those referential indexes. Go to the second 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
160 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
person and stop talking about you when you’re talking about yourself or 
whoever the story is about.  
 
 
Let’s do it relatively quickly, 3-4 minutes apiece and we’ll come back and add 
something to it to make the whole thing a lot of fun. New partner. Same story 
or new stories it’s up to you. Off you go 
 
Robin: 
That company said they were going to call us back next week but we didn’t 
make it to the car park. They called us up and said we want to work with you.  
 
Igor: 
So how did you experience that, the switching of indexes?  
 
Student: I think they… 
 
Igor: 
They probably confused each other with who they are.  
 
Amir: 
As a storyteller I found it quite difficult to start, going from one thing to the 
other.  
 
Igor: 
Once the doors are open you just keep rolling right? 
 
Amir: 
Yes, and I was looking for ways to close the loop.  
 
Igor: 
To close the story loops themselves? We’ll come onto that, it’s actually 
straightforward. How do you get on switching to the you’s and so on? 
 
Amir: 
That was easy. 
 
Igor: 
How do you experience it as the listener, having someone switch? Let me ask 
you this, did they pull you into the story more or push you out of it more? It 
pulled you in overall right? Did anyone lose sense of a little bit of reality of 
where you were, it’s like yeah I’m actually much more I’m there in the 
experience now? 
 
Amir: 
As a storyteller it was very easy to do. I added more characters into the story 
and then it got really confusing. Not only did I confuse the person in front of 
me but I confused myself and then I did something I didn’t think I was going to 
do, where I was not just making positive suggestions to the person in front of 
me but I also played being that person and saying thank you so much for you 
saying… 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
161 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
Igor: 
Giving them reaction right back.  
 
Amir: 
I thanked myself for suggesting they set it and it was interesting.  
 
Igor: 
A very warped reality. Would it be fair to say that what Amir just did there, 
could you call that a transformational story? 
 
Group: 
Yes.  
 
Igor: 
He’s presenting suggestions. He’s giving the reactions to suggestions and the 
kinds of gratitude that’s presupposing the work so the other person gets a 
sense of oh, well here’s a method of resolving the problem I have.  
 
Student: He does it in a natural way. 
 
Igor: 
Yes. Absolutely right, he’s just a nice chatty sort of person so he can do that 
naturally, but all of you did it to a certain degree already, so what we’re going 
to do now is formalize that.  
 
Robin: 
I usually keep track of stories. Igor knows occasionally I’ve been mid-story and 
wondering where I was going with it.  
 
Igor: 
Oh yes.  
 
Robin: 
Although usually my unconscious usually takes over at that point and goes 
here’s where you are, oh yeah.  
 
Igor: 
Except when he says here’s where you want to go, in which case a new story 
comes out, but it’s engaging.  
 
Student: Just as a joke in the last loop I got a completely unrelated suggestion, that this 
is because you’re going to buy this insurance or feel protected. It was a joke 
but even now I can feel there is a jolt in my brain of just the way that my mind 
immediately rejected the idea. I can feel it was a kick. 
 
Igor: 
Of course, because your unconscious recognizes the vulnerable state you put 
someone else in, in terms of you’ve opened the mind up and there are ethical 
considerations in play. There’s nothing wrong with making an offer for 
something. There’s nothing wrong with presenting people a transformational 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
162 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
moment where they can get a sense of oh, if I do follow these steps this is the 
kinds of outcome I can expect, but really the choice has to be theirs.  
 
 
That’s what we’re getting into now. You’ve opened a bunch of loops. This 
morning we started off telling transformational stories, correct? So why don’t 
you put this together. Tell your three opening stories, do your 
transformational story… 
 
Robin: 
With a referential index shift. 
 
Igor: 
Which you switch to the, you rather than the, I’ll person or whatever.  
 
 
When you finish your transformational story and there’s that catharsis then 
whilst in that afterglow go straight back to the end of the third story, second 
story, first story, so you close them in reverse order. Tell your 
transformational story, my dad told me something pretty amazing and looking 
back and then you have your other story. 
 
 
It makes me think of the man in the monastery who we haven’t finished with 
yet so I won’t close it. Do you see how simple it is to just go flipping right back 
at the end of it once you have that moment of oh yeah this is good and then 
you close one-two-three, done? The key here though for looping is if you tell 
stories one-two-three, you’ll close them in reverse order three-two-one, just 
because they neatly connect to each other in time.  
 
 
Simple?  
 
Student: What’s the maximum time you leave a story unfinished before the person 
forgets you’ve told the unfinished story? 
 
Igor: 
Life. Some people forget sooner, some later. I had one seminar person come 
up two years later and say do you know that story you told please, it’s been 
bugging me for two years, tell me what happened. I forgot the story and I was 
like no. I have to watch the DVDs to figure what the story was. Some people 
just forget and move on but others just can’t. 
 
Robin: 
I once worked with a drug addict who, we did some trance work and he 
remembered this memory popped into his mind and it was the cover of his 
chemistry exercise book from when he was 13 years old. He’d written a poem 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
163 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
on it. Something like, the end is nigh, I’m going to die, heroine’s all I’ve got. 
The only way I spend my day is sitting smoking pot.  
 
 
He’d written that as some type of joke when he was a teen, but every time he 
sat down to a typewriter or keyboard to test it out that’s the poem he’d write. 
He was completely unconscious of the connection between the two things.  
 
 
Chances are you told yourself a story when you were very young and a 
powerful storyteller and that storyteller is still going on.  
 
Igor: 
In fact, the story you told yourself when you were very young is your current 
life. It can be powerful things that happen. 
 
Student: I understand… how to make a connection between two opposite kinds of 
stories, like laugh and to fail. How to make connection from one to another 
when they are totally opposite. What’s the easiest way? 
 
Igor: 
Well, the simple version of that is that you shift your own emotions with it. 
Let’s say everyone is sitting here laughing and going this is so crazy, you’re a 
funny guy and you’re like yes I’m a funny guy. It’s not always laughter.  
 
 
I remember working with one guy who had gone through some really difficult 
times, and now my second story, so you have to make the transition yourself 
and that becomes an emotional bridge they can follow into the next story. 
The people that excel at this are in theater. In fact, Shakespeare was a genius 
at this. He’d create a comic moment, followed seconds later by one with 
absolute tragedy. 
 
 
That’s the way to do it.  
 
Robin: 
When you get into this a bit more, there are a number of different ways of 
structuring the kinds of stories you tell, the emotions you elicit from each 
story and how you chain those together with anchors. This is an NLP term, 
have you heard of sliding anchors? 
 
Igor: 
Or chaining anchors. 
 
Robin: 
Right. Yes, it’s possible to chain your story so you actually lead people through 
a series of useful states. So you lead them for example, from frustration and 
overwhelm to confidence and safety.  

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
164 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
Igor: 
And there are steps you take in between. 
 
Robin: 
So you start with the first storey in your external loop. You talk about the 
problem state, the state in the middle is your resourceful state and the states 
in the way are steps to that goal. Is that clear?  
 
Student: What’s the effect of closing in the wrong order? 
 
Igor: 
It’s not that it’s bad it’s just that the opposite question is more interesting, 
which is what is the effect of closing the loops in the reverse vs the correct 
order. That is that let’s do it with recency and primacy. We remember most 
easily the first and last thing that you experience. The things in between tend 
to fall out of memory. 
 
 
If you started your first story and you end with the first story you remember 
one story and it’s ending, so they’ll tend to connect and the things in the 
middle drop out and then the same thing happens with the second layer and 
if they have enough memory for that then the second layer is fully connected 
as well, which what’s underneath that drops out.  
 
 
So you create those layers so the things inside end up dropping out the 
middle. I like to call it the donut technique, because you have your donut and 
it’s very boring until you inject the jam in the middle. No one knows where it 
is but when you bite in that’s where you’ll find it.  
 
Arthur: 
Could you go over again the way and reason for switching a referential index 
in the middle of a story? 
 
Igor: 
Sure, happy to do that. Can we take this question first because it seems to be 
related to what we just talked about? I don’t want to keep the loops too 
open.  
 
Student: You explained how to lead someone out of a state through a more resourceful 
state and resolve it through three stories. Would you do a nested loop with 
that? Because at the same time the nested loop wouldn’t that run the risk to 
reconnect that to the problem? 
 
Igor: 
The endings don’t have to have the same emotions.  
 
Student: Okay. 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
165 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
Robin: 
It’s complicated. The simplest structure is that you start the outside with 
frustration with the problem state, which means you will also finish talking 
about the problem state. In the middle is the resource state. I would usually 
use five or so stories so you have five steps along the way. 
 
 
For it to work effectively you need to elicit and anchor each emotional state 
on each step of the journey and I usually throw in a confusion pattern before 
the resource state and I will also trigger the problem state using whatever 
anchor I’ve setup just before the solution state as well. Those are finesses. 
 
Igor: 
Keep it simple. As long as your endings are clean. All stories don’t have the 
same emotion entirely so you can have a happy ending to all three stories so 
the states become simplified. There’s a much simpler way of dealing with it.  
 
 
Now, going back to Arthur’s question. The simplest version are the words, you 
know what it’s like when you’re or another one might be, just imagine you’re 
and typically this happens at some type of climax. You know when you’ve 
been trying really hard to achieve something and you just get on top and look 
back on your life and go this is it?  
 
 
It’s like that. I got on the top most pillars of the rock you can stand on and was 
looking out and thought you’ve really made it. You just switch. You do it 100 
times when you’re in stories you just don’t realize it.  
 
Robin: 
 The effect is to associate the person into the story. 
 
Igor: 
It makes it their story then, at some level.  
 
 
The transformational story you start and finish in one block it’s its own thing.  
 
Robin: 
Can you remember what the exercise was? 
 
Igor: 
Very simply you’ll tell a story one, story two, story three, not completing it. 
Then tell your transformational story, all the way through until the happy 
ending. Finish story three, finish two and then finish story one, it’s that 
simple. Especially at this transformational stage you will switch to, you will 
switch to you will switch. I won’t switch you will switch. 
 
 
It can be the third or fifth story it’s just the one in the middle that will be the 
transformational story like we did this morning. It’s much easier to do than to 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
166 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
talk about. How about we just try that. Let’s take 6 minutes apiece, different 
partners, start with the three loops you opened up and tell your full 
transformational story from this morning and then close the loops in reverse 
order. [Exercise starts] 
 
 
You had a good sense of what loops do and how they open minds. Then you 
notice how when you put the transformational story in the middle of the 
open loops the impact is different, more profound and more personal, 
especially if you switch that index point that we talked about.  
 
 
Anything else before the break? 
 
Robin: 
Meow. 
 
Igor: 
That’s a good point. Let’s take a break.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
167 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
DVD 6 – Creating “Picaresque Adventures” & 
How To Scale Stories Depending On Your 
Environment 
 
Monastery & Cat Stories 4 
 
Igor: 
Meow. 
 
Robin: 
Meow. I think I need to warn you, the story doesn’t end well, for those of you 
who have a sensitive nature. I’m getting myself in a little bit of a state now 
because on the one hand I really like this cat, my daughter likes this cat and it 
keeps coming in the house and I keep putting it out again. This big motorcycle 
guy who keeps coming round to me and being angry at me, accusing me of 
somehow trying to steal his cat or kill it by feeding it or whatever. 
 
 
He won’t believe me. I told him, I fed your cat once and he keeps going on, 
you’ve been feeding my cat. I’m like no I haven’t and now he’s found me, 
found the cat in my house when I said it wasn’t there, so he thinks I’m trying 
to keep it a secret that I have the cat in here. I just don’t understand because I 
keep putting the cat out and it’s not learning. 
 
 
I noticed a funny thing which is that the cat keeps coming to the same place in 
the house. It keeps walking, walks around, says hellos and then it goes and 
sits under this one particular chair. I thought that’s a bit weird because there 
are plenty of places for it to sit why does it sit under that chair?  
 
 
Anyway, by now I’m like I’m afraid to open my back door. It’s summer and I 
have a lovely back garden. I need to water my tomatoes, I mean after all I left 
them to go to the Bahamas and they didn’t like that. Since then I’ve been a bit 
more attentive to them. So, I’m afraid to go into my, now cat litter tray, of a 
back garden. I’m nervous about cooking in case it will attract the cat.  
 
 
It’s hot, I want to leave my windows and doors open and I should be able to 
do that, right? I have a right to live in my house the way I want, to use my 
garden the way I want. I shouldn’t feel terrorized by a cat stalking me, 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
168 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
bringing its evil aggressive accusatory owner with it, projecting all his 
problems and anxiety. It’s because he’s not looking after the cat properly 
that’s why it’s coming to see me. It prefers me, basically. 
 
 
That night sitting in the living room, it’s a warm balmy evening so I had the 
windows open at the front of the house. I’m sitting doing some work and I 
hear this noise. The cat is scratching the hell out of my backdoor. It’s just 
sitting in the back scratching, won’t stop and give in. It’s freaky. I don’t know 
what to do. I walked to the backdoor to look at it. It’s just sitting there, meow. 
Meow.  
 
 
I opened the door a little bit and tried shooing it away. Go back to your 
owner. Your owner loves you, go back to him. I’m sorry I can’t, I just can’t, it’s 
not fair. It’s like I’m having an affair with the cat. Shoo, go. I slammed the door 
and go back to the living and bloody hell, the cat is coming in through the 
front window.  
 
 
I throw it out quickly and close the door. How did it get round the front? Wait, 
there’s traffic around the front. Oh no, now wait a minute I’m supposed to be 
friendly with its owner and now I’ve thrown it out in the front. How it got 
round to the front in the first place I don’t know. I’m sure it’s not supposed to 
be round the front because it might get run over, but do I ring up the guy now 
and tell him that I just saw the cat at the front or do I pretend that I don’t 
know? Maybe he’s going to come round now.  
 
 
I hear from the outside, rumble- rumble where are you? I thought oh my God 
he’s looking for his cat. He’s perched outside my front living room window 
looking in. I swear I actually went into my bedroom and closed the door and 
the curtains and hid. I’m a grown man this is ridiculous.  
 
 
It’s funny how we can get ourselves worked up into a state about things. I’m 
being stalked by a cat and its owner, feeling anxious in my own home. Now I 
have this text exchange going back and forth with the owner, where he’s 
accusing me of this and I’m going no, I’m trying to help I’ve given you my 
phone number so you can call me whenever. He’s like yeah but you shouldn’t 
be feeding him. I’m not feeding him your bloody cat. 
 
 
I explain to him the details. I’m like okay, you found the cat round my house 
the other day I admit it its true, but I’ve been doing what you said and threw 
the cat out like 15 times in one day and it’s still coming back in. I was in the 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
169 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
shower. I cannot remove the cat straightaway all the time. What if I’m taking 
a shit? What if I’m busy with a client or looking after my daughter? I was 
getting a bit too stressed.  
 
 
I remembered something about cats and what they do and why they start to 
go and hide places. If anyone’s had cats you know what they do don’t you? 
When they’re ready to die they go find somewhere to hide and curl up. The 
cat has been coming to my house and sitting under the same chair. I start 
feeling a bit different towards the cat.  
 
 
Now I’ve explained that the cats actually managed to break into my house 
through the cat flap that it’s been sitting there scratching away, the owner 
has calmed down a bit and I think he realizes the cat needs something he’s 
not getting right now and he’s coming looking. What we did, and this was just 
the week before coming out here, we made sure that cat had a really nice last 
week.  
 
Igor: 
So there’s this man walking out of the abbot office and it’s getting nighttime 
so he knows he has to go back to his quarters, but all he can hear is this voice 
ringing in his head sorry son I can’t tell you you’re not a monk. I can’t tell you 
you’re not a monk. It was ringing from ear to ear.  
 
 
The guy goes to bed and tries to sleep, but that voice, I can’t tell you you’re 
not a monk. He wakes up of course at one minute past midnight as he’s done 
for the entire stay so far. All the sadness of the world, the grief, terror and 
pain, he’s terrified and burning with curiosity and in the back of his mind is 
always the sound of that voice, sorry I can’t tell you you’re not a monk. 
 
 
So he devises a plan. In the morning he doesn’t fall asleep, the first thing he 
does is he gets up at the crack of dawn with all the other monks who 
somehow manage to sleep through the crazy nights. He looks up at the Father 
Abbot and lays out his plan to him. He says look, I’ve been here for two weeks 
now and I’ve worked in your gardens and kitchen. I’ve prayed with the monks 
in the abbey and studied and I’ve had a great time.  
 
 
I think I might enjoy this lifestyle. I think I might like to enjoy becoming a 
monk. Of course the abbot knows the game and he looks at him with sadness 
in his eyes and says son, are you sure? With a burning fever he says yes I’m 
sure. He says, you know, becoming a monk isn’t easy it takes time and 
dedication and practice. The man says I have all that. He sells his car, his 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
170 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
apartment and his possessions. He tells his boss he’s not coming back and of 
course the boss thinks he’s nuts.  
 
 
He gives it all to charity and spends 1-2 years living with the monks and each 
night whenever he feels like this is it I’ve had too much and don’t want this 
lifestyle anymore, that night he gets a reminder and that burning curiosity 
comes back and those words echo in his head, I’m sorry I can’t tell you you’re 
not a monk.  
 
 
Eventually enough time has passed and the Father Abbot grabs him from the 
refectory one day and says you’ve been with us some years now and have 
shown your dedication, showed your spirit, you’ve prayed with us, you’ve 
meditated and your mind is strong now, I think you’re ready to become one of 
us. The man is excited, terrified, elated and petrified.  
 
 
There’s a ceremony where he gets divested of his normal clothes and gets a 
lovely brown robe like all the other monks. His hair is shaved. He’s anointed 
and that night when all the other monks go to sleep he has to stand vigil in 
the abbey. At 10:00 o’clock, 11:00 o’clock… round about 11:30, 11:45 the 
abbot turns up with the old gatekeeper only the gatekeeper is no longer 
wearing his brown robes; he’s garbed in what can only be described as full 
plate mail armor. 
 
 
There’s a plate on his chest. He has chain mail coming down one side and has 
a long sword in one hand and a big evil looking dagger on the other. He has a 
round thing that looks like a shield with a big spike thing in the middle, a big 
cross on his chest and he looks like a man ready for death. He looks grim and 
resolved.  
 
 
Of course the man is now really worried and elated, excited and doesn’t know 
what to do with himself. The Father Abbot turns to him and says are you sure 
you want to know the secret of the monastery, of this abbey? He goes yes I’m 
ready to be one of you. Father Abbot looks at him with the saddest eyes and 
says follow me. They open the doors to the crypt and they descend the Father 
Abbot, the man and the keeper of the gates. 
 
 
They walk through this maze underground where hundreds of monks have 
been buried in the past. It’s dark and frightening but the anticipation is 
building. He can almost feel it and it’s getting closer now to midnight. Just 
before midnight strikes they reach a small wooden door and it’s been 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
171 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
reinforced with steel bolts that have been thrown in. In front of the wooden 
door is a portcullis, which is one of these iron gates like you’d find in castles.  
 
 
It’s only a small door. It’s very strange but his heart starts thumping. Midnight 
passes, not yet one minute past, then the keeper of the gate comes forward 
and with surprising strength for such an old man he pulls the chain and the 
portcullis lifts. With a trembling hand he pulls out a set of keys that fits in the 
lock. Just as the minute ticks past midnight he opens the door. Do you know 
what he saw? I’m afraid I can’t tell you you’re not a monk.  
[Applause] 
 
 
You are fortunate that I haven’t spent a month telling you that story, and 
really this takes us into what we want to cover now, which is that we’ve 
scaled the stories down but how do we scale them up? In particular I would 
like to introduce you to a vehicle that makes the practice of scaling your 
stories very easy because there’s no risk involved. You’ve already heard mine. 
Robin’s version is actually a more elegant version, because it’s a true story 
and it has a point, it has poignancy to it.  
 
 
Mine is just a bad joke, although as a storyteller it’s very amusing. If you can 
duck. Now you understand that one right.  
 
Robin: 
Shaggy cat story. 
 
Igor: 
The kind of story I told is a shaggy dog story, which is a very long story that 
really has no point. A shaggy dog story is a long, a legend as to how it got its 
name which probably isn’t a shaggy dog story come to think of it now. We 
don’t have enough time for that one. You’ll have to come to the next seminar 
to hear that one.  
 
 
There’s another kind of story which relates to this and is actually a little of 
what Robin and I have been doing. It’s called the picaresque adventure. Does 
anyone know that term? It’s an old style of story that was very popular in the 
medieval times. Essentially it’s a simple story A to B. I have to go on a 
pilgrimage for example and the story isn’t about going from A to B it’s about 
everything that happens on the way from A to B, it’s lots of little adventures.  
 
 
If you remember those old black and white serials like Zorro or whatever 
where every week something happened and it’s a little mini adventure. That’s 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
172 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
sort of a picaresque adventure. It’s a tremendous way for you to build your 
storytelling skills.  
 
 
I could have told my story very simply. Man gets kicked out of his office, finds 
a monastery, hears a crazy noise, asks what it is, won’t find out. He gets so 
frustrated that he becomes a monk, goes to the place where the noise is, 
can’t tell you you’re not a monk. That’s the short version of the story. Not 
quite as amusing I admit, but that’s the essence of the story. Everything else 
in between is just pure storytelling and did you notice something happening 
whilst you were listening to the story? 
 
 
Did anyone here feel a little curious?  
 
Did anyone here feel a little nervous? 
 
Did anyone here feel like their fantasy was running round inside the mind, 
what is it? 
 
Is it a beast or a ghost, a devil, what is it? 
 
 
The story that Robin told could also be told in a two minute version. How 
would you put that one? 
 
Robin: 
I fed the neighbors cat. It started stalking me. It died.  
 
Igor: 
Here’s why this is interesting. Apart from that you’ve now gone back to where 
we started the day, which is a very basic structure for a story. You’ve been 
thinking about a lot of stories that you’ve told but weren’t really stories to 
know how to shape them. Aren’t they like that? Yeah, went to the shops, a 
gunman shot someone, went home, it was really terrible.  
 
 
It’s just a sequence of events that have nothing connecting it. What makes a 
story is the picaresque adventure that comes with it. It’s the emotional 
rollercoaster that comes with it.  
 
Robin: 
Has anyone heard of the Epic of Gilgamesh? One of the oldest stories. There is 
a narrative that constitutes the main thrust of the story that you could 
summarize very quickly and then there’s a whole load of things on the way. 
Adisis, The Odyssey.  
 
Igor: 
The Iliad, which is Cesar of Troy. 
 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
173 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
Robin: 
Chalsa, he’s a bit clever because he puts a load of people together who are 
going on a journey and then each of them tells a story about something else.  
 
Igor: 
You mean like a nested loop? 
 
Robin: 
A little bit. A succession of them.  
 
Igor: 
It’s a well known literary device. 
 
Robin: 
The Adventures of Tom Jones, one of the earliest English novels. 
 
How To Scale Your Stories 
 
Igor: 
We’d like for you to use this vehicle to explore the craft part of storytelling, 
the artistic omen, the bit that draws people in. You’ve seen two versions of 
pretty much the same thing, a real story with a point and a fake story with 
none. 
 
 
I’d like you to start with that fake story with no point, the shaggy dog story 
and you can happily use mine. A man finds a monastery, mystery noise, can’t 
find out what it is because he’s not a monk. He becomes a monk, find out 
what it is but you don’t. That’s the short version.  
 
 
So, we’d like you to spend a minute telling that shaggy dog story or any story 
you think doesn’t really have a point, it could be a personal story without a 
point, to someone in literally just one minute or less and then give them a 
chance to do the same.  
 
 
Then we’ll come back and reset it and see if we can get some mileage out of 
the story that really isn’t one and then we’ll move on to actually making it 
real. Do you understand the idea? Find a partner, spend one minute, feel free 
to repeat my story in that one minute or come up with another pointless story 
that has no real meaning and then we’ll come back and see if we can build 
that into something useful.  
 
 
[Exercise starts – one minute apiece, two minutes total, off you go] 
 
 
We had someone come up and say he knows what was in the monastery on 
the other side of the door. It was his cat.  

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
174 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
 
You told a relatively pointless story in about a minute or so and you got quite 
animated about that. What I want you to do now is to tell the same point of 
story in five minutes, but see how much you can fit in on those five minutes in 
terms of the little side adventures, other things that are happening, like the 
man is driving, then there’s the monastery, then there’s a noise and then 
there’s a reaction to the noise and he’s trying to get to the faster stuff.  
 
 
See how much you can fill into that in five minutes, to build curiosity, 
engagement, and any other emotion you may want, something may be 
charming or funny. Something may be bizarre. It doesn’t matter too much 
what it is, just try to build in two or three of these moments around that story 
and really go to town on it, because you know the story is absolutely 
pointless, you’re free to not try and make sense or come to some dramatic 
conclusion and that freedom then allows you to invest all your energies into 
the storytelling elements on the journey to the pointless end.  
 
 
Does that make sense? This is just the vehicle for you to practice it. It’s also a 
very nice practical joke for all your friends and enemies. For enemies I 
recommend the one-two-three month version. For friends stick to about an 
hour. I find that after that you create frenemies. So you get the idea of the 
exercise? Same story again, five minutes and really, you’re putting attention 
on the development of the story elements rather than on the end which is 
what most people think about.  
 
Robin: 
How I met your mother, the TV series. 
 
Igor: 
Yes, that’s another picaresque adventure. [Exercise starts] 
--- 
 
It appears that you all are becoming such charismatic storytellers that you are 
missing all the social cues. Stop talking now. It’s very dangerous for us at this 
point isn’t it?  
 
Robin: 
Yes, it’s almost like they don’t need us anymore.  
 
Igor: 
Oh no, go home.  
 
Robin: 
You probably realize that this kind of story press is great training wheels for 
developing your ideas and pushing with them. If you’re interested in 
storytelling out of performance that’s the most obvious situation in which you 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
175 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
can go on and on with a story and create a big arc, journey for your hero and 
then segue off into little incidents along the way. 
 
 
Having said that, I’ve used this technique in a similar way that we’ve used it 
today, across an extended period of time teaching. Giving people a little story 
at the beginning and end of a teaching seminar over the course of six months. 
That’s something I did when I taught those personal development courses on 
the NBA program.  
 
 
It’s just fun and people know what you’re doing by the time you get there. Its 
just with learning, people have something that locks them in and if you think 
this through a little more and you have a lot of content, facts and things like 
that that you need to teach to people, than you might consider how the 
method of locai, which Igor showed you yesterday, where you place objects 
and symbols in different locations and how you might be able to use that in a 
similar way.  
 
 
I had a guy from India actually call me up about this very issue because he was 
teaching people the bones of the body, so we worked together on what’s the 
story you can tell that places all those bones from the cranium to the toe 
bones.  
 
Student: Metatarsal. 
 
Robin: 
Nice one.   
 
Igor: 
Will you tell us the story now?  
 
Robin: 
Well done. No. I gave him a starting point and told him some ideas and then 
he went off and to be honest I was going yeah great, because he’d run with it 
and made it his own and he knew he didn’t need me anymore.  
 
 
What we’d like you to do with this next one is to take one of your stories and 
add in two elements.  
 
How can you take those stories off on a tangent? 
 
Igor: 
Those picaresque adventures we talked about. How can you add sidelines into 
your story that were very interesting but really just amp up the ultimate end 
of the story? 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
176 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
Robin: 
So, I’m out in the garden with my neighbor from upstairs. She’s stroking the 
cat and she says it’s really skinny. Oh, there’s something really funny about 
my neighbor upstairs, because she was in a film a few months back and what 
happened was… suddenly segued into a whole new area now and you can fill 
in the details about her story. 
 
 
There’s a second element to introduce and when you look into the oral 
traditions of storytelling you’ll notice that there are two elements they 
interplay with each other. There’s the element of consistency. 
 
Igor: 
It is so. 
 
Robin: 
There’s the element of improvisation or spontaneity. 
 
Igor: 
It is so. 
 
Robin: 
So, some parts of the story remain fixed. 
 
Igor: 
It is so. 
 
Robin: 
Some phrases or images 
 
Igor: 
It is so. 
 
Robin: 
Or gestures 
 
Igor: 
It is so. 
 
Robin: 
Remain fixed and are returned to repeatedly over the course of the story, 
while other bits are extemporized and are made up on the spot. And you 
might have noticed in my story, meow… 
 
Igor: 
It is so. 
 
Robin: 
It was repeatedly returned to and it anchors a laugh. It anchored a laugh for 
you early on and then every time I brought it in and when you started 
responding to it… In Igor’s story he repeated the phrase… 
 
Igor: 
I’m sorry I can’t tell you because you’re not a monk. 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
177 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
Robin: 
And he actually repeated that a number of different times, so it became… 
 
Igor: 
It became a curiosity thing where every time you hear it you’d wonder what it 
was. Consider if I told you the same story over the same length of time or 
even longer, but the only time I ever mentioned that phrase, I’m sorry I can’t 
tell you you’re not a monk was right at the start of the story. It wouldn’t have 
had nearly the same impact at the end.  
 
 
That’s if you really don’t like someone, you can leave it totally flat and 
disinteresting. At that point there’s no continuity in the story. The fact that I 
kept repeating it at the peak of emotion that you applauded rather than 
punching me, because I’ve had both versions.  
 
Robin: 
If you return to certain particular things like the Iliad, which are a written 
record of an oral story, there are phrases in there, like the wine dark see, the 
incomparable Achilles, which he repeats. 
 
Igor: 
I just want to say they do that to identify certain characters, because people 
can’t necessarily remember all the names and which person is which. But, by 
creating a strong vivid image, like Achilles with his tree-like spear, that’s an 
image that’s strong in someone’s mind and every time they come back to the 
same image they know who the players are, how they relate to each other 
and it sets a strong connection inside the mind.  
 
Robin: 
For those of you who are familiar with NLP and the term anchoring, you’ll also 
recognize that there’s an equivalence here between those consistent and 
repeated elements and anchors. If you can setup strong anchors in terms of 
your location… 
 
Igor: 
That’s where Robin takes a shower over there. Isn’t that where he’s naked, 
washing off soil.  
 
Robin: 
There’s my door.  
 
Igor: 
You missed a bit.  
 
Robin: 
In terms of your gestures and locations can be just like here by the way. I once 
had a guy give me a… no, I won’t go there.  
 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
178 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
Student: Tell me. 
 
Robin: 
No. You can setup locations just in front of you, like this. Certain gestures, 
certain phrases and certain sounds, tones or qualities serve as anchors for 
specific things, so how can you be specific? Think about setting up. When you 
first introduce an element in your story, what are you doing when you say it, 
because quite often naturally you’ll be going…? So, he’s traveling across the 
whole world, and you’ll find yourself doing something naturally often. Repeat 
it. 
 
 
 
So he’s traveling through the world, whatever it is repeat the gesture, repeat 
the same phrases. You’ll do that in the context of telling one of your stories to 
another person. Get up and move around. I suggest for this exercise that you 
do it standing up, because then you’ll have a better range of space and 
gesture that you can use.  
 
 
I want to add one little element which you won’t get to practice here, but I 
think what happens or what would happen if you used the same anchor in 
different stories and why you might do that. [Take it away. How long are we 
giving them?] 
 
Igor: 
Let’s give them five minutes apiece. For those who need to simplify, just do 
the same as you did a moment ago which is to embellish your stories. 
Whenever you have a peak of emotion, that’s when you repeat your key 
phrase or gesture. As Robin was saying, let your key gesture be something 
that emerges spontaneously that’s the best one, otherwise choose 
something.  
 
 
Stick to one for now just because it makes life easier. In time you can get 
more complex.  
 
Robin: 
I reckon these guys are advanced by now. It’s easy. 
 
Igor: 
Either one of us will be right. You get to choose.  
 
Robin: 
Listen to him or me, either.  
 
Igor: 
Either way is better right? 
 
Robin: 
Or both will do. 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
179 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
Igor: 
Find a partner, five minutes apiece, tell your story. Off you go. Wait one 
second we have a question.  
 
Student: Can you use time for this to amplify something, for example, referring to do 
the same sort of thing like refer to the past, the future and then something 
about the present. 
 
Robin: 
Absolutely. 
 
Student: To amplify a particular… 
 
Igor: 
Yeah, so there I was and I was thinking about… 
 
Robin: 
Tomorrow… we’ve very much been talking about creating stuff personally and 
tomorrow we’ll be looking much more of reading other people and helping 
them to pull their stories out and in those situations it behooves you to notice 
how they arrange their internal space around you. 
 
Igor: 
More on that tomorrow.  
 
Robin: 
I’ll answer your question tomorrow.  
 
Igor: 
Right now we’ll go to the exercise to reset it so people don’t get confused. Tell 
one of your own personal stories which you collected yesterday. Spend five 
minutes telling that story, in the style you told the last one with the 
picaresque adventures, embellishments, sense of adventure in the middle and 
whenever you get to a peak of emotion you’ll use your key phrase or key 
gesture and repeat that as often as possible throughout the story when it hits 
highlights, so you can pick some emotional or symbolic momentum. 
 
Student: Are we driving to the same conclusion that the whole story is going to have? 
 
Igor: 
For the moment I don’t care it doesn’t matter so much right now. We’ll talk 
about functionality afterwards. Five minutes apiece. Off you go. [Exercise 
starts] 
--- 
 
How did you enjoy those stories everyone? Who is starting to feel that they’re 
really getting to be a storyteller and are really owning these stories?  
 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
180 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
[Applause] 
 
Robin: 
The rest of you what have you been doing for the last few days? 
 
Igor: 
Listening.  
 
The Influence Formula 
 
Igor: 
We’ve spent all this time building up your storytelling skills in order to be able 
to do something with it. You have one little model already and that’s loops 
with a transformational story in the middle that’s a nice model for stories that 
influence. I’d like to give you another one that’s a little more linear but 
actually fits a lot of natural conversations more fully. 
 
 
This is called the influence formula and it’s very straightforward and includes 
the stories you’ve already been telling. What I’d like to do is to build this up 
with you bit by bit so you focus on each stage at a time and then let the 
natural conversation evolve. So, for this I think the easiest thing to do is start 
by finding a new partner, someone you haven’t worked with today, that might 
make it most interesting. All you need to do is spending a minute or so socially 
chit-chatting about anything.  
 
 
The course, wine, cars, weather, whatever, just socializing where they say 
something you say something. If in that time you can introduce a little story, 
like your who am I story or your value story so much the better. In fact, why 
don’t I give you two minutes each and at the 2 minute mark you move from 
chit-chat into story. 
 
 
It’s very simple, because every chit-chat will end up having people ask you a 
question or you make a comment like, oh I had something like that happen 
and off you go into your little who am I story. Does that make sense? So, two 
minutes apiece, find a new partner and stay with them because then we’ll add 
some layers on top of that as you go along. Off you go. [Exercise starts] 
 
 
Now first question, do you notice how it’s relatively simple to transition from 
socially vibing type stuff into a, who I am type story, which is a very 
acceptable social thing to do. You probably also noticed that what happens is 
a trade-off where you tell one of yours and they tell one of theirs, is that fair 
to say? It’s a very natural transition. 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
181 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
 
We’ll take that transition and imagine that you were in the same point when 
we broke off, and pick up the theme again back to the little social chit-chat 
and then tell your second story, which is your value story or why am I here 
story, either is fine.  
 
 
So you’ve basically told two personal stories to get a sense of who you are. So 
far it’s easy right. We’re really in the same category, where you’re talking 
about personal stories that introduce yourself to someone else and they fit 
the social context. What we want to do at that point is to transition from 
personal stories that are about understanding who you are, being able to 
predict you and so on, into stories that will allow you to start influencing 
others.  
 
 
It will be stories about them in some way or other, and we have two vehicles 
you can play with for this. The first is the story we talked about yesterday the 
mind reading. Do you recall? I know you’re experiencing this or that and I 
have a story about that sort of thing. The other is a much simpler version 
which is essentially, you just preframe it. Tell your value story or they tell 
theirs and then you might say something along the lines of it’s interesting you 
should say that. 
 
 
Let’s put it into context because that’s always more useful. Let’s say you’re at 
a teachers conference and you want to influence on the teacher to change 
teaching styles and they talked about their values and some kids they helped 
out in some desperate situation. It’s interesting you should say that because 
there are so many different ways I’ve found you can reach kids. Some of them 
work okay and some work really well.  
 
 
For example… and now you’ve opened the door to allow your influence 
stories to step in. Make sense? It’s a very simple preframe preamble or, you 
can go for the whole mind read, like you’re probably feeling this, this and this. 
I was as frustrated when I experienced these things with my students. That 
opens the door wide for an open loop for the next story to occur and we’ll 
talk about that afterwards.  
 
 
Make sense? Do you all understand the exercise? Go back to the same 
partner, pick the conversation up where you left off so you both introduce 
each other with stories, so now you’re going to vibe a little more and then go 
straight into your value story or your why am I here story. They’ll do a similar 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
182 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
thing about giving a sense of your motivation and sense of where your 
boundaries lie, and segue from that story into a preframe and then pause it 
there or your mind reading story which again leaves an open loop to do 
something else.  
 
 
At that point you’ll back track to social vibing and they’ll do the same thing for 
their own. It’s a little bit of an odd situation after that point because the other 
person has to have a go to, but hopefully you’ll see pretty much the same 
patterning run. Do you understand? Easy.  
 
 
Take three minutes apiece to do that. [Exercise starts] Off you go.  
 
 
How did that go, interesting? Who found it relatively natural to vibe a bit, tell 
their personal story, vibe a bit and tell a more personal story in terms of your 
values and so on, vibe a bit more and tell a transitional story like a mind 
reading thing or just set a simple preframe that would lead into you being 
able to tell another story? Relatively easy. 
 
 
Of course you realize you can do any of these things here with open or closed 
loops. The more you open the loops the more curiosity you build. If you 
create more certainty you’ll close those loops, it just depends on how the 
conversation goes. Sometimes people force an open loop by presenting their 
story before you’re done.  
 
 
My rule of thumb is if I’m interrupted I tend not to go back to the story unless 
I really need to, unless they ask for it. For example, when telling something 
like the shaggy dog story I introduced you to, I will happily be interrupted. You 
go on a shopping trip and do this or whatever, you get interrupted and I’m 
actually just waiting for the person to go no, tell me more. What happens in 
the story? Tell more.  
 
 
That’s how I know I have a nice intensity in terms of the permission from my 
audience to actually carry on telling the story. So far so easy. So we set the 
context that will allow us to tell our main stories for influence. These ones 
build relationship and open the door. Now it’s time to actually do some 
influencing. That is hidden, somehow.  
 
 
So really, once you’ve open the preframe or mind reading than you can tell 
your teaching tale or your transformational story. Of course you realize we’ve 
given one example of this in a longer conversation, you might go through 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
183 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
loops where you tell a couple transformational ones and go back to social 
vibing and back to some personal stories, back to social vibing, back to some 
transformational stories and so on. 
 
 
This is a linear thing for a more non-linear conversation. The important point 
is that at some point when you finish your teaching tale or transformational 
story or emotional state stories, you want to distract them away. The simplest 
thing is to go back to social vibing, get them to tell a story. Be curious about 
their stories. Tomorrow we’ll bring in tools to let them evolve their own 
stories so they can feel like they’re contributing and it gives you more fuel for 
further influence as well.  
 
 
Sometimes, not always, but sometimes it’s useful once you’ve told the story is 
to summarize the point that you’re trying to make for them. So often if 
someone finds something perplexing I’ll illustrate with a story and then rather 
than saying just do this and this, I’ll tell a story to illustrate the principle and 
then I’ll say so, really you want to try these things, do you get what I mean? 
They’ll go oh yeah and then we’ll move on. 
 
 
A story has already told them what they need to know and I just pulled out 
the essence of that story in a point, if it’s relevant for that situation. 
Sometimes you’ll do it sometimes you won’t, it depends on how much 
conscious attention you want to have on the information you presented to 
them.  
 
 
Do you understand the seven steps of the influence formula? It’s a simple 
process and very easy. You have the tools for it already it’s just a question of 
putting them all together in a simple structure. So now take another three 
minutes apiece, same partner, pick up where you left off, you just opened 
that preframe up, tell your teaching tale or transformational story and at the 
end you may or may not want to pull it together into a simple point. If you do 
make it and then just vibe again. If you don’t than just start vibing.  
 
 
As soon as you go back to normal social conversation chit-chat type of stuff 
that means it’s the other person’s go now to reintroduce their preframe or 
mind read and tell their transformational tale. That shows you how a 
balanced conversation goes anyways. Do you all understand the exercise? Go 
back to your partner, three minutes apiece and finish up your persuasion 
formula. Off you go. 
 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
184 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
Robin: 
Just out of interest, is there anyone here who didn’t think they were creative 
on Sunday who would now put their hands up and say I feel like I’m creative 
now?  
 
Igor: 
Puts your hands up. Very nice.  
 
Robin: 
Anyone who didn’t think they could tell stories and now you can? 
 
Igor: 
Now they can. 
 
Group Double Induction 
 
Robin: 
Anyone really tired? Yes. So, you’ve been on a long journey. 
 
Igor: 
A long journey.  
 
Robin: 
Sometimes on that journey it’s time to rest. That’s right.  
 
Igor: 
And there are many ways to do that.  
 
Robin: 
That’s right.  
 
Igor: 
Oh, the penny’s dropping.  
 
Robin: 
It is. And how quickly it drops into a trance.  
 
Igor: 
When those eyes close.  
 
Robin: 
Will discover… 
 
Igor: 
That going inside 
 
Robin: 
Is a great way of… 
 
Igor: 
Really recollecting all the experiences you’ve had.  
 
Robin: 
Starting back at the beginning.  
 
Igor: 
The very first set of exercises just warming up 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
185 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
Robin: 
On Sunday morning 
 
Igor: 
All the crazy stuff you did to 
 
Robin: 
As you pay attention 
 
Igor: 
Develop your creativity 
 
Robin: 
To your body 
 
Igor: 
And evolve that into telling stories 
 
Robin: 
And then just enjoy breathing 
 
Igor: 
Just normal stories 
 
Robin: 
You can connect more and more 
 
Igor: 
That became very important stories 
 
Robin: 
To those memories 
 
Igor: 
And you developed a room 
 
Robin: 
To those experiences 
 
Igor: 
Inside your mind 
 
Robin: 
You know you can remember 
 
Igor: 
A simple tour of it 
 
Robin: 
Can’t you? 
 
Igor: 
Can remind you. 
 
Robin: 
And the more you focus 
 
Igor: 
Of all the stories you’ve collected 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
186 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
Robin: 
On those memories 
 
Igor: 
Location one 
 
Robin: 
And the last 
 
Igor: 
Location two 
 
Robin: 
Two days 
 
Igor: 
Location three 
 
Robin: 
Simply reviewing in your mind 
 
Igor: 
Location four 
 
Robin: 
And allowing yourself unconsciously 
 
Igor: 
Location five 
 
Robin: 
To begin to prepare 
 
Igor: 
Location six 
 
Robin: 
Because as you sleep and dream 
 
Igor: 
Location seven 
 
Robin: 
This evening 
 
Igor: 
Location eight 
 
Robin: 
And as you prepare 
 
Igor: 
Location nine 
 
Robin: 
Going around this evening 
 
Igor: 
Location… all the way 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
187 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
Robin: 
You’ll notice 
 
Igor: 
So many things 
 
Robin: 
And  
 
Igor: 
Have occurred inside 
 
Robin: 
When you 
 
Igor: 
And you can take those 
 
Robin: 
Find yourself 
 
Igor: 
Re-experience them 
 
Robin: 
Behaving in a new way 
 
Igor: 
Re-evaluate them 
 
Robin: 
In conversations 
 
Igor: 
Re-develop  
 
Robin: 
And naturally 
 
Igor: 
Your own  
 
Robin: 
As you make 
 
Igor: 
Conversational style 
 
Robin: 
New acquaintances, and  
 
Igor:  
Which will 
 
Robin: 
Go out into the world 
 
Igor: 
Allow you to 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
188 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
Robin: 
Spreading your message 
 
Igor: 
Really make a difference 
 
Robin: 
Making your ideas and passions 
 
Igor: 
In the way that you influence others  
 
Robin: 
Available to people through 
 
Igor: 
So many things you’ve learned 
 
Robin: 
The stories you communicate with 
 
Igor: 
So many things you’ve discovered about yourself 
 
Robin: 
And 
 
Igor: 
You can use these skills 
 
Robin: 
While you sleep and dream 
 
Igor: 
To interact with others 
 
Robin: 
To allow yourself the space 
 
Igor: 
In a more rich and encouraging way 
 
Robin: 
To really enjoy that fully now 
 
Igor: 
Ahh, what a day 
 
Robin: 
So that when you are ready to open eyes 
 
Igor: 
To a wonderful set of experiences 
 
Robin: 
You can do so, looking forward 
 
Igor: 
All the way until 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
189 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
Robin: 
To how  
 
Igor: 
You’re going to use these skills 
 
Robin: 
Much more you’ll enjoy 
 
Igor: 
When you get back 
 
Robin: 
Learning 
 
Igor: 
Into your normal environment 
 
Robin: 
Tomorrow 
 
Igor: 
Tomorrow of course is another day 
 
Robin: 
And when we start the day tomorrow we’ll be looking at 
 
Igor: 
Other stories 
 
Robin: 
Yes, particularly considering how you can discover the stories that other 
people have and encourage them to tell them. And how you can look for 
those secret words, those little code words 
 
Igor: 
Secret 
 
Robin: 
That people give you… that’s right they’re secret 
 
Igor: 
Secret 
 
Robin: 
You’ll only find out what they are if you come tomorrow 
 
Igor: 
Yes, if you’re late you might miss the secret 
 
Robin: 
If you don’t come tomorrow you won’t find out 
 
Igor: 
Maybe it was inside that door inside the monastery 
 
Robin: 
Maybe be 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
190 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
Igor: 
The secret was 
 
Robin: 
That allow you to unlock other people’s inner metaphors, the stories that they 
organize their life by. To understand their world view, so that rather than 
telling just your stories, your stories become your insight, your cue to the 
universal human experience that you adapt and share with people in a way 
that matches their world view.  
 
Igor: 
Think of it this way. What if you could shape your stories so it seems like they 
happened inside their mind already?  
 
Robin: 
It’s just a thought for you to dwell on tonight. And come back tomorrow 
 
Igor: 
Tomorrow is breezy; because you don’t want to miss that do you now. 
 
Robin: 
Awake, alive and ready to go. 
 
Igor: 
Thank you very much. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
191 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
DVD 7 – How To Find Your Own Internal 
Metaphors And Make Them Into Stories That 
Others Love 
 
 
Q&A Session 
 
Igor: 
Good morning everyone how are you?  
 
Robin: 
We’re great.  
 
Igor: 
I think it would be good to start with a Q&A session in terms of your 
experiences over the last few days. The good, the bad, the ugly, the questions, 
the answers, the epiphany’s… 
 
Mia: 
You said yesterday that there are stories that have no point.  
 
Igor: 
I did. Was there a point in the question? 
 
Mia: 
Yes. That has not been my experience, that even stories without a point 
there’s something happening.  
 
Igor: 
The stories that I say have no point, it means when they come to an end it’s 
an anticlimax. It’s like you expect a big final clash of heroes and so on, but 
nothing really happens. Those are the stories where all the fun of them is 
really in the telling of it, their journey. Hence, the monastery story the ending 
of which is pointless, it has no meaning, but actually the fun of the story is 
how you get engaged in the excitement the drama and all the things that 
happen in between. 
 
 
That’s what I mean by pointless, not that the storytelling itself is pointless. It’s 
that you’re free from the tyranny of having to make a dramatic ending. 
 
Robin: 
Once upon a time I used to believe that my NLP trainers, who shall remain 
nameless, told really purposeful stories and that they thought it out really 
carefully and they were so clever to create these elaborate tapestries of 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
192 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
stories. In some ways that was a bit of a problem for me, because I heard 
stories about all the things they’d gone and done and I thought if they can do 
it I can too. 
 
 
I went out and tried it and did it. Whew! I learned quickly… 
 
Igor: 
It’s called artistic license.  
 
Robin: 
Then I realized that if you put enough complexity together, enough stuff out 
there, then you naturally get interesting resonances occurring between the 
different stories you’re telling, that come because of the connections you 
make. More importantly, every single person in the audience takes their own 
specific lesson from a particular part. They go oh I know what he was trying to 
do there. That’s very clever. How did he know?  
 
 
Then they come up to you and say, that’s amazing how did you know that? 
You say hmm yes. If you want to encourage mystic. If you want to be honest 
you go, I don’t know. Well done, thank you for getting that lesson.  
 
Glen: 
I was reminded of something that was from something said yesterday about 
the notion that if you ask someone what their favorite book was from early 
childhood you often get a sense of what their life is like. Have you come 
across that before? 
 
Robin: 
That’s priceless, thank you Glen. 
 
Igor: 
It kind of goes into what we’re talking about today.  
 
Robin: 
Can you give an example, like for example I remember, because my name is 
Robin Manuell, the guy before me when they called registration was called 
Christopher Lee, so when they called the register it was always Christopher, 
Robin and we’d both go yes. Now, my life is strangely like wondering through 
the woods with little piglet by my side.  
 
 
When they remember that and it has made a powerful impact on them and 
it’s not funny, like when I first came to England the earliest images of fiction 
that I have in my mind are a little poem or nursery rhyme, Who Killed Cock 
Robin and another is about the Robin hiding his head under his wing when 
winter comes, and Robin Hood. I identified with all those books and I’ve been 
hiding in the woods stealing from the rich to give to the poor ever since. 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
193 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
Igor: 
Watch your wallets to see if you have any money today. You’re on notice.  
 
Robin: 
Yes or if there are bandits outside to mug you, they’re my men in green.  
 
Igor: 
Any other questions or comments? 
 
Michael: Yesterday we were sharing stories and it was like my partner shared a story 
which triggered another story within me and bounced back and forth 
between the two of us really getting a close connection.  
 
Igor: 
That’s exactly how it works. Thank you for sharing that.  
 
Robin: 
If there’s one thing I hope you will take away from this weekend is that this is 
how we communicate. It’s naturally what we do and the process of becoming 
better as a storyteller and better at presenting yourself in a way which is 
congruent with your true values and effective at influencing and persuading 
people in the world to simply becoming more conscious of what you’re doing 
and then handing it back over to your natural sense of what works.  
 
Igor: 
Anymore? 
 
Student: I was just wondering a little about how humor gets into the stories? Do they 
have to be a humorous story from the beginning or is it just like when you see 
a completely composed person and then they go I don’t know. That’s when 
you relax a person, just like hitting them in the head, the brain with a brick 
and acting like it never happened, so it just pops out? 
 
Igor: 
Here’s my take on humor in general. First, things that make things really funny 
is if you go first. In other words, if you find it hysterical than people get pulled 
into that. You have to be able to appreciate the humor of the situation. As a 
rule I think that a lot of humor comes from a part of the brain called the 
amygdala which deals in novelty.  
 
 
When something new happens it just kind of pays attention to figure out if it’s 
dangerous and whether it should be afraid and run or fight. If it’s not 
dangerous than all that psychological energy has to go somewhere and I think 
it usually gets dissipated in humor, so if you get surprised by something… 
have you ever noticed how when people get really surprised they start 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
194 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
laughing. Occasionally if they get really surprised they start crying and 
laughing and aren’t quite sure whether they’re happy or unhappy about it. 
 
 
We aren’t here doing a standup comedy shop or anything like that, but if you 
lead the mind down a particular path and suddenly switch directions 
unexpected, which is where puns come in, where they think they hear one 
thing but are actually saying another. Then that surprise could be where the 
humor comes in. So you don’t have to have humor all the way through. In 
fact, you can tell a serious story and then a pun at the end which is when 
people start laughing. 
 
 
If you think about it, the monastery story was pretty serious throughout, not a 
huge amount of humor in it and it wasn’t until right at the end that you had a 
choice of either lynching me as a mob or laughing, and I’m very happy you 
chose laughter, because I wasn’t entirely sure to be honest which way it 
would go.  
 
Robin: 
We had actually arranged an escape plan. 
 
Igor: 
The reason for this curtain is that there’s a big door back there and some big 
men with guns. 
 
Robin: 
Car, engine running.  
 
Igor: 
Then on the other side of course there are stories like the one Robin told, 
which was in itself was actually quite tragic, but all the action within it was 
humorous. It was characterized in many ways as exaggerations that took you 
different places and you can clearly see Robin enjoyed telling the story, whilst 
doing it.  
 
 
I think it’s more complex than just saying you have to start with a joke from 
the beginning. There are lots of different ways of doing it. Really, just go with 
what’s there for you. If you have a quiet more sedate character than you can 
be the straight person who tells quiet sedated stories and at the end of it 
people go, wait, no. Then suddenly and slowly the penny drops and they’re 
rolling on the floor laughing.  
 
 
If you’re more of a comic character, joking, jumping around, teasing people 
and so on then that’s more the kind of story you’ll tell as well. You want to 
also stretch yourself at some point, but then if you’re really telling a story for 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
195 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
influence for the humor value of it, tell it within your own character and what 
amuses you. It tends to amuse others as well. Does that help? 
 
 
 
 
Robin: 
The strategy Igor mentions, if you find something funny yourself… there’s a 
Scottish comedian named Billy Connelly. I think that’s his style of comedy very 
much is that he gets into telling a story and he finds it funny. He thinks 
nothing of cracking up to himself on stage about the joke.  
 
 
To get practical the cat story, for example, I’d never told that story before. It 
literally happened last week and I could see it had potential. I had this central 
idea because I did actually end up in my bedroom with the curtains and door 
closed, thinking oh my gosh I’m being stalked by a cat. Is this guy going to 
come round? At the time I thought this is ridiculous, so there has to be some 
mileage in this.  
 
 
As I started telling the story I had no idea which bits you’d find funny and 
which you wouldn’t. It’s simply when you did laugh I noticed it, sometimes 
repeated what I was doing and reincorporated it later. It’s in the rapport and 
relationship that you build up with the audience.  
 
 
Until about 2001/2002, I did the trainers training with Bandler. Oh no that 
was the master track I’d already done the trainers training before then. I got 
the whole modeling thing down pat. I never thought I was funny. I thought I 
told good stories, but I didn’t experience myself as a funny person on stage. I 
didn’t think I could make people laugh, particularly. 
 
 
I went out and got a whole load of videos by Billy Connelly, Bill Hicks, Eddie 
Izzard, just a bunch of comedians. I sat down and put myself in a modeling 
trance state and watched the videos through. I gave myself hypnotic 
suggestions to learn and identify with those role models. I actually locked 
myself away for a week with those videos every day, so it was an intense 
learning.  
 
 
Then for the next month or so, I was coming out with routines, practicing 
some of the things that I’d heard them do. Finding myself coming out with 
their voices, mannerisms and things like this, as I was experimenting in public. 
Over the course of two-three months people started laughing at me, in a good 
way. I don’t think I was very funny until about 2002 and now I think I’m quite 
funny. 
 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
196 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
You’ll notice if you watch, I mean, Eddie Izzard is a master of anchoring and 
reincorporation. He tells a fantastic… he’ll do a whole load of routines and 
each routine he’ll come up with a little mime or something random and at the 
end he’ll tell a story and put all those mimes into the story. So he’s basically 
retriggering all of those anchors.  
 
 
If you watch Ken Dodd with his tickle stick, again he’s doing this waving at the 
sections of the audience that are laughing to his responses. He’s anchoring 
that laughter. You’ll see some comedians doing it with tapping the mic. You’ll 
also see a favorite thing which is they’ll steal something from the previous 
comedian’s mannerisms or set and step into the laughter and appreciation 
that the previous comedian has got. If you want to be funny look at that and 
try some deep trance identification. 
 
 
I’m glad that our teaching is so complete that you don’t feel you need to learn 
anything more.  
 
Igor: 
If there are no more questions, let’s move forward because there’s more that 
can be learned despite all the things they have.  
 
Student: Will we be doing something called trance words today or is this a premature 
question? The query specifically is, when you’re listening to somebody and 
you’re developing that deep rapport, there are certain keywords that they’re 
dropping in their subconscious, activation words if you like.  
 
 
Things like, it felt amazing or it was such a wonderful feeling, for example, 
those words will slip right through if I understand correctly into their 
subconscious when you repeat that story or echo that story back. Will we 
cover that today? 
 
Igor: 
One of the things we’re about to come onto is, in fact it’s taking that idea 
even a step further and how we can take the actual raw material that’s inside 
their mind, their unconscious territory that they’re responding to without 
realizing and work that into your story so that the story actually feels more 
like their story.  
 
 
The language is part of it but really it’s about the whole metaphor behind it. 
It’s kind of more coming to the question asked, if you can recall the stories 
you told yourself as a child you’re probably living them right now.  
 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
197 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
Robin: 
Yes, we’ll be doing a lot more of that today.  
 
Igor: 
Let’s begin. 
 
Robin: 
Before we step off with some content can I suggest just a little exercise to 
warm us up a bit and get us started. Everyone get on your feet. Shake it out a 
little bit.  
 
Igor: 
Here we go again. 
 
Robin: 
Remember those hips. We’re not going the whole Tony Robbins way, but I’d 
like for you to turn to the person on your left and say hi, good morning.  
 
Igor: 
If there’s no one on your left go to the one behind you. 
 
Robin: 
Share just one piece of learning that you can take away and use from this 
weekend. 
 
How To Make Stories Relevant 
 
Igor: 
All right. Now that you’re nicely warmed up. Yesterday you told a bunch of 
stories is that correct? Did you notice that some of the stories really hit home 
and you went oh yeah, I can tell a story? And some stories were like yeah, 
there’s something missing here because they’re not really getting engaged or 
interested. 
 
 
What do you think might be happening there?  
 
Student: The content of the story isn’t resonating with the audience.  
 
Igor: 
That’s a very nice word resonating. Why do you think that might be? 
 
Student: It doesn’t match their experience.  
 
Igor: 
Right, because it’s your story not their story.  
 
Student: Yes. 
 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
198 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
Robin: 
Not only does it not match their experience but it may not be relevant right 
now to their immediate needs, like the nested loop patterns that we used 
where Rita was getting to a strangulation point by how many were getting 
layered on there.  
 
 
I don’t know whether you’ve noticed but I used to have this magical ability 
that I could sit down anywhere and attract some crazy person to sit next to 
me. It would be like the tramp and they’d sit down and start rambling away 
and telling me one story and then segue into another one and then another 
and I’m losing the plot and wondering why I’m here, but I’m still listening.  
 
 
Actually, I discovered that you could learn some really interesting things 
about people by actually paying attention and listening. So you get to that 
sense of frustration of, I have to go now but I can’t go because you’re in the 
middle of a story and it would be rude to interrupt you, so I hadn’t learned to 
that point to just go I’m really sorry I just have to go or something. Plan your 
escape route in advance.  
 
 
There’s actually a video on my blog about this. I think there are four elements 
to ensuring that your story is congruent with that other person’s experience 
and draws them in.  
 
1. Passion 
 
 
The same passion that I mentioned in the earlier five elements model. It’s 
your passion. If you have passion for something that is often enough to 
engage people because they’re thinking where does that come from and 
where is this going?  
 
 
We have a kind of box that we put around ourselves that limits what we’re 
prepared to express, how far we’re prepared to go and if you can step outside 
that box, one of the most powerful things that you can do as a storyteller, I 
think, is going somewhere vulnerable. Whether it’s tears, laughter or anger, 
by going far enough out there you give other people permission to follow you 
and that’s a very powerful thing.  
 
2. At the same time you have to keep the ongoing rapport, which is the 
second element. 
 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
199 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
By rapport I mean everything you know from your NLP and hypnosis training, 
the unconscious interplay of posture, gesture and non-verbal communication 
that goes on between you as you work together.  
 
3. The third element is jeopardy. 
 
 
Anybody know what I mean by that? Jeopardy, danger, how much have I got 
to lose? Risk. What’s at stake? The more there is at stake, which is why 
movies are typically about the end of the world or saving someone from being 
murdered. It’s what’s the jeopardy?  
 
 
I don’t know if you are fans of Dr. Who. That was always one of my favorites 
when I was a kid. Maybe I still watch a few episodes now and then. Maybe I 
get there on a Saturday and sit down, turn it on and there’s a new episode. 
Every episode the end of the world is at stake. Dr. Who has to save the 
universe from the invasion of aliens. I don’t know how they managed to save 
the universe for 40 years every week. Thank heaven he’s around. 
 
Igor: 
Thank God for Dr. Who. Let’s us go home and eat ice cream and know that 
we’re safe.  
 
Robin: 
Stories about, I was present when a volcano erupted. I was hanging by my 
fingernails from the edge of a cliff looking down wondering what was going to 
happen next and how I’d get out of this situation. I was told I had an incurable 
illness. Jeopardy, what’s at risk, what’s to lose?  
 
4. The fourth element is relevance. 
 
 
How is this relevant to the person I’m talking to? We’re all human beings 
aren’t we? So we share a certain set of universal experiences. We were all 
born. Most of us had parents at one time or other, certainly primary 
caregivers of one kind or other. We all had some kind of experience with the 
education system. We’ve all fallen in love. We’ve all been afraid. These are 
universal human experiences.  
 
Igor: 
I’ve not.  
 
Robin: 
No. Fear. 
 
Igor: 
No. 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
200 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
Robin: 
Sorry I just imagined my daughter then, she chases me down the street saying 
I’m blind daddy… Of course you are darling… argh… 
 
 
If you can get all of those elements into your story than you’re away. The 
question is relevant, how do you know what’s relevant? People tell you. 
 
Igor: 
Without telling you directly. 
 
Robin: 
In some situations they’ll tell you because they want you to help solve a 
problem. In other situations you’re playing a more active role in wanting to be 
able to influence them, whether because you’re leading a change process and 
want to get a team together or sell something. In those situations it’s really 
important to consider what the world view is, what the weltanschauung of 
your audience is.  
 
Igor: 
Or our German audience. 
 
Robin: 
That’s good he knows how to spell it.  
 
Igor: 
I also know how to say it.  
 
Robin: 
Think about an example that may relate directly. How many of you do stop 
smoking or weight loss?  
 
Igor: 
Any kind of hypnotherapy? 
 
Robin: 
Your client when they come in will be telling themselves a particular story 
about… 
 
Igor: 
I’ve tried five times already and I just can’t quit. It’s so hard. It’s a constant 
battle against these cigarettes. I fight it and fight it and I always lose.  
 
Robin: 
Okay. There are some keywords in there; can anyone tell me what they are? 
Battle and fight. What’s the underlying world view there? It’s battle, struggle, 
fight… 
 
Igor: 
It’s a war. 
 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
201 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
Robin: 
It’s a war. I know it’s been hard for you hasn’t it? You’ve probably had 
opportunities, all these battles to stop and yet you haven’t given up yet you 
still want to win the war? 
 
Igor: 
I do but I keep getting defeated. It’s painful. I’m ready to give up almost.  
 
Robin: 
I’m really glad you’ve come here today because this is going to be an 
opportunity to rally your forces together, get the supplies you need in place 
and set things up so you have a well coordinated plan of attack. You may or 
may not choose to use that particular approach. You might choose to reframe 
that story in the first place, but you get where I’m coming from.  
 
 
People will drop certain keywords that give you clues to their entire 
metaphorical landscape. It’s also affected in that it will come out in terms of 
their motivation and why they’re here. Do they want to stop smoking because 
it’s their health and they’re concerned about their health? Is it because they 
see themselves as family is really important to them and they’re doing it for 
their kids.  
 
Igor: 
Very common.  
 
Robin: 
You really want to be able to find and address what that world view is. Clear. 
Cool.  
 
Igor: 
Robin, how do we do that? 
 
Robin: 
Well, let’s start with a simple exercise. Let’s consider, have a quick minute 
each way in pairs, situations where you’ve missed it. 
 
Igor: 
Where you’ve talked to people and thinking about it now, looking back on it, 
they probably offered you on a plate what the perception was, their world 
view or was it on a journey, were they fighting a war or nurturing a garden or 
family of some sort.  
 
 
They presented to you their perception of the metaphor on the line, whatever 
the situation was but you missed it and maybe ran with your own. So there 
was a clash of some sort.  
 
Robin: 
Consider the alternative as well where someone has said something to you 
and missed your world view.  

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
202 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
Igor: 
Yes. Easy. Spend a minute, find a partner and off you go.  
 
Robin: 
With the same partner, just to keep it simple for now, what I’d like to do is 
take in turns for one of you to come up with a problem area. It may be a 
genuine problem or something you make up. 
 
Igor: 
If you make it up just think of a specific person who generally has that 
problem, just so you can channel it more effectively, so you get more of a 
sense of the kinds of answers they would give.  
 
Robin: 
So your person with a problem, coach for now. As a coach I want you to ask 
one simple question. So this whole problem in your life, the reason that’s 
brought you here, what’s that like?  
 
Igor: 
And learn how he’s taking the whole problem, to encompass the whole 
situation which goes through more of a global view and he’s not asking for 
any content or details, what do you do or what happens? 
 
Robin: 
Let’s find out what comes out when you ask that question. Go. 
 
Igor: 
Easy. Two minutes apiece. Off you go. [Exercise starts] 
 
 
How did that go? What kinds of interesting symbols did you get? Of course 
some of you are still getting… what kinds of things came out? This is the 
interactive portion. 
 
Student: I thought it was a great question, what’s the whole thing like. It was a great 
question to find out what modalities… 
 
Robin: 
Thank you. What answer did you get? 
 
Student: What answer did I get specifically? 
 
Robin: 
Yes.  
 
Student: Inner feelings.  
 
Igor: 
So you got like an emotion thing.  
 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
203 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
Robin: 
Okay, that’s not what we’re looking for. That’s okay this is the purpose of the 
exercise is because people will typically respond in certain ways that aren’t 
what we’re looking for so thank you for giving us one of those examples.  
 
Igor: 
Let me ask you this. At any point, whilst they were talking about the feeling 
and so on, did something symbolic at any point slip out? 
 
Student: No. 
 
Igor: 
Okay. That’s what we’re hunting for. We’ll get more examples so we can get 
as a group an idea of what we’re talking about.  
 
Oresztesz: For me, I had a tough time even understanding the exercise to begin with, 
because they’re saying okay, how do you feel about that or what’s your view 
about that? It’s like I have no context in which to put it in. 
 
Robin: 
This whole problem or area that you chose to focus in, in this exercise 
whether it’s real or imagined we don’t need to know, what’s that like for you? 
 
Oresztesz: I told him it’s frustrating because I don’t know what’s expected.  
 
Robin: 
Okay. Thank you for that, you’re telling me about your feelings. I didn’t ask 
you that. What I asked you is what’s it like? 
 
Oresztesz: What’s what like? 
 
Robin: 
What’s this whole situation in your life like? 
 
Igor: 
The problem situation. 
 
Oresztesz: I’m still not understanding.  
 
Robin: 
Okay thank you very much, let’s get the next question. 
 
Igor: 
Let me do something. Just to help you out, there are many ways you can think 
of something being like. You can feel it, talk about other situations that are 
similar and so on. What we’re interested right now is if you were going to give 
us an analogy what would it be? What scenario or scene or world would best 
represent what the problem would be like?  
 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
204 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
For example, you know the film ‘Forest Gump’, life is like a box of chocolates. 
It can be like a lot of other things too.  
 
Oresztesz: Okay. 
 
Igor: 
So what’s your problem like?  
 
Oresztesz: Oh, so you’re… 
 
Igor: 
That’s it. 
 
Oresztesz: I think you mean to extrapolate and say some sort of analogy about my world 
view.  
 
Igor: 
So what is the problem you’re thinking about, that you were talking about 
with your partner, what would that be like if it were like anything? 
Robin: 
Let’s move on. Ponder that and we’ll move on. Thank you. 
 
Igor: 
This is an important step right now because we’re getting past the normal 
social interaction element into somewhat more unconscious territory, which 
is why sometimes it can be a little difficult to get there. The story is classically 
there because otherwise you wouldn’t have the problem. It’s important to 
make that next step because that’s where you really connect to the kind of 
stuff that was being asked about early on which is the really unconscious 
material. 
 
Student: I would like to share something that was in the first exercise, when we were 
thinking about what’s not happening, what’s not helping and it made me 
realize something that may be of importance to you and I’m willing to share it 
even though it’s kind of a bad thing for me. 
 
 
My stop smoking clients weren’t very successful, I would say, just about 50%. 
Now that I realize it happened ever since I read a very famous Englishman 
that has been successful in this area with logical arguments, breaking down 
how the smoking thing goes consciously. Ever since I read that book I started 
to apply some of it but it ended up being a fight.  
 
 
I’m finding the client in their own world they would end up like this, looking at 
me and it was like okay now I’ve got myself into some trouble. That was 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
205 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
something I think that broke down a little bit, a lot of rapport with many 
people and trying to force them into my way of helping them.  
 
Igor: 
This is such an important point, which goes to the heart of what we’re talking 
about here which is never disagree with their conscious mind, because all 
you’ll do is trigger a defense mechanism, as you have noticed.  
 
 
What we’re looking for here is to figure out what the unconscious mind is 
actually attached to. What is the metaphor it’s working from? Because in 
doing so you bypass the resistance because you go oh great, now we know 
what country we’re in.  
 
Robin: 
So this whole problem/situation that’s brought you here today, whether it’s 
imaginary or real we don’t need to know, what’s that like? 
 
Student: Oh that part went fantastic. It’s like walking in a bubble, not paying attention, 
just floating through the day. 
 
Robin: 
Okay thank you that’s enough. So it’s like you’re walking in a bubble. 
Fantastic. Thank you that’s enough for now.  
 
Student: We talked about a problem. It was insomnia. He told me that he was willing to 
stay awake and the other day he was tired. So the image was he was trying to 
get the last drop of the orange but the next day the orange was completely 
dry. That’s the image.  
 
Igor: 
That’s a nice image.  
 
Robin: 
Can I just ask again, this problem or situation that has brought you here 
today, what’s it like?  
 
Student: That’s how I explain the situation.  
 
Robin: 
What’s it like? 
 
Student:  I don’t feel any frustration about that, because actually I tried to optimize. 
 
Robin: 
Thank you for telling me about your feelings and behavior. I’m asking you 
what it’s like. It’s like an orange being squeezed dry every day? 
 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
206 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
Student: To the last drop. 
 
Mia: 
My problem was like being in a strange house trying to find the door out. 
There are many doors that lead to other rooms. 
 
Robin: 
So it’s like you’re in a strange house, you’re trying to find your way out and 
there are lots of doors leading to different rooms.  
 
Igor: 
Very nice.  
 
Glen: 
The catch phrase I got was a pain in the ass. 
 
Igor: 
Thank you. 
 
Robin: 
So it’s like a pain in the ass.  
 
Leonard: We got one I think many can associate with. The problem we came up with at 
first is it’s like facing a wall of tasks. 
 
Robin: 
Are you beginning to get clear about this now? 
 
Igor: 
We’ll do two more and then we’ll do another exercise so you get experience 
with this.  
 
Student: It’s like a very difficult knot that we are trying to untie. 
 
Igor: 
Thank you. 
 
Robin: 
It’s like I’m trying to untie a really difficult knot. 
 
Pamela: With my partner, oddly enough it was like, I think for both of us, being in a 
silent movie and making all these pantomiming gestures and stuff and no one 
is hearing you. 
 
Robin: 
It’s like I’m in a silent movie and I can’t hear anything anyone is saying.  
 
Pamela: No, like they can’t hear you. 
 
Robin: 
It’s like I’m in a silent movie… I suspect if you explored that a little more you’d 
find you were actually in a bubble, but we’ll come onto that at another time.  

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
207 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
Igor: 
Okay. Let’s do a quick exercise on this now. So you get the idea of the kind of 
things we’re not really looking for and it’s the kinds of things people normally 
talk about. Have another chat with your partner. Any problem, including the 
one you might be frustrated about and not being able to figure out how to do 
the exercise, that’s a useful one too. 
 
Robin: 
What’s that like? 
 
Igor: 
The question is, when we ask what’s that like, you’re looking for anything 
that’s like an analogy, a simile, a metaphor whatever these words mean to 
you. You’re looking for some other situation that somehow describes how this 
particular event feels to them or how they perceive it in some ways. 
 
Robin: 
I’d just like to point out, notice how Pamela reacted there, when I tried to give 
her something that wasn’t right. Very strong. That’s important, because you 
don’t always get it right so it’s important to notice and test, because people 
are often much clearer about what it’s not like than they are what it is like.  
 
 
You see how people are… it’s quite difficult to get through our conscious 
reactions like behaviors, feelings and vision. You’ll see people processing as 
they try and answer the question. 
 
Student: I just want to make sure I understand the point of the exercise. Is it to 
understand the subconscious map coordinates so that as they’re experiencing 
something in their view of the world you’re able to match that and 
understand how that terrain works? 
 
Igor: 
For the moment don’t worry too much about how you’re going to use it, we’ll 
get onto that. The main thing you’re looking for more unconscious content 
than conscious. Beyond that we’ll come back to more later.  
 
Robin: 
All the fluff or usual stuff they would give you in this situation that you might 
choose to work with is left brain stuff. This like question maps straight onto 
what their right brain representation is going to be.  
 
Igor: 
Spend two minutes doing that again and we’ll come back to see if we can 
make it easier for the next round after this one. [Exercise starts] 
 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
208 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
Hands up if you want to talk about what you got the second time round and if 
it was any easier or different. We’ll do another round to see if we can make it 
even easier. 
 
Student: It was a lot easier this time round. The answers that we both got were much 
more interesting as well.  
 
Igor: 
Excellent. Do you want to give us an example? 
 
Student: Yes. The problem was like being on a bicycle and pedaling and the foot keeps 
slipping off the pedal. 
 
Igor: 
Beautiful. You can see a nice simple metaphor there right and already some 
material that might be useful somehow to merge, even though we don’t know 
how yet. Thank you, very nice.  
 
Student: Like walking in a maze.  
 
Igor: 
Again, do you see now the more symbolic elements of underlying stuff that’s 
coming out. Anyone else? 
 
Student: All right. The metaphor I got was, like sleeping in the morning and the alarm 
clock starts ringing and you push the snooze button and again and again and 
again… when you eventually wake up and get up it’s too late to have 
breakfast.  
 
Igor: 
Very nice. He’s given us the whole story.  
 
 
I presume one or two of you had slight difficulty in coming up with a 
metaphor or simile. Something you can do, a slightly more risky strategy with 
a stranger, but if you have enough rapport that they’re willing to engage 
there’s a simple way that you can get the unconscious material the symbol to 
come out and basically you needle them politely. You misunderstand them. 
 
 
Would someone that had a problem with this like to have an example so we 
can have a real thing?  
 
 
What’s the general problem area? 
 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
209 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
Student: I have to go to a meeting to present results on the problem I’m working on 
and I feel nervous even though there’s no need to feel that.  
 
Igor: 
Okay. What’s that like? We get the problem coming out. I don’t know. It 
sounds a bit like you’re a Mexican bandit about to jump into a bar and shoot 
everyone. Is that what it’s like? 
 
Student: No. 
 
Igor: 
Okay. Am I surprised? What is it like? What’s it more like? 
 
Student: Afraid of what’s going to happen. So going into a room and not knowing how 
they’re going to react. 
 
Igor: 
Oh great, so it’s like going into a room and not knowing how the people inside 
are going to react.  
 
Student: Yes.  
 
Igor: 
So is it like jumping into a shark tank and wrestling the big fish? 
 
Student: Yes, perhaps.  
 
Igor: 
You tell me. I have a sense it’s more like something else.  
 
Student: Maybe they’re not sharks but they certainly give me a very uneasy feeling. 
 
Igor: 
So if I understand you correctly, you know there’s a room you have to go into 
and you think you’re going to get a hard time from the people in that room. Is 
that right? 
 
Student: Yes and thinking they’re not going to be satisfied.  
 
Igor: 
They’re not going to be satisfied. So what are those people like? 
 
Student: Those kinds of people are like salespeople, big mouth, always criticizing.  
 
Igor: 
All right. So it’s like walking into a room with big mouth criticizing people that 
aren’t going to be satisfied with what you have to say, is that right? 
 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
210 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
Student: Yes. 
 
Igor: 
Thank you. Do you see how simple it is when you poke them a little bit? Of 
course we can elaborate on that and get an even richer metaphor. The point 
is if you get stuck on one level don’t necessarily loop around it too much. You 
could force it a bit more. Did you feel like I was being unfair or did you dislike 
me for misunderstanding your situation or was it more like he’s trying to 
understand me but he’s not getting it? 
 
Student: Not at all. 
 
Igor: 
Which one? 
 
Student: I meant to say that you were not intruding. You were polite.  
 
Igor: 
The attitude on one side is respectful in terms of an inquiry, but you can still 
prod a little in terms of what is this really like and by presenting the false 
analogy, false symbol and false metaphor it forces them out a little bit. Your 
preference as far as the exercise should be, not to actually present your 
symbol to get a reaction, because you’d rather it just be pure coming out of 
their mind.  
 
 
He almost bought into the whole shark metaphor which would have been 
unfortunate because that’s my fish in his dream, literally. However, if you’re 
getting stuck on one level just prod a little bit and see what comes out and 
then you get a much nicer, smoother process going on. Does that make 
sense? 
 
 
I’d like you to spend two minutes again, find a different partner and different 
problem so it’s a fresh thing, sit and have a normal chat and just ask them 
what is that like? If they don’t understand it at first feel free to misunderstand 
it sometimes. You have plan B and C, give an analogy, ask for an analogy and 
then give a false example. The more extremely false it is the less likely you are 
going to interfere with their symbol. [Exercise starts – off you go] 
 
 
At the risk of punning, what was that like? Who’s getting more of a sense that 
they’re getting to more symbolic stuff? 
 
Student: She gave me a good symbol straight off and I sat there thinking, oh shit, she’s 
answered the question already. I needled her by deliberately giving a slightly 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
211 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
ridiculous symbol and she responded with something that was much better 
than the first and we both agreed that touched on the matter.  
 
Igor: 
So you got some tools for exploring and getting richer things back. Excellent. 
 
Student: I think it’s very important too when the person has problem to work with 
symbol to bring him in another state. 
 
Igor: 
Yes. Part of the advantage of symbols is you don’t get so stuck in the content 
and ‘logic’ or ‘reasonableness’ of the problem, you work in a more symbolic 
realm where symbolic solutions can work too, right? 
 
Student: Let’s say for that story what he was thinking I immediately get in mind Bloody 
Mary drink. 
 
Igor: 
That’s a nice metaphor. I’m not quite sure I understand it, but it’s interesting.  
 
Student: Talking about juice, vodka and very hot stuff.  
 
Igor: 
And that fit the context your partner was talking about.  
 
Student: Yes with the story he was talking about.  
 
Igor: 
The key here is you want to make sure you get as much or as close to get their 
symbols out rather than introducing yours, oh I know what it’s like it’s like 
when Robin was misunderstanding Pamela earlier on. You want to make sure 
you get what is actually going on inside them because that’s going to be the 
material that will be useful for our stories when we get round to that point 
later.  
 
Student: When I presented my metaphor I got another one. That took me off my 
metaphor but it didn’t really help me because I was thrown away, like that’s 
not how it feels. For me I would have appreciated it if he would say how is it 
like to be in? 
 
Igor: 
So, when the person asked you, you gave them a symbol and metaphor and 
then he misunderstood you on purpose and that took you further away is that 
what you’re saying? This is important. If you’re already getting to the symbolic 
stuff there’s no need to prod them anymore. The last question wasn’t 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
212 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
necessarily something you need to do all the time it’s more to help you when 
you get into a position where you’re not quite getting the symbolic bit.  
 
 
In fact, in time where we want to get to is where you can conversationally 
draw these metaphors without even realizing you’re doing anything. 
 
Robin: 
Yes, these are training wheels. This is an exercise to help you establish exactly 
what it is you’re looking and listening for. We wouldn’t expect you to actually 
do this straight conversation. 
 
Igor: 
Because then what will happen is you’ll have a conversation like, let’s say 
Robin and I are chatting… hey how’s it going? 
 
Robin: 
Good thanks it’s all right.  
 
Igor: 
What’s up, you sound like something happened? 
 
Robin: 
I feel like I’m a little bit stuck. 
 
Igor: 
Do you hear it? What do you mean? Stuck in what way? 
 
Robin: 
Well, it’s like I’m walking through treacle all the time. 
 
Igor: 
All right. So it’s like walking through treacle and getting stuck in there. 
 
Robin: 
Yes.  
 
Igor: 
There’s a conversation you might have with a friend in a restaurant, café, bar 
or wherever. If you don’t know what to look out for then that becomes a 
throwaway line that you can ignore. Then you go oh, I get you. I get like that 
sometimes too. For me it’s like walking through the snow and it’s heavy and 
stuff. Now we’re totally talking about different things. 
 
 
We do that naturally. I’m sympathizing. I understand his metaphor. I’m 
searching for similar experiences in my life. I give him my metaphor which 
means I’m putting my fish in his dream and he’s going what are these fish 
doing here? Does that help? 
 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
213 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
These are literally training wheels to get passed being aware of it and the nice 
thing is that as you become more aware of it, you’ll hear these things popping 
out constantly anyway. 
 
Student: That’s the point of conversational hypnosis, to get on with it.  
 
Igor: 
Exactly. We’ll get into more conversational stuff as we get on with it. Shall we 
add more? 
 
Robin: 
Sure. To move this to the next stage we’ll give you some more choices and 
more questions to ask, as well as variations on this theme. We’d like you to 
consider some situation, some area where you have a victory, a triumph and a 
positive experience. 
 
Igor: 
Where you did great. Where you were proud of. Where you feel happy about. 
A wonderful moment you’ve experienced. A touching moment. Something 
wildly positive. Then have a chat with them again to see if you can get their 
symbols to come out, but now you have some more questions around that 
like what is that like? What kind of stuck is that? It’s like walking through 
treacle. 
 
 
Is there anything else about that treacle that is about that stuckness in that 
treacle? 
 
Robin: 
It kind of clings onto my feet and every time I try to take a next step it’s really 
hard.  
 
Igor: 
Are we getting clear in terms of how you’re starting to feel about this? 
Importantly folks, at this stage start feeding back exactly what they’re saying. 
It’s like you’re in treacle and you’re stuck and every time you try to move your 
feet the treacle is stuck to your feet and it’s hard to lift them up.  
 
 
That stickiness of the treacle, what is that like?  
 
Robin: 
It’s like it kind of goes on forever.  
 
Igor: 
So you’re stuck in this treacle and every time you try and take a step… 
 
Robin: 
Yes it’s like an ocean of treacle. It’s actually like Western soup in there at low 
tide.  

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
214 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
Igor: 
That’s a lot of treacle. Do you see how you naturally start pulling out the 
bigger metaphor? Again, right now we’re doing it mechanically just to get 
sensitive to these things whereas, in time you’ll be able to do it little more 
conversationally. 
 
 
Let’s take two minutes apiece, different partner and this time ask them about 
something positive, happy and vibrant in their life. Off you go. [Exercise starts] 
 
 
Okay, so is it getting easier yet?  
 
Group: 
Yes.  
 
Igor: 
Are you starting to get a sense of the symbols coming out and so on? Any 
questions so far?  
 
 
We’ll have a break in a minute. First of all, when you go into break you will 
chit-chat that’s what happens, so I want to invite you to listen out for the 
hints that there’s a metaphor on the line for the conversations you’re having. 
If you should be moved to ask a question like what’s that like or no, that 
pigeon you were talking about, what kind of pigeon is that exactly? 
 
 
Then I really can’t you prevent you from doing that on a break that’s your own 
time, you can do whatever you want. Off you go. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
215 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
DVD 8 – Symbolic Realities, Symbolic Influence 
& Putting Hypnotic Storytelling All Together 
 
 
Symbolic Realities 
 
Igor: 
Before the break you had a chance to investigate people’s symbolic realities 
with the unconscious mind how it symbolizes the highs and lows of life, shall 
we say.  
 
Robin: 
We’d like to give you some more questions, more ways of extending that. 
 
Igor: 
But to make it more fun, rather than focusing on a specific life issue the 
person’s had or an event like that, let’s just use some training wheels that we 
had back on day one just for the fun of it. Do you remember that strange new 
world exercise we did, spinning people around and a whole new world comes 
out? We’ll play with that a bit and to do that we’ll need you to move all the 
chairs to one side again. If you begin with that we’ll get into the exercise.  
 
Robin: 
So, you remember the exercise right? You find a partner and spin round and 
you’re all really fluid already right now in doing this exercise. You’ve done it 
before a number of different times and when you open your eyes you can 
look around and start creating this whole landscape.  
 
 
How do you help people develop that if they haven’t had a nice creative 
warm-up? These questions are a variation on something called clean 
language. Anyone heard of clean language? It’s a therapy model, based on the 
work of a guy named David Grove. It’s very much about exploring people’s 
symbolic landscape, but that symbolic landscape that represents their 
problems is also their creative symbolic landscape. 
 
 
By asking the right kinds of questions, you can help them to step through and 
around in that model of the world. So go find a partner, two minutes apiece 
to begin with. One of you spins round, the other is the coach and I’d like you 
to take them through these kinds of questions.  
 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
216 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
You can start with what’s that like, what do you see? Is there anything else 
there? Where are they standing? What’s to the left or to their right and 
what’s right in front of them? What’s behind them? What happens next? 
You’re exploring the dimensions of space and time, in which they move in 
their symbolic landscape.  
 
 
What you’ll find is that asking those questions once before, what happens 
next, starts to pull out the elements of the story and introduces different 
elements. So, on your mark get set go. 
 
Igor: 
Was that fun? All the stuff, getting pepped up? Good. Let’s do something 
interesting as an experiment. I’d like you to find a new partner, which means 
you have at least two more tasks. The second thing I want you to do is to have 
a little chat with them about some wonderful moment in their life, some 
happy event, positive event, some victory, something that makes them feel 
proud, etc. 
 
 
Talk about that and it can be as simple as, what makes you feel proud? When 
was the last time something really interesting or positive happened to you? 
All you can do is chat about that, normal chit-chat sort of stuff for a minute or 
two. You may hear some of these symbols start to come out and if you do 
note them, there’s nothing you need to do with them right now.  
 
 
Once you’ve talked for a minute or so, what I want you to do then is to say 
great, let me stop you there for a second, spin around and see a strange new 
world you’ve never seen before, start describing it and use these questions to 
populate it to bring it to life.  
 
 
So you’re going to have normal chit-chat about something positive. Then 
you’ll do the same exercise again and notice what happens. Then you’ll switch 
around and we’ll come back and talk about that. Sound good. Different 
partner. Four minutes apiece. Off you go. [Exercise starts] 
 
 
How did that go for you guys was that interesting? How did the first and 
second exercises compare to each other, the first strange new world and the 
second where you talked about something positive first? Were there any nice 
little differences there?  
 
Student: It was much more involved.  
 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
217 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
Igor: 
The second one was much more involved right?  
 
Student: Yes, more fun. I got the feeling that she was really feeling and experiencing 
this and having fun with it. 
 
Igor: 
Right, she was having fun with it and feeling it. Can I ask you, in terms of the 
experience you talked about beforehand, we don’t need to know what it was, 
was there a similar emotion in the positive experience to the one she 
experienced later on in the strange new world? 
 
Student: Yes it was similar, but the second one was much more intense.  
 
Igor: 
Absolutely and that makes sense. Thank you for that.  
 
Student: The second time around I ended up in an amusement park, and I’m still a 
teeny bit nauseas. 
 
Robin: 
Thank you. 
 
Igor: 
Very good, I think. So much for the interactive part. Here’s one of the reasons 
we wanted to start doing this. You probably noticed like you said, did you in 
general notice that the second set of strange new worlds were overall more 
engaging, more emotional and more vivid to people? Would that be fair to 
say?  
 
Group: 
Yes. 
 
Igor: 
The reason for that is because they’ve been primed ahead of time. By talking 
about some positive event it starts accessing all the memories and all the 
associations with that, including symbols. So you’ll probably find that within 
these strange new worlds that popped out of nowhere was actually very 
relevant to the symbolic elements that related to the positive experience we 
were talking about and so on. 
 
 
Get the idea? Hence the emotions were stronger, because a lot more stuff 
was happening. I think I want to talk now about the kinds of metaphors to 
look out for, the similes that people come out with, because you’ll be able to 
hear them happening. There are some patterns that repeat frequently.  
 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
218 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
Robin: 
Some people found themselves face to face with a brick wall. This is a 
common one, obstacles. You’ll hear various metaphors come up because they 
are universal. If you think about that, if you have an obstacle right in front of 
you than it’s really difficult to move forward in life isn’t it? You might find that 
you’re pushing and pushing against things and not making any progress.  
 
 
You might be banging your head against a brick wall. You might not be able to 
get over, over it. But maybe you need to explore what’s underneath that or 
find a way round it. Another common one that people come up with is edges. 
It’s like I’m on the edge of a cliff. Again, they can’t move forward. 
 
 
It feels like they’re looking down at people or they’re above people. Pedestals 
is another one. They find they’re standing on a pedestal and everyone is 
looking up at them, they’re looking down at everyone else, they still can’t 
move forward unless they step down from the pedestal and come down to 
earth. 
 
 
Containers, I’m depressed. People who are depressed are often in a pit of 
despair. They’re in a pit. So what’s it like when you’re in a pit? Again, it’s 
probably dark down there. You’re sick of looking up at everyone around you. 
Maybe you feel like you can’t move in any direction, you’re walking around in 
circles. You really just need to climb out, but who’s going to help you get a leg 
up and pull you out? 
 
 
Do you understand?  
 
Group: 
Yes. 
 
Robin: 
Does anyone not understand? Great. So, there are certain kinds of metaphors 
that you’ll find. For containers by the way, we can also be containers. I’m full 
of sadness. He’s full of joy. What kind of container is that? He’s just letting off 
steam. When you find these key metaphors that people are using about 
where they are… I’m stuck.  
 
 
Again, if someone is stuck, it might be because they’re on a pedestal. It might 
be because they’re moving through treacle. You need to find out enough 
about that particular stuckness, because when they’ve considered all the 
options, there’ll be some that are left. They might not be able to move 
forward but perhaps they can take the right path to a solution. 
 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
219 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
When you begin to understand somebody’s symbolic environment in that 
way, you can begin to coop their experience. To give you an example, I was 
doing this exercise on myself recently and it was like I was in a cave. That cave 
was halfway up a cliff. Sometimes in that cave it’s difficult to see, it’s dark in 
there and you have the pressure of the rocks bearing down on you.  
 
 
If you can’t go to the edge of the cave you can actually see forward. I can see 
the sun in front and the wonderful world in front of me, but I can’t move 
towards it because I’m on edge. So again I have to either, climb down to earth 
and just join everyone else, but maybe as I climb down I also need to grow up 
so I can still see what’s ahead of me, the bright future ahead of me.  
 
 
If you’re in a pit of despair, quite often that’s a good one because people 
don’t climb out of a pit they grow up and up out of it. So the whole purpose of 
this little section, and we can only cover it briefly, is to just start to tune your 
ears to listen out for these kinds of metaphors because once you’ve found 
them you can coop them and effectively mind read a whole part of their life. 
Do you understand?  
 
 
As you begin to explore, as we’ve already touched on earlier, there are whole 
sets of metaphors that we use about the organizations we work in, about the 
countries and towns we live in, about life, about what is our life like. What is 
life like? Is it a battle? Is it a garden? 
 
Igor: 
Is it a box of chocolates? 
 
Robin: 
Is it a box of chocolates? Is it a game?  
 
Igor: 
To add something here, the interesting thing is every group or sub-culture 
tends to have one or a handful of similar metaphors or symbols they operate 
by. This will be of importance to you if there’s a particular group you wish to 
influence, your customers for example. Your children also for example, in an 
area they will all have similar metaphors which they’re picking up from each 
other from the language, the way they talk about each other’s frustrations 
and so on. 
 
 
To the extent that you can get a sense of what your subcultures metaphors 
are, you’ll have a much stronger line into… 
 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
220 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
A- Understanding their behavior, how they feel and why they act certain 
ways, and  
B- To create the kinds of stories that fit them, that will either take them out 
of this dark hole or actually use the dark hole as the starting point for 
whatever influence you need to have in that place. 
 
Robin: 
Let me give you an example of how powerful this can be. I worked with a 
company in media technology, who were involved and trying to engage their 
supply chain, because they understood if they got everyone in the room 
together, basically engaged their supply chain more and shared their market 
research and ideas of where they were going forward, found out what the 
suppliers plans were for the future then they would be able to coordinate 
their activities a lot better.  
 
 
They could then anticipate what was coming up and eliminate a whole load of 
wasted effort. They’d been doing this for six to eight months and they kept 
sending out emails inviting their supply chain, suppliers along to meetings. 
They were getting hardly any response at all. A couple people turning up 
weren’t getting it.  
 
 
They changed two words, supply chain to delivery partner. The metaphor, the 
way they explained to me what the change was, was the supply chain is like 
this where people are handing things on and moving like this and it’s very 
much being led by what’s needed at the end. Then the person over here is 
really far away from there.  
 
 
With that one change of expression, delivery partners, the delivery, they were 
all suddenly handing, it was like they were standing in a circle delivering what 
they were producing, to the end customer. So they were all a lot closer 
together, they were partners. Their intention and outcome was focused on 
the end customer and how their relationship supported that. 
 
 
It worked completely. Within another four months they built up enough of 
momentum there that all the other suppliers who were still hesitating knew 
they had to get on board now. 
 
Igor: 
There’s another example from General Motors. Some years ago in the 
60s/70s, General Motors seem to be going through periods of struggle quite 
often and this particular instance there was a congressional hearing where 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
221 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
basically it was an unpopular thing and they were going to ask for a bailout, 
some money to help them and it was a politically hot potato. 
 
 
People were saying no, no more bailouts you sink or swim on your own. That 
was really the general attitude of the day. It was either the COO or CFO, he 
walks up to this hearing and really it’s supposed to be a massacre because 
everyone had made up their mind, but instead of talking about a bailout or 
handout to help them struggle to get through he just changed the metaphor.  
 
 
He said this isn’t a bailout it’s a safety net. Just by switching those two words 
around from bailout to safety net everyone went that’s all right, we can give 
them a safety net, yeah that makes sense. We’re talking about at a time when 
billion dollar investments, which now would be trillion dollar investments, but 
regardless we’re talking about a lot of money being handed out because a 
metaphor changed. 
 
 
So begin to appreciate a little bit of why we spend so much time doing this 
right now, because if you want to influence others, whether it’s 
therapeutically, business-wise, socially and so on, if you don’t appreciate the 
metaphors from which they’re operating unconsciously, they themselves 
don’t know. Notice how we started the exercises quite harshly this morning 
and it was difficult right, and now it’s getting easier because you have more of 
a sense what we’re trying to do with it. 
 
 
Consciously we’re not used to thinking these ways and yet unconsciously it’s 
still happening anyways, and to the extent that you can get to the symbolic 
level and understand where they’re operating from, you can have a sense of 
okay, do we coop the story they’re telling and then infuse characters that fit 
or do you help them transform the story they’re telling so that a better 
metaphor emerges that will help them more and of course serve you more as 
well? 
 
Robin: 
In order to illustrate this further and give you some examples we’re going to 
run quickly through some of the simple images we’ve come across in 
organizations. There’s actually a book called Images of Organizations by 
Gareth Morgan. It’s very handy. It’s a bit out of date now but is still useful for 
the insights it gives. 
 
 
My work as a consultant and working for companies, and when you go in 
there one of the first things we look to establish, because often we’re going in 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
222 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
as part of a change management program. There’s always a change going on, 
somebody is buying somebody, some merger is happening or a market is 
changing. They have to find something for all these managers to do, basically. 
Am I being cynical? Sorry. 
 
 
One of the most common metaphors we find is that change occurs because 
we tell you what’s going to happen.  
 
Igor: 
We’re going to lay down the law.  
 
Robin: 
Interesting. There are two ways we can go with that. There’s the law, well it’s 
command and control. Basically it’s rules and regulations, command and 
control, often military metaphors. In that kind of organization you’ll find 
battle, fight, people are going to work with their armor on and they’re coming 
home at the end of the day bruised and battered. 
 
Igor: 
And they’ll look for ways to attack whatever’s coming, they’ll want to get their 
preemptive attack in otherwise they feel they’ll be attacked, their positioned 
gets weakened. 
 
Robin: 
And unfortunately because of the way organizations work, often they’re 
involved in friendly fire skirmishes going off all the time.  
 
Igor: 
Do you see how these things will naturally evolve? Anyone here work at a 
senior managerial level or been in that situation? This is not uncommon is it? 
These metaphors actually get literally talked out like that you don’t even have 
to search for them, they get thrust upon you. 
 
Robin: 
The second most common metaphor we come across is it’s a marketplace. 
We’re going to sell the change. We have to get our employees to buy into this 
new way of working together. They might give you a menu of choices. It’s still 
actually a very much top down approach there. There’s a central supplier of 
items for the marketplace. 
 
 
The metaphor is all about this buy-in, how do we message them? How do we 
brand this change effectively?  
 
 
Another frequent metaphor is, we’re going to roll out some ideas but we’re 
going to test them first. This is the organization is the science project or 
experiment. It’s coming towards the machine metaphor. This is a system we 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
223 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
can understand, we’re going to test and gather results and we’re going to do 
some experiments. 
 
 
It’s still very much a top down approach and when you get into the whole 
scientific world view of an organization it will be about optimizing 
performance.  
 
Igor: 
If you think about some of these metaphors you’ve heard so far, just think 
about the two different positions. You have the management structure on 
one end and the employee structure at the other. How do the managers feel? 
Well, I’m in control. I’m the experimenter and you’re my lab rat. Essentially 
that’s the idea isn’t it? Or, I’m the vendor and the only place you can buy is 
from me, so it’s red, red or red which do you want?  
 
 
Maybe it’s I’m the commander, do as you’re told or you’ll be fired. How do 
you think the lab rats feel about that? They’re going to be really enthusiastic 
about the change that’s going to come aren’t they? Oh great, we get to 
choose between red and red again, yay! So you begin to see how 
misunderstanding the symbolic landscape can create all kinds of issues, and of 
course, the manager is going to be like I don’t understand this, we’re selling 
them change it’s good stuff. Of course it is if you’re the one with the goods.  
 
 
If you’re the one running the experiment it’s great. We should do that 
sometimes right, go into university, get all the experimenters and stick them 
in a maze and make them hunt the cheese. It’s not so much fun then is it? It’s 
important that you understand what these symbols are implying for everyone 
involved, because you can probably predict all kinds of problems that arise 
and also places where influence will be easy based on that particular model.  
 
Robin: 
As a consultant going into an organization, what am I doing? I’m consulting. 
I’m having a consultation. What am I a doctor? Is the organization my patient? 
I’m the expert still, still this top down approach, I’m the expert. I’m going in 
and consulting with people. I’m asking them what they think. Hmm. 
 
 
They’re telling me their problems. I’m going away and creating a solution. I 
can fix this. The way we always tried to work, because we were a big bunch of 
hippies was co-creation. With consultation, ultimately you end up going in 
there, ask the questions, gather the information and then you go back to the 
center and move to either, tell, sell or test mode. 
 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
224 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
Co-creation is more like a… 
 
Igor: 
A village. 
 
Robin: 
A village working together.  
 
Igor: 
You’ve heard the expression a global village? That’s because the big players 
are going oh, well you’re the CEO and I’m a CEO, I can’t look down on you 
because that would be looking down on me, so we’re in part of a global 
village. We work together. 
 
Robin: 
That’s right. We’re in it together.  
 
Igor: 
But of course, with our village not the lab rats. Do you understand how a lot 
of the issues can start coming out this way?  
 
Robin: 
Some very simple obvious ones, organizations is machines. In that situation 
it’s easy to throw a spanner in the works or for those non-English, a wrench in 
the machine.  
 
 
Some of those organizations will be well oiled. 
 
Igor: 
Some will get a little rusty. 
 
Robin: 
This machine, we only really need to tinker with it a little bit and it will run 
fine for ages. It’s running smoothly, why change things. Organizations can also 
be creatures, organisms, you know, there’s the head and the heart, the 
kidneys, the liver. They’ll all be mapped onto different parts of the 
organization. 
 
 
Brains is another one. Organizations is brains. Interconnected networks of 
neurons cooperating with each other. That’s a little image and insight to get 
you noticing. 
 
Igor: 
For those of you thinking, what does this have to do with me I don’t work in 
an organization and have no desire to? It’s a simple way of looking at any 
collection or group of people that identify with each other. If you’re working 
with troubled teenagers they’ll have their own symbols. They might be the 
Lost Boys, the rejects.  
 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
225 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
I know many of you are hypnotherapists, so you’re community that you’re 
serving, if it’s blue collar workers, white collar workers, if it’s very affluent or 
middle class, each one of those areas will have a different mindset, a different 
set of symbols they aspire to. You already know this right?  
 
 
In America they keep talking about this is an Italian community or African-
American community. What they’re really saying is that there are certain 
metaphors and symbols that these people believe in that will shape the story 
of their lives and your interactions with them. 
 
 
If you’re an influencer with people, understanding what those are will be very 
useful and having a tool to get what those symbols are will help you. For 
example, if you were to just chat with the client you have or the people you’re 
going to influence and you talk to enough people, you’ll notice that there is a 
general pattern, a lot of people who run similar things.  
 
 
Now, to use for example the military metaphor, some will see it more as a 
struggle. Some will see it about being in control. Some will see it more about 
authority figures, but they’re really saying the same thing just from a slightly 
different point of view. By understanding that you will be able to influence 
them and do something with your stories to help along with that too. 
 
 
Get the idea? Useful stuff? Shall we do something practical with it?  
 
Practical Use Of Symbols 
 
Igor: 
Let’s do an exercise. Let’s do this in pairs and talk to your partner the same 
way you did this morning about a particular issue that you could help them 
with. Let’s orient them towards something. You can even role play if you like.  
 
 
So, for example, what kinds of people do you want to influence? Give me 
some ideas so we can use something that fits your metaphor. Let’s grab the 
kinds of people you need to influence so you get an idea of what we’re talking 
about and then we’ll start pulling out the symbols so we can start using them 
practically. 
 
Pamela: My French in-laws. 
 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
226 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
Igor: 
So your in-laws who happen to be French. If anyone here knows the French 
very well you can start role playing them or you could even role play for them 
because you’ll have some instincts about how they think. You might actually 
want to be your in-laws and have someone else pull the metaphors out so you 
can see them, because you’ll have a lot of instincts about them.  
 
 
What other groups of people might you want to influence? 
 
Student: People that need help with chronic pain. 
 
Igor: 
People in chronic pain. What area are you? 
 
Student: In my case it’ll be pain for sickle cell anemia, which creates a lot of pain 
around the body. 
 
Igor: 
So people with sickle cell anemia sure, so with a disease or certain condition 
and there’ll be some ideas around that.  
 
 
Who else has a specific idea in mind? 
 
Stefan: 
Colleagues and co-workers at your place of work. 
 
Igor: 
Fantastic. You can look out for a lot of the metaphors you’ve already heard 
because there’ll be in there somewhere. You get the general idea of what 
we’re talking about right? 
 
Student: Teenagers.  
 
Robin: 
The Lost Boys and Lord of the Flies. 
 
Igor: 
Everyone’s going oh yeah. Exactly. I think the easiest way to do this exercise, 
and actually a fun way of doing it is to reverse roles. If you play the audience 
you want to influence. Have your partner talk to you about what it’s like and 
see if you can map it out around you. There’s a hole here and a wall there and 
a gun over here and all together I’m really in a bad place.  
 
 
Have them pull out, because you know those people already you’ve already 
talked to them and have some instincts about it, so chances are you already 
know more about their symbols and metaphors than you realize, so this might 
be a nice useful way for you to get at that. What we’re looking for is… you 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
227 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
don’t have to get the whole story right now you just need enough that we can 
use it usefully when we get back to the idea of storytelling. 
 
 
Do you understand the idea of the exercise everyone?  
 
Robin: 
They’re looking for their weltanschauung. 
 
Igor: 
Yes. Let’s take five minutes apiece, 10 minutes total, really think about a 
context where you want to be influential and then place someone you already 
know who is in that context so you can let those symbols emerge in a 
relatively close proximity to reality. Off you go. [Exercise starts] 
 
 
Are you beginning to have more fun now playing with these symbols? I know 
it’s a bit of a slower start this morning, but are you getting into this whole 
gear of it? Judging by the volume of the room, some bigger stuff is coming out 
now right? Did anyone surprise themselves that you were channeling the 
group, either teenagers, colleagues or so on and someone would go yeah, this 
is probably what they would say and stuff starts coming out where you were 
almost surprised? 
 
 
What kind of groups and symbols did you discover just now? 
 
Arthur: 
I didn’t particularly discover any symbols, but what I did, I wanted to see how 
I could influence my employees better so we got down to one group of 
employees and as I began thinking what they had to go through by putting 
myself in their place, I was thinking boy they really do have a hard job. 
 
Igor: 
It’s useful to understand that right?  
 
Arthur: 
Yes. 
 
Igor: 
So if you were one of your employees, one of your nurses, what would that be 
like? 
 
Arthur: 
There’s lots going on, lots of responsibility and people coming at you from 
every direction. 
 
Igor: 
Right, so when there’s lots of stuff going on and lots of responsibility… 
 
Robin: 
People are coming at you from every direction… 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
228 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
Igor: 
What’s that like? 
 
Arthur: 
A pressure cooker. 
 
Igor: 
It’s like a pressure cooker and the pressure just mounts over the course of the 
day right?  
 
Arthur: 
Yes. 
 
Robin: 
And unless they need some way of releasing that it might explode.  
 
Igor: 
Yes. 
 
Robin: 
It’s probably a good idea if sometimes they get to let off steam a little.  
 
Arthur: 
Not in the office.  
 
Igor: 
Well, you do realize that steam drives steam engines. That’s one of the ways… 
you can see by looking at Arthur’s face… there are locks I didn’t even know I 
had tumbling into place right now. It’s not the complete intervention now but 
it’s a great big door it’s like explain further. Well, let me illustrate with a story 
and suddenly we’re into a transformational story with a teaching tale.  
 
 
Do you see how useful this stuff can be now? A very simple snapshot can take 
someone from no, they can’t explode in the office to, oh maybe I can harness 
that energy to be something useful. But I could tell that to them logically and 
say yes let’s take all their pent up frustrations and harness it to something 
useful and productive in the office and it’s going to go are you crazy? Are you 
nuts?  
 
 
As opposed to, now you’re thinking how could I harness the pressure that’s 
building up? Do you understand the value of this now? We haven’t even 
gotten into how to build this into your stories yet, we just want you to go to 
lunch with an appreciation that you actually have a very potent tool here 
when applied with a little wisdom.  
 
 
Thank you for doing that Arthur.  
 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
229 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
Student: I was thinking about a potential client of mine who would not really believe 
hypnosis would help him. It was like being in a crowd watching a magician up 
on stage and suddenly everything falls apart and he becomes ridiculed. 
 
Igor: 
Would you be the magician for this client? 
 
Student: Yes. 
 
Igor: 
Again, there are many ways you can play with that and say well, what makes 
you think this is not a comedy magician. Would you not be entertained? 
Really, as long as you’re entertained does it matter whether or not you see 
through the trick? Again, do you see how they’re giving you the reframe 
there?  
 
 
Another version might be, so why on earth are you coming to see a magician 
if you don’t think the trick will work, if you expect it to fall apart? 
 
Student: Right. 
 
Igor: 
That will tell you more about the metaphor. So again I’m not giving you 
solutions as much as giving you some food for thought about the metaphors 
you discovered or the symbols.  
 
Student: I was thinking about trying to influence a lawyer on how to solve the 
underlying disputes that might be a mediator or using negotiation 
techniques… 
 
Igor: 
Great. 
 
Student: ... Instead of going through the legal motions. When we spoke I go the feeling 
this is a big box I’m carrying and people try to steal stuff out of my box.  
 
Igor: 
It’s almost like a kid, I’ve got my toys, don’t take my toys. 
 
Student: Exactly. Then the next thing, Ollie asked the question, what if you want to 
change the content how would you do that? My solution was, actually I can 
become a mediator myself and let’s make a legal profession out of it and 
that’s what’s happening in real life. It was very insightful. 
 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
230 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
Igor: 
Right. So now you understand. Of course, the more people you talk to in 
terms of the legal field the more you’ll understand what the global metaphor 
is, but you now have some ideas and people are doing this constantly. Great 
salespeople are constantly talking in symbols and metaphors. Sometimes they 
impose their own, but the wise ones just understand the ones everyone else 
is thinking about. It’s probably like, think of a child with their box and they’ve 
been protecting their toys and so on. 
 
 
After a while it’s the same old toy it gets boring. How about figuring out how 
you can change these toys and get a brand new set of toys in there so every 
day is like Christmas. Have you heard me change the metaphor? I’ve gone 
from a kid being possessive about toys to Christmas, which is about receiving 
more. Of course, the underlying implication being is that there are ways to get 
more business by doing something where you think you might get less.  
 
 
Are you beginning to see some value here folks? Anyone else want to share 
theirs? 
 
Student: I found the metaphor of a smoker going into hypnosis like being prodded by 
the world to go into a dark forest. This dark forest has the reputation of 
creating zombies. My coach was kind enough to point out that zombies aren’t 
so good because it’s like dying but sometimes there are parts of you that just 
need to die, like cancer.  
 
Igor: 
That’s a very powerful metaphor. I love that because you’re doing my job for 
me. We’re thinking about, let’s give them some reframes and things like that, 
and you’re going no we’ve got them already. Thank you for doing our job for 
us.  
 
Student: I’m a business consultant. I’ve always gotten the impression/feeling that I’m 
an adult and my clients are like kids playing in the sandbox. They are 
sometimes fighting, grabbing from each other, and just looking from the 
highest perspective down. I’m trying to teach them. Now I realize that I should 
go down to be together with those kids and play with them, than the results 
will occur.  
 
Igor: 
Because you won’t have the same kind of resistance with authority and that 
stuff. You won’t have naughty two-year olds you’ll have cooperative ventures. 
Thank you. 
 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
231 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
Robin: 
Those kids can only grow up when you set them free to do so.  
 
Rita: 
So tomorrow I’ll be working with a group of managers who have asked me to 
think with them about a change management process in the company, so I 
put myself in the shoes of their employees and George was very good at 
pointing out what they would be thinking, so I was going we’ve done this 
before, we’ve traveled down this road so nothing new is going to happen. 
 
Igor: 
That’s one symbol there, traveled down this road before.  
 
Rita: 
That was the one I was still hooked on and thinking, how could I reframe that 
one so they can appreciate the new road they’re going down? 
 
Igor: 
Right. People who live in the same place and same town have basically walked 
every single road at least once. The question is not whether you go down the 
same road it’s how far you keep going. Unless you keep going, how will you 
ever get anywhere else? 
 
Robin: 
You’ll never leave town. 
 
Igor: 
Right. Your choice.  
 
Robin: 
Sometimes of course we can go down the same road everyday on the way to 
work in a kind of trance and then something happens that jars us and wakes it 
up and it might be that we suddenly see something beautiful or… 
 
Igor: 
For example… 
 
Robin: 
… if we’re lucky. If we’re unlucky we might crash before we notice what’s 
going on. 
 
Igor: 
… I used to take the same bus to school every single day. Do you see where 
we’re going with this right now?  
 
 
I think that’s enough food for thought. I think you get the hint about the 
metaphor and what this matter is for.  
 
Robin: 
I want to reassure you because I know you’ve been very busy for the last 11 
days.  
 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
232 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
Igor: 
You worked hard. 
 
Robin: 
It’s a long road. 
 
Igor: 
In this seminar and others as well. 
 
Robin: 
And some of you are probably thinking, looking for to opening the front door 
and going into the other room 
 
Igor: 
Ah, my goodness, so much stuff.  
 
Robin: 
And really have you got what it takes  
 
Igor: 
Where do I put it all? 
 
Robin: 
To absorb any more information 
 
Igor: 
The fact is 
 
Robin: 
We’d like to reassure you 
 
Igor: 
That it is simple 
 
Robin: 
This afternoon 
 
Igor: 
Will get easier 
 
Robin: 
We’ll just be doing a few short and easy 
 
Igor: 
Fun exercises 
 
Robin: 
To give you the opportunity to consolidate what you’ve learned 
 
Igor: 
And realize it’s quite powerful 
 
Robin: 
And go away with a bit of a bang 
 
Igor: 
Right.  
 
 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
233 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
Symbolic Influence 
 
Igor: 
Welcome back everyone, how are you feeling? We’re in the last run, the final 
run of the day. This is the time to pull out of the bag, get those stories ready, 
get your engines running and do something. Are you ready? Dress yourself. I 
think he went to the coffee shop today. Don’t hold it against him he can’t 
handle his drugs.  
 
 
Let’s start again. How is everyone doing?  
 
Group: 
Yay! 
 
Igor: 
Hope you had a nice lunch. Before lunch we talked about symbolism in terms 
of people’s personal metaphors and how those apply to cultures and so on. 
You can understand that you have personal metaphors and we have cultural 
metaphors that we can buy into unconsciously within the groups or social 
groups we engage in. 
 
 
They can be useful and helpful for the influence process. Many of you already 
started to play with the idea of taking the metaphor that’s emerged and 
basically hijacking it. So, where they’re getting stuck with something, Arthur’s 
example was great with the idea of the pressure cooker and you can let off 
some steam. 
 
 
The concerns come out metaphorically but not in the office. Then you’re 
asking yourself, how can I use this metaphor to actually turn things to a 
positive event, whether it’s how far down the known path do you have to 
tread before you find new ground, the kind you’re looking for? Or, it’s 
reminding them that steam powers railway engines and get lots of work done. 
 
Robin: 
Because you need to keep a lid on things for the steam pressure to build up, 
to have enough pressure to actually get the thing moving. But then steam 
engines have a governor, that little device that spins out as it gets faster and 
faster which lets out steam gradually and just at the right pace, so you get the 
ideal pressure.  
 
Igor: 
So nothing else, they can all start whistling and work. (whistling) 
 
 
What I’d like you to do is a simple exercise just now and that is getting 
together with a partner and now that we’re used to this kind of language, see 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
234 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
if you can start drawing the metaphors out a little more conversationally. Get 
a new partner. Let’s focus on simple issues, something light we don’t want to 
get too heavy right now.  
 
 
Your main job is that once you’ve got a little bit of the symbolism out is can 
you somehow hijack the symbol to make it something more pleasant so it can 
become a useful metaphor for change. Does that make sense? The same way 
we had here with the pathway and so on. Does anyone have a question about 
it? Again, this is simpler to do than to talk about, so unless these looks are 
those of eager anticipation, go for it.  
 
 
Let’s take that as a sign that it’s time to do an exercise. Please find a partner 
you haven’t talked with yet. A simple small problem. Spend a minute or so 
just chit-chatting to see what symbols pop out. When you get a nice symbol 
like I’m stuck or there’s a lot of pressure then just zero in on it, what’s that 
like? Is it like a banana peel and you slip on it? No, it’s like a pressure cooker 
with pressure building up. 
 
 
Once you get that out, reframe it back to them and see the impact it has. You 
don’t have to go anywhere with it you just have to see the impact it has. We’ll 
show you right after this how to use it in a more storytelling context.  
 
Robin: 
Please do change partners.  
 
Igor: 
Change partners, change problems and change everything else you want to 
change. Five minutes apiece. Off you go. [Exercise starts] 
 
 
How’d that go guys? Who enjoyed that? Who is starting to see and experience 
the value of this symbolic way of working with stories as well?  
 
Student: It’s interesting. We were talking about problems dealing with teenagers. 
Basically, you want to chunk the crap out of them and shake them loose. 
What do you shake loose? Then we said if you look at a fruit tree, you shake it 
and you get fruit out. Then he says what if you get the fruit and give it to her. 
So if I say something nice first and… 
 
Igor: 
Then you shake the tree. Isn’t that nice. How does that make you feel, given 
that situation when someone says oh, that’s another way of looking at it? 
 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
235 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
Student: It’s interesting. It showed me that maybe the problem is more mine than 
someone else’s. 
 
Robin: 
It’s interesting often, if you remember the mirror story I told earlier about the 
guy and the fruit doesn’t fall far from the tree does it?  
 
Student: Guess not.  
 
Igor: 
Do you see the mileage you can get out of these things? Thank you for 
sharing.  
 
 
Let’s take the next step now. I know someone who’s a friend of mine who’s a 
salesman and he had a terrible time working. He was metaphorically 
constantly battered and bruised, because going on a sales trip was like going 
to war zone for him. He would turn up battle a client, sometimes he’d win 
sometimes he’d lose, but whether he won or lost there’s always going to be a 
scar for the interaction. 
 
 
He would come back exhausted, exhausted being exhilarated from the sale or 
exhausted and depressed at the humiliating defeat. One day his boss came in 
and said look Brian, I understand why you’re making life so hard for yourself. 
He said what you don’t realize is that all the people we’re sending out to see 
these potential clients, they need what we have.  
 
 
You’re both sitting in the same boat and someone has to be willing to pick up 
the oars and row. So it’s up to you, you can fight each other or you can start 
rowing. What are you going to start doing? 
 
Robin: 
Because the thing is we can’t all steer the boat.  
 
Igor: 
Too many cooks spoil the roast…  
 
 
So you get the idea that you can take those very metaphors that are 
underlying and start weaving them into your stories so that the 
transformational moment is actually presented in a story metaphorically and 
symbolically at the same time. See how that works?  
 
 
If someone wants to be really clever here’s what you can do with this. Do you 
remember the picaresque adventure from yesterday, where you tell like a 
shaggy dog story or you have a genuine story with lots of little things? Well 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
236 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
you have your loops and your little adventures, what if a side adventure was 
Brian’s sales problem or whatever the story is you want to throw in there, but 
then you go back to the main adventure of figuring out what’s going on in this 
monastery. 
 
 
You’ve just created a very simple, very covert bit of transformation haven’t 
you? The idea sinks but before they think of it too much, you carry on the 
story and they’re like tell me more about that and it sits in the backs of their 
mind where it belongs. Because it addresses the very question that someone 
over here was asking at the start of the day, which is, if you look at the stories 
children read and you look at your life, aren’t you really living out the same 
story? 
 
Group: 
Yes. 
 
Igor: 
The reason you’re living it out is because you forgot to think about it. It just 
became an assumption you made about life, a symbolic assumption that you 
recreated. So now we give them a symbolic way of transforming that. Do you 
understand the idea of this? 
 
Robin: 
Can I tell a little story? 
 
Igor: 
It’s a storytelling seminar so be my guest.  
 
Robin: 
Just on that issue of overt and covert, because you can use these things 
directly and also be a bit more subtle. I did one piece of work with a client 
who was working in a very rural bound IT department. He wanted to 
encourage creativity and to shake things up a bit, get people to realize they 
could step outside the rules they’d created for themselves and be a little 
more adventurous.  
 
 
He didn’t think that the direct approach would work, so what we ended up 
doing was to collect together newspaper articles, magazines, stories, the kinds 
of things that were lying around the office that you could point out and say 
read this story, the kinds of things you could leave on a bulletin board and not 
comment on. 
 
 
To give you an example of the kind of story we were looking for, there was a 
newspaper article about a fireman who was being punished, reprimanded in 
front of a work tribunal because he’d disobeyed his line manager during a fire 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
237 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
fight. This huge building was on fire and he’d disobeyed and obviously in that 
kind of situation that’s a very dangerous thing to do.  
 
 
He was reprimanded and fined. The tribunal pointed out in their judgment 
that they’d taken into account the fact that going into the building enabled 
him to save the life of two young children who were trapped there. So it was 
an example of a situation in which breaking the rules was the right thing to 
do. 
 
Igor: 
Do you get the idea?  
 
Student: Your example of converting the war metaphor into a boat seemed rather 
juxtaposition to me. Is that still okay?  
 
Igor: 
Remember, you’re doing this in story form right now. You can do it more 
smoothly if you want as well. Because you’re doing it in story form you’re not 
necessarily going straight like now, now you told me that your relationship 
feels like a war zone great. Now, let me tell you a story about someone else 
who had a relationship that resembled a war zone. That’s exactly what I’m not 
suggesting.  
 
 
So you have a little longer to do this exercise precisely because you’ll tell a 
little value story, maybe a mind reading story and then a teaching tale and 
one of those may become your picaresque adventure. Inside of that you don’t 
even talk about necessarily a relationship being like a war zone, you’ll talk 
about some other event being like a war zone.  
 
 
The fact that you’re using the metaphor, in this case a relationship that’s like a 
war zone and in the story it’s the salesperson treats it like a war zone, that’s 
the bit where you catch their attention. If you want you can put in a 
resolution  where you thought about it and maybe it pops out later on in 
another picaresque adventure much happier. That creates that transition 
point. 
 
Robin: 
There are a number of ways to go also. Navy’s take part in wars and during 
the First World War, horses had to pull together to pull the canons and guns 
forward to the front lines.  
 
Igor: 
There are many ways you can take it, we’ve just illustrated how you can take 
what you just did very directly as a reframe and put it inside a story. Let’s put 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
238 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
it this way , recall yesterday you were sitting there at the edge of your seat 
really listening to people’s stories and getting all excited by them. 
 
 
And you probably weren’t thinking too much about them other than they 
were very entertaining. Once you have someone there, that’s when you tell 
the story and it becomes a smoother transition. Then you move on to other 
parts of the story. Remember the open and closed loops once again, that 
becomes a useful thing to do there.  
 
 
It’s just another way of using a transformational story now that you have tools 
to build it in a different way. Does that help? Any other questions? All right. 
Let’s spend five minutes apiece with the same partner that you’ve already 
talked to a little bit about the metaphors so you’ll know where it’s going. You 
don’t necessarily have to elicit it now, just start talking to each other telling a 
personal or value story, some other thing and somewhere in the third or 
fourth story embed your reframe story, your transformational story and then 
finish up your stories in whatever way you want.  
 
 
So a five minute simple set of stories that you’re throwing in, one of which 
somewhere in the middle will be the one which handles the actual symbol 
they gave to you, like the fruit tree, pressure cooker and so on. Do you 
understand the exercise? All right then, off you go. [Exercise starts] 
 
Final Exercise 
 
Robin: 
In a moment we’re going to do another mingling exercise and we’re going to 
ask you to move from partner to partner and exchange a little bit of 
information.  
 
Igor: 
Shall we move the chairs first? 
 
Robin: 
Make sure you move around. Go up to people who you’ve worked with, who 
you’ve spent time with during the last three days, last 11 for some of you and 
get a chance for those people to really connect and share this information. 
The kind of information we would like you to share is simply like this… what I 
liked about what you did. What I enjoyed about working with you. I loved it 
when you did that. 
 
Igor: 
And if you want to add a simile along the way, it’s a bit like… 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
239 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
Robin: 
You’re some kind of storytelling ninja. 
 
Igor: 
Now, the important thing here is you will probably, in your journey around 
the room, bump into one or two people you haven’t really had interaction 
with in terms of stories and so on. You know what you do then? You tell a lie. 
You pretend you’ve had this amazing time because let’s face it, there is no 
contradictory evidence.  
 
Robin: 
I’m sure there will be universal principles, universal experiences that you can 
draw out. Igor, what I’ve really enjoyed about working with you is re-igniting 
our rapport on stage and I love that we can be a little competitive and banter 
and neither of us feel sulky or upset about it. I admire your ability to stay 
absolutely focused on these guys learning for 11 days in a row, working 10 
hour days. I love it when you show your human side, when you laugh I think 
you can be really funny. 
 
[Applause] 
 
Igor: 
My thoughts Robin I have to say and it’s very true. What I really enjoyed is the 
way that we can interweave stories and pick up where the other person left 
off. There aren’t a lot of people who actually have that kind of flow so that’s a 
real pleasure. As always I adore your stories. I’m sure these guys will agree 
with me when I say that just sitting here watching you perform them is like 
theater.  
 
 
It’s like wow, sit back I haven’t paid for this I’ll just watch. It’s phenomenal 
and every time I see you perform like that and every time I see you train I 
actually learn more of myself. It’s like going into the smoothie bar and having 
all the worst things in one drink only they’re not being good for you and I like 
that. It’s a private moment. 
 
[Applause] 
 
 
Do you get the idea? 
 
Robin: 
So, 10 minutes.  
 
Igor: 
Off you go. 
 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
240 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
--- 
 
 
 
How are you doing, did you enjoy that exercise? 
 
Group: 
Yes. 
 
Igor: 
Did you hear some nice things? Dare I say did a few little stories start coming 
out just because you couldn’t help it?  
 
Robin: 
Did anyone get feedback that surprised them in a nice way?  
 
Group: 
Yes. 
 
Robin: 
Excellent. 
 
Igor: 
Very good.  
 
Robin: 
Just that exercise I’ve run on four different continents in corporations and I 
always get the same feedback at the end of a session, which is, that was the 
best thing we’ve done all day. We never get a chance to do that in our work. 
That’s a tip for the consultants in the room.  
 
Final Thoughts 
 
Igor: 
We’re coming to the tail end of the day now. You have worked hard. I know 
you’ve worked a lot of things. As we know when you come to the end of an 
important journey usually people like to leave you with a last thought, idea or 
image. I’d like to do the latter. I’d like to leave you with one very important 
idea that hopefully you’ll take with you when we finish here.  
 
 
The idea comes more in the form of an image. If you imagine a monastery or 
abbey on top of a hill and inside there somewhere is a crypt, and if you follow 
a long series of tunnels you’ll get to a door. Behind that door lie all the stories 
you never told. I think it’s time to open that door don’t you? 
 
Robin: 
I started off talking about a windmill I bought for my mom. When I came over 
here I was wondering how I could keep in touch with my daughter while away 
and just relay how do I get her to relate to the experience that’s going on? So 
Paddington Bear smuggled himself into my suitcase and I have photos of him 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
241 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
peeking his head out of the suitcase, looking out the airplane window. Me, 
being surprised to find him in the hotel room. 
 
 
Us cuddled up in bed together. Him on a bicycle in Amsterdam by the canal. 
Sipping a bear by a famous bridge. Training with Igor Ledochowski.  
 
 
Igor: 
Why thank you for… 
 
Robin: 
I also told you a story about a picture frame. For me that story really 
encapsulated very simply, the real power of story. It’s just a picture frame 
right? It’s just a few dollars. But the story attached to it makes it priceless. So, 
on that note it’s time to close your book and close the book on this training. 
 
Igor: 
It’s usually easiest to do with flat feet on the floor 
 
Robin: 
And with your hands positioned comfortably, perhaps on your laps 
 
Igor: 
Eyes closed usually enhances an experience 
 
Robin: 
It doesn’t matter whether you take a deep breath in right now 
 
Igor: 
Or simply relax 
 
Robin: 
And allow your breathing to happen naturally 
 
Igor: 
As your thoughts circulates naturally, one 
 
Robin: 
The ones you feel 
 
Igor: 
Lazy idea to another 
 
Robin: 
Your breathing changing now 
 
Igor: 
And there are so many things you’ve experienced 
 
Robin: 
Let your attention play 
 
Igor: 
So many stories you’ve told 
 
Robin: 
Only on those most pleasant sensations 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
242 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
Igor: 
So many stories you’ve heard 
 
Robin: 
Those feelings of relaxation and comfort 
 
Igor: 
You’ve been touched 
 
Robin: 
In a deep way 
 
Igor: 
And moved 
 
Robin: 
And you can still feel the weight of your body on the chair 
 
Igor: 
By all the experiences  
 
Robin: 
And you can feel the temperature 
 
Igor: 
That others have shared with you 
 
Robin: 
On your skin 
 
Igor: 
In the form of stories 
 
Robin: 
You can hear the sounds in the room 
 
Igor: 
And there’s that woman’s story and truth 
 
Robin: 
And you can review the experience of the last three days 
 
Igor: 
Making one more palatable to the general population 
 
Robin: 
And you can imagine 
 
Igor: 
Important truths 
 
Robin: 
Whether you’re sitting in that chair 
 
Igor: 
Coming from your story 
 
Robin: 
Of who you are or another chair 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
243 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
Igor: 
What you value. And there are so many different ways to experience comfort 
 
Robin: 
That chair 
 
Igor: 
Could be any chair in the world 
 
Robin: 
Could be an armchair 
 
Igor: 
It could be a rocking chair 
 
Robin: 
It could be a throne 
 
Igor: 
It could be something you’ve sat in many times before 
 
Robin: 
Or it could be a chair you’ve only sat in once 
 
Igor: 
If you sat in a chair 
 
Robin: 
In a house 
 
Igor: 
In a clearing 
 
Robin: 
In a wood 
 
Igor: 
And waited comfortably 
 
Robin: 
Waiting for somebody to come visit you 
 
Igor: 
An important task 
 
Robin: 
A story to tell 
 
Igor: 
Something that only that individual needs to hear 
 
Robin: 
And they’ve traveled on a long journey 
 
Igor: 
A long way to be here 
 
Robin: 
To find you waiting for them 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
244 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
Igor: 
And there they are by the doorstep 
 
Robin: 
Here 
 
Igor: 
Walking in the room. Sitting down and looking at you expectantly 
 
Robin: 
As you begin  
 
Igor: 
The story 
 
Robin: 
To tell them  
 
Igor: 
What they need to hear  
 
Robin: 
Right now 
 
Igor: 
In the cloak of story 
 
Robin: 
And whether it’s a long story or a short story 
 
Igor: 
You have all the time you need 
 
Robin: 
Whether it’s the seed of the story 
 
Igor: 
In the next few moments 
 
Robin: 
Or the completion 
 
Igor: 
To expand time inside 
 
Robin: 
Of something left open 
 
Igor: 
To make it fit 
 
Robin: 
It’s a story that’s really important for you to hear 
 
Igor: 
The exact you’re telling. And notice the emotion. Feel how your words touch 
that person 
 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
245 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
Robin: 
Hear the sound of your own voice 
 
Igor: 
Change them 
 
Robin: 
As you tell that story 
 
Igor: 
Frees their own voice 
 
Robin: 
Using all the new skills you’ve learned 
 
Igor: 
Frees their own movements 
 
Robin: 
See the impact it has on them 
 
Igor: 
Releases the stories trapped inside 
 
Robin: 
Feel that connection between you both growing there together 
 
Igor: 
And you’ve done so many things now 
 
Robin: 
Have you not 
 
Igor: 
You’ve achieved so much now 
 
Robin: 
And you’ve learned 
 
Igor: 
And you can achieve even more. As the story finishes, a bigger one begins 
 
Robin: 
And it’s a story you may know the beginning  
 
Igor: 
Far away from a house and a clearing and a forest, there is another life 
 
Robin: 
Another place 
 
Igor: 
That awaits someone 
 
Robin: 
And you all know the way home don’t you 
 
Igor: 
There are so many things that await you and the stories you have to tell 
 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
246 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
Robin: 
And as you travel 
 
Igor: 
Will you experience it on a plane or a train 
 
Robin: 
On a car or a boat 
 
Igor: 
A bus or a bicycle 
 
Robin: 
As you continue on your journey 
 
Igor: 
Collecting stories and sharing them 
 
Robin: 
What diversions and detours will you take 
 
Igor: 
Who will you meet 
 
Robin: 
In the airport 
 
Igor: 
Who will you tell a story too 
 
Robin: 
In a café 
 
Igor: 
How will you know what story needs to be told next 
 
Robin: 
At work 
 
Igor: 
When something occurs 
 
Robin: 
At home 
 
Igor: 
And a person simply has a need to hear a story 
 
Robin: 
You’ll know 
 
Igor: 
That you have 
 
Robin: 
Just the story 
 
Igor: 
To share now 
 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
247 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
Robin: 
That they need 
 
Igor: 
A lifetime awaits you 
 
Robin: 
A lifetime and we don’t know how it ends 
 
Igor: 
We don’t know where it’s going to go 
 
Robin: 
We only know the journey continues 
 
Igor: 
It’s full of stories  
 
Robin: 
And that story unfolds forever 
 
Igor: 
Every moment 
 
Robin: 
Each of our individual stories 
 
Igor: 
Every beat of your heart 
 
Robin: 
Interweaving and intertwining 
 
Igor: 
Every dream you have  
 
Robin: 
Each of us 
 
Igor: 
Every obstacle you confront 
 
Robin: 
Each person you meet is the hero in their own story 
 
Igor: 
Every person you meet 
 
Robin: 
And make sure you’re the hero in your own story 
 
Igor: 
Every river you cross. Every goal you achieve 
 
Robin: 
Because if you’re not taking  
 
Igor: 
Every person you help 
 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
248 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
Robin: 
Authority for that journey 
 
Igor: 
Or simply sharing a good moment 
 
Robin: 
Than who is 
 
Igor: 
With another human being 
 
Robin: 
And now you know so much more 
 
Igor: 
You can sit in any chair in the world 
 
Robin: 
You could be sitting in an armchair 
 
Igor: 
You could be sitting on a throne 
 
Robin: 
You could be sitting on a chair in a training room 
 
Igor: 
You could be sitting right at home 
 
Robin: 
Or you could be sitting right there in that chair 
 
Igor: 
In an office or a plane 
 
Robin: 
Feeling the weight of your body on that chair 
 
Igor: 
And knowing that there’s a story to be told 
 
Robin: 
And getting ready now to return 
 
Igor: 
To bring it all together 
 
Robin: 
Only as quickly 
 
Igor: 
As all that rest insides you now 
 
Robin: 
And as you take a nice deep breath 
 
Igor: 
Your eyes can open 
 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
249 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
Robin: 
Enjoying taking that feeling with you and knowing 
 
Igor: 
And you can look on the world 
 
Robin: 
As you open your eyes 
 
Igor: 
As a true storyteller now 
 
Robin: 
When you’re ready to do so 
 
Igor: 
Doesn’t the world look a little different like this 
 
Robin: 
You’ll have a new view and a new perspective 
 
Igor: 
That’s really where stories come from isn’t it? 
 
Robin: 
It’s been fascinating to share this journey over the last three days. I’ve had a 
wonderful time.  
 
Igor: 
I have too. Thank you Robin. 
 
Robin: 
You rock mate.  
 
Igor: 
You too. 
 
[Applause] 
 
 
As with most things, neither of us could have done any of this if this room was 
empty. I want to thank each of you for participating and throwing yourself in. I 
know it hasn’t been easy at times and it’s been a lot of energy required of 
you. We’ve seen you really transform and your stories have become fantastic.  
 
 
I want you to appreciate yourselves and each other for becoming the 
storytellers you’ve become. Give yourself a round of applause. [Applause] 
 
Robin: 
And just in case we forget, the assistants at the back. 
 
Igor: 
All these fine people without whom… 
 
Robin: 
Thanking especially our camera crew who has captured every word for you. 

How To Be A World Class Hypnotic Storyteller 
 
250 WCHS                                       ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
Igor: 
We have our all important sound engineers without whom you would have 
heard nothing. I think the last clap should be to all the people you will be 
telling stories too to thank them in advance for listening and sharing moments 
with you. 
 
 
This story is over, now go home and find some new ones.   
 
 
 

