
We Interrupt This Program

The graphic image on the front cover was inspired by this photograph, 
taken by Ossie Michelin (Inuit) while he was covering the Elsipogtog 
First Nation’s 2013 struggle against corporate encroachment and oil 
fracking on their ancestral territories in New Brunswick. After the photo 
went viral, Michelin noted on his website that it had become “a symbol 
of Indigenous resistance and the power and grace of Indigenous 
women.” Artist Gregg Deal of the Pyramid Lake Paiute tribe in Nevada 
created the image featured on the cover, an image used widely by 
groups supportive of Elsipogtog and the Idle No More movement. 
| Photograph courtesy of Ossie Michelin and APTN National News

We Interrupt This Program
Indigenous Media Tactics 
in Canadian Culture
Miranda J. Brady and John M.H. Kelly

© UBC Press 2017
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in 
a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means, without prior 
written permission of the publisher, or, in Canada, in the case of photocopy-
ing or other reprographic copying, a licence from Access Copyright, www.
accesscopyright.ca.
Library and Archives Canada Cataloguing in Publication
Brady, Miranda J., author
We interrupt this program : Indigenous media tactics in Canadian culture / 
Miranda J. Brady and John M.H. Kelly.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
Issued in print and electronic formats.
ISBN 978-0-7748-3508-4 (hardcover).–ISBN 978-0-7748-3510-7 (PDF).–
ISBN 978-0-7748-3511-4 (EPUB).–ISBN 978-0-7748-3512-1 (Kindle)
1. Native mass media–Canada. 2. Native peoples in mass media. 3. Native 
peoples and mass media–Canada. 4. Mass media–Social aspects–Canada. 
5. Mass media and culture–Canada. I. Kelly, John M. H., author II. Title.
P94.5.I532C22 2017 	
302.23089’97071 	
C2017-904960-7
	
	
C2017-904961-5
UBC Press gratefully acknowledges the financial support for our publishing 
program of the Government of Canada (through the Canada Book Fund),  
the Canada Council for the Arts, and the British Columbia Arts Council.
Set in ITC Giovanni Std and Univers Lt Std by Marquis Interscript
Copy editor: Jillian Shoichet
Proofreader: Caitlin Gordon-Walker
Indexer: Margaret de Boer
Cover designer: Jessica Sullivan
UBC Press
The University of British Columbia
2029 West Mall
Vancouver, BC V6T 1Z2
www.ubcpress.ca

For Chris and Darlene

This page intentionally left blank

Contents
Preface / ix
Acknowledgments / xi
Introduction: Indigenous Media Tactics / 3
1  Media Practices and Subversions: Survivor Testimonials 
in the Truth and Reconciliation Commission / 31
2  IsumaTV’s “Testimony by Isuma”: Online Expressions 
of Inuit Culture and Assimilation / 57
3  Redfacing, Remediation, and Other Indigenous Art 
­Tactics: Challenging Cultural Institutions / 80
4  imagineNATIVE as Industry Intervention: Supporting 
and Growing Indigenous Media Makers / 109
5  Reporting News in Indigenous Communities: 
A Conversation with Journalist Duncan McCue 
on Respect and Relationality / 137
Conclusion: Media Tactics Old and New / 159
Notes / 167
Works Cited / 183
Index / 197

This page intentionally left blank

Preface
This book evolved out of our long-standing interest in 
Indigenous voices of resistance to colonial paradigms, and 
how Indigenous people actively challenge the limiting iden­
tities imposed upon them by the state and popular media. 
We ask how Indigenous actors intervene in established insti­
tutions through media tactics to disrupt the typical flows of 
image and discourse found in popular culture. As we ­discuss, 
institutions can be negotiated and subverted even when 
they were not originally designed to serve the best interests 
of Indigenous people. 
For Indigenous critics debating the efficacy of established 
institutions, the stakes are very high. As Indigenous people 
live the effects of colonization, they are concerned with the 
ways in which their participation in institutions may in­
advertently disadvantage their communities. They are also 
in a race against time to empower disillusioned young 
people. According to a Health Canada study published in 
2015, the suicide rate of First Nations youth is five to six 
times higher than that of non-Indigenous youth, with Inuit 
youth suicide rates among the highest in the world. The leg­
acies of colonial violence continue to plague Indigenous 
people, and many see both government and privately fund­
ed institutions as instrumental in this process, including 
laws and policies that work to dispossess Indigenous people 
of their lands and self-determining authority, at times re­
sulting in their displacement and the removal of children 
from their communities. Too many Indigenous people suf­
fer racism, inadequate government support, disproportion­
ate policing and incarceration, and poverty. They are victims 

Preface
x
of violence at abhorrent rates. Indigenous women are espe­
cially vulnerable with regards to their safety and security. Yet 
despite the oppressive circumstances in which they find 
themselves, Indigenous people routinely perform creative 
expressions of resistance and resurgence using the very ap­
paratuses originally designed to erase them. We honour and 
explore the nuances of those tactics in this book. 
We come to research and write this book from very differ­
ent perspectives. While Miranda J. Brady has been studying 
Indigenous identity construction in her academic work for 
fifteen years, she is a non-Indigenous settler from northern 
California. John M.H. Kelly is a Skidegate Haida, Eagle 
Moiety, of the Haida Nation of British Columbia. We further 
explain our subject positions and our relationship to this 
work and Indigenous communities in the book’s introduc­
tion. We believe our individual strengths and experiences 
complement each other and bring a unique perspective to 
our research. At the same time, the book reflects not only the 
complementary aspects of our differing experiences but also 
the ways in which our perspectives have been put in tension 
through our collaboration.
We hope we have treated the Indigenous actors described 
in this book with the dignity and respect they deserve. We 
hope we have appropriately conveyed their strength and the 
vital importance of their efforts. We remain at a historical 
conjuncture where Indigenous lives are always in a struggle 
against the imperatives of settler society, and we hope our 
research provides new insights into how media tactics can 
incite social and political change. As we write, Indigenous 
activists and allies to the south in the Dakotas are fighting 
for their Mother Earth, for their lives and our lives. To those 
and other activists, artists, teachers, elders, community lead­
ers, and survivors who continue the struggle, we say Haawa 
(thank you).

Acknowledgments
There are so many people to whom we owe our gratitude for 
making this book possible. We would like to start by thanking 
the participants who generously gifted us with their time, in­
sights, and stories, including Shane Belcourt, Nanobah Becker, 
Terril Calder, Dana Claxton, Duncan McCue, Kent Monkman, 
Ry Moran, Alanis Obomsawin, Murray Sinclair, Jason Ryle, 
and the residential school survivors giving public statements 
at the TRC’s 2013 national event in Montreal. We would also 
like to express our sincere appreciation to UBC Press and our 
editor, Darcy Cullen, for her encouragement and confidence 
in us. She solicited insightful feedback from three anonym­
ous reviewers, which contributed immensely to the develop­
ment of the book. We thank the reviewers for their detailed 
comments and prompts for further inquiry. We would like to 
thank the Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council 
of Canada for its financial support of this project. Our ­research 
assistants were also instrumental during various stages; thanks 
to Derek Antoine, Emily Hiltz, Lindsay Lachance, Martha 
Troian, Tamalik McGrath, Pitseolak Pfeifer, and Anna Hoque.
I, Miranda, would like to thank my family, who have been 
a central part of this project. My partner, Chris Russill, provid­
ed intellectual and moral guidance throughout the process, 
as he always does. We have engaged in more conversations 
about our respective work than I can count, and he never fails 
to nourish my thinking and motivate me. My daughter and 
son, Maya and Ewan, have been incredibly understanding 
about my divided attention over several years’ time. As they 
grow, I know they will understand the importance of their 
relationships with place and community, including the 

Acknowledgments
xii
Algonquin people on whose territories we now live, love, and 
learn. I want to thank my parents, Bonnie and Mike Brady, for 
their support of my scholarly pursuits throughout the years 
and their unconditional love; the latter is a precious gift in­
deed. My mother-in-law, the unflappable Sandy Russill, has 
also been exceptionally helpful, including the many hours of 
care and love she devoted to my children while I was away 
researching and presenting work.
My colleagues, friends, and mentors have been amazingly 
supportive, and my many conversations with them contrib­
uted to the thinking reflected in this book. I would like to 
acknowledge Salma Monani, Michel Hogue, Debra Merskin, 
Shoshana Magnet, Pavel Shlossberg, Jeremy Packer, Matt 
McAllister, Sarah Sharma, Michael Orsini, Melissa Aronczyk, 
Ira Wagman, Karim Karim, Josh Greenberg, Sheryl Hamilton, 
Eileen Saunders, Kirsten Kozalanka, David Dean, Carol 
Payne, Ruth Phillips, and John Sanchez. Anna Hoefnagels, 
Kahente Horn-Miller, Martha Attridge-Bufton, Sandra Dyck, 
Brenda Vellino, Jennifer Henderson, and Eva Mackey and 
our colleagues in Carleton’s Centre for Indigenous Research, 
Culture, Language, and Education (CIRCLE) have also played 
an important role in informing my intellectual and com­
munity-based work. I would also like to acknowledge my 
students at Carleton University, as we have had many won­
derful conversations over the years related to this book, 
which undoubtedly shaped and inspired my thinking. 
Finally, I would like to thank my colleague and friend John 
Medicine Horse Kelly. I have learned so much from seeing 
how he cares for his communities and treats others, always 
with kindness and respect.
I, John, would like to thank all the wonderful supporters 
and contributors that Miranda has already mentioned. In 
addition, I am forever thankful for my compassionate and 
talented wife, Darlene Gilson, for her encouragement and pa­
tience as we worked on this book. Thank you to all my Haida 

Acknowledgments xiii
relatives, who have inspired me. They are too numerous to 
name one by one. I must, however, especially thank from my 
heart our beloved Haida matriarch, my cousin Pearle Pearson, 
and her children and grandchildren, who tirelessly advocate 
for the value of our language and culture. Thank you to 
Pearle’s sister, cousin Rose, and Rose’s husband, Tim. Thank 
you to Chief Skidegate, Clarence Dempsey Collinson, and 
his wife, Irene. Thank you to all their children and grandchil­
dren. Thank you to Russ Jones, our clan chief.
The examples set by my grandparents, the Reverend 
Minister Dr. Peter Reginald Kelly and Gertrude Russ Kelly, 
taught me that truth and authority do not require a loud 
voice. Also, I will forever remember with a smile in my heart 
the lessons and love of our Haida values that I have learned 
from Horace Lloyd George Kelly (Uncle Jordy), Uncle T. 
Reginald Kelly, my Aunt Selma, and cousins Kristely Kelly 
and Isabel Brillon.
At Carleton University, Miranda’s acknowledgments have 
covered my list well, too. Among others are Allan J. and Rae 
Ryan. My guest lectures in Allan’s inspiring Indigenous topics 
class have been a highlight for me every year for the past four­
teen years. I also thank and appreciate those who contributed 
to the thinking and ethics in the book: Rodney Nelson, Sheila 
Grantham, Pitseolak Pfeifer, Katherine Graham, and Michele 
Moffat. I joyfully and deeply acknowledge Elaine Keillor, my 
dear friend, who was recently awarded the Order of Canada. 
Her long-time heartfelt work with Indigenous people sets an 
example among the finest of our allies.
I will always honour my co-author and friend Miranda 
Brady. Miranda and I could easily continue our acknowledg­
ments for nearly the length of this book and not exhaust the 
list of the many, many people who have inspired us over 
the years.
Thank you to every one of you.

This page intentionally left blank

We Interrupt This Program

This page intentionally left blank

In a January 2015 talk following a screening of her film 
Trick or Treaty, eighty-two-year-old filmmaking legend Alanis 
Obomsawin declared that Indigenous youth were living a 
resurgence prophesized by their ancestors.1 She joked that 
although she had believed her own cohort of 1960s activists 
would shake things up, this generation would be the real 
agents of change to disrupt the oppressive conditions of 
­settler-colonial society.
We begin this book by highlighting Obomsawin because, 
over the past fifty years, she has cleverly harnessed the resour­
ces available to her through established media institutions to 
encourage a new public understanding of Indigenous people 
and issues. In focusing on the agency of Indigenous youth, as 
she does in her role as an Indigenous leader, Obom­sawin 
humbly avoids mentioning her own profound influence in 
the reshaping of the Canadian media landscape. Her remarks 
also identify an important contemporary moment, where 
Indigenous people across Canada are working towards resur­
gence in their communities and inspiring the next gene­ration 
to lead. Like Obomsawin, they are attempting to intervene in 
Introduction
Indigenous Media Tactics
This is the seventh generation. 
There is a real change that is happening.
– Alanis Obomsawin, “Trick or Treaty?”

We Interrupt This Program
4
sites of power using media tactics as a means of changing 
settler-colonial thinking. As they repurpose established insti­
tutions, Indigenous agents manoeuvre in ways that are both 
subtle and overt, and they offer graceful negotiations.
This book traces how Indigenous people are using media 
tactics or interventions in art, film, television, and journal­
ism to disrupt Canada’s national narratives and rewrite them 
from Indigenous perspectives. As a result, these individuals 
are redefining how Indigenous peoples are viewed and repre­
sented in Western media and society. Looking to sites where 
Indigenous media tactics are used, we examine how Indi­
genous ontologies, or Indigenous relationships with and 
orientation to the world, are expressed in creative and some­
times unexpected ways for the larger culture and for Indige­
nous audiences. We focus on a recent period of roughly ten 
years, approximately 2006 to 2016, a time described by Indi­
genous leaders and prominent thinkers as a “rebirth” of Indi­
genous cultures: “Indigenous peoples are rising, Phoenix-like, 
from the ashes of hardship” following cultural resurgence in 
many communities.2 Exploring how Indigenous peoples 
have employed media tactics in the wake of this resurgence 
offers us a unique window onto this rebirth. 
While we explore the ways that Indigenous agents act 
­tactically within established institutions, as well as their at­
tempts to disrupt them, we also discuss the limitations and 
critiques of existing settler-colonial frameworks. For ex­
ample, while the National Film Board (NFB) has enabled 
Alanis Obomsawin to reach large audiences with more than 
forty films since the 1960s, some Indigenous thinkers ex­
press ambivalence about working within institutions that 
ultimately privilege the goals of the nation. In the book 
Sove­reign Screens: Aboriginal Media on the Canadian West 
Coast, anthropologist Kristin Dowell lists, among other 
concerns, the NFB’s ownership of rights to Indigenous films 
and the creative influence of non-Indigenous executive 

Introduction 5
producers.3 Dowell recounts a comment from an Indigenous 
film festival coordinator about the NFB: “They own the dis­
tribution rights – they own them! And isn’t that just an­
other form of colonialism?”4 We explore how and with 
what success Indigenous actors navigate and challenge such 
institutional structures. 
We are certainly not the first to explore Indigenous media 
in Canada.5 However, our focus on how media tactics are 
used within established institutional frameworks across a 
broad range of Indigenous contexts is unique. We suggest 
that, despite their limitations, media are used to promote 
Indigenous goals across the different domains we investigate. 
As with Anishinaabe writer and scholar Gerald Vizenor’s 
idea of survivance, or “survival plus resistance,”6 Indigenous 
media tacticians assert Indigenous presence and agency in 
the face of omission, erasure, and victimhood.7
We therefore focus on sites of public discourse where 
multiple audiences constitute ideas of Indigenous identity. 
These include sites of public memory (including on- and 
offline archives of historical and narrative material); popu­
lar media, art, and film institutions; and the news media. 
The cases we investigate illustrate the diversity of Indigenous 
media tactics as interventions into sites of power and a care­
ful negotiation between mixed and pan-Indigenous audi­
ences. They also illustrate the broader concerns important to 
contemporary Indigenous communities and the ways in 
which these concerns are placed firmly at the forefront of 
public consciousness.
Indigenous identity has had a unique relationship with 
the media because the formation of the most pervasive Indi­
genous identity constructs coincided with colonization in 
Canada and the United States and the development and pro­
liferation of a number of popular media technologies. From 
the nineteenth century to the twenty-first century, Indi­genous 
people were the popular subjects of photography, novels, 

We Interrupt This Program
6
and motion pictures. These media portrayals followed the 
patterns established by their predecessors, the Western fron­
tier paintings characteristic of George Catlin and Paul Kane. 
Contemporary media institutions have continued to further 
the goals of settler-colonial society by reproducing several 
centuries’ worth of damaging stereotypes about Indigenous 
people.8 The reductive stereotypes reflect a salvaging impulse 
and an imperialist nostalgia9 that lament the apparently 
inevitable extinction of Indigenous people in the face of 
what settlers called “progress” and “civilization.” It is not 
hard to see how the vanishing-Indian archetype furthered 
the goals of Western expansion: it implied that the so-called 
Indian problem had been resolved. However, as Michelle 
Raheja points out in Reservation Reelism: Redfacing, Visual 
Sovereignty, and Representations of Native Americans in Film, 
and as Philip Deloria notes in Indians in Unexpected Places, 
Indigenous actors employed varying degrees of agency and 
subversion in this process, even when they did not main­
tain media ownership or control.10 For example, they took 
advantage of the chance to leave impoverished circumstances 
through acting opportunities, or they “pulled one over” on 
their ignorant audiences by playing to stereotypes.
Conversely, some thinkers have suggested that the Western 
ontologies that underpin mainstream institutions are not 
only devoid of Indigenous perspectives – they are entirely 
counter to them. According to this view, it is impossible for 
Indigenous ways of knowing and being to transcend the 
boundaries of the colonizers’ institutions, as these institu­
tions devalue the relationship that Indigenous people have 
with their cultures, communities, and lands.11 Many con­
clude that even when Western institutions feign inclusivity, 
they are too flawed to act as mechanisms for Indigenous 
­resurgence; they are ultimately rooted in and designed to 
serve the goals of capitalism, patriarchy, and settler colonial­
ism.12 While this book focuses to some extent on Indigenous 

Introduction 7
participation within, or Indigenous negotiation of, estab­
lished boundaries, many Indigenous thinkers in recent years 
have addressed variations on the theme of refusal of these 
boundaries. As Taiaiake Alfred suggests in his essay “Opening 
Words” in Lighting the Eighth Fire: The Liberation, Resurgence, 
and Protection of Indigenous Nations:
Many of my own generation of scholars and activists hold 
on to ways of thinking and acting that are wrapped up in 
old theories of revolution. Those theories centre on con­
vincing the settler society to change their ways and re­
structure their society, through the use of persuasion or of 
force. But in the 20 years of my involvement in politics 
and academics, grounded in such revolutionary notions, 
I have often asked myself, “What if the settlers choose not 
to change their ways?” It is becoming more and more ap­
parent each day, as capitalism and materialism grow into 
ever more powerful and arrogant forces and continue to 
roll over landscapes and cultures with impunity, that re­
storing a regime of peaceful co-existence with settler soci­
ety and believing in the settlers’ potential for friendship 
and enlightenment is impossible.13
Similarly, in her article “Land as Pedagogy: Nishnaabeg 
Intelligence and Rebellious Transformations,” Leanne Beta­
samosake Simpson, a Michi Saagiig Nishnaabeg scholar, 
writer, and artist, discusses an ontological incommensurabil­
ity in Western educational systems that does not allow for 
the Nishnaabeg pedagogy she is committed to furthering:
A resurgence of Indigenous political cultures, governances 
and nation-building requires generations of Indigenous 
peoples to grow up intimately and strongly connected to 
our homelands, immersed in our languages and spiritual­
ities, and embodying our traditions of agency, leadership, 

We Interrupt This Program
8
decision-making and diplomacy. This requires a radical 
break from state education systems that are primarily de­
signed to produce communities of individuals willing to 
uphold settler colonialism.14
In the same vein, in his book Red Skins, White Masks, Dene 
scholar Glen Sean Coulthard challenges the politics of rec­
ognition, arguing that officially condoned forms of inclu­
sion maintain oppressive colonial regimes. He writes, “Since 
1969 we have witnessed the modus operandi of colonial 
power relations in Canada shift from a more or less uncon­
cealed structure of domination to a form of colonial govern­
ance that works through the medium of state recognition 
and accommodation.” He continues, “Regardless of this 
shift Canadian settler-colonialism remains structurally ori­
ented around achieving the same power effect it sought in the 
pre-1969 period: the dispossession of Indigenous peoples of 
their lands and self-determining authority.”15
Like Alfred, Simpson, and Coulthard, we acknowledge that 
Western institutions are circumscribed in their capacities to 
promote or encourage decolonizing epistemologies and 
Indigenous ontologies. Even while cultural policies encour­
age inclusivity (as in the case of the NFB, for example), they 
also make difference manageable while at the same time con­
cealing and downplaying the oppressive conditions that per­
sist. Contemporary cultural policies allow Canada to position 
itself as a benevolent and tolerant nation-state16 even as the 
state continues to disadvantage Indigenous people. A particu­
larly insidious kind of violence is occurring, one that claims 
that Indigenous peoples themselves are responsible for their 
adverse social situations, including high rates of violence, sui­
cide, incarceration, and the removal of children from com­
munities and their placement into state care.17 According to 
the logics of neoliberalism and governmentality, Indigenous 
people now have the opportunities to improve their social 

Introduction 9
and economic circumstances and are therefore to blame if 
they do not overcome their oppressive conditions, or if they 
choose to opt out of established structures for doing so. This 
perspective is ahistorical and fails to understand the ways 
in which current disparities are a direct result of the violent 
colonial legacies of dispossession and the attempted state-­
sanctioned eradication of Indigenous peoples. Moreover, 
Indigenous people are now encouraged to compete with each 
other for grants and status in order to achieve state-sanctioned 
forms of recognition and funding; ultimately, this process dis­
tracts from issues that are defined by Indigenous commun­
ities as essential.
A radical break, or a revolution in psychoanalyst Frantz 
Fanon’s terms, could be the only way to unshackle the col­
onized subject from the settler-colonial psyche that pervades 
the larger culture and Indigenous people alike.18 At the same 
time, however, the boundaries of cultural, social institutions 
are at times subverted – and they can be productive in rather 
unpredictable ways. As one ironic example, efforts to assimi­
late Indigenous people through residential schools in Canada 
and the United States facilitated the pan-Indigenous con­
nections among students who came together from widely 
dispersed regions. The common ground they discovered 
eventually inspired the American Indian Movement and its 
challenges to the US government in the 1960s and 1970s.19 
Similarly, Inuit leaders who experienced the trauma of 
­assimilation in residential schools used their formal educa­
tion to help establish greater political sovereignty in Canada 
through the formation of the government of Nunavut. Agents 
working within Western colonial institutions are playing cre­
atively with conventions and apparatuses, and their efforts 
do effect change. We trace some of those agents in this book 
rather than focusing on a radical break.
The Indigenous media interventions discussed in this 
book combine acts of acceptance and acts of refusal. They 

We Interrupt This Program
10
are akin to the tactics discussed by Michel de Certeau in The 
Practice of Everyday Life, or what he describes as “victories of 
the ‘weak’ over the ‘strong.’”20 In de Certeau’s estimation, tac­
ticians act within proper places in fleeting moments of re­
sistance, relying on small moments in time when they do 
not have their own permanent places in which to act. While 
Indigenous actors may be marginalized within dominant 
paradigms, we can consider the ways in which they manage 
to manoeuvre nonetheless. As de Certeau suggests, a tactician 
“is always on the watch for opportunities that must be seized 
‘on the wing.’”21 While these sorts of tactics may not lead to a 
radical transformation – or, for example, the repatriation of 
land necessary for Indigenous self-­determination22 – they 
can elicit results. Tactics rely on moments in time until 
Indigenous places are recovered. In other terms, the overarch­
ing systems of settler colonialism may remain, but there are 
opportunities to act on and create fissures in their standard 
operations. A number of tactical battles continue –  where 
Indigenous agents are engaging at the level of the institution 
or within established frameworks as a means of disrupting 
settler-colonial understandings – even when the disruptions 
are fleeting.23
It is not our intention to set up a false binary between the 
perspectives of radical change and fleeting opportunities, to 
suggest they are mutually exclusive, or to determine which 
approach is more prudent. Nor do we wish to present con­
temporary Indigeneity as nothing but a constant dialectic 
enmeshed in the colonizing culture. On the contrary, 
Indigeneity is vibrant and alive. At the same time, culture 
and cultural institutions are fluid and dynamic rather than 
inflexible and static. We certainly do not espouse the view 
that attempts to influence perception are a substitute for jus­
tice based on the repatriation of land, but we hope they do 
influence how people understand the fundamental link be­
tween Indigenous people’s identities and their territories.

Introduction 11
An Indigenous intervention in media and other socio-­
cultural institutions can be a counterpoint to what Indigenous 
people perceive as an omission, a misconception, or a stereo­
type, or a way of being in and understanding the world. Like 
Edward Said’s notion of the contrapuntal in Culture and 
Imperialism, we suggest that Indigenous media interventions 
provide avenues that denaturalize the “processes” of coloniz­
ation as well as point out resistance to them. Said suggests 
that a contrapuntal reading “can be done by extending our 
reading of the texts to include what was once forcibly exclud­
ed.”24 The media tactics we explore in this book not only 
identify an omission, they also actively engage a popularly 
held notion with Indigenous-influenced ways of seeing and 
the tools for asserting these Indigenous perspectives further. 
In Reservation Reelism, Michelle Raheja suggests that visual 
sovereignty can be subtle or overtly tactical; it can be a high­
ly visible assertion of identity, or it can be a subversive, fleet­
ing moment of resistance, sometimes as small as a nod and 
a wink by Indigenous actors to Indigenous audiences, even 
as majority audiences remain unchallenged. Raheja describes 
visual sovereignty as instances of creative self-representation 
by Indigenous media artists, both prior to and within the 
Hollywood system.25 Like Raheja, we understand some forms 
of Indigenous intervention to be subtle modes of self-­
representation, graspable only by an audience thoroughly 
acculturated to Indigenous ways. We also look to more overt 
instances for wider audiences.
Like Audra Simpson and Glen Sean Coulthard, we reflect 
in this book on refusal and participation in the ­communities 
we study, and the ambivalence of promoting decolonizing 
approaches through established academic institutions.26 Yet 
we also argue that theoretical and methodological tools 
­offered through established scholarly institutions can be 
­accessed to articulate and situate Indigenous concerns. At a 
time when the field of Native American and Indigenous 

We Interrupt This Program
12
studies is debating the efficacy and potentially repressive na­
ture of theory, scholars such as Audra Simpson and Andrea 
Smith encourage us, in the introduction to their edited col­
lection Theorizing Native Studies, to use conventional theory 
as a toolbox, challenging it where appropriate, bending it, 
and meshing it with Indigenous thinking – which scholars 
did not previously consider to be adequately theoretical.27 
By employing Indigenous thinking along with other theor­
etical frameworks, we acknowledge its much needed and 
deserved place in intellectual work. As Simpson and Smith 
suggest, there is no need to separate theory from its practical 
implications. Regardless of what we label it (worldview, 
knowledge system, or other), at its best, theory assists us in 
approaching the world in a more thoughtful way, especially 
when theory acknowledges and reflects Indigenous ontolo­
gies. As Opaskwayak Cree scholar Shawn Wilson suggests in 
a guest editorial for the Canadian Journal of Native Education, 
“There is an expression: ‘If I hadn’t seen it with my own eyes, 
I wouldn’t have believed it.’ The opposite holds just as true: 
‘If I hadn’t believed it, I wouldn’t have seen it.’”28 Taking our 
cue from Wilson, we think critically about the ways in which 
theoretical approaches shape our lenses of observation.
While traditional critical/cultural theoretical approaches 
can be helpful, they are at times inadequate for situating 
contemporary Indigeneity and its relationship with power. 
For example, Coulthard suggests a critical approach that 
goes beyond Marxist concepts of class and redistributive jus­
tice to encompass the histories and cultures of Indigenous 
people in a settler-colonial society founded on the seizure of 
Indigenous lands. He disagrees that politics focused on in­
equitable wealth distribution should take priority over iden­
tity politics and concerns over the loss of culture that is 
fundamentally tied to place: “Indigenous struggles against 
capitalist imperialism are best understood as struggles ori­
ented around the question and meaning of land.”29 

Introduction 13
At the same time, Coulthard suggests, brute-force assimi­
lation and removal policies may not be the primary means 
of maintaining power over Indigenous people in our con­
temporary age (though such strategies are still employed); 
rather, a similar outcome is achieved through the rationale 
of policies and practices that shift responsibility onto 
Indigenous people. This places Indigenous people in a kind 
of double bind vis-à-vis the modality of power described 
by Foucauldians as governmentality in which people self-­
govern through normalized tools, institutions, and discours­
es.30 Yet while this explanation may account for broad power 
shifts, it does not shed light on the ways in which Indigenous 
actors navigate, understand, or take advantage of the inher­
ent inconsistencies in the larger culture’s power structure. It 
also fails to consider the specific differences in how dis­
course and power operate variously for different subjects. 
This book examines how Indigenous perspectives and media 
tactics challenge and complement post-structuralist ideas of 
discourse and power. 
As with every academic pursuit, our work is limited in 
scope. Rather than focusing on how media tactics are re­
ceived by the audience, in this book we focus on the media 
tactics themselves. We explore the ways in which Indigenous 
actors attempt to appeal to audiences as opposed to the ways 
in which audiences read interventions by Indigenous actors. 
Yet it is important to describe how we understood audi­
ence(s) and their relationship with media as we began our 
study, and throughout the book we elaborate further on an­
ticipated audiences for the sites and texts we examine.
We understand audience(s) as active producers of mean­
ing, as diverse and non-monolithic, and as possessing varying 
understandings of Indigeneity based on their previous experi­
ences.31 A few researchers have discussed audience reception 
and Indigenous identity in the media. The work that has been 
done in the Canadian and American context has suggested 

We Interrupt This Program
14
that, not surprisingly, Indigenous and non-­Indigenous audi­
ences frequently have very different readings of texts and 
other media that feature Indigenous people and issues.
Anthropology scholar S. Elizabeth Bird found that the 
negative stereotype of the ignoble savage common for the 
past two hundred years32 had begun to disappear in 1990s 
American television shows. The archetype of the noble sav­
age had become more popular and was more widely identi­
fied with Indigenous identity by mainstream American 
audiences.33 In The Audience in Everyday Life: Living in a Media 
World, Bird compares the responses of Native Americans 
with those of the larger culture to the television show 
Dr.  Quinn, Medicine Woman, which included Indigenous 
characters and themes. She found that “the largely stereo­
typical presentation of Indians (stoic, non-emotional, spirit­
ual, and so on) was accepted as authentic and essentially 
unremarkable by White audiences, while Indian viewers 
found it inauthentic, irritating, and one-dimensional.”34
Media studies scholar Debra Merskin, who also conducted 
audience research in the United States, argues that the larger 
culture’s texts have been created mostly from non-­Indigenous 
perspectives and prioritize non-Indigenous people as the tar­
get audience. This leads to stereotypical representations that 
do not relate to the actual experiences of most Indigenous 
audiences.35 She views the essentialized media representa­
tions as a form of symbolic annihilation, “either condemna­
tion, trivialization, or absence,” with real implications for 
Indigenous self-image.36 According to Merskin, it is profit­
able to reproduce stereotypes of Indigenous people from 
“a shared cultural reservoir of thought-to-be-truths” as media 
texts frequently “serve the interests of those who aim to re­
tain their status and resources.”37 She suggests that the larger 
culture’s texts rarely challenge the accepted symbolic order. 
As author Daniel Francis argues in The Imaginary Indian: 
The Image of the Indian in Canadian Culture, they reflect the 

Introduction 15
imperatives of Canadian culture more than acting as accur­
ate representations of Indigeneity.38
As our studies in this book illustrate, the proliferation of 
reductive stereotypes has provided a great deal of material 
for Indigenous agents who wish to turn cultural assump­
tions on their heads. Our investigation suggests that Indi­
ge­nous media producers recognize the power of media as 
storytelling tools. In other words, the medium is not the 
message, as Marshall McLuhan’s famous aphorism would 
suggest.39 Whoever controls or subverts the content matters 
in the meaning-making process, as do varied audiences and 
modes of production access, and circulation.
Indigenous texts frequently appeal to multiple audiences 
simultaneously, with particular nods to Indigenous audi­
ences who will understand them. As indicated above, 
Michelle Raheja points to the ways in which Indigenous ac­
tors played along in films created by non-Indigenous people 
for general audiences, with a nod and a wink to other Indige­
nous people.40 Similarly, scholars Sophie McCall and Shari 
Huhndorf both discuss Inuktitut language cinema produc­
tion by Igloolik Isuma Productions, the Inuk company start­
ed by Zacharias Kunuk, Paul Apak Angilirq, Pauloosie 
Qulitalik, and Norm Cohn.41 The production company con­
sidered multiple audiences in its award-winning English-
subtitled film Atanarjuat: The Fast Runner. McCall argues, 
however, that “the Isuma filmmakers were deliberately pri­
oritizing Inuktitut speakers as their main audience.”42 She 
suggests that Isuma’s subsequent film, The Journals of Knud 
Rasmussen, caters “even less to non-Inuktitut speakers.”43 
Further, Kunuk’s later film Angirattut (Coming Home) was in­
tentionally released in Inuktitut without English subtitles in 
order to embed viewers in Inuit language and landscapes.44
Inuktitut is a highly sophisticated agglutinative language 
that does not translate precisely into English; moreover, its 
use  by Isuma created dialogue that diverged in meaning 

We Interrupt This Program
16
from the English translations in subtitles of earlier films. As 
Huhndorf and McCall suggest, potential interpretations of the 
films therefore vary for different audiences. The films include 
cultural cues that hold different meanings for Inuit audiences 
in comparison with non-Inuit audiences, or outsiders, whom 
Inuit refer to as Qallunaat. Among the cultural cues, Isuma 
films are nonlinear and feature dreams and characters from 
the spirit world as central to storylines, without explaining 
their appearance or suggesting they are separate from the con­
scious and material world. This reflects a uniquely Inuk world­
view not easily accessible to Qallunaat audiences. We explore 
this feature in greater depth in our discussion of IsumaTV’s 
Inuit residential school survivor testimonials.
The particular context and location of media is also cen­
tral to understanding its reception.45 The location of place-
based media in sites of public memory will inevitably lead 
to various readings in reception. In Decolonizing Museums, 
historian Amy Lonetree points to the differences between 
Indigenous exhibitions in centralized, majority museums 
and those in tribal or community museums, where the pri­
mary audience is Indigenous and local.46 While many cen­
tralized museums design exhibits for the larger culture’s 
audience, Lonetree looks at how colonial legacies are ad­
dressed when local Indigenous curators play a central role in 
designing exhibits. She suggests that the local sites she has 
examined tend to provide more critical commentary on col­
onization; many also serve as cultural centres where Indige­
nous people use the space to heal and work through the 
violent legacies of colonialism. We also find that the loca­
tions of the media tactics investigated here have and will like­
ly continue to have various implications for audiences, uses, 
and meanings, depending on where and when these tactics 
are employed.
Our approach considers the multiple interpretations of 
texts and institutions in which Indigenous actors play a role, 

Introduction 17
and the various ways in which diverse audiences actively en­
gage in meaning making. Because we focus on established in­
stitutions that attract both Indigenous and majority audiences, 
we consider how those institutions appeal to both kinds of 
audiences and some of the sub-audiences within those groups. 
For example, to satisfy its mandate to inform “all Canadians” 
about what happened in residential schools, the Truth and 
Reconciliation Commission (TRC) hosted events of various 
sizes in different types of communities, and used many forms 
of media to reach both local and national audiences. Each 
variegated audience likely understood TRC events very differ­
ently. Similarly, while the imagineNATIVE Film + Media Arts 
Festival in Toronto draws Indigenous filmmakers and partici­
pants from across Canada and beyond, the majority of festival 
participants come from the surrounding Greater Toronto Area 
and do not identify as Indigenous. The Indigenous films fea­
tured at the festival are polysemic, screened for audiences of 
various backgrounds and in differing contexts. In our person­
al communication with Terril Calder, a Métis filmmaker who 
premiered her first feature-length film at imagineNATIVE in 
2014, she stated, “I had Indigenous and white people look at 
my film, and they got completely different things out of it … 
I find that fascinating.”
• • •
We conducted research for this book over roughly a five-
year period, from 2012 through 2016. Taking our cue from 
Indigenous thinkers who employ decolonizing models of 
research, such as Māori academic Linda Tuhiwai Smith,47 
we offer a scholarly framework that combines ideas from 
Indigenous and non-Indigenous critical and cultural theor­
ists. We employ qualitative methods adapted for each con­
text, including loosely structured interviews and participant 
observation, as well as discourse and storytelling analysis, 

We Interrupt This Program
18
paying mind to the ways that Smith and other Indigenous 
scholars (such as Shawn Wilson, Margaret Kovach, Audra 
Simpson, and Joann Archibald) have troubled Western, 
­empirical frameworks. This includes the ways in which 
methods and theories are inextricably linked due to the fact 
that ontological and epistemological assumptions underpin 
both.48 Like Indigenous studies scholars Norman Denzin, 
Yvonna Lincoln, and Smith,49 we find qualitative methods 
useful for challenging notions of objectivity and neutrality. 
We understand our work as part of a larger decolonizing 
project, or “a process which engages with imperialism and 
colonialism at multiple levels. For researchers, one of those 
levels is concerned with having a more critical understand­
ing of the underlying assumptions, motivations and values 
which inform research practices.”50 Following the lead of 
Smith and others, we challenge and attempt to avoid practi­
ces that “perpetuate Western power by misrepresenting and 
essentializing Indigenous persons, often denying them a 
voice or identity.”51
While our work follows the decolonizing and Indigen­ist 
perspectives put forward by scholars such as Opaskwa­yak 
Cree academic Shawn Wilson,52 it is not strictly “Indi­
genous scholarship” in the way that thinkers such as Plains 
Cree/Salteaux scholar Margaret Kovach have defined it.53 
Kovach suggests such work “consists of scholarship that is 
based on a tribal epistemology” and is best conducted by 
Indigenous researchers who are members of that commun­
ity.54 She argues that Indigenous research frameworks 
should be ­relational; accordingly, she develops her own re­
search methodology to reflect the knowledge system of her 
Plains Cree culture.55
Notwithstanding the importance of Kovach’s relational 
approach and the idea of relational accountability,56 we rec­
ognize that the communities we explore in this book are 
not centred on one location and are not always rooted in 

Introduction 19
one ontological system. We therefore define Indigenous 
communities broadly. Because of the wide scope of our re­
search and the nature of the questions we ask, we look to 
multiple sites where Indigenous participants identify par­
ticularly with one Indigenous community as well as with a 
broader Indigenous identity. Scholars such as Jeff Corntas­
sel have discussed the link between resurgence, decoloniza­
tion, and “everyday practices of renewal and responsibility 
within Native communities today,” in particular Indigenous 
sites.57 Similarly, we understand decolonization as rooted 
in everyday practices of Indigenous resurgence that extend 
beyond one geographic site.
The locations we examine tend to draw wide Indigenous 
participation, but we do not assume that a universal ontolo­
gical or epistemological orientation motivates the Indige­
nous actors we discuss. As Cree scholar Michael Hart suggests, 
the many divergences among Indigenous perspectives make 
drawing totalizing statements about Indigeneity problem­
atic.58 At the same time, we recognize that some of the pat­
terns listed by Hart in his article “Indigenous Worldviews, 
Knowledge, and Research” are commonly articulated by the 
Indigenous actors and texts we engage. This includes a rela­
tional world view that encompasses “a close relationship 
with the environment.”59 It also recognizes “a spiritual realm 
and that this realm is understood as being connected with 
the physical realm.” Integral in this context is “a strong focus 
on people and entities coming together to help and support 
one another in their relationship.”60 Similarly, we recognize 
a “respectful individualism,” which Hart suggests exists in 
many Indigenous communities as being consistent with 
communalism and which considers the needs of commun­
ity rather than merely self-interest.61 
As Denzin, Lincoln, and Smith suggest, both qualitative 
and quantitative methodologies are rooted in historical 
traditions that promote colonial and imperialist agendas. 

We Interrupt This Program
20
Western epistemologies, including scientific inquiry and 
methods, have been mobilized over the past few centuries 
to legitimize Western institutions and their agents as ex­
perts, while delegitimizing Indigenous perspectives and 
people as objects of study.62 Research itself has often been 
considered “one of the dirtiest words” for understandably 
distrustful Indigenous communities.63 While the ethics and 
sense of responsibility vary among those employing re­
search, research can be used by Indigenous people as a tool 
for change. Research can be consistent with traditions of ob­
servation and information gathering long used to benefit 
Indigenous communities,64 though the methods of sharing 
knowledge among Indigenous communities may differ dra­
matically from the Western traditions of expert discourse 
and academic publication.
Community-based research founded upon equal partner­
ships with Indigenous peoples can find common ground for 
certain methodologies. Both Margaret Kovach and Soowahlie 
First Nation scholar Jo-Ann Archibald point to storytelling 
as an important site of intergenerational knowledge transfer 
that can act as a method, a site of analysis, and a research 
tool.65 As Kovach suggests, “The act of sharing through per­
sonal narrative, teaching story, and general conversation is a 
method by which each generation is accountable to the next 
in transmitting knowledge.”66 In our approach, we under­
stand storytelling very broadly, examining it through a num­
ber of different cultural sites and media, exploring the ways 
in which media augment and circumvent the storytelling 
process. We consider storytelling and performance as central 
functions of public statements, media texts, and loosely 
structured interviews.
Throughout our research, we were conscious of our sub­
ject positions, including who we are in relation to others,67 
which varied due to our own differing experiences. Our pos­
ition as insider/outsider was confounded by the fact that 

Introduction 21
only one of us is Indigenous, we both work for a research 
institution, and, in most cases, neither of us is a member of 
the specific communities of our participants. 
While Miranda J. Brady has been embedded in research 
related to Indigenous identity for fifteen years, she was 
raised in a white, middle-class family. Her approach to re­
search is partly influenced by her upbringing in a rural 
northern California town near an Indian rancheria; the area 
where she was raised has a violent colonial history that was 
not officially addressed in curricula when she was in 
school. Growing up, she was immersed in an environment 
that legitimized a deeply entrenched racism that con­
tinues to plague the Indi­genous people there today. As an 
academic, Brady is situated in a privileged position, yet she 
views her roles as learner and researcher to hold equal im­
portance. As part of this process, she uses decolonizing 
frameworks and an Indigenist paradigm throughout her 
research and university teaching. She takes very seriously 
her responsibility to teach her students about historical 
erasures and their ongoing legacies. This approach privil­
eges a commitment to relational accountability.68
 John M.H. Kelly is a Skidegate Haida, Eagle Clan, of the 
Haida Nation of British Columbia, an elder who is racially 
coded as Indigenous. By this, it can be understood that his 
appearance reflects his Indigeneity – he wears his hair in a 
long braid and wears clothes with Indigenous signifiers such 
as Northwest Coast designs. He also comports himself as an 
Indigenous elder, respectfully assuming a leadership role 
and providing guidance when he is asked, guidance that is 
consistent with his own traditions. Since 1975, his career 
has been wide-ranging, from newspaper and television jour­
nalism to Indigenous language and culture revitalization 
to teaching in secondary schools and universities. He has 
worked and lived within Indigenous communities and is 
­intimately familiar with and personally invested in many of 

We Interrupt This Program
22
the issues discussed in the book. At the same time, he is 
shaped by his professional training as a journalist. 
Neither of us claims to be a detached, distanced observer 
– nor would we wish to be. We acknowledge our own per­
formative positions as researchers and the transformative 
potential of seeing research as an “embodied struggle, as an 
intervention, as breaking and remaking, and as kinesis, that 
is, a sociopolitical act.”69 How we conduct ourselves as re­
searchers and the ethics that accompany and underpin our 
work continue to shape the landscape of Indigenous in­
quiry, potentially affecting our relationships with Indigenous 
people and their perceptions of a wider academic ­community. 
The capacity of research to promote fruitful models depends 
upon building truly equal partnerships with Indi­genous 
communities. Given the already tenuous relationship be­
tween researchers and Indigenous communities, we tread an 
always complex and potentially problematic path that re­
quires us to prioritize respect above all else. Wherever pos­
sible in our research, we included detailed descriptions that 
reveal our own assumptions about particular sites. Impor­
tantly, we had to recognize that our perspectives often di­
verged from each other and were far from universal.
We offered to share interview transcripts and our findings 
with participants and provided them with opportunities to 
revise. This reciprocity encouraged accuracy from their point 
of view. This honouring might not meet some researchers’ 
criteria for academic objectivity, but for Indigenous peoples, 
respect for the individual is crucial to the cultural ethic of 
achieving true consensus among researchers and partici­
pants. This also built trust and invited participants to be act­
ively involved. We often found our research transforming in 
unexpected ways as we opened discussions with filmmakers, 
artists, commissioners, journalists, and others. Rather than 
data gathering in the positivist sense, our research assumed 

Introduction 23
more of a dialogue as we found ourselves in extended con­
versations with participants beyond the interview process.
How we mobilize and make available for future genera­
tions the Indigenous words, sentiments, stories, and per­
formances discussed in this book has implications. As 
researchers who are invested in a decolonizing approach, we 
feel it is our responsibility to do justice to the intent, wis­
dom, and creativity shared with us by Indigenous actors 
wishing to advance the well-being of their people through 
media interventions in sites of power. By extension, voice 
was an important consideration in how we envisioned the 
book in two key ways. First, the fact that we come from both 
Indigenous and non-Indigenous backgrounds as co-authors 
meant that at times it was appropriate to signal that the col­
lective “we” used to discuss Indigeneity was voiced on be­
half of John as he identifies as Indigenous. In these cases, we 
highlighted John’s singular intention, sometimes with quo­
tation marks. Second, we attempted wherever possible to 
privilege the words offered to us by our Indigenous partici­
pants by incorporating long excerpts from interviews, public 
statements, and previous publications.
Even as we searched for the words to adequately discuss 
the struggle of Indigenous actors in order to address the in­
stitutional confines of the media landscapes in which they 
act, as researchers and writers we found ourselves facing 
­another sort of structural limitation – the limitation of lan­
guage as an impoverished and at times violent tool. Termi­
nology was a major point of concern; historically, naming 
and claiming have gone hand in hand in Canadian and 
American settler societies. We have used umbrella identity 
categories such as “Aboriginal” and “Indigenous” inter­
changeably, but by no means do we wish to conflate the very 
disparate groups who tend to be lumped together under 
them. Because we point to examples from both Canada and 

We Interrupt This Program
24
the United States, we use the terms widely employed in 
those countries: for example, “American Indian” and “Native” 
are used to describe groups in the United States, while 
“Aboriginal,” “First Nations,” “First Peoples,” “Inuit,” and 
“Métis” are used to describe groups from Canada. We under­
stand that such terms are problematic and reproduce static 
binaries; we fully acknowledge that opinions differ about 
which terms are appropriate, and we understand the objec­
tions people have to each of them. We rely on identity cat­
egories as severely flawed tools, and we intend them with 
the utmost respect. Wherever possible, we attempt to ­identify 
people according to their own modes of self-identification, 
including the names of particular Indigenous nations or the 
bands with which they identify, keeping in mind our limita­
tions in entering into conversations about “Indigeneity.” 
When asked to state simply how he defines Indigenous 
identity, John suggests: “We are ‘The People.’ Perhaps we can 
settle on that, plus this: ‘We Are the People Who Have Been 
Here from the Beginning,’ or, as an alternative, ‘We Are the 
People Who Have Always Been Here.’” These descriptions 
work for many who identify as Indigenous.70
We do not expound on Indigeneity beyond this. We saw 
our research task as not to define identity categories but to 
listen to our participants and their definitions of commun­
ity, and to observe how they engage media tactics in a mean­
ingful way, while recognizing the limitations of our tools. In 
John’s understanding, the newer culture uses labels and 
acronyms. Indigenous terms in their own languages are de­
scribers, however, not labels. For example, we are the Haida 
(the people), the Lakota (the friendly people), the Anishi­
naabe (the people), and the Dene (the people). Many others 
follow the same pattern. Until the Europeans came (to 
Turtle Island), we never needed quick-fix labels for stereo­
typing a continent that contains hundreds of communities 
linked by relationships, languages, heritages, and land. The 

Introduction 25
First Peoples should not be named by the 500-year-old mis­
take of a lost Italian sailing under the flag of Spain. The mis­
nomer “Indian” stuck – and did a disservice to Indigenous 
peoples from here and from India alike.
We found ourselves also having to rely on similarly prob­
lematic terms such as “settler-colonial society” and “majority 
culture.” As John suggests, we have no term to properly char­
acterize the rich diversity of the larger culture that does not 
identify as Indigenous. Some people from the larger culture 
deeply understand and care about the concerns of Indigenous 
people, work with them in respectful ways, and at times iden­
tify themselves as “allies.” Is it fair to paint with the same 
brush both “allies” and “adversaries”? We therefore negotiate 
language with caution. John insists the human circle is in­
complete if even one of the four colours is removed (the four 
colours representing both the directions so important in 
many Indigenous worldviews and the incredible global hu­
man diversity). Therefore, we hope to employ language that 
encourages bridge building rather than alienation.
Another challenge in writing the book was selecting from 
the bounty of Indigenous media interventions currently 
spanning the Canadian landscape. The cases we present 
only begin to convey the vibrant buzz in the air in many 
Indigenous communities across Canada today. As a means 
of delimitation, we have focused on issues and events that 
both cut to the heart of contemporary Indigenous concerns 
and convey broader themes for a wide audience.
There are a number of stories we could have shared that 
did not make it into the book. For example, while the works 
of filmmaking legend Alanis Obomsawin might provide 
more overt examples of manoeuvring within the confines of 
media institutions, we also wanted to illustrate some of the 
subtler tactics we understand as media interventions within 
established frameworks. By the same token, we made a con­
scious decision to not include a chapter on the Aboriginal 

We Interrupt This Program
26
Peoples Television Network (APTN). APTN is a non-profit 
independent broadcaster that provides a unique opportun­
ity for Indigenous perspectives to be widely distributed to 
Canadian households through basic cable packages, as 
mandated by the Canadian Radio-television and Telecom­
munications Commission (CRTC).71 APTN is important as a 
precedent and model that triggers Indigenous media pro­
duction.72 However, like the works of Alanis Obomsawin, 
APTN has already been discussed extensively in academic 
literature73 and has seen wide popular recognition due to its 
secured place via media regulation. We therefore choose to 
focus on less well-known but noteworthy examples.
Discussions in the first two chapters illustrate the contin­
gencies of historical narratives and the apparatuses for 
­reproducing them. We begin with a review of Indigenous 
interventions into history through media practices and pub­
lic testimonials in Canada’s Truth and Reconciliation Com­
mission (TRC). Some of the content of these chapters may 
be upsetting to some readers, especially residential school 
survivors or intergenerational survivors who have experi­
enced the effects of residential schools firsthand. 
We first explore how Indigenous actors used media prac­
tices to amend historical omissions and intervene in the 
public archive through the testimonials about Canada’s resi­
dential schools, while at the same time contesting the con­
ditions under which these actors gave their statements to the 
commission. Although the TRC has been widely criticized 
for various reasons,74 it allows for a revision of a national 
mythos, which has until this point omitted some of the 
most damning details of Canada’s origins as a nation-state, 
namely, the legacy of the residential schools. As Paulette 
Regan suggests in Unsettling the Settler Within, Canada large­
ly understands itself as a peacekeeping nation with a be­
nevolent settler past in comparison with its neighbour to 
the south. We challenge this celebratory notion as we review 

Introduction 27
statements about the forced removal of Indigenous children 
from their homes and communities and the systematic 
abuses they faced in the residential school system. We high­
light the courage of residential school survivors as they 
made their statements and of TRC leaders who attempted to 
bring their stories to the fore through a highly mediated 
testimonial process. At the same time, we draw attention to 
the omission of some Indigenous experiences from the 
commission’s process. Ultimately, we contend that the 
media practices of the TRC shaped and guided testimonials 
but left room for resistance to and alternative uses of the 
process. We also explore possibilities for the TRC’s National 
Centre for Truth and Reconciliation, which will house thou­
sands of digitized survivor testimonials and related docu­
ments for a wide Canadian public. 
We then describe the Inuk leaders of Nunavut’s struggle 
to gain more control over the context and ways in which 
Inuit survivor testimonials were to be conducted by the 
commission. Through productions posted on the IsumaTV 
media portal, Inuit leaders such as Zacharias Kunuk and 
Peter Irniq illustrated the importance of including distinct 
Inuit experiences in the TRC in their own communities and 
languages. These and other efforts eventually resulted in the 
formation of the TRC’s Inuit sub-commission. Thus, in the 
process of creating an archive of Inuit survivor testimonial 
videos, Inuit leaders intervened in the shaping of public 
memory. The archive is a political, ontological apparatus, a 
means of asserting Inuit inclusion in the TRC process and 
the national residential school archive, while at the same 
time reflecting the Inuit refusal to be conflated with other 
Indigenous people through the TRC process. The archive 
and its creation illustrate the distinct experiences of Inuit 
people, the conditions that shape Inuit historical narratives, 
and a drive for cultural sovereignty. While colonizers have 
used archives as mechanisms to mediate, surveil, and control 

We Interrupt This Program
28
Indigenous people, and to reproduce and maintain status 
quo power relations, the IsumaTV project illustrates how ar­
chives have also been mobilized to present culturally ­specific 
assertions of truth.
Next, we turn to the complex relationship between Indige­
nous peoples and the popular media, from early photog­
raphy and painting to film and television, and how such 
media are natural tools and sites of contestation. There is a 
close, historical relationship between the proliferation of Indi­
genous identity constructs; expansionist and nation-­building 
imperatives; and the development of photographs, motion 
picture, and film. Reductive Indigenous discourses and im­
agery have circulated widely over the past two centuries 
through the practices and forms of popular media. We ­review 
some of the most common stereotypes in popular media 
and Hollywood films and argue that such signifiers say 
more about the imagination of the larger cultures producing 
and viewing them than they do about Indigenous people 
themselves. At the same time, we propose a new cultural ap­
proach to media studies that considers the particular conno­
tations of Indigenous media practices. Many Indige­nous 
artists and thinkers use the existing media repertoire subver­
sively. We discuss redfacing and remediation in art institu­
tions as popular media tactics employed by Indige­nous 
artists (such as Kent Monkman, Jackson 2bears, and Dana 
Claxton) in order to turn mainstream media texts and prac­
tices on their heads and to shed light on Indigenous era­
sures. Through their installations in art institutions, their 
live performances, and their online presence, these artists 
recontextualize popular visual cues (for example, the v­anish­
ing Indian and Indian head iconography) and challenge the 
assumptions that underpin them. 
We then explore the imagineNATIVE Film + Media Arts 
Festival as an intervention into the film industry, fostering 

Introduction 29
Indigenous filmmakers in a harshly competitive environ­
ment. The original intention of the festival to support Indi­
genous filmmakers is reflected in its broad, artist-centred 
treatment of what constitutes Indigenous media. The festival 
encourages works and filmmakers who refuse filmmaking 
conventions and those who fully exploit them. By providing 
support and prioritizing the filmmaker’s self-identification 
rather than abiding by a strict definition of Indigenous aes­
thetics, the festival provides unique opportunities for Indi­
genous filmmakers to grow and develop their works. This 
encourages the proliferation of Indigenous perspectives in 
film and creative experimentation with genres, forms, and 
themes, as illustrated through the work of Jeff Barnaby, Terril 
Calder, and Shane Belcourt, who have all been active in im­
agineNATIVE over the years.
Finally, we consider some of the most common short­
comings of mainstream news coverage of Indigenous affairs, 
and the ways in which Indigenous public figures – particu­
larly Anishinaabe reporter Duncan McCue – actively work to 
intervene in them. McCue works within the confines of 
mainstream reporting in his position at the CBC, emphasiz­
ing the importance of stories and modes of storytelling that 
are relevant to and appropriate for Indigenous commun­
ities. As a journalist for CBC-TV British Columbia and a 
journalism educator at the University of British Columbia, 
McCue talks of the importance of training the next genera­
tion of news professionals to cover Indigenous affairs with 
awareness, respect, and relationality. Using our conversation 
with McCue as a starting point, we discuss the structural lim­
itations of mainstream news media and its ethnocentric re­
porting with regards to Indigenous issues, as well as the 
historical distrust with which many Indigenous people view 
reporters. McCue leaves us on an optimistic note, however, 
and models another type of journalism, actively involving 

We Interrupt This Program
30
himself in training Indigenous and non-Indigenous news 
professionals so that they are better equipped to approach 
Indigenous issues and communities in a thoughtful and re­
spectful manner.

1
Media Practices and Subversions
Survivor Testimonials in the 
Truth and Reconciliation 
Commission 
This is where it all happened ... hideous things happened ... 
I didn’t know nothing about anger. I didn’t know nothing about 
hatred. I didn’t know nothing about bitterness. But this is where 
I experienced everything ... when I attended that school.
– Mary Shecapio Blacksmith, Montreal, April 2013
In an April 2013 national event in Montreal at the Queen 
Elizabeth Hotel, Mary Shecapio Blacksmith testified to 
Canada’s Truth and Reconciliation Commission (TRC).1 
Blacksmith was one of 150,000 First Nations, Inuit, and 
Métis people who as children attended the government-­
mandated, church-run schools created to assimilate Indige­
nous children into the larger culture. Blacksmith disclosed 
her painful experiences of being taken from her parents 
when she was seven years old, being raped by a priest, and 
being subjected to harsh corporal punishments for speaking 
her native Cree language. Blacksmith referred to a clergyman 
notorious for molesting young girls: “We used to go to 
church. He would be standing up there, looking for his vic­
tims. And I was one of them.” She discussed her subsequent 
struggles with alcohol, drugs, and anger management, and 
suggested that “there will be no justice if we don’t share our 
stories ... It’s like a way out.”

We Interrupt This Program
32
Despite the sensitive nature of Blacksmith’s testimonial, 
the sharing circle where she gave her statement was a public 
and highly mediated affair. The hotel salon in which she 
spoke was packed with approximately one hundred onlook­
ers, including news reporters typing hurriedly on laptops and 
academics pointing voice recorders at the speakers and fever­
ishly taking field notes. The audience also included Indigenous 
attendees, other residential school survivors, and interested 
members of the public. Camera technicians weaved in and 
out of the audience with hand-held devices and rolled around 
larger equipment on wheels. During Blacksmith’s talk, five 
cameras slowly orbited around the circle as their operators 
attempted to capture the best angle. Statements gathered dur­
ing the course of the event were streamed live through the 
TRC’s website and will eventually become part of the com­
mission’s digital record in its National Centre for Truth and 
Reconciliation (NCTR). This will lead to a number of pos­
sible audiences, meanings, and remediations.2 The TRC’s 
­archive constitutes an important amendment to national his­
tory: for more than a century,  officials had largely omitted 
residential schools from Canadian public discourse. Though 
public discussion is long overdue, we suggest that public 
mediation of survivor testimonials has deeper implications.
The TRC has recorded testimonials to create “as com­
plete an historical record as possible of the IRS [Indian 
Residen­tial Schools] system and legacy,” which is prescribed 
by the commission’s mandate.3 This chapter explores the 
media practices of the TRC in its public statement-­gathering 
process, the coaching that officials provided to speakers for 
live-audience statements, and the possible afterlife of the 
testimonial via its remediation in the TRC’s NCTR. We in­
clude observations of the public statement-gathering pro­
cess at the April 2013 national event in Montreal, examples 
from TRC documents and testimonials posted online, and 
interviews with TRC representatives.

Media Practices and Subversions 33
As we argue, mediation did not just capture the testimon­
ial; it was both central to it and constitutive of it. In other 
words, mediation of TRC testimonials created models for sub­
sequent testimonials. By extension, we suggest the audience 
affects what happens in testimonials, whether the ­audience 
is immediate or an audience “in potentia,” made possible 
through mediation.4 We suggest that the TRC encouraged 
particular survivor narratives over others, as it signalled to 
speakers that they should anticipate the norms and uses of 
various media forms and narrative guidelines. How­ever, a 
layer of meta-narrative common in TRC statements suggests 
resistance to and repurposing of the mediated testimonial 
form, particularly when we consider the nuances of Indige­
nous peoples’ testimonials against the backdrop of their 
traditions of cultural knowledge transmission.
The Residential School System and the TRC
The Truth and Reconciliation Commission was established 
in 2008 as part of the Indian Residential Schools Settle­
ment Agreement among former students, the Government 
of Canada, and the churches that ran residential schools. It 
was the largest class action settlement in Canadian history. 
The residential schools were open from the 1870s; the last 
federally run Canadian school was closed in 1996. These 
schools were designed to assimilate Indigenous people into 
the larger culture and to strip children of their cultural mark­
ings by forbidding Indigenous dress, language, and rituals. 
Survivor Rose Wawakie was born to a traditional family in 
the bush near Rapid Lake, Quebec, and taken to residential 
school at the age of six. She stated, “They really do a number 
on you and your mind. I used to hate myself. I never wanted 
to be Anishinaabe by the time they got through with me. I 
wanted to be white.”
According to the TRC, more than 150,000 First Nations, 
Inuit, and Métis children were confined in the schools, often 

We Interrupt This Program
34
without the consent of their parents. Many suffered physic­
al, psychological, and sexual abuses, and thousands died.5 
Upon returning to their homes years later, survivors reported 
the hardships they continued to face. Many could no longer 
communicate with their families in their native tongue or fit 
in culturally. Often, family members had died in the stu­
dents’ absence.6 In addition, Indigenous communities have 
reported intergenerational damage caused by the system. 
The residential school legacy produced ongoing dysfunction 
and poverty within Native communities, including mental 
health issues, family relations problems and estrangement, 
alcohol and drug addictions, and domestic abuse.7 Inter­
generational survivors provided testimonials to the TRC on 
the impacts the schools have had on their families and lives. 
Several survivors at the Montreal event commented that be­
cause they were raised in cold, institutional settings, they 
did not develop the parental skills to connect emotionally 
with their own children and they perpetuated the violence 
they learned in the schools.
It should be noted that not all residential school experi­
ences were the same. A number of former students have re­
ported some positive memories, for example, about the 
friends they made or the pan-Indigenous identities fostered 
in residential schools.8 However, TRC testimonials in Canada 
most frequently centre on traumatic memories.9 
Until the end of its mandate in 2015, the TRC aimed to 
“learn the truth about what happened in the residential 
schools,” and to prepare “as complete an historical record as 
possible of the IRS system and legacy” in order to “inform 
all Canadians about what happened in the schools.”10 Once 
finished, this record of survivor testimonials and other rel­
evant documents will be archived and accessible to the pub­
lic in the NCTR. However, a number of controversies plagued 
the commission, and it struggled to meet its obligations.11 
For example, the TRC’s original board of commissioners 

Media Practices and Subversions 35
resigned after only a year, citing an inability to work togeth­
er. The Canadian government and the TRC also failed to 
cooperate in fulfilling the TRC’s mandate related to the re­
trieval of millions of relevant documents from Library and 
Archives Canada.12 The Canadian auditor general detailed 
the situation in an April 2013 report (discussed further 
below).13 The TRC’s own chair, Justice Murray Sinclair, 
pointed out in a personal communication some of the com­
mission’s limitations:
 I wish I had a couple of hundred million dollars more. I 
wish I had another lifetime to finish all of this. So it has 
been a lot of work to try to do this in five years. At the end 
of the day, we’re not going to have it all done as perfectly 
as it should be done. We are going to have it done as per­
fectly as we can do it, in the time and with the resources 
that we’ve got.
Since it was formed, the commission has also been the 
subject of a number of critiques from activists, academics, 
and survivors themselves. Scholars Jennifer Henderson and 
Pauline Wakeham argue that the TRC and the idea of recon­
ciliation erase a colonial history through a culture of re­
dress.14 They suggest that the continuing inequalities faced 
by Indigenous peoples are obscured through visible, short-
term gestures such as former prime minister Stephen 
Harper’s 2008 apology to residential school survivors and 
the formation of the delimited, short-term TRC. According 
to Henderson and Wakeham, the TRC operated under a mis­
guided “teleological drive” and promoted an idea of recon­
ciliation that worked to conceal the scars of colonization.15 
The idea that the deep-seated problems of colonization and 
residential schools could be addressed within the five-year 
span of the TRC (extended to six) was absurd to those who 
saw the TRC as an effort to placate critics of colonialism and 

We Interrupt This Program
36
obscure its ongoing effects,16 such as land dispossession.17 
Similarly, anthropologist and legal scholar Ronald Niezen 
suggests in Truth and Indignation: Canada’s Truth and 
Reconciliation Commission on Indian Residential Schools that 
the juridical apparatus out of which the TRC emerged ori­
ented all its activities around legal “remedy” of harms done. 
He argues, “Everything that we associate with this Truth 
and Reconciliation Commission … including the ritual, the 
kinds of emotion publicly expressed, and the form and 
dominant narratives of testimony – is set within the wider 
context of this remedial challenge and the solutions found 
for it.”18 One problem with the legal underpinnings of the 
class action settlement was the assumption that “harm” was 
contained and ende­mic to the schools rather than an inher­
ent feature of settler colonialism and was therefore ad­
dressed through monetary award.19 Moreover, as Niezen 
suggests, there was a “structural contradiction” in the resi­
dential schools claims procedure (the Independent Assess­
ment Process, or IAP) related to residential schools, which 
ostensibly shaped TRC testimonials. Because the burden of 
proof was placed on the survivor in the form of testimonial, 
the process “has disadvantaged some of those who were the 
most distressed, those who suffered lifelong mental illness, 
with all the attendant symptoms of trauma such as trouble 
remembering and acute anxiety when faced with the chal­
lenge of recalling traumatic events.”20 Moreover, as witnessed 
in Montreal, some struggled to locate the required documen­
tation of their enrollment at residential schools, as records 
had been destroyed, or the records that existed were deemed 
inadequate by the IAP or Common Experience process.
Another critique has been that the commission’s man­
date was explicit in stating that its purpose was not to provide 
names or bring legal action against offenders who mo­
lested or harmed Indigenous children.21 The separate repar­
ations and juridical processes resulting from the settlement 

Media Practices and Subversions 37
agreement included common-experience claims and the IAP. 
Privacy laws dictated that all identifying information about 
accused offenders be stricken from TRC testimonials in their 
final form, and those giving public testimonials were dis­
couraged from disclosing the names of those who assaulted 
them. Moreover, former students may have been dissuaded 
from giving public testimonials given the tension resulting 
from lateral (student on student) abuse in residential 
schools.22 The TRC had no juridical power, and its recom­
mendations to the government of Canada were advisory and 
carried no legal weight.23
Critics have maintained a healthy skepticism of Canada’s 
attempts to contain the evidence of such a damnable history 
in a neat, documented, and archived package. As the onus 
was placed on Indigenous people to self-manage their pain, 
Canadians participated in “media witnessing”24 from a safe 
and comfortable distance. In Michel Foucault’s terms, these 
sorts of practices help to manage potential dissent or 
unpredictable effects at a distance.25 Along these lines, the 
TRC not only anticipated emotive disclosures; it encouraged 
manageable affect. By placing survivors in a “field of docu­
mentation,”26 the TRC helped constitute an archive and cor­
responding system of knowledge about residential schools 
by promoting certain kinds of disclosure. 
We must also consider, however, how testimonials were 
situated within Indigenous cultural contexts, how they re­
flected meaningful traditions, and how they were productive 
for participants. Despite the TRC’s limitations, thousands of 
survivors provided testimonials, with many possible reasons 
for doing so. In our April 2013 interview, TRC commissioner 
Justice Murray Sinclair suggested that the TRC had taken 
about five thousand statements at TRC events. At the time of 
the TRC’s closing in 2015, the NCTR estimated it would even­
tually house nearly seven thousand video statements from 
survivors and intergenerational survivors, along with millions 

We Interrupt This Program
38
of documents provided by government offices and church­
es.27 Those who testified in Montreal in 2013 often expressed 
appreciation to listeners for hearing their stories. A witness or 
camera offers an audience, and the process of talking about 
traumatic events may provide some degree of comfort or 
emotional release. Victims of traumatic events may wait in 
anticipation to tell their stories to a sympathetic ear, or what 
has been described as an “affective community,” whether em­
bodied, remote, or “in potentia.”28 Critics argue that initia­
tives such as the TRC might obscure ongoing injustices, but 
the TRC held a broader productivity that could not be re­
duced to a symbolic gesture. TRC representatives travelled to 
Indigenous communities, and speakers and audiences were 
active and passionate participants in TRC activities.
Statement Gathering: Guiding the Process
TRC representatives collected public and private statements in 
a number of ways. These included community hearings across 
Canada as well as at larger-scale national events, which tend­
ed to be located in urban hubs. During the April 2013 four-
day national event in the Fairmont Queen Elizabeth Hotel in 
Montreal, public testimonials played a key role in the pro­
gram, including several sharing circles with the TRC’s Survivor 
Committee, an advisory board consisting of former residen­
tial school students. TRC commissioners Justice Murray 
Sinclair, Chief Wilton Littlechild, and Marie Wilson hosted 
six sharing panels, which attracted large audiences. The pan­
els sometimes included statements from higher-profile sur­
vivors, such as Member of Parliament Romeo Saganash, who 
testified at the national event in Montreal about the death of 
his brother in a residential school.
Statements given in the commissioners’ sharing panels 
have been streamed live and podcast through the online 
live video platform livestream.com. The audience looked 
on while those giving testimonials sat or stood facing the 

Media Practices and Subversions 39
audience and spoke into microphones, signalling a form of 
public address unlike traditional sharing circles, where 
participants sit in a circle facing one another. During the 
Montreal commissioners’ sharing panel, two large screens 
flanked each side of the stage in the grand salon of the ho­
tel, which seated up to seven hundred people.29 Camera 
shots focused on the speakers as well as on their supporters 
sitting close by (see Figure 1.1).
As speakers reached painful points in their stories, sup­
port people frequently reflected similar emotions through 
their facial expressions, magnifying affective responses for 
the audience via the large screens. Translators sat in booths 
to the side of the stage to provide variations of testimonials 
in English, French, and select Indigenous languages.
As the Montreal event illustrated, although survivors dis­
cussed the horrors of circumstances beyond their control, 
Figure 1.1  A residential school survivor gives his testimonial while 
his support person looks on during a commissioners’ sharing panel 
at the TRC’s 2013 national event in Montreal. | Miranda Brady, 
­personal collection

We Interrupt This Program
40
the TRC attempted to provide a controlled environment that 
encouraged potentially idiosyncratic stories to fit particular 
speech typologies, media forms, and discourses. The public 
testimonial format gave speakers a pre-established amount 
of time and primed them through modelled testimonials. 
Speakers were coached on the purpose of the testimonial, 
how to prepare, and the ways in which testimonials may be 
used in the future.
Speakers signed consent forms, and the TRC warned 
against disclosures that might be legally actionable, such as 
ongoing child abuse. Moreover, commissioners informed 
speakers that their statements would be edited if they dis­
closed private information about someone else, “subject to 
applicable freedom of information and privacy laws.”30 The 
TRC’s mandate suggested that it held sessions in camera if 
identifying information (such as the names of people ac­
cused of wrongdoing) was included. Moreover, it stated, 
“Other information that could be used to identify said indi­
viduals shall be anonymized to the extent possible.”31 The 
TRC’s mandate made clear that the purpose of the testimon­
ial was not to accuse particular individuals of wrongdoing. 
The exceptions to this included people already found guilty 
by a court or those who had already publicly admitted to 
a crime.
TRC materials also advised speakers how to control their 
emotions and to organize their thoughts. Speakers were 
warned that giving a statement might be “difficult and emo­
tional.”32 Therefore, even though a number of those testify­
ing at the sharing panels had provided previous versions of 
their testimonials at other TRC events or through the legal 
claims process,33 the TRC advised speakers to practise in ad­
vance through a kind of dress rehearsal and encouraged par­
ticipants to bring documents or photographs to help narrate 
the statement.34 A sheet listing frequently asked questions 
implied that these materials could assist in articulating the 

Media Practices and Subversions 41
notion of intergenerational effects by helping “Canadians 
understand what the schools were like, what happened in­
side them and how the experience affected people for gener­
ations to come.”35
In addition, the TRC provided questions that were “in­
tended to guide and may assist you in preparing to provide a 
statement to the TRC,” including, for example, “What do you 
recall about your life before residential school?,” “How has 
residential school had an impact on who you are today?,” 
and “How can Canadians and Aboriginal peoples establish 
new relations with one another based on mutual under­
standing and respect?”36 The last was a leading question, a 
subtle recommendation that speakers incorporate the idea of 
reconciliation into their statements, while leaving the defin­
ition of “reconciliation” open. The TRC “Statement Gathering 
FAQs” more overtly asked residential school survivors to ex­
plore the term through such questions as, “What does re­
conciliation mean to you?” and “How will we know when 
reconciliation has taken place?” As the overall name and 
theme of the commission implied, such questions encour­
aged building reconciliation into survivor narratives.
The TRC also posted a video on YouTube that modelled 
the statement-gathering process for survivors.37 Empathetic 
voice-overs in the video; upbeat music; and friendly, helpful-­
looking TRC staff made providing a testimonial look mis­
leadingly easy. The short film resembled an in-flight safety 
video and portrayed a smooth, composed, emotion-free 
process – which, of course, was well off the mark. Among 
other things, the video coached speakers on how to give a 
statement in front of a camera or other recording devices. It 
included tips on how to stay calm in the face of potentially 
overwhelming visceral reactions. The pleasant female voice-
over reassured survivors who feared they could not speak 
well or look their best: “Some lighting will also be used to 
make sure the video looks excellent.”38

We Interrupt This Program
42
As the video suggested, the TRC shaped and guided the 
testimonial process in order to avoid liabilities and to fulfill 
its own mandate, namely, to record the residential school 
experiences of survivors, their families, and school staff. The 
TRC’s approach was less prescriptive than that used in other 
kinds of witness testimonials, however. Unlike the approach 
of the Holocaust Memorial Museum, for example,39 the 
TRC’s public statement-gathering process was devoid of an 
interviewer and was not heavily edited. Most of the prepar­
ation work with survivors was completed prior to the offi­
cial statement, through materials such as those mentioned 
above. Testimonials available online were streamed in one 
long take, and included the interim conversation facilitating 
the process. The testimonials, however, will likely be edited 
and redacted once housed in the NCTR.
Despite the lack of interviewer guidance and editing, the 
statements observed in Montreal and online focused over­
whelmingly on the same themes, such as defining and pri­
oritizing reconciliation, traumatic events, sexual abuse, 
healing, and the therapeutic value of providing a testimon­
ial. However, a deeper reading of testimonials is necessary in 
order to understand the less obvious patterns present.
Narratives and Meta-narratives
“I appreciate you listening to my story,” a tearful Loretta 
Dursun concludes in her March 2012 statement to the TRC 
during a community hearing in Campbell River, British 
Columbia.40 Dursun, whose mother, Lillie Billie, attended 
residential school, is one of many intergenerational surviv­
ors who have experienced the long-term effects of the resi­
dential school system.
Dursun disclosed the painful details of her tragedy-ridden 
life. These included having alcoholic parents and experien­
cing domestic and sexual abuse, addiction, the suicide of 
her younger sister, and the abuse of her own children. Like 

Media Practices and Subversions 43
many others, Dursun felt compelled to explain why she de­
cided to give a public statement, stopping midway through 
to say, “This is harder than I thought.” Her words are punctu­
ated by periodically dabbing with a tissue at her tear-filled 
eyes and runny nose, nervous fidgeting, and playing with her 
hair. She is clearly uncomfortable and pauses frequently to 
collect herself:
 I just wanted to share my story because I know there’s sur­
vivors out there that are intergenerational that don’t have a 
voice … You know, they’re so ashamed of what happened 
to them, they can’t speak out, you know, they won’t even 
go talk to other people about the pain and the grief that 
they’re suffering, and I want them to know it’s OK.41
For Dursun, explanatory frameworks such as themes of hope 
and healing appeared to be powerful and held a great deal 
of meaning. This was not surprising as she, like her counter­
parts in Montreal, mentioned various forms of therapy that 
encourage disclosure as a means of processing trauma. It 
was clear, however, that Dursun felt she needed to explain 
why she was speaking.
Many of the TRC’s public testimonials at the national event 
in Montreal reflected similar sentiments, which justified the 
testimonial process despite the fact that it seemed incredibly 
difficult for some. For example, Mary Shecapio Blacksmith 
also commented on the importance of sharing painful stories 
with others, even as she endured strong physical responses. 
Despite the ten-minute time limitation, cameras, and waiting 
audience, Blacksmith took a long pause with her head down, 
due to what she described as an anxiety attack. However, like 
many others, she pushed herself to finish the statement de­
spite the emotional and physical toll.
During the same sharing circle, Murray Crow appeared 
breathless and coughed heavily as he stated, “I’m sorry if I 

We Interrupt This Program
44
get emotional … [coughs] … I spoke in Halifax … It’s never 
easy.” After fifty years of silence about his residential school 
experiences because of his shame, he began speaking only 
in recent years. In Montreal, he described having needles 
stuck in his tongue for speaking his mother tongue and be­
ing locked in a dark room when he cried after being taken 
from his mother at age five, which led to his continued fear 
as an adult of being alone in the dark. But he also reported 
relief in finding others who understood his experiences: 
“Listening to you people … it still hurts. I’m so glad I’m 
able to share.”
W. Claude Blacksmith, like many survivors, reported hav­
ing been sexually abused and having been beaten with a 
strap for speaking Cree. He broke down in tears during his 
statement: “I know it’s hard to talk about it. But, you have to 
talk about it. It can’t always stay inside of you … It’s the past, 
but we still don’t forget about it.”
These testimonials revealed the emotional and physical 
difficulty of making a public statement, of being filmed 
while sharing intimate information with a live audience and 
an audience in potentia.42 Each speaker was given the option 
of providing a private testimonial, but all felt compelled to 
give public statements, and they all justified their choice to 
do so and the testimonial process itself. In some ways, how­
ever, they defied the guidelines and preferred narratives, re­
vealing their critiques of and resistance to the testimonial 
process. For example, during a sharing circle at the Montreal 
national event, one woman stated the name of a nun who 
brought her as a child to a priest to be raped. After naming 
the accused, she recounted the story:
She took me and put a bag on my face and pushed me 
into the room. And I could smell cigar and I know who 
smoked cigar there. It was the bishop. I was just twelve 
years old and he raped me. I tried to fight him off but I 

Media Practices and Subversions 45
couldn’t because he was bigger than I was. I still feel 
him  … all these years. So finally when everything was 
over he left. I could hear the door shut. So this nun that 
was looking after the girls found me and said I ran away. 
I told her I didn’t but she didn’t believe me … so she gave 
me the strap … I felt like telling her “kill me and get it 
over with.”
The woman’s mention of the sister’s name in this horrific 
narrative showed how live testimonial could deviate from 
the TRC’s guidelines. Yet while the live testimonial included 
some degree of unpredictability, when the statement is pro­
cessed by the TRC’s National Centre for Truth and Recon­
ciliation, it is likely that the identifying information (that is, 
the name of the offender) will be redacted from the record if 
its inclusion conflicts with privacy laws.
Some statements during the Montreal event included 
more overt critiques of the process itself. One of the most 
common critiques was about the time constraint placed on 
speakers. Murray Crow joked that after speaking for seven­
teen minutes at a Halifax TRC event, he had to stop “because 
they kept giving me notes!” Mary Shecapio Blacksmith stat­
ed, “But since I have only ten minutes, I’ll just make my 
story shorter than I usually do.” TRC commissioners them­
selves expressed frustration at the time limit. During his 
opening remarks one morning in Montreal, Chief Wilton 
Littlechild commented, “We always seem to be running after 
time. We always seem to be in a hurry to get nowhere. 
We’re starting to pick up the habits of our white brothers.” 
Although speakers were often allowed to continue after hav­
ing exceeded their allocated time, they clearly still felt pres­
sured by the clock.
The TRC’s time and structural limitations are not compat­
ible with the ethos of oral traditions described by Indigenous 
education scholar Jo-Ann Archibald, who points out that, 

We Interrupt This Program
46
within an oral-traditional context, stories unfold through 
analogy and repetition (as an individual weaves a blanket or 
a spider weaves a web). Traditional narratives play with tem­
porality and take detours rather than recounting exact de­
tails in a linear fashion.43
For example, in Campbell River, British Columbia, Loretta 
Dursun held up a picture of her mother, Lillie Billie, at the 
beginning of her testimonial and stated that she brought 
her mother with her. Later, she mentioned that her mother 
had passed away. Dursun’s story jumped back and forth 
through different events and time periods. She kept referen­
cing her mother and, later, her own children, which helped 
illustrate her point about the intergenerational impacts of 
residential schools.
Speakers in Montreal incorporated descriptions of rituals 
from their cultures to tell their stories, even though doing so 
was not expedient. Many, for example, began in a traditional 
manner. They introduced themselves through familial rela­
tions and home territory, and many honoured their elders. 
Others provided statements in Indigenous languages, which 
was significant given the state-sanctioned attempts to eradi­
cate Indigenous languages. Such statements might have been 
intended less for someone outside of the speaker’s com­
munity and more for community members. In addition, 
statements were frequently intertextual – as speakers referred 
to previous oral statements, a point of reference for others in 
attendance but not necessarily for those who would later 
watch select statements online. Several of the survivors in 
Montreal compared their own experiences to the hardships 
depicted in We Were Children, a National Film Board film 
screened at the TRC national event. The film included re-­
enactments as well as interviews with residential school sur­
vivors Lyna Hart and Glen Anaquod. While Murray Crow 
reported having to leave the room because he was emotion­
ally overwhelmed three or four minutes into the film, Mary 

Media Practices and Subversions 47
Shecapio Blacksmith stated that the story of Hart, who had 
been raped by a priest, was like her own: “And when I was 
watching that movie this morning, it kind of reminded 
me what had happened where I went. And I know we’re all 
wounded. Damaged. They took away everything that I had. 
They took away my self-esteem, my self-respect, my culture.” 
Survivor Ruth Loft shared similar thoughts at the Montreal 
event: “That image of that girl … really affected me.” 
As these testimonials demonstrate, the public statement-­
gathering process did not merely elicit statements about per­
sonal experiences. Statements were also constituted through 
intertextual and community references, where “community” 
could be construed in several different ways. For example, 
those in attendance, those who attended residential school 
with the speaker, and those from the speaker’s hometown or 
city might all be considered members of different (but over­
lapping) communities at events.
While the TRC’s mandate was to document residential 
school experiences, many stories delved into other topics, in­
cluding the ongoing problems faced by Indigenous people. 
Some spoke about current government policies and even in­
cluded overt critiques of the TRC itself. For example, Rose 
Wawakie stated emphatically in a sharing circle:
But I’m not going to forgive the government. There’s no 
way in Hell that I’m going to do that. Because it’s just a 
repeating thing. What else are they going to come up 
with? This Truth and Reconciliation Commission is bull­
shit to me! I don’t believe that. Why I say that is because 
now I’m going to court to protect something I believe in, 
Turtle Island [North American] land. For the logging, all 
their doing, I cannot go back in the bush anymore. They 
put an injunction on my family. On my people … this 
is  why I say this is bullshit with the government and 
their reconciliation and the apology. So where is he 

We Interrupt This Program
48
[presumably former prime minister Stephen Harper]? I 
for one will never believe that.
Wawakie is engaged in a legal battle over ancestral lands 
­currently being logged, and her comments reflected the cri­
tiques of Jennifer Henderson and Pauline Wakeham and 
others who contend that the “culture of redress,” including 
apologies and statement gathering, is inadequate for ad­
dressing the continuing struggles of Indigenous peoples, and 
that such efforts mask contemporary injustices.44 As  Member 
of Parliament Romeo Saganash stated in response to Stephen 
Harper’s apology, “Yes, bravo, great … but action needs to be 
taken to support these words, and this is what is lacking … 
One cannot apologize and then go on negating the basic 
rights of those to whom you’re apologizing.”
In addition to the structural limitations imposed upon 
witness testimonials, the statement-gathering process itself 
was also open to criticism and resistance. While TRC state­
ments were influenced by mediation, structural guidelines, 
and previous statements, they also included a number of 
significant cultural markers specific to Indigenous commun­
ities. It might be a heavy burden to place on survivors to 
expose the nation’s historical injustices, but some who testi­
fied also used the process to present other grievances – like 
territorial dispossession.
Cultural institutions and policies cannot always be trust­
ed to recount the harder-hitting details of colonization;45 
although limited, the statement-gathering process allowed 
survivors the opportunity to address some of those. TRC 
events also provided a venue in which residential school 
survivors signalled belonging in First Peoples communities, 
a powerful form of cultural validation for those who had 
lived in oppressive institutions that aimed to “kill the Indian 
in the child.”46

Media Practices and Subversions 49
The National Centre for Truth and Reconciliation
Live testimonials have particular meanings and audiences, 
but a whole new range of possible audiences will have ac­
cess to the TRC’s National Centre for Truth and Reconciliation 
(NCTR), which will eventually house digitized versions of 
the testimonials compiled through the statement-gathering 
process. According to the TRC, the NCTR will be “Canada’s 
largest permanent collection of oral history of its kind.”47 
The NCTR estimates that its collection will include millions 
of digitized records, including written transcripts and audio 
and video recordings of testimonials about residential 
schools from survivors, families, community members, and 
residential school staff.48
In addition, archival records from other institutions will 
be added to the collection, including photos, letters, and 
documents from the Canadian government and the church­
es implicated in the Indian Residential Schools Settlement 
Agreement. The NCTR will also house a smaller collection 
of material culture, such as art, clothing, and memorabilia.49 
In June 2013, the commission announced that it had select­
ed the University of Manitoba to host the NCTR.50 The TRC 
was no longer responsible for the centre after the commis­
sion disbanded in 2015. The centre operates under its own 
mandate and funding for housing, further acquisitions, and 
maintenance and, as TRC commissioner Justice Murray 
Sinclair indicated in our April 2013 interview, it must com­
ply with privacy laws and honour Indigenous sensibilities 
related to accessibility. The TRC’s choice of host institution 
was determined, at least in part, by the need for proper infra­
structure and resources to support the massive, digitized pub­
lic collection. Exactly what the NCTR will look like and how 
visitors will use it has yet to be determined. Currently housed 
in the Chancellor’s Hall on the University of Manitoba cam­
pus, the NCTR will be moved into a dedicated building after 

We Interrupt This Program
50
construction of the building is complete. The centre hosted 
the launch of its database in November 2015. The database 
enables access for users to a limited portion of the collection 
the NCTR will eventually house.
In addition to logistical challenges, the NCTR inherited 
some of the more polemical entanglements that plagued the 
TRC. These included the TRC’s initial failure to reach an ac­
cord with the federal government on the terms outlined by 
the Indian Residential Schools Settlement Agreement. At 
least two major components were unsettled: first, Canada 
and the TRC did not agree on what constituted “as complete 
an historical record as possible,” and second, they did not 
agree on what constituted “all relevant documents.” A spring 
2013 report of the auditor general of Canada documented 
this failure. Eventually, the disagreement led to a court case 
launched by the TRC against the Canadian government for 
the government’s failure to provide to the TRC millions of 
documents that the TRC deemed relevant from Library and 
Archives Canada.51
In addition, the auditor general pointed out that “there 
was no agreement on the digitization formats to be used or 
on the quality of the relevant documents to be provided.” 
This led to inconsistent formats.52 The report suggested that 
the commission did not share its preferred digital format 
specifications with the government until January 2013, four 
years after the TRC was established and one year prior to its 
completion (two years prior to its completion if the exten­
sion is included in the reckoning).
To illustrate this problem, the report included an example 
of a blurry digital copy of a photo from the commission’s 
database, provided to the commission by the Canadian gov­
ernment. The image is nearly impossible to make out, com­
pared with a better-quality photo digitized using Library 
and Archives Canada’s “usual practices.”53 The collections 
the government had initially turned over to the commission 

Media Practices and Subversions 51
were not digitized for the purposes of fulfilling the govern­
ment’s obligations to the TRC per the Indian Residential 
Schools Settlement Agreement. Rather, as the auditor gener­
al pointed out, they were compiled for litigation purposes.
The visual evidence provided by the auditor general illus­
trates the problems of digitization. Having copies that were 
of “poor quality” and improperly indexed was almost worse 
than having no copies at all. The auditor general’s findings 
suggest a tremendous, but perhaps not surprising, lack of 
cooperation between the government of Canada and the 
commission. Although the dispute was addressed as a result 
of the auditor general’s report, and the subsequent court 
case required that the government supply the TRC with ad­
equate-quality digitized documents, this scenario illustrates 
a broader theme.54 Particularly, it highlights the emphasis 
now placed on archives as sites of political struggle over pub­
lic memory, a theme we return to in Chapter 2. As the TRC 
notes in its 2015 final report summary:
Although the difficulties the TRC encountered in ob­
taining LAC [Library and Archives Canada] documents 
were specific to the Commission’s mandate, they high­
light broader questions concerning the role of state ar­
chives and archivists in providing documents that reveal 
the facts of why and how a targeted group of people have 
suffered harms on a massive scale. As part of a growing 
trend toward demanding better government accountabil­
ity and transparency, and the evolution of new privacy 
and freedom of information legislation, archives have be­
come more directly connected to struggles for human 
rights and justice.55
Inevitably, concerns over politics and funding will affect 
the NCTR’s archive. In fact, the NCTR is currently engaged 
in another legal battle over the residential school survivor 

We Interrupt This Program
52
testimonials generated through the IAP.56 The question also 
remains whether the institution(s) managing and funding 
the centre will share the same goals as those outlined by the 
TRC. Initial costs for setting up the NCTR came out of the 
TRC’s $60 million from the Indian Residential Schools Set­
tlement Agreement, but as Murray Sinclair suggested in our 
personal communication, “In terms of actual cash – we don’t 
have much to give them.” According to Sinclair, the NCTR 
will likely count on funding from grants and the private sec­
tor. What is apparent is that the goal to create a digital archive 
of residential school testimonials was important in principle 
in the Indian Residential Schools Settlement Agree­ment as a 
means of intervening in the national historical narrative. No 
one, however, anticipated the true practical implications of 
what that mandate required from Canada, the churches that 
ran residential schools, and the commission.
Still, Murray Sinclair and other TRC staff have remained 
optimistic about the NCTR and the possibilities for different 
audiences. For example, Ry Moran, the director of statement 
gathering, who was eventually appointed as director of the 
National Centre for Truth and Reconciliation, stated in a per­
sonal communication, “I really hope that the statements are 
going to fuel a lot of really interesting work in the future. Not 
only academic work, but, you know, creative work … docu­
mentaries and all sorts of stuff ...  That will start bridging 
these stories into the mainstream and will help people under­
stand the full extent of the system.” 
In addition to its focus on interactivity and engagement 
with the broader Canadian and international community, 
the TRC asked potential hosts to describe specifically how 
their vision of the centre would be inclusive of the cultures 
of Indigenous people and whether the submission included 
“a plan for  how Aboriginal peoples will have significant 
decision-­making responsibilities about what goes into the 

Media Practices and Subversions 53
archives, who has access to the archives and how the ar­
chives are operated generally.”57 The TRC also recommended 
that the research centre be physically located near “substan­
tial Aboriginal populations.”58
Justice Sinclair indicated in our interview that Indigenous 
control of the NCTR would be further ensured through a gov­
ernance structure guided by Aboriginal peoples. He suggested:
One of the elements of the proposal that we put in place 
was that there are features about the National Research 
Centre [the former name of the NCTR] that have to be con­
trolled by Aboriginal people, such as the documents them­
selves, what happens to them, who can access them, issues 
around ceremony and protocols of access, issues around 
what kind of research can be done with regards to those 
documents [and] how the documents will be protected. If 
the university decided in ten years that this is not some­
thing that they want to stay involved in, then what is their 
right to dump it off onto someone else – or shut it down? 
So all of those decisions require Aboriginal approval. We 
have a plan to put in place an Aboriginal governing coun­
cil that will have the final say about those things. 
The formation of the NCTR’s governing circle, which is com­
posed partially of Indigenous members,59 is encouraging, 
but there remain several questions about the influence of 
changing political tides and the precarious nature of an in­
stitution dependent, at least in part, on private funding. 
Moreover, whether the NCTR will be relevant to the needs of 
Indigenous people and accessible to them, and whether it 
will be maintained and updated along with technological 
shifts and Indigenous concerns, has yet to be seen.
• • •

We Interrupt This Program
54
The TRC’s public statement-gathering process has been 
circumscribed by its mediation in several ways, including 
the parameters of legal frameworks (for example, the rules 
against naming names) and preferred discourses and narra­
tives centred on abuses within residential schools. Through 
its initial preparations with survivors, the TRC attempted to 
contain potentially unpredictable behaviours and to encour­
age preferred survivor narratives with manageable affective 
responses. One possible reason for this was the orientation 
of the TRC towards remedy, as Ronald Niezen suggests, 
where the archive documents evidence of legal harm.60 The 
production of such an archive makes possible a fuller under­
standing about the experiences of residential schools by 
classifying disparate experiences into common themes. At 
the same time, it reproduces an evidence-based system of 
knowledge that finds particular themes legitimate and oc­
cludes those that cannot or will not be recalled and dis­
closed. It also assumes survivors are responsible for the 
burden of proof. In Foucauldian terms, this archive works to 
produce knowledge and reinforce the importance of the jur­
idical state apparatus and the archive itself by demonstrat­
ing the ways in which it can reform and deliver justice. But 
as we argue, this is not the whole story: we can consider the 
ways in which survivor testimonials intervened in the histor­
ical archive in more nuanced ways.
In mediated testimonials from the April 2013 national 
event in Montreal and other TRC events, survivors often af­
firmed the importance of the public statement as part of their 
own healing or for the sake of others going through similar 
hardships. However, many who experienced physical and emo­­
tional difficulty providing testimonials criticized and resisted 
some aspects of the statement-gathering process, and adapted 
testimonials for their own purposes. For example, some sur­
vivors referenced residential schools but critiqued current 
government policies. Testimonials were intertextual, shaped 

Media Practices and Subversions 55
not only by the survivors’ experiences and the TRC’s guide­
lines but also by other testimonials, media texts (such as the 
film We Were Children), and Indi­genous oral traditions and 
cultural cues. In other terms, the testimonials do not merely 
serve the purpose of creating a historical record per the TRC’s 
mandate; they also serve as vehicles for critique, knowledge 
transfer, and belonging within communities.
For many survivors, the public statement is an important 
process, regardless of whether the process reflects a “culture 
of redress.”61 Yet some survivors remain skeptical, as a num­
ber of statements suggested. After the commission disbanded 
in 2015 and once public statements have been archived in 
the National Centre for Truth and Reconciliation, the audi­
ences for the testimonials and the meanings of the testimon­
ials themselves will inevitably shift. Given the commission’s 
limitations, it is doubtful that the TRC could have fulfilled its 
mandate to create as complete a historical record of the 
residential school legacy as possible acting on its own. The 
massive scale of the project, including millions of digitized 
records, which must be indexed and archived in accordance 
with legal and privacy concerns and archival standards, 
makes it highly unlikely that the mandate could ever have 
been completed within the stipulated timeframe and budget. 
Yet what is also clear is that the government dragged its heels 
in its support of the TRC once the magnitude of the project 
became clear. The reliance of the NCTR on private funding, 
the initial lack of cooperation between the government and 
the TRC in producing documents of adequate quality and 
resolution, and the practical burdens of housing, organizing, 
and maintaining archives all have potential implications for 
how testimonials will be contextualized and made available 
to the public. The scenario also illustrates the intensively pol­
itical nature of the archive and its mediation.
Despite its limitations, however, the National Centre for 
Truth and Reconciliation has the potential to open up further 

We Interrupt This Program
56
opportunities for Indigenous peoples and others to grapple 
with the residential schools legacy, which until recently was 
occluded from national histories in public institutions. 
Perhaps, as the mandate of the NCTR is meaningfully estab­
lished, new opportunities will be provided for Indigenous 
interventions in history. Like the TRC’s statement-gathering 
process, the NCTR and the statements it houses may be used 
in a number of creative and unpredictable ways that defy 
and subvert the limitations of structural form.

Archives are sites where collective imaginaries are formed, and 
they are also sites of struggle. Global truth commissions since 
the 1970s have illustrated this point through their attempts to 
establish accurate records of atrocities and human rights 
violations.1 Such “global archives of suffering” have prolifer­
ated, following technological advances in documentary and 
recorded forms of witnessing.2 However, archives are not sim­
ply objective sites of truth that historians can access to under­
stand “how things really happened.”3 In Canada, the political 
nature of the archive became especially apparent as Canada’s 
Truth and Reconciliation Commission (TRC) began forming 
its collection. Part of the commission’s mandate was to pro­
vide “as complete an historical record as possible of the IRS 
[Indian Residential School] system and legacy.”4 To this end, 
the TRC set about compiling materials from the government 
and the churches that ran the schools, as well as collecting 
testimonials from residential school survivors, for an archive 
that would come to be housed by the National Centre for 
Truth and Reconciliation.5 The TRC engaged in several legal 
battles over documents,6 contending that control over the ar­
chives was tantamount to “control over history.”7
2
IsumaTV’s “Testimony by Isuma” 
Online Expressions of Inuit 
Culture and Assimilation  
Inuit have to feel comfortable that 
they are being heard in their own language and to be 
understood by another Inuk of that pain in history. 
– Rosemarie Kuptana, IsumaTV, 2008

We Interrupt This Program
58
Now under the control of the NCTR rather than the gov­
ernment, the archive signifies a sharing of power over the 
production of knowledge. However, power dynamics were 
and continue to be apparent in the control, form, access, 
and accession of the archival documents. The prioritization 
of some Indigenous experiences demonstrates that the ar­
chive is a culturally and politically situated mechanism that 
works to constitute and (re)produce reality.8 It also illus­
trates that the archive is not merely a dusty or hermetically 
sealed compilation of materials. As media historian and so­
cial theorist John Durham Peters writes in Media, History, 
and the Archive, “Every collection is a selection.”9
This chapter explores the struggles of Inuit leaders to 
shape the archive of Canada’s residential schools in sites of 
public memory. Shortly after the formation of the TRC on 
June 1, 2008, leaders of Inuit Tapiriit Kanatami (ITK) began 
expressing concerns that Inuit experiences of institutional­
ized schooling would be excluded from the TRC’s statement-­
gathering process. Despite Inuit participation, the initial 
efforts of the TRC did not account for the particular history 
of institutionalized schooling in the North, and the special 
logistical, language, and cultural needs of Inuit witnesses.10 
As part of the struggle to establish Inuit-specific experiences 
in the TRC, a series of Inuit testimonials appeared on the 
IsumaTV website, an Internet portal started by Nunavut’s 
Igloolik Isuma Productions. The testimonials formed an ear­
ly archive of Inuit residential school experiences, prior to 
the establishment of the TRC’s Inuit sub-commission.11 The 
IsumaTV video testimonials were created in part as a vehicle 
for demonstrating the importance of including Inuit-specific 
experiences in the TRC and of conducting Inuit testimonials 
in Inuit communities and languages. In this chapter, we look 
to IsumaTV’s Inuit residential school survivor testimonials as 
interventions into the TRC’s national collection – interven­
tions that reflect Inuit experiences and archival practices.

IsumaTV’s “Testimony by Isuma” 59
Inuit-Specific Experiences
Because Inuit were not under federal jurisdiction until 
1939,12 the Canadian government did not begin imple­
menting schooling in the North until the 1940s. The schools 
were established in conjunction with growing federal inter­
est in asserting national sovereignty over the North during 
the Cold War. This was also evidenced by the government’s 
desire to monitor the northern borders and begin construc­
tion of the Distant Early Warning Line (the DEW Line).13 
Northern students often attended day schools with hostels 
attached. In many cases, children were removed from their 
homes and flown far from their remote communities and 
families to more centralized locations.14
While assimilation policies were enacted much earlier in 
southern parts of the country, the institution of compulsory 
schooling was mixed with other forms of swift and radical 
change for Inuit in the North. Widespread conversion to 
Christianity and the role of trading posts rather than no­
madic lifestyles in the organization of community life did 
not begin in the North until the 1920s (although many Inuit 
continued to live nomadic and semi-nomadic lives in hunt­
ing groups until the 1960s).15 By the early 1970s, most Inuit 
in the North lived in settlements made up of prefabricated 
housing units.16 However, many continued and still con­
tinue to engage in traditional harvesting practices.17
Increased population density led to the spread of com­
municable diseases such as tuberculosis and influenza, and 
the introduction of alcohol brought additional challenges. 
The slaughter of sled dogs by RCMP officers and other 
actions designed to eradicate Indigenous culture forced 
Inuit to rely on a cash-based economy and family allowan­
ces in conditions of underemployment. This devastated the 
traditional hunting economy.18 Children, who had trad­
itionally assisted their families with hunting and other sub­
sistence activities, were no longer there to help or to learn 

We Interrupt This Program
60
skills for living off the land. As former chief of the National 
Assembly of First Nations Georges Erasmus suggests:
Inuit Survivors speak of community relocations, hostels, 
and tent camps. Their experiences of the Indian Residen­
tial School System are inseparable from the swift, co-­
ordinated, and overwhelming descent of foreign people 
and policies upon Arctic communities in the 1950s. With­
in a generation, the Inuit went from living on the land to 
living rooms. The traumatic pace of change, and the extra­
ordinary dislocations which ensued, perhaps explain why 
the Inuit today are confronted by the highest suicide rate 
by ethnic group in Canada.19
Because of the unique experiences of Inuit residential school 
survivors and the push in the North to revitalize and main­
tain Inuit language, cultures, and worldview (Inuit Qaujima­
jatuqangit or IQ), leaders of ITK stressed the importance of 
collecting Inuit survivor testimonials in their communities 
and in their own languages.20 In 2010, after “intense lobbying 
by Inuit leaders,” the TRC formed the Inuit sub-commission 
to conduct the testimonial process in the North.21 This pro­
cess included community hearings and statement gathering 
from January 2011 to March 2013.22 As cultural activist Peter 
Irniq stated, he and other Inuit leaders saw the TRC as “our 
ear to the rest of Canada and to all Canadians.”23 
In the period leading up to the July 2009 agreement in 
principle between ITK and the TRC, IsumaTV began con­
ducting and posting its own interviews with Inuit residential 
school survivors. As in the case of other media texts coming 
out of parent company Igloolik Isuma Productions, the testi­
monials were an expression of Inuit cultural sovereignty, 
illustrating the need for Inuit control over the residential 
school testimonial process.

IsumaTV’s “Testimony by Isuma” 61
Isuma Media as Cultural Sovereignty
Igloolik Isuma Productions was founded by Inuit filmmaker 
Zacharias Kunuk and his partner Norm Cohn, along with 
other colleagues. In addition to creating the multimedia 
platform IsumaTV, Kunuk and Cohn are known for their 
award-winning films such as Atanarjuat: The Fast Runner 
(2001) and The Journals of Knud Rasmussen (2006). The im­
pact of Igloolik Isuma Productions on the Canadian film 
landscape really cannot be overstated; known for its “confi­
dent and culturally distinctive aesthetic approach to story­
telling in media practice,” the production company also 
plays an important role in “transforming the political econ­
omy of cultural policies that shape Indigenous media in 
Canada, as the circulation of this work oscillates between 
local communities, the nation, and the world stage.”24 
Community-based storytelling and Inuit cultural preserva­
tion are characteristic of Igloolik Isuma’s many productions. 
For example, Atanarjuat is in Inuktitut, depicts an ancient 
Inuit legend, and includes an all-Inuit cast. Production of 
the film involved consultations with elders.25 Indigenous 
studies scholar Sophie McCall argues in First Person Plural 
that Atanarjuat emerged out of the same “political crucible” 
as Nunavut; that is, the film reflects the struggle for cultural 
sovereignty engaged in by ITK leaders as Nunavut became a 
territory in 1999, just before the release of the film in 2001.26
Like its offspring IsumaTV, Igloolik Isuma Productions 
was heavily subsidized by Canadian granting agencies and 
governing bodies. However, co-founder Cohn noted the 
eventual lack of support from the government as a key rea­
son for the production company’s closure.27 Other scholars 
similarly recount Igloolik Isuma’s chronic struggles to se­
cure national funding and its failure to convince funders 
that its media products were compatible with accepted forms 
of Cana­dian cultural citizenship.28 While Igloolik Isuma 

We Interrupt This Program
62
eventually received substantial support from large funding 
bodies such as Telefilm Canada, the company struggled to 
succeed in an industry described by Cohn as exploitative 
and culturally insensitive.29
Despite the fate of its parent company, as of August 2017, 
IsumaTV still continues its operations, with Kunuk and Cohn 
at work on a number of projects. IsumaTV is an Internet por­
tal that challenges traditional notions of television and 
serves functions previously performed by other media, in­
cluding certain types of archiving. The name “IsumaTV” it­
self immediately establishes an interesting connection to 
television as both a cultural metaphor and a media form. 
Arctic communities at first were anxious about television sig­
nals from the South, fearing that the medium would erode 
Inuit language and culture.30 Later, Arctic communities em­
braced the emergence of culturally specific television pro­
gramming, enabled by satellite through the Inuit Broadcasting 
Corporation and TV Northern Canada.31 The term “Isuma” 
means “to think,” and the name “thinking TV” invites user 
reflection and insight.32 Users of IsumaTV are not only co-­
creators of content; they can also decide where and when 
they wish to access content and make it available for other 
users. IsumaTV’s flexibility also sets it apart from earlier 
models (that is, film) employed by its parent company.
Through the IsumaTV site, Indigenous filmmakers (broad­
ly construed) are invited to upload and access multimedia 
content free of charge, allowing them to “share IsumaTV’s 
sophisticated back-end infrastructure, without needing to 
re-invent the digital wheel.”33 Users customize “channels” 
organized by content themes and language “to reflect their 
own identity, mandate and audience.”34 Although older con­
tent is buried as newer content is added,35 users tag uploads 
with keywords to make them searchable. They also use a 
comments section to annotate and engage in conversations 
about content. The site offers syllabics, Inuktitut, English, 

IsumaTV’s “Testimony by Isuma” 63
French, and Spanish, but it can also be navigated through 
visual icons intended to be “user-friendly to oral cultures on­
line.”36 It features five thousand videos in seventy languages, 
noting the importance of “media to recover language and 
indigenous traditional strengths, and transform these into 
contemporary strengths.”37
The site includes a wide scope of users from around the 
world, including Canada, the United States, Greenland, 
Norway, Sweden, Russia, Australia, New Zealand, and Latin 
America.38 The accommodations for oral culture and the in­
clusion of various Native languages mark Indigenous global 
audiences as central to IsumaTV. Moreover, because many 
remote northern communities do not have the broadband 
service necessary to access and upload multimedia content, 
IsumaTV offers an independent, two-way communication 
stream to its website, called the IsumaTV Mediaplayer 
Distribution Network.39
Content on the site is diverse, from scripted and  non-­
scripted cultural lessons and teachings to fictional and 
non-fictional films and storytelling. Channels are dedicated 
to established topics and institutions, including the “UN 
Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues,” as well as less estab­
lished individuals and groups. The social rather than capital 
potential for IsumaTV’s content due to the site’s free access is 
conducive to ephemeral and non-revenue-generating media 
such as community meetings, testimonials, interviews, lan­
guage preservation lessons, older films no longer in high de­
mand, and “records of daily life,” many of which relate to 
Inuit experiences.40 In addition to acting as a portal where 
users upload and access material, IsumaTV includes services 
explicitly related to archiving through Digitizing the Inuit and 
Aboriginal Media Archive (DIAMA), which “preserves ir­
replaceable Inuit and Aboriginal media archives at risk of 
­being lost.”41 DIAMA works with users to clean, reformat, and 
upload digital media files.

We Interrupt This Program
64
The use of IsumaTV as an archive for Indigenous multi­
media content is not surprising given the history its founders 
have with film and video art. The site fits with Igloolik 
Isuma’s overall emphasis on the use of technology for culture 
and language preservation.42 As an Internet portal, IsumaTV 
differs from conventional archives in several respects: it does 
not have strict selection criteria, it is not actively curated, and, 
unlike other collections of Indigenous film that privilege 
documentary and narrative feature forms, it is more inclusive 
and features experimental and amateur works.43 However, 
film studies scholar Katherine Quanz notes the significance 
of IsumaTV and Vtape (discussed in Chapter 4) as archives 
that “collect, preserve, and exhibit” Indigenous media, not­
ing, “Without either of these organizations functioning as de 
facto archives, the majority of the works in their Aboriginal 
collections would not otherwise be preserved and there 
would be no central collection of independent Canadian 
Aboriginal produced moving images.”44 
The long list of funders for IsumaTV and its content illus­
trates the dependence of such ambitious projects on large 
sums of external funding. It also illustrates the tactical man­
oeuvring on behalf of Zacharias Kunuk and Norman Cohn 
in negotiating the challenges of media funding (as further 
elaborated in Chapter 4). As Kunuk states, “It’s hard being 
independent, living on grants. It’s hard, and I’m amazed 
that we did it for twenty years.”45 The struggles to create and 
maintain Igloolik Isuma Productions demonstrated the im­
perative in Nunavut to tell and share stories from Inuit per­
spectives for local and global audiences. It was a similar, 
tactical use of media that took place when ITK and other 
Inuit leaders began making a case for the importance of 
Inuit-specific experiences in the Truth and Reconciliation 
Commission and an Inuit archive of residential school sur­
vivor testimonials.

IsumaTV’s “Testimony by Isuma” 65
“Testimony by Isuma”: A Community-Based Approach
Between 2007 and 2009, two sets of testimonials that docu­
mented Arctic experiences of assimilation in educational in­
stitutions were conducted and later posted on the IsumaTV 
site under the Collective9 and Testimony by Isuma channels. 
At the time of writing, twenty-three testimonials related to 
residential schools in the North could be accessed through a 
search for the keyword “testimony.” (One survivor testimon­
ial is split into two videos, for a total of twenty-four videos).
Zacharias Kunuk has uploaded seventeen videos to the 
Testimony by Isuma channel. They are all in interview for­
mat, with interviews having been conducted by Inuit cultural 
activist and former Nunavut commissioner Peter Irniq, with 
the exception of his own testimonial, which was conducted 
in interview with Zacharias Kunuk. The Testimony by Isuma 
videos typically run between one and two hours in length 
and the interviews were conducted in Nunavut, the Northwest 
Territories, and Ottawa. The interviews took place in what 
appear to be offices, a church or community centre, and liv­
ing rooms. They are in Inuktitut (with one exception, the 
interview of Rosemarie Kuptana) and consist of statements 
from residential school survivors and their family members. 
Interviewees include the mother of five former students 
(Clara Quassa), the older sister of three siblings who at­
tended residential school (Eulalie Angutimarik), and the 
older brother and parent of children who attended (Louis 
Uttak). The majority of statements come from former stu­
dents of the Roman Catholic–run Chesterfield Inlet Indian 
Residential School, who lived in the associated Turquetil 
Hall residence in present-day Nunavut (see Figure 2.1). One 
statement is provided by a former student of Sir Alexander 
Mackenzie Day School in Inuvik, Northwest Territories 
(Rosemarie Kuptana). All but three testimonials in Inuktitut 
provide English translations.

We Interrupt This Program
66
We reviewed the seven English-language testimonials on 
the Collective9 and Testimony by Isuma channels and the 
English-language transcripts provided for fourteen testimon­
ials in Inuktitut, taking careful notes on the basic informa­
tion provided, the content, and the context of the interviews. 
For further context, we consulted with two fluent Inuktitut 
speakers who grew up in Nunavut about their impressions of 
the Inuktitut-language testimonials for which translations 
were included and of those for which translations were not 
included.46 We asked them to note cultural nuances in the 
statements as well as variations between the Inuktitut con­
versations and the English-language translations. One also 
provided feedback on an early draft of this chapter.
For the purposes of this chapter, we focused on the 
Testimony by Isuma collection. We were especially interest­
ed in the timing of production, as it ran concurrently with 
the initial formation of the TRC and rising concerns by ITK 
Figure 2.1 Turquetil Hall, group of students standing in the school 
playground, Chesterfield Inlet (Igluligaarjuk), Nunavut, September 5, 
1958 | Courtesy of Library and Archives Canada

IsumaTV’s “Testimony by Isuma” 67
leaders that Inuit perspectives would not be included. The 
timing is notable also because production occurred concur­
rently with and just after the Indian Residential Schools Set­
tlement Agreement was approved by courts across Canada 
in March 2007. This agreement led to the formation of the 
TRC in September 2007. However, these events took place 
before the agreement in principle between ITK and the TRC 
to form an Inuit sub-commission on July 1, 2009.47
During a portion of that time, Peter Irniq and ITK leaders 
had been lobbying the TRC for Inuit-specific inclusion in 
the process, but they had become disillusioned due to in­
fighting among the original TRC commissioners and the 
fact that their request for an Inuk commissioner on the TRC 
had been met with inaction.48 After news broke in 2008 that 
the TRC’s first head commissioner Justice Harry LaForme 
had resigned, Irniq alluded to the statements he had been 
collecting in Nunavut over the previous year: “Inuit will 
have to tell their stories through another media, which is 
something that we’ve already done with issue productions 
in Iglulik [sic].”49
The Testimony by Isuma statements are also notable be­
cause they help fulfill the broader goals of ITK leaders to re­
vitalize Inuit languages and traditions in the North. In our 
review of the testimonials, we noted a significant pattern, 
where Irniq facilitated survivor articulations of traditional 
Inuit culture and how that culture had been interrupted by 
residential schools. The Testimony by Isuma statements also 
list Zacharias Kunuk as the filmmaker. We are interested in 
how these statements reflected the broader cultural impera­
tives of IsumaTV. For example, the interviews are with only 
Inuit residential school survivors and, for the most part, are 
in Inuktitut. By comparison, the Collective9 testimonials are 
much shorter, generally between three and eight minutes in 
length (with one exception); they are in English and are 

We Interrupt This Program
68
with both Dene and Inuit survivors.50 Collective9 testimon­
ials tend to focus more on residential school experiences 
such as abuse rather than on broader and longer articula­
tions of traditional Inuit culture.
Most Testimony by Isuma videos provide basic informa­
tion, including the name of the person testifying; the iden­
tity of the individual who uploaded the video (Zacharias 
Kunuk); the region, month, and year that the interview took 
place; and the number of times the video has been viewed 
(for example, at the time of writing, Peter Irniq’s testimonial 
had received 7,727 views). Where written translations in 
English are provided, the names of the speaker and inter­
viewer appear in the translation; in some cases, the date 
when Irniq made the translation is also noted. A comments 
section is available to viewers, with the option to post testi­
monials to Facebook. Beyond basic details, there is little 
contextualization. The videos provide no explanation about 
how particular participants were selected or how the testi­
monial project came about.
In addition to providing his own statement about his at­
tendance at Chesterfield Inlet Indian Residential School, 
Irniq’s presence in the interviews is reflected in a number of 
ways. Although he is off camera for the most part, projecting 
a disembodied voice at the interviewee who is on the screen, 
his name is listed throughout corresponding transcripts. In 
a number of cases, Irniq indicates that he knows participants 
from their time together at Chesterfield Inlet or that he and 
the interviewee have mutual acquaintances. For example, 
in the middle of Simeonie Kunnuk’s interview, he interjects 
that he himself was a witness to an incident that Kunnuk 
notes, in which his brother almost fought a teacher who 
used to bully students. In his interview with Joe Ataguttaaluk, 
Irniq also recounts the “happy times” they had in Chester­
field Inlet. Referring to a time they were playing football, 
Irniq asks Ataguttaaluk, “Do you remember when Rene Otak 

IsumaTV’s “Testimony by Isuma” 69
broke his collar bone?” In the course of his interview with 
Eulalie Angutimarik, Irniq notes that he was on a plane to 
Chesterfield Inlet with her younger sister, and she similarly 
mentions interactions with his family and that she is a rela­
tion of Zacharias Kunuk, who is apparently situated just off-
screen or behind the camera. In such cases, Irniq indicates 
that he is part of the same community as those giving testi­
monials. In his own testimonial with Zacharias Kunuk, he 
sits at a table with a steaming-hot beverage in the foreground. 
He periodically breaks into laughter and seems relaxed, as 
though he is sitting with a friend. In some cases, as with 
Irniq’s own testimonial and that of Joe Ataguttaaluk, the 
transcript begins mid-story, as though Irniq is in the middle 
of a conversation when the interview actually begins. 
As another sign of Irniq’s position in the community, a 
number of gender dynamics can be read in interviews. For 
example, he greets women differently from men. He calls 
men by their names and generally signals the start of the 
interview by telling them to feel welcome or comfortable – 
for instance, “Lazarie Otak, please feel very welcome.” Con­
versely, he does not generally greet women by name; for 
example, he begins his interview with Celina Irngaut with, 
“Welcome! It’s wonderful that you came.” Only five of the 
seventeen survivors whom Irniq interviews are women; 
three of the five women appear to be in domestic surround­
ings, sitting in living rooms on couches or in stuffed chairs, 
while one is in a community centre or church. The other 
interview was conducted against a cloth backdrop. The male 
survivors are typically sitting across desks and tables.
Inuit Culture and Disruption
Irniq’s interviews tend to be long, spanning up to almost 
two hours. He prompts participants with questions and con­
versation but lets them tell lengthy stories, generally un­
interrupted. In some cases, Irniq first asks survivors to talk 

We Interrupt This Program
70
about their lives as children, waiting until later to bring up 
the topic of residential schools. For example, in his inter­
view with Rosemarie Kuptana, former president of ITK and 
the Inuit Broadcasting Corporation, Irniq asks questions 
about what life was like growing up as an Inuk. He does not 
ask Kuptana to talk about residential school until more than 
fifteen minutes into her approximately one-hour video.
In Kuptana’s interview and others, Irniq tries to draw out 
some sense of “true” Inuit culture, or culture prior to coloniz­
ation. Irniq asks Kuptana at the start of the interview to talk 
about her life as a “real Inummarik.” She describes a nomad­
ic lifestyle in which her family practised traditional subsist­
ence activities with the changing seasons, including ice 
fishing and seal and caribou hunting. Irniq asks women such 
as Celina Irngaut about the traditions of Inuit women, in­
cluding sewing. He also asks many of his participants what 
their Inuit names are, what kinds of foods they used to eat, 
and whether they remember shamanism, as well as what the 
importance of such practices and traditions is in their current 
lives. In his own testimony, Irniq employs a similar notion of 
pre-contact Inuit culture, using the term “true” twice and 
“truly” once in the span of two sentences: “as we were true 
Inuit, living off the land traditionally. We were true Inuit, 
with truly living Inuit traditional ways.” Notably, he asks 
Celina Irngaut how she learned her Inuit culture. She ex­
plains she simply lived it. She states, “We were all Inuit. I was 
not actually taught as such, but I learned it by observation.”
Irngaut’s comment exemplifies differences in learning be­
tween Inuit traditions and Western educational institutions. 
In the 1950s, when Irniq’s cohort attended school, physical 
discipline was accepted in mainstream institutions and ex­
periential learning was not prioritized. Irngaut and several 
other students note that Qallunaat rules were much ­different 
from the freedom they had at home. They describe standing 
in lines; the strict separation of girls and boys; and how 

IsumaTV’s “Testimony by Isuma” 71
children were forbidden from seeing their brothers, sisters, 
and other relatives who attended the same school. Irniq 
draws out these details with various questions, including the 
following question posed in Lazarie Otak’s interview: “Did 
you notice that there were all kinds of rules to follow?” Otak 
explains that he tried his best to follow the rules: “To make 
a mistake was extremely scary at the hostel,” where punish­
ment included being hit or beaten with a stick. Similarly, Joe 
Ataguttaaluk relates how he wet his pants after a teacher 
would not let him go to the washroom, and then wore the 
pants for several days without saying anything for fear of 
being punished. Ataguttaaluk notes that this kind of child 
rearing, with its extreme use of corporal punishment and 
humiliation, differed drastically from the discipline he 
had experienced at home. He explains that as soon as chil­
dren arrived, they were expected to act as adults. He stated, 
“They expected us to know things that we did not know.”
Like the TRC statements discussed in the last chapter, 
many of the IsumaTV testimonials discuss family estrange­
ments resulting from the strict rules in residential schools. 
Lazarie Otak recounts having nieces, a stepsister, and distant 
cousins in Chesterfield Inlet living just upstairs from him at 
Turquetil Hall (Figure 2.2 shows Turquetil Hall). After the 
separation imposed by the school, they were never allowed 
to talk. The extent of their contact was infrequent smiles 
snuck when teachers were not looking: “They were no long­
er anything to me … They were no longer sisters. They were 
no longer cousins. It was like they made us far away from 
each other.”
Interviewees also note a distancing from parents and 
grandparents, as they were made to feel ashamed of being 
Inuit, had trouble remembering their traditional languages, 
and only saw their adult family members when students 
were flown home once each year for the summer. Eulalie 
Angutimarik describes her sister, who attended residential 

We Interrupt This Program
72
school in Chesterfield Inlet: “When she left the first time, she 
was a very happy and talkative girl. When she got back home, 
she was often very quiet and, at most times, motionless. I 
particularly noticed that. I remember my mother asking her, 
‘Theresie, what is the matter with you? What is with you?’ She 
would just say, ‘I don’t know.’” Irniq also interviewed Clara 
Quassa, the mother of five children who attended Chesterfield 
Inlet Indian Residential School. One of Quassa’s children is 
Paul Quassa, who was also interviewed. Irniq asks Clara what 
it was like when her children left for school. She states, “It 
was an extremely lonely period, when your children were 
taken away. Especially when you had your children all the 
time with you and the only time you would see them again 
was in the springtime.” Clara Quassa talks about her daugh­
ter dying after falling ill at Chesterfield Inlet. She does not 
know where her daughter is buried, but it is somewhere in an 
unmarked grave. She also mentions being very afraid of 
Qallunaat (white people) and hearing that people had sent 
Figure 2.2  Girls with nuns, Turquetil Hall, Chesterfield Inlet (Igluligaarjuk), 
Nunavut, September 5, 1958 | Courtesy of Library and Archives Canada

IsumaTV’s “Testimony by Isuma” 73
their children to residential school under threat of being cut 
off from their government family allowances.
In addition to questions about rules, punishment, and 
family estrangement, Irniq asks questions specific to the dis­
tancing of Inuit people from their traditional culture. For 
example, in Joe Ataguttaaluk’s interview, he poses the ques­
tion: “They introduced you to a totally foreign culture, that 
was not part of Inuit culture?” He also asks, “When they 
took us to go to school in Chesterfield Inlet, was it their 
policy to make us Qablunaat [sic] [white people]?” to which 
Ataguattaaluk replies, “It seems pretty much that way.”
Irniq asks former students whether they were allowed to 
speak their languages or eat traditional foods; they report 
harsh punishment for speaking Inuktitut and that they ate 
only Qallunaat foods such as porridge, beans, and frozen 
beef, with the exception of Arctic char. Otak and Ataguttaaluk 
describe having the clothing their mothers painstakingly 
made for them (for example, kamik, or boots) confiscated 
upon their arrival. Otak notes being issued standard school 
clothing labelled with a number signalling they were his 
and which he was made to memorize. Irniq asks Rosemarie 
Kuptana if there were any Inuit “cultural inclusion pro­
grams” in her school, and she laughs and emphatically says 
no. Some of the respondents note the benefit of receiving 
education in the schools and of learning how to pray and 
appreciate the value of church. However, the interviews 
more prominently centre on Inuit culture and disruptions 
to it.
Notably, Irniq does not bring up sexual abuse until well 
into interviews. For example, he asks Kuptana about abuse 
after thirty-seven minutes. Compared with the shorter mono­
logue videos posted on the Collective9 channel, Irniq’s long­
er interview style addresses the holistic effects of residential 
school rather than the single aspect of sexual trauma. This 
approach stresses the importance of cultural revitalization. 

We Interrupt This Program
74
Irniq relates the theme of sexual abuse to Inuit culture as he 
states in his interview with Joe Ataguttaaluk, “If we were at 
home, we would not have been abused like that, as it is not 
in the culture of the Inuit.” Several of the survivors note a 
Catholic brother who was apparently the worst offender, sys­
tematically exploiting children for sexual gratification over 
the years; another Catholic father is noted in one interview as 
molesting girls. A number of former Chesterfield Inlet stu­
dents mention physical abuse by a teacher who would throw 
students against the classroom wall in anger. However, de­
spite extensive discussions of abuse, large portions of the 
interviews, especially at the beginning, are more focused on 
traditional Inuit ways of living.
Policy Implications and Multiple Audiences
In addition to questions aimed at getting survivors to articu­
late a sense of “real Inuit” identity and disruptions to it, some 
of Irniq’s questions reinforce the goals of ITK leaders to em­
phasize Inuit-specific experiences with the TRC. For example, 
in his interview with Kuptana, Irniq specifically asks her about 
the TRC. As the interview occurred around the time that the 
first commissioners were mired in the controversy that would 
eventually lead to their resignation, she notes the messy state 
of the commission. She also says Inuit should be able to tell 
their stories in their own language, emphasizing that simply 
having an Inuktitut translator does not go far enough. She 
states, “Inuit have to feel comfortable that they are being 
heard in their own language and understood by another Inuk 
of that pain in history.” Joe Kremmidjuar’s video expresses 
similar sentiments about marginalization in policies address­
ing the residential school legacy and the need for an organiz­
ation to focus specifically on distinct Inuit experiences, stating, 
“So the ones that are going to run this organization [the TRC] 
are all Indians. The First Nations and Inuit are not the same 
[as] each other.” He continues, “Yes, it is good that this is 

IsumaTV’s “Testimony by Isuma” 75
being started but let’s have more Inuit voices! ... Inuit were 
broken too, we need to have our own truth and reconciliation 
organization, one that will heal us. We need to say something, 
by voicing our own opinions.”
In addition to comments aimed at the TRC, Irniq draws 
out several other policy and government implications in 
interviews. For example, he asks Joe Ataguttaaluk how the 
government of Nunavut “could learn a great deal from us 
who have gone to residential school.” The two then discuss 
the ways in which Inuit culture could be integrated into 
school curricula. In his interview with Louie Uttak, Irniq also 
speaks about the rules in Nunavut that children take courses 
in Inuktitut only to Grade 3. He asks whether courses should 
be taught in Inuktitut to Grade 12. They also discuss whether 
elders should be included more in classroom learning.
Similarly, Irniq asks several participants, including Eulalie 
Angutimarik, whether a national apology would help, stating, 
“If the prime minister of Canada could stand up in the House 
of Commons and acknowledge the problems that occurred 
about sexual abuses and other things that happened to the 
survivors of residential school[,] would this be a big help as 
well?”51 Irniq’s discussion of policy implications and national 
questions on how to properly address the residential school 
legacy suggests he understands that the testimonials might 
have some political impact or influence on the TRC as well as 
on the Nunavut and Canadian governments. It also marks an 
oscillation between local concerns and the territorial and na­
tional implications that Irniq is trying to draw out.
Because locality and particular conditions so fundamen­
tally shape the Testimony by Isuma videos, some of the key 
differences between these videos and other kinds of survivor 
statements are worth highlighting. One of the most obvious 
differences is that of accessibility. While the TRC’s Inuit 
sub-commission streamed its community hearings online 
(as with the testimonials discussed in Chapter 1), it has now 

We Interrupt This Program
76
wrapped up its activities, and many of the testimonials that 
it collected for the National Centre for Truth and Recon­
ciliation will not be available until they have been processed 
for privacy and other concerns.52 Also worth noting is that 
while the IsumaTV site makes its testimonials available 
along with a broader array of content that reflects Inuit 
­experiences and goals of cultural maintenance, the TRC testi­
monials were more specifically oriented to address residen­
tial school experiences. Similarly, the Legacy of Hope, a 
national charitable organization, provides testimonials with 
a great deal of historical foregrounding through its book 
and physical and virtual exhibits We Were So Far Away. But it 
provides little context for contemporary Inuit experiences 
and potential policy implications when compared with 
IsumaTV’s testimonials. Moreover, unlike the polished ap­
pearance of the We Were So Far Away materials, Irniq’s inter­
views reflect the “poetics of imperfect media,” giving them 
more of a community feel and revealing their conditions of 
production.53 For example, Celina Irngaut’s interview is inter­
rupted by the sound of a vacuum cleaner or other machine in 
the background, and noise from a radio or television drowns 
out some of the conversation in Clara Quassa’s interview.
Similarly, the mental health apparatus that the TRC set up 
in preparation for survivor testimonials, including the pres­
ence of support people and mental health professionals, 
seems wholly absent in the IsumaTV interviews. When Celina 
Irngaut begins crying, no one even tries to provide her with 
a tissue. Finally, she states, “I need a Kleenex,” and someone 
from off screen eventually hands her a roll of toilet paper. 
She uses it to wipe her eyes without complaint or hesitation. 
Many of the precautions typical of TRC statements are lack­
ing in IsumaTV testimonials, perhaps because they operated 
prior to and outside of the state apparatus, although argu­
ably they were created in an attempt to intervene in the 
state’s program.

IsumaTV’s “Testimony by Isuma” 77
• • •
The TRC’s Inuit sub-commission was formed in 2010 only 
after “intense lobbying by Inuit leaders”54 to “establish a 
forum for Inuit survivors to tell their stories in their own 
language, in their own communities.”55 The drive to create 
the Inuit sub-commission was an attempt to bring the Inuit 
testimonial process under Inuit control and to manage the 
conditions under which the testimonials took place. It was 
also an opportunity to intervene in the national archive of 
residential school experiences, which will inevitably gain 
worldwide attention, as with the efforts of other global truth 
commissions.
In the lead-up to the July 2009 agreement in principle 
between the ITK and the TRC,56 Peter Irniq’s testimonials 
with Inuit residential school survivors and their families 
were conducted and later posted to the IsumaTV site. Isuma­
TV testimonials were created in part as a vehicle for demon­
strating the importance of Inuit-specific experiences in the 
TRC and of conducting Inuit testimonials in their own lan­
guages and communities. At one point, because of the TRC’s 
rocky start, and the uncertainty about whether Inuit experi­
ences would be fully included, Irniq believed that Inuit 
would “have to tell their stories through another media 
[sic].”57 The resulting archive provided a window into what 
Inuit residential school testimonials could look like if they 
operated outside of the state apparatus.
Despite the ways in which Irniq’s interviews reflect broad­
er, nation-wide discourses and implications, a common theme 
throughout is a focus on Inuit-specific experiences. IsumaTV 
testimonials mirror the ITK’s prioritization of Inuit traditions 
and culture. Zacharias Kunuk reflects the same imperatives of 
Inuit cultural revitalization and maintenance through his role 
in producing the testimonials and many other Isuma pro­
ductions that employ Inuktitut and community storytelling 

We Interrupt This Program
78
methods. Like other IsumaTV productions, Testimony by 
Isuma reflects a desire to appeal to both community and 
much broader audiences.
Peter Irniq’s role in conducting the IsumaTV interviews 
similarly demonstrates a community-based approach, in 
which Irniq knew the survivors with whom he was speaking 
and attended the same residential school as many of the 
interviewees. Irniq’s performance as an interviewer con­
ducting testimonials in Inuktitut in sixteen of seventeen 
testimonials and the kinds of questions he asked survivors 
encourages a sense of traditional Inuit culture. For example, 
he repeatedly asked participants to describe “true” Inuit 
identity that had been interrupted by residential schooling. 
In discussing the happiest moments of their lives as being 
prior to residential school, participants reinforced the over­
all goals of maintaining Inuit cultural traditions in Nunavut. 
Because the interviews were lengthy, participants had time 
to tell long stories about what Inuit life was like before resi­
dential schools, distinguishing these testimonials from 
other kinds of testimonials that focus more specifically on 
residential school experiences (for example, those of the 
TRC discussed in the last chapter).
Further, more critical points of consideration for IsumaTV’s 
archive include those related to technology, production, con­
tent, and accessibility. In addition, the fate of Igloolik Isuma 
Productions makes clear the precariousness of relying on gov­
ernment funding and grants for survival. Large amounts of 
funding and maintenance are necessary to ensure the digital 
archive does not disappear or become obsolete.
In terms of the content of the IsumaTV interviews, the 
gender imbalance, and the fact that Irniq interviewed surviv­
ors whom he knew personally suggest a partial selection 
process. Moreover, non-Inuktitut speakers (including the 
authors) must rely on Irniq’s translations and cultural inter­
locutors to understand survivor sentiment. However, such 

IsumaTV’s “Testimony by Isuma” 79
factors reflect no more of a bias than the ways in which the 
TRC archive was constituted to reflect some Indigenous ex­
periences more than others.
If the IsumaTV testimonials illustrate anything, it is the 
political nature of an archive – how it can be mobilized vari­
ously and formed alternatively under various conditions of 
production, in this case conditions under Inuit control. The 
Testimony by Isuma archive is housed alongside many other 
forms of content documenting everyday life in the North, 
accessible through IsumaTV (not simply content about resi­
dential school experiences). Taken as a whole, IsumaTV 
helps to contextualize the testimonials against a backdrop 
of broader Inuit experiences and goals of cultural preserva­
tion. Because Irniq encouraged speakers to tell long stories 
and to describe their lives as Inuit prior to residential schools, 
the residential school abuse experienced by interviewees 
constitutes only one portion of the interviews. IsumaTV did 
not merely create an “archive of suffering”58 but, rather, an 
expression of Inuit cultural sovereignty.

3
Redfacing, Remediation, 
and Other Indigenous Art Tactics
Challenging Cultural 
Institutions 
Occasionally there’s room to engage in a dialogue with those 
original works, to open the conversation and to challenge 
the ­subjectivity of some of the original artists. 
– artist Kent Monkman
And while disparate, most of these sources share this: 
They were not created by Native Americans. 
Not the paintings, not the photos, not the movies, not the 
exhibits and collections, and especially not the histories.
– Floyd Favel, “Our Peoples,” exhibition video, National Museum 
of the American Indian, Washington, DC, 2006
“Here we go again,” we thought when we saw images from 
Michelle Williams’ 2013 photo shoot for AnOther Magazine. 
In one black-and-white shot, the white actress is dressed as a 
classic “vanishing Indian,” with long black braids, feathers, 
and dark, sunken eyes looking into an uncertain future.1
Johnny Depp similarly played a vanishing Indian as his 
Comanche character Tonto in Disney’s The Lone Ranger 
(2013). The actor’s eccentric costume included an entire 
crow fastened to the centre of Depp’s forehead, inspired by 
the portrait of a fictional American Indian painted by 
non-Native artist Kirby Sattler. The Disney film reproduced 

Redfacing, Remediation, and Other Art Tactics 81
“the last of his kind” trope as Tonto is depicted as the only 
survivor of his massacred village.2
Contemporary acts of redfacing, including those of 
Williams and Depp, are culturally complicated and follow a 
long history of Indigenous objectification and erasure in the 
American and Canadian public imagination while they work 
to conceal the continuing legacies of colonial violence.3 
However, the proliferation of Indigenous imagery over the 
past two centuries has provided a rich archive from which 
Indigenous artists draw to problematize constructions of In­
digenous identity and the omissions they facilitate. Indige­
nous artists open up dialogue with media texts, forms, and 
practices by reframing and recontextualizing these construc­
tions through a tactic we describe as remediation.4
For example, musical artists A Tribe Called Red screen re­
mixed Indigenous imagery from popular culture in their live 
performances. Like artist Jackson 2bears, discussed below, A 
Tribe Called Red appeals to young audiences through hip 
hop sounds and aesthetics. The band’s remediations not 
only reveal the ridiculous or false nature of Indigenous 
stereotypes but also illustrate the logic by which they func­
tion and may even be empowering.5 Seeing the many images 
of “Hollywood Indians” edited and playing together on a 
loop in A Tribe Called Red performances provides a refer­
ence for viewers, one that might not have the same potency 
if the pervasive images were not played one after the other. 
The group illustrates that, despite popular imagery, 
Indigenous people and cultures are neither cemented in the 
past nor destined for extinction, but alive and thriving in 
contemporary contexts.
As we discuss in the next section, Indigenous identity has 
a unique relationship with mediation because coloniza­
tion happened synchronously with the development of a 
number of media technologies, including photography and 

We Interrupt This Program
82
motion pictures. As a result, Indigenous imagery proliferat­
ed widely with western expansion and settlement in North 
America and remains a central part of its imaginary.6 In par­
ticular, Indigenous disappearance, violence, and pacifica­
tion were popular themes throughout the nineteenth 
century and the early twentieth7 and continue in contem­
porary depictions, such as in the case of the vanishing In­
dian trope. In the fight against assumptions that Indigenous 
people are extinct or destined for extinction, remediation 
is a tactic used to assert Indigenous presence, often with 
the “vital irony” characteristic of what Anishinaabe writer 
and scholar Gerald Vizenor calls survivance, or “survival 
plus resistance.”8
Remediation is a term applied to media studies by schol­
ars Jay David Bolter and Richard Grusin in their seminal 
book Remediation: Understanding New Media. The idea, con­
noting a return to or correction, is defined by Bolter and 
Grusin as “the formal logic by which new media refashion 
prior media forms.”9 They suggest that “media are con­
tinually commenting on, reproducing, and replacing each 
other.”10 We expand Bolter and Grusin’s idea of remediation 
by exploring the ways in which it is situated against a long 
cultural and historical backdrop particular to Indigenous ex­
periences.11 We suggest Indigenous remediation is meaning­
ful in particular ways and explore the cultural subtleties 
articulated through the media practice.
First, we discuss the colonial relationship between Indi­
genous people and mediation in Canadian and Ame­rican 
histories. We then highlight the work of artists Kent Monk­
man, Jackson 2bears, and Dana Claxton to demonstrate the 
diversity of remediation and redfacing as popular media prac­
tices with particular connotations in Indigenous artistic ex­
pression. We look at how the practice of remediation extends 
across media platforms that both fit within the confines of art 

Redfacing, Remediation, and Other Art Tactics 83
institutions and transcend the gallery walls through new 
media and live performance. These artists demonstrate the di­
versity of remediation as a cultural practice, from new takes 
on old canonical paintings, to hip hop–inspired critiques of 
the nation gone viral, to single-channel gallery installations 
and live performances that employ and subvert redfacing. 
While all three find ways of appealing to wide Indigenous 
audiences, 2bears and Claxton especially include aesthetic 
and aural cues that are specific to their cultures (Lakota 
[Sioux] and Kanien’kehaka [Mohawk], respectively). Similarly, 
all three artists address in different ways the Indigenous ex­
periences of violence and dispossession.
Indigenous Identity and Mediation: 
The “Hollywood Indian”
The development of photography and motion pictures at 
the height of colonizing projects and westward settlement in 
North America throughout the late nineteenth and early 
twentieth centuries meant that these technologies had a spe­
cial relationship with Indigenous people. Common stereo­
types in paintings, films, photographs, motion pictures, and 
novels depicted Indigenous people as uncivilized,  non-­
technological, wise, and mystical.12 The noble savage and 
the ignoble savage have remained some of the most persis­
tent identity constructs throughout the years. The noble sav­
age embodies positive attributes, for example, as a friend of 
the white man, while the ignoble savage is the counterpart 
of the noble savage, the blood-thirsty “Indian on the war­
path.”13 The study of popular, essentialized signifiers of 
Indigeneity tells us much more about their creators and 
audiences than about Indigenous people themselves.
Painting, photography, and film shared close ties with the 
development of anthropology and scientific discourse in the 
mid-nineteenth century, and scientists employed them to 

We Interrupt This Program
84
gather supposedly documentary data.14 Their salvaging im­
pulses reflected sentiments of imperialist nostalgia, a term 
cultural anthropologist Renato Rosaldo used to describe the 
lamentation of colonizers over the disappearance of cultures 
and peoples they have intentionally worked to eradicate.15
Filmmaker Edward Curtis used his camera with the same 
salvaging imperatives in order to capture the iconographic 
vanishing Indian throughout the late nineteenth and early 
twentieth centuries. Curtis carefully controlled and edited 
the images to depict Indigenous peoples in a pre-contact 
manner, removing Western technologies such as clocks from 
his photographs and dressing his subjects in wigs and cos­
tumes.16 Curtis’s subjects often look downtrodden as they 
gaze into an uncertain future, as though they know their 
time is limited and their extinction inevitable. Similarly, in 
his 1914 film In the Land of the Head Hunters (re-released 
in the 1970s as In the Land of the War Canoes), Curtis places 
Indigenous people in a pre-contact, fictional drama. The 
film features Kwakwaka’wakw (Kwakiutl) people from the 
Northwest Coast of British Columbia and Vancouver Island, 
and includes the alleged Kwakwaka’wakw practice of head­
hunting, locking the subjects of this film into a historical 
and exotic context. As with other early films (such as Thomas 
Edison’s 1894 Sioux Ghost Dance), Curtis intentionally por­
trays traditional activities and rituals that had been out­
lawed, including the potlatch ceremony (banned in 1844 by 
the Canadian government), as a means of salvaging.17
Similarly, when Robert Flaherty shot Nanook of the North 
in Hudson Bay between 1919 and 1920, he attempted to 
maintain perceived authenticity by requiring his Inuit actors 
to dress only in traditional (rather than Western) clothing. 
Flaherty was influenced by early ethnography, or “the de­
scription of cultures, primarily by participant observers from 
other cultures.”18 The influence of his Indigenous actors, 
along with the film’s location, led reviewers to praise the 

Redfacing, Remediation, and Other Art Tactics 85
film’s “realism,” which of course was contrived. However, as 
media studies scholar Valerie Alia notes in Un/Covering the 
North, the dichotomy between documentary and fiction in 
critiques of Nanook of the North are problematic as “the pro­
duction of ethnographic texts is widely acknowledged to be 
subjective and narrative.”19 Flaherty’s films, like other docu­
mentary and anthropological texts, privilege an outsider 
perspective for a mostly non-Indigenous audience.
Perhaps some of the most problematic scenes in Nanook 
of the North place Inuit actors in awkward juxtaposition with 
Western technologies. The famous scene where a delighted 
and curious Nanook listens to a gramophone for the first 
time and attempts to take a bite out of a record is one of 
these notable instances. Implicit in this scene is the idea that 
Western technology is superior and that Indigenous people 
are somehow outside of this technology. As Native Ameri­
can literature scholar Michelle Raheja points out, Allakari­
allak, the Inuk actor playing Nanook, was likely familiar 
with this technology but performed these acts for effect, in 
essence pulling one over on the audience by pretending 
to  be amazed at the wonders of Western technology.20 In 
the process, he was “redfacing,” or “playing Indian,” in a 
way that would resonate with his non-Native audience, as 
the film was created for popular distribution.21 Nanook as a 
character is the archetypal noble savage, or friend of the 
white man.22
The concept of survivance, or survival with dignity,23 is 
useful for understanding the kind of agency employed by 
Indigenous actors, including Allakariallak. In the face of im­
poverished circumstances and a lack of opportunity, many 
Indigenous actors perhaps saw acting careers as a means of 
survival.24 However, as media studies author and scholar 
Marian Bredin points out, neither economic disadvantage 
nor lack of control over production explain entirely the par­
ticipation of Indigenous actors in co-constructing their 

We Interrupt This Program
86
identities for non-Indigenous audiences. Regardless of the 
stereotypical roles they often played, Indigenous actors some­
times approached their work with a nod and a wink to know­
ing audiences who recognized they were merely performing.25 
However, many majority audiences likely perceived Indige­
nous people who were playing Indian as authentic.
Michelle Raheja and Dakota historian Philip Deloria 
point to counter-examples in which American Indian direc­
tors such as James Young Deer and actors such as Princess 
Red Wing (Lillian St. Cry), exercised a high degree of agency 
in guiding filmic productions in the early twentieth cen­
tury.26 However, these examples reflect a brief moment in 
film history, prior to the entrenchment of the Hollywood 
studio system, after which roles for American Indian actors 
became much more limited and stereotypical, and it was 
more difficult for independent filmmakers to enter into 
the market.
In Indians in Unexpected Places, Deloria points out that 
when the large studio system took hold in the 1920s, it fell 
out of fashion in Hollywood to hire Indigenous actors to 
play lead roles in films. It became increasingly difficult for 
Indigenous people to find work outside of bit parts where 
they fought and killed white people and were killed en 
masse themselves. In films from the 1930s to the 1970s, for 
example, John Wayne often played the archetypal patriot 
who fought anything and anyone who was a threat to the 
American way – namely, the ignoble “Indian on the war­
path.” At the same time, white actors were hired to play 
Indigenous people in lead roles, in which they spoke in styl­
ized monosyllables to signify their Indian-ness.27
While the noble savage and the ignoble savage are most 
often masculine characters, female archetypes are similarly 
reductive, and often reflect shifting Euro-American values of 
morality.28 S. Elizabeth Bird argues that the most popular de­
pictions of American Indian women over the past 150 years 

Redfacing, Remediation, and Other Art Tactics 87
have been the Indian princess or maiden who is uncontrol­
lably drawn to the white man, and the promiscuous squaw 
who will submit readily to her lusty desires.29 In Killing the 
Indian Maiden, Indigenous film scholar M. Elise Marubbio 
identifies this character as the “sexualized maiden” popular in 
1940s films, who exhibited these characteristics: “beauty, 
mixed-blood heritage, out-of-control sexuality, marginaliza­
tion in white society, and deadliness to men,” which “surface 
in the form of a pinup girl figure.”30 She suggests these charac­
teristics extend into later decades in modified form, changing 
with the political climate.
These depictions did not reflect the experiences of actual 
Indigenous people. For example, among the Lakota of the 
Plains, strict moral codes were the norm. Young women 
were not permitted to be alone with a suitor. Courtship was 
conducted in the presence of the young woman’s relatives, 
“under the blanket.” That is, the young man brought a blan­
ket to the young woman’s family tipi. Behind this blanket, 
the couple could converse in whispers, illustrating the mod­
est behaviour that was the traditional cultural standard 
among Lakota people.
In another example, extramarital affairs among the Lakota 
were proscribed. In fact, a Lakota woman was not even permit­
ted to touch or braid the hair of another woman’s husband if 
she was not related to the man. Likewise, if a Lakota husband 
braided another woman’s hair, it signalled romantic or sexual 
intentions, to which his wife would vigorously object.
Women have always been highly esteemed and hon­
oured among Indigenous societies throughout Canada and 
the United States, many of which are matricentric (such as 
the Haida in the west; the Lakota-Dakota-Nakoda peoples, 
the Six Nations Confederacy, and other cultures farther 
east; and the Che­rokee to the south). Modest behaviour 
among these peoples is characteristic of powerful and well-
brought-up women.

We Interrupt This Program
88
In short, the Indian princess or maiden was a construct 
that worked to validate imagined white, masculine experien­
ces. The Indian princess appears in many forms of popular 
culture, from Land O’ Lakes Butter branding31 to Disney’s 
Pocahontas.32 As Bird suggests, Pocahontas signified more 
than just the figure of an Indigenous woman; she was a 
metaphor for the land itself and was seen as welcoming the 
white male settler in accordance with colonial imperatives. 
Whether the woman was sacrificing herself or being sacri­
ficed by riding a canoe over Niagara Falls,33 by offering up 
the bounty of nature as a stick of butter, or by her inevitable 
attraction to non-Native settlers, her role was one of valida­
tion for colonization.34
In Selling the Indian, Erik Trump points out that the image 
of “squaw drudges” drew a popular nineteenth- and early 
twentieth-century comparison between civilization and sav­
agery.35 Usually such characters were depicted as overworked, 
oversexed, and having too many children, in juxtaposition 
with “civilized” women. The lyrics of the song “I’m an Indian 
Too,” from the 1940s musical Annie Get Your Gun, illustrate 
this last stereotype: “Looking like a flour sack with two pa­
pooses on my back, and three papooses on the way.”36 The 
song suggests irresponsible over-procreation by Indigenous 
women, similar to Michel Foucault’s description of the ­social 
policing of childbirth in relation to problematized sexuality 
over the past two centuries.37 The sexuality and reproduction 
of Indigenous people were scrutinized at the same time that 
Indigenous women were sexualized as a means of othering 
and dehumanizing them. Associating self-control with civil­
ity and morality was a means of self-definition for the British 
Empire; this practice was passed on via the American and 
Canadian puritanical ethos.38
Conversely, for white society and its colonies, nineteenth- 
and twentieth-century social liberal reform institutions such 
as the public museum and compulsory schools provided 

Redfacing, Remediation, and Other Art Tactics 89
technologies for citizens to refine their thoughts and behav­
iours.39 Such institutions, housing the objects taken from 
and sometimes the actual bodies of Indigenous people sug­
gested that the more advanced society had the responsibility 
to tame and contain savage and exotic bodies by studying 
and assimilating them through the institutions of civiliza­
tion.40 The widely circulated media images and discourses 
constituting Indigenous identity in the nineteenth and twen­
tieth centuries were indicative of the paternalistic policies 
and institutions ostensibly aimed at protecting Indigenous 
people. A starkly negative example was the residential schools 
discussed in Chapters 1 and 2. However, like popular media, 
liberal reform institutions such as museums also produced 
vast archives of paintings, photographs, and films that Indi­
genous artists now use as a resource in their disruption of 
colonial assumptions and the erasures they facilitate.
Kent Monkman: Remediating and Amending 
Canonical Works
While the imaginary Indian has proliferated in popular cul­
ture over the past 150 years, European and North American 
painters over the past two centuries sometimes constituted 
Indigenous identity by erasing it from their landscapes alto­
gether. European painters, often from highly industrialized 
areas or pastoral environments with gently rolling hills, 
were inspired by the dramatic topography of the Americas. 
They portrayed its lands as an Eden untouched by human 
hands and ripe for European settlement.41 Painters who used 
the same style of realism to depict Indigenous people in the 
nineteenth and early twentieth centuries more directly re­
flected a number of cultural beliefs in their works. Some 
painters, including George Catlin and Paul Kane, sought to 
document Indigenous peoples and cultures under the as­
sumption that these peoples and cultures were destined for 
extinction. They captured those images they thought would 

Figure 3.1 Triumph of Mischief, Kent Monkman, 2007 | Courtesy of Kent Monkman and the National Gallery 
of Canada

Redfacing, Remediation, and Other Art Tactics 91
look authentic (pre-contact) for their non-Indigenous pa­
trons. Such portraits of Indigenous peoples from through­
out the Americas were prolific, and these white male artistic 
figures became central in the colonial construction of Indi­
genous identity, in particular reflecting an imperialist nos­
talgia through the trope of the vanishing Indian.
In response, Kent Monkman, a Canadian artist of Cree an­
cestry, sees his paintings as “a way of reminding people that 
the land was inhabited by Indigenous peoples first.” In a per­
sonal communication, Monkman stated that the omission of 
Indigenous people in famous landscape paintings was a way 
of “representing North America as an empty piece of real es­
tate, almost advertising it for development.” In some of his 
most notable paintings, Monkman reproduces famous land­
scapes and populates them in his own unique way. The 
Triumph of Mischief (2007), part of the 2013 Sakahan Indi­
genous International Art Exhibition at the National Gallery of 
Canada, recreates the Albert Bierstadt painting Looking Up at 
the Yosemite Valley (1863–65) and references a number of clas­
sical works and characters. A reimagining of history takes 
place in several parts of the painting. For example, in a humor­
ous turn, Lewis and Clark are being mauled by a bear.42 
George Catlin, Paul Kane, and Edward Curtis also appear in 
the painting, along with figures from Indigenous and Greek 
mythologies (see Figure 3.1).
The figures in The Triumph of Mischief are mostly male and 
largely nude. While the painting challenges colonial legacies 
through remediation, Monkman’s work also queers prior 
media forms by confounding the male/female binary and 
heteronormative sexuality, which he suggests was imposed 
on Indigenous people via colonization.43 Monkman’s works 
are often sexually charged and homoerotic, while confronting 
the violence of colonization with a sense of humour. Along 
those lines, in the centre of The Triumph of Mischief is the flam­
boyant, transgendered persona invented by Monkman, Miss 

We Interrupt This Program
92
Chief Eagle Testicle. Miss Chief is a berdache, or a “two-
spirited” person, someone who resists male/female binar­
ies.44 According to Monkman, “two-spirited” people existed 
in Indigenous cultures prior to colonization without facing 
the same sense of stigma associated with Christian-influenced 
sexuality.45 George Catlin’s painting Dance to the Berdache 
(1835–37) was the inspiration behind The Triumph of Mischief.
Miss Chief’s aesthetic resembles that of the singer Cher 
from the album Half-Breed. In performances of the song 
“Half-Breed,” Cher would don a full headdress and sit atop 
a horse in a skimpy, beaded outfit while belting out the 
lyrics about the trials of being from a bi-racial (Cherokee/
white) background. Cher’s look was also an appropriation 
of that used by Penobscot actress Molly Spotted Elk (1903–
77), who starred in such films as H.P. Carver’s The Silent 
Enemy (1930) and travelled extensively as a performer. As 
Monkman points out, Spotted Elk and Cher, like Miss Chief, 
were pushing male/female binaries by cross-dressing in 
headdresses, which were traditionally worn by Plains Indian 
chiefs, who were male. In his Emergence of a Legend series, 
Monkman appropriates the aesthetics of and pays homage 
to Molly Spotted Elk. 
Monkman’s work reflects his own creative expression, and 
his nod to queer culture is a means of critiquing colonization 
and reversing inequitable relations of power. However, it 
does not necessarily reflect the cultural traditions of other 
Indigenous people. While remediated art is an important 
means of protesting the colonizers’ dehumanizing gender 
stereotypes, there is a (hopefully minimal) risk that, for those 
who mistake artistic expression as representative, this sort of 
artistic remediation might further perpetuate the (often sar­
castic) stereotypes that Indigenous art parodies. 
Remediation takes many forms in Monkman’s work. In 
ad­dition to being an accomplished painter who reproduces 
canonical landscapes in order to correct their erasure of 

Redfacing, Remediation, and Other Art Tactics 93
Indigenous people, Monkman also directs and appears in 
live performances, photography, and film.
In his music video Dance to Miss Chief (the title of which 
is a reference to Catlin’s Dance to the Berdache), Monkman 
includes scenes from a German Karl May western featuring 
Winnetou, the fictitious, blue-eyed Indian warrior (see 
Figure 3.2). In the music video, shots of Miss Chief dancing 
enticingly are intermixed with segments from the western. 
The shot/reverse shot technique creates the effect of a flirta­
tious wooing between Winnetou and Miss Chief.46 Native 
men drum and dance as they celebrate Miss Chief, as in 
Catlin’s original painting, but the techno beat and Miss 
Chief’s sheer red outfit and high heels clearly set the video in 
a more contemporary moment. In addition to being a com­
edic, tongue-in-cheek re-appropriation of the western, Dance 
to Miss Chief pokes fun at the German fascination with Ame­
rican Indians and calls into question the hyper-­masculinity 
of the cinematic character of the noble savage as played by 
French actor Pierre Brice.
Although the character of Miss Chief certainly has some 
camp value, for Monkman, it is important to distinguish the 
Figure 3.2   Dance to Miss Chief, Kent Monkman, 2010 | Courtesy of 
Kent Monkman

We Interrupt This Program
94
character of Miss Chief from conventional forms of drag. 
While Monkman explained in our personal communication 
that drag has a “comedic value” and is meant as a form of 
entertainment in gay bars, Miss Chief appears primarily in 
films or performance pieces staged at museums where she is 
responding to specific collections. Examples include her 2007 
performance piece Séance at the Royal Ontario Museum in 
Toronto and her 2012 piece Miss Chief: Justice of the Piece, 
performed at the National Museum of the American Indian 
in Washington, DC.
Similarly, in the 2007 film Shooting Geronimo, Monkman 
confronts filmic practices by white filmmakers such as Edward 
Curtis, who worked hard to contrive images that would look 
“authentic” for mostly non-Native audiences (see Figure 3.3). 
While Curtis’s photos and films were thought of as documen­
tary, the filmmaker attempted to achieve a pre-contact aes­
thetic by removing objects that looked too Western, and he 
required his Native models and actors to wear costumes that 
his audiences would perceive as traditional.
In Shooting Geronimo, Monkman recreates the aesthetics 
of a silent movie from the turn of the century by using black-
and-white film, scoring the film with old-time-sounding 
piano music, and narrating it with intertitles (title cards). He 
includes an Edward Curtis–like character, Frederick Curtis, 
who is attempting to direct two Indigenous characters, 
Johnny Silvercloud and Blake Tenderfoot from the fictitious 
films The Red Menace and Ghost Dance of the American Indian. 
Curtis’s films are references to countless westerns depicting 
the ignoble, bloodthirsty savage on the war path, as well as 
early salvage films, which sought to record Indian cultural 
practices, such as Thomas Edison’s Sioux Ghost Dance (1894).
The idea of film as a documentary medium is called into 
question in humorous moments of Shooting Geronimo, when 
Curtis asks the grinning Silvercloud, who does not look 

Redfacing, Remediation, and Other Art Tactics 95
tough at all, to look more like a “fierce renegade” as he is 
playing Geronimo. When he asks both actors to perform 
“authentic” Native dances, they take a cue from Miss Chief 
and perform break-dancing moves. The actors also struggle 
with the costumes and long wigs provided by the director. 
While Silvercloud over-acts and flips his wig dramatically, 
Tenderfoot looks uncomfortable, getting his hair stuck in his 
mouth. In this film, as with many of her appearances, Miss 
Figure 3.3  Still from Shooting Geronimo, Kent ­Monkman, 
2007 | Courtesy of Kent Monkman

We Interrupt This Program
96
Chief acts as a trickster character, or a mischievous figure 
who creates disruptions, which are often humorous. In this 
case, she is an intervening force, who resists linear time 
(with her introduction of break-dancing into this turn-of-
the-century scene) and throws a hitch in Curtis’s plans.
Although working to denaturalize a long tradition of play­
ing Indian in Hollywood, Miss Chief herself participates in 
redfacing by using some of the same signifiers to indicate 
Indian-ness, including, for example, her use of a Plains Indian 
headdress. Michelle Raheja describes redfacing as “a com­
plex practice that was at times transgressive but reified nega­
tive stereotypes at others.”47 As Raheja suggests, there were a 
number of reasons Indigenous people engaged in “perform­
ances of the ‘Indian,’” including economic opportunities and 
escape from poverty.48 Similar­ly, in response to the question 
whether a difference exists between Indigenous perform­
ance of redface and non-­Indigenous performance of redface, 
Monkman stated in our personal communication, “Of 
course there is [a difference]. Artists like myself are making a 
profound political statement about basically attempted ex­
termination of our people.”
While he employs painting and film to respond to perva­
sive constructions of Indigenous people by white artists and 
filmmakers, Monkman also sees the museum as an important 
site of intervention and self-referential critique. He states:
A lot of my work deals with challenging the work that was 
done by artists in the nineteenth century, so basically their 
works are still represented at the museum and put for­
ward, and the authority of their work is still forwarded by 
current museum practice. So it’s very important that I also 
engage with museums because they are the ones who are 
perpetuating some of the same ideas that were originally 
held by those artists. Occasionally there’s room to engage 

Redfacing, Remediation, and Other Art Tactics 97
in a dialogue with those original works, to open the con­
versation and to challenge the subjectivity of some of the 
original artists.
He continues,
Museums are repositories of all kinds of objects from the 
past through to the present, so they have enormous value 
and interest for me just in terms of finding works in the col­
lection to … find inspiration from … to create response 
works linked to certain pieces, or to find connecting themes 
that link entire bodies of work from different artists. The 
main thing is really that they continue to present these 
works without any challenge to their original intent. That’s 
what I’ve found through a number of different museum 
projects, was that these works by Paul Kane or George Cat­
lin were still presented as voices of authority on Indigen­
ous people … I think some work is being done to unpack 
that and to shed light on the past contrivance of artists 
from that period so that their work is presented with some 
kind of critical light shed on it as well. But still, more often 
than not, it’s easier for them to hang the work without con­
textualizing it.
Monkman’s critiques about the uncritical treatment of ca­
nonical artists, including Paul Kane, ring true in the Royal 
Ontario Museum’s Daphne Cockwell Gallery of Canada: 
First Peoples. Paul Kane’s oil paintings of Indigenous life in 
North America, created in a studio based on his field sketch­
es and imagination, are positioned prominently and hung 
with very little commentary. It is up to the visitor to generate 
critical insights that challenge the authority of Kane’s works. 
The gallery is more successful when contemporary artists are 
invited to engage such works in conversation with Indigenous 

We Interrupt This Program
98
perspectives, as Kent Monkman did in his performance piece 
Séance in 2007. In the piece, Miss Chief conjures up the spir­
its of Paul Kane and George Catlin and engages them in a 
“discourse” about their work.49 Monkman remediates the 
works of these canonical artists in museums and art institu­
tions by critically engaging the motivations that generated 
and continue to authenticate them.
Jackson 2bears: Confronting the Nation through
Heritage Mythologies
In his film Heritage Mythologies, Jackson 2bears, Kanien’ke­
há:ka (Mohawk) DJ and multimedia artist, remixes patriotic 
celebrations of the nation with protests over dispossession of 
Indigenous land (see Figure 3.4). Heritage Mythologies pro­
vides a powerful critique of nationalistic texts that justify the 
co-optation of Indigenous territories and identities. The film 
was part of a 2010 live performance and video installation at 
the Saw Gallery in Ottawa and Beat Nation, a 2012 touring 
exhibition on Indigenous culture, art, and hip hop.50 In addi­
tion to gallery installations and live performances, 2bears’s 
work, including Heritage Mythologies, reaches wide audiences 
through online distribution sites, including Vimeo.com.
Heritage Mythologies juxtaposes Canadiana such as Histo­
rica Canada’s Heritage Minutes with images of Indigenous 
protests and standoffs with authorities. Heritage Minutes, origi­
nating in 1991 with Historica Canada (formerly the Historica-
Dominion Institute), is a series of sixty-second televised 
films that dramatize events in Canadian history and repro­
duce a sense of national “history, myth, and nostalgia.”51 
Through his recontextualizations, 2bears denaturalizes the 
nation building intended through the creation of such films. 
This includes a remix of the Heritage Minutes production 
about the French explorer Jacques Cartier, who led exped­
itions to North America in search of territory for King Francis 
I in the 1500s.

Redfacing, Remediation, and Other Art Tactics 99
The Heritage Minutes film depicts a dramatic re-enactment 
of Cartier’s meeting with Iroquoian Stadaconé people near 
modern-day Montreal. Cartier is famously known for giving 
Canada its name, but the Heritage Minutes film suggests that 
Cartier’s interpreter actually mistook the word “Kanata” to 
mean “nation” rather than “village.” While Cartier repeats 
aloud the word “Ka-na-ta” in monosyllables, 2bears inter­
rupts the video’s flow by repeating it several times as though 
the visuals are being “scratched” along with the audio. This 
effect emphasizes the arrogance and absurdity of the Euro­
peans in coming to claim (and name) the territories to which 
they had no right. 
In another clip, the mantra of the Heritage Minutes produc­
tions appears: “A part of our heritage” (emphasis added). In 
this context, the statement raises questions about whose 
agendas are being served by claiming Indigenous cultures 
and people as part of Canada’s (our) nation-building pro­
ject. As in his remix of the Cartier film, 2bears uses ­repetition 
several times to punctuate and trouble particular statements. 
Figure 3.4  Jackson 2bears during live performance | ­Courtesy of 
­Jackson 2bears

We Interrupt This Program
100
For example, he remixes video footage of a woman singing 
the Canadian national anthem, but in his version, she re­
peats the word “Native” several times rather than singing the 
lines, “O Canada! Our home and native land” (emphasis add­
ed). In one of the latter movements of Heritage Mythologies, 
footage from former prime minister Stephen Harper’s 2008 
apology for residential schools is remixed. Where Harper 
cites the schools’ policy to “kill the Indian in the child,” 
2bears punctuates the words “kill the Indian” by repeating 
them several times. 2bears also includes clips of late NDP 
leader Jack Layton stating, “We’re sorry,” while in the back­
ground plays a remixed acoustic version of the 1960s Brenda 
Lee song “I’m Sorry.” Video footage of residential school 
survivors talking about the brutal assimilationist agenda of 
the schools, with Lee’s frivolous song playing in the back­
ground, position the apologies as superficial and trifling.
In juxtaposition with the more sombre moments of 
Heritage Mythologies, 2bears remixes images from “Oh … 
Canada” by hip hop artist Classified with images of Indige­
nous protest. Footage of excited young crowds celebrating, 
waving flags, and proudly wearing clothing decorated with 
maple leaves is mixed with footage of protest signs that 
confront the nation’s occupation of Indigenous lands – such 
as “Oh Canada Our Home on Native Land” (emphasis add­
ed). In addition, the video also includes footage of confron­
tations between authorities and Indigenous protesters over 
encroachment on Indigenous territories, including scenes 
from Alanis Obomsawin’s 1993 documentary, Kanehsatake: 
270 Years of Resistance, which chronicles the 1990 events in 
Oka, Quebec. Words from a news headline also appear: 
“More anger in Caledonia” is a reference to the 2006 Grand 
River land dispute between the Ontario provincial govern­
ment and Six Nations, the home territories of 2bears.
Flags are a powerful form of symbolism in a number of 
the artist’s works. In Heritage Mythologies, for example, he 

Redfacing, Remediation, and Other Art Tactics 101
remediates images of the Canadian flag, turning it from a 
celebration of Canadian national identity into a problem­
atic signifier of violent dispossession.52 The burning of the 
Canadian flag and the depiction of the maple leaf upside-­
down indicate Indigenous resistance and national crisis. 
Also included throughout the video are images of the Six 
Nations Iroquois flag and the Mohawk Warrior flag (or the 
Unity flag), which is often used in Idle No More protests 
and other Indigenous solidarity activities as “a symbol for 
the unity of Indigenous peoples, illuminating our discord­
ant relationship with a world that remains dominated by 
beliefs and values that are alien to us.”53 Flags are a constant 
reminder of problematic national boundaries and signs of 
Indigenous sovereignty. For example, the Mohawk Nation at 
Akwesasne (which has many affinities with Six Nations) is 
literally bifurcated by the Canada–US border and must deal 
with the crossing and the border patrols of both countries to 
access its own territories.
In addition to remixing patriotic signifiers, 2bears uses a 
number of techniques that denaturalize the mediation and 
naturalization of nationalistic texts. The crackling sounds of 
an old record player at the beginning of the Heritage Minutes 
films (as though the films are pre-recorded), along with a 
standard disclaimer that warns viewers about “mature sub­
ject matter,” reminds audiences of the canned nature of 
the national message. 2bears remixes clips of the Heritage 
Minutes films with digital technologies to make them ap­
pear as though they are re-scanned with older media, a form 
of hypermediation, where the process of mediation itself 
becomes highly visible as multiple and conspicuous media 
are employed.54 As part of this technique, 2bears shows clips 
of the film in black and white (though they originally ap­
peared in colour) and inserts static lines and a split screen 
as a reference to older analogue televisions with poor recep­
tion. The static lines illustrate the constructed nature of the 

We Interrupt This Program
102
Heritage Minutes and the history these films purport to tell; 
at times, he inserts counter-messages and ominous music as 
though they are part of the static that disrupt both media­
tion and the national agenda (such as images of Indigenous 
protests and confrontations, for example). Other interrup­
tions of media flow include the use of the Indian head test 
pattern as well as the standard “test of the emergency broad­
cast system.”55 Moreover, 2bears includes commercial inter­
ruptions, such as a rather glib treatment of an Indigenous 
elder in a television advertisement for Lakota joint-pain-­
relief medication. Though it uses the image of an Indigenous 
elder in its branding and is purportedly “rooted in trad­
itional medicine,” the Lakota line of products has no appar­
ent ties to the Lakota people.56 The aesthetics employed 
by  2bears undoubtedly appeal to a youth audience, and 
the availability of his work online also makes it accessible 
to young people beyond the gallery. The artist’s video art 
and live performances provide biting criticism of the nation 
in no uncertain terms, using the very images created to cele­
brate it.
Conversely, other Indigenous artists and filmmakers, in­
cluding, for example, Shane Belcourt (discussed in more 
detail in Chapter 4), work with institutions to create new na­
tional texts from Indigenous perspectives. Historica Canada 
commissioned Belcourt to produce two Heritage Minutes 
films released in 2016. The mini-dramas portray the tragedy 
of residential schools (Chanie Wenjack) and treaties (Nas­ku­
mituwin [Treaty]), specifically noting the deceptions behind 
Treaty 9, signed in 1905 with northern Cree and Ojibwa 
peoples. The new Heritage Minutes films address issues that 
are central for many Indigenous people, and the creation of 
the short films provides a contribution to the national dia­
logue by a filmmaker who has been deeply immersed in 
these topics.

Redfacing, Remediation, and Other Art Tactics 103
Dana Claxton: Indigenizing the Archive 
in I Want to Know Why
Like Kent Monkman and Jackson 2bears, Lakota artist Dana 
Claxton uses remediation and accesses a wide archive to cri­
tique colonial violence and Indigenous erasure, often with 
biting judgments.57 Although her 1994 six-minute, twenty-
second black-and-white experimental video piece I Want to 
Know Why was created sixteen years before 2bears’ Heritage 
Mythologies, it also uses hypermediation techniques, such as 
re-scanning, and calls on popular sounds and aesthetics. Its 
continued use in art schools and its inclusion as part of a 
retrospective at the imagineNATIVE Film + Video Arts 
Festival in Toronto in 2014 illustrate the film’s longevity and 
continued potency in shedding light on the effects of col­
onial violence on generations of Indigenous women.
Claxton includes black-and-white images recorded and 
reshot on 8mm film and VHS tape, using the style of a 
1990s music video.58 I Want to Know Why also uses repeated 
images of an iconographic Indian head, as well as those of 
gritty urban landscapes. As in the work of 2bears, the black-
and-white images in Claxton’s film are dark, grainy, and at 
times hard to make out. The use of black-and-white images 
creates discomfort for the viewer, as though he or she is 
seeing the grainy images of closed-circuit surveillance cam­
era footage or watching an outmoded medium of lesser, 
televised quality.
In an interview in 2014, Claxton explained that some 
audiences mistook her newly shot film in I Want to Know 
Why as archival, partly because she shot footage in 8mm 
film, and partly because viewers associated some of the 
Indigenous markers, such as a tipi erected at the Carry the 
Kettle pow wow in 1993, as belonging in the past. The re­
peated images of an Indian head lining the sides of the 
shots, placed in the film footage post-production, look as 

We Interrupt This Program
104
though they are from photograph negatives or a film reel, 
denaturalizing their mediation, which is an instance of 
hypermediation.59 A female voiceover (by Claxton) repeats 
several chilling statements, starting quietly and then climax­
ing into an enraged scream. The first statement, “Mastincala, 
my great grandmother, walked to Canada with Sitting Bull 
starving,” ends with the arresting scream, “I want to know 
why.” This refrain is repeated after each of the statements, 
which reveal equally tragic events in Claxton’s family history 
that are linked to colonization.
In her online retrospective of Claxton’s work, Indigenous 
contemporary artist Tania Willard explains that Claxton’s 
great-grandmother fled the US plains during the violence of 
the Indian wars and in the wake of the 1862 mass hanging 
of thirty-nine Indigenous men in Minnesota (one of the lar­
gest mass executions in US history).60 Claxton also makes a 
statement about her grandmother and mother dying in im­
poverished and tragic circumstances, followed by the en­
raged scream, “I want to know why.”
As Anishnaabe artist and curator Lisa Myers points out in 
Of the Moment, Claxton disrupts the “rhythmic editing” of 
the music-video flow to upset audience expectations.61 
Claxton uses music to lull viewers into thinking they are 
about to see a music video, and then disrupts the pleasure of 
the seductive techno beat with her voice. Like the use of 
1970s experimental video that denaturalizes television and 
its cultural influences,62 Claxton’s use of the music video 
similarly calls into question the status quo media landscape 
of the 1990s. Claxton explained in our interview that she 
uses video in an attempt to transport viewers into the dream 
world, which is central in Lakota thinking. Lakota cosmol­
ogy is prominent in many of Claxton’s works.63 As Lisa 
Myers explains, “The technique of re-scanning … layers and 
re-inscribes pixels and scan lines as artifacts of the ubiqui­
tous television display. This form of saturation or distortion 

Redfacing, Remediation, and Other Art Tactics 105
of the video image creates a raw visual effect where the re­
duced image becomes high contrast and loses detail much 
as the stereotypical and iconic ‘Indian head’ image reduces 
First Nations identities.”64 She continues, “Claxton re-ap­
propriates and layers imagery of ‘Indian’ iconography with 
urban architecture settings to respond to traumatic injus­
tices endured by her ancestors.”65 
As Myers points out, the work reflects the aesthetics and 
sounds of 1990s MTV/Much Music youth culture. However, 
the use of the Indian-head iconography is more nostalgic 
and suggests the persistence of such iconography over time 
through its mediation (by, for example, calling up images 
such as the Indian head TV test pattern as 2bears does in 
Heritage Mythologies). And while Claxton denaturalizes their 
mediation through repeating the images, their appearance is 
also indicative of an erasure of actual Indigenous people. 
She names her ancestors and their erasure through the leg­
acies of colonial violence as a way of addressing the reduc­
tive signifier that has come to replace Indigenous people.
As Claxton’s work makes clear, media art can have a very 
long lifespan, and its meanings change when it is context­
ualized and recontextualized through remediation. I Want to 
Know Why was produced in the mid-1990s, and shortly 
thereafter was featured at film festivals in Canada and the 
United States. Claxton also performed the piece live as the 
video images were projected behind her at the Western Front 
gallery in Vancouver. In our interview, she told us she per­
formed a series of actions, from scratching an old vinyl rec­
ord of the song Ten Little Indians to performing the vocals 
from her video. The effect of the projection combined with 
her embodied presence onstage must have been chilling. 
The film was distributed by Video Out and VTape, and has 
been acquired by a number of art school libraries over the 
years. Since the 1990s, I Want to Know Why has influenced 
various art students and teachers. In 2014, Lisa Myers 

We Interrupt This Program
106
included I Want to Know Why as part of a retrospective on 
influential Indigenous video art of the 1990s, marking the 
imagineNATIVE Film + Media Arts Festival’s fifteenth anni­
versary. Myers noted that Claxton’s work is a seminal piece 
in Indigenous experimental video art. According to Claxton, 
as a result of the film being shown at imagineNATIVE, Claxton 
has been contacted by other artists who were moved by the 
work. When asked whether the remediation of her work at 
imagineNATIVE has caused her to start thinking about it 
again, Claxton stated,
It’s also a work of trauma … for some people who have 
trauma in their body, sometimes the trauma is just right 
in their throat ... just ready to come out ... so I was think­
ing about that work, how it’s also an expression of rage, 
but an expression of trauma as well, and thinking of how 
trauma has inhabited my own body, and releasing it how- 
ever I have, but that it’s still kind of in my throat ... and 
you know it’s such a personal work. I’ve had to ponder 
that ... making such a deeply personal work ... I hope all 
art work is personal, but I think that is especially person­
al, because I’m talking about my family ... my mother and 
my grandmother and my great-grandmother.  
The continued remediation of Claxton’s work at sites such 
as imagineNATIVE illustrates the multiple meanings pos­
sible through media recontextualization. While art schools 
likely screen Claxton’s work for mostly non-Indigenous art 
students, Claxton suggested, “Not to be an essentialist, but 
you know when you’re surrounded by a whole bunch of 
Indians looking at your work, it’s a different experience.” As 
Claxton points out, part of the work done through art hap­
pens in the process of making it, and as an Indigenous artist 
who is processing historical trauma, it is notable that one of 
her main tactics is to subvert and challenge the very media 

Redfacing, Remediation, and Other Art Tactics 107
that have worked to erase Indigenous identities. Indigenous 
remediation is not merely productive for audiences who will 
see it in multiple contexts, but in the meaning it holds for 
the artists and communities who have created it.
• • •
The works of Kent Monkman, Jackson 2bears, and Dana 
Claxton represent just a small sample of the diverse and rich 
cultural practice of Indigenous remediation, but they illus­
trate the many ways it can be productive as an Indigenous 
media tactic across multiple platforms. Monkman, 2bears, 
and Claxton mobilize various media archives from popular 
culture and art institutions as a means of questioning their 
power over Indigenous people. As the three artists’ work 
illustrates, remediation in Indigenous art challenges and 
subverts practices such as redfacing and the trope of the van­
ishing Indian. The artists’ use of techniques such as hyper­
mediation and re-scanning demonstrates how mainstream 
media and nationalistic texts paper over colonial violence 
and the continuing legacies of dispossession. As demon­
strated in the work of Kent Monkman, remediation also al­
lows Indigenous artists to question authoritative works and 
the institutions that present them as factual. When viewed 
in the same institution or in conversation with the very 
works they challenge, Indigenous remediations denaturalize 
the damage outsiders have caused through reductive con­
structions of Indigenous identities. By extension, as Monkman 
indicates, the practice of redfacing can also be empowering 
when it is re-appropriated.
Furthermore, the artists explored in this chapter illustrate 
the circularity of Indigenous mediation, and new, emergent 
meanings. For example, while Claxton’s remediation of 
Indian-head iconography was an expression of her own 
trauma in the 1990s, its recirculation at imagineNATIVE 2014 

We Interrupt This Program
108
has prompted us to put it in conversation with the work of 
other contemporary artists, including Kent Monk­man and 
Jackson 2bears, who use similar techniques. Their work illus­
trates that while Indigenous art can be productive within gal­
lery walls, it transcends institutions through recirculation 
online, in public screenings, and in live performances.
The production of art and media frequently connects in­
dividuals and communities as it often involves the efforts 
and contributions of many people. For example, while 
Claxton’s work was an expression of her own creativity, she 
is also active in the West Coast grassroots Indigenous arts 
scene and calls upon other Indigenous artists in her work, 
such as Russell Wallace (Stl’atl’imx), who performed the 
electronic music in I Want to Know Why.66 Indigenous media 
production and networking can be an important tool in 
building and nurturing such social ties.

4
imagineNATIVE as Industry Intervention
Supporting and Growing 
­Indigenous Media Makers
Festivals are very helpful to get our work screened to the ­public. 
And I would say imagineNATIVE is the best … Not only is 
it ­wonderful for young people to come … but perhaps sometimes 
for the first time leaving their community … first time getting 
on a plane. And they get here, and there’s always volunteers who 
will meet them and show them around the city … It is really 
­important because you can be really lost in big cities like 
this if you’ve never been.
– filmmaker Alanis Obomsawin 
It is 11 p.m. in downtown Toronto, and the beat is thumping 
at the Brandt House. Bear Witness, one of the DJs from A 
Tribe Called Red, is spinning records, and his mostly young, 
Indigenous audience is clearly pleased. Hip-looking party­
goers mingle over drinks, many wearing stylish, chic cloth­
ing and sporting artistic tattoos and piercings; some wear 
long, traditional braids or jewellery. They bop on the dance 
floor to an electronic mix with chanting and drumbeats and 
smile as they greet friends and colleagues, shouting over the 
loud music flooding the club. The remixes combine differ­
ent styles of music, including reggae and hip hop, and even 
sample audio clips from films, but there is one feature that 
distinguishes them from typical club beats: the chants and 
drumming laid on each track are Indigenous.

We Interrupt This Program
110
The music is fitting for the party, an opening-night cele­
bration for the imagineNATIVE Film + Media Arts Festival, 
one of the most renowned venues for Indigenous film­
making in North America. The site is important not only for 
filmmakers showcasing their work but also for making con­
nections in the film and arts industry that lead to potential 
funders, distributors, and collaborators. Tomorrow, attendees 
will be back at the Bell Lightbox, a multi-theatre complex in 
the heart of the city, where films will be screened for thou­
sands of viewers who will continue to mingle with the who’s 
who of Indigenous filmmaking.
Like the remixes of A Tribe Called Red, the films showcased 
at imagineNATIVE demonstrate the diversity and creativity of 
Indigenous cultural texts. While the barriers to entrance into 
the film industry are many, especially for Indi­genous people, 
participation in imagineNATIVE is a tactic for Indigenous 
filmmakers and artists to negotiate a competi­tive and at times 
hostile professional arena. Moreover, while artists face many 
pressures to conform to particular formats, genres, and styles, 
the festival provides loose articulations of Indigenous aesthet­
ics and allows inclusion of films that both conform to and 
borrow heavily from established genres, as well as those that 
defy neat categorization and expectations. Because inclusion 
of films in the festival is based on the identity of the film­
makers rather than aesthetics, festival films range from those 
that focus specifically on Indigenous themes to those that do 
not make any overt reference to them. The criteria for partici­
pation, coupled with various forms of support provided by 
the festival, foster creative development in Indigenous film­
making. While documentary and realism are well-established 
styles in Indigenous filmmaking, we explore the emergence 
of  experimental and allegorical work fostered by imagine­
NATIVE, including science fiction, horror, romantic comedy, 
and those works that defy categorization.

imagineNATIVE as Industry Intervention 111
In order to highlight the diversity of Indigenous creative 
cultural texts and participation at the festival, we discuss 
films showcased over the past several years and interviews 
with Indigenous filmmakers and festival organizers that 
took place from 2012 to 2015.1 We review debates over Indi­
genous aesthetics to situate a topology of films at the festival, 
including those that conform to and resist genre conven­
tions and Indigenous themes. We explore the works of Jeff 
Barnaby, Terril Calder, and Shane Belcourt, who have all 
screened multiple short films at the festival over the years, 
which aided them in kick-starting new projects, including 
feature films. Their work demonstrates the ways in which 
the festival helps Indigenous filmmakers to develop through 
a supportive Indigenous media community, rather than pro­
moting a strict definition of what constitutes Indigenous 
film. While each of these artists borrows from genre types, 
each does so in ways that reflect individual creativity and 
interest (or non-interest) in focusing on Indigenous themes.
imagineNATIVE as Intervention
The festival, originally titled the Centre for Aboriginal Media, 
was founded in 1998 by Cynthia Lickers-Sage (Mohawk) 
with Vtape, a not-for-profit, artist-run video distributor.2 It 
has grown to be one of the largest and most important 
Indigenous film festivals in North America and showcases 
media works from Indigenous artists around the world, as 
well as artist talks, performances, scholarly papers, and art 
installations. The Toronto-based festival calls itself “the 
world’s largest exhibitor of Canadian and international Indi­
genous film and media”3 with a mission that includes “dis­
pelling stereotypical notions of Indigenous peoples through 
diverse media presentations from within our communities, 
thereby contributing to a greater understanding by all audi­
ences of Indigenous artistic expression.”4

We Interrupt This Program
112
Festival director Jason Ryle estimates up to twelve thou­
sand people attended the 2011 festival, with locals constitut­
ing the majority.5 The festival had grown to 15,500 by 2014.6 
The audience is composed of both Indigenous and non-­
Indigenous people from Canada, as well as participants who 
have travelled internationally (about 10 percent of partici­
pants). All in all, fifty Indigenous nations are represented.7 
Since 2005, non-Indigenous attendees have made up the 
majority of the audience, at about 55 percent.8 
The festival, originally hosted in smaller venues, now 
takes place at the Bell Lightbox in downtown Toronto. Its 
central location and partnership with the Toronto Inter­
national Film Festival (TIFF), and its timing just after TIFF in 
October, have likely contributed to its success. The festival 
is also supported by sponsorships from corporations such 
as  Bell Media and the Royal Bank of Canada, as well as 
like-minded broadcasters such as the Aboriginal Peoples 
Television Network (APTN) and government sponsors, in­
cluding the Province of Ontario and Canadian Heritage.9 
The festival welcomes a broad audience, in part through 
good-humoured, campy marketing that involves ­mainstream 
pop culture such as “attack of the 50 foot woman, but it was 
a 50 foot Pocahontas”10 and a James Bond–like motif gra­
cing the cover of the 2014 festival guide, with Mi’gmaq actor 
Glen Gould posing with a camera instead of a gun (see 
Figure 4.1).
imagineNATIVE is one of several Indigenous film festivals 
that have emerged internationally since the 1980s.11 The fes­
tival’s growth is notable, however; similar events, such as the 
now defunct National Museum of the American Indian’s 
Native American Film and Video Festival (NAFVF) in New 
York and the Vancouver Indigenous Media Arts Festival, 
have struggled to maintain viability.12 The festival emerged 
as a response to the specific challenges faced by Indigenous 
filmmakers. As director Jason Ryle stated in our interview, 

imagineNATIVE as Industry Intervention 113
“Indigenous artists were telling us … that the work wasn’t 
given a platform or that the public wasn’t ­having access to 
their work. The festival was founded specifically to support 
Indigenous artists, and that was a really important distinc­
tion in terms of its mandate in comparison with other 
Native or Indigenous film festivals.” Venues such as imagine­
NATIVE are valuable for not only screening Indi­genous work 
but also acting as important sites for building community 
­behind the scenes,13 networking, collaborating, seeking men­
torship, and finding financial support and distribution outlets 
Figure 4.1  2014 imagineNATIVE Film + Media Arts Festival 
program | Courtesy of imagineNative Film + Media Arts 
Festival and Beehive Design

We Interrupt This Program
114
for emerging filmmakers. As artist Kent Monkman, who was 
among the original board members of the festival, suggested 
in our interview,
When I first started making films … there weren’t a lot of 
Indigenous filmmakers out there … There were people 
like Alanis Obomsawin, but she was making documen­
tary films. There were just a handful of other filmmakers, 
so at that time it was pretty clear that things were changing, 
and I think the festival, its intention was to create a sup­
port network for emerging filmmakers so that they could 
come in and do workshops and go to panels and hear 
what other, more experienced filmmakers were doing … 
and I think it has succeeded in that. It has nurtured a 
younger generation … The festival was already there when 
they made their choice to go study film or make their first 
video. There was a place for it to go, and that wasn’t the 
case twelve or thirteen years ago.
The festival’s program spans diverse themes and styles, from 
the environment and sexuality to horror and the supernatur­
al. Over the years, Monkman’s own films have appeared at 
imagineNATIVE, including Robin’s Hood, Shooting Geronimo, 
Blood River, Miss Chief: Justice of the Piece, and his music 
video Dance to Miss Chief, which was featured in the 2012 
program. Like a lot of Monkman’s work, Dance to Miss Chief 
not only challenges stereotypical depictions of Indigenous 
peoples in popular culture; it also intervenes in the binaries 
of sexuality reproduced through colonization. His films 
illustrate the diversity of style, content, and participation at 
the festival, especially because they are shown alongside 
very different kinds of films. For example, Dance to Miss Chief 
was shown in the same year as In the Name of Progress, 
directed by Danko Mariman (Mapuche), which challenges 
the development of traditional Mapuche homelands and 

imagineNATIVE as Industry Intervention 115
political corruption in Chile through a realist style. As 
­imagineNATIVE’s mission states, the festival showcases di­
verse Indigenous expression.
The festival has featured films mostly from Canada and 
the United States, with works by a smaller group of inter­
national artists from across the globe. It travels to Indigenous 
communities internationally and highlights filmmaking in 
different countries with its Spotlight series. Over the last sev­
eral years, the Spotlight series has included Mapuche films 
from Chile (2012), Māori films from New Zealand (2013), 
Aboriginal films from Australia (2014), and Saami films 
from Scandinavia (2015). While Indigenous films from North 
America are most prominent, other forms of Indigeneity less 
commonly recognized in North America are also included. 
In the past, for example, the festival has included films 
from Tibet.
While the festival itself is inclusive of international ar­
ticulations of Indigenous identity, Canadian participants 
have also commented on the welcoming nature of the 
­festival and the ways in which it allows participants to de­
fine Indigenous identity on their own terms. For example, 
Métis artist and filmmaker Terril Calder explained in our 
communication,
I have always been very upfront that I was Métis with 
everybody, and everyone didn’t necessarily know what 
that was, and they still don’t. But, the first thing that I 
wrote to imagineNATIVE was, “Can I apply for your fes­
tival? I am Métis.” And then I remember getting an okay 
back, and I was, like, “Yeah!” I was finally allowed on the 
bus. Because it had been a number of years, in Ontario 
specifically and in Canada, that we weren’t included in 
anything. And that was okay. I was very patient, and I was 
very respectful, and I was like, “I’m not First Nations, but 
I’m mixed. Can I be a part of this?” I can’t explain. I still 

We Interrupt This Program
116
remember the way I felt. “Yes, you accept me somehow,” 
and it was great to belong to something in a way that I 
wanted to be recognized, in a way that I recognize myself. 
They’re my family.
The festival’s inclusion of non-Indigenous people should 
also be noted. Film theorist Davinia Thornley describes the 
generosity of Indigenous participants and festival organizers 
in their willingness to open collaborative critique and cur­
atorship with non-Indigenous people, who must also be 
comfortable with “not always knowing” or fully understand­
ing Indigenous work. She argues, “imagineNATIVE aims to 
be inclusive, but not at the expense of ‘dumbing down’ in­
digenous content or concerns in order to make them palat­
able for a wider audience.”14 
Importantly, as Thornley points out, many of imagine­
NATIVE’s participants draw parallels between their own ex­
periences and those shown on screen. Thus, the festival 
experience is not merely about seeing films; it also includes 
social interactions and making sense of one’s shared experi­
ences. Moreover, current events shape and guide the festival 
tone. For example, during imagineNATIVE 2013, in the 
Mi’gmaq community of Elsipogtog, New Brunswick, a con­
frontation with authorities erupted over oil fracking on 
­ancestral territories. Organizers, panellists, and attendees re­
marked on the events, drawing parallels with the films being 
shown that year. Discussions about Idle No More’s activities 
were also frequent at the 2013 festival as the social move­
ment had the greatest momentum at that point.
The Challenges of Indigenous Filmmaking
imagineNATIVE works to address some of the challenges 
faced by Indigenous filmmakers through a venue dedicated 
solely to fostering Indigenous work. However, Indigenous 

imagineNATIVE as Industry Intervention 117
filmmakers still report the challenges of an already competi­
tive film industry, despite the relatively strong national fund­
ing for Indigenous films, film festivals, and media in Canada 
in comparison to that available in other countries.15 In 2013, 
festival organizers released Indigenous Feature Film Production 
in Canada, a commissioned report that listed four key ob­
stacles to the production of Indigenous feature films, as well 
as recommendations for addressing them. Among the chal­
lenges listed were “systemic barriers and cultural misconcep­
tions,” “access to industry partners and networks,” “access to 
financing,” and “access to distribution.”16 The report notes 
the “culture gap” Indigenous filmmakers must navigate as 
they “reported being challenged by pre-­existing beliefs or 
perceptions within the industry of what defines an Aboriginal 
film or content or that Indigenous content will not succeed 
in the marketplace. This challenge was manifest within the 
industry in the relationships between filmmakers and fund­
ers, distributors, story editors, broadcasters, potential produ­
cing partners, trainers and ­mentors.”17 As noted, part of the 
challenge of creating Indigenous films is convincing funders 
that they will have a wide enough  audience. As Navajo/
German-American director Nanobah Becker suggests, funding 
concerns lead to pressures to conform to more mainstream 
storylines and formats. Her film The 6th  World, which was 
screened at imagineNATIVE 2012, draws parallels with col­
onization through allegorical, sci-fi themes.
While Becker finds it important to speak to her Indigenous 
audiences, she has increasingly attempted to broaden her 
reach in more recent projects in the United States, partly due 
to a need for financial support. She stated in a personal 
communication with the authors, “It’s really hard not hav­
ing something mainstream or commercial. You can’t get 
funding for that. So that’s a reality that I’m dealing with now 
as a filmmaker.”  Becker points to a phenomenon similar to 

We Interrupt This Program
118
that of “audience valuation,” in which advertisers and media 
industries place a lower value on minority audiences.18 
Potential funders sometimes believe Indigenous content will 
appeal only to Indigenous audiences, which are not highly 
valued because of perceptions about their socio-­economic 
status and their smaller numbers relative to the larger popula­
tion. It is therefore more of a challenge to secure commercial 
funding for Indigenous films, making alternative funding 
(such as government support) essential.
As cultural anthropologist Kristin Dowell points out in 
Sovereign Screens, Indigenous film has been a vehicle by 
which Canada expresses its own national sovereignty as it 
competes with US content, and therefore it has enjoyed 
greater support from government bodies (such as the 
National Film Board since the 1960s) when compared with 
Indigenous film in the United States.19 This is also reflected 
in the Canadian Radio-television and Telecommunication 
Commission’s (CRTC) Cancon policy, which requires broad­
casters to air a certain percentage of Canadian content, thus 
influencing funding for Indigenous cultural texts. However, 
as Indigenous media scholars Faye Ginsburg and Lorna Roth 
point out, well-meaning funding bodies have at times under­
estimated Indigenous filmmakers by providing support for 
shorts but inadequate funding for larger projects (such as, 
for example, the features of Igloolik Isuma Productions dis­
cussed earlier).20
Not only are Indigenous audiences undervalued but they 
are also not accurately counted. To some extent, the distri­
bution process in Indigenous communities remains un­
traced through industry measures: “Aboriginal filmmakers 
often self-distribute their films to Aboriginal communities, 
and these audiences are not included in box office num­
bers.”21 Therefore, the success of Indigenous productions is 
not effectively measured, which adds another barrier to 
Indigenous filmmakers’ attempts to garner funding.

imagineNATIVE as Industry Intervention 119
Even when funding is available, it sometimes comes at 
the cost of relinquishment of film rights and some degree of 
creative control.22 While filmmaking has become increas­
ingly more accessible and affordable due to the prolifera­
tion of digital technologies,23 it can be quite difficult for 
Indigenous filmmakers to maintain creative control over 
their work. This can be especially the case as budgets in­
crease. As Terril Calder suggested to us in her interview, “If 
you want to go larger, then sometimes your vision will be 
altered to fit the industry.”
For their work to be commercially viable, Indigenous 
filmmakers are encouraged to bend to audience expecta­
tions in a number of respects, which can involve a kind of 
“smoothing.” As Thornley writes, “By ‘smoothing,’ I refer to 
how the production process, as well as the feature film for­
mat itself, work to simplify unique traditional cultural prac­
tices, many of which would be largely unintelligible to 
people outside the culture.”24 Moreover, filmic productions 
often conform to format expectations, including genre. 
Therefore, sites such as imagineNATIVE, where Indigenous 
aesthetics are better understood and expected, are important 
for emerging Indigenous artists who wish to showcase non-­
conventional works. Moreover, the festival has made room 
for films that push the boundaries of what has been charac­
terized as Indigenous aesthetics. As we argue, Indigenous 
aesthetics are not easily defined, and imagineNATIVE pro­
motes diverse articulations through its inclusion of various 
kinds of film.
Indigenous Aesthetics and Cultural Form
As a brief review of the festival’s program over the past sev­
eral years suggests, the films accepted by the festival are as 
diverse as the groups and individuals who create them. The 
festival’s inclusion of a variety of films speaks to debates 
about what constitutes an Indigenous film – whether that be 

We Interrupt This Program
120
aesthetic elements; the identity of the director, producers, and 
actors; or authorship of the screenplay.25 A confounding ­factor 
is how people define Indigeneity and who actually identifies 
that way. As cinema studies scholar Amalia Cordova suggests, 
organizations such as the Latin American Coor­dinator of In­
di­genous People’s Film and Communi­cation make decisions 
about inclusion on aesthetic terms and community relation­
ships, where “the dignified treatment of indigenous themes 
may outweigh indigenous authorship.”26
Conversely, for imagineNATIVE, the filmmaker’s identifi­
cation is privileged over a strict aesthetic topology. Although 
many of the festival’s films include Indigenous issues, “works 
selected for programming do not need to have overt Indi­
genous content or themes.”27 For example, What We Do In 
the Shadows, from Māori directors Jemaine Clement (of Flight 
of the Conchords fame) and Taika Waititi (Boy; Eagle vs. Shark; 
Two Cars, One Night), was screened at imagineNATIVE 2014’s 
opening night. The film is a humorous mockumentary about 
the trials and tribulations of four vampires who live together 
in a flat; it includes no overt Indigenous themes (as in the 
case of Boy) or even visual cues (as in portions of Eagle vs. 
Shark). Similarly, work by director Shane Belcourt screened at 
the festival is also not (necessarily) about Indigenous issues.
While imagineNATIVE defines Indigenous film based on 
the identity of the director(s), some thinkers have attempted 
to characterize Indigenous films on aesthetic terms.28 Yet 
most scholars agree that there is not one unifying aesthetic 
that transcends Indigenous texts. As Dowell writes,
I agree that on-screen aesthetics of Aboriginal media are 
distinctive in that Aboriginal filmmakers draw on aspects 
of indigeneity in the tone, structure, editing, framing, and 
content on-screen. However, there is no singular Aborig­
inal media aesthetic, but rather multiple Aboriginal aes­
thetics that reflect the individual artistic expression of the 

imagineNATIVE as Industry Intervention 121
filmmaker and the Aboriginal nation in which he or she 
is a citizen.29
A strict topology would treat Indigenous films as overly es­
sentialized and reductive.30  However, patterns in Indigenous 
cultural production have been identified by a number of 
Indigenous and non-Indigenous scholars, including story­
telling from Indigenous perspectives31 that denaturalize the 
ethnographic gaze by changing the position from which the 
story is told, or what Faye Ginsburg describes as the “Parallax 
Effect,”32 which is a focus on colonial oppression;33 and 
small-scale, low-budget, community-based production.34 
Respected Māori scholar and filmmaker Barry Barclay com­
pares the alternative orthodoxies through which Indi­genous 
cinema operates to those of Hollywood films, or First Cinema. 
He calls Indigenous films “Fourth Cinema.”35 Although some­
what reductive, Barclay’s endeavour to characterize common­
alities in Indigenous films “is still valuable for its recognition 
of the political and the historical in Indigenous filmmaking, 
including its revaluation of the ­human relationship to land, 
its differing relation to temporality, and, most importantly, its 
reappropriation of the ethnographic and taxidermic gaze.”36 
Although experiences of colonization vary dramatically, many 
Indigenous people share oppressive colonial histories, and, 
therefore, themes of “decolonizing and rehistoricizing” 
are   often included in Indigenous films.37 Cinema scholar 
Teshome Gabriel has argued that Indigenous films, along 
with Third Cinema, or third-world films, challenge colonial 
structures and establish the sense of place and community 
central to the worldviews of a particular group when com­
pared with Hollywood cinema.38 He has suggested that the 
latter is more frequently marked by individual psychology 
and related close-ups, high production values, fast-action 
shots, and simplified, universally understood plot lines and 
characters. This translates to greater reach and success in 

We Interrupt This Program
122
international markets.39 By contrast, Indigenous films rarely 
have large production budgets, are often less polished, and 
include non-­professional community members as actors.40 
These features are what anthropology and film studies scholar 
Juan Francisco Salazar characterizes as the “poetics of imper­
fect media.”41 As Gabriel suggests, in some instances Indigen­
ous films also attempt to establish a sense of place through 
long takes and panoramic shots.
As in the case of aesthetic influences, well-established cat­
egories such as genre also help to order and shape Indigenous 
cultural texts. The ways in which Indigenous perspectives are 
in conversation with such ordering logics reveal push-back 
but also some degree of conformity.42 In Genre and Television, 
Jason Mittell describes genre as a “cultural category” that 
constantly changes along with discursive shifts and historical 
contingencies. It is a form of classification that organizes and 
helps to constitute already-understood narratives that reson­
ate widely with audiences. As Mittell suggests, “Industries use 
genres to produce programs, to define brands and identi­
ties … and to target audiences.”43 Taken together with the 
larger culture’s expectations for particular formats and com­
mercial expectations, genre as a cultural form has a great deal 
of influence in shaping the tone and form of a film.44
The outcome can be unique, however, when Indigenous 
filmmakers borrow from and bend popular forms to create 
polysemic texts that appeal to Indigenous and non-­Indigenous 
audiences. While pre-established categories such as genre 
may shape and guide a text, they are not tyrannical. As in the 
case of Dana Claxton’s repurposing of the 1990s music video 
format and Kent Monkman’s recreation of western-style films, 
a media genre can be employed to trouble or poke fun at the 
conventions of that very genre. For example, Indigenous stud­
ies scholar Sophie McCall argues that Isuma Igloolik’s Ata­
narjuat: The Fast Runner was a “counter-ethnographic film,” 
which played with the conventions of the anthropological 

imagineNATIVE as Industry Intervention 123
lens in order to denaturalize it by directly referencing Nanook 
of the North through visual cues.45
Indigenous films, like any cultural text, are polysemic and 
reflect a negotiation of various influences, such as aesthetics, 
cultural form, political-economic circumstances, produc­
tion conditions, perceived audience(s), and the creativity of 
the artists or filmmakers. They also cross multiple and trans­
national “cultural boundaries” from their production to 
their consumption.46 While patterns across Indigen­ous texts 
may apply, a strict topology does not capture the rich divers­
ity of cultural texts Indigenous filmmakers are producing. As 
cultural studies scholar Miléna Santoro points out, earlier 
forms of Indigenous film funded through the National Film 
Board starting in the 1960s tended to reflect a realist, docu­
mentary format, as in the case of These Are My People (1969), 
directed by Michael Mitchell, Willie Dunn, Barbara Wilson, 
and Roy Daniels, and works by Alanis Obomsawin, includ­
ing Christmas at Moose Factory (1971).47 But a much more 
expansive array of styles has since emerged, including fic­
tional and allegorical films. While the realist style is an im­
portant component of imagineNATIVE’s program each year 
(as evidenced by the appearance of Obom­sawin’s films), the 
remainder of the chapter focuses on forms of Indigenous 
filmmaking other than documentary, a  well-established 
genre that is addressed extensively in academic work.48 
Stylistic and Creepy: Jeff Barnaby’s Nods to Horror 
and Sci-Fi
In her video and written essay titled This Video Essay Was Not 
Built on an Ancient Indian Burial Ground, presented at imagine­
NATIVE 2013, filmmaker Ariel Smith (Cree/Ojibway/Roma/
Jewish) explains that the horror genre in particular enables 
artists to illustrate the violence and upheaval of coloniza­
tion.49 Smith suggests the genre “has allowed filmmakers 
not to hold back the repugnant truths of colonization” and 

We Interrupt This Program
124
to express the rage fostered through historical and reoccur­
ring violence.50 According to Smith, employment of the ma­
cabre by filmmakers such as Mi’gmaq director Jeff Barnaby 
is influenced by the extreme, horrific circumstances all too 
familiar to Indigenous people. Smith suggests, therefore, that 
the aesthetic appropriation of the grotesque and repugnant 
in horror provides metaphors for colonization, the destruc­
tive tendencies of Western civilization, and the “monstrosity 
of colonial transgression.”51
For example, Barnaby combines the aesthetic traditions 
of science fiction with horror in his short film File Under 
Miscellaneous, screened at imagineNATIVE 2010. The film 
­depicts a futuristic 1984/Blade Runner–like dystopia, where 
Indigenous people have their skin and eyes surgically re­
moved and replaced with white skin and blue eyes at a 
Bureau of Indian Affairs medical facility. At the end of the 
film is an Orwellian scene in which all the Indigenous 
people exhibit bar codes on the backs of their pale heads 
and gaze up at a “Big Brother” screen, which indoctrin­
ates through propaganda. The Mi’gmaq man who narrates 
in his traditional language at the beginning of the film has 
his tongue surgically removed in a graphic, stomach-turning 
scene, and in the latter part of the film he switches to English. 
The short film exhibits the gore and creepiness of the futur­
istic, sci-fi horror genre, but it is also a metaphor for the 
gruesome violence of assimilation (see Figure 4.2).52
Barnaby blends themes of colonization with the broader 
disillusionment and alienation felt in Western society, as the 
narrator recites portions of the gritty poem “Walking 
Around,” by Chilean poet Pablo Neruda: “It so happens I 
am sick of being a man ... And it pushes me into certain cor­
ners, into some moist houses, into hospitals where the 
bones fly out the window.”53 The Mi’gmaq character seeks 

imagineNATIVE as Industry Intervention 125
out his own horrific transformation after stating that he is 
weary, presumably from fighting the changes underway.
In another of Barnaby’s films, From Cherry English, screened 
at imagineNATIVE 2009, the main character has all of the 
trappings of Indigenous identity common to outsiders (for 
example, his home is adorned with antlers and dream catch­
ers). But he does not speak his own language and is out of 
touch with his own Mi’gmaq culture. He brings a white 
woman home with him from a rave, and in one scene, she 
asks him to “say something in Indian.” He indicates that he 
does not know how. The metaphor for cultural loss con­
tinues as the character has a dream or vision, likely brought 
on by the drugs he has consumed. In a gruesome scene, his 
tongue falls out and is squirming out of his control, bloody 
in the bathroom sink; he tries to grab it, but it continues to 
thrash around. He is then pulled into the mirror by his own 
reflection, where he finds himself bleeding on the ground in 
a very different environment: a snowy, forested area. An old 
woman he recognizes as his grandmother covers him with a 
blanket and speaks to him in Mi’gmaw, but he does not 
Figure 4.2  Still from File Under Miscellaneous, Jeff Barnaby, 2010 | 
Courtesy of Jeff Barnaby and Prospector Films

We Interrupt This Program
126
understand her. The character’s grandmother sews his 
tongue back into his mouth as he moans in anguish. But 
the main character of the film does not seem to understand 
the significance of his vision – that reconnecting with his 
mother tongue, his people, and his culture will help guide 
him through the alienation the newer culture has caused. 
Consequently, when he wakes up, his first impulse is to 
start drinking.54 
As in the case of the director’s other films, From Cherry 
English speaks to the self-destructive nature of the larger cul­
ture and the self-loathing that results from cultural loss and 
separation. As Barnaby states, “Indians were taught to hate 
themselves; we didn’t just wake up doing it one day.”55 
Barnaby’s darker depictions have led some to question why 
he does not offer more positive or uplifting messages for 
Indigenous youth. Barnaby avoids the push in some Indigen­
ous quarters to counter more negative representations with 
more favourable depictions of Indigenous people, which 
Barnaby describes as “positivity porn.”56 He suggests that to 
focus on positive stories in ways that avoid the monstrosity 
of colonization would be a disservice to Indigenous people. 
His goal is “to give voice to a marginalized section of our 
culture[,] not to make propaganda movies of positivity.”57 
Barnaby departs from the traditional expectations for 
Indigenous films discussed in the imagineNATIVE 2013 re­
port (that is, realist forms). His choice to do this seems 
somewhat conscious, as he “dropped the drum and the 
feather for sex, violence, and booze hound broken Indians,” 
which has helped him to illustrate the tortured nature of his 
characters.58 In contrast, he emphasizes the importance of 
tradition in understanding the dysfunctions of modernity. 
The highly stylized conventions of horror and sci-fi act as 
potent metaphors of colonization.
However, Barnaby has also moved away from such con­
ventions in his feature-length drama Rhymes for Young Ghouls, 

imagineNATIVE as Industry Intervention 127
screened at imagineNATIVE in 2014. The film explores the 
abuse of power by authorities and institutions on a Mi’gmaq 
reservation and the creative manoeuvres used by the young 
heroine and her crew to survive until they eventually exact 
revenge. The film illustrates Barnaby’s expanded range and 
abilities as a filmmaker, which have been supported through 
imagineNATIVE throughout the years.
Experimental and Beyond Categorization
Like Jeff Barnaby, Métis filmmaker Terril Calder employs 
themes of violence and self-loathing in her films to demon­
strate the shame imposed on Indigenous people through col­
onization. But unlike Barnaby, Calder tends to focus on 
female characters and uses puppets to illustrate colonial al­
legories. As she explained in our interview in 2014, the festival 
has been a welcoming place for her non-conventional stop-­
motion animation work. It has shown all of her films since 
she contacted organizers, including her first feature-­length 
film, The Lodge, which premiered at imagine­NATIVE 2014. As 
it is time-consuming and labour-intensive, stop-­motion ani­
mation is less common in mainstream markets, which gener­
ally include CGI (computer-generated imagery) designed for 
children rather than adults. The festival provides an important 
site for filmmakers who work in experimental forms.
In addition to addressing the violence of colonization, 
Calder’s work reflects themes of mixed identity that have 
produced confusion as well as acceptance of differences 
within Indigenous communities. Calder also illustrates  the 
skewed values of Western society with respect to women 
through her characters, who are often female and who fre­
quently exhibit a kind of vapid vanity as part and parcel of 
internalized misogyny. In two of her films, described below, 
she addresses the violence that women do to themselves and 
that others do to them through their embodiment of the 
ideals of Western beauty.

We Interrupt This Program
128
In the short stop-motion animation film Canned Meat/
Immobilized (2008), Ida is a Métis character who dyes her 
hair blonde and is known as a beauty queen, passing as 
white in her early years. As she ages, however, she does not 
leave her mobile home for fear that others in her small town 
will bear witness to her decaying good looks. She is literally 
a prisoner of her own vanity and fails to realize her value as 
a human being outside of her appearance. “In canned meat 
[sic] the woman struggles with identity,” states Calder. She 
continues: “She’s ashamed of her culture. She’s ashamed of 
who she is ... She’s mixed up. She’s confused.” Despite Ida’s 
shallow outlook, Calder treats her with compassion. The 
character redeems herself by turning back to her culture at 
the end of the film. In the sequel, Canned Meat: The Whole 
Damn Can (2009), Ida grapples with “self-forgiveness.” 
Focusing on similar themes, Calder’s stop-motion feature 
The Lodge sees the main character, a British Second World 
War bride, use her beauty and sex appeal to manipulate her 
Métis husband (see Figure 4.3). The self-destructive wife, an 
oversexed puppet who drinks too much, complete with 
blonde hair and bustier, values herself and is valued by men 
only for her appearance and symbolic appeal. All the In­
digenous characters in the film, including her husband, are 
played by animal puppets, or morph between animal and 
human form. Calder explained in our communication that 
the film combines the classic story of “Goldilocks and the 
Three Bears” with the Ojibwa legend of “The Dandelion,” in 
which a man who falls in love with the yellow flower soon 
realizes he has been fooled as it transforms and disinte­
grates in the wind. According to Calder, the lesson of “The 
Dandelion” is about the misstep in “looking for novelty and 
not looking for purpose,” or placing value on appearance 
rather than on what people can do.
While the main character in The Lodge sees Indigenous 
people as animal-like and savage throughout most of the 

imagineNATIVE as Industry Intervention 129
film, and sees herself as racially superior, in her moments of 
self-loathing, she pictures herself as a dirty rodent. We find 
out that men have used her sexually from the time she was a 
child, leading her to believe that her only power is in her 
sexual manipulation. By the end of the film, the character 
herself transforms into a rodent as she is accepted into the 
community, despite her bad behaviour.
Calder points out that a major interpretive difference 
among audiences is their differing perspectives on animals 
in the film: “I had Indigenous and white people look at my 
film and they got completely different things out of it ... I 
find that fascinating.” Calder alludes to the fact that animals 
have historically been devalued in human-centric Western 
cultures, and that, therefore, equating Indigenous people 
with animals positions Indigeneity as lesser than white-ness 
in a racial hierarchy. Calder’s film demonstrates a difference 
in worldviews and confronts perspectives that degrade both 
animals and Indigenous people.
Although The Lodge fits the format of a feature-length 
film, it defies structure, genre, and other expectations in a 
number of respects. It is at times humorous, while it also 
Figure 4.3  Still from Terril Calder’s The Lodge, 2014 | Courtesy 
of ­Terril Calder

We Interrupt This Program
130
deals with extremely serious subject matter. While centred 
on Indigenous themes, it is told from the perspective of the 
outsider, who is profoundly confused, delusional, and de­
praved. However, while she is not a reliable narrator, the 
character is not simply good or bad; she is ambivalent. 
While the story might follow to some degree the conven­
tions of a redemption narrative about cultural acceptance, 
another reading might suggest that the character has entered 
the dream or spirit world rather than resolving her struggles 
in the material world. The final scene, when she has com­
pletely transformed and embraced self and community ac­
ceptance, seems a little too good to be true. Alternatively, the 
viewer half suspects the bears are going to eat Goldilocks out 
of spite, as her manipulative behaviour has wreaked havoc 
on the community. But Calder’s treatment of her film’s flawed 
main character generally seems much more generous. The 
potential for the community to forgive demonstrates a mod­
el for coexistence that may benefit everyone. While compli­
cated and resistant to conventional storylines, the film is 
surprising and polysemic.
In short, Calder’s films are an expression of her artistic 
inspiration, mixed with a number of themes and cultural 
influences. They break conventions in part because they are 
not created to succeed in a mainstream market. As Calder 
suggests, “Getting absorbed in the commercial film industry 
is smart financially. However, I really feel I had to sit down 
and decide what I wanted. I want to tell my own stories.” 
Indigenous Films Not (Necessarily) 
about Indigenous Issues
While imagineNATIVE makes room for films that discuss 
Indigenous themes in experimental, non-conventional ways, 
it also includes more conventional genres that may or may 
not include Indigenous themes. Filmmaker Shane Belcourt 
comes from a political family. His father, Tony Belcourt, is a 

imagineNATIVE as Industry Intervention 131
well-known Métis activist, who, along with notable figures 
like Maria Campbell and Harry Daniels, was (and continues 
to be) at the forefront of Indigenous rights movements in the 
1960s and 1970s. Shane’s sister Christi Belcourt is a re­
nowned artist, whose distinctive paintings are influenced by 
Indigenous beadwork. One of Christi’s most recent projects, 
Walking With Our Sisters (2015), includes multiple collabora­
tive exhibits across Canada dedicated to the more than 
1,180 Indigenous women who have been murdered or gone 
missing over the past thirty years. As a member of the Belcourt 
family, Shane has been immersed in serious topics his entire 
life, including issues about land dispossession, reclamation, 
and violence. And while he has explored these extensively in 
his films, he also likes to make romantic comedies and fun 
shorts. In an interview at imagineNATIVE 2014, Belcourt dis­
cussed the reasons he is sometimes attracted to filmmaking 
that is not overtly about Indigenous issues, and the ways in 
which the festival has been welcoming of his experimenta­
tion with different themes.
Belcourt noted in an interview the many childhood influ­
ences that ultimately led him to filmmaking. From the time 
he was small, he was exposed to community organizing with 
his family. Stories of “land loss and Métis history” were al­
ways in the background. However, he also notes that visual 
storytelling in popular culture was profoundly influential, in­
cluding comic books and blockbusters such as Return of the 
Jedi. He suggests that the framework of the Hollywood hero 
he loved as a child was not that different from the stories he 
heard about Louis Riel, which were similarly about “outsiders 
and castaways.” While Belcourt has explored overt questions 
of Indigenous identity in his films, he explained his desire at 
times to navigate away from those themes:
I’m also very interested in getting to a place where ... it 
can be the characters in the world ... where the film is not 

We Interrupt This Program
132
about what a person is, and what a person isn’t. You know 
it’s not a quest for identity ... What would it be like if the 
character just is what they are? Now it can be about some­
thing else. Not who am I? What does it mean? How do I 
define myself? When it was for me, it made sense to write 
about those things and explore those things, and now 
that it’s not, I don’t have to.
Some of Belcourt’s lighthearted films do not engage with 
Indigenous issues. These include the short Pookums, the 
story of an accidental dog sitter, a highly eccentric pet owner, 
and a pampered canine who dies while her sitter is on the 
job. Another short film F*%k Yeah, screened at imagine­
NATIVE 2010, is about a rock band mutiny gone wrong. In 
both cases, the films are about short, funny stories unfold­
ing rather than deep issues or character development.
Belcourt also noted in our interview that he has always 
been attracted to romantic comedies, or dramedies: “I got 
into film to make Woody Allen movies.” His feature film 
Tkaronto, screened at imagineNATIVE 2007, about a chance 
romantic encounter between two urban Indigenous people, 
reflects that interest. Arguably, Tkaronto addresses issues of 
identity in much the same way that Woody Allen films strug­
gle with existentialism, but with an Indigenous twist. How­
ever, Tkaronto is also about universal questions of life and 
love. Similarly, Belcourt’s short Keeping Quiet (2010) is a 
good-natured exploration of dating, loneliness, and the 
search for companionship – and it does not overtly address 
Indigenous themes. Belcourt suggests he was drawn to ro­
mantic comedies because they were “things that were funny 
that we could laugh at, and then you get hit a few times, and 
especially with Woody Allen, then you have these philo­
sophical moments where you ask, ‘Where am I in the uni­
verse? What’s the point?’ ... I loved all those things.” He 
continues: “Making the more serious drama thing ... I never 

imagineNATIVE as Industry Intervention 133
got up in the morning and said, ‘I want to do that. I want to 
get serious, man, and just get in peoples’ faces a bit, and just 
put this emotional rawness on screen.’ That was my sister 
Christi the painter ... that was my dad the politician. That’s 
not me.”
While Belcourt enjoys making more lighthearted films, he 
explains that many of his projects on difficult, hard-hitting 
issues have been guided by collaboration. For example, he 
worked with Yvette Nolan on A Common Experience, which 
addresses the topic of sexual violence in residential schools 
and is based on a play that Nolan authored about her 
mother as a way of honouring her. In addition, Belcourt had 
the opportunity to work with Maria Campbell on the festival-­
commissioned “Storytellers” collaboration Apikiwiyak (Coming 
Home), which was a combination of a film screening and a 
live reading by Campbell. The collaboration addressed issues 
of gender violence in Indigenous communities. After our 
interview, Belcourt was commissioned by Historica Canada 
to direct Heritage Minutes productions on the topics of treat­
ies and residential schools.
While Belcourt’s attraction to lighthearted filmmaking 
seems a departure from heavy topics, his desire to focus on 
comedy is likely related to the gravity of the issues from 
which (as a Métis person) he simply cannot escape. Belcourt 
is good-humoured, with an easy, gregarious personality, 
but it does not take much to uncover the ways in which he 
has borne the strains of historical violence. When pressed 
on the reasons he sometimes avoids themes of Indigeneity, 
he stated:
But when you are doing that thing … say with Apikiwiyak 
(Coming Home) with Maria [Campbell], if she’s saying, 
“These are my experiences; this is what I know,” then you 
have to be open to that. You can’t say, “I’m only here to 
make a comedy.” It’s difficult in the sense that all these 

We Interrupt This Program
134
things that deal with violence in Aboriginal ­communities, 
you know, first contact, colonialism, Métis land swindling, 
you know, Louis Riel hanging, going underground, you 
know, denying who you are, trying to pass off as some­
thing else if you can ...  all this stuff is emotionally devas­
tating ... Outside the community, it’s like, “That’s so sad.” 
Inside the community, it makes you angry ... It’s really 
hurtful for the rest of your life ... There are fissures in me 
that I don’t know if I’m ever going to be able to ... It’s not 
like a bone that gets stronger, you know. It’s always just a 
weak spot, like nerve damage or something. That’s where 
that stuff is in me. You know I experienced it. It’s in my 
family history. It’s in my extended family history. It’s in 
the generations of the Métis side of my family. There’s a 
lot of pain and suffering, and brutality, and awfulness. So, 
it’s there. That’s obviously where the comedy desire comes 
from. So you know, just turn it a little bit, and you don’t 
make fun of it, and it can be really sad and difficult to 
deal with. You kind of dredge it up. You talk about stuff. 
It’s there. It’s raw.
As Belcourt suggests, Indigenous experience carries a great 
deal of pain, and comedy is one means of making a violent 
past bearable. The old adage that laughter is the best medi­
cine has been discussed in relation to Indigeneity,59 and 
Belcourt’s work reflects that notion. Arguably, imagine­
NATIVE’s broad definition of Indigenous film as an expres­
sion by an Indigenous filmmaker has provided a space 
where artists such as Belcourt can develop themes and 
styles that are not (necessarily) about Indigenous issues. 
Such a space allows for creative expansion beyond the con­
fines of what is generally considered to be an Indigenous 
film. In our interview, Belcourt indicated he was welcomed 
and encouraged by the festival, not just as an Indigenous 

imagineNATIVE as Industry Intervention 135
filmmaker but as a filmmaker in general: “They accepted 
me as a filmmaker in their community, and they were very 
welcoming and encouraging ... Someone cared what I was 
going to do next.”
• • •
While Indigenous filmmakers face specific challenges, in­
cluding expectations about what kinds of films they should 
be producing, imagineNATIVE’s broad treatment of Indi­
genous media based on the identity of the filmmaker allows 
for experimentation and creative play beyond a strict defin­
ition of Indigenous aesthetics. The festival’s treatment of 
Indigenous films is an extension of its founding as an inter­
vention into the film industry, designed to support Indigen­
ous filmmakers. Realist and activist styles are important 
forms of Indigenous filmmaking, and “brutality, and awful­
ness” are just below the surface for Indigenous people. How­
ever, as the work and words of Jeff Barnaby, Terril Calder, 
and Shane Belcourt illustrate, contemporary Indigenous 
filmmaking reflects a multiplicity of content and storytelling 
forms. Indigenous filmmakers tactically borrow from estab­
lished mainstream genres in ways that at times defy neat cat­
egorization and expectations.
The styles discussed here reflect just a few examples, but 
they illustrate effectively the ways in which imagineNATIVE 
fosters the expanding diversity of Indigenous films through 
a site that is by and for Indigenous filmmakers. As the fes­
tival’s commissioned report suggests, industry challenges hit 
Indigenous filmmakers particularly hard. This makes sites 
that welcome their work all the more important, especially 
when the work defies mainstream expectations about what 
should constitute Indigenous content. The new and devel­
oping forms of allegorical Indigenous films in no way 

We Interrupt This Program
136
minimize the importance and impact of realist forms. 
However, creative experimentation and play within and out­
side of conventions complement more typical content and 
engage audiences through innovative forms of storytelling.

5
Reporting News in Indigenous Communities
A Conversation 
with Journalist Duncan ­McCue 
on Respect and Relationality 
I stand up and do my on-camera, and some director talks 
into my ear, “Okay, Duncan you’re on.” And then I talk, and 
then it goes off into the ether. And I don’t sit with people as they 
watch television. I don’t know that they’re necessarily having 
­conversations about what I just did. But I do hope that somehow 
stories can change something, can make a difference 
in changing the dialogue in this country.
– Duncan McCue 
Duncan McCue has learned a thing or two about telling a 
good story in his fifteen-year reporting career at CBC News 
Vancouver. His love of storytelling goes back much farther 
than that, however. McCue is an Anishinaabe from the 
Chippewas of Georgina Island First Nation in southern 
Ontario. Growing up, he was influenced by literary figures 
such as Thomas King and Tomson Highway. Academically, 
he gravitated towards English and law, but eventually decid­
ed to satisfy his penchant for storytelling through journal­
ism, ultimately reaching a national audience. As McCue’s 
work illustrates, stories are important for carrying Indigenous 
cultures and ensuring their survival,1 as well as intervening 
in colonial histories to “re-establish self-determined rep­
resentations.”2 We highlight McCue’s work on CBC’s The 

We Interrupt This Program
138
National because it encourages a nuanced approach to 
Indigenous affairs and offers a major departure from long­
standing patterns in mainstream news stories. We argue that 
while mainstream news outlets have limitations, they can be 
used to challenge problematic ways of understanding Indi­
ge­neity for wide audiences, as evidenced by McCue’s jour­
nalistic practices, founded on respect and relationality. 
More­over, McCue trains news professionals to cover Indigen­
ous affairs in a respectful manner through his university 
courses and online educational tools. We include long ex­
cerpts from our discussion with him on August 9, 2013, in 
order to narrate the approach he takes and how he under­
stands his role as a journalist. Our conversation illustrates 
the important role that storywork can have in Indigenous 
relational practices,3 where, according to McCue, process is 
key. We also discuss the historical tensions, shortcomings, 
and benefits of mainstream news coverage, as well as the 
challenges that Indigenous and non-Indigenous reporters 
face when covering Indigenous issues.
McCue is one of a handful of Indigenous journalists who 
have made their way into the larger culture’s news media for 
wide, national audiences in Canada. Since he began report­
ing for CBC Vancouver in 1997, he has won various presti­
gious awards, including a Jack Webster Award for Best 
Feature Story, Television. In our conversation, he indicated 
that Indigenous communities have assured him that his role 
and visibility in the mainstream media are greatly needed 
and appreciated.
When McCue is not reporting, he trains the next genera­
tion of journalism professionals to cover Indigenous affairs at 
the University of British Columbia’s Graduate School of 
Journalism. Thus far, most of his students at UBC have been 
non-Indigenous, but he has also spent time teaching jour­
nalism to Indigenous students at First Nations University of 
Canada (in Saskatchewan) and Capilano University (in North 

Reporting News in Indigenous Communities 139
Vancouver). McCue insists on the importance of training 
both Indigenous and non-Indigenous reporters, as both face 
similar challenges in entering Indigenous communities that 
are not their own. Moreover, people who do not have 
Indigenous roots will continue to make up the majority of 
reporters. He encourages his students to seek out the right re­
sources to help them better understand and tell the stories of 
the peoples and issues they will be covering.
From 2010 to 2011, McCue took up residency at Stanford 
University through a Knight Fellowship, where he designed 
the innovative online learning tool, “Reporting in Indigenous 
Figure 5.1  CBC reporter Duncan McCue | Courtesy 
of Duncan McCue and CBC

We Interrupt This Program
140
Communities,” or RIIC.4 The site provides resources for 
journalists, including commentary that foregrounds the 
long, often contentious relationship between Canada’s First 
Peoples and reporters. It describes a number of tips and 
urges reporters to avoid typical pitfalls by looking beyond 
stereotypical discourse and images common in popular 
media, such as the “tired victim/warrior narratives.”5 As we 
discuss below, while mainstream news institutions might 
not be structured to promote nuanced reporting on Indigen­
ous affairs, McCue encourages journalists to develop better-­
informed perspectives and practices.
Under-Representation and Misunderstandings 
in the Mainstream
Among the many problems in mainstream reporting, McCue 
suggests that First Peoples are drastically under-represented 
not just in news media but in all media. In addition, he pos­
its that journalists often misunderstand Indigenous people 
and affairs and that a number of constraints and conven­
tions of mainstream reporting contribute to these problems. 
Noting an internal study of CBC content, McCue suggests 
that CBC’s reporting of Indigenous affairs constitutes about 
3 percent, which is well under the national population base 
of 4–5 percent. Similarly, a study conducted by Journalists 
for Human Rights over a three-year span found that only 
about one-half of 1 percent of all media coverage in the 
province of Ontario (where the nation’s capital is housed) 
was about Indigenous issues, even though Indigenous people 
make up 2 percent of the total population of that province.6 
Related to the problem of under-representation, according 
to McCue, are skewed understandings of Indigenous people:
When we do have Indigenous news coverage, what types 
of representations of Aboriginal peoples are we seeing? 
And I think unfortunately it is often stereotypical. And I 

Reporting News in Indigenous Communities 141
don’t think journalists are necessarily conscious of the 
stereotypes they are perpetuating because, for example, 
with a TV reporter, he ends up shooting what he sees, like 
he’s showing reality. And that may be, but we make deci­
sions all the time about the kinds of stories we choose 
and what types of shots we use to tell those stories.
According to McCue, common themes in mainstream cover­
age “perpetuate a notion of conflict ... between Aboriginal 
peoples and non-Aboriginal peoples in Canada,” or an “us 
versus them” storyline. Equally damaging, McCue suggests, 
is the popular news story depicting Indigenous people as the 
“objects of pity or [as] victims.”
As McCue observes, the relationship between Indigenous 
people and mainstream news over the years has been am­
bivalent at best.7 Indigenous people constitute a small por­
tion of journalists and audiences, and issues that relate 
directly to them are often overlooked or over-simplified. The 
limited perspectives of mainstream reporters encourage 
stories and characters that fit easily into conventional news 
frames and that are quickly understood by a majority audi­
ence. Mainstream news often reflects an assimilationist 
agenda and stereotyped identity constructs that are easily 
recognized by the majority culture.8 Among these constructs, 
scholars and journalists have noted the ignoble savage 
(“Indians on the warpath”) and stories about legal battles 
and confrontations, as mentioned by McCue.9 These story­
lines are reductive and rarely delve into complicated issues 
or deep histories. During standoffs between authorities and 
Indigenous people, reporters often focus more on violence 
and inconveniences to locals than on the context of unfold­
ing events.10 In most instances, the mainstream press does 
not consider important or does not fully understand the 
concepts of government-to-government relations, nor First 
Peoples’ sovereignty.11 The media do not often flesh out 

We Interrupt This Program
142
disputes over land claims and the perpetual problem of in­
fringement on ancestral territories by government and cor­
porations, as in the case of conflicts in Elsipogtog in 2013 
and Kanehsatake in 1990.12 Moreover, the “experts” some­
times frame legitimate treaty and taxation issues as privil­
eges rather than as part and parcel of the unique status of 
Indigenous peoples and their negotiated relationships with 
the Crown.
As Indigenous media scholars Patty Loew and Kelly Mella 
argue in their article “Black Ink and the New Red Power,” a 
lack of understanding about historical context is one of the 
primary problems of news coverage and compulsory educa­
tion in general in North America.13 It was the lack of expos­
ure of journalists to Indigenous histories that led the Truth 
and Reconciliation Commission to include the following in 
its calls to action: “We call upon Canadian journalism pro­
grams and media schools to require education for all stu­
dents on the history of Aboriginal peoples, including the 
history and legacy of residential schools, the United Nations 
Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples, Treaties 
and Aboriginal rights, Indigenous law, and Aboriginal-
Crown relations.”14
The culture, history, and conventions of mainstream news 
– including tight deadlines, gate-keeping, logistics, newscast 
space restrictions, and limited budgets – all contribute to these 
problems. Some of these help journalists manage unpredict­
able aspects of news reporting,15 but they also present limita­
tions in reporting non-mainstream issues.16 Moreover, while 
far from monolithic,17 journalists and news institutions con­
stitute “interpretive communities” that help to establish 
­acceptable journalism conventions.18 However, because Indi­
gen­ous people constitute a minority within “interpretive com­
munities,” this can present additional limitations. Moreover, 
the kinds of “experts” who are legitimized in mainstream re­
porting can marginalize Indigenous perspectives.

Reporting News in Indigenous Communities 143
Since the nineteenth century, journalism has relied upon 
the ideals of objectivity.19 The goal is to convey a sense of 
non-bias by balancing stories with sources who, because of 
their formal education and accreditation, are trusted to in­
terpret Indigenous affairs for news audiences. But while the 
ideal of objectivity helps to legitimize journalism, it also 
conceals the subjectivity that actually shapes news stories.20 
The worldviews of reporters and experts underpin how they 
tell their stories, and their stories help to reinforce cultural 
meanings.21 As cultural anthropologist S. Elizabeth Bird ex­
plains in her introduction to The Anthropology of News and 
Journalism, “News is unique among media forms in that it 
purports to be (and is often received as) an accurate reflec­
tion of reality, even though we know that news is a cultural 
construction that draws on narrative conventions and rou­
tine practices.”22
Due to the difficulty of making inroads in Indigenous 
communities, experts who are non-Indigenous are fre­
quently sought out when journalists are working under 
tight deadlines,23 and Indigenous sources make up a frac­
tion of news sources.24 Reporters often fail to understand 
that their non-Indigenous preferences discredit Indigenous 
peoples as experts of their own cultures. Many of these news 
“experts,” such as government officials, police, anthropolo­
gists, and scientists, are legitimized in the mainstream. How­­
ever, they often know Indigenous cultures only from the 
outside.25 In addition, the tendency to consider only Abor­
iginal professionals who have government occupations 
and/or formal educations as experts works to delegitimize 
traditional and other community-based forms of knowledge 
and expertise.
Contributing to this problem, outsiders often do not 
know whom to consult as insider experts when they ap­
proach an Indigenous group. Many reporters consider the 
elected or government-appointed band council to act as 

We Interrupt This Program
144
public representatives, but elders, healers, and others also 
act as important leaders. Outsiders also might not have a 
good sense of the dynamics of a particular group – includ­
ing the tensions and rifts among elected or appointed offi­
cials and more traditional peoples.
Complex issues are overly simplified and sometimes pre­
sented grossly inaccurately when reporters are uninformed 
about the intricacies of the particular communities, groups, 
or issues they are covering. Moreover, traditional knowledge 
keepers in some communities (the Haida, for example, 
among many others) may not agree to assist until reporters 
ask the knowledge keepers in a traditional manner. A reporter 
must practise the protocols for learning who the knowledge 
keepers are and must approach them respectfully in order to 
hear their perspectives.
For journalists who are working under tight deadlines, the 
time it takes to gain the trust and respect of a community 
might be a luxury they feel they cannot afford. Because of the 
apprehension that many Indigenous people feel about insti­
tutionalized racism, it can be difficult to forge relationships 
with Indigenous sources.26 From the Indigenous perspective, 
however, time and respect are priorities that reporters cannot 
afford to ignore. This conflict indicates a flaw in the twenty-
four-hour news cycle system and a lack of proper training and 
understanding among journalists. As an award-winning jour­
nalist who has researched extensively in the Canadian North, 
Valerie Alia suggests that it can take a long time for outsiders 
to gain the trust of Indigenous groups (if they ever do). She 
states: “It’s a joke in the Canadian Arctic in the Inuit com­
munities ... where you go out one day, you get an article. You 
go out a week, you get a book ... There’s an arrogance that I 
find unethical about presuming you can learn something 
that’s meaningful to tell people about patterns from very brief 
and very limited information.”27 

Reporting News in Indigenous Communities 145
Another challenge for outsider reporters is that they might 
not know what is and is not acceptable protocol within a 
community. As Native American studies scholar Kevin 
Kemper explains, Indigenous communities may distrust 
outsiders as they attempt to protect sensitive information or 
sacred ceremonies that are not meant for outsiders. For ex­
ample, the pervasive phenomenon of outsiders photograph­
ing Hopi sacred sites and ceremonies in Arizona has led to 
strict enforcement; local authorities now use a review pro­
cess to determine who will gain access.28 Similarly, McCue 
disparages the disrespect exhibited by some reporters: 
If a community says, “No, this ceremony is not to be 
filmed,” I often ask my students, “Do you really need to 
show the ceremony? Do you really need to be there and 
describe the ceremony or do you kind of have some 
exotic notion of what an Indigenous person is? How im­
portant to the story is that ceremony, and is there a way 
to tell that story without exposing things that people 
don’t want exposed?”
According to McCue, disrespect lends itself easily to distrust 
within communities. For journalists who are not savvy or 
who do not have interlocutors within carefully guarded 
groups, this can mean that they are relying on their own as­
sumptions, comments from outsiders, or government press 
releases. These limitations contribute to one-sided and ill-­
informed reporting.
Reputation, Respect, and Relationality
In light of the long, contentious relationship that many 
Indigenous communities have with mainstream journalists, 
McCue suggests that transparency and a good reputation are 
helpful in fostering a trust relationship with communities. 

We Interrupt This Program
146
In particular, listening and explaining why he is proceeding 
in particular ways is key to how he practises journalism:
I often have a community say to me, “You need to inter­
view this person, you need to interview the chief and this 
elder, and you need to interview this woman who knows 
a lot about X, Y, Z, and then there’s a young person [who’s] 
growing up and learning this craft and you need to inter­
view him.” And I understand where that’s coming from. 
That is, it is very much a part of the notion within many 
of our communities that no one person should be more 
special than another, that there are a variety of people 
that have expertise on this matter ... 
But, there are certain expectations for what a story is 
going to look like. Because of the constraints that I work 
within and the expectations of news stories, and limited 
time format is one of them, I have to say, “Listen, I need 
to narrow this down, I can’t interview everybody. If I did, 
(a) it’s going to take a lot of my time, and that takes me 
away from being able to do a great job of telling this story; 
(b) a lot of people may end up on the cutting room floor, 
and it’s disrespectful for me to have spent time inter­
viewing somebody and not have them in the story. And, 
from a story-telling perspective it’s often helpful to focus 
in on one or two characters.”
So, how do I manage that? I try to be as transparent as 
I can about the need that I have within the medium that 
I work and explain why I’m making the decisions that I’m 
making and try to incorporate the needs of the commun­
ity as best as I can. For example, I was just recently on a 
story about a First Nation that’s trying to bring fire back to 
the land as a way of reviving plants and animals for their 
hunting practices. And, there were a number of people 
that they wanted me to interview, the chief being number 
one. The chief actually didn’t have as much knowledge 

Reporting News in Indigenous Communities 147
about the issue as some of the people who were involved. 
And I said to them, “Here’s why I’m choosing to follow 
the people, and I’m happy to interview the chief.”
McCue explains that reputations precede journalists, and 
that the journalist’s role is relational. Reputation is some­
thing that moves from one community to the next, and it 
extends from current to potential stories. He muses, “I’m 
really blessed. The communities have taught me that lesson 
because it really is about process.” McCue comments on the 
benefits of his own relationships with communities when 
he approaches them for help in training his students through 
first-hand experience with communities in his “Reporting in 
Indigenous Communities” course:
I didn’t want to be lecturing at them for thirteen lectures 
and talking at them for three hours straight and giving 
them a bunch of readings. This was going to be about 
experiential learning and getting them out into the com­
munities so they could get their hands dirty and learn the 
lessons from the people themselves, not from me. So it 
was important that we had community involvement, and 
it was important to me that those communities have a 
role in (a) supporting the course and (b) helping develop 
the content of it to a certain degree.
He thought communities might hesitate to let students in 
because they would not be able to review final versions of 
stories before publication, “which is something that as a 
journalist, I can’t do.” However, the communities did grant 
access to McCue and his students. Grateful for the oppor­
tunity, McCue states:
These are communities that I have worked with closely, 
I’ve worked with all of them, have told stories about all of 

We Interrupt This Program
148
them, some tough stories on top of that. If I had just 
shown up there to make my mark to tell tough stories 
about eagle poaching or suicide or anything and then for­
gotten about those communities afterwards, I might not 
have a great reputation in these communities. But, I was 
really honoured and blessed to work in those commun­
ities. They may be somewhat hesitant when I come knock­
ing on their door some days, but they appreciated the way 
that I operated, I suppose, because they were willing to let 
our students come in as well ... 
And so Indian country really is a small place. If you 
don’t conduct yourself with respect, both before, during, 
and after a story, then people will remember, and you’re 
going to find the story well starts to dry up pretty quickly 
from one community to another, if you have proven 
yourself on more than one basis to not be someone worth 
dealing with.
As McCue suggests, the relationships that he has built with 
communities have strengthened his reputation and, in turn, 
his ability to successfully cover stories about Indigenous 
people in respectful ways. He stresses the importance of re­
lationality in his journalism courses: “It’s absolutely about 
respect. And if you could boil my whole course down to one 
thing, it’s to act with respect. Respect is so important within 
Indigenous communities: respecting your elders, respecting 
your land, respecting Mother Earth.”
Some of the problems outlined above could ostensibly be 
addressed by an increase in the numbers of Indigenous jour­
nalists in newsrooms as Indigenous journalists might be 
better attuned to the concerns of their communities. McCue’s 
Anishinaabe heritage has undoubtedly helped him gain ac­
cess to Indigenous communities, but he recounts a number 
of struggles as he has covered highly contentious issues as 
well, including, for example, financial accountability. As he 

Reporting News in Indigenous Communities 149
points out, Indigenous reporters face challenges too, and 
realistically will likely continue to make up a small minority 
in the newsroom: “There are some non-Aboriginal reporters 
who do a fantastic job covering Aboriginal communities ... 
being Indigenous may be helpful in the first five minutes. 
But after that, it’s just about good solid journalism and good 
storytelling.”
Among the challenges that all reporters face, regardless 
of their background, McCue notes “the daily deadline” and 
the costs of in-depth reports. News media are primarily 
centred in urban areas, making it difficult to cover stories 
in remote locations. Time and geography are major con­
straints faced by all journalists, and battles about time and 
resource allocation also need to be fought at the level of 
the senior producer. As McCue explains, while all news­
rooms face such challenges,
it becomes more of an issue when you’re working in an 
Indigenous community because there is a real difference, 
a cultural understanding, about time. A lot of Indigenous 
people don’t necessarily operate ... with a watch or your 
average twelve-hour clock in mind. They are operating on 
“Indian Time,” which is a very cultural notion, doing 
things in a good way, in a right way and as long as it takes 
to do things in that way. Operating on that notion of time 
must ensure that proper respect is included in whatever 
process in which you’re included. None of those things 
are newsroom deadline time. And so that is always a real 
battle for any journalist whether they are Indigenous 
or not …
When there is a story that’s breaking, people want to 
know what’s going on and our audiences want to know, 
have answers, and we have a duty to give them those an­
swers. But, at the same time we can give them those ­answers 
in some kind of way that also allows us to look at the 

We Interrupt This Program
150
story longer and in more depth that will come away with 
more context rather than just parachuting in and getting 
really unsatisfactory cursory looks at these communities.
At the same time that journalists may struggle to balance the 
priorities of the newsroom and those of Indigenous commu­
nities, they may not know which stories matter to the Indi­
genous communities. For example, McCue notes the Idle No 
More movement as one of many examples of stories that 
mainstream journalists reported too late – long after Indi­
genous people had recognized it as significant. Similarly, 
violence against Indigenous women and the large numbers 
of Indigenous women who have been murdered and gone 
missing in Canada in recent years have been important con­
cerns to Indigenous communities for many years but were 
long overlooked in mainstream reporting.29
Mainstream Coverage and Indigenous Media: 
The Benefits of a Wide Audience
Given the long history of problems with mainstream cover­
age, we wondered why McCue was not drawn to work for 
news outlets that cater more to Indigenous interests. There is 
a long history of Indigenous journalism in Canada. Indi­
genous print media (newsletters, newspapers, and maga­
zines) have been active, often due to the efforts of staff who 
support publications even when they are underfunded, 
through paid subscriptions, advertising, or government sub­
sidies.30 Also, remote communities have been at the fore­
front worldwide of broadcast and film by and for Indigenous 
people, which has extended into new media productions.31 
A notable example is APTN National News on the Aboriginal 
Peoples Television Network (APTN). APTN presents a depar­
ture from the usual news formats by privileging Indigenous 
perspectives and audiences. APTN has been described by 

Reporting News in Indigenous Communities 151
media studies scholar Sigurjon Baldur Hafsteinsson as a 
form of “deep democracy” that is “already transgressive in 
that it gives voice to groups that assert their sovereignty 
within the boundaries of Canada.”32
APTN and APTN National News came out of the advocacy 
and coordination of broadcasters through the Northern 
Native Broadcast Access Program, which eventually formed 
the network’s predecessor, the satellite-based Television 
Northern Canada (TVNC).33 Launched in 1999, APTN has 
been heralded internationally as a model for independent 
Indigenous broadcasting, and APTN National News has been 
lauded for its informed coverage of national Indigenous 
concerns.34 As media policy scholar Marian Bredin notes, 
“Before the creation of APTN, there was no national outlet 
for Aboriginal television in Canada and relatively little in­
centive for mainstream networks to acquire or develop in­
formation or entertainment programming that reflected the 
nation’s Indigenous peoples.”35 Moreover, as Bredin points 
out, APTN has supported and triggered the creation of pro­
duction companies that focus on Indigenous content.36
Despite the good work of Indigenous news outlets such 
as APTN, mainstream news remains an important medium 
for reporting issues that impact the lives of Indigenous 
people. Mainstream news audiences continue to be com­
posed of both Indigenous and non-Indigenous people.37 
McCue notes the wide reach and audience that attracted 
him to CBC. He states, “On a nightly basis on The National, 
we get a million viewers on average. And there is nowhere 
else in the country ... in TV, other than CTV News, where I 
can reach that number of people.” He continues:
I get a little bit of a rush, to be honest with you, when I 
report a story, and it provokes conversation ... and an­
other story and another story ... That’s part of what I’m 

We Interrupt This Program
152
here to do, and so working in the mainstream was the 
best way for me to get the broadest possible audience. The 
other benefit is to have access to a great deal of resources.
Don’t get me wrong, I have had ups and downs, peaks 
and valleys working with the CBC over the years, in par­
ticular over Aboriginal coverage. There have been times 
when I have wanted to shift over to APTN and wondered 
what it would be like to be telling stories just to an In­
digenous audience.38 I hope that maybe sometime in my 
career I’ll be able to do that. But for the most part, the 
CBC has treated me pretty well and given me lots of 
opportunities to tell the kinds of stories that I want to tell. 
As long as that relationship continues, then I’m a pretty 
happy guy ... 
But, God knows I’m the biggest flag-waving supporter 
of APTN and Indigenous media. It is incredibly import­
ant that we are setting the agenda. I loved the ad ­campaign 
a couple years back that if APTN was there, history would 
have been told differently. That should be the rallying cry 
for all Indigenous media around the country. But that 
said, there is a real role – and I keep hearing this from 
people – for having Indigenous folks in the mainstream 
media as well. We can’t just play in our own sandbox.
We live in a country where, going back to that Delga­
muukw decision, the famous last line is “We are all here to 
stay.”39 And so, we need to continue that conversation 
with Canadians about our place here, who we are, and 
what our hopes and dreams and fears are.
If we aren’t speaking in forums that they pay attention 
to, then they won’t know. And they won’t know when 
people are making decisions that impact our lives and 
aspirations as Indigenous people, without ever knowing 
what it is that we hope to do. Which is why I do think that 
we need to have folks in the mainstream.

Reporting News in Indigenous Communities 153
While McCue notes the importance of exposing a wider, 
non-Indigenous audience to the concerns of Indigenous 
people, some of his mainstream news coverage is similar to 
that of APTN National News. As we discuss below in our de­
scription of McCue’s story on Marlene Bird, McCue includes 
interviews with Indigenous informants who take their time, 
and he doesn’t reduce their words into sound bites. He also 
provides foregrounding of Indigenous issues that is atypical 
of mainstream coverage. As anthropologist Kristin Dowell 
argues in Sovereign Screens, “Cultural protocol is reflected 
on-screen by not interrupting elders in the editing process, 
often resulting in longer ‘talking head’ shots than would be 
acceptable in mainstream media.”40 Such context is essential 
considering the legacy of reporting that has delegitimized 
and erased Indigenous people and perspectives.
Violence against Indigenous Women: Marlene Bird’s Story
Through their demands for a national inquest, Indigenous 
movements and organizations such as Sisters in Spirit, Native 
Women’s Association of Canada, Idle No More, and the 
Truth and Reconciliation Commission have brought wide­
spread attention to Canada’s murdered and missing Indi­
genous women. However, Indigenous communities have 
long been aware of the violence faced by their mothers, aunt­
ies, sisters, daughters, cousins, and friends.41 Such violence is 
part and parcel of a misogynist colonial system. For the most 
part, press attention on the violence has until recently been 
“relatively minimal.”42 The Native Women’s Association of 
Canada has gathered data on the Aboriginal women who 
have been murdered or gone missing; as of 2010, more than 
half the cases remained unsolved.43 The government of 
Canada estimates that more than 1,200 Indigenous women 
have been murdered or gone missing in recent years, but 
Indigenous Affairs Minister Carolyn Bennett commented in 

We Interrupt This Program
154
2016 that the problem was likely “way bigger” than original­
ly anticipated.44 Scholars suggest that the omission of vio­
lence against Indigenous women in the news media has been 
related to the low social value placed on Indigenous women 
in Canada. While Hollywood cinema has tended to repro­
duce the stereotype of the sexualized Indian princess, com­
munications scholars Yasmin Jiwani and Mary Lynn Young 
argue that news coverage in Canada paints a similarly stereo­
typical but much less sympathetic picture of Indigenous 
women. In a seven-year study of Globe and Mail news cover­
age related to Indigenous women, the researchers said the 
newspaper often relied on the “fallen woman” stereotype by 
focusing on stories about conflict, violence, custody battles, 
drug addiction, prostitution, and poverty.45
Similarly, media analyst Kristen Gilchrist argues that al­
though murdered and missing Indigenous women in Canada 
come from “all walks of life,” their treatment as “unworthy 
victims” might be one of the reasons they have received much 
less sympathetic coverage than white victims. Her study exam­
ines news coverage about six women who went missing or 
were found murdered during a similar time period. Three of 
the women were Aboriginal and three were not. The stories 
about the women from mainstream culture received more 
sympathetic, prolific, and prominent coverage.46
In considering the scant coverage of Indigenous gender 
violence in the past, it is worth drawing a comparison with 
Duncan McCue’s more nuanced and prominent coverage in 
January 2015 on The National: “Marlene Bird: Aboriginal 
Woman’s Story of Struggle and Survival.” The broadcast 
story, which focused on one particular case, was part of a 
larger feature discussing violence and Indigenous women 
more generally. Written components and video clips were 
also posted on the CBC website.47 Marlene Bird is a Cree 
woman who was brutally attacked by three people in June 
2014. She was beaten, sexually assaulted, set on fire, and left 

Reporting News in Indigenous Communities 155
for dead in a parking lot in Prince Albert, Saskatchewan. She 
survived the attack, but lost both her legs and the use of one 
of her eyes. McCue’s story recounts Bird’s abuse-ridden life 
and her continuing struggles to get off the street.
According to the story, Bird had alcoholic parents, was 
abused in residential school as a young girl, and faced severe 
physical violence at the hands of a former boyfriend. She 
began using alcohol at an early age and continued drinking 
after she became a parent. In response, authorities removed 
her children from her care. Finally, McCue’s story chronicled 
her life on the street as an alcoholic.
Bird’s horrible circumstances exemplify some of the worst 
aspects of Indigenous experiences in Canada today. McCue 
takes the time, through extensive interviews over the span of 
nineteen minutes, to humanize Bird and her current part­
ner, Patrick Lavallee, a recovering alcoholic. He notes the 
support that Lavallee has continued to exhibit in his at­
tempts to care for Bird, despite the harsh conditions faced 
by both because of their lack of permanent housing and 
Bird’s double amputation. Lavallee stopped drinking and re­
mained clean and sober for many months in order to care 
for Bird. McCue characterizes their experience as an unlikely 
but powerful “love story” (see Figure 5.2).
McCue is patient with those providing comments; the 
story moves at a slow pace and includes long interview ex­
cerpts. The comments from Bird and her partner are unpol­
ished, and the couple is far from media-savvy, but their 
perspectives are legitimized and treated as valuable. McCue 
also employs drawings by graphic-novel artist Dan Archer to 
illustrate and re-enact portions of the story. These are par­
ticularly effective, for example, in depicting Bird’s earlier ex­
periences as a young woman in residential school.
Although McCue must work within the confines of the 
news cycle form and structure, he is respectful to the partici­
pants and moves beyond their disabilities, alcoholism, and 

We Interrupt This Program
156
victimhood to provide a more nuanced portrait of their con­
ditions, even the ways in which they have managed to main­
tain a humble sense of humour. Importantly, the story more 
broadly addresses the alarming rates of violence against 
Indigenous women in Canada, where Indigenous women 
bear the brunt of a general societal antipathy towards 
Indigenous people. While the brutality of Bird’s story has 
likely shocked viewers, McCue and the CBC have thema­
tized it to make it clear that her experiences are far from 
unique. As the story illustrates, the violence faced by Bird is 
endemic to Indigenous communities and is part of a longer 
colonial legacy. In her interview, Bird asks, “Why did he do 
this to me? Why would he do that to a woman? That’s where 
you come from, a woman. Why would he want to try to kill 
me?” Although she asks it simply and gently, her question is 
potent and reverberates, as the answer lies not just with the 
perpetrators of the crime but in the logics of an oppressive 
colonial regime.
• • •
Figure 5.2  Image from Duncan McCue’s “Marlene Bird: Aboriginal 
Woman’s Story of Struggle and Survival” | Courtesy of CBC

Reporting News in Indigenous Communities 157
Despite the limitations of mainstream media in covering 
Indigenous issues, Duncan McCue’s presence is encouraging 
as he can push agenda-setters to pay attention to issues that 
matter to Indigenous people. Moreover, he can model jour­
nalistic practices based on respect and relationality with 
Indigenous communities as he trains a new generation of 
news professionals to do the same. As a journalist, McCue 
opens up opportunities for storytelling that re-orients main­
stream concerns to include Indigenous perspectives. He 
models storytelling that privileges Indigenous people, even 
when the subjects of his stories are not aware of media con­
ventions and do not fit reductive identity constructs. McCue’s 
message is clear to people who are contemplating a career in 
mainstream journalism covering Indigenous affairs, regard­
less of whether they are Indigenous:
I’d tell them what a rewarding career I have had. I’d tell 
them how blessed I have been to be in the homes of Ab­
original people who have opened up their doors to tell 
their stories to me about all kinds of things ... about hunt­
ing buffalo; about diabetes; about suicide; about how 
upset they were about eagles being poached; about how 
to make a drum; about their child being taken away from 
them by child welfare; stories about rock music and disco 
and how fun it is to make that kind of music. I could just 
keep on going for another half an hour about the privil­
ege of having those stories shared with me and then to be 
entrusted with telling those stories to other people. I 
mean, that is just such an honour and such a blessing.
What advice would I give? It is such a rewarding line 
of work for any reporter. And I’ve talked with many sen­
ior news reporters in Canada who will say that some 
of the most memorable stories that they have worked on 
have been in Indigenous communities because some of 
these stories just aren’t heard by Canadians and so, it 

We Interrupt This Program
158
goes back to Dickens’ line (he was a storyteller from an­
other culture, you know), “It’s the best of times and the 
worst of times.”
There are great heartaches in my efforts to tell some of 
those stories. There have been days where I’ve torn my 
hair out saying, “Why am I doing this?” But that’s all part 
and parcel of what ultimately has just been an absolute 
privilege to be able to tell stories in Indian country. Any 
reporter, Indigenous or non-Indigenous person, who 
makes a serious effort to try to tell and share some of the 
stories of First Nations people in this country with the 
rest of Canada is going to have those really positive and 
sometimes really negative experiences ... 
I stand up and do my on-camera and some director 
talks into my ear: “OK, Duncan you’re on.” And then I talk 
and then it goes off into the ether. And I don’t sit with 
people as they watch television. I don’t know that they’re 
necessarily having conversations about what I just did. But 
I do hope that somehow stories can change something, 
can make a difference in changing the dialogue in this 
country. To quote Thomas King, “Stories are all we are.”

We highlighted media interventions in Canadian culture to 
illustrate the profound adaptability of Indigenous agents 
who employ tactical manoeuvres within the structures of 
power. Throughout this book, we have focused on sites where 
understandings of Indigenous people are shaped for wide 
audiences and where media and media forms are subverted 
for Indigenous purposes. These include a national truth 
commission and associated archives, an online television 
portal, art and film institutions, and national news outlets. 
While they are disparate sites, each illustrates the creative use 
of media to highlight some of the most fundamental con­
cerns held by Indigenous people today. While the institu­
tions discussed in this book may be limited by cultural form, 
ownership, and control, they can be harnessed in sometimes 
surprising ways as mechanisms for denaturalizing the very 
power structures out of which they emerged.
While the media interventions highlighted in this book 
do not propose radical breaks, and the Indigenous actors 
may not captain the larger institutions in which they inter­
vene, their use of media tactics is about cultural resurgence 
Conclusion
Media Tactics Old and New
The past shall be made dynamic by the demands 
of the present and the hopes of the future.
 – Audra Simpson, Mohawk Interruptus

We Interrupt This Program
160
and survival, which demands creative play where circum­
stances are far from ideal. As Alanis Obomsawin reminds us 
in the opening paragraphs of this book, while Indigenous 
people may not always control the structures that affect them, 
there are still opportunities for them to assert their agency.
The discussions in this book highlight the creative nego­
tiations, or tactics, that Indigenous actors employ to ­navigate 
their complex, contemporary experiences. The institutions 
in which they intervene may not be designed to benefit their 
interests, but media tactics provide opportunities for the 
­disruption of the typical flows of history, discourse, and im­
age. The radical break that some Indigenous thinkers have 
prescribed1 may indeed foster Indigenous ways of being 
and knowing, but the examples herein illustrate a manoeuv­
ring within a colonial system in which the actors negotiate 
a  ­necessary relationship with the larger culture, for better 
or worse.
 We are interested in the ways in which Indigenous ac­
tors “manage the present” through not just an acceptance 
of  contemporary paradigms but also an elaborate dance 
with them.2 The simultaneous engagement with and rejec­
tion of settler-colonial models within these media interven­
tions is a testament to the profound dynamism of the 
Indi­genous people we have discussed. We looked to media 
tactics that reflect elaborate negotiations that both accept 
and refuse the terms of contemporary mediated and politi­
cized landscapes. We approached media as always socially 
and culturally situated.
As the sites we explored were diverse, we adapted our con­
ceptual, theoretical, and methodological frameworks as ne­
cessary. For example, Indigenous identity as an umbrella 
category was both employed and contested. In some cases, 
we illustrated articulations of broad Indigenous experiences 
with some oscillation between specificity and more univer­
sal themes, as with the Inuit residential school survivor 

Conclusion 161
testimonials discussed in Chapter 2. In most of the cases 
and institutions we discussed, however, appeals to broad ar­
ticulations of Indigeneity were emphasized as a means of 
mobilizing wide concerns.
The perspectives of our Indigenous participants were cen­
tral, and their stories formed a web out of which the rest of the 
book grew. We invited Indigenous elders, artists, filmmakers 
and festival organizers, Truth and Reconciliation Commission 
representatives, activists, reporters, and journalism educators 
to speak with us. The people with whom we spoke were 
­generous with their time and insights, well beyond our ex­
pectations. We hope we have done their stories justice; we 
understand the stakes are serious in recording these stories for 
future generations. In moments where we employed partici­
pant observation, we were inspired by what we saw. The joy 
and warmth exhibited when Indigenous artists gathered at 
places such as the imagineNATIVE Film + Media Arts Festival 
in Toronto reminded us of the importance of community, cul­
ture, relationality, and hope. It also illustrated the intensely 
social nature of Indigenous media making.
Through the heartbreaking testimonials and tears at Truth 
and Reconciliation Commission gatherings, we could feel 
the determination that residential school survivors had when 
sharing their stories, and their hopes for safeguarding future 
generations of Indigenous children from enduring the pain 
and suffering they had experienced. The strength that surviv­
ors and intergenerational survivors exhibited in discussing 
the worst moments of their lives was intensely humbling.
Rather than assuming the position of detached scientific 
observers, we found it was only appropriate to act with re­
spect, assuming a kind of “ethnographic refusal” in which 
we shared the concerns of the people with whom we spent 
time and who gifted us with their stories.3 Even so, there 
were several cases in which the irony of our position as aca­
demics attempting to do ethical work in Indigenous studies 

We Interrupt This Program
162
was stark. For example, before a discussion with Alanis 
Obomsawin about her film Trick or Treaty, which is in part 
about how the Crown dispossessed Indigenous people of 
their lands and rights by coaxing and coercing them into 
signing treaties, we asked the filmmaking legend to sign a 
consent form. The form is in place to ensure participants’ 
rights (and Alanis Obomsawin is a seasoned professional 
who has likely seen many of these), but it also acts as a re­
minder of how the institution wields power over the discus­
sion through its own legal protection. While we adapted our 
approach according to circumstances, it was not a seamless 
process as we also worked within institutional confines.
The topics we examined also reinforced the need for a 
dynamic theoretical approach. We found that Indigenous 
responses within power relations cannot be reduced to over-­
determined frameworks. We also described models for 
understanding Indigenous texts that do not cling to strict 
aesthetic topologies, further demonstrating the dynamic 
characteristics of current Indigenous media practices. For ex­
ample, the imagineNATIVE film festival includes works 
based on the identity of the filmmaker and a well-­established 
web of social connections. It models how we might rethink 
Indigenous media and support Indigenous filmmakers with­
out adhering to an aesthetic definition.
Our explorations into Indigenous identity and social con­
nections in relation to media tactics have also shown us that 
we do not need to abandon cultural meanings in favour of 
reductive theoretical models. As the examples throughout 
this book illustrate, media practices have particular mean­
ings in Indigenous communities, which makes a cultural 
approach to media studies all the more necessary.4 For ex­
ample, by privileging concerns about class, we miss the 
unique Indigenous experiences of displacement and terri­
torial dispossession, which simultaneously attacks place-
based cultures and mobilization based on identity.5 At the 

Conclusion 163
same time, post-structuralist accounts on their own do not 
adequately explore the negotiations through which Indi­
genous people engage with power relations on the ground. 
In summary, while the frameworks of mainstream (Marxist 
and post-structuralist) theorists are useful, theory is best em­
ployed when adapted for the specific modern conditions of 
Indigenous people, their own ideas, and the histories that 
have shaped them.
We have reviewed just a small number of Indigenous 
interventions into the newer culture’s consciousness and 
into Indigenous communities in Canada. We have attempted 
to highlight not just the positive work but also the problems 
that persist. For example, as the Truth and Reconciliation 
Commission (TRC) pointed out in its final report summary, 
one of the most essential concerns to Indigenous commun­
ities across Canada today is the alarmingly high numbers of 
Indigenous women who have been murdered or gone missing 
in recent years.6 Indeed, pervasive violence against Indigen­
ous women is a theme that emerges in one way or another 
in every chapter of this book. While mainstream institutions 
(legal, social, cultural) have clearly failed Indigenous 
women, the TRC’s invocation for a national inquiry into 
those who have been murdered and gone missing is re­
inforced by thousands of mediated testimonials recounting 
the abhorrent violence that Indigenous people have faced 
and the continuing legacies of this violence. Indigenous 
filmmakers, artists, and activists are anchoring this issue in 
public consciousness. Indigenous agents are demanding 
that institutions be accountable for their complacency and 
participation in the erasures that have happened in the past 
and that continue to occur.
As we write, the TRC has disbanded, and the National 
Centre for Truth and Reconciliation (NCTR) is organizing a 
digital archive that will be available to the Canadian public. 
It includes the statements gathered in the North through the 

We Interrupt This Program
164
Inuit sub-commission. NCTR leaders are challenging a court 
decision requiring the destruction of nearly forty thousand 
residential school survivor statements gathered through the 
Independent Assessment Process.7 Indigenous artists across 
the country continue their work critiquing the structures of 
power that disadvantage their people. At the same time, im­
agineNATIVE is gearing up for another festival that will at­
tract mainstream and Indigenous audiences and filmmakers 
from around the world. Duncan McCue is training the next 
generation of news professionals to cover Indigenous issues 
with respect and relationality.
Indigenous elders, traditional leaders, and knowledge 
keepers such as Alanis Obomsawin are inspiring the next 
generation of Indigenous youth to lead their people and 
have identified a powerful cultural resurgence underway. 
Many young people are using social and mainstream media 
to challenge power structures and to promote the goals of 
cultural resurgence. For example, Anishinaabe comedian 
Ryan McMahon uses hard-hitting humour to denaturalize 
settler-colonial thinking in his performances and online 
podcasts, including Stories from the Land and Red Man 
Laughing. Tsilhqot’in storyteller Lisa Charleyboy hosts the 
national CBC show New Fire, which highlights Indigenous 
youth such as Facebook sensation Savannah “Savvy” Simon. 
Simon uses the social-networking platform to forward the 
practice of Mi’kmaq language and sends encouraging messa­
ges to young Indigenous people (see Figure 6.1).8
Indigenous youth have been handed a difficult and at 
times overwhelming responsibility to heal and support their 
communities, but their continuing work through new media 
is encouraging. Undoubtedly, Indigenous leaders will con­
tinue to push Canadian institutions to take Indigenous per­
spectives seriously, and Indigenous youth will carry on 
the  fight. The mainstream and political powers may never 
fully acknowledge or understand Indigenous concerns, but 

Conclusion 165
Indigenous agents are exploring how the larger culture’s 
standard operations can be disrupted and mobilized to draw 
attention to the concerns of their communities.
We have emphasized contemporary interventions, but we 
hope we have not downplayed the intense foregrounding 
that has underpinned these efforts. In other terms, we hope 
we have not privileged the current moment as though it has 
happened spontaneously. From first contact until now, 
Indigenous chiefs, matriarchs, elders, ancestors, healers, and 
other leaders, all of whom have been pillars in Indigenous 
communities, have helped inspire current and future activ­
ism in creative and tactical ways. Indigenous communities 
have not always agreed upon the best ways to intervene in 
the newcomer culture’s consciousness. However, divisions 
do not outweigh the importance of collective Indigenous 
self-determination. The multiple approaches of Indigenous 
individuals and communities, whether institutional, artis­
tic, or activist, signal rich cultures and peoples who are dis­
tinct, unique, and ancient, yet who share a collective identity 
that has increasingly been mobilized to incite social change 
in sites of power.
Figure 6.1  Savannah “Savvy” Simon, #SpeakMikmaq 
Campaign image | Courtesy of Savannah Simon

This page intentionally left blank

Notes
Introduction
	 1 	Alanis Obomsawin, “Trick or Treaty? The Fight for Justice,” public 
screening followed by Q&A, Carleton University, Ottawa, January 30, 
2015.
	 2 	On “rebirth,” see Alfred (2008, 9); John Ralston Saul, “Canada’s 
Aboriginal Comeback,” Globe and Mail, August 9, 2013, A11. See also 
Ralston Saul (2014).
	 3 	Dowell (2013, 50).
	 4 	Ibid.
	 5 	See, e.g., Roth (2005), McCall (2011), Evans (2008), Alia (1999), and 
Ginsburg (2003a, 2003b).
	 6 	Vizenor (1999, 2008).
	 7 	Dion and Salamanca (2014, 159).
	 8 	Berkhofer (1979), Francis (1999).
	 9 	Rosaldo (1989).
	10 	Raheja (2010), Deloria (2004).
	11 	Alfred (2008), L. Simpson (2014).
	12 	Alfred (2005), Coulthard (2014a).
	13 	Alfred (2008, 11).
	14 	L. Simpson (2014a, 1, emphasis added).
	15 	Coulthard (2014a, 25).
	16 	Lee (2012), Hill and McCall (2015).
	17 	Razack (2000, 2015).
	18 	Fanon (1991 [1967]).
	19 	Josephy, Nagel, and Johnson (1999 [1971]).
	20 	De Certeau (1984, xix).
	21 	Ibid.
	22 	Alfred (2005, 2009), Coulthard (2014a, 2014b).
	23	 Although Galloway (2004) and Raley (2009) also use the term “tacti­
cal media,” we conceived of the notion of Indigenous media tactics 
independently of their work. However, there are some parallels with 
their idea of media used subversively to circumvent ownership and 
control. Galloway (2004, 175) defines “tactical media” as “a term 
given to political uses of both new and old technologies, such as the 

168 Notes to pages 10–18
organization of virtual sit-ins, campaigns for more democratic access 
to the Internet, or even the creation of the new software products not 
aimed at the commercial market.”
	24 	Said (1993, 66–67).
	25 	Raheja (2010).
	26 	See A. Simpson (2014) and Coulthard (2014a, 2014b).
	27 	Simpson and Smith (2014).
	28 	Wilson (2008, 6).
	29 	Coulthard (2014b, 69).
	30 	Foucault (2007).
	31 	Bird (2003).
	32 	Bird (2003), Berkhofer (1979).
	33 	Bird (2003). Conversely, as we discuss later, the ignoble savage 
identity construct is alive and well in Hollywood and Canadian news 
media coverage.
	34 	Ibid., 89.
	35 	Merskin (1998). 
	36 	Tuchman (1981), as cited by Merskin (1998, 335).
	37 	Merskin (2014, 190).
	38 	Francis (1999).
	39 	McLuhan (1964). 
	40 	Raheja (2010).
	41 	McCall (2011), Huhndorf (2001).
	42 	McCall (2011, 190).
	43 	Ibid.
	44 	Jason Anderson, “imagineNative Launches 16th Annual Edition,” 
­Toronto Star, October 8, 2015, https://www.thestar.com/entertainment/
2015/10/08/imaginenative-launches-16th-annual-edition.html.
	45 	Bird (2003).
	46 	Lonetree (2012).
	47 	Smith (1999).
	48 	Kovach (2009).
	49 	Denzin, Lincoln, and Smith (2008).
	50 	Smith (1999, 20).
	51 	Denzin, Lincoln, and Smith (2008, 5), citing Bishop (1998). 
	52 	Wilson (2007). 
	53 	Kovach (2009).
	54 	Ibid., 84.
	55 	Ibid., 47.
	56 	Wilson (2007, 2008).

169
Notes to pages 19–34
	57 	Corntassel (2012, 86).
	58 	Hart (2003).
	59 	Ibid., 7, 2.
	60 	Ibid., 7.
	61 	Hart (2003, 3), citing Gross (2003). 
	62 	Denzin, Lincoln, and Smith (2008).
	63 	Smith (1999, 1).
	64 	Cram, Chilisa, and Mertins (2013).
	65 	Kovach (2009), Archibald (2008).
	66 	Kovach (2009, 14).
	67 	Kovach (2009).
	68 	Wilson (2007, 2008).
	69 	Denzin, Lincoln, and Smith (2008, 7).
	70 	Some Indigenous peoples have migration stories rather than origin 
stories about their homelands. For example, Māori clans can trace 
their lineage back to the canoes their ancestors are said to have trav­
elled in when reaching Aotearoa/New Zealand.
	71 	Roth (2005), Bredin (2012a, 2012b).
	72 	Bredin (2012a, 2012b).
	73 	See, for example, Roth (2005), Alia (1999, 2010), Bredin (2012a, 
2012b), Hafsteinsson (2010).
	74 	See, for example, Henderson and Wakeham (2013), Niezen (2013), 
Coulthard (2014a), and Hill and McCall (2015).
Chapter 1: Media Practices and Subversions
An earlier version of Chapter I appeared in Media International Australia.
	 1 	Mary Shecapio Blacksmith, Montreal, April 2013. Unless otherwise 
indicated, public testimonials cited in this chapter were given at the 
TRC’s national event in Montreal, April 24–27, 2013.
	 2 	Bolter and Grusin (2000).
	 3 	Indigenous and Northern Affairs Canada (2016). 
	 4 	Pinchevski (2011, 258). 
	 5 	TRC, “About Us,” http://www.trc.ca/websites/trcinstitution/index.
php?p=4. 
	 6 	Castellano, Archibald, and DeGagné (2008).
	 7 	Episkenew (2009) and Truth and Reconciliation Commission of 
Canada (2015a, 2015b).
	 8 	Child (2000) and Lomawaima (1995) cite such stories in the Ameri­
can context.
	 9 	Niezen (2013).

170 Notes to pages 34–41
	10 	TRC, “About Us,” and Indigenous and Northern Affairs Canada 
(2016). In 2013, the TRC announced that its five-year mandate had 
been extended by a year to 2015.
	11 	TRC, “Statement Gathering FAQs,” http://www.trc.ca/websites/
trcinstitution/File/pdfs/SG%20and%20FAQ_en.pdf; Office of the 
Auditor General of ­Canada (2015a, 2015b); Truth and Reconciliation 
Commission of Canada (2016).
	12 	CBC, “Truth and Reconciliation Lawsuit Wants Records to Residential 
School Program,” The Current, December 14, 2012.
	13 	Office of the Auditor General of Canada (2013).
	14 	Henderson and Wakeham (2009, 2013).
	15 	Henderson and Wakeham (2009, 20-21).
	16 	Carr (2009), Henderson and Wakeham (2013).
	17 	Hill and McCall (2015).
	18 	Niezen (2013, 42).
	19 	Niezen (2013), Henderson (2015).
	20 	Niezen (2013, 48).
	21 	Episkenew (2009), Henderson and Wakeham (2009).
	22 	Niezen (2013).
	23 	Mylène Jaccoud, “La portée reparatrice des Commissions Verité 
Reconcilation et les pensionnats indiens au Canada” (paper presented 
at the Native Residential Schools in Quebec: Legacies for Research 
Conference, University of Montreal, PQ, April 18, 2013).  
	24 	Frosh and Pinchevski (2011).
	25 	Foucault (1988).
	26 	Foucault (1977).
	27 	NCTR, “A Message from the Commissioners of the Truth and Recon­
ciliation Commission of Canada (TRC),” http://umanitoba.ca/
centres/nctr/commisioners.html.
	28 	Pinchevski (2011, 258). 
	29 	See the hotel’s capacity charts at http://www.fairmont.com/queen-
elizabeth-montreal/meetings-weddings/capacity-charts/.  
	30 	TRC, “Statement Gathering FAQs”; TRC, “Informed Consent” form, to 
be signed by speakers at the 2013 national event in Montreal prior to 
their providing testimony (Miranda Brady, personal collection). 
	31 	Indigenous and Northern Affairs Canada (2016).
	32 	TRC, “Statement Gathering FAQs.”
	33 	Niezen (2013).
	34 	TRC, “Statement Gathering FAQs.”
	35 	Ibid., emphasis added.
	36 	Ibid. 

171
Notes to pages 41–55
	37 	TRC, “TRC Gathering Final,” http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-
BQgPrTbsqs&lr=1&user=TheTRCCanada.
	38 	Ibid.
	39 	Shenker (2010).
	40 	TRC, “Campbell River Hearings,” http://original.livestream.com/trc_
cvr/video?clipId=pla_d5fe63e1-1bed-4b24-b778-c164ce3f1a3d&utm_
medium=ui-thumb&utm_source=lslibrary. 
	41 	Ibid.
	42 	Pinchevski (2011, 258).
	43 	Archibald (2008). 
	44 	Henderson and Wakeham (2009, 2013).
	45 	Lonetree (2012), Hill and McCall (2015).
	46 	TRC, “About the Commission: Historical Overview,” para. 1, http://
www.trc.ca/websites/trcinstitution/index.php?p=39.
	47 	TRC, “Objective of the Forum,” para. 3, http://www.myrobust.com/
websites/NRC/index.php?p=121.
	48 	NCTR, “About the Collection,” http://umanitoba.ca/centres/nctr/­
collection.html.
	49 	Ibid.
	50 	Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada (2015a). 
	51 	Mira Rabson. “Release All Papers on Residential Schools: Judge,” Win­
nipeg Free Press, January 31, 2013, http://www.winnipegfreepress.com/
local/release-all-papers-on-residential-schools-judge-189157531.html.
	52 	Office of the Auditor General of Canada (2013).
	53 	Ibid., 13.
	54 	CBC, “Ottawa Ordered to Provide All Residential School Documents,” 
January 30, 2013,  http://www.cbc.ca/news/politics/ottawa-ordered-
to-provide-all-residential-schools-documents-1.1345892.
	55 	Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada (2015a, 256).
	56 	Ry Moran, “The Duty to Remember, the Right to Be Forgotten: Records 
of the Independent Assessment Process” (presentation at the Canadian 
Historical Association annual meeting, Ottawa, ON, June 1, 2015); 
NCTR, “The IAP Records,” http://umanitoba.ca/centres/nctr/iap_
records.html; McMahon et al. (2010).
	57 	TRC, “Call for Submissions,” http://www.trc.ca/websites/trcinstitution
/File/pdfs/NRC%20-%20Call%20NOV%2016_EN_FINAL.pdf.
	58 	Ibid.
	59 	NCTR, “Truth Inspires Our Future” (brochure, n.d., University of 
Manitoba).
	60 	Niezen (2013, 42).
	61 	Henderson and Wakeham (2013).

172 Notes to pages 57–58
Chapter 2: IsumaTV’s “Testimony by Isuma”
	 1 	Hayner (1996, 21).
	 2 	Sarkar and Walker (2010, cover, 2).
	 3 	Robertson (2011, 1).
	 4 	TRC, “IRS Settlement Agreement, Schedule N,” n.d., http://www.trc.
ca/websites/trcinstitution/index.php?p=7. As discussed in Chapter 1, 
from the mid-nineteenth century until 1996, the Canadian government 
forced Indigenous children to attend church-run residential schools, 
where they were subjected to “cultural genocide,” sexual and physical 
abuse, neglect, and even death (see TRC 2015a, 1).
	 5 	NCTR, “Truth Inspires Our Future” (brochure, n.d., University of 
Manitoba).
	 6 	TRC, “TRC Welcomes Court’s Clarification of Its Mandate,” January 
30, 2013, http://www.myrobust.com/websites/trcinstitution/File/pdfs/
TRC%20NEWS%20RELEASE%20--%20TRC%20WELCOMES%20
COURT%20DECISION%2030%20jan%202013.pdf; CBC, “Ottawa 
Ordered to Provide All Residential School Documents,” January 30, 
2013,  http://www.cbc.ca/news/politics/ottawa-ordered-to-provide-all-
residential-schools-documents-1.1345892.
	 7 	Julian Falconer, as cited in “TRC Takes Ottawa to Court in Battle over 
‘Control’ of Residential School History,” APTN, December 3, 2012, 
para. 5. Accessed July 27, 2015, at http://aptn.ca/news/2012/12/03/
trc-takes-ottawa-to-court-in-battle-over-control-of-residential-school-
history-2/. As we write, there is a struggle over the testimonials pro­
duced through the Independent Assessment Process (IAP), or the 
juridical arm formed out of the Indian Residential School Settlement 
Agreement. While the TRC has sued to maintain the testimonials 
produced through the IAP for the archive it compiled, which will be 
housed in the National Centre for Truth and Reconciliation, in 2014, 
the Ontario Superior Court of Justice ruled that the documents will 
be destroyed after fifteen years (NCTR, “The IAP Records,” http://
umanitoba.ca/centres/nctr/iap_records.html).
	 8 	Niezen (2013), Gadoua (2010), TRC (2015a, 2015b), Logan (2008). 
See also Laura Beaulne-Stuebing, “Métis Excluded from Closing Cer­
emony of TRC,” CBC News, June 3, 2015. 
	 9 	Peters (2011, 111).
	10 	Inuit Tapariit Kanatami, “ITK/TRC and Reconciliation Commission 
and Inuit Leaders Agree in Principle to an Inuit Subcommission” 
(media release, July 16, 2009, accessed July 27, 2015, https://www.itk.
ca/media/media-release/itktrc-truth-and-reconciliation-commission-
and-inuit-leaders-agree-principle); Gadoua (2010).

173
Notes to pages 58–63
	11 	Ibid.
	12 	With the Supreme Court decision Re Eskimos [1939] S.C.R. 104.
	13 	The DEW Line was a system of radar stations in the far northern Arctic 
region of Canada, intended to detect incoming Soviet bombers dur­
ing the Cold War.
	14 	Legacy of Hope Foundation (2010).
	15 	Hicks and White (2000).
	16 	Brody (2001).
	17 	Hicks and White (2000).
	18 	Legacy of Hope Foundation (2010).
	19 	G. Erasmus, cited in Legacy of Hope Foundation (2010, 8–9).
	20 	Gadoua (2010); Inuit Tapariit Kanatami, “ITK/TRC and Reconciliation 
Commission and Inuit Leaders Agree in Principle.”
	21 	Gadoua (2010, 167); Inuit Tapariit Kanatami, “ITK/TRC and Rec­
onciliation Commission and Inuit Leaders Agree in Principle”; M. 
Simon, cited in Inuit Tapariit Kanatami, “ITK/TRC and Reconciliation 
Commission and Inuit Leaders Agree in Principle.”
	22 	TRC, “TRC Inuit Sub-commission Concludes Its Work: Open House 
Celebrates Northerners’ Contribution to Truth-Telling and Reconcili­
ation,” (media release, March 19, 2013, http://www.myrobust.com/
websites/trcinstitution/File/pdfs/TRC%20NEWS%20RELEASE%20
Inuit%20Sub%20Comm%20concludes%2019%20March%202013.
pdf).
	23 	P. Irniq as cited in IsumaTV’s “Testimony by Isuma,” interview with 
Celina Irnguat, 2008.  
	24 	Ginsburg (2003a, 827, 828).
	25 	Ginsburg (2003a).  
	26 	McCall (2011, 197).
	27 	CBC News, “Igloolik Isuma Productions Going Out of Business,” 
July 8, 2011,  http://www.cbc.ca/news/canada/north/igloolik-isuma-
productions-going-out-of-business-1.1112223.
	28 	Ginsburg (2003a, 2003b) and Ginsburg and Roth (2002).
	29 	Ginsburg (2003a).
	30 	Evans (2008).
	31 	Roth (2005), Ginsburg (2011).
	32 	Zacharias Kunuk, “The Art of Inuit Story-Telling,” https://www.isuma.
tv/isuma-productions/art-inuit-story-telling.
	33 	IsumaTV, “About Us,” http://www.isuma.tv/about-us.
	34 	Ibid.
	35 	Quanz (2014).
	36 	IsumaTV, “About Us.”

174 Notes to pages 63–76
	37 	IsumaTV “Mediaplayer Distribution Network,” http://www.isuma.tv/
media-players-network.
	38 	IsumaTV, “About Us.”
	39 	IsumaTV, “Mediaplayer Distribution Network.”
	40 	Quanz (2014, 268).
	41 	IsumaTV, “DIAMA: Digitizing the Inuit and Aboriginal Media ­Archive,” 
https://www.isuma.tv/diama.
	42 	Alexander et al. (2009).
	43 	Quanz (2014).
	44 	Quanz (2014, 256–57).
	45 	CBC, “Igloolik Isuma Productions Going Out of Business.”
	46 	All “Testimony by Isuma” interviews (by Peter Irniq and Zacharias 
Kunuk, with translations from Inuktitut to English by Peter Irniq) 
were accessed July 27, 2015, at http://www.isuma.tv/video/testimony. 
We would like to thank Dr. Tamalik McGrath and Pitseolak Pfeifer 
for their research assistance in writing this chapter. In particular, Dr. 
McGrath provided invaluable guidance on the cultural and political 
context in Nunavut and on Inuktitut-language translations.
	47 	Inuit Tapariit Kanatami, “ITK/TRC and Reconciliation Commission 
and Inuit Leaders Agree in Principle.”
	48 	Carolyn Sloan, “Commission Head Resigns,” Northern News Service, 
October 27, 2008, http://georgewhalley.ca/main/sites/default/
files/2010-061_011_075.pdf.
	49 	Irniq as cited in Sloan, “Commission Head Resigns,” para. 7.
	50 	The Collective9 testimonials were conducted in the Northwest Ter­
ritories and Cambridge Bay areas, where there has historically been 
more intermixing of Dene and Inuit people (as compared with the 
Chesterfield Inlet area, where all but one of the residential school sur­
vivors whom Peter Irniq interviewed attended school). The difference 
in regions and testimonials is a reminder of the diversity within Inuit 
territories and the dangers of over-generalizations about Inuit culture.
	51 	Irniq would go on to contribute to the apology read by former prime 
minister Stephen Harper in 2008.
	52 	Many remote Indigenous communities still struggle to obtain the 
hardware, software (Alexander et al., 2009), broadband services, and 
bandwidth necessary for sharing and viewing multimedia (Molyneaux 
et al., 2014). There is limited funding to build piecemeal infrastruc­
tures (Sandvig, 2012). The efforts of Inuit filmmaker Zacharias Kunuk 
and his partner Norm Cohn are notable in ensuring broadband 
connections for remote Indigenous communities through projects 
such as IsumaTV’s Northern Indigenous TV Network (NITV), which 

175
Notes to pages 52–84
provides high-speed access to seven Inuit communities (McMahon 
et al., 2010). However, global Indigenous use of media, including 
Isuma­TV, will depend on unique local circumstances. As with any 
kind of medium, accessibility is contingent on technical equipment 
and knowledge as well as cultural perceptions, values, and uses.
	53 	Salazar, cited by Cordova (2012, 67).
	54 	Gadoua (2010, 167).
	55 	M. Simon, cited in Inuit Tapariit Kanatami, “ITK/TRC and Reconcilia­
tion Commission and Inuit Leaders Agree in Principle.”
	56 	Inuit Tapariit Kanatami, “ITK/TRC and Reconciliation Commission 
and Inuit Leaders Agree in Principle.”
	57 	Sloan, “Commission Head Resigns,” para. 7.
	58 	Sarkar and Walker (2010, cover).
Chapter 3: Redfacing, Remediation, and Other Indigenous Art Tactics
	 1 	AnOther Magazine, March 14, 2013, S/S13, featuring Michelle ­Williams. 
	 2 	Indian Country Today Media Network, “Johnny Depp’s Explana­
tion of Tonto Costume Both Clarifies and Muddles,” April 25, 2012, 
https://indiancountrymedianetwork.com/news/johnny-depps-
explanation-of-tonto-costume-both-clarifies-and-muddles/.
	 3 	Deloria (1998), Raheja (2010), Francis (1999).
	 4 	Bolter and Grusin (2000).
	 5 	Bear Witness, public lecture presented at the Visual Arts Building at 
Concordia University, December 4, 2013, https://www.youtube.com/
watch?v=MYsmPF_v548. DJ Bear Witness of A Tribe Called Red is the 
son of urban-Iroquois artist Jeff Thomas and Kuna and Rappahannock 
actor Monique Mojica. In addition to his music career, Bear Witness is 
also an artist who uses visual media as a natural extension of his work.
	 6 	Hearne (2012).
	 7 	Deloria (2004).  
	 8 	Vizenor (2008, 1).
	 9 	Bolter and Grusin (2000, 273).
	10 	Bolter and Grusin (2000, 55).
	11 	Since becoming a media studies classic, Bolter and Grusin’s text has 
been critiqued for its failure to situate the specific nuances of reme­
diation as a cultural practice. Couldry (2008), Dobson (2015).
	12 	Berkhofer (1979), Francis (1999).
	13 	Francis (1999), Deloria (1998).
	14 	Hinsley (1994 [1981]).
	15 	Rosaldo (1989).
	16 	Wakeham (2008), Hearne (2006),

176 Notes to pages 84–92
	17 	Wakeham (2008). In the West Coast and adjacent lands, a potlatch 
is a community feast where guests from near and far are witnesses to 
important cultural events, such as the appointment of a new chief, the 
adoption of relatives, the bestowing of traditional names, and so on. 
Potlatches include dancing, speechmaking, and the lavish giving of gifts 
to all who come. The government rescinded the potlatch ban in 1951.
	18 	Alia (1999, 18).
	19 	Ibid.
	20 	Raheja (2007, 2010).
	21 	Raheja (2010, xii). 
	22 	Berkhofer (1979).
	23 	Vizenor (1999).
	24 	Deloria (1998), Raheja (2010).
	25 	Bredin (2010).
	26 	Raheja (2010), Deloria (2004).
	27 	Tahmahkera (2008), Deloria (2004). 
	28 	Marubbio (2006). 
	29 	Bird (2003).
	30 	Marubbio (2006, 137).
	31 	Merskin (2001), Green (1993).
	32 	Bird (1999, 2001).
	33 	Bredin (2010).
	34 	Bird (1999, 2001).
	35 	Trump (2001).
	36 	Dorothy Fields and Herbert Fields (playwrights) and Irving Berlin 
(music and lyrics). Annie Get Your Gun was first performed in 1946.
	37 	Foucault (1978). 
	38 	Rose (1999), Coward (1999).
	39 	Bennett (1995).
	40 	Hinsley (1994 [1981]).
	41 	Mackey (2002).
	42 	Meriwether Lewis and William Clark were commissioned by US presi­
dent Thomas Jefferson after the Louisiana Purchase to lead an expedi­
tion of the Western United States. They travelled from St. Lewis to the 
Pacific in order to map and study the land, and to establish a presence 
and lay claim to the new territory for the American government.
	43 	Kent Monkman, public lecture hosted by the Faculty of Social 
­Sciences, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, ON, March 5, 2013.
	44 	Text panel, “Sakahan” (exhibition), 2013, National Art Gallery of 
Canada. 
	45 	Ibid.

177
Notes to pages 93–111
	46 	Pearson and Knabe (2015).
	47 	Raheja (2010, 8).
	48 	Ibid. 
	49 	Gerald Hannon, “How Kent Monkman – a Half-Cree Illustrator from 
Winnipeg – Sexed up the Exploitation of First Nations People and 
Conquered Toronto’s Art World,” Toronto Life, September 6, 2011, 
http://torontolife.com/city/the-pink-indian/. 
	50 	Jarrett Martineau, “O Kanata Day: Watch Mohawk Artist Jackson 
2bears Remix Colonial ‘Heritage Mythologies,’” RPM: Indigenous Music 
Culture, July 1, 2015, 2017, http://rpm.fm/news/o-kanata-day-jackson-
2bears-heritage-mythologies/. 
	51 	Hodgins (2003, title page).
	52 	The Six Nations flag is also prominent in For This Land, a collabora­
tion with Mohawk/Tuscarora artist Janet Marie Rogers that appeared 
as a video installation at imagineNATIVE 2015.
	53 	Horn-Miller (2010, 96).
	54 	Bolter and Grusin (2000).
	55 	The Indian head test pattern was a black-and-white card featuring an 
Indian head drawing that appeared at the end of television broadcast 
days between the 1930s and 1970s to signal that the channel was 
­going off the air.
	56 	Lakota™ (2016), “About,” https://www.lakotaherbs.com/pages/about.
	57 	We borrow the phrase “indigenizing the archive” from Taunton 
(2013, 126).
	58 	Myers (2014).
	59 	Bolter and Grusin (2000).
	60 	Willard (2007).
	61 	Myers (2014).
	62 	Gale (1995).
	63 	Dowell (2013).
	64 	Myers (2014, 8).
	65 	Ibid.
	66 	Dowell (2013).
Chapter 4: imagineNATIVE as Industry Intervention
	 1 	Indigenous filmmakers and festival organizers were incredibly gener­
ous with their time and insights when we requested interviews.
	 2 	imagineNATIVE (2013), i. 
	 3 	Ibid.
	 4 	imagineNATIVE, “Mission,” http://www.imaginenative.org/vision-
mission/.

178 Notes to pages 112–22
	 5 	J. Ryle, cited in Monani and Brady (2013, para 7). 
	 6 	Community Knowledge Centre, Toronto Foundation, “imagine­
NATIVE Film + Media Arts Festival,” http://ckc.torontofoundation.ca/
org/imaginenative-film-media-arts-festival.
	 7 	Thornley (2017).
	 8 	Monani and Brady (2013).
	 9 	See the imagineNATIVE 2014 program.
	10 	J. Ryle, cited in Monani and Brady (2013, 5).
	11 	Cordova (2012).
	12 	Dowell (2013).
	13 	Dowell (2006).
	14 	Thornley (2017).
	15 	Dowell (2013).
	16 	Ibid., 10–13.
	17 	Ibid., 4.
	18 	Gandy (2000). 
	19 	Dowell (2013).
	20 	Ginsburg and Roth (2002).
	21 	imagineNATIVE, Indigenous Feature Film Production in Canada, 5.
	22 	Dowell (2013); imagineNATIVE, Indigenous Feature Film Production 
in Canada.
	23 	See Alia (2010), Evans (2008).
	24 	Thornley (2014, 76). 
	25 	Cordova (2012), Pearson and Knabe (2015).
	26 	Cordova (2012, 67).
	27 	imagineNATIVE, “Artistic Policy,” para. 3., http://www.imaginenative.
org/artistic-policy/.
	28 	Leuthold (1998), Worth and Adair (1972).
	29 	Dowell (2013, 2).
	30 	Columpar (2010, xiv), Pearson and Knabe (2015), Oppenneer (2009).
	31 	Barclay (2003).
	32 	Ginsburg (1995).
	33 	Pearson and Knabe (2015).
	34 	Ginsburg (1999).
	35 	Barclay (2003).
	36 	Pearson and Knabe (2015, 16). 
	37 	Ibid., 24.
	38 	Gabriel (1989).
	39 	Ibid.
	40 	Cordova (2012).
	41 	As cited in Cordova (2012, 67).

179
Notes to pages 122–41
	42 	Bird (2003).
	43 	Mittell (2004, vii).
	44 	Williams (1974).
	45 	McCall (2011, 183). 
	46 	Ginsburg (2003b, 304).
	47 	Santoro (2013).
	48 	See, for example, Leuthold (1998), Gauthier (2013), and Foster and 
Evans (2015).
	49 	Ariel Smith, This Video Essay Was Not Built on an Ancient Indian Burial 
Ground, presented at the imagineNATIVE Film + Media Arts Festival 
on October 19, 2013, as part of the IndigiTALKS Video Essay Project 
Panel (written essay, video performance, and live Q & A with Ariel 
Smith). Written component at http://offscreen.com/view/horror-
indigenous-cinema.   
	50 	Ibid., video portion of Ariel Smith’s essay presented at iN October 19, 
2013.
	51 	Ibid., written essay, para. 11.
	52 	Lempert (2014).
	53 	Neruda (1993). 
	54 	Santoro (2013).
	55 	As cited in Mark Krupa, “An Interview with Filmmaker Jeff Barnaby,” 
Montreal Serai, February 12, 2011, http://montrealserai.com/article/
an-interview-with-filmmaker-jeff-barnaby/.
	56 	Jamaias DaCosta, “Interview with Filmmaker Jeff Barnaby on Rhymes 
for Young Ghouls,” Muskratmagazine.com, February 1, 2014, para 13, 
http://muskratmagazine.com/interview-with-filmmaker-jeff-barnaby-
on-rhymes-for-young-ghouls/.
	57 	As cited in Santoro (2013, 272–73). 
	58 	imagineNATIVE.org, “Jeff Barnaby.” 
	59 	See, for example, Taylor (2005) and Ryan (1999).
Chapter 5: Reporting News in Indigenous Communities
	 1 	Kalafatic (1999).
	 2 	Taunton (2013, 130).
	 3 	Archibald (2008).
	 4 	See http://www.riic.ca/.
	 5 	Ibid.
	 6 	Journalists for Human Rights (2013).
	 7 	See, for example, Weston (1996), Coward (1999), and Alia (1999).
	 8 	Loew and Mella (2005).
	 9 	Joe Allen, cited by Loew and Mella (2005, 101–42).

180 Notes to pages 141–52
	10 	Orsini (2010), Johnson (2011).
	11 	Loew and Mella (2005).
	12 	Leanne Simpson, “Elsipogtog Protest: We’re Only Seeing Half the 
Story,” The Huffington Post, October 22, 2013, http://www.huffington­
post.ca/leanne-simpson/elsipogtog-racism_b_4139367.html.
	13 	Loew and Mella (2005).
	14 	Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada (2015b, 10).
	15 	Zelizer (1993), Tuchman (1973).
	16 	Alia (1999).
	17 	Wahl-Jorgensen (2010), Cottle (2007).
	18 	Zelizer (1993).
	19 	Schudson (1981), Soloski (1999).
	20 	Bird (2010).
	21 	Carey (1989), Zelizer (2004).
	22 	Bird (2010, 5).
	23 	Weston (1996); Meagan Gillmore, “How Journalism Students 
Are Taught to Tell Aboriginal Stories,” J-source.ca, http://www.
j-source.ca/article/how-journalism-students-are-taught-tell-­
aboriginal-stories.
	24 	Meadows (2001, 2005), Weston (1996). Meadows specifically 
discusses Aboriginal sources in Australia but draws parallels with 
the United States and Canada.
	25 	Journalists for Human Rights (2013).
	26 	Gillmore, “How Journalism Students Are Taught.”
	27 	Valerie Alia, cited in Sydney Smith, “The New Media Nation: Valerie 
Alia on Media Ethics, Indigenous People,” iMediaEthics, February 23, 
2011, para. 19, http://www.imediaethics.org/the-new-media-nation-
valerie-alia-on-media-ethics-indigenous-people/.
	28 	Kemper (2012).
	29 	Amnesty International (2004).
	30 	Alia (1999).
	31 	Alia (1999, 2010).
	32 	Hafsteinsson (2010, 53).
	33 	Roth (2005), Alia (1999), Bredin (2012b), Evans (2008).
	34 	Hafsteinsson (2010).
	35 	Bredin (2012b, 73). 
	36 	Bredin (2012b).
	37 	Alia (1999).
	38 	It should be noted that APTN’s audience extends well beyond Ab­
original viewers, as its mandate is “to continue to bring Aboriginal 
perspectives to Canadian television viewers” (Bredin 2010, 74).

181
Notes to pages 152–64
	39 	The 1997 Delgamuukw v. British Columbia decision by the Supreme 
Court of Canada was a foundational ruling on determination and 
protection of Aboriginal title. For more critical discussions of the case, 
see Razack (2015).
	40 	Dowell (2013, 145).
	41 	Idle No More, “Calls for Change,” http://www.idlenomore.ca/calls_for_
change; Clayton Thomas-Mueller, “The Rise of the Native Rights-Based 
Strategic Framework,” June 16, 2013,  http://www.idlenomore.ca/
the_rise_of_the_native_rights_based_strategic_framework; Amnesty 
International (2004).
	42 	Gilchrist (2010, 373).
	43 	NWAC, “Fact Sheet: Missing or Murdered Aboriginal Women and 
Girls,” https://www.nwac.ca/.
	44 	Kristy Kirkup, “Number of Missing and Murdered Indigenous Women 
Higher Than Thought: Minister,” Toronto Star, February 15, 2016, 
https://www.thestar.com/news/canada/2016/02/15/number-of-missing-
and-murdered-indigenous-women-higher-than-thought-minister.html.
	45 	Jiwani and Young (2006).
	46 	Gilchrist (2010). 
	47 	Duncan McCue, “Marlene Bird: Aboriginal Woman’s Story of Struggle 
and Survival,” CBC: The National (print and broadcast versions), Janu­
ary 29, 2015. Print version  at http://www.cbc.ca/news/indigenous/­
marlene-bird-who-lost-her-legs-after-attack-finally-has-a-home-1.293
4456. Broadcast version at http://www.cbc.ca/player/play/2650950499. 
Conclusion
	 1 	Alfred (2008), L. Simpson (2014).
	 2 	A. Simpson (2014, 45).
	 3 	Simpson (2007, 67).
	 4 	Carey (1989).
	 5 	Coulthard (2014a).
	 6 	Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada (2015a).
	 7 	NCTR, “IAP Records.” Accessed May 4, 2017, http://umanitoba.ca/
centres/nctr/iap_records.html.
	 8 	Lisa Charleyboy, “The Digital Life of Savannah Simon,” August 
18, 2015, http://www.cbc.ca/radio/newfire/getting-abo-digital-
indigenous-youth-talk-tech-1.3174368/the-digital-life-of-savannah-
simon-1.3174653.

This page intentionally left blank

Works Cited
Interviews
Becker, Nanobah. October 18, 2012.
Belcourt, Shane. October 24, 2014.
Calder, Terril. October 23, 2014.
Claxton, Dana. November 26, 2014. 
McCue, Duncan. August 9, 2013.
Monkman, Kent. March 19, 2013.
Moran, Ry. April 22, 2013.
Obomsawin, Alanis. October 20, 2012.
Ryle, Jason. October 19, 2012.
Sinclair, Murray. April 16, 2013.
Books and Articles
Alexander, Cynthia J., Agar Adamson, Graham Daborn, John Houston, 
and Victor Tootoo. 2009. “Inuit Cyberspace: The Struggle for Access for 
Inuit Qaujimajatuq.” Journal of Canadian Studies/Revue d’Etudes 
Canadiennes 43 (2): 220–49.
Alfred, Taiaiake. 2005. Wasáse: Indigenous Pathways of Action and Freedom. 
New York: Broadview Press.
–. 2008. “Opening Words.” In Lighting the Eighth Fire: The Liberation, 
Resurgence, and Protection of Indigenous Nations, ed. Leanne Simpson, 
9–11. Winnipeg: Arbeiter Ring Publishing.
–. 2009. “Restitution Is the Real Pathway for Justice of Indigenous 
Peoples.” In Response, Responsibility, and Renewal: Canada’s Truth and 
Reconciliation Journey, ed. Gregory Younging, Jonathan Dewar, and 
Mike DeGagné, 179–87. Ottawa: Aboriginal Healing Foundation.
Alia, Valerie. 1999. Un/Covering the North: News, Media, and Aboriginal 
People. Vancouver: UBC Press.
–. 2010. The New Media Nation: Indigenous Peoples and Global Communica­
tion. New York: Berghahn Books.
Amnesty International. 2004. Stolen Sisters: A Human Rights Response 
to Discrimination and Violence against Indigenous Women in Canada. 
https://www.amnesty.ca/sites/amnesty/files/amr200032004enstolen
sisters.pdf.

Works Cited
184
Archibald, Jo-Ann. 2008. Indigenous Storywork: Educating the Heart, Mind, 
Body and Spirit. Vancouver: UBC Press.
Barclay, Barry. 2003. “Celebrating Fourth Cinema.” Illusions Magazine, 10. 
http://www.maoricinema.com/wp-content/uploads/2014/02/
BarclayCelebratingFourthCinema.pdf.
Bennett, Tony. 1995. The Birth of the Museum. New York: Routledge.
Berkhofer, Robert F. 1979. The White Man’s Indian. New York: Vintage 
Books.
Bird, S. Elizabeth. 1999. “Gendered Construction of the American Indian 
in Popular Media.” Journal of Communication 49 (3): 61–83. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1460-2466.1999.tb02805.x.
–. 2001. “Savage Desires: The Gendered Construction of the American 
Indian in Popular Media.” In Selling the Indian: Commercializing and 
Appropriating American Indian Cultures, ed. Carter Jones Meyer and 
Diana Royer, 62–98. Tucson: University of Arizona Press.
–. 2003. “Imagining Indians: Negotiating Identity in a Media World.” In 
The Audience in Everyday Life, 86–117. New York: Routledge.
–. 2010. “Introduction.” In The Anthropology of News and Journalism, ed. S. 
Elizabeth Bird, 1–18. Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 2009.
Bishop, R. 1998. “Freeing Ourselves from Neo-Colonial Domination in 
Research: A Maori Approach to Creating Knowledge.” International 
Journal of Qualitative Studies in Education: QSE 11 (2): 199–219. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1080/095183998236674.
Blackstock, Cindy. 2008. “Reconciliation Means Not Saying Sorry Twice: 
Lessons from Child Welfare in Canada.” In From Truth to Reconciliation: 
Transforming the Legacy of Residential Schools, ed. Marlene Brant 
Castellano, Linda Archibald, and Mike DeGagné, 163–78. Ottawa: 
Aboriginal Healing Foundation.
Bolter, Jay David, and Richard A. Grusin. 2000. Remediation: Understand­
ing New Media. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Bredin, Marian. 2010. “Niagara Falls Indian Village: Popular Productions 
of Cultural Difference.” In Covering Niagara: Studies in Local Popular 
Culture, ed. Joan Nicks and Barry Keith, 45–68. Waterloo, ON: Wilfrid 
Laurier University Press.
–. 2012a. “Indigenous Media as Alternative Media: Participation and 
Cultural Production.” In Alternative Media in Canada, ed. Kirsten 
Kozolanka, Patricia Mazepa, and David Skinner, 184–204. Vancouver: 
UBC Press.
–. 2012b. “Producing Aboriginal Television in Canada: Obstacles and 
Opportunities.” In Canadian Television: Text and Context, ed. Marian 

Works Cited 185
Bredin, Scott Henderson, and Sarah A. Matheson, 73–94. Waterloo, 
ON: Wilfrid Laurier University Press.
Brody, Hugh. 2001. The Other Side of Eden: Hunters, Farmers, and the 
Shaping of the World. New York: North Point Press.
Carey, James. 1989. Communication as Culture: Essays on Media and Society, 
13–36. New York: Routledge.
Carr, Geoffrey. 2009. “Atopoi of the Modern: Revisiting the Place of the 
Indian Residential School.” English Studies in Canada 35 (1): 109–35. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1353/esc.0.0161.
Castellano, Marlene Brant, Linda Archibald, and Mike DeGagné, eds. 
2008. From Truth to Reconciliation: Transforming the Legacy of Residential 
Schools. Ottawa: Aboriginal Healing Foundation.
Child, Brenda. 2000. Boarding School Seasons: American Indian Families, 
1900–1940. Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press.
Cordova, Amalia. 2012. “Toward an Indigenous Film Festival Circuit.” In 
Film Festival Yearbook 4: Film Festivals and Activism, ed. Dina Irodanova 
and Leshu Torchin, 63–80. St. Andrews, UK: St. Andrews Film Studies.
Columpar, Corinn. 2010. Unsettling the Sights: The Fourth World on Film. 
Carbondale: Southern Illinois University Press. 
Corntassel, Jeff. 2012. “Re-envisioning Resurgence: Indigenous Pathways 
to Decolonization and Sustainable Self-Determination.” Decolonization 
1 (1): 86–101.
Cottle, Simon. 2007. “Ethnography and News Production: New(s) 
Developments in the Field.” Sociology Compass 1 (1): 1–16. http://dx.
doi.org/10.1111/j.1751-9020.2007.00002.x.
Couldry, Nick. 2008. “Actor Network Theory and Media: Do They 
Connect and On What Terms?” In Connectivity, Networks and Flows: 
Conceptualizing Contemporary Communications, ed. A. Hepp, F. Krotz, 
S. Moores, and C. Winter, 93–110. Cresskill, NJ: Hampton Press.
Coulthard, Glen Sean. 2014a. Red Skins, White Masks: Rejecting the 
Colonial Politics of Recognition. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota 
Press. http://dx.doi.org/10.5749/minnesota/9780816679645.001.0001.
–. 2014b. “From Wards of the State to Subjects of Recognition?” In 
Theorizing Native Studies, ed. Audra Simpson and Andrea Smith, 
56–98. Durham and London: Duke University Press. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1215/9780822376613-004.
Coward, John. 1999. The Newspaper Indian. Urbana: University of Illinois 
Press.
Cram, Fiona, Bagele Chilisa, and Donna M. Mertins. 2013. “The Journey 
Begins.” In Indigenous Pathways into Social Research: Voices of a New 

Works Cited
186
Generation, ed. Donna M. Mertins, Fiona Cram, and Bagele Chilisa, 
11–40. Walnut Creek, CA: Left Coast Press.
de Certeau, Michel. 1984. The Practice of Everyday Life. Berkeley: Univer­
sity of California Press.
Deloria, Philip J. 1998. Playing Indian. New Haven, CT: Yale University 
Press.
–. 2004. Indians in Unexpected Places. Lawrence: University Press of Kansas.
Denzin, Norman, Yvonna S. Lincoln, and Linda Tuhiwai Smith. 2008. 
“Introduction.” In Handbook of Critical and Indigenous Methodologies, ed. 
Norman Denzin, Yvonna S. Lincoln, and Linda Tuhiwai Smith, 1–20. 
Los Angeles: Sage. http://dx.doi.org/10.4135/9781483385686.n1.
Dion, Susan D., and Angela Salamanca. 2014. “inVisibility: Indigenous 
in the City: Indigenous Artists, Indigenous Youth and the Project of 
Survivance.” Decolonization 1:159–88.
Dobson, Stephen. 2015. “Remediation: Understanding New Media: 
Understanding a Class.” Seminar.net 11 (1), http://seminar.net/reviews-
hovedmeny-110/68-remediation-understanding-new-media-revisiting-
a-classic.
Dowell, Kristin. 2006. “Indigenous Media Gone Global: Strengthening 
Indigenous Identity On- and Offscreen at the First Nations/First 
Features Showcase.” American Anthropologist 108 (2): 376–84. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1525/aa.2006.108.2.376.
Dowell, Kristin L. 2013. Sovereign Screens: Aboriginal Media on the 
Canadian West Coast. Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press.
Episkenew, Jo-Ann. 2009. Taking Back Our Spirits: Indigenous Literature, 
Public Policy, and Healing. Winnipeg: University of Manitoba Press.
Evans, Michael Robert. 2008. Isuma: Inuit Video Art. Montreal: McGill-
Queen’s University Press.
Foster, Stephen, and Mike Evans. 2015. “The Prince George Métis Elders 
Documentary Project: Matching Product with Process in New Forms 
of Documentary.” In Reverse Shots: Indigenous Film and Media in an 
International Context, ed. Wendy Gay Pearson and Susan Knabe, 
221–32. Waterloo, ON: Wilfrid Laurier University Press.
Foucault, Michel. 1977. Discipline and Punish: The Birth of the Prison. New 
York: Vintage Books.
–. 1978. The History of Sexuality: An Introduction, vol. 1. London: Penguin 
Books.
–. 1988. “Technologies of the Self.” In Technologies of the Self: A Seminar 
with Michel Foucault, ed. Luther H. Martin, Huck Gutman, and Patrick 
H. Hutton, 16–49. Boston: University of Massachusetts Press.

Works Cited 187
–. 2007. Security, Territory, Population: Lectures at the College de France, 
1977–1978 by Michel Foucault, trans. Graham Burchell. Basingstoke, 
UK: Palgrave Macmillan.
Francis, Daniel. 1999. The Imaginary Indian: The Image of the Indian in 
Canadian Culture. Vancouver, BC: Arsenal Pulp Press.
Frosh, Paul, and Amit Pinchevski. 2011. “Introduction.” In Media 
Witnessing: Testimony in the Age of Mass Communication, ed. Paul Frosh 
and Amit Pinchevski, 1–19. New York: Palgrave Macmillan.
Gabriel, Teshome. 1989. “Towards a Critical Theory of Third World 
Films.” In Questions of Third Cinema, ed. Jim Pines and Paul Willemen, 
30–52. London: BFI Publishing.
Gadoua, Marie-Pierre. 2010. “The Inuit Presence at the First Canadian 
Truth and Reconciliation Commission National Event.” Inuit Studies 
34 (2): 167–84. http://dx.doi.org/10.7202/1004096ar.
Gale, Peggy. 1995. Videotexts. Waterloo, ON: Wilfred Laurier University 
Press.
Galloway, Alexander R. 2004. Protocol: How Control Exists after Decentral­
ization. Boston: MIT Press. 
Gandy, Oscar. 2000. “Audience Segmentation: Is It Racism or Just Good 
Business?” Media Development 2: 3–6. 
Gauthier, Jennifer. 2013. “Dismantling the Master’s House: The Feminist 
Fourth Cinema Documentaries of Alanis Obomsawin and Loretta 
Todd.” In Native Americans on Film: Conversations, Teaching, and Theory, 
ed. M. Elise Marubbio and Eric L. Buffalohead, 89–115. Lexington: 
University Press of Kentucky.
Gilchrist, Kristen. 2010. “’Newsworthy’ Victims? Exploring Differences 
in Canadian Local Press Coverage of Missing/Murdered Aboriginal 
and White Women.” Feminist Media Studies 10 (4): 373–90.
Ginsburg, Faye. 1995. “The Parallax Effect: The Impact of Aboriginal Media 
on Ethnographic Film.” Visual Anthropologist Review 11 (2): 64–76.
–. 1999. “Shooting Back: From Ethnographic Film to Indigenous 
Production/Ethnography of Media.” In A Companion to Film Theory, 
ed. T. Miller and R. Stam, 295–322. Malden: Blackwell.
–. 2003a. “Atanarjuat Off-Screen: From ‘Media Reservations’ to the World 
Stage.” Visual Anthropology 105 (4): 827–31.
–. 2003 b. “Embedded Aesthetics: Creating Discursive Space for Indig­
enous Media.” In Planet TV: A Global Television Reader, 303–19. 
New York: New York University Press.
–. 2011. “Native Intelligence: A Short History of Debates on Indigenous 
Media and Ethnographical Film in Banks.” In Made to Be Seen: 

Works Cited
188
Perspectives on the History of Visual Anthropology, ed. Marcus Banks 
and Jay Ruby, 234–55. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Ginsburg, Faye, and Lorna Roth. 2002. “First Peoples Television.” In 
Television Studies, ed. Toby Miller, 130–32. London: The British Film 
Institute.
Green, Michael K. 1993. “Images of Native Americans in Advertising: 
Some Moral Issues.” Journal of Business Ethics 12 (4): 323–30. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1007/BF01666536.
Gross, L.W. 2003. “Cultural Sovereignty and Native American Hermeneu­
tics in the Interpretation of the Sacred Stories of the Anishinaabe.” 
Wicazo Sa Review 18 (2): 127–34. http://dx.doi.org/10.1353/
wic.2003.0014.
Hafsteinsson, Sigurjon Baldur. 2010. “Aboriginal Journalism Practice as 
Deep Democracy: APTN National News.” In Indigenous Screen Cultures 
in Canada, ed. Sigurjon Baldur Hafsteinsson and Marian Bredin, 
53–68. Winnipeg: University of Manitoba Press.
Hayner, Priscilla. 1996. “Commissioning the Truth: Further Research 
Questions.” Third World Quarterly  17 (1): 19–29.
Hart, Michael Anthony. 2003. “Indigenous Worldviews, Knowledge, and 
Research: The Development of an Indigenous Research Paradigm.” 
Journal of Indigenous Voices in Social Work 1 (1): 1–16.
Health Canada. 2015. “First Nations and Inuit Health: Mental Health and 
Wellness.” http://www.hc-sc.gc.ca/fniah-spnia/promotion/mental/
index-eng.php.
Hearne, Joanna. 2006. “Telling and Retelling in the ‘Ink of Light’: 
Documentary Cinema, Oral Narratives, and Indigenous Identities.” 
Screen 47 (3): 307–26. http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/screen/hjl024.
–. 2012. Native Recognition: Indigenous Cinema and the Western. New York: 
SUNY Press.
Henderson, Jennifer. 2015. “Residential Schools and Opinion-Making in 
the Era of Traumatized Subjects and Taxpayer Citizens.” Journal of 
Canadian Studies 49 (1): 5–43, 267.
Henderson, Jennifer, and Pauline Wakeham. 2009. “Colonial Reckoning, 
National Reconciliation? Aboriginal Peoples and the Culture of Redress 
in Canada.” English Studies in Canada 35 (1): 1–26. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1353/esc.0.0168.
–. 2013. “Introduction.” In Reconciling Canada: Critical Perspectives on the 
Culture of Redress, ed. Jennifer Henderson and Pauline Wakeham, 
3–30. Toronto: University of Toronto Press.
Hicks, Jack, and Graham White. 2000. “Nunavut: Inuit Self-Determination 
through Land Claim and Public Government?” In Nunavut: Inuit Regain 

Works Cited 189
Control of Their Lands and Their Lives, 30–116. Copenhagen: Interna­
tional Work Group for Indigenous Affairs.
Hill, Gabrielle L’Hirondelle, and Sophie McCall, eds. 2015. The Land We 
Are: Artists and Writers Unsettle the Politics of Reconciliation in Canada. 
Winnipeg: ARP Press.
Hinsley, Curtis. 1994 [1981]. The Smithsonian and the American Indian: 
Making a Moral Anthropology in Victorian America. Washington, DC: 
Smithsonian Institution Press.
Hodgins, Peter. 2003. “The Canadian Dream-Work: History, Myth and 
Nostalgia in the Heritage Minutes.” PhD diss., Carleton University. 
Horn-Miller, Kahente Doxtater. 2010. “From Paintings to Power: The 
Meaning of the Warrior Flag Twenty Years After Oka.” Socialist Studies: 
The Journal of the Society for Socialist Studies 6 (1): 96–124.
Huhndorf, Shari M. 2001. Going Native: Indians in the American Cultural 
Imagination. New York: Cornell University Press.
imagineNATIVE. 2013. Indigenous Feature Film Production in Canada. 
http://www.omdc.on.ca/Assets/Research/Research+Reports/
Indigenous+Feature+Film/Indigenous+Feature+Film+Production+in+
Canada.pdf.
Indigenous and Northern Affairs Canada. 2016. “Residential School 
Settlement Agreement, Schedule N: Mandate for the Truth and Recon­
ciliation Commission.” Ottawa: Indigenous and Northern Affairs 
Canada. http://www.residentialschoolsettlement.ca/SCHEDULE_N.pdf.
Jiwani, Yasmin, and Mary Lynn Young. 2006. “Missing and Murdered 
Women: Reproducing Marginality in News Discourse.” Canadian 
Journal of Communication 31 (4): 895–917.
Johnson, Daniel Morley. 2011. “From the Tomahawk Chop to the Road 
Block: Discourses of Savagism in Whitestream Media.” American Indian 
Quarterly 35 (1): 104–34. http://dx.doi.org/10.5250/0095182x.35.1.104.
Josephy, Alvin M., Jr., Joanne Nagel, and Troy R. Johnson. 1999 [1971].  
Red Power: The American Indians’ Fight for Freedom. Second edition. 
Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press.
Journalists for Human Rights. 2013. “Buried Voices: Media Coverage of 
Aboriginal Issues in Ontario.” Accessed December 18, 2013.  http://
www.jhr.ca/en/aboutjhr/downloads/publications/buried_voices.pdf.
Kalafatic, C. 1999. “Keepers of the Power: Story as Covenant in the Films 
of Loretta Todd, Shelley Niro, and Christine Welsh.” In Gendering the 
Nation, ed. K. Armatage, 109–19. Toronto: University of Toronto Press. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.3138/9781442675223-009.
Kemper, Kevin R. 2012. “Sacred Spaces: Cultural Hybridity and Boundar­
ies for Visual Communication about the Hopi Tribe in Arizona.” Visual 

Works Cited
190
Communication Quarterly 19 (4): 216–31. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/
15551393.2012.735582.
Kovach, Margaret. 2009. Indigenous Methodologies: Characteristics, 
Conversations, and Contexts. Toronto: University of Toronto Press.
Lee, Ruthann. 2012. “(Un)settling Multicultural Masculinities in 
Contemporary Canadian Art.” In Canadian Men and Masculinities: 
Historical and Contemporary Perspectives, ed. Christopher J. Greig and 
Wayne J. Martino, 285–312. Toronto: Canadian Scholars’ Press.
Legacy of Hope Foundation. 2010. We Were So Far Away: The Inuit 
Experience of Residential Schools. Ottawa: Legacy of Hope Foundation. 
Lempert, William. 2014. “Decolonizing Encounters of the Third Kind: 
Alternative Futuring in Native Science Fiction Film.” Visual Anthropol­
ogy Review 30 (2): 164–76. http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/var.12046.
Leuthold, Steven. 1998. Indigenous Aesthetics: Native Art, Media, and 
Identity. Austin: University of Texas Press.
Loew, Patty, and Kelly Mella. 2005. “Black Ink and the New Red Power: 
Native American Newspapers and Tribal Sovereignty.” Journalism & 
Communication Monographs 7 (3): 99–142. http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/
152263790500700301.
Logan, Tricia. 2008. “A Métis Perspective on Truth and Reconciliation.” In 
From Truth to Reconciliation: Transforming the Legacy of Residential Schools, 
ed. Marlene Brant Castellano, Linda Archibald, and Mike DeGagné, 
69–90. Ottawa: Aboriginal Healing Foundation.
Lomawaima, K. Tsianina. 1995. They Called It Prairie Light: The Story of 
the Chilocco Indian School. Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press.
Lonetree, Amy. 2012. Decolonizing Museums: Representing Native America 
in National and Tribal Museums. Chapel Hill: University of North 
Carolina Press.
Mackey, Eva. 2002. The House of Difference: Cultural Politics and National 
Identity in Canada. Toronto: University of Toronto Press.
Marubbio, M. Elise. 2006. Killing the Indian Maiden: Images of Native 
American Women in Film. Lexington: University of Kentucky Press. 
McCall, Sophie. 2011. First Person Plural: Aboriginal Storytelling and the 
Ethics of Collaborative Authorship. Vancouver: UBC Press.
McLuhan, Marshall. 1964. Understanding Media: The Extensions of Man. 
New York: McGraw Hill.
McMahon, R., S. O’Donnell, R. Smith, J. Woodman Simmonds, and B. 
Walmark. 2010. Putting the Last Mile First: Reframing Broadband Develop­
ment in First Nations and Inuit Communities. Vancouver: Centre for 
Policy Research on Science and Technology (CPROST), Simon Fraser 

Works Cited 191
University. http://firstmile.ca/wp-content/uploads/2015/04/2010-
Putting-the-Last-Mile-First.pdf.
Meadows, Michael. 2001. Voices in the Wilderness: Indigenous Australians 
and the News Media. Westport, CT: Greenwood.
–. 2005. “Journalism and Indigenous Public Spheres.” Pacific Journalism 
Review 11 (1): 36–41.
Merskin, Debra. 1998. “Sending up Signals: A Survey of Native American 
Media Use and Representation in the Mass Media.” Howard Journal of 
Com­munications 9 (4): 333–45. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/10646179824
6943.
–. 2001. “Winnebagos, Cherokees, Apaches, and Dakotas: The Persistence 
of Stereotyping of American Indians in American Advertising Brands.” 
Howard Journal of Communications 12 (3): 159–69.
–. 2014. “How Many More Indians? An Argument for a Representational 
Ethics of Native Americans.” Journal of Communication Inquiry 38 (3): 
184–203. http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/0196859914537304.
Mittell, Jason. 2004. Genre and Television: From Cop Shows to Cartoons in 
American Culture. New York: Routledge.
Molyneaux, Heather, Susan O’Donnell, Crystal Kakekaspan, Brian 
Walmark, Philipp Budka, and Kerri Gibson. 2014. “Social Media in 
Remote First Nation Communities.” Canadian Journal of Communica­
tion 39 (2): 275–88.
Monani, Salma, and Miranda Brady. 2013. “imagineNATIVE 2012: 
Ecocinema and the Indigenous Film Festival.” Reconstruction 13 (3/4): 
1–26.
Myers, Lisa. 2014. “Of the Moment: In the Moment.” Paper distributed at 
“Following the Moment,” imagineNATIVE indigitalks lecture, Toronto, 
24 October.
Neruda, Pablo. 1993. “Walking Around.” In Neruda and Vellejo: Selected 
Poems. Trans. Robert Bly. Boston: Beacon Press.
Niezen, Ronald. 2013. Truth and Indignation: Canada’s Truth and Reconcili­
ation Commission on Indian Residential Schools. Toronto: University of 
Toronto Press.
Office of the Auditor General of Canada. 2013. “Report of the Auditor 
General of Canada: Chapter 6: Creating a Historical Record of Indian 
Residential Schools.” http://www.oag-bvg.gc.ca/internet/English/parl_
oag_201304_06_e_38191.html.
Oppenneer, Mark. 2009. “Problematizing Indigenous Aesthetics.” 
EthnosProject.org. http://www.ethnosproject.org/problematizing-
indigenous-aesthetics/.

Works Cited
192
Orsini, Michael. 2010. “The Journalist and the Angry White Mob.” In This 
Is an Honour Song: Twenty Years Since the Blockades, ed. Leanne Simpson 
and Kiera L. Ladner, 249–60. Winnipeg: Arbeiter Ring Publishing.
Pearson, Wendy Gay, and Susan Knabe. 2015. Reverse Shots: Indigenous 
Film and Media in an International Context. Waterloo: Wilfrid Laurier 
University Press.
Peters, John Durham. 2011. “Why We Use Pencils and Other Thoughts 
on the Archive (An Afterword).” In Media, History, and the Archive, 
ed. Craig Robertson, 108–20. New York: Routledge.
Pinchevski, Amit. 2011. “Archive, Media, Trauma.” In On Media Memory: 
Collective Memory in a New Media Age, ed. Motti Neiger, Oren Meyers, 
and Eyal Zandberg, 253–64. New York: Palgrave Macmillian. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1057/9780230307070_19.
Quanz, Katherine. 2014. “Preserving Ephemeral Aboriginal Films and 
Videos: The Archival Practices of Vtape and IsumaTV.” In Cinephemera: 
Archives, Ephemeral Cinema, and New Screen Histories in Canada, ed. Zoe 
Druick and Gerda Cammaer, 256–72. Montreal: McGill-Queen’s 
University Press.
Raheja, Michelle. 2007. “Reading Nanook’s Smile: Visual Sovereignty, 
Indigenous Revisions of Ethnography, and Atanarjuat (The Fast Run­
ner).” American Quarterly 59 (4): 1159–85. http://dx.doi.org/10.1353/
aq.2007.0083.
–. 2010. Reservation Reelism: Redfacing, Visual Sovereignty, and Representa­
tions of Native Americans in Film. Lincoln and London: University of 
Nebraska Press.
Raley, Rita. 2009. Tactical Media. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota 
Press.
Ralston Saul, John. 2014. The Comeback. Toronto: Viking.
Razack, Sherene H. 2000. “Gendered Racial Violence and Spatialized 
Justice: The Murder of Pamela George.” Canadian Journal of Law and 
Society 15 (2): 91–130. http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/S0829320100006384.
–. 2015. Dying from Improvement: Inquests and Inquiries into Indigenous 
Deaths in Custody. Toronto: University of Toronto Press.
Regan, Paulette. 2010. Unsettling the Settler Within: Indian Residential 
Schools, Truth Telling, and Reconciliation in Canada. Vancouver: UBC 
Press.
Robertson, Craig. 2011. “Introduction.” In Media, History, and the Archive, 
ed. Craig Robertson, 1–7. New York: Routledge.
Rosaldo, Renato. 1989. Culture and Truth: The Remaking of Social Analysis. 
Boston: Beacon Press. http://dx.doi.org/10.1525/rep.1989.26.1.
99p0282w.

Works Cited 193
Rose, Nikolas. 1999. Powers of Freedom: Reframing Political Thought. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/
CBO9780511488856.
Roth, Lorna. 2005. Something New in the Air: The Story of First Peoples 
Television Broadcasting in Canada. Montreal: McGill-Queen’s University 
Press.
Ryan, Allan. 1999. The Trickster Shift: Humour and Irony in Contemporary 
Native Art. Vancouver: UBC Press.
Said, Edward. 1993. Culture and Imperialism. London: Vintage.
Sandvig, Christian. 2012. “Connection at Ewiiaapaayp Mountain: 
Indigenous Internet Infrastructure.” In Race After the Internet, ed. Lisa 
Nakamura and Peter Chow-White, 168–200. New York: Routledge.
Santoro, Miléna. 2013. “The Rise of First Nations’ Fiction Films: Shelly 
Niro, Jeff Barnaby, and Yves Sioui Durand.” American Review of 
Canadian Studies 43 (2): 267–82. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/02722011.
2013.795031.
Sarkar, Bhaskar, and Janet Walker. 2010. “Introduction.” In Documentary 
Testimonies: Global Archives of Suffering, ed. Bhaskar Sarkar and Janet 
Walker, 1–34. New York: Routledge.
Schudson, Michael. 1981. Discovering the News: A Social History of 
American Newspapers. New York: Basic Books.
Shenker, Noah. 2010. “Embodied Memory: The Institutional Mediation 
of Survivor Testimony in the United States Holocaust Memorial 
Museum.” In Documentary Testimonies: Global Archives of Suffering, ed. 
Bhaskar Sarkar and Janet Walker, 35–58. New York: Routledge.
Simpson, Audra. 2007. “On Ethnographic Refusal: Indigeneity, ‘Voice’ 
and Colonial Citizenship.” Junctures 9: 67–80.
–. 2014. Mohawk Interruptus: Political Life across the Borders of Settler States. 
Durham and London: Duke University Press. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1215/9780822376781.
Simpson, Audra, and Andrea Smith. 2014a. “Introduction.” In Theorizing 
Native Studies, ed. Audra Simpson and Andrea Smith, 1–30. Durham 
and London: Duke University Press.
Simpson, Leanne Betasamosake. 2014. “Land as Pedagogy: Nishnaabeg 
Intelligence and Rebellious Transformations.” Decolonization 3 (3): 
1–25.
–. 2014b. “Indigenous Feminists Are Too Sexy for Your Heteropatriarchal 
Colonialism.” African Journal of Criminology and Justice Studies 8 (1): 
89–103.
Smith, Linda Tuhiwai. 1999. Decolonizing Methodologies: Research and 
Indigenous Peoples. New York and London: Zed Books.

Works Cited
194
Soloski, John. 1999. “New Reporting and Professionalism: Some 
Constraints on the Reporting of News.” In News: A Reader, ed. H. 
Tumber, 308–19. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Tahmahkera, Dustin. 2008. “Custer’s Last Sitcom: Decolonized Viewing 
of the Sitcom’s ‘Indian.’” American Indian Quarterly 32 (3): 324–51. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1353/aiq.0.0012.
Taunton, Carla. 2013. “Indigenous (Re)memory and Resistance: Video 
Works by Dana Claxton.” In Native Americans on Film: Conversations, 
Teaching, and Theory, ed. M. Elise Marubbio and Eric L. Buffalohead, 
116–34. Lexington: University Press of Kentucky. 
Taylor, Drew Hayden. 2005. Me Funny. Vancouver, BC: Douglas and 
McIntyre.
Thornley, Davinia. 2014. Cinema, Cross-Cultural Collaboration, and 
Criticism: Filming on an Uneven Field. London: Palgrave. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1057/9781137411570.
–. 2017. “imagineNATIVE Film + Media Arts Festival: Collaborative 
Criticism through Curatorship.” In Activist Film Festivals: Towards a 
Political Subject, ed. Sonia Tascon and Tyson Wils, 199–229. Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press.
Trump, Erik. 2001. “The Idea of Help: White Women Reformers and the 
Commercialization of Native American Women’s Art.” In Selling the 
Indian: Commercializing and Appropriating American Indian Cultures, ed. 
Meyer Carter Jones and Diana Royer, 159–89. Tucson: University of 
Arizona Press.
Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada. 2015a. Honouring the 
Truth, Reconciling for the Future: Summary of the Final Report of the Truth 
and Reconciliation Commission. http://www.trc.ca/websites/trcinstitu­
tion/File/2015/Exec_Summary_2015_06_25_web_o.pdf.
–. 2015b. Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada: Calls to Action. 
http://www.trc.ca/websites/trcinstitution/File/2015/Findings/Calls_to_
Action_English2.pdf.
Tuchman, Gaye. 1973. “Making News by Doing Work: Routinizing the 
Unexpected.” American Journal of Sociology 79 (1): 110–31. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1086/225510.
–. 1981. “The Symbolic Annihilation of Women by the Mass Media.” In 
The Manufacture of News: Social Problems, Deviance, and the Mass Media, 
ed. Stanley Cohen and Jock Young, 169–85. London: Constable.
Vizenor, Gerald. 1999. “Native American Indian Literatures: Narratives of 
Survivance.” In Native North America: Critical and Cultural Perspectives, 
ed. Renee Hulan, 47–63. Toronto: ECW Press.

Works Cited 195
–. 2008. “Aesthetics of Survivance: Literary Theory and Practice.” In 
Narratives of Native Presence, ed. Gerald Vizenor, 1–24. Lincoln: 
University of Nebraska Press.
Wahl-Jorgensen, Karen. 2010. “News Production, Ethnography, and 
Power: On the Challenges of Newsroom-centricity.” In The Anthropol­
ogy of News and Journalism: Global Perspectives, ed. S. Elizabeth Bird, 
21–34. Bloomington: University of Indiana Press.
Wakeham, Pauline. 2008. Taxidermic Signs: Reconstructing Aboriginality. 
Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
Weston, Mary Ann. 1996. Native Americans in the News: Images of Indians 
in the Twentieth Century Press. Westport, CT: Greenwood.
Willard, Tania. 2007. “‘Starting from Home’: An Online Retrospective of 
Dana Claxton.” Vancouver: Grunt Gallery. http://www.danaclaxton.
com/indes.html.
Williams, Raymond. 1974. Television: Technology and Cultural Form. New 
York: Routledge. http://dx.doi.org/10.4324/9780203426647.
Wilson, Shawn. 2007. “Guest Editorial: What Is an Indigenist Research 
Paradigm?” Canadian Journal of Native Education 30 (2): 193–95.
–. 2008. Research Is Ceremony: Indigenous Research Methods. Halifax and 
Winnipeg: Fernwood Publishing.
Worth, Sol, and John Adair. 1972. Through Navajo Eyes: An Exploration 
in Film Communication and Anthropology. Albuquerque: University 
of New Mexico.
Zelizer, Barbie. 1993. “Journalists as Interpretive Communities.” Critical 
Studies in Mass Communication 10 (3): 219–37. http://dx.doi.org/10.
1080/15295039309366865.
–. 2004. Taking Journalism Seriously: News and the Academy. New York: 
Sage.

This page intentionally left blank

Index
Note: (f) after a page number indicates an illustration.
A Common Experience, 133
A Tribe Called Red, 81, 109, 175n5
Aboriginal peoples. See Indigenous 
peoples
Aboriginal Peoples Television 
Network (APTN), 26, 112, 
150–53, 180n38
affective community, 38
agency, 3, 5, 6–7, 85–86, 160
Akwesasne, 101
Alia, Valerie, 85, 144
Allakariallak, 85
American films, 28, 81, 83–89, 
121, 131, 168n33
American Indians, 9, 14–15, 24, 
80, 86–88, 93–94, 102, 104, 
145
American television shows, 14–15, 
168n33
Anaquod, Glen, 46
Angilirq, Paul Apak, 15
Angutimarik, Eulalie, 65, 69, 
71–72, 75
Annie Get Your Gun, 88, 176n36
Apikiwiyak (Coming Home), 
133–34
Archer, Dan, 155
Archibald, Jo-Ann, 18, 20, 45–46
archive of suffering, 57, 79
art tactics, 11, 81–108
assimilation: mainstream media, 
141–42; residential school 
system, 9, 73. See also residential 
school system
Ataguttaaluk, Joe, 68–69, 71, 73, 
74, 75
Atanarjuat: The Fast Runner, 15, 61, 
122–23
audience (Indigenous vs non-
Indigenous), 13–17, 33, 118, 
150–53
Australia (films), 115, 180n24
Barclay, Barry, 121–22
Barnaby, Jeff, 29, 111, 123–27
Bear Witness (Ehren Thomas), 
109, 175n5
Becker, Nanobah, 117–18
Belcourt, Christi, 131
Belcourt, Shane, 29, 102, 111, 120, 
130–35
Belcourt, Tony, 130–31
Bennett, Carolyn, 154
Bierstadt, Albert, 90
Billie, Lillie, 42–43, 46
Bird, Marlene, 154–56(f)
Bird, S. Elizabeth, 14, 86–87, 88, 
143, 168n33
Blacksmith, Mary Shecapio, 31–32, 
43, 45, 47
Blacksmith, W. Claude, 44
Bolter, Jay David, 82
Brady, Miranda J., 21
Bredin, Marian, 151

Index
198
Calder, Terril: experimentation, 29, 
127–29(f), 130; film festival, 
111, 115–16; funding challenges, 
119, 130; Indigenous vs non-
Indigenous audience, 17; Métis 
identity, 115–16
Campbell, Maria, 131, 133
Canada: cultural policy and 
settler colonialism, 8–9; 
flags, 100, 177n52; historical 
recontextualizations, 98–99, 
101–2, 133; Indigenous films 
and national sovereignty, 
118; naming of, 99; national 
anthem remix, 100; patriotism 
vs land dispossession, 98–102; 
television content, 118
Canadian Broadcasting 
Corporation (CBC), 29–30, 
137–40, 151–52, 154–56, 
164–65. See also mainstream 
media
Canadian Radio-television 
and Telecommunication 
Commission (CRTC), 26, 118
Canned Meat, 128
canonical art works, 89–98
Capilano University, 138
Cartier, Jacques, 98–99
Carver, H.P., 91
Catlin, George, 6, 89–90, 91, 93, 
97–98
CBC. See Canadian Broadcasting 
Corporation (CBC)
Charleyboy, Lisa, 164, 165(f)
Cher, 91
Chesterfield Inlet Indian 
Residential School (Roman 
Catholic), 65, 66(f), 68, 72(f), 
74
Chile and Mapuche homelands, 
114–15
Christmas at Moose Factory, 123
Clark, William, 90, 176n42
Classified, 100
Claxton, Dana, 28, 82, 103–7, 122
Clement, Jemaine, 120
Cohn, Norm, 15, 61, 64, 174n52
Collective9, 65, 67–68, 73, 174n50
colonialism. See settler colonialism
consent form, 162
Cordova, Amalia, 120
Corntassel, Jeff, 19
Coulthard, Glen Sean, 8, 11, 12–13
Crow, Murray, 43–44, 45, 46–47
cultural genocide, 172n4
cultural sovereignty, 27, 60–64, 79
Curtis, Edward, 84, 90, 94
Dance to Miss Chief, 91, 93(f)–96, 
98, 114
Dance to the Berdache, 91, 93
Daniels, Harry, 131
Daniels, Roy, 123
de Certeau, Michel, 10
Delgamuukw v. British Columbia 
judicial decision, 152, 181n39
Deloria, Philip, 6, 86
Denzin, Norman, 18, 19
Depp, Johnny, 80
digital archives (survivor 
testimony), 32, 37–38, 49–56, 
78–79, 163–64, 172n7
Digitizing the Inuit and Aboriginal 
Media Archive (DIAMA), 63–64
Distant Early Warning Line (DEW 
Line), 59, 173n13
Dowell, Kristin, 4–5, 118, 120–21, 
153
Dunn, Willie, 123

Index 199
Dursun, Loretta, 42–43, 46
Edison, Thomas, 94
education: Indigenous pedagogy, 
7–8; Indigenous vs non-
Indigenous traditions, 70–71, 
73; Inuktitut language learning, 
75; journalism, 138–39, 142, 
147–48, 164
Elsipogtog protest, 116, 142
Emergence of a Legend, 91
English language: film subtitles, 
15–16; testimony, 39, 66, 
67–68
Erasmus, Georges, 60
family estrangement, 34, 59, 
71–73
Fanon, Frantz, 9
File Under Miscellaneous, 124–25(f)
films and filmmaking. See Indig­
enous films and filmmaking
First Nations University, 138
F*%k Yeah, 132
flags, 100, 177n52
Flaherty, Robert, 84–85
Foucault, Michel, 13, 37, 54, 88
Francis, Daniel, 14–15
From Cherry English, 125–26
Gabriel, Teshome, 121–22
gender: remediation tactic, 90–94; 
testimony dynamics, 69, 78
Ginsburg, Faye, 118, 121
Globe and Mail, 154
Gould, Glen, 112, 113(f)
government funding, 61–62
government policy: assimilation, 
59, 73; Inuktitut language 
learning, 75; land claims and 
logging, 47–48; privacy and 
freedom of information, 51. See 
also settler colonialism
Grusinin, Richard, 82
Hafsteinsson, Sigurjon Baldur, 151
Half-Breed, 91
Harper, Prime Minister Stephen, 
35, 48, 100, 174n51
Hart, Lyna, 46–47
Hart, Michael, 19
Henderson, Jennifer, 35–36, 48
Heritage Minutes, 98–99, 101–2, 133
Heritage Mythologies, 98–102
Historica Canada, 98, 102, 133
“Hollywood Indian,” 81, 83–89, 
121
Hopi sacred sites, 145
horror and science fiction films, 
123–27
Huhndorf, Shari, 15–16
human circle, 25
hunting traditions, 59, 70, 146, 
157
hypermediation (music videos), 
101, 103–7, 108
I Want to Know Why, 103–7
Idle No More movement, 116, 150, 
153
Igloolik Isuma Productions: about, 
61–62; films, 15–16, 122–23; 
funding, 64, 118; survivor 
testimony, 58, 60, 77–78. See 
also IsumaTV; Testimony by 
Isuma
ignoble vs noble savage, 14, 83, 
86–87, 93, 94, 141, 168n33
imagineNATIVE Film + Media 
Arts Festival: about, 28–29, 

Index
200
110, 111–12; audiences, 17; 
funding, 112; Indigenous 
content, 103, 106, 109–30, 
162; international films, 115; 
as intervention, 111–16; non-
Indigenous content, 116, 120, 
130–35; program guide, 113(f); 
report, 117; storytellers, 133. 
See also Indigenous films and 
filmmaking
imperialist nostalgia, 6, 12, 18, 19, 
84, 90
In the Name of Progress, 114–15
Independent Assessment Process 
(IAP), 36, 57, 164, 172n7
Indian head test, 102, 105, 177n55
Indian Residential School system. 
See residential school system
Indian Residential Schools 
Settlement Agreement, 32, 33, 
49, 50, 52, 67
Indian-head iconography, 28, 
102–3, 105, 107, 177n55
Indians in Unexpected Places, 86
indigenizing the archive, 103–7, 
177n57
Indigenous actors, 6, 11, 15, 
85–86, 96
Indigenous art tactics, 80–108
Indigenous films and filmmaking: 
audiences, 15–16, 118; 
challenges, 116–19, 135; 
cultural forms, 119–23; on 
cultural sovereignty, 61; 
decolonizing themes, 121; 
experimentation, 127–30; 
film festival, 109–36, 177n1; 
as “Fourth Cinema,” 121–22; 
funding, 117–19, 130; horror 
and science fiction, 123–27; 
indigenizing the archive, 
103–7, 177n57; on national 
sovereignty, 118; non-
Indigenous content, 116, 120, 
130–35; ownership rights, 4–5, 
119, 130; realist documentary, 
94, 123, 135–36; redfacing, 
80–81, 85, 96; violence of 
colonization, 123–26, 133–34. 
See also imagineNATIVE Film + 
Media Arts Festival; Indigenous 
media and media tactics
Indigenous flags, 100, 177n52
Indigenous identity: avenues 
of, 5; collective identity, 165; 
cultural resurgence, 3–4, 6, 7–8, 
19, 159–65(f); educational 
resurgence, 7–8; giving voice, 
23; hunting traditions, 59, 70, 
146, 157; ignoble vs noble 
savage, 14, 83, 86–87, 93, 94, 
141, 168n33; and journalism, 
137–58; land sovereignty, 12; 
self-identification, 11, 24–25, 
29, 169n70; stereotypes, 83–89; 
terminology, 23–25, 169n70; 
theoretical frameworks, 12–13, 
162–63; visual sovereignty, 11
Indigenous media and media 
tactics: acts of acceptance vs 
refusal, 9–10; art tactics, 11, 
81–108; audience, 13–14, 
150–53; cultural resurgence, 
159–65; funding, 64, 78, 
118; vs mainstream media, 
150–53; media archives, 
63–64; mediation, 83–89; 
music remixes, 81, 93, 101, 
103–7, 108, 109; as “outside” 
of technology, 85; perspectives, 
6–7, 102, 154–56(f); and 
power, 4, 5, 15, 23, 28, 162–63, 

Index 201
165; selection criteria, 25–26; 
subversive tactics, 28; tactical 
media terminology, 10, 167n23. 
See also Indigenous films and 
filmmaking; mainstream media
Indigenous peoples: agency, 3, 
5, 6–7, 85–86, 160; digital 
records governance, 52–53; 
family estrangement, 34, 59, 
71–73; human circle worldview, 
25; knowledge keepers, 144; 
land title, 152, 181n39; media 
coverage statistics, 140; media 
stereotypes, 6, 14–15, 28, 82, 
140, 168n33; oral traditions, 
45–46, 55, 63; and research 
methodology, 18–19; sacred 
ceremony privacy, 145; “two-
spirited” people, 91. See also 
Inuit people
Indigenous women: media 
depictions of, 86–88, 127–30, 
154; missing and murdered, 
131, 150, 153–54, 163; 
stereotypes, 86–88, 154; 
violence against, 153–56
Indigenous youth, 126, 164, 
165(f), xiii
intergenerational knowledge and 
storytelling, 15, 20, 29, 61, 121, 
133, 135–36, 157
intergenerational trauma, 34, 
42–43, 106, 161
Inuit Broadcasting Corporation, 62
Inuit people: assimilation, 57–79; 
communications accessibility, 76, 
174n52; films, 15–16, 61; media 
archives, 63–64; media funding, 
61–62; residential school system 
testimony, 27–28, 58–79; suicide 
rate, 60; traditional culture, 
59–61, 70–71, 77–78. See also 
Indigenous peoples
Inuit sub-commission, 164
Inuit Tapiriit Kanatami (ITK), 58, 
60, 67, 77
Inuktitut language: films, 15–16, 
61; learning, 75; residential 
schools, 73; survivor testimony, 
60, 65–66, 68, 74, 174n46
Inuvik, Sir Alexander Mackenzie 
Day School, 65
Irngaut, Celina, 70, 76
Irniq, Peter: interviewer role, 
75–78; lobbyist, 67; on national 
apology, 174n51; policy 
implications, 75–78; survivor 
testimonies, 27, 60, 68–69, 70
IsumaTV: about, 61, 62; funding, 
64; survivor testimony, 27–28, 
58, 60, 65–69, 77–79; website, 
58, 60, 62–63, 77. See also 
Igloolik Isuma Productions; 
Testimony by Isuma
IsumaTV Mediaplayer Distribution 
Network, 63
Jiwani, Yasmin, 154
journalism: calls to action (TRC), 
142; challenges, 143–45, 
149–50; cultural protocols, 153; 
in Indigenous communities, 
137–58; Indigenous sources, 
143, 180n24; journalists as 
outsiders, 143–45; objectivity, 
143; relational practices, 138, 
145, 147–48; reputation, 
respect, and relationality, 
145–50; training, 29–30, 
138–39, 142, 147–48, 164. See 
also McCue, Duncan
Journalists for Human Rights, 140

Index
202
Kane, Paul, 6, 89–90, 97–98
Kanehsatake: 270 Years of Resistance, 
100
Keeping Quiet, 132
Kelly, John M.H., 21–22
Kemper, Kevin, 145
Killing the Indian Maiden, 87
Kovach, Margaret, 18–19, 20
Kremmidjuar, Joe, 74–75
Kunnuk, Simeonie, 68
Kunuk, Zacharias: 
communications accessibility, 
174n52; filmmaker, 15, 61, 62; 
media funding, 64; survivor 
testimony and video interviews, 
27, 65, 67–69, 77–78
Kuptana, Rosemarie, 65, 66, 70, 
73, 74
LaForme, Justice Harry, 67
Lakota people, 24, 83, 87, 102, 104
land dispossession, 47–48, 
98–102, 116, 142, 152, 181n39
language: education, 75; films, 
15–16, 61; identity terminology, 
23–25; survivor testimony, 60, 
65–66, 68, 74, 174n46
Lavallee, Patrick, 155
Layton, Jack, 100
Legacy of Hope, 76
Lewis, Meriweather, 90, 176n42
Library and Archives Canada, 35, 
50–51
Lickers-Sage, Cynthia, 111
Lincoln, Yvonna, 18, 19
Littlechild, Chief Wilton, 38, 45
livestream.com, 38
Loew, Patty, 142
Loft, Ruth, 47
Lonetree, Amy, 16
mainstream media: assimilationist, 
141–42; audiences, 150–53; and 
Indigenous coverage, 140–45, 
150; vs Indigenous media, 
150–53; Indigenous sources, 
143, 180n24; on murdered and 
missing women, 154; Western 
technology as superior, 85. See 
also Canadian Broadcasting 
Corporation (CBC); Indigenous 
media and media tactics
Māori people, 115, 120, 169n70
Mariman, Danko, 114–15
Marubbio, M. Elise, 87
May, Karl, 93
McCall, Sophie, 15–16, 61, 
122–23
McCue, Duncan: about, 137, 
139(f); awards, 138; journalism 
practices, 146–47; journalism 
training, 29–30, 138–39, 
147–48, 164; on mainstream 
media, 140–45, 151–52; 
online learning tool, 139–40; 
on rewarding career, 157–58. 
See also journalism
McGrath, Dr. Tamalik, 174n46
McLuhan, Marshall, 15
McMahon, Ryan, 164
media and media tactics. See Indig­
enous media and media tactics; 
mainstream media
Mella, Kelly, 142
Merskin, Debra, 14
Métis activists, 131
Métis artists, 115–16
Mi’gmaq protest, 116, 142
missing and murdered Indigenous 
women, 131, 150, 153–54, 163
Mitchell, Michael, 123

Index 203
Mittell, Jason, 122
Mojica, Monique, 175n5
Monkman, Kent, 28, 82, 89–98, 
114, 122
Moran, Ry, 52–53
multimedia remixing, 98–102
museums, 16, 96–97
music remixes, 81, 93, 101, 103–7, 
108, 109
Myers, Lisa, 104–6
Nanook of the North, 84–85
national apology, 75, 174n51
National Centre for Truth and 
Reconciliation (NCTR): 
building, 49–50; database 
launch, 50; digital archive 
(survivor testimony), 32, 37–38, 
49–56, 163–64, 172n7; funding, 
49, 52; Indigenous governance 
structure, 52–53; legal battle, 
51–52, 57–58, 163–64, 172n7; 
mandate, 49; testimony 
accessibility, 76, 174n52
National Film Board (NFB), 4–5, 
46–47, 123
Native American Film and Video 
Festival (NAFVF), 112
Native Americans, 9, 14–15, 24, 
80, 86–88, 93–94, 102, 104, 145
Native Women’s Association of 
Canada, 153
Neruda, Pablo, 124
New Fire, 164, 165(f)
news media, 29–30, 137–40, 
150–56, 164–65. See also 
mainstream media
newspapers, 150, 154
Niezen, Ronald, 36, 54
Nishnaabeg, 7–8
noble vs ignoble savage, 14, 83, 
86–87, 93, 94, 141, 168n33
Nolan, Yvette, 133
Northern Indigenous TV Network 
(NITV), 174n52
Northern Native Broadcast Access 
Program, 151
Nunavut, 9
Obomsawin, Alanis: agency, 3–4, 
160, 164; consent form, 162; 
documentary filmmaker, 25, 26, 
100, 114, 123
Of the Moment, 104–5
Otak, Lazarie, 71, 73
Otak, Rene, 68–69
paternalism. See settler colonialism
patriotism vs land dispossession, 
98–102
Peters, John Durham, 58
Pfeifer, Pitseolak, 174n46
Pookums, 132
popular media, 28, 82, 140
potlatch ceremony, 84, 176n17
power and media tactics, 4, 5, 15, 
23, 28, 162–63, 165
public statements. See survivor 
testimony
qualitative methods (research 
methodology), 17–18
Quanz, Katherine, 64
Quassa, Clara, 65, 72–73, 76
Quassa, Paul, 72
Qulitalik, Pauloosie, 15
Raheja, Michelle, 6, 15, 85, 86, 96
records archive. See digital archives 
(survivor testimony)

Index
204
Red Man Laughing, 164
redfacing (“playing Indian”), 
80–81, 85, 96
redress, 36, 47–48, 55
Regan, Paulette, 26
relational accountability, 18–21
relationality and journalism, 138, 
145, 147–48
remediation: about, 82; canonical 
art, 89–92(f), 97–98; as cultural 
practice, 82–83; as empowering, 
81, 108; films, 94–96, 98–102; 
hypermediation techniques, 
101, 103–7, 108; music remixes, 
81, 93, 101, 103–7, 108, 109; 
survivor testimony, 32–33
remedy (testimony narratives), 
36, 54
reporters. See journalism
research methodology: 
community-based, 18–22; 
ethnographic refusal, 161–62; 
interview transcript sharing, 
22–23; language limitations 
and terminology, 23–25; 
media selection criteria, 25–26; 
qualitative, 17–18
residential school system: about, 
33–34, 57, 66(f), 72(f), 
172n4; assimilation goals, 
9, 73; as cultural genocide, 
172n4; education and political 
sovereignty, 9; Heritage Minutes, 
102, 133; intergenerational 
trauma, 34, 42–43, 161; Inuit 
experiences, 58–79; legacy, 34, 
36, 75; media practices, 26–27; 
sexual abuse, 73–74, 155; 
students, 65, 66(f), 68, 72(f), 
74; survivor testimony, 26–27, 
31–56, 73–74, 155
Rhymes for Young Ghouls, 126–27
Rogers, Janet Marie, 177n52
Rosaldo, Renato, 84
Roth, Lorna, 118
Royal Canadian Mounted Police 
(RCMP), 59
Royal Ontario Museum, 97
Ryle, Jason, 112–13
Saami films (Scandinavia), 115
Saganash, Romeo, 38, 48
Said, Edward, 11
Salazar, Juan Francisco, 122
salvaging impulse, 6, 84
Santoro, Miléna, 123
Sattler, Kirby, 80
Séance, 94, 98
self-determination, 10, 137, 165
self-identification, 11, 24, 29
Selling the Indian, 88
settler colonialism: cultural policy, 
8–9; imperialist nostalgia, 
6, 12, 18, 19, 84, 90; power 
structures, 8, 12–13, 18, 91, 
163; and remediation, 82–83, 
89–98; salvaging impulse, 
6, 84; terminology, 23–25; 
vs traditional culture, 70–71; 
violence of, 81, 123–26, 
133–34
sexual abuse testimony, 31, 44–45, 
73–74
Shooting Geronimo, 94–95(f), 96
Simon, Savannah (Savvy), 164, 
165(f)
Simpson, Audra, 11–12, 18
Simpson, Leanne Betasamosake, 
7–8
Sinclair, Justice Murray, 35, 37, 38, 
52, 53
Sioux Ghost Dance, 84, 94

Index 205
Sir Alexander Mackenzie Day 
School (Inuvik), 65
Sisters in Spirit, 153
Smith, Andrea, 12
Smith, Ariel, 50, 123, 179nn49
Smith, Linda Tuhiwai, 17–18, 19
Spotlight series, 115
Spotted Elk, Molly, 91
St. Cry, Lillian (Princess Red 
Wing), 86
Stories from the Land, 164
storytelling and intergenerational 
knowledge, 15, 20, 29, 61, 121, 
133, 135–36, 157
suicide, 60, xiii
survivance, 5, 82, 85–86
Survivor Committee (TRC), 38
survivor testimony: as archive of 
suffering, 57, 79; community-
based approach, 65–69, 174n50; 
gender dynamics (testimony), 
69, 78; media practices, 32; 
policy implications, 74–79; 
political nature of, 79; public 
statement-gathering process, 
44, 47–48, 55–56; remedy, 36, 
54; time limits, 45–46, 78; on 
traditional culture disruption, 
69–74; translations, 68, 174n46; 
video accessibility, 65–66, 
75–76. See also Testimony by 
Isuma; Truth and Reconciliation 
Commission (TRC)
tactical media, 10, 167n23
Telefilm Canada, 62
television broadcasting, 102, 105, 
118, 177n55. See also Aboriginal 
Peoples Television Network 
(APTN); Canadian Broadcasting 
Corporation (CBC); IsumaTV
Television Northern Canada 
(TVNC), 151
Ten Little Indians, 105
Testimony by Isuma, 65–69, 75–
76, 79, 174n52. See also IsumaTV
The Dandelion, 128
The Lodge, 127, 128–29(f), 130
The Lone Ranger, 80
The Triumph of Mischief, 90–91, 
92(f)
theoretical frameworks, 12–13, 
162–63
These Are My People, 123
Third Cinema (third-world films), 
121
Thomas, Ehren (Bear Witness), 
109, 175n5
Thomas, Jeff, 175n5
Thornley, Davinia, 116, 119
Tkaronto, 132
Toronto International Film Festival 
(TIFF), 112
transgendered persona, 90–92(f), 
93–96, 98
Trick or Treaty, 3, 162
Truth and Reconciliation 
Commission (TRC): archive 
specifications, 50–51; auditor 
general report, 50; calls to 
action, 142; commissioners, 
34–35, 67; controversies and 
critiques, 34–38; final report 
summary, 51, 163; government 
absence, 51; instructional video, 
41–42; Inuit sub-committee, 
27–28, 67, 75, 77; juridical 
power, 37; limitations, 35; 
mandate, 34–35, 57, 170n10, 
172n4; media practices, 17, 26–
27, 32; mental health supports, 
76; on missing and murdered 

Index
206
Indigenous women, 153, 163; 
national event (Montreal 2013), 
31–32, 38–39(f), 40–42, 44–48, 
170n30; privacy laws, 36–37, 
40, 45, 170n30; remedy of 
harms, 36, 54; sharing panels, 
38–39(f), 40–42; statement-
gathering process, 31–56; 
testimony archives, 27–28, 45; 
testimony narratives, 42–48, 
161; testimony time limits, 45–
46. See also survivor testimony; 
Testimony by Isuma
Turquetil Hall residence, 65, 66(f), 
72(f)
TV Northern Canada, 62
2bears, Jackson, 28, 81, 82, 98, 
99(f)–102
Unity flag, 101
University of Manitoba, 49
Uttak, Louis, 65, 75
Vancouver Indigenous Media Arts 
Festival, 112
vanishing Indian, 80, 82, 84
video art and remediation, 98–102
Video Out, 105
visual media and remediation, 
175n5
visual sovereignty, 11
Vizenor, Gerald, 5
Vtape, 64, 105, 111
Waititi, Taika, 120
Wakeham, Pauline, 35–36, 48
Walking With Our Sisters, 131
Wallace, Russell, 108
Wawakie, Rose, 33, 47–48
Wayne, John, 86
We Were Children, 46–47
We Were So Far Away, 76
Western society. See settler 
colonialism
Willard, Tania, 104
Williams, Michelle, 80
Wilson, Barbara, 123
Wilson, Marie, 38
Wilson, Shawn, 12, 18
women. See Indigenous women
Young, Mary Lynn, 154
Young Deer, James, 86
youth. See Indigenous youth

