URINARY- REGULATION  
OF FLUID BALANCE 
Learning objectives: 
 
1. Recall the location of the juxtamedullary nephrons. 
2. Explain the change in permeability along the renal  
tubule to ions and water. 
3. Explain the importance of the osmotic gradient in  
the kidney medulla.   
4. Explain RAAS and the conditions that activate it.  
5. Explain the hormonal regulation of ECF volume.   
6. Define diuresis and explain the different causes  
of diuresis.  

OSMOLARITY & 
VOLUME IN TUBULES  
• Kidney can conserve water but can not replenish water. 
• Only water excreted by the kidney can be regulated.  
• Normal urine mOsM changes with body’s need. 

TUBULE PERMEABILITY 
TO SOLUTE & WATER 
1. Standing osmotic gradient in medulla. 
 
2.  Descending Thin Loop of Henle is  
permeable to water but not to Na+. 
 
3. Thin Loop of Henle is permeable to  
water and Na+. 
 
4. Ascending Thick Loop of Henle is  
permeable to Na+, K+ and Cl- but not 
to water. 
 
 

VASOPRESSIN (ADH)   
FUNCTION 
Increases reabsorption of  water in distal tubule  
& collecting duct to concentrate urine. 
Acts to dilute ECF osmolarity & increase blood pressure. 

ALDOSTERONE FUNCTION 
Acts to increase ECF volume & blood pressure (BP). 
Increases reabsorption of Na+ & 
secretion of K+ by principal cells.   

RENIN-ANGIOTENSIN II- 
ALDOSTERONE SYSTEM 
(RAAS) 
RAAS = coordinated response  
increases 2 vasoconstrictors 
(ADH & ANGII) and  
aldosterone  in circulation. 

EXCESS VOLUME 
Increases GFR & water loss to urine 

DIURESIS 
(increased loss of body water to urine, > 1 ml/min) 
•
Water diuresis – decreased osmolarity of plasma and/ 
 
or increased blood volume leading to decrease in anti-
 
diuretic hormone (ADH) levels.  Urine output increases. 
 
•
Osmotic diuresis -  osmotically active substance (e.g., 
glucose) within renal tubule. Urine output increases. 
 
•
Diuretics - drugs that increase loss of body water  
 
primarily by inhibiting Na+ reabsorption by the renal 
 
tubule. Diuretics act at different segments of the renal 
 
tubule. Urine output increases. 

1. Two-thirds of the body’s water is in the ICF; one third  
in the ECF. The ICF and ECF are in osmotic balance.  
 
2. Kidneys’ primary functions are (1) to maintain body fluid  
volumes by regulating salt balance & (2) to maintain the 
osmolarity of the body by regulating water balance.  
 
3. Reabsorption and secretion of water and solutes is  
governed by gradients and secondary active transport. 
 
4. Hormones regulate osmolarity (ADH), & body fluid  
volume (ADH, aldosterone, & ANF). 
 
5. Increased urine excretion above 1 mL/min is called  
diuresis. There are several causes including: water, osmotic  
and diuretic.  Diuretics  primarily inhibit Na+ reabsorption.  
 
KEY CONCEPTS 

