REFLEX CONTROL  
Learning Objectives 
1. Describe the reflex control of blood pressure. 
  
2. Explain how baroreceptors (pressure sensors)  
control blood pressure (BP). 
 
3. Explain how other sensors such as the cardio-pulmonary 
receptors and blood volume receptors can control BP.   
 
 4. Describe central control of blood pressure in response 
to exercise and hypotension. 

REFLEX LOOP  

BARORECEPTOR 
REFLEX 
 
Carotid sinus & aortic arch respond rapidly to a  
change in pressure (stretch) for minute-minute  
control of BP. 
 
Increased MAP  increases firing of baroreceptors  
which decreases sympathetic tone.  
 
Decreased MAP decreases firing of baroreceptors 
which increases sympathetic tone.  
 
[Example: orthostatic hypotension] 

OTHER RECEPTORS  
INFLUENCE MAP 
Arterial chemoreceptors (CO2, H+, O2) 
 
- integrates respiratory and CV system 
 
Hypothalamus (controls body temperature) 
 
- sympathetic tone of skin vascular beds 
 
Kidney controls fluid volume 
- Atrial Natriuretic Factor (ANF) increases fluid loss 
- Antidiuretic Hormone (ADH) decreases fluid loss 

Large drop in blood volume leads to 
decreased firing of baroreceptors, and 
activation of sympathetic NS responses. 
 
Drop in blood pressure also triggers secretion 
of renin from the kidney leading to an 
increase in circulating aldosterone and two 
vasoconstrictors, Antidiuretic hormone (ADH) 
and Angiotensin II (ANGII). 
 
* Net result = increased heart rate (HR) & SV  
HEMORRHAGE 
     decreased Blood Volume 
 
  decreased Baroreceptors firing 
 
increased SNS  
   Kidney  
                
 
      TPR 
 
 
 
HR     
Stroke Volume (SV) 
Renin 
Aldosterone, 
ANGII, ADH 

CO, TPR, & MAP IN 
AEROBIC EXERCISE 
What happens to blood flow in muscle?  
 
Does TPR increase or decrease in 
strenuous aerobic exercise?  
 
Predict what happens to MAP?   
 
MAP = CO x TPR  
Pre-exercise level 
Aerobic exercise  
level 
CO = 5 L/min 
CO = 20 L/min 
HR = 70 bpm 
150 bpm 
20% flow to muscle increased flow to 
muscle (vasodilation) 
TPR = basal  
MAP = basal 

HEART FAILURE  
A. Lower ejection volume (SV) lowers CO. 
 
B. Increased fluid retention by kidney  
increases end diastolic volume (200mL).  
 
What happened to SV in (B)?  
 
BUT increased fluid retention = increased 
afterload!  
normal heart 
weak heart 
A 
B 

1. Cardiac output (CO) is matched with tissue blood flow by maintaining mean arterial 
blood pressure (MAP) relatively constant. 
 
2. Baroreceptors act as short term regulators of arterial blood pressure. They provide 
sensory information to the cardiovascular center in the medulla (MCCC). Autonomic 
outflow from the MCCC maintains blood pressure constant. 
 
3. Total blood volume can change the end diastolic volume (EDV) of the ventricles (filling) 
and thereby change stroke volume.  
 
4. Hemorrhage reduces EDV leading to hypotension. Normal compensatory response to 
hemorrhage is vasoconstriction of arteries and capacitance veins and increased heart rate 
and contractility.    
GENERAL CONCEPTS 

GENERAL CONCEPTS 
5. Hypotension can result from either a sudden postural change or from prolonged 
quiet standing (orthostatic hypotension). The compensatory response is as stated 
above for hemorrhage.  
 
6. Aerobic exercise increases CO (up to 30 L/min) but reduces TPR so MAP remains 
almost constant. In weight lifting, CO, TPR, and MAP increases.   
  
7. Failure of the heart to maintain normal CO leads to increased TPR to maintain MAP.  
 
8. Compensation for decreased CO caused by heart failure (weak heart) includes 
increases in HR and TPR, vasoconstriction of veins, and retention of water by the 
kidneys.  

