CIRCULATORY SYSTEM 
Learning Objectives 
1.Describe the functions of arteries, arterioles, capillaries, venules & veins.  
2.Describe the relationship between pressure, flow, and resistance  
      in regulating peripheral circulation.  
3. Define systolic, diastolic and mean arterial pressures 
4. Explain the myogenic response, active and reactive hyperemia and reflex 
  
control of blood vessel resistance.  
5. Explain the factors that alter trans-capillary movement of fluid and solutes . 
6. Explain the difference between capacitance and distributing vessels and the  
      relationship between lymphatic and blood circulations. 

CIRCULATORY (CV) SYTEM 

1. Bulk flow from high to low pressure states. 
2. Resistance opposes blood flow. Resistance depends on: 
 
a. length of the tube (blood vessel) 
 
b. radius of the tube (to 4th power!)- most important! 
 
c. viscosity of the blood 
3. Flow rate is the volume of blood that passes a given point  
 
per unit time (L/min). This is determined by pressure  
 
gradients and resistance. 
4. Velocity of the blood is how far a volume of blood travels  
 
per unit of time (mm/sec). This is determined by cross  
 
sectional  area, if the flow rate is constant. 
RULES FOR CV SYSTEM 

Blood pressure  (BP) 
maintained in diastole by 
compliance of elastic 
arteries.   
 
Pulsatility & blood pressure 
diminishes in arterioles due 
to resistance.  
PRESSURE & PULSATILTY 
Blood 
Pressure 
(mmHg) 
Aorta    arteriole capillary    vein       Vena Cava 
 
       Distance from Heart 
120 
  
  80 
 
 
 
 
  
  10 

BLOOD PRESSURES 
Mean Arterial (MAP)  
 
MAP = DP + 1/3 (SP – DP)  
 
Pulse Pressure (PP)  = SP –DP 
 
Where DP = diastolic pressure 
SP = systolic pressure 

ARTERY REGULATES BLOOD 
FLOW TO AN ORGAN 
Arteries  distribute  blood  to individual organs! 
FLOW (F) = (P2-P1)/Resistance 
 
CO = Q = (MAP- P vena cava)/Total Peripheral Resistance   
              = MAP/TPR 
 
Q organ = (MAP – Venous P)/Resistance of organ  
                = MAP/R organ 
 
. 
. 

ARTERIOLES REGULATE  
BLOOD WITHIN ORGANS 
1. LOCAL CONTROL:  
Myogenic response = change in wall tension 
Hyperemia = change in ECF metabolites  
 
active = increased metabolism increases ECF metabolites (K+, CO2, H+) 
 
reactive hyperemia =  increased metabolites during ischemia causes higher flow 
 
 
       in reperfusion  
 
   
2. REFLEX CONTROL:  
Sympathetic innervation  (NorEpi at α 1 AR) 
Hormones (vasopressin, epinephrine) 

Dynamic changes in arterioles  
(vasodilation or vasoconstriction) 
regulate downstream pressures &  
flow rates across capillary beds.  
 
Green = vasodilation of arteriole 
Blue = basal state of arteriole 
Red = vasoconstriction 
ARTERIOLES ACT AS  
“NOZZLES” 
Pressure   
(mmHg) 
    Artery 
     Arteriole 
Capillary 
80 
 
 
 
40 
 
 
 
20 

EXCHANGE ACROSS  
CAPILLARY 
Arteriole                          Capillary                                      Venule 

LYMPHATIC SYSTEM 
Lymph is formed by the slight 
mismatch between filtration 
and absorption in the blood 
capillaries.  
 
3L per day of lymph is returned 
to the blood. 
 
Lymph drainage not in CNS. 
Lymph node 
Lymphatic vessel       

GENERAL CONCEPTS 
1. Heart consists of two pumps that drive the unidirectional flow of blood through the 
pulmonary and systemic circulations.   
2. Vascular system is a conduit for blood flow and a dynamic system that controls the 
distribution of the blood to the organs of the body.    
3.   Arteries are low resistance conduits that maintain pressure during diastole and 
 
distribute blood to organs.  
4.   Arterioles are the dominant site of resistance to blood flow within the organ.  
5.   Capillaries are the site of exchange. Balance between hydrostatic and oncotic forces       
determines the direction of fluid movement either into or out of the capillaries.  
6.   Veins are the low resistance conduits for venous return and volume reservoirs.  

GENERAL CONCEPTS 
6.  Sympathetic nervous system (SNS) constricts smooth muscle of veins leading to 
increased venous return, and thereby increased SV and CO.  
 
7.  The lymphatic system provides a one-way route for the return of interstitial fluid to 
the cardiovascular system.  
 
8.  Disease states that alter the hydrostatic and oncotic pressures can result in edema. 
These disease states include heart failure, liver disease, kidney disease and protein 
malnutrition. 
  

