SMOOTH	  MUSCLE	  	  	  
Learning objectives 
1.	  Describe	  the	  structure	  and	  func2on	  of	  smooth	  muscle	  	  
2.	  Explain	  how	  myoﬁlaments	  are	  regulated.	  
3.	  Name	  three	  ways	  in	  which	  contrac2on	  is	  ini2ated.	  
4.	  Explain	  spontaneous	  electrical	  ac2vity	  (pacemaker).	  
5.	  Contrast	  single	  unit	  and	  mul2unit	  smooth	  muscles.	  

•  The	  sliding	  ﬁlament	  mechanism,	  in	  which	  myosin	  	  
	  	  	  	  	  	  ﬁlaments	  bind	  to	  and	  move	  ac2n	  ﬁlaments,	  is	  the	  
	  	  	  	  	  	  basis	  for	  shortening	  of	  s2mulated	  muscle.	  
	  
•  Myosin-­‐ac2n	  interac2ons	  are	  regulated	  by	  calcium.	  
	  
•  Changes	  in	  membrane	  poten2al	  are	  linked	  to	  changes	  
	  	  	  	  	  in	  internal	  Ca++	  leading	  to	  contrac2on	  (E-­‐C	  Coupling).	  
SHARED	  PRINCIPLES	  

Thin,	  cigar	  shaped	  cells	  with	  central	  
nucleus.	  
	  
No	  T	  tubules	  &	  no	  troponin-­‐tropomyosin.	  	  
ContracHon	  is	  regulated	  by	  thick	  (myosin)	  
ﬁlament.	  	  
	  
Thin	  ﬁlaments	  are	  anchored	  to	  the	  plasma	  
membrane	  by	  dense	  bodies	  (analogous	  to	  
z	  lines).	  	  
	  
When	  contracted,	  cells	  have	  a	  “postage	  	  
stamp”	  	  shape.	    
SMOOTH	  MUSCLE	  FIBER	  	  

Removal	  of	  Ca++	  leads	  to	  relaxaHon	  by	  
dephosphorylaHng	  myosin	  light	  chain.	  	  
Ca++	  REGULATES	  MYOSIN	  	  	  

TONIC:	   	  amount	  of	  tension	  generated	  is	  
	  
	  
	  
	  propor6onal	  to	  the	  s6mulus	  and	  	  
	  
	  is	  sustained	  over	  6me.	  	  	  
	  
PHASIC:	  	  single	  contracHon	  followed	  by	  
	  
	  relaxaHon	  =	  twitch.	  	  
	  
TYPES	  OF	  CONTRACTION	  
Slow	  myosin	  ATPase	  =	  slow	  contracHon	  

•  Mechanically	  Gated	  Channels	  
•  Ligand	  Gated	  Channels	  or	  Receptors	  
	  
	  -­‐	  Autonomic	  nervous	  system	  (NorEPI)	  
	  
	  -­‐	  Hormones	  (expl.	  oxytocin)	  	  
	  
	  -­‐	  Paracrine	  agents	  (expl.	  K+,	  H+)	  
•  Voltage	  Gated	  Channels	  
	  
	  -­‐	  Spontaneous	  pacemaker	  poten6als	  
REGULATION	  OF	  
CONTRACTION	  

PACEMAKER	  ACTIVITY	  
Unstable	  res2ng	  membrane	  poten2al	  
opens	  Ca++	  voltage	  channels	  	  
resul2ng	  in	  rhythmic	  pa]erns	  of	  
ac2on	  poten2als	  and	  contrac2ons.	  
	  
Res2ng	  membrane	  poten2al	  is	  unstable	  
due	  to	  eﬄux	  of	  K+	  via	  K+	  leak	  channels.	  	  	  
Membrane	  potenHal	  (mV)	  
Time	  (msec)	  
threshold	  

SINGLE	  UNIT	  &	  	  
MULTI	  UNIT	  FIBERS	  
In single-unit muscles: a few cells are innervated. 
Gap junctions spread the membrane potentials  
between neighboring cells = synchronous activity.  
(Expl: GI tract, uterus and small blood vessels) 
In multi-unit muscle: each fiber is innervated.  
There are few or no gap junctions. These cells are not 
activated by stretch receptors.  
(Expl:	  associated	  with	  hair	  follicles)	  	  

KEY	  CONCEPTS	  
•  Smooth	  muscle	  is	  an	  involuntary,	  non-­‐striated	  muscle	  associated	  with	  blood	  vessels	  
and	  visceral	  organs.	  	  
•  Smooth	  muscle	  contains	  overlapping	  protein	  myoﬁlaments,	  ac2n	  and	  myosin.	  The	  
rela2ve	  sliding	  of	  which	  produces	  shortening	  and	  generates	  force.	  This	  process	  
involves	  cross	  bridge	  forma2on	  between	  ac2n	  and	  myosin	  which	  is	  driven	  by	  ATP.	  	  
• 
Coupling	  between	  the	  membrane	  ac2on	  poten2al	  and	  contrac2on	  is	  mediated	  by	  
calcium	  ions.	  Ca++	  regulates	  myosin	  to	  enable	  cross	  bridge	  forma2on	  and	  contrac2on.	  
•  Smooth	  muscle	  is	  regulated	  by	  the	  autonomic	  nervous	  system.	  Some	  smooth	  muscle	  
is	  regulated	  by	  stretch	  and/or	  by	  paracrine	  factors.	  
•  In	  pacemaker	  cells,	  ac2on	  poten2als	  are	  ini2ated	  by	  an	  inﬂux	  of	  extracellular	  	  Ca++.	  	  	  	  
•  Some	  smooth	  muscle	  exhibits	  fused	  tetanus	  and	  tonic	  contrac2on.	  	  	  	  

