THE PALADIN OK THE MCHT
A Bantam Spectra Book I May 1989
AH rights referred.
Copyright C 1989 by Margaret Weis and Tracy Hickman.
Cover art ana interior HuOrations copyright C J989 by Larry Elmort.
No part of tha book may be reproduced or transmitted
in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical,
including photocopying, recording, or by any information
storage and retrieval system, without ptrmistion in
writing from the publaher. For information addrett: Bantam Books.
ISBN 0553-27902-5 Published simultaneously in the United States and Canada
Bantam Books are publiiaed by Bantam Booki, a division of Bantam Douhieday DeO
Publishing Croup, Inc. Its trademark, coiuMfing of the wordt 'Bantam Books"
and the portrayal of a rootter, it Registered in V.S. Patent and Trademark
Office and in other countries Marca Rttfttrada. Bantam Boob. 666 Fifth Avenue,
New York, Jtfnc Yorft 10103.
PRINTED IK THE UNITED STATES OK AMERICA
00987654321
Book One
THE BOOK OF THE IMMORTALS 1
Chapter 1
*!l1»e theories about the creation of the world of Sularin num-
,: bered the same as the Gods who kept it in motion. The
followers of Benario, God of Thieves, were firm in their belief
. that their God stole the world from Sul, who had been going to set it as
another jewel in the firmament. Uevin's worshipers portrayed Sul as a
craftsman, holding calipers and a T
, square in his hand and spending his spare time considering
;ihe nature of the dodecahedron. Quar taught that Sul molded the world from a
lump of clay, used the sun to bake it, then bathed it with his tears when he
was finished. Akhran told his followers nothing at all. The Wandering God
hadn't the least
• interest in the creation of the world. That it was here and now was enough
for him. Consequently each Sheykh had his own view, handed down from
great-great-grandfather to great-grandfather to grandfather to father to son.
Each Sheykh's view was the right one, all others were wrong, and it was a
mat-;'ter over which blood had been spilled on countless occasions. ~    in
the Emperor's court in Khandar, renowned for advanced thought, learned men and
women spent long hours , debating the differing theories and even longer hours
prov-;-,ing, eventually, that Quar's teachings were undoubtedly the v inost
scientific. Certainly it was the only theory to explain 'adequately the
phenomenon of the Kurdin Sea—an ocean of '^arft water populated with seagoing
fish and completely surrounded on all sides by desert. ;1:.-    The landlocked
Kurdin Sea was populated by other things,
4
WEIS AND HICKMAN
too; dark and shadowy things that the learned men and women, living in the
safety and comfort of the court of Khandar, saw only in their sleep or in
fevered delirium. One of these dark things (and not the darkest by any means)
was Quar's minion, Kaug.
Three figures, standing on the shore of the sea, were discussing this very
subject intently. The figures were not human; no human had ever crossed the
Sun's Anvil whose empty dunes surrounded the sea. The three were immortals—
not gods, but those who served both gods and humans.
"You're telling me that his dwelling is down there, in that?" said a djinn,
staring at both the water and his fellow djinn with deep disgust.
The water of the Kurdin Sea was a deep cobalt blue, its color made more vivid
and intense by the stark, glaring whiteness of the desert. In the distance,
what appeared to be a cloud of smoke was a white smudge against a pale blue
sky.
"Yes," replied the younger djinn. "And don't look so amazed, Sond. I told you

before we left—"
"You said on the Kurdin Sea, Pukah! You never said anything about in the
Kurdin Sea!"
"Unless Kaug's taken up boating, how could he live on the Kurdin Sea?"
"There's an island in the center, you know."
"Galos!" Pukah's eyes opened wide. "From what I've heard of Galos, not even
Kaug would dare live on that accursed rock."
"Bah!" Sond sneered. "You've been listening to the mectdah's stories with ears
soaked in qttmiz."
"I haven't either! I'm extensively traveled. My former master—"
"—was a thief and a liarl"
"Don't pay any attention to him, Asrial, my beautiful enchanter," said Pukah,
turning his back upon Sond and facing a silver-haired woman clad in white
robes, who was looking from one to the other with increasing wonder. "My
former master was a follower of Benario, but only because that was the
religion in which he was raised. What could he do? He didn't want to offend
his parents—"
"—by earning an honest living," interposed Sond.
"He was an entertainer at heart, with such a wonderful way with animals—"
THE PALADIN OF THE NIGHT
5
- "Snake charmer. That was his ploy to get into other people's houses-."
He was not a devout believer! Certainly Benario never blessed him!"
"That's true. He got caught with his hand in the money
jw—"
"He was misunderstood!" Pukah shouted.
"When they were through with him, he was missing more than understanding,"
Sond said dryly, folding his gold-braeeleted arms across his bare chest.
Drawing his saber from the green sash at his waist, Pukah rounded on the older
djinn. "You and I have been friends for centuries, Sond, but 1 will not allow
you to insult me before the angel I love!"
"We've never been friends, that I knew of," Sond growled, drawing his saber in
turn. Steel flashing in the bright sun-Hgbt, the two began to circle each
other. "And if hearing the truth insults you—"
"What are you two doing?" the angel demanded. "Have you forgotten why we are
here? What about your Nedjma?" She glared at Sond. "Last night you shed tears
over her cruel fide—being held captive by this evil afright—"
"—'efreet," corrected Sond.
"Whatever it is called in your crude language," Asrial said loftily. "You said
you would give your life for her—which, considering you are immortal, doesn't
seem to me to be much of a sacrifice. We have spent weary weeks searching the
heavens for her and now you quibble about going into the sea!"
"I am of the desert," Sond protested sullenly. "I don't like water. It's cold
and wet and slimy."
"You can't really feel anything, you know! We are immor-bl." Asrial glanced at
Pukah coolly from the corner of her blue eyes. "We are above such things as
love and physical sensations and other human frailties!"
"Above love?" cried Pukah jealously. "Where did the
tears I saw you shedding over your mad master come from, if
^Vou have no eyes? If you have no hand, why do you caress his
.cJbrehead and, for all I know, other parts of his body as well!"
"As for my tears," retorted Asrial angrily, "all know the , The drops of rain
are the tears the Gods shed over the lies of man-—"
6
WEIS AND HICKMAN
"Hazrat Akhran goes about with dry eyes, then," Pukah interrupted, laughing.
Asrial pointedly ignored him. "And as for your insinuation that I have had
carnal knowledge of my 'prot6g6'—Mathew is not my master and he's not mad—your
statement is absurd and what I would expect of one who has been living around
humans so long he has tricked himself into believing he can feel what they
feel—"
"Hush!" said Sond suddenly, cocking his turbaned head to one side.

"Whatr
"Shhht" the djinn hissed urgently. He stared far off into nothing, his gaze
abstracted. "My master," he murmured. "He's calling for me."
"Is that all?" Pukah raised his eyes to heaven. "He's called for you before.
Let Majiid tie his headcloth himself this morning."
"No, it is more urgent than that! I think I should attend him!"
"Come now, Sond. Majiid gave you permission to leave. I know you don't want to
go swimming, but this is ridiculous—"
"It isn't that! Something's wrong! Something's been wrong ever since we left."
"Bah! If something was wrong, Khardan would be calling for me. He can't get
along without me for even the smallest thing, you know." The young djinn
heaved the sigh of the vastly overworked. "I rarely have a moment's peace. He
begged me to stay, in fact, but I told him that die wishes of Hazrat Akhran
held preference over those of a human, even my master—"
"And is your master calling for you?" Sond interrupted impatiently.
"No! So you see—"
"I see nothing except a braggart and a buffoon—" Sond fell silent. "That's
odd," be said after a moment's pause. "Majiid's calls just ceased."
"There, what did I tell you. The old man pulled his trousers on all by
himself—"
"I don't like this," muttered Sond, putting his hand over his breast. "I feel
strange—empty and hollow."
"What does he mean?" Asrial drew near Pukah. Slipping her hand into the hand
of the djinn, she held onto him tightly. "He looks terrible, Pukah!"
THE PALADIN OF THE NIGHT
7
1 know, my dear. I never could understand what women see in him!" said Pukah.
Looking down at the small white hand he was holding, die djinn squeezed it
teasingly. "A pity yon can't feel this—"
Angrily, Asrial snatched her hand away. Spreading her white wings, she
smoothed her robes about her and waded Btto the water of the cobalt blue sea.
Pukah followed instantly, plunging headlong into the sea water with a splash
that drenched the angel and sent a school of small fish into a panicked
frenzy. "Coming?" he yelled.
"I'll be along," Sond answered softly.
Facing the west, the djinn's eyes scanned the horizon. He saw nothing but
blowing sand, heard nothing but the eerie song the dunes sing as they shift
and move in their eternal dance with the wind.
Shaking his head, the djinn turned away and slowly entered the Kurdin Sea.
THE PALADIN OF THE NIGHT
9
Chapter 2
Sinking deeper and deeper into the Kurdin Sea, Asrial tried to appear as
nonplussed and casual as if she were drifting through a clear blue sky in the
heavens of Promenthas. Inwardly, however, she was a prey to growing terror.
The guardian angel had never encountered a place as fearsome as this.
It wasn't the cold or the wetness that sent shudders through her ethereal
body—Asrial had not been around humans nearly as long as either Pukah or Sond
and so did not feel these sensations. It was the darkness.
Night steals over the surface of the world like the shadow of an angel's wing
and it is just that—a shadow. Night hides objects from our vision and this is
what frightens mortals-* not the darkness itself, but the unknown lurking
beneath it. Night on the world's surface merely affects the sight, however,
and mortals have learned to fight back. Light a candle and drive the darkness
away. Night above does not affect hearing—the growls of animals, the rustling
of trees, the sleepy murmur of the birds are easily detected, perhaps more
easily than in daylight, for night seems to sharpen the other senses in return
for dimming one.
But the night of the water is different. The darkness of the sea isn't a
shadow cast over mortal vision. The sea's night is an entity. It has weight
and form and substance. It smothers the breath from the lungs. The sea's night

is eternal. The sun's rays cannot pierce it. No candle will light it. The
sea's
night is alive. Creatures populate the darkness and mortals are the
trespassers in their domain.
The sea's night is silent.
The silence, the weight, the aliveness of the darkness pressed in on Asrial.
Though she had no need to breathe, she felt herself gasping for breath. Though
her immortal vision could see, she wished desperately for light. More than
once die caught herself in what appeared to be the act of swimming, as were
Sond and Pukah. Asrial did not cleave the water with clean, strong strokes
like Sond or flounder through it fishlike, as did Pukah. It was, with her,
more as if she sought to push the water aside with her hands, as if she were
trying to clear a path for herself.
"You're growing more human all the time," commented Pukah teasingly, bobbing
up near her.
"If you mean that I am frightened of this terrible place and want very much to
leave, then you are right," Asrial said miserably. Brushing aside the silver
hair that floated into her fece, she glanced around in dismay. "Surely this
must be the dwelling place of Astafas!"
"Asta-who?"
"Astafes, the God who sits opposite Promenthas in the Great Jewel. He is cruel
and evil, delighting in suffering and misery. He rules over a world that is
dark and terrible. Demons serve him, bringing him human souls on which he
feeds."
"That sounds a lot like Kaug, only he eats things more substantial than souls.
Why, you're trembling all over! Pukah, you are a swine, a goat," he muttered
beneath his breath. "You should never have brought her in the first place." He
started to slip his arm comfortingly around the angel, only to discover that
her wings were in the way. If he put his arm above where the wings sprouted
from her back, it looked as if he were attempting to choke her. Sliding his
arm under the wings, he became entangled in the feathers. Finally, in
exasperation, he gave up and contented himself with patting her hand
soothingly. "Ill take you back up to the surface," he offered. "Sand can deal
with Kaug."
"No!" cried Asrial, looking alarmed. "I'm all right. Truly. It was wrong of me
to complain." She smoothed her silver hair and her white robes and was
endeavoring to appear composed and calm when a tentacle snaked out of the
darkness and wrapped around her wrist. Asrial jerked her hand away with a
smothered shriek. Pukah surged forward.
10
WEIS AND HICKMAN
THE PALADIN OF THE NIGHT
11
"A squid. Go on, get out of here! Do we look edible? Stupid fish. There,
there, my dearest! It's all right. The creature's gone. ..."
Completely unnerved, Asrial was sobbing, her wings folded tightly about her in
a protective, feathered cocoon.
"Sondl" shouted Pukah into the thick darkness. "I'm taking Asrial to the
surface— Sond! Sond? Drat! Where in Sul has he got to? Asrial, my angel, come
with me—"
"No!" Asrial's wings parted suddenly. Resolutely, she began floating through
die water. "I must stay! I must do this for Mathew! Fish, you said. The fish
told me— Mathew would die a horrible death . . . unless I came—"
"Fish? What fish?"
"Oh, Pukah!" Asrial halted, staring at the djinn in horror. "I wasn't supposed
to tell!"
"Well, you did. The sheep is dead', as they say. Might as well eat it as cry
over it. You spoke with a fish? How? Where?"
"My proteg6 carries with him two fish—"
"In the middle of the desert? And you say he isn't mad!"

"No! No! It isn't like that at all! There's something . . . strange"—Asrial
shivered—"about these fish. Something magical. They were given to Mathew by a
man—a terrible man. The slave trader who took my proteg£ captive. The one who
ordered the slaughter of the helpless priests and magi of Proraenthas.
"When we came to the city of Kich, the slave trader was stopped outside the
city walls by guards, who told him he must give up all his magical objects and
sacrifice diem to Quar. The slave trader gave up every magic item he
had—except for one."
"I've heard of fish that swallowed magic rings, but magic fish?" Pukah
appeared highly skeptical. "What do they do? Charm the baitr^'
"This is serious, Pukah!" Asrial said softly. "One life has been lost over
them already. And my poor Mathew ..." She covered her face with her hands.
"Pukah, you are a low form of life. A worm, a snake is higher than you." The
djinn gazed at the angel remorsefully. "I'm sorry. Go on, Asrial."
"He ... the slave trader . . . called Mathew over to the white palanquin in
which the trader always traveled. He handed my protege1 a crystal globe
decorated on the top and bottom with costly gold work. The globe was filled
with water and inside swam two fish—one gold and one black. The
trader ordered Mathew to keep them hidden from the guards. There was a poor
girl standing there, watching—a slave girl. The trader told Mathew to witness
what would happen if he betrayed him and he ... he murdered the girl, right
before Mathew's eyes!"
"Why did he choose Mathew to carry these fish?"
Asrial blushed faintly. "The trader mistook my proteg£ for a female—"
"Ah, yes," muttered Pukah. "I forgot."
"The guards would not search the women in the caravan-not their persons, at
least—and so Mathew was able to conceal the fish. The slave trader said that
he would take them back when they went into town. But then your master rescued
Mathew and carried him away. And with him, the magical fish. ..."
"How do you know they're magic? What do they do?" Pukah asked dubiously.
"Of course they're magic!" Asrial snapped irritably. "They live encased in a
crystal globe that no force on this world can shatter. They do not eat. They
are not bothered by heat or cold." Her voice lowered. "And one spoke to me."
"That's nothing!" Pukah scoffed. "I've talked to animals. I once shared my
basket with a snake who worked for my former master. Quite an amusing fellow.
Actually, it was the snake's basket, but he didn't mind a roommate after I
convinced—"
"Pukah! This is serious! One fish—the gold one—told me to come with you to
find the Lost Immortals. The fish referred to Mathew as the Bearer . . . and
she said he was in dreadful danger. In danger of losing not only his life but
his soul as well!"
"There, there, my dear. Don't get so upset. When we get back, you must show me
these wonderful fish. What else do they— Oh, Sond! Where have you been?"
The elder djinn swam through the murky water, his strong arms cleaving it
aside with swift, clean strokes. "I went ahead to Kaug's dwelling, to look
around. The 'efreet's gone, apparently. The place is deserted."
"Good!" Pukah rubbed his hands in satisfaction. "Are you certain you want to
continue on, Asrial? Yes? Actually, it's well that you are coming with us,
beautiful angel, because neither Sond nor I may enter the 'efreet's dwelling
without his permission. Now you, on the other hand—"
"Pukah, I need to talk to you." Sond drew the young
12
WEIS AND HICKMAN
djinn to the far side of a large outcropping of rock covered with hollow,
tubular plants that opened and shut with the flow of the water, looking like
hundreds of gasping mouths. "Well, what is it?"
"Pukah, a strange feeling came over me when I drew near Kaug's dwelling—"
"It's the stuff he cooks for his dinner. I know, I felt it, too. Like your
stomach's trying to escape by way of your throat?" "It's not anything I
smelled!" Sond said angrily. "Quit being a fool for once in your life. It's a
feeling like . . . like . . . like I could enter Kaug's dwelling without his

permission. In feet, it seemed as if I was being pulled inside!"
"Pulled inside an 'efreet's. house! Who's the fool here now? Certainly not
me!" Pukah appeared amused.
"Bah! I might as well be talking to the seaweed!" Shoving Pukah aside, Sond
swam past him, diving down toward the cave on the ocean floor where the
'efreet made his home.
Pukah cast the djinn a scathing glance. "At least the seaweed would provide
you an audience on your own mental level! Come on, Asrial." Catching hold of
die angel's hand, he led her down to the very bottom of the sea.
Kaug's cave was hollowed out of a cliff of black rock. A light glimmered at
the entrance, the eerie luminescence coming from the heads of enthralled sea
urchins gloomily awaiting their master's return. The long greenish brown moss
that hung from the cliff reminded Asrial of the squid's tentacles.
"I'm going in there alone," whispered the angel, reminding herself of Mathew's
plight and trying very hard to be courageous. "I'm going in there." But she
didn't move.
Sond, biting his lower lip, stared at Kaug's dwelling as though mesmerized by
it.
"On second thought, Asrial," Pukah said in a bland and innocent voice, "I
think it might be better if we did accompany you—"
"Admit it, Pukah! You feel it, don't you!" Sond growled. "I do not!" Pukah
protested loudly. "It's just that I don't think we should let her go in there
alone!"
"Come on then," said Sond. "If we're not barred at the threshold, then we know
something is wrong!"
The two djinn floated ahead to the entryway of the cave, their skin shimmering
green in the ghostly light emanating from the sea urchins, who were staring at
them with large, sorrowful eyes. Slowly Asrial swam behind. Her wings fan-
THE PALADIN OF THE NIGHT
13
nmg the water, she paused, hovering overhead as the djinn stopped—one standing
on either side of the entryway.
"^Vell, go on!" Sond gestured,
"And get a jolt of lightning through my body for breaking the rule. No thank
you!" Pukah sniffed scornfully.
"This was your idea!"
"I've changed my mind."
"You're not going to be stopped and you know it. I tell you, we're being
invited inside there!"
"Then you accept the invitation!"
Glaring at Pukah, Sond cautiously set his foot across the threshold of the
'efreet's dwelling. Cringing, Pukah waited for the blue Bash, the crackle, and
the painful yelp from Sond, an indication that the established rule among
immortals was being violated.
Nothing happened.
Sond stepped across the threshold with ease. Pukah sighed inwardly. Despite
what he'd told Sond, he, too, had the distinct feeling that he was being urged
to enter the 'efreet's home. No, it was stronger than that. Pukah had the
disquieting impression that he belonged inside the eerily lit cave.
"What nonsense, Pukah!" Pukah said to himself with scorn. "As if you ever
belonged in a place where fish heads are an integral part of the decor!"
Sond was staring at him in grim triumph from (he entry-way. Ignoring him,
Pukah turned to give Asrial his hand. Together, they entered the cave. The
angel stayed quite near the djinn. The feathers of her wings brushed against
his bare back, and despite his growing sense of uneasiness, Pukah felt his
skin tingle and a pleasurable warmth flood his body.
Was Asrial right? he wondered for a moment, standing in the green-tinged
darkness, the angel's hand held fast in his. Is this sensation something I've
tricked myself into experiencing to become more like humans? Or do I truly
enjoy her touch?

Leaning near him, looking around but not letting go of his hand, Asrial
whispered, "What is it we're searching for?"
"A golden egg," Pukah whispered back.
"I doubt well find the egg," Sond muttered unhappily. "And if we did, my
lovely djinniyeh would not be inside. Remember? Kaug said he had taken Nedjma
to a place where I would never see her again until I joined her."
"Then what are we doing here?" Pukah demanded.
"How should I know? It was your idea!"
14
WEIS AND HICKMAN
THE PALADIN OF THE NIGHT
15
"Me? You were the one who said Kaug was holding Nedjma captive! Now you change
your tune—"
Hie djinn sucked in a furious breath. "I'll change your tune!" Sond laid his
hand on the hilt of his sword. "You will sing through a slit in your throat,
you—"
"Stop it! Just stop it!" AsriaTs tense voice hissed in the darkness. "Now that
we're here, it can't hurt to look! Even if we don't find Nedjma, we may find
something that would guide us to where this alright has taken her!"
"She's right," said Pukah hastily, backing up and stumbling over a sponge. "We
should search this place."
"Well, we'd better hurry," Sond grumbled. "Kaug may be back any moment. Let's
separate."
Repeating Mathew's name over and over to herself to give her courage, Asrial
drifted deeper into the cave. Pukah slanted off" to die right, while Sond took
the left.
"Ugh! I just found one of Kaug's pets!" Rolling over a rock that the 'efreet
used for a chair or a table or perhaps just liked to have around, Pukah
grimaced as something black and ugly slithered out from underneath. "Or maybe
it's a girlfriend." Setting the rock back hastily, he continued on, poking his
long nose into a bed of lichen. "Asrial is right you know, Sond. Hazrat Akhran
believes that Quar is responsible for the disappearance of the immortals,
including his own. If that's true, then Kaug must know where they are."
"This is hopeless!" Asrial waved her hands helplessly. "There's nothing here
but rocks and seaweed." Turning, she suddenly recoiled. "What's that?" She
pointed to a huge iron cauldron standing in a recessed area of the cave.
"Kaug's stew pot!" Pukah's nose wrinkled. "Can't you smell it?" The djinn
drifted over near the angel. "The place has changed," he admitted. "Last time
I was here, there were all sorts of objects sitting about. Now there's
nothing. It looks as if the bastard moved out. I think we've searched enough.
Sond! Sond? Where are you!"
"But there must be something!" Asrial twisted a lock of her hair around her
finger. "The fish said I should come with you! Maybe we could talk to your
God. Perhaps he knows something?"
"No, no!" Pukah grew pale at the thought. "That wouldn't be wise. I'm sure if
Akhran knew anything He would have informed us. Sond! Sond! I—"
A hoarse, ragged cry came from the inner depths of the cave.
"Sul's eyeballs! What was that?" Pukah felt the hair beneath his turban stand
straight up.
"Promenthas be with us!" Asrial breathed.
The terrible cry rose again, swelled to a shriek, then broke off in a choking
sob.
"It's Sond!" Pukah sprang forward, overturning rocks, shoving through curtains
of floating seaweed. "Sond! Where are you? Did you step on a fish? Is it Kaug?
Sond . . ."
Pukah's voice died. Bounding a corner, he came upon the elder djinn standing
by himself in a small grotto. Sickly green light, oozing from slimy plants
clinging to the walls, was reflected in an object Sond held in his hands. The
djinn was staring at it in horror.

"What is it, my friend? What have you found? It looks like—" Pukah gasped.
"Akhran have mercy!"
"Why? What's the matter?" Asrial tiptoed into the grotto behind Pukah and
peered over his shoulder. "What do you mean scaring us half to death? It's
only an old lamp!"
Sond's face was a pale green in the light of the plants. "Only an old lamp!"
he repeated in an anguished voice. "It's my lamp! My chirak\"
**His what?" Asrial looked at Pukah, who was nearly as green as Sond.
"It is more than a lamp," Pukah said through stiff lips. "It is his dwelling
place."
"And look, Pukah," Sond said in a hushed whisper. "Look behind me, at my
feet."
"Mine, too?" Though Pukah's lips formed the words, no one could hear them.
Sond nodded silently.
Pukah sank slowly to the cave floor. Reaching out his hand, he took hold of a
basket that stood behind Sond. Made of tightly wrapped coils of rattan, the
basket was small at the bottom, swelled outward toward the top like the bulb
of an onion, and curved back in toward the center. Perched atop it was a woven
lid with a jaunty knob. Lovingly drawing the basket close, Pukah stroked its
woven coils.
"I don't understand!" Asrial cried in growing fear, looking from one
despairing djinn to the other. "All I see is a basket and a lamp! Why are you
so upset? What does it mean?"
"It means," came a deep, booming voice from the front of the cave, "that now /
am their master!"
THE PALADIN OF THE NIGHT
17
Chapter 3
The 'efreet's shadow fell over them, followed by the hulking body of the
gigantic immortal. Water streamed from the hairy chest, the 'efreet's
pugnacious face was split by a wide grin, "I took your homes several weeks
ago, during the Battle at the Tel. A battle your masters lost, by the way. If
that old goat, Majiid, is still alive, he now finds himself without a djinn!"
"Still alive? If you have murdered my master, I swear by Akhran that—"
"Sond! Don't! Don't be a—" Pukah bit off his words with a sigh. Too late.
Swelling with rage, Sond soared to ten feet in height. His head smashed into
the cave ceiling, sending a shower of rock crashing to the floor below. With a
bitter snarl, the djinn hurled himself at Kaug. The 'efreet was unprepared for
the suddenness and fury of Sond's attack. The weight of the djinn's body
knocked the hulking Kaug off his feet; the two hit die ground with a thud that
sent seismic waves along the ocean floor.
Clutching at a rock to keep his balance on the heaving ground, Pukah turned to
offer what comfort he could to Asrial, only to find that the angel had
vanished.
A huge foot lashed out in Pukah's direction. Crawling up on the rock to be out
of the way of the combatants thrashing about around him, Pukah considered the
matter, discussing it with himself, whom he considered to be the most
intelligent of all parties currently in the room.
16
"Where has your angel gone, Pukah?"
"Back to Promenthas."
"No, she wouldn't do that."
"You are right, Pukah," said Pukah. "She is much too fond of you to leave
you."
"Do you really think so?" asked Pukah rapturously.
"I do indeed!" replied his other self, although his statement lacked a certain
ring of conviction.
Pukah almost took himself to task over this, then decided, due to the serious
nature of the current crisis, to overlook it.
"What this means is that Asrial is here and in considerable danger. 1 don't

know what Kaug would do if he discovered an angel of Promenthas searching
through his underwear."
Pukah glanced at the combatants irritably. The howling and gnarltng and
gnashing was making it quite difficult for him to carry on a normal
conversation. "Ah, ha!" he said suddenly, hopefully, "but perhaps he didn't
see her!"
"He heard her voice. He answered her question."
"That's true. Well, she's gone," said Pukah in matter-of-fact tones. "Perhaps
she's just turned invisible, as she used to do when I first caught a glimpse
of her in camp. Do you suppose she's powerful enough to hide herself from the
eyes of an 'efreet?"
There was no answer. Pukah tried another question. "Does her disappearance
make things better or worse for us, my friend?"
"I don't see," came the gloomy response, "how it matters."
Taking this view of the situation himself, Pukah crossed his legs, leaned his
elbow on his knee and sat, chin in hand, to wait for the inevitable.
It was not long in coming.
Sond's rage had carried him further in his battle with the efreet than anyone
could have expected. Once Kaug recovered from his surprise at the sudden
attack, however, it was easy for the strong 'efreet to gain the upper hand,
and Sond's rage was effectively punched and pummeled out of him.
Now it was the 'efreet who carried the djinn, and soon a / battered and bloody
Sond was hanging suspended by his feet from die cracked ceiling of the cave.
Dangling head down, his arms and legs bound with cords of prickly green vine,
the d)uin did not give up, but fought against his bonds—struggling wildly
until he began to revolve at the end of his tether.
"I wouldn't do that, Sond," advised Pukah from his seat
18
WEIS AND HICKMAN
THE PALADIN OF THE NIGHT
19
on the rock. "If you do free yourself, you will only come down on your head
and you should certainly take care of what brains you have."
"You could have helped, you bastard son of Sul!" Sond writhed and twisted.
Blood and saliva dripped from his mouth.
Pukah was shocked. "I would not think of attacking our new master!" he said
rebukingly.
Turning from admiring his handiwork, Kaug eyed the young djinn suspiciously.
"Such loyalty, little Pukah. I'm touched."
Sliding down from his rock, the young djinn prostrated himself on the cave
floor before the 'efreet, his head brushing the ground.
"This is the law of the immortals who serve upon the mortal plane," recited
Pukah in a nasal tone, his nose pressed flat against the floor. "Whosoever
shall acquire the physical object to which the immortal is bound shall
henceforth become the master of said immortal and shall be due all allegiance
and loyalty."
Sond shrieked something vile, having to do with Pukah's mother and a male
goat.
Pukah appeared pained. "I fear these interruptions annoy you, My Master. If I
may be allowed—"
"Certainly!" Kaug waved a negligent hand. The 'efreet appeared preoccupied;
his gaze darting here and there about the grotto.
Believing he knew the quarry the 'efreet was hunting, Pukah thought it best to
distract him. He picked up a handful of seaweed, grabbed hold of Sond by his
turban, and stuffed the pale green plant into the djinn's yammering mouth.
"His offensive outbursts will no longer disturb you, My Master!" Pukah threw
himself on his knees before the 'efreet.
"Allegiance and loyalty, eh, little Pukah?" said Kaug. Stroking his chin, he
regarded the djinn thoughtfully. Then my first command to you is to tell me
why you are here."

"We were drawn here. Master, by the physical objects to which we are bound
according to the law that states—"
"Yes, yes," said Kaug irritably, casting another searching glance around the
cave once more. "So you came here because you couldn't help yourself. You are
lying to your master, tittle Pukah, and that is quite against the rules. You
must be punished." Lashing out with his foot, the 'efreet kicked
Pukah under the chin, snapping the djinn's head back painfully and splitting
his lip.
'"The truth. You came here in search of Nedjma. And the .third member of your
party. What was her reason for coming?"
"I assure you, Master," said Pukah, wiping blood from his mouth, "there were
only the two of us—"
Kaug kicked him in the face again.
"Come, come, loyal little Pukah! Where may I find the lovely body belonging to
that charming voice I heard when I entered my dwelling this night?"
"Alas, My Master, you see before you the only bodies belonging to the only
voices you heard in your dwelling place. It depends upon your taste, of
course, but I consider my body the loveliest of the two—"
Nonchalantly, Kaug drove his foot into the young djinn's kidney. Real or
imaginary, the pain was intense. Pukah doubled up with a groan.
"I heard a voice—a female voice, little Pukah!"
"I have been told I have a most melodious ring to my— ughh!"
Kaug kicked the djinn in the other kidney. The force of the blow rolled Pukah
over on his back. Drawing his sword, the 'efreet straddled the young djinn,
his weapon poised above a most vital and vulnerable area on Pukah's body.
"So, little Pukah, you claim the female voice was yours. It wdl be, my friend,
if you do not tell me the truth and reveal the whereabouts of this
trespasser!"
Covering himself with his hands, Pukah gazed up at the enraged 'efreet with
pleading eyes. "O My Master! Have mercy, I beg of you! You are distressed by
the unwarranted attack on your person by one who should, by rights, be your
slave"—a muffled shriek from Sond—"and that has thrown a cog (ha, ha, small
joke) in the wheel of your usually brilliant thought process! Look around,
Great Kaug! Could anyone or anything remain hidden from your all-seeing gaze,
O Mighty Servant of the Most Holy Quar?"
This question stumped the 'efreet. If he said yes, he admitted he wasn't
all-seeing, and if he said no, he granted that Pukah was right and that
he—Kaug—hadn't really heard die strange voice after all. The 'efreet sent his
piercing gaze into all parts of the cave, dissecting every shadow, using all
his senses to detect a hidden presence in the dwelling.
Kaug felt a thrill in his nerve endings, as ff someone had
20
WEIS AND HICKMAN
THE PALADIN OF THE NIGHT
31
touched his skin with a feather. There VMS another being in his cave, someone
who had the ability to enter his dwelling without permission, someone who was
able to hide herself from his sight. A film of white mist blocked his vision.
Kaug rubbed his eyes, but that did nothing to dispel the odd sensation.
What should he do? Castrate Pukah? The 'efreet pondered. Other than providing
a bit of mild amusement, it would probably accomplish little else. Such an act
of violence might actually frighten the creature into disappearing cora-f
pletely. No, she must be lulled into a sense of well-being.
I will give Pukah die hemp and watch him weave the rope that will go around
his neck, said Kaug to himself. Aloud, be intoned, "You are right, little
Pukah. I must have been imagining things." Sheathing his sword, the 'efreet
kindly helped the djinn to his feet. Kaug wiped slime from Pukah s shoulder
and solicitously plucked fronds of seaweed from die djinn's pantalons.
"Forgive me. I have a quick temper. A felling of mine, I admit, pond's attempt
on my life upset me." The 'efreet pressed his hand over his huge chest. "It

wounded me deeply, in fact, especially after all the trouble I went to in
order to rescue both of you."
"Sond is a beast!" cried Pukah, casting Sond an indignant glance and
congratulating himself on his cleverness. The young djinn's sharp ears
pricked. "Uh, what do you mean . . . rescue us? If it's not asking too much of
you in your weakened condition to explain, Most Beneficent and Long-Suffering
Master."
"No, no. I'm just exhausted, that's all. And my head is spinning. If I could
just sit down ..."
"Certainly, Master. You do seem pale, sort of chartreuse. Lean on me."
Kaug draped his massive arm over Pukah's slender shoulder. Groaning, the young
djinn staggered beneath the weight.
"Where to, Master?" he gasped.
"My favorite chair," said Kaug with a weak gesture. "Over there, near my
cooking pot."
"Yes, Master," Pukah said with more spirit than breath left in his body. By
the time the two reached die huge sponge that the 'efreet indicated, the young
djinn was practically walking on his knees. Kaug sank into his chair.
Pukah, suppressing a groan, slumped down on the floor at his feet. Sond had
lapsed into silence, whether in order to
near better or because he was unconscious the young djinn didn't know and, at
this point, didn't care.
"You were not present at the battle that took place around die Tel, were you,
little Pukah?" said Kaug, settling his massive body in his chair. Leaning
back, he regarded die young djinn with a mild-eyed gaze.
"You mean the battle between Sheykhs Majiid and Jaafar and Zeid?" questioned
Pukah uneasily.
"No," said Kaug, shaking his head. "There was no battle between die tribes of
the desert."
"There wasn't?" Pukah appeared much amazed, then recovered himself. "Ah, of
course, there wasn't! Why should there be? After all, we are all brothers in
the spirit of Akhran—"
"I mean the battle between die tribes of the desert and the armies of the Amir
of Kich," continued Kaug coolly. Pausing a moment, the 'efreet added, "Your
mouth is working, little Pukah, but I hear nothing coming out of it. I didn't
accidentally hit something vital, did I?"
Shaking his head, Pukah found his voice, somewhere down around his ankles. "My
. . . my master and die . . . the armies of—"
"Former master," amended Kaug.
"Certainly. Former m-master," Pukah stammered. "Forgive me, noble Kaug."
Prostrating himself, he hid his burning face against the floor.
The 'efreet smiled and settled himself more comfortably in his spongy soft
chair. "The outcome of the battle was never in question. Riding their magical
steeds, the troops of the Amir easily defeated your puny desert fighters."
"Were . . . were all... killed?" Pukah could barely force himself to say the
word.
"Killed? No. The objective of the Imam was to bring as many living souls to
Quar as possible. The orders of the Amir, therefore, were to capture, not
kill. The young women and children we brought to Kich to learn the ways of the
One, True God. The old people we left in the desert, for they can be of no use
to us in building the new world Quar is destined to rule. Your master and his
spahis we left there, also. Soon, bereft of their families, broken in spirit,
weak in body, they will come to us and bow before Quar."
A strangled sound from Sond was expressive of defiance.
Kaug gazed at the elder djinn sadly. "Ah, he will never leam gratitude, that
one. You are intelligent, Pukah. The
12
WEIS AND HICKMAN
winds of heaven have switched direction. They blow, not from the desert, but
from the city. The time of Akhran is dwindling. Long did Majiid call for his

djinn to come to his aid, but there was no answer."
Glancing through his fingers at Send, Pukah saw that the older djinn had
ceased struggling. Tears flowed from Sond's eyes, dripping into the puddles of
sea water on the floor beneath him. Pukah turned his head from the distressing
sight.
"The Sheykh's faith in his Cod is beginning to weaken. His djinn will not come
at his command. His wife and children were taken captive. His eldest son—the
light of his eyes—is missing and all assume him to be dead—"
Pukah lifted a strained face. "Khardan? Dead?"
"Isn't he?" Kaug's eyes stabbed at him?
"Don't you know?" Pukah parried the thrust.
They stared at one another, mental swords clashing, then Kaug—felling
back—shrugged. "The body was not discovered, but that means tittle. It is
probably in the belly of a hyena—a fitting end to a wild dog."
Lowering his head again, Pukah endeavored to gather up tyis widely scattered
wits. "It must be true! Khardan must be dead! Otherwise, he would have called
on me to come to Iris aid!"
"What are you mumbling about, little Pukah?" Kaug nudged the djinn with his
foot.
"I was ... er ... remarking to myself that I am most fortunate to be your
slave—"
"Indeed you are, little Pukah. The Amir's men were going to burn your basket
and sell that lamp but I—recognizing them as the dwellings of fellow
immortals—was quick to rescue you both. Only to be set upon in my own home—**
The 'efreet glowered at Sond.
"Forgive him, Master. He thinks with his pectorals." Where is Asrial? Pukah
wondered. Much like Kaug, he was darting glances here and there in an effort
to locate her. Has she heard? A sudden thought occurred to him. If she has,
she must be frantic with worry.
"I—I don't suppose, Kind Kaug, that you could reveal to me the fete of my
mast—former master's—wives?" Pukah asked warily.
"Why do you want to know, little Pukah?" Kaug yawned.
"Because I pity those who must try to console them for
THE PALADIN OF THE NIGHT
13
the loss of such a husband," Pukah said, sitting back on his heels and
regarding the 'efreet with a face as bland as a pan of goat's milk. "The Calif
was deeply in love with his wives and they with him. Their sorrow at his loss
must be terrible to witness."
"Now, as a matter of feet, it is a great coincidence, but Khardan's two wives
have disappeared as well," Kaug said. Leaning back in his chair, the 'efreet
regarded Pukah through narrowed eyelids.
It may have been his overwrought imagination, but Pukah thought he heard a
smothered cry at this. The 'afreet's eyes opened suddenly. "What was that?"
Kaug glanced about the cave.
"Sond! Moan more quietly! You disturb the Master!" Pukah ordered, leaping to
his feet. "Allow me to deal with him, O Mighty 'Efreet. You rest."
Kaug obediently leaned back and shut his eyes. He could sense Pukah hovering
over him, staring at him intently. Then he heard the djinn padding away on his
bare feet, hastening toward Sond. The 'efreet heard something else,
too—another grieving moan. Opening his eyes a slit, he saw a most interesting
sight. Pukah had tucked his hands beneath his armpits and was flapping his
elbows frantically.
Sond stared at him, bewildered, then suddenly took the hint—for that's what it
obviously was—and began to groan loudly.
"What do you mean by that dismal howling?" Pukah shouted. "My Master is in
enough pain as it is. Shut up this instant!" Whirling about to face the
'efreet, Pukah grabbed hold of a largish rock. "Allow me to knock him
senseless, My Master!"
"No, that will not be necessary," Kaug muttered, shifting Jn his chair. "I
will deal with him myself."

Pukah flapping his arms. Pukah with wings? The trail had taken an unusual turn
and the 'efreet, in trying to follow the path, had the distinct impression
he'd become lost en route. He knew he was getting somewhere, but he needed
time to find his way.
"Sond, I confine you to your chirakV The 'efreet snapped his fingers and the
djinn's body slowly began to dissolve, changing to smoke. The smoke wavered in
the air; two eyes could be seen, fixed in malevolent fury on Kaug. A simple
WEIS AND HICKMAN
gesture from the 'efreet caused the lamp to suck the smoke out of the air, and
Sond was gone.
"And what is your will concerning me, My Master?" Pukah asked humbly, bowing
low, his hands pressed against his forehead.
"Return to your dwelling. Remain there until I call for you," Kaug said
absently, preoccupied with his thoughts. "I am going to pay my homage to
Quar."
"A safe and pleasant journey, Master," said Pukah. Bowing his way across the
floor, the djinn retired precipitously to his basket.
"Ugggh," grunted Kaug, heaving his bulk up out of the chair.
Ugggh," Pukah mimicked, his ears attuned to ascertain the 'efreet's departure.
"One of his more intelligent noises. The great oafl Pukah, my friend, you've
fooled him completely. He has neglected to confine you to your dwelling, and
while he is gone, you may leave it to search for your lost angel."
Materializing inside his basket, Pukah found it in a state of general
disarray—the furniture overturned, crockery smashed, food scattered about.
Having previously shared his dwelling with a snake, who had not been very neat
in his personal habits, the djinn was accustomed to a certain amount of
slovenliness. Ignoring the mess, Pukah set the bed to rights, then lay down on
it and waited, listening intently, to make certain the 'efreet had really gone
and that this wasn't some sort of lamebrained trick to trap him.
Hearing nothing, Pukah was just about to leave his basket and go search the
cave when he was nearly suffocated by a flurry of feathers. Silver hair
obscured his vision and a warm, soft body hurled itself into his arms.
"Oh, Pukah!" Asrial cried, clutching at him frantically. "My poor Mathewl I
have to find him! You must help me escape!"
Chapter 4
"This would seem to indicate that their Calif, this Khardan, is not dead,"
Quar mused.
Kaug found the God taking a stroll in His pleasure garden, Quar's mind
occupied with the march of the Amir's army south. This jihad was a weighty
matter, so much to do; making certain the weather was perfect, preventing rain
so that the baggage trains did not founder in the mud; forcing Disease's
deadly, hand away from His troops; keeping the magic of Sul flowing into the
horses, and a hundred other worries. Quar had frowned at Kaug's interruption
but, since the 'efreet insisted it was important, magnanimously agreed to
listen.
"That is what I think as well, O Holy One," said the 'efreet, bowing to
indicate he was sensible of the honor of sharing like beliefs with his God.
"The djinn, Pukah, has the brains of a mongrel, but even a dog knows when its
master is dead and the news came as a complete surprise to Khardan's lackey."
"And this you tell me about the wives. It is certainly mysterious," Quar said
ofihandedly, sinking his white, perfectly shaped teeth into the golden skin of
a kumquat. "What do you make of it?" A speck of juice dripped onto the costly
silk robes. Irritably, the God dabbed at it with a linen napkin.
"Pukah brought up the matter, Magnificent One. When I asked him why he was
interested, he lied, telling me that Khardan cared deeply for his wives. We
know from the
25
26
WEIS AND HICKMAN
woman, Meryem, that the Calif hated his head wife and that his second wife was
a madman."

"Mrammm." Quar appeared entirely absorbed with removing the stain from his
clothing.
"It was when I mentioned that the wives had disappeared that I heard the
strange sound—as of someone stricken with grief. Holy One. I am convinced that
there is someone else present in my dwelling." Kaug scowled, his brow furrowed
in thought. "Someone with wings . . ."
Quar had been just about to take another bite of the fruit. His hand stopped
midway to his mouth. "Wings?" he repeated softly.
"Yes, Holy One." Kaug described Pukah's peculiar behavior and Sond's reaction.
"Promenthas!" murmured Quar softly. "Angels in company with djinn of Akhran!
So the Gods are fighting me on the immortal plane as well!"
"What is it you say. Holy One?" Kaug drew nearer.
"I said this strange winged intruder has probably taken advantage of your
leaving and fled," Quar said coldly.
"Impossible, My Lord. I sealed my dwelling before I departed. I thought 1
should lose no time in bringing you this information," the 'efreet added
deprecatingly.
"I do not see why you are so concerned with this Khardanl" said Quar, plucking
another kumquat. "All my people have become obsessed with himl The Imam wants
his soul. The Amir wants his head. Meryem wants his body. This Calif is human,
nothing more—the blind follower of a dying God."
"He could be a threat—"
"Only if you make him one!" Quar rebuked sternly.
Kaug bowed. "And what are your instructions concerning the djinn, My Lord?"
Quar waved a delicate hand. "Do what you want. Keep them as your slaves. Send
them where we send the others. It matters Uttle to me."
"And the mysterious third party—"
"You have more important things to occupy your time, Kaug, such as the
upcoming battles in the south. However, I give you leave to solve your little
mystery, if you like."
"And would my Lord be interested in the outcome?"
"Perhaps some day, when 1 am bored with other foolishness, you may share it
with me," Quar said, indicating with a cool nod that the 'efreet's presence
was no longer wanted.
THE PALADIN OF THE NIGHT
27
The 'efreet, bowing again, evaporated into the blossom-scented air.
As soon as Kaug was gone, Quar disgarded the semblence of negligence that he
wore in the presence of the powerful 'efreet. Hastening back into his
sumptuous dwelling, he entered a Temple, whose exact duplicate could be found
in the world below, in the city of Kich. The God lifted a mallet and struck a
small gong three times.
A wasted face appeared in Quar's mind, its eyes burning with holy ecstasy.
"You have summoned me, Hazrat Quar?"
"Imam, among the people of the desert we captured must be some who are related
to this Khardan, their Calif."
"I believe there are, Holy One. His mother and a half-brother ... or so I am
told."
"I want information regarding this man, this Calif. Attain it any way
possible. It would be ideal, of course, if you could convert one or both to
the true faith."
"I hope to convert all the desert nomads, Holy One."
"Excellent, Imam."
Feisal's face disappeared from Quar's sight.
Settling back on a silk brocade sofa, Quar noted that he still held die
kumquat in his hand. Regarding it with complacence, he slowly closed his fist
upon it and began to squeeze. The skin ruptured, the juice flowed over his
fingers. When the fruit was reduced to an unrecognizable pulp, the God tossed
it casually away.
THE PALADIN OF THE NIGHT

Chapter 5
"We must escape! We must get out of Here, Pukah!" Asrial cried distractedly.
"That terrible monster is right. Mathew has disappeared! I searched for his
being in my mind and could not see him! A darkness shrouds him, hiding him
from my sight. Some dreadful thing has happened to him!"
"There, there," murmured Pukah, too dazzled and confused to know what he was
saying. The beautiful creature appearing out of nowhere, her soft hands
clinging to him, her fragrance, her warmth. The djinn had just presence of
mind enough to take hold of the soft hand and draw the angel down with him
upon the bed.
"Let's relax and think about this calmly." Pukah brought his lips near the
smooth cheek. How did one manage about the wings? They were bound to be in the
way. . . .
"Oh, Pukah!" Asrial sobbed miserably, lowering her head. Pukah found himself
kissing a mass of wet, silver hair. "It's all my fault! I should never have
left him!"
Putting one arm around her waist (sliding it under th^ wings), Pukah held
Asrial nearer. "You had no choice, my enchanter!" he whispered, brushing aside
the hair. "The fish told you to come." His lips brushed her fevered skin.
"What if it was a trick!" Asrial sprang to her feet with such energy that her
wings swept Pukah off the bed. "It could have been a ploy of Astafas's, an
attempt for that Lord of Darkness to steal Mathew's soul! Oh, why didn't I
think of this before! And your master, Khardan. He must be with
28
Mathew. He is undoubtedly in danger, too. Let's leave, Pukah, quickly!"
"We can't," said the djinn, picking himself up off the bottom of the basket.
"Why not?" Asrial stared at him, startled.
"Because"—Pukah, sighing, sat down upon die bed—"Kaug sealed the cave before
he left."
"How do you know?"
Pukah shrugged. "See for yourself. Try going back out into the ocean again."
Asrial closed her eyes, her lips moved, her wings waved gently. Her eyes flew
open, she looked about eagerly and her face crumpled in disappointment "I'm
still here!"
"Told you," said Pukah, lounging back on the bed. Reaching out, he patted a
place beside him. "Come, beloved. Rest yourself. Who knows how long Kaug will
be gone? We're trapped here together. We might as well make the best of it."
"I—I think I would prefer a chair," said Asrial. Her face flushing rosy red,
she glanced about the djinn's dwelling in search of an article of furniture
that was not smashed, missing a leg, or most of the stuffing.
"Not a whole piece of furniture in the place except the bed, I'm afraid," said
Pukah cheerfully. He owed Kaug one. Two in feet. "Come, Asrial. Let me comfort
you, distract your sorrowful thoughts, take your mind from your trouble."
"And how will you do that, Pukah?" Asrial asked coolly, the flush subsiding
from her cheeks. "If I am not mistaken, you are attempting to seduce me, to
... make love to me. That's completely ridiculous! We do not have bodies. We
can't feel physical pleasure!"
"Tell me I didn't feel this!" Pukah said grimly, pointing to his swollen lip.
"Tell Sond he didn't feel that drubbing he took!" Climbing out of bed, the
djinn approached the angel, hands outstretched. "Tell me I'm not feeling what
I feel now—my heart racing, my blood burning—"
"Sond didn't!" Asrial fettered, taking a step backward. "You don't! You've
just tricked yourself—"
"Tell me you don't feel this!" Crabbing the angel around the waist, Pukah
pressed her body close to his and kissed her.
"I ... I didn't . . . feel a thing!" gasped Asrial angrily when she could
breathe. Struggling, she tried to push Pukah away. "I—"
30
WEJS AND HICKMAN
"Hush!" The djinn put his hand over her mouth.
Furious, Asrial clenched her fists and started to beat on the djinn's chest.

Then she, too, heard the sound. Her eyes widening in fear, she went limp in
Pukah's arms.
"Kaug's back!" whispered the djinn. "I've got to go!"
Pukah vanished so suddenly that Asrial, bereft of his support, nearly fell.
Weakly, she sank down on the bed and crouched there, shivering, listening to
what was happening outside die basket.
Slowly, unconsciously, her tongue moved across her lips, as though she could
still taste a lingering sweetness.
"Master!" cried Pukah in a transport of joy. "You've returned!" He flung
himself on the cave floor.
"Humpf," growled Kaug, glowering at the groveling djinn. "He doesn't pull the
wool over my eyes!"
"Indeed, such a thing would take a great many sheep, Master," said Pukah,
cautiously rising to his feet and padding after the 'efreet, who was stomping
about the cave angrily.
"He fears Khardan!"
"Does he, Master?"
"Not because your former master is mighty or powerful, but because Quar can't
rule him and, seemingly, he can't kill him."
"So my master—former master—is not dead?"
"Is that a great surprise to you, little Pukah? No, I thought not. Nor to your
winged friend, either, eh?"
"Unless Sond has sprouted feathers, I have no idea to whom my Master is
referring." Pukah prostrated himself upon the floor, extending his arms out in
front of him. "I assure my Master of my absolute loyalty. I would do anything
for my Master, even go in search of the Calif, if my Master commands it."
"Would you, Pukah?" Kaug, turning, eyed the djinn intently.
"Nothing would give me greater pleasure, My Master."
"I believe that for once you are telling the truth, little Pukah." The 'efreet
grinned. "Yes, I think I will take you up on your offer, slave of the basket.
You understand who it is you serve now, don't you, Pukah? By the laws of the
djinn, I am your master, you are my servant. If I ordered you to bring Khardan
sliced neatly into four equal parts, you would do so, would you not, slave?"
THE PALADIN OF THE NIGHT
31
"Of course, My Master," said Pukah glibly.
"Ah, already I can see your mind turning, planning to find some way out of
this. Let it turn all it wants, little Pukah. It is like a donkey tied to the
waterwheel. Round and round he goes, never getting anywhere. I have your
basket. I am your master. Do not forget that or the penalty if you disobey
me."
"Yes, My Master," said Pukah in a subdued voice.
"And now, to prove your loyalty, little Pukah, I am going to send you on an
errand before you go and search for the missing Khardan. I command you to take
the chirak of Sond to a certain location. You will leave it there and you will
return to me for my orders concerning the Calif."
"Where is this 'certain location,' My Master?"
"Not backing out already, little Pukah, are you?"
"Certainly not, My Master! It is just that I need to know where I am going in
order to get there, you dundering squidhead." This last being muttered under
Pukah's breath.
"Despite his harsh treatment of me, I am going to grant Sond his heart's wish.
I am going to reunite him with his beloved Nedjma. You wanted to know where
the Lost Immortals were, little Pukah?"
"I assure my Master that I have not the slightest interest—"
"Take the lamp of Sond and fly with it to the city of Serinda and you will
discover what has become of the Vanished Ones."
"Serinda?" Pukah's eyes opened wide; he raised his head from the floor. "That
city no longer exists. My Master. It vanished beneath the desert sands
hundreds of years ago, so long past that I cannot even remember it."

Kaug shrugged. "Then I am asking you to deliver Sond's chirak to a dead city,
little Pukah. Do you question my commands already?" The 'efreet's brow creased
in a frown.
"No, Master!" Pukah flattened himself completely. "The wings of which you
speak are on my feet. I will return to my 1 dwelling—"
"No need to rush, little Pukah. I want you to take some time to look around
this interesting city. For—if you fail me, djinn—your basket will find itself
sitting in Serinda's marketplace."
"Yes, My Master. Now 111 just be getting back to my dwelling—"
"Not so fast. You must wear this." A black, three-sided rock attacked to a
leather thong appeared in the 'efreet's hand. "Sit up." Pukah did as he was
ordered and Kaug cast
32
WEIS AND HICKMAN
the thong around the djinn's neck. The rock—which came to a point at the top
like a small pyramid—thumped against Pukah's bare chest. Pukah regarded it
dubiously.
"It is kind of you to give me this gift, Master. What is this interesting
looking stone, if I might ask?"
"Black tourmaline."
"Ah, black tourmaline," said Pukah wisely. "Whatever this is," he muttered.
" What did you say?"
"I will keep it always, Master, to remind me of you. It's ugly enough."
"You must learn to speak up, little Pukah."
"I was saying that if you don't need me, I will return to my dwelling and put
this marvelous object somewhere safe—"
"No, no! You will wear it at all times, little Pukah. Such is my wish. Now, be
gone!"
"Yes, Master." Rising to his feet, Pukah headed for his basket.
"What are you doing?" Kaug growled.
Pukah stopped, glancing over his shoulder. "I am returning to my dwelling, O
Mighty Master."
"Why? I told you to take Sond's lamp and leave."
"And so I will, Master," said Pukah firmly, "after I have made myself
presentable. These"—he indicated his pantafons— "are stained with blood and
slime. You would not want me appearing before your friends in such a state,
Master. Think how it would reflect upon you!"
"I have no friends where you are going, little Pukah," Kaug said with a grim
smile. "And believe me, in Serinda, no one will remark on a few spots of
blood."
"Sounds like a cheerful place," Pukah reflected gloomily. "Then I am not going
to my dwelling. I am just going over to pick up Sond's lamp, Master," the
djinn said loudly,'sidling nearer and nearer his basket. "The floor of this
cave is extremely wet. I hope I don't slip and tall— Ooops!"
The djinn sprawled headlong on the floor, knocking over the basket. As it hit
the ground, the lid flew off and Pukah made a desperate attempt to slip
inside, but Kaug was there ahead of him. Crabbing the lid, the 'efreet slammed
it on top of the basket and held it there firmly with his huge hand.
"I hope you have not hurt yourself, little Pukah?" the 'efreet said
solicitously.
THE PALADIN OF THE NIGHT
33
"No, thank you, Master." Pukah gulped. "It is amazing how fast one of your
bulk can move, isn't it, Master?" "Isn't it, little Pukah? Now, you will be
going!" "Yes, Master." Sighing, Pukah leaned down and picked up Sond's lamp. 
Slowly and reluctantly, the young djinn began to dwindle away into the air
until all that remained of him was his eyes, staring disconsolately at the
basket. "Master!" cried his disembodied voice. "If you would only grant
me—
"Be gone!" roared Kaug. The eyes rolled upward and disappeared. Instantly the
'efreet snatched off the lid of the basket and thrust his huge hand inside.
Book Two

THE BOOK OF ZHAKRIN 1
Chapter 1
Hie procession wound its way slowly across the plains toward the city of
Idrith. It was a magnificent sight, and—as word of its approach spread through
the souks—many Idrithians clambered up the narrow stairs and lined the city
walls to see, exclaim, and speculate.
At the head of the procession marched two mamalukes. Gigantic men, both seven
feet tall, the slaves wore red-and-orange feathered headdresses that added an
additional three feet to their height. Short black leather skirts banded by
gold encircled their narrow waists. Cold flashed from the collars they wore
round their necks, jewels glittered on the headdresses. Their chests and legs
were bare, their skin oiled so that it glistened in the noonday sun. In their
hands, each mamaluke carried a banner with a strange device, the like of which
had never before been seen in Idrith. On a background red as blood, there
glistened a black snake with eyes of orange flame.
Now snake banners were common enough—every city had at least one minor or
major potentate who thought himself wily enough to deserve such a symbol. But
this particular insignia had something unusual—and sinister—about it.
The snake's body was severed in three places and still, from the portrayal of
the forked tongue flicking from the silken mouth, it seemed that the snake
lived.
Behind the mamalukes marched six muscular slaves clad in black leather skirts
bound with gold but without the addi-
37
38
WEIS AND HICKMAN
tional finery of the standard-bearers. These slaves bore between them a
palanquin whose white curtains remained tightly closed, permitting no one to
catch a glimpse of the person who rode inside. A troop of gooms mounted on
matching black horses closely followed the palanquin. The soldiers' uniforms
were a somber black, with black short coats and matching black, flowing pants
that were tucked into knee-high red leather boots. Each man wore upon his head
a conical red hat adorned with a black tassel. Long, curved-bladed swords
bounced against their left legs as they rode.
But it was that which came behind these goums in the solemn processional that
caught the attention of the crowd on the walls of Idrith. Numerous slaves bore
between them three litters, each covered by white fabric. Several goums rode
at the side of the litters. The heads of these soldiers were bowed, their
black uniforms were torn, they wore no hats.
Following the litters was another squadron of goums,, escorting three
baggage-laden camels decked out in splendid finery—orange-and-red feathered
headdresses, long tassels of black fringe that bounced about their spindly
legs.
From the slow movement and sorrowful mien of those marching across the plains,
it was soon obvious to the people of Idrith that this was a funeral cortege
they were observing from the walls. Word spread and more people pushed their
way through the crowds to see. Nothing attracts attention like a funeral, if
only to reassure the onlooker that he himself is still alive.
About a mile from the city gates, the entire procession came to a halt. The
standard-bearers dipped their banners—a sign that the party approached in
peace. The slaves settled die palanquin on the ground. The goums dismounted,
the camels sank to their knees, the rattan-covered titters were lowered with
great ceremony and respect to the ground.
Looking and feeling extremely important, aware of hundreds of envious eyes
upon him, the Captain of the Sultan's Guard led a squadron of his men out to
meet and inspect the strangers before permitting them to enter the city.
Barking a sharp command for his men to keep in line and maintain discipline,
the Captain cast a glance toward the Sultan's palace that stood on a hill
above Idirth. The Sultan could not be seen, but the Captain knew he was
watching. Bright patches of color crowding the balconies gave indication that

THE PALADIN OF THE NIGHT
the Sultan's wives and concubines were flocking to see the procession.
His spine might have been changed to iron, so stiff and straight was the back
of the Captain as he walked his horse slowly and with great dignity past the
standard-bearers, advancing upon the palanquin. A man had emerged from its
white curtains and was waiting with every mark of respect to meet the Captain.
Beside the man stood the leader of the goums, also on foot and also
respectful. A slave held his horse some distance behind him.
Dismounting himself, the Captain handed the reins of his horse to one of his
men and walked forward to meet the head of the strange procession.
The man of the palanquin was clothed almost completely in black. Black leather
boots, black flowing trousers, a long-sleeved, black flowing shirt, a black
turban adorning his head. A red sash and a red jewel in the center of the
turban did nothing to relieve the funereal aspect of the man's costume.
Bather, perhaps because of the peculiar shade of red that was the color of
fresh blood, they enhanced it.
The skin of the man's face and hands was white as alabaster, probably why he
took such precautions to keep himself out of the burning sun; Idrith being
located just to the north of the Pagrah desert. By contrast, his brows were
jet black, feathering out from a point above a slender, hawkish nose. The lips
were thin and bloodless. Trimmed moustaches shadowed the upper lip, extending
down the lines of the unsmiling mouth to join a narrow black beard that
outlined a firm, jutting jawline.
The man in black bowed. Placing a white-skinned, slender hand over his heart,
he performed the salaam with grace. The Captain returned the bow, far more
clumsily—he was a big, awkward man. Raising his head, he met the gaze of the
man in black and flinched involuntarily, as if the penetrating glance of the
two dark, cold eyes had been living steel.
Instantly on his guard, the Captain cleared his throat and launched into the
formalities. "I see by the lowering of your standards that you come in peace,
Effendi. Welcome to the city of Idrith. The Sultan begs to know your names and
your business that we may do you honor and lose no time in accommodating you."
The expression on the face of the man in black remained grave as he replied
with equal solemnity and politeness. "My
WEIS AND HICKMAN
name is Auda ibn Jad. Formerly a trader in slaves, I am now traveling eastward
to my homeland of Simdari. I wish only to stop over in your city for a day and
a night to replenish .my supplies and give my men some rest. Our journey has
been a long and a sad one, and we have still many hundreds of miles to go
before its end. I am certain that you must have surmised, Captain," the man in
black said with a sigh, "that we are a funeral cortege."
Uncertain how to respond, the Captain cleared his throat noncommittally and
glanced with lowering brows at the number of armed men he was being asked to
let into his city. Auda ibn Jad appeared to understand, for he added, with a
sad smile, "My goums would be most willing to surrender their swords to you,
Captain, and I will answer for their good conduct." Taking hold of the
Captain's arm with his slender hand, Auda led the soldier to one side and
spoke in a low voice. "You will, however, be patient with my men, sUU. They
have the gold of Kich in their purses, gold that melancholy circumstances
prevented them from spending. They are excellent fighters and disciplined men.
But they have suffered a great shock and seek to drown their sorrows in wine
or find solace in the other pleasures for which this city is well-known. I
myself have some business to do"—ibn Jad's eyes flicked a glance at several
iron-bound wooden chests strapped to the camels—"with the jewel merchants of
Idrith."
Feeling the cold sensation spread from the man's eyes to die fingers that
rested on his arm, the Captain of the Sultan's Guard drew back from that icy
touch. Every instinct that had made him a good soldier for forty years warned
him to forbid this man with eyes like knives to enter his city. Yet he could
see the heavy purses hanging from each gown's sash. The merchants of Idrith

standing upon the city walls could not detect the money pouches from that
distance, but they could see the heavy chests on the camels' backs, the gold
that glittered around the necks of this man's slaves.
On his way out of the city gates, the Captain had seen the followers of
Kharmani, God of Wealth, reaching for their tally-sticks, and he knew very
well that the proprietors of the eating houses, the tea shops, and the arwats
were rubbing their hands in anticipation. A howl of outrage would split the
Sultan's eardrums if this woolly sheep all ready for the shearing were driven
from the city gates—all because the Captain did not like the look in the
sheep's eyes.
THE PALADIN OF THE NIGHT
41
The Captain still had one more bone to toss in the game, however. "All those
desirous of entering the city of Idrith must surrender to me not only their
weapons but all their magic items and djinn as well, Effendi. These will be
given as sacrifice to Quar," said the Captain, hoping that this edict— one
that had come from the God and one that therefore not even the Sultan could
lift—would discourage these visitors. His hope was a vain one, however.
Auda ibn Jad nodded gravely. "Yes, Captain, such a commandment was imposed on
us in Kich. It was there that we left all our magical paraphernalia and our
djinn. We were honored to do this in the name of so great a God as Quar and—as
you see—he has in turn favored us with his blessing in our journeying."
"You will not be offended if I search you, Effendi?" asked the. Captain.
"We have nothing to hide, sidi," said ibn Jad humbly, with another graceful
bow.
Of course they don't, the Captain thought dowerly. They knew about this and
were prepared. Nevertheless, he had to go through the motions. Turning, he
ordered his men to commence the search, as Auda ibn Jad ordered the leader of
the goums to unload the camels.
"What is in there?" The Captain pointed to the litters.
"The bodies, sidi," replied ibn Jad in low, reverent tones. "I did mention
that this was a funeral cortege, didn't I?"
The Captain started. Yes, the man had said that they were a funeral
procession, but the Captain had assumed it was an honorary one, perhaps
escorting the icon of some deceased Imam back to his birthplace. It never
occurred to the soldier that this Auda ibn Jad was carting corpses around with
him. The Captain glanced at the litters and frowned outwardly, though inwardly
sighing with relief.
"Bodies! I am sorry, Effendi, but I cannot allow those inside the city walls.
The risk of disease—"
"—is nonexistent, I assure you. Come, Captain, look for yourself."
The Captain had no choice but to follow the man in black to where the litters
rested on the sandy soil of the plains. Not a squeamish man—the Captain had
seen his share of corpses in his lifetime—he nevertheless approached the
litters with extreme reluctance. A body hacked and mangled on the field
WEIS AND HICKMAN
THE PALADIN OF THE NIGHT
43
of battle was one thing. A body that has been traveling in the heat of early
summer was quite another. Coming near the first titter, the Captain hardened
himself for what was to come. It was odd, though, that there were no flies
buzzing about. Sniffing, the Captain detected no whiff of corruption, and he
glanced at the man in black in puzzlement.
Reading the Captain's thoughts, Auda ibn Jad smiled dep-recatingly, as if
denying credit for everything. He neared the litter, and his smile vanished,
replaced by the most sorrowful solemnity. With a gesture, he invited the
Captain to look.
Even as close as this, there was no hint of the nauseating odor of decay, nor
could the Captain detect any perfume that might have covered it. His
repugnance lost in curiosity, the Captain bent down and peered inside the

first litter.
His eyes opened wide.
Lying in the most peaceful attitude of repose, his hands folded over the
jeweled hilt of a splendid sword, was a young man of perhaps twenty-five years
of age. He was handsome, with black hair and a neatly trimmed black beard. A
helm carved to resemble the severed snake device lay at his feet, along with a
broken sword that belonged—presumably—to the enemy who had vanquished him.
Dressed in shining black armor, whose breastplate was decorated with the same
design that appeared on the banners of Auda ibn Jad, the young man seemed by
outward appearance to have just fallen asleep. So smooth and unblemished was
the flesh, so shining black and lustrous was the hair, the Captain could not
forbear stretching forth his hand and touching the white forehead.
The flesh was cold. Hie pulse in the neck was stilled, the chest did not move
with the breath of life.
Stepping back, the Captain stared at the man in black in astonishment.
"How long has this man been dead?"
"About a month," ibn Jad replied in grave tones.
"That—that's impossible!"
"Not for the priests of our God, sidi. They have learned the secret of
replacing the fluids of the body with fluids that can delay or completely
arrest the natural process of decay. It is quite a fascinating procedure. The
brains are taken out by drawing them through the nose—"
"Enough!" The Captain, paling, raised his hand. "Who is this God of yours?"
' :-
"Forgive me," said Auda ibn Jad gently, "but I have taken a sacred vow never
to speak His name hi the presence of unbelievers."
"He is not an enemy of Quar's?"
"Surely the mighty and powerful Quar can have no enemies?" Ibn Jad raised a
black eyebrow.
This statement left the Captain somewhat at a loss. If he pursued the matter
of this man's God, it would appear that the mighty and powerful Quar did
indeed have something to fear. Yet the soldier felt uncomfortable in not
pursuing it.
"Since your priests have conquered the effects of death, Effendi," said the
Captain, hoping to gather more information, "why have they never sought to
defeat Death himself?"
"They are working on it, sidi" said ibn Jad coolly.
Nonplussed, the Captain gave up and glanced back down at the corpse of the man
lying in state in the litter. "Who is he and why do you carry him with you?"
"He is Calif of my people," answered ibn Jad, "and I have die sad task of
bearing his body home to his grieving father. The young man was killed in the
desert, fighting the nomads of Pagrah alongside the Amir of Rich—a truly great
man. Do you know him, Captain?"
"Yes," said the Captain shortly. "Tell me, Effendi, why is a Prince of Simdari
fighting in foreign lands so far from his home?"
"You do not trust me, do you, Captain?" said Auda ibn Jad suddenly, frowning,
a look in the cold eyes that made the soldier—a veteran of many
battles—shudder. The Captain was about to respond when ibn Jad shook his head,
putting his hands to his temples as if they ached. "Please forgive me," he
murmured. "I know you have your duty to uphold. I am short-tempered. This
journey of mine has not been pleasant, yet I do not look forward to its
ending." Sighing, he crossed his arms over his chest. "I dread bringing this
news to my long. The young man"—with a nod toward the corpse—"is his only son,
the child of his old age at that. And now"—ibn Jad bowed gracefully—"to answer
your most reasonable question, Captain. The Calif was visiting the court of
the Emperor in Khandar. Hearing of the fame of the Amir, the Calif rode to
Kich to study the art of warfare at the feet of a master. It was by the vilest
treachery that the savage nomads killed him."
44
WEIS AND HICKMAN

THE PALADIN OF THE NIGHT
45
Ibn Jad's story seemed plausible. The Captain had heard rumors of the Amir's
attack on the nomads of the Pagrah desert. It was well-known that the Emperor
of Tara-Jcan—a man who thirsted after knowledge as another thirsts for strong
drink—encouraged visitors from strange lands who worshiped strange Cods. Yes,
it was all nice and neat, so very nice and neat. . . .
."What do you carry in those other twe litters, Effendi?"
"Ah, here you will see a sight that will move you profoundly, suit. Come."
Walking over to the two litters that rested behind the first, the Captain
saw—out of the corner of his eye—that his troops had almost completed their
search of the caravan's goods. He would have to make a decision soon. Admit
them into the city or keep them out. Every instinct, every twitching nerve
fiber in his body warned him—keep them out. Yet he needed a reason.
Glancing inside the litter, expecting to see another soldier— perhaps a
bodyguard who had sacrificed his life for his master— the Captain caught his
breath. "Women!" he stated, looking from one litter to the other.
"Women!" murmured Auda ibn Jad in reproof. "Say rather 'Goddesses' and you
will come nearer the truth, for such beauty as theirs is rarely seen on this
wretched plane of mortal existence. Look upon them, Captain. You may do so
now, though to have set eyes upon their beauty before the death of my Calif
would have cost you your life."
A white gauze veil had been drawn over the face of each woman. With great
respect and reverence, ibn Jad removed the veil from the first. The woman had
classic features, but there was something about the pale, still face that
spoke of fierce pride and stern resolution. Her long black hair glistened blue
in the sun. Bending near her, the Captain caught the faintest smell of
jasmine.
Auda ibn Jad turned to the other woman, and the Captain noticed that his touch
grew more gentle. Slowly he drew back the veil from the motionless body.
Gazing at the woman lying before him, the Captain felt his heart stirred with
pity and with admiration. Ibn Jad had spoken truly. Never had the soldier seen
a woman more beautiful. The skin was like cream, the features perfect. Hair
the color and brilliance of dancing flame tumbled down over the slender
shoulders.
"The wives of my Calif," Auda said, and for the first time the Captain heard
grief in the voice. "When his body was brought into the palace at Kich where
they were staying, awaiting my lord's return, they hurled themselves upon him,
weeping and tearing their clothes. Before any could stop them, the one with
the red hair grabbed the Prince's sword. Crying that she could not live
without him, she drove the blade into her own fair body and dropped dead at
his feet. The other—jealous that the red-haired wife should reach him first in
the Realm of Our Cod—drew a dagger she had hidden beneath her gown and stabbed
herself. Both are the daughters of Sultans in my land. I bear them back to be
buried with honor in the tomb of their husband."
His head whirling from his glimpse of the beauty of the women, combined with a
story of such tragedy and romance, the Captain wondered what to do. A Prince
of Simdari, a friend of both the Emperor and the Amir, the body of this young
man should be rights be escorted into the city. The Sultan would never forgive
his Captain if, on his yearly visit to the court of Khandar, he was asked by
the Emperor if he had received the funeral cortege of the Calif with honor and
the Sultan was forced to reply that he knew nothing of any such cortege. In
addition, was the Captain to deny his Sultan— who was always on the verge of
perishing from boredom—the opportunity of meeting exotic guests, of hearing
this sad tale of war and love and self-sacrifice?
The only metal the Captain had to set against all this glittering gold was
plain, solid iron—an instinctive feeling of dislike and distrust for this Auda
ibn Jad. Still pondering the matter, the Captain turned to find his lieutenant
hovering at his elbow, the leader of the goums standing at his side.
"We have completed die search of the caravan, sir," the lieutenant reported,

"with the exception of those." He pointed at the litters.
The leader of the goums gave a shocked yelp that was answered swiftly and
sternly in their own language by Auda ibn Jad. Even so, the leader of the
goums continued to talk volubly until Auda silenced him with a sharp, angry
command. Red-faced and ashamed, the gaum slunk away like a whipped dog. Auda,
pale with fury, yet with his temper under control, turned to the Captain.
"Forgive the outburst, sitli. My man forgot himself. It will
4«
WEIS AND HICKMAN
not happen again. You mentioned searching the corpses. By all means, please
proceed."
"What was all that about, Effendft" the Captain asked suspiciously.
"Please, Captain. It was nothing."
"I insist on knowing—"
"If you must." Auda ibn Jad appeared faintly embarrassed. "The priests of our
God have placed a curse upon these bodies. Any who disturb their rest will die
a most horrible death, their souls sent to serve the Calif and his wives in
heaven." Ibn Jad lowered his voice to a confidential whisper. "Accept my
apologies, Captain. Kiber, the leader of my goums—while he is a good
soldier—is a superstitious peasant. I beg you to pay no heed to him. Search
the bodies."
"I will," said the Captain harshly.
Turning to his lieutenant to issue the order, the Captain saw by the carefully
impassive, frozen expression on the soldier's face that he had heard ibn Jad's
words quite clearly. The Captain opened his mouth. The lieutenant gave him a
pleading look.
Angrily, the Captain marched over to the body of the Calif. "May Quar protect
me from the unknown evil," he said loudly, reaching forth his hand to search
the mattress upon which the corpse rested. Any number of objects could be
concealed in it, or beneath the silken sheet that covered the lower half of
the body, or even inside the armor itself. . . .
An eerie murmur, like the low whistle of a rising windstorm, caused the
Captain's hair to bristle. Involuntarily, his hand jerked back. Looking up
swiftly, he saw the sound had come from ibn Jad's goums. The men were backing
away, their horses—affected by the fear of their masters—rolled their eyes and
danced nervously. The slaves huddled together in a group and began to wail
piteously. Auda ibn Jdd, with a scowl, rounded upon them and shouted at them
in his own language. From the motion of his hand, the Captain gathered he was
promising them all a sound thrashing. The wailing ceased, but the slaves, the
goums, the horses, and even, it seemed, the camels—beasts not noted for their
intelligence—watched the Captain with an eager, anticipatory thrill of horror
that was most unnerving.
Ibn Jad's face was tense and strained. Though he was endeavoring hard to
conceal his emotions, apparently he, too,
THE PALADIN OF THE NIGHT
47
was a superstitious peasant at heart. Abruptly, the Captain withdrew his hand.
"I will not disturb the honored dead. And you, Auda ibn Jad, and your men have
leave to enter Idrith. But these"—he gestured at the rattan litters—"must
remain outside the city walls. If they are indeed cursed, it would not do to
bring them into the sacred precincts of Quar." At least, the Captain thought
grimly, he had solved that dilemma! Perhaps Auda ibn Jad and his men will take
oflense at this and leave.
But the man in black was smiling and bowing graciously, his fingers going to
heart, lips, and forehead in the graceful salaam.
"I will order my men to guard the dead," the Captain offered, though—glancing
at his troops—he knew such an order would be unnecessary. Word of the curse
would spread like the plague through the city. The most devout follower of
Benario, God of Thieves, would not steal so much as a jeweled earring from the
corpses.
"My grateful thanks, Captain," said Auda, bowing again, hand pressed over his

heart.
The Captain bowed awkwardly in return. "And perhaps you would do me the very
great honor of accompanying me to the Sultan's palace this evening. Affairs of
state prevent His Magnificence from seeing the world, and he would be much
entertained by the stories you have related to me."
Auda ibn Jad protested that he was not worthy of such attention. The Captain
patiently assured'him that he was. Auda insisted that he wasn't and continued
to demur as long as was proper, then gave in with refined grace. Sighing, the
Captain turned away. Having no legitimate reason to keep this man and his
goums out of Idrith, he had done what he could. At least the corpses with
their unholy curse would not ; pollute the city. He would himself take
personal charge of Auda ibn Jad and order his men to keep a watchful eye upon
the goums. After all, they numbered no more than thirty. The Sultan's wives
alone outnumbered them two to one. Amid the thousands of people jammed into
Idrith, they would be as a single drop of rain felling into a deep well.
Telling himself that he had the situation under control, the Captain started
to remount his horse. But his uneasiness persisted. His foot in the stirrup,
he paused, hands on the saddle, and looked for one last time at the man in
black.
Beneath hooded lids, the eyes of Auda ibn Jad were
48
WEIS AND HICKMAN
glancing sideways into the eyes of Kiber, leader of the gowns.
Much was being said in that exchange of glances, though
probably nothing that was not of the most innocent nature.
The Captain shivered in the noonday sun.
"I am," he said grimly, "a superstitious peasant." Pulling himself up into the
saddle, he wheeled his horse
and galloped off to order the city gates be opened to Auda ibn
Jad.
Chapter 2
The Sultan was—as the Captain had foreseen—charmed with Auda ibn Jad. Nothing
would do but that the Sultan and his current favorites among his wives and
concubines must leave the palace and traipse outside the city walls to pay
homage to the dead. The women cooed and sighed over the handsome young Prince.
The Sultan and the nobles shook their heads over the wasted beauty of the
women. Auda ibn Jad told his story well, bringing tears to many eyes in the
royal court as he related in heartfelt tones the final words of the red-haired
wife as she fell dead across her husband's body.
Following this, there was a sumptuous dinner that lasted long into the night.
The wine flowed freely, much of it into the Captain's mouth. Ordinarily, the
Captain did not take to strong drink, but he felt he had to warm himself.
There was something about Auda ibn Jad that chilled his blood; but what it
was, the Captain couldn't say.
Deep into his sixth cup of the unwatered vintage that came from the grapes
grown in the hills above Idrith, the Captain stared at the man, seated
cross-legged on silken cushions opposite him. He couldn't take his eyes off
ibn Jad, feeling himself caught by the same terrible fascination a cobra is
said to exert over its victims.
It is Auda ibn Jad's face, the Captain decided,muzzily. The man's lace is too
smooth. There are no lines on it, no traces of any emotion, no traces of any
human feeling or passion—either good or evil. The corners of the mouth turn
49
50
WEIS AND HICKMAN
THE PALADIN OF THE NIGHT
51
neither up nor down. The cold, hooded eyes narrow in neither laughter nor
anger. Ibn Jad ate and drank without enjoyment. He watched the sinuous
twistings of the dancing girls without lust. A face of stone, the Captain
decided and drank another cup of wine, only to feel it sit in his stomach like

a lump of cold clay.
At last the Sultan rose from his cushions to go to the bed of his chosen. Much
pleased with his guest, he gave Auda ibn Jad a ring from his own hand. Nothing
priceless, the Captain noted, staring at it with bleary eyes—a semiprecious
gem whose glitter was greater than its worth. Auda ibn Jad apparently knew
something of jewels himself, for he accepted it with a flicker of sardonic
amusement in the cold eyes.
In answer to the Sultan's invitation to return to the palace tomorrow, ibn Jad
replied regretfully that he must not tarry in his sad journey. His long had,
as of yet, no knowledge of the death of his son and Auda ibn Jad feared lest
it should reach his ears from some stranger, rather than a trusted friend.
The Sultan, yawning, was very understanding. His Captain was overwhelmed with
relief. In the morning they would be rid of this man and his well-preserved
corpses. Stumbling to his feet, the Captain—accompanied by a cold sober ibn
Jad—made his way through the winding passages of the palace and stumbled
drunkenly down the stairs. He narrowly missed tumbling headfirst into a large
ornamental pool that graced the front of the palace—it was ibn Jad's hand that
pulled him back—and finally weaved his way through the various gates that led
them by stages back into the city.
Once in the moon-lit streets of Idrith, Auda ibn Jad glanced about in
perplexity.
"This maze of alleys confuses me, Captain. I fear I have forgotten the way
back to the arwat in which I am staying. If you could guide me—"
Certainly. Anything to get rid of the man. The Captain lurched forward into
the empty street; ibn Jad walking at his side. Suddenly, inexplicably, the man
in black slowed his pace.
Something inside die Captain—some old soldier's instinct— screamed out a
desperate warning. The Captain heard it, but by then it was too late.
An arm grabbed him from behind. With incredible strength, it wrapped around
his neck, choking off his breath. The
Captain's fear sobered him. His muscles tensed, he raised his hands to resist.
...
The Captain felt the stinging pain of the knife's point entering his throat
just beneath his jaw. So skilled was the hand wielding the blade, however,
that the Captain never felt the swift, slicing cut to follow.
There was only a brief tremor of fear . . . anger. . . .
Then nothing.
The Captain's body was discovered in the morning—the first in a series of
grisly discoveries that left the city of Idrith in the grip of terror. Two
streets over, the body of an old man was found lying in a gutter. Ten blocks
to the north, a father woke to find his young, virgin daughter murdered in her
sleep. The body of a virile, robust man turned up floating in a hauz, A
middle-aged mother of four was discovered lying in an alley.
The disciplined guards surged outside the city walls to question the
strangers, only to find that the funeral cortege of Auda ibn Jad had
disappeared. No one had heard them leave. The sunbaked ground left no trace of
their passing. Squadrons of soldiers rode out in all directions, searching,
but no trace of the man in black, his gowns, or the bodies in the rattan
litters was ever found.
Back inside the city, the mystery deepened. The dead appeared to have been
chosen at random—a stalwart soldier; a decrepit old beggar; a beautiful young
virgin; a wife and mother; a muscular young man. Yet the victims had one thing
in common—the manner of their dying.
The throat of each person had been slit, neatly and skillfully, from ear to
ear. And, most horribly, by some mysterious means, each body had been
completely drained of blood.
Book Three
THE BOOK OF QUARI
Chapter 1
It was the noise—the noise and the stench of the prison that disturbed the

nomads most. Accustomed to the music of the desert—the song of the wind over
the dunes, the hum of the tent ropes stretched taut in a storm, the barking of
camp dogs, the laughter of children, the voices of the women going about their
daily chores, the cry of a falcon making a successful kill—the sounds of the
prison tore at the young men until they felt as if every inch of their skins
had been flayed from their bodies.
The soldiers of the Amir did not mistreat the desert dwellers, who had been
captured in the raid on the camp around the Tel. Far from it. Although the
nomads had no way of knowing, they were being accorded better treatment than
any other prisoners. Physicians had been sent to treat their wounds, and they
were allowed exercise and a small amount of time each day to see their
families. But to the imprisoned Akar, Hrana, or Aran tribe members, being
deprived of their freedom was the most excruciating torture the Amir could
have devised.
When the captives were first brought in, they were assembled in the prison
yard and the Amir spoke to them.
"I watched you in battle," he said, sitting astride his magical, ebony horse,
"and I will not hide from you the feet that I was impressed. All my life I had
heard the stories of the bravery and skill of the followers of Akhran."
The nomads, who had previously been standing sullenly,
55
56
WEIS AND HICKMAN
eyes on the ground, looked up at this, pleased and startled that Qannadi
should know the name of their Cod. Hie Amir made it a point to keep such
details in his mind, often surprising his own men by speaking to each by name,
recalling some act of bravery or daring. An old soldier, he knew such small
things touched the heart and won undying loyalty.
"I did not believe it," he continued in his deep baritone, "until I saw it for
myself." He paused here dramatically, to let his words slide like oil upon the
troubled waters. "Outnumbered, taken by surprise, you fought like devils. I
needed every soldier in my command to defeat you and even then I began to fear
that the might of my army was not strong enough."
This was not exactly true; the outcome had never been in doubt and—considering
the strength of the army the Amir had built up to conquer the south-—Qannadi
had thrown only a token force at the nomads. He could afford to lie at his own
expense, however, being ten times rewarded by seeing die sullen eyes gleam
with pride.
"Such men as you are wasted out there." Qannadi gestured dramatically toward
the Pagrah desert. "Instead of stealing sheep, you could be capturing the
wealth of cities. Instead of knifing each other in the dark, you could be
challenging a brave foe in glorious combat on an open field. I offer you this
and morel Fight with me, and I will pay you thirty silver tumans a month. I
will give your families free housing in the city, the opportunity for your
women to sell their wares in the souks, and a fair share in the spoils of any
city we conquer."
Most of the nomads growled and shook their heads, but some—Qannadi
noted—dropped their eyes, shuffling their feet uneasily. Many here had ridden
with their Calif in the raid on the Kich. Qannadi skillfully conjured up
visions in then* minds of galloping their horses through rich palaces,
snatching up gold and jewels and Sultans' beautiful daughters. The Amir did
not delude himseE He did not think it likely he would gain any recruits this
moment. After all, the men had just seen their families carried off, they had
seen some of their own die in battle. But he knew that this arrow he had fired
would pierce their imaginations and stick there, festering, in their minds.
Sayah, Zohra's half brother, stepped forward. "I speak for the Hrana," he
cried, "and I tell you that we serve no man except our Sheykh!"
THE PALADIN OF THE NIGHT
57
"The same for the Akar!" came a voice and, "The same for the Aran," came

another.
Without responding, Qannadi turned and galloped out of the prison yard. The
nomads thought he rode off in anger and congratulated themselves on having
tweaked the Amir's nose. So rowdy were they that the guards thought it best to
beat soundly the most vocal before driving them back to their cells.
Qannadi was not angry, however. The true, underlying meaning of what these men
said struck the Amir with such force it was a wonder he didn't fall from his
saddle. Absorbed in thought, he returned to the palace and sent at once for
the Imam.
"Bringing their Sheykhs in is out of the question," the Amir said, pacing back
and forth the length of die room that had once been the Sultan's private study
and was now his, never noticing that his boots were tracking mud and manure on
the handwoven, priceless carpets covering the floor. "They are old dogs who
will bite any hand other than their master's. But these young pups are
different. They might be taught to jump through the hoops of another,
especially if it is one of their own. We need to raise up a leader in their
midst, Feisal, someone they trust and will follow. But someone who, in turn,
must be under our complete control. Is that possible, do you think. Imam?"
"With Quar, all is possible, O King. Not only possible, but probable. It is
too bad," Feisal added, with a subtle change of expression in his voice, "that
their Calif, this Khardan, should have vanished so mysteriously."
Qannadi glanced at the priest sharply. "Khardan is dead."
"His body was not discovered."
"He is dead," the Amir said coldly. "Meryem reported to me that she saw him
fall in battle, mortally wounded. As for why the corpse was not discovered, it
was probably hauled off by some wild beast." Qannadi fixed Feisal with a
stern, black-eyed gaze. "We both want these nomads on our side, Imam!"
"There is one difference, O King," said Feisal, not at all discomfited by the
Amir's baleful gaze. "You want their bodies. / want their souls."
The following day, and many days after that, the Imam visited the prison.
Though he would never admit as much to
58
WEIS AND HICKMAN
die Amir, Feisal realized Qannadi had grasped hold of die tail of a valuable
idea. It would be up to the Imam to soothe the beast attached to tiiat tail
and make it work for diem. Conse-quendy, he talked to die young men, bringing
diem news of their families, assuring diem that their mothers, wives, and
children were being well cared for, and extolling die virtues of setded city
life, drawing subtle differences between it and die harsh life of the
wanderer. Wisely, the Imam never mentioned Quar. He never mentioned Akhran,
either, but left die young men to draw their own conclusions.
One person in particular drew his attention. Sitting alone in die tiny,
narrow, windowless cell in die Zindan, Achmed, Khardan's half brother,
foundered in a despair so black and murky he felt as though he were drowning
in it.
The smell in die prison was poisonous. Once a day, the prisoners were allowed
outside to walk around the compound and to perform their ablutions, but that
was all. The remainder of die time they had to make do with a comer of die
cell, and though it was cleaned out daily by slaves, die stench of human
excrement, as well as that of sickness, was always in die air.
Achmed could not eat. The stink penetrated die food and tainted die water. He
could not sleep. The noise, that spoke of pain and suffering and torture, was
dreadful. In die cell next to his, an unlucky follower of Benario's had been
captured inside one of die bazaars after curfew, making away with stolen
goods. The wretch's hands had been cut off, to teach him a lesson, and he
moaned and howled with die pain until he either lapsed into unconsciousness or
one of die guards—irritated at the clamor—clouted him over die head.
In die other side cell, a debtor to the followers of Kharmani, God of Weahh,
had developed an insidious cough and lay hacking his life away while bemoaning
the fact that he couldn't raise the money to pay off his debts while confined
in prison.

Across from Achmed, a beggar caught exhibiting fake sores to a gullible
audience was developing real ones. Two cells down a man condemned to be hurled
from the Tower of Death for raping a woman pounded on die walls and pleaded
with an unhearing Amir for another trial.
At first, getting out of the cell was a welcome release, but after a few days
Achmed grew to dread die time they were allowed to walk in die compound. No
loving wife came to stretch her hand out to him through the bars of the gate,
no
THE PALADIN OF THE NIGHT
59
mother came to weep over him. His own mother—one of Majiid's many wives—had
been captured in the raid on the camp. She was in the city, but too ill to
come and see him. This Achmed heard from Badia, Khardan's mother, the only one
who occasionally visited the young man.
"The soldiers did not hurt her," Badia hastened to assure Achmed, seeing by
the dark, violent expression on the young man's face diat he might commit some
foolish act. "They were really very kind and gentle and took her to a house of
one of their own Captains, whose wives are caring for her like a sister. The
Imam himself has been to see her and said a prayer for her. But she was never
strong, Achmed, not since your baby sister was born. We must put our trust in
Akhran."
Akhran! Alone, despairing, Achmed cursed the name of the God. Why have You
done this to me, to my people? the young man questioned, head in his hands,
tears creeping through his clenched fingers. This day would have been my
birthday. Eighteen years. There would have been a baigha held in my honor.
Khardan would have seen to that, even if Majiid—Achmed's father and Sheykh of
the Akar—forgot. Majiid very likely would have forgotten; he had many sons and
took pride in only one—his eldest, Khardan.
Achmed didn't mind. He, too, admired Khardan with all his heart and soul,
feeling—in many ways—that Khardan was more of a father to him than the rough,
bellowing, quicktempered Majiid. Khardan would have seen to it that this day
was special for his younger half brother. A present—perhaps one of die Califs
very own jeweled daggers. A dinner just for the two of them in Khardan's tent,
drinking qumiz until they couldn't stand and listening to Pukah's tales of
bloodsucking ghuls, the flesh-eating delhen, or the alluring and deadly
ghaddar.
The thief in die next cell began to rave deliriously. A sob burst from
Achmed's throat. Slumping down onto the straw spread over his floor, he hid
his face in the crook of his arm and wept in lonely, bitter anguish.
"My son."
The soft, sympathetic voice spread over Achmed's bleeding soul like a soothing
balm. Startled—the young man had been so lost in his grief he had not heard
die sound of die key in die door or the door being opened—Achmed sat up and
hastily wiped away the traces of his tears. Glancing suspiciously at the
slender figure of the priest entering his cell,
60
WEIS AND HICKMAN
Achmed crouched down on the dirty mattress that was his bed and affected to be
intently interested in a crack in the wall.
"I hear that you suffered a wound in the battle. Are you in pain, my son?" the
Imam inquired gently. "Shall I send for the physicians?"
Sniffing, Achmed wiped his nose on the sleeve of his robe and stared fiercely
straight ahead.
The priest smiled inwardly. He felt instinctively he had arrived at precisely
the right moment, and he thanked Quar for having been led to the suffering
lamb in time to save it from the wolves.
"Let me examine your injury," said the Imam, although he knew well that it was
not the wound on the head but the wound in the heart that brought the tears to
the young man's eyes.
Achmed ducked his head, as though he would have refused, but Feisal pretended

not to notice. Removing the haik, he examined the cut. During the battle,
Achmed had been struck by the flat of a sword blade. The blow had split the
skin and knocked him unconscious, leaving him with a terrible headache for a
day after but doing no serious injury.
"Tsk," the Imam made a clucking sound, "you will have a scar."
"That is good!" Achmed said suddenly, huskily. He had to say something. The
attention the priest paid him and the gentle touch of his fingers had come
dangerously near to making him start to cry again. "My brother has many such
scars. It is the mark of a warrior."
"You sound like the Amir," said Feisal, his heartbeat quickening in secret
delight. Many times he had looked in on Achmed and the young man had never
spoken to him, never even looked at him. The Imam smoothed back the black
hair. "To me, such scars are the mark of the savage. When man is truly
civilized, then all wars will cease and we will live in peace. There." He
handed back the headcloth. "The wound is healing cleanly. It will leave a
white mark on your scalp, however. The hair will not grow back."
Holding the cloth in his hands, Achmed twisted it with his fingers. He did not
put it back on. "Civilized? You're one to talk. This"—he pointed to his
head—"was the work of your "savages'!"
The Imam carefully concealed his joy by glancing around
THE PALADIN OF THE NIGHT
61
the cell. It was impossible to talk here. Next door the mutilated thief was
screaming feverishly. "Will you come outside and walk with me, Achmed?"
The young man glowered at him suspiciously.
"It is a fine day," the Imam said. "The wind blows from the east."
The east. The desert. Achmed lowered his eyes. "Very well," he said in a low
voice. Rising to his feet, he followed Feisal out the door of his cell,
trudging down the long, dark corridor. The guard started to follow, but the
Imam shook his head and warned him away with a gesture of his thin fingers. As
they passed the cells, those inside stretched out their hands to the priest,
begging for his blessing, or tried to snatch up and kiss the hem of his robe.
Stealing a glance from the corner of his eye, Achmed saw the Imam react to all
this with extraordinary patience, murmuring the ritual words, reaching through
the bars to touch a bent head, offering comfort and hope in the name of Quar.
Achmed recalled the first time he had seen the priest, when Khardan had come
to the palace to try to sell horses to the Amir. Achmed had been frightened of
the Imam then and he was frightened of him now. It was not that the priest's
physical presence was formidable. Days and nights of fasting and praying had
left the Imam's body so slender and delicate that Achmed could have picked the
man up and broken him in two with his bare hands. Tlie fear did not generate
from the gaunt and handsome face.
It was the eyes, aflame with holy zeal, whose fire could burn holes through a
man as a hot iron burns through wood.
Emerging into the sunshine, Achmed lifted his face to the heavens, reveling in
the welcome warmth on his skin. He drew a deep breath. Though the air smelled
of city, at least it was better than the stench in the prison. And, as the
Imam had said, the wind was from the east and Achmed could swear he caught the
faintest breath of the desert's elusive perfume.
Glancing about, he saw Feisal watching him intently. Shoulders slumping,
Achmed dove back into sullen uncaring like a startled djinn diving back into
his bottle.
"Your mother's health is improving," said the Imam.
"She wouldn't have fallen sick if you'd left her alone," Achmed returned
accusingly.
"On the contrary, my son. It was well for her that we
62
WEIS AND HICKMAN
brought her to Kich. Our physicians have undoubtedly saved her life. Out
there, in that wretched land"—the Imam looked to the east—"she would surely

have perished," Seeing stubborn disbelief on the young face, the priest turned
the conversation. "Of what were we speaking?" he asked.
"Savages." Achmed sneered.
"Ah, yes. So we were." Feisal gestured to what little shade existed in the
compound. "We are alone. Shall we sit down to talk more comfortably?"
"You'll soil your robes."
"Clothes can be cleansed, just like the soul. I see that no one has brought
you a clean robe. Disgraceful. I will speak to the Amir."
The Imam settled himself comfortably on the hard rock pavement. Leaning
against the prison wall, the priest appeared as much at home as if he had been
lounging on a sofa in the finest room in the palace. Awkwardly, Achmed
squatted down beside him, the young man flushing in embarrassment at the
deplorable condition of his clothes.
"You have a younger sister," the Imam said.
Achmed—all his suspicions aroused once more—scowled and did not answer.
"I have seen her, when I visited your mother," Feisal continued, gazing
unblinking out over the compound that was bathed in brilliant sunlight. "Your
sister is a beautiful child. How old is she? Two?"
Still no reply.
"An interesting age. So full of curiosity and testing one's limits. I suppose
that, like all children, she put her hand into the cooking fire, didn't she?"
"What?" Achmed stared at the priest in puzzlement.
"Did she ever put her hand into the fire?"
"Well, yes, I guess so. ... All little kids do."
"Why?"
Achmed was confused, wondering why they were discussing small children. He
shrugged. "They're attracted to it— the bright light, the colors, the warmth."
"They don't understand that it will hurt them?"
"How could they? They're too little."
"What did your mother do when she caught your sister starting to put her hand
in the dancing flames?"
"I don't know. Smacked her, I guess."
THE PALADIN OF THE NIGHT
63
"Why didn't your mother reason with the child, tell her that the fire will
hurt her?"
"You can't reason with a two-year-old!" Achmed scoffed.
"But the child understands a slap on the wrist?"
"Sure. 1 mean, I guess so."
"Did she understand it because it gave her pain?"
"Yes."
"And did your mother enjoy hurting her child?"
"We're not barbarians, no matter what you think!" Achmed answered hotly,
thinking this was a slur on his people.
"I am not saying that. Why does your mother choose to hurt her child?"
"Because she's afraid for her!"
"A slap on the wrist hurts, yet not like the fire."
"This is a stupid conversation!" Moodily, Achmed picked up small pieces of
loose rock and began tossing them into the compound,
"Be patient," the Imam counseled softly. "We see the road beneath our feet,
not the end. But we walk it still or we would get nowhere. So—the child
reaches for the fire. The mother slaps the child's wrist and tells her no.
Until the child is capable of understanding that the fire will burn her, the
lesser hurt protects the child from the greater. Is" this true?"
"Something like that, I suppose." Achmed had always heard priests were crazy.
Now he had proof.
Reaching out his hand, the Imam touched the young man upon his forehead. "Now
do you understand?" Feisal asked, his fingers gliding gently over the wound.
Turning, pausing in midthrow, Achmed stared at the priest in astonishment.
"Understand what?"

Feisal smiled, his eyes were brighter than the sun of dohar.
"In spiritual matters, you are the child. Your God, the false Cod, Akhran, is
the fire—bright colors and dancing light. Like the fire, he is a dangerous
God, Achmed, for he wilt bum up your soul and leave it nothing but ashes. Hie
Amir and myself are the parents who must protect you from everlasting harm, my
son. We tried to reason with you, but you did not understand our words.
Therefore, in order to save you from the inferno, we had to strike out, to
slap your hand. . . ."
"And what about those you hit a little too hard?" Achmed cried angrily. "Those
who died!"
64
WEIS AND HICKMAN
"No one regrets loss of life more than I," the Imam said, his almond-shaped
eyes burning into Achmed's. "It was your people—most notably your headstrong
brother—who attacked us. We defended ourselves."
Jumping to his feet, Achmed began to walk away, heading back for the cells.
"Believe me, Achmed!" The Imam called after him. "The Amir could have
destroyed your tribes! He could have wiped you out. It would have been far
less trouble. But such was not his intent, nor mine!"
"You take us hostage!" Achmed tossed the words over his shoulder.
Rising gracefully, the Imam walked after the young man, talking to a
steel-stiffened back.
"Hostage? Where is the demand for ransom? Have you been put up on the slave
blocks? Tortured, beaten? Has one of your women been violated, molested?"
"Perhaps not." Achmed slowed his furious pace across the compound, his head
half-turned. "Cream floating on soured milk! What do you want from us?"
Coming to a halt before the young man, the Imam spread his hands. "We want
nothing from you. We want only to give."
"Give what?"
"The cream, to use your words. We want to share it with you."
"And what is this cream?" The young man was scornful.
"Knowledge. Understanding. Faith in a God who truly loves and cares for you
and for your people."
"Akhran cares for His people!"
Achmed's tone was defiant, but Feisal knew it to be the defiance of a small
child striking back at the hand that had hurt him, not the defiance of a man
firm in his convictions. Coming up behind the young man, the priest rested his
hands upon Achmed's shoulders. The Imam felt the young man flinch, but he also
felt that the touch of friendship was not unwelcome to the lonely youth.
Feisal said nothing more to challenge the young man's faith, wisely knowing
that this would only force him to strengthen his defenses. It was Feisal's
plan to slip quietly into the carefully guarded fortress of Achmed's soul, not
attack it with a battering ram.
"There is someone who wants to see you, Achmed—a member of your tribe. May I
bring him tomorrow?"
THE PALADIN OF THE NIGHT
65
"You can do what you like. What choice do I have? I am your prisoner, after
all."
"We keep you in your cells only as the mother keeps her babe in a cradle, to
protect it from harm."
Tired of hearing about children—or perhaps tired of being constantly referred
to as a child—Achmed made an impatient gesture.
"Until tomorrow, then?" the Imam said.
"If you like," Achmed said sullenly, but the priest had seen the flash of the
eyes, the heightened color in the averted face at the mention of a visitor.
"The peace of Quar be with you this night," the Imam said, gesturing to a
guard, who arrived to take Achmed back to his cell.
Twisting his head, the young man watched the priest leave, the spare body
moving gracefully beneath the white robes that were now stained with the filth

and muck of the prison. Yet Feisal didn't appear disgusted. He hadn't tried to
brush it off or keep himself away from it. He had touched the beggars, the
condemned, the diseased. He had given of his God to them. Clothes can be
cleansed, tbe Imam had said. Just like the soul.
The peace of Quar or any other God was a long way from Achmed that night.
THE PALADIN OF THE NIGHT
67
Chapter 2
Achmed waited impatiently the next morning to learn the identity of this
mysterious visitor. He hoped it might be his mother, but the morning hour for
the meeting of the prisoners and their families at the iron gates came, and
she was not there. Khardan's mother was there to visit, however, and Badia
told Achmed that what the Imam had said was true. Sophia was improving.
Although she was not strong enough to make the journey to the prison, she sent
her love to her son.
"What the Imam said about my mother, that she would Jiave died out there in
the desert. Is that true?"
"Our lives are in the hands of Akhran," said Badia, averting her eyes and
turning to leave. "Pray to him."
"There is something wrong!" cried Achmed, catching hold of the woman's hand
through the gate. "What is it? Badia, you have always been a second mother to
me. I see trouble in your face. Is it my mother? Tell me what is the matter!"
"It is not your trouble, Achmed," the woman said in a broken voice. "It is my
own." She pressed her hand over her heart. "Our God gives me strength to bear
it. Farewell. I leave you with this"—she kissed him on the forehead—"and your
mother's blessing."
Turning, she hurried away, disappearing into the crowd of the nearby souks
before Achmed could question her farther. A bell sounded. The guards came out
to lead the prisoners
66
back to their cells amid the wailing and parting cries of their mothers,
wives, and children.
Badia surely hadn't been the visitor the Imam meant, Achmed thought as he
walked with slow and shuffling step across the compound. Lost in his thoughts,
he started when he felt an elbow dig into his side. Glancing up, he saw Sayah,
a Hrana.
"What do you want, shepherd?" Achmed asked rudely, noting that Sayah's
expression was grim and dark.
"Just wondering if you'd heard the news."
"What news?" Achmed appeared uninterested. "Has one of your women given birth
to a goat that you fathered?"
"It is you who has bred the goat and it is in your own tribe."
"Bah!" Achmed tried to move away, but Sayah caught hold of the sleeve of his
robe.
"One of your own, an Akar, has renounced our holy Akhran and gone over to the
God of this city," he hissed.
"I don't believe you!" Achmed glared at Sayah defiantly.
"It is so. Look there!" Sayah gestured toward the gate.
Achmed turned his head reluctantly, knowing what he would see even before he
glanced around, for he had instantly guessed the identity of the Imam's
visitor. Standing at the bars, dressed in clean, fresh white robes, looking
both defiant and extremely nervous was Saiyad, one of Majiid's most trusted
men. Next to Saiyad stood the Imam.
From the sound of the low growl that rumbled around him, Achmed knew that the
other members of the Akar had heard Sayah's words and seen Saiyad standing by
the gate next to the priest. Looking about the crowd for advice, Achmed was
amazed to find that all the men of the Akar were staring expectantly at him!
It suddenly occurred to the young man that they were assuming he would take
the role of leadership! He was Majiid's son, after all. ...
Confused and overwhelmed by this unexpected responsibility, Achmed muttered

something about "talking to him myself and clearing up this mistake," then
walked back toward the gate. The guards leaped after him, but a gesture from
the Imam sent them about their duties. Gathering together their other
prisoners, the guards marched them back to the cells, taking out their
frustrations on the nomads when they were certain that the Imam wasn't
watching.
Drawing nearer, a stem, unwavering gaze fixed on Saiyad,
68
WEIS AND HICKMAN
Achmed saw that the man's eyes looked everywhere But at him—the ground, the
sky, the prison, the Imam. Saiyad's fingers worked busily, folding and
pleating, then drawing smooth, then folding and pleating a handful of the
white cotton of his flowing robes.
"So it is no mistake," Achmed said beneath his breath, his heart dragging in
the sand.
He reached the gate. The Imam did not enter, keeping both himself and Saiyad
outside, perhaps afraid for his visitor's life. A glance at Achmed's dark and
foreboding expression must have made the priest thankful for his precaution.
"Saiyad," said Achmed coolly. "Salaam aleikum."
"And . . . and greetings to you, Achmed," answered Saiyad, his eyes meeting
the young man's for the first time. He was obviously sorry they did so, for
his gaze darted away the next instant. His fingers clenched around the fabric
of his robe.
"What brings you here?" Achmed asked, attempting to conceal his rising fury.
Why had Saiyad done this foul act? Worse, why did he feel it necessary to come
and rub their noses in his dirt?
"Saiyad has come to check on your welfare, Achmed," said the Imam smoothly,
"and to make certain that you and the others are being well treated."
"Yes, that is the reason I have come!" Saiyad said, his bearded face splitting
into a grin.
Liar! thought Achmed, longing to shove the man's teeth down his throat. "So it
is true what they say," the young man's voice was low. "You have converted to
Quar."
The man's grin vanished instantly, to be replaced by a sickly smile. Shrugging
his shoulders, he glanced deprecat-ingly at the Imam, and still working the
fabric that was now dirty from the misuse, he drew near the iron gates and
motioned for Achmed to come closer.
Feeling his skin crawl as though he were approaching a snake, the young man
did as he was asked. The Imam, half turning, affected to be absorbed in the
beauty of the palace that was nearby.
"What could I do, Achmed?" Saiyad whispered, his fingers leaving his robes and
gripping the young man's through the bars. "You don't know what it's like out
there in the desert!"
"Well, what is it like?" Achmed asked, trying to maintain his composure, yet
feeling himself go cold all over.
THE PALADIN OF THE NIGHT
69
"We are starving, Achmed! The soldiers burned everything, they left us with
nothing—not even a goatskin in which to put the water! We have no shelter. By
night we sleep in the sand. During the day, we fight for the shade of a palm
tree! There are many sick and injured and only a few old women with magic
enough to tend them. My wife, my children were carried away. ..."
"Stop whining!" Achmed snapped. Unable to help himself, he drew back from
Saiyad's touch in disgust. "You are not the only one to suffer! And at least
you are free! Look at us, locked in here, worse than animals!" Lowering his
voice, glancing at the Imam, he added softly, "Surely my father must be
planning some way to get us out of here. Or Khardan—"
"Khardan!" Saiyad spoke too loudly. Both saw the thin shoulders of the Imam
jerk, the turbaned head move ever so slightly. Hunching around so that his
back was to the priest, Saiyad faced Achmed. The eyes that had been cast
downward in guilt suddenly met his in contempt; the young man was disquieted

to see the older man's lip curl in a sneer.
"Haven't you heard about your precious brother?"
"What? What about Khardan?" Achmed's heart stopped beating. "What's happened
to him?" Now it was he who grabbed hold of the older man's robes.
"Happened? To him?" Saiyad laughed unpleasantly. "Nothing! Nothing at all, the
filthy coward!"
"How dare you!" Achmed dragged the man closer with a jerk of his hands,
banging Saiyad's head against the bars. One of the guards took a step toward
them, but the Imam, supposedly neither hearing nor seeing what was going on,
made a quick, imperceptible gesture, and—once again—the guard retreated.
"It's true, and all your ill usage of me won't change it! Our Calif fled the
battlefield, disguised as a woman!"
Achmed stared at the man, then suddenly began to laugh. "Liar as well as a
traitor! At least you could have come up with something more believable."
Releasing his hold of the older man, Achmed wiped his hands on his robes, like
one who has come into contact with a leper.
"Yes, couldn't I?" Saiyad retorted angrily. "Think, Achmed! If I was lying,
wouldn't I have made up a better tale? What reason would I have to lie
anyway?"
70
WEIS AND HICKMAN
THE PALADIN OF THE NIGHT
71
"To get me to join him!" Achmed made a furious gesture at the priest.
"I don't give a_damn whether you join us or not!" Saiyad snarled. Realizing he
was losing control and hurting his own cause, the older man drew himself up
with an air of shabby dignity. "I came here to explain why I did what I did,
hoping you and the others would understand. What I told you about Khardan is
the truth, I swear by—" Saiyad hesitated. He had been about to say "Akhran,"
but seeing the silent figure of the Imam standing some distance away, he
choked on the word "—by the honor of my mother," the older man concluded
lamely. "All in the desert know it is true."
"Not my father!"
"Your father more than any of them!" Saiyad waved his hands. "Here!" Reaching
into his sash, he fumbled for something, then withdrew a sword, "Majiid bade
me give this to Khardan's mother, but I did not have the heart. You do with it
what you want."
Seeing the flash of steel passing between the visitor and the prisoner, the
guard leaped to intervene—Imam or no Imam.
"You dogs!" the guard swore at them. "I'll have you both whipped—"
Hastily, the Imam stepped in front of the guard, extending a slender arm
between him and the nomads. "It is nothing of importance, I assure you!"
"Nothing! I saw that man give the boy a sword—"
"True," the Imam interrupted. Reaching through the bars, he grasped Achmed's
limp hand and held the weapon up for inspection. "It is a sword. But can this
be of harm?"
Looking at the weapon intently, the guard scowled, then gave a brief laugh and
turned away, shaking his head over the stupidity of those who cooked their
brains in the sun.
The sword's blade was broken; only the hilt and three inches of steel
remained.
"Your father himself did that with an axe," Saiyad hissed, when the Imam had
once again turned away.
Achmed held the broken sword—Khardan's sword—in a nerveless grasp, staring at
it with anguished eyes. "I ... I don't understand. . . ."he said thickly.
"Your father proclaimed Khardan dead." Saiyad sighed. Reaching through the
bars, he patted Achmed's arm, giving awkward, embarrassed comfort. "Majiid is
a broken man. We
are leaderless now. Day after day, he sits doing nothing but staring into the
east, where it is said Khardan vanished!"

"But how could he know? Did he see Khardan . . . ?"
"No, but there was one who did. Fedj, the djinn."
"Jaafar's servant? A Hrana djinn?" Fire scorched the tears that had glimmered
in Achmed's eyes. "No one would believe that—"
"He swore the Oath of Sul, Achmed," Saiyad said quietly. "And he walks among
us still."
The young man stared. He could not speak, his tongue seemed to have swollen,
his throat gone dry. The Oath of Sul was the most terrible, the most binding
oath an immortal could take.
If what I now repeat is not the truth, may Akhran take me now, as I stand
here, and lock me in my dwelling, and drop that dwelling, into the mouth of
Sul, and may Sul swallow me and hold me in the darkness of his beUyfor a
thousand years.
Thus ran the Oath. Many times Achmed had seen the djinn (most notably Pukah)
threatened with the Oath, and each time he had seen them back down, refusing
to take it. This was the first he had ever heard of one actually swearing by
it.
Dazed, blinded by his tears, he could only whisper, "How?"
"Fedj was not present at the battle. He was detained by Raja, Zeid's djinn,
who attacked him. Fearing for his master, Fedj left the contest as speedily as
he could, only to find the battle ended. He discovered Jaafar lying among the
wounded. Seeing his master to safety, Fedj then went to see if there was
anyone else who needed his aid. The Amir's soldiers were burning the camp, and
all was in disorder. Dusk had fallen, smoke filled the air. Fedj heard a noise
and saw three women taking advantage of the confusion to flee the soldiers.
Thinking he would lend them His assistance, Fedj flew toward them. Just as he
started to speak, he saw the veil covering the face of one of the women slip
down— "
Seeing the pain in Achmed's eyes, Saiyad stopped speaking and stared at his
feet.
"Khardan?" the young man murmured almost inaudibly, more of a sigh than a
spoken word.
Saiyad nodded.
Clutching the broken sword, Achmed slumped against the bars of the gate. Then,
angrily, he cried, "I don't believe it!
72
WEIS AND HICKMAN
Maybe he was injured, unconscious, and they were helping him I"
"Then why hasn't he come back? He knows his people need him! Unless ..."
"Unless what?" Achmed glanced up swiftly.
"Unless he is truly a coward—"
Crabbing hold of Saiyad, Achmed slammed the man's face up against the bars.
"Swine! Who is the coward? Who has come crawling on his belly? I will loll
you, you—1"
The Imam could see that Saiyad was in trouble this time. Together he and the
guard managed to free the nomad from Achmed's strangling grip.
"The bearer of bad news is always treated as though he were the cause of it,"
Saiyad muttered, breathing heavily and twitching his robes back into place.
"Others feared telling you, but I thought you should know."
"The bearer of bad news is treated thus only when he takes pleasure in the
telling!" Achmed retorted. "You have hated Khardan ever since he made you look
a fool over the madman!" The last words were so choked that they were
practically indistinguishable. "Get out of my sight, dog!" Achmed waved the
broken sword. "My father is right! Khardan is dead!"
Saiyad's face (lushed in anger, "For his sake and for yours, I hope so!" he
snarled.
Half-blind with rage, Achmed hurled himself again at the bars, thrusting at
Saiyad with the broken sword as though it had a blade still.
Alarmed at this sight, afraid that the young man would hurt himself, the Imam
shoved Saiyad away from the gate. "Go back to your home!" the priest

instructed in a low voice. "You can do nothing more here!"
Guards came running from across the compound. Grabbing hold of Achmed by both
arms, they wrestled the young man away from the gate. Glowering at die priest
defiantly. Saiyad moved closer. "Listen to me, Achmed! We are finished as a
people and a nation. Akhran has abandoned us. You and the rest of them in
there"—he nodded at the prison— "must face that. Now you know why I turned to
Quar. He is a God who protects and rewards His own."
With his last strength, Achmed hurled the broken sword at Saiyad.
THE PALADIN OF THE NIGHT
73
"You have done enough, my friend," the Imam said coldly. "Go back to your
home!"
Gathering the remnants of his dignity about him, Saiyad turned and headed for
the souks.
"Take the young man back to his cell," the Imam ordered. "Treat him well," the
priest added, seeing glances pass among the guards and guessing that they
intended to use this display of defiance as an excuse to punish their
prisoner. "Any marks on his body and you will answer to Quar!"
The guards dragged their prisoner away and deposited him in his cell without a
bruise on him. But they grinned at each other as they left the young man,
rubbing their hands in satisfaction. The Imam had much to learn. There are
ways and methods that leave no marks.
In the darkness and stench of the cell, Achmed lay upon his bed, doubled up
with a pain that twisted his soul more than the beating had twisted his body.
Khardan was dead. And so was his God.
THE PALADIN OF THE NIGHT
75
Chapter 3
Leaving the prison, Feisal walked slowly through the crowds that parted at his
coming, many sinking to their knees, hands outstretched to seek his blessing.
He granted it reflexively, absentmindedly touching the foreheads with his thin
fingers^ murmuring the ritual words as he passed. Absorbed in his thoughts,
the Imam was not even consciously aware of where he was until the
incense-scented, cool darkness of the inner Temple washed over his skin, a
relief from the noonday heat.
Pacing back and forth before the golden ram's-head altar of his God, Feisal
considered all that he had heard..
Believing that Achmed was wavering in his faith, the Imam had brought the
nomad, Saiyad, to the prison with the simple intent of showing the young man
that his people remaining in the desert were scattered and despairing and that
those who came to Quar were finding a chance for better lives. That was all.
The Imam had been as shocked as Achmed to hear this news of Khardan, and now
Feisal considered what to make of it.
The-Imam had his spies—exceedingly good ones, devoted to him and to Quar. The
priest knew how many segments of orange the Amu- ate for breakfast in the
morning; he knew the woman the Amir chose to sleep with at night. Qannadi had
kept his voice low—but not low enough—when he gave his favorite Captain,
Gasim, secret orders to make certain that Khardan's soul was one of the first
to be dispatched to Quar. The Imam had been angry at the flouting of his God's
74
wishes, at Qannadi thus acting against the Imam's expressed command that the
kafir, the unbelievers, be brought to Quar alive. Nevertheless, anger did not
draw the veil of folly over Feisal's eyes. The priest detested bloodshed, but
he was wise enough in his knowledge of man's stubborn nature to know that
there were some who would see Quar's light only when it gleamed through the
holes in their flesh. Qannadi was a skillful general. He would be needed to
bring the southern cities to their knees in both surrender and worship. Feisal
knew he must occasionally toss a bone to this fierce dog to keep him friendly,
and therefore he said nothing about his knowledge that Khardan's death had
been a deliberate act of murder.

But now—was Khardan dead? Apparently Quar did not think so. If not, how had
the Calif escaped? Feisal could hardly credit this strange tale about the
Calif disguising himself as a woman. And, more important, where was he?
One person might know the answer to this. The one person who had been acting
very mysteriously since the Battle at the Tel.
Ringing a tiny silver bell, the Imam summoned a half-naked servant, who flung
himself upon the polished marble floor at his master's feet.
"Bring me the concubine, Meryem," ordered Feisal.
Leaving the inner Temple, Feisal walked a short distance down a corridor to
the chamber where he held audience. Like the inner Temple, the room gave the
appearance of being closed off from the outside world. It had no windows and
the only doorways were reached by means of circumnavigating long and winding
corridors. The floor was made of black marble. Tall marble columns supported a
ceiling of carved ivory that had been shipped in squares from the Great
Steppes of Tara-kan and whose ornate figures represented the many blessings
that Quar bestowed upon his people. Lit by huge charcoal braziers that stood
on tripods in each corner of the square room, the Imam's audience chamber was
otherwise empty, with the exception of a single, marvelous wooden chair.
Sent from Khandar, the chair was probably worth more than the entire Temple,
complete with furnishings, for it was carved ofsaksmd. Found only in the
salt-impregnated sand of the eastern Pagrah desert, the saksaul tree had been
long venerated 'for its unusual properties. The black wood was extremely hard,
yet—when carved—it splintered and broke
76
WEIS AND HICKMAN
THE PALADIN OF THE NIGHT
77
like glass. Thus the craftsman needed to exert extraordinary care, and even
small carvings could take many months of work. The wood was heavy and sank in
water. When burned, the saksaul gave off spicy, fragrant fumes that induced a
kind of intoxication. The ash left behind was often carefully preserved and
used by physicians for various medicines. Most curious of all, the tree grew
beneath the sand, its snakelike trunk—stretching over thirty feet or
more—lying buried ten to twelve inches below the surface.
Seated in the saksaul chair, the ornate carving of which had reputedly taken
several craftsmen many years of painstaking labor, Feisal began collecting in
his mind all the reports he'd received and everything he had himself observed
about Meryem. One by one he considered them, fingering each as a beggar
fingers gold coins.
Qannadi's soldiers had discovered the Amir's concubine and spy lying
unconscious in the nomads' camp. Most of her clothes and all her possessions
had been stripped from her body, including all of her powerful magical
paraphernalia. When the Amir questioned her, Meryem told him that one of his
soldiers had mistaken her for a filthy kafir and had tried to rape her. She
was able to point out the man and watched in offended innocence while he was
flogged nearly to death in punishment.
The Amir had not believed her and neither had Feisal. Qannadi's soldiers had
been ordered under penalty of castration not to molest any woman. They had
been given orders to watch for Meryem, to rescue her from the nomads if it
appeared she was in danger. The idea that one of his men would risk his life
harming the Amir's concubine was ludicrous. But the Amir had no proof, other
than that the soldier volubly protested his innocence, and so he had no choice
but to have the wretch punished. Qannadi did not carry out his threat to
castrate the man, but a flogging on occasion was useful in maintaining
discipline, and if the soldier didn't deserve punishment for this infraction,
he undoubtedly deserved it for something else.
The matter was closed, and Meryem was sent back to the seraglio where,
according to Yamina, the girl waited in dread for the Amir to fulfill his
promise and make her one of his wives. Feisal knew that two months ago this
had been the dearest dream of Meryem's heart. Not that Qannadi was any great

prize in the bedroom. He was nearly fifty, his warrior's
body grotesquely scarred, his hands rough and callused, his breath often sour
with wine. It was not, therefore, for the pleasure of his company that the
women vied with each other to be his chosen favorite, but for the pleasure of
the rich rewards of such a distinction.
The status of wife in the Amir's harem meant that a woman joined the ranks of
the powerful sorceresses who worked the palace magic. Any children born of
this union were legitimate sons and daughters of the Amir and, as such, were
often granted high places in court, to say nothing of the fact that any one
could be chosen as Qannadi's heir. A concubine might be loaned out or even
given as a gift to a friend or associate. Not so a wife, who was kept in
well-guarded seclusion.
Such isolation did not mean that the wives were not a force in the world.
Yamina, Qannadi's head wife, was known to every grandee, noble, priest, and
lowly citizen to be the true ruler of the city of Kich. The Imam had, more
than once, seen Meryem watching and listening when he and Yamina were involved
in political discussions. There was no doubt that it was her ambition to gain
as much power as she was able.
But Qannadi never sent for her.
"I think the time she spent living in the desert has driven her insane,"
Yamina had confided during one of the many private and confidential talks with
the Imam she always managed to arrange in his chambers in the Temple. "Before
she left, she did everything possible to catch Qannadi's eye— dancing naked in
the baths, flaunting her beauty, appearing unveiled. ..."
Yamina always went into details describing such things to the Imam; her
hand—by accident—touching the priest's thin leg or gliding gently along his
arm. Sitting alone in his marvelous chair, Feisal remembered Yamina's words
and remembered her touch as well. He frowned to himself in displeasure.
"Since her return," Yamina had continued somewhat coldly, the priest having
sidled farther away from her on the sofa on which they both sat, "Meryem
bathes in the morning when she knows the Amir is away reviewing his troops.
She hides whenever the eunuch appears to select Qannadi's choice for the
night. If the Amir asks for dancers, she pleads that she is unwell."
78
WEIS AND HICKMAN
THE PALADIN OF THE NIGHT
79
"What is the reason for this strange behavior?" Feisal asked. He recalled that
he had not been particularly interested, other than keeping himself aware of
all that concerned the Amir. "Surely she knows the risk she is taking? She is
already in disfavor. Qannadi is convinced she lied about what happened to her
in the nomads' camp."
"I think she is in love," Yamina said in a throaty, husky whisper, leaning
nearer Feisal.
"With the nomad?" Feisal appeared amused. "A wild man who smells of horse."
"A wild man? Yes!" Yamina breathed, running her fingers along the Imam's arm.
Her veil had slipped from her face, her hand artfully displaced the filmy
fabric covering her neck and breasts, allowing the priest to see a beauty
still considered remarkable after forty years. "A wild man with eyes of flame,
a body hard and muscular, a man accustomed to taking what he desires. A woman
in love with such a man will risk everything!"
"But this Khardan is dead," Feisal said coolly, rising to his feet and walking
around to the back of the sofa.
Biting her lip in frustration, Yamina stood up. "Like other men I could
mention!" she hissed. Covering herself with her veil, she left his chambers in
an angry rustle of silk.
Feisal had not paid much heed to Yamina's words. She frequently used gossip
such as this in her attempts to arouse him to a passion that his religious
soul viewed as onerous and disgusting, his common sense viewed as highly
dangerous. Now, however, he began to wonder. ...

"The concubine, Meryem," said the servant, startling Feisal out of his
reverie.
The  Imam  looked up and saw a lithe,  slender figure clothed in a pale blue
paranja standing, hesitating, inside the chamber's doorway. The light from the
flaming brazier glis- ' tened on golden hair, just barely visible beneath the
folds of her veil. Bright blue eyes watched the Imam with what the priest
noted was an almost feverish luster.
Dismissing the servant, Feisal beckoned.
"Come nearer, child," he said, assuming a paternal tone, though he himself was
only a few years older than the woman.
Meryem crept forward and threw herself on the floor before him, her arms
extended. Gazing down at her, the Imam saw that the girl was terrified. She
trembled from head to toe, the fabric of her gown shivered as in a breeze, her
earrings and bracelets jingled in nervous agitation. Feisal smiled to himself
in inward satisfaction, all the golden coins of his thoughts falling together
in one bag. Bending down, he took hold of her hand and raised her to her
knees, drawing her close.
"Meryem, my child," he began softly, his almond eyes catching hers and holding
them fast, "I have received reports saying that you are unwell. Now that I see
you, I know they are true! I am deeply concerned, both as your spiritual
adviser and, more importantly, as your friend."
He could not see her face, hidden behind her veil. But he saw the fear in the
eyes waver, the feathery brows come together in confusion. This wasn't what
she had expected. The Imam grew more and more certain of himself.
"What have you heard, Imam?" she asked, casting out her line, fishing for
information.
Feisal was quick to take the bait. "That you imagine someone is trying to
poison you, that you refuse to eat or drink unless a slave tastes your portion
first. That you sleep with a dagger beneath your pillow. I realize that your
experiences in the desert among the nomads must have been quite frightening,
but you are safe from them now. There is no way they can harm you—"
"It isn't the nomads!" The words burst from Meryem's lips before she could
stop them. Realizing too late that the fish had just landed the fisherman, she
turned deathly white and covered her veiled mouth with her hand.
"It isn't the nomads you fear," Feisal said with increasing gentleness that
brought tears to the blue eyes. "Then it must be someone in the palace."
"No, it is nothing! Only my foolishness! Please, let me go, Imam!" Meryem
begged, trying to free her hand from die priest's grasp.
"Qannadi?" Feisal suggested. "Because you lied to him?"
Meryem made a choked sound. Almost strangling, she sank down onto the floor,
cowering in terror. "He will have me killed!" she wailed.
"No, no, my child," the Imam said. Slipping out of the chair, the priest knelt
beside the girl and gathered her into his arms, rocking her and talking to her
soothingly. Yamina, had she been there, would have writhed in jealousy
completely misplaced. The only desire Feisal felt was the intense
80
WEIS AND HICKMAN
THE PALADIN OF THE NIGHT
81
desire to drain this girl of the vital information she had hidden in her
heart.
"On the contrary," the Imam said to Meryem when her sobs grew calmer, "the
Amir has completely forgotten the incident. Of course he knew you lied. More
than one of his men had reported seeing Gasim fighting Khardan hand to hand.
Qannadi thought it very strange, then, to hear that his best Captain died of a
knife wound in the back!" Meryem groaned, shaking her head. "Hush, child.
Qannadi guessed only that you were trying to save your lover. With the war in
the south, he has more things on his mind than concern over a concubine's
infidelity."
The blue eyes looked up at him over the edge of the veil. Shimmering with

tears, they were wide and innocent and Feisal wasn't fooled by them in the
least.
"Is ... is that truly what he believes, Imam?" Meryem asked, blinking her long
lashes.
"Yes, my dear," said Feisal, smiling. Reaching up, he smoothed back a lock of
blond hair that had slipped from beneath the head-covering. "He doesn't know
you were plotting to overthrow him."
Meryem gasped. Her body went rigid in the Imam's arms. She stared at him
wildly, and suddenly Feisal had another golden coin to add to his growing
accumulation of wealth. "No," he said softly. "That's not quite true. Not were
plotting to overthrow him. You are plotting to overthrow
1     •
I"                                                               
                                                                              
                                 10
him!
The tears in the blue eyes vanished, burned away by shrewd, desperate
calculation. "I will do anything!" Meryem said in a tight, hard voice.
"Anything you ask of me. I will be your slave!" She tore the veil from her
face. "Take me now!" she said fiercely, pressing her body against Feisal's. "I
am yours— "
"I want nothing from you, girl," the priest said coldly, pushing her away from
him, sending her sprawling onto the marble floor. "Nothing, that is, except
the truth. Tell me everything you know. Everything!" he added, speaking the
word slowly and with emphasis. "And remember. I know much already. If I catch
you in another lie, I will turn you over to Qannadi. Then you can tell your
story to the Lord High Executioner under much less pleasant circumstances!"
"I will tell you the truth, Imam!" Meryem said, rising to her feet and
regarding Feisal with cool dignity. "I will tell
you that the Amir is a traitor to Quar! Because of his sacrilege, the Cod
himself has ordained his downfall. I am but His humble instrument," she added,
lowering her eyes modestly.
Feisal found it difficult to maintain his countenance during this sudden,
newfound religious fervor on Meryem's part. Pkcing his fingers over his
twitching lips, he motioned with the other hand for her to speak.
"It is true that I love Khardan, Imam!" Meryem began passionately. "And
because I love him I wanted more than anything else to bring him to the
knowledge of the One, the True God. I knew that the Amir planned to attack the
camp, of course, and I feared for Khardan's life. From some words of Yamina's,
I came to realize that Qannadi is afraid of Khardan and with reason," the girl
added loftily, "for he is strong and brave and a fierce warrior. I guessed
that the Amir might try to have Khardan assassinated.
"Before the battle, therefore, I gave Khardan a charm to wear around his neck,
Imam. He thought it an ordinary amulet of good luck, such as are made by the
backward women of his tribe."
"But it wasn't, was it?" said Feisal grimly.
"No, Imam," Meryem answered with some pride. "I am a skilled sorceress, almost
as powerful as Yamina herself. When I spoke the word, the charm cast an
enchantment over the nomad, sending him into a deep sleep. It also acted as a
shield, preventing any weapon from harming him. It was well I did so," she
said, her voice hardening, "for it was as I suspected. Going against your
express command that the nomads were not to be harmed, Qannadi attempted to
have Khardan murdered. I caught Casim in the act."
She paused, glancing at the Imam from the corner of her eye, perhaps hoping to
see the priest fly into a rage at this news. Having been aware of it, Feisal
showed no emotion whatsoever, and Meryem was forced to continue without having
any idea how the priest might be reacting. "I carried Khardan from the battle
on Gasim's horse. I intended to bring him to Kich and place him in your care,
Imam, so that the Amir would not have him killed. Between the two of us, I
knew we could convert Khardan's soul to Quar!"
"I doubt you were interested in his soul so much as his body," the Imam said

dryly. "What happened to spoil your little plan?"
Meryem's (ace flushed in anger, but she carefully con-
82
WEIS AND HICKMAN
trolled herself and went on smoothly with her story, as though there had been
no interruption. "I was waiting for Kaug, the 'efreet, to extend his hand and
take us up into the clouds when I saw, out of the corner of my eye, that
madman coming up behind me and—"
"Madman?" Feisal questioned curiously. "What madman?" "Just a madman, Imam!"
Meryem said impatiently. "A youth Khardan rescued from the slave traders here
in Kich. Khardan thought the boy was a woman, but he wasn't; he was a man
without hair on his face or chest who had dressed up in woman's clothing. The
other nomads wanted to execute him, but Khardan wouldn't let them, saying that
the youth was mad because he claimed to have come from over the sea and to be
a sorcerer. Then the witch woman—Khardan's wife— said that the youth should be
taken into Khardan's harem, and that is why Khardan couldn't marry me!"
Feisal didn't hear half of this involved and somewhat incoherent explanation.
The words "over the sea" and "sorcerer" had completely overwhelmed his mind.
It was only with a violent effort that he managed to wrench his thoughts back
to what Meryem was saying.
"—the madman pulled me from the horse and struck me savagely over the head.
When I woke up," she concluded pitifully, "I was as they found me—half-naked,
left for dead." "Khardan?"
"Gone, apparently, Imam. I don't know. I didn't wake up until I was in the
palace. But when I questioned the soldiers, they had seen no sign of him."
"And his body was never discovered," the Imam mused. "No, it wasn't," Meryem
muttered, drawing her veil over her face once more, keeping her eyes lowered.
"And why do you think this - . . this madman would strip off your clothes?"
"Isn't that obvious, if you will forgive me, Imam? To have his way with me, of
course."
"In the midst of a raging battle? He must have been mad indeed!"
Meryem kept her gaze on the floor. "I—I suppose, Imam, that he was interrupted
in his foul deed—"
"Mmmm." Feisal leaned forward. "Would it surprise you to hear that Khardan was
seen fleeing the field of battle, dressed in women's clothes?"
THE PALADIN OF THE NIGHT
83
Meryem looked up, blue eyes open wide. "Of—of course!" she stammered.
"Don't lie!"
"All right!" she cried wildly, stamping her small foot. "I didn't know, but I
suspected. It would have been the only way to escape the soldiers! There were
a lot of old hags left behind in the camp. If the soldiers saw Khardan dressed
as a woman, they would probably just let him go."
"And Khardan is still alive!" Feisal said softly. "You know it and you are
hoping he will come back!"
"Yes!"
"How do you know?"
"The enchantment will continue working to keep him from harm as long as he
wears the necklace. ..."
"But someone may have removed it, taken it off. Perhaps the madman." Feisal
sank back into the chair, his brows knotted. "If he is truly a sorcerer—"
"That is nonsense!" Meryem said spiritedly. "Only women have the magic. All
know that!"
"Still . . ." Feisal seemed lost in thought. Then, shrugging, he returned to
the matter at hand. "You do not speculate that he may be alive, Meryem! You
know he is alive! You know where he is, and that is why you have been afraid.
Because you think that he will turn up any moment and challenge the Amir, who
will then begin to suspect there is a snake hiding in his fig basket—"
"No! I swear—"
"Tell me, Meryem. Or"—Feisal caught hold of her hand— "would you prefer to
tell the Lord High Executioner as he flays the skin from these delicate bones.
..."

Meryem snatched her hand away. The veil, stained with sweat and tears, clung
damply to her face. "I—I looked into the scrying bowl," she murmured. "If ...
if he was dead, I would see his ... his body."
"But you didn't?"
"No!" Her voice was faint.
"You saw him alive!"
"No, not that either. ..."
"I grow tired of these evasions!" The Imam's voice cracked, and Meryem
shuddered, the words flicking over her like a whip.
"I am not lying now, Imam!" sbe cried, casting herself upon the floor and
looking up at him pleadingly. "He is alive,
84
WEIS AND HICKMAN
THE PALADIN OF THE NIGHT
85
but he is covered by a cloud of darkness that hides him from my sight. It is
... magic, I suppose. But like no magic I have ever seen before! I do not know
its meaning!"
There was silence in the Temple chamber, a silence so deep and thick and
reverent that Meryem stifled her sobs, holding her breath so as not to disturb
it or the Imam, whose almond eyes stared unseeing into the shadows.
Finally, the Imam stirred. "You are right. You are in danger in the palace."
Lifting her head, Meryem gazed at him with incredulous, unbelieving hope
dawning in her eyes.
"What's more, you are being wasted. I am going to suggest to the Amir that you
be sent to live in the city with the nomads. Khardan's mother, I believe, is
one who was captured and brought to Kich."
"But what will I tell them?" Meryem sat back on her knees. "They think I am
the Sultan's daughterl They would expect the Amir to execute me!"
"An expert on lying such as yourself should have no trouble coming up with a
story that will melt their hearts," Feisal remarked. "The Amir was going to
have you thrown from the Tower of Death but then he succumbed to your charms.
He begged you to marry him, but you—loyal to your nomadic prince—refused.
Qannadi hurled you in the dungeon and fed you only on bread and water. He beat
you. Still you remained true. Finally, knowing he could never have you, he
cast you into the streets. . . ."
Meryem's lips came together, the blue eyes glistened. "Lash marks and
bruises," she said. "The guards must throw me out at midday, when there is a
crowd—"
"Anything you want," the Imam interrupted, suddenly impatient for the girl to
be gone and leave him to his thoughts. Clapping his hands, he caused the
servant to appear. "Return to the seraglio. Make your preparations. I will
speak to the Amir this evening and convince him of the necessity of replanting
our spy among the nomads." He waved his hand. "Get up. Your thanks are not
necessary. You are serving Quar, as you said. And Meryem— "
This to the girl as she was rising to her feet.
"Yes, Imam?"
"Anything you discover concerning Khardan—anything at all—you will inform me."
"Yes, Imam," she said glibly.
Too glibly. Feisal leaned forward in the saksaul chair. "Know this, my qhild.
If I hear his name on the tongue of another before I hear it on yours, I will
have that tongue torn from your mouth. Do you understand?"
"Yes, Imam." All glibness disappeared.
"Very well. You may go. Quar's blessing attend you."
When the girl and the servant were gone, Feisal sank back into the chair. His
elbow resting on the hard, carved surface of the chair arm, the Imam allowed
his head to sink into his hand as though the weight of his contemplations was
too much for his neck to bear. The nomads . . Khardan . . the Amir . . .
Achmed ... His thoughts tumbled about in his mind like rocks in a jeweler's
polishing wheel. One only he found rough, uncut, disturbing.

The madman . . .
Chapter 4
The prison guards sat hunched in the meager shade afforded by the squat,
square gatehouse, their backs pressed against the cool wall that had not yet
been baked by the sun. It "was nearly noon and the shade was dwindling
rapidly. Soon the heat of afternoon would drive them inside the gatehouse
itself. They avoided that as long as possible. Entering the clay-brick
dwelling was tantamount to entering an oven. But though the heat inside was
intense, it had at least the advantage of providing shelter from the
sweltering sun. As the last vestige of shade was vanishing, the guards,
grumbling, rose to their feet. One of the younger nudged an older man, his
superior, and pointed.
"Soldiers."
Squinting into the sunlight, the commandant peered out toward the souks,
always thankful for some change in the monotony of his watch. Several of the
Amir's soldiers, splendid in their colorful uniforms, were urging their horses
through the crowds in the bazaar. The people scattered before them, mothers
grabbing up small children, the merchants quickly removing their most valuable
items from display and shoving their daughters behind die curtained
partitions. If the crowd was too thickly packed together, and the horses could
not get through, the soldiers cleared a path, lashing out efficiently with
their riding sticks, ignoring the cursing and the angry shouts that died away
to a hushed awe when the crowd caught sight of the man riding behind the
soldiers.
86
THE PALADIN OF THE NIGHT
87
"The Amir," the commandant muttered. "1 think he's coming here," said the
young guard. "Pah!" The older guard spat on the ground, but his gaze was fixed
warily on the retinue that was making its way through the bazaars. "I think
you're right," he said slowly, after a moment's pause. Whirling around, he
began bellowing orders that brought other sleepy guards to their feet, hastily
stumbling across the compound at the commandant's call.
"What's the matter with Hamd?" he bellowed, noting that one of the guards was
not responding. "Drunk again? Drag him inside the gatehouse! Quickly! And look
to your uniforms! What's that? Blood? Yours, too? Tell him it's from the
thief. What's that? The man died two days ago? Worse luck! Keep out of sight,
then! The rest of you—try to look alert, if that's possible, you sons of pigs.
Now go on! Back to your places!"
Muttering imprecations on the heads of everyone from the Amir to the comatose
Hamd, whose limp, flabby body was being dragged unceremoniously across the
ground to the gatehouse, the commandant began pushing and shoving his
bleary-eyed men toward their assigned positions, some of the slower being
assisted on their way by sound thwacks from the commandent's thick cudgel.
The clattering of horses' hooves drew nearer. Gulping for breath, sweating
profusely, the commandant cast one final glance around his prison. At least,
he thought thankfully, the prisoners had been put back in their cells
following the midday exercise period. In the darkness of the Zindan, swollen
cheeks, split lips, and blackened eyes were not readily apparent. Neither were
blood stains on tunics, for that matter. Just to be safe, however, the
commandant's dull mind was fumbling with excuses for going against the Amir's
express orders that the prisoners—particularly the nomads—were not to be
physically abused. The commandant was just fabricating a full-scale riot that
had forced him to resort to the use of force when the younger guard
interrupted his lumbering thoughts.
"Why is the Amir coming here? Is this customary?"
"No, by Sul!"
The two were standing at some semblance of attention in front of the gatehouse
and the commandant—keeping eyes forward with a grin of welcome plastered
across his face—was forced to talk out of the side of his mouth.
The old Sultan never came within a thousand paces of

88
WEIS AND HICK MAN
the place, if he could help it. And when he was forced to ride past, he did so
in a covered sedan chair with the curtains pulled tightly shut, holding an
orange stuck all over with cloves to his nose to ward away the smell."
"Then why do you suppose the Amir's coming?" "How in Quar's name should I
know?" the commandant grunted, surreptitiously mopping his face with his
sleeve, "Something to do with those damn nomads no doubt. It's bad enough we
have the priest skulking about, sticking his nose into everything. Quar
forgive me." The commandant glanced warily up at the heavens. "I'll be glad
when the lot of them are out of here."
"When will that be?" "When they convert, of course." ^Theyll die first"
"All the same to me." The commandant shrugged. "Either way, it shouldn't take
very long. Shhh!"
The men fell silent, the commandant shifting uneasily, longing to turn his
head and look behind him to see that everything was in order but not daring to
allow his nervousness to show. Behind him, be could hear Hamd's drunken voice
suddenly raise in a bawdy song. The commandant's blood began throbbing in his
temples, but then came a sound as of someone thumping an overripe melon, a
muffled groan, and the singing ceased.
The soldiers on horseback trotted up to the gate. At their leader's command,
they spread out in a straight line, sitting stiffly at attention in their
saddles, their magical horses standing as still as if they had turned back to
the wood out of which they were created. The Captain raised his sword with a
flourish. Qannadi, who had been riding a short distance behind his troops,
cantered forward. Returning his Captain's salute, he dismounted. Eyes flicking
here and there over the prison and its yards, he slowly approached the
sweating commandant. The Captain followed.
In the old days, if the Sultan had taken it into his head to visit the
prison—which was about as likely as if he had taken it into his head to fly to
the moon—such a visit could never have been accomplished without hundreds of
guards surrounding his sacred person; slaves carrying his chair and rolling
out velvet carpets so that he might not soil his silken shoes upon the
unworthy ground; several other litters bearing his favorite wives, who would
be peeping out between the
THE PALADIN OF THE NIGHT
89
curtains and holding their veils over their mouths; more slaves carrying huge
feathered fans to keep away the flies that found the prison a veritable
feasting ground.
The Sultan would have stayed four minutes, five at the most, before the hot
sun and the stench and the general unpleasantness of the place drove him back
into the perfumed silken shelter of his palanquin. Watching the Amir walk with
long, purposeful strides over the hard-baked ground, appearing cool and calm,
his nose not even wrinkling, the commandant heartily missed the old days.
"O Mighty King!" The commandant dropped to his belly on the blisteringly hot
ground, looking — in this undignified attitude — very much like a toad and
adding nothing to the already deplorable state of his uniform. "Such an honor
— "
"Get up!" Qannadi said with disgust. "I've no time for that. I'm here to see
one of your prisoners."
The commandant scrambled to his feet but left his heart lying on the pavement.
Which prisoner? Hopefully not one who had been chastised too severely.
"Filthy wretches, O King. Unworthy of such attention! I beg of you — "
"Open the gate."
The commandant had no choice except to obey. His hands shook so that he could
not fit the key into the latch, however, and Qannadi made a sign. The Amir's
Captain stepped forward, took the keys from the shaken guard, and opened the
gate that rotated on its hinges with a shrill squeak. Thrusting his way past
the stammering commandant, the Amir entered the prison compound.
"Where is the cell of Achnied, the nomad?"

"On ... on the lower level, third to your left. But do not offend your spirit
by entering the House of the, Damned, Your Majesty!" Panting, the commandant
waddled about six steps behind the swiftly walking general. "My eyes are
accustomed to the sight of these dregs of humanity. Allow me to bring the
kafir into your Exalted Presence, O King. "
Qannadi hesitated. He had intended to enter the prison and talk to Achmed in
his cell. But now that he stood before the ugly, windowless building, now that
he could smell the smell of human refuse and despair, now that he could hear
faintly the moans of hopelessness and pain coming from inside, the general's
courage — whose flame had never once died on the field of battle — wavered and
dimmed. He was
90
WEIS AND HICKMAN
THE PALADIN OF THE NIGHT
91
accustomed to death and misery in war, he would never grow accustomed to death
and misery where men were caged like beasts.
"The gatehouse is quite comfortable this time of day, O Magnificent One," the
commandant suggested, seeing the Amir hesitate.
"Very well, " Qannadi said abruptly, turning his steps and attempting to
ignore the audible whoosh of relief that escaped the commandant.
"Go ahead!" the commandant shouted at the young guard, who was standing rooted
to the spot, staring at the Amir in awe. "Make the gatehouse ready for His
Majesty!"
By dint of several frantic hand motions behind the Amir's back and a series of
threatening grimaces, the commandant managed to convey the message to the
dumbfounded young guard that he was to make certain the drunken Hamd was out
of sight. Catching on, the young man bolted away, and Qannadi entered the
sultry shadows of the bare brick room just in time to hear a scuffling sound
and see the soles of the boots of the unfortunate Hamd disappear into a back
room. A door slammed shut.
Picking up an overturned chair, the Captain of the Amir's guard placed it at a
crude table for Qannadi who, however, seemed to prefer pacing about the small
dwelling. The commandant appeared, gasping for breath, in the doorway.
"Well?" said Qannadi, glaring at the man. "Go get the prisoner!"
"Yes, O King!" The commandant had completely forgotten this small matter. He
vanished precipitously from the doorway. Glancing out a small window, Qannadi
saw the man running across the compound, headcloth flapping in the wind of his
exertions. Glancing at die Captain, the Amir raised his eyebrows. The Captain
silently shook his head.
"Clear everyone out," Qannadi ordered, motioning toward the back room.
The Captain acted immediately on his orders and by the time Qannadi saw the
commandant returning across the compound, shoving a reluctant and unwilling
Achnted along in front of him, the building had been emptied of all its
occupants, including a dazed and bloody Hamd. The Captain of the guard took up
his post outside die door.
The puffing and panting commandant appeared in the entrance. Dragging the
young man by die arm, he thrust
Achmed inside the gatehouse. The nomad stood in the cool shadows, dazed,
blinking his eyes, glancing around in confusion.
"Bow! Bow to the Amir, dog of an unbeliever!" the commandant shouted angrily.
It was obvious to Qannadi that the sun-blinded young man had no idea an Amir
or anyone else was in die room. But when Achmed did not respond fast enough to
suit the commandant, he kicked die youth painfully in the back of the knees,
causing his legs to buckle. Gripping him by the back of his tunic, the
commandant bashed the young man's head on die floor.
"I apologize for the dog's ill manners, O Exalted One—"
"Get out!" -said Qannadi coldly. "I want to speak to die prisoner in private."
The commandant glanced uneasily at Achmed, lying pros-
;   trate on die floor, and spread his hands in a deprecating

manner. "I would not be so bold as to disobey an order of my
king but I would be remiss in my duties if I did not inform
His Majesty that these kafir are wild beasts—"
"Are you saying that I—General of the Armies of Quar's Chosen—cannot deal with
one eighteen-year-old boy?" Qannadi inquired smoothly.
"No! No! Assuredly not, O King!" babbled the comman-|    dant, sweating so it
appeared he might melt into a puddle on the spot.
"Then leave. The Captain of my guard will be posted outside. In case I find
myself in any danger, I can always yell '-    for him to come rescue me."
Not knowing exactly what to make of this speech, the dull-witted commandant
stammered out that diis knowledge would be of great comfort to him. Disgusted,
Qannadi turned His back upon the prison guard and gazed out a square window at
nothing with magnificent aplomb. The folds of the ; haik hiding his face, the
Amir was able to turn his head slightly to see what was happening behind him
out of the corner of his eye. The commandant, casting a swift, fearful glance
at his king, administered a swift, savage kick to Achmed, catching the boy
painfully in the crook of his knee. His face dark, the commandant raised a
fist at his prisoner direaten-ingly, then, bobbing up and down like a beggar's
monkey, backed out die door, fervent in his praise of die Amir, the Emperor,
Quar, the Imam, the Amir's wives, and anyone else he could think of.
92
WEIS AND HICKMAN
His hand itching to draw his sword and rid the world of this specimen of
humanity, Qannadi kept his back turned until a scuffle, the sound of his
Captain's voice, and a whine assured him that the commandant had been hustled
off the premises.
Still Qannadi did not turn around.
"Get up," he ordered the young man gruffly. "I detest seeing a man grovel,"
He heard the sharp intake of breath as Achmed stood upon his injured leg but
even that indication of weakness was quickly choked off by the young man.
Qannadi turned around just in time to see the nomad draw himself up, standing
straight and tall and facing the Amir with defiance.
"Sit down," said Qannadi.
Startled, seeing only one chair and realizing—barbarian though he was—that no
one ever sat in the presence of the king, Achmed remained standing.
"I said sit down!" Qannadi snapped irritably. "That was a command, young man,
and—like it or not—you are in no position to disobey my commands!"
Slowly, his face carefully impassive, Achmed sank down into the chair,
gritting his teeth to keep the gasp of pain from slipping out.
"Are the guards mistreating you?" Qannadi asked abruptly.
"No," lied the young man.
The Amir turned his head back to the window again to hide the emotion on his
face. The "no" had not been spoken out of fear. It had been spoken in pride.
Qannadi remembered suddenly another young man who had nearly died of a
festering arrow wound because he was too proud to admit he'd been hit.
The Amir cleared his throat and turned back again.
"You will address me as 'King,' or 'Your Majesty,' " he said. Walking over to
the door, he glanced outside to see his men, mounted on their horses, waiting
patiently in line in the hot sun. He knew his men would remain there
uncomplaining until they dropped but—magic or not—the animals were beginning
to suffer. Cursing himself, aware that in his preoccupation he'd forgotten
them, the Amir ordered the Captain to disperse the guard and see that the
horses were watered. The Captain left, and the Amir and the young man were
alone.
THE PALADIN OF THE NIGHT
93
"How long have you been confined here?" Qannadi asked, coming over to gaze
down upon the young man.
Shrugging, Achmed shook his head.
"A month? Two? A year? You don't know? Ah, good. That means we are starting to
break you."

The young man looked up swiftly, eyes glittering.
"Yes," Qannadi continued imperturbably. "It takes spirit, an effort of will,
to keep track of the passing of time when one .is in a situation where each
day of misery blends into a night pf despair until all seem alike. You've seen
the wretches who've been here for years. You've seen bow they live only for
the moment when they receive their wormy bread and their cup of rancid water.
Less than animals, aren't they? Many forget how to talk." Qannadi saw fear
darken the young man's eyes and he smiled to himself in inner satisfaction. "I
know, you see. I was in prison myself for a time. I wasn't much older than
you, fighting the warriors of the Great Steppes.
"They are fierce fighters, those men of Hammah. Their women fight alongside
them. I swear by Quar that is the truth," Qannadi added gravely, seeing
Achmed's stare of disbelief. "They are a large, big-boned race—the women as
big as the men. They have golden hair that, from birth, is never cut. Men and
women both wear it in braids that hang down below their waists. When they
fight, they fight in pairs—husband and wife or couples betrothed to be
married. The man stands upon the right to wield sword and spear, the woman
stands to his left, holding a great, huge shield that protects them both. If
her husband is killed, the wife fights on until either his death is avenged or
she herself (alls beside his body." Qannadi shook his head. "And woe betide
the man who takes the life of a shieldmaid."
Pain forgotten, Achmed listened with shining, wondering ^eyes. Gratified,
Qannadi paused a moment to enjoy this audience. He had told this story to his
own sons and received only stifled yawns or bored, glazed stares in return.
"I was lucky." Qannadi smiled wryly. "I didn't have a chance to kill anyone. I
was disarmed the first pass and knocked unconscious. They took me prisoner and
cast me into their dungeons that are carved out of rock into the sides of
mountains. At first, I was like you. My life was over, I thought. I cursed my
bad luck that I hadn't fallen among my comrades. The Hammadians are a just
people, however. They
94
WEIS AND HICKMAN
offered all of us the chance to work out our servitude, but I was too proud. I
refused. I sat in my cell, wallowing in my misery, day after day, blind to
what was happening to me. Then something occurred that opened my eyes."
"What?" Achmed spoke before he thought. Face flushed, he bit his lip and
looked away.
Qannadi kept his own face carefully smooth and impassive. "When the Hammadi
first captured me, they beat me every day. They had a post planted in the
center of the prison yard and they would put a man up against it like so"—the
Amir demonstrated— "and chain his hands to the top. Then they stripped the
clothes from my back and struck a leather thong across my shoulders. To this
day I bear the scars." Qannadi spoke with unconscious pride. He wasn't
watching Achmed now, but was looking back, into his past. "Then one day they
didn't beat me. Another passed, and another, and they continued to leave me
alone. My comrades—those that still lived—were being punished. But not me. One
day I overheard another prisoner demand to know why I alone was spared this
harsh treatment.
"Can you guess their answer?" The Amir looked at Achmed intently.
The young man shook his head.
" "We do not beat the whipped dog.' "
There was silence in the gatehouse. Because it had been many years since he
had thought of this incident, Qannadi had not realized that the pain and shame
and humiliation was still^ within him, festering like that arrow wound of long
ago.
" 'We do not beat the whipped dog,' " he repeated grimly. "I saw then that I
had let myself become nothing but an animal—an object of pity, beneath their
contempt."
"What did you do?" The words were forced through clenched teeth. The young man
stared at hands clasped tightly in his lap.

"I went to them and I offered myself as their slave." "You worked for your
enemy?" Achmed looked up, his black eyes scornful.
"I worked for myself," the Amir replied. "I could have proudly rotted to death
in their prison. Believe me, young man, at that point in my life, death would
have been the easy way out. But I was a soldier. I reminded myself that I had
been captured, I had not surrendered. And to die in their
THE PALADIN OF THE NIGHT
95
foul prison would be to admit defeat.  Besides, one never knows the paths Cod
has chosen one to walk."
The Amir glanced surreptitiously at Achmed as he said this last, but the young
man's head was bowed again, his gaze fixed upon his clenched hands.
"And, as it turned out, Quar chose wisely. I was sent to work on the form of a
great general in the Hammadi army. TTieir armies are not as ours," Qannadi
continued. Staring out his window, he saw not the crowded souks of Kich but
the vast, rolling prairies of the Great Steppes. "The armies are under the
control of certain rich and powerful men, who hire and train their soldiers at
their own expense. In time of war, the king calls these armies to come fight
for the defense of the land. Of course, there is always the chance that the
general might become too powerful and decide that he wants to be king, but
that is a danger all rulers must face.
"I was put to work in the fields of this man's farm. At first, I regretted
that I had not died in the prison. I was thin, emaciated. My muscles had
atrophied during my long confinement. More than once, I sank down among the
weeds with the thought that I would never rise again. But I did. Sometimes the
overseer's lash helped me up. Sometimes I myself struggled to my feet. And, as
time passed, I grew strong and fit once more. My interest in life and, more
importantly, my interest in soldiering returned. My master was constantly
exercising his troops, and every moment I could escape from my labors I spent
watching. He was an excellent general, and the lessons I learned from him have
helped me all my life. Particularly, I studied the art of infantry fighting,
for in this these people were most skilled. At length, he noticed my interest.
Far from being offended, as I feared, he was pleased.
"He took me from the fields and set me among his troops. My life was not easy,
for I was different, a foreigner, and they did everything they could to test
me. But I gave as good as I got, most of the time, and eventually earned their
respect and that of my general. He made me one of his personal guard. I fought
at his side for two years."
Achmed stared in blank astonishment at this, but Qannadi seemed no longer
aware of the boy's presence.
"He was a great soldier, a noble and honorable man. I loved him as I have
loved no other, before or since. He died on the field of battle. I, myself,
avenged his death and was
96
WEIS AND HICKMAN
given the honor of placing the severed head of his enemy at his feet as he lay
upon his funeral bier. I cast my lighted torch onto the oil-soaked wood and I
bid his soul godspeed to whatever heaven he believed in. Then I left."
Qannadi's voice was soft. The young man had to lean forward to hear him. "I
walked for many months until I reached my homeland once more. Our glorious
Emperor was only a king then. I came before him and laid my sword at his
feet."
Sighing, the Amir withdrew his gaze from the window and turned to look at
Achmed. "It is a curiosity, that sword. A two-handed broadsword it is called
in the north. It takes two hands to wield it. When I first was given one, I
could not even lift it from the floor. I still have it, if you would like to
see it."
The young man glowered at him, dark eyes wary, sullen, suspicious.
"Why are you telling me this tale?" He rudely refused to use the proper form
of address, and the Amir—though he noticed—did not press him.

"I came because I deplore waste. As for why I told you my story, I am not
certain." Qannadi paused, then spoke softly. "You take a wound in battle and
it can heal completely and never bother you again. Then, years later, you see
a man hit in exactly the same place and suddenly the pain returns—as sharp and
piercing as when the steel first bit into your flesh. When I looked into your
face, Achmed, I felt the pain. ..."
The young man's shoulders slumped. The pride and anger that had kept him alive
drained from his body like blood from a mortal wound. Looking at Achmed,
Qannadi had one of those rare flashes of illumination that sometimes, in the
dark night of wandering through this life, lights the way and shows the soul
of another. Perhaps it was seeing once again in his mind Khardan and Achmed
together, standing before his throne—one brother proud and handsome, the other
looking at him with complete and total adoration. Perhaps it was the Imam,
telling him the strange tale of Khardan's alleged flight from the battle.
Perhaps it came from within the Amir himself and the memory of his own starved
childhood, the father who had abandoned him. Whatever it was, Qannadi suddenly
knew Achmed better than he knew any of his own sons, knew him as well as he
1iad come to know himself.
THE PALADIN OF THE NIGHT
97
He saw a young man deprived of the light of a father's love and pride, growing
in the shadow cast by an older brother. Instead of letting this embitter him,
Achmed had simply transferred the love for his father to his older brother,
who had—Qannadi knew—returned it warmly. But Khardan had betrayed him, if not
by an act of cowardice (and the Amu-found it difficult to believe such a wild
tale) then at least by dying. The boy was left with no one—father, brother,
all were gone.
Going up to the young man, Qannadi put his hand on his shoulder. He felt
Achmed flinch, but the boy did not pull away from the Amir's touch.
"How old are you?"
"Eighteen," came the muffled response. "I—I had a birthday."
And no one remembered, Qannadi thought. "I was the same age myself when I was
captured by the Hammadi." A lie. The Amir had been twenty, but that was not
important. "Are you a whipped dog, Achmed? Are you going to lie down on your
master's grave and die?" The boy cringed. "Or are you going to live your own
life? I told you I deplore waste. You are a fine young man! I could wish my
own sons to be more like you!"
A touch of bitterness crept into the voice. Qannadi fell silent, mastering his
emotions. Achmed was too preoccupied with his own to notice, although he would
recall it later.
"I came here to make you an offer," Qannadi continued. "I watched the Battle
at the Tel. My men are good soldiers, but it took four of them to one of yours
to conquer your people. It is not that you are more skilled in handling your
weapons, I believe, but in handling your horses. Quar has given us magical
beasts but, it seems, He has not seen fit to train them in the art of warfare.
Instead of your people breaking your hearts in this prison, I give you the
chance to earn your freedom.
Achmed's body held rigid for a moment. Slowly he raised his head to look
directly into Qannadi's eyes.
"All we would do is train the horses?"
"Yes."
"We would not be forced to join your army? Forced to fight?"
"No, not unless you wanted."
"The horses we train will not fight our own people?"
98
WEIS AND HICKMAN
"My son"—Qarmadi used the word unconsciously, never realizing he had spoken it
until he saw the eyes looking into his blink, the lids lower abruptly—"your
people are no more. I do not tell you this to attempt to trick you or
demoralize you. I speak the truth. If you cannot hear it in my voice, then
listen to your own heart."

Achmed did not respond but sat, head down, his hands grasping spasmodically at
the smooth top of the crude wooden table, seeking something to hold onto and
not finding it.
"I will not make you convert to our God," the Amir added gently.
At this, Achmed raised his head. He looked, not at Qannadi, but eastward, into
the desert that could not be seen for the prison walls.
"There is no God," the young man answered tonelessly.
Chapter 5
The nomads of the Pagrah desert believed that the world was flat and that they
were in its center. The huge and splendid city of Khandar—as far distant, in
their minds, as a remote star—glittered somewhere to the north of them and
beyond Khandar was the edge of the world. To the west was the city of Kich,
the mountains, the great Hum Sea, and, finally, the edge of the world. To the
south was more desert, the cities of the land of Bas in the southeast, and the
edge of the world. To the east was the Sun's AnviWthe edge of the world.
It was rumored among the nomadic tribes that the city dwellers spoke of the
existence of another great sea to the east, beyond the Sun's Anvil, and had
even given it a name— the Kurdin Sea. The nomads scoffed at this belief—what
could one expect of people who built walls around their lives—and spoke
scornfully of the Kurdin Sea, referring to it in ironic terms as the Waters of
Tara-kan and considering it the biggest lie they had heard since some insane
marabout of Quar's had ventured into the desert a generation ago, babbling
that the world was round, like an orange.
There was also rumored to be a lost city somewhere in the Sun's Anvil—a city
of fabulous wealth, buried beneath the dunes. The nomads rather liked this
idea and kept the tradition of Serinda alive, using it to illustrate to their
children the mutability of all things made by the hands of man.
The djinn could have told their masters the truth of the matter. They could
have told them that there was a sea to the
99
100
WEIS AND HICKMAN
THE PALADIN OF THE NIGHT
101
east, that there had been a city in the Sun's Anvil, that Khandar did not
stand at the top of the world nor was the Pagrah desert the world's center.
The immortal beings knew all this and much more besides but did not impart
this information to their masters. The djinn had one abiding rule: When in the
service of humans, you who are all knowing know nothing and they who know
nothing are all knowing.
To be fair to the nomads, the average city dweller of Kich or Khandar or
Idrith thought the world considerably smaller.. Let the madrasahs teach
differently. Let the Imam preach about bringing the kafir who lived in lands
beyond to a knowledge of the True God. To the coppersmith, the weaver, the
baker, the fabric dyer, the lamp seller—the world's center was the four walls
of his dwelling, its heart the souk where he sold his skill or his wares, its
edge the wall surrounding the city.
Bom and bred in the court of an enlightened Emperor, the Imam knew the truth
about the world. So did the Amir, who—though not an educated man—had seen too
much of it with his own eyes not to believe that there was always more over
the next hill. The learned scholars in the Emperor's court taught that the
world was round, that the land of Sardish Jardan was just one of many lands
floating atop the waters of several great oceans, and that people of many
lands and many different beliefs lived in these lands—people who were to be
drawn inevitably into the arms of Quar. Thus, when the Imam heard from Meryem
about a madman who claimed to have come from over the sea, Feisal considered
this news worthy of being passed on to his God.
The Imam prepared for his Holy Audience by fasting two days and a night, his
lips touching only water and that sparingly. Such a feat was no hardship for
Feisal, who had fasted whole months at a time in order to prove that the body

could be subdued and disciplined by the spirit. This short fast was undertaken
to purge the unworthy house of the spirit of all outside influences. During
this time, the Imam kept strictly to himself, refusing contact with anyone
from the outside (particularly Yamina), who might draw his thoughts from
heaven. He broke his self-imposed restriction only twice—once to talk at
length with Meryem, another to question the nomad, Saiyad.
The night of the Audience came. Feisal bathed himself in water made frigid by
die addition of snow hauled from the
mountain tops; snow that was used in the palace to cool the wine, used by the
Imam to mortify his flesh. This done, he anointed his unworthy body with
scented oils, to make it more pleasing to the God. At the hour of midnight,
when the weary minds and bodies of other mortals found solace from their
sorrows in sleep, Feisal stripped himself of all his clothes except for a
cloth wrapped about his thin loins. Trembling, in an ecstasy of holy fervor,
he entered the Inner Temple. Carefully, reverently, he struck the
copper-and-brass gong on the altar three times. Then he prostrated himself
flat on the floor before the golden ram's head and waited, his skin shivering
with excitement and the chill of the air.
"You have called, my priest, and I have come. What is it you want?"
The voice caressed him. The Imam caught his breath in rapture. He longed to
lose himself in that voice, to be lifted from this body with its weak need for
food and water, its unclean habits, its impure lusts, its unholy longings. It
was with an effort that the Imam reminded himself of what Quar had told him
when the priest was young—it was through this unworthy body that the Imam
could best serve his Master. He must use it, though he must fight constantly
never to let it use him.
Knowing this and knowing, too, that he had to wrench his soul from the peace
it longed to attain in heaven back to the travails of the world, the Imam
lifted a silver dagger and thrust the knife blade with practiced skill into
his ribs. There were many such scars on the Imam's body; scars he kept hidden
from view, for knowledge of such self-inflicted torture would have shocked the
High Priest himself. The pain, the knowledge of his mortality, the blood
running down his oiled skin—all brought Feisal crashing down from heaven and
enabled him to discuss the concerns of humans with his God. ':' Pressing his
hand over his side, feeling the warm blood well between his fingers, Feisal
slowly drew himself to a kneeling position before the altar.
"I have been in contact with the nomads and I have heard, O Most Holy Quar, a
very strange thing. There is or was a man living among the followers of Akhran
who claimed to have come from over the sea and—what's more—who claimed to
possess the magic of Sul."
The very air around the priest quivered with tension. Feeling now no pain from
his wound, Feisal reveled in the
102
WEIS AND H1CKMAN
sensation of knowing that, as he had believed, this information was welcome to
his God.
"Is your informant reliable?"
"Yes, Holy One, particularly because she considers this to be of little
importance. The man is dismissed as mad."
"Describe him."
"Hie man is a youth of about eighteen years with hair the color of flame and a
hairless face and chest. He goes about disguised in women's clothes to hide
his identity. My informant did not see him practice magic, but she sensed it
within him—or thought she did."
"And where is this man?"
"That is the strange part, Hazrat Quar. The man escaped capture by the
soldiers when they raided the camp. He interfered with plans to bring that
most dangerous of the nomads—Khardan—into our custody. Both the madman and
Khardan have disappeared under mysterious circumstances. Their bodies were not
found, yet—according to those I have questioned—neither has been seen. What is

stranger still is that my informant, a skilled sorceress, knows Khardan to be
alive, yet, when using her magic to search for him, she finds her mystic
vision obscured by a cloud of impenetrable darkness."
The Cod's silence hummed around the Imam, or perhaps it was a buzzing in his
ears. Feisal was growing dizzy and light-headed. Grimly, he clung to
consciousness until his God should have no further need of him.
"You have done well, my servant, as usual," spoke Quar finally. "Should you
hear or discover anything further about this man from across the sea, bring it
to my attention at once."
"Yes, Holy One," murmured Feisal ecstatically.
The darkness was suddenly empty and cold. The God's, presence in the Inner
Temple was gone. The bliss drained from the Imam's body. Shivering with pain,
he rose unsteadily to his feet and crept over to where his pallet lay on the
cold marble floor. Knees weak, he -sank down onto it and groped with a shaking
hand for a roll of soft cloth he had hidden beneath it. Pulling it out,
Feisal—with his fading strength—bound the bandage tightly about his wound.
His consciousness slipped from him and he slumped down upon the bloodstained
pallet. The ball of cloth fell from his hand and rolled, unwinding, across the
black, chill floor.
Chapter 6
We do not beat the whipped dog. . . . Are you going to lie down on your
master's grave and die?
Crouched in his dark cell, Achmed repeated the Amir's words to himself. It was
true. Everything the Amir sai,d was true!
"How long have I been in prison? Two weeks? Two months?" Despairing, Achmed
shook his head. "Is it morning or night?" He had no idea. "Have I been fed
today, or was that yesterday's meal I remember eating? I no longer hear the
screams. I no longer smell the stench!"
Achmed clutched at his head, cowering in fear. He recalled hearing of a
punishment that deprived a man of his five senses. First the hands were cut
off, to take away the sense of touch. Then the eyes were gouged out, the
tongue ripped from the mouth, the nose cut off, the ears torn from the head.
This place was his executioner! The death he was dying was more ghastly than
any torture. Misery screamed at him, b;ut he had lost the ears to hear it. He
had long ago ceased being bothered by the prison smell, and now he knew it was
because the foul stench was his own. In horror, he realized he was growing to
relish the guards' beatings. The pain made him feel alive. . . .
Panic-stricken, Achmed leaped to his feet and hurled himself at the wooden
door, beating it with his fists and pleading to be let out. The only response
was a shouted curse from another cell, the debtor having been rudely awakened
103
104
WEIS AND HICKMAN
THE PALADIN OF THE NIGHT
105
from a nap. No guards came. They were used to such disturbances. Sliding down
the doorway, Achmed slumped to the floor. In his half-crazed state, he fell
into a stupor.
He saw himself lying on a shallow, unmarked grave, hastily dug in the sand. A
terrible wind came up, blowing the sand away, threatening to expose the body.
A wave of revulsion and fear swept over Achmed. He couldn't bear to see the
corpse, decaying, rotting. Desperately, he shoveled the sand back over the
body, scooping it up in handruls and tossing it onto the grave. But every time
he lifted a handful, the wind caught it and blew it back into his face,
stinging his eyes, choking him. He kept working frantically, but the wind was
relentless. Slowly, the face of the corpse emerged—a man's face, the withered
flesh covered by a woman's silken veil. . . .
The scraping sound of the wooden bar being lifted from the door jolted Achmed
out of his dream. The shuffling footsteps of prisoners being herded outside
and the distant cries of women and children told the young man that it was

visiting time.
Slowly Achmed rose to his feet, his decision made.
Emerging into the bright sunlight, Achmed squinted painfully against the
brilliance. When he could see, he scanned the crowd pressed against the bars.
Badia was there, beckoning to him. Reluctantly, Achmed crossed the compound
and came to stand near her.
The woman's eyes, above the veil, were shadowed with concern.
"How is my mother?" Achmed asked.
"Sophia is we!) and sends her love. But she has been very worried." Badia
examined the young man intently. "We heard that the Amir sent for you. That he
spoke to you . . . alone."
"I am all right." Achmed shrugged. "It was nothing."
"Nothing? The Amir sends for you for nothing? Achmed"— Badia's eyes
narrowed—"there is talk that the Amir offered you a place in his army."
"Talk! Talk!" Achmed said impatiently, turning from the woman's intense gaze.
"That is all."
"Achmed, your mother—"
"—should not worry. She will make herself ill again. Badia" —Achmed changed
the subject abruptly—"I heard about Khardan."
Now it was the woman's dark eyes that lowered, the long
lashes brushed the gold-trimmed edge of the veil. Achmed saw Badia's hand
steal to her heart, and he knew now what sorrow she had hidden from him the
last time she had visited.
"Badia," the young man asked hesitantly, swallowing, "do you believe—"
"No!" Badia cried stubbornly. Raising her eyes, she looked directly at Achmed.
"The rumor about him is a lie—a lie concocted by that swine Saiyad. Meryem
says so. Meryem says Saiyad has hated Khardan ever since the incident with the
madman and that he would do anything—"
"Meryem?" Achmed interrupted in amazement. "Wasn't she captured? The Sultan's
daughter— Surely the Amir would have done away with her!"
"He was going to, but he fell in love with her and couldn't bear to harm her.
He begged her to marry him, but Meryem refused. Don't you see, Achmed," Badia
said eagerly, "she refused because she knows Khardan is alive!"
"How?"
Achmed was skeptical. Meryem was certainly lovely. The young man could
remember watching the lithe, graceful body gliding like the evening breeze
through the camp, going about her chores, long lashes modestly downcast until
you came close to her then, suddenly, the blue eyes were looking right into
your heart. Khardan had fallen headlong into the pool of those blue eyes.
Achmed tried to visualize the stern-faced, gray-haired, battle-scarred Qannadi
floundering in the same water. It seemed impossible. But, Achmed was forced to
admit, what a man does in his tent in the night is best covered by the blanket
of darkness.
"—she gave Khardan a charm," Badia was relating.
Achmed scoffed. "Women's magic! Abdullah's wife gave him a charm, too. They
buried it with what was left of him."
Badia drew herself to her full height, which brought her about to Achmed's
chin, staring at him with the sharp-edged gaze that had often cut the tall
Majiid off at the knees. "When you have known a woman, then mock her magic and
her love if you dare. But do not do so while you are still a boy!"
Wounded, Achmed lashed out. "Don't you understand, Badia? If Khardan is alive,
then what Saiyad said is true! He fled the battle—a coward! And now he hides
in shame—"
Thrusting her arm through the prison gate, Badia slapped him. The woman's
blow, hampered as it was by the iron bars,
106
WEIS AND HICKMAN
was neither hard nor painful. Yet it brought bitter tears to the young man's
eyes.
"May Akhran forgive you for speaking of your brother so!" Badia hissed through

her veil. Turning on her heel, she walked away.
Achmed sprang at the bars, shaking them with such violence that the guards
inside the compound took a step toward him.
"Akhran!" Achmed laughed harshly. "Akhran is like my father—a broken old man,
sitting in his tent, mourning a way of life that is as dead as his son! Can't
you understand, woman? Akhran is the past! My father is the past! Khardan is
the past!" Tears streaming down his cheeks, Achmed clutched the bars, rattling
them and shouting. "/—Achmed! / am the future! Yes, it is true! I am joining
the army of the Amir! I—"
A hand caught hold of his shoulder, spun him around.
Achmed saw Sayah's face, twisted with hatred.
"Traitor!" A fist slammed into Achmed's jaw, knocking him backward against the
bars. The faces of other tribesmen loomed close. Glittering eyes floated on
waves of hot breath and pain. A foot drove into his gut. He doubled over in
agony, slumping to the ground. Hands grabbed him roughly by the collar of his
robes and dragged him to his feet. Another blow across the mouth. A flaring of
fire in his groin, burning through his body, forcing a scream from his lips.
He was on the ground again, covering his head with his arms, trying to shield
himself from the eyes, the hands, the feet, the hatred, the word . . .
"Traitor!"
Chapter 7
Qannadi sat late in his private chambers. He was alone, his wives and
concubines doomed to disappointment, for none would be chosen this night.
Dispatches had arrived by courier from the south, and the Amir had informed
his staff that he was not to be disturbed.
By the light of an oil lamp burning brightly on his desk, Qannadi read the
reports of his spies and double agents— men he had planted in the governments
of the cities of Bas who were working for their overthrow from the inside.
Studying these, he compared them to the reports of his field commanders,
occasionally nodding to himself in satisfaction.
The ripples created by the rock thrown at the nomads were still spreading
across the pond. Qannadi had made certain his agents proclaimed publicly that
the Amir had done Bas a tremendous favor by ridding them of the spear that had
long been pointed at their throats. Never mind that centuries had passed since
the nomads had attacked Bas and that the attack had come at a time when the
newly arising cities were seen as a distinct threat to the nomads and their
way of life. So devastating had been the battles fought then that they lived
in legend and song, and it took only the mention of the fearsome spahis—the
cruel desert riders in their black robes and black masks—to drain the blood
from the plump cheeks of many a Senator.
Governed by democratic rule that permitted all men of property (excluding
women, slaves, laborers, soldiers, and
107
108
WEIS AND HICKMAN
THE PALADIN OF THE NIGHT
109
foreigners) to have an equal vote, the people of Bas had lived in relative
peace for many years. Once they had established their city-states, they
devoted themselves to their favorite occupation—politics. Their God,
Uevin—whose three precepts were Law, Patience, and Reality—delighted in all
that was new and modern, despising anything that was old or outdated. His was
a materialistic outlook on life. What counted was the here and now—that which
could be seen and that which could be touched. The people of Bas insisted on
having every moment of their lives controlled, and there existed so many
ordnances and laws in their cities that walking on the wrong side of the road
on an odd-numbered calendar day could land one in prison for a month. The
great joy in their lives was to crowd the Senate chambers and listen by the
hour to endless harangues over trivial points in their numerous constitutions.
Uevin's followers' second greatest joy was to create marvels of modern

technology to enable them to better the quality of their lives in this world.
Huge aqueducts crisscrossed their cities, either bringing water into the homes
or carrying waste away from them. Their buildings were massive, and of modern
design with no frivolous adornments, filled with mechanical devices of every
conceivable shape and description. They had developed new methods of farming—
terracing the land, using irrigation, rotating crops to rest the soil. They
invented new ways to mine gold and silver and, so it was rumored, had even
discovered a black rock that burned.
Though the majority of people in Bas believed in Uevin, they considered
themselves enlightened, and encouraged believers in other Gods to settle in
their cities (mostly, it was believed, for the sake of the debates it stirred
up). Followers of both Kharmani and Benario were numerous in Bas, and an
occasional temple could be found to Zhakrin and Mimrjm and Quar. Life was good
in Bas. The people exported their crops; their technological devices, their
ores and metals, and were generally well off. Their faith in Uevin had never
wavered.
Until now.
In determining how his immortals should best serve both himself and his
followers, Uevin rejected the notion of djinn and angels that were used by
other Gods and Goddesses. He designed a more modern system, one that could be
completely controlled and was not subject to the whim of changeable humans.
Delineating his immortals as "minor dieties," he
put each in charge of one specific area of human life. There was a God of War,
a Goddess of Love, a God of Justice, a Goddess of Home and Family, a Goddess
of Crops and Farming, a God of Finance, and so forth. Small temples were built
wherein each of these minor dieties and their human priests and priestesses
dwelt. Whenever a human had a problem, he or she knew exactly what deity to
consult.
This worked well until, one by one, Uevin's immortals began to disappear.
First to vanish had been the Goddess of Crops and Farming. Her priestesses
went to her one day with a question and did not hear her voice in response. A
drought struck. The wells ran dry. The water in the lakes and ponds dwindled.
Crops withered and died in the fields. Uevin ordered the God of Justice to
salvage the desperate situation, but his God of Justice was nowhere to be
found. The system of government fell apart. Corruption was rife, the people
lost faith in their Senators and threw them out of office. At this critical
juncture, Uevin lost his God of War. Soldiers deserted or rioted in the
streets, demanding more pay and better treatment. With the God of War went the
Goddess of Love. Marriages fell apart, neighbor turned against neighbor,
entire families split into quarreling factions.
At this critical juncture, Quar's followers lifted their voices. Look to the
north, they said. Look to the city of Kich and see how well the people are
living. Look to the rich and powerful city of Khandar. See her Emperor and how
he brings peace and prosperity to the people. See the Amir of Quar, who has
saved you from the savage nomads. Discard your useless beliefs, for your God
has betrayed you. Turn to Quar.
- Many of Uevin's followers did just that, and Quar took care to see to it
that those who came to worship at his temples were blessed in all their
endeavors. Rain fell on their fields. Their children were polite and did well
in school. Their gold mines were prosperous. Their machines worked.
Consequently they were elected to the Senate. They began to gain control of
the armies.
Uevin attempted to fight back, but without his immortals he was losing the
faith of his people and therefore growing weaker and weaker.
The Amir knew little and cared less about the war in Heaven. That was the
province of the Imam. Qannadi cared about the reports of a Bas general
assassinated by undisci-
110
WEIS AND HICKMAN
plined soldiers, a Governor deposed by the Senate, a student riot. Reading the

missives of his spies, Qannadi deemed that the time was at hand to march
south. Like rotten fruit, the city-states of Bas were ready to fall into his
hand.
A knock at the door disturbed his thoughts.
Annoyed, Qannadi looked up from his reading. "I left orders not to be
bothered."
"It is Hasid, General," came a rasping voice.
"Enter," said the Amir immediately.
The door opened. Qannadi could see his bodyguard on the other side and behind
him an old man. Dressed in dirty rags, his body gnarled and twisted as a carob
tree, there was a dignity and pride in the old man's bearing and his upright
stance that marked him a soldier. The bodyguard stood aside to let the old man
pass, then shut the door again immediately. The Amir heard the sentry's boots
thud on the floor as he once more took up his position outside the door.
"What is it, Hasid? The young man — "
"I think you should send for him, O King." Hasid stumbled over the unfamiliar
royal appellation.
"We have known each other long enough to dispense with formalities, my friend.
Why should I send for the young man now?" Qannadi glanced at a candle marked
off in hours whose slow-burning flame kept track of the time. It was well past
the midhour of darkness.
"It must be tonight!" said the old soldier. "There will be no tomorrow for
Achmed. "
"What happened?" Frowning, the Amir laid the dispatch down on the desk and
gave Hasid his complete attention.
"This noon, the young man lost control. He shouted out to the crowd at the
gates his intention of joining your army."
"There was a riot, General. I am surprised you didn't hear about it."
"That fat fool who runs the prison never reports to me. He is terrified that I
will lock him in one of his own cells. He is right, but all in due time.
Continue."
"The guards put the riot down, dragging off the other nomads, beating them and
locking them in their cells. But not before Achmed's tribesmen had nearly
killed him."
Startled to feel a pang of fear, like the thrust of cold iron through his
bowels, Qannadi rose to his feet. "Is he all right?"
THE PALADIN OF THE NIGHT
111
"I don't know, sir. I couldn't find out." Hasid shook his head.
"Why didn't you come to me sooner?" The Amir slammed his fist on the table,
sloshing the oil in the lamp over the dispatches.
"If I am to remain valuable to you," the old soldier said shrewdly, "then I
must keep up my appearance as an ordinary prisoner. I dared not leave until
the guards had drunk themselves into their usual nightly stupor. I think the
young man is still alive. I went to his cell and I could hear his breathing,
but it is very rapid and shallow."
Buckling on his sword, Qannadi flung open the door. "I want an escort of
twenty men, mounted and ready to ride within five minutes," he said to the
sentry.
Saluting, the guard turned and ran to a balcony overlooking the soldiers*
quarters. His voice rang out through the night, and within moments the Amir
heard the clatter and clamor below that told him his orders were being obeyed
with alacrity.
"Wait here," the Amir told the old soldier. "I have further need of you, but
not in that prison."
Hasid saluted, but his king was already out of the room.
Chapter 8
Achmed wakened and this time managed to hold onto awakening. Until now,
consciousness had slithered away from him—a snake sliding through the hands of
the dancer in the bazaars. Now he gazed about him, able to bring reality and

dreams together, for he vaguely remembered coming to this place, except that
he visualized it in his mind as being dark and shadowy, lit with soft candles
and peopled with veiled women whispering strange words and touching him with
cool hands.
Now it was daylight. The women were gone. There was only an old man, sitting
beside him, looking at him with a grave face. Achmed gazed at him and blinked,
thinking he might be a trick of his aching head and vanish. He knew the old
man, but not from the shadowy dreams. He remembered him from . . . from . . .
"You were in the prison," Achmed said and was startled at the sound of his own
voice. It seemed different, louder.
"Yes." The old man's grave expression did not alter.
"I'm not there now, am I?"
"No. You are in the palace of the Amir."
Achmed looked around. Yes, he had known that. There had been flaring
torchlights and strong arms lifting him from the pallet. The Amir's voice,
thick with anger. A ride on horseback and jolting pain. Warm water washing
over him, the hands of men—gentle as women—cleansing his battered body.
112
THE PALADIN OF THE NIGHT
113
Then this room . . .
His hand smoothed silken sheets. He was lying on thick, soft mattresses
resting on a tall, ornately carved wooden frame. He was clad in clean clothes.
The filth had been washed from his body, he smelled the sweet fragrance of
rose and orange blossom, mingled with pine and other, more mysterious
perfumes.
Look up, Achmed saw silken drapes swooping gracefully over the tall wooden
pillars of the bed to fall in folds around him. The curtains had been pushed
aside, to permit him a view of his room—magnificent and beautiful beyond
fantasy— and the wizened old man, sitting unmoving beside him.
"You very nearly died," said the old man. "They sent for the physicians, who
did what they could, but it was the magic of Yamina that brought you back."
"You were one of the prisoners. Why are you here?"
"I was in the prison," corrected the old man. "I was not one of the
prisoners."
"I don't understand."
"I was placed in the prison by the gener—the Amir—to watch over you. I am
called Hasid and I was Captain of the Body Guard under Abul Qasim Qannadi for
twenty years, until I grew too old. I was pensioned honorably and given a
house. But I told him when I left—'General,' I said, 'there's going to come a
time when you 11 need an old soldier. Not these young men, who think all
battles are won with trumpet calls and shouts and dashing here and there.
You'll need someone who knows that sometimes victory comes only by stealth and
long waiting and keeping the mouth shut.' And so he did." Hasid nodded
gravely. "So he did."
"You went into prison . . . voluntarily?" Achmed sat up in his bed, staring at
the old soldier in amazement. "But—they beat you!"
"Hah!" Hasid looked amused. "Call that a beating? From those dogs? My mother
gave me worse, to say nothing of my sergeant. Now there was a man who could
lay it on! Broke three of my ribs once," the old soldier said, shaking his
head in admiration, "for drinking on watch. 'Next time, Hasid/ the sergeant
told me, helping me to my feet, '111 break your skull.' But there wasn't a
next time. I learned my lesson."
Achmed paled. Memory leaped out at him. The angry, frightened faces, the
flailing fists and feet, punching and kicking . . .
114
WEIS AND HICKMAN
"They hate me! They tried to kill me!"
"Of course! What do you expect? But not for the reason you think. You spoke
the truth, and it was the truth they were trying to beat down—not you. I know.

I've seen it before. There isn't much," Hasid said on reflection, scratching
himself beneath his rags, "that I haven't seen."
"What happened to them?" Achmed asked in a strained voice.
"The Amir released them."
"What?" Achmed stared. "Freed?"
"He opened the prison gates wide. Sent them slinking back out into the
streets, crawling on their bellies like whipped curs."
Lying on your master's grave . . .
"Why is he doing this?" Achmed muttered, restlessly shoving aside the silken
sheets.
"He's smart, is the Amir. Let them go. He's keeping their mothers, their
wives, their families here in the city. They can go home to them—if they
choose—or they can make their way across the desert and find that their tribe
is nothing but a few old men, beating their toothless gums, yammering about a
God who no longer cares—"
Achmed cringed. "I understand that!" he said hurriedly. Glancing at the luxury
and finery about him, he gestured. *'I meant why is the general doing this.
You . . . watching over me. Bringing me here. Saving my life ... All to train
horses." His face grew dark with suspicion. "I don't believe it."
"You believed it in prison."
"In that pit of Sul, it made sense. Maybe because I wanted it to." Achmed
tossed the blankets aside and swung his bare legs over the edge of the
mattress. Ignoring the sharp pain in his head, he struggled to rise. "I see it
now. He's been lying to me. Maybe he's using me, holding me hostage." A sudden
dizziness assailed him. Pausing, he put his hand to his head, fighting it off.
"Where are my clothes?" he demanded groggily.
"Hostage? And what ransom would your father pay? He has nothing left,"
Achmed closed his eyes to keep the room from spinning. A bitter taste filled
his mouth; he was afraid he would be sick.
Nothing left. Not even a son. . . .
Cold water splashed in his face. Gasping, Achmed opened his eyes, staring at
Hasid.
THE PALADIN OF THE NIGHT
115
"Why—" he sputtered.
"Thought you were going to faint." Hasid returned the water carafe to a nearby
table. "Feel better?"
A nod was all Achmed could manage.
"Then get dressed," the old soldier ordered. "Your old clothes have been
burned, as mine will be once I can get rid of them." He scratched himself
again. "There are your new
ones.
Wiping his dripping face, Achmed glanced at the foot of his bed to see a
simple white cotton caftan lying there, not unlike that which Qannadi himself
wore.
"I can't tell you why he's doing this—not in words. That would be betraying a
friend's trust. But, if you feel up to walking a bit," Hasid continued, "I've
got something to show you that might answer your questions"—he peered at the
young man out of the corner of his eye—"if you're as smart as he says you are,
that is."
Wordlessly, moving slowly and carefully to avoid jarring his aching head,
Achmed drew on soft undergarments, then the caftan. He hoped that they
wouldn't have to walk far. Despite the magical healing, his legs felt weak and
wobbly as a newborn colt's.
"Come on!" Hasid prodded him in the ribs. "I marched five miles once on a
broken ankle, and no woman's hands -tended me either!"
Gritting his teeth against the pain, Achmed followed the old soldier across
the room that was as large as Majiid's tent. Carpets of intricate and delicate
weave covered the floor, their shimmering colors so beautiful that it seemed a
desecration to walk on them. Lacquered wood furniture, decorated with gold

leaf and adorned with objects rare and lovely, stood beside low sofas whose
overstuflfed, silken cushions invited the young man to sink down and lose
himself amid their embroidered leaves and flowers. Feeling clumsy and awkward,
fearful of knocking some precious vase to the floor, Achmed tried to imagine
walking on a broken ankle. Finally, he decided the old man was lying. Later,
when Achmed asked the Amir if Hasid's claim was true, Qannadi grinned. Hasid
was lying. It hadn't been five miles he walked. It had been ten.
Approaching a window, the old soldier pressed his face against the glass and
indicated that Achmed was to do the same. The room stood on the ground floor
of the palace. The
116
WEIS AND HICKMAN
windows opened onto the lush garden through which he and Khardan had escaped
only months ago.The bright sunlight sent a stabbing throb through his
eyeballs, memories sent a pain through his heart. Achmed couldn't see anything
for long moments.
"Well?" Hasid prodded him again.
"I—I can't. . . That is, what am I—"
"There, the man right across from us. By that fountain."
Blinking his eyes rapidly, not daring to wipe his hand across them for fear of
rousing Hasid's contempt, Achmed at last focused on a man standing not five
feet from them, tossing grain to several peacocks that had gathered around
him.
The sight of the man was interesting enough to dry Achmed's tears and make him
forget the pain of both body and soul. The man was young—perhaps
twenty--five—tall and slender with skin as white as the marble fountains. A
turban swathed his head, its silken fabric glittering with jewels and golden
baubles. His clothing was equally sumptuous. Full-cut silken pantalons in
colors of blues and greens and gold rippled about his legs as he moved among
the peacocks. A golden sash encircled his slim waist, golden shoes with
turaed-up toes graced his feet. A billowing sleeved shirt, open at the throat,
was covered by a vest made of golden fabric decorated with green embroidered
curlicues and knots, finished off by a row of silken fringe that swung when he
made the slightest move.
The man's eyelids were painted green and outlined in kohl, jewels sparkled on
the fingers that tossed the grain to the birds, gold dangled from his
earlobes.
Achmed gasped. He had never seen anyone so truly magnificent. "Is that the
Emperor?"
"Hah!" Hasid began to wheeze with laughter, causing the man outside to turn
his head and glance at them with disapprobation. Brushing the grain from his
hands, he walked away, moving past the splashing fountain with studied grace
and elegance, the peacocks walking with mincing step behind him.
"The Emperor!" Hasid struggled to catch his breath. "If the Emperor came,
where do you think we'd be, boy? Turned out in the streets, most likely. This
place wouldn't be big enough to hold all his wives, let alone his wazirs and
priests and grandees and scribes and slaves and cupbearers and
THE PALADIN OF THE NIGHT
117
platebearers and footwashers and asslickers that surround him from the moment
he wakes up in the morning to when he enters one of his hundred bedrooms in
the night. The Emperor!" The old soldier chuckled, shaking his head.
"Then who is it?" Achmed demanded irritably, feeling the pounding in his head
once more.
"The answer to your question." Hasid eyed him shrewdly. "The eldest son of
Abul Qasim Qannadi."
Achmed gaped. Turning to look outside, he saw the man pluck an orchid and
begin ripping the petals from it in bored fashion, tossing them idly at the
birds. "He was raised in the Emperor's court and lives in the palace in
Khandar. Yamina, his mother, is one of the Emperor's sisters, and she saw to

it that her son had all the advantages of being brought up in the royal
household. Qannadi rarely saw the boy." Hasid shrugged. "His own fault,
perhaps. He was always away somewhere, conquering more cities in the Emperor's
name. He sent for his son a month ago, to teach him the art of warfare. He was
going to take him south. His son said he would be honored to attend his
father, but he would need a covered litter in which to travel since he
couldn't for the life of him ride a horse and he dare not remain out in the
sun long—it would ruin his complexion—and was it possible to bring several of
his own friends, as he could not stand to be in the company of vulgar
soldiers, and he wanted his own personal physician as well since it was quite
likely that he would feint at the sight of blood.
"The young man," Hasid added dryly, "is returning to Khandar tomorrow."
Achmed's breath was gone from his body. He felt like the man who commanded his
djinn to bring him a silver ball and found himself holding the gleaming moon.
As the man said to the djinn, "It is beautiful and of exceeding value, but I'm
not certain what to do with it." The garden dissolved before the youth's eyes.
Gazing out the window, he did not see the ornamental trees and the hanging
orchids and the blood red roses. He saw the desert—the vast, empty dunes
beneath a vast, empty sky; the tall tasseted grass bending in the everlasting
wind; the scraggly palms clinging to life around a bracken puddle of water;
the shriveled, stinking plant whose name now held for the young man a
terrible, bitter irony— the Rose of the Prophet.
us
WEIS AND HICKMAN
"You were right," Hasid said softly. "This has nothing to do with the training
of horses. Qannadi has asked to see you. Will you come to him?"
Achmed turned away from the window.
"Yes," he said."I will come."
Chapter 9
The God Quar stood in the incense-sweetened darkness of his Temple in the City
of Kich, his hand resting upon the golden ram's head of his altar. The God was
obviously waiting and doing it with an obvious ill grace. Occasionally his
fingers drummed nervously upon the ram's head. More than once, his hand lifted
a mallet to strike a small gong which stood on the altar, but he always—after
a moment's hesitation and an impatient snarl—withdrew it.
Lying on a pallet on the cold marble floor opposite Quar, the God's Imam
muttered and moaned, tossing in a feverish sleep. His self-inflicted wound had
not healed cleanly, the flesh around it was swollen and hot to the touch,
streaks of fiery red were spreading outward from it. Yamina had attempted to
tend to the priest, as had all the court physicians, but Feisal refused all
help.
"This is ... between my God . . . and myself!" he gasped, clutching Yamina's
hand with painful intensity, his other hand pressed against the bandages that
were wet with blood and pus from the oozing wound. "I have done . . .
something to . . . displease Him. This ... is my punishment!"
Pressing FeisaTs wasted hand against her lips, Yamina pleaded, calling him
every endearing name that came to mind. Gently, firmly, he told her to leave.
Sorrowfully, she did as he asked, secretly intending to sneak back in when he
was asleep and use her magic to heal him without his knowledge.
119
120
WEIS AND H1CKMAN
THE PALADIN OF THE NIGHT
121
To Feisal, Yamina was transparent as the water in the palace hauz. Feeling his
strength dwindle, knowing that consciousness would soon leave him, the Imam
commanded his servant to permit no one to enter, binding the man with the most
terrible of oaths to insure his obedience. The servant was to shut the inner
Temple doors and seal them. Not even the Amir himself would be allowed entry.
The last sound Feisal heard before he sank into fever-ridden, insane dreams,

was the hollow booming of the great doors coming together, the crashing fall
of the iron bar across them.
Drifting in and out of delirium, the Imam was vaguely aware of the arrival of
the God in his Temple. At first Feisal doubted his senses, fearing that this
was a fever dream. Battling pain and the fire that was consuming his body, he
struggled to hold onto consciousness and knew then that Quar was truly with
him. His soul radiant with joy, the priest attempted to rise to do Quar
homage, but his body was weaker than his spirit, and he fell back, gasping for
breath.
"Tell me . . . what I have done ... to incur your wrath, O Holy One," murmured
Feisal weakly, extending a trembling hand to his Cod.
Quar did not respond or even look in the direction of his suffering priest.
Pacing about near the altar, he peered with markedly growing irritation into
the darkness. Feisal lacked the breath to repeat his question. He could "only
stare with adoring eyes at his God. Even the pain and torment he was enduring
seemed blessed—a flame cleansing soul and body of whatever sins he had
committed. If he died in the fire, then so be it. He would stand before his
God with a spirit purged of infection.
The gong spoke suddenly, sounding three times. Quar turned toward it eagerly.
The gong was silent for the count of seven, then rang three times again. A
cloud of smoke took human shape and form around the gong, coalescing into a
ten foot tall 'efreet.
Clad in red silken pantalons girded with a red sash around its massive
stomach, the 'efreet performed the salaam, its huge hands pressed against its
forehead. Feisal watched silently, without wonder.
"Well, where is he?" Quar demanded.
"I beg your pardon, Effendi," said the 'efreet in a voice like the low
rumbling of distant thunder, "but I have not found him."
"What?" The God's anger stirred the darkness. "He cannot have gone far. He is
a stranger in this land. Bah! You have lost him, Kaug!"
"Yes, Effendi, I have lost him," replied Kaug imperturb-ably. "If I may be
permitted to tell my tale?"
Turning his back upon the 'efreet, the God made an irritated gesture.
"As you surmised, My Holy Master, the so-called madman was one of the kafir
who came by ship across the Hum Sea and landed near the city of Bastine.
Immediately on their arrival, the priests and sorcerers of Promenthas—"
":—were met by a group of my zealous followers and slaughtered," interrupted
the God impatiently. "I know all this! What—"
"I beg your pardon, Effendi," interrupted the 'efreet, "but it seems we were
misled. It was not your followers who murdered the kafir."
The God was silent for long moments, then said skeptically, "Go on."
"Consider, Majesty of Heaven—if the unbelievers had been killed in your name,
you should have had some claim to their souls."
"They were protected by guardian angels—"
"I have fought the angels of Promenthas before, Effendi, as you well know,"
the 'efreet stated.
"Yes, and this time you fought them and lost and did not tell me," Quar
remarked coldly.
i
"This time, 1 did not fight them. I never saw them. I was if      not
called to fight the angels."
Quar half turned, regarding Kaug through narrowed eyes. "You are speaking the
truth."
"Certainly, Effendi."
"Then it is Death who has failed us."
"No, Effendi. The angels of Promenthas whisked their charges away without
contest. According to Death, the kafir were killed in the name of a God of
Evil—a God too weak to claim them."
;
Quar sucked in his breath, the skin with which he adorned *       his
ethereal being paled. !            "Zhakrin!"
*.

:!
"Yes, Effendi. He has escaped!"
':
"How is that possible? He and Evren were being held in
122
WEIS AND HICKMAN
the Temple of Khandar, .my most powerful priests guarding them. No one knew
the Cods were being held there—"
"Someone knew, Effendi. At any rate, neither Zhakrin nor Evren are there now.
One of your powerful priests, it now appears, was in reality in the service of
Zhakrin. By some means not known to us, he managed to free the Cods and carry
them away."
"What do we know about him? Where has he gone?"
"I believe him to be the same man who slaughtered the worshipers of
Promenthas. He passes himself off as a slave trader, but he is in reality a
Black Paladin, a devoted follower of Zhakrin. He first appeared in Ravenchai,
where he captured a number of the natives and brought them to sell in Kidi. He
has a troop of goums in his command, and it was they who killed the priests
and the magi of Promenthas. But one person was left alive. A young man of
extraordinary beauty who was mistaken for a woman. Thinking to fetch a high
price for such a prize, the slave trader took her to Kich. The young
man—maintaining his disguise as a woman—was put upon die block just as Khardan
and his nomads were terrorizing the city. Khardan took it into his head to
rescue the beautiful 'woman.' "
"Took it into his head! Hah!" Quar snarled. "I see the guiding hand of
Promenthas in this. He has joined with Akhran to fight me!"
"Undoubtedly, Holy One." Kaug bowed. "The young man was taken to the camp of
the nomads. Here, according to the woman, Meryem, he was nearly executed by
the enraged man who sought to take the lovely 'woman' as his concubine.
Khardan saved the young man's life, proclaiming him mad. Meryem believes that
it was this young 'madman' who thwarted her plans to bring Khardan to Kich."
"Then the two are together."
"Presumably, Effendi."
"Presumably!" Quar's rage beat upon the walls of the Temple. Feisal, in his
fevered imaginings., thought he saw the marble blocks start to melt beneath
the heat. "I am divine! I am all-knowing, all-seeing! No mortal can hide
himself from my sight and the sight of my servants!"
"Not a mortal, Holy Master." Kaug's voice lowered. "Another Cod. A dark cloud
hides them from my sight and the sight of your sorcercess."
"A dark cloud. Slowly, inexorably, the power of my ene-
THE PALADIN OF THE NIGHT
123
mies grows." Quar fell silent, musing. The 'efreet's hulking body wavered in
the air, or perhaps it was Feisal's dimming vision that caused the immortal to
appear as if he were a mirage, shimmering against empty sand. "I dare not wait
longer."
The Cod turned his attention to his dying priest. Gliding across the black
marble floor, his silken slippers making no noise, his silken robes shining a
cold and brilliant white in the darkness, Quar came to stand by Feisal's
pallet.
Unable to move, the Imam gazed up at the face of the Cod with an adoration
that banished all pain and fever from his body. The Imam saw his soul rise to
its feet, leaving the frail husk of its flesh behind, holding out its hands to
the Cod as a child reaches for its mother. Content, blissful, Feisal felt life
ebbing away. The name of the Cod was on his lips, to be spoken with his last
breath.
"No!" said Quar suddenly, and the Imam's soul—caught between two planes—shrank
back in bewilderment. Kneeling beside Feisal, the Cod tore off the
bloodstained bandages and laid his hand upon the wound. His other hand touched
the priest's hot forehead. "You will live, my faithful Imam. You will rise up
from your bed of pain and suffering and know that it was I who saved you. You
will remember my face, my voice, and the touch of my hands upon your mortal

flesh. And the lesson you will have learned from the agony you have undergone
is this.
"You have placed too great a value on human life. As you have seen, it is a
thing that can be taken from us as easily as thieves robbing a blind man. The
souls of men are what is truly important and they must be rescued from
stumbling about in the darkness. Those who do not believe in me must die, so
that the power of their false gods dies with them."
Feisal drew a deep breath and another and then another. His eyes closed in a
peaceful sleep, his soul reluctantly returned to the fragile body.
"When you awaken," Quar continued, "you will go to the Amir and tell him it is
time. ..."
"Time?" Feisal murmured.
"Jihad!" whispered Quar, bending low over His priest, caressing him, smoothing
the black hair with His hand. "Convert or die!"
Book Four
THE BOOK OF ZHAKR1N 11
"In the name of Zhakrin, God of Darkness and All That Is Evil, I command you,
wake!"
Mathew heard the voice as if it were coming from far away. It was early
morning in his homeland. The sun shone brightly, joyous bird song greeted the
new day. A spring breeze, laden with the scent of pine and rain-damp earth
blew crisp and chill in his window. His mother stood at the foot of tfie long,
stone stairs, calling her son to come break his nightlong fast. ...
"Wake!"
He was in a classroom, after luncheon. The wooden desk, carved with countless
names and faces long since gone out into the world, felt cool and smooth
beneath lethargic hands. The old Archmagus had been droning on and on for an
eternity. His voice was like the buzzing of flies. Mathew closed his eyes,
only for a moment while the instructor turned his back. . . .
"Wake!"
A painful tingling sensation was spreading through Mathew's body. The feeling
was distinctly unpleasant, and he tried to move his limbs to make it cease.
That only made it worse, however, sending small needles of agony darting
through his body. He moaned.
"Do not struggle, Blossom. Lie still for an hour or so and die sensation will
pass."
Something cold brushed across his forehead. The cold touch and the colder
voice brought back terrifying memories.
127
128
WEIS AND HICKMAN
THE PALADIN OF THE NIGHT
129
Forcing his eyes open—the lids feeling as if they'd been covered with some
sort of sticky resin—Mathew gazed upward to see a slender hand, a face masked
in black, two cruel and empty eyes.
"Lie still, Blossom. Lie very still and allow your body to resume its
functioning once more. The heart beats rapidly, the sluggish blood now runs
free and burns through the body, the lungs draw in air. Painful? Yes. But you
have been asleep a long time, Blossom. A long, long time."
Slender fingers brushed his cheek.
"Do you still have my fish, Blossom? Yes, of course you do. The city guards do
not search the bodies of the dead, do they, my Blossom?"
Mathew felt, cool against his skin, the crystal globe that was hidden in the
folds of the woman's gown he wore; the globe filled with water in which swam
two fish—one golden, one black.
The sound of boots crunching on sand came to Mathew's ears. A voice spoke
respectfully, "You sent for me, Effendi?" and the hand and eyes withdrew from
Mathew's sight.
The young wizard's vision was blurred. The sun was shining, but he could see

it only as if through a white gauze. It was hot and stuffy where he lay, the
air was stale. He was smothering and he tried to suck in a deep lungful of
breath. His flaccid muscles refused to obey his mind's command. The attempt
was more of a wheeze or a gulp.
The tingling sensation in his hands and legs increased, nearly driving him
wild. Added to this was a panicking feeling that he was suffocating, the
inability to draw breath. His sufferings were acute, yet Mathew dared not make
so much as a whimper. Death itself was preferable to those cruel eyes.
"Blossom is coming around. What about the other two?" queried the cold voice.
"The other woman is conscious, Effendi. The bearded devil, however, will not
awaken."
"Mmmm. Some other enchantment, do you think, Kiber?"
"I believe so, Effendi. You yourself mentioned the possibility that he was
ensorcelled when we first captured him, if I recall correctly?"
"You do so. Let us take a look at him."
The booted feet—now two pairs of them—moved somewhere to Mathew's right.
Bearded devil. Tlie other woman. Khardan! Zolira! Mathew's body twitched and
writhed in agony. Memory returned. . . .
Escaping the Battle at the Tel; Khardan, unconscious, bound by some
enchantment. Zohra and I dressed him in Meryem's rose-colored, silken chador.
The veil covered his face. The soldiers stopped us!
"Let the old hags go!"
We escaped and crouched down in the mud near the oasis, hidden in the tall
grass. Khardan, wounded, spellbound; Zohra, exhausted, sleeping on my
shoulder.
"I will keep watch."
But tired eyes closed. Sleep came—to be followed by a waking nightmare.
"A black-haired beauty, young and strong," the cold voice had spoken. "And
what is this? The bearded devil who stole the Blossom and put me to all this
trouble! Truly, the God looks down upon us with favor this night, Kiber!"
'^fes, Effendi/"
"And here is my Blossom with the flame-colored hair. See, Kiber, she wakes at
the sound of my voice. Don't be frightened, Blossom. Don't scream. Gag her,
Kiber. Cover her mouth. That's right."
I looked up, bound and helpless, to see a black jewel sparkling in the light
of the burning camp.
"In the name ofZhakrin, God of Darkness and All That Is Evil, I command you
all—Sleep. . . ."
And so they had slept. And now they woke. Woke ... to what? Mathew heard die
voices again, coming from a short distance away.
"You see, Kiber? This silver shield that hangs round his neck. See how it
glows, even in daylight?"
"Yes, Effendi."
"I wonder at its purpose, Kiber."
"To protect him from harm in the battle, surely, Effendi. I have seen such
before, given to soldiers by their wives."
"Yes, but why render him unconscious as well? I begin to see what must have
happened, Kiber. These women feared their man would come to harm. They gave
him this shield that not only would protect him from any blow, but would also
cause him to fall senseless during the battle. Then they dragged him away,
dressed him in women's clothes—as we found him—and escaped the field."
130
WEIS AND HICKMAN
THE PALADIN OF THE NIGHT
131
"One of them must be a powerful sorceress, then, Effendi.
"One or both, although our Blossom did not exhibit any magical talents when in
our company. These nomads are fierce and proud warriors. I'll wager this one
did not know he was being saved from death by his womenfolk, nor do I think he
will be at all pleased to discover such a fact when he awakes."

"Then why bring him out of the enchantment, Effendi?" It seemed to Mathew that
Kiber sounded nervous. "Let him stay in stasis, at least until we reach
Galos."
"No, we have too much work to do to load the ships without hauling him on as
well. Besides, Kiber"—the cold voice was smooth and sinuous as a snake
twisting across the sand-—"I want him to see, to hear, to taste, to feel all
that is yet to come to him. I want the poison to seep, little by little, into
the well of his mind. When his soul goes to drink, it will blacken and die."
Kiber did not appear so confident. "He will be trouble, Effendi."
"Will he? Good. I would hate to think I had misjudged his character. Remove
the sword from his hands. Now, to break this enchantment—"
"Let one of the women, Effendi. It is never wise to interfere with wizardry."
"Excellent advice, Kiber. I will act upon it. When Blossom is able to speak
and move about, we will question her concerning this. Now, remove the baggage
from the djemel and line it up along the shore. We must be ready to load the
ships when they land, for they will not be able to stay long. We do not want
to be caught here in the heat of the afternoon."
"Yes, Effendi."
Mathew heard Kiber move away, his voice shouting orders to his men. Closing
his eyes, the wizard could once again see the colorful uniforms of the gowns,
the horses they rode. He could see the slaves, chained by the feet, shuffling
across the plains. He could see the white-curtained palanquin. ...
White curtains! Mathew's eyes opened, he looked about him. His vision had
cleared. Gritting his teeth against the pain, concentrating every fiber of his
being on the efibrt, he managed to move his left hand enough to draw aside'the
fold in the fabric and peer out at his surroundings.
The sight appalled him. He stared, aghast. He had thought
the desert around the Tel, with its undulating dunes of sand stretching to the
far distant mountains, empty and forbidding. There was life around the oasis,
certainly. Or at least the nomads considered it life. The tall palm trees,
their brown-tipped fronds—looking as if they had been singed— clicking in the
everlasting wind. The lacy tamarisk, the sparse green foliage, every blade and
leaf precious. The waving stands of brown, tasseled grass that grew near the
water's edge. The various species of cacti that ranged from the wiggly-armed
burn plant—so called because of its healing properties —to the ugly,
sharp-needled plant known by the incongruous, romantic appellation of the Rose
of the Prophet. Coming from a world of ancient, spreading oaks, stands of pine
forests, wild mountain flowers, Mathew had not considered this desert life
life at all—nothing more than a pathetic mockery. But at least, he realized
now, it had been life.
He looked out now on death.
The land was dead and the death it had died had been a tortured one. Flat and
barren, the earth was white as bone. Huge cracks spread across its surface,
mouths gaping open in thirst for the rain that would never fall. Not far from
where he lay, Mathew could see a heap of black, broken rock, and near that a
pool of water. This was no oasis, however. Nothing grew near that pool. Steam
rose from its surface, the water bubbled and churned and boiled.
The sun had just lifted into the eastern sky. Mathew could see, from where he
lay, the tip of a red, fiery ball appearing over the horizon. Yet already the
heat was building, radiating up from the parched ground. There was a gritty
taste in his mouth and he suffered from a terrible thirst. Mathew ran his
tongue across his lips. Salt. Now he knew why the land was this strange,
glaring white. It was covered with salt.
His strength gave out. Mathew's hand fell limp at his side, the curtain hid
the vision. No wonder they had to be gone before afternoon. Nothing could live
in this desert in the noonday sun. Yet the man had spoken of ships. Mathew
feebly shook his head, hoping to clear it. He must be hallucinating, imagining
things. Or perhaps he meant camels, the young wizard thought weakly. Weren't
they sometimes called the ships of the desert?
But where would they go? Mathew had seen nothing in that picked-clean corpse

of a world. And his thirst was growing unbearable. Cruel eyes or not, he was
desperate for
132
WEIS AND HICKMAN
THE PALADIN OF THE NIGHT
133
water. Just as his parched lips shaped the word and he tried to force sound
from his dry throat, Kiber thrust aside the curtains of the litter. He held a
waterskin in his hand.
"Drink!" he commanded, glowering sternly at Mathew, perhaps remembering the
days in the slave caravan when he'd caught the young wizard refusing to eat.
Mathew had no intention of refusing water. By a supreme effort he raised his
arms, grasped the neck of the girba, aimed a stream of the warm, stale liquid
into his mouth and drank thirstily. Some splashed on his neck and
face,-cooling him. All too soon, Kiber snatched the waterskin away and
disappeared. Mathew heard the goum's boots crunching on the salt-covered
ground and, in a few moments, a throaty murmur, probably Zohra.
Mathew lay back on the litter. The water gave him strength; he seemed to feel
it spreading energy through his body. He longed to sit up and his hand itched
to draw the curtains aside. But to do so was to risk attracting the attention
of the man with the cruel eyes to himself.
Thrusting his hand into the folds of the woman's clothing, Mathew touched the
crystal globe containing the fish. It was cold and smooth against his hot
skin. He was suddenly possessed by a desperate desire to examine the fish, to
see if they were all right. Fear stopped him. The slaver might chance to look
inside and Mathew did not want to seem to be paying too much attention to the
magical globe. He wondered what the man had meant by the curious statement,
"The city guards do not search the bodies of the dead."
The smothering sensation increased, that and an almost overwhelming urge to
move his body. Finally Mathew sat up and was almost immediately seized with a
sudden dizziness. Starbursts exploded before his eyes. Weakly, he propped
himself up on his arm and, hanging his head, waited until his vision -cleared
and the terrible light-headed feeling passed. Cautiously pushing aside the
curtain a crack, he peered out, further examining his surroundings. The
litter, he discovered, was sitting on stilts about four feet off the floor of
the salt flats. Keeping a wary eye out for the slave trader, Mathew looked to
the front of the litter and blinked in astonishment.
Before him stretched a vast body of water—wide as an ocean—its deep blue color
like nothing he Had ever seen before. A cool breeze, blowing off the sea,
drifted in a
whisper past his face, and he thankfully gulped in the fresh
air.
The slave trader stood at the water's edge, facing out into it. Lifting his
arms above his head, he cried in a loud voice, "It is I, Auda ibn Jad! In the
name of Zhakrin, I command you. Send my ship!"
So he had meant ships! But what sea could this be? It didn't look like the
Hum. No waves crashed against the shore. It wasn't the greenish color of the
ocean he.had crossed. The water lapped gently about the feet of the slave
trader, Auda ibn Jad (it was the first time Mathew recalled ever hearing the
man's name). Staring intently out into the sea in the same direction as ibn
Jad, Mathew thought he could detect a shadow on the horizon—a dark cloud in an
otherwise cloudless sky.
Turning abruptly, the slave trader caught Mathew staring out of the curtains.
"Ah, Blossom! You are enjoying the fresh air."
Mathew did not answer. He could not speak a word. The cold eyes had snatched
out all the wits in his head, leaving behind nothing but empty fear.
"Come, Blossom. Stand up. That will help get the blood circulating again. I
need you."
Walking over to Mathew, ibn Jad reached out his slender hand and grasped hold
of the young wizard's right arm. The man's touch was as cold and unfeeling as

his eyes and Mathew shivered in the hot sun.
Rising to his feet, he thought at first he was going to faint. His knees gave
way, the sunbursts flared again in his vision. Falling back, he caught hold of
one of the supports of the litter's roof with his hand and hung onto it
grimly; Auda propping him up. The slave trader gave Mathew a few moments to
recover, then dragged the groggy wizard across the sand to another litter.
Mathew knew who lay inside, just as he knew the question he was going to be
asked. Shoving aside the curtains of the palanquin, ibn Jad pushed Mathew f'
forward.
.»."' "The charm the bearded devil wears around his neck? '';. Did you make
it? Are you the sorceress who laid the enchant-T ment upon him?"
v We plan and work for years to chart our life's course, and ^:: then
sometimes one instant, one word will irrevocably alter ,?•>- our destiny.
'
134
WEIS AND HICKMAN
THE PALADIN OF THE NIGHT
135
"Yes," said Mathew in a barely audible whisper.
He could not have told the conscious reasoning behind his lie. He had the
distinct feeling it was motivated by fear; he did not want to appear
completely defenseless and helpless in the eyes of this man. He knew, too,
that if he answered no, ibn Jad would simply question Zohra, and he would not
believe either of them if both denied it.
"I made . . . the charm," Mathew said hoarsely.
"A fine piece of work, Blossom. How do you break the spell?"
"By taking it from around his neck. He will immediately begin to come out of
the enchantment." That was a guess, but Mathew felt fairly certain it was a
good one. Generally, that was how charms such as this one worked. There
wouldn't have been any reason for Meryem to have created a delayed effect.
"Break it," commanded ibn Jad.
"Yes, Effendi," Mathew mumbled.
Leaning over Khardan, the young wizard stretched forth a trembling hand and
took hold of the silken ribbon from which hung the softly glowing silver
shield. Mathew noticed, as he did so, the unusual armor in which Khardan had
been dressed. It was made of metal—black and shining. A strange design was
inset into the breastplate—a snake whose writhing body had been cut into
several pieces. It was a gruesome device, and Mathew found himself staring at
it, unmoving, his hand poised in midair above Khardan's neck.
"Go on!" grated ibn Jad, standing over him. "Why do you delay?"
Starting, Mathew wrenched his gaze from the grotesque armor and fixed it on
the silver shield. Cupping his hand beneath the talisman, he closed his
fingers over it gingerly, as though fearing it would be hot to the touch. The
silver metal felt warm, but only from the heat of Khardan's body. Clasping the
shield, Mathew gave the ribbon a sharp tug. It snapped. The charm came off in
Mathew's hand. Almost instantly the metallic glow began to fade. Khardan moved
his head, groaning.
"Give that to me."
Wordlessly, Mathew handed ibn Jad the charm.
The man studied it carefiilly. "A delicate bit of craftsmanship." He glanced
from the charm to Mathew to Khardan. "You must care about him very much."
"I do," Mathew said softly, keeping his eyes lowered.
"A pity," said Auda ibn Jad coolly.
Mathew looked up in alarm, but at that moment, movement seen out of the corner
of his eye distracted him.
Zohra, stumbling with faltering footsteps but managing to walk nonetheless,
was approaching their group. Mathew saw the set of her jaw, the fire in the
black eyes, and tried to call out, to speak, to warn her, but the words caught
in his dry throat. Seeing his fixed gaze, the slave trader turned.
The wind from the sea was rising. Small waves were washing up on the shore

now. Behind Zohra, Mathew saw the cloud on the horizon growing larger and
darker.
The wind whipped Zohra's veil from her face. She caught hold of it and covered
her nose and mouth. Coming to stand before Auda ibn Jad, she drew herself
weakly to her full height, regarding him with flashing black eyes.
"I am Zohra, Princess of the Hrana. I do not know where I am or why you have
brought me here, dog of a kafirl But I insist that you take me back!"
THE PALADIN OF THE NIGHT
137
Chapter 2
An angry shout from Kiber, who was lashing out at one of his own men with his
camel stick, attracted Auda's attention, and he did not immediately answer
Zohra's demand. Kiber was busy supervising the unloading of several djemel,
baggage camels. Under their leader's direction, the goums and the slaves
placed the wooden boxes, rattan baskets, and other items in the sand near the
water's edge. It was the mishandling of several large, carved ivory jars with
sealed lids that brought down Kiber's wrath on his gown. The slaves were not
allowed to touch these jars, Mathew noted. Several hand-picked goums were
lowering die jars from the djemel to die sand with extreme care and caution,
treating them with almost reverential respect. When one of the goums nearly
dropped his end of the jar. Kiber was on him in a flash, and ibn Jad frowned
darkly.
Mathew wondered what could be in the jars—possibly some rare incense or
perfume. Whatever it was, it was heavy, It took two of Kiber's strongest goums
to lift a jar by its ivory handles and stagger across the sand to place it
with the other merchandise stacked along the shoreline.
The men carrying the jars passed quite close to where Mathew stood in die hot
sun near Khardan's litter. The young wizard would have liked to have examined
the jars more closely, for he thought he detected magical runes among the
other designs carved on the sides, and his skin prickled with a tingle of fear
and curiosity when he observed that the lid was
136
decorated with the carved body of a severed snake—the same device that
appeared on Khardan's black armor. But Mathew did not have time to investigate
or even give more than a moment's passing thought to the ivory jars. His
attention was focused on Zohra, and he stared at the woman with mingled anger,
frustration, fear, and admiration.
She must be as bewildered and confused as I am, Mathew thought. No, more so,
because he at least knew the slave trader and knew why Auda ibn Jad wanted
him—the fish, obviously, although that didn't begin to answer all the
questions. Zohra had wakened in a strange place from some sort of enchanted
sleep, experienced all the same uncomfortable sensations Mathew had
experienced—even now she swayed slightly on her feet and he could tell that it
was taking every ounce of will she possessed to remain standing. She had,
apparently, no idea where she was (This disappointed Mathew. He had hoped she
would recognize this place.) and yet she was regarding the formidable Auda ibn
Jad with the same scornful gaze she might have fixed upon poor Usti, her
djinn, for bungling a command.
Auda's attention continued to remain focused on the unpacking of the ivory
jars. Mathew saw Zohra's dark eyes above the veil flare with anger, her black
brows draw together. He knew he should stop her. In his mind he saw the slave
girl falling to the sand, ibn Jad's knife in her ribs. But the intense heat of
the sun radiating up from the salt floor was sapping Mathew's strength.
Clinging to one of the poles supporting the litter where Khardan lay, Mathew
could only try to warn Zohra to keep still with a gesture of his hand. Zohra
saw him and she saw Khardan, who was groaning, shaking his head muzzily, and
making feeble, futile attempts to sit up.
"I asked you a question, swine!" Zohra said, stamping her slippered foot on
the cracked ground, her jewelry jingling, her body quivering with anger.
Dog of a kafir] Swine! Mathew cringed.

"I am a Princess of my people. You will treat me as such," Zohra continued,
holding the veil tightly over her face, the rising wind whipping the silken
folds of her chador around her legs. "You will tell me where I am and you will
then return me to my people."
Seeing the nine ivory jars safely stacked up on the shoreline with four goums
posted guard around them, Auda ibn
138
WEIS AND HICKMAN
Jad turned his attention to the woman standing before him. A glint of
amusement flickered in the hooded eyes. Weakly Mathew sank down onto the hot
ground, huddling in a small patch of shade cast by Khardan's litter. Almost
immediately, however, a new fear arose when the young wizard saw Khardan's
eyes open to stare about his surroundings in confused astonishment.
A waterskin lay nearby. Catching it up, Mathew held the mouth out to Khardan
to drink, trying as best he could to warn him to keep silent. The Calif thrust
the waterskin aside. Gritting his teeth against the pain, Khardan propped
himself up on one elbow and stared intently at Auda ibn Jad.
"You stand, Princess, on the shores of the Kurdin Sea—"
"The Waters of Tara-kan?" Zohra cut in scornfully. "Do you take me for a
fool?"
"No, my lady." Respect coated the surface of Auda's voice.
He was toying with her, amusing himself because he had no other entertainment.
The slaves and the gowns had completed unloading the camels. The slaves sank,
panting, down onto the ground, trying desperately to find some modicum of
shade by crouching beside the kneeling camels. The gowns stood in disciplined
silence, sipping water and keeping watch over the baggage and the slaves. They
appeared immune to the heat, though Mathew could see huge patches of sweat
darkening their black uniforms. And he noted, as he glanced at them, that more
than one turned his gaze out to sea, nodding in relief and satisfaction at the
sight of the shadow growing larger upon the water.
"All know the Waters of the Tara-kan do not exist," said Zohra, dismissing the
vast sea that stretched before her with decisive finality. So calmly and
firmly did she speak that' it seemed the sea itself must realize its mistake
and take itself out of her presence at once.
"I assure you, madam, that these are the waters of the Kurdin Sea. We have
reached them by traveling north from the Tel in the desert of Fagrah to the
city of Idrith, then due east across the southernmost border of the Great
Steppes."
Zohra gazed at Auda pityingly. "You are mad. Such a journey would take
months!"
"Indeed it has, my lady," ibn Jad replied softly. "Look at the sun."
Zohra looked upward at the sun. So did Khardan. Mathew watched the Calif
carefully, searching for dues in die expres-
THE PALADIN OF THE NIGHT
139
sion on the man's face. The young wizard himself did not bother to study the
orb's position in the sky. In this strange part of the world, he was barely
able to judge the passing of day into night much less the passing of weeks
into months. It seemed to him to have been only last night that they had
escaped the Battle at the Tel. Had it truly been months ago? Were they truly
far from their homeland?
Our homeland! Mathew shook his head bleakly. What am I thinking about? My
homeland ... So much farther away than that. . . Farther away than the blazing
sun . . .
He saw Khardan's eyes widen, the man's face grow pale beneath the growth of
heavy black beard, the lips part, the tongue attempt to moisten them. The
Calif looked down now upon the strange armor that he wore, noticing it for the
first time. His hand ran over it, and Mathew saw the fingers tremble.
Wordlessly the young wizard held out the waterskin again. This time Khardan
accepted it, drinking a small amount, his brow furrowed, his black eyes fixed

upon Auda ibn Jad with a dark expression Mathew could not fathom.
Zohra's cool demeanor, too, was shaken. She darted a swift, fearful glance at
Mathew from above her veil—the glance of one who has ventured blithely onto
smooth, hardpacked sand, only to discover herself being sucked beneath the
shifting surface.
Mathew quickly averted his eyes. She had thrown herself into this, she must
get herself out. He could say or do nothing that would help her, and he dared
not attract the attention of the slave trader to himself. By the looks of it,
Auda ibn Jad was telling the truth. They had undertaken a long journey,
apparently traveling under some sort of spell that feigned death yet kept them
very much alive.
The city guards do -not search the bodies of the dead.
That statement was beginning to make sense. Mathew's hand stole
surreptitiously to the globe containing the fish. Ibn Jad had given it to him
originally to sneak it past the guards in the city of Kich. Now Mathew had
been instrumental, apparently, in doing the same thing with the guards of
Idrith. That was the reason ibn Jad had taken Mathew captive instead of
killing him and retrieving the fish. Mathew recalled the moment of terror when
he had awakened in the tall grass near the oasis. Seeing the slave trader
standing above him, he had supposed the man meant to murder him. Instead, ibn
Jad had cast him into a deep sleep.
140
WEIS AND HICKMAN
But why take Khardan? Why take ZohraP Why bring them here? Why the ships?
Where were they being taken? Surely, if he had brought them this far, ibn Jad
did not intend to kill them now.
Looking at Auda's smooth, impassive face, the unblinking eyes; looking at the
waters of the sea that were growing rougher by the moment; looking at the
shadow covering the water and realizing that it was the darkness of a rapidly
approaching storm—a strange storm, a storm that seemed to rage only on a small
part of the ocean—Mathew wondered despairingly if death coming to them this
minute might not be a blessing.
"I do not like this place," said Zohra coolly. "I am leaving."
Mathew raised his eyes, staring at her in astonishment.
Gathering the folds of her wind-whipped clothes around her with one hand,
holding her veil over her nose and mouth with the other, Zohra turned her back
upon Auda ibn Jad and began walking due west over the cracked, tortured earth.
Shrugging, ibn Jad moved over to the shoreline and stood there, gazing
intently out eastward into the storm. The goums, watching Zohra, nudged each
other, many pointing at the sun and laughing. Kiber said something to Auda ibn
Jad, who glanced at Zohra out of the corner of his eye and shrugged again.
Mathew stared at her, aghast. She knew, far better than he, having lived in
the desert, that she would not last more than a few hours out there before the
merciless heat blistered her skin and boiled her blood, before the lack of
water drove her to madness. The storm wind blowing off the sea tore the silken
veil from her head, her long black hair streamed into her face, nearly
blinding her. Still weak from the effects of the spell, Zohra stumbled over
the cracked, uneven ground, slipped and fell. Pausing a moment to catch her
breath, she staggered back up to her feet and continued on, limping.
She's twisted her ankle. She won't get a hundred yards! Mathew realized.
Half-heard words spoken by the goums indicated they were placing bets on how
far she could go before collapsing. Of all the stupid, meaningless gestures!
Mathew fumed. Why didn't she just drive a knife into her heart? Was her pride
that important? More important than her life?
And these people considered him mad!
Struggling to his feet, Mathew cast a wary glance at ibn
THE PALADIN OF THE NIGHT
141
Jad. Seeing him apparently absorbed in watching for the ship, the young wizard
started after Zohra. She was weakening fast. Her limp was more pronounced,

every movement must be causing her agony. Mathew quickly caught up with the
woman and grabbed hold of her arm.
Turning, she saw who it was held her and immediately jerked away.
"Let me go!" she ordered
At the sight of her pain-twisted face, the parched lips already cracked and
bleeding from the salt-laden air, and the fierce pride and determination
masking the terror in the black eyes, Mathew felt tears well up in his throat.
Whether they were tears of pity, tears of admiration, or tears of exasperated
rage, he wasn't certain. His instinct was to take her in his arms and comfort
her, let her know she wasn't alone in the fear and despair she was trying
desperately to hide. Yet the wizard had the distinct feeling that once he got
his hands on the obstreperous woman, he'd shake her until her teeth rattled in
her head.
"Zohra! Stop! Listen to me!" Mathew caught hold of her again and this time
held on firmly. Unable to free herself, she glared at him in fury. "You're
only making things worse! Do you know what kind of death youll die out there?"
The black eyes stared at him unwaveringly.
She knows, Mathew thought, swallowing the lump in his throat. "Zohra"—he tried
again—"whatever we face can't possibly be as bad as that! Don't leave me!
Don't leave Khardan! We've got to get through this together. It's our only
chance!"
Her eyes blinked, her gaze shifted from Mathew to Khardan, a slight smile
twisted the cracked lips. Not liking the looks of that smile, Mathew glanced
swiftly around.
Auda ibn Jad had his back turned, staring out to sea. Unarmed, with no weapon
but his bare hands, Khardan had risen from the litter and was running across
the sand toward the slave trader.
Gnashing his teeth in frustration, his heart stopped in fear, Mathew watched
helplessly, expecting to see the goums rush the Calif, Kiber draw his shining
sword and cut Khardan down. Instead, no one made a move. No one even shouted a
warning to ibn Jad, who still had his back to his rapidly approaching enemy.
142
WEIS AND HICKMAN
Khardan hurled himself at the slave trader, his hands outstretched.
The end came swiftly, occurring so fast that Mathew wasn't certain what
happened. He saw Auda ibn Jad sidestep ever so slightly. Khardan leaped on his
back, his arms closing around the slave trader's throat. Auda's hands grabbed
hold of Khardan*s arms and in the same, fluid movement, bent forward, pulling
the Calif with him. Propelled by his own momentum, Khardan was flipped over
the slave trader's shoulder. The Calif flew through the air and splashed inte
the shallow water at the shore's edge. He lay there, dazed and stunned,
staring up at the sky.
"Has everyone gone insane? Are all you nomads intent on delivering yourselves
as quickly as possible into the arms of Death?" Mathew demanded bitterly.
"We are not cowards!" Zohra hissed, struggling feebly to escape his grip. "Not
like you! I will die before anyone keeps me captive, for whatever reason!"
"Sometimes it takes more courage to live!" Mathew responded, his voice thick
and choked.
Zohra stared at him, the women's clothes he wore, and made no answer.
Auda ibn Jad was shouting orders. Goums came running across the sand toward
them. Catching hold of both Zohra and Mathew, they dragged them back to the
slave trader. Other goums, supervised by Kiber, were lifting Khardan up out of
the sea. They shoved Mathew down into the sand near the baggage that was to be
loaded onto the approaching vessels. Zohra fell down next to him, Kiber
dropped Khardan, breathing heavily, at their feet. Bending over the Calif,
ostensibly to see if he was hurt but in reality hiding his face, Mathew saw
Zohra looking at him, her dark eyes unusually thoughtful.
He turned his head, not wanting to meet her gaze, afraid that if she should be
able to see inside him, she would see there the sick fear that shamed him and
made a mockery of his words.

Chapter 3
Bruised and aching, Khardan was content for the moment to catch his breath and
consider the situation. His attack on Auda ibn Jad had not been as rash and
ill considered as it appeared to Mathew. The Calif knew that the fall of a
leader can never fail to throw even the best disciplined army into confusion
and disarray. There was every possibility this slave trader ruled by fear
alone and his followers might be exceedingly grateful to the man who removed
the sword from their throats.
That man is not likely to be me—at least not at this moment, Khardan thought,
glancing at ibn Jad with grudging respect. The slave trader had tossed him
around with the ease of a father playing with his children! Looking at the
long, curved sword ibn Jad wore at his side, the Calif guessed that the man
was undoubtedly equally skilled with it, as well. And the longer Khardan
watched Kiber and his gowns, the more obvious it became to him that they
served ibn Jad with unshakable, unswerving loyalty—the type of loyalty that is
not and never can be generated by fear.
What I need now are answers, Khardan thought upon reflection. Of course, these
had to come from the red-haired youth, the one whose life he had saved. The
Calif had recognized the slave trader as the man in the white palanquin who
had stared at Khardan with such malevolence in the city of Rich. More than
once Khardan had wakened in the night, sweating and shaking, remembering the
dreadful promise of .revenge in those cold, flat eyes—the eyes of a snake.
143
144
WEIS AND HICKMAN
THE PALADIN OF THE NIGHT
145
Khardan could understand ibn Jad's anger—the Calif had stolen one of his
salves, after all. But Khardan had known at the time, when those deadly eyes
first pierced his soul, that there was more to it than that. It was as if the
Calif had snatched up the one thing in this world that gave ibn Jad reason to
live. And Auda had promised, in that look, that he would have it back.
What was the young man's name, anyway? Khardan tried to remember through the
haze of pain and confusion. Mat-hew. Something like that. He'd heard Zohra
pronounce it. Thinking of his wife, who wasn't a wife to him any more than the
young man was a wife to him, Khardan glanced at her. Zohra sat on the other
side of Mathew, and unlike the young man, who was looking at him with a
worried expression, she didn't appear to be the least interested in Khardan's
welfare. He couldn't see her face; the black hair, blown by the wind, covered
it like a veil. Nursing her sore ankle, rubbing it with her hand, she stared
straight out to sea and was seemingly lost in her thoughts.
Khardan wondered what she knew about the young man. It was too late to ask.
Bitterly he regretted not questioning this man about his past, about where
he'd come from, why he had chosen to hide his sex from the world in women's
clothes. It occurred to Khardan that he hadn't spoken more than twenty words
to the youth the entire time he'd been in the nomad's camp.
Who could blame me? Khardan reflected grimly, looking up at the young man with
the flame-colored hair and the face as smooth and delicate as that of any
woman. Kneeling beside Khardan, Mathew was making a clumsy attempt to loosen
the fastenings of the breastplate clamped over the Calif's chest.
A man who disguises himself as a woman! A man who lets himself be taken into
another man's harem! Bad enough I had to live with such disgrace—but to be
seen taking an interest in him!
There was too much on my mind to worry over a boy— SheykhZeid, Meryem . . ,
Khardan's heart jumped. Meryem! She'd been in danger! The battle ... he
remembered seeing her face just before he lost consciousness. What had
happened to her? What had happened to all of them—his people? Why was he here?
He stared again at the sun whose position in the sky meant the passage of two
months at least.
From Idrith to the Kurdin Sea . . .  Answers! He needed answers!

Reaching out, he caught hold of the young man's arm. "What is going on?" he
asked softly.
Startled, Mathew glanced at Khardan uneasily, then shook his head and averted
his face. He was attempting to untie a knot in one of the leather thongs
holding the sides of the breastplate together. Khardan's hand closed over his,
halting his work with its firm pressure.
"What is your name?"
"Mathew," was the barely audible reply. The young man kept his eyes lowered.
"Mat-hew," repeated Khardan, stumbling over the strange-sounding word and
coming out with it finally in a manner and accent similar to Zohra's.
"Mat-hew, it is obvious that we are here because of you. Why does this man
want you?"
Mathew lowered his head. Locks of the flaming red hair slid out from beneath
the woman's veil he wore, partially hiding his face. But Khardan saw a flush
stain the fair cheeks, he saw the curved lips tremble, and he could guess at
the answer the youth was too embarrassed to give.
"So, he does not know you are a —" Khardan paused. ,,»,.,       The crimson in
the cheeks deepened. Mathew shook his :<  head. Khardan felt the young man's
hands shake; the fingers were icy to the touch, despite the terrible heat.
Letting loose the boys hand, Khardan glanced around cautiously. Auda ibn Jad
and Kiber stood together on the beach, conferring in low tones, occasionally
glancing out to sea. The gowns' attentions were focused on the sea as well.
-- The slaves sat huddled together near the camels, heads bowed, j. no
interest in anything.
"That's not the truth, Mat-hew," Khardan said slowly, \ turning his gaze back
to the youth. "He doesn't want you for
his bed. He would have sold you in Kich if I hadn't stolen
you away. There is another reason he wants you and it is the
reason we are here. Tell me."
Raising his head, Mathew looked at Khardan. The young
man's eyes were wide and in them was a look of such plead-.':. tag and terror
that Khardan was taken aback. |;       "Don't ask me!" The words came out a
gasp.
•t;; Khardan's lips tightened in anger and frustration. The v boy's fear was
contagious. Khardan felt it chill his own blood ." and the feeling irritated
him. He'd never experienced fear
146
WEIS AND HICKMAN
1
THE PALADIN OF THE NIGHT
147
like this before, and he had feced death in battle since he was seventeen
years old. This fear was like a child's fear of the dark—irrational,
illogical, and very real.
Mathew gave up on the knot; his hands were shaking too violently. He started
to turn away, to go sit with Zohra, who was crouched on the hot ground near
Khardan's feet. The Calif caught hold of him again.
Slowly, reluctantly, Mathew glanced back at him. The face was terror stricken,
the eyes begged Khardan to release him. Khardan bit back the words he'd been
going to «ay. He wanted to sit up; the heavy metal of the armor was poking him
uncomfortably in the back. But moving about might attract the attention of ibn
Jad, and Khardan wanted to talk undisturbed for as long as possible.
"What happened at the Tel, then," Khardan said gruffly, frowning. "Surely you
can tell me that! How did we come to fell into the hands of this slave
trader?"
As he had hoped she would, Zohra turned her head at his question. She scared
at her husband, exchanged a swift, grim glance with Mathew, then turned back
to gaze out at the sea in silence once more.
"The Amir's forces raided the camp. Everyone—women and children—were taken
prisoner—" Mathew answered softly, warily.

"I know that," Khardan snapped impatiently. "I saw. I mean after."
"We—Zohra and I—escaped fay hiding in a tent." Mathew's eyes, as he spoke,
were focused on the snake on Khardan's armor. "You . . . fell in battle. We
... uh ... found you on the battlefield. The Amir's men were taking prisoners,
you see, and we feared that they would take you, so we carried you off the
field of battle—"
"—disguised as a woman."
Hie cold, smooth voice broke in on the conversation. Intent upon Mathew's
story, Khardan had not heard the man approach. Twisting, he looked up into the
black masked face of Auda ibn Jad.
Hie man was talking nonsense! Khardan sat up, chafing beneath the hot, heavy
armor. Ignoring ibn Jad, the Calif looked to Mathew to continue his story and
was astounded to see that the boy had gone deathly white and was biting his
nether lip. Khardan's gaze went to Zohra. She kept her back
turned to him, but that back was rigid, her neck stiff, her head held high in
a manner quite well-known to him.
"Is this true?" Khardan demanded angrily.
"Yes, it's true!" Zohra whirled to face him, her hair whipping about her in
the wind blowing off the sea. "How do you think you would have escaped
otherwise? Is the Amir such a kindly man that he would say, 'Ah, poor fellow,
he's hurt. Take him away and tend him'? Hah! More likely a sword through the
throat and the jackals feasting off your brains, much food they would find
there!"
A smile twitched at the corner of the mouth of Auda ibn Jad.
"You have . . . shamed me!" Khardan's face burned an angry red. Sweat beaded
his brow. His hands clenched and he struggled for breath. "I am ...
dishonored!"
"It was all we could think of to do!" Mathew faltered. Glancing up, he saw the
reptile eyes of ibn Jad watching with interest. The youth laid a placating,
trembling hand on Khardan's arm. "No one saw us, I'm certain. There was so
much smoke and confusion. We hid in the tall grass, near the oasis. ..."
"The young woman tells the truth, Nomad," said ibn Jad. "It was there I found
you, in the oasis, dressed in rose-pink silk. You don't believe me?" Crouching
down opposite Mathew, the slave trader reached out his slender hand and caught
hold of the youth by the chin. "Look at that face, Nomad. How can such beauty
lie? Look into the green eyes. See the love they hold for you? Blossom here
did it for love, Nomad." Ibn Jad released Mathew roughly, the marks of the
man's fingers showing clearly on the youth's livid face. "Now this one." The
slave trader turned to look admiringly at Zohra, who was pointedly ignoring
him. "This one, I'd say, did it for spite." Auda ibn Jad rose to his feet.
"Not that it matters, where you are going, Nomad," he added casually.
"Where are we going?" Zohra asked with disdain, as though inquiring of a slave
what they might be having for dinner.
"Across this—the waters of the sea whose existence you refuse to acknowledge,
Princess," said Auda ibn Jad with a smile and a gesture of his hand. "We go to
the island fortress of Galos, where dwells the last remnant of those who
worship Zhakrin, God of the Night."
148
WEIS AND HICKMAN
"I have never heard of this God," Zohra stated, dismissing Zhakrin as she
dismissed the ocean.
"That is because he has been deposed from his heavenly throne. Some think him
dead—a costly mistake. Zhakrin lives, and we gather now in his palace to
prepare for his return."
"We?" Zohra's lip curled in scorn.
Auda ibn Jad's voice became cool, reverent. "The Black Paladins, the Holy
Knights of Evil."
Chapter 4
Black Paladins, Zhakrin . . . The words meant nothing to Zohra. None of this
meant anything to Zohra, except that she was here where she did not want to

be, she was being held captive by this man, and her attempt to escape had been
stopped by Mathew. Zohra did not believe ibn Jad's wild tales about traveling
to Idrith and beyond to a sea that did not exist. The Tel was nearby. It had
to be. He was lying to prevent them from attempting to escape, and Mathew had
swallowed that lie. And so had Khardan, apparently. As for the odd position of
the sun in the sky, a summer sun—it had been spring when she closed her eyes
to sleep the sleep of exhaustion in the oasis—that could be explained. She
knew it could, if only she could get away from this man with the disturbing
eyes and discover the truth.
What they needed was action, to fight, to do something instead of just sit
here like . . . like old women! Zohra glanced at the two men with her and her
lips twisted in derision. At least Khardan had tried to fight. She had been
proud of him at that moment. But now the man's anger and hurt pride had
overthrown his reason, casting him into some sort of stupor. He stared at his
hands, his fists clenching and unclenching, his breath coming in short gasps.
As for the young wizard— Zohra glanced at him in scorn.
"He has already exhibited his worth!" the woman muttered beneath her breath.
"I could measure it in goat droppings!"
149
150
WEIS AND HICKMAN
THE PALADIN OF THE NIGHT
151
She herself was at a disadvantage now, with her injured ankle. At a
disadvantage, but not helpless. Her hand went to her breast. The dagger she
had grabbed during the onset of the raid was hidden in her bosom. Pressing
against her flesh, the metal felt warm and reassuring. She would neve'r be
taken aboard a ship, if such was truly the intent of this man. She would never
be taken to any palace of a dead God.
Mathew's voice, speaking to the Paladin, disturbed her thoughts.
"So that is how you did it?" The young man wa§ staring up at Auda ibn Jad with
awe; fear made his voice crack. Zohra glanced away from him in disgust. "That
is how you cast the enchanted sleep over us. You are not a wizard—"
"No, Blossom." Ibn Jad frowned at the idea. "I am a true knight and my power
comes from Zhakrin, not from Sul. Long ago, in my youth, I learned the might
of Zhakrin. I accepted him as my God and pledged to him my life, my soul. I
have worked—all those of my Order have worked— unceasingly to bring about our
God's return into this world."
"A priest!" Zohra sneered. She did not see the cruel eyes, gazing at her,
narrow dangerously.
"No!" said Mathew hastily. "Not a priest. Or rather a priest who is a warrior.
One who can"—the young man paused, then said heavily—"kill in the name of the
God."
"Yes," said the Black Paladin coolly. "I have laid many souls upon the altar
of Zhakrin." The toe of his boot idly scraped the salty soil from around the
base of one of the ivory jars that stood near them. "We kill without mercy,
yet never without reason. The God is angered by senseless murder, since the
living are always more valuable in his service than the dead."
"That's why you've kept us alive," Mathew said softly. "To serve your God. But
. . . how?"
"Haven't you figured that out yet, Blossom?" Auda ibn Jad looked at him
quizzically. "No? Then I prefer to keep you ignorant. Fear of the unknown is
much more debilitating."
The storm was worsening. Water that had previously been calm now crashed on
the shore. Everyone's clothing was wet through with salt spray. The sun had
disappeared behind the storm clouds, casting a dark shadow over them.
Kiber's voice called out urgently. The Black Paladin turned to look to sea.
"Ah! The ship is in sight. Only a few more
moments before it lands. You will excuse me, I am certain." Ibn Jad bowed.
"There are matters to which I must attend."

Turning, he walked over to Kiber. TTie two conferred briefly, then Kiber
hurried over to his goums, gesturing and shouting orders. Hie soldiers sprang
into action, some running over to the camels, others taking up positions
around the baggage, others hauling the slaves to their feet.
Curious, Zohra looked out to sea.
She had heard tales of the dhough, the vessels made of wood that floated upon
the water and had wings to drive them before the wind. She had never seen one
before. She had never, in fact, seen a body of water as large as this one and
was secretly in awe of it, or would have been, if such an emotion would not
have betrayed weakness. Looking critically at the ship as it approached, Zohra
felt at first disappointment.
The meddah, the storyteller, had said these vessels were like white-winged sea
birds, swooping gracefully over the water. This dhough^ resembled a gigantic
insect, crawling over the ocean's surface. Oars stuck out from either side,
scrabbling over the waves like feet, propelling the insect forward into the
teeth of the wind. Ragged black wings flapped wildly.
Zohra knew nothing about ships or sailing, but she found it impossible to see
how this one stayed afloat. Time and again she expected to see it perish. The
vessel plunged in and out of the tall waves, its prow sliding down an incline
that was steep and smooth as polished steel. It disappeared, and it seemed it
must have vanished forever beneath the churning waters. Then suddenly it came
in sight, springing up out of the watery chasm like a many-legged bug
scrabbling to regain its footing.
Zohra's disappointment turned to uneasiness; her uneasi-ness darkened and
deepened the nearer the ship approached.
"Mat-hew,"she said softly, moving nearer the young wizard, whose gaze was
fixed, like hers, upon the ship. "You have sailed in these dhough?"
"Yes." His voice was tight, strained.
"You have sailed across a sea?" She had not believed his story before. She
wasn't certain she believed it now, but she needed reassurance.
He nodded. His eyes, staring at the ship, were wide. .       "It looks so
frail. How does it survive such a beating?"
152
WEIS AND HICKMAN
THE PALADIN OF THE NIGHT
153
"It shouldn't." He coughed, his throat was dry. "It"—he hesitated, licking his
lips—"it isn't an ... ordinary ship, Zohra. Just like that isn't an ordinary
storm. They're supernatural. "
He used the term from his own language and she stared at him, uncomprehending.
Mathew groped for words. "Magic, enchanted."
At that, Khardan lifted his head, his fog of rage blown away by the cold,
biting wind of Mathew's words. The Calif stared out at the ship that was so
close now they could see figures walking across its slanting deck. A jagged
bolt of lightning shot from the churning black clouds, striking the mast.
Flame danced along the yardarms, the rigging caught fire and burned, the sails
became sheets of flame whose garish light was reflected on the water-slick
deck and flickered in the rising and falling oars. The vessel had become a
ship of fire.
Catching her breath, Zohra looked hurriedly at Auda ibn Jad, expecting some
outcry, some angry reaction. The man paced the shore and appeared disturbed,
but the glances he cast the ship were of impatience, not dismay.
Mathew's hand closed over hers. Looking back out to sea, Zohra shrank close to
the young man. The flames did not consume the vessel! Burning fiercely, the
ship surged across title storm-tossed waves, being driven to shore by
buffeting winds. Thunder boomed around it, a black banner burst from its
masthead. Outlined in flame was the image of a severed snake.
"They would put us aboard that!" Zohra's voice was low and hollow.
"Zohra," Mathew began helplessly, hands on her shoulders, "it will be all
right. ..."

"No!" With a wild shriek, she broke free of him. Leaping to her feet, fear
absorbing the pain of her injured ankle, Zohra ran wildly away from the sea,
away from the blazing ship. Her flight caught everyone off guard; the Black
Paladin fuming at the slowness of the ship in docking was staring out to sea,
as were all those not involved with more pressing tasks. A flutter of silk
seen out of the corner of the eye caught Kiber's attention. He shouted, and
the goums guarding the captives and the baggage set off instantly in pursuit.
Fear lends strength, but it saps strength, too, and when panic subsides, the
body is weaker as a result. The fire from
Ae ship seemed to shoot through Zohra's leg; her ankle could no longer bear
her weight and gave way beneath her. Away from the water's edge and the
cooling winds of the storm, Zohra felt the heat that was rising from the salt
flats suck out her breath and parch her throat. The glare of the sun off the
crystalline sand seared through her eyes and into her brain. Behind her, she
could hear panting breath, the pounding of booted feet.
Staggering blindly, Zohra stumbled and fell. Her hand closed over the hilt of
the hidden dagger and, when rough hands grabbed hold of her, she struck out at
them with the knife. Unable to see through her tangled hair, she lashed wildly
at the sound of their voices or their harsh, rasping breath. A grunt and a
bitter curse told her she'd drawn blood and she fought ever more furiously.
A cold voice barked a command.
Hands closed over her wrist, bones cracked, pain burned in her arm. Gagging,
choking, she dropped the dagger.
Gripping her firmly by the arms, the goums—one of them bleeding from a slash
across the chest—dragged her back across the sand. The ship had dropped anchor
some distance from the shore and stood burning in the water like a horrible
beacon. The sight of small boats, black against the flames, crawling slowly
toward land, renewed Zohra's terror.
She struggled against her captors, pulling backward with all the weight of her
body.
Sweating profusely, the goums hauled her before the Black Paladin. Zohra shook
the hair out of her eyes, her sun-dazzled vision had cleared enough to see
him. He was regarding her coolly, thoughtfully, perhaps wondering if she was
worth the trouble.
Decision made, ibn Jad lifted his hand and struck.
THE PALADIN OF THE NIGHT
155
Chapter 5
"Bind his hands and arms!"
Rubbing his knuckles, Auda ibn Jad glanced from the comatose body of Zohra
lying at his feet to the insane struggles of Khardan, battling with the goums.
"If he persists in causing trouble, render him unconscious as well."
"Khardan!" Mathew was pleading, "be calm! There's nothing we can do! No sense
in fighting! We must just try to survive!"
Soothingly, timidly he touched the muscular arm that was being wrenched behind
Khardan's back and bound tightly with cords of braided hemp used to hold the
baggage in place upon the camels. Glaring at him in bitter anger, Khardan drew
away from the young man. His struggles ceased, however, but whether from
seeing the logic in Mathew's words or because he was bound, helpless and
exhausted, the young wizard did not know.
His body shivering, like that of a horse who has been run into the ground,
Khardan stood with head bowed. Seeing him calm for the moment at least, Mathew
left the Calif to tend to Zohra, who lay in a heap on the ground, her long
black hair glistening with the salt spray from the pounding
waves.
Mathew glanced warily at the goums, but they made no attempt to stop him. The
flat, cruel eyes turned their gaze on him, however, and Mathew faltered, a
bird caught and held by the mesmerizing stare of the cobra.
154
Kiber spoke, ibn Jad's gaze turned to his Captain, and Mathew—with a shivering

sigh—crept forward again.
"These two are trouble," the leader of the gowns grumbled. "Why not leave them
as payment, along with the slaves,"
"Zhakrin would not thank us for wasting such fine, healthy bodies and souls to
match. This woman"—ibn Jad bent over to caress a strand of Zohra's black
hair—"is superb. I like her spirit. She will breed many strong followers for
the Cod. Perhaps I will take her myself. As for the bearded devil" —ibn Jad
straightened and glanced over at Khardan, his eyes coolly appraising the young
man's muscular build—"you know what awaits him. Will that not be worth some
trouble in the eyes of Zhakrin?"
Auda ibn Jad's tone was severe. Kiber cringed, as though die knight's stern
rebuke cut his flesh. The goum's "Yes, Effendf was subdued.
"See to the landing party," ibn Jad ordered. "Keep your men occupied in
loading the baggage aboard. Send the sailors to me. I will take charge of
them."
Kiber, bowing, scurried away. It seemed to Mathew that, at the mention of the
sailors, Kiber's tan face became unusually pale, strained, and tense.
Zohra moaned, and Mathew's attention turned to her.
"You had best rouse her and get her on board the boats as quickly as possible,
Blossom," said the Black Paladin carelessly. "The sailors will be coming to me
for their payment and you are both in danger here."
Payment? Mathew saw the Black Paladin's reptile eyes go to the slaves, who
crouched together in a miserable huddle, chained hand and foot by the goums as
soon as their labors were finished. Pitifully thin and emaciated, their bones
showing beneath their whip-scarred skin, the slaves stared in wild-eyed terror
at the fiery ship, obviously fearing that they would be forced to board it.
Mathew had a sudden, chilling premonition that the poor wretches' fears were
groundless—or rather, misplaced. Hastily he helped Zohra to her feet. Draping
one of her arms over his shoulder, he put his arm around her waist and half
carried, half dragged her across the sand, over to where the gpums were
keeping a wary eye on Khardan. Groggy but ^conscious, Zohra clung to Mathew.
The right side of her face was bruised and swollen. Blood trickled from a
split lip. She
156
WEIS AND HICKMAN
THE PALADIN OF THE NIGHT
157
must have had a blinding headache, and a tiny gasp of pain escaped her every
time her injured foot touched the ground.
She made no complaint, however, and did her best to keep up with Mathew, whose
own growing fear was lending impetus to his strides. He was facing the
incoming boats now, and his gaze went curiously to the crew who sailed a ship
of flame across storm-blasted water and who were now coming to shore to demand
payment for their services.
There seemed nothing unusual about them. Human males, they shipped their oars
with disciplined skill. Jumping over the side into the shallow water, they
dragged the boats onto the shore, leaving them under Kiber's command. At his
orders, the goums immediately began to stow the baggage on board, Kiber
personally supervising the loading of the large, ivory jars. Though all did
their work efficiently, Mathew noted that every goum—Kiber included—kept his
eyes fearfully upon the sailors.
They were all young, muscular men with blond hair and fair, even features.
Coming ashore, they paused and looked long and hard at the goums, their blue
eyes eerily reflecting the orange glow of the fire that blazed in the water
behind them. Kiber gave them a swift, hunted glance. His eyes darted to Auda
ibn Jad, then back to his men, who weren't moving fast enough to suit him.
Shouting at the goums, Kiber's voice cracked with fear.
"In the name of Zhakrin, God of Night and Evil, I bid you greeting," called
Auda ibn Jad.
The eyes of the sailors reluctantly left the goums. As one man, they looked to

the Black Paladin standing, facing them, some distance up the beach from the
shoreline. Mathew caught his breath, his arms went limp, he nearly let loose
his hold on Zohra. He couldn't move for astonishment.
Each of the sailors was identical to every other. The same nose, same mouth,
same ears, same eyes. They were the same height, the same weight. They moved
the same, they walked the same, they were dressed the same—in tight-fitting
breeches, their chests bare, gleaming with water,
Zohra sagged wearily in Mathew's arm. She did not look up and something warned
Mathew to make certain that she didn't. Snatching the veil from his hair, he
cast it over her head. The sailors' eyes swept over both of them like a
bone-chilling wind. Mathew knew he should move, should take the few steps—all
that was required to bring them back
under the protection of Kiber and his goums. But Mathew's fiset were numb, his
body paralyzed by a fear that came from deep inside the part of his mind where
nightmares lurked.
"We answered your summons and sailed our ship to do your bidding," spoke one
of the sailors—or perhaps it was all the sailors; the fifty mouths moved, but
Mathew heard only one voice. "Where is our payment?"
"Here," said Auda ibn Jad, and pointed at the slaves.
The sailors looked and they nodded, satisfied, and then their aspect began to
change. The jaws thrust forward, the lips parted and drew back, gleaming teeth
lengthened into fangs. The eyes burned, no longer reflecting the fire of their
ship, but with insatiable hunger. Voices changed to snarls, fingernails to
ripping talons. With an eager howl, the sailors swept forward, the wind of
their passing hitting Mathew with a chill, foul-smelling blast, as if someone
had opened the doors of a desecrated and defiled tomb.
He did not need to look at the prints left behind by the creatures in the sand
to know what these monsters were. He knew what he would see—not a human track,
but the cloven hooves of an ass.
"Ghulsl" he breathed, shuddering in terror.
The slaves saw death running toward them. Their shrieks were heartrending and
piteous to hear. Zohra started to lift her head, but Mathew—clasping her close
to him—covered her eyes with his hand and began to run, dragging her stumbling
and blinded along with him.
"Don't look!" he panted, repeating the words over and over, trying not to hear
what was happening behind him. There was the clanking of chains—the slaves
trying desperately to escape. He heard their wails when they realized it was
hopeless and then the first horrible scream and then more screams and the
dreadful ripping, tearing sounds of teeth and talons sinking into and
devouring living flesh.
Zohra became dead weight in Mathew s arms. Overcome by her pain, she had lost
consciousness. Shaking, unable to take another step, he lowered her onto the
ground. Kiber himself ran forward to lift up the woman's body and carry her
into the waiting boats. The gpum kept his eyes averted from the grisly
massacre, driving his men to their work with shouts and curses.
"Hazrat Akhran, have mercy on us!" The voice was Khardan's, but Mathew barely
recognized it. The Calif's face
158
WEIS AND HICKMAN
was livid, bis beard blue against the pallid skin. His eyes were white-rimmed
and staring, purple shadows smudged the skin. Sweat trickled down his face;
his lips trembled.
"Don't watch!" Mathew implored, trying to block the man's vision of the
gruesome carnage.
Khardan lunged forward. Bound or not, he obviously intended to try and help
the doomed slaves.
Mathew caught hold of him by the shoulders. Struggling wildly, Khardan sought
to free himself, but the youth held onto him tightly, with the strength of
desperation.
*
"Ghuls!" Mathew cried, his voice catching in his burning throat. "They feed on

human flesh. It will be over soon. There's nothing you can do!"
Behind him, he could hear screams of the dying, their still living bodies
being rended from limb to limb. Their wails tore through head and heart.
"I can't stand it!" Khardan gasped.
"I know!" Mathew dug his nails into the man's flesh. "But there is nothing you
can do! Ibn Jad holds the ghuls in thrall, but just barely. Interfere, and you
kill us all!"
Wrenching himself free from Mathew's hold, Khardan lost his balance, stumbled,
and fell to his knees. He did not get up, but remained crouched on the ground,
sweating and shivering, his breath coming in painful sobs.
The screams ceased suddenly. Mathew closed his eyes, going limp in relief.
Footsteps crunched in the sand near him, and he looked up hurriedly. Auda ibn
Jad stood beside him, staring down at Khardan. The Calif heaved a shuddering
sigh. Wiping his hand across his mouth, he lifted his head. His face was
white, the lips tinged with the green of sickness. Dark, bloodshot eyes,
shadowed with the horror of what they had witnessed, stared up at the Black
Paladin.
"'What kind of monster are you?" Khardan asked hoarsely.
"The kind you will become," answered Auda ibn Jad.     '
Chapter 6
It was well Mathew had others to worry about during the journey across the
Kurdin Sea on the demon-driven vessel, or he might have truly succumbed to
madness. They had no more set foot on board when the ghuls returned from their
feast. Once more in the guise of handsome young men, their bodies daubed with
blood, they silently took their places at the oars below and on the decks and
in the rigging above. A word from Auda ibn Jad set the black sails billowing.
The anchor was weighed, the ghuls heaved at the oars, the storm winds howled,
lightning cracked, and the ship clawed its way through the foaming water
toward the island of Calos.
Khardan had not spoken a word since ibn Jad's strange pronouncement on shore.
He had suffered himself to be hoisted roughly aboard ship without a struggle.
The goums, under Kiber's orders, lashed the nomad to a mast and left him
there. Sagging against his bindings, Khardan stared around him with dull,
lusterless eyes.
Thinking the sight of Zohra might rouse the Calif from the stupor into which
he had fallen, Mathew brought the limp and lifeless form to lie on the deck
near where her husband stood, tied to the mast. Soaked through to the skin
from the rain and the sea water breaking over the heaving deck, the young
wizard did what he could to keep Zohra warm and dry, covering her with a tarp,
sheltering her amid the tall ivory jars and the rest of the baggage that the
ghuls had secured as
150
160
WEIS AND HICKMAN
best they could on the slippery deck. Khardan did not even glance down at the
unconscious woman.
After he had done what he could for Zohra, Mathew wedged himself between two
carved wooden chests to keep himself from sliding around with the yawing of
the ship. .Wet and miserable and extremely frightened, the young man glared up
at the stupefied Khardan with bitter anger.
He can't do this to me! Mathew thought, shivering from cold and fear. He's the
one who's strong. He's the warrior. He's supposed to protect us. I need kirn
now. He can't do this to me!
What's the matter with him anyway? Mathew wondered resentfully. That was a
horrible sight, but he's been in battles before. Surely he's seen things just
as gruesome, I know I have. ...
The memory of John, kneeling on the sand, Kiber's shining sword flashing in
the sunlight, the warm blood splashing on Mathew's robes, the head with the
lifeless eyes rolling across the sand. Tears blinded Mathew. He hung his head,
clenching his hands.

"I'm frightened! I need you! You're supposed to be strongl Not me!" If I can
cope with this . . . this horror, why can't you?"
If Mathew had been older and able to think rationally, he would have been able
to answer his own despairing question. He had not seen the ghuls attack and
devour the helpless slaves. Khardan had, and though to Mathew there was not
much difference between driving a sword into a man's gut and sinking fangs
into his neck, the warrior's mind and heart reacted differently. One was a
clean death, with honor. The other—a horrifying death brought about by
creatures of evil, creatures of magic.
Magic. If Mathew had considered it, magic was the key—a key that unlocked the
box of Khardan *s innermost fears and let them loose to terrorize and
overthrow his mind.
To the nomad, magic was a woman's gift—a tool used to quiet teething babies,
to soothe horses during a sandstorm, to make the tent feist against wind and
rain, to heal the sick and injured. Magic was the magic of the immortals,
which was the magic of the God—the earth-shaking, wind-roaring magic of
Akhran's 'efreets; the miraculous comings and goings of Akhran's djinn. This
was the magic Khardan understood,
THE PALADIN OF THE NIGHT
161
much as he understood the rising of the sun, the falling of the rain, the
shifting of the dunes.
The dreadful evil magic Khardan had just witnessed was beyond his
comprehension. Its terror slammed into the mind like cold steel, shattering
reason, spilling courage like blood. Ghuls to Khardan were creatures of the
meddah's creation, beings ruled by Sul who could take any human form but were
particularly fond of turning themselves into young, beautiful women. Wandering
lost and alone in the desert, they would trap unwary travelers into helping
them, then slay their rescuers and devour them.
To Mathew, ghuls were forms of demons studied in textbooks. He knew the
various means by which they could be controlled, he knew that for all services
rendered the living, these undead demanded payment and this must be made in
die form of that which they constantly craved—warm, sweet human flesh. The
magic of the ghuls, the storm, the sea, the enchantment that had kept him
asleep for two months, all of this was familiar to Mathew, and understandable.
But he was in no condition to consider any of this rationally. Khardan was
slipping under very last, and the young wizard had to find some means of
rousing him. Had he been stronger, had he been Majiid or Saiyad or any of
Khardan's fellow tribesmen, Mathew would have clouted the Calif in the jaw—it
being well-known that bloodletting cleared the brain. Mathew considered it. He
pictured himself hitting Khardan and discarded the idea with a rueful shake of
the head. His blow would have all the force of a girl slapping an over-eager
suitor. He lashed out with the only other weapon he had available.
"It seems we should have left you in women's clothing!" Mathew cried bitterly,
loud enough to reach Khardan through the pounding of the rain and the howling
wind and the blackness that was engulfing him.
The verbal thrust stung. "What did you say?" Khardan banted his head, bleary
eyes staring at Mathew.
"Your wife has more courage than either of us," Mathew continued, reaching oat
a gentle hand to wipe away water that had dripped onto Zohra's bruised face.
"She fought them. They had to strike her down."
"What was there to fight?" Khardan asked in a hollow voice, his gaze going to
the ghuls sailing their enchanted ship
162
WEIS AND HJCKMAN
THE PALADIN OF THE NIGHT
163
through the storm. "Demons? You said yourself there was nothing to be done
against them!"
"That is true, but there are other ways to do battle."

"How? Disguise yourself and run away? That isn't fighting!"
"It's fighting to survive!" Mathew snouted angrily, rising to his feet. His
red hair, wet and matted, poured like blood over his shoulders. The wet
clothing clung to his slim body, the heavy folds of the soaked fabric kept his
secret, hiding the flat chest and the thin thighs that would never be mistaken
for a woman's. His face was pale, his green eyes glinted in the glare of the
flame and the lightning.
"Survive through cowardice?"
"Like me?" Mathew questioned grimly.
"Like you!" Khardan glared at him through the water streaming down his face.
"Why did you save me? You should have let me die! Unless"—he cast a scathing
glance at Zohra—"it was her intent to humiliate me further!"
"Me! Me! Me! That's all you think about!" Mathew heard himself screaming, knew
he was losing control. He could see several of the gowns, clinging to the
rigging for balance, look in their direction, but he was too caught up in his
anger to speak calmly. "We didn't save you! We saved your people. Zohra had a
magical vision of the future—"
"Magic!" Khardan shouted in fiiry and derision.
"Yes, magic!" Mathew screamed back, and saw that here would be the end of it.
Khardan would never listen to the telling of Zohra's vision, much less credit
it. Angry and exasperated, frightened and alone in his fear, Mathew slumped
back down on the slick, wet deck and prepared to let misery engulf him.
"Akhran, save us!" Khardan cried to the heavens, struggling against his bonds.
"Pukah! Your master is in need! Come to me, Pukah!"
Mathew didn't even bother to lift his head. He hadn't much faith in this God
of the nomads, who seemed more a megalomanic child than a loving father. As
for the djinn, he was forced to believe that they were immortal beings, sent
from the God, but beyond that he hadn't seen that they were of much use.
Disappearing into the air, changing themselves to smoke and sliding in and out
of lamps, serving tea and sweet cakes when guests arrived . . .
Did Khardan truly expect his God to rescue him? And how? Send those fearsome
beings called 'efreets to pluck
them off the deck of the ship and carry them, safe and sound, back to the Tel?
Did he truly expect to see Pukah—white pantalons, turban, and impish
smile—trick Auda ibn Jad into setting them free?
"There is no one who can help you!" Mathew muttered bitterly, hunching himself
as far back into the shelter of the baggage as possible. "Your God is not
listening!"
And what about you? came the voice inside Mathew. At least this man prays, at
least he has faith.
I have faith, Mathew said to himself, leaning his head wearily on the side of
a basket, cringing as the sea broke over the ship and deluged him with chill
water. He closed his eyes, fighting the nausea that was making his head whirl.
Promenthas is far away from this land. The powers of darkness rule here. . . .
The powers of darkness . . .
Mathew froze, not daring to move. The idea came to him with such vivid clarity
that it seemed to take material form on the deck. So powerful was the
impression in his mind that the young wizard opened his eyes and glanced
fearfully around the ship, certain that everyone must be staring at him,
divining his thoughts.
Auda ibn Jad paced the foredeck, hands clasped behind his back, his eyes
looking straight ahead, unseeing, into the storm. His body was rigid, his
hands clenched so tightly that they were white at the knuckles. Mathew
breathed easier. The Black Paladin must be exerting all his power to maintain
control over the ghuls. He wouldn't waste a scrap of it on his captives. And
why should he?
We're not going anywhere, Mathew thought grimly. He looked swiftly at the
gowns. Kiber, green around the mouth and nose, clung to the rigging, looking
nearly as bad as Mathew felt. Several of the other goums were also seasick and
lay upon the deck moaning. Those who had escaped the Sickness eyed the ghuls

warily, shrinking away whenever one of the sailors drew too close. The ghuls,
their hunger assuaged, were occupied with outsailing the storm.
Sick and despondent, Khardan slumped against his bonds. The Califs head hung
limply. He had ceased to call upon his God. Zohra, unconscious, was probably
the most fortunate person on the ship.
Hunching down amidst die jumble of baskets and chests ;• and the tall ivory
jars, Mathew doubled over as though clenched
164
WEIS AND HICKMAN
THE PALADIN OF THE NIGHT
165
by sickness. Unfortunately, the play-acting became reality. The nausea,
forgotten in his initial excitement, rose up and overwhelmed him. His body
went hot, then cold. Sweat rolled down his face. Panting, refusing to give
way, Matthew closed his eyes and waited grimly for the sick spell to pass.
At last he felt the nausea ease. Reaching into the folds of the caftan, he
drew out a small pouch that he'd hurriedly tied around the sash at his waist.
He cast a swift, furtive glance over his shoulder. Fingers trembling, he
yanked open the pouch and carefully shook the contents out in his lap.
When he and Zohra had accosted the sorceress Meryem— fleeing die battle with
the enchanted Khardan—Mathew had taken from her all the magical paraphernalia
he could find. Surrounded by soldiers, smoke, and fire, he hadn't bothered to
examine them other than a cursory glance before he thrust them into a pouch
and concealed the pouch in the folds of his clothing.
That they were objects empowered to work black magic, Mathew hadn't a doubt.
He guessed Meryem was devoted to the dark side of Sul since she had used her
skill in the arcane arts to attempt murder. Looking at the various articles,
unwilling even to touch them, he was overwhelmed with revulsion and
disgust—feelings that ran deeper than his sickness; die feelings all wizards
of conscience experience in the presence of things of evil.
Mathew's first impulse—and one so strong it nearly overpowered him—was to cast
the ensorceled items into the sea. This is what he should do, this is what he
had been taught to do.
This was what he could not afford to do.
Feverishly, between bouts of sickness, he examined each object.
There weren't many. Counting on her beauty and charm and the naivete of the
nomads to succumb to these, Meryem hadn't considered herself in any real
danger. She had carried a small wand, about six inches in length, designed to
be easily concealed in a pouch or tucked into the bosom of a gown. Mathew
studied it intently, trying, as he had been taught, to understand its use by
analyzing the material out of which it was made. The base of the wand was
formed of petrified wood. Set atop that was a piece of black onyx in the form
of a cube with the corners ground down. It was a remarkable example of
workmanship and obviously the most
powerful of the arcane treasures Mathew held. His fingertips tingled when he
touched it, a numbing sensation spread up his arm. The wand slipped from his
nerveless grasp.
This won't do! Mathew said to himself angrily, beginning to see hope's light
flicker and dim. I can overcome this natural aversion, any disciplined wizard
can. It's mental, not physical, after all. I've seen the Archmagus demonstrate
the use of objects far darker and more foul than thesel •'" Resolutely, he
picked up the wand from where it lay on the deck and held it tightly in his
hand. The chill sensation spread instantly from his palm up to his elbow, then
into his shoulder. His arm began to ache and throb. Biting his lip, fighting
the pain, Mathew held onto the wand. He saw, in his mind, Khardan's face and
the look of scorn in the man's eyes. I will prove myself to him! I will!
Slowly the chill wore off. Sensation returned to his hand and Mathew
discovered he'd been gripping the wand so tightly that the cube's sharp edges
had cut into his flesh. Carefully, he dropped it back into the pouch.
Now, if he only knew what it did. . . .

He mentally recounted all the possible enchantments that could be laid upon
wands; he considered also the natural powers of black onyx itself. Mathew
attempted to come up with the answer as he hurriedly sorted through the other
objects. But his mind was clouded with sickness and terror. Every time he
heard a footstep on the deck, he started and glanced fearfully over his
shoulder, certain he'd been discovered.
"Black onyx," he mumbled to himself, leaning back against a wooden chest,
another wave of sickness breaking over him. Closing his eyes, he saw himself
in the classroom—the wooden desks with their high stools, meant for copying;
the smell of chalk dust; the clatter of the slates; the monotone "voice of an
aged wizard reciting the text. n Black onyx. Black for self-protection, the
power of disciplined thought. Onyx, possessor of an energy that can be used to
control and command, frequently useful in direct intercession with those who
dwell on SuFs plane of existence. Petrified wood—that which was once alive,
but which is now dead, devoid of life, mocking its form. Often used as base
for wands because the wood has the ability to absorb the life of the wielder
and transfer it to the stone.
Add to this the strange design of the wand's onyx tip—not spherical, which
would have indicated a harmony with na-
166
WE1S AND HICKMAN
hire, not even a perfect cube that would have represented order. A cube with
the corners ground off—order turned to chaos?
So what did it all mean? Mathew shook his head weakly. He couldn't guess. He
couldn't think. He gagged and wretched, but there was nothing in his stomach
to purge. His body, under the spell of the Black Paladin, had apparently not
required food. Knowing he was growing weaker and fearful of discovery, Mathew
began to thrust the remaining magical objects, one by one, back into the
pouch. They seemed relatively worthless anyway. A couple of healing scrolls, a
scroll of minor protection from pointed objects (so much for Zohra and her
dagger. Meryem had protected herself against that.), a charm carved in the
shape of a phallus that affected male potency (to be used for or against
Khardan?), and finally a ring.
Mathew stopped to study the ring. It was made of silver, not very elegant
craftsmanship. The stone was a smoky quartz and was obviously designed to be
functional rather than ornamental. Of all the objects, this was the only one
that did not make the young wizard holding it feel unease or disquiet. He
guessed it was the only object whose magic was not harmful. Smoky
quartz—protection from harm—by showing us the dark, we are drawn toward the
light.
It wouldn't help him. If he went through with his plan, it might hinder him.
He turned to Zohra, lying near him. They hadn't taken her jewelry from her.
Lifting a limp left hand, Mathew slid the ring onto her finger. It looked
plain and poor near the other more beautiful jewels. Mathew hoped she wouldn't
notice it, at least until he found a chance to whisper some quick word of
explanation.
The young wizard closed the pouch and thrust it into the bodice of his gown,
near the globe containing the fish. Then he gave himself up to feverish
consideration.
This plan is sheer folly. It will end in disaster. What I contemplate risks
not only my life, but my immortal soul! No one expects that of me. Not Zohra.
Certainly not Khardan. Not even myself.
I am helpless, just as I was when I came to this accursed land and ibn Jad
slaughtered my comrades and took me captive.
I stand blindfolded upon the edge of a cliff. Perhaps if I keep perfectly
still and do not move, nothing will happen to
THE PALADIN OF THE NIGHT
167
me! If I start to walk, I will surely fall, for I cannot see where I am going!
I am helpless! Helpless!

But that wasn't quite true, and Mathew's soul squirmed uncomfortably. Months
ago, when he'd first been cast up onto the shore where the bones of his
friends now lay buried in the blood-drenched sand, he had been helpless. He'd
had no magic, the only weapon with which he could defend himself.
Mathew rested his hand over the pouch, concealed in his clothes. Now he had
the power to act. He had the power to take a step that might lead him—lead
them all—safely to the bottom of the cliff.
He had the power.
If only he could find the courage.
Book Five
THE BOOK OF THE IMMORTALS 11
Chapter 1
"Poor Sond," commiserated Pukah, flitting through the ethers, the djinn's lamp
clasped firmly in his hands. "You're going to be incarcerated in a dark
dungeon, in a town that has been dead and buried for centuries. Chained hand
and foot, water dripping on your head, rats nibbling your toes—if rats are
able to live in such a desolate place, which I hope, for your sake, poor Sond,
that they cannot. I truly feel for you, my friend. I truly do. Of
course"—Pukah heaved a sigh—"it is nothing, absolutely nothing compared to the
torture I'm going to be forced to endure as stave to that oyster-headed
monster. Oh, granted 111 be free to come and go pretty much as I choose. And
it's undoubtedly true that since Kaug has clam shells for brains it is I
myself, Pukah, who will likely end up the master and he, Kaug, my slave. Plus,
111 have my beautiful angel with* me.
"Ah, Sondl She adores me!" Pukah heaved another sigh, this time a rapturous
one. "You should have seen us together in my basket before squid-lips
returned. She pulled me down on the bed and began to fan me with her wings.
She kissed me again and again and . . . well ... we are both men of the world
aren't we, poor Sond? I dare say you know what she wanted of me.
" 'Ah, my dear,' I said sadly, "I would more than gladly oblige you, here and
now, but this is hardly a romantic setting. That crustacean who calls himself
an "efreet may return at any moment. And then there is my poor friend, Sond,
who is in a most dire predicament,' I continued, trying manfully to break free
of her embrace. But she continued to have her way with me and what could I do?
The basket is only so big, you know, and I didn't want to make too much noise.
171
172
WEIS AND HICKMAN
THE PALADIN OF THE NIGHT
173
I believe I'll tell Kaug I am indisposed tonight. He can find someone else to
cook his flounder. As soon as I discover where my white-winged dove is hiding,
we will have leisure to finish what we began."
Pausing for breath, Pukah peered through the swirling mists of the immaterial
plane.
"Dratted stuff. It's as thick in here as Jaafar's wits. I can't see a thing!
Ah, wait. It's clearing. Yes, this is it. I do believe, my poor Sond, that we
have arrived."
Setting the chirak down at his feet, Pukah looked around with wonder.
"This is Serinda? This is where the immortals are being held . . . prisoner?"
Long ago, so many centuries past that it was not worth remembering, when the
great and glorious city of Khandar was nothing but a camel-watering hole, a
beautiful city named Serinda flourished.
Few people living now remembered Serinda. Those who did so were generally
scholars. The city was marked on the Emperor's maps, and many were the
evenings in the Court of Khandar when learned minds debated long and ardently
over the mystery of Serinda—a city that existed, supposedly thrived—in the
middle of a desert.
Kuo Shou-ching, a man of vast wisdom who had traveled to the Emperor's court
from the far eastern lands of Simdari, maintained that the Pagrah desert was

not always a desert. It was a known fact in Simdari that the volcano, Calos,
erupted about this time, spewing out deadly ash, belching tons of rock into
the air, and sending lava—the hot blood of the world's heart—pouring forth.
The eruption was so powerful, claimed Kuo Shou-ching, that a black cloud of
ash hung in the sky for a year, obliterating the sun, turning day to night. It
was during this time that the city of Serinda died a horrible death, its
people perishing from the volcano's foul breath, their bodies and their city
buried in ash. Galos continued to belch forth fire and smoke sporadically for
years, forever changing the face of the land of Sardish Jardan.
One who disputed the theory of Kuo Shou-ching was Hypatia, a wise woman from
the land of Lamish Jardan. She maintained that the city of Serinda was founded
after the eruption of Galos, that the natives—who were extremely advanced in
the ways of science and technology—brought the
water of the Kurdin Sea into the desert through a remarkable system of
aqueducts and that they literally made the desert bloom. She stated further
that they built ships to sail the inland sea, formed by the volcano's
eruption, and that they traded with the peoples of the Great Steppes and the
populace of Lamish Jardan.
According to Hypatia, the fell of Serinda was brought about by the desert
nomads, who feared the city was growing too powerful and would attempt either
to absorb them into it or to drive them from their lands. Consequently, the
fierce tribes fell upon peaceful Serinda, putting every man, woman, and child
to the sword.
Needless to say, this was the theory that found favor with the Emperor, who
had become increasingly irritated by reports he had been receiving of the
nomads in the Pagrah desert, and who began to think that it might be an
excellent thing for the world if the nomads were obliterated from the face of
it.
There was likewise the theory of Thor Hornfist, from the Great Steppes, who
stated that the city of Serinda and its inhabitants had been eaten by a giant
bear. Almost no one paid attention to Thor Hornfist.
The immortals, of course, knew the truth, but being highly diverted by the
theories of the mortals, they kept it to themselves.
The history of the dead city of Serinda was not in Pukah's mind as he stared
about the place, however. What was in the young djinn's mind was the fact
that—for a dead city—Serinda was certainly lively!
"Market day in Khandar is nothing to thisl" Pukah gaped.
The streets were so crowded \t was difficult to walk through diem. They
reverberated with noise—merchants extolling, customers bargaining, animals
bleating. Arwats and coffee houses were doing a thriving business, so packed
that their patrons were literally tumbling out the doors and windows. No one
seemed to be making any attempt to keep order. Everyone was intent on doing
whatever he or she pleased, and pleasure seemed to be Serinda's other name.
Pukah stood in a dark alley between the weapons dealers' and the silk
merchants' bazaars. In the length of time it took him to orient himself, the
djinn saw two fistfights, a drunk get his face slapped, and a couple kissing
passionately in a garbage-infested corner.
174
WEIS AND HICKMAN
THE PALADIN OF THE NIGHT
175
Raucous laughter echoed through the streets. Women hanging out of silk
curtained windows called out sweet enticements to those below. Cold and silver
flowed like water, but not so freely as the wine. Every mark and feature of
every race in the world of Sularin was visible—straight black hair, curly
golden hair, slanted dark eyes, round blue eyes, skin that was white as milk,
skin tanned brown by wind and sun, skin black and glistening as ebony. All
jostled together; greeted each other as friend, fell upon each other as enemy;
exchanged wine, laughter, goods, gold, or insults.
And every one of them was an immortal.

"Poor Sond!" snarled Pukah, giving the lamp a vicious lack. "Poor Sond!
Sentenced to a life of constant merrymaking, lovemaking, drinking, and dicing!
While I'm chained, day and night, to a beast of an 'efreet who will no doubt
beat me regularly—"
"If he does, it will be no more than you deserve," cried an indignant,
feminine voice.
Smoke poured forth from the lamp's spout, coalescing into the handsome,
muscular Sond. Bowing gallantly, the djinn extended his hand and assisted
another figure to step from the lamp—this one slender and lovely with flowing
silver hair and feathery white wings, who glared at Pukah with flashing blue
eyes.
"What do you mean—I fanned you with my wings?" Asrial demanded angrily.
"What were you two doing in there?" Pukah demanded back.
"Precisely what we did in your basket!" retorted Asrial.
"Aha!" Pukah cried, raising clenched fists to Sond.
"Nothing!" Asrial shrieked, stamping her bare foot.
"A fight! A fight!" cried several onlookers. Immortals swarmed into the alley,
pressing eagerly around Sond and Pukah.
"My money on the big handsome one!"
"Mine on the skinny one with the shifty eyes. He probably has a dagger in his
turban."
"You're fools, both of you. My money for the enchanting creature with the
wings. My dwelling place is near here, my sweet. A little wine to cool you
after your journey—"
Steel flashed in Pukah's hands. "I do have a dagger, and you'll feel it if you
don't let go of her!" He caught hold of
Asrial, dragging her out of the arms of a bearded, red-haired barbarian
dressed in furs and animal skins.
"There's not going to be any fight," Sond added, his strong hand closing over
the arm of the barbarian, who was hefting a wicked-looking, two-handed sword.
A handful of gold coins materialized in the djinn's palm. "Here, go have a
drink on us. Pukah, put that knife away!" Sond ordered out of the corner of
his mouth.
Swearing fealty forever, the barbarian threw his arms around Sond and gave him
a hug that nearly squeezed the djinn in two. Then, weaving drunkenly, he and
his companions staggered back down the alley and out into the street. Seeing
that there was, after all, not going to be a fight, the other onlookers
dwindled away in disappointment.
"Well, what were you doing in there?" Pukah asked sullenly.
Asrial removed herself from the djinn's grasp. "It was obvious that the
'efreet must have guessed where I was hiding. When I heard him coming, I had
no choice but to flee into Sond's lamp. Your friend"—she smiled sweetly and
demurely at Sond— "was a perfect gentleman," The blue eyes turned to Pukah,
their gaze cool. "More than I can say for you."
"I'm sorry," Pukah said miserably. Suddenly contrite, he cast himself bodily
at the angel's feet. "I'm a wretch! I know! So do you, I've mentioned it
before!" He groveled in the alley. "Trod on me! Grind me into the dust! I
deserve no lessl I'm dog meat! The hind end of a camel! The tail of the
donkey—"
"I'd enjoy taking you up on that offer," said Sond, kicking at Pukah with his
foot. "But there isn't time. We have to find Nedjma and get out of here. After
all," added the djinn ^smoothly, "soon Kaug will command you to return!"
Grin-ning, the djinn reached down to pick up his lamp, only to see it vanish
beneath his hand. Kaug's laughter could be heard echoing above the noise.
For an instant, Sond paled. Then he shrugged. "It doesn't matter. Ill escape
him somehow."
"And how do you think you're going to get free?" Pukah cast a bitter glance at
the djinn.
"Do you see any guards?" Sond countered, sauntering down the alley.
"No, but we've only been here a quarter of an hour."

176
WEIS AND HICKMAN
Emerging out of the shadows of the alley, the three blinked in the bright
sunlight pouring down upon Serinda.
"I don't think we'll find any guards," said Sond quietly, after a moment's
study of their surroundings.
The only ruler in the city of Serinda appeared to be Chaos, with Disorder as
his Captain. A victorious army invading a conquered city could have created no
greater turmoil in the streets. Every conceivable vice known to mortal flesh
was being plied in the streets and houses, the alleys and byways of Serinda.
"You're right," Pukah admitted glumly. "Why don't they all leave, then?"
"Would you?" Sond asked, pausing to watch a dice game.
"Certainly," said Pukah in lofty tones. "I hope / know my duty—"
Sond made an obscene noise.
"Pukah!" gasped Asrial, grabbing the djinn, digging her nails into his arm.
"Pukah, look!" She pointed. "An ... an archangel!" Her hand covered her mouth.
"Arch who?"
"Archangel! One . . . one of my superiors!"
Turning, the djinn saw a man, dressed in white robes similar to Asrial's,
standing in a doorway. His wings quivering, he was enjoying the favors of a
giggling, minor deity of the goddess Mimrim.
Forgetting himself, Pukah sniggered. Asrial flashed him a furious glance.
"He ... he shouldn't be doing . . . such things!" the angel stammered, a
crimson flush staining her cheeks. "Promenthas would be highly displeased.
I'll . . . I'll go and tell that angel so, right now!"
Asrial started to push her way through the milling, jostling crowd.
"I don't think that's such a good idea!" Pukah snatched her out from under the
nose of a horse whose rider—another barbarian—was urging the animal into the
very heart of the mob, heedless of those he knocked down and trampled.
"You told me you angels didn't indulge in that sort of thing," Pukah teased,
sweeping Asrial into the shelter of an ironmonger's stand.
"We don't!" Asrial blinked her eyes rapidly, and Pukah saw tears glimmering on
her long lashes.
"Don't cry!" Pukah's heart melted. Wiping her tears with
THE PALADIN OF THE NIGHT
177
one hand, he took advantage of the situation to slide the other around the
angel's slim waist, congratulating himself on dealing adroitly with the wings.
"You're too innocent, my sweet child. Knowing their God disapproves, I imagine
your higher-ranking angels have learned to keep their love affairs private—"
"Aflairs? There are no love affairs! None of us would ever even think of doing
. . . such . . . such ..." Glancing back at i'the couple in the doorway, her
eyes widened. She flushed a deep red, and hastily turned away. "Something's
wrong here, Pukah!" she said earnestly. "Terribly wrong. I must leave and tell
Promenthas—"
Pukah's heart—that had melted and run through his body like warm
butter—suddenly chilled into a lump. "No, don't leave me!" he pleaded. "I
mean, don't leave ... us. What will you tell your God, after all? I agree with
you. Something is wrong, but what? There are no guards. It doesn't look like
anyone's being held here against his will. Help us find Nedjma," continued
Pukah, inspired. "She'll tell us everything, and then you can take that
information to Promenthas, just as I'll take it to Akhran."
The thought of being the bearer of such news to his own God considerably
lightened the lump that was Pukah's heart. He envisioned Akhran listening in
profound admiration as his djinn described the numerous harrowing dangers
he—Pukah— faced in the daring rescue of Nedjma and the discovery of the Lost
Immortals. He could picture Akhran's reward. . . .
"How can you go to Akhran if you belong to Kaug?" Asrial asked thoughtfully.
"Fish-face?" Pukah was amused. "His brain can deal with only so much at one
time. When I'm not in his direct line of sight, he probably doesn't remember

that I exist. Ill be able to come and go as I please!"
Asrial appeared dubious. "I'll come with you to find Sond's friend and hear
what she has to say. Then I must return to Promenthas. Although I don't quite
understand," she added with a tremor in her voice, "how this is going to help
Mathew."
"Your prote'ge' is with my master," Pukah said, hugging her comfortingly.
"Khardan will protect him. When you have reported to your God and I to mine,
then you and I will go find both of them!"
"Oh, Pukah!" Asrial's eyes gleamed through her tears, the light within making
them glitter more beautifully than the
m.
178
WEIS AND HICKMAN
stars in the heavens, at least to the djinn's enraptured mind. "That would be
wonderful! But ..." The light dimmed. "What about Kaug?"
"Oh damn and blast Kaug!" Pukah snapped impatiently. He was not, in fact,
quite as confident as he sounded about the 'efreet's thickness of skull and
dullness of wit and did not want to be reminded of him at every turning. "Come
on, Sond! Are you going to stand here for the next millennium?"
"I was just considering the best way to search for her." Sond looked bleakly
at the hundreds of people milling about in the street. "Perhaps we should
split up?"
"Since neither Asrial nor I know what she looks like, that is hardly a good
idea," remarked Pukah acidly. "From what you've told me about her, I suggest
we just listen for the sound of tambour and quaita and look for the dancing
girls."
Sond's face darkened with anger, and he began to swell alarmingly.
"I'm only trying to be helpful," said Pukah in soothing tones.
Muttering something that fortunately never reached the angel's ears or Asrial
might have left them then and there, Sond began to shove his way through the
crowd. Pukah, with a wink at the angel, followed along behind.
Chapter 2
As it turned out, Pukah's suggestion led them straight to Nedjma.
Unfortunately, the djinn never had a chance to gloat over it.
It was with some difficulty that they made their way through the dead city of
Serinda—now possibly the liveliest city in this world or the next. The two
djinn and the angel were continually accosted by merrymakers seeking to draw
them into their revels.
"Thank you," said Pukah, disentangling himself from a
throng of Uevin's Gods and Goddesses who were weaving
,    through the streets.  Clothed in nothing but grape leaves,
they carried jars of wine that they lifted to purple-stained
mouths. "But we're a girl short, you see. We're looking for
f one for my friend!" he explained to the countless pairs of
;  glazed eyes focused—more or less—on him. "Yes, that's right.
,   Now if you'd just let us past. . . . No, no! Not you, I'm afraid,
my dear. We're hunting a specific girl. But if we don't find
her, I'll bring him right back."
%,      "I'm not 'your g"~I/ " said Asrial coldly, attempting to pry ^ her
hand loose from Pukah's.
"Fine!" returned the djinn, exasperated. "When I've rescued my master and your
madman from whatever difficulty ; they've managed to land in without me, then
I'm coming
straight back here!"
(       "Mathew isn't mad!" Asrial cried indignantly. "And I don't ;   care
where you go—"
v&.      "Shhh!" Pukah held up his hand for silence, something |, practically
impossible to achieve amidst the hubbub around Athens. jfe.      "What?"
Jl*!i
179

180
WEIS AND HICKMAN
THE PALADIN OF THE NIGHT
181
"Listen!"
Rising above the laughter and the giggles and the shouts and the singing, they
could hear—very faintly—the shrill, off-key,  sinuous notes of the quaita,
accompanied by the clashing jingle of the tambour. Sond glared at Pukah.
"Very welll" The young djinn shrugged. "Ignore it." Without saying a word,
Sond turned and crossed the street, heading for a building whose shadowy
arched doorways offered cool respite from the sun. Roses twined up ornate
lattice work, decorating the front. Two djinn in silken caftans lounged around
outside the doorways, smoking long, thin pipes. Sond looked neither to the
right nor the left, up nor down, but pushed his way past the djinn, who stared
after him in some astonishment. "Eager, isn't he?" said one.
"Must be a newcomer," said the other, and both laughed.
Raising his gaze to the upper levels of the building, Pukah
saw several lovely djinniyeh leaning seductively over the
balconies, dropping flowers or calling out teasingly to the
men passing by in the street below.
Pukah shook his head and glanced at a grave and solemn Asrial. "Are you sure
you want to come in here?" he whispered. "No. But I don't want to stay out
here either." "I guess you're right," Pukah admitted, scowling at the
red-bearded barbarian who appeared to be following them. "Well"—he grasped her
hand again, smiling as her fingers closed firmly over his—"just keep close to
me."
Tugging Asrial after him, Pukah stepped between the two djinn lounging in the
doorway.
"Say, friend, bring your own?" commented one, tapping Pukah on the shoulder.
"I know that voicel" Pukah said, studying the other djinn intently. "Baji?
Yes, it is!" Pukah clapped the djinn on his muscular forearm. "Bajil I might
have known I'd find you here! Didn't you recognize Sond, who just walked past
you?" "Friend, I don't even recognize you," said the djinn, eyeing Pukah
calmly.
"Of course, you do! It's me, Pukah!" said Pukah. Then, frowning, "You aren't
trying to get out of paying me those five silver tumans you owe me, are you,
Baji?"
"I said you're mistaken," returned the djinn, a sharp edge
to his voice. "Now go on in and have your fun before things turn ugly—"
"Like your face?" said Pukah, fists clenching.
The shrill, anguished bleep of a quaita being cut off in midnote and the
clattering of a tambour hitting the floor mingled with a female scream and
angry, masculine voices raised in argument.
"Pukah!" Asrial gasped. Peering into the shadows of the entryway, she tugged
on the djinn's hand. "Sond's in trouble!"
"He's not the only one!" said Pukah threateningly, glaring at his fellow
djinn.
"Pukah!" Asrial pleaded. The voices inside were growing louder.
"Don't leave!" Pukah growled. "This will only take a moment."
"Oh, I'll be right here," said the djinn, leaning back against the archway,
arms folded across his chest.
"Pukah!" Asrial pulled him along.
Crystal beads clicked together, brushing against Pukah's skin as he passed
through them into the cool shadows of the arwat. A wave of perfume broke over
him, drenching him in sweetness. Blinking his eyes, he tried to accustom
himself to a darkness lighted only by the warm glow of thick, jojoba candles.
There were no windows. Silken tapestries covered the walls. His foot sank into
soft carpeting. Luxurious cushions invited him to recline and stretch out.
Flasks of wine offered to make him forget his troubles. Dishes heaped high
with grapes and dates and oranges and nuts promised to ease his stomach's

hunger, while the most enticing, beautiful djinniyeh he'd ever seen in his
life promised to ease any other hungers he might have.
An oily, rotund little djinn slithered his way through the f.niyriad cushions
that covered every inch of the floor and, 'glancing askance at the angel,
offered Pukah a private room to themselves.
"A charming little room, Effendi, and only ten silver tumans for the night!
You won't find a better price in all of Serinda!" Catching hold of Pukah's
arm, the chubby djinn started to draw him across the room to a bead-curtained
alcove.
Pukah jerked his arm free. "What's going on here?" He glanced toward the
center of the room, where the shouting was the loudest.
182
WEIS AND HICKMAN
"Nothing, Effendi, nothing!" assured the rotund djinn, making another attempt
to capture Pukah's arm, urging him onward. "A small altercation over one of my
girls. Do not trouble yourself. The mamalukes will soon restore peace. You and
your lady friend will not be disturbed, I assure you—"
"Pukahl Do something!" Asrial breathed.
Fukah quickly assessed the situation. A flute player sat gagging and coughing
on the carpeted floor; it appeared he'd had his quaita shoved down his throat.
The tambour player lay sprawled amid the cushions, unconscious; one of the
drummers was attempting to bring him around. Several patrons were gathered
together in a circle, shouting and gesticulating angrily. Pukah couldn't see
between their broad backs, but he could hear Sond's voice, bellowing from
their midst.
"Nedjma! You're coming with me!"
A shrill scream and the sound of a slap was his answer, followed by laughter
from the patrons. Irritably shoving away the grasping hands of the rotund
rabat-bashi, Pukah ordered, "Stay here!" to Asrial and shoved his way through
the circle.
As he had expected, Sond stood in the center. The djinn's handsome face was
twisted with anger, dark with jealousy. He had hold of the wrist of a
struggling djinniyeh with the apparent intent of dragging her out of the
building.
Pukah caught his breath, forgetting Asrial, forgetting Sond, forgetting why
they were here, forgetting his own name for the moment. The djinniyeh was the
most gorgeous creature he'd ever laid eyes on, and there were parts of her on
which he longed to lay more than his eyes. From her midriff up, only the
sheerest of silken veils covered her body, sliding over her firm, high
breasts, slipping from around her white shoulders. Honey gold hair had come
loose in her struggle and tumbled about a face of exquisite charm that, even
in her indignation, seemed made to be kissed. Numerous long, opaque veils
hanging from a jeweled belt at her waist formed a skirt that modestly covered
her legs. Noticing several of these veils wound around the heads of the
onlookers, Pukah guessed that the djinniyeh's shapely legs, already partially
visible, wouldn't be covered long.
"Nedjmal" said Sond threateningly.
"1 don't know any Nedjmal" the djinniyeh cried.
"Let go of her! On with tbe dance! Pay your way like everyone else!"
Pukah glanced behind him and saw the rabat-bashi make
THE PALADIN OF THE NIGHT
183
a peremptory gesture. Three huge mamalukes began to edge then- way forward.
"Uh, Sond!" Shoving the unsteady-footed patrons out of his way, Pukah tripped
over a cushion and tumbled onto the cleared area of the dance floor. "I think
you've made a mistake!" he said urgently. "Apologize to the lady and let's
go!"
"A mistake? You bet he's made a mistake." A huge djinn that Pukah didn't
recognize and thought must be one of Quar's immortals thrust his body between
Sond and the djinniyeh.

"The girl doesn't know you and doesn't want to," the djinn continued, his
voice grating. "Now leave!" Pukah saw the djinn's hand go to the sash he wore
round his waist.
Sond, his gaze fixed on the djinniyeh, saw nothing. "Nedjma," he said in a
pleading, agonized voice, "it's me, Sond! You told me you loved—"
"I said leave her alone!" The large djinn lunged at him.
"Sond!" Pukah leaped forward, trying to deflect the knife. Too late. A quick
hand movement, the flash of steel, and Sond was staring down at the hilt of a
dagger protruding from his stomach. The huge djinn who had stabbed him stepped
back, a look of satisfaction on his face. Slowly, disbelievingly, Sond
clutched at the wound. His face twisted in pain and astonishment. Red blood
welled up between his fingers.
"Nedjma!" Staggering, he extended the crimson-stained hand to the djinniyeh.
Crying out in horror, she covered her eyes with her jeweled hands.
"Nedjma!" Blood spurted from Sond's mouth. He crashed to the floor at her feet
and lay there, still and unmoving.
Pukah sighed. "All right, Sond," he said after a moment. "That was very
dramatic. Now get up, admit you were wrong, and let's get out of here."
The djinn did not move.
The patrons were gathering around the djinniyeh, offering comfort and taking
advantage of the opportunity to snatch away more of the veils. The huge djinn
put his arm around the weeping Nedjma and drew her away to one of the shadowy
alcoves. The other patrons, wailing in protest, demanded that the dance
continue. Other djinniyeh soon appeared to ease their disappointment.
Clucking to himself about blood ruining his best carpets,
184
WEIS AND HICKMAN
the rabat-bashi was pointing at Pukah and demanding payment for damages. The
tall mamalukes, faces grim, turned their attention to the young djinn.
"Uh, Sond!" Pukah knelt down beside him. Placing his hand on the djinn's
shoulder, he shook him. "You can quit making a fool of yourself any time now!
If that was Nedjma, she's obviously enjoying herself and doesn't want to be
bothered. . . . Sond." Pukah shook the unresponsive body harder. "Sond!"
There was a flutter of white wing and white robes, and Asrial was beside him.
"Pukah, I'm frightened! Those men are staring at me! What's Sond doing? Make
him get up and let's leave— Pukah!" She caught sight of his face. "Pukah,
what's wrong!"
"Sond's dead," said Pukah in a whisper.
Asrial stared at him. "That's impossible," she said crisply. "Is this more of
your antics, because—" The angel's voice faltered. "Promenthas have mercy!
You're serious!"
"He's dead!" Pukah cried. Almost angrily, he grabbed Sond's shoulder and
rolled the body of the djinn over on its back. An arm flopped limply against
the floor. The eyes stared at nothing. Pulling die dagger from the wound, the
djinn examined it. The blade was smeared with blood. "I don't understand!" He
glared around the room. "I want answers!"
"Pukah!" Asrial cried, trying to comfort him, but the mamalukes shoved the
angel aside. Grasping the young djinn by the shoulders, they dragged him to
his feet.
Pukah lashed out furiously. "I don't understand! How can he be dead?"
"Perhaps I can explain," came a voice from the beaded-curtained entryway. "Let
him go."
At the sound, the mamalukes instantly dropped their hold on the djinn and
stepped back from him. The proprietor ceased his lamentations, the patrons
swallowed words and wine, several nearly choking themselves, and even this
sound they did their best to stifle. No one spoke. No one stirred. The light
of the candles flickered and dimmed. The fragrant air was tinged with a sweet,
cloying smell.
A cold whisper of air on the back of his neck made Pukah's skin shiver.
Reluctantly, unwillingly, but completely unable to help himself, the djinn

turned to face the doorway.
Standing in the entrance was a woman of surpassing beauty.
THE PALADIN OF THE NIGHT
185
Her face might have been carved of marble by some master craftsman of the
Cods, so pure and perfect was every feature. Her skin was pale, almost
translucent. Hair, thin and fine as a child's, fell to her feet, enveloping
her slender, white-robed body like a smooth satin cape of purest white.
Pukah heard Asrial, somewhere near him, moan. He couldn't help her, he
couldn't even see her. His gaze was fixed upon the woman's face; he felt
himself slowly strangling.
The woman had no eyes. Where there should have been two orbs of life and light
in that classic face were two hollows of empty blackness.
"Let me explain, Pukah," said the woman, entering the room amid a silence so
deep and profound that everyone else in the room seemed to have suffocated in
it. "In the city of Serinda, through the power of Quar, it is at last possible
to give every immortal what he or she truly desires."
The woman looked expectantly at Pukah, obviously waiting for him to question
her. "And that is?" he was supposed to say. But he couldn't talk. He had no
breath.
Yet his words echoed, unspoken, through the room.
"Mortality," the woman replied.
Pukah shut his eyes to blot out the sight of the empty eye sockets.
"And you are—" he blurted out.
"Death. The ruler of Serinda."
THE PALADIN OF THE NIGHT
187
Chapter 3
In the arwat, the immortals resumed their pleasure-taking, giving the body of
Sond nothing more than a cool, casual glance or—at most—a look of bitterness
for having bled all over the carpet {this from the rabat-bashi).
"Get him out of here!" the proprietor muttered to two mamalukes, who bent down
ancf—lifting the dead djinn by his flaccid arms—appeared prepared to drag him
unceremoniously out the door.
"The back door," specified the rabat-bashi.
"No one's taking Sond anywhere," declared Pukah, drawing a dagger from the
sash around his slim waist. "Not until I have some answers."
Dropping Sond's arms, which fell with a lifeless thud on the floor of the
arwat, the two immortal mamalukes drew their daggers, eager grins on their
faces.
"Pukah, no!" cried Asrial, hurling herself at the young djinn.
Gently he pushed her away, his eyes on the knife-wielding slaves who were
circling, one to either side of him, steel flashing in their hands.
"You there!" cried the proprietor distractedly, gesturing to another mamaluke,
"roll up that other carpet! It's the best one in the house. I can't afford to
have it ruined as well. Quickly! Quickly! Excuse me, sir"—this to Pukah—"if
you could just lift your foot for a moment? Thank you. It's the blood, you
see, it doesn't wash—-"
"Blood!" Asrial put her hands to her head in an effort to concentrate. "This
is impossible. Our bodies are ethereal. They cannot bleed, they cannot die!"
Lowering her hands, she looked at Death. "I don't believe this," the angel
stated
186
flatly. "Sond is not dead! Not even you can make the immortal mortal. Pukah,
stop that nonsense."
Somewhat startled, Pukah glanced at her, then at Sond lying on the floor.
Slowly he lowered his dagger. "That's true," he said. "Sond can't be dead."
"You are both young," said Death, turning the empty eye sockets toward them,
"and yon have not lived long among humans—especially you," she said to Asrial.
"You are right, of course. Sond is not dead—at least not as mortals would term

it. But he might as well be. When the sun dawns tomorrow, this djinn will
regain his life—but nothing else."
"What do you mean?" Pukah glared at the cold and lovely woman suspiciously.
"What else is there?"
"His identity. His memory. He will have no knowledge of who he is, whom he
serves. He will be—as it were—newborn and will take on whatever identity
occurs to him at the moment. He will forget everything. . . ."
"Even the fact that he is immortal," said Asrial slowly.
Death smiled. "Yes, child, that is true. He will have the mortal hunger to
live life to the fullest. As are mortals, he will be driven—blessed and cursed
with the knowledge that it must all come to an end."
"This is why the immortals are lost to the world," realized Pukah, staring at
Sond. "They no longer remember it. And that is why Nedjma did not know my poor
friend."
"She is no longer Nedjma, nor has she been for a long time now. Only a few
nights ago she died at the hands of a jealous lover. Days before that, she was
accidentally killed in a street brawl. No one in this city"—the hollow eyes
turned to Asrial—"remains alive from dusk to dawn."
A hoarse cry interrupted them. The djinn who had stabbed Sond staggered out of
the inner room, clutching his throat with one hand, a half-emptied goblet of
wine in the other. Falling to the floor, he writhed in agony for a few
seconds, then his body went rigid. The cup fell from his hand, rolling across
the carpet, leaving a trail of spilled wine. Nedjma swept out from the room.
Standing above the body, she deliberately brushed a fine, white powder from
her delicate fingers. "Let this be a lesson to all who think they own mel"
Tossing her honey-colored hair, she vanished behind another beaded curtain.
188
WEIS AND HICKMAN
THE PALADIN OF THE NIGHT
189
"Wine ... it stains are almost as bad as blood," whined the proprietor,
wringing his hands.
Death watched appreciatively, her lips slightly parted as though she were
sipping the dead djinn's life.
"So," said Pukah to himself. "I am beginning to understand. ..." His hand went
to the tourmaline amulet Kaug had given him. As he touched it, he thought he
saw Death flinch. The hollow eyes met his, a fine line marring the marble
smoothness of the white brow.
Tucking his dagger into his sash, Pukah crossed his arms and rocked back on
his heels. "There is one who will leave this city at dusk or dawn or whenever
I choose. Me." He held up the amulet that he wore around his neck. "My master
cannot do without me, you see, and so has insured my return."
"What is this?" Death peered closely at the tourmaline, the coldness of her
eyeless gaze causing Pukah's flesh to shiver and crawl. "This goes against our
agreement! I am to have all who come here! Who is this master of yours?"
"One Kaug, an "efreet, in the service of Quar," answered Pukah glibly.
"Kaug!" Death's brow furrowed. The shadow of her anger descended upon the
arwat, causing the rabat-bashi to hush his complainings, and the guests to
hastily withdraw to whatever dark, obscure corners they could find.
Pukah saw Asrial staring at him pleadingly, begging him to take her from this
place. The thought that she might die and forget her protege^ must be
terrifying to her. What she didn't realize—and Pukah had—was that he could
leave, but she couldn't. Death would never allow it. I am to have all who come
here. The only way for them to escape, the only way for all the immortals
trapped here to escape was Pukah's way. Pukah had a plan.
Not only will Hazrat Akhran reward me, Pukah thought blissfully. All the Gods
in the Jewel of Sul will be forever indebted to met I will be an immortal
among immortals! Nothing in this world or in the heavens will be too good for
me! One palace—hah! I will have twenty*palaces—one given by each God. I will
spend the heat of the summer in a vast stone fortress on the Great Steppes. I

will winter in a grass hut of thirty or forty rooms on one of those little
tropical islands in Lamish Aranth, sleeping on the feathery wings of a
grateful, loving angel . . .
Seeing Death's pallid hand reaching for the amulet, Pukah hastily clamped bis
fingers over it and took a step backward.
"Rest assured my master reverences you most highly, my lady," Pukah said
humbly. " 'Death is second to Quar in my esteem.* Those were the 'efreet's
very words."
" "Second to Quar!* " Death's eyeless sockets grew dark as endless night.
"Quar is becoming the One, the True God," Pukah said apologetically. "You must
concede that. The number of humans worshiping Him grows daily."
"That may be true," Death said sharply, "but in the end their bodies are mine!
That is the promise of Sul!"
"Ah, but didn't you hear?—" Pukah stopped, biting his tongue, lowering his
eyes, and glancing at Death from beneath the lids—"but then I guess you
didn't. If you 11 excuse me, my lady, I really should be getting back. Kaug is
dining on boiled ray tonight, and if I'm not there to remove the sting, my
master will—"
"Hear what?" questioned Death grimly.
"Nothing, I assure you, my lady." Grabbing hold of AsriaTs hand, Pukah began
to sidle past Death toward the door. "It is not my place to reveal the secrets
of the Most Holy Quar—"
Death raised a pale, quivering finger and pointed at Asrial. "You may have an
Amulet of Life, djinn, but this feathered beauty here does not! Tell what I
need to know, or she will be struck down before your eyes this instant!"
Death gestured, and the two mamalukes, their daggers still in hand, looked
with eager, burning eyes at the angel. Asrial caught her breath, pressing her
hands over her mouth and shrinking next to Pukah. The djinn put his arm around
her reassuringly. The foxish face was pale, however, and he ^ was forced to
swallow several times before he could speak.
"Do not be hasty, my lady! I will tell you everything, for
it is obvious to me now that you have been the victim of a
trick played upon you by the God. I assume that it was Quar
who schemed to trap the immortals by laying this spell upon
i      the city of Serinda?"
f
Death did not reply, but Pukah saw the truth in the face
f      whose marble facade was beginning to crack. Hurriedly he
I      continued, "Quar gave you the delightful task of casting this
spell over the city, knowing—as He did—that your greatest
pleasure in life comes from watching others leave it?"
too
WEIS AND HICKMAN
THE PALADIN OF THE NIGHT
191
Again, though Death did not answer, Pukah knew he was right and spoke with
increasing confidence, not to mention a hint of smugness. "Thus, Lady, Quar
rid the world of the immortals—all the immortals, if you take my meaning. Your
grave and lovely self included."
"Pukah! What are you saying?" Asrial glanced up at him in alarm, but the djinn
hugged her into silence.
"For you see, O Sepulchral Beauty, Quar has promised all who follow him
eternal life!"
Death sucked in a deep breath. Her hair rose around her in a wrathful cloud, a
cold blast of fury hit those in the arwot, causing the strongest slave to
tremble in fear. Asrial hid her face in her hands. Only Pukah remained
confident, sure of himself and his glib tongue.
"I have proof," he said, forestalling what he was certain would be Death's
next demand. "Only a few months ago, Quar ordered the Amir of Rich to attack
bands of nomads living in the Pagrah desert. Were you present at the battle,
Lady?"

"No, I was—"
"Busy here below," Pukah said, nodding knowingly. "And your presence was
sorely missed, Lady, I can tell you, particularly by the jackals and hyenas
who count upon your bounty. For hardly anyone died in that battle. The Imam of
Quar ordered them taken alive! Why? So that his God could grant them eternal
life and thereby be assured of eternal followers! Before that was the battle
in Kich—"
"I was present then!" Death said.
•
"Yes, but whom did you take? A fat Sultan, a few of his wives, assorted
warirs. Piffle!" Pukah said with a disdainful sniff. "When there was an entire
city filled with people who could have been raped, murdered, burned,
stoned—the survivors left to fend off" disease, starvation—"
"You are right!" said Death, her teeth clenching in a skull-like grimace.
"Far be it from me to betray Hazrat Quar, for whom I have a high respect,"
added Pukah humbly, "but I have long been one of your most ardent admirers, my
lady. Ever since you took my former master—a follower of Benario—in the most
original fashion—his body parts cut off one at a time by the enraged owner of
the establishment my poor master took it into his head to rob without first
checking to make certain that no one was at home. That is why I have revealed
to you
Quar's plot to remove you forever from the world of the living and keep you
here below, playing games."
"I will show you how games are played!" Seething, Death approached Pukah, die
hollow of her empty eyes seeming to grow larger, encompassing the djinn.
"Show me?" Pukah laughed lightly. "Thank you, but I really don't have time for
such frivolities. My master cannot do without—" It suddenly occurred to. the
djinn that Death was drawing uncomfortably near. Letting go of Asrial, he
tried to back up and tumbled over a hubble-bubble pipe. "What have I to do
with this? Nothing!" He scrambled to his feet. "If I were you, now, Lady, I
would leave this city immediately and fly to die world above. No doubt the
Amir is riding to battle this very instant! Spears through chests, sword
slicing through flesh. Arms ripped from their sockets, entrails and brains on
the ground! Tempting picture, isn't it?"
"Yes indeed! So Quar has sent you here to frighten me—" Death stalked him.
"F-frighten you?" Pukah stammered, knocking over a table and small chair. "No,
Lady," he said with complete honesty, "I assure you, that frightening you is
the furthest thing from my— his mind!"
"What does He want? His immortals returned? Eternal life! Well see what Sul
has to say about this!"
"Yes, yes!" gabbled Pukah, backed up against a wall, his hand clutching the
amulet. "Go talk to Sul! Wonderful person, Sul. Have you ever met Him?"
"I intend to speak with Him," said Death, "but first I will send Quar his
messenger back in the form of a skeleton to remind him of whom he is trying to
cheat!"
"You can't touch me!" said Pukah quickly, raising the amulet in front of
Death's baleful, empty eyes.
"No," said Death softly, "but I can her!"
Death vanished and reappeared. The pale, cold hands were suddenly clasped
around Asrial's shoulders, the angel caught fast in Death's grip.
The djinn stared into the angel's blue, despairing eyes and wondered what had
gone wrong. It had been such a simple, beautiful plan! Get Death out of the
city. Set her on Quar. . . . "Ill make a bargain with you," offered Pukah
desperately.
192
WEIS AND HICKMAN
THE PALADIN OF THE NIGHT
193
"A bargain?" Death stared at him suspiciously. "I have had enough of your
Master and His bargains!"
"No," said Pukah solemnly, "this would be ... just between you and me. In

exchange for her"—he looked at Asrial, his soul in his eyes, his voice
softening—"I will give you my amulet—"
"No, Pukah, no!" Asrial cried.
"—and I will remain in the city of Serinda," the djinn continued. "You boast
that no one lives from dawn to dusk in this city. I challenge that claim. I
say that I am cleverer than you. No matter what form you choose to take, I can
avoid falling your victim."
"Ha!" snorted Death.
"No one shall goad me into any quarrel," averred Pukah. "No woman will slip
poison into my drink!"
"And if I win, what do I get out of this bargain, beyond the pleasure of
seeing you stretched lifeless at my feet?"
"I will give you not only myself, but my master as well."
"Kaug?" Death sneered. "Another immortal? As you can see, I am well supplied
with those already."
"No." Pukah drew a deep breath. "You see, Kaug is not my master so much as he
is my jailer. Sond and I were captured by the 'efreet and forced to do his
bidding. My true master is Khardan, Calif of the Akar—"
"Pukah, what are you saying?" cried Asrial, appalled.
"Khardan!" Death appeared interested. "Akhran holds that particular mortal in
high favor. He keeps close watch upon him. I cannot get near. You are saying
that if I win*—"
"—the eyes of Akhran will be looking elsewhere."
"You know that now your mortal, Khardan, stands in dire peril?" Death inquired
coolly.
"No," said Pukah, looking somewhat uncomfortable, "I didn't. It's been some
time, you see, since I was captured, and I—"
"Not only him, but those with him," said Death, her eyes on Asrial.
Clasping her hands, the angel gazed at the pale woman beseechingly. "Mathew?"
she whispered.
"We will speak of this later, you and I," said Death soothingly, running her
cold hand over Asrial's silver hair. "Very well," she added, "I accept your
bargain, Pukah. Hand me die amulet."
"But you haven't heard the rest of the deal," protested the young djinn in
offended dignity. "The part about what you give me if I win."
Death glanced around the arwat. "If he wins!" she repeated. Everyone burst
into shouts of laughter, the proprietor guffawing until he lost his breath and
had to be pounded on his back by one of the slaves. "Very well," said Death,
wiping tears of mirth that sprang horribly from the empty sockets. "If you
win, Pukah, I will give you— what? Your freedom, I suppose. That's what all
you djinn want."
"Not only my freedom," said Pukah cunningly. "I want the freedom of every
immortal in the city of Serindal"
The laughter in the arwat suddenly ceased.
"What did he say?" puffed the rabat-bashi, who—between trying to breathe and
getting thumped on the back—hadn't been able to hear clearly.
"He says he wants us freed!" growled an immortal of Zhakrin's, eyeing Pukah
grimly.
"Freed!" said a cherubim, staggering out of a bead-curtained room, a goblet in
her hand. "Free to go back to a life of drudgery!"
"A life of slavery," slurred one of Quar's 'efreets from where it lay
comfortably beneath a table.
"Death take him!" cried Uevin's God of War.
"Death! Death!" chanted everyone in the arwat, rising to their feet, fingering
their weapons.
"Free? Did I say free?" Sweat trickled down from beneath Pukah's turban.
"Look, we can discuss this—"
"Enough!" Death raised her hands. "I agree to his terms. Pukah, if you are
alive by sunset tomorrow"—hoots and howls of derision greeted this. Clenching
her raised fists, Death commanded silence—"then I swear by Sul that the spell

over the city of Serinda will be broken. If, however, the Jailing light of the
sun casts its rays over your body as it lies upon its bier, Pukah, then your
master, Khardan, is mine. And his end will be truly terrible"—Death looked at
Asrial— "for he will be slain by one whom he trusts, one who owes him his
life."
Asrial stared at Death in horror. "Not—" She couldn't finish.
"I fear so, child. But—as I said—we wilh discuss that
194
WEIS AND HICKMAN
THE PALADIN OF THE NIGHT
195
later. Hear me!" Death lifted her voice, and it seemed that the entire city of
Serinda fell silent. "I owe allegiance to no God or Goddess. I have no
favorites. Whatever else may be said of me, I am impartial. I take the very
young. I take the very old. The good cannot escape me, neither can the sinner.
The rich with all their money cannot keep me from their doors. The magi with
all their magic cannot find a spell to defeat me. And so I will have no
favorites here. Pukah will have this night to prepare his defense. The people
of Serinda will have this night to prepare their attack.
"Pukah, this night you may keep your amulet and freely walk the city. Whatever
weapon you find will be yours. Tomorrow, at the Temple in the city plaza, at
the dawning of the new day, you will deliver to me the amulet and the contest
will begin. Is this agreed?"
"Agreed," said Pukah through lips that, despite his best efforts, trembled. He
couldn't meet Asrial's despairing eyes.
Death nodded, and the people resumed their frenetic activities, everyone
making eager preparations for tomorrow's deadly contest!
"And now, child, you want to see what is happening in the world of humans?"
asked Death.
"Yes, oh yesl" cried Asrial.
"Then come with me." Death's hair lifted as though stirred by a hot wind.
Floating around her, it enfolded the angel like a shroud.
'
"Pukah?" Asrial said, hesitating.
"Go ahead," said the djinn, trying to smile. "Ill be fine, for a while at
least."
"You will see him again, child," Death said, putting her arm around Asrial and
drawing her away. "You will see him again. . . ."
The two vanished. Pukah slumped down into a nearby chair, ignoring the snarls,
the hostile stares. Gulping slightly at the sight of daggers, knives, swords,
and other cutlery that was making a sudden appearance, he turned his head to
look out the window. He was not cheered by the sight of an imp pushing a
grindstone down the street; the demon was besieged by a mob of immortals
brandishing weapons to be sharpened.
Seeing his reflection in the window, Pukah found it more comforting to look at
his own foxish face. "I'm smarter than Death," he said, seeking reassurance.
The unusually gloomy reflection made no answer.
Book Six
THE BOOK OF QUAR 11
Chapter 1
Far from the Kurdin Sea, where the ship of ghuls sailed amid its own storm;
far from where Mathew struggled against inner darkness; far from Serinda,
where a djinn battled against Death; another young man fought a battle of his
own, though on much different ground.
Quar's jihad had begun. In the first light of dawn, the city of Meda, in
northern Bas, fell to the troops of the Amir without putting up more
resistance than was necessary for the citizens to be able to meet each other's
eyes and say, "We fought but were defeated. What could we do? Our God
abandoned us."
And it did seem as if this were true. In vain the priests-of Uevin called for
the God of War to appear in his chariot and lead the battle against the armies

of the Emperor. In vain the priestesses of the Earth Goddess called for the
ground to open and swallow the Amir's soldiers. There came no answer. The
orades had been silent many months. Uevin's immortals had disappeared, leaving
their human supplicants to cry their pleas to deaf ears.
Uevin's ears were not deaf, though he often wished they were. The cries of his
people rent his heart, but there was nothing he could do. Bereft of his
immortals, losing the faith of his people, the God grew weaker by the day.
Ever before him was the vision of Zhakrin and Evren, their shriveled and
starved bodies writhing upon the heavenly plane, then blowing away like dust
in the wind. Uevin knew now, too late, that the Wandering God, Akhran, had
been right. Quar was intent on becoming the One, the Only. Uevin hid inside
his many-
199
200
WEIS AND HICKMAN
THE PALADIN OF THE NIGHT
201
columned dwelling, expecting every moment to hear Quar's voice summon him
forth to his own doom. Hie Cod, quaking and trembling, knew there was nothing
he could do to stop Quar.
The army of Meda—outnumbered, beset by dissension within their ranks, aware
that their Governor was hastily packing his valuables and fleeing through the
back wall of the city as they prepared to defend its front—fought
halfheartedly and, when called upon to surrender, did so with such promptness
that the Amir remarked to Achmed drily that they must have ridden forth to
battle with white flags in their saddlebags.
Achmed never had a chance to fight—a feet that made him burn with
disappointment. Not that he would have seen battle this day anyway. The young
man rode with the cavalry and they would not be used today unless the Medans
proved more stubborn than was expected. Chafing with inaction, he sat his
magical horse high on a ridge overlooking the plains on which the two armies
rushed together like swarms of locusts.
Achmed shifted in his saddle, his gaze darting to every boulder and bush,
hoping to see some daring Medan raise up out of the cover with bow poised and
arrow at the ready, endeavoring to end the war by killing the general. Achmed
saw himsea hurling his own body protectively in front of the Amir (the king's
bodyguards having fled, the cowards!}. He saw the arrow fly, he felt it graze
his flesh (nothing serious). He saw himself draw his sword and dispatch the
Medan. Cutting off the man's head, he would present it to the Amir. Refusing
all assistance, he would say, with eyes modestly downcast, "The wound? A
scratch, my lord. I would gladly be pierced by a thousand arrows if it would
serve my king."
But the Medans selfishly refused to cooperate. No assassin crouched in the
bushes or crept among the rocks. By the time Achmed saw himself, in his
vision, carried away on a shield, the Medans were throwing their own shields
on the ground and handing over their weapons to the victors.
When the battle had ended, the Amir rode up and down the long line of
prisoners that were drawn up outside the city walls. Most of the Medans stood
with heads bowed, in sullen or fearful silence. But occasionally Achmed—riding
at Qannadi's side—saw a head raise, a man glance up at the king out of the
corner of an eye. The Amir's stern and rigid face never changed expression,
but his eyes met those of the prisoner, and there was recognition and promise
in that glance. The man would look back down again at his feet, and Achmed
knew he had seen someone in Qannadi's pay—a worm the Amir had purchased to
nibble at the fruit from the inside.
Achmed heard mutterings of disgust from the Amir's bodyguards, who rode behind
him. They, too, knew the meaning of that exchange of glances. Like most
soldiers, they had no use for traitors, even when the traitors were on their
side.
The young man's face burned, and he hung his head. He felt the same stirrings

of disgust for the treacherous who had betrayed their own people, yet all he
could ask himself was, "What is the difference between them and me?"
The inspection came to an end. Qannadi announced that the Imam would speak to
the prisoners. The Amir and his staff rode off to one side. Achmed, still
brooding, took his place beside and a few steps behind Qannadi.
A creaking of the Amir s leather saddle and a slight cough caused Achmed to
raise his head and look at the man. For a brief moment a warm smile flickered
in the dark eyes.
"You came to me out of love, not for money," was the silent message.
How had Qannadi divined what he was thinking? Not that it mattered. This
wasn't the first time their thoughts had ridden together over the same path.
Feeling comforted, Achmed allowed himself to accept the answer. Knowing it was
true in part, he could feel satisfied with it and firmly shut out any efforts
by his conscience to question it further.
In the past month that they had been together, Achmed had come to love and
respect Qannadi with the devotion of a son—giving to the Amir the affection he
would have been glad to give to his own father, had Majiid been the least bit
interested in accepting it. Each filled perfectly the void in the other's
heart. Achmed found a father, Qannadi the son he'd been too busy fighting wars
to raise.
The Amir was careful not to let his growing affection for the young man become
obvious, knowing that Yamina watched her husband jealously. Her own child
stood to inherit the Amir's position and wealth, and neither she nor her
mincing peacock of a son would hesitate to send a gift of almonds rolled in
poisoned sugar to one who might pose a threat. Long ago, a pretty young wife
of whom Qannadi had been especially fond and who was to have delivered a baby
near the same date as Yamina's had died in a similar manner. Such things were
not unusual in court, and Qannadi accepted it. But it was one reason, perhaps,
that he afterward exhibited no great affection for any of his wives.
202
WEIS AND HICKMAN
THE PALADIN OF THE NIGHT
203
Hie Amir gave Achmed the rank of Captain, put him in charge of training both
men and horses in the cavalry, and took care—while they were in court—to speak
to him as he would any other soldier in his army. If he spent a lot of time
with the cavalry, it was only natural, since they were the key to victory in
many instances and required much training in advance of the war against Bas.
Yamina's single, jealous eye saw nothing to give her concern. She sent her son
back to the glittering court in Khandar, both of them happy in the knowledge
that generals often met with fatal mishaps.
Qannadi himself had no illusions. He would have liked to make Achmed his heir,
but he feared that the young man would not last even a month hi the palace of
the Emperor. Honesty, loyalty—these were qualities a king rarely saw in those
who served him. Qualities the Amir saw in Achmed. The Amir didn't attempt to
instruct the young man in the dangerous machinations of court intrigue. The
nomad's blend of brute savagery and naive innocence delighted Qannadi. Achmed
would not hesitate to hack to bits a rival in a fair fight, but he would allow
himself to be devoured by ants before he would slyly murder that same rival.
What was worse, Achmed fondly believed that every man worthy of being called a
man abided by the same code of honor. No, he wouldn't last long in the court
at Khandar.
Let my painted-eyed, painted-lipped son grovel at the Emperor's feet and smile
when His Imperial Majesty kicks him. I have Achmed. I will make of him an
honorably dutiful soldier for Quar. For myself, I will have one person "who
will fight at my side, who will be near me when I die. One person who will
truly mourn my passing.
But the ways of Quar are not die ways of Akhran. Qannadi himself was naive in
thinking he could uproot the thorny desert Rose, bring it into the stifling
atmosphere of court, and expect it to thrive. The cactus would have to send

down tough new roots in order even to survive.
The Imam had watched the battle from the protection of a palanquin borne on
the long journey from Kich to Meda by six sweating, struggling priests of
Quar. At the Amir's signal, they hauled the covered litter out onto the plains
before the city walls that were lined with Medans waiting in hushed,
breathless silence to know their fate.
Feisal emerged from the palanquin, his thin hand pushing aside the golden
curtains decorated with the head of the ram. A change had come over the Imam
since his illness. No one
knew what had happened to him, except that he had come very close to death and
had been—according to his awestricken servant—healed by the hand of the God.
Feisal's body, always slender from fasting, now appeared emaciated. His robes
hung from his spare frame as they might have hung from a bare-limbed tree.
Every bone, every vein, every muscle and tendon was visible in his arms. His
face was skull-like, with cadaverous hollows in the cheeks, the sunken eyes
appeared huge.
These eyes had always glowed with holy zeal, but now they burned with a fire
that appeared to be the only fuel the man needed to keep the body functioning.
The sun was blazing hot on the plains in midsummer. Achmed sweated in the
leather uniform trousers worn by the cavalry. Yet he shivered when the Imam
began to speak, and, glancing at Qannadi, he saw the black hair on the
sunburned arms rise; tne strong jaw—barely visible beneath the man's helm—
tighten. The Imam's presence had always inspired discomfort. Now it inspired
terror.
"People of Meda!" Feisal's voice must have been amplified by the God. It was
hardly creditable that the lungs in that caved-in chest could draw air enough
to breathe, let alone to shout. Yet his words could be clearly heard by all in
Meda. It seemed to Achmed that they must be heard by every person in the
world.
"You were not this day defeated by man," the Imam called out. He paused,
drawing a deep breath. "You were defeated by Heaven!" The words rolled over
the ground like thunder; a horse shied nervously. The Amir cast a stern glance
behind him and the soldier quickly brought his animal under control.
"Do not grieve over your loss! Rather, rejoice in it, for with defeat comes
salvation! We are children in this world and we must be taught our lessons of
life. Quar is the father who knows that sometimes we learn best through pain.
But once the blow has been inflicted, He does not continue to whip the child,
but spreads His arms"—the Imam suited his action to his words—"in a loving
embrace."
Achmed thought back to when he'd heard these—or similar—words, back to that
dark time in prison. Clenching his hands over the saddle horn to keep himself
calm, he wished desperately this would end.
"People of Meda! Renounce Uevin—the weak and imperfect God who has led you
down a disastrous path, a path that could have cost you your lives had not
Quar been the merciful father that He is. Destroy the temples of the false God
Uevin!
204
WEIS AND HICKMAN
Denounce His priests! Melt down His sacred relics, topple His statues and
those of the immortals who served Him. Open your hearts to Quar, and He will
reward you tenfold! You will prosper! Your families will prosper! Your city
will become one of the brightest jewels in the crown of the Emperor! And your
immortal souls will be assured of eternal peace and rest!"
Growing light-headed in the heat, Achmed imagined the Imam's words leaping
from the man's mouth in tongues of flame that set the dry grass ablaze. The
flames spread from the priest to the prisoners lined up against the wall and
lit them on fire. The blaze burned hotter and hotter until it engulfed the
city. Achmed blinked and licked thirstily at a trickle of sweat that dropped
into his mouth. The plains reverberated with the sound of cheering, started on
cue by the Amir's forces and picked up eagerly by the defeated Medans.

Feisal had no more to say, which was well, since he could never have been
heard. Exhausted, drained, he turned to make his way back to the palanquin,
his faithful servant hurrying forward to assist the priest's feeble steps. At
the city walls, enthusiastic crowds shoved open the wooden gates. Chants of
"Quar, Quar, Hazrat Quar" reverberated across the plains.
Uneicpectedly the Medan prisoners broke ranks and surged toward the Imam.
Qannadi acted swiftly, sending his cavalry forward with a wave of his hand.
Riding with the others, Achmed moved his horse in a defensive position around
the priest's palanquin. Sword drawn, he had orders to hit with the flat of the
blade first, the cutting edge second?
Achmed's Horse was engulfed by a tide of humanity, but these men were not out
for blood. Risking life and limb amid the horses of the cavalry, they sought
only to touch the palanquin, to kiss the curtains. "Your blessing on us,
Imam!" they cried, and when Feisal parted the curtains and extended his bony
arm, the Medans fell to their knees; many had tears streaming down their
dust-streaked laces.
<•
Feisal's dark, burning eyes looked at Qannadi, giving a wordless command. The
Amir, lips pressed grimly together, ordered his men to fall back a discreet
distance. The Medans lifted the Imam's palanquin onto their own shoulders and
bore Him triumphantly through the city gates. The roar of the crowd must have
been heard by the sorrowing Uevtn as far away as heaven.
It's all over! thought Achmed with relief and turned to share a smile with his
general.
Qannadi's face was stern. He knew what was coming.
Chapter 2
Achmed crouched in the shadow of his tent, eating his dinner and watching the
sun's last rays touch the grass of the prairie with an alchemist's hand,
changing the green to gold. The young man ate alone. He had made few
acquaintances among the Amir's troops, no real friends. The men acknowledged
his skill in riding and his way with horses, even magical ones. They learned
from him: how to sit a galloping horse by pressing the thighs against the
flanks, leaving hands free to fight instead of clutching the reins; how to use
the animals' bodies for cover; how to leap from the saddles of running horses
and pull themselves back up again. They learned how to keep the horses calm
before a battle, how to keep them quiet when slipping up on the enemy, how to
hush them when the enemy is somewhere out there, preparing to slip up on you.
They accepted Achmed's teaching, though he was younger than most of them. But
they never accepted him.
Although accustomed to the close comradeship of the friends in his father's
tribe, most of whom were not only friends but relatives in one way or another,
Achmed was not bothered by the lack of friends among the troops. The month in
prison had hardened him to isolation; cruel usage at the hands of his
tribesmen had caused him to welcome it.
Few others were stirring about the camp. The guards walking the perimeter
looked dour and put-upon, for they could hear the shouts and laughter drifting
up over the city walls and knew that their comrades were enjoying them-
205
206
WEIS AND HICKMAN
THE PALADIN OF THE NIGHT
207
selves. The Amir had given each man a sackful of the Emperor's coins with
orders to spend freely—the first sign that Quar was raining gold down upon
Meda. The troops were commanded to be friendly and as well behaved as could be
expected; dire punishments were threatened for those who raped, looted, or in
any other way harmed a Medan. The Amir's household guards manned the streets
to maintain order. Achmed could have been among those disporting themselves in
the city, but he chose not to. The Medans, who had surrendered their city to
Heaven without a fight, disgusted him and, if truth be told, disturbed him
more than he could admit.

The sun's gold was darkening to dross, and Achmed was thinking about rolling
himself in his blanket and losing himself in sleep when one of Qannadi's
servants appeared and told him that all officers were ordered into the Amir's
presence. Hurrying through the city streets, Achmed saw no signs of rising
rebellion or any other threat, and he wondered what this was about. Perhaps
nothing more than joining the Amir for a victory dinner. Achmed's heart sank.
There was no way he could excuse himself, yet he didn't feel up to
celebrating. The servant did not lead him to the Governor's Palace, however,
but to an unexpected place—a large temple-like structure located in the center
of a plaza.
A broken statue of Uevin lay on the paving stones. North of the plaza stood
the columned building that was—Achmed realized from his talks with Qannadi—the
seatJof Medan government known as the Senate. Standing on top of the smashed
remains of the God Uevin was a huge golden ram's head that had been carted
from Kich for precisely this purpose. (When, days later, the Amir's troops
moved on southward, the golden ram's head would be reloaded into the cart and
hauled off to do similar service in future conquered cities.)
' The plaza
was crowded with Medans, talking in low voices. On its outer perimeter, the
Amir's elite household guards stood stern-faced and implacable, the tips of
their spears gleaming in the sun's afterglow. The crowd kept its distance from
the soldiers, Achmed noticed. Taking advantage of this path that had formed
between the people and the guards, the young man followed the servant to the
steps leading up to a marble-columned portico.
A throne from the Governor's Palace had been carried
here by the Amir's servants and stood before the Senate's entryway. Qannadi
sat on the throne, looking out onto the crowd gathered before him. He had
changed from his battle armor into a white caftan, cloaked with a purple,
gold-trimmed robe. His head was bare, except for a crown of laurel leaves,
worn because of some silly custom of the Medans. It was already dark within
the confines of die Senate porch. Torch-bearers stood on either side of
Qannadi, but they had, for some reason, not yet been given the order to light
their brands. Looking intently at the Amir's face as he ascended the stairs,
Achmed saw the firm set of the jaw, the shadows carved in the face, making
Qannadi appear grim and unyielding in the fading light.
Next to Qannadi stood Feisal. No torchlight needed for him, the fire in the
priest's eyes seemed to light the plaza long after the sun's glow had faded.
Hoping to lose himself in the gathering gloom, Achmed took his place at the
end of the line of officers who stood pressed against the Senate wall behind
the Amir's throne. The young man wondered briefly how his absence had been
noticed, when suddenly he felt the fiery gaze of the Imam sear his flesh.
Feisal had been waiting for him! The priest raised his thin hand and beckoned
for Achmed to approach.
Startled and unnerved, Achmed hesitated, looking to Qannadi. The Amir glanced
at him from the corner of his eye and nodded slightly. Swallowing a knot in
his throat, Achmed edged his way in front of his fellow officers, who stared
straight out over the heads of the crowd. Why should I be afraid? he scolded
himself, irritated at his clammy palms and the twisting sensation in his
bowels. Perhaps it was the unusual silence of the people, who stood quietly as
darkness washed slowly over them. Perhaps it was the unusually rigid stance
and serious mien of the officers and guards. Perhaps it was the sight of
Qannadi. Drawing closer, Achmed saw that the firmness of the man's jaw was
being maintained by a strong effort of will, the merciless face beneath the
leafy crown was the face of a man Achmed didn't know.
Feisal, though he had sent for the young man, took no further notice of him.
"Stand here," the Amir ordered coldly, and Achmed did as he was commanded,
taking his place at Qannadi's right hand.
"Light the torches," was Qannadi's next order, and the
208
WEIS AND HICKMAN
THE PALADIN OF THE NIGHT

209
brands being held behind him sputtered into flame, as did other torches
carried by those in the crowd in the plaza. "Bring forth the prisoners. You,
guards, clear a space there." He gestured at the foot of the steps. Hie guards
used the hafts of their spears to push back the Medans, forming an empty,
circular area at the base of the Senate stairs. Facing the Medans, spears held
horizontally before them, the guards kept the milling crowd at bay.
Achmed breathed easier. He'd heard it rumored that the Governor had been
captured by the men-at-arms of those Medan Senators who had been in the Amir's
pay. The wretched politician, bound hand and foot, was dragged forth, as were
several other Senators and ministers who had remained loyal to their thankless
citizens.
That this was to be a trial and execution, Achmed now recognized. He could
view the deaths of these men with equanimity. In their gamble for power, the
dice had turned against them. But they iiad lived well off the winnings up
until this time; this was the chance they took when they first began to play
the game. He found it difficult, therefore, to understand the unusual grimness
of the Amir.
Perhaps he sees himself, standing there in chains, came the sudden,
disquieting thought. No, that's impossible. Qannadi would never have run. He
would have fought, even though he had been one against a thousand. What then?
More prisoners were being led by the guards into the doomed circle. One was a
woman of about fifty,'dressed in white robes, her gray hair worn in a tight
braid around her head. Behind her stumbled four girls, younger than Achmed.
They, too, were dressed in white, their gowns dung to bodies just swelling
with the first buds of womanhood. Their hands were bound behind their backs,
and they stared about with dazed, uncomprehending eyes. Following the four
girls marched a man of rotund girth clad in red robes. From the expression on
his face, he knew what was coming and yet walked with dignity, his back
straight.
The voice of the crowd changed in regard to each prisoner. A guilt-laden
murmur began when the Governor and the Senators were led in, many eyes looking
up or down or anywhere but at the faces of the men for whom most of them had
undoubtedly voted. The murmur changed to a whisper of pity at the sight of die
young girls, and low mutterings of
respect for the large man in red. The mutterings swelled to anger with the
arrival of the last prisoner.
Beardless, with long brown hair, the prisoner was clad in black trousers
tucked into the tops of black leather boots; a black silken shirt with flowing
sleeves, open at the neck; and a crimson red sash around his waist. A curious
device—that of a snake whose body had been cut into three pieces—was
embroidered upon the front of his shirt.
Achmed stared at the snake in fascination. His skin prickled, his thumbs
tingled, and from nowhere the image of Khardan came to him. Why should he
think of his lost brother now, of all times? And why in the presence of this
brown-haired man, who swaggered into the circle, closely followed by two
guards carrying drawn swords. Achmed stared at the man intently, but found no
answer to his question. The man in black started to move to the center of the
circle. One of die guards put his hand on his arm to draw him back. The man
turned on him with a vicious snarl, freeing himself of the guard's hold. The
man in black walked where he was tokl, but of his own free will. He leered at
the crowd, who swallowed their words at his baleful look. Those standing
anywhere near the man fell backward in an attempt to get away from him—guarded
as he was—an attempt that was thwarted by the press of the crowd.
The man looked up at the Amir and suddenly grinned, his white face skull-like
in the light of the flaring torches. The vision of Khardan faded from Achmed's
mind.
"Is this all?" demanded Feisal, the timbre of his voice quivering slightly
with anger. "Where are the underlings for .these two?" He gestured at the
rotund man and the man in black.

The captain of the elite guard stepped forward, hand raised in salute, his
gaze on the Amir. "Have I leave to report, My King?"
"Report," said Qannadi, and Achmed heard weariness and resignation in the
reply.
"All the other priests of Uevin escaped, Highness, due to the cou—" he was
about to say "courage" but a glimpse of Feisal's burning eyes made him change
the word—"efforts of the High Priest." He gestured with a thumb toward the
rotund man in red, who smiled serenely. "He held the doors with his own body,
my lord. It took a battering ram to break
210
WEIS AND HICKMAN
them down, and due to the delay, the remainder of Uevin's priests escaped. We
have no idea where they've gone."
"Secret passages underground," Qannadi growled.
"We searched, My Lord, but found none. That is not to say that they couldn't
exist. The Temple of Uevin is filled with strange and unholy machines."
"Keep looking," Qannadi said. "And what about this one?" His gaze turned to
the man in black, who stared boldly back.
"A follower of the god, Zhakrin, my lord," the captain said in a low voice.
Qannadi frowned; his face grew, if possible, grimmer. Feisal sucked in a
hissing breath.
"That God of Evil no longer has power in the world," the Imam said, speaking
to the man in black. The thin hand clenched. "You have been deceived!"
"It is not we who have been deceived, but you!" The man in black sneered.
Taking a step forward, before the guard could stop him, he spit at the Imam's
face. The crowd gasped. The guard smote the bound man on the side of the head
with the butt-end of the spear, knocking him to the ground. Feisal remained
unmoving; the fire in his eyes burned brighter.
Slowly the brown-haired man regained his feet. Blood streamed down the side of
his face, but his grin was as wide as ever.
"We found the rest of the scum in the temple dead, My Lord," the Captain
reported. "They died by their own hands. This one"—he gestured at the man in
black—"apparently lacked the courage to kill himself. The coward put up no
resistance."
The follower of Zhakrin did not note or even seem to hear the condemnation.
His eyes were focused now on Feisal, never leaving the priest.
"Very well," Qannadi said in disgust. "Are you satisfied, Imam?"
"I suppose I must be," said Feisal sourly.
Qannadi rose to his feet, facing the crowd that hushed to hear his words.
"Citizens of Meda, there stand before you those who refuse to accept the
blessings of Quar, who spurn the mercy of the Cod. Lest their unbelief spread
like a poison through the now healthy body of your city, we take it upon
ourselves to remove die poison before it can do you further harm."
One of the young girls cried out at this, a piercing wail that was cut off by
one of the guards clapping his hand over
THE PALADIN OF THE NIGHT
211
her mouth. Achmed's throat went dry, blood throbbed in his ears so that he
heard the Amir's words as though through a hood of sheep's wool.
"It shall be done this night, before you all, that you may see Quar's mercy
and His judgment. He is not a God of vengeance. Their deaths shall be
quick"—the Amir's stern gaze went to the man in black—"even though some may
not deserve such a fate. The bodies may be claimed by their relatives and
buried in accordance with the teachings of Quar. Imam, have you words to add?"
The priest walked down the stairs to stand on the lowest step in front of the
prisoners. "Are there any who would now convert to Quar?"
"I will!" cried a Senator. Flinging himself forward, the politician fell at
the Imam's knees and began to kiss the hem of his robe. "I place myself and
all my wealth into the hands of the God!"
Qannadi's mouth twisted; he regarded the wretched man with repugnance and made

a motion with his hand for the Captain of the guard to come near. The Captain
did so, silently drawing his sword from its sheath.
Feisal bent down, laying his hands upon the Senator's balding head. "Quar
hears your prayer, my son, and grants you peace."
The Senator looked up, his face shining.
"Praise to Quar!" he shouted, a shout that ended in a shocked cry. The
Captain's sword stabbed him to the heart. Staring at the Imam in amazement,
the Senator pitched forward onto his stomach, dead.
"May Quar receive you with all blessing," the Imam said in a soft voice over
the body.
"Carry on," ordered Qannadi harshly.
The guards surrounding the prisoners drew their swords. The rotund priest fell
to his knees, praying to Uevin in a firm voice that ended only with his life.
The Governor left the world in bitter silence, casting a scathing glance at
those who had betrayed him. The priestess, too, met her end with dignity. But
one of the young virgins—seeing the priestess fall lifeless, the bloody sword
yanked from the body—twisted free of her guard and ran in panic-stricken
terror to the stairs.
"Mercy!" she cried. "Mercy!" Slipping and falling, she looked up directly at
Achmed, extending her hands plead-
212
WEIS AND HICKMAN
ingly. "You are young, as ! am! Don't let them kill me, Lord!" she begged him.
"Please! Don't let them!"
Blonde hair curled about a pretty, terrified face. Fear made her eyes wild and
staring. Achmed could not move or look away but regarded the girl with pity
and dismay.
Hearing the guard's footsteps coming up behind her, too weakened by fear to
stand, the girl tried pathetically to crawl up the stairs, her hands stretched
out to Achmed,
"Help me, Lord!" she cried frenziedly.
Achmed took a step forward, then felt Qannadi's hand close over his forearm
with a crushing grip.
Achmed halted. He saw the hope that had dawned bright in the girl's eyes
darken to despair. The guard struck quickly, mercifully cutting short the
girl's last moment of terror. The body sagged, blood poured down the stairs,
the hand reaching out to Achmed went limp.
Hie torchlights blurred in Achmed's vision. Dizzy and sick, he started to turn
from the gruesome sight.
"Courage!" said the Amir in a low voice.
Achmed lifted glazed eyes. "Is it courage to butcher the innocent?" he asked
hoarsely.
"It is courage, to do your duty as a soldier," Qannadi answered in a fierce,
barely audible whisper, not looking at Achmed but staring straight ahead
impassively. "Not only to yourself but to them." He cast a swift glance around
the crowd. "Better these few than the entire city!"
Achmed stared at him. "The city?"
"Meda was lucky," the Amir said in flat, even tones. "Feisal chose it to set
an example. There will be others, in the future, not so fortunate. This is
ji/wd, a holy war. Those who fight us must die. So Quar has commanded."
"But surely He didn't mean women, children—"
Qannadi turned to look at him. "Come to your senses, boy!" he said angrily.
"Why do you think he brought you here?" He did not look at Feisal, still
standing at the bottom of the stairs, or motion toward him, but Achmed knew
whom the Amir meant.
"My people!" Achmed breathed.
Nodding once, briefly, Qannadi removed his hand from the young man's arm and
slowly and tiredly resumed his seat upon the throne.
His mind engulfed by the horror of what he had witnessed and the implication
of what he'd just heard, Achmed

THE PALADIN OF THE NIGHT
213
stared blindly at the carnage when hoarse, triumphant laughter jolted him from
his dark dream.
"The curse of Zhakrin upon the hand that kills Catalus!" cried the man in
black.
He stood in the center of what had become a ring of bodies lying in the plaza.
In his hand he held a dagger. Its blade, gleaming in the torchlight, twisted
like the body of the snake on his shirt. So commanding was he and so forceful
his presence that the guards of the Amir fell back from him, looking
uncertainly at their Captain, all clearly loathe to strike him.
"I did not lack courage to die with my fellows!" cried the man, the dagger
held level with his red sash, one hand extended to keep off the guards. "I,
Catalus, chose to die here, to die now, for a reason."
Both hands grasped the dagger's hilt and plunged the weapon into his bowels.
Grimacing in pain, yet forbearing to cry out, he drew the weapon across his
gut in a slashing motion. Blood and entrails splashed out upon the stones at
his feet. Sinking to his knees, he stared up at Feisal with that same ghastly
grin on his face. The dagger slid from Catalus's grasp. Dipping his hands in
his own blood, he lurched forward. His crimson fingers closed on Feisal's
robes.
"The curse of Zhakrin ... on you!" Catalus gasped, and with a dreadful
gurgling sound that might have been laughter, he died.
Book Seven
THE BOOK OF ASTAFAS
Chapter 1
The imp materialized within the darkness. It could see nothing, and the only
part of the imp that could be seen were its bright red eyes and the occasional
flick across the lips of an orange-red tongue.
"Your report astonishes me," said the darkness.
The imp was pleased at this and rubbed its long, skinny hands together in
satisfaction. It could not see the speaker, not because the darkness hid the
voice's source but because the darkness was the voice's source. The words
reverberated around the imp as though spoken from a mouth somewhere beneath
its feet, and the imp often had the impression, when summoned to appear before
its God, that it was standing inside the brain of Astafas. It could sense the
workings of the brain, and the imp occasionally wondered if it could grab a
flash of intelligence as it whizzed past.
In order to prevent itself from touching that which was sacrosanct, the imp
continued rubbing its hands, twining the large-knuckled fingers together in
eager excitement.
"I begin to think the Wandering God was right after all," continued Astafas.
"Quar played us all for fools. He intends to become the One, True God. The
rival Gods of Sardish Jardan are falling to His might. I would not care so
much, except that now His mask is off and I see His eyes turning to gaze
greedily across the ocean."
The voice sank to the darkness and was silent. The imp
217
218
WEIS AND HICKMAN
THE PALADIN OF THE NIGHT
219
felt a tingling sensation in its feet—the Cod was thinking, musing. Fidgeting,
the imp bit off a squeal.
"To think," muttered Astafas, "if it hadn't been for those wretched priests of
my ancient foe, Promenthas, getting themselves involved, I might not have
discovered Quar's intentions until it was too late. Strange are the ways of
Sul."
The imp agreed heartily with this, but said nothing, thinking it best not to
reveal that it had ever doubted its master. A sudden jolt in the vicinity of

its arm sent the imp skittering across the darkness, its skin burning with the
shock of the God's sudden anger.
"My immortals, too, have been disappearing! And, by your account, they are
being held captive somewhere?"
"This is the reason the guardian angel, Asrial"—the imp spoke the name
gingerly, as though it stung its tongue—"left her protege1, Dark Master. One
of the fish of which I spoke in my report sent her, along with the two
immortals of the Wandering God, to search for them."
"A guardian angel of Promenthas leaving her charge. I do not believe I have
ever heard of such a thing." If Astafas had been Promenthas—instead of that
God's evil opposite—he could not have been more shocked. "The natural order is
Billing apartl"
"Still," suggested the imp, nursing a singed elbow, "it does provide us with
an opportunity. ..."
"Yes," agreed the God thoughtfully. "But would it be worthwhile to gain one
soul and lose thousands?"
The imp seemed to think it would—by the flicking of its hungry tongue across
its lips.
The brain of the God hummed and buzzed around the imp. Its red eyes darted
here and there nervously. It lifted up one foot and then the other, hopping
back and forth in anticipation of some paralyzing shock. It still wasn't
prepared for it, and when it came, the imp was knocked flat on its face.
"There is a way we can have both," said Astafas. "You are certain you know the
young man's plans?"
"I see into his mind." The imp lifted its head, peering eagerly into the
darkness, its red eyes shining like hot coals. "I read his thoughts."
"If he does what you anticipate, you will go along with him."
"I will?" The imp was pained. "I can't snatch him for you, then and there?"
"No. I need more information. I have an idea, you see, about these fish he
carries. Humor the young man. He will not escape," said Astafas soothingly.
"He will simply wind himself tighter and tighter in our coils."
"Yes, Dark Master." The imp did not sound overly enthusiastic. Scrambling to
its splay-toed feet, it dejectedly asked if it was dismissed.
"Yes. Oh, one other thing—"
The darkness began to disappear; the imp had the uncomfortable sensation of
falling.
"Dark Master?" it questioned.
"Do what you can to protect him."
"Protect him?" the imp wailed.
"For the time being," said the fading darkness.
THE PALADIN OF THE NIGHT
221
Chapter 2
The ghuls piloted their storm-driven ship through the murky waters of the
Kurdin Sea. Whether the power of Sul kept the vessel afloat or the power of
the evil God in whose service the ghuls sailed, Mathew had little idea. Fierce
gusts ripped the sails into tattered black shreds that streamed from the
yardarms like the banners of a nightmarish army. The rigging snapped and
slithered to the deck, twisting and writhing like snakes. None except the
ghuls and the Black Paladin, Auda ibn Jad, could stand on the pitching deck,
swept constantly by battering waves. Kiber and his men huddled aft, crouched
beneath whatever meager shelter they could find from the wind and wet. The
faces of the gowns were pale and strained; many were sick and they obviously
liked this voyage as little as their captives.
Auda ibn Jad stood beside the wheel, staring intently ahead as though he could
pierce the storm clouds and catch a glimpse of his destination. Where that
destination was or what it might hold, Mathew had long ago ceased to care.
In his sickness, crazed thoughts came to his horror-numbed brain. The ghuls
began to fascinate him; he could not take his eyes off" tbe men who were not
men but creatures of Sul held in thrall by the power of Zhakrin. The idea of

leaping up and hurling himself into the arms of one of the ghuls came to his
mind and the thought, in his weakness and terror, was a pleasant one. With the
warm-blooded human in its grasp, the
220
ghul would certainly kill him. Not even Auda ibn Jad—who was just barely
holding them in check now—could prevent that. The ghuls suddenly became
creatures filled with light, almost angelic in aspect. Benevolent, handsome,
strong, they offered him escape, a way out.
"Come to me," the ghul seemed to whisper every rime one looked his way. "Come
to me and I will release you from this torment."
Mathew imagined the hands gripping him tightly, the teeth sinking into his
flesh, the sharp, burning pain, and the swift fear that would soon mercifully
end as the blood drained from his body, bringing blissful lethargy and,
finally, welcome darkness.
"Come to me. ..."
He had only to move, to stand, to run forward. It would all be over—the fear,
the guilt.
"Come to me. ..."
He had just to move. . . .
"Mat-hew!"
A thick, pain-filled call, heard over the terrible whispers, roused him.
Reluctantly, he wrenched his mind from dreams of death and returned to the
world of the living.
"Mat-hew!" Panic tinged the voice. Zohra could not see him, he realized. Her
view was blocked by one of the heavy ivory jars. Slowly he made his way to
her, crawling on hands and knees over the heaving deck.
At the sight of him, Zohra half raised, clutching at him desperately.
"Lie back down," he urged her, pressing her body gently .back onto the deck.
But she sat up again, her eyes blinking against the pain that must be making
her head throb. "Mat-hew, what i& happening!" she demanded angrily.
Mathew sighed inwardly. First she acts, then she questions. Just like Khardan.
Just like these nomads. Whenever anything out of the ordinary confronts you,
don't think about it, don't try to understand it. Attack it. Kill it, and it
will go away and not bother you anymore. If that doesn't work, perhaps
ignoring it will. And if that doesn't work, then you cry and mope like a
spoiled child. . . .
Mathew cast a bitter glance at Khardan. Lashed to the mast, the Calif sagged
in his bindings, his head bowed. Occasionally a groan escaped his lips when
the sickness took
222
WEIS AND HICKMAN
THE PALADIN OF THE NIGHT
213
hold of him, but other than that—not a word. He has lost a battle and so
considers that he has lost the war, Mathew thought, anger stirring in him
again (completely ignoring that only moments before he himself had been
courting death).
"Mat-hew!" Zohra tugged on his soaking-wet clothes. "Where are they taking
us?" She looked fearfully about at the ship. "Why does that man want us?"
Mathew nudged his brain to function. Zohra had been unconscious when they
brought her on board. She probably didn't even remember the ghuls attacking
and devouring the helpless slaves. How could he hope to explain what he didn't
understand himself?
"It's all ... my fault," he said at last, or rather croaked, his throat sore
from swallowing sea water and vomiting. Another wave of nausea swept over him,
and he slumped down weakly beside Zohra, wondering, as he did so, why she
wasn't deathly ill like the rest of them.
"Your fault!" Zohra frowned. Leaning over him, her wet black hair slapping
against his face, she grabbed two handfuls of the wet silk of his caftan and
shook him. "Get up! Don't lie there! If this is your fault, then you must do

something!"
Closing his eyes, Mathew turned his head and did something.
He was sick.
Mathew lost all concept of time. It seemed they sailed forever before the
storm winds began to abate and the black, lowering clouds that hung over the
masts began to lift. Had he looked into a mirror at that moment and seen that
his skin was wrinkled and aged, his eyes dim, his body bent, his hair white,
he wouldn't have been much surprised. Eighty years might have passed on board
that dreadful ship.
Eighty years . . . eighty seconds.
From his prone position on the deck, Mathew heard Auda ibn Jad's voice raised
in command. He heard the sound of boots hitting wood and a few suppressed
groans—the gaums staggering to their feet.
Kiber's face—pale and green—loomed above him, the gown leader shouting
something that Mathew could not hear over the crashing of the sea. Suddenly
the young wizard wished the voyage would go on, that it would never end. The
memory of his idea returned to him. He did not welcome it and wished heartily
that the thought had never occurred to
him. It was stupid, it was foolhardy. It was risking his life in what was
undoubtedly a futile gesture. He had no notion of where his actions might lead
him because he had no notion of where he was or what was going to happen to
him. Conceivably, he could make matters worse.
No, he would not be like Khardan and Zohra. He would not leap forward in the
darkness and grapple with the unknown. He would do what he had always done. He
would let tilings take their course. He would ride the current in his frail
craft and hope to survive. He would do nothing that might risk falling into
the dark water where he would surely drown.
Kiber jerked him roughly to his feet. The motion of the ship, although not as
violent, was still erratic, and sent Mathew stumbling back against the
baggage. He caught himself and stood clinging to a large rattan basket. Kiber
glanced at him, saw that for the moment he was standing, and turned to Zohra.
Seeing the goum approaching her, she repelled him with a flashing-eyed look
and stood up on her own, backing out of the man's reach as far as she could
before being brought up by several of the huge ivory jars.
Reaching out, Kiber grabbed hold of her arm.
Zohra struck the goum across the face.
Auda ibn Jad shouted again, sounding impatient.
Grim and tense, the red marks of the woman's hand showing clearly against his
livid skin, Kiber caught hold of Zohra again, this time wrenching her wrist
and twisting her arm behind her back.
"Why can't you be a woman like Blossom?" Kiber muttered, taking hold of
Mathew, as well, and dragging him forward. "Instead of a wild cat!"
Zohra's eyes met Mathew's. A woman like you! Her contempt seared him. Despite
that, his resolve was not shaken. He caught a glimpse of Khardan. The man
didn't have strength enough left in his body to crush an ant beneath his heel,
yet he had apparently roused himself from his stupor and was struggling feebly
with the goum* freeing him from his bonds. For what? Nothing but pride. Even
if he did manage to overpower them, where could he go? Leap off the ship?
Throw himself into the arms of the ghuls, who now watched the fight with
intense, hungry interest.
That's what this plan of yours is—a feeble struggle against
224
WEIS AND HICKMAN
THE PALADIN OF THE NIGHT
225
overwhelming odds. And that's why it's forgotten, Mathew told himself, looking
away from both Zohra and Khardan. His fingers brushed against the pouch that
contained the magical objects, and he snatched his hand away as though it had
burned him. He would have to get rid of them and quickly. They were a danger
to him now. He cursed himself for having picked them up.

Fumbling at his belt, Mathew pulled out the pouch and instantly crumpled it in
his hand, pressing it against his waist, concealing it in the folds of his wet
clothes. He darted a furtive look from beneath his lowered eyelids, hoping to
be able to drop the pouch to the deck without anyone noticing. Unfortunately,
Auda ibn Jad turned from looking out over the sea, his snake-eyed gaze resting
upon Mathew and Zohra and the grim-faced Kiber behind them.
'Trouble, Captain?" ibn Jad asked, noting with amusement Kiber's bruised
cheek.
Kiber answered something; Mathew didn't know what. He froze beneath the
piercing gaze. Panicked, he doubled over, digging the hand with the pouch into
his stomach, hoping to seem to be still sick, although in reality his nausea
was passing, either because the motion of the ship was settling down or his
fear and worry had driven it from his mind.
Ibn Jad's gaze flicked over him, to rest more steadily at Zohra. There was
neither lust nor desire in the man's dark eyes. He was regarding her with the
same cool appraisal a man might regard a dog he was considering acquiring.
When he spoke, his words were the embodiment of Mathew's thought, causing the
young wizard to start guiltily, wondering if the Black Paladin had the power
to read minds.
"The bitch will produce strong whelps," said ibn Jad in satisfaction. "Fine
new followers for our God."
"Bitch!" Zohra's eyes flared.
Breaking free of die weakened Kiber, she hurled herself at ibn Jad. Kiber
jumped after her and wrestled her back before she reached the Black
Paladin—whose amusement seemed to grow. Auda made a sound in his throat that
might have been a chuckle but caused Mathew to go cold all over. Obviously out
of patience and in an ill humor, Kiber handed Zohra over to a couple of his
men with orders to tie her hands and hobble her feet.
Ibn Jad's eyes were again on Mathew, and the young wizard cowered beneath
their gaze, realizing too late that he
could have dropped the pouch during the altercation and wondering, briefly,
why he hadn't.
Ibn Jad ran his slender hand over Mathew's smooth cheek.
"A jackal, that one, compared to our fragile and delicate Blossom here who
trembles beneath my fingers."
Mathew cringed and gritted his teeth, forcing himself to submit to the man's
odious touch, slightly turning his body to keep the pouch in his hand
concealed. He was vaguely aware of activity stirring around them, of the
rumbling of a heavy chain, a splash, and the ship swinging slowly at anchor.
Brutal enslavement—Jhis was to be Zohra's fate and his, too, undoubtedly,
until ibn Jad discovered he had been deceived, that Mathew would never bear
this Cod, Zhakrin, worshipers. It was happening all over, he realized in
despair— the terrible waiting, the dread anticipation, the fear, the
humiliation, and then the punishment. And there would be no one to save him
this time. . . .
"These women . . . are my wives!" said a slurred voice. "You will die before
you touch them!"
Mathew looked at Khardan and then averted his face, tears stinging his
eyelids.
The Calif stood before ibn Jad. The bindings had cut deeply into the nomad's
arms, fresh blood streamed from a gash on his swollen lip. The sickly pallor
of his complexion was accentuated by the blue-blackness of his unkept beard.
His eyes were sunken, encircled by shadows. He walked unsteadily; it took two
goums to hold him upright. At a nod from ibn Jad, they let go. Khardan's knees
buckled. He pitched forward, falling at the feet of the Black Paladin.
"A bold speech from a man on his knees, a man we found hiding from the
soldiers of the Amir in a dress," said Auda ibn Jad coolly. "I begin to think
I made a mistake with this one, Kiber, He is not fit for the honor I intended
to bestow upon him. We will leave him to the ghuls. . . ."
Damn you, Khardan! Mathew cursed the Calif silently, bitterly. Why did you

have to do that? Jeopardize your life for two people you detest—a woman who
brought you to shame and a man who is shame personified. Why do this? Honor!
Your stupid honor! And now they will rend your flesh, murder you before my
eyes!
Putting his booted foot on Khardan's shoulder, ibn Jad gave the man a shove,
and the Calif went over backward, landing heavily on the deck.
226
WEIS AND HICKMAN
THE PALADIN OF THE NIGHT
227
Mathew heard the splash of oars in the water. Small boats had set sail from
land and were drawing near the ship. Hie ghuls, their ship at anchor, their
task finished, were gathering around Khardan, eyes shining with an eager,
eerie light. The Calif tried to rise, but Kiber kicked him in the face,
knocking him back onto the deck. The ghuls drew nearer, their aspect beginning
to undergo the hideous change from man to demon. Seeing them, Khardan shook
his head to clear it and started to struggle once more to stand.
Stop it! Mathew cried in silent agony, fists clenching. Stop fighting! Let it
end!
Auda ibn Jad was pointing toward the boats, issuing orders. Kiber, turning to
obey, drove the toe of his boot deep into Khardan's gut. With a gasp of agony,
the Calif sank back onto the deck and did not rise again.
The ghuls closed in, their teeth lengthening into fangs, their nails into
talons.
"Bring the women," said ibn Jad, and Kiber motioned to the goums holding
Zohra. She stared at the ghuls in dazed disbelief and horror, seeming not to
comprehend what was happening. The goums dragged her forward to where the
boats were pulling up beneath the ship's hull. She twisted around, straining
to watch Khardan, who was pressing his body flat against the deck as though he
might escape by crawling into the wood. Bending over him, their breath hot
upon his skin, the ghuls began to howl, and Khardan's arms twitched, his hands
clenched spasmodically. Then taloned fingers stabbed deep into his flesh, and
the Calif screamed.
Mathew's hand was inside the pouch; he never remembered how. His fingers
closed over the cold wand of obsidian. He had no clear conscious thought of
what he was doing, and when he drew forth the wand, the hand holding it seemed
to belong to someone else, the voice that spoke the words was the voice of a
stranger.
"Creatures of Sul," he cried, pointing the wand at the ghuls, "in the name of
Astafas, Prince of Darkness, I command you to withdraw!"
The world went completely black. During the breadth of a heartbeat, night
engulfed those standing on the ship. Light returned in the blink of an eye.
A skinny, shriveled creature with skin the color of coal stood spraddle-legged
over Khardan. Its eyes were red fire,
its tongue flickering flame. Raising a splay-fingered hand, it pointed at the
ghuls.
"Heard you not my master?" the imp hissed. "Be gone, lest he call upon Sul to
cast you in the fiery depths where you will never more taste sweet flesh or
drink hot blood."
The ghuls halted, some with their talons digging into Khardan's flesh, others
with their teeth just inches from his body. They stared at the imp balefully.
The imp stared back, its red eyes burning fiercely.
"Always hungry, always thirsting ..."
One by one, the ghuls released their hold upon Khardan. Slowly—eyes on the
imp—they moved away from the Calif, their aspect shifting from demon to man.
Its tongue flicking in and out of its mouth in pleasure, the imp turned to
Mathew and bowed.
"Will there be anything more, My Dark Master?"
THE PALADIN OF THE NIGHT
229

Chapter 3
Mathew very nearly dropped the wand.
Of all the astonished people on the ship, the young wizard was the most
astounded of all.
Feeling the wand start to slip from his shaking fingers, Mathew caught hold of
it with a spasmodic jerk of his hand, reacting more out of instinct than
conscious thought. To drop a wand during a spell casting was considered a
grievous and dangerous error on the part of any wizard. Almost every nervous
young student did it once, and Mathew could hear the voice of the Archmagus
dinning furiously in his ears. The young wizard's training saved him. 'He
gained additional strength from the sudden frightening realization that if the
spell was broken, he was in far more danger than if all the ghuls in the
nether plane had ringed themselves round him.
An instant before the imp bowed, Mathew saw clearly in the creature's eyes the
burning desire to lay claim to his immortal soul. Then it would be Mathew who
was forever hi servitude to a Dark Master—Astafas, Prince of Darkness. Why
didn't the imp snatch him up? Mathew had put himself in forfeit by speaking
the name of Astafas. Why was the creature obeying him? Only the most powerful
of the wizard's Order could summon and control immortals such as the imp.
The wand might have such powers, but Mathew doubted it. Meryem was a skilled
sorceress, but not even she could have attained the high rank necessary to
enable her to make a
228
Wand of Summoning. If she had possessed this kind of arcane power, she would
not have needed to resort to anything as clumsy as murder. No, some strange
and mystifying force was at work here.
Too late, Mathew regained control of his features. He had been staring blankly
at the imp as these confused thoughts tumbled through his mind, and he hoped
no one had noticed.
His hope was a vain one. Auda ibn Jad's cool composure had been disturbed by
the appearance of the imp, still more by its referring to the beautiiul
red-haired young woman as Dark Master. Ibn Jad was quick to note Mathew's
unnerved appearance, however, and—though the Black Paladin did not know what
it portended as yet—he filed it away in memory for later consideration.
Mathew knew he had to act, and he tried desperately to think what was the next
logical order a powerful, evil wizard might be likely to issue.
The command that was in his heart was to have the imp carry him, Khardan, and
Zohra off this horror-filled ship, as far away from Auda ibn Jad as the
creature could manage. But just as this thought traveled from heart to mind,
the imp raised its head and looked at Mathew. Its red eyes flared fire, its
mouth parted in a wicked grin, the tongue licked dry, cracked lips.
Mathew shuddered and banished the thought. The imp could read his mind,
obviously. And while undoubtedly it would obey his command, Mathew knew
exactly where the imp would take them—a place of eternal darkness whose Demon
Prince made Auda ibn Jad seem saintly in comparison.
"Dark Master?" the imp prompted, rubbing its skinny hands together.
"I need you no more," Mathew said at last, a quaver spoiling the authoritative
note he tried to instill in his voice. "Be gone until I call for you again."
Was this how one spoke to summoned creatures? Mathew couldn't remember; he'd
had only the most cursory studies in Black Magic and the only object it
accomplished was to fix in the minds of White Wizards that dabbling in this
art would invariably lead to disaster. Mathew had the uncomfortable feeling,
however, that no matter what he said, the imp would deal with the situation.
"I obey, My Dark Master," said the imp, and disappeared with a heart-stopping
bang.
230
WEIS AND HICKMAN
THE PALADIN OF THE NIGHT
231
No one moved. Now that the imp was gone, all eyes turned to Mathew.

He had to keep going, keep performing. He gave them all what he hoped was a
cold, threatening stare and made his way across the deck to Khardan. Raising
the wand, he fixed his gaze upon the ghuls, and was relieved to see them step
back respectfully at his approach.
Mathew knelt down beside Khardan. Wounded, shaken by the nearness he had come
to a tortured death, the Calif barely had the strength to raise his head.
Putting his arm around the man's shoulders, Mathew lifted him to a sitting
position on the deck.
"Are you all right?" he asked in a low voice.
Khardan's teeth chattered, his lips were blue. "The scratches!" he gasped.
"Burn . - . like . . . cold fire."
Mathew examined the places on his arms and torso where the ghuls had driven
their talons into the flesh. The long tears in the skin were swollen and
colored a bluish white. There was no blood visible, although the cuts were
deep. Leaning against Mathew, Khardan shook as with a chill. He was in such
agony that he seemed to have only the vaguest idea what had happened.
"The ghuls' poison has entered his blood. He is too ill to walk. Some of you
carry him-ashore." Looking up as he issued the command, Mathew's eyes met the
eyes of Auda ibn Jad. He saw nothing in the black, reptilian flatness to give
him a clue as to what the Black Paladin was thinking. If Auda challenged him,
Mathew had no idea what he would do. Certainly not summon the imp again, if he
could help it!
For long moments, the two stared at each other; die ship, the goums, the
ghuls, the boats arriving beneath the ship's hull, voices shouting hails to
the deck—all vanished from the mind of each man as he strove to see deep into
the heart of the other.
Mathew came away with nothing. What Auda ibn Jad came away with—if
anything—remained locked deep inside him.
"Kiber," said ibn Jad, "take three of your men and place the Calif in the
bosun's chair, then lower him into the boats. Gently, Kiber, gently."
Kiber called out three goums, who left their duties tying the baggage that had
been brought on board in huge nets to be swung out over the side and deposited
in the waiting
boats. Hurrying forward—with sidelong, distrustful glances at Mathew—the goums
lifted Khardan by his knees and his arms and hauled him awkwardly over to the
ship's rail.
Rising to his feet, Mathew followed them, thankful that the folds of the
caftan hid the-trembling of his legs and hoping he did not disgrace himself by
collapsing in a heap upon the deck. He still clutched the wand in his hand and
thought it best to keep it visible. So tightly were his fingers wrapped around
it, he wasn't at all certain he could let loose of the thing.
"Approach me, Blossom," said Auda ibn Jad. "The rest of you"—he gestured at
the goums—"continue your work. It is almost nightfall and we must be off this
ship by then. Take her"—he indicated Zohra—"and put her in the same boat with
her husband."
Mathew glanced at Zohra apprehensively; there was no telling what she might
say, perhaps blurt out that the wand wasn't his at all or that he had told her
the God he followed was called Promenthas not Astafas. Zohra said nothing,
however; simply stared at him in wide-eyed astonishment. He managed to smile
at her in what he hoped was reassurance, but she was apparently so completely
shocked by what had happened that she couldn't respond. Zohra allowed her
captors to lead her away, looking as though she were in a waking dream.
Sighing, Mathew came to stand before Auda ibn Jad, the two of them were alone
in the center of the deck.
"Well, Blossom, it seems your face and lithe body and the sorcerer's robes you
wore when I first saw you fooled me. It was not a woman I took into my slave
caravan but a man. Of course, you thought I would kill you, and so you let me
remain deceived. You might have been right, but then again, I am not so sure I
would have had you murdered as I did the others. There are those who fancy a
pretty boy above a pretty girl and who are just as willing to pay good money

for such in the slave market. You might have spared yourself much humiliation
and me much trouble had you told me the truth. Still, the water spilled into
the sand cannot be drunk, and there is no going back. I think you should give
me the fish, now, Blossom."
All this was spoken in cool, calm tones, even the last. But Mathew felt the
steel-edged menace prick him sharply. Taking a moment to gather his thoughts
and to grasp hold of his
232
WEIS AND HICKMAN
courage with the same desperate grip by which he held the wand, Mathew shook
his head.
"No," he replied softly. "I will not do that. I know something of magic, as
you have seen. You called me the Bearer and one so designated cannot be parted
from that which he bears by any force in this world."
"I can kill you and take it from your corpse," said the Black Paladin with an
easy, impersonal casualness that made Mathew blench.
"Yes," he answered, "you could kill me. But you won't, at least not until you
know how much I know and—more importantly—how much my God"—the word came with
difficulty—"knows."
"Astafas, our brother God in Evil." Auda ibn Jad nodded slowly, reflectively.
"Yes, I must admit I am curious to know more about the Prince of Darkness. In
fact, I am pleased at the opportunity for contact with our Brother. I will not
sacrifice you in order to take the fish—not yet at least. There will come a
time, Blossom—you don't mind me calling you this? I find I have grown
accustomed to it—when your usefulness will be at an end, and then I will not
hesitate to destroy you in a most unpleasant manner."
"I understand," said Mathew wearily. "You can do with me what you
will—provided Astafas allows it—but I"—the young wizard drew a deep breath—"I
insist that you let my friends go."
Auda ibn Jad smiled—so might a snake smile. Reaching out with his slender
hand, he took hold of a strand of Mathew's wet red hair and drew it slowly and
lingeringly through his fingers. The Black Paladin moved close to Mathew, his
body touching that of the wizard's, his face and eyes filling Mathew's vision.
"I will let your friends go, Blossom," ibn Jad said gently. "Tell me where.
Shall I leave them on this ship? Shall I drop them in the Kurdin Sea? Or
perhaps you would prefer that I wait and set them free on the island of Galos?
The Guardians of our castle find their work tedious sometimes. They would
enjoy a chance for a little sport. ..."
Ibn Jad wrapped the strand of hair rightly about his finger and pulled
Mathew's head so near his own that the wizard could feel the man's breath upon
his cheek. Involuntarily, Mathew closed his eyes. He felt sufibcated, as if
the Black
THE PALADIN OF THE NIGHT
233
Paladin were breathing in all the air and leaving Mathew stranded in a vacuum.
"I was preoccupied, absorbed in keeping the ghuls in thrall. You took me by
surprise, Blossom. You caught me off guard. Few have ever done that, and
therefore I rewarded you by allowing your Calif to live." Ibn Jad gave a sharp
tug on Mathew's hair, bringing tears to the young man's eyes and jerking his
head nearer still. "But never again!" The Black Paladin breathed the words.
"You are good, my dear, but young . . . very young."
Giving Mathew's hair a vicious yank, he sent the wizard sprawling face first
on the deck. The wand flew from Mathew's hand, and he watched in agony as it
slid across the sand-scrubbed wood. He made a desperate lunge for it, but a
black-booted foot stepped on it.
Crouched on his hands and knees, Mathew cowered in chagrin and shame. He could
feel Auda ibn Jad's smile shine upon him like the light of a cold, pale sun.
And then he heard the boot scrape across the deck; the wand rolled toward
Mathew and bumped against his hand.
"My regards to Astafas," said the Black Paladin. "I welcome his servant to the

Isle of Galos."
Chapter 4
The Isle of Galos was the peak of a huge volcano whose smoke-rimmed,
storm-shrouded head reared up out of the murky waters of the Kurdin Sea. Like
a fierce and ancient patriarch who sits motionless in his wheeled chair for
days and at whom relatives glance fearfully and say, "Do you suppose he's
still alive?" the volcano had done nothing in years. But, like the old man,
the volcano lived still and occasionally gave evidence of this by a slight
tremor or a small belch of noxious fumes.
It was here that the few followers of the dead Zhakrin chose to make what
might very well be their final stand against the world and the Heavens. When
it was known— almost twenty years ago—that their God was growing weaker, word
went forth from the Lord of the Black Paladins, and those last remaining
survivors of various purges and jihads and persecutions made their way to this
place that seemed the embodiment of the dark horrors of their religion.
Carried across the Kurdin Sea by their few remaining immortals, the Black
Paladins were left alone on the Isle when those immortals vanished. The
knights' lives were harsh. Their God could no longer help them. They had
nothing on which to live but faith and the code of their strict sect that
bound them with undying loyalty to each other. Their single, unswerving goal
was to bring about their God's return.
None but the members of that strict Order could have
234
THE PALADIN OF THE NIGHT
235
survived the ordeal. Survive they did, however, and—not only that—they began
to thrive and prosper, acquiring—by various means—new members for their Black
Cause. The sorceresses of the Black Paladins were able to capture the ghuls
and, by granting them human flesh in payment, they persuaded Sul's creatures
to work a sailing vessel between the Isle and the mainland. Contact with the
world was reestablished, and once more the Black Paladins went forth— always
in secret—to bring back what was needed.
The knights imported slave labor and began building Castle Zhakrin—a place of
refuge where they could live and a temple for their God when he should return.
Castle Zhakrin was constructed of shining black obsidian, granite, magic,
blood, and bones. Numerous unfortunate slaves either fell to their deaths from
the towering battlements, were crushed beneath huge blocks of stone, or
sacrificed to Zhakrin. The Black Paladins sprinkled the blood of the victims
over the building blocks; their bones were mixed with the mortar. When the
Castle was completed, the remaining slaves were put to death and their
skeletons added to the building's decor. Human skulls grinned above doors,
dismembered hands pointed the way down corridors, leg and foot bones were
imbedded in the walls of winding staircases. -
Riding in the stern of ibn Jad's boat, Mathew gazed in awe at the Isle that he
had been too preoccupied to notice from the ship. A barren, windswept, jagged
cone of rock jutted from the water, soaring up to lose itself in the perpetual
clouds that shrouded the mountain's peak. Nothing grew on the rock's dead,
rough-edged surface. The wind seemed the only living thing on the Isle,
whistling through lips of twisted stone, howling bleakly when it found itself
trapped in deep ravines, beating against blank canyon walls.
Castle Zhakrin stood against one side of the mountain, its sharp spires and
gap-toothed battlements making it look like the mountain's offspring,
something the volcano spewed forth in fire and smoke and ash. A great signal
fire burning from atop one of the towers added to the illusion, reddish orange
light poured from die windows like molten lava streaming down upon the black
sand beach below.
Gathered upon that beach were the Black Paladins. Fifty men of ages ranging
from eighteen to seventy stood in a single straight line upon the sand. They
were dressed in
236

WEIS AND H1CKMAN
THE PALADIN OF THE NIGHT
437
black metal armor that gleamed red in the rays of the setting sun. Draped over
their shoulders were vestments of black cloth, each adorned over the left
breast with the signet of the severed snake. The knights wore no helms, their
laces— Mathew saw as the boat drew near—might have been carved from the stone
of their mountain, so cold and immovable were they. Yet, when the boats were
dragged ashore by the rowers—young men of between fifteen and seventeen whom
Mathew judged, from what he overhead, to be knights-in-training—he noticed
that the laces of the Black Paladins underwent a swift and subtle change.
Greeting one of their own, he saw true emotion light their eyes and soften
their features. And he saw this—astonishingly—reflected in the usually
impassive face of Auda ibn Jad.
Startled by the change in the man, Mathew watched in wonder as the usually
cold and taciturn Black Paladin leapt from the boat into the water before the
squires had a chance to haul the boats ashore. Wading through the crashing
waves, Auda ran into the arms of an elderly man whose head was ringed round by
a crown shaped in the semblance of two snakes, twined together, their heads
joining at his forehead, their red-jeweled eyes sparkling in the twilight.
"Ibn Jad! Zhakrin by thanked! You return to us safely," cried the man.
"And successfully, Lord of Us All," said Auda ibn Jad, falling to his knees
and reverently kissing the old man's hands.
"Zhakrin be praised!" cried the Lord, lifting his hands to the heavens. His
words were echoed by the other knights in a litany that reverberated from the
mountainside and faded away in the pounding of the surf.
Khardan cried out in pain, and Mathew's attention was withdrawn from the
Paladins. The Calif lay in the bottom of Mathew's boat. He had lapsed into
unconsciousness and twitched and tossed and moaned in some horrid,
fever-racked dream.
"The Black Sorceress will care for him. Do not worry, Blossom," Auda had told
him. "He will not die. Don't be surprised, however, if he doesn't thank you.
You did him no service in saving-his life."
Mathew considered glumly that he had done none of them any service by his
foolhardy act and had undoubtedly further compounded their troubles. Ibn Jad
viewed him as a
threat. Worse still, Zohra saw him as a hero. Despite the fact that they were
in separate boats—Zohra having been put into the custody of Kiber, who looked
none too happy about the fact and watched her warily—Mathew could feel the
woman's eyes on him, looking at him with admiration. This newfbund regard for
him only served to increase Mathew's unhappi-ness. She expected him to save
them, now, and he knew it was impossible. Once again he found himself living a
lie, trapped into pretending he was something he wasn't, with death the
penalty for the tiniest mistake.
Or perhaps death was the reward. Mathew didn't know anymore. He'd lived with
fear so long, lived with the twisting bowels and cold hands and chill sweat
and thudding heart that he increasingly saw death as blissful rest. The
irrational anger continued to burn inside him—anger at Khardan and Zohra for
being dependent on him, for making him worry about them, for making him feel
guilty over having plunged them into this danger.
The squires and goums carried Khardan to shore. Wading through the water
beside him, Mathew looked down at the pain-racked body and tried to feel some
pity, some compassion. But all was darkness inside him, darkness cold and
empty. He watched them place Khardan upon a makeshift litter, watched them
haul him slowly up stairs carved into the rock leading to the Castle, and felt
nothing. Zohra floundered through the water, Kiber holding her arm. Raising
her head, she gazed after her husband with lips that parted in concern. Fear
and pity for him—not for herself—glimmered in her black eyes. Mathew saw then
that Zohra's hatred of Khardan masked some type of caring—perhaps not love,
but at least a concern for him. And Mathew, who had loved Khardan longer than

he cared to admit to himself, was too frightened to feel anything.
The emptiness only angered him further. He thought, somewhere, he could hear
the imp laughing, and he looked away from Zohra's smile of approval and
expectation. Mathew was almost thankful when Auda ibn Jad beckoned
peremptorily to the young wizard to attend him. Turning his back on Zohra—who
was standing wet, haughty, and bedraggled hi the black sand—Mathew walked over
to where ibn Jad was exchanging warm greetings with his fellow knights.
"What dread brotherhood is this?" Mathew said to himself, glad to have
something to which he could turn his
238
WEIS AND HICKMAN
THE PALADIN OF THE NIGHT
239
thoughts. "This man sold humans into slavery with no more regard than if they
had been goats. He murdered an innocent girl, driving a knife into her body
with as little care as if she had been a doll. He cast men to ghuls and
watched their terrible sufferings with equanimity. And I see nothing but the
same cold, dispassionate cruelty in the faces of these men surrounding him!
Yet tears shine in their eyes as they embrace!"
"But where is Catalus, my bonded brother?" Auda looked questioningly around
the circle of knights surrounding him. "Why wasn't he summoned to join us for
this, our greatest hour?"
"He was summoned, Auda," said the Lord in a gentle, sorrowful "Voice, "and it
is sad news I must relate to you, my friend. Catalus was in the city of Meda,
training priests in our new temple there when the city was attacked by troops
of the Emperor of Tara-kan. Cowards that they are, the Medans surrendered
and—to a man—pledged their allegiance to Quar!"
"So the war in Has has begun," said ibn Jad, his brows drawing together, the
cruel eyes darkening. "I heard rumors of it as I passed through the land. And
Catalus?"
"Knowing the people would turn our followers over to the troops of the Amir,
he commanded the priests to kill themselves before they could be offered up to
Quar. When the troops came, they found the temple floor running with blood,
Catalus standing in the middle, his sword red, having dispatched those who
lingered overlong.
"The troops of the Amir laid hands upon him, calling him coward. He bore their
taunts in silence, knowing that he would soon see them choke on their own
poisoned words. They dragged him before the Amir and the Imam of Quar, who
thought he now had possession of the soul of Catalus."
Shuddering himself at the terrible tale, Mathew saw Auda ibn Jad's face drain
of its color. White to the lips, the Black Paladin asked softly, "And what did
my bonded brother do?"
The Lord laid his hand upon Auda's shoulder. All the knights had fallen
silent, their faces stem and pale, their lips compressed. The only sound was
the breaking of the waves upon the shore, the mournful wailing of the wind
among the rocks, and the deep voice of the Lord of Black Paladins.
"Catalus watched the other prisoners slaughtered around him. When it came his
turn, he drew from his robes a dagger he had concealed there and sliced open
his belly. He crawled forward and, with his dying breath, grasped hold of the
Imam's robes with his crimsoned hands and called down Zhakrin's Blood Curse
upon Feisal, the Imam of Quar."
Auda ibn Jad lowered his head. A sob tore through his body; he began to weep
like a child. Several of the blights standing near rested their hands upon him
in compassion, many of them unashamedly wiping their own eyes.
"Catalus died in the service of our God. His soul is with Zhakrin, and he will
fight to help bring our Cod back to this world," said the Lord. "We mourn him.
We honor him. Next we avenge him."
"Honor to Catalus! Praise to Zhakrin!" cried ibn Jad fiercely, lifting his
head, tears glistening on his cheeks.
"Honor to Catalus! Praise to Zhakrin!" shouted the knights, and as if their

call had summoned the darkness, the sun vanished into the sea and only the red
afterglow remained to light the land.
"And now, tell us the name of this woman with hair the color of flame who
stands here with you," said the Lord, his admiring gaze sweeping over Mathew.
"Have you brought her for one of the Breeders, or has your heart been touched
at last, Auda ibn Jad, and will you take her for wife?"
"Neither," said ibn Jad, his lips twisting in a smile. "No woman, this one,
but a man." There was laughter at this, and several of the men flushed in
embarrassment, their companions nudging them teasingly. "Do not be ashamed, my
brothers, if you looked upon him with desire. His milk skin and green eyes and
delicate features have deceived more than one, including myself. His story I
will tell you in detail over our evening repast. For now, know that he is the
Bearer and a sorcerer in the service of Astafas, our brother God."
A subdued, respectful murmur rippled through the Black Paladins.
"A sorcerer!" The Lord looked at Mathew with interest. "I have heard of men
who were skilled in the art of magic, but I have never before encountered one.
Are you certain, ibn Jad? Have you proof?"
"I have proof," said Auda with a touch of irony in his voice. "He summoned an
imp of Sul and kept the ghuls from feasting upon that man whom you saw being
carried into the Castle."
'Truly a skilled magus! My wife will be pleased to meet you," said the Lord to
Mathew. "She is the Black Sorceress of our people, without whose magic we
could not have survived."
240
WEIS AND HICKMAN
Ibn Jad's eyes still glistened with tears shed over the death of a comrade,
yet their threat slid through Mathew s soul like sharp steel. The young wizard
could not make a coherent response, his tongue seemed swollen, his throat
parched and dry. Fortunately a bell began to toll from the Castle tower. The
knights began to disperse, walking across the beach, their boots crunching in
the sand. Several respectfully drew the attention of their Lord to themselves.
Ibn Jad was carried off by friends demanding to hear the tales of his
adventures. Mathew thought he was going to be left alone, forgotten on this
dismal shore, when the Lord glanced around over his shoulder.
"Some of you squires"—he called to the young men unloading the ivory jars and
other baggage from the boats— "take the sorcerer to the chambers of my wife.
Bid her find him suitable clothing and prepare him for tonight's ceremony."
Two squires leaped to act on their Lord's command, taking charge of Mathew.
Without speaking a word to him or paying him attention beyond a cool, curious
glance at his sodden woman's clothes, they led him swiftly over the wet,
packed sand to where Castle Zhakrin stood, its black shining surface tinged
with the blood of the departed sun.
Chapter 5
Climbing the black stairs carved into the side of the mountain, Zohra
continued to maintain her haughty dignity and composure. Pride was, after all,
the only thing she had left. Led by Kiber, who kept glancing at her as though
she were a ghul and might eat him at a bite, Zohra set her face into a rigid
mask that effectively hid her fear and confusion. It wasn't as difficult as
might be expected. She seemed to have gone numb, as though she had been
drinking gumiz or chewing the leaves of the plant that made city dwellers
crazy.
She walked up the steep stairs without feeling the stone beneath her bare
feet. At the top of the steps, a bridge known as the Dead March led the way
across a deep ravine to the Castle. Made of wood and rope, the bridge swung
between the sheer sides of the defile. Narrow, swaying dangerously whenever
anyone stepped on it, the bridge could be crossed only by a few people at a
time and was within easy ^arrow shot of the Castle's battlements. A hostile
army attempting to use it was doomed—easy targets for the Castle's archers,
who could also shoot flaming arrows that would set die ropes afire and send
the entire structure plunging into the canyon below.

Human heads, mounted on poles, guarded the entrance to the Dead March. These
were heads of prisoners, captured by the Black Paladins, and made to suffer
the most dreadful tortures. By some arcane art, the flesh remained on the
skulls
-
241
242
WEIS AND HICKMAN
THE PALADIN OF THE NIGHT
243
and the agonized expressions on the dead faces served to warn all who looked
on them what awaited an enemy of the Black Paladins in Castle Zhakrin.
Zohra glanced at the gruesome guardians with uncaring eyes. She navigated the
perilously swinging bridge over the ravine with an appearance of calm that had
Kiber shaking his head in admiration. Entering the gaping black archway of the
Castle without faltering, she passed coolly beneath the red-tipped iron spikes
that could be sent crashing down from the ceiling, impaling those who stood
beneath them. The skulls grinning at her from the granite walls, the bony
hands that held the flaring torches, didn't cause her cheeks to pale or her
eyes to widen. Standing in the huge, torchlit hall, she watched the goums bear
the litter on which Khardan shivered and moaned up a staircase. She had not
spoken since they'd left the ship and asked only three questions upon entering
the Castle.
"Where are they taking him? Will he recover?" and "What will become of him?"
Kiber glanced at the woman curiously. She certainly didn't sound the wife
inquiring about the fate of a beloved husband. Kiber had seen many such in
this hall, clinging to their men, being dragged away screaming and weeping. Of
course, they had known or guessed what fate awaited their men. Perhaps this
woman didn't ... or perhaps she did and didn't care. Kiber suspected that it
might not make much difference; she would never give way to weakness, no
matter what she felt. Kiber had never met a woman like her, and he began to
envy Auda ibn Jad.
"They are taking him to the Black Sorceress. She is skilled in healing the
touch of the ghuls. If she chooses, he will recover. Beyond that his fate is
up to my master," said Kiber gravely, "and will undoubtedly be determined at
the Vestry"— he stumbled over the word, the only term comparable in her
language was "conclave," but this did not give quite the correct nuance.
Her face did not change expression, and he doubted if she understood. Now she
will ask about her fate or that of the other red-headed woman . . . man . . .
whatever it was.
But she didn't; she didn't say a word. From the expression on her proud face
it soon became clear to Kiber that the
woman understood; she was simply refusing to speak to someone she obviously
considered far beneath her.
This irritated Kiber, who could have gone into detail concerning what would
happen to this Zohra-woman, at least. The imagining of it excited him, and he
considered telling her anyway, hoping to see her pride punctured by despair's
sharp knife. But it wasn't his place to speak. The women brought to Castle
Zhakrin either captive or voluntarily were the province of the Black
Sorceress, and she would take it adversely if Kiber were to meddle in her
affairs. Kiber—as did everyone else in the Castle—went out of his way to avoid
offending the Black Sorceress.
Without saying anything further to Zohra, he led her up winding stairs to a
spire known as the Tower of Women. There was no guard at the door; fear of the
Black Sorceress was guard enough—the man who entered the Tower of Women at any
other time except the scheduled hours would rue the day he had been born. So
powerful was this influence that even though he was here on business, Kiber
still felt uncomfortable. He opened the door and took a cautious step inside.
Silent figures shrouded in black robes glided away at his coming, melting into
the shadows of the dark and gloomy hallway, their eyes darting frightened or
curious glances at his prisoner. The air was heavy with perfume. The only

sounds that broke the silence were the occasional cry of a baby or, far away,
the scream of a woman giving birth.
Kiber hurried Zohra to a small room that stood just opposite the main
entryway. Opening the door, he shoved her roughly inside.
"Wait here," he said. "Someone will come."
Hastily he shut the door, locking it with a silver key that hung from a black
ribbon wrapped around a nail in the shining black wall. He returned the key to
its place and started to leave, but his eyes were drawn to an archway that
stood to his right. A curtain of heavy red velvet blocked the arch; he could
not see beyond it. But from it wafted the scent of the perfume that hung in
the air. The smell and the knowledge of what went on behind that curtain made
his heart beat, his loins ache. Every night at midnight, the Black Paladins
mounted the stairs and entered the Tower of Women. They and they alone had the
right to pass beyond the red velvet curtain.
The sound of a door opening down the hall to his left
M4
WEIS AND HICKMAN
made Kiber start. Wrenching his gaze from the curtain, he yanked open the door
leading out of the Tower with such haste that he very nearly hit himself in
the head.
"Kiber?" said a dried, rasping voice.
Pale-faced and sweating, Kiber turned around, his hand still on the wrought
iron handle of the door.
"Madam," he said faintly.
Facing him was a woman of such small stature she might have been mistaken for
a frail girl of twelve years. In reality, she counted seven times that number,
though no sign of those years could be seen upon her face. What arcane art she
used to cheat age none could tell, although it was whispered she drank the
blood of stillborn babes. Her beauty was undeniable, but it did not foster
desire. The cheeks were free of wrinkles, but their smoothness—on close
observation—was not the tender firmness of youth but that of the taut,
stretched skin of a drum. The eyes were lustrous, it was the glow of power's
flame that brightened them. The breasts, rising and falling beneath black
velvet, were soft and ripe, yet no man sought to pillow his head there, for
the heart that beat beneath them was ruthless and cold. The white hands that
beckoned Kiber so gracefully were stained with the blood of countless
innocents.
"You have brought another one?" the woman inquired in a low, sweet voice whose
dread music stilled the heart.
"Yes, Madam," Kiber answered.
"Come into my room and give me your report." The woman vanished back into the
fragrant shadows without waiting to see if her command was obeyed.
There was no question that it would be. Kiber, with a quivering sigh, entered
the chambers of the Black Sorceress, wishing devoutly he was anywhere else,
even setting foot upon the ghuls' ship instead. Far better his flesh be
devoured than his soul, doomed to Sul's abyss—if the Sorceress chose— where
not even his God would be able to find him.
Alone in the room, Zohra stood staring at nothing. There was no one to see her
now. Pride, because it feeds on others, began to starve and waste away
quickly, and hysteria was there to take its place. Zohra lifted her face to
the Heavens, a cry burning in her throat.
"Free me, Akhran!" she screamed furiously, flailing her arms. "Free me from
this prison!"
THE PALADIN OF THE NIGHT
245
The frenzied excitement lasted only moments, draining her remaining strength.
Zohra sank down to the floor and lay there in a land of stupor, eventually
slipping into exhausted sleep.
The cold woke her. Shivering, Zohra sat up. The nap had done her some good.
She felt strong enough to blush with shame over the memory of her outburst.
Anger returned, too, anger at Mathew for involving her in this and then

abandoning her, anger at Khardan for his failures, anger at the God for
refusing to answer her prayers.
"I am alone, as I have always been alone," Zohra said to herself. "I must do
what I can to leave this horrible place and return to my people."
Rising to her feet, she walked over and tried to open the door. It was locked.
She jerked on the handle several times, but it refused to give. Biting her lip
in frustration, she turned and looked around the room, examining it for a way
out.
An iron brazier standing on a tripod in a corner lighted the chamber, which
was small and square and high-ceilinged. It had no windows and no other door
except the one against which Zohra leaned. A handwoven carpet of
extraordinarily beautiful design covered the floor, several black lacquer
chairs were placed about the rug, small tables stood beside them.
Shivering in her wet clothes, Zohra walked the length and width of the room,
searching for even the smallest crack. There was none, she realized, and the
thought came to her, then, that she was trapped within these four walls. Never
before had she been in any walled place. The yurts in which her people lived
were temporary dwellings, made to let in air and light. They adapted to
nature, permitted it entry. They did not shut it out and deny it.
The cold stone walls seemed to grow thicker the longer Zohra stared at them.
Their solid structure and permanence weighted her down. The air was smoky and
filled with dust that covered the furniture and the floor. She feit an
increasing sensation of being unable to catch her breath and sank down into
one of the chairs. The room was smaller than she'd noticed. What would happen
when she used up all the air? She shrank back in the chair, panting, nervously
twisting the rings on her fingers.
"Princess!" cried a distraught voice.
A puff of white smoke issued from a ring and hovered on f.the floor before
her, swelling like a ball of flabby white
246
WEIS AND HICKMAN
dough. A turban, a pair of yellow silk pantalons, pointed shoes, and a fat
face, squinched up in misery, gradually took form.
"Usti!" gasped Zohra.
Throwing himself at Zohra's feet, the djinn wrapped his fat arms around her
legs and burst into tears.
"Save me, Princess!" he wailed. "Save me!"
Chapter 6
"Save you?" repeated Zohra angrily, trying without success to free herself
from the grip of the clinging, blubbering djinn. "I'll save you—in a
goatskin!"
"Goatskin!" Usti hastily released his hold on Zohra. Sitting back on his
heels, he groaned and mopped his eyes with the cloth of his turban that had
come partially unwound and dangled down the side of his head. The djinn's
clothes were torn and bedraggled, his face was grimy—now streaked with
slobber, its expression woeful.
"I beg your pardon, Princess," whimpered the djinn. Every chin aquiver, he
hiccuped. "But my life has been one of unendurable torment!"
"Your—!" Zohra began.
"For months," wailed Usti, placing his hands on his fat knees and rocking back
and forth, "I've been sealed up inside . . . inside—"
He couldn't even say the word but pointed a trembling finger at the ring of
smoky quartz on Zohra's hand.
"It was awful! When the 'efreet, Kaug, attacked the camp, my dwelling was
destroyed. Fortunately I was outside of it at the time. I sought shelter in
the first place I could find! That ring! And now, all these months, I've been
trapped there! Nothing to eat and drink!" he sobbed wretchedly. "Nothing to do
and no room to do it in. I've lost weight!" He gestured at his rotund stomach.
"I'm skin and bones. And—"
247

i48
WEIS AND HICKMAN
Usti caught his breath in a gulp. Zohra had risen to her feet and was staring
down at him with the formidable expression he knew so well.
"Skin and bones! Youll wish you were skin and bones, you bloated, oversized
pig's bladder! I've been taken prisoner, brought to a sea that doesn't exist,
carried across it on a ship filled with demons, and dragged to this awful
place! Trapped in a ring!"
Glaring at the djinn, who was trying desperately to appear impressed and
{ailing utterly, Zohra drew in a seething breath. Her hands flexed, her nails
gleamed in the dim light. Usti's eyes flared wide in alarm, his visage began
to waver.
The djinn was leaving!
She would be alone again!
"No! Don't go!" Zohra calmed herself. Sinking back into the chair, she held
out a placating hand. "I didn't mean what I said. I—I'm frightened. I don't
like this place or these people. You must free me! Get me out of here! You can
do that, can't you, Usti?"
"Immortals, Princess, can do anything," said Usti loftily. "You will take me
back to my brazier?"
"Yes, of course!"
"You won't make me return to that ring?"
"No!" Zohra snapped, exasperated, keeping a tight hold on the arms of the
chair to prevent herself from grabbing hold of the djinn by the collar of his
ripped silken shirt and shaking him until the remainder of his turban
unrolled. "Hurry! Someone might come!"
"Very well," said Usti placidly. "First, I must know where we are."
"We're here!" Zohra cried, waving her hands.
"Unless the walls deign to speak, this tells me nothing," said the djinn
coldly.
"Surely you were listening!" Zohra said accusingly. "You must know where we
are!"
"Princess, how can you possibly have expected me, in my state of mental agony,
to pay attention to the generally trite and uninteresting prattlings of
mortals?" Usti was aggrieved.
Zohra's words came out strained through tightly clenched teeth. "We are being
held captive by those who call themselves Black Paladins. They serve a God
named Shakran or something—"
"Zhakrin, Princess?"
THE PALADIN OF THE NIGHi
249
"Yes, that seems right. And we are on an island in the—"
"—middle of the Kurdin Sea," finished Usti crisply. "An island known as Galos.
This, then, must be Castle Zhakrin." He glanced about with interest. "I have
heard of this place."
"Good!" Zohra sighed in relief. "Now, hurry. You must take me"—she hesitated,
thinking rapidly—"tt$ out of here." Khardan would be forever in her debt. This
would make twice she had saved his life.
"Impossible," said Usti. "Us? Who's us?"
"What do you mean—impossible!" Zohra's hands curled over the arms of the
chair, her eyes glittered feverishly.
Usti blanched but did not quail before his mistress's anger. An expression of
self-righteousness illumined his fat face. Clasping his fingers over his
stomach, he said importantly, "I swore an oath."
"Yes, to serve your mistress, you—!"
"Begging your pardon, Princess, but this oath takes precedence and would be so
adjudged in the Immortals' Court. It is a rather long story—"
"But one I am eager to hear!" Zohra's lip curled dangerously.
Usti gulped, but he had right on his side and so proceeded. "It involved my
former master two masters ago, one Abu Kir, a man exceedingly fond of his
food. It was he, the blessed Abu Kir, may Akhran himself have the pleasure of

dining with him in heaven, who taught me the delights of the palate." Usti
gave a moist hiccup. "And to think I should be forced to talk about him, I—who
have not dined in months! Be still, poor shriveled thing"—he patted his
stomach—"we shall dine soon, if there is anything fit to eat in this wretched
place. Yes," he continued hastily, "begging your pardon, Princess. We were
speaking of Abu Kir. One night, Abu Kir summoned me forth.
" 'Usti, my noble friend, I have a taste this evening for kumquats.'
" 'Nothing easier, My Master,* I said, being, of course, always willing to
serve. 'I will send for the slave to run to the market.'
" 'Ah, it is not that easy, Usti,* said Abu Kir. The kumquats I fancy grow
only in one place—the garden of the immortal Quar. I have heard that one taste
of their sweet, thick lusciousness, and a human will forget all trouble and
care.
" Truly, Master, you have heard correctly. I myself have
250
WEIS AND HICKMAN
tasted them, and that is no exaggeration. But acquiring the fruits of that
garden is more difficult than inducing the mother of a beautiful young virgin
to let her daughter spend the night in your bed. In fact, Master, if you but
command it, I have a virgin in mind that will make you forget all about
kumquats.'
" 'Women!' said Abu Kir in scorn. 'What are they compared to food! Fetch me
the kumquats of Quar's garden, Usti, and I will—in turn—grant you your
freedom!'
"I could not refuse such a generous offer; besides, I am—as you know,
Princess—most devoted to those I serve and do my best to please them. A djinn
of Akhran could not very well walk into the garden of Quar, however, and beg
for kumquats, especially when Kaug—may his snout suck up sea water—is the
gardener.
"Therefore I went to an immortal of Quar's and asked him if he would be so
kind as to fetch me several kumquats from the garden of his master.
" 'Nothing would give me greater pleasure,* said Quar's djinn. 'And I would
fly to do so right now except that my mistress has had her favorite
jade-and-coral necklace stolen by one of the followers of Benario. I was
currently on my way to try to persuade one of the God's light-fingered
immortals to persuade his master to return it. Otherwise, dear Usti, I would
bring you the kumquats.'
"He looked at me out of the corner of his slanted eye as he spoke, and I knew
what I must do to obtain the kumquats.
"Off I went to the immortal of Benario, first taking care, as you might
imagine, that I had left my purse safely in my charcoal brazier."
Zohra leaned her head on her hand.
"I told you it was a long story," Usti said deprecatingly.
"How long until we get to Zhakrin and your 'oath'?"
"just coming to that, Princess. You see, the immortal of Benario promised to
return the jade-and-coral necklace in exchange for an assassin's dagger made
by the followers of Zhakrin. Therefore I went—"
"Shhh!" Sitting up, Zohra stared at the door. The sound of rustling could be
heard outside, a strong scent of perfume drifted into the room.
"Musk," said Usti, sneezing.
"Shhh!" Zohra hissed.
A key rattled in the lock.
THE PALADIN OF THE NIGHT
251
"Get back into the ring!" Zohra whispered.
"Princess!" Usti stared at her in horror.
"Do as I command!" Zohra said fiercely, holding out her left hand, the smoky
quartz sparkling on her finger.
The lock on the door clicked. Usti cast a despairing glance at the ring. The
door began to open. The djinn gasped, as though struck a physical blow. He,

gave the door a terrified glance. His eyeballs bulging in his head, he changed
instantly into smoke, spiraled up to the ceiling, and dove headlong into the
ring.
Zohra took a moment to glance at the ring as the djinn disappeared inside. It
was a plain silver ring with its darkish gem. It was ugly, and it wasn't hers.
Hurriedly, she clapped her hand over it and turned to (ace her visitor.
A woman stood in the doorway, delicately sniffing the air. Her face was not
veiled; she wore no covering over her head. Thick hair, chestnut brown, was
pulled back into a tight, intricately twisted coil worn on the back of her
head. Her robes of black velvet swept the floor as she walked; the symbol of
the severed snake that Zohra had seen both on Khardan's armor and fluttering
from the mast of the ghuls' ship adorned her left breast. Her face was
remarkable for its clear-cut beauty, but—in the light of the brazier standing
near the door—the white skin took on a grayish cast, reminding Zohra of the
ivory jars the goums had loaded aboard the ship.
"I demand that you release me." The words were on Zohra's lips, but they were
never uttered.
The woman said nothing. She simply stood in the doorway, her hand on the
handle, looking at Zohra intently with eyes whose color was indistinguishable.
Zohra met and returned the gaze haughtily at first. Then she noticed that her
eyes began to sting and water. She might have been looking directly into the
sun. The sensation became painful. The woman had neither moved nor spoken; she
stared straight at Zohra. But Zohra could no longer look at her. Tears blurred
her vision; the pain grew, spreading from her eyes to her head. She averted
her gaze, and instantly the pain ceased. Breathing hard, she stared at the
floor, not daring to look back at the strange woman.
"Who has been here?" the woman asked.
Zohra heard the door shut, the rustle of black robes
252
WEIS AND HICKMAN
whisper across the floor. The odor of musk was overpowering, choking.
"No one," said Zohra, her hand covering the ring, her eyes on the carpet at
her feet.
"Look at me when you speak. Or do you fear me?"
"I do not fear anyone!" Zohra proudly lifted her head and glanced at the
woman, but the pain returned and she started to turn away. Reaching out, the
woman caught hold of Zohra's chin in her hand and held it firmly. Her grip was
unusually strong.
"Look at me!" she said again, softly.
Zohra had no choice but to stare straight into the woman's eyes. The pain
became excruciating. Zohra cried out, shutting her eyelids and struggling to
free herself. The woman held her fast.
"Who was here?" she asked again.
"No one!" Zohra cried thickly, the pain throbbing in her head.
The woman held her long seconds. Blood beat in Zohra's temples, she felt
nauseous and faint, then, suddenly, the hand released its hold, the woman
turned away.
Gasping, Zohra slumped over in her chair. The pain was gone.
"Kiber said you were brave." The woman's voice touched her now like cool
water, soothing her. Zohra heard the robes rustle, the soft sound of a chair
being moved across the carpeting. The woman settled herself directly across
from Zohra, within arm's reach. Cautiously Zohra lifted her eyes and looked at
the woman once more. The pain did not return. The woman smiled at her
approvingly, and Zohra relaxed.
"Kiber is quite an admirer of yours, my dear," said the woman. "As is Auda ibn
Jad, from what I hear. I congratulate you. Ibn Jad is an extraordinary man. He
has never before requested a specific woman."
Zohra tossed her head contemptuously. The subject of Auda ibn Jad was not
worthy of being discussed. "I have been brought here by mistake," she said.
"The one called Mat-hew is the one you want. You have him, therefore you

must—"
"—let you go?" The woman's smile widened, a mother being forced to refuse a
child some absurd demand. "No, my dear. Nothing ever happens by mischance. All
is as the God desires it. You were brought here for a purpose. Perhaps it may
be the very great honor of increasing the God's fol-
THE PALADIN OF THE NIGHT
253
lowers. Perhaps"—the woman hesitated, studying Zohra more intently—"perhaps
there is another reason. But, no, you were not brought here by mistake, and
you will not be released."
"Then I will go of my own aecord!" Zohra rose to her feet.
"The Guardians of our Castle are called nesnas," said the woman
conversationally. "Have you ever heard of them, my dear? They have the shape
of a man—a man that has been divided in half vertically, possessing half a
head, one arm, half a trunk, one leg, one foot. They are forced to hop on that
one leg, but they can do so quite swiftly, as fast as a human can run on two.
There have been one or two women who have managed to escape the Castle. We do
not know what happened to them, for they were never seen again, although we
heard their screams several nights running. We do know, however"—the woman
smoothed a fold of her velvet robes— "that the nesnas' population increases,
and we can only assume that, though they are half men in almost all aspects,
there must be one aspect, at least, in which they are whole."
Slowly, Zohra sank back into her seat.
"I did not think you would want to leave us quite this soon."
"Who are you?"
"I am called the Black Sorceress. My husband is the Lord of the Black
Paladins. He and I have ruled our people over seventy years—"
Zohra stared at the woman in astonishment.
"My age? Yes, I see you find that remarkable. I can promise you the same
eternal youth, my dear, if you prove tractable."
"What do you want of me?"
"Now you are being reasonable. We want your body. That and the fruit it will
bear. Have you ever borne children?"
Zohra shook her head disdainfully.
"Yes you are wife to the one who was attacked by the gnuls."
Zohra's face burned. Pressing her lips together, she stared into the
flickering light of the brazier. She could feel the eyes of the sorceress on
her and she had the uncomfortable sensation that the woman could see into the
very depths of her soul.
"Extraordinary," the sorceress murmured. "Let me tell you, my dear, how the
God chooses to honor women brought
254
WEIS AND HICKMAN
THE PALADIN OF THE NIGHT
255
into this Castle. Those who are found worthy are selected to be the Breeders.
It is they who are increasing the followers of Zhakrin so that our great Cod
can return to us in strength and in might. Every night these women are placed
into special rooms, and each midnight the Black Paladins enter this tower and
go to the rooms. Here, each man honors the chosen woman by depositing his seed
within her womb. When that seed takes, and the woman becomes pregnant, she is
removed from the rooms and is well cared for until the babe is delivered. Then
she is returned to the rooms to conceive another—"
"I would die first," stated Zohra calmly.
"Yes," remarked the sorceress, smiling. "I believe you would. Many say that,
in the early days, and a few have attempted it. But we cannot afford to allow
such waste, and I have means by which I make the most obdurate eager to obey
my will."
Zohra's lip curled in scorn.
The sorceress rose to her feet. "I will have dry clothing brought to you, as

well as food and drink. A room is being prepared for you. When it is ready,
you will be taken there."
"You are wasting your time. No man will touch me!" Zohra said, speaking slowly
and distinctly.
The sorceress raised an eyebrow, smiled, and glided toward the door, which
opened at her approach. Two women, dressed in black robes similar to those .of
the sorceress, slipped noiselessly inside the room. One bore a bundle of black
velvet in her arms, the other carried a tray of food. Neither woman spoke to
Zohra or even looked at her, but kept their eyes lowered. Under the watchful
gaze of the sorceress, they deposited the clothes upon a chair and set the
tray of food upon a table. Then they silently departed. The sorceress, giving
Zohra one final glance, followed them.
Zohra listened for the key but did not hear it. Swiftly, she ran to the door
and pressed her ear against it. When all sounds had ceased in the corridor,
she pulled on the handle. The door remained sealed fast. From far away, Zohra
thought she heard a soft tinkle of laughter. Angrily, she whirled around.
"Usti!" she whispered.
Nothing happened.
"Usti!" she repeated furiously, shaking the ring.
Smoke drizzled out, coalescing into the form of a pale and shaken djinn.
"That woman is a witch!"
"To say the least. Oath or no oath, you must get me out of here!"
"No, Mistress!" Usti licked his lips. "She is a witch! A true witch! In all my
lifetimes, I have never met such a powerful human. She knew I was Here!"
"Impossible!" Zohra scoffed. "Quit making excuses and cttturn Khardan and me
to our desert this instant!" She stamped her foot.
"She spoke to me!" Usti began to tremble. "She told me what she would do to me
if I crossed her. Princess"—he began to blubber—"I do not want to spend my
eternal life sealed up in an iron box, wrapped round with iron chains!
Farewell, Princess!"
Hie djinn leaped back into the ring with such alacrity that Zohra was
momentarily blinded by the swirl of smoke. Enraged, she grabbed hold of the
circlet of silver, and tried to yank it from her finger. It was stuck fast.
She tugged and twisted, but the ring would not come off, and finally, her
finger swollen and aching, she gave up.
She was shaking with cold. The smell of food made her mouth water.
"I must keep up my strength," she said to herself. '-'Since it seems I must
fight this alone, it won't do to fall sick from a chill or hunger."
Her mind searching for some way out of this situation, Zohra stripped off her
wet gown and replaced it with the black robes on the chair. Clothed and warm
again, she sat down to dine. As she lifted the cover from the tray, her eyes
caught the glimmer of steel.
"Ah!" Zohra breathed and swiftly picking up the knife, she tucked it into a
pocket of her gown.
The food was delicious. All her favorites were on the various plates—stripes
of shiskhlick grilled to her exact taste, succulent fruit, honey cakes, and
candied almonds. A carafe was filled to the brim with clear, cold water, and
she drank thirstUy. Her strength returned and with it hope. The knife pressed
reassuringly against her flesh. She could use it to force the door lock, then
make her way out of the Castle. Dressed like all the others, she would simply
be taken for one of the other women, and surely they must go about the
256
WEIS AND HICKMAN
THE PALADIN OF THE NIGHT
257
castle on some errand or other. Once outside—Zohra thought of the nesnas.
Half men who hop on one leg! The sorceress must take her for a child to
believe such stories. Zohra had a momentary regret in leaving Khardan; she
recalled him lying in the litter, shivering and moaning in agony; she saw the
bluish-purplish scratches on his arm and body, and she remembered guiltily

that he had been willing to give his life to defend her.
Well, she told herself, it was all for his own honor, anyway. He cares nothing
for me. He hates me for what Mathew and I did to him; humiliating him by
taking him from the battlefield. I shouldn't have done it. That vision was
stupid. Undoubtedly it was some trick of Mathew's to ... to ...
How hot it was! Zohra loosened the neck of the robe, unbuttoning the tiny
buttons that held it together. It was growing unbearably warm. She seemed to
smell again the stifling odor of musk. She was becoming sleepy, too. She
should not have eaten so much. Blinking her heavy eyelids, Zohra struggled to
her feet.
"I must keep awake!" she said aloud, tossing some of the cool water on her
face. Standing up, she began to walk around the room, only to feel the floor
slip away beneath her feet. She staggered into a chair and grabbed hold of it
for support. The light coming from the brazier was surrounded, suddenly, by a
rainbow of color. The walls of the room began to breathe in and out. Her
tongue seemed dry, and there was an odd taste in her mouth.
Zohra stumbled back to the table, clinging to chairs, and grabbed hold of the
water carafe. She lifted it to her lips. . . .
"I have means by which I can make the most obdurate eager to obey my will."
The carafe fell to the floor with a crash.
Two women, clothed in black, carried Zohra from the antechamber. Zohra's eyes
were open, she stared at them dreamily, a vacant, vacuous smile on her lips.
"What do we do with her?"
The Black Sorceress looked down at the nomad woman, then raised her.eyes to
the red velvet curtain covering the archway. The two women holding Zohra by
her arms and legs exchanged swift glances; one lowered her eyes to her own
swelling belly, and a small sigh escaped her lips.
"No," said the Black Sorceress after a moment's profound
thought. "I am not clear in my mind about this one. The Cod's message is to
wait. Take her to the chamber next to mine."
The women nodded silently and moved down the hall, carrying their burden
between them.
The sonorous clanging of an iron bell, sounding from a tower high above them,
caused the Black Sorceress to lift her head. Her eyes gleamed.
"Vestry," she murmured, and wrapping her fingers around an amulet she wore at
her neck, she disappeared.
THE PALADIN OF THE NIGHT
250
Chapter 7
Auda ibn Jad had been at Mathew's side, step for step and almost heartbeat for
heartbeat, as they made their way up from the beach to Castle Zhakrin.
Mathew's sodden wet clothes clung to him. The mournful wind cut through his
flesh like slivers of ice, but was nothing compared to the cold, glittering
side-ways glances of the Black Paladin. Always the focus of that piercing
gaze—even when ibn Jad was talking to a fellow knight—Mathew had a difficult
time maintaining his composure when faced with the horrors of the Castle. A
follower of Astafas, he was certain, would not stare fearfully at the gruesome
heads that guarded the bridge, or shrink away from the human skeletons on the
walls.
By the time ibn Jad had escorted him to an antechamber located on the ground
level of the palace, and left him there alone with a flask of wine to ease die
chill, Mathew thought that he had performed adequately. No credit to himself.
After the long walk to the Castle in the company of the Black Paladin, the
young wizard was so miserable and cold that he doubted if any emotion other
than terror was left inside him.
Shivering so he could barely keep hold of the glass, Mathew drank a little
wine, hoping to lift his spirits and warm his blood. All the wine squeezed
from every grape in the world could not obliterate reality, however.
I may have deceived ibn Jad, he thought, but I can never hope to deceive the
Black Sorceress. A skilled Archmagus

258
would see through me as if I were crystal. Mathew had little doubt—from the
obviously high regard in which this woman was held—that this Black Sorceress
was, indeed, very skilled.
Hoping to distract himself from his mounting fear, Mathew listlessly examined
his surroundings. The room was bleak and comfortless. A huge fireplace
dominated almost one entire wall, but no fire burned there. Fuel must be
difficult to obtain on this barren isle, Mathew realized, peering wistfully at
the cold ashes upon the hearth. He knew now why everyone dressed in such heavy
clothing and began to think with longing of soft black velvet draping him with
warmth. Drawing back thick red curtains, he found a window. Made of large
panes of leaded, stained glass bearing the design of the severed snake, it had
no bars and looked as if it could be easily opened. Mathew had no wish to try
it, however. Though he could not see them, he sensed the dark and evil beings
that lurked outside. His life would not be worth a copper's purchase if he set
foot beyond the Castle walls.
Turning back, leaning upon the mantelpiece above the chill fireplace, Mathew
saw no hope for them—for any of them. Auda ibn Jad had described in a cold,
dispassionate voice what fate awaited Zohra in the Tower of Women. The Black
Paladin made it clear that he admired the nomad woman for the strong and
spirited followers she would deliver to the God, adding that he planned to
request her for his own private use, at least to father her first few
children. Ibn Jad's talk of his intentions sickened Mathew more then the sight
of the polished skulls adorning the stair railings. If the man had spoken with
lust or desire, he would at least have demonstrated some human feeling, if
only of the basest nature. Instead, Auda ibn Jad spoke as if he were
discussing the breeding of sheep or cattle.
"What will happen to Khardan?" Mathew had asked, abruptly changing the
subject.
"Ah, that I cannot say," was Auda's reply. "It will be up to the members of
the Vestry this night. I can only make my recommendation."
Alone in the bitterly cold room, sipping the wine that tasted like blood in
his mouth, Mathew wondered what this meant. Recalling the human heads mounted
on the Dead March, he shuddered. But surely if they were intent only upon
murdering Khardan they would not go through such
260
WEIS AND HICKMAN
ceremony. Ibn Jad had been ready to toss the Calif to the ghuls, but that had
been done in anger or ...
Mathew stared into the flame of a candle burning on the mantelpiece. Perhaps
it had been a test. Perhaps ibn Jad had never intended to give Khardan to the
ghuls.
A soft knock upon the door made Mathew start; his hand shook so that he
sloshed wine on his wet clothes. He tried to bid the person enter, but his
voice couldn't escape past the choking sensation in his throat. Not that it
mattered; the door opened and a woman stepped inside.
She smote Mathew with the heat of the blazing desert sun, blinding him,
burning him. Her evil was deep and dark and ancient as the Well of Sul. Her
majesty overawed, her power overwhelmed, and Mathew bowed before her as he
would have bowed to the head of his own Order. He was conscious of eyes
studying him, eyes that had studied countless others before him, eyes that
were old and wise in the knowledge of the terrible depths of the human soul.
There could be no lying to those eyes.
"You come from Tirish Aranth," said the Black Sorceress.
The door shut silently behind her.
"Yes, Madam," answered Mathew inaudibly.
"That facet of the Jewel of Sul shared by Promenthas and your God, Astafas."
"Yes, Madam." Did she know he lied? How could she not? She must Icnow
everything.
"I have heard that in this part of the world men have the gift of magic. I

have never met a male sorcerer before. You are man and not eunuch?"
"I am a man," Mathew murmured, his face flushing.
"How old are you?"
"Eighteen."
He was conscious of the eyes staring at him intently, and then suddenly he was
enveloped by a fragrance of heady musk. The walls around him changed to water
and began to slide down into some vast ocean that was rising up around him.
Soft lips touched his, skillful hands caressed his body. The smell, the touch
aroused almost instantaneous desire. . . .
And then he heard a laugh.
The water disappeared, the walls surrounded him again, the fragrance was blown
away by a cold wind. Gasping, he caught his breath.
"I am sorry," said the sorceress, amused, "but I had to
THE PALADIN OF THE NIGHT
261
make certain you were telling the truth. A man your age with no beard,
features and skin any woman might envy. I have heard it said that men gained
magic at the price of their manhood, but I see that is not so."
Breathing heavily, his body burning with shame and embarrassment, disgust
twisting his stomach, Mathew could not reply nor even look at the woman.
"Male children born to you will acquire this gift?"
"They may or may not," answered Mathew, wondering at this unexpected question.
Then Auda ibn Jad's description of the Tower of Women came to his mind. He
lifted his head and stared at her.
"Yes." She answered his thought. "You will prove quite valuable to us. Male
magi!" The sorceress drew in a deep breath of pleasure. "Warriors trained to
kill with arcane weapons! We could well become invincible. It is a pity"—she
regarded him coolly—"that there aren't more of you. Perhaps Astafas could be
persuaded to lend us others?"
"I—I'm certain ... he would be honored, as would I, t-to serve you," stammered
Mathew, not knowing what else to say. The suggestion appalled him, he felt
again the touch of the woman's hands on his body, and he hastily averted his
face, hoping to hide his repugnance.
It obviously didn't work. "Perhaps a bit more manly than you," the sorceress
said wryly. "And now tell me, how did one as young and obviously inexperienced
as yourself manage to summon and control an imp of Sul?"
Mathew stared at her helplessly. He was a wet rag in this woman's hands. She
had wrung him and wrenched him. He had no dignity, no humanity left. She had
reduced him to the level of a beast.
"I don't know!" He hung his head. "I don't know!" i "I thought as much," the
sorceress said gently. A hand patted him, an arm stole around his shoulder. It
was now a mother's touch—soothing and comforting. She led him back to his
chair and he sank down, unnerved and sobbing—a child in her arms.
"Forgive me, my son," said the soft voice, and Mathew raised his head and saw
the sorceress clearly for the first time. He saw the beauty, the cruelty, the
evil, and that strange compassion he had seen on the face of Auda ibn Jad and
the other worshipers of Zhakrin. "Poor boy," she murmured and his own mother
could not have grieved for him
£62
WEIS AND HICKMAN
more. "I had to do this to you. I had to make certain." She stroked his face
with her hand. "You are new to the paths of the shadow and you find the
walking difficult. So do all who come to us from the light, but in time you
will grow accustomed to and even revel in the darkness." The sorceress cupped
his face in her hands, staring deeply into his eyes.
"And you are fortunate!" she whispered passionately, a thrill in her voice
transmitting itself to Mathew's flesh. "Fortunate above all men for Astafas
has obviously chosen you to do his bidding! He is granting you power you weuld
otherwise not have! And that means he is aware of us and watching us and
supporting our struggle!"

Mathew began to shake uncontrollably as the import of her words and their
truth tore open his soul.
"The transition will be painful," said the sorceress, holding him close,
pitying his fear, "but so is every birth." She drew his head to her breast,
smoothing his hair. "Long I mourned that I could bring only daughters of magic
into this world. Long I dreamed of giving birth to a son born to the talent.
And now you have come—the Bearer, chosen to guard, to carry our most precious
treasure! It is a sign! I take you for my own, from this moment." Her lips
pressed against his flesh, stabbing like a knife at his heart. He cringed and
cried out with the pain.
"It hurts," she said softly, brushing away a tear that had fallen from her eye
onto Mathew's cheek. "I know it hurts, my little one, but the agony will soon
end, and then you will find peace. And now I must leave you. The man, Khardan,
waits for my ministration so that he may be fit to receive the honor that is
going to be bestowed upon him. Here is clothing. Food will be brought to you.
Is there anything else you desire— What is your name?"
"Mathew!" The word seemed squeezed out of his chest by his bursting heart.
"Mathew. Nothing else you want? Tlien make yourself ready. The Vestry convenes
at ten this evening, four hours from now. Ah, poor boy." Her tongue clicked
against the roof of her mouth. "Fainted dead away. His mind can accept this,
but not his heart. It fights me, it fights the darkness. I will win, though. I
will win!
"Astafas has given me a son!"
Chapter 8
In Castle Zhakrin was a great hall made entirely of black marble—perfectly
circular in shape. Black columns surrounded a large center floorspace in which
the signet of the severed serpent, done in gold, had been inlaid in the
marble. There was only one piece of furniture in the room at this time, and
that was a small table on which stood an object covered with black velvet. The
chamber was rarely opened and then only for ceremonial purposes, for the hall
was known as the Vestry and it was here that the followers of Zhakrin met once
monthly or, as on this occasion, whenever there was something of special
significance to be brought before the people.
Having stored up winter's chill in its stone walls, the cold in the hall froze
the heart. The black marble, gleaming in the light of innumerable torches that
had been placed in sconces fashioned from the bones of human hands, might have
been ice for the freezing breath it gave off. Mathew huddled thankfully within
the warm, thick velvet of his new black robes, his hands folded in the
sleeves.
At ten o'clock an iron bell rang through the Castle. The people of Zhakrin,
with solemn mien, began to arrive in the hall. Swiftly and without connision
each took his or her place in the large circle that was forming around the
severed serpent. There were fewer women than men. The women were dressed in
black robes similar to those of the sorceress, and many were pregnant. Each
woman stood beside a Black
263
264
WEIS AND HICKMAN
THE PALADIN OF THE NIGHT
265
Paladin, and Matbew realized that these must be their wives. He sensed within
almost all the women a powerful gift for magic, and no longer did he have to
wonder how these people managed to survive under such harsh and hostile
conditions.
Sometimes, standing respectfully a few steps outside the circle of adults, was
a young person of about sixteen years, this being the age required to first
begin attending Vestry. From the comments made by those on entering and from
the proud and fond looks given these young people, Mathew guessed that they
were children of the Paladins. Again he marveled at the strange dichotomy of
these people—the love and warmth extended to family members and friends; the

heartless cruelty extended to the rest of the world.
Hie Black Sorceress appeared suddenly next to him, materializing out of the
chill air. Remembering what had occurred between them in the room, Mathew
lowered his head, a burning flush spreading over his skin. He knew he had
fainted, he knew someone had dressed him and warmed him like a child, and he
suspected who that person had been. Hie Black Sorceress gave no sign, either
by word or look, that she was aware of his confusion. Standing beside him, she
watched calmly and proudly as her people took their places in the circle. It
was almost complete, with the exception of several gaps, and these were
apparently left deliberately vacant.
"In time, you will be able to take your place with us in the Holy Circle,"
said the sorceress. "But for now you may not. Wait here and do not stir until
you are summoned forth."
"How is Khardan?" Mathew asked softly.
In answer, the Black Sorceress turned her head slightly. Mathew followed her
gaze and saw Kiber and another goum leading Khardan into the room. The Calif
was pale and obviously confused and amazed by what he saw. But he walked
firmly and steadily and there was no trace of pain on his face.
"And Zohra?" Mathew continued, swallowing, wondering at his daring.
"Zohra?" The sorceress was only half attending to his words; her eyes were on
the gathering assembly.
"The woman who was with us?" Mathew pursued.
The sorceress glanced at him and shook her head, her eyes darkening. "Do not
hold onto any interest iii her, my son. There are many other women here as
beautiful as that
wild desert flower. That one is not for you.  She has been chosen by another."
The Black Sorceress's voice was reverent and hushed. Thinking she meant Auda
ibn Jad, Mathew was startled to see her look at the Black Paladin with a
slight frown and a creased brow. "No, and not for him, either. I hope he does
not take that ill." Shaking her head to prevent the young wizard from speaking
further, the sorceress gave Mathew a reassuring smile, then left him, walking
over to take her place in the circle beside the Lord of the Black Paladins.
A solemn hush fell over the assembly. All bowed their heads and clasped their
hands before them. The Lord took a step forward.
"Zhakrin, God of Evil, we gather in your name to do you honor this night. We
thank you for the safe return of our brother, Auda ibn Jad, and for the
fulfillment, at last, of all that we have worked to achieve these many years."
"We thank you, Zhakrin," came the response from around the circle.
"And now, according to ancient tradition, we do honor to the fallen."
The Lord of Black Paladins turned to his wife, who drew near the black
velvet-covered table. Removing the cloth, she lifted in her hand a golden
chalice. Its foot was the body of a coiled snake, bearing a cup wrapped in its
coils. Placing her hand over the chalice, the Black Sorceress whispered arcane
words and sprinkled a powder from inside a golden ring she wore on her finger.
Entering the circle, she walked slowly across the black marble floor and
handed the chalice to Auda ibn Jad. He accepted it from her reverently, bowing
his head. Turning to the empty place beside him in the circle, Auda raised the
chalice. 1 "To our brother, Catalus."
"To Catalus," came the response.
Ibn Jad put the chalice to his lips, sipped at whatever was inside, then
solemnly moved across the circle to present the chalice to a woman dressed in
black.
She spoke in a language Mathew did not understand, but there was an empty
place in the circle beside her, as well. The chalice went from hand to hand.
Mathew gathered from those words he could understand that many of those being
remembered here had died in the city of Meda. Several of
266
WEIS AND HICKMAN
THE PALADIN OF THE NIGHT
267

the Black Paladins wept openly. A man put his arm around the shoulders of a
woman; they drank out of the chalice together, and Mathew understood that a
beloved son had been among those who killed themselves in the Temple rather
than permit their souls to be offered up to Quar. The grief of these people
moved Mathew deeply. Tears came to his eyes and might have fallen had not the
chalice passed again to the Lord of the Black Paladins. He handed H to his
wife, who held it reverently.
"Now it is the time to put grief aside and prepare for joy," said the Lord of
the Black Paladins. "Our brother, Auda ibn Jad, will now relate to us what he
has done on his journeys in the name of Zhakrin."
Auda ibn Jad stepped forward and began to speak. There followed a tale of such
atrocities that Mathew's tears were burned out of his eyes and he grit his
teeth in order to keep from crying out. Villages burned, the elderly and very
young slaughtered without mercy, the fit and strong captured and sold into
slavery. Ibn Jad spoke proudly of the murder of the priests and magi of
Promenthas who had been so unlucky as to set foot upon the shores of
Tara-lcan. He described their deaths in detail and went on to relate the
sparing of the Hfe of the young sorcerer who—as it turned out—had been sent to
diem by Astafas.
Cringing, Mathew kept his head lowered, chills shaking his body. He was aware
of eyes upon him—eyes of those standing in the circle, the eyes of the Black
Sorceress, the eyes of ibn Jad. Mathew was acutely aware, too, of another pair
of eyes watching him, and he felt a swift, secret thrill of sweet pain. It was
the first time Khardan had ever heard Mathew's story, and he could sense the
Calif regarding him with sympathy and dawning understanding.
Auda ibn Jad continued his story, relating how Khardan and his nomads had
wrecked the bazaars of Kich, how they had stolen Mathew from ibn Jad, and had
then ravaged the Temple of Quar. Ibn Jad did not seem to mind telling tales
against himself and related Khardan's bravery and valor in terms that won the
Calif murmurs of approval and a grim smile from the Lord of the Black
Paladins.
Auda went on to relate how the Amir had taken out his wrath at this effrontery
to Quar by attacking the nomads, taking their women and children and young men
prisoner, and scattering the tribes. The people of Zhakrin regarded
Khardan with the shared compassion of those who have suffered a similar fate.
Mathew saw now that ibn Jad was purposefully establishing Khardan as a hero in
the eyes of Zhakrin's followers. The words the Black Sorceress had spoken, the
"honor to be bestowed upon him" came to Mathew's mind. It all sounded well, as
if Khardan were out of danger. But Mathew's uneasiness grew, particularly as
he listened to what had occurred during their journey from the desert of
Pagrah north—the cold-blooded butchering of innocent people in the city of
Idrith. Now he knew it was their blood—drained from the bodies—contained in
those ivory jars, and his soul recoiled in horror as he remembered leaning
against the jars on board the ship.
Khardan, too, must be wondering at the Black Paladin's intent. His face dark
and suspicious, the Calif watched ibn Jad warily. There was a saying among the
nomads that Mathew had heard, and he knew Khardan must be thinking of it now.
"Beware the honeyed tongue. It oft drips poison."
Ibn Jad finished his tale. It was applauded with soft murmurs from the women,
deeper-voiced approval from the men. The Lord of the Paladins spoke of his
pleasure and the Black Sorceress rewarded Auda with a nod and a smile and
another drink from the chalice. Mathew had no idea what the cup contained, but
he saw a rising flush come to Auda ibn Jad's pale, stern cheek; the cruel eyes
glowed with increasing ferocity. The chalice was then passed from one person
in the circle to the next, each taking a drink. It never, apparently, ran dry,
and as the cup passed from hand to hand, Mathew saw that each person began to
burn with an inner flame.
Ibn Jad returned to his place within the circle, and the Lord stepped forward.
"Now we will speak our recent history, that each may •hear it once again so
that it echoes forever in the heart. To those who are new to us and hearing

this for the first time"— his eyes went to Mathew and Khardan—"this will help
you to better understand us.
"Long ago, Zhakrin was a rising power in this world. And as is often the way
of Sul, when the Facet of Evil began to glow more brightly in the heavens, the
Facet of Good gleamed brilliantly as well. Many and glorious were the
encounters between the Black Paladins of Zhakrin and the White Knights of
Evren, the Good Goddess." The Lord's voice softened, his aged eyes looked far
away. "Just barely do I remember that
268
WEIS AND HICKMAN
time. I was no more than a boy, squire to my knight. Brave deeds were done in
the name of both the Dark and the Light, each striving for supremacy with
honor, as becomes knights.
"And then there came a time when the price of honor was too dear." The Lord
sighed. "Immortal beings who had long served us no longer answered our
prayers. The power of our God Himself was weakened. The people sickened and
died, women grew barren. Some turned, then, to other Gods and Zhakrin grew
weaker still. And it was in this hour that the followers of Evren began to
persecute us—so it seemed—^ and, in anger and desperation, we fought back.
Like dogs, we hunted each other down, expending our dwindling energies in
savage hatred. Our numbers lessened, as did theirs, and we were forced to
withdraw from the world, to hide in places dark and secret, and then we spent
our days and nights searching each other out." The Lord's face grew grim. "No
longer were the contests glorious and brave. We could not afford that. We
struck by night, by stealth, as did they. Knives in the back replaced swords
face-to-face.
"And then came the time when the fire in our hearts turned to black ash, and
we knew our God was defeated. All but the most faithful left us then, for we
were weak and had only the power within us with which to fight the battle that
is this life. We fled here, to this place. With the strength we had remaining,
we built this Castle. We cursed the name of Evren and plotted to destroy her
followers if it cost us every last drop of our blood.
"Then a God came to us. It was not our God. It was a strange God we had never
before seen. He appeared before us, standing in that very place." The Lord
gestured at the head of the snake in the floor. "We asked his name. He said he
was known only as the Wandering God"—Mathew glanced at Khardan in
astonishment; the Califs mouth sagged open—<4 "and that he brought urgent
news. It was not Evren who caused our Zhakrin's downfall. She herself was gone
as well, and all her immortals. Her followers hid away as did we.
" 'Your fight is not with each other,' " said this Wandering God. 'You have
been duped by one called Quar, who tricked you into nearly destroying each
other, and while you were fighting, he took the field and claimed the victory.
He seeks to become the One, True God; to make all men bow down and worship
him.'
"The strange God disappeared, and we discussed this long
THE PALADIN OF THE NIGHT
289
among ourselves. We sent our knights to investigate. They found that the
Wandering God had spoken the truth. Quar was the rising power in the world. It
seemed that there were few who could stop him. Then it was that Auda ibn
Jad—at great peril to his life—disguised himself as a priest of Quar and
penetrated the very inner circles of the God's Temple in the Emperor's court
of Khandar. Here he discovered the essences of Zhakrin and Evren, held
prisoner by Quar. Auda ibn Jad summoned my wife to his aid. Together and in
secret they succeeded in snatching the souls of the Gods from Quar, who even
now, perhaps, is not yet aware that they are gone.
"Last time we met, you heard my wife's story of this daring theft. You heard
her relate their final triumph. She and her knights traveled back here,
drawing off pursuit, leaving Auda ibn Jad and his brave soldiers to slip
unobserved into Ravenchai with the precious treasure they guarded. This night
you have heard him relate his adventures in returning home to us. And now

you—"
Mathew heard no more. The sound of pounding waves, the roar of rushing wind
throbbed in his head. Pressing his hand over his breast, he felt the crystal
globe cold and smooth against his skin.
The Bearer.
He knew now what he carried. Two fish—one dark, one light . . .
Mathew stared at the knights aghast, saw them all turn to look at him. The
Lord's mouth was moving, he was saying something but his words were
obliterated by the throbbing in Mathew's head and he couldn't hear. The Black
Sorceress stepped into his line of vision and into his heart and his mind. She
was all he could see, could think about. Her words alone he could understand,
and when she raised her hand and beckoned, he responded.
"Let the Bearer come forward."
Moving slowly, Mathew stepped toward the Holy Circle. It broke and opened for
him, it absorbed him and closed around him.
The Black Sorceress came to stand directly before the young wizard.
"Give me that which you bear," she said softly.
There was no denying her. Mathew's hand moved by her will, not his own.
Reaching into the bosom of his black robes, he drew forth the crystal globe
and held it in his trembling palm.
270
WEIS AND HICKMAN
THE PALADIN OF THE NIGHT
271
The golden fish remained motionless in the center of the globe; the black fish
swam about in wide circles, its mouth opening wide, striking in excitement at
his crystal walls.
Breathing a reverent sigh, the Black Sorceress lifted the globe gently and
carefully. Mathew felt the slight weight leave his hands and a great weight,
not noticed until now, leave his heart. The sorceress carried the globe to the
table and laid it down beside the chalice. Then she covered both with the
black velvet cloth.
"Hear me, my people." Her voice rang triumphantly through the Vestry.
"Tomorrow night, our god, Zhakrin, will return to us!"
There was no sound from the God's followers, no cheering. The matter touched
the soul too deeply for the voice to echo it. Their victory shone in their
eyes.
"He will be weak and thus He has chosen to reside in a human body until He can
gain strength and return to His immortal form. This will mean the death of the
body in which He chooses to reside for His short stay upon this plane, for He
will be forced to suck it dry of its life's juices to feed him—"
Auda ibn Jad sprang forward. "Let Him take my body! "
"Mine! Mine!" shouted the Black Paladins, breaking the circle, vying with each
other for the honor.
The Black Sorceress raised her hand for silence.
"Thank you all. The God takes note of your courage. But He has made His choice
and"—the sorceress smiled proudly— "it is to be the body of a female. As man
is born of woman, so shall our God be brought forth in the body of a woman.
Because He will not diminish the number of his followers, He has selected one
of our female prisoners—the newest one. She is strong in magic, which the God
will find useful. She is intelligent, strong-willed and spirited—"
>
"No!"
Mathew's mouth formed the word, but it was Khardan who shouted it.
"Take my body, if it's flesh you need to feed your accursed God!" the Calif
cried fiercely, struggling to break free of Kiber and the goum, straining
against them with such strength that Auda ibn Jad left his place within the
circle and moved near Khardan, his hand on the hilt of the sword he wore at
his waist. Turning, the Paladin looked'back at the sorceress with a raised
eyebrow.
She nodded, appearing well pleased. "It is as you said, ibn Jad. The nomad is

noble and honorable. We know that he is strong and his spirit that of a
warrior. You may begin his training tonight.' Her eyes fixed upon Khardan.
"Your offer becomes you, sir. But to accept such a sacrifice would be a tragic
waste, abhorred by our God. You have proven your merit and will, therefore,
serve Zhakrin in another way. You will begin your preparation to become one of
the Black Paladins."
"I serve Aknran, the Wanderer, and no other!" Khardan itetorted.
"As of now you serve Him. That will change," said the Black Sorceress gravely.
"Since the circle has been broken, our Vestry is concluded. Auda ibn Jad, you
will take the man below. His preparation will begin at once.
"We will reconvene tomorrow night at eleven o'clock," the sorceress continued,
speaking to all. "The ceremony begins at midnight—the ending of one day and
the beginning of another. So shall our God's return mark the beginning of a
new time for the world."
"One question before we depart," said the Lord of the Black Paladins.
The sorceress turned respectfully to face her husband.
"We Have here two holy beings—Zhakrin and Evren. What will we do with the
Goddess of Good?"
"Because she is a Goddess and we but mortals, we are powerless to offer Her
either help or harm. Her fate rests in the hands of Zhakrin."
The Lord nodded, and the people began to file out of the Vestry. The Black
Sorceress remained, beckoning several of the women to join her. Their
conversation was low and hushed, probably discussing tomorrow night's
ceremony. Auda ibn Jad ordered Kiber, with a gesture, to bring Khardan, and
together they left the Vestry.
Mathew glanced around. No one was paying any attention to him. He could see
ibn Jad and his men traversing a narrow corridor. If I'm going to follow them,
I must do so now, before they leave me behind. Silently, after one final look,
he stole from the Vestry.
The eyes of the Black Sorceress did not mark his passing, but his footsteps
resounded in her heart.
THE PALADIN OF THE NIGHT
273
Chapter 9
When did I begin to lose control? Khardan wondered angrily.
For twenty-five years, I've held life in my hand like a lump of cold iron
ready for the forging. Then, suddenly, the iron changed to sand. Life began to
slide through my fingers, and the harder I grasped hold of it, the more fell
away from me.
It all started with the God's command that I marry Zohra and wait for that
accursed Rose of the Prophet to bloom. What have I done to offend the God that
he treats me thus? What have my people done? Why has Akhran allowed me to be
brought here when my people need me? Instead of helping us to defeat our
enemies, why has he chosen to appear to these kafir and assist them in their
evil plots?
"Hear my prayer, Akhran!" Khardan muttered angrily. "Send my djinn to me! Or
appear here with your fiery sword and free me!"
In the passion of his plea, the nomad strained against the leather thongs that
bound his wrists together. Kiber growled, and a knife flashed in the light of
a torch. Whirling, Khardan turned to face his attacker. Bound as he was, he
was prepared to fight for his life, but Auda ibn Jad shook his head. Reaching
out, he took the knife from Kiber, grabbed hold of Khardan's arms, and pushed
him up against a wall. The knife sliced through the leather thongs.
272
"That will be all for the night, Kiber," Auda said. "You have leave to go to
your quarters."
The goum bowed and, after giving Khardan one final, threatening glance,
departed. Walking back down the hallway, Kiber seemed not to notice—since he
had been given no orders concerning the matter—the black shape moving some
distance behind them that vanished precipitously into the deeper darkness of

an open doorway at the gown's approach.
Khardan rubbed his wrists and stared suspiciously at ibn Jad. The two were
alone in a shadowy hallway that was spiraling downward, taking them deep
beneath the ground level of the Castle.
"Fight me!" Khardan said abruptly. "Your sword. My bare hands. It doesn't
matter."
Auda ibn Jad appeared amused. "I admire your spirit, nomad, but you lack
discipline and common sense. What have either of us to gain by fighting?
Perhaps you could defeat me, although I doubt it, for I am well trained in
forms of hand-to-hand combat of which you have no conception. Still, by some
mischance you might win. Then what? Where would you go? Back to the ghuls?"
Khardan could not help himself; a shudder shook his body. Ibn Jad smiled
grimly. "Such was my purpose in allowing them to attack you. I wouldn't have
let them kill you, you know. You are far too valuable to us. Blossom's rescue
of you was quite unexpected, although highly instructive, as it turned out.
Strange are the ways of the God," he murmured reflectively and stared back
down the hall in thoughtful silence. Shaking his head, breaking his reverie,
ibn Jad continued. "No, I will not fight you. I have released your bonds so
that we may walk together as men—with dignity."
"I will not serve your God!" Khardan said harshly.
"Gome, let us not spend our time in pointless argument," Auda made a polite,
graceful gesture with his slender hand. "Will you walk with me? The way is not
far."
"Where are we going?"
"That will be seen."
Khardan stood irresolutely in the hallway, glancing up and down the torchlit
corridor. Carved out of granite, it was narrow and grew narrower still up
ahead. Torches lit the way, but they were placed upon the wall at intervals of
about twenty or thirty feet and so left patches of darkness broken by
274
WEIS AND HICKMAN
THE PALADIN OF THE NIGHT
275
circles of light. Farther back, at the beginning of the hall, after they'd
left the Vestry, they had passed doorways and the arched entrances to other
corridors. But soon these were left behind. The walls that had been made of
smooth, polished stone gave way to rough-hewn blocks. There were no windows,
there was absolutely no way out.
And if there was, there were the ghuls. . . .
Khardan began to walk down the hall, his dark brows lowering, his face grim
and stern. Auda ibn Jad accompanied him.
"Tell me, is it true that your God— What is His name?"
"Akhran."
"—Akhran is known as the Wanderer? Could it be your God who came to us with
news of Quar's duplicity?"
"Yes," Khardan admitted. "Akhran has warned us of Quar's treachery, and we
have seen it for ourselves."
"In the Amir's attack on your people?"
"I did not flee the battle, dressed as a woman!"
"Of course not. That was the doing of Blossom and your wife, Zohra. A
remarkable woman that one. I cannot imagine that she would be the kind to drag
a man out of battle. Did she give you any explanation for this irrational
behavior?"
"Something about a vision," Khardan replied irritably, not wanting to discuss
the matter, not wanting to think about Zohra. Despite the fact that she had
dishonored him in his bed, despite the fact that she had thwarted his marriage
to Meryem and made him ridiculous in the eyes of his fellow tribesmen by
forcing him into the position of accepting a man into his harem, she was his
wife, deserving his protection, and he was helpless to grant it.
"A vision?"

"Women's magic," muttered Khardan.
"Do not disparage women's magic, nomad," said Auda ibn Jad gravely. "Through
its power and the courage of those who wield it—courage as strong or stronger
than any man—my people have survived. This vision was important enough to the
woman to cause her to act upon it. I wonder what it was. And still more, how
it might affect what I do now."
Khardan could hear the Paladin's unspoken words as plainly as the spoken; the
thoughtful, brooding expression on Auda's face indicated how seriously he took
this matter. Khardan began to regret that he had not questioned Mathew further
on this point.
The Black Paladin did not speak for several minutes, while they continued to
walk the winding hallway. At length, the light of the torches ended. Beyond
them was impenetrable darkness and an evil whose depths were unfathomable.
Khardan stopped. A sudden weakness came over him. Trembling, he leaned against
the wall. A draft wafting up those shadowy stairs caused him to shiver
uncontrollably. It was as chill and damp as the breath of Death; its touch
upon his skin was like the cold touch of a corpse.
Auda ibn Jad took a torch from a sconce on the wall and held it aloft. The
light illuminated stone stairs descending in a sharp spiral.
"Courage, nomad," said the Paladin, his hand on Khardan's bare arm.
"What is down there? Where are you taking me?"
"To your destiny," answered Auda ibn Jad.
Khardan was about to hurl himself at the Black Paladin, make a last,
desperate, hopeless attempt to battle for his life; but the man's dark eyes
met his, caught and held him motionless.
"Is this courage? To fight in despair like a cornered rat? If it is death you
face down there, surely it is better to face it with dignity."
"So be it!" said Khardan. Shaking off Auda's hand, the Calif walked ahead of
the Paladin down the staircase.
At the foot of the stairs they came to another hallway. By the light of ibn
Jad's torch, Khardan could see a series of heavy wooden doors placed at
intervals on either side of a narrow corridor. All the doors except one were
closed. From that one shone a bright light, and Khardan could hear faint
sounds emanating from it.
"This way," said ibn Jad, with a gesture.
<>•       Khardan walked slowly toward the doorway, his legs seemingly
unwilling to carry him forward, his feet heavy and clumsy. Fear crawled like a
snake in his belly, and he knew that if it were not for the black eyes of ibn
Jad watching him, the Calif would have broken down and wept like a terrified
child.
The sounds grew clearer the nearer he drew to the open door, and the snake in
his gut twisted and turned. It was the sound of a man moaning in death's
agony. Sweat broke out on Khardan's face, trickling down into his black beard.
A tremor shook him, but still he kept going. Coming opposite the
276
WEIS AND HICKMAN
doorway, he felt the touch of Auda's hand upon His arm and came to a stop.
Blinking against the brightness inside the room, he looked within.
At first he could see nothing but a figure of darkness outlined against
blazing firelight. A small, shrunken man with an oversized head and a wizened
body glanced at Khardan with shrewd, appraising eyes.
"This is the one, Paladin?" came a voice as wizened as the body.
"Yes, Lifemaster."
The man nodded his huge head. It seemed balanced so precariously upon his
scrawny neck, and he moved so care-fiilly and with such deliberation, that
Khardan had a fearfiil, momentary impression the head might topple off. The
man was dressed in voluminous black robes that stirred and rippled in waves of
hot air wafting from the room. From behind him, running like a dark
undercurrent to his words, came the low, moaning sound.
"You arrive in good time, Paladin," said the man in satisfaction.

"The rebirth?"
"Any moment now, Paladin. Any moment."
"It should prove instructive to the nomad. May we watch, Lifemaster?"
"A pleasure, Paladin." The small man bowed and stepped aside from the doorway.
Khardan looked inside, then hastily averted his eyes.
"Squeamish?" said the wizened man, scurrying over to poke at Khardan with a
bony finger. "Yet here I see scars of battle—"
"It is one thing to fight a man. It is another to see one tormented to his
death!" Khardan said hoarsely, keeping his head turned from the gruesome sight
within.
"Watch!" said Auda softly.
"Watch!" said the old man. The bony hand crawled over Khardan's flesh and he
cringed in disgust, then started and gasped. Needle-sharp pain raced through
his nerve endings. The small man held no weapon, but it was as if a thousand
piercing thorns had driven into Khardan's flesh. Choking back his cry, he
stared at the black-robed man, who smiled modestly.
"When I came to Zhakrin, I wondered how best I might serve my God. This"—he
spread his thin arms, the yellowed
THE PALADIN OF THE NIGHT
277
skin hung from the bones—"is not the body of a warrior. I could not win souls
for Zhakrin with my sword. But I could win them another way—pain. Long years I
studied, traveling to dark and secret places throughout Sularin, learning to
perfect the art. For art it is. Look, look at this man."
The fingers caressed Khardan's skin. Reluctantly, he turned his gaze back upon
the figure in the room.
"He was brought in yesterday, Paladin. Look at his armor!" The wizened man
pointed a palsied finger toward a corner of the room.
"A White Knight of Evren!" said Auda in awe.
"Yes!" The small man smiled proudly. "And look at him now. One of her
strongest, one of her best. Look at him now!"
The man, his arms chained to the wall, sprawled naked upon the stone floor. He
stared at the Lifemaster with wild, dilated eyes. His body was covered with
blood—some of it still flowing—from numerous wounds, the skin was ashen gray.
The low moaning sound came from his throat; then suddenly his body jerked
convulsively. He screamed in agony, his head dashed back against the wall as
though he had been struck by a giant hand.
But no one had touched him. No one had gone near him.
The wizened man smiled with quiet pride. "Pain, you see"—he nudged Khardan—"is
in two places. Body and mind. The pain you feel"—his fingers twitched and
Khardan felt the needles race through his flesh again, this time sharper and
seemingly tipped with fire. He could not forbear crying out, and the wizened
man grinned in satisfaction—"that was in your body. You are brave, nomad, but
within fifteen minutes, with my instruments and my bare hands, I can reduce
you to a quivering mass of flesh promising me anything if I will only end your
torment. But that is nothing, nothing to the pain you will endure when I enter
your mind! I am there now, in his." The wizened man pointed at the White
Knight. "Watch!"
The Lifemaster slowly began to clench his tiny fist, the fingers curling
inward. And, as he did so, the man chained to the wall began to curl in upon
himself, his muscles clenching spasmodically, his entire body curling up like
that of a dying spider, scream after scream bursting from his throat.
"Honor?" Turning to the Black Paladin, Khardan sneered, though his face ran
with sweat and his body shook. "What honor is there is torturing your enemy to
death?"
278
WEIS AND HICKMAN
"Death?" The wizened man appeared shocked. "No! Senseless, wasteful!"
"He is dyingl" Khardan said angrily.
"No," said the Lifemaster softly, "he is praying. Listen. ..."

Reluctantly, Khardan turned his gaze back to the tortured body. Evren's Knight
hung from his chains, his strength nearly spent. His screams had ceased, his
broken voice whispered words that could not, at first, be heard.
The Lifemaster raised a hand for silence. Hardly breathing, ibn Jad leaned
forward. Baffled, Khardan glanced from one to the other. A look of triumph was
on each face, yet the Calif could not understand their victory. A dying man
praying to his Goddess to accept his soul . . .
And then Khardan heard the man's words clearly.
"Accept me ... in your service . . . Zhakrin. ..." The man's voice grew
stronger. "Accept me ... in your service . . . Zhakrin!"
Preparation to become a Black Paladin.
Evren's Knight lifted his head, tears streamed from his eyes. He raised his
manacled hands. "Zhakrin!" he whispered reverently. "Zhakrin!"
The Lifemaster shuffled across the stone floor. Drawing a key from his robes,
he removed the manacles. The knight fell to his knees, embracing the man
around the legs. Clucking like a mother over her child, the wizened old man
lifted a bowl of water and began to cleanse the tormented flesh.
"Naked, covered with blood, we come into this life," murmured ibn Jad.
Sickened and dizzy, Khardan slumped back against the stone wall. The tortured
man's body was muscular; he was obviously strong and powerful. A bloodstained
sword rested in the comer, his armor—adorned with a lily—was dented and
scratched. He had apparently fought his captors valiantly. He had been the
sworn enemy of this God, and now he offered Zhakrin his life.
"So did many of us come to the God," said ibn Jad. "The path of fire cleanses
and leads the soul to the truth. And so it will be with you, nomad." He
gripped Khardan's arm. "In years to come, you will look back on this as a
blessed experience. And with you, it will be a twice wonderful transformation,
for you will be reborn almost at the same moment as will our God!"
The Lifemaster had the knight on his feet, his scrawny
THE PALADIN OF THE NIGHT
279
arm around the strong body, holding him tenderly. "Take him, Paladin. Take him
to his chamber. He will sleep and wake refreshed and renewed in the morning."
Auda ibn Jad accepted charge of Evren's Knight, who was still murmuring the
name of Zhakrin in holy ecstasy.
Leading the knight back down the hallway, Auda glanced over his shoulder at
Khardan. "Farewell, nomad. When we meet tomorrow, I hope it will be to call
you brother."
Khardan surged forward, with no hope of escape, with 'Only some dim view in
his mind of smashing his head into the stone wall, of dashing out his brains,
of killing himself.
Bony fingers closed over his wrist. Pain mounted up his arm, running from tiny
nerve to tiny nerve, seeping through his veins like slow-moving ice water. He
stumbled to his knees, resistance gone. The Lifemaster grabbed hold of his
other wrist and dragged him across the stone floor into the sweltering heat of
the room.
Flame leaped high in Khardan's vision, heat beat upon his body. The manacles
snapped shut around his wrists. The old man shuffled across the floor to where
an iron cauldron hung over the roaring fire. Reaching inside, his flesh
seemingly impervious to the searing heat, he drew forth a thin piece of
red-hot, glowing iron and turned back with it to face Khardan.
"Akhran!" Khardan shouted, plunging against the manacles, trying to rip them
from the wall. "Akhran! Hear me!"
The old man shuffled closer and closer until his huge head loomed in Khardan's
vision. "Only one God hears your screams, nomad. Zhakrin!" The hissing breath
was hot upon Khardan's cheek. "Zhakrin!"
THE PALADIN OF THE NIGHT
281
Chapter 10
Mathew crept silently down the stairs behind Auda ibn Jad and Khardan, his way

lit only by the faint afterglow of the Black Paladin's torch. Peering
cautiously around the corner at the bottom, he saw the long, narrow hallway
with its rows of closed wood doors and realized that to go any farther would
lead to certain discovery.
He had no choice but to retreat back up the stairs, feeling his way in the
darkness, moving cautiously so that he would not be heard. He came to a halt
about halfway up die staircase, pressed against die wall, holding his breath
to hear. Hie men's words came to him clearly; a trick of the stone carrying it
to his ears almost as plainly as if he stood beside them.
Thus Mathew heard everything, from Evren's tortured Knight's agony to his
final, ecstatic prayer to Zhakrin. He heard the scuffling sound of Khardan's
futile try for freedom, he heard the Calif cry out in pain, and the sound of a
heavy, weight being dragged across the floor. But he heard something else,
too. Auda ibn Jad was coming back this direction. Moving as swiftly as he
dared in the total darkness, Mathew dashed to the top of the stairs. Reaching
the level floor but not expecting it, he staggered and fell. The footsteps
grew louder. Fortunately, ibn Jad was weighted down by the burden of the weak
knight he was supporting and so was forced to move slowly. The Knight's
murmuring prayers to Zhakrin kept the Black Paladin from hearing Mathew's
scramblings.
280
Rising hastily to his feet, Mathew looked despairingly down the long hall. A
torch burning on the wall about twenty feet away illuminated much of the
corridor brightly, leaving only 3 swatch of shadow between it and the next
torch; Mathew could not hope to run the length of the hall without being seen.
Near him, just at the edge of the circle of torchlight, a darker shadow
offered his only hope. Darting to it, Mathew discovered what he had been
praying for—a natural alcove in the rough rock walls. It wasn't very big and
seemed to grow smaller as Mathew attempted to squeeze his slender body into
the fissure. If he had been standing directly beneath the blazing torch, he
could not have imagined himself more visible. Turning his face to the wall in
an effort to hide the milk-white skin that would show up in the light, Mathew
drew his hands up into the sleeves of his black robes and held his breath.
Ibn Jad and the knight passed within inches of him. Mathew could have reached
out and plucked the Paladin's sleeve with his hand. It seemed that they must
see him or hear him; his heart thudded loud enough to wake the dead. But the
two walked on by, continuing down the hall without once looking in his
direction. Exhaling a relieved sigh, Mathew was about to offer a prayer of
thanks for the protection when he remembered uncomfortably which God it was
who ruled the Darkness.
An agonized scream welled up from below, echoing in the hallway. Khardan . . .
Mathew's legs gave way and he sank down weakly onto the stone floor, the
terrible sound reverberating in his heart. Trembling, his hand went to the
pouch he wore at his waist, his fingers closed over the obsidian wand.
The darkness hissed. "Say the word, Master, and I will save your friend from
his suffering."
"I did not summon you!" Mathew said shakily, aware that he had no control over
this creature.
"Not by word," replied the imp, sniggering. "I read the wishes of your heart."
Another cry rent the air. Mathew shrank back against the wall. "By saving him,
you don't mean taking us away from here, do you?" he questioned. His chest
constricted painfully; it was difficult to breathe.
"No," said the imp, drawing out the word, ending in a throaty growl. "My Demon
Prince would not Idee that at all.
282
WEIS AND HICKMAN
THE PALADIN OF THE NIGHT
283
If you leave, then so must I, and my Prince commands that I stay. He is
delighted to hear of his brother God's return and more delighted still to know

that the Good Goddess is in Zhakrin's power."
"What will he do with her?"
"Stupid mortal, what do you think?" the imp returned, its shriveled body
writhing in eager anticipation.
"He can't destroy—" Mathew began, appalled.
"That remains to be seen. Never before has one of the Twenty been so weakened.
Her immortals are not here to help her; her mortal followers, as you have
seen, are succumbing to Zhakrin. His power grows as Evren's wanes."
Mathew tried to think, to feel some sense of loss at the terrible fete of the
Goddess, tried to force himself to contemplate what this upset might do to the
balance of power in heaven. But Khardan's screams were in his ears, and
suddenly he cared about nothing but what was happening on earth.
"Free him, free Zohra! Take me to your Prince," Mathew begged, sweat beading
on his lip.
The imp pursed its shriveled lips. "A poor bargain, trading nothing for
something. Besides, Zhakrin has requested the woman's body. Astafas would
never offend his brother by stealing her away."
Khardan's screams ceased abruptly, cut off by a choked, strangled city. In the
awful silence, a glimmering of understanding lit Mathew's darkness. The
perplexing behavior of the Wandering God was no longer perplexing. The young
wizard longed to fan the tiny spark of the idea that had come to him, to blow
on the coal and watch it burst into flame. But he dared not. The moment the
thought came to mind, he saw the imp's tongue lick its lips, the red eyes
narrow.
Drawing the wand from his pouch, Mathew held it up before the imp. "I want to
talk to Khardan," the young wizard said evenly, keeping tight control on his
voice. "Lure his tormentor away."
The imp laughed, sneering derisively.
"What would happen," Mathew continued calmly, though his body trembled beneath
the black robes, "if I were to give this wand to the Black Sorceress?"
The imp's red eyes flared. Too late, it hooded them with thin, wrinkled lids.
"Nothing," said the creature.
"You lie," Mathew returned. "I begin to understand. The wand serves to summon
the immortal nearest our hearts. Meryem used it to call one of Quar's minions.
When the wand came into my hands, however, its power acted on an immortal
being of the Gods in which 1 believe, and because its magic is black, it
called you."
The imp's long red tongue lolled out of its mouth in derision. Its teeth
showed black against the red, its eyes burned.
Mathew averted his gaze; looking directly at the wand he held in his hand. "If
I gave this wand to the Black Sorceress, she could use it to summon an
immortal being of Zhakrin's."
"Let her try!" The imp's tongue rolled up into its mouth with a slurp. "His
immortals have long since disappeared."
"Nonetheless, you would be banished."
"As long as you are here, I am here, Dark Master," said the imp, grinning
wickedly.
"But powerless to act," Mathew returned.
"As are you!"
"It seems I am powerless either way." Mathew shrugged. "What do I have to
lose?"
"Your soul!" hissed the imp with a wriggle of delight that nearly twisted the
creature in two.
Mathew saw the Hand reaching out for him; he saw the vast void into which he
would be cast, his soul wailing in despair until its small cry was swallowed
up by the eternal darkness.
"No," said Mathew softly. "Astafas would not have even that. For when I give
the wand to the Black Sorceress, I give myself to her as well."
The imp was caught in mid-writhe. One leg twined about the other, one arm
wrapped about its neck. Slowly it unwound itself and crept forward to glare at

Mathew.
"Before I would allow that, I would snatch your soul away!"
"To do that, you would have to have me killed, and I would be dead, and you
would lose entry to this place."
"It seems we are at an impasse!" the imp snarled.
"Do for me what I ask. Help me to see Khardan—alone."
Its tongue curling and uncurling, the imp considered. It peered into Mathew's
mind, but all it saw there was a theological muddle. As far as the imp was
concerned, theology
284
WEIS AND HICKMAN
was good for only one thing—leading the overzealous scholar into deep and
dangerous waters. While occasionally amused to hear mortals argue with firm
conviction over something they knew absolutely nothing about, the imp
generally found theological discussion sonrnambulic. The imp thought it odd
(even for Mathew) to choose this time to discuss theology with a man being
tortured, and the creature probed Mathew's mind deeply. The young wizard
appeared to have nothing more treacherous planned, however. Not that anything
he attempted would do him any good anyway. The imp decided to humor the mortal
and gain a valuable concession at the same time.
"If I obey your commands, then you must swear fealty to Astafas."
"Anything!" Mathew said shortly, eager to reach Khardan. This ominous silence
was more terrifying than the screams.
"Just a moment!" The imp held up a splay-fingered hand. "I feel it only right
to tell you that your guardian angel is not present, and so you have no one to
intervene in your behalf before you make this commitment."
Why this news should have distressed Mathew, who did not believe in guardian
angels any more than he believed in other nursery tales, was a mystery. But he
felt a sudden heaviness in his heart.
"It is of no matter," he said after a moment. "I pledge my loyalty to the
Prince of Darkness."
"Say his name!" hissed the imp.
"I pledge my loyalty to ... to Astafas." The word burned Mathew's lips like
poison. When he licked them, he tasted a bitter flavor.
The imp grinned. It knew Mathew lied. It knew that though the human's mouth
spoke the words, they were not repeated by his soul. But the mortal was alone
on this plane of human existence, his guardian angel was no longer there to
shield him with her white wings. And now Mathew knew he was alone. Despair,
hopelessness—these would be the imp's instruments of torture, and when the
time came—as it would soon; the imp, too, was starting to form a plan—the
young wizard would be all too willing for the torment to end, to lapse into
the soothing comfort of dark oblivion.
"Wait here!" the imp said and vanished in an eyeblink.
A voice came out of the torchlight, sounding so near and so real that Mathew
started to his feet, looking around in terror.
THE PALADIN OF THE NIGHT
285
"Lifemaster! Come swiftly!" Auda ibn Jad sounded angry, upset. "This knight.
There is something wrong with him! I think he is dying!"
The hall was empty. The Black Paladin was nowhere in sight. Yet the voice
seemingly came from near Mathew's shoulder.
"Lifemaster!" Ibn Jad commanded.
"What is it?" a shrill voice answered from below.
Mathew scrunched back into the alcove, holding his breath.
"Lifemaster!" The Black Paladin was furious, insistent.
Steps rasped upon the stairs. The Lifemaster, wheezing, slowly made his way to
the top and stared down the hall.
"Ibn Jad?" he queried in a tremulous voice.
"Lifemaster!" The Black Paladin's shout echoed through the corridor. "Why do
you tarry? The knight has gone into a fit!"

His oversized head jutting forward, peering this way and that, the Lifemaster
shuffled down the hallway, following the sound of ibn Jad's voice that grew
increasingly angrier as it grew increasingly more distant.
Chapter 11
Strong arms held Zohra close, warm lips tasted hers, hands caressed her. The
aching of desire burned within her, and she cried out for love, but there was
nothing. The arms melted away, the lips turned cold, the hands withdrew. She
was empty inside, longing desperately for that emptiness to be filled. The
pain grew worse and worse, and then a dark figure stood above her bed.
"Khardan!" Zohra cried out in gladness and held forth her arms to draw the
figure near.
The figure raised a hand and a bright, white light shone in Zohra's eyes,
burning away the dream.
"Waken," said a cool, smooth voice.
Zohra sat up, her eyes watering in the sudden brilliance. Holding up her hand
to shield them, she endeavored to see the figure that was reflected in the
white light.
"What happened to me?" Zohra cried fearfully, the memory of the arms and lips
and hands all too real, her body still aching for the touch even as her mind
revolted against it.
"Nothing, my dear," said the voice, a woman's voice. "The drug was given you
prematurely." The white light became nothing more than the flame of a candle,
illuminating the taut, stretched skin of the sorceress. Placing the
candlestick on a table beside Zohra's bed, the sorceress sat down next to her
The flame burned steadily and unwaveringly hi
286
THE PALADIN OF THE NIGHT
287
the depths of the woman's ageless eyes. Reaching out a hand, she smoothed back
Zohra's mane of tangled black hair.
"I believe, however, that it has proved most instructive. You see now that you
are ours—body, mind, and soul."
"What do you mean?" Zohra faltered, drawing back from the woman's touch.
Finding herself naked in the bed, she grasped hold of the silken sheets on
which she lay and clasped them around her body.
The Black Sorceress smiled. "Had not another requested you, my dear, you would
have now been languishing in the arms of one of the Black Paladins; perhaps
within a few months, bearing his child."
"No!" Zohra tossed her head defiantly, but she kept her eyes averted from the
stern, cold face.
The Black Sorceress leaned near, her hand touching Zohra's cheek. "Strong
arms, soft kisses. And then nothing but cold emptiness. You cried out—"
"Stop!" Zohra thrust the hand from her, glaring at the woman through tears of
shame. Clutching the sheets to her breast, she scrambled back as far as
possible from the woman— which wasn't far until the carved wooden bedstead
blocked her way. "I will eat nothing, drink nothing!" she cried passionately.
"I will never submit—"
"The drug was not in your food, child. It was in the clothing you put on. The
fabric is soaked in it, and the drug seeps through your skin. It could be in
these bed sheets." She waved a hand. "The perfume with which we anoint your
body. You would never know, my dear. . . . But"—the sorceress rose languidly
to her Feet. Turning from Zohra, she walked away from the bed and began to
pace the floor slowly—"do not concern yourself. As I said, you have been
chosen by another, and though He wants your body, it is not for the purpose of
breeding new followers."
Zohra remained silent, disdaining to question. She was barely listening, in
fact. She was trying to figure some way to avoid the drug.
The Black Sorceress looked toward a small leaded glass window set into the
wall of the cheerless room. "It is only a few hours until the dawn of what
will be for us a new day, a day of hope. When the mid hour of night strikes,

our Cod will return to us. Zhakrin will be reborn." She glanced around at
Zohra, who—catching the sorceress's gaze and seeing that some response was
required—shrugged.
288
WEIS AND HICKMAN
"What is that to me?"
"Everything, my dear," the Black Sorceress said softly, her eyes glittering
with an eager, intense light. "He will be reborn in your body!"
Zohra rolled her eyes. Obviously the woman was insane. I have to get out of
here. The drug . . . perhaps it was that musky odor I smelled. There must be
an antidote, some way to counter it. Usti might know, if I can persuade the
blubbering coward to help me—
A pang of fear struck Zohra. She glanced around hastily and saw her rings
lying on the table beside the bed, gleaming brightly in the candlelight. She
sighed in relief.
The Black Sorceress was watching her gravely. "You don't believe me."
"Of course not!" Zohra gave a brief, bitter laugh. "This is a trick to confuse
me."
"No trick, my dear, I assure you," said the Black Sorceress. "You are to be
honored above all mortals, your weak flesh will hold our God until He attains
the strength to abandon it and take His rightful place among the other
deities. If you do not believe me, ask your djinn." The sorceress's gaze fixed
upon the silver ring. Zohra's face paled, but she pressed her lips tightly
together and said nothing. The sorceress nodded. "I will give you a few
moments alone to ease the turbulence of your soul. You must be relaxed and
peaceful. When I return with the dawn, we will begin preparing you to accept
the God."
The Black Sorceress left the room, shutting the door softly behind her. There
came no sound of a lock, but Zohra knew hopelessly that if she tried to open
it, the door would not yield. Silently, unmoving, clutching the sheets to her
bosom, Zohra lifted the ring.
"Usti," she called out in a small, tight voice.
"Is she gone?"
"Yes!" Zohra checked an impatient sigh.
"Coming, Princess." The djinn drifted out from the ring—a thin, wavering wisp
of smoke that writhed about on the floor before finally coalescing into a
flabby body. Subdued, miserable, and frightened, the fat djinn had the
appearance of a lump of goat's cheese melting beneath the desert sun.
"Usti," said Zohra softly, her eyes on the candle flame, "is what she said
true? Can they . . . give my body ... to a God?"
THE PALADIN OF THE NIGHT
288
"Yes, Princess," said the djinn sadly, bowing his head. His chins folded in on
one another until it seemed likely his mouth and mose would be swallowed up by
flesh.
"And . . . there is nothing you can do?" Her spirit broken, her fears
beginning to conquer, Zohra asked the question in a wistful, pitiful tone that
wrung the djinn's nonexistent heart.
"Oh, Princess," Usti wailed, twisting his fat hands together in anguish. "I
have been a most worthless immortal, all my life! I know that! But I swear to
you that I would risk the iron box—I swear by Hazrat Akhran—that I would help
you if I could! But you see!" He gestured wildly at the door. "She knows I am
here! And she does nothing to try to stop me. Why? Because she knows I am
helpless, powerless to stop her!"
Zohra bowed her head, her black hair tumbling over her shoulders. "No one can
help me. I am all alone. Mathew has deserted me. Khardan is undoubtedly either
dead or dying. There is no escape, no hope. . . ." Slowly, despondently, she
let the sheet slide from nerveless hands. Tears trickled down her cheeks and
dripped onto the sheet, spotting the silk.
Usti stared at her in dismay. Flinging himself upon the bed, nearly upsetting
it in the process, he cried, "Don't give up, Princess! This isn't like you!

Fight! Fight! Look, aren't you furious with me? Throw something! Here"—the
djinn grabbed hold of a water carafe. Splashing water recklessly over the bed,
he thrust it into Zohra's unresponsive hands— "toss that at me! Hit me on the
head!" Usti snatched off his turban, offering his bald pate as a tempting
target. "Yell at me, scream at me, curse me! Anything! Don't cry, Princess!
Don't cry!" Tears rolling in torrents down his own fat face, Usti dragged the
bedclothes up over his head. "Please don't cry!"
"Usti," said Zohra, Her eyes shining with an eerie light. "I have an idea.
There is one way to prevent them from taking my body."
"There is?" Usti said warily, lowering the sheet and peering over it.
"If my body was dead, they could not use it, could they?"
"Princess!" Usti gasped in sudden terrified understanding, flinging the sheet
over his head again. "No! I can't! I am forbidden to take a mortal life
without permission from the God!"
290
WEIS AND HICKMAN
"You said you would risk anything for me!" Zohra tugged at the fabric. Slowly,
the djinn's face emerged, staring at her woefully. "My soul will plead for you
to Holy Akhran. The God has done nothing to help us. Surely He will not be so
unjust as to punish you for obeying the final request of your mistress!"
Usti gnawed on the hem of the sheet. Zohra's gaze was steadfast, unwavering.
Finally, the djinn stood up. "Princess," he said, his chins quivering, but his
voice firm, "somewhere within this fat body I will find the courage to carry
out your command."
"Thank you, Usti," Zohra replied gently.
"But only at the last moment, when there is no ... no hope," the djinn said,
the final word lost in a knot of choking tears.
"At the last, when there is no hope," Zohra repeated, her gaze going to the
window to watch for the dawn.
Chapter 12
Mathew waited until he saw the Lifemaster's bulbous head gleam in the flame of
the most distant torch lighting the hallway, then the young wizard slipped
from his alcove. Keeping to the shadows, he ran to the stairs and, clinging to
the wall, fumbled his way down them. Once at the bottom, he could see the
light streaming from the room where he knew Khardan must be held. No sound
came from it. All was silent, silent as a tomb, he thought, his heart aching
in fear.
Outside the door the memory of those agonized screams returned, and this
courage failed him.
"Coward!" he cursed himself bitterly as he stood trembling in the doorway,
fearful of entering, terrified of what he might find. "He is the one who is
suffering and you shake in terror, ! anable to move to help him!"
"Help," he scoffed at himself. "What help can you offer? What hope? None.
Words, that's all. What do you fear? That you will find him dead? Shouldn't
that be your wish for nun, if you truly care about him? Or are you selfish as
Well as cowardly? And what if he isn't dead? You will exhort him to accept
more torment. Better to leave, better to let nim go. ..."
"No! You're wrong!" Mathew argued resolutely, pushing ;,i>ack his doubts. He
recognized that voice, it was the same one that had told him to give up when
he'd been captured by the slave trader, the voice that had whispered to him of
the
291
292
WEIS AND HICKMAN
THE PALADIN OF THE NIGHT
293
sweetness of death. "I'm wasting time. The tormentor will be back soon."
Clenching his jaw tightly, Mathew walked into the torture chamber.
"Khardan!" he murmured. Compassion rushed in to fill fear's dark and empty
well. Mathew forgot that the tormentor might return any moment. He forgot the

imp, forgot his own danger.
Khardan sat on the stone floor, his back against a wall, his arms chained
above his head. He had been stripped of his clothes. Burn marks scorched his
bare chest, blood oozed from strategically inflicted wounds. The Calif's head
lolled forward, he had lost consciousness. Tears stinging his eyes, Mathew
pressed his hand to his lips, forcing back a choking cry of anguish.
"Leave him!" the voice urged. "Leave him this one moment of peace. It will be
all he has. ..."
Shaking his head, blinking back the tears, Mathew summoned all his strength
and courage—a far more difficult task than summoning demons—and knelt down
beside the Calif. A bowl of water stood on a table nearby, just out of reach,
probably placed there to enhance the tormenting of the chained man. Lifting
it, Mathew dipped his fingers in the cool water and dabbed them upon the
Califs blood-caked lips.
"Khardan," he said. The name came out a sob.
Khardan stirred and moaned, and Mathew's heart was wrung with pity. The hand
touching the lips trembled, tears blinded him momentarily and he could not
speak. He forced himself to quash the sympathy, the vivid imaginings of what
it must be like to endure such torture.
"Khardan," he repeated, more firmly, with a sternness he knew to be a prop
holding him up.
Khardan raised his head suddenly, looking about him with a wild terror in his
feverish eyes that pierced Mathew to his soul.
"No more!" the nomad muttered. His arms wrenched, trying to drag the chains
from the wall. "No more!"
"Khardan!" Mathew stroked the man's hair back with a gentle, soothing hand and
held the water bowl to his lips. "Khardan, it's Mathew! Drink. ..."
Khardan drank thirstily, then retched, moaning in agony, bringing most of the
water back up. But his eyes lost their
wild look, a glimmer of recognition flickered in the dark depths. He leaned
back weakly against the wall.
"Where is ... he\" The horror with which Khardan said the word sent chills
through Mathew. He set down the water bowl, his shaking hand was spilling most
of it.
"He is gone, for the moment," Mathew said softly. "The creature I ... control
. . . led him away."
"Get me out of here!" Khardan gasped.
Removing his hand from the man's forehead, Mathew sat back, looking into the
black, hopeful eyes- "I can't, Khardan." No words ever fell more reluctantly
from Mathew's lips. He saw the eyes flash in contempt and anger, then they
closed. Khardan sighed.
"Thank you for this much, at least," he said slowly, painfully nodding toward
the water. "You had better leave now. You've risked a great deal in corning to
me. . . ."
"Khardan!" Mathew clasped his hands together pleadingly. "I would free you if
I could! I would give my life for you if I could!" Khardan opened his eyes,
looking at him intently, and Mathew flushed. He hadn't meant his words to come
out stained with his heart's blood. Lowering his head, staring down at the
bowl of pinkish water sitting on the floor at his knees, Mathew continued
speaking in more subdued tones, all the while nervously twisting the black
velvet robes between his trembling fingers. "But I can't. It would be
pointless. There is nowhere to go, no hope of escape."
"We could at least die like men, fighting until the end," Khardan said warmly.
"We would die, each in the service of his God—"
"No!" Mathew said stubbornly, suddenly clenching his fist and driving it into
his knee. "That's all you think about—you nomads! Death! When you are winning,
life is fine; when you are losing, you decide to give up and die!"
"To die with honor—"
"Honor be damned!" Mathew cried angrily, lifting his head and glaring at
Khardan. "Maybe your death isn't what your God wants! Did you ever think about

that? Maybe you're of no use to Him dead! Maybe He's brought you here for a
reason, a purpose, and it's up to you to live long enough to try to find out
why!"
"My God has abandoned me," Khardan said harshly. "He has abandoned all of us,
it seems, for now He talks to these unbelievers."
294
WEIS AND HICKMAN
THE PALADIN OF THE NIGHT
295
"Hurt's what they want you to think!" Impulsively, Mathew reached out to take
the pale, suffering face in his hands. "Believe your God has abandoned you,
and you will abandon your God!"
"What do you know of my God, kafir?" Khardan jerked his head away from
Mathew's touch, averting his eyes.
Clasping him by the shoulders, Mathew moved so that the black eyes had nowhere
to look but at him. "Khardan, think about what we heard up there! Think about
what these people have endured, have suffered for their faith. Their God was
dead, and still they didn't forsake Him! Are you less strong? Will you give
in?"
Khardan stared at him thoughtfully, brows furrowed, eyes dark and unreadable.
His glance went to Mathew's hands, the thin, delicate fingers, cool from the
water, against the Calif's burning skin.
"Your touch is gentle as a woman's," he murmured.
Flushing in shame, Mathew snatched his hands away.
"More gentle than some women's—like my wife's," Khardan continued with a
ghastly smile. "I don't envy the one who tries to take her body. God or no
God, He's going to be in for an interesting time—" Khardan gasped in pain. His
body doubled over, nearly wrenching his arms from their sockets.
Mathew looked about frantically for the source, but saw nothing and realized
it must be coming from within. Helplessly he watched Khardan writhe, his body
jerking convulsively, and then the spasm passed. Breathing heavily, his flesh
glistening with sweat, Khardan slowly lifted his head.
Mathew saw himself reflected in the red-rimmed eyes. He might have been the
one tormented. His face was ashen, he was shaking in every limb.
Khardan smiled gently. His lips almost instantly twisted in a pain-filled
grimace, but the smile remained in the dark, shadowed eyes. "You better go,"
he spoke almost inaudibly. "I don't think . . . you can take . . . much more
of this. . . ."
Fraying that the imp was still leading the Lifemaster a merry chase, Mathew
caught up Khardan*s bloodstained shirt and, dipping it in the water, washed
the man's feverish forehead and face with cooling liquid. Khardan's eyes
closed, tears crept from beneath the lids. He gave a shuddering sigh.
"Khardan," said Mathew softly, "there is a way out, I think, but it is
desperate, almost hopeless."
Khardan nodded weakly, to show he understood. He had
strength for nothing more, and Mathew—seeing his suffering— nearly gave way.
"Be at peace," he longed to say, "go ahead and die. I was wrong. Give yourself
rest." But he didn't. Gritting his teeth, dipping the cloth in the water
again, he continued, the knowledge of what he was going to ask making his
heart wrench. "We must try, somehow, to gain possession of the two Gods before
Zhakrin can come back into the world. Once we have them both, we must free
Evren, the Goddess who is Zhakrin's opposite. With Her power—weak as it is—on
our side, I think we might succeed in escaping."
Khardan moved his head, the eyes opening the tiniest crack to look at Mathew
intently. Mathew laid down the cloth. Gently, he ran his fingers through the
crisp, curling black hair. Unable to meet those eyes, he gazed above them, at
his own hand. "To do this, you must gain admittance to the ceremony," Mathew
said, his voice catching in his throat. "To gain admittance, you must be a
Black Paladin. ..."
Khardan's jaw muscles twitched, his teeth clenched.

"Do you know what-I am saying?" Mathew persisted, emotion choking him. "I am
saying you must hold out until the point . . . the point of. . ." He couldn't
continue.
"Death. . . ." murmured Khardan. "And then . . . convince them I am . . . one.
. . ."
Mathew froze. What was that? Fearfully he listened. Footsteps! On the stairs!
Khardan did not move. His face was livid, blood trickled from the corner of
his mouth.
Shivering so he could barely stand, Mathew somehow managed to regain his feet.
His legs seemed to have gone numb, however, and he thought, for a moment, he
must sink back down to the floor again. Hesitating, he looked at Khardan.
I should forget this! The idea is insane. Far better to give
up now
will
not
Khardan's sunken eyes flickered. "I foil!"
Nor will I! Mathew said to himself in sudden grim determination. Turning, he
fled from the chamber, darting farther down the hallway, out of the light, to
hide himself in the shadow of another cell.
Muttering irritable imprecations down upon Auda ibn Jad for disturbing his
work for nothing and then having the nerve to try to deny that he had done
anything, the Lifemaster shuffled back into the chamber.
296
WEIS AND HICKMAN
Mathew heard the small man's dragging footsteps cross the room; he heard them
stop and could almost picture the tormentor bending over Khardan.
"Ah, had a visitor." The Lifemaster chuckled. "So that's what all that
rigmarole and fal-de-ra was about. Whoever it was gave you back a bit of
strength, I see. Well, well. No thanks to whoever it was. We'll just have to
work a little harder. ..."
Khardan's scream tore through the darkness and through Mathew's heart. Putting
his hand in his pouch, gripping the wand tightly, the young wizard spoke the
words of magic and felt impish hands grab hold of him and pluck him into the
darkness.
Chapter 13
"Take me to the Tower of Women," Mathew ordered wearily.
"To see the Black Sorceress? I think not!" the imp returned.
"No, I must talk with—" Staring around him, Mathew swallowed the word with a
gulp.
, The imp had returned Mathew to the room where the young wizard had been
first taken on his arrival. Materializing within it, both Mathew and his
"servant" were unpleasantly astonished to see the Black Sorceress standing
before the cold ashes left scattered in the fireplace.
"Talk with whom?" inquired the woman. "Your other friend?"
"If you have no further need of me, Dark Master—" whined the imp with an
obscene wriggle intended for a bow.
"Do not leave yet, creature of Sul," commanded the sorceress.
"Servant of Astafes!" hissed the imp angrily, its tongue sliding out between
its sharp black teeth. "I am not a low demon of Chaos, madam!"
"That could be arranged," said the Black Sorceress, her brows coming as close
together as was possible on the tightly stretched skin of her face. She
glanced at Mathew. "Make me a gift of this creature."
"I cannot, madam," said Mathew in a low, respectful tone. He had little to
fear. The sorceress might try to take the wand from him by force, but the imp
would most certainly
297
208
WEIS AND HICKMAN
fight—if not to protect him, then to protect its own shriveled skin.
"You are wise for one so young." The sorceress gazed at him searchingly.

Moving close to him, she laid a hand upon his cheek. Her touch was like the
bony fingers of a skeleton. Mathew shivered but did not move, caught and held
by the mesmerizing stare of the woman's eyes. "Your wisdom comes not from
years but from the ability to see into the hearts of those around you. A
dangerous gift, for then you begin to care for them. Their pain becomes your
pain." She lingered on the word, her fingers softly caressing, and the chill
touch began to burn, like ice held in wet hands.
Trembling, Mathew held himself very still, though the pain increased
immeasurably.
"You have seen what you should not have seen," the voice breathed all around
him. "You have been where you should not have gone. In time, when you were
ready, I would, have shown you all. Now, because you do not understand, you
are confused and disturbed. And you have done nothing for your nomad friend
except increase his torment. Why did you go? Did you think you could free
him?"
She didn't know! Blessed Fromenthas, she didn't know, didn't suspect!
"Yes, that was it!" Mathew gasped.
"A hopeless, foolish thought." The Black Sorceress made a clicking sound with
her tongue; the noise flicked on Mathew's exposed nerves. "How did you think
to accomplish your escape, and why didn't you go ahead and attempt it?"
"Madam," interposed the imp, rubbing its hands as though they ached, "the
nomad was too far gone for us to be able to help him. Madam will forgive us,"
added the imp, licking its lips, "if we do not tell her our plans for
assisting the nomad to escape."
"Why will madam forgive you?" The sorceress smiled cruelly at the imp, keeping
her hand on Mathew's cheekbone, the young man not daring to move, though it
seemed his teeth were on fire and his brain was expanding in his skull.
"Because, madam, you hope that Astafas will forgive you for harming one of His
own." The imp sidled nearer to Mathew. Elongating, stretching its small form
like rubber, it closed its splay fingers over the hand of the sorceress. "When
Zhakrin returns to the world, He will require the help of Astafes in the fight
against Quar." The imp's narrowed red
THE PALADIN OF THE NIGHT
299
eyes were fiery slits against its blackened, wrinkled skin. "Zhakrin has
Astafas's help and freely given, but Zhakrin is not to forget that this young
one is ours, not His." Like slithering snakes, the imp's words wound around
Mathew, tightening their coils.
Slowly, the sorceress removed her hand, though her fingers lingered long on
Mathew's skin. "You are weary." She spoke to Mathew, but her eyes were on the
imp. "Sleep now." The pain eased, submerged in a wave of drowsy warmth.
A soft pillow was beneath his head; he was lying in a bed. Darkness enfolded
him, banishing pain, banishing fear.
"Thank you," he murmured to the imp.
"Payment will come," whispered the darkness back to him. "Payment will come!"
Chapter 14
Dawn—The sun's light struggled feebly to penetrate the shroud of gray mist
that overhung the Isle of Galos—and the day began to march inexorably toward
night, time moving far too slowly for some, far too swiftly for others.
Mathew slept the sleep of exhaustion, waking well past midday. His sleep had
been neither restful nor refreshing, however. Filled with terror, his dreams
tormented his sou! as the Lifemaster tormented Khardan's flesh.
In the halcyon days in his own land, the young man had never given much
thought to eternity, to the soul's repose after its sojourn through the world
with the body. Like most young people, he assumed he would live forever. But
all that had changed. In those terrible days of enforced travel with the slave
caravan, when death seemed the only end to his suffering, Mathew thought with
longing of his soul ascending to a place where he would find comfort and ease
and^hear a gentle voice say, "Rest now, my child. You are home."
Now he would never hear that gentle voice. Now he would hear only harsh

laughter, crackling like flame. There would be no rest, no sweet homecoming.
Only an empty void without and within, his soul gnawing at the nothingness in
a hunger that could never be assuaged. For I have dared use the power of
Astafas; not only used it—(Promenthas might be able to forgive that,
considering the circumstances), but—and Mathew admitted this to himself as he
stood in the sunlight
300
THE PALADIN OF THE NIGHT
301
trickling feebly through the leaded glass window—I have enjoyed it, exulted in
it!
Deep beneath the shock at the imp's appearance had run an undercurrent of
pleasure. He had felt the same thrill last night when the imp did his bidding,
and lured away the tormentor.
"I should cast away the wand," Mathew said to himself firmly, "destroy it;
fall to my knees and pray for Promenthas's forgiveness; and give myself up to
whatever fate awaits me. And if it were just me, if I were alone, I would do
that. But I can't. Others depend on me."
Flinging himself back onto his bed, Mathew shut his eyes against the light.
"I said I would give my life for Khardan," he said through trembling lips.
"Surely I can give my soul!"
And Zohra—exasperating, foolhardy, courageous. Zohra— fighting her weaknesses,
never seeing that they were her strengths. Trapped in these walls, without
even the poor comfort of being able to exchange a few words as had Mathew and
Khardan, Zohra must imagine herself completely alone. Had her courage given
way at last? Would she go meekly to her dread fate? Perhaps, like Khardan, she
believed that her God had abandoned her.
"I must go to her," Mathew said, sitting up, brushing the tangled red hair out
of his face. "I must reassure her, tell her there is hope!"
His hand went to the wand in the pocket of his black robes. As his fingers
closed over it, a surge of warmth washed pleasurably over Mathew. Drawing
forth the wand, he examined it admiringly. It was a truly fine piece of
workmanship. Had Meryem made it, or had she purchased it? He recalled reading
of certain dark and secret places in the capital city of Khandar where devices
of black magic such as this could be bought if one had the proper—
Mathew caught his breath. His hand began to shake, and he dropped the wand
upon the bedclothes. When he'd first discovered the wand on board ship, when
he'd first lifted it, his fingertips had tingled painfully, a numbing
sensation had spread up his arm. His hand had lost all sense of feeling.
Now its touch gave him pleasure. . . .
"Master," hissed the imp, appearing with a bang, "you summoned me?"
302
WEIS AND HICKMAN
THE PALADIN OF THE NIGHT
303
"No!" Mathew cried in a hollow voice, shoving the wand away from him. "No, I—"
A thin curl of smoke drizzled into the center of the room and began to take
form. Staring in astonishment, Mathew saw the many chins and round belly of a
djinn emerge from the cloud.
"Usti?" he gasped.
He wasn't certain even now, when the djinn appeared as a mountain of flesh
before him, that it was Usti to whom he was speaking. The djinn had lost at
least two chins, his rotund stomach was no longer capable of holding up his
pantalons that sagged woefully around his middle, revealing a jeweled navel.
The djinn's ordinarily fine clothes were torn and dirty and disheveled, his
turban had slipped down over one eye.
"Madman!" Usti fell to his knees with a thud. "Thank Akhran I have found you.
I—" He stopped, staring at the imp. "I beg your pardon," said the djinn
stiffly. "Perhaps I have come at an inopportune time." The immortal's flabby
form began to fade.

"No, no!" cried Mathew. "Don't go!"
The imp darted Mathew a narrow-eyed, suspicious glance. "How clever of you, My
Dark Master. Do you not find it confusing, serving so many Gods?"
"Whom do you serve, sir?" inquired Usti with a sniff, eyeing the imp's skinny
body with disfavor. "And doesn't He feed you?"
"I serve Astafas, Prince of the Night!"
"Never heard of Him," replied Usti.
"As for food," continued the imp, its red eyes flaring, its splay-fingers
twitching and curling, "I dine off the flesh of those whose souls my Prince
drags shrieking into the Pit!"
"From the looks of you," said Usti, with a pitying glance, "the Prince's
larder must be rather bare, I should stick to mutton—"
The imp gave a piercing shriek and made a dive for Usti, who gazed at it in
offended dignity. "My dear sir, remember your place!"
Hastily grabbing the wand, Mathew pointed it at the imp. "Be gone!" he ordered
harshly, wrenching back a hysterical desire -to laugh, at the same time
choking on tears. "I have no more need of you."
"How sweet will be the taste of your soft flesh, Dark
Master!" The imp's red eyes devoured Mathew, its hand groped toward him.
"Be gone!" Mathew cried in desperation.
"Ugghhh." Looking at Mathew's slender form, Usti grimaced. "There is no
accounting for taste. Mutton," he advised the imp, "sliced thin and grilled
with mustard and pepper—"
The imp vanished with a deafening shriek and a blast that shook the room.
Mathew rose hurriedly from the bed. Afraid that they had roused the entire
Castle, he stared fearfully at the door. He waited expectantly, but no one
came. They must all be preparing for the ceremony, he thought, and turned to
the djinn, who was still going on about mutton.
"Usti, where did you come from? Are the other djinn with you?" Mathew asked
hopefully. "I remember that Khardan had a djinn—a young man with a foxlike
face."
"Pukah," said Usti distastefully, mouthing the name as though it were a bad
fig. "A lying, worthless—" The djinn's fat face sagged. "But for all that, he
might have been useful."
"Where is he?" Mathew nearly shouted.
"Alas, Madman." Usti heaved a quivering-chinned sigh. "He and the djinn of
Sheykh Majiid were taken captive during the battle by Kaug, the 'efreet of
Quar—may dogs relieve themselves in his shoes."
Hope's flame died, leaving behind cold ash. "So that is why Pukah did not
answer Khardan's summons," Mathew murmured. "How did you escape?"
Usti was instantly defensive.  "I saw the great horrible
hairy hands of the 'efreet sweep Sond's lamp and Pukah's
"     basket up into his arms. I heard his booming laugh, and I
knew that I was next! Is it to be wondered that I fled to a
;:    place of safety?"
"Meryem's ring," guessed Mathew grimly. "So you thought you'd try life in the
palace of the Amir?"
"You have sadly misjudged me, Madman, I would never
desert my mistress, no matter how wretchedly she used me,
no matter that she made my life a living hell!" Usti regarded
Mathew with wounded pride.   "I had no doubt that you
£,    would stop the rose-colored whore in her vicious plot. When
|v   you clouted her upon the head, I took that opportunity to
f    escape her, causing the ring to slip off her finger and com-
|     manding it to hide in your pouch."
304
WEIS AND HICKMAN
THE PALADIN OF THE NIGHT
305
Mathew had his doubts about this; he considered it far more likely that Usti

had been cowering in the ring and that he'd been taken up by sheerest
accident. It was pointless to argue; time was pressing.
"Your mistress, Zohra, how is she? Is she all right?"
Usti's fat face crumbled with true, sincere distress. "Ah!"—he clasped his
chubby hands—"that is why I have come to you! The Princess I knew and feared
is gone! She wept, Madman, wept! Oh what wouldn't I give"—tears crept down the
fat cheeks, losing themselves in the crevices of the djinn's remaining
chins—"to be back in my dwelling as it goes sailing through the air! To sew up
my mistress's ripped cushions! To ... to feel an iron pot she has thrown at me
wang against my skull!"
The djinn flung wide his arms. "My mistress has commanded me to kill her!" he
sobbed.
"What?" Mathew cried, alarmed. "Usti, you can't!"
"I am sworn to obey," said the djinn solemnly, with a hiccup. "And, indeed, I
would do that rather than see her suffer." Usti's voice grew gentle. "But that
is why I came to you, the first chance I had. My mistress says that you have
deserted her, but I did not believe that, so I came to see for myself." Usti
glanced dubiously at where the imp had been standing. "And I find a creature
of Sul who calls you Dark Master. Perhaps, after all, the Princess is right,"
Usti's eyes narrowed suspiciously. "You have betrayed us, gone over to the
side of darkness!"
"No, no! I haven't!" Mathew lowered his voice. "Trust me, Usti! Tell Zohra to
trust me! And don't harm her. I have a plan—"
A knocking came at the door. Mathew cringed. "Who is it?" he managed to call
out, in a voice that he hoped sounded as though he'd just awakened.
"I have food and drink," came the answer, "to break your fast."
"Just . . . just a moment!" Mathew couldn't delay long. Moving slowly toward
the door, he spoke hastily to the djinn, who was already beginning to
disappear. "Tell Zohra to have faith in her God! He is with her!"
Usti appeared dubious. "I will give her the message," he said morosely, "if I
have the chance. Already the witch-woman has taken her and begins some evil
process of purification—"
There came the grating of a key in the lock; the door began to swing open.
"Don't carry out Zohra's command!" Mathew begged to the vanishing smoke. "Not
unless all is lost!"
He spoke to empty air. Sighing, he barely glanced at the slave who entered
with a laden food tray. He did notice, however, a Black Paladin standing guard
outside his door, and he knew there would be no more opportunities to walk
freely through the Castle.
The slave placed the tray upon a table and left without a word; Mathew heard
the door lock click. Feeling little appetite, but knowing he should eat to
keep up his strength, he sat down to his gloom-ridden breakfast.
Up above him, in the shadows of the ceiling, the imp glared at the young
wizard. "He has a plan, does he? You're thinking much too hard, human. I see
your thoughts. I believe my Prince will find this most interesting. ..."
THE PALADIN OF THE NIGHT
307
Chapter 15
Auda ibn Jad opened his casement to the night air, feeling it blow cool
against skin flushed and feverish with excitement and anticipation. He reveled
in the sensation; then, turning back to his room, he bathed—shivering in the
chill air—and arrayed himself in the black armor, donning at the last the
black velvet robes. Examining himself critically in the mirror, he searched
for the slightest flaw, knowing that the eyes of his Lord would be hard to
please this night. He smoothed the black beard that ran across his strong jaw,
brushed the wet black hair so that it glistened and tied it behind his head
with a black ribbon. The mustache that grew over his upper lip traced two fine
lines down either side of his mouth, flowing at last like a thin black river
to the bearded chin. His pale face was stained with an unnatural infusion of
blood beneath the skin, the black eyes glittered in the light.

I must calm myself. This excitement is unholy and irreverent. Kneeling down
upon the cold stone floor, Auda clasped his hands in prayer and brought a
restful repose to his soul by losing himself in holy meditation. The Castle
around him was abnormally still and quiet. All were in their rooms alone,
preparing themselves with prayer and fasting. They would remain there until
the hour for the Gathering came. Eleven times the iron bell would toll,
calling all forth to the Vestry.
It lacked an hour till that time yet. Ibn }ad rose to his feet, his prayers
concluded. His mind was clear, his racing
306
pulse once more beating slowly, steadily. He had a matter of importance to
attend to before the Gathering. Walking from his room, his booted feet making
as little noise as possible upon the stone so as not to disturb the others in
their holy solitude, ibn Jad went forth. He left the upper recesses of the
Castle, making his way down to the chambers below the surface of the earth.
He had seen the Lifemaster this morning. Exhausted from having had no sleep
throughout the day and night, the man was on his way to his room to eat a
morsel (the strictures of the fast being required only of the knights) and
then nap a few hours. An assistant, one to whom he was teaching his heinous
skills, had taken over with the subject.
"The nomad is a strong man, ibn Jad," said the Lifemaster, his oversized head
bobbing upon its spindly neck. "You chose well. It will be nightfall before we
break him."
"The only man alive who ever bested me," said Auda ibn Jad, remembering
Khardan raiding the city long months ago. "I want the bonding, Lifemaster."
The Lifemaster nodded, as if this did not surprise him. "I thought as much. I
heard about Catalus," he added softly. "My condolences."
"Thank you," said ibn Jad gravely. "He died well and for the cause, laying the
blood curse upon the priest who seeks to rule us all. But now I am
brotherless."
"There are many who would be honored to bond with you, Paladin," said the
Lifemaster emotionally.
"I know. But this man's fate and mine are bound together. So the Black
Sorceress told me, and so I knew in my heart from the moment we looked upon
each other in the city of Kich."
The Lifemaster said nothing more. If the Black Sorceress had set her word upon
it, there was nothing more to say.
"The critical time will come this evening. His pain and anguish will have
drawn him near death. We must be careful not to allow him to slip over." The
Lifemaster spoke with the modest air of one who has mastered a delicate art.
"Arrive at ten strokes of the bell. The bonding will be stronger if it is your
hand that leads him away from death."
The final strokes of the iron bell were just fading away when Auda ibn Jad
entered the Lifemaster's dread chamber.
Khardan was very far gone. Ibn Jad, who had murdered countless of his fellow
beings and felt without a qualm their
308
WEIS AND HICKMAN
THE PALADIN OF THE NIGHT
309
blood splash upon his hands, could not look at the nomad's tortured body
without feeling his stomach wrench. Memories of his own conversion to Zhakrin,
of his own suffering and torment in this very chamber, seared through the
blackness of deliberate, blessed fbrgetfumess. Auda had seen others endure the
same fete without thinking back to that time. Why? Why now?
Face pale, a bitter taste in his mouth, the Black Paladin sank weakly back
against a wall, unable to wrench his gaze from the dying man who lay limply on
the floor. Khardan was no longer chained. He no longer had the energy left to
escape or fight his tormentor.
The Lifemaster, busy with his work, spared ibn Jad a glance, "Ah," he said

softly, "the bonding starts already."
"What . . . what do you mean?" ibn Jad asked hoarsely.
"The God has given you back the memory He once blessedly took away. Your souls
share pain, as your bodies will soon share blood."
Falling to his knees, ibn Jad bowed his head, thanking Zhakrin, but he
flinched and came near crying out when the Lifemaster grasped hold of his arm.
"Come forward!" the tormentor said urgently. "It is time!"
Auda moved near Khardan. The nomad's face was ashen, his eyes sunken in his
head. Sweat gleamed on his skin. Mingling with blood, it trickled in rivulets
over his body.
"Call to him!" ordered the Lifemaster.
"Khardan," said ibn Jad, in a voice that trembled despite himself.
The nomad's eyelids shivered, he drew a quivering breath.
"Again!" the Lifemaster's voice was insistent, fearful.
"Khardan!" called Auda more loudly and stronger, as though shouting to one
about to walk blindly off a cliff. "Khardan!" Ibn Jad grasped hold of a limp
hand that was already devoid of the warmth of life. "We are losing him!" he
whispered angrily.
"No, no!" said the Lifemaster, the huge head whipping about so rapidly it
seemed it must fly off the thin, brittle neck. "Make him call upon the name of
Zhakrin!"
"Khardan," cried ibn Jad, "pray to God—"
"There, he hears you!" said the Lifemaster in what ibn Jad noted was a tone of
relief. The Black Paladin glanced coldly at the man, his displeasure obvious,
and the Lifemaster quailed before Auda's anger.
But ibn Jad had no time to spare upon the tormentor.
Khardan's eyelids flickered open. Rimmed with crimson, the pupils dilated, the
nomad's eyes stared at Auda without a glimmer of recognition.
"God?" he said inaudibly, the barest hint of breath displacing the bloody
froth upon his lips. "Yes, I ... remember. Mathew ..." His words died in what
ibn Jad feared was his final breath. The Black Paladin clutched the man's
hand.
"Call upon the God to spare you, Khardan! Offer him your soul in exchange for
your life, for an end to this torment!"
"My soul. . ." Khardan's eyes closed. His lips moved, then he fell silent.
Slumping forward, his head rested on his chest.
"What did he say?" ibn Jad demanded of the tormentor.
"He said . . . 'Zhakrin, I give you my life.' "
"Are you certain?" Ibn Jad frowned. He had heard the words "give you my life,"
but the name of the God to whom the man prayed had been indistinct.
"Of course!" the Lifemaster said hastily. "And look! The lines of pain upon
his face ease! He draws a deep breath! He sleeps!"
"Truly, life returns to him," said ibn Jad, feeling the hand he held grow
warm, seeing color flow into the bloodless cheeks. "Khardan!" he called
gently.
The nomad stirred and lifted his head. Opening his eyes, he looked around him
in astonishment. His gaze went to the Lifemaster, then to ibn Jad. Khardan's
eyes narrowed in obvious puzzlement. "I ... I am still here," he murmured.
An odd reaction, thought ibn Jad. Still, this was an OB* usual man. I've never
seen one draw so near death and tfeafc-have the strength to turn back.
"Zhakrin be praised!" said ibn Jad, watching the nomad's reaction closely.
"Zhakrin ..." Khardan breathed. Then he smiled, as though seeming to recall
something. "Yes, Zhakrin be praised."
Scrambling to his feet, the Lifemaster hastened over to a .table and returned
bearing a sharp knife, whose blade was already stained with dried blood.
Seeing it, Khardan's eyes flared, his lips tightened grimly.
"Have no fear, my . . . brother," said Auda softly.
Khardan glanced at him questioningly.
"Brother," repeated ibn Jad. "You are a Black Knight, now. One who serves
Zhakrin in life and in death, and you are therefore my brother. But I would go

further. I have requested that you and I be bonded, that our blood mingle."
310
WEIS AND HICKMAN
"What does this mean?" asked Khardan thickly, propping himself up, his face
twisting in pain as he moved.
"Life for life, we are pledged to each other. Honor bound to come to the
other's defense when we can, to avenge the other's death when we cannot. Your
enemies become my enemies, my enemies yours." Taking the knife from the
Lifemaster, the knight made a slash in his own wrist, causing the red blood to
well forth. Grasping Khardan's arm, he cut the skin and then pressed his flesh
against die nomad's. " 'From my heart to yours, from your heart to mine. Our
blood flows into each other's bodies. We are closer than brothers born.'
There, now you repeat the oath."
Khardan stared searchingly at ibn Jad for long moments; the Califs lips
parted, but he said nothing. His gaze went to the arms, joined together—ibn
Jad's arm strong and white-skinned, the veins and sinews clearly visible
against the firm muscles; Khardan's arm, pale, weak from the enforced inaction
of the past few months, stained with blood and filth and sweat.
"To refuse this honor would be a grievous insult to the God who has given you
your life," said the Lifemaster, seeing the nomad hesitate.
"Yes," muttered Khardan in seemingly increasing confusion, "I suppose it
would." Slowly, haltingly, he repeated the oath.
Auda ibn Jad smiled in satisfaction. Putting his arm around Khardan's naked
back, he lifted the nomad to his feet. "Come, I will take you to your room
where you may rest. The Black Sorceress will give you something to ease the
torment of your wounds and help you sleep—"
"No," said Khardan, stifling a cry of anguish. Sweat beaded his upper lip. "I
must ... be at the ceremony."
Auda ibn Jad looked His approval but slowly shook his head. "I understand your
desire to share in this moment of our victory, but you are too weak, my
brother—"
"No!" insisted Khardan, teeth clenched. "I will be there!"
"Far be it from me to thwart such noble courage," said ibn Jad. "I have a
salve that will help ease the pain somewhat and a glass of wine will burn away
the rest."
Khardan had no breath to reply, but he nodded his head. The Lifemaster draped
a black cloth over the nomad's naked body. Leaning upon Auda ibn Jad, the
Calif—weak as a babe—let himself be assisted from the chamber.
Chapter 16
Mathew had remained locked in his room throughout the day. He had spent the
incredibly long hours of waiting pacing the floor, his fears divided among
Khardan, Zohra, and himself. He knew what he must do, knew what he had to do
tonight, and he mentally prepared himself, going over and over it again in his
mind. It was no longer a question of courage. He knew himself well enough now
to understand that his bravery sprang from desperation. Matters were desperate
enough. This was their only chance to escape, and if it meant surrendering his
soul to Astafas, then that is what he was prepared to do.
"And even that is a cowardly act," he said to himself, slumping exhausted in a
chair, having walked miles in his little room. "It is all very well t^say that
you are sacrificing yourself for Khardan and Zohra, both of whom saved your
life, both of whom were dragged into this because of you! But admit it. Once
again, you are acting to save your own skin, because you can't face the
thought of death!
"That was a very fine lecture you gave Khardan. All about having the courage
to live and fight. Fortunately he couldn't see the words were stained yellow
with a coward's bile as they fled your mouth. He and Zohra both are prepared
to die rather than betray their God! You're prepared to sell your soul for
another few moments of keeping life in a craven's body that isn't worth the
air it breathes!"
311

312
WEIS AND HICKMAN
Night had darkened his window. The tones of the iron bell had rung out at such
long intervals during the day that Mathew often wondered if the timekeeping
device had broken down. Now the peals dinned in his ears so often he was half
convinced that they had let the clock run loose, chiming the quarter hours on
whatever whim took it.
To distract thoughts that were threatening to run as wild as time, Mathew rose
to his feet and threw open the window. A freshening wind from the sea blew
away the foul-smelling, yellowish tinged fog that had clung like a noxious
blanket to the Castle all day. Looking outside, Mathew could see a cliff of
black jagged rocks—below that, the seashore, whose white sand gleamed eerily
in the starlight. Dark waves broke upon the shoreline. A black patch against
the water, the ship of the ghuls swung at anchor, its crew no doubt dreaming
of sweet, human flesh.
Movement near the window casement caught Mathew's attention. He looked out to
find a horrid figure looking in. Springing backward, Mathew slammed shut the
window. Grabbing hold of the velvet curtains, he drew them closed with such
force he nearly ripped them from their hangings. He left hSe window hastily,
hurrying back to his bed, and sank down upon it.
A nesnas\ Half human and half . . . nothing!
Mathew shuddered, closing his eyes to blot out the memory and succeeding only
in bringing it more clearly to his mind. Take a human male and chop him in
two, lengthwise, with an axe, and that is what I saw from my window! Half a
head, half a nose and mouth, one ear; Haifa trunk, one arm, one leg . . .
hopping, horribly . . .
And that is what we must face when we leave the Castle!
You are the Bearer. Nothing can harm the Bearer!
The words came back to him comfortingly. He repeated them over and over in a
soothing litany. But what about those with me? They will be safe, he assured
himself. Nothing out there will harm them, for I will be the master, the
master of all that is dark and evil. . . .
What am I saying? Cowering, shivering, Mathew slid from the bed and fell to
his knees. "Holy Father," he whispered, folding his hands and pressing them to
his lips, "I am sorry to have failed you. I had supposed that you kept me
alive, when so many more worthy than myself died, for some purpose. If so,
surely I have upset that purpose through my
THE PALADIN OF THE NIGHT
313
foolish actions. It's just that. . . that I seem so alone! Perhaps what the
imp said about a guardian angel is true after all. If that is so, and she has
forsaken me, then I know why. Forgive me, Father. My soul will go to its dark
reward. I ask only one last thing. Take the two lives in my care and deal
mercifully with them. Despite the fact that they worship another God and are
barbaric and savage in their ways, they are both truly good and caring people.
See them safely back to their homeland . . . their homeland. ..." Tears crept
down Mathew's cheeks, falling among his fingers. "The homeland they long to
see once more, to parents who grieve for them.
"What a wretch I am!" Mathew cried suddenly, flinging himself away from the
bed. "I cannot even pray for others without finding myself sucked into the
mire of self-pity." Glancing up at heaven, he smiled bitterly. "I cannot even
pray . . is that it? They say that those who worship the Prince of Darkness
cannot say Your Holy Name but that it burns their tongues and blisters their
lips. I—"
There came a knock on his door. Fearfully, Mathew heard the clock begin to
chime. One . . . five . . . eight ... his heart counted the strokes . . . ten
. . . eleven. . . .
A key rattled in the door lock.
"You are wanted, Blossom."
Swallowing, Mathew tried to answer, but the words would not come. His hand

moved to grasp hold of the black wand. It was an unconscious act; he did not
know he was touching it until he felt its sharp sides bite into his flesh, its
reassuring warmth wash over him like the dark waters of the ocean waves,
crashing on the beach below.
The door swung open. Auda ibn Jad stood framed in the doorway, silhouetted
against a backdrop of blazing torches. The flickering light burned bright
orange on his black armor, glittered off the eyes in the head of the severed
snake that adorned his breastplate. Beside ibn Jad stood another knight,
dressed in the same armor.
The torchlight gleamed on curly black hair, lit a face that had been in
Mathew's thoughts all day—a face that was pale and wan, drawn with pain yet
alight with a fire of fierce eagerness, a face that looked at Mathew with no
recognition at all in the black eyes.
"You are wanted," said Auda ibn Jad coolly. "The hour of our triumph draws
near."
314
WEIS AND HICKMAN
Bowing his head in acquiescence, Mathew walked out the doorway. Ibn Jad
entered the room and began to search it. What he might be hunting for, Mathew
hadn't any idea— perhaps the imp. Drawing near Khardan, the young wizard took
the opportunity to look once more into the face of the Calif.
One eyelid flickered. Deep, deep within the blackness of the eyes was the
glimmer of a smile.
"Thank you, Promenthas," Mathew breathed, then bit off his prayer, thinking he
felt a burning sensation in his throat.
Chapter 17
Once again tm? circle of Black Paladins formed in the Vestry around the signet
of the severed snake. This time, however, all the followers of Zhakrin were
present in the room. Black-robed women, many with the swollen bellies that
held future followers of the Cod, sat in chairs in one comer of the huge hall.
Kiber and his goums and the other men-at-arms in service to the Black Paladins
stood ranged around the hall, their weapons in hand. The naked blades of sword
and dagger, the sharp points of spears, gleamed brightly in the light of
thousands of black wax candles set in wrought-iron flambeaux that had been
lowered from the high ceiling.
Behind the soldiers, huddled on the floor, their faces pale with fear, the
slaves of the followers of Zhakrin waited in hopeless despair for the return
of the God that would seal their fate forever.
Flanked by Khardan and Auda ibn Jad, Mathew entered die Vestry. He walked
closely between the two knights; more than once Khardan's body brushed against
his, and Mathew could feel it tense and taut for action. But he could also
hear the breath catch in Khardan's throat when he moved, the stifled groan or
gasp of pain that he could not quite suppress. TTie Califs face was pale;
despite the intense chill of the great hall, sweat gleamed upon his upper lip.
Auda ibn Jad glanced at him in concern and once whispered something to him
315
316
WEIS AND HICKMAN
urgently, but Khardan only shook his head, gruffly answering that he would
stay.
It occurred to Mathew, as he entered the huge, candlelit chamber, that Khardan
was suffering this because of him, because of what he'd said. He has faith in
me, thought Mathew, and the knowledge terrified him. I can't let him down, not
after what he's endured because of me. I can't!
Gripping the wand more tightly, he entered the circle of Black Paladins, who
moved aside respectfully to make room for them.
Within the center of the circle of men and women had been placed an altar of
such hideous aspect that Mathew stared at it, appalled. It was the head of a
snake that had been cut off at the neck. Carved of ebony, standing four feet
high, the snake's mouth gaped open. Glistening fangs made of ivory parted to

reveal a forked tongue encrusted with rubies. The tongue, shooting upward
between the fangs, formed a platform that was empty now, but Mathew guessed
what object soon would rest there. Around the altar stood the tall ivory jars
that Mathew had seen on die boat. Their lids had been removed.
Beside the altar stood the Black Sorceress. Her gaze fixed on Mathew when he
stepped into the circle. Aged, ageless, the eyes probed the young wizard's
soul and apparently liked what they saw there, for the lips of the stretched
face smiled.
She sees die darkness within me, realized Mathew with a calmness that he found
startling. He knew she saw it because he could feel it, a vast emptiness that
felt neither fear nor hope. And over it, covering the hollowness like a shell,
spread exultation, a sensation of power coming into his hands. He reveled in
it, rejoicing, longing to wield it as a man longs to wield the blade of a new
sword.
Glancing at Khardan, he wondered irritably if the man would be of use to him
now, injured as he was. Mathew fretted impatiently for the ceremony to get
under way. He wanted to see that smile on the woman's drum-skin face vanish.
He wanted to see it replaced with awe!
The Black Sorceress laid her hands upon the emerald eyes of the snake's-head
altar, and a low sound thrummed through the Vestry, a sound that was like a
wail or moan. At the sound, all excited talk that had flowed among the circle
of Paladins and whispered through the women waiting in the corner of the
Vestry ceased. The men-at-arms came to stiff attention,
THE PALADIN OF THE NIGHT
317
their boots scraping against die stone floor. The circle parted to admit four
slaves carrying a heavy obsidian bier. Staggering beneath the weight, the
slaves bore it slowly and carefully into the center of the circle that closed
around them. Reverently, the slaves brought their burden before the Black
Sorceress.
Upon the obsidian slab lay Zohra, clothed in a gown made entirely of black
crystal. The beads' sparkling edges caught the candlelight and gave off a
rainbow-colored aura whose heart was darkness. Her long black hair had been
brushed and oiled and fell from a center part in her head around her
shoulders, touching her fingertips. She lay on her back, her hands stretched
out straight at her sides. Her eyes were wide open, her lips slightly parted;
she stared at the candles above her, but there was no sign of life on her
face. From the pallor of her complexion, she might have been a corpse, but for
the even rise and fall of her chest that could be detected by the faint
shimmering of the crystal beaded gown.
Mathew felt Khardan flinch and knew this pain the man experienced did not come
from his wounds. He cares for her more than he admits, thought Mathew. Just as
well, it will give him added incentive to serve me.
The Lord of the Paladins stepped forth and made a speech. Mathew shifted from
foot to foot, thinking they were taking an inordinate amount of time to
conduct this ceremony. He had just heard the clock chime three-quarters of the
hour gone, when he suddenly stared intently at one of the slaves carrying the
bier.
At that moment the skve Mathew was watching set his
end of the bier down suddenly, groaning from the strain and
wiping his face. The bier tilted, jostling Zohra and causing
the Black Sorceress to glare at the slave with such ire that
i everyone in the Vestry knew the wretched fellow was doomed.
Usti! recognized Mathew, staring in blank astonishment. How he had managed the
transformation, Mathew didn't know. He was certain the djinn hadn't been among
those who first carried die bier into the Vestry. But there was no mistaking
the three chins, the fat face rising from bulging shoulders.
The other bearers started to set down their ends, but the Black Sorceress said
sharply, "No! not here in front of me! Beneath the altar."
With a long-suffering groan, Usti lifted his end of the bier

318
WEIS AND HICKMAN
THE PALADIN OF THE NIGHT
319
again, helping to shift it around to place it where indicated. Mathew saw the
jeweled handle of a dagger flare from the djinn's sash wound around his broad
middle. Usti's fat face was grim. His chins shaking with intent and purpose
and resolve, Usti took his place at his mistress's head.
A hushed silence descended upon the Vestry; breath shortened, hearts beat
fast, blood tinged the faces of those who had worked and waited and dedicated
their very lives to the attaining of this moment of glory. The iron chimes
began their toll. . . .
One.
The Black Sorceress drew forth from her robes the crystal globe containing the
swimming fish.
Two.
Reverently, she laid the globe upon the forked tongue of the snake.
Three.
Turning to one of the ivory jars, the Black Sorceress dipped in her hand and
drew it forth, stained with human blood.
Four.
The Black Paladins began to call upon their Cod by name. "Zhakrin . . .
Zhakrin . . . Zhakrin ..." whispered through the Vestry like an evil wind.
Five.
The Black Sorceress bent over Zohra and drew an S-shape on her forehead in the
blood of the murdered innocents of the city of Idrith.
Six.
The chant rose in volume, increased in speed. "Zhakrin, Zhakrin, Zhakrin."
Seven.
Mathew's hand slowly began to draw forth the black wand.
Eight.
The Black Sorceress lifted the crystal globe and placed it upon Zohra's
breast.
Nine.
The chant became frenzied, triumphant. "Zhakrin! Zhakrin! Zharkin!"
Ten.
The Black Sorceress dipped her hand again in the blood in the ivory jar and
smeared it over the crystal globe.
Eleven.
Removing one of the razor-sharp, ivory fangs from the mouth of the altar, die
Black Sorceress held it poised above the globe, above Zohra's breast. . . .
Twelve.
"In the name of Astafas, I summon you! Bring the fish to me!" cried Mathew.
He raised the wand, the imp appeared. A shattering explosion blew out the
lights of the candles and plunged the room into darkness.
THE PALADIN OF THE NIGHT
321
Chapter 18
The chanting dwindled into contusion, swallowed up by shouts of outrage and
anger.
"Torches!" cried some of the Paladins, starting to leave.
"Do not break the Circle!" the Black Sorceress's voice shrieked.above the
cries, and Mathew heard movement around him cease.
But the men-at-arms standing outside the Circle were free to act. Hastening
into the hallways around the Vestry, their booted feet skidding and sliding on
the slick floors in their haste, the soldiers grabbed torches from the walls
and were back into the Vestry before Mathew's eyes had yet grown accustomed to
the darkness.
Blinking in the blazing light that caused his eyes to ache, Mathew saw the
Black Sorceress staring at him, her face livid, her eyes burning more fiercely

than the flames reflected in their dark depths. She did not say a word or make
a move but only gazed upon him, testing his strength. Between her and Mathew
stood the imp, its splay-fingered hands outstretched, its red eyes flaring
threateningly around the circle, its tongue lolling in excitement from its
drooling mouth.
Nobody moved or spoke. All eyes were on him. Mathew smiled, secure in his
power. "Bring me the fish," he ordered the imp again, his voice cracking with
impatience. "Why do you delay? Must I speak the name of Our Master again? He
won't be pleased, I can assure you."
320
Slowly, the imp turned and faced Mathew, its red eyes flickering, its
shriveled skin glistening with slime in the torch-tight. "You speak the name
of My Master glibly enough," said die imp, pointing at Mathew with a crooked
finger, its feet sliding noiselessly over the floor as it drew near him. "But
Astafas is not convinced that you are His servant. He demands proof, human."
"What more proof does he want?" Mathew cried angrily, keeping the wand pointed
at the imp. "Isn't it enough that I am capturing these two Gods, bringing them
to Him to do with as He pleases?"
"Are you?" inquired the imp, grinning. "Or are you using that as an excuse to
aid you in your escape from the Castle, knowing that if you have the magical
globe in your possession, no one can harm you? Will you truly offer the fish
to Astafas?"
"I will! What can I do to prove it?"
The imp's pointing finger began to move. "Sacrifice, in the name of Astafas,
this man." The finger stopped. It was aimed at Khardan's heart.
Mathew socked in his breath. The wand in his hand . began to writhe and change
and suddenly he held an onyx dagger with a handle of petrified wood. The
breastplate melted from Khardan's body, leaving his chest bare, the wounds of
his torment clearly visible on his skin. The Calif regarded Mathew
complacently, obviously thinking this was part of the plan. He made no attempt
to escape, and Mathew knew he would not.
He has faith in me!
Not until Mathew plunged the dagger into his heart, would Khardan realize he'd
been tricked, duped.
"There is nothing else I can do!" Mathew whispered, raising the dagger,
enveloping himself in the darkness that had suddenly become a living,
breathing entity.
And thus he did not see, behind him, torchlight flare off die drawn blade of
the sword of Auda ibn Jad.
IF
Book Eight
THE BOOK OFAKHRAN
Chapter 1
Death led Asrial from the arwat through the crowded streets of the dead city
of Serinda. Glancing back, the angel could see Pukah sitting disconsolately
near the window, his face against the glass, staring into nothing. For the
first time since Asrial had come to know him, the djinn looked defeated, and
she felt an aching in her chest in what Pukah would have termed her heart.
Repeating to herself that immortal beings did not possess such sensitive and
wayward organs did little to ease die angel's pain.
"I've been around humans too long," Asrial rebuked herself. "When I go back, I
will spend seven years in chapel and do penance until these uncomfortable,
very wrong, and improper feelings are expunged from my being!"
But the strong, shielding walls of the cathedral of Promenthas were very far
away. A mist began to rise up around the angel, obliterating the sight of the
arwat from her view. The sounds of the city of Serinda faded in the distance.
Asrial could see nothing except the gray fog that swirled around her and the
figure of Death near.
"Where are we?" asked Asrial, confused and disoriented in the thick mist.
"One might say this is my dwelling place," responded Death.

"Dwelling!" Asrial peered through the mist, attempting to see past the wispy
rags of fog that wrapped and whorled and meandered around them. "I see no
dwelling!"
325
326
WEIS AND HICKMAN
THE PALADIN OF THE NIGHT
327
"You see no walls, no floor, no ceiling, you mean," Death corrected. "Such
structure makes—for you—a dwelling. Yet how should I—who know the impermanence
of all things— put my faith hi the frail and fragile elements? Were I to live
in a mountain, I would eventually see it crumble around me. Speaking of that
which is frail and fragile, I will show you the human in whom you take such an
interest."
The mists swirled and then parted, swept from before the angel's eyes by a
blast of cold wind. She stood in the Vestry. Mathew—dagger in hand—faced
Khardan. Behind Mathew stood Auda ibn Jad, his sword slowly and noiselessly
sliding from its scabbard. And standing near them all, its red eyes gleaming
in glee—
"A servant of Astafas!" cried Asrial. "And I am not there to protect Mathew!
Oh, I should never have left him, never!"
"Why did you come?"
"I was told I had to, or else my protege1 would lose his soul," Asrial
faltered, her eyes on the imp.
"And who told you this?"
"A... fish," Asrial said, flushing in embarrassment. "How could I be so
foolish!"
"The fish was the Goddess Evren, child." Death seemed amused. "Trying to
regain Her immortals, so that She can return to power, if She manages to
return to life."
"I don t understand."
"The two fish you see in the globe on the altar are, in reality, the Cod
Zhakrin and His opposite, the Goddess Evren. They are in the hands of
Zhakrin's followers. The Black Sorceress, the woman standing beside the altar,
was just about to bring Zhakrin back into the world by placing His essence
into the body of a human when your Mathew decided to interfere.
"The young man came into possession of a wand of evil magical power. He
succumbed to the temptation to use it and so—without you to guard him—he is
easy prey for Astafas. Your Mathew is attempting to take possession of the
fish."
"To save Evren!" Asrial breathed.
Death shrugged. "Mathew is a human, child. The war in Heaven is not his
concern. Under the growing influence of evil, the only person he intends to
free is himself. Once he has possession of the globe, the magic surrounding it
will protect him from harm. If he takes it, he would dare not free the Gods.
And it would not make much difference if he did.
^Without their immortals, Zhakrin and Evren will soon dwin-%dle, and this time
they will vanish completely. Quar's power '**is ten times what it was when he
first caught them. Their
-£; followers will be obliterated from the earth." 1£ The vision changed.
Asrial saw the future. A mighty ar-fjmada sailed the Kurdin Sea. Hordes of
men, bearing the ;v standard of the golden ram's head, landed upon the beach
of ;; the Isle of Galos. The followers of Zhakrin fought desperately :to save
their Castle, but it was all in vain. They were over-^ whelmed. The bodies of
the Black Paladins lay hacked and if mangled upon the beach. Their line had
not broken; each Idled where he stood—side by side with his brother. In the ,
the Black Sorceress and the women fought with their but that, too, could not
prevail against the might of tiQuar. The Imam called down their ruin. The
'efreet, Kaug, ffiurged up from the volcano, bringing with him deadly ash
Jpind poisonous fume. He shook the ground; the Castle walls cracked and

crumbled. The armies of Quar fled to their boats sailed hastily back to the
mainland. The volcano blew under; molten rock flowed into the boiling sea.
Steam and |; cloud wound their winding sheets about the Isle of Galos, and
i?it vanished forever beneath the dark waters. If. "They are a cruel and evil
people," said Asrial, reliving in spier mind the murder of the priests and
magi upon the shores
. "They deserve such a fete. They are not fit to live." "So Quar teaches—about
the followers of Promenthas,"
Death coolly.
"He is wrong!" Asrial cried.  "My people are not like ose!"
"No, and they are not like Quar's followers. And therefore they must either
become like Quar's followers or they must
tdie, for 'they are not fit to live.' " ; "You must stop him!"
;§;   ' "Why should I care? What does it matter to me if there is
l^-one God or twenty? And it is not your concern, either, is it,
"Child? Your concern is for that one mortal whose life and
soul stand poised upon the blade of a dagger. I fear there is
- little you can do to save his life"—Death caused the vision of
Mathew to return and gazed upon it, an expression of insatia-
Ifble hunger on her pallid face—"but you might yet be able to
his soul."
"I must go to him—" "By all means," said Death nonchalantly. "But I should
328
WEIS AND HICKMAN
remind you that in order to reach the city gate, you will have to traverse the
streets of Serinda."
The angel stared at Death with stricken face.
"But I can't! If I should die—"
"—you would live again, but without any memory of your prot6geV'
"What do you want of me?" Asrial demanded through trembling lips. "You brought
me here, you showed me this for a purpose."
"Can't you guess? I want Pukah."
"But you have him!" the angel answered despairingly. "You said yourself that
there is no way for him to escape!"
"Nothing in Sul is certain," replied Death sagely, "as I— above all
others—have reason to know. You love him, don't you?"
"Immortal beings cannot love." Asrial lowered her eyes.
"Should not. It reduces their efficiency, as you yourself can plainly attest.
You have committed a double sin, child. You have fallen in love with a mortal
and an immortal. Now you must choose between them. Give me Pukah, and I will
set you free to go to the rescue of your mortal's soul, if not his body."
"But it will be too late!" Asrial gazed, terrified, at the vision before her.
"Time has no meaning here. One day pastes in this realm for every millisecond
in the mortal realm. Bring me the tourmaline amulet this night, leave the
djinn defenseless, and I will see to it that you arrive in time to fight for
Mathew's soul."
"But you said Pukah had until morning!"
'Hie woman showed her teeth in a grin. "Death is without pity, without mercy,
without prejudice . . . without honor. The only oaths I am bound to keep are
those I swear in Sul's name."
Asrial looked again at Mathew. She could see the darkness already folding its
black wings around him. The sword of Auda ibn Jad was sliding forth slowly,
ever so slowly, from its scabbard and she saw Mathew—his back turned to the
Black Paladin—raise his dagger against a man who had trusted him, a man he
loved.
Asrial bowed her head, her white wings drooped, and she found herself standing
in the street, in front of the arwat in the city of Serinda.
Chapter 2
"My enchanting one!" Pukah shouted, spying Asrial from the window. Springing
to his feet, he raced outside the arwat and accosted the angel in the street.

"You came back!" '    "Of course," said Asrial sadly. "Where did you think I
could go?"
"I don't know!" Pukah said, grinning. "All sorts of wild ideas went through my
head when I saw you disappear with Death. Like maybe she might send you back
to be with that madman of yours—"
"No!" cried Asrial wildly. Pukah looked at her, startled, and she flushed,
biting her lip. "I mean, no, how silly of you to imagine such a thing."
Reaching out her hand, she clasped hold of Pukah's and gripped it tightly. Her
fingers were a bit too cold for those of an ardent lover, and her grasp was
more resolute than tender, but so thrilled was Pukah at this expression of
caring, that he immediately overlooked these minor inconsistencies.
" "Asrial," he said earnestly, gazing into the blue eyes that were raised to
his, "with you here, I'm not afraid of anything that might happen to me
tomorrow."
The angel lowered her eyes, hurriedly averting her face, but not before Pukah
saw a tear glisten on her cheek.
"Forgive me! I'm a wretch, a beast! I didn't mean to talk about tomorrow.
Besides, nothing's going to happen to me. There, I'm talking about it again!
I'm sorry. I won't say another word." He drew her near, putting a protective
arm
329
330
WEIS AND HICKMAN
THE PALADIN OF THE NIGHT
331
around her and glowering at those in the street who were lustfully eyeing the
lovely angel. "I think we should go someplace where we can be alone."
"Yes," said Asrial shyly. "You're right." Her eyes looked to the upper windows
of the arwat, from where sounds of sweet laughter drifted out into the street.
"Perhaps—"
"By Sul!" Fukah caught her meaning and stared at her, amazed. "Are you
serious?"
Pressing her lips together firmly, Asrial moved nearer Pukah and rested her
head against his chest.
The djinn flung his arms around the angel, hugging her close, never minding
that it was similar to embracing the hard and unresisting trunk of a date
palm. Her lips were stiff and did not kiss back.
"She does not want to seem too eager," said Pukah to himself. "Quite proper. I
wonder if the wings are detachable."
Keeping his arm around Asrial's waist, the djinn led her back to the arwat. "A
room," he said to the rabat-bashi.
"For the night only, I suppose." The proprietor grinned wickedly,
Pukah felt Asrial tremble in his arms and glared at the man. "For a week! Paid
in advance." He tossed a handful of gold into the immortal's hands.
"Here's the key. Up the stairs, second door to your left. Don't wear yourself
out tonight. You 11 need to be fresh for the morrow!"
"Ill be fresh enough for you on the morrow you can be sure of that!" muttered
Pukah, hurrying the near-collapsing angel up the stairs. "Don't pay any
attention to that boor, my dearest."
"I'm . . . not," said Asrial faintly. Leaning against the wall, while Pukah
fumbled with the key, the angel looked at him with such a sorrowful gaze that
Pukah couldn't bear it.
"Asrial," he said gently, hearing the lock click, but not yet opening the
door, "wouldn't you rather go sit somewhere and talk? Maybe the fountain by
the Temple?"
"No, Pukah!" Asrial cried fiercely, flinging her arms around his neck. "I want
to be with you tonight! Please!" She burst into tears, her grip tightened
until she nearly strangled him.
"There, there," he said soothingly, feeling the heart beating wildly in the
soft breast pressed against his bare chest. "You and I will be together, not

only this night, but all nights in eternity!" Opening the door, he led the
angel inside.
The rays of the setting sun beamed brightly through an open window. Asrial
drew away from his arms as soon as they were in the room. Pukah locked the
door, tossing the key on a nearby table, then hurried over to shut out the
red, glaring light, slamming closed the wooden shutters and plunging the room
into cool darkness.
When he turned around, his eyes growing accustomed to the dimness, he saw
Asrial lying upon the bed that was the room's prominent feature. The
wings—about which he had been so worried—spread out beneath her, forming a
white, feathery blanket. Her long hair seemed to shine with its own tight,
bathing the angel in silver radiance. Her face was deathly pale, her eyes
shimmering with unshed tears. Yet she held out her arms to him, and Pukah was
very quick to respond.
Unwinding his turban, he shook free his black hair and crawled into bed beside
her. Asrial did not look at him, but kept her eyes lowered in a maidenly
confusion that made r Pukah's blood throb in his temple. Slowly, her arms cold
and shaking, the angel drew his head to her bosom and began to mechanically
stroke the djinn's curly hair,
Pukah nestled into the softness of the wings and, placing his lips upon the
white throat, was just about to lose himself in sweetness when he noticed that
Asrial was singing.
"My dove," he said, clearing his throat and trying to lift his head, only to
find that the angel held him close, "your song is beautiful, if a bit eerie,
but so mournful. Plus"—he yawned—"it's making me sleepy."
The angel's hand motions were lulling and soothing. Pukah closed his eyes. The
enchanting song bubbled into his mind tike the rippling waters of a cool
stream, quenching desire. He let the waters take him up and bear him away,
floating on the top of the music until he sank beneath its waves and drowned.
Asrial's voice died. The djinn slept soundly, his head on her breast, his
breathing regular and even. Rolling his body over gently, she sat up beside
him. She had no fear of waking him. She knew he would sleep soundly for a
long, long time.
A very long time. Sighing, Asrial gazed at the slumbering Pukah until she
could not see him for the tears in her eyes. The slim, youthful body, the
foxish face that thought itself so clever. Her hands stole around his chest
and drew him close. She buried her face in his chest and felt his heart beat.
332
WEIS AND HICKMAN
"No immortal can have a heart!" she wept. "No immortal can love! No immortal
can die! Forgive me, Pukah. This is the only way! The only way!"
Taking hold of the amulet in her shaking hands, Asrial slowly removed it from
around the djinn's neck.
Chapter 3
A djinn awoke in a dimly lit, cavernous chamber. Sitting up and looking'around
him, he could barely make out tall marble columns reflecting the orange light
of glowing flame off their polished surface. The handsome djinn had no idea
where he was and no recollection of how he got here. He had no recollection of
anything, in feet, and felt his head to see if there was a lump on it.
"Where am I?" he asked rhetorically, more to hear the sound of his voice in
the shadowy darkness than because he expected an answer.
An answer was returned, however. "You are in the Temple of Death in the city
of Serinda." Startled, the djinn glanced quickly around and saw the figure of
a woman clad in white standing over him. She was beautiful, her marble-smooth
face reflecting the flame in the same manner as the towering columns. Despite
her beauty, the djinn shivered when she approached. It may have been some
trick of the indistinct light, but the djinn could have sworn there was
something strange about the woman's eyes. "How did I get here?" the djinn
asked, still feeling his head for swellings or bruises. "You don't remember."
"No, I don't remember . . . much of anything." "I see. Well, your name is

Sond. Does that sound familiar?" Yes, the djinn thought, that seemed right. 
He nodded gingerly, expecting his head to hurt. It didn't.
333
334
WEIS AND HICKMAN
"You are an assassin—a skilled one. Your price is high. Few can afford you.
But one did. A king. He paid you quite handsomely to kill a young man."
"A king shouldn't have to hire an assassin," said Sond, rising slowly to his
feet and staring at the woman suspiciously. What was there about her eyes?
"He does when the killing must be kept secret from everyone in court, even the
queen. He does when the person to be assassinated is his own son!"
"His son?"
"The king discovered the boy plotting to overthrow him. The king dares not
confront his son openly, or the boy's mother would side with him, and she has
her own army, powerful enough to split the kingdom. The king hired you to
assassinate the young man; then he will spread the news that it was done by a
neighboring kingdom, an enemy.
"You tracked your quarry to this city, Serinda. He stays in an arwat not far
from here. But beware, Sond, for the young man is aware of you. Last night,
you were attacked by his men who beat you and left you for dead. Some citizens
found you and brought you to the Temple of Death, but you recovered, with my
help."
"Thank you," said Sond warily. He moved nearer the woman, trying to see her
more clearly, but she stepped back into a shadow.
"Your thanks are not required. Does any of this bring back memories?"
"Yes, it does," Sond admitted, though it seemed to him more like a story he'd
once heard a meddah relate than something that had happened to him. "How do
you know—"
"You spoke of it in your delirium. Do not worry, it is not unusual for
memories to flee a person's mind, especially when they have taken such a
brutal beating."
Now that she spoke of it, Sond did feel pain in his body. He could almost see
the faces of his attackers, the sticks they carried raining blows down upon
his body while the young man whom they served stood looking on, smiling.
Anger stirred in his heart. "I must complete my mission, for the honor of my
profession," he said, feeling for the dagger in the sash at his waist, his
hand closing reassuringly over the hilt. "Where did you say he was staying?"
"In the arwat the next street over to the north. It has no name, but you can
tell it by the lovely girls who dance on the
THE PALADIN OF THE NIGHT
335
balconies in the moonlight. When you enter, ask the proprietor to show you the
room of a young man who calls himself Pukah."
"His guards?"
"He believes you to be dead, imagines himself safe. You will find him alone,
unprotected." In her hand the woman held an amulet, swinging it by its chain.
Sond paid scant attention to the jewel. Eager to get on with his work, his
memories growing clearer and more vivid by the moment, he looked about for an
exit.
"There." The woman pointed, and Sond saw moonlight and heard faint sounds of a
city at night.
He hurried forward, then stopped, turning. "I am in your debt," he said. "What
is your name?"
"One you know in your heart. One you will hear again and again," said the
woman, and her lips spread over her teeth in a grin.
Sond had no trouble finding the arwat. A huge crowd was gathered outside to
watch the girls dancing on the balcony. This Serinda was a lusty, brawling
city, apparently. If Sond was at all worried about how the murder of a Prince
might be viewed here, his fears were quickly eased. Life was cheap in Serinda,
to judge by what he glimpsed in dark alleyways as he made his way through the

streets. With only a glance at the dancing girls, one of whom seemed vaguely
familiar, Sond entered the inn.
He found the proprietor—a short, fet man, who glanced at him and nodded in
recognition, though Sond couldn't recall ever having seen him before.
"I am looking for a man called Pukah," said Sond in a low undertone. The woman
had said the Prince's guards would not be about, but it never hurt to be
cautious.
The rabat-bashi burst into wheezing, gasping laughter, and Sond glared at him
angrily. "Shut up! What is so funny?"
"A small joke just occurred to me," said the proprietor, wiping his streaming
eyes. "Never mind. You wouldn't understand. A pity, too. Don't glower so and
keep your knife where it is, or you'll regret it, friend." Steel flashed in
the proprietor's hand. He could move fast, it seemed, for one so round. "Your
man is upstairs, second door to the left. You'll need a key." Knife in one
hand, he fumbled at a ring at his waist with the other. "Sure you don't want
to wait until sunrise?"
336
WEIS AND HICKMAN
THE PALADIN OF THE NIGHT
337
"Why should I?" Sond asked impatiently, snatching die key from die man's hand.
"No reason." The rabat-bashi shrugged. "You know your business, I guess. He
was with a woman—a beauty, too. But she left some time ago. I'll wager you'll
find him sleeping like a babe after his ... um . . . exertions."
Scowling, Sond didn't wait to hear anymore but ran up the stairs, taking them
two at a time. Pausing outside the door, he laid his ear to the keyhole, but
it was futile to attempt to hear anything above the wailing of the music and
the howls of the crowd outside. Ah, well, the noise would muffle any
sound—such as a scream.
Quickly, Sond inserted the key, heard the lock click, and silently pushed open
the door. The curtains were closed; he could see only a dark shape lying on
white sheets. Padding softly across the floor, the djinn opened the curtains a
crack, allowing moonlight to spill through and shine upon the figure in the
bed. He wouldn't want to kill the wrong man by mistake.
But this was his man, he was sure of it. Young, with a thin, pointed-chinned
face and an expression on his countenance indicating that—even in sleep—he
thought very well of himself. Though Sond couldn't say he recognized the face,
that smug, self-satisfied look evoked a response—a highly unpleasant one.
Drawing his dagger, Sond crept over to the bed where Pukah lay, apparently in
deep slumber. To his consternation, however, the young man's eyes suddenly
opened wide.
The dagger's blade gleamed in the moonlight. There was no mistaking the
murderous intent on Sond's face. He gripped the dagger in his sweating palm
and prepared to fight.
But the young man lay in bed, staring at him with an odd expression—one of
sorrow.
"Pukah?" questioned Sond grimly.
"Yes," replied the young man, and there was a tremor in the voice as of one
who holds very tightly to courage.
"You know why I am here."
"Yes." The voice was faint.
"Then you know that I bear you no malice. I am but the hand at the end of
another's arm. Your vengeful spirit will not seek me, but the man who paid
me?"
Pukah nodded. It was obvious he could not reply. Rolling over on his stomach,
he hid his face in the pillow, gripped it
with both hands. His body was covered with sweat, he quivered, his lips
trembled.
Sond stood over him, looking down at him, contemptuous of his victim's fear.
Lifting the dagger, the djinn drove it to the hilt between Pukah's shoulder

blades.
Chapter 4
The entire population of the city of Serinda gathered to celebrate Pukah's
funeral. The arwat's proprietor (a new one; the former had been dispatched
during the night in a quarrel over the price of a room) discovered the djinn's
body in the morning when she made a tour of the rooms, throwing out any guests
too drunk to stagger forth on their own.
Death came to view the body as it was being carried forth, accompanied by a
mockery of solemn state and ceremony. The dancing girls preceded it. Dressed
in sheer, filmy black silk, they wept copiously and disappeared rapidly; there
being those in the crowd who offered to comfort them in their affliction. The
arwat's musicians played funeral music to a festive beat that started an
impromptu street dance as the bearers carried the djinn's corpse on their
shoulders to the Temple of Death. Several fights broke out along the route—
those who had placed bets on the time of death were arguing among themselves
vehemently, since no one was quite certain when he'd died.
Death walked behind the body, smiling upon her subjects, who instantly cleared
a path for her, scrambling to get out of the way of her coming. The hollow
eyes scanned the mob, searching for one who should have been in attendance but
was not. Death did not look for the assassin. She had taken Sond last night.
Several immortals, convinced that they were the "Prince's" bodyguards,
cornered the djinn in an alley and effectively avenged the death of their
imagined
338
THE PALADIN OF THE NIGHT
33B
monarch. Sond lay once again in the Temple where he would be restored to life
as a slaver, perhaps, or a thief, or a Prince himself.
"Where is the angel?" Death questioned those who gathered to watch. "The woman
who was with the djinn yesterday?"
Since few to whom she spoke remembered yesterday or knew anything about the
dead man other than that it was rumored he had sought to destroy their city,
no one could answer Death's question. Asrial had come to Death last night,
bearing the amulet, and had given it into her hand without a word. Death
promised that the angel should leave at sunset the following day, when the
bargain was concluded. Asrial had seemed til at ease, inattentive, and had
vanished precipitously without responding to Death's offer.
"Truly she loves that liar," said Death to herself, and it occurred to her as
she walked among the crowd that Asrial might have attempted to prevent the
djinn's assassination and could very well have fallen victim to Sond's knife
herself. Death shrugged, deciding it didn't really matter.
Pukah was laid upon a bier of cow dung. The singing, dancing immortals strewed
garbage over him. Soaking the bier in wine, they made preparations to burn it
with the setting of the sun.
Death watched the proceedings until, bored, she left to follow the Amir's
troops into battle against another city in Bas. This city was proving
obstinate—refusing to give up without a fight, refusing to acknowledge Quar
their God. Death was certain to reap a fine harvest from this bloody field.
The Imam had ordered every kafir—man, woman, and child—put to the sword.
She had all day until she must return to Serinda and see her bargain with
Pukah completed.
Death had time to kill.
THE PALADIN OF THE NIGHT
341
Chapter 5
"Dark as Quar's Heart," muttered Pukah to himself, opening his eyes and
staring around him confusedly. "And the air is thick! Has there been a
sandstorm?" Dust flew into his mouth, and the djinn sneezed. Sitting up to see
where he was, he received a smart rap on the head.
"Ooofl" Dizzily, Pukah lay back down and, moving more cautiously, slowly

extended his hands and felt around him. Above his head, apparently, was a slab
of wood. And he was lying on wood—dirty, dust-covered wood by the feel and the
smell.
Just when the djinn had decided that he was lying in a wooden box—for Sul only
knew what reason—Pukah groped about farther and felt his hand brush into soft
material on either side of him. "A wooden box with curtains," he commented.
"This gets stranger and stranger." One hand slid completely underneath the
material. Figuring that where his hand could go, he could follow, the djinn
scooted across the' floor, raising a huge cloud of dust, and nearly sneezing
himself unconscious.
"By Sul!" said Pukah in astonishment, "I've been lying under a bed!"
Sunlight streaming through a dirty window revealed to the djinn the place
where he'd apparently spent the night. It was the same bed on top of which
he'd been lying in a state of bliss with . . .
"Asrial!" Pukah cried, looking around him frantically.
340
He was alone and his head felt as though it were stuffed with Majiid's
stockings. Pukah had the vague memory of singing in his ears, then nothing.
Slowly he sank down on the bed. Batting himself on the forehead several times,
hoping to displace the stockings and allow room for his wits, the djinn tried
to figure out what had happened. He remembered Asrial returning to the arwat
after his bargain with Death. . . .
Bargain with Death!
Pukah's hand went to his chest. The amulet was gone!
"Death's taken it!" Gulping, he leaped up from the bed and staggered across
the room to peer out the window. The sun was low, the shadows in the street
were long.
"It's morning!" Pukah groaned. "Time for the entire city to try to kill me.
And I feel as if camels have been chewing on my brain!"
"Asrial?" he called out miserably.
No answer.
She probably couldn't bear to watch, Pukah thought gloomily. I don't blame
her. I'm not going to watch either.
"I wonder," the djinn said wistfully after a moment, "if I was good last
night." He heaved a sigh. "My first time . . . probably my last . . . And I
don't remember any of it!"
Flinging himself upon the bed, he pulled the pillow over his aching head and
moaned a bit for the hardness of the world. Then he paused, looking up. "It
must have been wild," his alter ego said upon reflection, "if you ended up
under the bed!"
"I've got to find her!" Pukah said decisively, scrambling to his feet. "Women
are such funny creatures. My master the Calif told me that one must reassure
them in the morning that one still loves them. And I do love her!" Pukah said
softly, clasping the pillow to his chest. "I love her with all my heart and
soul. I would gladly die for her—"
The djinn stopped short. "You undoubtedly will die for her," his other self
told him solemnly, "if you go out that door. Listen, I have an idea. Perhaps
if you stayed hidden inside this room all day, no one would find you. You
could always slip back underneath the bed."
"What would the Calif say—his djinn hiding beneath a bed!" Pukah snorted at
himself in derision. "Besides, my angel is probably roaming the city now,
thinking in her virgin heart that I have had my way with her and now will
abandon her. Or, worse still"—the thought made him catch his
342
WEIS AND HICKMAN
breath—"she might be in danger! She has no amulet, after all! I must go find
her!"
Checking to make certain his knife was tucked into his sash, the djinn hurled
open the door and ran down the stairs, feeling as though he could take on the
entire city of Serinda. He paused outside the beaded curtains.

"Hoi Come out, you droppings of goats, you immortal refuse of swine! Cornel It
is I—the gallant Pukah—and I challenge one and all to do battle with me this
day!"
There was no response. Grimly Pukah charged through the curtains into the main
room.
"Come, you horses' hindquarters!"
The room was empty.
Frustrated, Pukah fought his way through the swinging beads and leapt out the
door, into the street.
"It is I, the challenger of Death, the formidable Pukah. . . ."
The djinn's voice died. The street was empty. Not only that, but it seemed to
be growing darker instead of lighter.
What with all the confusion, the shouting and yelling and flinging himself
about, Pukah felt his head begin to throb. He gazed about in the gathering
gloom, wondering fearfully if his vision was beginning to go. A fountain stood
nearby. Bending his head at the marble feet of a marble maiden, he allowed her
to pour cooling water from her marble pitcher upon his fevered brow. He felt
somewhat better, though his vision did not clear up, and he was just sitting
down on the fountain's rim when he heard a great snout rise up some distance
away from him.
"So that's where everybody is!" he said triumphantly. "Some sort of
celebration. Probably"—he realized glumly— "working themselves into a blood
frenzy."
He jumped to his feet, the sudden movement making his head spin. Dizzily he
fell back into the fountain, clinging td the marble maiden's cold body for
support. "Maybe they're tormenting Asrial! Maybe Death took her from me in the
night!"
Fury burning in his imaginary veins, Pukah shoved the maiden away from him,
knocking her off her pedestal and sending the statue crashing to the pavement.
He ran through the empty streets of Serinda, using the shouts as his guide,
hearing them grow louder and more tumultuous as the darkness deepened around
him. No longer trying to figure ou what was going on, knowing only that Asrial
might be suffer-
,
THE PALADIN OF THE NIGHT                      343
fag, and determined to save her no matter what cost to himself, Pukah rounded
a corner and ran headlong into the Temple plaza.
He was stopped by a crush of immortals blocking his path, ilbeir backs to him,
they were staring at something in the center of the plaza and cheering madly.
Standing on tiptoe, trying to see over veils and turbans, laurel wreaths and
steel helms, golden crowns and tarbooshes and every other form of
head-covering known to the civilized world, Pukah could make out a wisp of
dark, foul-smelling smoke beginning to curl into the air. He saw Death,
standing next to something in the center of the Plaza, a look of triumph upon
her cold, pale face.
But what was it she was gazing at with those hollow, empty reyes? Pukah
couldn't see, and finally, exasperated, he increased his height until he
towered head and shoulders above everyone in the crowd.
The djinn sucked in his breath, a sound like storm wind •whistling through
taut tent rigging. :      Death was looking triumphantly at him!
But it wasn't the him standing at the edge of the cheering mob. It was a him
lying prone upon a bier of cow dung, flames flickering at its base from
torches thrown by the crowd. t "Hazrat Akhran!" Pukah gasped. "There really
are two of me! I've been leading a double life and I never knew it! Suppose"—a
dreadful thought struck the djinn—"suppose he's the one Asrial fetl in love
with!" Pukah shook his fist at the body on the bier. "You've been so
understanding, so sympathetic! And all the time it was you making love to
her!"
Jealousy raging in his soul, Pukah began to shove his way through the mob.
"Get out of my way! Step aside there. Y/hat are you staring at? You'd think
you'd seen a ghost. Move over! I have to get through!" So intent was he upon

confronting himself with betraying himself, the djinn did not notice that—at
the sight of him—the immortals fell back, staring at him in shock.
Striding angrily down the path cleared for him by the shaken immortals, Pukah
came to the bier. Death gaped at him, her mouth open, her jaw working in
unspeaking rage. Pukah never noticed. His eyes were on himself lying, covered
with garbage, upon the smoldering dung heap.
"You were with her last night!" Pukah cried, pointing an
344
WEIS AND HICKMAN
THE PALADIN OF THE NIGHT
345
accusing finger at himself. "Admit itt Don't lie there, looking so innocent. I
know you, you—"
"Kill him!" Death shrieked, her hands clenching to fists. "Kill him!"
Howling in fear and fury, the mob surged toward Pukah, their screams and
curses bringing him to his senses at last.
"I'm not dead!" he said. "But then who—"
The mob attacked him. The fight was hopeless; he was one against thousands.
Falling back across the bier and the body on it—the body whose identity he now
knew, the body who had given her life for his—Pukah raised his arm
instinctively to ward off the blow. Averting his eyes from Death, his gaze
rested on the face he loved, a face he could see beneath the mask it wore.
"Holy Akhran, grant my prayer. Let us be together!" Pukah whispered. Looking
at Asrial, he did not see the sun vanish beneath the horizon.
Death saw. The dark eyes stared into descending darkness, and she gnashed her
teeth in her wrath.
"No!" she cried, raising her hands to Heaven. "No, Sul! I have been cheated!
You can't take this away from me!"
Night came to Serinda; the sun's afterglow lit the sky, and by its dim light
the immortals watched their city begin to crumble and fall into dust.
Staring at the body on the bier, Pukah saw it change form. Blue eyes looked
into his. "You've won, Pukah," the angel said softly, her silver hair shining
in the twilight. "The Lost Immortals are freed!"
"Because of you!" Pukah caught Asrial's hand and pressed it to his lips. "My
beloved, my life, my soul . . ." The hand began to fade in his. "What—" He
grasped at it frantically, but he might as well have been clutching at smoke.
"What is happening? Asrial, don't leave me!"
"I must, Pukah," came a faint voice. The angel was disappearing before his
eyes. "I am sorry, but it has to be this way. Mathew needs me!"
"Stop, 111 go with you—" Pukah cried, but at that moment he heard a harsh
voice booming in his ears.
"Pukah! Your master calls you! Have you been purposefully avoiding me? If so,
you will find your basket being used to roast squid upon your return!"
"Kaug!" Pukah licked his lips, peering into the Heavens. He felt himself
slipping away, as though he were being
sucked into a huge vortex. "No, Kaug! Please!" The djinn fought frantically,
but he couldn't help himself.
A last glance at the city of Serinda, the dying city of Death, revealed all
the immortals looking around themselves in vast confusion. A seraphim dropped
a wine goblet, staring at it in horror, and hastily wiped his lips in disgust.
A virginal goddess of Vevin glanced down at her own scantily clad form and
blushed in shame. Several immortals of Zhakrin, who had been leading the
murderous assault upon Pukah, suddenly lifted their heads, hearing a voice
long stilled. They •vanished instantly. A deity of Evren dropped a sword she
had been waving and lifted her voice in a glad cry. She, too, disappeared.
Sond staggered out of the Temple, looking dazed.
"Kaug?" he muttered, shaking his head muzzily. "Don't yell! I'm coming."
Pukah rumbled through the ethers, whirling round and round.
Death stood in the midst of the ruins of an ancient city lying silent and
forgotten, sand blowing through its empty streets.

THE PALADIN OF THE NIGHT
347
Chapter 6
Khardan understood little of what was transpiring around him. It was
magic—magic more powerful and terrifying than he could have ever believed was
possible to exist in this world. At first he had assumed that this was all
part of Mathew's plan to help them escape—until he saw by the deperate,
half-crazed look in the youth's eyes that Mathew truly meant to kill him.
Khardan could do nothing to defend himself. Pain-numbed and shocked, he stared
at Mathew in a stupor.
And then his eye caught movement.
Swiftly, silently, Auda ibn Jad drew his curved sword. Light flashing on the
arcing blade, the Black Paladin swung it in a slashing, upward thrust aimed at
Mathew's back. True to his oath, Auda was going.to save his brother's life.
Khardan's sluggish heartbeat quickened; action's heat surged through him,
driving off" the chill of helpless fear of the unknown. This he knew. This he
understood. Steel against steel. Sinew and bone, muscle and brain against
another man's bone and brain and brawn. Counting life's span by each panting
breath, each thud of the heart, knowing any second it might end in a blood-red
explosion of pain.
Far better than dying by magic.
Mathew did not see his danger. Eyes squinched shut, the youth lunged at
Khardan with a despairing, clumsy thrust. Stepping lightly to his left,
avoiding the dagger's jab, Khardan clasped his right hand around Mathew's
wrist and yanked the
346
boy past him and out of danger, sending him sprawling on his stomach to the
stone floor. In the same movement, the
; nomad's left hand knocked aside Auda's sword thrust. Khardan intended to
follow through with a knee to the groin, incapaci-
; taring his enemy, but ibn Jad quickly recovered and blocked
-the jab. Falling back before die nomad's rush, Auda kept his sword easily
clear of Khardan's frantic grasp. His blade Baring in the torchlight, ibn Jad
faced Khardan, who drew his ' ijwn sword and fell on his guard.
'      "Tell me," said ibn Jad, his hooded eyes glittering, "the name of the
God you serve?"
"Akhran," answered Khardan proudly, keenly watching ; die other's every move.
The Black Paladins gathered round, watching, not drawing their weapons. It was
Auda's privilege to dispatch his foe himself. They would not intervene.
"That is impossible!" ibn Jad hissed. "You spoke the name '-''Zhakrin'!"
"Zhakrin, Akhran"—Khardan shrugged wearily, his wounds aching—"they sound
alike, especially to ears listening for what they want to hear."
"How did you manage to survive?" "All my life I have made demands of my Cod,"
said Khardan in a low, earnest voice, never taking his eyes from
• die eyes of ibn Jad. "When He did not answer in the way I ^wanted, I was
angry and cursed His name. But in that terrible chamber, my pain and torment
grew more than I could bear. My body and my spirit were broken and I saw—as
you meant me to see—a Cod. But it was not your Cod. It was Akhran. Looking at
Him, I understood. I had been fighting His will instead of serving Him. That
is what had led me to disaster. Stripped naked, weak and helpless as when I
first came into this world, I knelt before Him and begged for His forgiveness.
Then I offered Him my life. He took it"— Khardan paused, drawing a deep
breath—"and gave it back."
Auda lunged. Khardan parried. The swords slid blade to blade to the hilts, the
two men locked in a struggle that each knew would prove fatal to the one who
faltered. They strained against each other, foot braced against foot, body
shoving against body, arms locked.
Ibn Jad smiled. Khardan's breath was coming in painful, catching jerks. Sweat
broke out on the Califs forehead, his body began to tremble. Khardan sank to
one knee, bowed

348
WEIS AND HICKMAN
THE PALADIN OF THE NIGHT
349
down by ibn Jad's strength. He held his sword steady until, striking like a
snake, Auda dropped his weapon, and seizing the wrist of the nomad's sword
arm, he gave a sharp, skilled twist. Khardan's sword fell from a hand that had
suddenly ceased to function.
Retrieving his weapon, the Paladin prepared for the kill.
Khardan made a last, feeble effort to fight. His hand reached out for his
sword that lay on the stone floor at Auda's feet. The Black Paladin caught
hold of Khardan's arm. Blood flowed from a reopened wound on the nomad's
wrist—a cut that had been made with the Black Paladin's own knife. Blood from
that wound was on ibn Jad's fingers—the blood of his bonded brother. . . .
Mathew hit the floor hard, the fall slamming the air from his lungs and
sending the dagger-wand flying from his grasp. He tried to draw a breath, but
his breathing pattern had been disrupted, and for several horrifying moments
he could not inhale. Panic-stricken, he gulped and gasped until air flowed
into his lungs at last. His breathing resumed its normal rhythm. Panic
subsided and fear rushed in to take its place.
Mathew heard shouts behind him. The remembered flash of ibn Jad's sword,
glimpsed from the corner of his eye, filled Mathew with terror. The wand had
changed back from dagger to its usual form. It lay only inches from his hand.
"Grab it! Use it! Kill!" The imp's shrill command dinned in Mathew's ears.
Scrambling forward, Mathew stretched out his hand to seize the wand when he
felt something like feathers tickling the back of his neck. Startled, thinking
someone had crept up on him from behind, he lifted his head and looked
frantically around. No one was there. He started to turn his attention back to
the wand when he saw the Black Sorceress. Ignoring the confusion and turmoil
going on about her, she had lifted the ivory fang of the altar snake and was
preparing to drive its pointed edge into the crystal globe that rested upon
Zohra's chest.
"Stop her! Use the wand!" hissed the imp.
The young wizard lunged forward, his fingers closed over the handle of
petrified wood.
"Command me!" begged the imp, panting, its hot breath burning Mathew's skin.
"I will slay her! I will slay them all at
your word, Dark Master. You will rule, in the name of Astafas!"
Rule! Mathew lifted the wand. Its evil power shot through this body with the
tingling blast of a lightning bolt.
The imp's red eyes left Mathew and gazed at something that had seemingly
appeared above the young wizard. "In the name of Astafas, I claim him as
mine!" the creature crowed
•triumphantly. "You are too late!"
"In the name of Promenthas," came a whisper soft as the touch of a feather
upon Mathew's skin, "I will not let you take him."
War raged in Mathew's soul. Turmoil and doubt assailed Him. The hand holding
the wand shook. The hands of the
••'Black Sorceress, holding the ivory knife, descended.
Fear for Zohra swept over Mathew like a cleansing, purifying fire, burning
away terror, panic, ambition. He had to save Zohra. The magic was in his hand
that could do so, but Mathew knew—and finally admitted to himself—that he was
: too young, too inexperienced to call upon it. Acting out of desperation, he
did the first thing that came to mind. He lifted the obsidian wand and threw
it, as hard as he could, at the Black Sorceress.
He missed his aim. The wand crashed instead into the crystal globe, knocking
it from Zohra's chest, sending it rolling and bouncing over the marble floor.
With a piercing scream, the Black Sorceress left Zohra to chase after the
precious globe.
"Our only way out!"

Scrambling to his feet, Mathew joined in the pursuit of the crystal fish bowl.
Though he was faster, the aged sorceress was closer. She must win the prize.
"It's over!" Mathew whispered to himself. Their brief, futile, hopeless battle
was coming to its only possible end.
And then, suddenly, the globe vanished, swallowed up by what seemed to
Mathew's dazed eyes a mound of flesh.
Flopping on his fat belly, Usti had flung himself bodily upon the bounding
crystal globe.
"Thank Promenthas!" Mathew cried, lunging forward. "Usti! Give me the globe!
Quickly!"
"Give it to me, meddlesome immortal," shrieked the sorceress. "I might yet
spare you the fate of an eternity locked away in iron!"
Ignoring threats and cajoles alike, the djinn lay prone
350
WEIS AND HICKMAN
upon the floor where he had landed, his arms stretched out above his head in
an attitude that might have been mistaken for prayer until it became obvious
to the two tense, eager observers that Usti seemed to be endeavoring to dig up
the marble and crawl beneath it.
The sorceress gave an impatient snarl, and—at this dreadful sound—Usti lifted
his head. His chins shook, the fat face was the color of tallow, congealing
into lumps of fear. The djinn's eyes darted from one to another.
"Madam, Madman"—Usti raised himself up slowly off the floor—"I fear that I
cannot accommodate either of you, no matter what"—the djinn gulped—"you
threaten to do to me!"
"Give me the fish, Usti!" Mathew demanded in a cracked, terror-laden voice.
"—to me, or I'll rip out your eyes!" hissed the sorceress, clawlike hands
twisting, taloned nails ready to sink into immortal flesh.
"I cannot!" Usti cried, wringing his hands. Sitting back on his fat knees, he
gazed despairingly down at the front of his rotund belly. Water soaked the
front of the djinn's silk Mouse; the torchlight winked off shards of
blood-smeared crystal poking out of his stomach. On this floor before him, two
fish flopped feebly in a puddle.
"I broke it!" said Usti miserably.
Chapter 7
'From my heart to yours, from your heart to mine . . . jser than brothers
born.1 "
Khardan heard the whispered words, felt ibn Jad's grip on relax. Pulling
Khardan to his feet, Auda tossed the Calif sword and then put his back to the
nomad's. Hie Black Hns, who were waiting for ibn Jad to finish his opponent,
at their comrade in wordless astonishment. "What are you doing?"  Khardan
demanded,  his voice lick, his breathing ragged.
"Keeping my oath," said ibn Jad grimly. "Have you strength fight?*
"You're going against your own?" Khardan shook his head contusion.
"You and I are bonded by blood. I swore before my God!" "But it was a trick! I
tricked you—"
"Don't join your arguments with those of my own heart, wmad!" Auda ibn Jad
snarled over his shoulder. "I am al-sady more than half inclined to sink my
blade in your back! )o you have the strength to fight?"
"No!" gasped Khardan. Every breath was burning agony. |Tlie sword had grown
unaccountably heavy. "But I have the [strength to die trying."
Auda ibn Jad smiled grimly, keeping his eyes on the Paladins. At last
beginning to understand that they had been betrayed, they were drawing their
weapons.
"Nomad—you have stolen from me, cheated me, tricked
351
352
WEIS AND HICKMAN
THE PALADIN OF THE NIGHT
353

me, and now it seems likely you are going to get me killed by my own people."
Ibn Jad shook his head. "By Zhakrin, I grow to like you!"
Swords slid from scabbards, blades gleamed red in the torchlight. Their faces
grim, confused no longer, the Black Paladins closed the circle of steel.
Broken! Mathew stared bleakly at the water dribbling down Usti's belly, the
shards of crystal on the stone floor, the fishing lying—gasping and
twitching—in a puddle. But the globe couldn't break! Not by mortal hands! But,
perhaps, an immortal belly? . . .
"You could have had much, but you wanted it all!" whispered the Black
Sorceress in Mathew's ear. Hands gripped his arm, and he flinched at the
touch, knowing in sick despair that there was worse—far worse—to come. "What
would Astafas have given you for them that I couldn't give you?"
Her hands crawled over his chest, up his neck.
Mathew couldn't move. Perhaps the sorceress had laid a spell on him, perhaps
it was her awful presence alone that stung him, paralyzing him. He stared at
her, seeing her emerge from her unnatural youthful shell like some dreadful
insect crawling out of its husk. The flesh receded from the fingers; they were
pincers with bloodstained talons scraping his chin, tearing his lips.
"First the eyes!" Her breath was hot and foul against his skin, her gaze
mesmerizing, and Mathew felt his blood congeal, his senses go numb. The
pincers clawed over his cheeks, piercing the flesh. "Then I will turn you over
to the torturer and watch while he removes other parts of you. But not the
tongue." A thumb caressed his mouth. "I will save that for last, I want to
hear you beg for death—"
Mathew shut his eyes, a scream welling up inside him. The pincers were on his
eyeballs, they began to dig in ...
Suddenly there was a soggy thud, a muffled groan. The pincers twitched and
relaxed. The hands slide horribly down his face, his body, but they were limp
and harmless. Opening his eyes, Mathew saw the Black Sorceress lying
unconscious at his feet, a bruised and bloody mark upon her forehead.
"Mat-hew," said a groggy voice at his side, "you must learn ... to defend
yourself. I cannot always ... be rescuing you. ..."
The voice faded. Mathew turned, but Usti was there to ^ catch his mistress as
she slumped over sideways, the blood-jjlrimmed ivory lid of one of the tall
jars slipping from her Ifingers. Lifting Zohra in his flabby arms, his face
reddening |rwith the exertion, Usti turned to Mathew. "What now, Madman?"
"You're asking me?" Shaking in reaction to his horrifying jexperience, the
young wizard stared at the djinn. "Take us t of here!"
Usti drew himself up with dignity.
"I can take myself out of here. Poof, I'm gone! But humans are entirely
another matter. You do not easily 'poof.* jjOnly my vast courage and undying
loyalty to my mistress |keeps me here—"
"And the fact that they've taken the ring and you have -nowhere to hide!"
Mathew muttered viciously beneath his ibreath, noting that all the jewels had
been removed from | Zohra's fingers. Frustrated, frightened, he ceased to
listen to sthe djinn's self-aggrandizements. The Black Sorceress was pdead—at
least Mathew hoped to Promenthas she was dead— § but their danger had not
lessened. If anything, it was now [greater. He could picture to himself the
fury of these people Lwhen they discovered their witch-queen murdered.
Where was Khardan? Was he still alive? Sounds of fight-coming from the
opposite end of the Vestry, near the | door, seemed to indicate that he was.
How to reach him? How to win their way out of this dread Castle against so
many = opponents?
"I can take you out of here, Dark Master!" came a whin-' ing hiss at his
elbow. "Speak the name of Astafas—"
"Be gone!" said Mathew shortly. "Return empty-handed your Demon Prince—" "Not
empty-handed!" flashed the imp. With a gurgling cry, he snatched the golden
fish up in his shriveled fingers, then vanished with a bang.
Mathew stared at the black fish, resting near the hand of the sorceress. The
fish's spasmodic twitchings were growing more feeble, its heaving gills showed

blood-red against its black scales. Mathew scooped up the fish in his hands.
Cupping his fingers, cradling the slimy amphibian in his palms, the young
wizard turned slowly around to face the followers of Zhakrin.
354
WEIS AND HICKMAN
"Listen to me—" His voice cracked. Angrily, he cleared his throat and began
again. "Listen to me! I have defeated your Black Sorceress, and now I hold in
my hands your God!"
His call thundered through the Vestry, echoing off the ceiling, rising above
the clash and clamor of the combatants. All faces, one by one, turned toward
his, all sound died in the vast chamber.
Mathew could not see Khardan, there were too many people standing between
them. But Mathew knew from the sound of battle where the Calif must be. The
young wizard began to hedge slowly in that direction.
"Follow me!" he shot out of the side of his mouth.
Regarding Mathew with a look of amazed respect, the djinn hurriedly fell into
step behind him, bearing the unconscious Zohra in his arms.
Coming up upon a line of Black Paladins that had formed in front of him,
Mathew felt his heart pounding so that it came near to suffocating him.
Mathew tilted his hands slightly so that they could all see the black fish.
"Let me pass," he said, drawing a shivering breath, "or I swear I will destroy
your God!"
Chapter 8
On the eastern shores of the Kurdin Sea was a small fishing village. It was
located far enough from the Isle of Galos that the people dwelling there could
see only the perpetual cloud that hung above the volcano.
Swirling over the village like the tide that ruled their lives, night had
reached its flood stage and was beginning to ebb when a boat took to the
water. A man was setting out fishing.
Not such a strange occupation for a resident of this tiny village, whose
houses appeared at first glance to be nothing more than pieces of debris
washed up on the shore during the last storm. Or at least it wouldn't have
been strange to see the boat setting sail with all the others of the village,
the fishermen casting out their baited hooks by the first rays of the sun.
This fisherman was out in a boat by himself, in the dead of night, the oars
muffled with old rags, the oarlocks greased with tallow so that no sound
betrayed him.
No long length of rope was coiled at his feet, no hooks were baited with juicy
squid. The solitary fisherman's only fishing equipment was a net and lantern
of his own clever devising, for he could be clever if he chose—this fisherman—
especially when it came to the crafty, the sly, and the deceitful.
Made of brass, the lantern was completely closed on all four sides and open
only at the bottom, a narrow crossbar stretching from side to side. On the
center of this crossbar
355
356
WEIS AND HICKMAN
rested the stub of a candle, and the light that this lantern shed streamed out
from the bottom; no glimmer of flame could be seen shining from the sides. An
odd sort of lantern, one might think, and certainly not .practical for walking
at night.
But highly practical for unlawfully catching fish.
Crouched at the boat's stern, the man, whose name was Meelusk, held the
lantern up over the water, watching in high glee as the fish—attracted to the
light—came swimming all goggle-eyed and gasping-mouthed to get a better look.
Meelusk waited until he had a fair number, then gathered in his net with his
wiry arms.
Dumping his catch in a basket made of twisted wire, Meelusk took time to
cackle silently at the slumbering village of dolts who had no more brains than
the fish they caught. They worked throughout the day, from dawn to dusk, those

codheads, and oftimes came back with little to show for their labors. Meelusk
worked only a few hours each night and never came in empty-handed.
Oh, he made a fine pretence of taking his boat out every day, but never fished
with the rest, claiming to have a secret spot all his own. So he did. Every
night he sailed to a secluded alcove and lowered his wire basket, full of
fish, into the water. Every day he returned to this alcove—well hidden from
the eyes of his neighbors—and slumbered peacefully through the heat of the
afternoon. Waking with the setting of the sun, Meelusk hauled in his catch and
sailed back to the village, to greet his neighbors with gibes and taunts.
"What, no luck this day, Nilock? And you with a family of ten to supportl Try
selling children in the market, instead of fish!"
"The God of the Sea favors the righteous, Cradic! Quit ogling your neighbor's
wife, and perhaps your luck will change!"
With a cackling laugh, always cut short by a wheeze, for Meelusk complained of
a weakness in his lungs (a weakness his neighbors devoutly hoped would carry
him swiftly to his just reward), the skinny, bent, little man would caper away
to his wretched hut, which stood far apart from the rest of the village.
Meelusk lived by himself; not even a dog would have anything to do with him.
Eating his miserly dinner, Meelusk stopped occasionally to wrap his arms
around his scrawny body, hug himself, and think with delight how his neighbors
must envy him.
THE PALADIN OF THE NIGHT
357
Envy was not the word.
All knew about the poaching. All knew about the cunning lantern. All knew
about his "secret fishing spot." And there was more. Meelusk did not steal
only fish. They told stories of how the greedy old man dropped pebbles in the
cups of blind beggars and filched the coins; how he grabbed the wares sold by
poor cripples and ran off, taunting them to catch him. He was not a follower
of Benario. Such thieves risked their lives to steal the rubies from a
Sultan's hand while the man slept. This little man stole shirts drying on the
line, snitched bread from the ovens of poor widows, snatched bones from the
mouths of toothless dogs. Followers of Benario spit upon Meelusk. He was a
craven coward who believed in no God whatsoever.
This night, shortly after midnight, Meelusk flashed his lantern light into the
water and cursed. There was something amiss with the fish, it seemed. Few came
near the light. Those that had been taken in his net were wretched little
creatures, hardly worth the effort, too small to eat. Other fishermen would
have thrown them back, making suitable apologies and asking them politely to
return when they were bigger. Meelusk left the little things in the bottom of
the ' boat, taking a mean, nasty satisfaction in hearing them flopping
helplessly about. It was the only satisfaction he was liable to get this
night, the old man thought sourly, tossing out his dripping net without much
hope of bringing in anything.
He shone the lantern in the water, peering down, and gave a wheeze of delight.
Something shiny and bright glittered right below him! Eagerly he took a pull
at the net and grunted in amazement. The net would barely budge! A spasm of
excitement shook Meelusk's bony frame. Truly this was big! Perhaps a
dolphin—those kind an gentle daughters of Hum that the fools on shore always
treated with such respect, petting them when they rubbed up against the boats
or actually leaping overboard and frolicking in the sea with them! Meelusk
grinned a gap-toothed grin and, throwing all his-weight into the task, heaved
again on the net. He could imagine what they'd say when he dragged this big
fish to market; they'd berate him, of course, for killing an animal known to
be good luck to mariners. But he Icnew that in reality they would be eaten
alive with envy.
By Sul, it was heavy!
358
WEIS AND HICKMAN
Veins bulging on his bony arms, his feet braced against the gunnel, Meelusk

pulled and grunted and panted and sweated and hauled and pulled. Slowly the
net rose dripping from the water. His arms trembling from the strain, fearing
at the last moment his muscles would give out and he would drop it back into
the dark depths, Meelusk threw everything he had and then some into dragging
the net over the side of the boat.
He made it,. heaving it over the hull with such tremendous effort that he
heaved himself along with it and sprawled fiat on top of his catch. Pausing to
catch his wheezing breath, Meelusk was so done in by his exertions that he
resembled the unfortunate fish he'd landed, able only to gape and gasp.
Finally, however, the stars quit bursting in his head; he was able to stand
and stagger to a seat. Lifting the cunning lantern, he eagerly looked to see
what he had caught.
Undoing the net with trembling fingers, Meelusk lifted up his first object and
spit out a filthy, nasty little word. "A basket," he muttered. "Nothing but a
water-soaked old basket— belonged to a snake charmer by the looks of it.
Still, I can probably get a few coppers for it—
"Ah, ha! What's this? A lamp!" Dropping the basket, Meelusk grabbed the lamp
and stared at it with greedy, rapacious eyes. "A fine brass chirakl This will
fetch a fair price in the market—not once but several times over!" Meelusk was
adept at selling something to an unsuspecting merchant, then snitching it and
reselling it again.
Tipping the lamp upside down, Meelusk shook it to drain out the water. More
than water came out of the lamp, however. A cloud of smoke issued from the
spout, assuming the form of an incredibly large and muscular human male. Arms
clasped before his bare chest, the gigantic man regarded the little, dried-up
Meelusk with humble respect.
"What are you doing in my lamp? Be gone! Get out!" screeched the old man in
high dudgeon, clutching the lamp to his bosom. "I found it! It's mine!"
"Salaam aleikum, Ejfendi," said the man, bowing. "I am Sond, the djinn of this
lamp and you have saved me! Your wish is my command, O master."
Meelusk cast the djinn a disparaging gaze—noting the silken pantalons, golden
arm rings, earrings, jeweled turban. "What do I want with a pretty boy like
you?" the little man
THE PALADIN OF THE NIGHT
359
snorted in disgust. "Get you gone!" he was about to add, when suddenly the
basket at his feet stirred, the lid flew off, and another cloud of smoke
materialized into the form of a man—somewhat thinner and not as handsome as
the first.
"And who might you be?" growled Meelusk warily, keeping a firm grip on the
lamp.
"I am Pukah, djinn of this basket, Effendi, and you have saved me! Your wish
is my command, O mast—" Pukah stopped speaking abruptly, his gaze becoming
abstracted, bis foxish ears pricking.
"I know, I know," mimicked Meelusk irritably, "I'm your master. Well you can
just hop back into the sea, Fancy Pants, because—"
"Sond," interrupted Pukah, "our master talks too much. Hear how his breath
rattles in His lungs? It would be far more healthful for him to speak less."
"My thought exactly, friend Pukah," said Sond, and before Meelusk knew what
was happening, the firm, strong hand of the djinn clamped the little man's
mouth tightly shut.
Pukah was listening intently, his head cocked toward the plume of smoke that
was a dark splotch against the moonlit horizon. Enraged, Meelusk whined and
whimpered until the young, foxish djinn gazed at him severely.
"Friend Sond, I fear our master will do himself an injury if he persists in
making those annoying sounds. For his own benefit, I suggest you render him
unconscious!"
Seeing the djinn clench an enormous fist, Meelusk immediately ceased his
pitiful screeching. Nodding in satisfaction, Sond turned to Pukah. "What do
you hear?"

"Khardan, my master—former master"—Pukah amended, with an obsequious bow to
the muffled Meelusk—"is in dire peril. -Over there, from whence issues that
cloud of steam." The djinn's Bice paled, his eyes widened. "And Asrial! Asrial
is there, too! lliey are fighting for their lives!"
Sond removed his hand from Meelusk's mouth. "What place is that, Ejfendi?"
"Hie Isle of Galos!" Meelusk whined. "A dreadful island, so I've heard,
populated by demons who eat human flesh and evil witches who drink the blood
of babes and terrible men with great, shining swords who lop off heads—"
"It seems to me, Effendi," said Pukah solemnly, "that you have had, your
entire life, a burning desire to visit this wondrous isle."
360
WEIS AND HICKMAN
Somewhat slow-witted when it came to things other than cheating and stealing
and lying, Meelusk smugly shook his head. "No, you are wrong, Puke-up, or
whatever your name is. I am content with my home." He gave the djinn a cunning
glance. "And I command you to take me there, this instant!" Another thought
occurred to him. "After we've caught all the fish in the sea first, of
course."
"Fish! Alas, all you think of is work, I fear, Effendi. You are such a
conscientious man." Sond gave Meelusk a charming smile. "You must take some
time off to pursue pleasure! As your djinn, Effendi, it is our duty to fulfill
the wish of your heart. Rejoice, Effendi! This night, we sail for the Isle of
Galos!"
Meelusk's gap-toothed mouth dropped open. He nearly swallowed his tongue and
was, for a moment, so occupied in attempting to cough it back up that he could
only splutter and slobber.
"I fear the master is going into a fit," said Pukah sadly.
"We must keep him from choking on his spit," added Sond solicitously.
Snatching up a slimy rag used to slop the deck, the djinn stuffed it neatly
into Meelusk's gabbling mouth.
"Throw these little fellows overboard!" Pukah ordered, and began to hoist the
boat's tattered and torn sail.
Gathering up the fish, accepting graciously their cries of thanks, Sond tossed
them back into the ocean and sent the net and cunning lantern down after them.
"We need some wind,, my friend"—Pukah stated, looking critically at the sail
that hung limp in the still night air—"or we will arrive at the battle two
days after its conclusion."
"Anything to oblige, friend Pukah. You take the tiller."
Flying out over the calm water, Sond began to swell in size until he was
twenty feet tall—a sight that caused Meelusk's eyes to bulge from his head.
The djinn sucked in a deep breath that seemed to displace the clouds in the
sky and let it out in a tremendous blast of wind that billowed the sail and
sent the fishing boat skipping and dancing over the water.
"Well done, friend Sond!" cried Pukah. "Look! The Isle of Galosl You can see
it!"
The Isle of Galos loomed large on the horizon. Ripping the gag from his mouth,
Meelusk began to beat his breast and wail. "You're going to get me killed!
They wiH eat my flesh! Chop off my head!"
THE PALADIN OF THE NIGHT
361
"Effendi," said Pukah with a sigh, "I sympathize with your vast excitement and
your eagerness to fight nesnas and ghuls—"
"Nesnas! Ghuls!" Meelusk shrieked.
"—and I am aware that you are thankful to us—your djinn—for providing you with
the opportunity to draw your sword against Black Knights, who are devoted to
torturing those they capture— "
"Torture!" Meelusk screeched.
"—but if you go on flinging yourself about in this manner, Master, you will
upset the boat." One hand on the tiller, Pukah reached out his other and
picked up Meelusk by the scruff of his neck. "For your own good, Master, in

order that you be rested and ready to do battle when we go ashore—"
"Battle!" wailed poor Meelusk.
"—I am going to offer you the loan of my dwelling," continued Pukah with a
magnanimous bow.
Meelusk's mouth thought what was left of Meelusk's brain was going to order it
to say something and worked away at forming the words, but no sound came out.
Pukah nodded solemnly. "Sond, our master is speechless with gratitude. I fear,
Master, that you will find the basket cramped, and there is a redolent odor of
Kaug, for which I apologize, but we were just now released from imprisonment,
and I have not yet had time to clean." So saying, Pukah stuffed
Meelusk—headfirst, feet flailing—into the basket, firmly slamming shut the lid
upon the man's protests and screams.
A peaceful silence descended over the dark water.
Sitting back calmly at the tiller, Pukah steered a direct course for Galos.
Sond flew along behind the boat, adding a puff every now and then to keep it
skimming over the waves.-
"By the way," said Pukah, comfortably extending his legs and giving the
basket, from which muffled howls were starting to emerge, a remonstrating
nudge with his foot, "did you discover the reason why that Goddess—what was
her name— slipped into Kaug's dwelling and rescued us from that great hulking
oaf?"
"The Goddess Evren."
"Evren! I thought she was dead."
"She seemed very much alive to me, especially when she ordered her immortals
to pick up our dwellings and hurl them into the sea."
362
WEIS AND HICKMAN
"Why would she do that? What are we to her?" Sond shrugged. "She said she owed
Akhran a favor." "Ah," remarked Pukah with a si^h of admiration, "Hazrat
Akhran always did have a way with the ladies!"
Chapter 9
"Stand aside! Let the wizard pass!" ordered the Lord of the Black Paladins.
The line of armored men slowly parted, their eyes burning with hate, clouded
with fear.
Keeping the fish in his cupped hands, deathly afraid he would drop the wiggly,
slimy thing, Mathew walked through their ranks, feeling their gazes pierce him
like sharp steel. Trotting along behind him, carrying Zohra in his arms and
panting from the strain, came the djinn.
"Madman," gasped Usti in a low undertone that echoed resoundingly through the
silent Vestry. "Where are we going?"
Mathew's breath caught in his throat. Where were they going? He hadn't any
idea! His one thought was to get out of this nightmare chamber, but then what?
Go out into the night, to face the one-armed, half-headed nesnas?
"To the sea!" came the cool pronouncement. "The God must be taken to the sea!"
Mathew looked down the row of men that lined his path like black, armor-plated
columns. Standing at the end was Auda ibn Jad, sword stained crimson, more
than one of his fellow knights lying wounded at his feet. Beside him, face
ashen with pain and exhaustion, blood smeared over his bare chest and arms,
was Khardan.
To Mathew's wild-eyed gaze, it seemed ibn Jad must have been fighting in
defense of the nomad. And it was assuredly
363
364
WEIS AND HICKMAN
THE PALADIN OF THE NIGHT
365
his voice that had ordered the wizard to take the fish to the sea. The sea!
There were boats! . . .
"Ghuls!" cried Usti, his round, frightened eyes looking like holes punched in
bread dough.

"One worry at a time," Mathew snapped.
He glanced warily at the Black Paladins. They were muttering darkly; he saw
his death in their grim faces, saw it in the white knuckles that clenched over
the hilts of swords or around the hafts of spears, saw it in the bristling
mustaches, the lowering brows.
He continued walking forward.
The fish in his hands gave a spasmodic jerk, flipping out of his grasp, taking
Mathew's heart with it. Frantically he clutched at it, caught it by the tail,
and closed his hands over it with a relieved sigh. The mutterings among the
Paladins grew louder. He heard footsteps coming up behind him, steel sliding
from a scabbard.
"Master!" whimpered Usti.
"I'll kill it!" Mathew shouted, sweat trickling down his face. "I swear!"
And then ibn Jad was at his side, guarding his back, a dagger, in one hand,
his drawn sword in another.
"Let them go," came the order. The face of the Lord was a terrifying
sight—contorted with fury, pale with fear. Mathew darted a glance at the Black
Sorceress lying on the floor at her husband's feet. Her women were gathered
around her, endeavoring to bring her back to consciousness. But it appeared
that it would be a long time—if ever—before she spoke to her people again. "We
can do nothing more," the Lord added grimly. "My wife is the only one who
could tell us if Zhakrin is truly in peril and she cannot speak."
Catching sight of Auda ibn Jad's face over his shoulder, Mathew saw a ghostly
smile flicker across the thin, cruel lips. What the man might be thinking,
Mathew couldn't fathom. From the expression on Auda's face, he wasn't at all
certain he wanted to know.
Mathew kept walking.
Footsteps followed him across the stone floor; the wizard could feel the thud
of boots jar his body. Behind the Paladins came their men-at-arms, and behind
them the black-robed women.
The fish lay in his hands, its unblinking eye staring upward, the heaving of
its gills growing weaker.
"If that fish dies, so do you!" hissed ibn Jad.
Mathew knew that all too well. Focusing his attention on the fish to the near
total exclusion of all else, he willed the creature to live. Each breath it
drew, he drew. He was only dimly aware of Khardan joining them, of the nomad
taking Zohra from the arms of the djinn, of Usti's protest. "My Prince, you
can barely walk yourself." Of Khardan's stern reply. "She is my wife." Of
Usti's muttering, "I shall soon have to carry both of you!" But the words
drifted past the young wizard, less real than the sudden sensation of cool,
night air blowing upon his face.
They were outside the Castle, moving in a torchlit procession down the
pathway, and still the fish clung to life. His gaze fixed upon it, Mathew
slipped and slid precariously in the loose gravel of the path until ibn Jad's
strong arm caught hold of him and braced him.
They were crossing the narrow bridge with its grinning, gruesome heads, when
the fish stopped breathing. Mathew glanced in fear and consternation at ibn
Jad, who shook his head grimly and hurried the wizard along, now half carrying
the young man. The others followed, and the Black Paladins followed them.
Salt spray cooled Mathew's feverish skin. He could hear the waves rolling to
shore. Leaving the bridge, setting foot on the ground once more, he looked
down the cliff of shining wet black rock and saw the vast ocean before him,
the moon's white light forming a glistening path on the top of the black
water.
At the smell of the sea, the touch of spray upon its scales, the fish jerked
and gasped, and Mathew began to breath himself. The crossing of the bridge had
slowed the Black Paladins. Cautiously he began to descend the slick, steep
steps.
"Hurry!" urged ibn Jad in Mathew's ear. "The damned thing's about finished!
When we reach the sand, head for the boats!" he added in a piercing whisper.

Looking ahead, Mathew saw a line of boats drawn up in the sand near the
water's edge. But he also saw the ship, swinging at its anchor, its sailors
crowded on the deck, watching the unusual activity on shore with hungry eyes.
"What about the ghuls?" returned Mathew frantically, fighting to keep calm,
avoiding the longing to break into a panic-stricken run. Behind him, he could
hear Khardan's labored breathing, Usti's frightened whimpers.
366
WEIS AND HICKMAN
"Once we're on the boat, I'll take care of Sul's demons! Whatever you do, keep
hold of that fis—"
Mathew had just set foot upon the shore when, "Stop them!" The shrill cry of a
woman rang like a hideous bell from the topmost turret of Castle Zhakrin.
"Too late! Run!" cried Auda, giving Mathew a rough push.
Mathew stumbled. The fish flew from his hands and plopped into the murky
water.
"Stop them!" came the enraged sorceress's command, and it was echoed by the
furious shouts of the knights.
Mathew reached down into the crashing waves and began to grapple frantically
for the fish.
"Never mind!" Crasping him by the back of his wet robes, Auda jerked him
upright. "You can't fool them any longer. It's all over! Run!"
Looking behind him, Mathew saw swords flash. The Paladin had turned to lace
alone the onslaught of charging knights, when there came a blinding flash of
light. The djinn, Sond, exploded in their midst like thunder.
Chapter 10
Springing up from the sand, full ten feet tall, wielding a scimitar it would
have taken four mortal men to lift, Sond stood between the captives and their
attackers. Fanatic fighters though they were, the Black Paladins could not but
be awed by this fantastic apparition appearing before them. Coming to a halt,
they glanced askance at each other and at their Lord. Above them, the Black
Sorceress called down death from the Castle spires, but she was far from the
towering, grim-faced djinn and his scimitar that gleamed wickedly in the
bright moonlight.
"Master, Master!" cried a voice excitedly. "Over here! Over here!"
Khardan raised his eyes—even that took a supreme effort it seemed—to see a
rotting, leaking, tattered-sailed fishing boat nudging the shoreline, rocking
back and forth with the waves. On board was Pukah, waving his turban like a
flag, and a small, wizened man crouched at the tiller, who shook in such
paroxysm of fear that the chattering of his teeth could be heard above the
clash of steel.
Khardan forced his weary, aching legs to drag him forward another step. Fire
burned in the muscles of shoulders and arms from carrying the unconscious
Zohra, his wounds pained him, his strength was gone. Pride alone kept him from
collapsing before his enemies.
Seeing his master begin to give way, Pukah leapt from the boat and ran toward
the Calif, taking Zohra from him just as
367
368
WEIS AND HICKMAN
THE PALADIN OF THE NIGHT
369
Khardan's eyes rolled back in his head and he pitched forward onto the sand.
Mathew stopped in his own headlong flight and knelt to help him.
"Run for it, Blossom!" Auda ibn Jad commanded harshly.
"I can't leave Khardan!"
"Go on!" Auda hauled Mathew roughly to his feet. "I swore to protect him with
my life! I will do so!"
"I will fight alongside you!" Mathew insisted doggedly.
Ibn Jad glowered at him, then gave a grudging nod. Several of the Paladins
started forward, only to be confronted by the djinn. Undaunted, the knights

were prepared to fight even the immortal when the voice of the Black Sorceress
rang out again from the tower.
"You are commanded to"—it seemed she choked on the words—"let them go!"
"Let them go?" Turning to face her, the Lord of the Paladins stared up at his
wife in astonishment. "Who commands such a thing?" he shouted.
"Zhakrin commands!" came a deep voice that seemed to well up from the ground.
At the sound, several of the Paladins sank to their knees. Others remained
standing, however, including their Lord. Sword in hand, he glared balefully at
Mathew.
The volcano rumbled. The earth shook. Many more Paladins fell to their knees,
looking at their Lord in fear.
Reluctantly, the knight lowered his sword.
"It seems our God owes Akhran a service," the Lord of the Black Paladins
growled. "Leave quickly, before He changes His mind!"
Together, Mathew and Auda ibn Jad lifted Khardan to his feet and dragged him
across the sand to the waiting boat.
"What did you mean when you told me—'y°u can * f°°l them any longer'?" Mathew
asked the Black Knight.
"Surely you knew, didn't you, Blossom"—Auda's black eyes, glittered in the
moonlight—"that you did not hold a God in your hands?"
Mathew stared at him, aghast. "You mean—"
"You held in your hands nothing but a dying fish!" A ghostly smile touched
Auda's thin lips. "The Black Sorceress was not the only one who would be aware
of the presence of the God within the fish. I was there during the ceremony
when we freed the God from the Temple in Khandar. I was
myself the Bearer for a long time after that. The God left when the djinn—or
should I say Hazrat Akhran—broke the crystal."
"But you— Why didn't—" Mathew's lips went numb. He felt the blood drain from
his face, his strength seep from his body when he recalled how he had walked
down that black-armored aisle of death.
"Betray you?" Ibn Jad released Khardan into the strong arms of Pukah. "Ask the
nomad when he awakens."
Gently lifting up the Calif, the young djinn carried him through the water to
the waiting boat and deposited Khardan next to his wife in the bottom. Pukah
hurried back to pluck at Mathew's sleeve.
"Come, Mad—" The young djinn's gaze went to a point above and behind Mathew,
his expression softened; indeed, it became almost enraptured. Looking around,
startled, Mathew could have sworn that he caught a flash of white and silver.
But there was no one near him. "Come, Mat-hew," amended Pukah gravely and
respectfully, holding out his hand to assist the young wizard through the sea
water. "Hurry! We could throw this wretch of a fisherman to the ghuls if they
decided to chase after us, but I doubt his scrawny body would content them for
very long."
Turning, Mathew waded into the rippling waves, then realized that Auda ibn Jad
was not with him.
"Aren't you coming?"
The Black Paladins had risen to their feet and were swarming down toward the
boat. Pukah was tugging at Mathew's sleeve. Sond splashed into the water
beside him, appearing prepared to lift up the young wizard and carry him
aboard bodily.
Auda ibn Jad shook his head.
"But . . ." Mathew hesitated. This was an evil man, one who murdered the
innocent, the helpless. Yet he had saved their lives. "They will take their
wrath out on you."
Ibn Jad shrugged, and—ignoring Mathew—the Black Paladins descended on their
fellow knight. Auda surrendered without a struggle. The Paladins divested him
of sword and dagger. Wrenching his arms painfully behind him, they forced him
to his knees before their Lord.
"Traitor!" The Lord of the Paladins stared coldly at ibn Jad. "From now on,
every second will bring your tortured body one step closer to death—yet never

close enough!"
370
WEIS AND HICKMAN
Raising a mail-gauntleted hand, he struck the Black Paladin across the face.
Ibn Jad fell back in his captors' arms. Then, shaking his head to clear it, he
raised his eyes to meet Mathew's.
"As was our friend's, my life is in the hands of my God." He smiled, blood
trickling from his mouth. "Do not fear. Blossom. We will meet again!"
The Paladins carried him off the beach, their Lord remaining behind. His eyes,
blazing in the moon's pale rays, were so filled with enmity that their gaze
alone might kill. Mathew no longer needed Pukah's exhortations and pleadings
(all given in the most respectful tones) to hasten through the silver-laced,
black sea water. Catching the young wizard up in his strong grip, Sond tossed
him headfirst over the hull.
"The ghuls! They're watching! They smell blood! Oh, make haste, make haste!"
Crouched on a seat, Usti wrung his hands.
But Sond, shaking his head, was examining the boat with a frown. At the bottom
lay Khardan and his wife. Pukah had taken advantage of their unconscious state
to rest Zohra's head upon her husband's shoulder and drape Khardan's arm
around her protectively.
"Truly, a marriage made in Heaven," sighed the djinn.
Heaven! I've had enough of Heaven, thought Mathew wearily. Hunching down on
his knees in the boat's stern, oblivious to the inch or so of sea water that
sloshed around him, he laid his cheek on a wet basket and closed his eyes.
"Well, what are you waiting for?" screeched the little old man from the
tiller. "Get this thing moving."
"Master, shut up," said Pukah politely.
"The boat's too low in the water. There's too much weight," stated Sond.
"Usti, get out!"
"Don't leave me! You can't!" wailed the djinn. "Princess, please don't let
them—"
"Stop blubbering!" snapped Pukah. "We're not going to leave you. And don't
wake your mistress. We want a peaceful trip after what we've been through, to
say nothing of what faces us when we reach shore. Crossing the Sun's Anvil on
foot. If we survive that, we must then raise an army to defeat the Amir—"
None of it mattered to Mathew. It was all too far away.
"We need a new sail," grunted Sond. "Usti, you'll do fine!"
THE PALADIN OF THE NIGHT
371
"A sail!" The djinn drew an indignant breath. "I will not—"
"Was that a ghul I heard, smacking his lips? . . ." inquired Pukah.
"I'll do it!" cried Usti.
The boat heaved and floundered. Startled, jolted to wakefulness, Mathew opened
his eyes and beheld an astounding sight.
Curling his feet under the boom, groaning and protesting over the hardness of
his life, Usti grabbed hold of the mast with both hands. His massive body
stretched and expanded until all that remained recognizable were his woeful
eyes, his turban, and numerous chins.
Sucking in a deep breath, Sond let it out in a whoosh. Usti filled with air.
"Swells up like a goat's bladder!" commented Pukah in awe.
The fishing boat began to move over the water. Taking the tiller, Pukah
steered the vessel into a path seemingly laid down for them by the moon.
Mathew closed his eyes again. The wind sang in the rigging. Pukah began to
relate some improbable escapade about himself and Mathew's guardian angel in a
City of Death. Usti whimpered and complained. Sond blew and puffed. Mathew
paid no attention to any of it.
It seemed to him that he felt a gentle hand touch his cheek. A blanket of
feathery softness wrapped him in warmth, and he drifted into a relaxed sleep.
A last image drifted into his mind, that of an imp appearing before Astafas,
Prince of Darkness, bearing in its splay-fingered hand . . .

A dead fish.
Glossary
agal: the cord used to bind the headcloth in place
aksakal: white beard, village elder
Amir; king
Andak: Stop! Halt!
ariq: canal
arwat: an inn
asettr; after sunset
baigha. a wild game played on horseback in which the "ball"
is the carcass of a sheep bairaq: a tribal flag or banner Ball: Yes!
bassourab. the hooped camel-tent in which women travel batir: thief,
particularly horse or cattle thief (One scholar
suggests that this could be a corruption of the Turkish
word "bahadur" which means "hero.") berkouks: pellets of sweetened rice
Bilhana: Wishing you joy! Bilshifa: Wishing you health! burnouse: A cloaklike
garment with a hood attached
Calif: prince
caftan: a long gown with sleeves, usually made of silk chador. women's robes
chirak: lamp
couscous;  a lamb  stuffed with  almonds and  raisins  and roasted whole
delhan: a monster who eats the flesh of shipwrecked sailors
(though; ship
divan: the council-chamber of a head of state
372
THE PALADIN OF THE NIGHT
373
djinn:   beings  who  dwell   in   the   middle  world   between
humans and the Gods fljinniyeh: female djinn djemel: baggage camel dohar:
midafternoon dutar: two-stringed guitar
Effendi: title of quality
'efreet: a powerful spirit
Emshi besselema: a farewell salutation
eucha: suppertime
eulam: post meridien
fantasia: an exhibition of horsemanship and weapons skills fatta: a dish of
eggs and carrots fedjeur: before sunrise feisha: an amulet or charm
ghaddar: a monster who lures men and tortures them to death
ghul:  a monster that feeds on human flesh. Ghuls may take any human form, but
they can always be distinguished by their tracks, which are the cloven hooves
of an ass
girba: a waterskin; four usually carried on each camel of a caravan
gown; a light horseman
haik: the combined headcloth and face mask worn in the
desert harem:   "the  forbidden,"   the  wives  and  concubines  of a
man or the dwelling places allotted to them hauz. artificial pond Hazrat: holy
henna: a thorn-shrub and the reddish stain made from it houri: a beautiful and
seductive woman
Imam: priest jihad: holy war
kafir: unbeliever Kasbah: a fortress or castle khurjin: saddlebags
kohl: a preparation of soot used by women to darken their eyes
374
WEIS AND HICKMAN
madrasah: a holy place of learning
Makhol: Right! (exclamation)
mamaluks; originally white slaves; slaves that are trained
warriors
mehara: a highly bred racing camel mehari: a plural of mehara mehariste: a
rider of a mehara marabout: a priest mogreb: nightfall
nesnas: a legendary, fearsome monster that takes the form of a man divided in

half vertically, with half a face, one arm, one leg, and so on'
palanquin: a curtained litter on poles, carried by hand paranja: a woman's
loose dress pasha: title of rank
quaita: a reed instrument
qarakurt: "black worm," a large species of deadly spider
qumiz: fermented mare's milk
rabat-bashi: innkeeper
saksul: a tree that grows in the desert
salaam: an obeisance,  a low bow with the hand on the
forehead
salaam aletkum!: Greeting to you saluka; a swift hunting dog
seraglio: the quarters of the women of the harem Sheykh: the chief of a tribe
or clan shishtick: strips of meat grilled on a skewer shir: lion sidi: lord,
sir
sirocco: the south wind, a windstorm from the south souk: marketplace, bazaar
spahi: native cavalryman Sultan: king Sultana: wife of a Sultan, queen
tamarisk:  a graceful evergreen  shrub  or  small  tree  with
feathery branches and minute scalelike leaves tambour: similar to a tambourine
tel: a hill tuman: money
THE PALADIN OF THE NIGHT
375
wadi. river or stream wazir: an adviser to royalty
yurt: semipermanent tent
About the Authors
Born in Independence, Missouri, Margaret Weis graduated from the University of
Missouri and worked as a book editor before teaming up with Tracy Hickman to
develop the Dragonlance novels. Margaret lives in a renovated barn in
Wisconsin with her two teenage children, David and Elizabeth Baldwin, and her
three cats. She enjoys reading (especially Charles Dickens), opera, and
rollerskating.
Born in Salt Lake City, Utah, Tracy Hickman resides in Wisconsin in a
100-year-old Victorian house with his wife and three children. When he isn't
reading or writing, he is eating or sleeping. On Sundays he conducts the hymns
at the local Mormon church.
The Darksword Trilogy marked Margaret and Tracy's first appearance as Bantam
Spectra authors. They followed up with Darksword Adventures, a companion
volume and game book set in the same world. They've just finished writing The
Rose of the Prophet Trilogy—The Will of the Wanderer, The Paladin of the
Night, and The Prophet ofAkhran—which will be published in 1989. Margaret and
Tracy are about to begin working on the first of volume of their new series.
Coming in August
the stunning conclusion to
The Rose of the Prophet
The Prophet of Akhran
by Margaret Weis and Tracy Hickman
Don't miss it!
The Darksword Trilogy
by Margaret Weis and Tracy Hickman
Here are the adventures of the angry young Joram, born into a world where his
lack of magic powers means an instant death sentence. When he meets the
catalyst Saryon, they become allies and together forge a sword capable of
absorbing magic: the Darksword. Joined by the young mage Mosiah and the
trickster Simkin, Joram embarks on a perilous journey, rising to power he
never dreamed of, and finding himself faced with the greatest challenge of his
people's history.
G Forging the Darksword (26894-5 • $3.957
$4.95 in Canada)
D Doom of the Darksword (27164-4 • $3.957
$4.95 in Canada)
n Triumph of the Darksword (27406-6 • $3.95/

$4.95 in Canada)
D Darksword Adventures (27600-X* $4.50/$5.50 in Canada) An exciting,
groundbreaking gaming manual— the first ever in paperback—which requires no
peripheral equipment. It's also an indispensible companion to The Darksword
Trilogy, full of fascinating background information and lots of surprises.
Buy Forging the Darksword, Doom of the Darksword, Triumph of the Darksword and
Darksword Adventures
now on sale wherever Bantam Spectra Books are sold, or use this page for
ordering:
Bantam Books, Dept. SP07.414 East Golf Road, Des Ptaines, IL 60016
Please send me the books I have checked above. I am enclosing $————— (please
add $2.00 to cover postage and handling). Send check or money order—no cash or
C.O.D.s please.
Mr/Ms_ Address _
City/State
SF07—5/89
Please allow four to six weeks for delivery. This offer expires 11/89. Prices
and availability subject to change without notice.
Zip
MARGARET WEIS and TRACY HICKMAN both live in Wisconsin. They have coauthored
thirteen previous books, including the bestselling Darksword Trilogy. They are
currently working on Volume 111 of Rose of the Prophet, to be published by
Bantam Spectra in August 1989.

