welL
FEd
FOR PEOPLE
WHO LOVE 
 TO EAT
melissa 
joulwan
BY
PHOTOgraphy BY 
David Humphreys
forewOrd BY 
Melissa & Dallas Hartwig
Whole9
paleo 
recipes 


ISBN
weLl FEd
By Melissa Joulwan
Foreword by Melissa and Dallas Hartwig
Photos by David Humphreys
Design by Kathleen Shannon
paleo recipes for people who love to eat

Well Fed: Paleo Recipes for People Who Love to Eat
Copyright ©2011 Melissa Joulwan. All rights reserved.
No part of this book my be used or reproduced in any manner whatsoever without written 
permission except in the case of brief quotations embodied in critical articles and reviews.
Well Fed: Paleo Recipes for People Who Love to Eat
Author: Melissa Joulwan
Foreword: Melissa and Dallas Hartwig
Copy Editor: Alison Finney
Assistant Copy Editor: Walker Fenz
Photography: David Humphreys
Illustrations: David Humphreys
Design: Kathleen Shannon
ISBN 10: 0-615-57226-X
ISBN 13: 978-0-615-57226-0
Published by:
Smudge Publishing, LLC
405 El Paso Street
Austin, TX 78704
www.smudgepublishing.com
To the entire Joulwan and Stramara clans – and the spirit 
of my Sitti – for all the food and love, and food-love
And to my husband Dave, who is my favorite dinner companion

To Bethany Benzur, for bringing us together with Kathleen Shannon
To Nathan Black, for taking the Well Fed team photos and making us all look so good
To Tannen Campbell, Cameron Siewert, and Blake Howard, for the generous 
contribution of their big brains and senses of humor to the book title brainstorm 
(and an additional hug of appreciation to Tannen for her one-of-a-kind bowls)
To Stefanie DiStefano, for her made-with-love pottery and magical energy
To Stacey Doyle, for being a voluntary recipe tester and playing “You Know How You 
Could Do That?” during our work lunches
To Walker Fenz, for detail-obsessed editing and proofing
To Alison Finney, for approaching her sharp-eyed copy editing with eagerness, then 
delivering her recommendations with a gentle touch
To Melissa and Dallas Hartwig, for showing us the way to love food again and for 
applying their giant brains to the cookbook manuscript
To Gray Luckett and Chris Lynn, for living without some of their bowls, plates, and 
cutlery for a few months so we had props for photos
To Cheryl McKay, for inspiring me with wild-caught salmon and for volunteering her 
legal eagle eyes at the eleventh hour
To Kathleen Shannon, for designing a cookbook that’s both a how-to guide and a love 
letter to cooking real food
And to all the readers of my blog The Clothes Make The Girl, for testing my recipes, 
asking questions, and sharing their enthusiasm for this project when I needed it most
THANK YOU 
We have a confession: Overall, we give our collective cooking 
skills a “B” grade at best.  (Truthfully, one of us is pulling that 
average down, but we’re not saying which one.)  We’re darn 
good nutritionists, but our background isn’t in the culinary 
arts.  The good news?  We don’t have to be Cordon Bleu-trained 
chefs, because we’ve got a well fed, dressed to kill, glossy haired, 
rock and roll, tart tongued secret weapon: our friend Mel. 
First, she is a naturally gifted chef – but not the snooty kind who 
makes dishes better suited for an art gallery than a normal person’s 
kitchen.  No, she’s the kind of chef who makes real food for real 
people, using simple, fresh ingredients designed to make you 
healthier.  She’s the kind of chef you’d want as your best friend or 
your next-door neighbor, both for her style and for her food.  And 
her star has never shined more brightly than within the pages of 
this cookbook. 
Flip through Well Fed, and you’ll immediately see this isn’t some 
taking-itself-so-seriously cookbook full of pictures you’d barely 
recognize as food.  Mel created these recipes in her kitchen, using 
the same basic tools and equipment you’ve got in your kitchen.  
And she developed and prepared these meals around her own busy 
schedule – in between work, exercise, family, friends, and looking 
after a house and a husband and a cat.  (The lesson: if she’s got 
time to create them from scratch, you’ve got time to make them 
for dinner.)  Because she knows that cooking is scary for lots of 
folks, she’s filled her recipes with extra details, helpful hints, and 
technique tips. (No Ph.D. required!)
In addition, Well Fed meals don’t demand fancy pants ingredients – 
it’s all stuff you can pick up at your average grocery store or health 
food market.  (Don’t be intimidated by the spices, just polish your 
measuring spoons and dive on in.)  Finally, Mel understands that 
treats and sweets are a normal part of most peoples’ sustainable 
diet, but we don’t need yet another “healthy” brownie recipe.  We 
need inspiration to make our everyday food new, fresh, and exciting. 
That’s why almost all of the Well Fed recipes are Whole30 approved, 
perfect for both our nutrition program and your everyday meals. 
(And when you decide to kick up your heels, there’s one sinful-
looking dessert that should hit the spot, but won’t make you feel 
like you swallowed a brick.)
The best part about Well Fed? Mel stamps her irreverent brand onto 
every dish, combining simple, fresh ingredients in ways you’d never 
expect.  It’s healthy eating like you’ve never seen it – a collision of 
flavors, textures, and colors designed to impress your eyes, stimulate 
your taste buds, and nourish your body.
We believe the purpose of a cookbook is not to cook for you 
or even to teach you how to cook.  Instead, the right cookbook 
will inspire you to 
discover your own 
creativity and tastes, 
and establish your 
own experiences and 
traditions.  Well Fed 
was written to do 
just that, and will 
effortlessly allow 
you to cultivate 
your own rock star 
inner chef.
Bon appétit!
Best,
Dallas & Melissa Hartwig
Founders, Whole9
Creators of the Whole30 program
FOREWORD
“You don’t have to cook fancy or 
complicated masterpieces – just 
good food from fresh ingredients.”
                            - Julia Child

	001	 Welcome to Well Fed
	002	 What is Paleo?
	003 	 The “No” List
	004 	 The “Yes” List
	005 	 My Paleo Story
	007	 You Know How You Could Do That?
	008	 About This Book
	009 	 A Very Special Cookbook
	010 	 About The Recipes
	013 	 Better Than a Restaurant
The Paleo Kitchen
	016	 How To: The Weekly Cookup
	021	 Your Paleo Pantry
	024	 Essential Kitchen Tools
the weekly cookup 
	029	 Grilled Chicken Thighs
	031	 Garlic-Browned Ground Meat
	033	 Steam-Sautéed Veggies
	035	 Hot Plates
	038 	 Cool Salads
Protein
	063	 Pad Thai
	065	 Cinnamon Beef Stew with 
	
	 Orange Gremolata
	067	 Waldorf Tuna Salad
	067	 Mediterranean Tuna Salad
	067	 Middle Eastern Tuna Salad
	067	 Tex-Mex Tuna Salad
	069	 The Best Chicken You Will Ever Eat
	071	 Moroccan Meatballs
	073	 Chocolate Chili
	075	 Ginger-Lime Grilled Shrimp
	077	 Meatza Pie (lots of variations!)
	079	 Machacado and Eggs with 
	
	 Avocado Relish
	081	 Maki Rolls
	081	 Mango-Shrimp Rolls
	081	 Avocado-Salmon Rolls
	083	 Scotch Eggs (lots of variations!)
Sauces & Seasonings
	043	 Olive Oil Mayo
	045	 Sunshine Sauce
	047	 Ras el Hanout
	049	 Italian Sausage Seasoning
	049	 Pizza Seasoning
	051	 Best Stir-Fry Sauce Ever
	053	 Basil and Walnut Pesto
	053	 Mediterranean Parsley-Mint Pesto
	053	 Mint Chutney
	055	 Moroccan Dipping Sauce
	055	 Chimichurri Sauce
	057	 Sri Lankan Curry Sauce
	059	 Creamy Italian Dressing
	059	 Southwest Cumin-Lime Dressing
	059	 Ranch Dressing
	059	 Middle Eastern Dressing
	059	 Sweet Mustard Dressing
TABLE OF CONTENTS
	085	 Rogan Josh
	087	 Egg Foo Yong
	089	 Czech Meatballs
	091	 Char Siu (Chinese BBQ Pork)
	093	 BBQ Pork Fried Rice
	095	 Citrus Carnitas
	097	 Shepherd’s Pie
	099	 Bora Bora Fireballs
	101	 Italian Sausage and Eggplant Strata
	103	 Salmon a l’Afrique du Nord
	105	 Meat and Spinach Muffins 
	
	 (lots of variations!)
	107	 Blue Ribbon Country Captain 
	
	 Chicken
Veggies & Salads
	111	 Creamy Spice Market Kale
	113	 Mashed Cauliflower
	115	 Cumin-Roasted Carrots
	117	 Greek Broccoli
	119	 Velvety Butternut Squash
	121	 Cauliflower Rice Pilaf
	121	 Basic Rice
	121	 Confetti Rice
	121	 Curry Rice
	123	 Roasted Spaghetti Squash
	125	 Coconut-Almond Green Beans
	127	 Cocoa-Toasted Cauliflower
	129	 Sesame-Garlic Nori Chips
	129	 Southwest Nori Chips
	129	 Toasted Onion Nori Chips
	131	 Jicama Home Fries
	133	 Zucchini Noodles Aglio et Olio
	135	 Roni’s Creamy Cucumbers
	135	 French Onion Cucumbers
	135	 Middle Eastern Cucumbers
	137	 Jicama “Potato” Salad
	139	 Baba Ghanoush
	141	 Turkish Chopped Salad
	141	 French-ish Chopped Salad
	141	 Italian-ish Chopped Salad
	143	 El Minzah Orange Salad
Fruits
	147	 Fried Apples with Bacon and Pecans
	149	 Berries and Whipped Coconut Cream
	151	 Peach Almond Crisp 
	
	 (lots of variations!)
	153	 Caramelized Coconut Chips 
	
	 (lots of variations!)
Resources
	156 	 Recommended Resources
	157 	 Paleo Nutrition & Lifestyle Info
	157 	 Free Ebook Code
	158 	 The Well Fed Team
	160 	 Index

I was born into a restaurant family. 
Before you get the wrong idea, you should know a few facts: We 
lived in rural Pennsylvania, it was the late sixties, and no one was 
yet treating chefs like rock stars.
My grandfather owned The Garfield, one of those shiny chrome 
diners, where you could sit at the counter, sip on a bottomless cup 
of coffee, and wisecrack with the waitresses and other regulars. 
My dad ran The Country Squire Restaurant, a combination coffee 
shop, formal dining room, and motel.
I grew up in these restaurants and took my place in an extended 
family of cooks.
As a teen and young adult, I ate for pleasure, without too much 
concern for nutrition. Soon, even though I loved to eat and food 
was a major binding agent in my family, food became the enemy. 
I grew fat and unhealthy because I knew food, but I didn’t know 
how to eat.
Now, because I follow a paleo diet, cooking and eating have again 
become a source of joy. Visualizing the meal, buying the healthy 
ingredients, chopping and stirring and working the alchemy that 
transforms ingredients into love in the form of food – these are a 
few of my favorite things.
My goal with this book is to teach you what I know about how to 
run a paleo kitchen and how to combine ingredients to become 
something truly nourishing for your body and soul and for the 
important people in your life.
The two essential tricks for happy, healthy eating are being prepared 
and avoiding boredom. Well Fed explains how to enjoy a “cookup” 
once a week so that you have ready-to-go food for snacks and 
meals every day. It will also show you how to mix and match basic 
ingredients with spices and seasonings that take your taste buds on 
a world tour. 
I’ve kept the recipes as simple as possible, without compromising 
taste, and I’ve tested the recipes extensively to minimize work and 
maximize flavor. Where it makes sense, I’ve explained how you 
can cut corners on technique and when you’ll have the best results 
if you follow my instructions. Some of the dishes are “project 
recipes,” so I’ve included prep and cooking time to indicate which 
are quick enough for weeknights and which are perfect for lazy 
Sunday afternoons.
I’m from a melting pot family: Lebanese on Dad’s side, Italian 
and Slovak on Mom’s. From the time I could shove food into 
my mouth, I ate kibbeh and eggplant parmesan, and while Mom 
taught me to cook pancakes on weekend mornings, I picked up 
my dad’s tricks for making baba ghanoush at dinner. The recipes 
in this book reflect my affection for traditional ethnic cuisines 
and for foods with contrasting flavors and textures, so that your 
healthy food also includes the luscious contrasts of sweet savory 
and crispy chewy.
Ultimately, I hope this book will make you feel that paleo eating 
– too often defined by what we give up – is really about what we 
gain: health, vitality, a light heart, and memorable meals to be 
shared with the people we love.
Welcome to Well Fed
My dad at his first cooking job in the Poconos.

You’ve probably heard the paleo diet called a lot of things. 
Caveman Diet. Primal. Real Food. Paleo Lifestyle. Around our 
house we call it “Dino-Chow.” All of these terms refer to roughly 
the same way of eating that’s based on the idea that we feel our best 
– and are our healthiest, mentally and physically – when we mimic 
the nutrition of our hunter-gatherer ancestors.
I know it sounds a little groovy or like something from science 
fiction. But evolutionary biologists, chemists, and nutritionists are 
really onto something. When we remove inflammatory foods from 
our diets – foods that were not part of our ancestors’ daily meals 
– we reduce our risk for “diseases of civilization” like heart disease, 
diabetes, and cancers. Additionally, our energy levels are better, we 
look years younger, and we enjoy life more.
To understand all of the science behind these nutritional 
guidelines, I recommend you turn to the same experts that 
educated me:
Whole9: Melissa and Dallas Hartwig are the big brains behind 
the wonderful Whole30 program that’s helped thousands 
of people slay their sugar demons and create a new, healthy 
relationship with real food. They consume and digest all the 
paleo research so that foodies like us can simply learn how to 
eat. Thanks to Melissa and Dallas, I can now enjoy my food 
without measuring every meal or recording every bite in a food 
journal.
Robb Wolf: The author of The Paleo Solution goes deep into 
the geeky science with a sense of humor that makes it all easily 
understood and relevant to daily life. Robb’s book broadened 
my understanding of the “why” behind the paleo lifestyle so it’s 
easier to do the right “what” on a daily basis.
Mark Sisson: The author of The Primal Blueprint presents a 
compelling case for living more primally in every aspect of life: 
nutrition, exercise, sleep, socializing, and sex! I love what Mark 
has to say about finding time to play and taking advantage of 
modern conveniences without feeling beholden to a thoroughly 
modern (unhealthy) lifestyle.
Nora Gedgaudas: The author of Primal Body, Primal 
Mind explains how blood sugar swings – from too many 
carbohydrates, and inadequate protein and fat – contribute to 
mental illness and general unhappiness.
The Resources section (p. 156) includes more details about 
these mentors, as well as a comprehensive list of the sources I 
turn to for inspiration and information.
PALEO EXPERTS
WHAT IS PALEO? 
002
page
WE CALL IT Dino-chow
I know there were no dinosaurs in the Paleolithic Era, but 
dino-chow is a funny name, so just roll with the joke, please.
Let’s get the bad news out of the way immediately: Paleo eating 
means avoiding many foods that top your list of favorites. Different 
paleo practitioners promote differing guidelines. I follow the 
standards outlined by Melissa and Dallas Hartwig of Whole9. The 
guidelines are fairly stringent, but they’re based on the compelling 
idea that we should eat the foods that make us healthiest, and I 
can’t argue with that.
My “No” List includes the following, and you won’t find any of 
these foods in Well Fed recipes.
Processed foods:As a former Doritos aficionado, 
I know it can be hard to give up junk food. But anything found 
in the middle of the grocery store, housed inside brightly-colored 
plastic or cardboard, is not a healthy choice.
Grains:Despite conventional wisdom, even whole grains 
are not a good idea. Grains include wheat, corn, oats, rice, quinoa, 
barley, and millet. They’re to be avoided in all their devilish forms: 
bread, pasta, cereals, breading on fried foods, etc.
Legumes:All beans – including black, kidney, pinto, white, 
and chick peas – fall into this category, along with lentils, peas, and 
peanuts, including peanut butter. (I know! Sorry! I don’t make the 
rules; I just share them.)
Soy:Soy is a legume, but I’ve called it out separately because 
it’s insidious and can be found in unsuspected places, like cans of 
tuna. Soy is to be avoided in all its forms: edamame, tofu, meat 
substitutes, and food additives.
Sugar:Sugar appears naturally in fruit, and you may eat 
fruit. Yay! But other natural sugars that are added to foods to 
sweeten them, like brown sugar, maple syrup, agave nectar, stevia, 
evaporated cane juice, and honey, are out. Also out are artificial 
sweeteners, like Splenda, Equal, Nutrasweet, and aspartame.
Dairy: The source of milk doesn’t matter – cow, sheep, or 
goat. Milk and the creamy things made from it are off our plates, 
including cream, butter, cheese, yogurt, and sour cream. Some 
paleo people eat grass-fed, full-fat dairy; for me, the negatives 
outweigh the pleasure.
Alcohol:There is no argument anywhere that alcohol 
makes us healthier. Plus, you have a drink, then your drink has a 
drink, and soon, you’re face first in a pile of french fries with cheese 
sauce.
White potatoes:Some paleo people eat potatoes; I’m 
not one of them. The starch in white potatoes produces a strong 
insulin reaction and they have very little to offer nutritionally.
Vegetable oils:This includes basic vegetable oil –
which isn’t made from vegetables at all! – as well as peanut, canola, 
sunflower, safflower, soybean, and corn oils.
Each of the No foods has its own unique properties that put it on 
that infamous list. Generally, these foods are excluded because they 
either produce blood sugar spikes, cause systemic inflammation, or 
both. Yes, some are so bad they both wreak havoc on your insulin 
levels and fire up your immune system. We very strongly dislike 
them. (We’re looking at you, grains.)
So, there’s potentially a lot of bad news in that list. I understand.
But I’m going to make you feel better right now...
Take a deep breath and think of every kind of meat, seafood, 
vegetable, and fruit you can.
Now think of fat sources like coconuts and avocados and olives and 
nuts and seeds. Visualize your list. Looks great, right? That’s a lot of 
delicious food. And that is what makes up the paleo diet.
processed foods, grains, legumes, soy, sugar, dairy, alcohol,
                         white potatoes, vegetable oils 
THE “NO” LIST
003
page

WE EAT REAL FOOD.
THE “YES” LIST
When I tell people I don’t eat grains, sugar, or dairy, they invariably 
look at me like I’ve got two heads or as if I’m speaking Swahili, 
then they ask The Question: “What do you eat?!”
Animals and plants.
Generally speaking, the paleo diet is made up of nutrient-dense 
foods that began with dirt, rain, and sunshine. They come from the 
earth and would be recognizable as food by a person from any time 
in human history. 
We eat real food: animal-based protein, vegetables, fruits, and 
natural fat sources.
Some day, I’d like to live in Prague. This is me, pretending to be a local,
on our first visit to the Czech Republic in 2010.
I have excellent habits 95% of the time. I sleep eight hours per 
night to recover from and prepare for CrossFit training and lifting 
heavy barbells. I keep the house stocked with paleo ingredients and 
cook nutrient-infused food, so we can eat paleo food every day.
Then on rare occasions, I indulge. I become a temporary slug, 
and give in to the temptation of corn-based chip products, 
buttered popcorn, and an icy-cold glass of Prosecco. I might also 
occasionally sip on a glass of Ouzo and eat whipped cream. 
These minor transgressions are possible because I make deposits 
in the good health bank the rest of the time. Every workout, every 
good night’s sleep, every paleo meal is a deposit so that every once 
in a while, I can make withdrawals in the shape of a food treat.
This way of living started about two years ago when I made  
the switch to the paleo diet. Before then, I didn’t have such 
excellent habits.
From grade school to the day I graduated from college, I 
was a chubby nerd and an easy target. My parents were both 
exceptionally good cooks – my dad owned a restaurant and my 
mom won almost every cooking contest she entered. I wore Sears 
“Pretty Plus” jeans because I really liked food, and I really didn’t 
like to sweat. After a broken ankle and innumerable playground 
insults (At a bus stop, I was once unfavorably compared to a whale 
by one of the neighbor kids.), I stuck with reading and practicing 
the piano and roller skating to the library. I don’t know how many 
gym classes I missed because I was “sick” or “forgot” my gym 
clothes. I do know that my P.E. attendance put my otherwise stellar 
grade point average in jeopardy.
Even though I avoided sports, I secretly admired the athletic kids. 
They walked taller than the rest of us. When I was in tenth grade, 
my dad took me to Annapolis to see the Navy band play a concert, 
and for about three weeks, I was determined to get in shape so 
I could apply to the Naval Academy. I abandoned that dream 
because I was incapable of doing pushups and situps – and I was 
too embarrassed and overwhelmed to ask for help.
For most of my life, I was haunted by a deep desire to be different 
than I was. To be thin. To feel confident. To break the cycle of 
thinking of food – and my behavior – as “good” and “bad.” 
I joined Weight Watchers and became a Lifetime Member with a 
weight loss of more than 50 pounds. I signed up with a CrossFit 
gym and learned to love workouts that scared my socks off. But 
despite my successes, it was still my habit to celebrate and to grieve 
and to stress out and to relax with food.
MY PALEO STORY
005
page
How I Learned To Just Eat

Although I worked out regularly, I didn’t feel as strong – inside 
or out – as I wanted to. I had insomnia and allergies and stomach 
aches. My body didn’t feel like it belonged to me. Then in 2009, I 
learned I had a nodule on my thyroid. The risk of cancer was high, 
so I had the nodule surgically removed, and the doctor hoped that 
my remaining half-thyroid would continue to function. It held 
on for a few months, then stopped working. It was a very difficult 
time. It was like constantly having a case of the blues, and I was 
sluggish, foggy-headed, and desperately worried about re-gaining 
all the weight I’d worked so hard to lose.
Then I found Whole9.
It was surprisingly easy for me to give up grains, despite my deep 
affection for toast, but saying goodbye to my standard breakfast 
of blueberries with milk almost did me in. I did not approach the 
paleo rules with an open heart.
But I committed. I followed the eating guidelines. I made it a 
project to get eight hours of sleep every night. I worked with 
my doctor to find the right doses for my thyroid hormones. And 
finally, eventually, I got my body back.
I spent about three decades at war with my body, with my short 
legs and stocky frame and junk food cravings and emotional eating. 
In comparison, giving up grains and dairy was easy. And in return, 
I’ve forged a partnership with my body that uses good food as fuel.
Now I know when and how often I can indulge in non-paleo foods, 
and I enjoy those once-in-a-while treats like never before. The food 
tastes a lot better when it’s savored and not followed by a chaser of 
self-recrimination. I finally know how to truly celebrate on special 
occasions, while I live clean and healthy the rest of the time.
Top: My husband Dave and I out for a run in Prague.
Bottom: The two of us at the Cowboy Breakfast, held 
every year before the opening of the rodeo in Austin, TX.
Everyone in my family is a food lover. My dad is (mostly) 
Lebanese, and my mom is (mostly) Italian, with large families on 
both sides of the equation. Any gathering of the tribes included 
tables that buckled under the weight of homemade stuffed grape 
leaves and kibbeh on the Middle Eastern side – or homemade 
lasagna, meatballs, and cannoli at the Italian family reunions.
My family is happiest together in the kitchen. Cooking and the 
associated eating are the activities on which we all agree. We might 
go toe to toe on, say, the inherent value of my tattoos, but get us 
around a stove or a cutting board, and we are the very definition 
of collaboration. We move in a smooth rhythm, and the right 
ingredients seem to appear out of thin air. Suddenly, the clove of 
garlic I need has been perfectly minced, and somehow, the parsley 
is already chopped.
This harmony in the kitchen is the result of a lifetime of playing a 
game we call, “You Know How You Could Do That?”
It’s generally played in a restaurant and goes like this:
The waiter places a gorgeous plate of food in front of someone 
– my mom, for example. I usually clap my hands with delight 
when the food arrives, and someone else – my dad, perhaps – says, 
“Oooh, that looks good.” 
Then Mom takes a bite. She smiles and nods her head. “Oh, yeah. 
That is good,” she says.
The rest of us extend our forks and take a bite ourselves, nodding 
in agreement, making the appropriate, positive, nonverbal noises: 
Mmmmm. Aaaaah. Oooooh.
Then my dad will pause, tilt his head to the side, and maybe 
squint his eyes a little.
“It’s really good, but… you know how you could do that?”
And then he’ll offer a suggestion for a different spice or, perhaps, 
an added garnish. His idea will spark my imagination, so I’ll take 
another bite from Mom’s plate and offer a few suggestions of my 
own. Soon we’ve created variations that transform the chef’s dish 
into something else entirely.
In recent years, we’ve adapted the game to be played with recipes, 
too. We don’t even give the original chef the honor of trying the 
recipe as written. Instead, we go right into You Know How You 
Could Do That? mode and create our own version of the recipe.
Throughout this book, I’ve played You Know How You Could Do 
That? with my recipes, and I invite you to do the same. Have fun! 
Use your imagination! Make these recipes your own.
YOU KNOW HOW YOU COULD DO THAT?
The kitchen has been my favorite hangout for a long time.

This isn’t a diet book or a health book
I know the word “paleo” in the title is probably what compelled 
you to choose this cookbook over others, which means you 
probably care about your health. I’m very glad! But my mission 
isn’t to clobber you with the healthfulness of the recipes in this 
book. My mission is to inspire you with stories and tempt you with 
recipes that will make you want to smash in your face with joy. 
I also want you to be healthy, so all of the recipes are free of gluten, 
grains, legumes, dairy, added sugars, and alcohol – and I’ve paid 
attention to things like Omega-6 and Omega-3 fatty acid ratios. 
I’ve worried about the somewhat annoying nutritional details so 
that you can just eat.
I want you to savor flavorful foods every time you eat, every single 
day. The majority of these recipes rely on meats, vegetables, fats, 
and spices to make your taste buds sing. When I’ve used calorie-
dense foods like nuts or dried fruit, they act as condiments rather 
than primary ingredients.
Just eat
There’s no nutritional information included with the recipes. 
If we eat real food, in quantities that are satiating, there’s really 
no need to niggle over how many calories we ate and what 
percentage of them came from fat or carbohydrates. The recipes, 
however, don’t go overboard, either. Fat is an essential nutrient 
for health and an important component for flavor, so my recipes 
include just enough fat to make them work, without being 
overindulgent.
When I adopted a paleo diet, I stopped thinking of foods as 
appropriate for breakfast, lunch, and dinner; instead, (say it with 
me) I just eat. Grilled chicken and vegetables make an excellent 
breakfast, and eggs with zucchini can be a comforting dinner 
after a tough day making your way in the world. Why would you 
deny yourself the fun of breakfast at 7:00 p.m. or steak after your 
morning workout by adhering to the conventional notions of 
breakfast, lunch, and dinner?
How to use this book
The book is divided into three primary sections – The Paleo 
Kitchen, recipes, and Resources – to keep you well fed all week 
long. If you’re an experienced cook or if a particular photo 
catches your eye, I know you’ll probably be tempted to just start 
cooking, and I encourage you to do that! 
But then I recommend that you return to the beginning of the 
book and read “The Weekly Cookup” to learn how to minimize 
your time in the kitchen and maximize the flavor of your food. 
The Weekly Cookup introduces the idea of “Hot Plates” and 
explains how I cook once to eat well all week. 
About This Book
008
page
The Clothes Make The Girl
Many of the recipes in Well Fed debuted on my blog, The Clothes 
Make The Girl. I started my blog in 2008 to write about my workout 
and fashion adventures. As my diet evolved to focus on paleo foods, 
I started to casually write about the things I was eating. Soon my 
adaptations of family recipes were some of the most popular pages on 
my site, and the idea for the cookbook started to simmer. I hope you’ll 
visit The Clothes Make The Girl to learn more about me, CrossFit 
training, and strength training. Throughout Well Fed, I’ve included 
pointers to my blog for additional instruction, photos, and video demos, 
so you can play “You Know How You Could Do That?” online.
Preparing quality food is among the most caring things 
we can do for ourselves and the people we love. 
A VERY SPECIAL COOKBOOK
I didn’t have much mad money when I was a student at Syracuse 
University. My parents generously paid for school, clothes, books, 
and other essentials, and I had a work study job (that often paid me 
even when I didn’t show up ‘cause I was too busy studying) to keep 
me stocked up on beer and non-dining hall food. I had plenty for 
which to be grateful, and I satisfied my book lust at the library.
When I moved into my own apartment, I went through an Italian 
cooking phase that taught me how to make homemade pesto and 
tomato, basil, and mozzarella salad; a Thai phase that required a 
trip to the Asian grocer for fresh lemongrass and other ingredients 
to make curry paste from scratch (My advice? Just buy the damn 
paste in a jar and make everything else yourself.); and an “I should 
eat beans instead of meat” phase.
On one trip to the library, I discovered Middle Eastern Cooking 
by Rose Dosti. Because of my dad’s heritage, I grew up eating 
hummus, stuffed grape leaves, and lamb kabobs; and I had my 
dad’s recipes for all of those things written on index cards in my 
kitchen cabinet. Dosti’s cookbook expanded my repertoire with 
192 pages of Greek, Arabic, Israeli, and North African recipes. I 
loved the cookbook so much that I wanted to buy it, but in the 
pre-internet world, it was impossible to find a copy.
The solution to the problem appeared when my dad came to 
visit one weekend. The two of us went to Kinko’s and obsessively 
photocopied the whole thing. It took a long time, and we chatted 
and laughed while we plunked the book down on the glass, over 
and over, oohing and aahing at each recipe, and playing You Know 
How You Could Do That?
I bought a bright yellow cardboard expandable report cover, and 
that bootlegged cookbook traveled with me from Syracuse to an 
apartment in Escondido, California, to a houseboat in Sausalito to 
an apartment in San Francisco, and finally, to a duplex and now 
our house here in Austin. Last year, I found an original copy of 
the book on Amazon, but I couldn’t bear to toss the photocopied 
version. I keep them both – side by side – on the bookshelf.
I’ve made the baba ghanoush and tahini dressing so many times 
that I don’t need the cookbook to make them anymore. But every 
few months, I pull out Middle Eastern Cooking to make spiced 
olives or to drool over photos of a decadent Chicken Bastila 
(chicken, ground almonds, and cinnamon baked inside buttered 
philo dough and sprinkled with powdered sugar. I mean… really!), 
and I remember Dad and I, talking about nothing in particular 
while we broke several copyright laws simply to hold onto some 
wonderful, authentic recipes.
If you enjoy Well Fed, you can thank my dad for teaching me to 
love a well-constructed recipe for food that brings us together.

I think playing in the kitchen is a pretty good time, so I’ve tried 
to make these recipes fun for you, too. Each recipe is packed with 
helpful tips, tasty nuggets of advice, and some silliness as a garnish. 
It is my fervent hope that you’ll make these recipes your own. 
To do that, I recommend that you read through the recipe in its 
entirety at least once before you make it. Here are a few more tips 
to help ensure things come out just right.
Happy meat
If you have a kind heart, it’s both a blessing and a curse to be at the 
top of the food chain. We have access to a wide variety of animal 
proteins, and I honor and respect those animals for making us 
stronger and healthier. Factory farming damages the environment 
and produces animals that are not optimally healthy, which means 
they also make us less healthy. Finances are always a concern, so I 
don’t specify organic, grass-fed, pastured, wild-caught, or free-range 
protein in my recipes, but I do encourage you to buy the highest 
quality protein you can afford. If you can’t invest in grass-fed meats, 
buy the leanest cuts you can find, remove excess fat before cooking, 
and drain the fat after cooking.
Organic produce
It’s best to eat local produce that’s in season, both for the health 
of your body and your wallet. Sometimes I want eggplant in 
winter, even though it’s not grown here that time of year. My 
recommendation is to buy local, organic versions of the produce 
identified by the Environmental Working Group as the “dirty 
dozen” (produce with high levels of pesticides). The list includes 
apples, bell peppers, blueberries, celery, cherries, grapes, kale 
(and other leafy greens), lettuce, nectarines, peaches, potatoes, 
and strawberries. For the rest of your produce needs, buy local, 
conventionally grown produce, and wash it well under running 
water to remove dirt and pesticides.
Serving sizes
I’ve included the number of servings in a recipe as a guide for 
planning, based on an “average” serving. For most people, a serving 
of protein is about four ounces and a serving of vegetables is about 
one cup. Keep this in mind if you’re cooking for a giant, muscle-
bound man or wee ones and adjust your quantity accordingly.
Cooking fats
I’m no longer afraid of fat – it’s an essential part of good health, 
and it’s delicious. Double win! There’s no reason, however, to go 
overboard either. My recipes include enough fat to appropriately 
cook and flavor the food. Feel free to increase the amount of fat if 
you’d like, but keep in mind that you will change the taste a bit if 
you reduce the fat.
For higher temperature cooking – like sautéing and baking – I 
recommend coconut oil, although some paleo eaters use clarified, 
organic, grass-fed butter or ghee instead. You can make that 
substitution in these recipes if you prefer. (All fats can be swapped 
with each other in a 1:1 ratio.) I do not recommend using olive oil 
for cooking; high heat causes olive oil to oxidize which has some 
health ramifications. Reserve olive oil for drizzling on already-
cooked foods, salads, and homemade mayo.
Seasoning with salt
American table salt is devoid of trace minerals; sea salt is a slightly 
superior option. Most sea salt, however, doesn’t include the iodine 
found in table salt. I don’t specify the type of salt to be used in 
these recipes, but I recommend iodized sea salt. All measurements 
refer to fine salt.
It’s important to taste food for salt levels throughout the cooking 
process. Some of my recipes, where I think a particular amount 
makes it sing, specify the amount of salt, others simply say “salt 
ABOUT THE RECIPES
010
page
and black pepper, to taste.” I recommend that you season with salt 
during cooking and adjust seasonings again just before the end of 
cooking to get the best flavor. And with all spice quantities, feel free 
to adjust down or up according to taste.
Cooking temperatures
If you’re using grass-fed meats, you’ll get the best results if you use 
medium-high (or even medium) heat. High heat can make leaner, 
high-quality meat taste tough. You’ll also notice that most of my 
recipes instruct you to preheat the pan before cooking; you’ll be 
happiest if you don’t ignore this advice.
Working with hot peppers
Some of these recipes include fresh jalapeños, which taste delicious, 
but can be hazardous to chop. When working with fresh jalapeños 
or other hot peppers, it’s a good idea to either wear gloves or rub 
a little oil on the hand that’s holding the pepper (but not the one 
holding the knife!) to protect yourself from the seeds and ribs. 
You can also burn a candle next to your cutting board to burn off 
the offending vapors or rub your hands with oil after chopping a 
hot pepper to remove the capsaicin residue. Absolutely, positively 
do not touch any part of your face while working with fresh 
hot peppers.
Mixing tools
In most cases, my recipes instruct you to mix seasonings into raw 
meat by hand; this is primarily to save time. To make meatballs 
and sausages tenderer, blend the meat and seasonings in a food 
processor or mixer instead of by hand.
For stovetop cooking, I usually recommend a wooden spoon 
because it’s versatile, durable, the handle doesn’t (usually) get hot, 
and it won’t scratch non-stick cookware.
Omitting ingredients
In many of these recipes, garnish ingredients and some seasonings 
are listed as optional. Keep in mind that in all recipes, flavoring 
ingredients are always optional. Rather than skip an entire recipe if 
it includes something that’s not on your list of favorites, just omit 
the element you don’t like. None of these recipes will fail if you 
omit hot peppers or leave out the cumin.
Nuts and dried fruit
When a Well Fed recipe includes nuts, seeds, or dried fruit, those 
ingredients are included as fun flavoring components, rather than 
primary ingredients. All nuts, seeds, and dried fruits included 
in these recipes are optional. If you’re trying to minimize your 
Omega-6 fatty acids or fruit/sugar intake, you can omit the nuts 
and fruit without damaging the recipe.
Mise en place
(Chef-speak for “everything in place.”) Prior to starting a recipe, set 
up like a cooking show: Measure and prep the ingredients you need 
to make the recipe, organize the equipment you need within easy 
reach, and pre-heat the oven or stove so you don’t suddenly realize 
you need a diced onion when you’ve got your hands buried in a 
bowl of ground meat.
You’re gonna need a bigger bowl
A few words of advice from my dad: Always, always, always use a 
bowl that’s bigger than you think you need. (Thanks, Daddy!)

Once you know how to put paleo ingredients together, most restaurant food can’t compete in terms of flavor. But there is something 
undeniably lovely about sitting down to a pretty table setting and having food served with flair. You can easily create a dining experience 
for yourself at home that rivals your favorite restaurant. 
Don’t forget the garnish
We eat first with our eyes, and restaurants do a bang-up job of making food look like something you’d want to eat. This one is so easy! 
Eating Pad Thai (p. 63)? Add a few chopped nuts and a wedge of lime to the plate. Staring at a pile of kale and ground beef? Drizzle it 
with Sunshine Sauce (p.45) and a sprinkle of chopped scallions. Edible garnishes not only pump up the flavor and add texture to your 
meals, but they give your eyes a feast, too.
A place at the table
Sometimes I like to plop on the couch with a bowl of food that I can slurp like an animal, and a few times a week, Dave and I use stools 
to casually sit at our kitchen island, instead of our big dining table. But most days, I set the table with placemats so that our brains 
register the message: “We’re eating now.” Take the time to slow down, chew your food, relax, and savor the flavors. It’s an easy way to 
recreate the restaurant experience – and encourage the tradition of family dinner – at your dining table.
Tableware
Fun and funky tableware doesn’t need to be expensive to add a new dimension to home dining. I love to eat from my shallow bamboo 
bowl that’s the perfect size for a Hot Plate (p. 35) or breakfast scramble, and we use polka dotted ice cream dishes for desserts like a 
handful of fresh cherries or Berries with Coconut Whipped Cream (p. 149). We picked up some inexpensive rice bowls and plastic 
chopsticks to make eating homemade Asian food just as much fun as takeout. Find a few plates that make your food look as good as it 
tastes. And why not serve yourself water in a wine glass, or place a wedge of lime on the rim of your club soda? You probably remember 
those small extras for guests; treat yourself like a guest, too.
Multiple courses
Restaurants stretch out the dining experience by serving you in courses, so why not try the same at home? Relax and linger over a salad, 
then serve yourself the entrée after a brief interlude. It gives you more time for conversation and will leave you feeling more satiated than 
quickly eating your entire meal.
Better than a restaurant

PALEO
Here’s all the info you’ll need to 
minimize the hassle of grocery 
shopping, to prep food so you’re 
well fed all week long, and to 
make cooking a creative pleasure.
KITCHEN
THE

How To: The Weekly Cookup
016
page
The film Food, Inc. changed our lives. It vividly drove home the 
detrimental effects of factory farming on the environment, our 
individual health, and the fabric of families. My husband Dave and 
I had already been eating paleo for about two months, but seeing 
that film guaranteed we’d never return to our old habits. We left 
the theater and drove directly to the grocery store, then spent hours 
reading labels and re-thinking how we were going to shop.
We made lists of what we could buy at a regular grocery store 
(pantry items, eggs, and produce) and what would require a trip 
to a higher-end store like Whole Foods or Sprouts (grass-fed, 
organic meat). We researched which produce should be organic 
and which could be conventionally grown. Then we stocked up on 
coconut aminos and loaded the freezer with grass-fed protein, so we 
wouldn’t need to visit two grocery stores every week. We also signed 
up with a CSA (Community Supported Agriculture) for a weekly 
delivery of organic produce to supplement our trips to the store.
I’m not going to lie to you: At first, it was a huge annoyance. I was 
bitter. I complained a lot. But we both stuck to our guns, and soon 
it became routine. Our kitchen is now habitually stocked with 
healthy food, and it’s not much more work than our previous, lazy, 
more destructive ways.
As the new shopping habits took hold, it became painfully evident 
that if we were going to take our health and longevity seriously, 
restaurant meals were not going to cut it.
I was going to be spending a lot of time in the kitchen. 
For the first few weeks, I did. I felt like I was on an endless loop of 
chop, cook, eat, wash, repeat. It was tedious.
But then I remembered the lessons of my dad’s restaurant kitchen 
and came up with a plan to keep us stocked with food, without 
driving myself mad. Now, just one big, weekly shopping trip and 
one Weekly Cookup keeps us happily fed all week.
I muster up about 30 meals and snacks each week: I eat a 
homemade breakfast every day except Saturday, and I pack my 
lunch and snacks for day job sustenance every weekday. To forage 
all the ingredients for that food, my husband does one giant 
shopping trip on Friday afternoons, and I spend about two hours 
on Sunday cooking for the week. With most of our food already 
cooked, meal prep on an average day takes about 30 minutes 
total: 10 minutes to pack my food for work and 20 minutes to 
throw together a delicious dinner. 
I’m going to show you how to plan your own Weekly Cookups, 
so cooking can become one of your favorite things, too.
1. Run your kitchen like a restaurant
Most neighborhood restaurants don’t cook every part of your meal 
to order. If they did, they’d never get the food to the table fast 
enough. Instead, restaurants do prep work for cooked food that 
divides the process into three broad categories: 
 
• tastes best when eaten immediately: broiled or grilled meats, 
	
	 delicate produce
 
• tastes best after a day or two: casseroles, braised meats, stews 
	
	 and soups, sauces
 
• tastes great when partially cooked then caramelized in fat: 
	
	 many vegetables, some meats
Well Fed includes recipes that represent all three of these categories, 
so you can enjoy a variety of grab-and-go foods and slow-simmered 
meals throughout the week.
2. Feel the difference between “cooking” and 
   “making dinner”
Cooking is art, love, experimentation, relaxation, and fun. It can be 
savored as an experience. Sing along to music you love, while losing 
yourself in the rhythm of chopping and the aroma of far off places.
Making dinner is more like, “If I don’t get that food from its 
ingredient state, into dinner state, and into my mouth soon, I’m 
going to murder someone.”
I like to separate the two as much as possible. Cooking on Sunday 
is creative “me” time so that the rest of the week, making breakfast, 
lunch, and dinner is as painless as possible.
3. You will need a lot of food
The increase in the amount of protein, vegetables, and fat you need 
to make the transition to paleo can be shocking. I was amazed at 
the sheer volume of veggies and meat we needed once we jettisoned 
cheese, tortillas, toast, pasta, and rice. You know how you used to 
find wilted, moldy vegetables in the back of your crisper drawer? 
Those days are over; you are now a veggie-eating machine. 
Buy accordingly.
Cooking WOD
In CrossFit, the workout of the day (WOD) is always timed. 
The idea is that you do the movements as quickly and efficiently 
as possible, without sacrificing form and technique. It’s very 
motivating and on many occasions, the clock inspires me to do 
things I don’t think I can do.
One day, feeling unenthusiastic about the assembly line of meat 
and vegetable prep on my schedule, I decided to treat my Sunday 
Cookup like a WOD. Could I do all my food prep in one hour?
I set a stopwatch for 60:00 and got busy rattling some pots and 
pans. I bounced back and forth among the oven, the stove – where 
I had two pans going at once – and the gas grill outside the kitchen 
door. My iPod cranked out appropriate cooking tunes. (For me, 
that’s Social Distortion, The Clash, and Duran Duran, with a little 
Barry Manilow thrown into the mix.) I set a second timer to beep 
at five-minute intervals so I wouldn’t burn anything.
Sunday Cooking WOD
For time, 60-minute cutoff:
Steam-sauté a head of bok choy (p. 33)
Steam-sauté a head of Swiss chard
Roast a large spaghetti squash (p. 123)
Roast sweet potatoes
Chop cauliflower for pilaf (p. 121)
Grill 2 1/2 pounds chicken thighs (p. 29)
Grill 1 pound chicken sausage
Stew lamb for Rogan Josh (p. 85)
Brown 2 pounds ground beef (p. 31)
Boil 1 dozen eggs
Mix pork and seasonings for Scotch Eggs (p. 83)
My time: 61:00 / Cleanup time: 5:00
Think you don’t have time to prepare food so you can eat clean all 
week? I call bull on that! One hour of chopping, steaming, stewing, 
mixing, and grilling netted me enough raw materials to build 
meals for at least five days. Granted, it wasn’t one of those fun and 
leisurely cooking experiences, but every workout at the gym isn’t 
an endorphin-laced funfest, either. Sometimes, for your own good, 
you’ve just got to get it done.

Our Weekly Haul
The list below is a pretty good representation of what we eat in a 
typical week. Keep these stats in mind as you read the list:
1. Dave is 6’5” and weighs about 250. I’m 5’4” and 150 pounds 
of fury. I eat between 1700-1800 calories a day: 40% fat, 30% 
protein, 30% carbs. Dave eats more than that!
2. We usually eat out in restaurants only once or twice a week. 
During the weekdays, we cook breakfast and dinner at home. I 
pack my lunch and snacks to take to work; Dave eats lunch at the 
house.
3. We shop at a regular grocery store and a natural foods store. We 
also get a weekly organic produce delivery and order grass-fed meat 
online or from a local meat share.
Protein
2 pounds turkey sausage
3 pounds chicken thighs
2 pounds chicken breasts
2 pounds ground lamb
3 dozen eggs
2 pounds turkey bacon
2 pounds ground beef
Produce
3 pounds green beans
4 green bell peppers
1 pound okra
2 pints grape tomatoes
4 carrots
2 pounds snap peas
8 cucumbers
2 eggplants
3 heads cauliflower
1 head green cabbage
1 head red cabbage
1 pound Brussels sprouts
5 oranges
2 apples
2 pink grapefruits
4 sweet potatoes
1/2 pound baby carrots
3 onions
2 heads garlic
1 bunch flat-leaf parsley
Fat
3/4 jar coconut oil
1/2 bottle olive oil
1 pound cashews 
(Dave likes to snack on these a lot!)
4. You will need a lot of storage containers
Stock up on containers with tight-fitting lids in sizes ranging from 
small enough for a handful of snap peas to large enough for half a 
casserole. You are now in the business of making your own pack-
aged food, and you need high-quality packaging.
5. Build a protein foundation
Protein is key, so build your meals from the protein up. I grill a few 
pounds of chicken, brown a few pounds of ground meat, and boil 
a dozen eggs every week, so we have the protein building blocks we 
need to create meals quickly.
Cooked meat can be served “diner style” with veggies on the side 
or diced for a stir-fry, simmered in a quick coconut milk curry, 
or turned into sautés with exotic seasonings. (I call these Hot 
Plates; see page 35.) Toss in an egg for extra protein, or construct 
a giant omelet.
Here’s a simple formula to help you calculate how much protein 
you need to buy for the week:
Example:
4 ounces x Mel x 20 meals = 80 ounces  / 16 
= 5 pounds of protein + extra for snacks
6 ounces x Dave x 20 meals = 120 ounces / 16 
= 7.5 pounds of protein + extra for snacks
So, Dave and I chow our way through the equivalent of approxi-
mately 13 pounds of protein each week, just in our main meals. 
6. Prep your vegetables
We eat a lot of fresh veggies every day, but I prepare most of them 
in advance. I chop and steam-sauté a variety of veggies (p. 33), like 
cabbage, broccoli, bell peppers, green beans, and leafy greens so 
they’re ready to be sautéed with seasonings and fat. 
4 to 6 oz. per person
= number of pounds per week
16 (ounces)
x
x
# of people you need to feed
# of meals
Heartier vegetables like Brussels sprouts and spaghetti squash are 
roasted in the oven for quick reheating when we’re ready to eat. 
Cauliflower is chopped in the food processor so it’s ready to be 
turned into Cauliflower Pilaf (p. 121), and veggies we like to eat 
raw – lettuce, bell peppers, snap peas, jicama, and cucumbers – 
are washed and stored in the fridge so they’re ready to be eaten.
I always have chopped, frozen broccoli, cauliflower, spinach, and 
collard greens in the freezer. They have the same nutrient profile 
as fresh (sometimes even better) and go from frozen to ready to 
eat in under 10 minutes.
Based on the idea that each of your meals will include at least 
two different vegetables and that your snacks will also include 
about one or two cups of veggies each, you need about eight 
cups of veggies per person per week. A cucumber yields about 
two cups, a red pepper is about one cup, and a handful of snap 
peas is about a cup. Fear not! You’ll get pretty good at eyeballing 
the right amounts at the store, and you cannot overeat vegeta-
bles, so dig in.
7. Rely on Hot Plates
More than half of the meals we eat every week are Hot Plates (p. 
35): Meals we build spontaneously from raw materials like grilled 
chicken, browned ground meat, steam-sautéed veggies, and 
sauces. Our pre-dinner conversation usually goes like this:
Me: Are you in the mood for Chinese, Middle Eastern, Mexican, or 
Italian?
Dave: Mmmm... Mexican!
Me: Beef or chicken?
Dave: Beef!
Then I pull the containers of ground beef and steam-sautéed 
peppers and cabbage from the fridge. While they’re warming up 
in the pan with a little fat, I turn homemade mayo into South-
western Cumin-Lime Dressing (p. 59) to drizzle on top of our 
Mexican Hot Plate, and we’re eating dinner in about 10 minutes 
from fridge to table.
Hot Plates should make up the majority of your meals. They’re 
fast, they’re nutritious, and if you alternate them with “real 
recipes,” you will naturally eat a balance of Omega-3 and Omega-6 
fats, plenty of vegetables, a wide variety of protein sources, and 
your taste buds will never get bored. Find step-by-step instructions 
and tons of ideas for Hot Plates on page 35.
8. Try a few recipes
Each week, in addition to the basics, I cook two or three “real 
recipes” that require me to follow instructions or invest a little 
more time. Things like Italian Sausage & Eggplant Strata (p. 101) 
or Shepherd’s Pie (p. 97) or Chocolate Chili (p. 73) are complete 
meals and taste better after a day or two in the fridge. They require 
no additional work beyond a reheat, so they’re the perfect cooking 
and “making dinner” experience.
To summarize, here’s a formula for your Weekly Cookup:
[raw materials for Hot Plates] + [2-3 recipes] + random snacks
Super Snack
Every week, I eat almost the same snacks every day. That way, when 
I go shopping, I know I need to buy a bunch of X. 
For example, one of my favorite snacks is what I call an “Antipasto 
Snack Pack.” It’s composed of a handful of snap peas, half a red 
pepper cut into strips, and half a cucumber sliced into coins, plus a 
handful of black olives, a piece of cold grilled chicken, and a little 
dill pickle.
To make shopping easier, I calculate how much of the ingredients 
I need to make it every day for five days – two bags of snap peas, 
three red peppers, three cucumbers, two cans of olives – and auto-
matically add those to my shopping list every week. 
Sometimes I go a little crazy, and I do something daring like use 
green bell pepper instead of red or swap carrots for the snap peas. 
This limited spontaneity ensures that I don’t get bored, and the 
consistent veggies mean I don’t suffer a 6:00 a.m. realization that I 
don’t have food to pack for a work snack. The added bonus is that 
I also know I’m hitting good nutrition, because I’ve got a variety of 
veggies, solid protein, and quality fat in each snack pack. 

A Sample Weekly Cookup
Here’s an example list of the foods I prep during my Sunday 
Cookup so we can make Hot Plates all week:
2-3 pounds Basic Grilled Chicken Thighs (p. 29)
2-3 pounds Basic Ground Meat (p. 31)
1 large cabbage, steam-sautéed (p.33)
1 large spaghetti squash, roasted (p. 123)
1 large cauliflower, riced in the food processor (p. 121)
2 pounds green beans, steam-sautéed
1 dozen hard-boiled eggs
1-2 jicama, peeled and cut into matchsticks
Olive Oil Mayo (p. 43)
1-2 supplemental veggies cooked “to order:” 
  fennel
  baby spinach
  cucumbers
  carrots
  snap peas
  bell peppers
Plus, I always have these things in the pantry 
and freezer:
tuna, packed in olive oil
sardines, boneless, skinless, packed in olive oil
kipper snacks
olives
coconut milk
frozen chopped spinach or collard greens
frozen chopped broccoli
frozen cauliflower florets
frozen baby Brussels sprouts
frozen shrimp
Plus, we get our organic produce delivery filled with surprises 
that I use for inspiration: “Oh, look! Lots of eggplant! I can 
make Baba Ghanoush!” (p. 139)
See page 21 for a complete list of essential goodies to keep 
stocked in your pantry.
Paleo eating is basically about animal protein, piles of fresh 
produce, and quality fat sources. But there’s more to it than that. 
Those ingredients are the foundation, but with a well-stocked 
pantry, you can turn raw materials into meals, every day of 
the week.
Spice It Up!
One of the things I love about spices and other seasonings is that, 
much like a good book, they can take you just about anywhere in 
the world. When I mixed up a batch of tuna with lemon, black 
olives, mint, and piquant peppers, I was no longer in hot and 
humid Austin, Texas. For just a little while, I was on holiday, along 
the sunny coast of the Mediterranean, enjoying a light lunch before 
a jaunt along the coast on a scooter (wearing a really cute sundress, 
giant sunglasses, and a scarf in my hair).
Individual Spices & Herbs
Here are the individual spices that appear in my recipes most often. 
If you have these at your disposal, you should have what you need 
to make lots of tasty recipes. Don’t feel like you need to buy them 
all at once, but I encourage you to slowly build your collection as 
you explore new recipes. An unfamiliar spice or herb can open up a 
whole new world of flavor.
Bay Leaf: Adds depth to soups, stews, and braises, especially in 
Mediterranean cuisine. According to legend, the oracle at Delphi 
chewed bay leaves to promote her visions.
Cardamom: A key ingredient in Indian curries.
Cayenne Pepper: Adds a little to heat to just about anything. 
Named for the city of Cayenne in French Guiana.
Chives, dried: Used in French and Swedish cooking, these are 
the smallest species of edible onion with a mild flavor. Ideal for 
scrambled eggs, steamed veggies, and creamy salad dressings, I 
throw them into everything!
Cinnamon: A must-have basic for sweet and savory foods in just 
about every ethnic cuisine. In ancient times, it was prized as a gift 
fit for the gods. 
Cloves: Used in sweets, as well as Indian, Vietnamese, Mexican, 
and Dutch cooking. Eaten on their own, cloves will numb your 
tongue!
Cocoa:  A rich surprise in savory dishes like chili. Hello, chocolate!
Coriander, ground: Common in Middle Eastern, Asian, 
Mediterranean, Indian, Mexican, Latin American, African, and 
Scandinavian foods. Coriander is the seed of the cilantro plant.
Cumin, ground: Essential for North African, Middle Eastern, 
Mexican, and some Chinese dishes. The Greeks used cumin at the 
table as a seasoning and that habit continues in modern Morocco. 
My favorite spice!
Garlic Powder, granulated: For just about everything. Fresh is best 
for cooking, but homemade spice blends require dried garlic, and 
I’m not going to lie to you: Sometimes I just reach for the powder 
when I don’t feel like dealing with mincing the fresh cloves. I’m a 
culinary pragmatist.
Ginger, ground: A necessity for Indian curries and Asian dishes. 
Scrambled with eggs, it’s a paleo home remedy for a cough. 
Mint, dried: A magical flavor in Middle Eastern and 
Mediterranean cooking.
Mustard Seed, ground: Used in homemade mayo, salad dressings, 
and piquant spice blends. Jewish texts compare the knowable 
universe to the size of a mustard seed to teach humility.
Oregano: The “pizza herb” for everything Italian. It’s also tasty in 
Turkish, Syrian, Greek, and Latin American foods.
YOUR PALEO PANTRY
021
page

Paprika: Adds a peppery bite and rich color to Moroccan, Middle 
Eastern, and Eastern European dishes.
Pepper, black: Important for just about everything. Buy it whole 
and crush just before using for optimal flavor.
Red Pepper, crushed: Made from a variety of dried hot red 
peppers. Adds zip to Italian and Asian dishes.
Sea Salt: Salt brings out the best in everything we eat. I like fine sea 
salt for cooking, preferably iodized.
Thyme, dried: Used in Middle Eastern, Indian, Italian, French, 
Spanish, Greek, Caribbean, and Turkish cuisines. The ancient 
Greeks believe thyme was a source of courage.
Spice Blends
This book includes recipes for some spice blends – like Italian 
Sausage Seasoning and Pizza Seasoning (both on p.49) – that often 
include sugar when they’re commercially produced. For other 
international flavors that I don’t need to make myself, I rely on top-
notch spice shops. My favorites are Penzeys Spices and the Savory 
Spice Shop; find their contact info in Resources (p. 156).
Chili Powder: Used in Tex-Mex, Indian, Chinese, and Thai. A 
blend of chili peppers, cumin, oregano, garlic, and salt. Heat varies 
based on the type of chilies used.
Chinese Five-Spice Powder: Balances the yin and yang in Chinese 
food with star anise, Szechuan peppercorns, cinnamon, cloves, 
and fennel seeds. In Hawaii, it’s used as a condiment in a table-top 
shaker.
Curry Powder: Essential for curries, egg or tuna salad, and 
vegetable dishes. My favorite is Penzeys salt-free Maharajah Style 
Curry Powder.
Greek Seasoning: Mixed into beef or lamb, it tastes like gyro meat. 
Blended with olive oil and lemon juice, it’s salad dressing and 
marinade. Stirred into homemade mayo, it’s Greek dipping sauce.
Italian Herb Mix: Essential for my homemade Creamy Italian 
Salad Dressing (p. 59) and enormously helpful for providing a taste 
of Italy to vegetables, soups, stews, and sautés.
Tsardust Memories (Penzeys Spices): Spicy, not hot, and mildly 
sweet, when it’s mixed into ground pork or beef, it creates instant 
Eastern European sausage. It’s also wonderful as a rub for roasted 
or grilled meat or sprinkled onto hearty vegetables like cabbage and 
winter squashes.
Turkish Seasoning (Penzeys Spices): Blended into ground beef or 
lamb, it creates instant Mediterranean kebabs, is also tasty as a rub 
on grilled meats, and is lovely scrambled into eggs and veggies.
Za’atar: A classic Middle Eastern finishing seasoning – made from 
sesame seeds, dried sumac, salt, and thyme – to sprinkle on salads 
and cooked vegetables.
Other Pantry Essentials
These items are always in my cabinet and on my weekly shopping 
list so I never run out. They easily transform the mundane into the 
memorable.
Coconut Aminos: Almost identical to soy sauce in taste, coconut 
aminos are a healthy replacement for Asian-inspired recipes.
Coconut Oil: Use organic, refined coconut oil for optimal health 
benefits. It lends a somewhat buttery flavor to dishes and can 
be used at high temperatures without oxidizing (which means it 
remains good for you, even if you turn up the heat). Because it’s 
saturated, it’s solid at cooler temperatures, so it’s a good stand-in for 
butter in baked treats.
Coconut Flakes, unsweetened: Eaten on their own or sprinkled 
into and on top of dishes, coconut flakes add another dimension of 
flavor and texture. 
Coconut Milk: Equally at home in sweet and savory dishes, it’s 
an excellent replacement for heavy cream or yogurt in curries and 
sauces. According to Whole9, it’s okay if the ingredient list includes 
guar gum, but avoid brands that include sulfites or added sugar.
Dried Fruit: Because it’s naturally high in sugar, I don’t snack on 
dried fruit, but a few dates, raisins, or dried cranberries can add 
just the right touch of sweetness to savory foods. I keep a small 
amount in the cabinet (just enough to flavor my food but not to 
feed the sugar demons). Be sure to look for varieties without added 
ingredients.
Extra-Virgin Olive Oil: Fruity with a peppery kick at the end, 
EVOO is best for salads and finishing cooked dishes. For high 
temperature cooking, use coconut oil.
Light-flavored Olive Oil: Less expensive and less flavorful, use this 
type of olive oil for Olive Oil Mayo (p. 43).
Olives: A salty, chewy addition to salads, snacks, and garnishes, 
olives also add a dose of healthy fats. Again, check ingredient labels 
for added junk; you want only water, olives, and salt.
Nuts: I try not to snack on nuts, but instead save them for adding 
crunchy flavor to cooked foods. I keep a small amount of pine 
nuts, dry-roasted unsalted almonds, pecans, and cashews on hand.
Pickles, Banana Peppers, Jalapeños: These crispy, piquant nibbles 
transform salads and sautés from ho-hum to yum. Jalapeños are 
Dave’s favorite addition to egg scrambles.
Beef and Chicken Broth: Look for organic chicken, beef, and 
vegetable stock that doesn’t contain any added sugar, starches, or 
soy.
Sunbutter and/or Almond Butter: A healthier alternative to 
peanut butter, get sugar-free varieties that include only seeds or 
nuts and salt, then prepare for lusciousness.
Tomatoes, Tomato Paste: For quick sauces and to add depth to 
soups, stews, and sautés, tomatoes are like a secret weapon. Look 
for brands that contain only tomatoes and salt. I recommend all of 
the Muir Glen varieties and especially like the fire roasted options.
Tuna, Sardines, Kipper Snacks: Good-to-go protein that requires 
no fridge or cookery. Read the labels to make sure it’s pure.
In the Freezer
Many dinnertime meltdowns have been averted by reaching into 
the freezer for some quick-thaw protein and vegetables. Frozen 
veggies are just as nutritious as fresh, so stock up for food-related 
emergencies. Always in my freezer:
Wild-caught, Cooked Shrimp
Chopped Spinach
Chopped Collard Greens
Chopped Broccoli
Cauliflower Florets
French-Cut Green Beans

Essential Kitchen Tools
The Perfect Bowl
For as long as I can remember, what we call the “Sitti bowl” has 
been the most important tool in our kitchen. It’s a 4-quart Pyrex 
bowl, yellow on the outside, white on the inside.
“Sitti” means grandmother in Arabic, and we call this the Sitti 
bowl because my mom inherited it from my great-grandmother 
– my Sitti – in 1970. As the story goes, my parents had recently 
moved into the house where I grew up on East Mifflin Street in 
Orwisburg, Pennsylvania. Sitti had come to their new house to 
teach my mom how to make Syrian bread. (You probably know 
it as pita, but in our house, it always has been, and always will 
be, Syrian bread.) At the time, my mom didn’t have a bowl large 
enough to knead the dough, so Sitti gave my mom the big yellow 
bowl that day, and that’s how the Sitti bowl came to be.
I don’t know how much I actually remember of my Sitti, because 
she died when I was very little. My dad’s stories about her, along 
with the few photos I’ve seen of her with 
coiffed 1940s hair and house dresses, have 
implanted memories deep in my heart and 
my head.
According to legend, she removed hot pies 
from the oven without oven mitts and could 
be found on the back porch smoking cigars, 
while Syrian bread puffed in the oven. I think 
her days in the old country – and her new life 
in America – must have been pretty tough. To 
me, she represents the best that we can be: A 
no-nonsense person who wouldn’t be pushed 
around, but who could be very loving and 
nurturing at just the right moments.
Sitti taught my parents how to make Lebanese 
food, and they taught me. When we cooked 
together – stuffed grape leaves and spinach pies 
and hummus and kibbeh – we did all the work 
in that yellow bowl. It’s not only the perfect size for mixing or 
tossing, it immediately infuses love into everything prepared in it.
When my husband Dave and I lived in San Francisco, we found a 
clone of the Sitti bowl in a vintage store in the Mission, and it has 
held a special place in my kitchen ever since. It is also known as 
the Sitti bowl and is treated with reverence: hand-washed only and 
preferred over the glass nesting bowls from Williams-Sonoma.
Now that I spend so much time in the kitchen, the right tools 
have become even more important to me. I need to feel like the 
tools and I are working together to create nourishing, soul-feeding 
food. If you’re beginning to cook or expanding your repertoire, I 
encourage you to find the tools you like the best and invest in the 
ones that make cooking both easier and more pleasurable, because 
the first step toward eating well is cooking well.
024
page
Recommended Equipment
With these basics, you should be able to make everything in 
this cookbook. For my recommendations on specific pieces 
of equipment, along with buying information, visit www.
theclothesmakethegirl.com/store.
Large Cutting Board: Almost every recipe begins with chopping, 
and a hefty cutting board protects the knife, your countertop, and you.
A Really Good Knife: In the kitchen, your knife is an extension of 
you. Choose a knife that feels comfortable in your hand. I like an 
8-inch blade; it works well on both meat and produce.
Food Processor or Blender: Essential for the sauces and seasonings 
that make paleo food sing, a food processor is a solid investment 
in your healthy, happy taste buds. You can get away with either a 
processor or blender, but I have both, and I’m glad.
Chili Pot: Get a pot larger than you think you need, preferably 
with a non-stick interior and a heavy bottom.
Large Sauté Pan: Essential for everyday cooking, invest in a 
non-stick, 12-inch skillet, so it’s large enough to handle Hot Plates 
with ease.
Large Baking Sheets: Insulated sheets help prevent burning and 
a rim prevents smoke-inducing drips inside the oven. Ideally, you 
should have at least two of these.
Sturdy Mixing Bowls: Graduated sizes ensure you have a Sitti 
bowl for large kneading projects and spice-sized bowls to keep your 
workspace tidy.
Colander or Wire Sieve: For washing produce, draining steamed 
foods or fatty meats, and sweating raw vegetables.
Assorted Baking Pans: You can get by with either a 13X9 or two 
8- or 9-inch round pans, but if you have both, you have more 
options. Buy them at thrift stores or yard sales and stock up.
Standing or Hand Mixer: You can get by with just a food 
processor, but a mixer can handle more volume and more delicate 
tasks, like whipping coconut milk into luscious dessert topping.
Measuring Cups & Spoons: You’ll have everything you need if 
you invest in a 2-cup liquid measuring cup, dry measuring cups 
ranging in size from 1 cup to 1/4 cup, and measuring spoons from 
1 tablespoon to 1/4 teaspoon.
Rubber Scraper: I don’t like to leave even one drop of homemade 
mayo inside the blender! Look for a scraper that’s both sturdy and 
flexible, so it bends into corners.
Parchment Paper and/or Aluminum Foil: Invaluable for 
minimizing clean-up time. I prefer having both on hand, but if you 
must choose one, go with aluminum foil.
Storage Containers: Essential for stocking up on paleo ingredients. 
You’ll need more than you think, and there is acute satisfaction in a 
fridge filled with ingredients and homemade food.
Wooden Spoons: My preferred tool for sautéing, mixing, 
and tossing.
Garlic Press: Not required, but a real time saver unless you’re adept 
at mincing with a knife.
Pastry or Barbecue Brush: Cheap to buy and priceless in the 
kitchen for adding the finishing touch to your homemade dishes.
Kitchen Shears: A huge timesaver for prepping raw meat, cleaning 
produce, and mincing fresh herbs.
Tongs: Essential for grilling and browning meat for stews.
Skewers, Metal or Bamboo: Minimize the fuss of grilling small 
items, plus: Meat on a stick! Soak bamboo skewers in water for 30 
minutes before using to prevent burning.
Grater/Zester: You’re not grating cheese anymore, but citrus zest is 
a magical ingredient.

WEEKLY
These simple recipes and instructions 
will help you create delicious, 
international Hot Plates from simple, 
nourishing, and tasty ingredients.
COOKUP
THE

Hot Plates, p. 35
Pad Thai, p. 63
BBQ Pork Fried Rice, p. 93
No grill? Preheat the oven to 400 F. Follow seasoning instructions for 
grilling then place the chicken in a single layer, smooth side up, in a 
large baking dish. Bake 30-35 minutes until juices run clear and the 
tops are well browned.
2 pounds boneless, skinless chicken thighs
salt
ground black pepper
coarse (granulated) garlic powder
paprika
Preheat a gas grill with all burners on high and the lid closed, about 10 minutes. 
Place the chicken on a large platter or baking sheet in a single layer, smooth side 
facing up. Sprinkle generously with salt, pepper, and garlic powder, then add just 
enough paprika for a little kick. Flip the chicken and season the other side.
Place the chicken smooth side down on the heated grill and close the lid. Cook 4-5 
minutes, then flip and cook an additional 4 minutes with the lid closed. The chicken 
is cooked when the juices run clear, and it has turned toasty brown on both sides.
ingredients
directions
YOU KNOW HOW YOU COULD DO THAT?
TASTY IDEAS
prep
cook
Fresh off the grill, this chicken is crisp and garlicky with a satisfying char. Dressed up with 
seasonings, sauces, and vegetables, the leftovers are so versatile, they’re easily transformed 
from “basic ingredient” to a meal worthy of licking your plate clean.
min.
10
min.
05
serves 6 to 8
a staple that will become a fast favorite
Grilled Chicken Thighs
029
page
notes
This works for boneless chicken breasts and pork chops, too. Brush 
meat with melted coconut oil before seasoning and reduce grill time to 
4 minutes per side.
The caramelized, charred bits are my favorite. They add depth 
and texture that elevate a simple sauté to meal status.

prep
cook
A pan of freshly-browned ground meat is pure potential, a culinary blank canvas. 
Sometimes, the aroma is so tempting, I eat it just like that – with a spoon, from a bowl – 
so I can experience the pure meat-ness of it. Later, combined with vegetables and the right 
seasonings, this basic can be elevated to luscious international status.
1 tablespoon coconut oil
1 medium onion, diced (about 1 cup)
2 pounds ground meat (beef, bison, lamb, pork, turkey, or chicken)
salt
ground black pepper
coarse (granulated) garlic powder
Heat a large skillet over medium-high heat, about 3 minutes. Add coconut oil and 
allow it to melt. Toss the onion in the pan and sauté, stirring with a wooden spoon. 
Cook until crisp-tender and translucent, about 5 minutes.
Crumble the ground meat into the pan with your hands, then break up large 
chunks using the wooden spoon. Season generously with salt, pepper, and garlic 
powder. Continue to cook and stir until the meat has no pink spots and reaches a 
warm brown hue, about 7-10 minutes. If you’re not using grass-fed meat, drain the 
excess fat before you dig in.
min.
10
min.
03
serves 6 to 8
ingredients
directions
a star on its own & a supportive bit player
Garlic-Browned Ground Meat
031
page
Meat combos can be fun! Good pairings include 
pork+beef, beef+turkey, beef+lamb, and chicken+turkey.
YOU KNOW HOW YOU COULD DO THAT?
Hot Plates, p. 35
Egg Foo Yong, p. 87
Jicama Homefries, p. 131
TASTY IDEAS
notes
Ever notice that a cast-iron skillet is not only the 
ideal kitchen tool, it can also double as a weapon?
Grass-fed meats prefer low, slow temps, so turn down the heat 
and let the meat relax into the browning process.

prep
cook
Most days, I eat vegetables at breakfast, lunch, dinner, and snacks. That’s in the 
neighborhood of six or seven cups of veggies every day. Oh, there’s so much chopping and 
cooking! So once a week, I turn into a Veg-O-Matic and make it my mission to clean and 
partially steam at least three different vegetables, so they’re ready to be transformed into 
meals when I need them. 
your favorite vegetables
water
Wash your veggies under running water, then, using a sharp knife, cut or slice 
into desired shape, depending on your mood and tastes. It’s best if you keep the 
pieces roughly the same size, so they’ll cook evenly.
Heat a large skillet over medium-high heat. Toss the still-wet-from-the-washing 
vegetable into the pan, cover with a lid, and allow the residual water to soften 
the veg a bit. Remove the lid, and stir vigorously with a wooden spoon until the 
vegetable is softened but not completely cooked. If the veg sticks to the pan or 
begins to brown, add a tablespoon of water to continue the steaming process.
Place each vegetable in its own container and store in the fridge. Be sure to pop 
the containers into the refrigerator while hot – cooling at room temperature allows 
bacteria to grow. I usually reserve the bottom shelf of my fridge for hot veggies.
When it’s time to eat, heat about 1-2 teaspoons of coconut oil in your skillet, then 
toss in the partially-cooked veggies and seasonings. No fuss, no muss, no chopping 
right before dining!
min.
3-7
min.
05
serves a lot
ingredients
directions
the “never run out” plan
Steam-Sautéed Veggies
033
page
Need ideas? This is a short list of vegetables that are good choices to 
have around for everyday fortification – and they’re hearty enough to 
stand up to this kind of pre-cooking:
YOU KNOW HOW YOU COULD DO THAT?
bell pepper, sliced
bok choy, chopped
Brussels sprouts, cut in half
broccoli, Broken into florets
cabbage (red or green), sliced or chopped
carrots, sliced
cauliflower, broken into florets
celery, sliced thin
chard, chopped
collard greens, chopped
eggplant, sliced or chopped
green beans, whole
kale, chopped
mustard greens, chopped
parsnips, sliced
turnip greens, chopped
yellow squash, sliced
zucchini, sliced
Hot Plates, p. 35
TASTY IDEAS
This method works best for fibrous, sturdy vegetables. Tender 
veggies like snap peas, snow peas, fennel, asparagus, and spinach 
are best cooked “to order.”
Taste the rainbow! Be sure to eat 
a variety of veggies every week 
and strive for a mix of bright 
green, red, purple, and orange.

prep
cook
This is not so much a recipe as it is a formula for putting together meals from protein, 
veggies, and a world of spices and seasonings. We eat these sautés for more than half of our 
meals every week. With this approach, you can make the transition from “cold ingredients” 
to “delicious meal” in under 10 minutes, and it’s an easy way to satisfy an “I’m really in the 
mood for [insert name of ethnic food here]” craving.
Really in a hurry? Feeling particularly lazy? Skip the onion and garlic 
step and proceed straight to “meat in pan.” The flavors will have a 
little less depth, but your meal will still be tasty. You can also amp up 
the protein and breakfast quotient by adding 1-2 scrambled eggs along 
with the protein and vegetables.
Per person:
1/2 tablespoon coconut oil
1/4 medium onion, diced (about 1/4 cup)
1 clove garlic, minced (about 1 teaspoon)
3-6 ounces of cooked protein (p. 29 and 31)
2 cups Steam-Sautéed Veggies (p. 33)
salt and black pepper, to taste
spices
Heat a large skillet over medium-high heat, about 3 minutes. Add coconut oil and 
allow it to melt. Toss the onion and garlic in the pan and sauté, stirring with a wooden 
spoon. Cook until crisp-tender and translucent, about 5 minutes.
Add the spices to the pan and stir until fragrant, about 30 seconds. Add the protein 
and vegetables, sprinkle generously with salt and pepper. Stir continuously with a 
wooden spoon until it’s hot and the vegetables begin to brown, about 5 minutes.
min.
10
min.
05
ingredients
directions
turn “ingredients” into “dinner”
notes
Hot Plates
YOU KNOW HOW YOU COULD DO THAT?
THE FORMULA
035
page
Per Person = 
  3-6 ounces of protein 
+ 2 cups veg 
+ 1 tablespoon fat 
+ seasonings
Get Lots of Hot Plates Ideas Over Here
These are the ingredients for one of my favorite Hot Plates: 
ground beef, Roasted Spaghetti Squash (p. 123), and red 
cabbage sautéed in coconut oil with garlic, parsley, and Penzeys 
Tzardust Memories. For breakfast, I also add one scrambled egg.

You really can’t go wrong by following your taste buds, but I’ve listed some combos that work particularly well together. 
Traditional ethnic cuisines are delicately nuanced and are influenced by geographical region and the whims of the cook. 
These ingredient recommendations are merely broad strokes at recreating the predominant flavors of each cuisine.
NOTE: For grilled meats, see Grilled Chicken Thighs (p. 29), and for ground meats, see the recipe for Garlic-Browned 
Ground Meat (p. 31).
AMERICAN
CHINESE
FRENCH
036
page
You can always make yourself a “Diner Dinner:” load 
up a plate with protein, two veggie sides, and a salad. 
Or make a Hot Plate with all-American meat  and 
“potatoes.”
ground beef
Jicama Home Fries (p. 131), bell pepper
It’s also not a bad idea to scramble an egg with one 
teaspoon coconut aminos and throw that in the pan 
near the end of cooking time. Serve on a bed of Basic 
Cauliflower Rice (p. 121). Garnish with toasted 
sesame seeds, chopped scallions, and/or one teaspoon 
of sesame oil. You can find the Best Stir Fry Sauce 
Ever on page 51. 
ground beef
eggplant, red bell pepper
Best Stir Fry Sauce Ever
ground beef 
broccoli, slivered carrots, mushrooms
Best Stir Fry Sauce Ever
ground beef
bok choy, scallions
pinch dried ginger, 1 tablespoon coconut aminos
To garnish, sprinkle these with fresh minced parsley 
and a spritz of lemon juice. Serve on a bed of raw 
baby spinach leaves; the heat from the Hot Plate will 
wilt the leaves to a tender texture.
ground pork
kale or other greens
dried chives; pinch each of nutmeg, tarragon,     
cinnamon, and cloves
grilled chicken
carrots, tomato
pinch each of tarragon and chervil
grilled chicken
green beans
1/2 teaspoon Dijon mustard; pinch each of lemon 
pepper and tarragon
Top these with fresh minced parsley for a bright flavor 
that balances the warmer tones of the spices.
ground pork
apples, cabbage
1/2 teaspoon mustard; pinch each of caraway seeds 
and paprika
ground lamb
red bell pepper, green beans, cabbage
Best Stir Fry Sauce Ever
ground lamb
onions, scallions
pinch dried ginger, 1 tablespoon coconut aminos
grilled chicken
snow peas, snap peas, red bell pepper
Best Stir Fry Sauce Ever
grilled chicken
broccoli, red bell pepper 
Best Stir Fry Sauce Ever
grilled chicken
celery, green bell pepper
1 tablespoon coconut aminos, cashews
Char Siu (p. 91)
broccoli, cabbage, scallions
1 tablespoon coconut aminos
EUROPEAN
Central &
Eastern
ground beef
tomato, mushroom, carrot
pinch each of paprika and marjoram
ground beef or pork
red cabbage, Roasted Spaghetti Squash (p. 123)
Penzeys Tsardust Memories
grilled chicken
Jicama Home Fries (p. 131), apples
pinch each of cinnamon and paprika
Hot Plates Mangez! Essen! Eat!
Greek
Indian
ITALIAN
Moroccan
THAI
MIDDLE EASTERN
These taste great garnished with fresh minced parsley, 
sliced black olives, and fresh lemon juice. Penzeys 
Greek Seasoning is a wonderful alternative to the 
herbs listed below. Serve on a bed of Cauliflower Rice 
(p. 121); add Mediterranean Mint and Parsley Pesto 
on the side (p. 53).
ground lamb
tomatoes, eggplant
splash red wine vinegar; pinch each of oregano and 
marjoram
ground pork or grilled pork chop, sliced very thin
tomatoes, green beans
splash red wine vinegar; pinch each of oregano and 
marjoram
grilled chicken
tomatoes, zucchini
pinch each of oregano and marjoram
Indian curries taste best when they’re slowly 
simmered, but if you must have the flavors of Indian 
food right now, these will do nicely. You can also use 
any of these combos with Sri Lankan Curry Sauce (p. 
57). Serve on a bed of Basic Cauliflower Rice (p. 121), 
top with minced cilantro, and enjoy Mint Chutney 
(p. 53) on the side. 
ground lamb
tomatoes, eggplant
2 tablespoons coconut milk
1 teaspoon curry powder
ground lamb
Roasted Spaghetti Squash (p. 123)
2 tablespoons coconut milk
1 teaspoon curry powder
grilled chicken
tomatoes, zucchini
2 tablespoons coconut milk
1 teaspoon curry powder
grilled chicken
cauliflower
2 tablespoons coconut milk
1 teaspoon curry powder
These are all wonderful on their own or served on a 
bed of either Roasted Spaghetti Squash (p.123) or 
Zucchini Noodles Aglio et Olio (p. 133). Just before 
eating, drizzle the Hot Plate with a 1/2 teaspoon of 
extra-virgin olive oil.
ground beef
tomatoes, zucchini, black olives
Pizza Seasoning (p. 49)
ground beef
cauliflower, red bell pepper, black olives 
Pizza Seasoning (p. 49)
ground beef
tomato, red and green bell peppers
Italian Sausage Seasoning (p. 49)
ground lamb
tomatoes, zucchini, garlic
1/2 teaspoon each of dried rosemary and oregano
grilled chicken
tomatoes, green beans
Basil and Walnut Pesto (p. 53)
grilled chicken
sliced fennel, black olives
pinch of crushed red pepper flakes
grilled chicken
kale
juice of 1/2 lemon
grilled pork chop
tomato, red and green bell peppers
a splash balsamic vinegar, garlic, 1/2 teaspoon 
dried oregano
Serve on Cauliflower rice Pilaf (p. 121 and drizzle 
with Moroccan Dipping Sauce (p. 55).
ground lamb
tomatoes, zucchini
1/4 teaspoon Ras el Hanout (p. 47)
ground lamb
Roasted Spaghetti Squash (p. 123)
1/4 teaspoon Ras el Hanout (p. 47)
grilled chicken
zucchini, red bell pepper
1/4 teaspoon Ras el Hanout (p. 47)
Serve on Roasted Spaghetti Squash (p. 123) or Basic 
Cauliflower Rice (p. 121) and garnish with a squeeze 
of fresh lime juice.
ground beef 
green beans, fresh basil leaves, jalapeño
1 tablespoon each of lime juice and coconut      
aminos; pinch of red pepper flakes
ground pork
eggplant, fresh basil leaves
1 tablespoon each of lime juice and coconut      
aminos; pinch of red pepper flakes
grilled chicken
green beans, red bell pepper, mango
Sunshine Sauce (p. 45), cashews
Serve on Cauliflower Rice Pilaf (p. 121) with a drizzle 
of Middle-Eastern Dressing (p. 59). A sprinkle of 
fresh minced parsley or mint adds zing.
ground lamb
okra
1/4 teaspoon each of cumin and dried mint
ground lamb
any leafy greens
1/4 teaspoon each of cumin and dried mint
pine nuts, juice of 1/2 lemon

038
page
All-American Salad Plate
Arrange on a plate: grilled chicken, a hard-boiled egg, 
raw vegetables, and a serving of Jicama “Potato” Salad 
(p. 137) or Roni’s Creamy Cucumbers (p. 135). Add a 
ramekin of Ranch or Sweet Mustard Dressing (p. 59) 
on the side for dipping and a sliced apple or pear for 
something sweet.
Deconstructed Hamburger Salad
Toss shredded iceberg lettuce with tomato, onion, and 
banana pepper rings. Dress with 1 teaspoon each olive 
oil and vinegar, plus a 1/2 teaspoon of Pizza Seasoning 
(p. 49). Top with ground beef and a dollop of Olive 
Oil Mayo (p. 43).
Asian Chicken Salad
Toss shredded cabbage, carrots, scallions, and snap 
peas with diced grilled chicken. Dress with Sunshine 
Sauce (p. 45), a sprinkle of sliced almonds, and a 
squeeze of fresh lime juice.
Asian Tuna Salad
Toss baby spinach, slivered red onions, and a few 
orange sections with a can of drained tuna. Dress with 
Sunshine Sauce (p. 45) and sprinkle with crushed 
Sesame-Garlic Nori Chips (p. 129).
Italian Antipasto Platter
Arrange on a plate: Mediterranean Tuna Salad (p. 67) 
or grilled chicken, a hard-boiled egg, black olives and 
raw vegetables; sprinkle with fresh minced parsley. 
Add a ramekin of Creamy Italian Dressing (p. 59) on 
the side for dipping, and a small cluster of grapes for 
something sweet.
Middle Eastern Meze Platter
Arrange on a plate: Middle Eastern Tuna Salad (p. 
67) or grilled chicken, black olives, raw vegetables, a 
few little pickles, and a serving of Baba Ghanoush (p. 
139); sprinkle with fresh minced parsley and mint. 
Add a ramekin of Middle-Eastern Dressing (p. 59) 
on the side for dipping, and a small orange or a few 
almonds for something sweet.
Thai Salad Platter
Arrange on a plate: grilled chicken or pork chop, snap 
peas, red bell pepper strips, cucumber slices, carrots, 
and butter lettuce leaves; sprinkle with fresh minced 
cilantro. Add a ramekin of Sunshine Sauce (p. 45) on 
the side for dipping and a small pile of Caramelized 
Coconut Chips (p. 153) for something sweet.
A tablespoon of minced parsley leaves is the culinary 
equivalent of a fresh breeze. When I do my Weekly 
Cookup, I usually wash a bunch of flat-leaf parsley, 
pluck the leaves, and store them in a zipper baggie in 
the fridge, so they’re ready to be chopped for garnishes 
and added to Hot Plates and salads.
A spritz of fresh lemon, lime, or orange juice wakes up 
food. Here are some delicious short cuts to become a 
citrus master.
Lime:
cumin + cayenne
Lemon:
garlic + oregano
curry + ginger
tarragon + onion powder
parsley + mint
COOL SALADS
Sometimes you need something 
crisp and quick 
The Magic of Parsley
Citrus & Seasonings
Orange:
cayenne + thyme
garlic + rosemary
notes
Fastest Packed Lunch Ever
If you’ve got a refrigerator and microwave in your workplace, you don’t 
even need to sauté your Hot Plate before packing it for lunch! I put 
two cold, steam-sautéed veggies in a portable container, add the right 
amount of protein, then spoon cold Sri Lankan Curry Sauce (p. 57) 
on top – or bring Moroccan Dipping Sauce (p. 55), Tahini Dressing 
(p. 139) or a creamy salad dressing (p. 59) in a separate container. 
When it’s time to eat, I zap the entree container in the microwave and 
drizzle with the sauce. 
In a pinch, I’ve also used frozen veggies; by lunch time, they’ve 
defrosted in the fridge and the microwave makes them tender.
THAI SALAD PLATTER
Caramelized Coconut Chips
Grilled Chicken Thighs
Sunshine Sauce

SAUCEs
There’s no faster, easier, tastier way to add zip 
and zing to your meals than a pinch of spice 
blend or a drizzle of luscious dressing. 
& sEAsoNInGS

Creamy Salad Dressings, p. 59 
Tuna Salads, p. 67
Jicama “Potato” Salad, p. 137
Cucumber salads, p. 135
• Use cider vinegar instead of lemon juice for a new twist.
• Stir in a few chopped, pickled jalapeños for a kick of heat.
YOU KNOW HOW YOU COULD DO THAT?
TASTY IDEAS
notes
The blender version is fluffier and thicker; the food processor version 
is thinner, but still creamy. Both versions will get thicker as they 
chill in the fridge. If you suffer a mayo “fail,” don’t despair! It can 
be used for salad dressing and also firms up a bit when cooled.
Science! The magic of mayo is that it’s an emulsion: The oil and egg plus lemon create 
a colloid. You don’t need to understand all the physics, but you do need to bring all 
of your ingredients to room temperature. 
In a blender or food processor, break the egg and add the lemon juice. Put the lid 
on your appliance and allow the egg and lemon juice to come to room temperature 
together, at least 30 minutes and up to 2 hours.
When the egg and lemon juice are room temp, add the mustard, salt, and 1/4 
cup oil to the canister. Blend on medium until the ingredients are combined. Now 
the exciting part begins. Your mission is to incorporate the remaining 1 cup oil by 
pouring very, very slowly. You want the skinniest drizzle you can manage; this takes 
about 2 to 3 minutes. Breathe. Relax. Sing to yourself.
If you’re using a blender, you’ll hear the pitch change as the liquid begins to form 
the emulsion. Eventually, the substance inside the blender will resemble traditional 
mayonnaise, only far more beautiful. Do not lose your nerve and consider dumping! 
Continue to drizzle. Slowly.
When all of the oil is incorporated, revel in your triumph and transfer the mayo to 
a container with a lid. Mark a calendar with your egg expiration date – that’s when 
your mayo expires, too.
ingredients
directions
prep
cook
Lemony, light, silky, and luxurious, this mayo makes just about everything better. Indulge 
with a dollop on grilled meat, transform it into creamy salad dressing in a flash, or stir 
it into a can of tuna for instant salad. Mix up a batch every week in the blender or food 
processor to rediscover creamy salads and sauces. 
min.
N/A
05
MAKES 1 ½ cups
you’ll never consider store-bought again
OLIVE OIL MAYO
043
page
1 large egg
2 tablespoons lemon juice
1/4 cup plus 1 cup light-tasting olive oil (not extra-virgin!)
1/2 teaspoon dry mustard
1/2 teaspoon salt
For a video demo of the perfect oil drizzle, visit www.theclothesmakethegirl.com/wellfed
No EVOO here! Cheapo olive oil is best for 
mayo – and bottled lemon juice is better than 
fresh because of its reliable acid content.

prep
cook
It didn’t seem like a big deal to me to give up peanuts until I remembered the decadent 
deliciousness that is peanut sauce. Veggies dipped in peanut sauce. Grilled chicken satay 
dipped in peanut sauce. Shredded beef wrapped in a butter lettuce leaf with diced red 
onion and drizzled with... peanut sauce. You get the idea. Then Sunbutter entered my life 
with its creamy, nutty-flavored goodness, and I got creative.
2 tablespoons lime juice
1 clove garlic, minced (about 1 teaspoon)
1/2 teaspoon crushed red pepper flakes
1 tablespoon coconut aminos
1/4 teaspoon powdered ginger
1/2 teaspoon rice vinegar
1/4 cup sunflower seed butter (no sugar added)
dash ground cayenne pepper (optional)
1/4 cup coconut milk
Place all the ingredients except the coconut milk in the bowl of a food processor 
and whirl until well blended. 
Scrape down the sides of the bowl with a rubber scraper, then add the coconut milk. 
Process until it’s blended and smooth. Store covered in the fridge.
MAKES 2/3 cup
ingredients
directions
inspired by the Thai food I ate in San Francisco
SUNSHINE SAUCE
045
page
Try almond butter in place of the sunflower seed butter.
YOU KNOW HOW YOU COULD DO THAT?
Hot Plates, p. 35
Pad Thai, p. 63
TASTY IDEAS
notes I like Sunbutter brand sunflower seed butter. Be sure to get the sugar-
free, organic variety; the only ingredient is organic sunflower seeds.
This sauce never met a raw veggie it didn’t like.
min.
N/A
05
Make a quick version of satay: grill thin slices 
of steak, chicken, or pork on bamboo skewers, 
then dip in Sunshine Sauce.

Ras el Hanout (sounds like rahss el HA-nooT) originated in North Africa thousands of 
years ago and can include up to 100 individual spices. Each vendor in the market declares 
his blend to be the best and holds his recipe as a closely-guarded secret. Some people believe 
the seductive ingredients in Ras el Hanout produce an aphrodisiac. At the very least, any 
food you season with this exotic blend should inspire diners to kiss the cook.
the name means ‘top of the shop’
Ras el Hanout
047
page
prep
cook
MAKES
min.
N/A
05
1/4 cup
2 teaspoons salt
2 teaspoons ground cumin
2 teaspoons powdered ginger
2 teaspoons ground black pepper
1 1/2 teaspoons ground cinnamon
1 teaspoon ground coriander
1 teaspoon ground cayenne pepper
1 teaspoon ground allspice
1/2 teaspoon ground cloves
1/4 teaspoon ground nutmeg
Measure all of the spices into a medium bowl and mix with a fork until combined. 
Close your eyes, take a deep inhale through your nose, and imagine a market in 
Morocco. 
Transfer the spice blend to an airtight container and apply liberally to your food 
whenever you need a quick getaway to an exotic land.
ingredients
directions
Play around with the quantities of each spice to create your own 
unique blend, but remember, the goal is a nuanced flavor in which no 
single spice dominates.
YOU KNOW HOW YOU COULD DO THAT?
notes
Mix 1-2 teaspoons per pound into ground beef or lamb for 
burgers or meatballs. You can also use it as a rub on steaks, 
chops, or chicken parts.
Hot Plates, p. 35
Creamy Spice Market Kale, p. 111
Velvety Butternut Squash, p. 119
Caramelized Coconut Chips, p. 153
TASTY IDEAS
My first tattoo was inspired by 
traditional Moroccan henna. 
It’s an intricate design that 
wraps around my right wrist 
and ends in a hand of Fatima 
to ward off the evil eye.

Use 1-2 tablespoons of Italian Sausage Seasoning per 1 pound 
of ground meat for optimal flavoring. If you want your sausage 
smokin’ hot, increase the paprika and red pepper by about half.
Sausage shouldn’t be complicated: It’s essentially meat made magical with spices. But too 
many store-bought brands include sugar and other mystery ingredients. This sugar-free 
blend works well with ground pork, beef, turkey, and chicken and produces flavorful, 
worry-free sausage flavor that guarantees you won’t need to rely on store bought.
4 teaspoons dried parsley
1 tablespoon dried Italian herbs (I like Penzeys.)
2 teaspoons ground black pepper
2 teaspoons coarse (granulated) garlic powder 
2 teaspoons paprika
4 teaspoons salt
1 teaspoon crushed red pepper flakes
1 1/2 teaspoons fennel seed (optional)
In a medium bowl, crush the dried parsley and Italian herbs with your fingers 
or a fork to release their flavor. Add the black pepper, garlic powder, paprika, 
salt, red pepper flakes, and fennel seed. Mix with a fork and transfer to an 
airtight container for storage.
ingredients
directions
sugar free and ready in a snap
   Italian Sausage Seasoning
049
page
Same directions, different ingredients. 
Pizza Seasoning
4 teaspoons dried oregano leaves
4 teaspoons dried basil leaves
4 teaspoons dried parsley leaves
1 teaspoon salt
2 teaspoons coarse (granulated) garlic powder
1 teaspoon onion salt (I like Savory Spice Shop’s Ornate Onion Salt.)
1/2 teaspoon crushed red pepper flakes
YOU KNOW HOW YOU COULD DO THAT?
Hot Plates, p. 35
Meatza Pie, p. 77
Scotch Eggs, p. 83
Italian Sausage and 
  Eggplant Strata, p. 101
TASTY IDEAS
notes
prep
cook
MAKES
min.
N/A
05
1/3 cup
The takeout taste without the pizza hangover.

Hot Plates, p. 35
Substitute other fruit juices for the orange juice: lime, lemon, 
pomegranate, pineapple.
The way a vegetable is cut affects how quickly it cooks, its texture, 
and its mouth-feel. Try to cut all your veggies for a stir fry into 
approximately even-sized pieces so they cook uniformly. Try 1-inch 
chunks, matchsticks, or thin slices. Change the shape, change your dish.
1 clove garlic, minced (about 1 teaspoon)
1/2 teaspoon crushed red pepper flakes
2 teaspoons Chinese five-spice powder
1/2 teaspoon rice vinegar
2 tablespoons fresh orange juice
3 tablespoons coconut aminos
In a small bowl, mix the garlic, red pepper flakes, five-spice powder, and rice vinegar 
with a fork to form a smooth paste. Stirring continuously with the fork, pour in the 
orange juice, then add the coconut aminos. 
ingredients
directions
YOU KNOW HOW YOU COULD DO THAT?
TASTY IDEAS
When I was a small-town kid, my parents would sometimes take my brother and me to 
a Chinese restaurant in the next town over. There were lush potted palms and a koi pond 
with a bridge in the middle of the restaurant. The big round table (“our table”) had a 
Lazy Susan in the center of it for sharing dishes. The unfamiliar tastes were irresistible, 
and I still relish the way a particular flavor can send me on an adventure. Five-spice 
powder is a crucial ingredient in this sauce and instantly transports local ingredients to an 
exotic place.
exotic and homey all at once
Best Stir-Fry Sauce Ever
051
page
notes
Use right away in a stir fry or store in a container with a lid in the 
refrigerator for up to five days.
prep
cook
MAKES
min.
n/a
05
Enough for 
1/2 pound 
of protein 
and 4 cups 
veggies
Five-spice powder is sweet, sour, 
bitter, pungent, and salty
1/3 cup
If you’d like to thicken the sauce a bit, stir 1/2 
tablespoon arrowroot powder into the sauce with 
a fork before adding the sauce to the pan.

Same directions, different ingredients. 
Mediterranean Parsley-Mint Pesto
1 bunch fresh mint leaves (about 2 cups)
1 cup fresh parsley leaves
juice of half a lemon (about 2 tablespoons)
1/4 cup extra-virgin olive oil
1 clove garlic, minced (about 1 teaspoon)
1/2 teaspoon salt
pinch of crushed red pepper flakes
Mint Chutney
1 bunch fresh mint leaves (about 2 cups)
1/2 fresh jalapeño
1/4 cup fresh parsley leaves
1/4 medium onion, roughly chopped
2 teaspoons lime zest
1 tablespoon fresh lime juice
1/4 teaspoon dried ginger or 1 teaspoon minced fresh
1/4 teaspoon salt
Basil pesto turns bitter when it’s cooked, so mix pesto into warm 
foods off the heat to protect the tender aromatics. All types of pesto 
taste fresh for three to four days.
If sunshine had a smell, it would be the aroma of basil. Making a batch of homemade pesto 
can feel like a quick jaunt to a sunny Mediterranean coast. I include a small amount of 
parsley in this basil pesto to sweeten the leaves a bit in the absence of Parmesan. 
2 cups fresh basil leaves, packed
1/2 cup fresh parsley leaves, packed
1/3 cup extra-virgin olive oil
1/3 cup walnuts
3 cloves garlic, minced (about 1 tablespoon)
1/2 teaspoon salt
1/8 teaspoon ground black pepper
Puree all ingredients in a blender or food processor to desired consistency. Allow 
the flavors to meld for about 30 minutes before eating and store in an airtight 
container in the refrigerator.
ingredients
directions
a crash course in nose appreciation
Basil and Walnut Pesto
053
page
Dollop on grilled meat, fish, or seafood – or mix into a 
can of tuna for a light twist on tuna salad.
Toss with hot, cooked vegetables: summer squash, 
broccoli, cauliflower, baby spinach, spaghetti squash, 
or diced tomatoes.
Stir a spoonful into hot vegetable soup or plain broth 
for a cup of warm love.
Use as a quick marinade for black and green olives.
TASTY IDEAS
notes
prep
cook
MAKES
min.
N/A
05
1 cup
YOU KNOW HOW YOU COULD DO THAT?
I like to use walnuts instead of pine nuts in basil pesto because 
they add a creamy texture that makes up for the absence of 
cheese. To make the walnuts especially tender, cover them with 
boiling water and soak for 30-60 minutes before pureeing.

I’ve yet to encounter a vegetable or grilled meat that wasn’t improved by a little drizzle of 
olive oil and herbs. These two sauces come from opposite sides of the planet but share one 
lovely characteristic: They make already good food even better. And they both provide a dose 
of healthy oils. It’s an international win-win.
a taste of the Kasbah
   Moroccan Dipping Sauce
055
page
prep
cook
MAKES
min.
N/A
05
½ cup
Same directions, different ingredients. 
Chimichurri Sauce
2 tablespoons red wine vinegar
4 cloves garlic, minced (about 4 teaspoons)
1 teaspoon salt
1/4 teaspoon ground black pepper
1/2 teaspoon crushed red pepper flakes
1/2 cup extra-virgin olive oil
1 cup firmly packed fresh parsley leaves, minced (about 1/4 cup)
2 tablespoons fresh oregano leaves (or 2 teaspoons dried oregano)
	
      These sauces taste best served at room temperature, but 
should be refrigerated if you’re not going to eat them within the hour. 
They can be kept for two or three days without diminishing their 
dazzling flavor.
YOU KNOW HOW YOU COULD DO THAT?
juice of 2 lemons (about 1/4 cup)
1 clove garlic, minced (about 1 teaspoon)
1/2 teaspoon ground cumin
1/4 teaspoon paprika (sweet, hot, or smoked)
pinch ground cayenne pepper
1/2 teaspoon salt
1/4 teaspoon ground black pepper
1/3 cup extra-virgin olive oil
1/2 cup fresh cilantro leaves, minced (about 2 tablespoons)
1/2 cup fresh parsley leaves, minced (about 2 tablespoons)
In a small bowl, whisk together the lemon juice, garlic, cumin, paprika, cayenne, and 
salt and pepper. Inhale and rejoice that you have a nose.
Gradually whisk in the oil, then stir in the fresh cilantro and parsley. 
ingredients
directions
Hot Plates, p. 35 
The Best Chicken You Will Ever Eat, p. 69
Salmon a l’Afrique du Nord, p. 103
TASTY IDEAS
notes
This sauce is the ideal accessory for unadorned ingredients. 
Drizzle on a salad of cucumbers, tomatoes, avocado, and 
onions, steamed green veggies, or any cooked meats.

I’m a sucker for anything leopard print and any recipe that includes coconut, which sort of 
explains how this recipe came to be. Sri Lanka is home to the distinctively-spotted Sri Lankan 
leopard, as well as a traditional dish called “sambol,” a paste made of ground coconut, chiles, 
and lime juice. Sri Lankans don’t usually follow strict recipes, so every cook’s curry has a 
unique flavor, just as every leopard’s spots are one of a kind. This sauce is slow-simmered on its 
own, so it can be mixed with any cooked protein and veggies at mealtime for curry in a hurry.
2 medium jalapeño peppers, seeds and ribs removed
1/4 cup unsweetened shredded coconut
2 teaspoons ground coriander
1 teaspoon cinnamon
1 1/2 teaspoons ground cumin
1/2 teaspoon powdered ginger
3/4 teaspoon salt
2 cloves garlic, roughly chopped (about 2 teaspoons)
1/4 cup water
1/2 cup + 1/4 cup coconut milk
1 tablespoon coconut oil
3 medium carrots, grated (about 2 cups)
2 cans (14.5 ounces) diced tomatoes
In a food processor, combine the jalapeños, coconut, coriander, cinnamon, cumin, 
ginger, salt, garlic, and water. Process until it forms a smooth paste, remove to a 
medium-sized bowl, and stir in 1/2 cup coconut milk with a wooden spoon.
Heat a large non-stick skillet over medium-high, about 3 minutes. Add the coconut 
oil and allow it to melt. Add the carrots and sauté, stirring with a wooden spoon, until 
they’re tender, about 3 minutes. Add the tomatoes along with their juice. Bring to 
a boil, then reduce heat to simmer, stirring occasionally and crushing the tomato 
chunks with the back of the spoon. Cook 7-10 minutes until the sauce thickens and 
the vegetables are soft.
Pour in the spice paste, mix well, and add the 1/4 cup coconut milk. Stir to combine, 
then remove from heat. Use immediately on a Hot Plate (p. 35) or store in a covered 
container in the refrigerator.
ingredients
directions
versatile sauce from the land of leopards
Sri Lankan Curry Sauce
057
page
notes
Amp up the heat by using the seeds and ribs when you prep the 
jalapeños, or turn it down by reducing the number of peppers.
prep
cook
min.
min.
05
20
This sauce can be customized with any or all of the following:
minced cilantro
fresh lime juice
finely chopped almonds, cashews, or macadamias
thinly-sliced scallions
a spoonful of sugar-free sunflower seed butter
YOU KNOW HOW YOU COULD DO THAT?
Hot Plates, p. 35
TASTY IDEAS
serves 4 to 6
I’m a child of the ‘80s, and Duran Duran 
remains one of my favorite bands. Their 
videos for “Hungry Like The Wolf” and 
“Save a Prayer” were shot in Sri Lanka 
against the backdrop of lush jungles, 
idyllic beaches with wandering elephants, 
and a marketplace full of intrigue.

I was never happy when I found a sandwich in my packed lunch. But I always loved salads, 
especially with a major dose of creamy Italian dressing. When I was in grade school, my 
mom would put my lunchtime salad in a Tupperware, then pour just the right amount of 
bottled creamy Italian dressing in a plastic baggie. All I had to do was cut the corner off the 
bag and squeeze out the dressing. We grownups mostly toss salad with EVOO and vinegar, 
but thanks to my homemade mayo, creamy Italian is back on the menu. 
just a little more fun than vinaigrette
     Creamy Italian Dressing
059
page
prep
cook
MAKES
min.
05
N/A
Same directions, different ingredients. 
Southwest Cumin-Lime Dressing
1/4 cup Olive Oil Mayo (p. 43)
1/2 clove garlic, minced (about 1/2 teaspoon)
1/4 teaspoon ground cumin
a few jalapeño rings, finely minced (optional)
1 tablespoon lime juice
salt and black pepper, to taste
Ranch Dressing
1/4 cup Olive Oil Mayo (p. 43)
1/2 clove garlic, minced (about 1/2 teaspoon)
1/8 teaspoon paprika
2 tablespoons fresh parsley leaves, minced (about 1 tablespoon)
2 teaspoons dried chives
1/2 teaspoon lemon juice
salt and black pepper, to taste
Middle Eastern Dressing
1/2 teaspoon dried mint
1/4 cup Olive Oil Mayo (p. 43)
2 tablespoons fresh parsley leaves, minced (about 1 tablespoon)
1/2 teaspoon za’atar
1/2 teaspoon crushed red pepper flakes or Aleppo pepper
1/2 clove garlic, minced (about 1/2 teaspoon)
1 tablespoon lemon juice
salt and black pepper, to taste
Sweet Mustard Dressing
1/4 cup Olive Oil Mayo
1/2 teaspoon dried mustard
1/2 clove garlic, minced (about 1/2 teaspoon)
2 teaspoons unsweetened applesauce
1 teaspoon cider vinegar
salt and black pepper, to taste
I’ve given instructions for a smallish quantity so it’s made “to order.” 
I don’t recommend that you make a big batch in advance; the texture 
will suffer. It takes so little time to blend, make it fresh. Your tastebuds 
will thank you.
YOU KNOW HOW YOU COULD DO THAT?
1/2 teaspoon dried Italian herb blend or dried oregano
1/4 cup Olive Oil Mayo (p. 43)
1/2 clove garlic, minced (about 1/2 teaspoon)
2 tablespoons vinegar: balsamic, wine, or cider 
salt and black pepper, to taste
In a small bowl, crush the dried herbs with your fingers, then add mayo and garlic. 
Blend well with a fork.
Drizzle in the vinegar, mixing with the fork, then taste and season with salt and 
pepper. If your dressing is too thick, add either vinegar or water – a 1/4 teaspoon at 
a time – until it’s the right consistency. Keep in mind that it will thin slightly as you 
toss it with your salad ingredients.
ingredients
directions
2 to 4
• Drizzle over a freshly-grilled burger, steak, or chicken.
• Use as a dip for red pepper strips, cucumber slices, 
  tomato wedges, and matchsticks of jicama.
• Stir into tuna, egg, or shrimp salad instead of plain mayo.
• Place on a spoon. Eat. (I’m only halfway kidding.)
TASTY IDEAS
Change the flavor in 
the Italian dressing 
by switching up 
the vinegars. I like 
pomegranate balsamic, 
but other infused 
vinegars are lovely, too.

ProTEiN
From slow-simmered stews to grilled meats and seafood to comforting 
casseroles, these recipes have your protein needs covered. Most of them include 
veggies, too, but their primary raison d’être is the protein punch! 

PREP
COOK
Sometimes you just want a pile of something spicy-creamy-comforting like Pad Thai. But 
the original dish uses rice noodles (fail), soy sauce (fail), peanuts (fail), and sugar (fail) 
to create the delicate Thai balance of sour, sweet, and salty. This version is Pad Thai you 
can feel good about eating, emotionally and physically. There’s a touch of rice vinegar in 
the Sunshine Sauce for sourness, snap peas for sweetness, and coconut aminos for saltiness. 
The ingredients combine to create a dish with just the right feeling on your tongue: creamy, 
rich, and luxurious.
• Replace grilled chicken with Ginger-Lime Grilled Shrimp 
  (p. 75) or Char Siu (p. 91).
• Swap Zucchini Noodles Aglio et Olio (p. 133) for spaghetti squash.
• Use chopped steam-sautéed broccoli or cabbage in place of snap peas 
  (p. 33).
1 batch Sunshine Sauce (p. 45)
2 large eggs
2 teaspoons coconut aminos
2 teaspoons plus 1 teaspoon coconut oil
1/2 medium onion, thinly sliced (about 1/2 cup)
1 cup snap peas, thinly sliced lengthwise
2 cups Roasted Spaghetti Squash (p. 123)
6-8 ounces Grilled Chicken Thighs, diced (p. 29)
Optional garnishes:
chopped toasted cashews or almonds
sunflower seeds
sliced scallions
minced cilantro
a squeeze of lime juice
Crack the eggs into a small bowl, and use a fork to scramble them with the coconut 
aminos. Heat a large skillet over medium-high heat, about 3 minutes. Add 2 teaspoons 
coconut oil  to the skillet, and when it’s melted, pour in the eggs and let them spread 
like a pancake. Reduce the heat to medium and cover with a lid, letting the eggs cook 
until they’re set and beginning to brown on the bottom, about 3-4 minutes. Flip and 
lightly brown the other side. Remove the eggs from the pan and cut into strips with 
a sharp knife.
Using the same pan, increase heat to medium-high and add 1 teaspoon coconut 
oil to the pan. Sauté the onion and snap peas, stirring with a wooden spoon, until 
they’re crisp-tender, about 2 minutes. Add the spaghetti squash, chicken, and cooked 
egg to the pan and, stirring with a wooden spoon, cook until heated through, about 
3 minutes. 
Add the Sunshine Sauce to the pan and stir-fry until everything is well-blended and 
hot. Divide among two plates, sprinkle with garnishes, and dig in.
min.
05
min.
15
serves
2
ingredients
directions
slinky, silky noodles from Siam
PAD THAI
YOU KNOW HOW YOU COULD DO THAT?
063
page
notes
Serve this with thin slices of fresh cucumber and bell pepper rings for a cool, crisp contrast to the creamy noodles.
Thai food is usually served with a variety of condiments. 
Arrange small bowls of garnishes and let your dining 
companions customize their plates the way they like ‘em.

COOK
PREP
Stews are lovely because while they simmer, I forget that I’m the one who made them. 
When it’s time to sit down and eat, I feel as if someone else cooked for me. What a treat! 
In this flavorful stew, the cinnamon and herbs create a mellow, earthy gravy that’s a foil for 
the bright, tart taste of the orange gremolata on top. It’s sophisticated comfort food.
Stew:
2-3 pounds beef stew meat, cut into 1-inch cubes
salt and black pepper, to taste
3 tablespoons coconut oil
1 medium carrot, peeled and finely chopped (about 1/4 cup)
1 medium onion, diced (about 1 cup)
1 medium celery stalk, finely chopped (about 1/4 cup)
2 cloves garlic, minced (about 2 teaspoons)
2 tablespoons tomato paste
1/2 cup beef broth
2 tablespoons balsamic vinegar
3-5 cups water
2 teaspoons salt
1 teaspoon ground black pepper
2 bay leaves
1 sprig fresh rosemary 
  (or 1/2 teaspoon dried)
1 sprig fresh thyme 
  (or 1/2 teaspoon dried)
1 sprig fresh sage 
  (or 1/2 teaspoon dried)
2 cinnamon sticks
extra-virgin olive oil, 
  for garnish (optional)
orange gremolata:
1/2 cup fresh parsley leaves, finely 
  minced (about 2 tablespoons)
zest from 1 orange 
  (about 2 tablespoons)
leaves from 1 sprig fresh thyme 
  (1/2 teaspoon dried)
2 cloves garlic, minced 
  (about 2 teaspoons)
1/2 teaspoon rose water (optional)
Sprinkle the beef generously with salt and pepper. In a large pot or Dutch oven, 
heat the coconut oil over medium-high heat, then add the meat in batches and sear 
on all sides. It’s important that you don’t crowd the pan. The meat needs air around 
it to achieve a crisp brown crust. With tongs or a slotted spoon, remove the browned 
pieces to a bowl to catch their juice. Repeat with the remaining cubes.
In the same pot, sauté the chopped carrot, onion, celery, and garlic for about 2 
minutes, stirring with a wooden spoon. Add the tomato paste and stir for about 1 
minute.
Deglaze the pan. Which is just a cook’s way to say: Add the broth and vinegar, then 
stir with passion, scraping up all the wonderful brown bits at the bottom of the pan. 
Keep stirring until the mixture starts to thicken.
Put the meat and its drippings back into the pot. Add 3 cups water, 2 teaspoons 
salt, a healthy dose of pepper, the bay leaves, rosemary, thyme, sage, and cinnamon 
sticks.
Bring to a boil, then reduce the heat and simmer with the pot only partially covered 
for about 90 minutes. This is not a soupy stew, but if the stew starts to dry out, add 
more water, about a 1/2 cup at a time. Simmer until the meat is fall-apart tender and 
the liquid in the pan has been reduced to gravy-like status. 
During the last 15 minutes of stew cooking time, make the gremolata. In a small 
bowl, mix the parsley, orange zest, thyme, garlic, and rose water. 
Remove the cinnamon sticks and herb stems from the stew pot. Ladle the stew 
into deep bowls and top with a few pinches of orange gremolata. Bonus points if you 
also add a light drizzle of olive oil.
min.
min.
90
30
serves
ingredients
directions
suddenly, you’re in a Greek taverna
Cinnamon Beef Stew with Orange Gremolata
065
page
6 to 10
Eat the orange gremolata immediately to enjoy the full effects of the aromatic orange oils. 
It will keep in the refrigerator for a few days, but it’s best when it’s fresh.
Like all great stews, this one improves with age. Just make some 
fresh gremolata to sprinkle on the leftovers for maximum effect.
Mashed Cauliflower, p. 113
Basic Cauliflower Rice, p. 121
Roasted Spaghetti Squash, p. 123
TASTES GREAT WITH

PREP
COOK
When we made Waldorf Salad in sixth-grade home ec, I declined to eat it. To my 8-year-
old mind, the original Waldorf salad – created at the Waldorf Astoria Hotel – sounded 
both gross (apples and mayo?!) and romantic (a glittery hotel in Manhattan!). But now, 
I appreciate its elegance, its short preparation time, and the contrast of crisp apples and 
tangy mayo.
Same directions, different ingredients.
Mediterranean Tuna Salad
10 black olives, pitted and sliced
2-3 banana peppers, sliced into rings
10 fresh mint leaves, minced (about 1 tablespoon) or 1/4 teaspoon dried 
mint leaves
1/4 cup fresh parsley leaves, minced (about 1 tablespoon)
1 teaspoon lemon juice
salt and black pepper, to taste
Middle Eastern Tuna Salad
1/4 cup fresh parsley leaves, minced (about 1 tablespoon)
1/4 teaspoon za’atar
1/4 teaspoon crushed red pepper flakes or Aleppo pepper
1/4 teaspoon dried mint leaves
1/4 teaspoon ground cumin
1 teaspoon lemon juice
salt and black pepper, to taste
Tex-Mex Tuna Salad
1/4 cup fresh cilantro leaves, minced (about 1 tablespoon)
1/4 cup avocado, diced (about 1/2 small avocado)
1/4 cup tomato, diced (about 1/2 small tomato)
1/4 teaspoon chili powder
1/8 teaspoon ground cumin
1 teaspoon lime juice
salt and black pepper, to taste
Roll the tuna salad in butter lettuce leaves to make 
wraps, or spoon into red pepper halves or cucumber boats. 
Instant party food! You might also try swapping steamed 
shrimp for the tuna.
1 small apple, diced (about 1 cup)
2-3 scallions, dark green tops only, thinly sliced (about 1/4 cup)
4 pecan halves, coarsely chopped (about 2 tablespoons)
1/4 cup fresh parsley leaves, minced (about 1 tablespoon)
2 cans (5 ounce) tuna
1/2 teaspoon mustard powder
3-4 tablespoons Olive Oil Mayo (p. 43)
salt and black pepper, to taste
Place apple, scallion tops, nuts, and parsley in a medium-sized bowl and mix 
with a fork.
Drain the liquid from the tuna and add the tuna to the bowl. Mash with a 
fork to break it up until no big chunks remain.
Add the mustard and mayo to the bowl and mix with a rubber spatula until 
blended. Try a bite, then add salt and pepper to adjust the seasonings. If you can 
stand it, let the tuna salad sit for 15 minutes so the flavors meld.
N/A
min.
05
serves
2
ingredients
directions
I Tip my hat to the classic Waldorf Salad
WALDORF TUNA SALAD
YOU KNOW HOW YOU COULD DO THAT?
TASTY IDEAS
067
page
Waldorf salad appeared in a cookbook in 1928 
and was so popular, it was featured in Cole Porter’s 
“You’re the Top” from the musical Anything Goes.
You’re the top! You’re a Waldorf salad.
You’re the top! You’re a Berlin ballad.
You’re the boats that glide on the sleepy Zuider Zee,
You’re an old Dutch master, You’re Lady Astor,
You’re broccoli!

PREP
COOK
BRINING
The grill is not always kind to our lean, reliable friend, the skinless, boneless breast. But 
this recipe unlocks the secrets of juicy, flavorful meat with minimal work. Infused with zing 
from a relatively quick brining and coated in a fragrant blend of spices, this chicken gets a 
sexy finish with a drizzle of Moroccan Dipping Sauce.
BRINING: 
2 garlic cloves, whole
8 cups water
3 tablespoons salt
1/2 tablespoon coconut aminos
1 bay leaf
1 teaspoon whole coriander seeds
1 teaspoon whole cumin seeds
1 teaspoon whole black peppercorns
2-3 pounds boneless, 
skinless chicken breasts
spice blend:
1 tablespoon ground cumin
1 tablespoon curry powder
1 tablespoon chili powder
1/2 tablespoon ground allspice
1/2 teaspoon ground cinnamon
1/4 tablespoon ground black pepper
2 tablespoons coconut oil
Secret #1: Brining
You will think this step is not necessary. You will, 
perhaps, find it too fussy. Ignore those feelings, and put 
the chicken in the salty spa. Trust.
Place the garlic cloves on a cutting board and place 
the flat side of a knife on top of them. With your fist, 
lightly strike the knife to crack the cloves, then remove 
and discard the peel.
Place a 1-gallon zipper storage bag inside a large bowl 
so it’s standing up. Pour the water into the bag, then 
add the garlic, salt, coconut aminos, bay leaf, coriander 
seeds, cumin seeds, and peppercorns. Stir with your 
hand to dissolve the salt, then add the chicken to the 
bag. This will look a bit unappetizing; avert your eyes.
Seal the bag and place the bowl in the refrigerator 
for 2 hours, then rinse the chicken well, and set it in 
a collander to dry while you move on to Secret #2. If 
you want, you can stop here, wrap and refrigerate the 
chicken, then grill it another day; it will survive in the 
fridge for 2-3 days.
Secret #2: Spice Blend
Preheat a gas grill on high heat, with the lid closed, 
about 10 minutes. 
Place all the spice blend ingredients except the 
coconut oil in a small bowl and mix with a fork. Put 
the coconut oil in a microwave-safe dish and heat until 
melted, about 15 seconds. Pour the melted oil into the 
spice blend and combine with a fork.
Coat the chicken pieces with the mixture. You can 
either massage it on lovingly by hand or toss it in a bowl 
with enthusiasm until the chicken is coated.
Place the chicken smooth side down on the preheated 
grill, close the lid, and cook for 4 minutes. Flip the 
chicken, cook for an additional 3-4 minutes with the 
lid closed, until the chicken is browned and cooked 
through.
NOTE: Any leftover spice blend needs to be discarded. 
Don’t re-use it on vegetables or think you can save it for 
later. It’s once and done when raw chicken is involved.
Secret #3: Dipping Sauce
The Moroccan Dipping Sauce is perhaps the best 
secret of all; see page 55.
min.
min.
HRS.
10
08
2
serves
ingredients
directions
inspired by Cook’s Illustrated & an essay by Michael Pollan
The Best Chicken You Will Ever Eat
069
page
6 to 12
Thanks for introducing me to brining. Quite 
possibly the moistest boneless, skinless, chicken breast 
I’ve ever had. I have always heard about brining 
but thought it was super complicated. Easy.
–Anna, a blog reader
x2
This technique and spice blends works 
wonders on boneless chicken thighs and lean 
pork chops, too. Increase grill time to about 5 
minutes per side.
YOU KNOW HOW YOU
COULD DO THAT?
Middle Eastern Cucumbers, p. 135
Baba Ghanoush, p. 139
El Minzah Orange Salad, p. 143
TASTES GREAT WITH
No grill? Apply the Secrets as 
directed, but bake chicken 
in a 400 F oven for 15-20 
minutes instead of grilling.
Leftovers don’t feel like leftovers when they’re sliced and 
piled atop a salad of butter lettuce, very thin slices of 
cucumber, and slivered red onion, then dressed with 
Moroccan Dipping Sauce (p. 55).

PREP
MAKES
COOK
Morocco has long been on my list of must-visit countries. Twisting alleys, markets crowded 
with vendors, scampering trained monkeys... I need to see it all. The country sits in the 
northwestern corner of Africa, and the influence of Arab and Moorish invaders can be 
tasted in traditional Moroccan cuisine. Lucky us! Spices like aromatic cinnamon, cumin, 
and paprika are prevalent, along with herbs like mint and parsley. These meatballs are 
seasoned with essential Moroccan spices, then simmered in tomatoes that cloak them in a 
sauce that tastes like mystery and adventure.
To make it just like a cook would in Marrakesh, carefully break a few 
eggs on top of the meatballs when they’re finished cooking, and let the 
sauce gently poach the eggs until the yolks are firm.
meatballs:
1/2 cup fresh parsley leaves, minced (about 2 tablespoons)
1 tablespoon paprika
2 teaspoons ground cumin
1 teaspoon salt
1/4 teaspoon ground black pepper
2 pounds ground lamb
sauce:
1 tablespoon coconut oil
2 medium onions, diced (about 2 cups)
2 garlic cloves, crushed (about 2 teaspoons)
2 teaspoons paprika
2 teaspoons ground cumin
1 teaspoon salt
1/4 teaspoon ground black pepper
2 medium tomatoes, diced (about 2 cups)
1 1/2 cups water
2/3 cup tomato paste
1/2 cup fresh parsley leaves, minced (about 2 tablespoons)
garnish:
1/4 cup roasted pistachios, chopped
In a large mixing bowl, combine the parsley, paprika, cumin, salt, and pepper with 
a fork. With your hands, crumble the lamb into the bowl and knead until all of the 
ingredients are incorporated.
Moisten your hands with water and shake to remove excess. Measure a level 
tablespoon of lamb and roll into a ball between your palms. Line up the meatballs on 
a baking sheet until it’s time to put them in the sauce.
Heat the oil in a large, deep skillet or pot. Add the onion and sauté until soft, about 
5 minutes. Add the garlic, paprika, cumin, salt, and pepper and stir until fragrant, 
about 30 seconds. Add the chopped tomatoes to the pan and stir about 1 minute. Add 
the water, tomato paste, and parsley, mixing to dissolve the tomato paste.
Bring the sauce to a boil, then gently place the meatballs in the skillet, cover, and 
reduce heat to simmer. Cook 40 minutes covered, then remove the lid and cook an 
additional 20 minutes, until the sauce has thickened. Sprinkle each serving with a few 
teaspoons of chopped pistachios.
min.
60
min.
15
serves
ingredients
directions
get lost on a street in Marrakesh
Moroccan Meatballs
Lamb and beef are both popular in Morocco, so a blend of ground beef and lamb is a good way to roll.
YOU KNOW HOW YOU COULD DO THAT?
071
page
6 to 8
about 36 
meatballs
Mashed Cauliflower, p. 113 
Cauliflower Rice Pilaf, p. 121
Roasted Spaghetti Squash, p. 123 
Zucchini Noodles Aglio et Olio, p. 133
TASTES GREAT WITH
When I ate in a North African restaurant in 
Harlem, the plates arrived with chilled slices 
of raw cucumber, tomato, and green pepper 
alongside the meat. Steal that idea!

PREP
COOK
In sixth-grade English, our class read a story about a Native American tribe in the Southwest. I’ve 
forgotten all but one fascinating detail of that story: The family ate meat cooked with chocolate. 
Thanks to my dad’s rule that we must at least try everything once, I ate a lot of weird stuff as a 
kid – raw lamb in kibbeh, sweetbreads, capers – but this was something I simply couldn’t fathom. 
Chocolate! With meat! Now, I’m a sucker for anything that’s sweetly savory, and every time I reach 
for the cocoa, I smile at the memory of 11-year-old me. This chili is spicy, but not hot. Reminiscent 
of mole, the flavors are rich, mellow, and deep.
•  Try a meat combo by mixing ground beef with ground turkey, pork, 
   or bison. 
• Make a double batch and freeze half so you have chili-on-demand.
• Top with sliced olives, diced onions, and/or avocado slices.
2 tablespoons coconut oil
2 medium onions, diced (about 2 cups)
4 cloves garlic, minced (about 4 teaspoons)
2 pounds ground beef
1 teaspoon dried oregano leaves
2 tablespoons chili powder
2 tablespoons ground cumin
1 1/2 tablespoons unsweetened cocoa
1 teaspoon ground allspice
1 teaspoon salt
1 can (6 ounces) tomato paste
1 can (14.5 ounces) fire-roasted, chopped tomatoes
1 can (14.5 ounces) beef broth
1 cup water
Heat a large, deep pot over medium-high heat, then add the coconut oil. When the 
oil is melted, add onions, stir with a wooden spoon and cook until they’re translucent, 
about 7 minutes. Add the garlic and as soon as it’s fragrant, about 30 seconds, crumble 
the ground meat into the pan with your hands, mixing with the wooden spoon to 
combine. Continue to cook the meat, stirring often, until it’s no longer pink.
In a small bowl, crush the oregano between your palms to release its flavor, then add 
the chili powder, cumin, cocoa, allspice, and salt. Combine with a fork, then add to 
the pot, stirring like you mean it. Add tomato paste and stir until combined, about 
2 minutes.
Add the tomatoes with their juice, beef broth, and water to the pot. Stir well. Bring 
to a boil, then reduce the heat so the chili enjoys a gentle simmer. Simmer for at least 
2 hours. Do not skimp on the simmer! 
hrs.
2-3
min.
20
serves
ingredients
directions
yeah, that’s right. chocolate.
Chocolate Chili
YOU KNOW HOW YOU COULD DO THAT?
073
page
6 to 8
Place a generous helping of Roasted 
Spaghetti Squash (p. 123), Mashed 
Cauliflower (p. 113), or a handful of raw 
baby spinach leaves in the bottom of your 
chili bowl. Veggie power!
TASTY IDEAS
2-3
notes
Simmering is the magic time when the flavors meld and, like 
most tomato-based, slow-simmer foods, this tastes even better on 
the second (or third) day.
“When I came across this recipe on your 
blog, I knew we had to try it. I am not 
sure whether I regret it, though, because 
my husband devoured more than half of 
it within two hours! Great flavor – cocoa 
really does something special.“
– Anichka, a blog reader

MARINATE
PREP
COOK
Ridiculously fast and easy to make, these shrimp are packed with a one-two punch of garlic 
and ginger, followed by a touch of lime that tingles the tongue. The natural sweetness of the 
shrimp complements the citrus, and the touch of char from the grill is a nice partner for the 
firm flesh of the seafood.
juice of 1 lime (about 2 tablespoons)
1/4 teaspoon crushed red pepper flakes
3 cloves garlic, minced (about 1 tablespoon)
2 teaspoons freshly-grated ginger (about a 2-inch piece)
1/4 teaspoon salt
1/4 teaspoon ground black pepper
2 tablespoons fresh cilantro leaves, minced (about 1 tablespoon)
1 tablespoon extra-virgin olive oil
1-2 pounds large shrimp
In a small bowl, squeeze the lime to extract the juice, then add the red 
pepper flakes, garlic, ginger, salt, black pepper, and cilantro. Mix well with a 
fork, then drizzle in the oil, stirring constantly.
With a small, sharp knife, pierce the shrimp at the head end and carefully 
cut along the back toward the tail, removing the dark vein. Rinse in running 
water. Pat dry, then place the shrimp in a medium bowl and mix with the 
marinade. Cover tightly and refrigerate for 20 minutes.
Preheat the gas grill on high heat with the lid closed, about 10 minutes. 
Thread the shrimp on skewers, leaving a little room between them so they 
don’t steam. Grill 2-3 minutes per side with the lid closed.
min.
06
min.
min.
20
05
serves
ingredients
directions
might inspire you to limbo
Ginger-Lime Grilled Shrimp
075
page
3 to 4
Try it on scallops or cubes of dense white fish, chicken breast, 
or pork chops.
YOU KNOW HOW YOU COULD DO THAT?
Cauliflower Rice Pilaf, p. 121 
Coconut-Almond Green Beans, p. 125
Zucchini Noodles Aglio et Olio, p. 133
TASTES GREAT WITH
notes:
To get maximum juice from your lime, roll it a few times (with 
purpose!) on the countertop under your palm before cutting. This 
breaks up the membranes and loosens the juice inside.
Go tropical! Add cubes of fresh pineapple to 
the skewers and replace the lime juice with 
pineapple juice. Bonus points if you sprinkle 
the skewers with shredded, unsweetened 
coconut when they come off the grill.

PREP
bake
My perfect Friday night? Pizza and a movie on the couch. Some might argue it’s the cheese 
that makes a pizza, but I disagree. I think it’s the friendly wedge shape of the slices – and 
that they’re meant to be eaten with our hands. Then there’s the play of oregano and garlic 
against the sweetness of the tomato sauce, and the slightly guilty pleasure of just a little 
grease. So go ahead! Pop in a rental movie, slide a slice of meatza pie onto a paper plate, 
and snuggle in.
Meat Crust:
1 pound ground beef
2 teaspoons Italian Sausage Seasoning 
  (p. 49)
Sauce:
1 teaspoon olive oil
1 clove garlic, minced 
  (about 1 teaspoon)
1 teaspoon Pizza Seasoning (p. 49)
3 ounces tomato paste (1/2 can)
1/4 cup water
Toppings:
1/4 cup steam-sautéed broccoli (p. 33)
1/4 cup steam-sautéed bell pepper strips
10 black olives, pitted and sliced
a handful of fresh baby spinach leaves
Preheat the oven to 400F. Mix the ground beef and 
Italian Sausage Seasoning until combined.
Make the meat crust. Divide the meat in half, roll 
into a ball, and press evenly into an 8- or 9-inch 
round pie pan. Cover only the bottom of the pan and 
smooth the meat with damp hands until it’s an even 
thickness. Repeat with the other piece of “crust.” Bake 
for 10-15 minutes, until the meat is cooked through 
and the edges are brown. Leaving the oven on, remove 
the crusts from the oven and allow to cool in the pan.
Make the pizza sauce. Heat a small saucepan over 
low heat, then add the olive oil, garlic, and Pizza 
Seasoning, stirring with a wooden spoon until 
fragrant, about 20 seconds. Add the tomato paste and 
stir until combined, then stir in the water. Bring to 
a boil, then simmer for 5 minutes until thickened. 
Set aside.
Make your meatza. Cover a large baking sheet with 
parchment paper or aluminum foil and place the 
meat crusts on the baking sheet. Spread about 1/4 
cup sauce on each meat crust, leaving a 1/2-inch 
border around the edges. Arrange the vegetables on 
top, pressing them gently into the sauce. Pop the 
pizza back into the oven for 10-15 minutes, until hot 
and browned to your liking.
Bonus! Drizzle each pizza with 1 teaspoon of extra-
virgin olive oil when they come out of the oven.
min.
min.
15
15
MAKES
ingredients
directions
reclaim movie night
Meatza Pie
077
page
2 6-inch meatzas
Eliminate the Italian Sausage Seasoning from the 
crust and instead, use salt, black pepper, and 2 
cloves of minced garlic to flavor the meat crust. 
Replace the pizza sauce with the sauces listed below, 
then add the recommended toppings for a whole 
new world of flavors.
beef crust + pizza sauce + fresh tomato, 
  fresh basil, garlic
beef crust + no sauce + caramelized onions,   
  fennel, garlic, black olives
beef crust + pizza sauce + mushrooms, 
  prosciutto
beef crust + salsa + black olives, 
  green bell pepper, avocado 
beef crust + pesto (p. 53) + sundried 
  tomatoes, roasted red pepper, black olives
beef crust + pizza sauce + kale, bacon, tomato
pork crust + Sunshine Sauce (p. 45) + 
  scallions, carrots, red bell pepper, 
  sesame seeds
pork crust + a little mustard + cabbage, 
  apples, caraway seeds
lamb crust + Baba Ghanoush (p. 139) + raisins, 
  pine nuts, red bell pepper
lamb crust + Tahini Dressing (p. 139) + baby 
  spinach, black olives, tomato
lamb crust + no sauce + zucchini, fresh 
  tomato, dried oregano
YOU KNOW HOW YOU
COULD DO THAT?
Instead of individual round pizzas, 
use a 13x9-inch pan. Cut it into 
small squares for portable party food.
Make the crust, sauce, and 
veggies in advance – they hold 
up great in the fridge or freezer –
then assemble anytime you want 
pizza. Faster than delivery!

PREP
COOK
Machacado and eggs is a Mexican dish made from shredded, dried beef (called carne seca), eggs, 
diced onion and tomato, with a touch of jalapeño. This style of dried beef originated near Monterrey, 
Mexico. As the legend goes, a woman named Tia Lencha was the first to mix the air-cured local beef 
with eggs. She eventually sold the recipe to a restaurant, and now, the Tia  Lencha brand of carne seca 
is available in grocery stores all over Mexico. This dish is my standard Saturday morning breakfast, 
and I especially like it after a tough workout. The dried beef has just the right amount of saltiness, and 
its chewiness is a lovely contrast to the tender scrambled eggs. 
Avocado Relish:
1/2 avocado, cut into 1/2-inch dice (about 1/2 cup)
1/4 cup cilantro leaves, minced (about 1 tablespoon)
1/4 medium red onion, minced (about 2 tablespoons)
2 teaspoons fresh lime juice (about 1/2 a lime)
salt and black pepper, to taste
Machacado and Eggs:
6 large eggs
salt and black pepper, to taste
coconut oil, for sautéing
2 ounces carne seca (a.k.a., machacado) or dried beef
1/4 medium onion, diced (about 1/4 cup)
1 clove garlic, minced (about 1 teaspoon)
1/2 jalapeño, ribs and seeds removed, finely diced (about 1 
tablespoon)
1/2 medium tomato, seeded and diced (about 1/2 cup)
1/4 teaspoon chili powder
Place all the ingredients for the avocado relish in a small bowl and mix gently with 
a fork until just combined; you want the avocado to retain its structural integrity. Set 
aside to allow the flavors to meld while you make the eggs.
Crack the eggs into a medium bowl, sprinkle with salt and pepper, then lightly beat 
with a fork or whisk. Set aside.
Heat a skillet over medium-high heat and add 1 tablespoon coconut oil. When 
the pan is hot, add the carne seca, onion, garlic, jalapeño, tomato, and chili powder. 
Sauté, stirring with a wooden spoon, until the onions are tender and beginning to get 
nice brown spots, about 7-10 minutes. 
Push the vegetables and beef to the side of the pan and add 1 tablespoon coconut 
oil. Add the scrambled eggs to the pan and push the meat and veggies into the egg. 
Let it all rest for a bit so the egg begins to set around the other ingredients, then 
gently stir with a wooden spoon. Continue to gently scramble until cooked to your 
liking; personal preference should dictate cooking time. Taste a bite, then add salt 
and pepper.
min.
10
min.
05
serves
ingredients
directions
Tex-Mex brunch any time
Machacado & Eggs with Avocado Relish
079
page
Chimichurri Sauce, p. 55
Jicama Home Fries, p. 131
TASTES GREAT WITH
notes
2
Carne seca is available in most grocery stores; substitute dried 
beef or beef jerky in a pinch. But check your ingredient labels! 
The only ingredients in the package should be beef and spices.

PREP
COOK
Confession: My favorite kind of sushi is the California roll. I know it doesn’t have the 
elegance of sashimi, but here’s the thing: it’s got the flavor and texture mélange (mélange!) 
of cool, sweet seafood with creamy avocado, salty coconut aminos, and the bite-you-back of 
wasabi. There’s also plenty to love in the nutrition department. Seafood and fish are excellent 
protein sources, and avocado is a first-rate source of monounsaturated fat (a.k.a., the good 
kind). Plus, sushi is fun to eat. You like fun, right?   
• Add cooked and cooled scrambled egg, cut 
  into strips.
• Replace shrimp with crab or lobster.
• Mix seafood with a little Olive Oil Mayo 
   (p. 43) and wasabi powder.
1 medium avocado
1/2 medium mango
1 medium red bell pepper
2-3 scallions, green tops only
1 medium cucumber
1/4 jicama (about 1/4 pound)
4 ounces shrimp, steamed and chilled 
(I used wild, cold-water salad shrimp)
4 ounces smoked salmon
4 sheets nori
wasabi powder, coconut aminos (optional)
Prep your ingredients
Avocado: Cut in half and remove the pit. Use a 
spoon to remove the fruit from the skin and slice 
the avocado lengthwise into thin slivers. 
Mango: Peel the mango, remove the pit, and cut 
half of it into strips lengthwise. Reserve the other 
half for dessert!
Red pepper: Cut in half, remove stem and ribs, 
then slice into very thin strips lengthwise.
Scallions: Cut in half to separate the dark green tops 
from the white, then cut the dark green tops into strips 
lengthwise.
Cucumber: Peel, cut in half lengthwise and remove the 
seeds with a spoon, then cut into matchsticks. 
Jicama: Cut in half, peel, then cut a slice into 
matchsticks.
Wasabi: If using, mix wasabi with water, following the 
package instructions, and  set aside.
Assemble
Lay a piece of nori on a rolling mat, shiny side down. 
With about 1/4 of the avocado, form a single layer of 
slices on the nori. Leave a naked 1-inch strip on the 
side closest to you. Use the back of a spoon to spread 
the avocado across the surface of the nori. It doesn’t 
need to cover it completely – just enough to help seal 
the roll and soften the nori. Repeat with all 4 nori 
sheets.
We’ll start with Mango-Shrimp. Place half the shrimp 
on the bare strip of nori closest to you and top them 
with a few of the scallion greens. Place a parallel stripe 
of mango on the far-side front of the shrimp, and add a 
few strips of red pepper on top of the mango.
Time to roll. Starting at the end closest to you, take a 
deep breath and roll the sushi, using the mat to help 
you tuck the ingredients into the roll. When you get to 
the end, give it a gentle squeeze to help the avocado do 
its job. Repeat with the remaining shrimp and another 
sheet of nori.
Now the Avocado-Salmon. Place half the salmon on 
the bare strip of nori closest to you and top it with a 
few of the scallion greens. Place a parallel strip of jicama 
in front of the salmon, and add a few matchsticks of 
cucumber on top of the jicama. Roll, starting with 
the end closest to you, then repeat with the remaining 
salmon and remaining sheet of nori.
Slice and serve. Run a sharp knife under water and 
shake to remove the excess. Slice the roll crosswise 
into rounds about 1-inch thick and arrange on a plate, 
along with the remaining vegetables to eat on the side. 
If you’re dipping, add some coconut aminos to your 
wasabi and dig in.
N/A
min.
10
serves 1 to 2
ingredients
directions
who needs rice and soy?!
Maki Rolls
Don’t have a sushi mat? Don’t fret! Just follow the 
instructions and use a piece of construction paper in place 
of the bamboo rolling mat.
081
page
I’ve included two versions to get you started: 
Mango-Shrimp Roll and Avocado-Salmon Roll.
For more how-to info on sushi rolling, visit theclothesmakethegirl.com/wellfed
YOU KNOW HOW YOU
COULD DO THAT?
Nori is one-third protein 
and is packed with iodine, 
carotene, and vitamins A, 
B, and C, along with lots 
of calcium and iron. Make 
Nori Chips, too! (p. 129)
Serve with a slaw made from 
shredded cabbage, a dash of 
sesame oil, a splash of rice 
vinegar, and a sprinkle of 
toasted sesame seeds.
TASTY IDEAS

PREP
COOK
Jane Eyre is my favorite book, and I’m a sucker for any fog-shrouded British mystery. I can’t 
get enough of the accents, the Queen’s English, the tweed and wellies, the moody weather, and 
the fervent belief that a steaming cup of tea is a cure-all. Scotch eggs were invented at the 
London department store Fortnum & Mason and were packed in picnic baskets for members 
of Victorian high society on their way to Ascot races. These days, pre-packaged Scotch eggs 
are a staple at roadside service stations and are often eaten cold. Step it up a notch and serve 
these with a dollop of Olive Oil Mayo mixed with a little spicy mustard.
2 pounds ground pork
2 teaspoons salt
1 teaspoon ground black pepper
1/2 teaspoon nutmeg
pinch cinnamon
pinch cloves
1 teaspoon dried tarragon leaves
1/4 cup fresh parsley leaves, minced (about 1 tablespoon)
1 tablespoon dried chives
2 cloves garlic, minced (about 2 teaspoons)
8 large eggs, hard-boiled and peeled
1 bag (2 ounces) fried pork rinds (optional)
2 large eggs, raw (optional)
Preheat the oven to 375 F. Cover a baking sheet with parchment paper.
Place the ground pork in a large mixing bowl. Add salt, pepper, nutmeg, cinnamon, 
cloves, tarragon, parsley, chives, and garlic. Knead with your hands until well mixed.
Divide the pork mixture into 8 equal servings. Roll each piece into a ball, then 
flatten it in your palm into a pancake shape. Wrap the meat around a hard-boiled egg, 
rolling it between your palms until the egg is evenly covered. This is much easier than 
it sounds. If the meat sticks to your hands, moisten them with a little water. Place the 
meat wrapped eggs on the baking sheet.
If using the pork rinds, place them in the bowl of the food processor and process 
until they resemble bread crumbs; pour them onto a plate or in a shallow bowl. In 
another shallow bowl, beat the 2 raw eggs. Gently roll each meatball in pork rind 
crumbs; you want just a thin dusting. Then roll each meatball in the raw egg and roll 
a second time in the crushed pork rinds to evenly coat. Place on the baking sheet.
Bake for 25 minutes, then increase the temperature to 400 F and bake an additional 
5-10 minutes, until the eggs are golden brown and crisp.
min.
30
min.
15
serves
ingredients
directions
perfect for supper or tea
Scotch Eggs
083
page
4 to 8
Roasted Spaghetti Squash, p. 123
Zucchini Noodles Aglio et Olio, p. 133 
Jicama “Potato” Salad, p. 137
TASTES GREAT WITH
Change the seasonings to take this very British snack around the world. 
Eliminate all the seasonings in the original recipe and make these substitutions:
Italian! pork + 2 tablespoons Italian Sausage Seasoning or Pizza Seasoning (p. 49)
Asian! pork + 1 1/2 tablespoons Chinese five-spice powder + 2 tablespoons coconut aminos
Indian! lamb + 1 1/2 tablespoons curry powder
Moroccan! lamb + 1 1/2 tablespoons Ras el Hanout (p. 47)
Tex-Mex! beef + 1 tablespoon ground cumin + 1 tablespoon chili powder
YOU KNOW HOW YOU COULD DO THAT?
Hard-boiled Eggs 101: Put eggs in a pan and cover with 
cold water. Bring to a boil, cover, turn off heat, and let eggs 
sit in the hot bath for 10 minutes. Drain the hot water 
and cover the eggs with ice water for 5 minutes. Drain and 
place in the fridge, until cold.
Do yourself a favor: read Jane Eyre, or at least watch the 
Masterpiece Theater adaptation on DVD. You might also want to 
get lost in British mysteries by Dick Francis or Elizabeth George.

PREP
COOK
Rogan Josh is a curry dish from Kashmir, a region tucked among the borders of India, 
Pakistan, and China, all of which can be tasted in its fragrant blend of spices. I’d never 
eaten Rogan Josh before I bought the seasoning based solely on its enticing aroma, and now 
I’m not sure how I lived without it. Different cooks embelish their spice blends in different 
ways; this recipe is the one I devised in my kitchen in Austin, Texas. The resulting curry is 
rich and creamy with plenty of depth, but not too much heat. 
• Use beef instead of lamb.
• Add sliced almonds to the sauce for rich indulgence.
• Sprinkle the top with Caramelized Coconut Chips (p. 153).
Rogan Josh Spice Blend:
1/2 teaspoon ground cardamom
1/2 teaspoon ground cloves
3/4 teaspoon powdered ginger
2 tablespoons sweet paprika
2 teaspoons chili powder
2 teaspoons ground cinnamon
4 teaspoons ground cumin
4 teaspoons ground coriander
2 teaspoons salt
1/2 tablespoon ground cayenne pepper
Curry:
2 pounds lamb (stew meat, shoulder, or leg), cut into 1-inch cubes
salt and black pepper, to taste
1 tablespoon coconut oil
2 medium onions, diced (about 2 cups)
1 cup coconut milk
1 1/4 cups water
In a small bowl, combine all the Rogan Josh spices and mix with a fork. In a large 
bowl, sprinkle the meat generously with salt and pepper, tossing with your hands to 
coat.
In a large pot or Dutch oven, heat the oil over medium-high heat, then add the lamb 
in batches and sear on all sides. Here’s a tip from me to you: Respect the contact. Put 
the meat in there and let it be for at least 5 minutes, so it gets a nice brown crust – 
resist the temptation to stir it. Give it some private time, and it will reward you for 
your generosity. (Do that with people and get the same result. Neat!)
When the meat is brown, add the chopped onions and cook until the onions begin 
to soften and show brown spots.
Add the Rogan Josh spice blend to the pan and stir until fragrant, about 30 seconds. 
The spices really come to life in the fat, so let them revel in it.
Pour the coconut milk and water into the pot. Mix well, turn the heat to high, and 
bring to a boil. Cover and reduce heat to a simmer, allowing the meat to braise in the 
coconut milk for 1-2 hours. 
When time’s up, remove the lid and let the sauce thicken a bit, about 2-3 minutes. 
hrs.
1 - 2
min.
30
serves
ingredients
directions
a texture like cashmere from Kashmir
Rogan Josh
YOU KNOW HOW YOU COULD DO THAT?
085
page
6 to 8
Mint Chutney, p. 53 
Mashed Cauliflower, p. 113
Cauliflower Rice Pilaf, p. 121
Roasted Spaghetti Squash, p. 123
TASTES 
 GREAT WITH
If you prefer, use 2-3 tablespoons of a commercial Rogan Josh 
spice blend. I recommend either Penzeys or Savory Spice Shop.
1 - 2 hrs.
I’m not making any promises, but in Persian, rogan means 
oil and josh means heat, red, or passionate. Perhaps Rogan 
Josh is an aphrodisiac? I know it makes me feel good all over, 
and it’s so scrumptious, it makes me want to marry myself.

PREP
COOK
Egg Foo Yong has a deliciously confused identity. It’s not quite an omelet, almost a pancake, and 
somewhere beyond a fritter. It has become a 100% American dish, although its culinary roots reach 
back to Shanghai, and its name – with at least six accepted spellings – is Cantonese. Egg foo yong 
appeared in the first Chinese cookbook for American cooks in 1912, but reached the pinnacle of 
its popularity after World War II. The country was wild for Tiki culture and egg foo yong became 
ubiquitous in “Polynesian” and Chinese restaurants across the U.S. I was introduced to egg foo yong 
on a date with a very cute boy in high school; I was smitten with both.
Egg Foo Yong:
4 large eggs
4 ounces grilled chicken thighs (p. 29), diced
2 cups steam-sautéed cabbage (p. 33), minced
4 scallions, green and white parts, thinly sliced
2 teaspoon coconut aminos
1 teaspoon Chinese five-spice powder
1/4 teaspoon cayenne pepper
1 teaspoon sesame oil
2 teaspoons coconut oil
additional scallion tops, for garnish
Spicy Secret Sauce:
2 tablespoons Olive Oil Mayo (p. 43)
1 teaspoon coconut aminos
1/2 teaspoon sesame oil
1/4 teaspoon rice vinegar
1/2 clove garlic, minced (about 1/2 teaspoon)
1/4 teaspoon crushed red pepper flakes
pinch cayenne pepper
Preheat the oven to 300 F.  Cover a large baking sheet with parchment paper or 
aluminum foil. 
In a large bowl, beat the eggs with a whisk or fork, then add the diced chicken, 
cabbage, scallions, coconut aminos, five-spice powder, cayenne, and sesame oil. Blend 
well.
Heat a large skillet over medium-high heat, about 3 minutes. Add coconut oil and 
allow it to melt. Place pancake rings in the skillet, and pour 1/4 cup batter into each 
ring. Cook 5 minutes, remove the rings, and flip the patties to brown the other side. 
Cook about 5 minutes, then remove to the baking sheet and place in the oven to keep 
them hot while you make the rest of the patties.
To make the Spicy Secret Sauce, place all the ingredients in a small bowl and use a 
fork to mix until blended.
To serve egg foo yong, stack the patties on a plate top with a dollop of Spicy Secret 
Sauce, and sprinkle with sliced scallion tops.
min.
20
min.
05
serves
ingredients
directions
the all-American Chinese treat
Egg Foo Yong
087
page
2
Replace the grilled chicken with Char Siu (p. 91), steamed shrimp or 
crabmeat, grilled pork chop, or browned ground pork (p. 31).
YOU KNOW HOW YOU COULD DO THAT?
Veggies with Best Stir-Fry Sauce Ever, p. 51 
Sesame-Garlic Nori Chips, p. 129 
Jicama Home Fries, p. 131
TASTES GREAT WITH
If you’d visited the restaurant New Joy Young in Knoxville, 
Tennessee in the 1950s, you could have enjoyed a $3.20 feast 
of wonton soup, egg foo yong, chow mein, and egg rolls.
I use pancake rings to make 3-inch egg foo yong patties. 
You can also make large, skillet-sized omelets instead.

PREP
COOK
My maternal granny, Veronica Caroline Rovnak, came to the United States in 1902 from what was then 
called Czechoslovakia. Her village, not much more than a single street dominated by a white clapboard 
church, sat deep in a leafy green valley. At 17, she married my Italian grandfather in Pennsylvania, and 
they passed their fiery emotions to my mom and to me. I never learned much of Granny’s personal history, 
but I liked to make up stories about gypsies and the evil eye. As a teenager, I gave myself chills by thinking 
of spies behind the Iron Curtain of Eastern Europe. When I finally visited Prague in 2010, it exceeded my 
romantic imagination. Everywhere I looked there was a story: in the cobblestone streets; in the statues atop 
the buildings; in the stained glass windows; and in the pubs where Czechs drink beer, eat hearty food, and 
swap tall tales about their everyday lives.
1 clove garlic, minced (about 1 teaspoon)
1/2 tablespoon salt
1 tablespoon caraway seeds
1 teaspoon ground paprika
1 tablespoon ground black pepper
1 cup fresh parsley leaves, minced (about 1/4 cup)
1 tablespoon grainy mustard
1 large egg
2 pounds ground pork
Preheat the oven to 400 F. Cover a large baking sheet with parchment paper 
or aluminum foil.
In a large bowl, mix the garlic, salt, caraway seeds, paprika, pepper, parsley, 
mustard, and egg with a fork until combined. With your hands, crumble the 
pork into the bowl and knead until all of the ingredients are incorporated.
Moisten your hands with water and shake to remove excess. Measure a 
level tablespoon of pork and roll into a ball between your palms. Line up the 
meatballs like little soldiers on the prepared baking sheet, about 1/2 inch apart.
Slide the meatballs into the oven and bake for 20-25 minutes, until golden 
brown and cooked through.
min.
25
min.
15
serves
ingredients
directions
inspired by my Prague adventures
Czech Meatballs
089
page
Make ‘em tiny and serve on toothpicks as appetizers; 
reduce baking time to 10-15 minutes.
YOU KNOW HOW YOU COULD DO THAT?
A side dish of Olive Oil Mayo (p. 43) mixed with a 
little grainy mustard for dipping would be a fine idea.
Pile the meatballs on a bed of shredded red or green 
(or both!) cabbage sautéed with salt, pepper, and garlic.
Serve on top of Mashed Cauliflower (p. 113).
TASTY IDEAS
MAKES
6 to 8
about 36 
meatballs
notes
The Czech language is intimidating, which only inspires me to try 
to learn it. It uses 10 vowels but some words have no vowels, like vlk 
(wolf). So far, I’ve only mastered “cheers,” so... Na zdraví!
I considered several names for these meatballs, 
including Caraway’d Away Meatballs, Czechit 
Meatballs, and (ahem) Czech Out My Balls.

MARINATE
PREP
COOK
I love nouns that are also verbs, words like cheer, smile, mug, and potentially my favorite – fork. 
In Cantonese, char siu literally means “fork roast,” in reference to the traditional cooking method 
for this tangy-sweet BBQ pork which involves piercing strips of pork with a fork and roasting until 
they’re tender and caramelized. This Chinese restaurant classic is usually seasoned with sugary, no-
no ingredients like hoisin sauce, honey, brown sugar, and soy sauce. My marinade uses substitutions 
with minimal sugar and plenty of flavor. This recipe is not difficult, but demands your attention 
near the end. You’ll forgive its neediness with your first bite of its sticky-crisp glaze.
4 pounds boneless pork shoulder
marinade:
1/2 cup coconut aminos
1 dried date
3 cloves garlic, roughly chopped (about 1 1/2 tablespoons)
1/4 cup unsweetened apple sauce
1 teaspoon rice vinegar
1 tablespoon sunflower seed butter or almond butter (no sugar 
added)
4 teaspoons sesame oil
1/4 teaspoon crushed red pepper flakes
1 1/2 teaspoons powdered ginger
1 teaspoon Chinese five-spice powder
1/4 teaspoon ground black pepper
BBQ glaze:
1/4 cup tomato paste
1/3 cup unsweetened apple sauce
1/2 tablespoon rice vinegar
Cut the pork into 8 strips: Cut the shoulder in half lengthwise, then lay each half 
on its cut side, and slice lengthwise into 4 equal-sized strips. Trim off excess or hard 
fat. Poke each of the strips 10-12 times with a fork, then place the strips in a large 
zipper storage bag.
Place all the ingredients for the marinade in the food processor and process until 
combined. Measure 1/2 cup of the marinade and set it aside to use in the BBQ glaze 
later. Pour the rest of the marinade over the pork in the zipper bag. Squeeze out the 
excess air, seal the bag, and place in the fridge for 30 minutes to 4 hours. Flip the bag 
every once in a while so all sides of the meat are coated in the marinade.
While the pork is marinating, make the BBQ glaze. In a small saucepan, combine 
the 1/2 cup reserved marinade, tomato paste, apple sauce, and rice vinegar. Cook over 
medium heat, stirring with a wooden spoon until the sauce begins to thicken, about 
4-6 minutes. You should end up with about 1 cup of sauce.
When you’re almost ready to remove the meat from the marinade, preheat the 
oven to 300 F. Cover a large rimmed baking sheet or pan with aluminum foil, then 
set a wire rack on the pan; pour 1/4 cup water into the pan. 
Remove the pork from the marinade and place on the rack, then cover the entire 
pan with aluminum foil, crimping the edges to form a seal. Roast the pork for 20 
minutes, then remove the foil and roast an additional 40-45 minutes.
Increase the oven temperature to 500 F, remove the foil from the pork, and roast 
for 8-12 minutes more, until it’s evenly browned. Carefully remove the pork from 
the oven and brush the tops and sides of the pieces with half the sauce. You want 
complete coverage with a thin layer so the sauce forms a glaze in the oven. As my dad 
would say, “Put it on like you’re taking it off.”
Return the pork to the oven for 6-8 minutes, until the sauce is a deep shade of 
burgundy. Remove the pan from the oven and use tongs to flip the pork. Brush the 
other side with sauce and return to the oven for the final 6-8 minutes. 
Remove the pork from the oven and let it rest for 10 minutes, then cut cross-wise 
into 1/2-inch slices.
min.
HR.+
40
1
min.
min.
30
10
serves
ingredients
directions
Char Siu (Chinese BBQ Pork)
Use a broiler: Instead of increasing oven temp to 500 F, you can use 
a broiler. Broil for 7-9 minutes before brushing with sauce, then 
broil 3-5 minutes per side after glazing. 
091
page
8 to 12
1hr.+40min.
YOU KNOW HOW YOU COULD DO THAT?
stick a fork in it
This recipe is a paleo-friendly adaptation of a recipe 
from Cook’s Illustrated, my favorite go-to source for 
technique that consistently produces excellent meals.
Hot Plates, p. 35 
Pad Thai, p. 63 
Egg Foo Yong, p. 87 
BBQ Pork Fried Rice, p. 93
TASTY IDEAS 

PREP
COOK
My days of ordering Chinese takeout are mostly behind me, but I used to love the 
experience. Negotiating picks from the menu. Saying “Pu Pu platter” out loud. Watching 
the clock for the food to arrive. The inevitable grease marks on the delivery bag. 
Unpacking those distinctive white cardboard boxes. But you know what ruined the fun? 
The takeout food hangover from the soy, the sugar, the rice, the flour, the MSG, and the 
regret. This version includes the chewy-crisp nuggets of pork; vibrant, fresh vegetables; a 
nice salty bite from the coconut aminos; and the fresh snap of scallions. The fun is back.
• 	Replace BBQ pork with steamed shrimp or 
	 grilled chicken (p. 29).
• 	Replace the broccoli with slivered snap peas 
	 or snow peas.
• 	Replace half the broccoli with shredded 
	 steam-sautéed cabbage (p. 33).
• 	Add a handful of shredded iceberg lettuce 
	 during the final stir-fry.
1 large head fresh cauliflower
2 large eggs
2 teaspoons plus 2 tablespoons 
  coconut aminos
coconut oil, for sautéing
1/2 medium onion, diced (about 1/2 cup)
1 cup steamed broccoli florets, cut into 
  1/2-inch pieces (p. 33)
6-8 ounces Char Siu, cut into
  1/2-inch cubes (p. 91)
2-3 scallions, dark green tops only, thinly    
  sliced (about 1/4 cup)
salt and black pepper, to taste
2 teaspoons sesame oil (optional)
2 teaspoons sesame seeds, for garnish   
  (optional)
Break the cauliflower into florets, removing the 
stems. Place the florets in the food processor bowl and 
pulse until the cauliflower looks like rice. This takes 
about 10-15 one-second pulses. You may need to do 
this in two batches to avoid overcrowding. You should 
end up with about 3 cups of cauliflower rice.
Place the grated cauliflower in a microwave-safe 
container and zap for 2 minutes. This step preps the 
cauliflower, so it’s almost tender before the stir-frying 
process. If you skip this step, you run the risk of the 
cauliflower turning to mush. You don’t want BBQ Pork 
Fried Mush. (At least I don’t think you do.)
If you’re using the sesame seeds, heat a large sauté 
pan or wok over medium-high heat. When the pan is 
hot, toss in the sesame seeds and stir constantly until 
they’re lightly toasted, about 3-5 minutes. Keep an eye 
on them! They can quickly change from pale white to 
dark brown in a blink. When you’re happy with the 
toastiness, remove them from the pan and save for later.
In a small bowl, use a fork to scramble the eggs with 
2 teaspoons coconut aminos. Heat 1 teaspoon coconut 
oil over medium-high heat in the pan, then add the 
eggs and stir with a wooden spoon until cooked 
through. Remove them from the pan and save for later.
In the same pan, heat 1 teaspoon coconut oil over 
medium heat, then sauté the diced onion until it’s 
tender and translucent, about 5 minutes. Things are 
going to start happening a little faster now.
Add 1 tablespoon coconut oil to the onions and 
increase heat to high for about 90 seconds. When the 
pan is good and hot, add the cauliflower, scrambled 
egg, broccoli, and Char Siu. Stir with purpose! Sprinkle 
2 tablespoons of coconut aminos over the ingredients 
in the pan, and continue to stir with enthusiasm until 
it’s heated through, about 3 minutes.
Divide the fried rice onto two plates, then sprinkle 
each with half the chopped scallions and, if you’re into 
the flavor of sesame, about 1 teaspoon sesame oil and 
1 teaspoon of the toasted sesame seeds. Dig in with 
the sure knowledge that you are consuming at least 
two servings of vegetables, plenty of protein, and zero 
mystery ingredients.
min.
min.
05
10
serves 2
ingredients
directions
even better than a #27 special to go
BBQ Pork Fried Rice
You can use just about any veggies, but it’s 
important to get the proportions right. If you add 
too many supporting vegetables, the ratio of veggies 
to rice is thrown off. Use about 1 cup of supporting 
veggies to every 3 cups of cauliflower rice.
093
page
YOU KNOW HOW YOU
COULD DO THAT?

COOK
PREP
ALERT
The cooking part of this recipe takes about two to three hours, but at the end of that 
waiting period, you will be rewarded with caramel-brown, salty-tart, crispy pork that 
practically falls apart when you look at it. Isn’t that worth a few hours of bubbling atop 
the stove? And the seasonings! The cumin is rich and earthy, the cayenne adds just the right 
bite, and the citrus juice creates a deep, layered flavor while it slyly tenderizes the meat.
3-4 pounds pork shoulder, boneless or bone-in
1 rounded (!) tablespoon ground cumin
1 tablespoon coarse (granulated) garlic powder
1/2 tablespoon salt
1 teaspoon ground coriander
1 teaspoon ground black pepper
1 teaspoon ground cayenne pepper
1/2 cup lime juice
1/2 cup lemon juice
water
With a sharp knife, cut the pork shoulder into a few large chunks. You don’t want 
them bite-sized; I make mine about 3-4 inches across. Place the pork pieces in a large 
zipper storage bag.
In a small bowl, combine the cumin, garlic powder, salt, coriander, black pepper, 
and cayenne; mix with a fork. Add the spice blend to the bag, zip it closed, and shake 
assertively until all the pieces are coated with the spices. Feel free to add hips to the 
shaking action.
Place the pork in a large, deep pot. Pour the lime and lemon juice into the bottom 
of the pot, then add water to just cover the meat.
Place the pot on high heat and bring the water to a rip-roaring boil. When it’s 
rolling, reduce the heat to keep a steady, strong simmer with the pan uncovered. 
The liquid should bubble a fair amount, but should not be a vigorous boil. While 
it’s cooking, it will look like uninspired soup. Do not be discouraged! As the water 
evaporates, the powerful acidic qualities of the citrus juice tenderizes the meat.
At about the 2-hour mark, check the pot. The water should be much lower and 
maybe even almost gone. Things are about to get interesting! Allow all the water to 
cook out of the pan and watch as the meat magically fries and caramelizes in the pork 
fat and fruit juice. It is a thing of beauty – but now you need to pay attention so the 
alluring exterior doesn’t burn.
Carefully turn the hunks of meat – without shredding them – to brown all sides, 
then remove the hunks to a plate and let them rest for 5 minutes before eating.
HRS.
min.
min.
2-3
05
15
serves
ingredients
directions
could superSede bacon as your favorite use of pig
Citrus Carnitas
095
page
8 to 12
2-3 hrs.
Pad Thai, p. 63
Egg Foo Yong, p. 87
Shred, wrap in butter lettuce leaves, 
and drizzle with Sunshine Sauce, p. 45
TASTY IDEAS
I experimented with orange and pineapple juices, 
too, but lime and lemon was the best-tasting combo.
notes
You can eat this with your fingers, like an animal. It’s delightful. You 
can also serve it – with utensils, if you must – alongside pineapple, 
chopped cilantro, and lime wedges.
“You should probably rename this to 
pork crack-nitas, because I cannot 
stop making and eating it.” 
- Shayne, a blog reader

PREP
COOK
Shepherd’s pie is a traditional British or Irish dish made of lamb under a blanket of 
potatoes, and it’s a kissin’ cousin to cottage pie, made with beef. Cottage pie has been 
around since 1791. Back then, villagers topped it with potato slices that mimicked the 
tiles on a rustic cottage roof. This paleo version replaces the potatoes with creamy mashed 
cauliflower and can easily be doubled and frozen. With its short cooking time, this is 
perfect for a weeknight when you want to crawl into something warm and toasty.
1 batch Mashed Cauliflower (p. 113)
1 1/2 tablespoons coconut oil
1 medium onion, diced (about 1 cup)
2 carrots, peeled and finely diced (about 1 cup)
2 cloves garlic, minced (about 2 teaspoons)
2 pounds ground lamb
salt and black pepper, to taste
1 tablespoon tomato paste
1 cup beef or chicken broth
1 teaspoon coconut aminos
1 teaspoon dried rosemary
1/2 teaspoon dried thyme leaves
3 egg whites
paprika, for garnish
a wooden spoon. Sauté until it’s cooked through and brown, about 5-10 minutes. 
Taste, then season with salt and pepper.
Add the tomato paste, broth, coconut aminos, rosemary, and thyme to the 
pan. Stir to combine, then bring to a boil and simmer until most of the liquid has 
evaporated, about 10 minutes. Set the pan aside and let it cool for 10-15 minutes. 
Scramble the egg whites until frothy and blend into the meat mixture.
To assemble the shepherd’s pie, spread the meat mixture evenly in a 12X6-inch 
(2.2 quart) baking dish. With a rubber scraper and a light hand, spread the mashed 
cauliflower on top of the meat. Gently drag the tines of a fork in a zigzag pattern 
across the surface to create a texture – the peaks and valleys turn a lovely golden 
brown in the oven. Sprinkle the top lightly with paprika.
Place the pan on the middle rack of the oven and bake for 25-30 minutes, until 
the top begins to brown. Remove to a cooling rack for 5-10 minutes before serving.
Preheat the oven to 400 F. 
Heat a large skillet over medium-high heat, about 3 minutes. Add coconut oil 
and allow it to melt. Add the onion and carrot, reduce heat to medium-low and 
cover; allow the vegetables to get soft but not brown, about 5 minutes.
Add the garlic to the pan and stir until fragrant, about 1 minute. With your 
hands, crumble the ground lamb into the pan and break up large chunks with 
MIN.
min.
30
30
serves
ingredients
DIRECTIONS
the most comforting of comfort foods
Shepherd’s Pie
097
page
4 to 6
Cumin-Roasted Carrots, p. 115
TASTES GREAT WITh
Cottage pie! Replace the ground lamb with ground beef.
Italian! Use beef instead of lamb, increase the tomato paste to 2 
tablespoons, omit the coconut aminos, and replace the thyme with 1 
tablespoon Pizza Seasoning (p. 49).
Curry! Omit rosemary and thyme; add 1 1/2 tablespoons curry powder.
Morrocan! Omit rosemary and thyme; add 1 1/2 tablespoons Ras el 
Hanout (p. 47).
Tex-Mex! Omit rosemary and thyme; add 1 tablespoon each of ground 
cumin and chili powder.
Middle Eastern! Omit rosemary and thyme; add 1 tablespoon 
ground cumin.
YOU KNOW HOW YOU COULD DO THAT?
Meat topped with potatoes isn’t only found in the U.K. Natives of 
Quebec enjoy pâté chinois; the French eat hachis Parmentier; in the  
Middle East, it’s Siniyet Batata, and in the Dominican Republic, they 
add cheese and call it pastelón de papa.

PREP
COOK
These meatballs came to me in a dream. I woke up with tumbling thoughts about a lush 
combination of pineapple, succulent pork, and creamy-sweet coconut. I was haunted by 
images of tikis and luaus. The only way to clear my mind was to surrender to the kitchen gods. 
After three attempts, something still wasn’t quite right. Later, while lost in photos of tropical 
beaches and coral reefs, I landed on the fiery name, and the rest of the recipe fell into place. 
These taste even better the second day, so if you can endure the wait, you will be rewarded.
1 1/2 cups shredded coconut
1/2 teaspoon plus 1/2 teaspoon salt
3/4 teaspoon plus 1 teaspoon ground cayenne pepper
1 cup canned crushed pineapple, sugar-free, packed in
  its own juice
2 tablespoons coconut aminos
1 1/2 teaspoons dried ginger
3 cloves garlic, minced (about 1 tablespoon)
3-4 scallions, white and green, very thinly sliced (about 1/4 cup)
1/2 fresh jalapeño, seeds and ribs removed, finely minced 
  (about 2 teaspoons)
2 large eggs, lightly beaten
2 pounds ground pork
min.
30
min.
10
serves
ingredients
Preheat the oven to 375 F. Cover a large baking sheet with parchment paper or 
aluminum foil. Heat a large non-stick skillet over medium-high heat, then add the 
coconut. Toast, stirring often with a wooden spoon, until golden brown, about 3 
minutes. Remove from the heat and sprinkle with 1/2 teaspoon salt and 3/4 teaspoon 
cayenne pepper. Set aside to cool.
Drain the can of pineapple in a sieve placed over a bowl to catch the juice. Press the 
pineapple pulp against the sieve with a wooden spoon to extract the excess moisture. 
Place the pineapple in a large mixing bowl and save the juice for later.
To the pineapple, add 1/2 teaspoon salt, coconut aminos, ginger, garlic, scallions, 
jalapeño, and eggs. Beat with a wooden spoon until combined. With your hands, 
crumble the pork into the bowl and knead until all of the ingredients are incorporated.
Arrange the bowls of pineapple juice, spiced coconut, and seasoned pork for easy 
access. Measure a level tablespoon of pork to make a meatball. Lightly douse it in the 
pineapple juice, then roll it in the coconut, pressing the coconut shreds into the meat 
by lightly rolling the ball between your palms. This is a rare case in which more isn’t 
better – don’t go too cuckoo with the coconut. Line up the meatballs on the prepared 
baking sheet, about 1/2 inch apart.
Slide the meatballs into the oven and bake for 25-30 minutes, until sizzling and 
golden brown.
directions
a few bites of island paradise
Bora Bora Fireballs
099
page
Sunshine Sauce, p. 45 
Confetti Rice, p. 121
TASTES GREAT WITH
MAKES
6 to 8
about 42 
meatballs
notes
Sprinkle leftover pineapple with crushed macadamia nuts 
and a dollop of Coconut Whipped Cream (p. 149) for a 
sweet tropical treat.
Mount Otemanu, an extinct volcano, stands guard 
over the azure blue Bora Bora lagoon. And should 
you be lucky enough to visit paradise, you can speak 
either French or Tahitian, the primary  languages on 
the island.

COOK
PREP
REST
It’s said that good things come to those who wait, and this dish may test your patience. 
Constructed with layers of tender eggplant, spicy homemade sausage, and silky tomato 
sauce, this casserole tastes best eaten a few days after baking. But the delayed gratification 
is worthwhile. A bite of the top layer, so tender and airy, is followed by a pleasant kick of 
heat that’s soon tempered by the creamy eggplant.
3 1/2 pounds globe eggplants (about 2-3)
2 tablespoons coconut oil, melted
2 pounds ground pork
3 tablespoons Italian Sausage Seasoning (p. 49)
1 tablespoon coconut oil
2 cloves garlic, minced (about 2 teaspoons)
1 (28 ounce) can diced fire-roasted tomatoes (I like Muir Glen)
8 large basil leaves, slivered (about 2 tablespoons)
4 eggs
salt and black pepper, to taste
2 teaspoons extra-virgin olive oil
Heat a large sauté pan over medium-high heat. Crumble the pork into the pan, 
then break up large chunks using a wooden spoon. Cook until the pork is nicely 
browned, about 7-10 minutes. Remove the meat to a bowl and return the pan to 
the stove.
Reduce the heat to medium, then add 1 tablespoon coconut oil and the garlic to the 
pan. Cook until the garlic is fragrant, about 30 seconds, then add the tomatoes and 
1 tablespoon of the basil. Stir to combine, increase heat, and bring to a boil. Reduce 
heat to low and simmer until slightly thickened, about 10 minutes. Season with salt 
and pepper to taste. Remove from heat and allow to cool to room temperature.
When the tomato sauce is cool, scramble the eggs in a small bowl, then blend 
them into the tomato sauce with a wooden spoon. Warning: This will not look like 
something you’ll want to eat, but soldier on.
To assemble the strata, place a single layer of eggplant in the bottom of the greased 
13X9-inch pan. Sprinkle half of the cooked meat on top of the eggplant, then top 
with 1 1/2 cups of the sauce. Create another layer of eggplant, top with the remainder 
of the meat and 1 cup of the sauce. Build your final layer with eggplant and spread 
the remaining sauce evenly over the top.
Place the pan in the center of the oven and bake for 30 minutes. Remove the pan 
from the oven and let it rest for at least 30 minutes before slicing or eating. Before 
serving, lightly brush the top of the strata with the olive oil, then sprinkle with the 
remaining basil.
Preheat the oven to 400 F. Cover two baking sheets with parchment paper or 
aluminum foil and brush a 13X9-inch pan with some of the melted coconut oil. 
Slice the eggplant into rounds about 1/2-inch thick and place on baking sheet. 
Brush the eggplant with the remaining melted coconut oil, and sprinkle with salt 
and pepper. Bake for 20 minutes then remove from the oven and allow to cool. 
Reduce the oven temperature to 350 F for the next stage of baking.
While the eggplant is roasting, crumble the ground pork into a large mixing 
bowl with your hands, then add the Italian Sausage Seasoning and knead until 
well blended. 
MIN.
MIN.
min.
30
30
30
serves
ingredients
DIRECTIONS
inspired by a story in The New York Times
Italian Sausage and Eggplant Strata
101
page
6 to 8
If you’re waiting a few days to eat it (good for you!), skip the olive oil and basil step when the strata comes out of the oven. Instead, wrap the pan tightly in aluminum foil and place 
in the refrigerator. When you’re ready to eat, keep the strata covered in foil and reheat in a 300F oven for 20-30 minutes, then follow the garnish instructions.
• Try a combo of 1 pound pork and 1 pound beef.
• Leave the meat out all together and use as a side dish or to feed 
  vegetarian friends.
YOU KNOW HOW YOU COULD DO THAT?
Visit theclothesmakethegirl.com/wellfed for tips on prepping the basil
“It’s excellent on day one, but by 
day three, it is sheer ambrosia.” 
–Ehsa, a blog reader

MARINATE
PREP
COOK
Summers in Austin, Texas, are hot, humid, and oh so long. One afternoon, deep in the triple-
digit days, a frosty package arrived on my front porch: a box of 18-inch-long salmon fillets 
direct from my friend Cheryl in the forty-ninth state. She’s courageous and spicy, the kind 
of friend that’s always in your corner. So when I made this recipe the first time, I channeled 
those qualities, gathered my courage, stood over the grill with commitment, and flipped that 
giant salmon fillet whole. I encourage you to do the same.
1 tablespoon coconut oil, melted
1 tablespoon fresh orange juice
1 1/2 teaspoons dried ginger
1 1/2 teaspoons ground cumin
1 1/2 teaspoons ground coriander
1/2 teaspoon paprika
1 1/2 teaspoons salt
1/4 teaspoon ground cayenne pepper
1 1/2 to 2 pounds salmon fillets
Mix the oil, orange juice, ginger, cumin, coriander, paprika, salt, and 
cayenne together in a small bowl to form a paste the consistency of thick salad 
dressing. This will transform into a gorgeous crust during grilling.
Place the salmon in a glass dish, massage the marinade over the salmon, then 
cover and refrigerate 30 minutes.
Preheat a gas grill on high with the lid closed for about 10 minutes, then 
place the salmon skin-side down, close the lid, and wait 3 minutes. Check the 
salmon; the skin should be a little blackened and starting to separate from the 
pink flesh. Take a deep breath, gather your confidence, slide a grill-safe flipper 
under the fillet, and flip! Breathe a sigh of relief, close the lid, and wait another 
3 minutes.
Remove from the grill and eat like a cave person. I like to include a little piece 
of the crispy skin with each serving.
min.
6-7
min.
min.
30
05
serves
ingredients
directions
dedicated to a good friend in Anchorage, Alaska
Salmon a L’Afrique du Nord
103
page
• Replace orange juice with lemon or lime.
• Try the spice rub on shrimp or white fish like cod or tilapia.
YOU KNOW HOW YOU COULD DO THAT?
Cumin-Roasted Carrots, p. 115 
Cauliflower Rice Pilaf, p. 121
El Minzah Orange Salad, p. 143
Turkish Chopped Salad, p. 151
TASTES GREAT WITH
6 to 8
notes
Make a no-fuss salad alongside the salmon with slices of fresh avocado 
and mango sprinkled with minced red onion and fresh minced cilantro.
If you’re wary of the flip, you can cut large fillets 
into individual servings to make them easier to 
manage, but where’s the adventure in that?!

COOL
BAKE
PREP
These muffins are a savory surprise. First, they come in a brightly-colored wrapper, just like 
cupcakes, only better. They also have a pleasantly dense texture that packs both meat and 
veggies into a fun, portable shape. Great hot or cold, you can enjoy them as a grab-and-go 
snack or a sit-down meal.
3 16-ounce bags frozen chopped spinach, 
  defrosted
1/2 tablespoon coconut oil
1/2 medium onion, diced (about 1/2 cup)
1 1/2 pounds ground beef
2 cloves garlic, minced (about 2 teaspoons)
1/2 teaspoon salt
1/4 teaspoon ground black pepper
1/2 teaspoon ground cayenne pepper
3 large eggs
Crumble the meat into the pan, breaking up lumps 
with the wooden spoon. Add the garlic, salt, black 
pepper, and cayenne pepper and cook until the meat 
is browned. Stir in the spinach until it’s combined. Set 
aside to cool for about 15 minutes.
Scramble the eggs in a small bowl with a fork, and 
when the meat is cool, add them to the meat; blend 
well. The easiest way to combine everything is to mix 
with your hands. Dig in!
Place muffin papers in a 12-count muffin pan; 
they prevent sticking. Pack the batter into a 1/2-
cup measurer, then transfer it to the muffin pan, 
using your hands to pack the spinach tightly into the 
muffin paper. It should be slightly mounded on top 
– the muffins puff a bit when they bake, then slightly 
deflate when cool. Remove the muffins from the pan 
and store covered, in the refrigerator.
Preheat the oven to 375 F.
This is crucial step! Squeeze the excess water 
from the defrosted spinach. Here’s my trick for 
removing excess water: Place all the spinach in 
a colander or wire sieve and press out the water 
with the bottom of a bowl that fits inside the 
colander, then squeeze individual handfuls of 
spinach to wring out the remaining water. You 
should have about 4 cups of spinach when you’re 
finished with the squeezing process.
Heat a large skillet over medium-high heat, 
about 3 minutes. Add coconut oil and allow it to 
melt. Toss the onion in the pan and sauté, stirring 
with a wooden spoon, until it’s crisp-tender and 
translucent, about 5 minutes.
min.
min.
min.
15
15
40
MAKES
ingredients
DIRECTIONS
Meat and Spinach Muffins
105
page
12 muffins
Take your muffins on a world tour. Follow the directions above 
and add the following seasonings.
Italian! ground beef + 1 tablespoon Pizza Seasoning (p. 49)
Tex-Mex! ground beef + 1-2 tablespoons chili powder + 1 tablespoon lime juice
indian! ground lamb + 1 tablespoon curry powder + 2 tablespoons raisins
Middle Eastern! ground lamb + 1 tablespoon cumin + 1 teaspoon dried mint leaves
Moroccan! ground lamb + 1 tablespoon Ras El Hanout (p. 47)
Greek! ground lamb + 1 teaspoon dried oregano leaves + 1 tablespoon lemon juice
Italian! ground pork + 1 tablespoon Italian Sausage Seasoning (p. 49)
Asian! ground pork + 2 teaspoons Chinese five-spice powder + 1 tablespoon coconut aminos
YOU KNOW HOW YOU COULD DO THAT?
Omit the meat to make an unexpected 
spinach side dish that looks (and tastes) great 
alongside roasted meat or grilled steak – like 
popovers with more nutritional punch.
notes
Better than the bakery
Party food! Divide your batter 
into several bowls, give each a 
different seasoning, then bake in 
mini muffin tins. Reduce baking 
time to 10-15 minutes.

PREP
COOK
In 1971, wearing a groovy vest-and-pants outfit she sewed herself, my mom won first prize 
in the Pottsville Republican’s annual Share-Your-Recipe contest. In the photo of the award 
ceremony at the swanky Necho Allen Hotel, she is clearly the hippest looking lady in the 
crowd. And she bucked tradition with her Country Captain Chicken recipe, too, omitting 
tomatoes and accessorizing with a sprinkle of bacon and almonds.
3 strips of sugar-free, nitrate-free bacon (optional)
2 pounds boneless, skinless chicken thighs
salt and black pepper, to taste
1/2 tablespoon coconut oil
4 medium onions, thinly sliced (about 4 cups)
3 large bell peppers (red and/or green), thinly sliced
3 cloves garlic, minced (about 1 tablespoon)
3 tablespoons raisins
1/2 cup chicken broth
2 tablespoons curry powder (I like Penzeys Maharajah)
3 scallions, green tops only, thinly sliced
3 tablespoons sliced almonds, toasted (optional)
min.
45
min.
20
serves
ingredients
Preheat the oven to 350 F.
Cut the bacon crosswise into 1/4-inch wide pieces. Place the chopped bacon in a 
cold skillet, turn the heat to medium-high, and fry the bacon until it’s crisp, about 
3-4 minutes. Remove from the pan with a wooden spoon and drain on a paper towel.
Season the chicken generously with salt and pepper. Add the coconut oil to the 
bacon fat in the pan, and reheat the skillet, about 3 minutes. Add the chicken in a 
single layer, smooth side down. Don’t crowd the pan and don’t annoy the chicken! 
You want it to form a crisp, brown crust, so place it in the pan and leave it alone, 
about 4 minutes per side. You may need to cook it in batches or be daring (!) and get 
two pans going at once. As the chicken browns, remove it from the skillet and place 
it in a single layer in a 13x9-inch baking pan.
In the same pan, without draining any remaining fat, sauté the onions, peppers, 
garlic, and raisins until the vegetables just begin to soften, but are not cooked through. 
Spread them on top of the chicken and return the skillet to the stove.
Pour the chicken broth into the hot skillet and use a wooden spoon to scrape up 
any brown bits. Add the curry powder to the pan and stir until the sauce begins to 
thicken, about 2 minutes. Pour the sauce over the chicken and wrap the pan tightly 
with aluminum foil.
Bake 35 minutes, then remove the foil, increase the heat to 400 F, and bake an 
additional 5-10 minutes. Before serving, sprinkle with scallions, bacon, and almonds.
directions
my mom’s award-winning version of a southern classic
notes
Blue Ribbon Country Captain Chicken
107
page
6 to 8
• Replace the thighs with boneless, skinless breasts; increase the coconut 
   oil for browning to 2 tablespoons.
• Add diced mango or apple to the chicken along with the peppers 
   and onions.
• Garnish with shredded, unsweetened coconut.
YOU KNOW HOW YOU COULD DO THAT?
Mashed Cauliflower, p. 113 
Cauliflower Rice Pilaf, p. 121
Roasted Spaghetti Squash, p. 123
Zucchini Noodles Aglio et Olio, p. 133
TASTES GREAT ON A BED OF
To toast almonds, cook over medium-high heat in 
a dry skillet until browned, about 2-3 minutes.
Food historians wage an ongoing battle 
about the origin of Country Captain 
Chicken, which seems appropriate. The 
name most likely refers to a British sea 
captain, who carried the exotic flavors 
of the East to Britain and the American 
South sometime in the 18th century.

VegGIES
& SaLADs
A simple meal of meat and vegetables becomes something special
with these recipes for surprising side dishes and cool salads. 

Try this with cooked spaghetti squash, other greens, or vegetables like 
green beans, cabbage, or broccoli. Simply adjust the pre-steaming time 
to accommodate their sturdiness.
Want to keep it basic? Toss washed and sliced kale into a skillet over 
medium-high heat. Add 1-2 tablespoons water, bring to a boil, cover 
and simmer ‘til the kale is tender. Remove the lid and let extra water 
evaporate. Turn off the heat, drizzle the leaves with olive oil, then stir 
in salt, black pepper, and a crushed garlic clove. Sprinkle a squeeze of 
fresh lemon juice.
Wash the greens and remove the tough stems with the tip of a sharp knife. 
Roughly chop or tear the leaves. Unlike salad greens, you want to let a little 
water cling to tough braising greens. The water droplets turn to steam in the 
pan and tenderize the leaves.
Heat a large skillet over medium-high heat, then toss in about half the greens. 
Stir them with a wooden spoon until they begin to wilt, then add the rest of the 
greens. Stir, then cover with a lid.
In a small bowl, mix the Ras el Hanout, garlic, and salt with a fork.
When the leaves are dark green and beginning to wilt, remove the lid and let 
any remaining water evaporate. When the pan is mostly dry, push the leaves to 
the side and add the coconut oil. Let the oil heat, then pour the spices directly 
into the pool of oil to release their fragrance (and flavor), about 20 seconds.
Pour the coconut milk into the pan, stirring to combine the greens, seasonings, 
and milk. Sauté until the sauce begins to thicken and your nose is delighted by 
the aroma.
ingredients
directions
YOU KNOW HOW YOU COULD DO THAT?
TASTES GREAT WITH
PREP
COOK
Leafy greens like kale, chard, beet tops, and collards are the definition of “good for us,” but 
I’ve never been a fan of the standard “throw in a pot with bacon, stew for hours, and hope 
for the best” approach. There is surely an elderly (but still elegant) lady in the South – who 
wears pearls, smokes cigars, and pours a mean mint julep – that can slow-braise greens to 
perfection. But she doesn’t live in my house. So I turned to coconut milk and Ras el Hanout. 
With all due respect to Southern tradition, this trumps the tried and true.
min.
min.
05
10
SERVES 2 to 4
face-smashingly good and good for you
notes
Creamy Spice Market Kale
111
page
Use a sharp knife to cut along the thick stems to remove only the soon-
to-be-tender leaves. Pile the leaves in a stack, then slice into 1-inch 
strips for leaves that look pretty and cook evenly.
1 large bunch kale (or other sturdy leafy greens)
2 teaspoons Ras el Hanout (p. 47)
2 cloves fresh garlic, crushed (about 2 teaspoons)
pinch salt
1 teaspoon coconut oil
1/2 cup coconut milk
The Best Chicken You Will Ever Eat, p. 69
Ginger-Lime Grilled Shrimp, p. 75 
Scotch Eggs, p. 83
Salmon a l’Afrique du Nord, p. 103
A small handful 
of raisins, dried 
cranberries, or some 
toasted nuts would 
be a fine addition 
to this dish for a 
special occasion. 
Or Tuesday dinner.

Cook the cauliflower according to the package directions until it’s very soft, 
but not waterlogged. Drain the water from the cauliflower and place the florets 
in the food processor.
In a microwave-safe bowl or small saucepan, heat the garlic, coconut oil, 
coconut milk, salt, and pepper, about 1 minute.
Puree the cauliflower in the bowl of a food processor, scraping down the sides. 
Add the coconut milk to the processor, along with 1 tablespoon of chives. 
Process about 10 seconds. Taste and adjust seasonings. Sprinkle with remaining 
chives before serving.
ingredients
directions
TASTES GREAT WITH
PREP
COOK
I grew up in diner country, where creamy mashed potatoes were a standard side dish that 
almost defined a balanced dinner. (Hello, meat and potatoes!) This cauliflower proves 
that starch is not a requirement for comfort. Snuggled under a hearty beef stew or savory 
meatballs, mashed cauliflower is worthy of blue plate special status.
min.
min.
10
05
SERVES 2 to 4
classic comfort food, reinvented
notes
Mashed Cauliflower
113
page
1 bag (16 ounces) frozen cauliflower florets
1 garlic clove, crushed (about 1 teaspoon)
1 1/2 tablespoons coconut oil
1/2 cup coconut milk
salt and black pepper, to taste
1 tablespoon plus 2 teaspoons dried chopped chives
This can be made with fresh cauliflower, but the lovely, creamy texture 
is reached so much faster and easier with frozen. The nutrition of frozen 
stands up to fresh, so give yourself a break and opt for the easy way.
Cinnamon Beef Stew, p. 65 
The Best Chicken You Will Ever Eat, p. 69
Scotch Eggs, p. 83 
Czech Meatballs, p. 89

• Try slicing the carrots into 1/4-inch thick coins; increase roasting time 
   to 30 minutes. 
• Swap parsnips for carrots, or roast a batch of both for a colorful combo. 
Preheat the oven to 400 F. Cover a large baking sheet with parchment paper. 
Wash and peel the carrots, then cut them lengthwise into thin strips, about 
1/4-inch wide. Toss them into a large bowl.
With a fork, mix the cumin, cinnamon, salt, and pepper in a small 
microwave-safe bowl. Add the coconut oil and microwave until melted, about 
15-20 seconds.
Pour the seasoned coconut oil over the carrots and toss with two wooden 
spoons until the carrots are evenly coated. Sing a verse of your favorite song 
so you don’t skimp on tossing time. Do a taste test and adjust the seasonings.
Spread the carrots in a single layer on the baking sheet and roast for 15-20 
minutes, until tender and slightly browned. Remove from the oven and squeeze 
the fresh lemon juice over the top. Sprinkle with the chopped herbs.
ingredients
directions
YOU KNOW HOW YOU COULD DO THAT?
TASTES GREAT WITH
PREP
COOK
“The Incident” in my elementary school cafeteria left me cooked-carrot averse. (Think mean 
lunch lady, waterlogged carrots from a can, tepid milk, and force feeding.) But my mom 
introduced me to the sweet goodness of roasted carrots and saved the day. These carrots are 
tender, not mushy, with lovely brown bits and a flirty whisper of cumin that’s brightened 
with a ping of mint. Take that, lunch lady!
min.
min.
05
20
SERVES 2 to 4
dedicated to the mean lunch lady
notes
Cumin-Roasted Carrots
115
page
Until the 15th century, carrots were only available in purple, yellow, 
and red varieties. Those rainbow hues are making a comeback, thanks 
to local farmers and heirloom seeds. Look for white, yellow, red, and 
purple, in addition to the standard orange.
1 pound fresh carrots (about 10)
1/2 tablespoon ground cumin
1/4 teaspoon ground cinnamon
1/4 teaspoon salt
1/4 teaspoon ground black pepper
1 1/2 tablespoons coconut oil
1/2 fresh lemon (optional)
a few leaves of fresh parsley and mint, minced, 
for garnish (optional)
“These were so good, I had to stop myself from eating 
the entire batch in one sitting! Love, love, love them.”
–BurdNurd, a blog reader
Cinnamon Beef Stew, p. 65 
Moroccan Meatballs, p. 71
Salmon l’Afrique du Nord, p. 103

PREP
COOK
Banish boring broccoli! In the time it takes to microwave a bag of the frozen stuff, you can 
whip up this fresh side dish that brings the sun-dappled shores of the Aegean right into your 
kitchen. The tender broccoli and tangy-sweet tomatoes relax in a sauce that’s lightly flavored 
with Greek herbs. Opa!
min.
min.
10
15
SERVES 2 to 4
fresh, bright, and pretty on the plate
Greek Broccoli
117
page
In a large sauté pan, bring the water to a boil over high heat. Add the 
broccoli, cover with a tight-fitting lid, and steam the broccoli until tender, 
about 4-5 minutes. Drain the broccoli in a colander and rinse with cold 
water to stop the cooking process.
Dry the pan and heat the olive oil over medium heat. Add the onion, 
garlic, tomatoes, parsley, and oregano. Sauté until the onions are translucent 
and the tomatoes begin to pop. Add the broccoli, paprika, salt, and pepper; 
stir well to combine. Simmer 5-7 minutes until heated through. Taste and 
adjust seasonings.
ingredients
directions
1/2 cup water
1 pound fresh broccoli, broken into florets
2 tablespoons extra-virgin olive oil
1 medium onion, diced (about 1 cup)
3 cloves garlic, minced (about 1 tablespoon)
1 cup fresh grape or cherry tomatoes
1/2 cup fresh parsley leaves, minced (about 2 tablespoons)
1/2 teaspoon dried oregano leaves
1/2 teaspoon paprika
salt and black pepper, to taste
2 tablespoons tomato paste
Replace the broccoli with fresh green beans or cauliflower.
YOU KNOW HOW YOU COULD DO THAT?
TASTES GREAT WITH
notes
No cherry or grape tomatoes? Use two ripe tomatoes instead. Remove 
the seeds, cut into 1-inch dice, and follow the rest of the directions.
Hot Plates, p. 35 
Meatza Pie, p. 77

Skip the baking step and instead, make it a soup. Stir the purée 
into hot chicken or vegetable broth until desired consistency, then 
swirl in a few tablespoons of coconut milk. Add shredded, cooked 
chicken to make it a meal, then sprinkle the top with chopped 
parsley and a squeeze of fresh lemon juice. 
Replace the butternut squash with other winter squash varities 
like acorn, delicata, kabocha, hubbard, turban, or pumpkin. 
Sweet potatoes or yams will work very nicely, too.
Preheat the oven to 350 F. Cover a baking sheet with parchment paper. Cut the 
squash in half lengthwise and remove the seeds. Place cut-side down on the baking 
sheet and sprinkle 2 tablespoons of water onto the paper around the squash.
Peel the loose, papery skin off the garlic, and wrap it in a piece of aluminum foil. 
Put the baking sheet of squash and the foil packet in the oven. Bake 40-50 minutes, 
until the squash is tender. Set both aside until they’re cool enough to handle, about 
20 minutes. 
Increase the oven temperature to 400 F.
When the squash is cool, use a spoon to scoop the flesh into the bowl of a food 
processor. Separate the garlic cloves and squeeze the roasted pulp into the bowl with 
the squash. Process the mixture to a smooth puree, then add the coconut oil, coconut 
milk, salt, and Ras el Hanout. Taste and adjust seasonings.
Beat the egg in a small bowl. Scrape the puree into a large mixing bowl and stir in 
the beaten egg with a wooden spoon until combined.
Grease the inside of a 3-cup casserole dish or individual ramekins with a little 
coconut oil, then add the squash puree. Top with chopped pecans and bake in the 
400 F oven for 25-30 minutes, until the edges are a little bubbly and the top is golden 
brown.
ingredients
directions
YOU KNOW HOW YOU COULD DO THAT?
ROAST
prep
BAKE
The word “casserole” is so unassuming, so suggestive of “stuff from cans,” it hardly seems 
appropriate for this dish. It’s almost a confection, made of pillows and clouds and 
whispers. It starts as a puree that, while not bad on its own, is still just squash. But 
lovingly stir in a touch of coconut milk, Ras el Hanout, and an egg, and what you 
remove from the oven a short time later is smooth, spicy-sweet, and so far beyond a 
casserole, it deserves a new name.
min.
min.
min.
50
05
30
SERVES 4 to 6
silky and sublime
notes
Velvety Butternut Squash
119
page
If you’re using individual ramekins, keep an eye on the clock. 
You may need to reduce the second baking time to 15-20 minutes.
2 1/2 pounds butternut squash
2 tablespoons water
1 head garlic
1 tablespoon coconut oil
2 tablespoons coconut milk
1/4 teaspoon salt 
2 teaspoons Ras el Hanout (p. 47)
1 large egg
1/4 cup pecan halves, chopped (reserve a few whole for garnish)
A combination of whole and chopped pecan 
halves is the ideal blend of “pretty to behold” 
and “scrumptious to eat.”

Same directions, different ingredients.
Turn your favorite rice into a one-dish meal – add diced, grilled chicken (p. 29).
Basic Rice
Eliminate the fruit, nuts, and spices for a basic rice that’s an ideal 
bed for meats, curries, and stews.
Confetti Rice
1/2 medium onion, chopped (about 1/2 cup)
1 clove garlic, minced (about 1 teaspoon)
1/2 medium green pepper, diced (about 1/2 cup)
1/2 medium red pepper, diced (about 1/2 cup)
1 medium carrot, grated (about 1/2 cup)
salt and black pepper, to taste
Curry Rice
1/2 medium onion, chopped (about 1/2 cup)
1 clove garlic, minced (about 1 teaspoon)
1 cup diced fresh pineapple
2 tablespoons sliced almonds
1 teaspoon ground curry powder
salt and black pepper, to taste
BBQ Pork Fried Rice (p. 93)
Break the cauliflower into florets, removing the stems. Place the florets in the 
food processor bowl and pulse until the cauliflower looks like rice. This takes 
about 10-15 one-second pulses. You may need to do this in two batches to avoid 
overcrowding (which leads to mush).
Heat a large skillet over medium-high heat, about 3 minutes. Add 1 
tablespoon of coconut oil and allow it to melt. Add the apricots, raisins, pine 
nuts, onion, and garlic. Stir with a wooden spoon to combine and cook until 
the onions are translucent and the nuts start to brown, about 5 minutes.
Push the onions to the side of the pan and add the remaining 1 tablespoon 
of coconut oil. Add the cumin and cinnamon to the oil, then stir everything 
together – oil, spices, onions, nuts, and fruit – so they all mingle in happy 
harmony. When you can smell the spices, about 30 seconds, toss in the riced 
cauliflower and sauté until the cauliflower is tender, about 5 minutes. Try a bite, 
then season with salt and pepper.
ingredients
directions
YOU KNOW HOW YOU COULD DO THAT?
TASTES GREAT WITH
PREP
COOK
I was the official rice maker in my family, and I perfected a water-measuring technique that 
involved placing my thumb against the bottom of the pan, just like my Sitti (“grandmother” 
in Arabic) taught my mom. I took great pride in my fluffy rice, and it was with a heavy 
heart that I banished my favorite grain from my diet. Then I learned the cauliflower trick, 
and my pilaf was reborn.
min.
min.
10
10
SERVES 6
Cauliflower Rice Pilaf
121
page
1 large head fresh cauliflower
1 tablespoon plus 1 tablespoon coconut oil
8 dried apricot halves, minced (about 2 tablespoons)
1 1/2 tablespoons raisins
2 tablespoons pine (pignola) nuts
1/2 medium onion, diced (about 1/2 cup)
1 clove garlic, minced (about 1 teaspoon)
1/2 teaspoon ground cumin
1/2 teaspoon ground cinnamon
salt and black pepper, to taste
Quick salad! Toss cooked basic cauliflower rice with sliced 
olives, chopped parsley, sliced scallions, diced cucumber and 
tomato, a garlic clove, and equal parts lemon juice and 
extra-virgin olive oil. Let it rest at room temperature for 
about 20 minutes, then dig in.
Cinnamon Beef Stew, p. 65
Moroccan Meatballs, p. 71
Salmon a l’Afrique du Nord, p. 103
the sensation of rice back in your life
Pine nuts are traditional for pilaf in my family, 
but walnuts, pistachios, almonds, and pecans are 
all solid choices, too. The dried fruit can also be 
replaced with dried cranberries, figs, or dates.

Preheat the oven to 375 F. Cover a large baking sheet with parchment paper.
Cut the squash in half lengthwise. The easiest way to do this is, surprisingly, 
with a small knife. Use a sharp paring knife to carefully create a shallow slit 
along the top of the squash, lengthwise. Now, using a large knife, place the 
blade in the slit and bang the squash carefully with some force on the cutting 
board. It should crack along the fault line created by the small knife. Scoop out 
the seeds and pulp with a large spoon.
Place squash cut side down on the baking sheet. Sprinkle the water onto the 
paper around the squash. Roast until the squash is tender, but not mushy, 30-40 
minutes. Place the baking sheet on a cooling rack, and, using a hot mitt, turn 
the squash cut side up to cool.
When it’s cool enough to handle, scrape the inside with a fork to shred the 
squash into gorgeous spaghetti strands.
ingredients
directions
TASTY IDEAS
PREP
COOK
I call bull on anyone who says, “Spaghetti squash tastes just like spaghetti.” It does not. 
But it is delicious and nutritious, has the right shape, and can be twirled on a fork, so I 
accepted this vegetable substitute for pasta with an open heart. I was, however, repeatedly 
disappointed in the texture. I tried the microwave. I tried roasting it whole. I tried halfway 
submerging it in water while it baked. All of those methods resulted in a mushy mess. But 
now I’ve got it!  I included this “recipe” so you, too, can roast your spaghetti squash to an 
ideal al dente. 
min.
min.
02
35
SERVES 4 to 6
notes
Tasty ways to spice up spaghetti squash. 
Toss with melted coconut oil and...
• garlic + cumin + cinnamon
• garlic + cumin + chili powder
• chopped chives
• garlic + ginger + coconut aminos +    
  crushed red pepper flakes
Roasted Spaghetti Squash
123
page
1 large spaghetti squash
3 tablespoons water
Hot Plates, p. 35
Pad Thai, p. 63
In a hurry? You can cook spaghetti squash in the microwave, but 
it will not retain its al dente texture. Place squash cut side up in a 
microwave-safe dish along with 1/4 cup water. Cover with plastic 
wrap and cook on high for 10-15 minutes, depending on size.
YOU KNOW HOW YOU COULD DO THAT?
For tips on how to remain injury free while cutting spaghetti squash, visit www.theclothesmakethegirl.com/wellfed
twirl it on a fork

Heat the oil in a large sauté pan over medium heat. Add the almonds and cook 
until lightly browned. Keep an eye on them; they brown quickly! Transfer almonds to 
a plate for later. Resist the temptation to eat them!
In the same pan, sauté the onion, garlic, cumin, coriander, paprika, chili pepper 
flakes, and salt. Cook until the onion is soft and beginning to get brown bits, about 
4-5 minutes.
Add the coconut milk to the pan and mix well, then add the green beans. Make 
sure everything is blended, then bring the pan to a boil, reduce the heat to a simmer, 
and cook covered until the beans are tender. The cooking time is a judgment call. If 
you like them crisp, it’s about 6 minutes. If you like them softer, let them braise for 
about 8 minutes.
When the beans have reached the desired tenderness, remove the lid and let the 
sauce cook down until it thickens a bit. Remove the pan from the heat and stir in the 
almonds, lime juice, and cilantro (if using).
ingredients
directions
TASTES GREAT WITH
PREP
COOK
This could become the only green bean recipe you need. During the braising process, the 
sliced almonds almost melt into a rich coconut milk sauce that renders the elements 
indistinguishable from each other. And that’s when you know the ingredients have fulfilled 
their destiny. Trust me: Make a double batch. 
min.
min.
10
15
SERVES 4
a very special recipe
Coconut-Almond Green Beans
125
page
1 tablespoon coconut oil
2 tablespoons sliced almonds
1/2 medium  onion, finely diced (about 1/2 cup)
3 cloves garlic, minced (about 1 tablespoon)
1 teaspoon ground cumin
1 teaspoon ground coriander
1 teaspoon paprika
1/2 teaspoon red chili pepper flakes
3/4 teaspoon salt
1 cup coconut milk
1 pound green beans, trimmed
1 teaspoon lime juice
1/2 cup fresh cilantro leaves, minced (2 tablespoons) (optional)
Grilled Chicken Thighs, p. 29
Ginger-Lime Grilled Shrimp, p. 75
Citrus Carnitas, p. 95
Replace green beans with leafy greens like kale, collards, or chard 
and increase cooking time to 10-12 minutes.
YOU KNOW HOW YOU COULD DO THAT?
notes
Should you find yourself lucky enough to have leftovers, you could 
treat yourself well by tossing the beans with thin slices of cooked beef, 
pork, or chicken.

PREP
COOK
White, gnarled, and so... solid, cauliflower can be difficult to love when it’s raw. But roasted, 
it yields and becomes tender, almost creamy inside. The nutty flavor belies its bland color 
and holds its own against sturdy spices. Toasted in the oven with cocoa and the warmth of 
paprika, it easily overcomes its good-for-you reputation. Just right for a cozy evening when 
comfort food beckons.
min.
min.
10
30
SERVES 2 to 4
cocoa is a reward for eating your veggies
Cocoa-Toasted Cauliflower
127
page
Preheat the oven to 400 F. Cover a baking sheet with parchment paper or 
aluminum foil. With a sharp knife, remove the core of the cauliflower and break it 
into florets. Place the florets in a large mixing bowl.
In a small microwave-safe bowl, mix the paprika, cocoa, salt, pepper, and garlic 
with a fork. Add the coconut oil and microwave for 15-20 seconds until the coconut 
oil is melted and the spices are fragrant.
Drizzle the spiced coconut oil over the cauliflower in the bowl, then toss with 
two wooden spoons until well coated. This should take at least 2 minutes. Name a 
food for every letter of the alphabet to amuse yourself while you toss. Do a taste test 
and adjust the seasonings.
Spread the cauliflower in a single layer on the baking sheet and roast in the oven 
for about 25-30 minutes, until it’s tender and starting to get nice brown spots.
ingredients
directions
1 head fresh cauliflower
1 teaspoon paprika
1 teaspoon unsweetened cocoa
1/4 teaspoon salt
1/4 teaspoon ground black pepper
1 clove garlic, minced (about 1 teaspoon)
2 tablespoons coconut oil
TASTES GREAT WITH
notes
Use best-quality cocoa for the richest, deepest flavor. 
I like Penzeys Natural Cocoa Powder.
Cinnamon Beef Stew, p. 65 
Chocolate Chili, p. 73
Cauliflower is white, unlike its green cousin 
broccoli, because its protective leaves block the 
sun, negating its ability to produce chlorophyll.

Preheat the oven to 275 F. Cover two large baking sheets with parchment paper or 
aluminum foil.
Place 6 sheets of nori, shiny side up, on the baking sheets. With a pastry brush, 
lightly brush the shiny side of the nori with water, being sure to reach the edges, then 
carefully align another sheet of nori on top and press them together. Repeat with the 
remaining sheets until they’re all buddied up.
Using kitchen shears or a sharp knife, cut the nori into 1-inch strips, then cut those 
strips in half crosswise. You should end up with about 42 chips. Arrange the chips in 
a single layer on the baking sheets.
In a small bowl, combine the sesame oil, garlic, and cayenne. Use the pastry brush 
to coat the top the chips, then sprinkle generously with salt. Use your fingers to 
sprinkle the sesame seeds across the tops of the chips.
Place on the middle rack of the oven and bake for 15-20 minutes. They will crisp 
and turn a deep, glossy green. Remove from the oven, taste and sprinkle with more 
salt if you like, and allow them to cool before eating for maximum crunch.
ingredients
directions
TASTES GREAT WITH
PREP
COOK
Sometimes I want to chow down like a teenager: just lie in front of the television, tune 
into something entertainingly mindless, and snarf a snack. But my ever-present adult voice 
knows that no amount of saltiness will ever recreate that fleeting adolescent combination of 
zero responsibility and boundless possibility. But that doesn’t mean I won’t try. When you 
feel like crawling into a bag of potato chips, whip up a quick batch of these instead.
min.
min.
10
15
MAKES 42 chips
salty, crispy, snacky, grown-up, guilt-free goodness
Sesame-Garlic Nori Chips
129
page
12 nori sheets
water
1 tablespoon sesame oil
3 cloves garlic, minced (about 1 tablespoon)
pinch ground cayenne pepper
salt, to taste
1/2 tablespoon sesame seeds
Same directions, different ingredients.
Southwest Nori Chips
12 nori sheets
water
1 tablespoon coconut oil, melted
1 clove garlic, minced (about 1 teaspoon)
1 teaspoon paprika
1 teaspoon chili powder
salt, to taste
Toasted Onion Nori Chips
12 nori sheets
water
1 tablespoon coconut oil, melted
1/2 tablespoon onion salt (I like Savory Spice Shop’s Ornate Onion Salt)
1 tablespoon dried chives
YOU KNOW HOW YOU COULD DO THAT?
Maki Rolls, p. 81
Char Siu, p. 91
BBQ Pork Fried Rice, p. 93
The nori sheet was invented in Asakusa, Edo (now Tokyo), during the 17th century when 
the Japanese method for making paper was applied to nori paste. Nori sheets can be 
found in most grocery stores in the Asian food section or in the deli near the sushi display.

Make hash! Add 1 cup diced bell pepper along with the onion and stir in 
Garlic-Browned Ground Beef (p. 31) after the jicama has browned.
jicama:
Cut the jicama into 1/2-inch dice. Whether or not to peel it is up to you; I 
usually peel half and leave the skin on half to better impersonate a potato. When 
you’re done chopping, you should have about 3 cups of cubes. Place the jicama 
and salt in a slow cooker and add enough water to cover the jicama by about 
2 inches. Cover and cook on high for 12-24 hours. The longer it simmers, the 
more tender it becomes. 
When the jicama has finished its soak, drain, pat dry, and place in the 
refrigerator until you’re ready to start frying.
home fries:
Heat a large skillet over medium-high heat, about 3 minutes. Add coconut 
oil and allow it to melt. Toss the onion in the pan and sauté, stirring frequently with 
a wooden spoon. Cook until nicely browned, about 8-10 minutes. Transfer the onion 
to a small bowl and return the pan to the heat.
Add 2 tablespoons coconut oil to the skillet and allow the pan to get hot, about 
2 minutes. Add the jicama cubes, shaking the skillet to make an even, single layer. 
Cook the jicama without stirring until the cubes are golden brown on the bottom, 
about 5 minutes, then carefully flip the jicama with a large spatula and make another 
single layer. Repeat this process until the jicama is browned on most sides,  about 15 
minutes.
When the jicama is appropriately toasty in color, add the onions, paprika, chili 
powder, salt, and pepper to the pan. Stir to blend and heat through. Remove the 
home fries from the heat, stir in the parsley, and serve immediately.
ingredients
directions
YOU KNOW HOW YOU COULD DO THAT?
TASTES GREAT WITH
PREP
SOAK
COOK
Diner home fries don’t discriminate. The brown, crisp outside and warm tender inside are 
equally comfortable alongside eggs for an early morning (or midnight) breakfast and next 
to a beef burger. Seasoned with plenty of salt and just a whisper of paprika, these home fries 
transform jicama, the “Mexican potato,” into an all-American classic.
NOTE: This recipe requires you to pre-soak the jicama for 12-24 hours, so you’ll need to start the process the day before you 
want to eat.
min.
HRS.
min.
05
12-24
20
SERVES 2
the diner classic at home
notes
Jicama Home Fries
131
page
If you need to double this recipe, cook two batches separately – the home 
fries need breathing room to get brown and crisp. Place the first batch 
in a single layer on a parchment-covered baking sheet in a 300 F oven 
while you fry the second batch.
jicama:
1 pounds jicama
1/2 teaspoon salt
home fries:
1 medium onion, finely diced (about 1 cup)
1/2 tablespoon plus 2 tablespoons coconut oil
1 teaspoon paprika
1/2 teaspoon chili powder
1/4 teaspoon salt
1/4 teaspoon ground black pepper
1/4 cup fresh parsley leaves, minced (about 1 tablespoon)
The Best Chicken You Will Ever Eat, p. 69
Machacado Con Huevos, p. 79
Scotch Eggs, p. 83 
Egg Foo Yong, p. 87
12-24
For tips on peeling and cutting jicama, visit www.theclothesmakethegirl.com/wellfed

Make it a complete meal: Toss in grilled shrimp or chicken, or add a few 
scrambled eggs during the last few minutes of cooking to gently coat the 
strands with soft-cooked egg. Delizioso!
Omit the almond flour bread crumbs, then toss with Basil and Walnut 
Pesto (p. 53), Sri Lankan Curry Sauce (p. 57), or Sunshine Sauce (p. 45).
Place the julienned zucchini in a colander or wire strainer and toss generously with 
salt until the strands are lightly coated. Allow the zucchini to sit for 20-30 minutes 
to remove excess water. Rinse with running water, drain well, and pat dry with paper 
towels. (You may be tempted to skip this step; I strongly advise against it. This step 
ensures tender, rather than watery, noodles.)
While the zucchini is sweating in the colander, heat a large skillet over medium-
high heat, about 2 minutes. Add the coconut oil, and when it’s melted, add the 
almond flour and a pinch of salt. Sauté, stirring often with a wooden spoon, until it’s 
toasty brown, about 2 minutes. Remove crumbs from the pan and save for garnish.
Return the pan to the medium-high heat and add the prepared zucchini noodles. 
Sauté them in the dry pan until just tender, about 1-2 minutes. Push the noodles to 
the side of the pan, and reduce the heat to low. Add the olive oil, garlic, and crushed 
red pepper, stirring with the spoon until the garlic is fragrant, about 20 seconds. Push 
the zucchini noodles into the oil and stir gently until they’re coated. Turn off the heat 
and mix the parsley, salt, and black pepper into the noodles. 
Sprinkle the noodles with the almond flour crumbs before serving. Slurping and 
ridiculously big bites are heartily encouraged.
ingredients
directions
YOU KNOW HOW YOU COULD DO THAT?
TASTES GREAT WITH
SWEAT
PREP
COOK
Oh! The comfort of a warm bowl of slippery noodles that can be slurped or twirled 
with a fork to make big, soft, round bites; it’s the kind of food you make while wearing 
pajamas and losing yourself in an excellent book. That’s what this recipe is. The zucchini 
barely registers as a vegetable, so complete is its transformation to noodle by the olive oil, 
garlic, and almond flour “bread crumbs.” It’s warm, tender, familiar, and comforting. 
A hug in a bowl.
min.
min.
min.
20
05
03
SERVES 2
go ahead! slurp it up and lick your lips
notes
Zucchini Noodles Aglio et Olio
133
page
4 zucchini, julienned (about 4 cups)
1/2 teaspoon coconut oil
1 tablespoon almond flour or almond meal
2 tablespoons extra-virgin olive oil
2 cloves garlic, minced (about 2 teaspoons)
1/4 teaspoon crushed red pepper flakes
1/4 cup fresh parsley leaves, minced (about 1 tablespoon)
salt and black pepper, to taste
Grilled Chicken Thighs, p. 29
Moroccan Meatballs, p. 71
Czech Meatballs, p. 89
Blue Ribbon Country Captain Chicken, p. 107
A combination of both yellow squash and green 
zucchini makes for a colorful dish that’s special 
enough to serve to guests, too.
Zucca is the Italian word for squash, and in 
France, Ireland, and the U.K., zucchini is 
known as courgette.

Same directions, different ingredients.
French Onion Cucumbers
2 medium cucumbers, very thinly sliced into rounds
1/2 medium onion, very thinly sliced (about 1/2 cup), sautéed in coconut 
oil until soft, then cooled 
1/2 cup packed parsley leaves, minced (about 2 tablespoons)
1 teaspoon white wine vinegar
1/4 cup Olive Oil Mayo (p. 43)
1 clove garlic, minced (about 1 teaspoon)
1/4 teaspoon dried thyme leaves
1 tablespoon dried chives
1/2 teaspoon onion salt
black pepper, to taste
Middle Eastern Cucumbers
2 medium cucumbers, very thinly sliced into rounds
1/2 medium onion, very thinly sliced (about 1/2 cup)
1/3 cup fresh parsley leaves, minced (about 1 1/2 tablespoons)
1/3 cup fresh mint leaves, minced (about 1 1/2 tablespoons)
1 teaspoon lemon juice
1/4 cup Olive Oil Mayo (p. 43)
1 clove garlic, minced (about 1 teaspoon)
1/2 teaspoon za’atar (optional)
1/2 teaspoon crushed red pepper flakes or Aleppo pepper
1/2 teaspoon ground cumin
salt and black pepper, to taste
YOU KNOW HOW YOU COULD DO THAT?
PREP
COOK
It was the 1970s, and most weekends, we pulled out the wicker picnic basket – fitted with 
nesting plastic plates, bowls, and cutlery in red, blue, yellow, and green – to go to the lake 
for swimming and grilling. My favorite summertime salad was Mom’s cucumbers. The 
grassy-fresh parsley and piquant onions cut through the creaminess of the dressing and the 
almost-sweet cucumbers were cool and refreshing. To me, even in winter, this salad tastes 
like those lazy, carefree days.
min.
N/A
05
SERVES 4
inspired by Mom’s summer picnic baskets
Roni’s Creamy Cucumbers
135
page
Place the cucumbers, onion, and parsley in a large mixing bowl. Stir with a 
rubber scraper to combine.
In a small bowl, mix the vinegar, mayo, and garlic lightly with a fork until 
combined. Pour over cucumbers and gently fold until evenly coated. Season 
with salt and pepper.
ingredients
directions
2 medium cucumbers, very thinly sliced into rounds
1/2 medium onion, very thinly sliced (about 1/2 cup)
2/3 cup fresh parsley leaves, minced (about 3 tablespoons)
1 teaspoon cider vinegar
1/4 cup Olive Oil Mayo (p. 43)
1 clove garlic, minced (about 1 teaspoon)
salt and black pepper, to taste
TASTES GREAT WITH
If you’re not in a hurry, you can make the salad even better. Toss the cucumber 
slices with a generous amount of salt and let them sit for 20-30 minutes in a 
colander to remove excess moisture. Rinse, drain, and pat dry with paper towels, 
then proceed.
Grilled Chicken Thighs, p. 29
Ginger-Lime Grilled Shrimp, p. 75 
Citrus Carnitas, p. 95
I like Ornate Onion Salt from the Savory Spice 
Shop, but any onion salt that pleases you will do 
for the French Onion Cucumbers.

Add 1/4 cup chopped dill pickles and/or 1/4 cup diced bell pepper.
jicama:
Cut the jicama into 1/2-inch dice. (Whether or not to peel it is up to you; I usually 
peel half and leave the skin on half to better impersonate a potato.) When you’re done 
chopping, you should have about 6 cups of cubes. Place the jicama and salt in a slow 
cooker and add enough water to cover the jicama by about 2 inches. Cover and cook 
on high for 12-24 hours. The longer it simmers, the more tender it becomes. 
When the jicama has finished its soak, drain, pat dry, and place in the refrigerator 
until you’re ready to assemble the salad.
salad:
Cut the bacon crosswise into 1/4-inch wide pieces. Place the chopped bacon in a 
cold skillet, turn the heat to medium-high, and fry the bacon until it’s crisp, about 
3-4 minutes. Remove from the pan with a wooden spoon and drain on a paper towel.
Place bacon, eggs, celery, onion, parsley, chives, mustard, paprika, salt, and pepper 
in a large mixing bowl. Blend with a rubber scraper, then add jicama and mix again. 
Add mayo and gently fold until combined. Chill for 20-30 minutes before eating to 
allow the flavors to meld.
ingredients
directions
YOU KNOW HOW YOU COULD DO THAT?
TASTES GREAT WITH
PREP
SOAK
COOK
Seemingly impenetrable, with an appearance between a potato and a rock, jicama is not the 
supermodel of the produce world. But remove that tough, dusty, brown skin, and you’ll find a 
sweet, tender, juicy inside that’s remarkably similar to a potato. Unlike potato, however, it can 
be eaten raw. Cut into slices or sticks, jicama is a refreshing addition to crudité plates. Cubed 
and slowly simmered, jicama softens and lives up to its alternative name: the Mexican potato.
NOTE: This recipe requires you to pre-soak the jicama for 12-24 hours, so you’ll need to start the process the day before you 
want to eat it.
min.
HRS.
N/A
20
12-24
SERVES 4 to 6
a fresh twist on a picnic classic
Jicama “Potato” Salad
137
page
jicama:
2 pounds jicama
1 teaspoon salt
salad:
4 strips sugar-free, nitrate-free bacon
4 large hard-boiled eggs, peeled and diced
1 medium stalk celery, diced (about 1/2 cup)
1/2 medium yellow or red onion, diced (about 1/2 cup)
1/2 cup fresh parsley leaves, minced (about 2 tablespoons)
1 tablespoon dried chives
3/4 teaspoon dried mustard
1/2 teaspoon paprika
1/2 teaspoon salt
1/2 teaspoon ground black pepper
3/4 cup Olive Oil Mayo (p. 43)
Basic Grilled Chicken Thighs, p. 29 
Scotch Eggs, p. 83
Citrus Carnitas, p. 95
For tips on peeling and cutting jicama, visit www.theclothesmakethegirl.com/wellfed
notes
Large jicama can taste dry and woody. Choose small- to medium-
sized jicama – no bigger than the size of two fists – for the best 
flavor and texture.

Oven method: Place the oven rack in middle position and preheat oven 
to 500 F. Cover a large baking sheet with parchment paper. Poke the 
whole eggplant a few times with a fork and place on the baking sheet. 
Bake for 40-50 minutes, until the eggplant is very soft and beginning to 
collapse. Allow to cool, then follow the instructions above.
Preheat a gas grill or broiler on high heat with the lid closed, about 10 minutes.
Cut the eggplant in half lengthwise and use a sharp knife to cut a few diagonal score 
lines in the flesh. Place face down on the grill, close the lid, and grill for 5 minutes. 
Turn the eggplant face up, close the lid, and grill for an additional 10 minutes, until 
the skin is blackened and the eggplant is very tender (almost squishy). Set aside to 
cool.
While the eggplant cools, place the tahini, salt, lemon juice, garlic, chili powder, and 
cumin in the bowl of a food processor. 
Scoop the roasted eggplant pulp out of the skin and place in a colander to drain 
extra moisture for 3-5 minutes. You should have about 2 cups of eggplant. Place it in 
the food processor and puree to your desired consistency.
To serve the traditional way, spread the baba ghanoush on a plate or in a shallow 
bowl and drizzle with olive oil, parsley, and sesame seeds. Use raw veggies and olives 
to scoop it into your mouth with abandon. Baba ghanoush tastes best at room 
temperature, but should be stored in the fridge. Its delicate flavor will hold up for 
2-3 days.
ingredients
directions
YOU KNOW HOW YOU COULD DO THAT?
TASTES GREAT WITH
PREP
COOK
Baba ghanoush is a Lebanese dish, but cooks in Egypt, Turkey, India, and even Romania 
have their own versions: a little more tahini here, onion instead of garlic there. Slightly 
smokey and laced with garlic and sesame, baba ghanoush is as much fun to eat as it is to 
say. “Baba” means father in Arabic, so I guess it’s no accident that my dad taught me his 
way to make this timeless dish.
min.
min.
10
20
ABOUT
    2 ½ cups
somewhere deliciously between dip and salad
notes
Baba Ghanoush
139
page
2 pounds globe eggplant, about 2
1/4 cup tahini
1 teaspoon salt
3 tablespoons lemon juice
2 garlic cloves, roughly chopped
1/8 teaspoon chili powder
1/8 teaspoon ground cumin
Optional garnishes:
extra-virgin olive oil
a handful of fresh parsley leaves, minced
1 teaspoon toasted sesame seeds
Middle Eastern Tuna Salad, p. 67 
The Best Chicken You Will Ever Eat, p. 69
Bonus! Tahini Dressing Recipe: Omit the eggplant and 
reduce garlic to one clove. Use the dressing as a dipping 
sauce for vegetables or drizzle it over cooked meat.
To toast sesame seeds, toss them in a dry pan 
over medium-high heat until lightly browned.

Same directions, different ingredients.
Make French-ish dressing! 
1 cup fresh parsley leaves, minced (about 1/4 cup)
juice of 2 lemons (about 1/4 cup)
1 clove garlic, minced (about 1 teaspoon)
1/2 tablespoon Dijon mustard
1 teaspoon dried thyme leaves
1/3 cup extra-virgin olive oil
salt and black pepper, to taste
Make Italian-ish dressing! 
1 cup fresh parsley leaves, minced (about 1/4 cup)
4-5 fresh basil leaves, minced (about 2 tablespoons)
1/4 cup balsamic vinegar
1 clove garlic, minced (about 1 teaspoon)
1 teaspoon crushed red pepper flakes
1/3 cup extra-virgin olive oil
salt and black pepper, to taste
ingredients
Chop the parsley and place in a medium bowl. Add the lemon juice, garlic, cumin, 
paprika, oregano, and sumac. Whisk until blended, then slowly drizzle in the oil, 
stirring vigorously. Season with salt and pepper, taste, then adjust seasonings.
Dice all the vegetables into roughly the same size – a 1/4-inch dice is nice – and 
place in a large mixing bowl. Slice the olives and add to the bowl.
Pour the dressing over the salad and toss with two wooden spoons until the 
vegetables are coated. Taste and adjust seasonings.
directions
YOU KNOW HOW YOU COULD DO THAT?
TASTES GREAT WITH
PREP
COOK
This is one of those recipes that makes everyone think you’re a genius because it tastes so 
good (while inside you know the real secret: lots of chopping). Bright and crunchy, it’s 
ridiculously healthy – without tasting like it’s ridiculously healthy – and it’s so friendly 
and eager to please. Cut the recipe in half if you don’t want leftovers or double it up to 
share at a potluck. 
n/a
min.
15
SERVES 6 to 8
Turkish Chopped Salad
141
page
dressing:
1 cup fresh parsley leaves, minced (about 1/4 cup)
juice of 2 lemons (about 1/4 cup)
1 clove garlic, minced (about 1 teaspoon)
1/4 teaspoon ground cumin
1/4 teaspoon paprika
1/4 teaspoon dried oregano
1/4 teaspoon sumac (optional)
1/3 cup extra-virgin olive oil
salt and black pepper, to taste
salad:
2 medium cucumbers, peeled
2 medium green peppers, seeded
3 medium tomatoes
1/2 medium red onion
1 bunch radishes, tops removed
1 can (6 ounces) large black pitted olives
Grilled Chicken Thighs, p. 29
Citrus Carnitas, p. 95
Salmon a l’Afrique du Nord, p. 103
a secret weapon for your next potluck
(all chopping!)
Make this recipe your own! Add other raw veggies like slivered red cabbage, 
fennel, or a few hot peppers. Toss in green olives instead of black, or roasted 
red peppers instead of raw. The only requirement? Chop everything into equal-
sized dice, so no one taste dominates.

Add diced avocado for a creamy touch.
ingredients
Use a sharp knife to peel the oranges, removing all of the bitter white pulp and 
the membrane on the outside of the orange sections. With your fingers, separate the 
sections and cut them into 1-inch pieces. Place in a large bowl.
Remove the fronds from the fennel and reserve a few for garnish. Cut the ends off 
the fennel bulb, and slice it very thinly, crosswise. Add the fennel, onion, olives, and 
mint to the oranges. Gently combine with a rubber scraper.
In a small bowl, whisk together lemon juice, paprika, cayenne, coriander, 
garlic, salt, and pepper. Add the oil in a slow drizzle, whisking continuously. 
Pour the dressing over the oranges and toss gently to blend. Let the flavors meld  
for about an hour before serving. Taste, adjust seasonings, then top with minced 
fennel fronds. 
directions
TASTES GREAT WITH
PREP
COOK
The city of Tangier – perched on the northwestern tip of Morocco – was declared an 
International Zone after World War I and was jointly ruled by nine different countries, all 
reluctant to relinquish control of this glamorous port. The winding alleyways of the old city 
became a haven for smugglers, agents, double agents, and movie stars. Hotel El Minzah was 
the place to see and be seen. Like the motley cast of characters who sipped cocktails on the 
patio of the hotel, this salad brings together strong players –sweet oranges, cool fennel and 
mint, salty olives – that result in an enticing blend.
n/a
min.
15
SERVES 6 to 8
El Minzah Orange Salad
143
page
4-5 large seedless oranges (about 3 pounds)
1 fennel bulb (about 1 pound)
1/4 medium red onion, very thinly sliced (about 1/4 cup)
1 cup large black olives, pitted and cut in half
1/4 cup fresh mint leaves, coarsely chopped (about 2 tablespoons )
2 tablespoons lemon juice
1 teaspoon paprika
1/4 teaspoon ground cayenne pepper
1/4 teaspoon ground coriander
1 clove garlic, minced (about 1 teaspoon)
salt and black pepper, to taste
3 tablespoons olive oil
fennel fronds, minced, for garnish (about 1/2 tablespoon)
The Best Chicken You Will Ever Eat, p. 69
Ginger-Lime Grilled Shrimp, p. 75 
Salmon a l’Afrique du Nord, p. 103
Cauliflower Rice Pilaf, p. 121
the foreign allure of Tangier
YOU KNOW HOW YOU COULD DO THAT?
notes
For tips on cutting the fennel and the oranges, visit www.theclothesmakethegirl.com/wellfed
“One of the wonderful things about Tangier was the fact 
that you could wear any mask you chose, provided you wore 
it with the proper dash and kept your story straight.”
– from Two Tickets for Tangier by Van Wyck Mason
Rick’s Café Américain, the location of 
skullduggery and heartbreak in the classic film 
Casablanca, was modeled after Hotel El Minzah.

FrUiTs
There is nothing wrong with a little something sweet from time to time.

• Skip the bacon and nuts, then drizzle the apples with a spoonful of 
   sunflower butter that’s been warmed in the microwave.
• Use ripe pears as a stand-in for the apples.
Cut the bacon crosswise into 1/4-inch wide pieces. Place the chopped bacon 
in a large, cold skillet, turn the heat to medium-high, and fry the bacon until 
it’s crisp, about 3-4 minutes. Remove from pan with a wooden spoon and drain 
on a paper towel.
Wipe the grease out of the skillet, place it back on the heat, and add the 
chopped pecans. Stir with a wooden spoon until toasted, about 3-4 minutes. 
Remove from the pan.
In the same skillet, heat the coconut oil over medium-high. Add the apple 
slices and sauté until the apples begin to soften, about 2-3 minutes. In a small 
bowl, mix the apple pie spice, lemon zest, and salt with a fork, then add to 
the apples. Continue cooking until the apples are golden and fragrant, about 
5 minutes.
Spoon into small dishes and sprinkle with bacon bits and chopped pecans.
ingredients
directions
YOU KNOW HOW YOU COULD DO THAT?
TASTY IDEAS
PREP
COOK
My one-stoplight hometown in Pennsylvania was tucked between coal mines and Amish 
country, so daytrips to Bucks County often ended in a diner where fried apples were almost 
always on the menu. This dessert strays from the standard Amish recipe, but I believe 
bacon is a worthy break from tradition. These tender slices of apple, dusted with cinnamon 
and sprinkled with pecans and bacon, melt on your tongue and taste like love.
min.
min.
10
05
SERVES 4
as easy as, well... you know.
notes
Fried Apples with Bacon and Pecans
147
page
1 strip sugar-free, nitrate-free bacon
8 roasted, unsalted pecan halves, chopped (about 2 tablespoons)
1 tablespoon coconut oil
2 large, crisp apples, cored and sliced (about 2 cups)
1/4 teaspoon apple pie spice or cinnamon
zest from 1/4 lemon (about 1/4 teaspoon)
generous pinch salt
Serve with a pork chop, pork loin, or roasted turkey to 
turn this dessert into a sweetly surprising side.
A mix of sweet and tart apples adds dimension, so consider Granny 
Smith with Pink Lady, or Braeburn with Honeycrisp. You can also go 
with Jonathan apples, the traditional Amish favorite.
You might be tempted to increase the amount of bacon 
and nuts. Who wouldn’t be?! Most of the time, I’d agree 
with you. But the allure of this dessert is the subtle kiss of 
hickory and salt that makes the apples all the sweeter.

Go tropical! With mango, banana, pineapple, and/or papaya.
Celebrate summer! With peaches, nectarines, apricots, and/or cherries.
Make it sophisticated! With grilled figs.
This requires a bit of forethought: place a can of coconut milk in the 
refrigerator, ideally overnight, but 3-4 hours will do.
When you’re ready to eat, put the can, a metal mixing bowl, and beaters from 
the mixer in the freezer for 15 minutes. While the coconut milk is chilling out 
in the freezer, gently wash the fruit and pat dry with paper towels. 
Heat a nonstick skillet over medium-high heat. Add the sliced almonds and 
stir continuously with a wooden spoon until the almonds turn golden brown, 
about 3-5 minutes. Don’t get distracted because they can change from toasty to 
tragic in a heartbeat.
When the coconut milk is cold, pour it into the chilled mixing bowl and add 
the almond extract. Whip on your mixer’s highest setting until the milk is fluffy 
and has taken on the texture of whipped cream, about 5-7 minutes. Marvel at 
the creaminess!’
Divide the berries among 4 bowls, then top with a dollop of whipped cream. 
Sprinkle each bowl with some of the toasted almonds and caramelized 
coconut chips.
Eat your dessert slowly with a spoon – then lick the bowl. Leftover whipped 
cream can be covered and stored in the refrigerator for about 3 days.
ingredients
directions
YOU KNOW HOW YOU COULD DO THAT?
PREP
COOK
I’ve spent most of my adult life skipping dessert or requesting “just an extra spoon” from 
the waitress, so I could steal bites from someone else’s plate. No more! It’s such a lovely, tasty 
relief to eat paleo food and enjoy guilt-free desserts. The sweet surprise on the spoon with 
this dessert is the luxuriousness of whipped coconut milk. Chilled and flavored with a hint 
of almond, it’s luscious and feels decadent. No sharing necessary.
NOTE: This recipe requires you to chill a can of coconut milk in the fridge for at least 3-4 hours but, ideally, overnight.
min.
N/A
15
SERVES 4
grab a spoon of your own 
notes
Berries and Whipped Coconut Cream
149
page
1 can (14.5 ounces) coconut milk
2 cups fresh berries: strawberries, raspberries, and/or blueberries
1 teaspoon pure almond or vanilla extract
2 tablespoons sliced almonds
2 tablespoons Caramelized Coconut Chips (p. 153)
You need either a stand or hand mixer to make this dessert, but the 
extra gear is worth it.
Caramelized Coconut Chips 
are a salty-sweet surprise on 
top of a berry-delicious sundae.

Preheat oven to 350 F.
In a medium bowl, mix the peaches, lemon zest, and lemon juice with a wooden 
spoon. Allow to rest at room temperature while you prepare the topping.
Place almond flour, dates, cinnamon, nutmeg, and salt in food processor. Pulse 
until combined. Sprinkle the chilled coconut oil chunks over the flour. Pulse about 
10 times, then process on high for 5-10 seconds, until there are no lumps. Pour the 
topping into a bowl and use a fork to mix in the sliced almonds.
For an 8-inch square pan: Pour the fruit into the pan, pressing it gently into place 
with the back of a wooden spoon. Sprinkle the almond topping over the fruit and 
lightly press it into the fruit with the back of the spoon.
For individual ramekins: Place 4 ramekins on a baking sheet covered with parchment 
paper. Spoon generous 1/2-cup servings into individual ramekins, pressing the fruit 
into the ramekin with your hands. Press about 2 tablespoons of topping onto each 
ramekin.
Cover the crisp lightly with foil and bake for 30 minutes. Remove foil and bake 
5-10 more minutes, until browned.
ingredients
directions
Other sweet fruit and nut combinations:
1/2 pound peaches + 1 pound pitted cherries 
  + sliced almonds
1 pound pears + sliced almonds or chopped walnuts
1 pound apples + chopped pecans
2 pints raspberries/blackberries/blueberries + 
  sliced almonds
2 mangoes + chopped macadamias
2 pints strawberries + chopped pecans
To use frozen fruit, defrost it in the refrigerator, then drain the fruit 
before tossing with the lemon zest and juice.
YOU KNOW HOW YOU COULD DO THAT?
PREP
COOK
Warm, tender fruit nestled under a blanket of cinnamon-scented, crumbly topping is the 
very definition of summer dessert. In each bite of sun-kissed peaches, you can taste warm 
rains, and dirt, and languid afternoons. Happily, this recipe works equally well with 
frozen fruit, so even in the deep of winter, you can recreate golden days so tasty, you will 
need a spoon.
min.
min.
15
40
SERVES 4 to 6
nutty, crumbly, sticky-sweet goodness
notes
Peach Almond Crisp
151
page
1 pound peaches (2-3 medium), cut into 1/2-inch dice (about 4 cups)
1/2 teaspoon lemon zest
1/2 tablespoon lemon juice
1/3 cup almond flour
4 dried dates, pitted
1/4 teaspoon cinnamon
1/8 teaspoon nutmeg
1/8 teaspoon salt
1 tablespoon coconut oil, chilled until solid, then diced
1/4 cup sliced almonds
This is best enjoyed warm – but not too hot – with a few tablespoons of 
coconut milk drizzled over the top.

Replace the cinnamon with one of these spices for international flair:
Indian! 1/4 teaspoon curry powder
Moroccan! 1/4 teaspoon Ras el Hanout
Garlicky! 1/4 teaspoon coarse (granulated) garlic powder
Southwest! 1/4 teaspoon chili powder + 1/4 teaspoon paprika
Asian! 1/4 teaspoon Chinese five-spice powder 
                (Thanks for the tip, David “Chef” Wallach!)
Mix the salt and cinnamon with a fork in a small ramekin and save for later. 
(The fun part!)
Heat a non-stick skillet over medium-high heat, about 2 minutes. Add the 
coconut flakes and distribute evenly, so they form a single layer in the bottom of 
the pan. Stir frequently. They begin to crisp and turn brown pretty quickly. This 
step takes only about 3 minutes, so pay attention! When the flakes have reached 
an appealing level of toastiness, remove the pan from the heat.
Sprinkle the hot coconut flakes with the salty cinnamon and toss until 
evenly seasoned. Transfer to a plate and allow them to cool in a single layer for 
maximum crunch. Store at room temp in an airtight container – if they last 
that long.
ingredients
directions
YOU KNOW HOW YOU COULD DO THAT?
PREP
COOK
Thursday nights in the Joulwan household, circa the 1980s, were “popcorn night.” In sixth 
grade, I wrote an ode to popcorn, such was my devotion to the salty snack. Even though 
it’s not on the paleo-approved menu, I still think of popcorn as my favorite food. These 
cinnamon-caramelized coconut chips do not taste like popcorn, but they do approximate 
the experience: the saltiness and mild sweetness, the blend of white and brown bits, and 
that ever-so-satisfying crunch.
SEC.
MIN.
10
03
MAKES
1 cup
notes
Caramelized Coconut Chips
153
page
1/4 teaspoon salt
1/4 teaspoon cinnamon
1 cup unsweetened coconut flakes
Enjoy a warming treat: Heat a cup of beef or chicken broth, add a crushed clove of garlic, 
and float a handful of Caramelized Coconut Chips on the top. Instant hug in a mug!
TASTY IDEas
Sprinkle the original flavor of coconut chips with abandon on other dishes:
Hot Plates, p. 35 
Rogan Josh, p. 85 
Cauliflower Rice Pilaf, p. 121
Coconut-Almond Green Beans, p. 125
Berries and Whipped Coconut Cream, p. 149
And now, a coconut chip haiku:
Salty sweet and crisp
Not popcorn but paleo
Hail coconut chips
Is a coconut a fruit, a nut, or a seed? It’s all three. 
Botancially speaking, it’s a drupe, a fruit with a stony 
covering that encloses the seed (like a peach).

RESOUrCes
This is your directory to the best sources for cooking tools, 
quality ingredients, and information about living paleo.

156
page
I tend to like what I like, and once I’ve found something I love, 
I don’t usually experiment too much. That’s why this is not a 
lengthy, comprehensive list of all the paleo resources out there. 
Instead, it’s my personal list of bests. I use all of these myself, and 
I think they’re top notch.
The Clothes Make The Girl
www.theclothesmakethegirl.com
I update my site at least once a day with daring tales of my 
workouts, kitchen adventures (and disasters), useful bits of 
information to help you find motivation and inspiration in all areas 
of your life, and sometimes really good pictures of my cat, Smudge.
Shopping
My Amazon Store
www.theclothesmakethegirl.com/store
I’m a big fan of Amazon, because they have so many of the things 
I love. This store is my curated collection of “Good Stuff You Can 
Buy From Amazon,” including essential kitchen tools that I use 
every day, the paleo books I read, “take me away” fiction, and a few 
other things that caught my fancy.
Spices
These are my trusted suppliers for the magical substances that 
turn ingredients into meals. All three companies are owned by real 
people, not giant corporations, and have offline stores as well as 
online sales.
Penzeys Spices
www.penzeys.com
Savory Spice Shop
www.savoryspiceshop.com
The Spice & Tea Exchange
www.spiceandtea.com
Grass-fed / Pastured Meat
Both of these sites offer delicious, nutrition-packed meat, a wide 
variety of other healthy products, and reasonable prices (with deals 
for ordering in larger quantities). They are also both staffed by real 
people, who seem to genuinely care about their products and the 
people who eat them.
Rocky Mountain Organic Meats
www.rockymtncuts.com
U.S. Wellness Meats
www.grasslandbeef.com
Recommended Resources
157
page
You’ll find everything you need to develop healthy, happy eating 
habits at the Whole9 site. But if and when you’re ready to learn 
more about different approaches to paleo eating, sink your teeth 
into these sites.
Whole9 – change your life in 30 days
www.whole9life.com
Robb Wolf – author of The Paleo Solution
www.robbwolf.com
Mark Sisson – author of The Primal Blueprint
www.marksdailyapple.com
Nora Gedgaudas – author of Primal Body, Primal Mind
www.noragedgaudas.com
Loren Cordain – author of The Paleo Diet
www.thepaleodiet.com
Sarah Fragoso – author of Everyday Paleo
www.everydaypaleo.com
Paleo Digest – aggregates posts from a wide variety of paleo and 
primal blogs
http://www.paleodigest.com
Modern Paleo – a moderated collection of paleo blogs that cover 
science, lifestyle, and recipes
http://modernpaleo.com
PALEO NUTRITION & LIFESTYLE INFO

Melissa Joulwan
Well Fed Author
Surprisingly, Melissa Joulwan’s favorite vegetable is cabbage. Her 
favorite spice is cumin. Her favorite book is Jane Eyre. Her favorite 
city is Prague, and her favorite band is Social Distortion. You might 
have known all of that already if you follow her blog, The Clothes 
Make The Girl. 
The Clothes Make the Girl is an unusual title for a blog that’s about 
her tales of triumph and failure in the gym, in the kitchen, in life. 
She admits to being a sucker for the perfect little black dress and 
stompy black boots and sparkly what-whats. She may have started 
the blog going one way and wound up in entirely another. She says 
that her desire to be fit and healthy is almost matched by her love 
of punk fashion and high glamour.
Well Fed is her second book. Her first is Rollergirl: Totally True Tales 
from the Track, a memoir of her experiences as one of the founders 
of the Texas Rollergirls, the original Flat Track Roller Derby 
league. She has appeared on the Today Show and Good Morning 
America – in her roller skates and fishnets.
These days, she’s hung up her skates, and her workouts are just as 
likely to include yoga and meditation, as lifting heavy things and 
trying to stay ahead of the CrossFit stopwatch.
Her favorite Well Fed recipe is Bora Bora Fireballs because it 
came to her in a dream – but Olive Oil Mayo runs a close second 
because it’s so “spoontastically good.”
David humphreys
Well Fed Photographer & Illustrator
David Humphreys has, at different times, 
been an editor, a programmer, a project 
manager, a people manager, an illustrator, 
a photographer, a musician, and a 
designer. And that was just during this 
Well Fed project. 
Currently, Dave has 675 items on his Amazon wishlist, including 
books on creative writing, cartooning and visual storytelling, 
portrait photography, living abroad (particularly in Europe), 
music theory, poster design, religion, electronics, computer 
science, crime, and Keith Richards. He also reads fiction. Last 
novel read: Galore by Michael Crummey. (Which is fantastic; 
you should read it!)
He considers himself quite lucky to be living with celebrity chef 
and generally fantastic person, Melissa Joulwan, and the best cat 
in the round world, Smudge. 
His favorite Well Fed recipe is the Chocolate Chili, which he 
swears he could eat every damn day.
158
page
THE WELL FED TEAM
Alison Finney
Well Fed Copyeditor
Alison Finney is a writer, copyeditor, 
and content lover, who credits Essie’s 
many childhood tales of Toby the horse 
with her love of storytelling. Her work 
has appeared in Texas Monthly, Austin 
Culture Map, Texas Tour and Meeting 
Guide, and other Texas publications.
She grew up in the Texas Panhandle, where there were shootouts in 
the street every day at high noon and all food was served “plain and 
dry,” to her liking. But eventually, she made her way to Austin, and 
now calls the city home and asparagus a friend. 
There’s an unbreakable tie between her two favorite Well Fed 
recipes: Peach Almond Crisp and Blue Ribbon Country 
Captain Chicken. 
Kathleen Shannon
Well Fed Graphic Designer
Kathleen Shannon is an ad agency 
senior art director turned freelancer 
turned brand consultant. She’s also a 
local-sustainable-square-foot-gardening 
foodie, with a lacy-layeredy-boyfriend-
jean aesthetic and a style perspective 
that pervades everything from her 
clothes, to her home, to her food. She’ll follow a whim from the 
foothills of Mount Everest to a reality show audition just to have 
a good story to tell. Her approach to capturing, shaping and 
sharing overlaps her profession, her life and her blog at www.
jeremyandkathleen.blogspot.com. 
Kathleen is currently building a business with her sister called 
Braid Creative & Consulting, where they share their expertise on 
branding and being creative professionals with the world. 
Her favorite Well Fed recipe is the Best Stir-Fry Sauce Ever. She 
loves it so much, she would like to marry it. 
nathan black
Well Fed Team Photographer
Nathan Black is a photographer, 
stunt man, door guy, and drifter. 
Since 2006, he has been collecting 
photos of knuckle tattoos – and the 
tall tales behind them – at www.
knuckletattoos.com. He recently 
began a portrait project awkwardly 
titled iwanttotakebeautifulpicturesofyou.com. He lives in East 
Austin with his three cats and two house mates.
His favorite Well Fed recipe is Pad Thai.
STEFanie distefano
Well Fed Potter & Mosaic Artist
Stefanie is a potter, mosaic artist, and, perhaps, the very best kind 
of witch. Everything she touches in her pink-infused studio, known 
as FlamingO Ranch (www.flamingoranch.com), shimmers, glitters, 
shines, and glows. Her mosaics transform the mundane to the 
magical, and her handcrafted pottery graces the pages of Well Fed, 
as well as hundreds of stylish tabletops around the world.
She was mentored by the greatest mosaic artist on the east coast – 
Isaiah Zagar – and like her mentor, she is absolutely committed to 
and immersed in her art. You can see Stef’s made-with-love pottery 
in the photos on these pages: 65, 99, 113, 121, 139.
After fulfilling the challenging role 
of neighbor and taste tester, Stef has 
determined that her favorite Well Fed 
recipe is Carmelized Coconut Chips. 

A
Almond Meal
	
peach almond crisp, 151
	
zucchini noodles aglio et olio, 133
Almonds
	
asian chicken salad, 38
	
berries and whipped coconut cream, 149
	
berry crisp, 151
	
blue ribbon country captain chicken, 107
	
coconut almond green beans, 125
	
curry rice, 121
	
pad thai, 63
	
peach almond crisp, 151
	
pear crisp, 151
	
rogan josh, 85
American Cuisine
	
all-american salad plate, 38
	
berries and whipped coconut cream, 149
	
blue ribbon country captain chicken, 107
	
chocolate chili, 73
	
deconstructed hamburger salad, 38
	
fried apples with bacon and pecans, 147
	
hot plates, 35
	
jicama home fries, 131
	
jicama “potato” salad, 137
	
mashed cauliflower, 113
	
meat and spinach muffins, 105
	
peach almond crisp, 151
	
ranch dressing, 59
	
roni’s creamy cucumbers, 135
	
sweet mustard dressing, 59
	
toasted onion nori chips, 129
	
waldorf tuna salad, 67
Apples
apple crisp, 151
fried apples with bacon and pecans, 147
waldorf tuna salad, 67
Apricots, Dried
	
cauliflower rice pilaf, 121
Avocado
	
avocado relish, 79
	
avocado-salmon maki rolls, 81
Asian Cabbage Slaw, 81
Asian Cuisine
asian chicken salad, 38
asian cabbage slaw, 81
asian tuna salad, 38
bbq pork fried rice, 93
best stir-fry sauce ever, 51
caramelized coconut chips (variation), 153
char siu (chinese bbq pork), 91
egg foo yong, 87
hot plates, 35
maki rolls, 81
meat and spinach muffins (variation), 105
pad thai, 63
scotch eggs (variation), 83
secret spicy sauce, 87
sesame-garlic nori chips, 129
sunshine sauce, 45
thai salad platter, 38
B
Baba Ghanoush, 139
	
meatza pie, 77
Bacon!
	
blue ribbon country captain chicken, 107
	
fried apples with bacon and pecans, 147
	
jicama “potato” salad, 137
Basil
	
basil and walnut pesto, 53
	
italian sausage and eggplant strata, 101
Basil and Walnut Pesto, 53
BBQ Pork Fried Rice, 93
Beef, Ground
beef and home fries hash, 131
chocolate chili, 73
deconstructed hamburger salad, 38
garlic-browned ground meat, 31
hot plates, 35
meat and spinach muffins, 105
meatza pie, 77
shepherd’s pie, 97
Beef, Stew Meat
	
cinnamon beef stew with orange gremolata, 65
	
rogan josh, 85
Bell Pepper, Green or Red
	
confetti rice, 121
	
maki rolls, 81
	
steam-sauteéd veggies, 33
	
turkish chopped salad, 141
Berries and Whipped Coconut Cream, 149
Berry Crisp, 151
Best Chicken You Will Ever Eat, 69
Best Stir-Fry Sauce Ever, 51
Blackberry Crisp, 151
Blue Ribbon Country Captain Chicken, 107
Blueberry Crisp, 151
Bok Choy
	
steam-sauteéd veggies, 33
Bora Bora Fireballs, 99
British Cuisine
	
scotch eggs, 83
	
shepherd’s pie, 97
Brussels Sprouts
	
steam-sauteéd veggies, 33
Broccoli
	
greek broccoli, 117
	
steam-sauteéd veggies, 33
	
C
Cabbage
	
egg foo yong, 87
	
steam-sauteéd veggies, 33
Caraway Seeds
	
czech meatballs, 89
	
meatza pie, 77
Caramelized Coconut Chips, 153
	
berries and whipped coconut cream, 149
Carrots
	
confetti rice, 121
	
cumin-roasted carrots, 115
	
sri lankan curry sauce, 57
	
steam-sauteéd veggies, 33
Cashews
	
pad thai, 63
Casseroles
	
italian sausage and eggplant strata, 101
	
shepherd’s pie, 97
	
velvety butternut squash, 119
Cauliflower
	
basic rice, 121
cauliflower rice pilaf, 121
cocoa-toasted cauliflower, 127
confetti rice, 121
160
page
RECIPE INDEX
curry rice, 121
mashed cauliflower, 113
shepherd’s pie, 97
steam-sauteéd veggies, 33
Cauliflower Rice Pilaf, 121
Celery
	
steam-sauteéd veggies, 33
Central European Cuisine
	
czech meatballs, 89
	
hot plates, 35
Chard
	
steam-sauteéd veggies, 33
Char Siu (Chinese BBQ Pork), 91
	
bbq pork fried rice, 93
	
hot plates, 35
Cherry Crisp, 151
Chicken
	
baked chicken thighs, 29
best chicken you will ever eat, 69
blue ribbon country captain chicken, 107
egg foo yong, 87
grilled chicken thighs, 29
	
hot plates, 35
	
pad thai, 63
Chili
	
chocolate chili, 73
Chimichurri Sauce, 55
Chinese BBQ Pork (Char Siu), 91
Chinese Cuisine. See Asian Cuisine.
Chocolate!
	
cocoa-toasted cauliflower, 127
	
chocolate chili, 73
Chocolate Chili, 73
Cilantro
	
moroccan dipping sauce, 55
Cinnamon Beef Stew with Orange Gremolata, 65
Citrus Carnitas, 95
Cocoa
	
cocoa-toasted cauliflower, 127
	
chocolate chili, 73
Cocoa-Toasted Cauliflower, 127
Coconut
	
bora bora fireballs, 99
	
caramelized coconut chips, 153
	
sri lankan curry sauce, 57
Coconut-Almond Green Beans, 125
Coconut Milk
	
berries and whipped coconut cream, 149
	
coconut-almond green beans, 125
	
creamy spice market kale, 111
	
mashed cauliflower, 113
	
rogan josh, 85
	
sri lankan curry sauce, 57
	
sunshine sauce, 45
	
whipped coconut cream, 149
Collard Greens
	
steam-sauteéd veggies, 33
Confetti Rice, 121
Cottage Pie, 97
Creamy Italian Dressing, 59
Creamy Spice Market Kale, 111
Cucumber
	
french onion cucumbers, 135
	
french-ish chopped salad, 141
	
italian-ish chopped salad, 141
	
maki rolls, 81
	
middle eastern cucumbers, 135
	
roni’s creamy cucumbers, 135
	
turkish chopped salad, 141
Cumin-Roasted Carrots, 115
Curry
	
curry rice, 121
	
coconut-almond green beans, 125
	
rogan josh, 85
	
sri lankan curry sauce, 57
Czech Meatballs, 89
E
Eastern European Cuisine. See Central European Cuisine.
Egg Foo Yong, 87
Eggplant
	
baba ghanoush, 139
	
italian sausage and eggplant strata, 101
	
steam-sauteéd veggies, 33
Eggs
	
egg foo yong, 87
	
jicama “potato” salad, 137
	
machacado and eggs with avocado relish, 79
	
meat and spinach muffins, 105
	
olive oil mayo, 43
	
scotch eggs, 83
El Minzah Orange Salad, 143
F
Fennel
	
el minzah orange salad, 143
French Cuisine
	
french onion cucumbers, 135
	
french-ish chopped salad, 141 
	
hot plates, 35
French Onion Cucumbers, 135
Fried Apples with Bacon and Pecans, 147
Fruit Crisp, 151
	
apple crisp, 151
	
berry crisp, 151
	
cherry crisp, 151
	
mango crisp, 151
	
peach almond crisp, 151
	
pear crisp, 151
G
Garlic-Browned Ground Meat, 31
Ginger-Lime Grilled Shrimp, 75
Greek Broccoli, 117
Greek Cuisine
	
cinnamon beef stew with orange gremolata, 65
	
greek broccoli, 117
	
hot plates, 35
	
meat and spinach muffins (variation), 105
	
mediterranean parsley-mint pesto, 53
Green Beans
	
coconut-almond green beans, 125
	
steam-sauteéd veggies, 33
Grilled Chicken Thighs, 29
	
egg foo yong, 87
	
hot plates, 35
	
pad thai, 63
H
Home Fries
	
jicama home fries, 131
	
beef and jicama home fries hash, 131
Hot Plates, 35
	

I
Indian Cuisine
	
caramelized coconut chips, 153
curry rice, 121
hot plates, 35
meat and spinach muffins (variation), 105
	
mint chutney, 53
	
rogan josh, 85
	
scotch eggs (variation), 83
	
shepherd’s pie (variation), 97
	
sri lankan curry sauce, 57
Italian Cuisine
basil and walnut pesto, 53
creamy italian dressing, 59
hot plates, 35
italian salad platter, 38
italian sausage and eggplant strata, 101
italian sausage seasoning, 49
italian-ish chopped salad, 141
meat and spinach muffins (variation), 105
meatza pie, 77
pizza seasoning, 49
scotch eggs (variation), 83
shepherd’s pie (variation), 97
zucchini noodles oglio et olio, 133
Italian Sausage and Eggplant Strata, 101
Italian Sausage Seasoning, 49
	
hot plates, 35
	
meat and spinach muffins, 105
	
scotch eggs, 83
J
Japanese Cuisine. See Asian Cuisine.
Jicama
	
jicama home fries, 131
	
maki rolls, 81
Jicama Home Fries, 131
Jicama “Potato” Salad, 137
K
Kale
	
basic kale, 111
	
creamy spice market kale, 111
	
steam-sauteéd veggies, 33
L
Lamb
	
garlic-browned ground meat, 31
	
hot plates, 35
	
meat and spinach muffins, 105
	
meatza pie, 77
	
moroccan meatballs, 71
	
rogan josh, 85
	
shepherd’s pie, 97
Lemon Juice
	
baba ghanoush, 139
	
citrus carnitas, 95
	
cumin-roasted carrots, 115
	
moroccan dipping sauce, 55
	
peach almond crisp, 151
	
olive oil mayo, 43
	
seasoning ideas, 38
	
turkish chopped salad, 141
Lime Juice
	
citrus carnitas, 95
	
coconut-almond green beans, 125
	
el minzah orange salad, 143
	
ginger-lime grilled shrimp, 75
	
pad thai, 63
	
seasoning ideas, 38
	
southwest cumin-lime dressing, 59
	
sunshine sauce, 45
M
Macadamia Nuts
	
mango crisp, 151
Machacado and Eggs with Avocado Relish, 79
Maki Rolls, 81
	
mango-shrimp rolls, 81
	
avocado-salmon rolls, 81
Mango
	
mango crisp, 151
	
mango-shrimp maki rolls, 81
Mashed Cauliflower, 113
Mayonnaise
creamy italian dressing, 59
french onion cucumbers, 135
jicama “potato” salad, 137
mediterranean tuna salad, 67
middle eastern cucumbers, 135
middle eastern dressing, 59
middle eastern tuna salad, 67
olive oil mayo, 43
ranch dressing, 59
roni’s creamy cucumbers, 135
secret spicy sauce, 87
southwest cumin-lime dressing, 59
sweet mustard dressing, 59
tex-mex tuna salad, 67
waldorf tuna salad, 67
Meat and Spinach Muffins, 105
Meatballs
	
bora bora fireballs, 99
	
czech meatballs, 89
	
moroccan meatballs, 71
Meatza Pie, 77
Mediterranean Cuisine
	
chimichurri sauce, 55
cinnamon beef stew with orange gremolata, 65
meat and spinach muffins (variation), 105
mediterranean parsley-mint pesto, 53
mediterranean tuna salad, 67
turkish chopped salad, 141
Mediterranean Parsley-Mint Pesto, 53
Mediterranean Tuna Salad, 67
Middle Eastern Cuisine
	
baba ghanoush, 139
cauliflower rice pilaf, 121
cumin-roasted carrots, 115
hot plates, 35
meat and spinach muffins (variation), 105
middle eastern cucumbers, 135
middle eastern dressing, 59
middle eastern meze platter, 38
middle eastern tuna salad, 67
shepherd’s pie (variation), 97
Middle Eastern Cucumbers, 135
Middle Eastern Dressing, 59
Middle Eastern Tuna Salad, 67
Mint
	
cumin-roasted carrots, 115
	
el minzah orange salad, 143
	
mediterranean parsley-mint pesto, 53
	
mint chutney, 53
Mint Chutney, 53
Moroccan Cuisine
	
best chicken you will ever eat, 69
	
hot plates, 35
	
meat and spinach muffins (variation), 105
	
moroccan dipping sauce, 55
	
moroccan meatballs, 71
	
ras el hanout, 47
	
salmon á l’afrique du nord, 103
	
scotch eggs (variation), 83
	
shepherd’s pie (variation), 97
	
velvety butternut squash, 119
Moroccan Dipping Sauce, 55
Moroccan Meatballs, 71
Mustard
	
czech meatballs, 89
	
sweet mustard dressing, 59
Mustard Greens
	
steam-sauteéd veggies, 33
N
Noodles
	
roasted spaghetti squash, 123
	
zucchini noodles aglio et olio, 133
Nori
	
sesame-garlic nori chips, 129
	
southwest nori chips, 129
	
toasted onion nori chips, 129
Nuts. See Almonds, Pecans, Macadamia Nuts, Pine Nuts, 
Pistachios, Walnuts.
O
Olive Oil Mayo, 43
Olives
	
el minzah orange salad, 143
	
mediterranean tuna salad, 67
	
turkish chopped salad, 141
Orange
	
el minzah orange salad, 143
	
orange gremolata, 65
Orange Juice
	
best stir-fry sauce ever, 51
	
salmon á l’afrique du nord, 103
	
seasoning ideas, 38
P
Pad Thai, 63
Parsley
chimichurri sauce, 55
french onion cucumbers, 135
greek broccoli, 117
jicama home fries, 131
magic of parsley, 38
mediterranean parsley-mint pesto, 53
middle eastern cucumbers, 135
moroccan dipping sauce, 55
orange gremolata, 65
roni’s creamy cucumbers, 135
turkish chopped salad, 141
zucchini noodles aglio et olio, 133
Parsnips
	
steam-sauteéd veggies, 33
Peach Almond Crisp, 151
Pear Crisp, 151
Pecans
apple crisp, 151
fried apples with bacon and pecans, 147
strawberry crisp, 151
velvety butternut squash, 119
waldorf tuna salad, 67
Pepper, Bell, Green or Red. See Bell Pepper.
Pesto
	
basil and walnut pesto, 53
	
meatza pie, 77
Pineapple
	
curry rice, 121
	
bora bora fireballs, 99
Pine Nuts
	
cauliflower rice pilaf, 121
	
meatza pie, 77
Pizza Seasoning, 49
	
hot plates, 35
	
meat and spinach muffins, 105
	
scotch eggs, 83
Pork
	
bora bora fireballs, 99
	
char siu (chinese bbq pork), 91
	
citrus carnitas, 95
	
czech meatballs, 89
	
garlic-browned ground meat, 31
	
hot plates, 35
	
italian sausage and eggplant strata, 101
	
meatza pie, 77
R
Radishes
	
turkish chopped salad, 141
Ranch Dressing, 59
Ras El Hanout, 47
	
caramelized coconut chips, 153
	
creamy spice market kale, 111
	
hot plates, 35
	
meat and spinach muffins, 105
	
scotch eggs, 83
	
velvety butternut squash, 119
Raspberry Crisp, 151
Roasted Spaghetti Squash, 123
Rogan Josh, 85
Roni’s Creamy Cucumbers, 135
S
Salads
	
all-american salad plate, 38
	
asian cabbage slaw, 81
	
asian chicken salad, 38
	
asian tuna salad, 38
	
cool salads, 38
	
deconstructed hamburger salad, 38
	
el minzah orange salad, 143
	
italian antipasto platter, 38
	
mediterranean tuna salad, 67
	
middle eastern meze platter, 38
	
middle eastern tuna salad, 67
	
roni’s creamy cucumbers, 135
	
tex-mex tuna salad, 67
	
thai salad platter, 38
	
turkish chopped salad, 141
	
waldorf tuna salad, 67
Salad Dressings
	
creamy italian dressing, 59
	
middle eastern dressing, 59
	
ranch dressing, 59
	
southwest cumin-lime dressing, 59
	
sweet mustard dressing, 59
	
tahini dressing, 139
Salmon
	
avocado-salmon maki rolls, 81
	
salmon á l’afrique du nord, 103
Salmon á L’Afrique du Nord, 103
Sauces
	
basil and walnut pesto, 53
	
best stir-fry sauce ever, 51
	
chimichurri sauce, 55
	
creamy italian dressing, 59
	
mediterranean parsley-mint pesto, 53
	
middle eastern dressing, 59
	
mint chutney, 53
	
moroccan dipping sauce, 55
	
ranch dressing, 59
	
secret spicy sauce, 87
	
southwest cumin-lime dressing, 59
	
sri lankan curry sauce, 57
	
sunshine sauce, 45
	
sweet mustard dressing, 59

	
tahini dressing, 139
Scotch Eggs, 83
Seasonings
	
best chicken you will ever eat, 69
	
italian sausage seasoning, 49
	
pizza seasoning, 49
	
ras el hanout, 47
	
rogan josh spice blend, 85
Secret Spicy Sauce, 87
Sesame-Garlic Nori Chips, 129
Sesame Seeds
	
baba ghanoush, 139
	
bbq pork fried rice, 93
	
meatza pie, 77
	
sesame-garlic nori chips, 129
Sesame Oil
	
bbq pork fried rice, 93
	
sesame-garlic nori chips, 129
Shepherd’s Pie, 97
Shrimp
	
ginger-lime grilled shrimp, 75
	
mango-shrimp maki rolls, 81
Southwest Cuisine. See Tex-Mex Cuisine.
Southwest Cumin-Lime Dressing, 59
Southwest Nori Chips, 129
Snap Peas
	
pad thai, 63
Spinach
	
meat and spinach muffins, 105
Squash, Butternut
	
velvety butternut squash, 119
Squash, Spaghetti
	
pad thai, 63
	
roasted spaghetti squash, 123
Squash, Summer (Yellow)
	
steam-sauteéd veggies, 33
Sri Lankan Curry Sauce, 57
Steam-Sauteéd Veggies, 33
Stews
	
chocolate chili, 73
	
cinnamon beef stew with orange gremolata, 65
	
rogan josh, 85
Strawberry Crisp, 151
String Beans
	
steam-sauteéd veggies, 33
Sunbutter
	
pad thai, 63
	
sunshine sauce, 45
Sunshine Sauce, 45
	
meatza pie, 77
	
pad thai, 63
Sushi
	
mango-shrimp maki rolls, 81
	
avocado-salmon maki rolls, 81
Sweet Mustard Dressing, 59
T
Tahini
	
baba ghanoush, 139
	
tahini dressing, 139
Tahini Dressing, 139
Tex-Mex Cuisine
caramelized coconut chips (variation), 153
citrus carnitas, 95
meat and spinach muffins (variation), 105
ranch dressing, 59
scotch eggs (variation), 83
shepherd’s pie (variation), 97
southwest cumin-lime dressing, 59
southwest nori chips, 129
tex-mex tuna salad, 67
Tex-Mex Tuna Salad, 67
Thai Cuisine. See Asian Cuisine.
Toasted Onion Nori Chips, 129
Tomato Paste
	
char siu (chinese bbq pork), 91
	
chocolate chili, 73
	
meatza pie, 77
	
moroccan meatballs, 71
	
shepherd’s pie, 97
Tomatoes, canned
	
chocolate chili, 73
	
italian sausage and eggplant strata, 101
Tomatoes, fresh
	
greek broccoli, 117
	
turkish chopped salad, 141
Tropical Cuisine
	
bora bora fireballs, 99
	
caramelized coconut chips, 153
	
coconut-almond green beans, 125
	
ginger-lime grilled shrimp, 75
	
mango crisp, 151
Tuna
	
asian tuna salad, 38
	
mediterranean tuna salad, 67
	
middle eastern tuna salad, 67
	
tex-mex tuna salad, 67
	
waldorf tuna salad, 67
Turkey, Ground
	
garlic-browned ground meat, 31
	
hot plates, 35
Turkish Chopped Salad, 141
Turnip Greens
	
steam-sauteéd veggies, 33
V
Velvety Butternut Squash, 119
W
Waldorf Tuna Salad, 67
Walnuts
	
basil and walnut pesto, 53
	
pear crisp, 151
Z
Zucchini
	
steam-sauteéd veggies, 33
	
zucchini noodles aglio et olio, 133
Zucchini Noodles Aglio et Olio, 133
Most lamb in the U.S. comes 
from Australia. G’day, mate!

This is what it looks 
like to be Well Fed.

