www.ebook3000.com

What is a Law of Nature?

CAMBRIDGE PHILOSOPHY CLASSICS
General editor sydney shoemaker
Advisory editors j.e.j. altham, simon blackburn, gilbert harman, martin
hollis, frank jackson, jonathan lear, william g. lycan, john perry,
barry stroud
Recent Titles
ﬂint schier
Deeper into pictures
anthony appiah
Assertion and conditionals
robert brown
Analyzing love
robert m. gordon
The structure of emotions
franc¸ ois recanti
Meaning and force
william g. lycan
Judgement and justiﬁcation
gerald dworkin
The theory and practice of autonomy
michael tye
The metaphysics of mind
david o. brink
Moral realism and the foundations of ethics
w. d. hart
Engines of the soul
paul k. moser
Knowledge and evidence
d. m. armstrong
A combinatorial theory of possibility
john bishop
Natural agency
christopher j. maloney
The mundane matter of the mental language
mark richard
Propositional attitudes
gerald f. gaus
Value and justiﬁcation
mark heller
The ontology of physical objects
john bigelow and robert pargetter
Science and necessity
www.ebook3000.com

What is a Law of Nature?
B
d. m. armstrong

University Printing House, Cambridge CB2 8BS, United Kingdom
Cambridge University Press is part of the University of Cambridge.
It furthers the University’s mission by disseminating knowledge in the pursuit of
education, learning and research at the highest international levels of excellence.
www.cambridge.org
Information on this title: www.cambridge.org/9781316507094
© Cambridge University Press 1983
This publication is in copyright. Subject to statutory exception
and to the provisions of relevant collective licensing agreements,
no reproduction of any part may take place without the written
permission of Cambridge University Press.
First published 1983
First paperback edition 1985
Reprinted 1987, 1991, 1993, 1999
Cambridge Philosophy Classics edition 2016
Printed in the United Kingdom by Clays, St Ives plc
A catalogue record for this publication is available from the British Library
Library of Congress Cataloguing in Publication data
Names: Armstrong, D. M. (David Malet), 1926-2014, author.
Title: What is a law of nature? / D. M. Armstrong.
Description: Cambridge Philosophy Classics edition. | Cambridge, United
Kingdom : Cambridge University Press, [2016] | Originally published in 1983. |
Includes bibliographical references and index.
Identiﬁers: LCCN 2015045198| ISBN 9781107142312 (Hard back : alk. paper) |
ISBN 9781316507094 (Paper back : alk. paper)
Subjects: LCSH: Philosophy of nature. | Law (Philosophical concept)
Classiﬁcation: LCC BD581 .A75 2016 | DDC 113–dc23 LC record available at
http://lccn.loc.gov/2015045198
ISBN 978-1-107-14231-2 Hardback
ISBN 978-1-316-50709-4 Paperback
Transferred to digital printing 2003
Cambridge University Press has no responsibility for the persistence or accuracy
of URLs for external or third-party internet websites referred to in this publication,
and does not guarantee that any content on such websites is, or will remain,
accurate or appropriate.
www.ebook3000.com

For Jenny

www.ebook3000.com

Contents
B
Preface to this edition by marc lange
page xi
Acknowledgements
xiii
Part I A critique of the Regularity theory
1
1 Introductory
3
1 The importance of our topic
3
2 A possible difﬁculty in investigating our topic
5
3 Assumptions
7
4 The Regularity theory
9
2 Critique of the Regularity theory (1): The problem of accidental
uniformities
10
1 The Naive Regularity theory of law
10
2 Classiﬁcation of criticisms of the Regularity theory
11
3 Single-case uniformities
12
4 How to pass from single-case uniformities to multi-case uniformities
14
5 How to pass from local uniformities to Humean uniformities
15
6 Unrealized physical possibilities
16
7 Humean uniformities with non-existent subjects
17
3 Critique of the Regularity theory (2)
22
1 Spatio-temporally limited laws
22
2 Local uniformities as laws
24
3 Inﬁnitely qualiﬁed laws
25
4 Probabilistic laws
27
5 Probabilistic laws: the retreat to Positivism
32
6 Functional laws
35
4 Critique of the Regularity theory (3)
36
1 Lack of inner connection
36
2 Laws of nature as Principles of Explanation
37
3 The Paradoxes of Conﬁrmation
38
4 The Problem of Counterfactuals
43
5 The Problem of Induction
48
vii

5 Can the Regularity theory be sophisticated?
56
1 Preliminary
56
2 Epistemic restriction upon uniformities
57
3 The Resiliency solution
60
4 Systematic restrictions upon uniformities
61
Part II Laws of nature as relations between universals
69
6 Laws of nature as relations between universals
71
1 The need for universals
71
2 The theory of universals
75
3 A ﬁrst formulation
78
4 Laws as universals
81
5 Causation as a relation between particulars
86
6 Necessitation, universals and laws
89
7 Advantages and some disadvantages of conceiving of laws
of nature as relations between universals
92
8 Braithwaite’s and Popper’s argument
99
7 Functional laws
103
8 Uninstantiated laws
109
1 Tooley’s cases
109
2 Tooley’s conclusions
110
3 Tooley’s cases solved by the introduction of powers?
113
4 A sceptical treatment of Tooley’s cases
115
5 Uninstantiated laws with nomically impossible antecedents
117
9 Probabilistic laws
119
1 The form of probabilistic laws
119
2 Probabilistic laws as probabilities of necessitation
122
3 Other types of probabilistic laws
126
10 Further considerations concerning the form of laws
128
1 Scientiﬁc identiﬁcation
128
2 Laws with universal scope
131
3 Are there any Exclusion laws?
134
4 Iron laws and oaken laws
137
5 Disjunctive laws
140
6 Do laws always link the properties of the same object?
143
7 Formal properties of necessitation
145
11 Are the laws of nature necessary or contingent?
148
1 Arguments for the necessity of laws
149
2 Strong Necessity
152
viii
www.ebook3000.com

3 Weak Necessity
155
4 Uninstantiated laws
158
Conclusions
161
Works cited
163
Index
166
ix

www.ebook3000.com

Preface to this edition
marc lange
B
David Armstrong’s What is a Law of Nature? is a beautiful book. It offers its
readers an exciting philosophical problem at the busy intersection of
metaphysics, epistemology, and the philosophy of science – namely, what
makes certain facts constitute matters of natural law? How do laws of
nature (such as, according to current science, the fact that electric charge is
conserved) differ from accidents (such as, in Reichenbach’s example from
Elements of Symbolic Logic, the fact that all solid gold cubes are smaller than
one cubic mile)? In virtue of what is the former a law of nature whereas the
latter is a coincidence – a ‘historical accident on the cosmic scale’ (Kneale,
‘Natural Laws and Contrary-to-Fact Conditionals’)? I am one of the many
students who, after reading Armstrong’s magisterial book, was ﬁrmly in
the grip of this problem. It has never let go.
Armstrong’s book exempliﬁes a familiar pattern of philosophical expos-
ition. Armstrong begins by marshalling a wide variety of arguments
against various proposed answers to his title question. His systematic
exploration of the resources available to ‘regularity accounts’ of law ultim-
ately leads him to investigate the advantages of and obstacles facing
David Lewis’s ‘Best System Account’. Having sharpened the challenges
facing any proposal, Armstrong then gives his own account of what laws
of nature are: contingent relations of ‘nomic necessitation’ among proper-
ties (i.e., universals). Armstrong works out his proposal methodically,
displaying both its strengths and its difﬁculties. (Fred Dretske (in ‘Laws
of Nature’) and Michael Tooley (in ‘The Nature of Laws’) made roughly
similar proposals at about the same time as Armstrong.)
In the years since Armstrong’s book, many philosophers have investi-
gated how Lewis’s view of laws as arising ‘from below’, supervening on
the global spacetime mosaic of instantiations of certain fundamental prop-
erties, contrasts with Armstrong’s view of laws as governing the universe
‘from above’ so that two possible universes may differ in their laws
despite having exactly the same global property mosaic. Philosophers
have also followed Armstrong in investigating which view best accounts
for the laws’ relations to inductive conﬁrmation, natural necessity, coun-
terfactual conditionals, and scientiﬁc explanations. Philosophers have
xi

explored whether the virtues that Armstrong attributes to his own view
are more fully realized by accounts according to which the laws are
metaphysically necessary rather than contingent (see, for example, Bird’s
Nature’s Metaphysics) or according to which counterfactuals sustain laws
rather than the reverse (Lange, Laws and Lawmakers). Armstrong’s book
has been enormously inﬂuential in deepening the philosophical investi-
gation of natural lawhood – research that continues vigorously today.
What is a Law of Nature? is a rare achievement: not only a pungently
written, accessible, opinionated introduction, but also a cutting-edge con-
tribution to philosophy. Let us go on learning from it!
xii
www.ebook3000.com

Acknowledgements
B
I am conscious of great debts to many people in the composition of this
work. I would like to thank John Bacon, Michael Bradley, Gregory Currie,
Peter Forrest, Laurence Goldstein, Herbert Hochberg, Frank Jackson,
Bruce Langtry, David Lewis, Chris Mortensen, Len O’Neill, David San-
ford, Jack Smart, David Stove, Richard Swinburne, Chris Swoyer, Martin
Tweedale, Peter Van Inwagen, and John Watkins. I hope that I have not
left anybody out. Speciﬁc acknowledgements on particular points are
made in the text. But I have received so much valuable comment that
I know that there is some of it which I have failed to assimilate and proﬁt
from. I have also learnt a great deal from my students in the course of
giving seminars on the Laws of Nature at the University of Sydney and the
University of Texas at Austin. I should like to thank Anthea Bankoff, Pat
Trifonoff, and Jackie Walter for much typing and retyping of drafts.
I leave to the last mention of my quite special debt to Michael Tooley. As
I hope that the text makes clear, he has everywhere inﬂuenced my think-
ing on this thorny and difﬁcult topic of the nature of the laws of nature.
Sydney University D. M. A.
1982
xiii

www.ebook3000.com

PART I
A critique of the Regularity theory

www.ebook3000.com

1
Introductory
B
1
The importance of our topic
The question ‘What is a law of nature?’ is a central question for the
philosophy of science. But its importance goes beyond this relatively
restricted context to embrace general epistemology and metaphysics. In
this section I will ﬁrst discuss the importance of the question for the
philosophy of science and then its importance in the wider context.
Natural science traditionally concerns itself with at least three tasks. The
ﬁrst is to discover the geography and history of the universe, taking
‘geography’ to cover all space and ‘history’ to cover all time, including
future time. Astronomy is beginning to give us a picture of how the
universe as a whole is laid out in space and time. Some other natural
sciences give us an overview of more restricted spatio-temporal areas.
A second task is to discover what sorts of thing and what sorts of
property there are in the universe and how they are constituted, with
particular emphasis upon the sorts of thing and the sorts of property in
terms of which other things are explained. (These explainers may or may
not be ultimate explainers.)
The third task is to state the laws which the things in space and time
obey. Or, putting it in the terms used in describing the second task, the
third task is to state the laws which link sort of thing with sort of thing,
and property with property.
It may not be obvious that there is a second task to be distinguished
from the third. But consider the scientiﬁc discovery that heat is molecular
motion. It is obvious that this is not a historical/geographical truth. I shall
argue at a later point that it is not a law of nature, even a ‘bridge law’
(Ch. 10, Sec. 1). It is something different: it gives the constitution of a
property, or range of properties, in terms of more ultimate properties.
(It could be said to give the ‘geography’ of a property.)
What is true is that the three enquiries are inextricably bound up
with each other. They logically presuppose each other and can only be
3

pursued
in
conjunction
with
each
other.
Nevertheless,
they
are
distinguishable.
If the discovery of the laws of nature is one of the three great traditional
tasks of natural science, then the nature of a law of nature must be a
central ontological concern for the philosophy of science. As for the
importance of science itself, I take its ‘vanguard role’ in the gaining of
knowledge and/or reasonable belief about the world to be obvious
enough.
However, our question ‘What is a law of nature?’ is of still wider
philosophical importance. To see why, we may appeal to Hume. Hume
said (Treatise, Bk 1, Pt III, Sec. II) that the only relation which enables us to
infer from observed matters of fact to unobserved matters of fact is the
relation of cause and effect. If no such relation existed, we would have no
way to reason beyond our observations.
Hume spoke little of laws. Nevertheless, it can be said that he held a law
theory of cause and effect. Setting aside the mental component which he
found in our concept of cause, he conceived of the relation between cause
and effect as a law-like relation. (The law in turn he conceived of as a mere
regularity.) We can therefore invoke his authority to say that inferences to
particular matters of unobserved fact would not be reliable inferences if
there were no laws of nature.
But it is hardly required that we appeal to Hume. The proposition is
obvious enough in itself. The scientist trying to establish the geography
and history of the unobserved portion of the universe must depend upon
what he takes to be the laws of the universe. Otherwise he is helpless. (It is
true also, of course, that what he takes the laws to be will in part depend
upon what he takes the history and geography to be.) In ordinary life, by
contrast, when making inferences to particular matters of unobserved fact,
we make little appeal to, and would be unable to state, the supposed laws
which ground our inferences. But it is still the case that, on the supposition
that there are no laws, the inferences would not be rational.
As Hume understood and emphasized, inference from the observed to
the unobserved is central to our whole life as human beings. We have just
seen, however, that if there were no laws (whatever a law is, be it regular-
ity or something else), then such inferences would not be reliable. Hence
the notion of law is, or should be, a central concept for epistemology. If so,
we will also want to enquire into its ontology. We will want to know what
a law of nature is.
There is one truly eccentric view, brought to my attention by Peter
Forrest, which would evade this argument. This is the view that, although
4
www.ebook3000.com

there are regularities in the world, there are no laws of nature. Such a view
agrees with critics of the Regularity theory of law that mere regularities are
insufﬁcient for law. But, in Eliminativist spirit, it goes on to deny that the
world contains anything except these regularities. This Disappearance
view of law can nevertheless maintain that inferences to the unobserved
are reliable, because, although the world is not law-governed, it is, by luck
or for some other reason, regular.
Such a view, however, will have to face the question what good reason
we can have to think that the world is regular. It will have to face the
Problem of Induction. It will be argued in Chapter 4, Section 5, that no
Regularity theorist, whether or not he is prepared to call his regularities
‘laws’, can escape inductive scepticism.
2
A possible difﬁculty in investigating our topic
So much by way of apologia for our topic. But it may seem to be some-
what recalcitrant to philosophical investigation. Here we may recall Soc-
rates’ and G. E. Moore’s ‘Paradox of Analysis’. If we ask what sort of thing
an X is (a right act, a law of nature. . .) then either we know what an X is, or
we do not. If we know, then there is no need to ask the question. If we do
not know, then there is no way to begin the investigation. The enquiry is
either pointless or impossible.
The orthodox, and I think correct, solution of this puzzle is that we do
not start with blank ignorance of what an X is. Instead, we start with an
unreﬂective, unselfconscious or merely practical grasp of the thing. The
philosophical object is to pass from this to an articulate, explicit and
reasoned grasp of what an X is. We do not go from black night to daylight,
but from twilight to daylight.
In such investigations it is a great advantage, to say the least, if we can
securely identify instances of X. Given such paradigms, we can to some
extent tie the enquiry down. An account of what it is to be an X is
suggested by a philosopher. If we can be sure that a is an X, then we can
use other things which we know or believe about a to check the proposed
account of X. But without paradigms the whole business of testing the
proposal becomes very much more difﬁcult.
Our problem is now before us. There are no secure paradigms of laws of
nature. Consider contemporary natural science. It is perfectly possible,
epistemically possible, that we do not know a single law of nature. This,
it may be objected, is a considerable handicap to answering the philosoph-
ical question ‘What is a law of nature?’
5

To this objection, two answers may be made.
First, even though we can point to no secure paradigms of laws, the
scientiﬁc theories which we now work with are obviously a reasonable
approximation to at least some of the real laws of nature. For if our
theories did not nearly grasp the truth at many points, it would be inex-
plicable that they should permit so much successful prediction. Theoretical
calculations which can return men from the moon with split-second accur-
acy can hardly be mere fantasies. We may make an ‘inference to the best
explanation’ from the predictive success of contemporary scientiﬁc theory
to the conclusion that such theory mirrors at least some of the laws of
nature over some part of their range with tolerable accuracy.
Actually, it seems that even the rough-and-ready generalizations of pre-
scientiﬁc practical wisdom represent a reasonable degree of approxima-
tion to genuine laws. Consider Hume’s examples: ﬁre burns, bread nour-
ishes,
water
suffocates.
If
there
were
not
laws
to
which
these
generalizations represent some rough approximation, then we should all
be dead.
It may be remarked in passing that this ﬁrst reply to the objection from
the absence of paradigms indicates the importance, in the ﬁght against
scepticism, of developing a satisfactory theory of degrees of closeness to
the truth, a theory of partial truth.
The second answer to the objection is that, even if we know no laws, we
do know the forms which statements of law take. Consider the following
formulae which use dummies:
(1) It is a law that Fs are Gs
(2) It is a law that an F has a certain probability (> 0, <1) of being a G
(3) It is a law that the quantities P and Q co-vary in such a way that Q is a
certain function of P (Q = f (P)).
It turns out, as a matter of fact, that the sort of fundamental investigation
which we are undertaking can largely proceed with mere schemata of this
sort. After all, it is not as if philosophers can expect to make any serious
contribution to the scientiﬁc project of establishing what in fact the laws of
nature are! Our abstract formulae may actually exhibit the heart of many
philosophical problems about laws of nature, disentangled from confusing
empirical detail. To every subject, its appropriate level of abstraction.
If more concrete examples are required, then we can take them from
current or earlier science. We now know that Newton’s Law of Universal
Gravitation is not really a law. Yet we also know that Newton’s formula
approximates to the truth for at least a wide range of phenomena. Its
6
www.ebook3000.com

predictive power would be inexplicable otherwise. So it makes a very
good stand-in for a paradigm of a law of nature.
In this essay the abstract formula considered will often be (1): It is a law
that Fs are Gs. In fact, arguing from the present state of science, it does not
seem very likely that many laws are of this form. It would appear, for
instance, that the laws governing sub-atomic phenomena are both irredu-
cibly probabilistic and are functional. They have a form which combines
(2) and (3).1 But the peculiar simplicity of (1) makes it extremely useful for
discussing a number of difﬁcult philosophical issues concerning laws.
These issues would emerge less clearly in more complex contexts.
3
Assumptions
Some of the presuppositions of this enquiry have already emerged. In this
section I will mention three further assumptions that I will make. I hope
that they will not remain assumptions merely, but that some consider-
ations in their favour will emerge in the course of the discussion. But since
they are rather fundamental, and so not easily argued for, and since they
are also somewhat controversial, it seems desirable to put them explicitly
before the reader.
First, I assume the truth of a Realistic account of laws of nature. That is
to say, I assume that they exist independently of the minds which attempt
to grasp them. (Just what sort of thing they are, it is the task of this essay to
investigate. It is clear, simply from considering the typical forms of law-
statements, that a law is some sort of complex entity.) Laws of nature must
therefore be sharply distinguished from law-statements. Law-statements
may be true or (much more likely) false. If they are true, then what makes
them true is a law.
The task of the critic of anti-Realist views of laws has been greatly eased
by the recent publication of a ﬁne and scholarly article by Alan Musgrave
(1981). What he offers is primarily a critique of Wittgensteinian Instru-
mentalism about laws, as it is found in the Tractatus, and in Wittgenstein’s
followers W. H. Watson, Toulmin, Hanson and Harré. But there is also
useful criticism of other anti-Realist positions.
In any case, however, behind all anti-Realist views of laws stands the
Regularity theory. After all, those who do not take a Realistic view of laws
have to allow that there is some foundation in the world for the
1
It may be argued that both (2) and (3) can be reduced to form (1). My reasons for rejecting
both these reductions will emerge. See Ch. 3, Sec. 4 for (2) and Ch. 7 for (3).
7

acceptability or otherwise of law-statements. At this point they must
appeal to regularities. Regularities are the Realistic component of anti-
Realist theories of laws. As a result, a destructive critique of the Regularity
theory, the business of the ﬁrst Part of this essay, will simultaneously
undermine anti-Realist theories of laws.
Second, to this Realism about laws, I add a more speciﬁc Realism:
Realism about universals. As a matter of fact, I do not think that even
the Regularity view can be coherently developed, at least in a Realistic
way, without the introduction of universals (Ch. 2, Sec. 4). But, as we shall
see (Ch. 6, Sec. 1), the Realist about laws who wishes to go beyond the
Regularity theory must certainly invoke universals.
Theories of universals are developed in different ways, and these differ-
ences place different constraints upon theories of laws of nature which
involve universals. My own Realism about universals is developed in a
previous book, Universals and Scientiﬁc Realism (1978). No acquaintance
with that work is presupposed, but in this essay I will state my views
about universals (Ch. 6, Sec. 2), and take these views are constraints on my
theory of laws. Arguments for these views are to be found only in the
earlier work. To that extent, this monograph is a sequel to the book on
universals. That book’s last chapter put forward what now seems to me to
be a somewhat primitive form of the view of laws of nature defended in
the present work.
Third, in this essay I assume the truth of what may be called Actualism.
According to this view, we should not postulate any particulars except
actual particulars, nor any properties and relations (universals) save
actual, or categorical, properties and relations. I do not think that this
should debar us from thinking that both the past and the future exist, or
are real. But it does debar us from admitting into our ontology the merely
possible, not only the merely logically possible but also the merely phys-
ically possible.
This debars us from postulating such properties as dispositions and
powers where these are conceived of as properties over and above the
categorical properties of objects. It is not denied that statements attributing
dispositions and/or powers to objects, or sorts of objects, are often true.
But the truth-makers or ontological ground for such true statements must
always be found in the actual, or categorical, properties of the objects
involved.
I regard Actualism as the most difﬁcult and uncertain of my three
assumptions. It is bound up with the difﬁcult question whether the laws
of nature involve logical necessities in things: whether there is de re logical
8
www.ebook3000.com

necessity involved in laws. For dispositions and powers, if they are con-
ceived of as the non-Actualist conceives them, involve logical or quasi-
logical connections in the world between the dispositions and powers, on
the one hand, and their actualizations on the other.
4
The Regularity theory
It is convenient to begin by examining and criticizing the Regularity
analysis of laws of nature. The credit of this theory does not stand as high
as it used to. But, although somewhat battered, it is still orthodoxy among
analytic philosophers. In particular, there are still many who would like it
to be true. While this liking persists, we can expect it to have a powerful, if
not always acknowledged, inﬂuence. So it is still important to work
through the theory in detail, and see just how unsatisfactory it is.
Nor will the value of a discussion of the Regularity theory be critical and
therapeutic only. In the course of the criticisms a number of considerations
will be introduced which will lead us toward a more satisfactory account
of laws of nature, if only by showing us what a good theory of laws ought
to do.
With the Regularity theory disposed of, it will then be argued that any
satisfactory account of laws of nature must involve universals, and irredu-
cible relations between them. This opens up a new, by no means easy, but
exciting programme of philosophical research. The second part of this
essay attempts to advance the programme.
9

2
Critique of the Regularity theory (1):
The problem of accidental uniformities
B
Laws of nature characteristically manifest themselves or issue in regular-
ities. It is natural, therefore, in Ockhamist spirit, to consider whether laws
are anything more than these manifestations.
When philosophers hear the phrase ‘Regularity theory’ they are inclined
almost automatically to think of a Regularity theory of causation. It is
important, therefore, to be clear at the outset that what is being considered
here is a Regularity theory of laws.
The Regularity theory of causation appears to be a conjunction of two
propositions: (1) that causal connection is a species of law-like connection;
(2) that laws are nothing but regularities in the behaviour of things. It is
possible to deny the truth of (1), as Singularist theories of causation do,
and then go on either to assert or to deny the truth of (2). Alternatively, (1)
can be upheld, and either (2) asserted (yielding the Regularity theory of
causation), or (2) denied. The reduction of cause to law, and the reduction
of law to regularity, are two independent doctrines. They can be accepted
or rejected independently.
It therefore appears that the Regularity theory of causation entails the
Regularity theory of laws of nature, because the latter theory is a proper
part of the former. By the same token, the Regularity theory of laws of
nature fails to entail the Regularity theory of causation. Our concern is
with the Regularity theory of law.
1
The Naive Regularity theory of law
There are different versions of the Regularity theory. Effective criticisms of
one version may fail to be effective criticisms of another, leading to a
certain amount of confusion. George Molnar (1969) provides us with a
good strategy in this situation. He begins by outlining a theory which he
calls the Regularity theory of laws of nature, but which I shall call the
Naive Regularity theory. He then considers an important argument against
such a theory advanced by William Kneale, an argument from unrealized
10
www.ebook3000.com

physical possibilities. Molnar claims that Kneale’s argument succeeds
against the theory which he, Molnar, has outlined. However, numerous
modiﬁcations of this theory can be proposed, with the object of meeting
Kneale’s and other criticisms. Molnar therefore goes on to consider
whether the theory can be rescued from Kneale’s attack by means of
judicious modiﬁcations which still respect the spirit of the theory. He
argues, however, that when these proposed modiﬁcations are scrutinized,
none are found to be satisfactory. He concludes that there is no acceptable
form of the Regularity theory. It cannot be modiﬁed, it must be
abandoned.
I propose to generalize Molnar’s strategy. I agree with his estimation of
the force of Kneale’s argument. But I think that there are many other
arguments which either refute, or tell heavily against, the Regularity
theory. It is very convenient to advance these as arguments against the
Naive theory in the ﬁrst place, and only after that to consider whether they
can be evaded by more sophisticated versions of the theory.
Molnar deﬁnes the Naive Regularity theory by using the device of
semantic ascent. He says:
p is a statement of a law of nature if and only if:
(i) p is universally quantiﬁed
(ii) p is [omnitemporally and omnispatially]1 true
(iii) p is contingent
(iv) p contains only non-local empirical predicates, apart from logical
connectives and quantiﬁers.
There is much in this deﬁnition which could be discussed, but which I pass
over for the present. I think it will serve our current purposes. It is easy to
see the aim of the deﬁnition: to pick out the unrestricted or cosmic uniform-
ities from all other uniformities in nature. I will call them Humean uni-
formities, for obvious reasons. These Humean uniformities the Naive
Regularity theory identiﬁes with the laws of nature.
2
Classiﬁcation of criticisms of the Regularity theory
If we take the Humean uniformities and try to identify them with the laws
of nature, then various difﬁculties for the identiﬁcation arise. First, there
are what may be broadly termed extensional difﬁculties. There are, or
1
David Lewis has pointed out to me that the bracketed phrase is redundant.
11

there appear to be, Humean uniformities which are not laws of nature.
That is, being a Humean uniformity is not sufﬁcient for being a law of
nature. Again there are, or at least there could be, laws which do not hold
over all space and time. There are also probabilistic laws. Neither of these
sorts of law involve Humean uniformities.2 That is, being a Humean
uniformity is not necessary for a law of nature. The failure of sufﬁciency
will be the subject of this chapter, the failure of necessity the subject in the
earlier sections of the next chapter.
Even if all these difﬁculties can be overcome, and I do not believe that
they can be, plenty of difﬁculties remain for the Regularity theory of laws.
That theory envisages a very simple relationship between a law and its
associated Humean uniformity. It is a law that Fs are Gs if and only if all Fs
are Gs, where the latter is a Humean uniformity. The content of the law
and the content of the uniformity are identical. However, there appear to
be cases where a law and its manifestation are not related in this straight-
forward way. A gap can open up between law and manifestation of law.
Two sorts of case will be discussed in the last two sections of the next
chapter, involving probabilistic and functional laws.
Finally, there are what might be called ‘intensional’ difﬁculties. Sup-
pose that there is a Humean uniformity to which a law does correspond,
and suppose that the content of the uniformity is the same as the content
of the law. Even so, there are a number of reasons for thinking that the
law and the uniformity are not identical. For the law has properties
which the manifestation lacks. These difﬁculties will be discussed in
Chapter 4.
In Chapter 5 we will consider attempts to meet some of these difﬁculties
by sophisticating the Naive Regularity theory. The failure of these sophis-
ticating attempts should leave us intellectually and psychologically well
prepared to look for a replacement for the Regularity theory.
3
Single-case uniformities
It has long been recognized, even by Regularity theorists themselves,
that the laws of nature are, at best, a mere sub-class of the class of
Humean uniformities. A recognized research programme for contem-
porary Regularity theorists is to ﬁnd a way to cut out unwanted
Humean uniformities while still remaining faithful to the spirit of the
2
Although we shall see that there is a strategy which attempts to reinterpret probabilistic
laws as a special sort of uniformity.
12
www.ebook3000.com

Regularity theory. For the present, however, we are concerned to make
a case against the Naive Regularity theory, which simply identiﬁes laws
and Humean uniformities. Various objections show that this identiﬁca-
tion is indeed naive. I begin by considering single-case uniformities. It is
clear that they are ubiquitous. Yet in general they are not associated
with laws of nature.
It is probable that every object in the universe differs in its properties
from everything else. I mean here by ‘properties’ general, that is, non-local,
properties. On this understanding, living in Australia is not a property. In
the case of microscopic objects, such as electrons, it may be necessary to
include relational properties in order to ensure that the objects differ from
each other in properties. The relational properties must again be non-local.
Being a light-second distant from proton A is not a general relational property,
but being a light-second distant from a proton would be satisfactory. In the
case of macroscopic objects, however, it is not even necessary to appeal to
relational properties. Consider, for instance, the exact shape, size and
arrangement of the microscopic constituents of two identical-seeming
ball-bearings. These properties of shape, size and arrangement of constitu-
ents have the advantage that, even on quite restrictive theories of proper-
ties, they will count as genuine properties. They may, of course, be
idiosyncratic and uninteresting properties. But they will serve to differen-
tiate all macroscopic objects.
For each particular, therefore, it is likely that there exists at least one
individuating conjunction of properties, that is, a conjunction of properties
such that the particular instantiates this conjunction and nothing else does.
The vast majority, at least, of these individuating conjunctions will be non-
exhaustive, that is, will fail to exhaust the nature of the particular in
question. The particular will have further properties. Where there is an
individuating conjunction which thus fails to exhaust the nature of a
particular, call the set of the further properties of that particular the
‘remainder set’.
The existence of an indeﬁnitely numerous set of Humean uniformities
now becomes obvious. Its members are constituted by antecedents involv-
ing (non-exhaustive) individuating conjunctions of properties. The conse-
quents will involve a property drawn from the corresponding remainder
sets. It is true that, in the case of all these uniformities, there can never be
any more than one instance associated with each uniformity. But they will
be Humean uniformities nevertheless.
In general, however, we do not think that these uniformities are laws of
nature.
13

It may be thought that single-case uniformities are somewhat degener-
ate cases of Humean uniformities. It is therefore important to realize that a
Regularity theorist cannot deal with the problem which they raise simply
by not counting them as Humean uniformities. For although, in general,
single-case uniformities are not manifestations of laws of nature, it is
perfectly thinkable, and may be the case, that some are. Some individu-
ating conjunctions of properties may be such that it is a law that if and
only if a particular instantiates that conjunction then the particular will
have a certain further property.
In causal contexts, indeed, single-case uniformities which are mani-
festations of a corresponding law might easily occur. Suppose that
certain complex and idiosyncratic conditions give rise to idiosyncratic
emergent effects, and suppose that this causal sequence is law-
governed. It is easy to imagine that these conditions occur only once.
We will have a single-case Humean uniformity which is a manifestation
of a corresponding law.
4
How to pass from single-case uniformities to multi-case uniformities
In any case, as David Blumenfeld has pointed out to me, given a plurality
of single-case Humean uniformities, we can immediately construct plural-
case Humean uniformities which, however, we have no reason to believe
are manifestations of laws of nature. All we do is to point to uniformities
of the following sort. Consider individuating conjunctions of properties A,
B and C, associated with distinct particulars, a, b and c. We can then say
that whenever an object is of the sort (A or B or C), then it further has the
property (A* or B* or C*). The latter disjuncts are properties drawn from
the remainder sets associated with A, B and C respectively.
But why is this disjunctive state of affairs to be accounted a uniformity?
The problem, of course, is how to exclude it. Disjunctive predicates must
be used in setting up the case. But what objection is there to saying that
these disjunctive predicates pick out properties? Suppose that a single
predicate ‘M’ is introduced in place of ‘A or B or C’, and ‘N’ instead of
‘A* or B* or C*’. Each M is an N. Why is this not a Humean uniformity
having just three instances? Certainly, it would be permitted by Molnar’s
deﬁnition of a uniformity (Sec. 1). Molnar says (on behalf of Regularity
theorists) that ‘p’, the statement of the law of nature, must contain only
non-local empirical predicates. The schematic predicates just introduced
respect that condition. Yet surely Blumenfeld’s uniformities are mere
pseudo-uniformities?
14
www.ebook3000.com

The problem is a close relative of the problem introduced by Nelson
Goodman (1954) with his famous predicates ‘grue’ and ‘bleen’.3 Suppose
that all green things were to turn blue after 2000 A.D., and all blue things
green. Relative to the predicates ‘green’ and ‘blue’ the things change. But it
would be possible to introduce a pair of predicates ‘grue’ and ‘bleen’
relative to which the things did not change. A green thing which became
blue at that date would be said to be still grue, while a blue thing which
became green would be accounted still bleen. Relative to these new predi-
cates, a green thing which remained green through 2000 A.D. or a blue
thing which remained blue, changed at that time. The problem is to say
why one set of predicates should have preference over the other.
Returning to our own problem, it is clear that if the Regularity account
of laws of nature is to be developed in a Realistic way it must be stipulated
that only certain non-local predicates can be used to state ‘uniformities’.
Admissable predicates must carve reality along some joint, must pick out
a natural, or uniﬁed, or objectively resembling, class of phenomena.
Otherwise the ‘uniformities’ are not uniformities.
Historically, defenders of Regularity theories have tended to be Nom-
inalists, that is, deniers of universals. But Blumenfeld’s difﬁculty seems to
show that a Realistic version, at least, of a Regularity theory of laws will
have to postulate universals. How else will it be possible to say that the
different instances of a certain uniformity are all instances of objectively
the same phenomenon? (Another possibility is to try to construct
resemblance-classes based upon objective resemblances which, however,
are not grounded upon common properties. But I do not believe that such
a ‘Resemblance Nominalism’ is a satisfactory account. See my 1978, Ch. 5.)
5
How to pass from local uniformities to Humean uniformities
The single-case argument shows how likely it is that there are indeﬁnite
numbers of Humean uniformities which are not laws of nature. This is a
grave embarrassment to any Regularity theory. Ayer (1956) has pointed
out that by starting with local uniformities, it is easy to see that, associated
with each of them, there are Humean uniformities which, in general, are
not laws of nature. These new Humean uniformities will be plural-case
manifestations.
3
As is often done in contemporary discussion, I will not use Goodman’s own deﬁnitions.
Instead I will adopt simpler deﬁnitions which are more convenient for my purposes.
15

Consider any plural-case local uniformity, for instance that everybody
in a certain room is wearing a wrist-watch. It is overwhelmingly likely that
there is a Humean uniformity associated with this local uniformity. It is
necessary only that there be an individuating conjunction of (non-local)
properties associated with the room. The people in the room will then be
all and only those objects which (a) are people, (b) have the relational
property of being within an object having that set of individuating proper-
ties. It will be a Humean uniformity that people having these properties all
wear wrist-watches. But such uniformities will not in general be (or be
manifestations of) laws of nature. At the same time, it cannot be logically
excluded that some of these uniformities are in fact laws of nature.
6
Unrealized physical possibilities
We now turn to consider Kneale’s argument against the Naive Regularity
theory, the argument from unrealized physical (empirical, nomic) possi-
bilities (1950, 1961).
We ordinarily assume, in a relatively pre-theoretical way, that there are
physical possibilities which are omnitemporally never realized. We
believe that there never was nor will be a solid lump of gold with a volume
greater than a cubic mile. Yet we also believe that such a piece of gold
cannot be logically ruled out simply on the basis of the laws of nature.
Such a piece of gold is an unrealized physical possibility. It may be
contrasted with a lump of uranium-235 with a volume greater than a
cubic mile. If we temporarily prescind from the possibility that the laws
involved are merely probabilistic, then the lump of uranium is a physical
impossibility, because ‘critical mass’ would be exceeded.
What Kneale points out is that, given the Naive Regularity theory of
law, there cannot be any unrealized physical possibilities.
The following case given by Kneale (1950) illustrates the argument.
Consider the possibility that a whole race of ravens (as opposed to mere
sports) should have white plumage. This has never been the case, and, we
may assume, will never be the case. However, evolutionary theory gives
us good reason to think that, if a race of ravens came to inhabit perman-
ently snowy regions, that race would eventually be a white-feathered race.
A race of white ravens is therefore an unrealized physical possibility. But it
is a Humean uniformity that no race of ravens is white-feathered. Hence, if
the Naive Regularity analysis of law is correct, it is a law that no race of
ravens is white-feathered, that is, such a race is physically impossible.
A most unwelcome result of the theory.
16
www.ebook3000.com

Karl Popper (1959, pp. 427–8) has contributed an imaginary case con-
cerning moas, ﬂightless New Zealand birds which have been extinct for
some centuries. He supposes that every moa died before the age of ﬁfty
years. This appears to create a Humean uniformity. The number of moas
throughout all time is presumably ﬁnite, but it is potentially inﬁnite. Popper
now further supposes that there is nothing in the genetic constitution of
moas which prevents them living beyond ﬁfty years. Rather, it was the
presence of a certain virus in the New Zealand environment which caused
each moa to die before it was ﬁfty. In an otherwise similar, but virus-free,
environment, some moas would have lived beyond ﬁfty years.
Popper thus gave a sketch of an unrealized physical possibility. But,
given the Naive Regularity view of laws, it is a law that moas die before
ﬁfty, for this is a Humean uniformity. Hence it is physically impossible
that a moa should live beyond ﬁfty.
The same argument can be mounted in the case of any general unreal-
ized physical possibility. Given the Naive Regularity view of laws, it will
be a law that such possibilities are unrealized. They will be logically
possible, but not physically possible.
It should be noted that it is possible to assimilate the argument from
single-case Humean uniformities (Sec. 3), and from Humean uniformities
generated from local uniformities (Sec. 5), to this objection from unrealized
physical possibilities. For, in both sorts of case, the reason for thinking that
these uniformities are unlikely to be manifestations of laws is that it seems
physically possible that the antecedent properties of these uniformities
should have been instantiated, yet the consequent properties not have
been instantiated. Perhaps the importance of these two arguments is that
they show how easy it is to point to vast multitudes of unrealized physical
possibilities, each of which raises a problem for the Naive Regularity
theory of laws.
7
Humean uniformities with non-existent subjects
Contemporary logic renders a Humean uniformity by expressions of the
form ‘(x) (Fx ⊃Gx)’, or some more complex expression of a material
implication preceded by a universal quantiﬁer. It is notorious that such a
formula expresses a true proposition if there are no Fs. For the statement is
a statement about everything, saying of each thing that either that thing is
not an F, or if it is an F, then it is a G. Hence, given that everything is not an
F, the statement is true. Given further that ‘F’ and ‘G’ are suitable predi-
cates, then ‘(x) (Fx ⊃Gx)’ is a statement of a Humean uniformity.
17

It apparently follows that, on the Naive Regularity view of laws of
nature, it is a law of nature that centaurs are peculiarly adept at philoso-
phy, simply because, omnitemporally, there are no centaurs. It is also a
law of nature that centaurs are quite unable to take in the simplest
philosophical argument. There is no contradiction in the notion that both
these ‘uniformities’ should be laws. But it is a most unwelcome conclusion.
There are three ways in which the Regularity theorist may attempt to
evade this conclusion. The ﬁrst is the most conservative from the point of
view of the Naive Regularity theory. It is plausible, and indeed I think
correct, to argue that it is a necessary condition for something being a law
of nature that the objects about which the law holds should be nomically
possible objects. There are no laws about things which the laws forbid to
exist (other than that they cannot exist). It is also the case that, for every-
thing which exists, that thing is not a centaur: (x) (~Cx). That, however, is a
Humean uniformity, and so a law. Admittedly, it is a Humean uniformity
of a very special sort, a law whose statement involves only a single term
(a law of universal scope), and that a negative term. One might well
wonder whether a satisfactory theory of laws would want to treat this
either as a law or a manifestation of a law. But the Naive Regularity view
does not exclude it. Within this theory, it is a law. Hence centaurs are
physically impossible. Combining this with our previous principle, that
there are no laws about things which the laws forbid to exist other than
that they cannot exist, there can be no laws about the properties that
centaurs do or do not have.
The ﬁrst point to be made about this solution is that, even if it succeeds, it
serves to bring out how utterly devastating Kneale’s argument from unreal-
ized physical possibilities is when the Naive theory is not modiﬁed in any
way. The argument of the previous paragraph has brought out that, from
the standpoint of the unmodiﬁed Naive theory, if something of a certain
general sort does not exist omnitemporally, then it is physically impossible
that it should exist. In fact, however, we believe that there are innumerable
general sorts of thing which do not exist omnitemporally, but which are not
ruled out by the laws of nature. In the particular case of centaurs it may be
that they are physically impossible. They are physiologically unlikely
beasts. But what applies to centaurs can hardly apply generally.
However, even if we abstract from the difﬁculty about unrealized
physical possibilities, this ﬁrst solution is unsatisfactory. The problem is
that science wishes to recognize certain laws whose logical form the
Regularity theorist seems forced to render as the conjunction of (x) (~Fx)
and (x) (Fx ⊃Gx). There can be true scientiﬁc generalizations about
18
www.ebook3000.com

non-existent things. However, since this difﬁculty is also the fatal objection
to the second attempt by a Regularity theorist to solve his present problem,
I will postpone developing it for a moment.
This second attempt involves a modiﬁcation of the Naive Regularity
theory. This modiﬁcation questions whether a formula like ‘(x) (Fx ⊃Gx)’
really captures the notion of a Humean uniformity. Perhaps the formula is
too liberal, and it should be restricted by requiring the actual existence of
Fs at some time:
9x
ð
Þ Fx
ð
Þ& x
ð Þ Fx  Gx
ð
Þ:
In defence of this formula it may be said that uniformities without positive
instances are really pseudo-uniformities.
To this it might be added that a uniformity such as (x) (~Cx) does not
satisfy anything but a formal criterion for existential import. Things which
are not centaurs do exist – they are everywhere – but a genuine uniformity
must involve a positive antecedent. The notion of a positive antecedent is
difﬁcult to deﬁne, because a deﬁnition in terms of syntactically positive
predicates is clearly insufﬁcient. But the notion can be apprehended, and it
is fairly clear that not being a centaur is semantically as well as syntactically
a negative notion.
However, as already foreshadowed, the addition of a condition
demanding that the antecedent exist is too strong. I have great sympathy
with the insistence upon existential import. My feeling is that it is a basically
sound reaction. It respects what Meinong so insultingly called ‘a prejudice
for the actual’. The laws of nature should concern only the actual behaviour
of actual things. (An intuition which is one of the admirable intellectual
sources of the Regularity theory.) Unfortunately, however, there are many
cases where we assert the existence of laws but do not grant existence to the
subject of the law. In the Regularity tradition these are often spoken of as
‘vacuous’ laws. But this is theory-laden terminology, deriving from such
paradoxes as that about the centaurs with which we began this section.
Since I think that a true theory of laws has no need to become entangled in
these difﬁculties, I shall use a more neutral terminology and speak of
uninstantiated laws. A number of examples may be cited.4
4
Molnar (1969, p. 84) gives as an example of an uninstantiated law:
Nothing travels faster than light.
But as David Lewis has pointed out to me, this seems not to be an example of an
uninstantiated law at all. Prima facie, it is a law of universal scope involving a negation.
19

Newton’s First Law. A case in point is Newton’s First Law of Motion. The
law-statement tells us what happens to a body which is not acted upon by
a force. Yet it may be that the antecedent of the law is never instantiated. It
may be that every body that there is, is acted upon by some force.
Foresight and prudence. One possible source of uninstantiated laws is the
result of human foresight and prudence. W. E. Johnson gave the case of the
brakeless trains (1924, Pt III, p. 12). It can be foreseen that brakeless trains
would lead to accidents. As a result, all trains are ﬁtted with brakes.5 There
are no brakeless trains. Hugh Mellor (1974, p. 167) gives the more contem-
porary, and perhaps better, example of precautions taken at a nuclear
power station. It may be foreseen, as a matter of nomic truth, that, if a
certain eventuality occurs, the result will be a certain sort of nuclear
accident. We therefore try to ensure that this eventuality never occurs.
We may be lucky enough to succeed. If so, the law governing this eventu-
ality may be an uninstantiated one.
Functional laws. We now come to a very important possible source of
uninstantiated laws. As was apparently ﬁrst pointed out by C. D. Broad
(1935; pp. 174–5 in the 1968 reprint), functional laws may give rise to
uninstantiated laws. He points out that laws of the form Q=f(P), with
Q and P variable magnitudes, may involve missing values of P. Suppose,
for instance, that P can take continuum-many values. It may well be that,
omnitemporally, certain of the values are never instantiated. (The nomic
equivalent of Hume’s missing shade of blue.) Yet the functional law gives
us the value of dependent Q for uninstantiated values of P as much for the
instantiated values.
Perhaps all empirically plausible cases of uninstantiated laws reduce to
cases of missing values of functional laws. Newton’s First Law appears to
reduce to an uninstantiated case of the Second Law, which is in turn a
functional law. The ‘law’ governing brakeless trains is derivable from
various functional laws governing masses in motion in an earth-like
context. A plausible concrete scenario for Mellor’s nuclear accident case
would involve functional laws of physics.
Michael Tooley (1977) has argued that there are other logically possible
cases of uninstantiated laws of a sort different from those given in this
Its apparent form is (x) (~Fx), like the ‘law’ about there being no centaurs. To have an
uninstantiated law we require the conjunction of (x) (~Fx) with (x) (Fx ⊃Gx).
5
A note for train enthusiasts. David Lewis tells me that there may have been brakeless
trains. He says that early mineral trains had high friction axleboxes, went very slowly, and
were very unsafe by our standards.
20
www.ebook3000.com

section. We will consider his cases in Chapter 8. But the cases already
mentioned show that the Regularity theory cannot simply deny the exist-
ence of uninstantiated laws. Since it also cannot admit them promiscu-
ously, some way must be found to admit them in a selective fashion.
The third alternative for a Regularity theorist is to admit uninstantiated
laws, but only to admit them as a special case. The ﬁrst-class or central
cases of laws are instantiated laws. This respects the ‘prejudice for the
actual’. Uninstantiated laws are admitted only where they round out the
system of instantiated uniformities, giving that system greater simplicity
than it would have without the uninstantiated uniformities. (A functional
law with ‘missing values’ is not so simple as a law where these values are
not treated as missing.)
I think that this is undoubtedly the best strategy for a Regularity
theorist. However, it demands a certain sophistication of the Regularity
theory, a sophistication to be examined in Chapter 5, Section 4. There the
whole project of defending the Regularity theory by putting ‘systematic’
restrictions upon the uniformities admitted as laws will be examined.
21

3
Critique of the Regularity theory (2)
B
In the previous chapter we saw that there are innumerable Humean
uniformities which we are unwilling to account laws of nature or mani-
festations of laws of nature. Being a Humean uniformity is not sufﬁcient
for being a law of nature. The Naive Regularity theory is therefore false.
The Regularity theorist must ﬁnd some way to distinguish between
Humean uniformities which are laws and those which are not, without
compromising the spirit of the Regularity theory.
In this chapter we will investigate cases, or possible cases, where laws of
nature exist but Humean uniformities are lacking. Clearly, they pose a
potentially still more serious threat to the Regularity theory. In the last two
sections of the chapter we will consider cases where there is a failure of
correspondence between the content of the law and the content of its
manifestation.
1
Spatio-temporally limited laws
From time to time it is suggested by philosophers and scientists that the
laws of nature may be different in different places and times. Obviously,
this is not just the suggestion that the same sort of thing may behave
differently in different sorts of conditions. The latter is compatible with the
laws of nature being omnitemporally uniform. The suggestion is rather
that the same sorts of thing may behave differently at different places and
times, although the conditions which prevail are not different except in
respect of place and time.
One philosopher who held such a view was Whitehead. He believed
that the laws of nature might be different in different ‘cosmic epochs’. (See
1933, Ch. 7, Sec. 5. Further references are given in Beauchamp 1972.)
As Michael Tooley has pointed out to me, however, there are two
possibilities which can be distinguished here. It might be that, although
irreducibly different laws obtain in different cosmic epochs, these laws are
governed by a single second-order law. This second-order law determines
22
www.ebook3000.com

that, for any time t, if the laws at time t are L, then, given a time g(t) which
is a certain function of t, the laws at g(t) will be a certain function, f, of
L. The second possibility is that there is no such higher-order law. It is the
second possibility which most clearly poses problems for the Regularity
theory, and is the possibility which I wish to consider.
Two questions arise. (1) Is it possible for scientiﬁc laws to vary in this
arbitrary way from one place and time to another? (2) Is the Regularity
theorist well placed to deny that it is a possibility?
My initial inclination was to hold that (1) is not a possibility. If laws of
nature are relations of universals, as I shall be arguing in the latter half of
this book, it seems not to be a possibility. However, a case of Michael
Tooley’s, to be discussed in the next section, suggests that laws which
essentially involve particulars must be admitted as a logical possibility. If
so, the possibility of arbitrarily different laws in different cosmic epochs
will have to be allowed, and the theory of laws modiﬁed to admit the
possibility.
But whatever we say about (1), it does seem clear that the Regularity
theorist is in a weak position to resist the suggestion that there can be such
spatio-temporally limited laws.
The reason for this is that only a rather small conceptual gap separ-
ates cosmic, that is, Humean, uniformities from large-scale uniformities
which are less than cosmic. Suppose that there are no cosmic uniform-
ities at all, but that there are large-scale regularities of the sort we are
envisaging. This supposition is logically compatible with all our obser-
vational evidence. How should the Regularity theorist describe the
situation? ‘There are no laws, but there are large-scale regularities’ or
‘There are laws, but they do not have cosmic scope’? The latter seems
far closer to the pragmatic and positivist spirit which animates the
Regularity analysis.
It seems, then, that the Regularity theory ought to be modiﬁed to allow
the possibility of laws which are less than Humean uniformities. This, of
course, exposes the theory to the paradox of the heap. Where, in the gamut
of possible cases, do laws of limited scope end and merely accidental
collocations begin? Presumably it will have to be said that there is no
conceptually sharp dividing line. Laws fade off into states of affairs which
are not laws.
I do not want to say that this consequence is, by itself, any fatal blow to
the Regularity theory. But consideration of cosmic epochs and the like
does give the theory a little nudge towards anti-Realism. What constitutes
a law of nature becomes a bit more arbitrary and conventional.
23

2
Local uniformities as laws
Worse follows. It seems logically possible that even a small-scale, local,
possibility could be a law or manifestation of a law. Michael Tooley (1977)
gives a fanciful case:
All the fruit in Smith’s garden at any time are apples. When one
attempts to take an orange into the garden, it turns into an elephant.
Bananas so treated become apples as they cross the boundary, while
pears are resisted by a force that cannot be overcome. Cherry trees
planted in the garden bear apples, or they bear nothing at all. If all
these things were true, there would be a very strong case for its being a
law that all the fruit in Smith’s garden are apples. And this case would
be in no way undermined if it were found that no other gardens,
however similar to Smith’s in all other respects, exhibited behaviour
of the sort just described. (p. 686)
Tooley is aware, of course, that one might try to counter such a case by
suggesting that the garden has some property, P, such that it is a law that
all gardens with property P behave in this way. (It might be the case that
Smith’s garden is the only actual garden with this property.) But what,
Tooley asks, if (a) thousands of years of careful investigation of Smith’s
garden fails to differentiate it from other gardens; and (b) no experimental
attempt to produce another garden for which the apple-generalization
holds is ever successful? Would it not be rather reasonable to conclude
that no such property P exists? The law would then be a limited or local
law: essentially a law about Smith’s garden.
The fanciful nature of the case need not detain us. Nothing turns upon
it. We could suppose instead that uranium found in Australia behaves in a
slightly different manner from uranium found elsewhere, but does not
differ from other uranium in any of its identifying quantum-mechanical
and other properties.
Still more realistic candidates for local uniformities which are neverthe-
less manifestations of laws are to be found in cosmological systems which
make the universe spatially ﬁnite and then give the centre of the universe a
special nomic role. The laws of nature were once thought to involve such a
centre. It does not seem that such a system is involved in logical error
about the nature of law.
However, I wish to emphasize particularly cases like Smith’s garden and
the uranium case. If cases like these are admitted then the Naive Regularity
is refuted, and, I think, any Regularity theory is in serious trouble.
24
www.ebook3000.com

In the Smith’s garden case as described by Tooley all sorts of things
were imagined to have happened which constituted objective tests of the law.
But surely it is possible for a law to hold, but for the circumstances which
would constitute objective tests of the law never to occur? If so, why
should there not be laws of purely local sort where, it so happens, object-
ive tests were lacking? Nature, or we, failed to carry out any relevant
experiments.
For instance, why might it not have been a law that, in a certain room,
over a certain ﬁxed time, everybody in the room had shoes on? Nobody
submitted the law to objective test by trying to take their shoes off, but if
they had tried, they would not have succeeded. Admittedly, we have no
reason to think that such a law obtained. But might it not have obtained
for all that?
These considerations, if admitted, are absolutely fatal for a Naive Regu-
larity theory of law. The theory cannot claim that every local uniformity is
a law. That would be madness. But if some untested local uniformities can
be laws, how is the theory to mark off those local uniformities which are
laws from those which are not? It is fairly clear, furthermore, that the
difﬁculty is a most serious one for any sophistication of the Regularity
theory.
The consolation for the Regularity theorist is that the objection, if suc-
cessful, seems to refute not only the Regularity theory but also any other
theory of the nature of laws of nature which has been proposed. Certainly
it refutes the view that laws of nature must be in every case relations of
universals. However, the Regularity theorist cannot comfort himself too
deeply. The situation is not symmetrical. As will be seen later, the theory
that laws of nature are relations between universals can be generalized to
admit cases like that of Smith’s garden, even if generalized in what I ﬁnd a
rather unintuitive way. No such generalization is available to the Regular-
ity theory.
3
Inﬁnitely qualiﬁed laws
It might be a law that Fs are Gs, except where Fs have the further property
H. In this exceptional case the law fails. It might even be the case that it is
actually nomically impossible for FHs to be G. H might inhibit an F from
being a G.
The case may now be made more complex. Suppose that there is
another property, J, quite distinct from H, and that, although in general
it is a law that Fs are Gs, it is not a law that FHs or FJs are Gs.
25

We are now prepared for a still more extreme possibility:
It is a law that Fs are Gs, except where Fs are Hs, are Js, and Ks . . . and so
on for an inﬁnite set of distinct properties.
It seems that there could be a law of this form. How will a Regularity
theory deal with it?
Such a law will manifest itself in the following way (ignoring compli-
cations about uninstantiated Fs):
All Fs are Gs, except that there are FHs which are not Gs, FJs which are
not Gs, FKs which are not Gs, and so on for an inﬁnite set of distinct
properties.
Can this be considered a uniformity? It is not a uniformity of the sort
originally envisaged by the Regularity theory.
It is, of course, natural to seek for some single property, P, which
underlies the inﬁnite set {H, J, K . . .}, such that any particular having a
property drawn from this set has P, and such that having both F and
P ensures that the F is not a G. But it is possible that there is no such
underlying property. It is logically possible that Fs naturally tend to be Gs,
but that the tendency can be blocked by inﬁnitely many quite different
sorts of factor.
While a situation of this sort is not a paradigm case of a uniformity, it
can perhaps be accommodated by stretching the deﬁnition of a Humean
uniformity a little. For that reason, like the problem about regularities
which do not persist beyond cosmic epochs, the possibility of inﬁnitely
qualiﬁed laws does not by itself refute the Regularity theory unless the
latter is rather strictly conceived. But it may be noted that the possibility of
such laws forces the Regularity theorist, and others, to distinguish sharply
between laws and statements of law. Here are possible laws which, if they
hold, can never actually be stated in full. Must not these laws, and so by
implication all laws, be distinguished from statements of law? The possi-
bility of inﬁnitely qualiﬁed laws requires a Realist theory of the nature of
laws. (Though not, just from this, a Realism about universals.)
Other patterns of inﬁnite qualiﬁcation seem possible. Suppose it to be
nomically true that, in general, Fs are Gs, but that it is not a law that Fs
which are Hs are Gs. Indeed, it is nomically true that Fs which are Hs are,
in general, not Gs. This, however, is merely in general. It is nomically true
that Fs which are Hs and Js are, in general, Gs. This however is merely in
general. It is nomically true that Fs which are Hs and Js and Ks . . . It seems
clear that such a progression of interfering factors, each interfering with
26
www.ebook3000.com

the operation of the previous interfering factor, might go to any ﬁnite
depth. But is it not also possible that the progression of interfering factors
may have no end?
This second sort of case, however, is not so troublesome for a Regularity
theory. For at each stage of the regress there is a ﬁnitely stateable uniform-
ity. All Fs which are not Hs are Gs. All Fs which are Hs and are not Js are
not Gs. And so on.
4
Probabilistic laws
The considerations advanced in the ﬁrst and third sections of this chapter,
those from cosmic epochs and inﬁnitely qualiﬁed laws, do not strike
deeply at the Regularity theory, although they are important from the
standpoint of the general theory of law. The argument of Section 2, that
purely local uniformities might be laws or manifestations of laws, if
successful, refutes the Naive Regularity theory. But that difﬁculty
threatens to be a difﬁculty for any alternative theory also. The difﬁculty
now to be considered poses quite special difﬁculties for the Regularity
theory.
If we are to accept the interim verdict of contemporary physics, then
many of the fundamental laws of nature issue not in regularities, but
rather in probabilistic distributions.
What makes such a distribution the manifestation of a probabilistic law?
It is not enough that there is a certain probability that an F be a G. For
instance, it is not enough that there be a certain probability (>0, <1) that a
uranium atom will disintegrate in a certain time. A probability of this sort
is necessary for a probabilistic law but is not sufﬁcient. For the facts given
are compatible with the following further factors. Suppose that there is a
property, D, which some but only some uranium atoms come to have.
Suppose further that if a uranium atom comes to have D, then after an
interval t it will disintegrate, but not otherwise. We can then speak of the
probability that an (unspeciﬁed) uranium atom will disintegrate after
interval t has elapsed, a probability dependent upon the relative frequency
with which such atoms acquire property D. But no probabilistic law of
disintegration is involved. The law is deterministic. For a probabilistic law,
there must be no such differentiating factor D which determines the
outcome. The law must be irreducibly probabilistic.
However, an irreducibly probabilistic law will not, in general, manifest
itself in a Humean uniformity. Or, at any rate, it will not manifest itself in
any ordinary Humean uniformity. We will consider shortly the suggestion
27

that it manifests itself in a uniformity involving objective single-case
propensities.
How might the Naive Regularity theory be adjusted to deal with prob-
abilistic laws? Suppose it to be an (irreducibly) probabilistic law that Fs
have a certain probability of being G. Consider in turn the case where the
omnitemporal number of the Fs is ﬁnite, and the case where that number
is inﬁnite.
Taking the ﬁnite case ﬁrst, the natural ﬁrst move for a Regularity
theorist is to identify the probabilistic law with the actual relative fre-
quency of Gs among the Fs. However, this at once creates the spectre of a
huge unwanted mass of probabilistic ‘laws’. Suppose, for instance, that the
universe is spatio-temporally ﬁnite. Wherever a general property is found
sometimes in association with another property, and sometimes not, and
there is no further differentiating property present which marks off the
positive from the negative cases, there, the Regularity theorist will be
forced to say, we have a probabilistic law. The law’s content will be given
by the relative frequency of the positive to negative cases.
If instead the class of Fs is inﬁnite in number, then the notion of a
relative frequency is not straightforwardly applicable. But the more
sophisticated notion of a limiting relative frequency can be introduced.
The notion of a random sequence is ﬁrst deﬁned, the technicalities of
which need not be discussed here. Now if, in a random sequence of Fs,
the frequency of Gs among Fs tends towards a certain ﬁxed limit as the
sequence of Fs becomes longer, that limit may be taken to be the relative
frequency of Gs among Fs.
The existence of random sequences of Fs requires deﬁnite conditions
which may not obtain. As a result, the notion of a limiting relative fre-
quency is a more restrictive notion than that of relative frequency for ﬁnite
classes. Hence there will not be the same worry about too many laws
which we noticed in the ﬁnite case. It is therefore tempting for the Regu-
larity theorist to try to introduce the notion of a limiting relative frequency
even where the class of Fs is ﬁnite. In the ﬁnite case, the probability of a
G being an F is identiﬁed with the limiting relative frequency of Gs among
Fs which would obtain if, contrary to fact, the class of Fs were inﬁnite.
This suggestion appears to be a classic case of the misuse of counter-
factuals. What sort of truth-maker, what sort of ontological ground, can be
provided for such counterfactuals? What states of affairs make these
counterfactuals true? If one were developing a theory of laws as relations
between universals, then perhaps we might appeal here to relations hold-
ing between the universals F and G. But the Regularity theorist has only
28
www.ebook3000.com

the actual Fs, ﬁnite in number, a proportion of which are Gs. What here
can determine a hypothetical limiting relative frequency one way or
another? The counterfactual ﬂoats on nothing.
But even if we are dealing with genuine inﬁnite collections, the prob-
ability given by a probabilistic law cannot be identiﬁed with the limiting
relative frequency of a random inﬁnite sequence. For each instantiation of
a law is an independent event, uninﬂuenced by the other instantiations of
the law. Since what happens on any particular occasion may be improb-
able, it is possible (and this means physically possible) that what happens
even in the longest run should be improbable. It is possible therefore,
physically possible, that the limiting relative frequency of Gs among the
inﬁnite class of Fs be such-and-such a ﬁgure, and yet this frequency fail to
reﬂect the probabilities given by the law. Such a state of affairs is indeﬁn-
itely improbable, but it is not impossible. (It is worth remembering here, as
David Lewis has reminded me, that, whatever the actual nature of the
inﬁnite sequence is, however orderly, it too is indeﬁnitely improbable.)
The point is that probabilistic laws appear to permit any distribution at all
of the factors which they govern. Some distributions are vastly more
probable than others, and the laws give these probabilities. But no distri-
bution is impossible. Hence a probabilistic law cannot be identiﬁed with a
limiting relative frequency. A fortiori, probabilistic laws cannot be identi-
ﬁed with ordinary relative frequencies.
The fact is that probabilistic laws, if they are admitted, seem to point to
something which no Regularity theory can accept: the failure of laws of
nature to be logically supervenient upon particular matters of fact. For the
Regularity theorist, if we are given the whole history and geography of the
universe, that is, what happens at each particular place and time inde-
pendently of what happens elsewhere, then the laws of nature are auto-
matically given also. For laws are simply molecular facts of uniformity
which collect these atomic facts. They are not anything over and above the
atomic facts.
Probabilistic laws, however, cannot be handled in this way. For they
cannot be identiﬁed with molecular facts about distributions, whether for
ﬁnite or inﬁnite cases. Probabilistic laws permit distributions which do not
reﬂect the probabilities involved. They are therefore not logically super-
venient upon, they are logically independent of, particular matters of fact.
Prima facie, probabilistic laws cannot be accommodated by the Regularity
theory.
A spectacular yet plausible case where the gap is discernible between
law and manifestation is this. The law assigns a very high probability,
29

which is nevertheless less than 1, to an F being G. The number of Fs is
relatively small, but, as it happens, each F is a G. Given the right numbers,
this may even be the most probable manifestation. Yet the law which is
thus manifested in a uniformity is not a deterministic one.
It might be wondered what reasons we would have in such a situation
to postulate a probabilistic rather than a deterministic law. But, as Tooley
has pointed out (1977, p. 669), such reasons could easily exist. Suppose F to
be a very rare sort of particle, created only occasionally in very special
conditions. Suppose also that in the case of other, more common, particles,
there is clear evidence that their behaviour is governed by non-
deterministic laws assigning a certain high probability. Considerations of
symmetry might strongly suggest that the F!G law also assigns no more
than the same high probability to the F being G.
There is, however, a way in which the Regularity theorist can avoid all
these difﬁculties and reduce probabilistic laws to uniformities, though it
involves a considerable price. The solution is indicated by D. H. Mellor
(1980, p. 106) who writes:
A law says that all things or events of some kind have a certain property
or are related in a certain way to something else. If the law is statistical,
the property is having a chance of having some property or of being
related to something else.
What Mellor has done here, as I understand him, is to introduce into his
ontology an irreducibly new, higher-level, sort of property: a chance of
having an ordinary, lower-level property. These new properties attach to
individual things. If there is a probabilistic law that Fs have a certain
probability of being Gs, then it is a Humean uniformity that each F has
the further property of having a certain chance, C, of being a G. In this
way, the logical supervenience of laws upon the particular historical facts
is restored. But particular facts now include the possession by particulars
of these new sorts of property: objective chances.
One question which immediately arises for a Regularity theorist who
accepts this account of probabilistic laws is whether he wishes to general-
ize it to apply to deterministic laws. Once probabilistic laws, however
construed, are admitted, it is natural to reconstrue deterministic laws as a
limiting case of probabilistic laws: those cases where the probability is
one.1 But if the deterministic laws are limiting cases of probabilistic laws,
1
Some care is needed here. It is necessary to distinguish between probability 1, and a
probability indeﬁnitely close to 1, that is, only inﬁnitesimally different from 1. Suppose
30
www.ebook3000.com

and if probabilistic laws involve higher-level properties (chances of having
an ordinary property) then deterministic laws will involve higher-level
properties also: chance 1 of having an ordinary property. Chance 1 leads
us back to the old notion of a power. If it is a law that Fs are Gs, this
involves Fs having two further properties. First, they have the power
(chance 1) that necessitates that they be Gs. Second, they are Gs. With
mere probabilistic laws, the (lesser) chance is also always present, but,
since the chance is not always realized, the second property may not
always be present.
In the case of deterministic laws, there will be a logically necessary
connection holding in re between the power and its actualization. For
probabilistic laws there can be no necessary connection, because the
chance may not be realized. But it is of the essence of the chance that it
establishes a probability that the chance will be realized. It seems that we
must think of it as a logical probability holding in re.
It is to be noticed that these powers and chances are bare powers and
chances. Their nature seems exhausted in their manifestations. There is no
possibility of identifying them, as a result of a posteriori investigation, with,
say, a categorical structure, S, in the things which are F. For, in the case of
genuinely probabilistic laws, this will simply be to replace the law that Fs
have a certain probability of being G with the law that Ss have a certain
probability of being G. Ss will then have to be accompanied by chances of
being a G, thus reproducing the problem. I do not even think that we can
identify one chance with another. Suppose that Fs have chance C1 of being
G, and chance C2 of being H. Could these chances be the very same
property? It does not seem so. It is the essence of the ﬁrst property that
it gives chance C1 of being a G, and not of its essence that it gives chance
C2 of being an H. The same holds in reverse for the second property. So
they cannot be identical. There is no question therefore of the one single
that the number of Fs is inﬁnite, Fs are in general Gs, but a ﬁnite number of Fs are not Gs.
The limiting relative frequency of Gs among Fs is then 1. As we have seen, this limiting
frequency cannot be identiﬁed with the probability assigned by the law. Nevertheless, we
may wish to say that it is a law that the probability of such an F being a G is 1. However,
unlike the case of a deterministic law, we must add that, strictly, the value is 1 minus an
inﬁnitesimal. (For the new mathematics of inﬁnitesimal probability, see for instance,
Skyrms, 1980, Appendix 4.)
It is to be noted also, as pointed out by David Lewis, that if objective chances are
introduced, as Mellor introduces them, then it would be possible for the relative frequency
of Gs among the Fs to be strictly 1, and yet for the chance of an F being a G to be less than
1, including inﬁnitesimally less, i.e. for the law not to be deterministic.
31

property being responsible for a multitude of effects, a pattern to be found
in much fruitful theoretical postulation.
It is to be noted, however, that chances are properties which can exclude
each other. It is impossible that a certain object at a certain time should
have two different chances of being a G. They form a set of determinates
under a determinable, excluding each other by logical necessity.
I am inclined to think that the notion of a property which can only be
described in itself as that which gives a certain chance of having an ordinary,
ﬁrst-level, property is an incoherent notion. But even if this is not so, the
postulation of such properties seems an undesirable piece of metaphysics
unless very strongly motivated. The defence of the battered Regularity
theory hardly constitutes such a motive, especially since the postulation will
sufﬁce to deal with exactly one of the many difﬁculties faced by the theory.
It is to be noted, in any case, how far this solution to the problem of
probabilistic laws has drifted from the original inspiration of the Regular-
ity theory. Part of the rhetorical stock-in-trade of a Regularity theorist,
handed down, of course, from Hume, consists of scornful reference to
those who postulate connections between things and/or events which are
anything more than mere uniformities. The connections are variously
stigmatized as mysterious, unobservable, unknowable and unintelligible.
(Mellor following Ramsey (1978), attacks the idea of laws of nature as
relations between universals in just this way. See his 1980, p. 124.) Yet a
theorist who feels himself free to introduce objective chances as properties
of particular things and/or events should surely be a little bit careful about
what ontological theories he ﬁnds mysterious and unintelligible. He is
living in an ontological glass house.
5
Probabilistic laws: The retreat to Positivism
However, for those who wish to give an account of probabilistic laws
within the framework of the Regularity theory, but who spurn objective
single-case chances, there is another option. It is represented by J. L.
Mackie (1974, Ch. 9) and Brian Skyrms (1980). The idea is to identify the
law with the evidence which, if we could have it, would persuade us that
we were in the presence of a probabilistic law.
Mackie writes:
If radium atoms are considered in one or other possible series, for
instance a series determined by increasing distance at time t1 from some
arbitrarily chosen point, their decaying or not decaying within some
period of time may exhibit the sort of pattern that makes a series look
as if it were a random collective approaching a certain limiting
32
www.ebook3000.com

frequency. Its doing this, I suggest, would constitute the holding of a
statistical law of working, (p. 240)
A statistical law, then, must consist in some outcome’s having some
limiting frequency in certain actual series or sequences of instances of
the assemblage of antecedent conditions. (p. 241)
. . . long runs of such instances in various spatio-temporally determined
series usually exhibit frequencies close to the limiting one. (p. 241)
What may be thought of as a sophistication of this approach is to be
found in Skyrms, although he says that his central notion is not essen-
tially tied to limiting relative frequencies. The notion is that of a resilient
probability. Suppose that there is a certain probability of an F being a
G. For this to be a resilient probability it is further necessary that this
probability remain the same over suitable subclasses of F. Fs that are J,
that are K, that are L . . . have the same probability of being a G that the
original class of the Fs had.
When this idea is applied to the giving of a Regularity account of
probabilistic laws, we have the condition that Gs have a certain limiting
frequency among the Fs, and that, as we vary the attendant circumstances
of the Fs, the limiting frequency of Gs is maintained, in each class of
attendant circumstances.2
The ﬁrst point to be noted about this approach is that it introduces a
considerable arbitrary and conventional element into the account of prob-
abilistic laws. The law-statement assigns a precise probability of an F being
a G. But, according to these views, this conceals the fact that there will
regularly be an element of decision that the facts are to be so described.
Mackie and Skyrms are honest men and do not conceal the point.
Mackie says of his own remarks about the law concerning radium atoms:
This statement may well seem crude. But this is deliberate. It is all too
easy in this area to sacriﬁce reality to precision. (p. 240)
Skyrms says:
The only sort of physical randomness that makes sense, then, is random-
ness relative to a given set of physical properties. (There is no absolute
physical randomness. There is no absolute resiliency.) (p. 15)
2
In private communication from Skyrms, received late in the composition of this work, he
disclaims the intention, which his text suggested to me, of using the notion of resiliency to
cast light on the truth-conditions for statements of law. However, an ontological inter-
pretation of his work still seems interesting in its own right.
33

And again:
Things are not so clear-cut as one might hope. We ﬁnd no absolute
resiliency in physics, nice as it would be if we did. And philosophers
have no business trying to lay down, a priori, standards for the scope of
resiliency appropriate to physical theories. Standards for resiliency
evolve along with physical theory in a big virtuous circle, and in our
dealings with nature we take what we can get. (p. 19)
It is clear, I think, why Skyrms has to be content with imprecision and
relativity. His notion of resiliency seems an important and illuminating
one when thinking about what constitutes the objective tests of a law. But
it appears that we should demand no more of laws themselves than this:
that they should be potentially resilient. If it really is a law that Fs have
probability P of being Gs, then Fs have this probability under every nomi-
cally possible circumstance. But that all these circumstances sometimes
obtain is contingent. We expect that some will never obtain. To the extent
that the circumstances are varied, either by nature or by our deliberate
design, to that extent there may be conﬁrmation available that the
law holds.
Skyrms, however, because he is a Regularity theorist, has only avail-
able to him the actual occasions of variation, and so has to make
resiliency over these occasions constitutive of the law. The spottiness
of the occasions of variation accounts for the spottiness of his concept
of a law.
In fact, however, it is easy to conceive of there being probabilistic
laws for which neither nature nor art has provided a test. Suppose that
Gs have a certain limiting frequency among the Fs, and that this fre-
quency is resilient over a wide range of factors. But suppose that,
omnitemporally, Fs are Hs, and Js and Ks. Are these further factors
nomically relevant to an F being a G? It seems that they might be or that
they might not be, and that this is a question with an objective answer,
although, as things stand, there might be no evidence available which
epistemically probabiliﬁed any answer. Skyrms, however, would have
to treat this as a case where there was no objective matter of fact to be
decided.
Mackie’s position, I take it, falls with that of Skyrms, unless, indeed, he
is advocating that we count as a probabilistic law something even less
ontologically precise than Skyrms’ resilient relative frequencies. But then
his position would seem to collapse back into treating probabilistic laws as
constituted by mere relative frequency.
34
www.ebook3000.com

6
Functional laws
We have seen in the case of probabilistic laws that the content of the law
does not determine uniquely the nature of the manifestation, nor does the
manifestation determine uniquely the content of the law. The latter phe-
nomenon can also occur in the case of functional laws.
We have already considered the possibility that a functional law might
hold, but that there might be missing, that is, uninstantiated, values of the
function (Ch. 2, Sec. 7). Suppose now that a functional law appears to hold,
but that the instantiated values of the function do not sufﬁce to determine
the function uniquely. Many possible functions, perhaps inﬁnitely many,
are logically compatible with the instantiated values.
The difﬁculty for the Naive Regularity theory is this. It seems natural to
think that, although many possible functions are compatible with the data,
there is in fact just one function which constitutes the law which actually
governs the situation. But the relevant set of Humean uniformities do not
logically determine what that function is.
Indeed, as Timothy Potts (then a student at Sydney University) pointed
out, given the Naive Regularity theory each function which ﬁts the instan-
tiated values will come out as a Humean uniformity, and thus as a law.
Yet can they all be laws? The corresponding law-statements will sustain
logically incompatible counterfactuals. Given that the missing values are
nomically possible ones, as they well may be, this, contra the Naive
Regularity theory, makes the possible laws incompatible with each other.
It appears that a more sophisticated Regularity theory will have to
choose one of the possible functions on the basis of simplicity and coher-
ence. We are to take as ‘the’ law whatever function gives us the simplest ﬁt
for the instantiated values and/or the greatest coherence with other
functional laws.
This, however, creates the possibility that the nature of the function, and
thus the law, will have to be settled in an arbitrary manner. Suppose that
the universe appears to involve only three fundamental laws, all func-
tional laws. Two of the apparent laws, L1 and L2, which do not involve any
uninstantiated values, differ in their mathematical properties, but are
equally simple. An apparent third law, L3, has uninstantiated values,
and furthermore the uninstantiated values are compatible with two fairly
simple mathematical functions. The ﬁrst function resembles the L1 func-
tion, the second function resembles the L2 function. What is the L3 law? An
arbitrary choice will have to be made.
The drift towards convention and subjectivity, which tends to occur
wherever the Naive Regularity theory has to be modiﬁed, continues.
35

4
Critique of the Regularity theory (3)
B
It was argued in Chapter 2 that there are innumerable Humean uniform-
ities which we think are neither laws of nature nor manifestations of such
laws. In Chapter 3 it was argued that there are, or can be, laws of nature
which are not manifested in Humean uniformities. It was also pointed out
that in the case of probabilistic and functional laws the relation between
the content of a law and the content of the manifestation of the law need
not be identity, yet identity is demanded by the Regularity theory.
In this chapter, all these difﬁculties will be waived. Suppose it to be a
law of nature that Fs are Gs, and that this law issues in the (actually
instantiated) uniformity that each F is a G. Even given this favourable case
for the Regularity theorist, there are great difﬁculties in identifying the law
and the uniformity.
1
Lack of inner connection
Suppose it to be a law that Fs are Gs, and suppose there to be a plurality of
Fs. Consider one of these: a. By hypothesis, it is a G. We can say that a’s
being F nomically necessitates a’s being G.
Suppose, however, that we consider this particular instance falling
under the law from the standpoint of the Regularity theory. What does
the theory postulate to obtain? Nothing but the two states of affairs: a’s
being F, and a’s being G. Yet such a mere conjunction of states of affairs
can obtain where there is absolutely no nomic connection between the
states of affairs involved. For the Regularity theory, the essence of the
nomic connection is not to be found in the two states of affairs and any
dyadic relation which holds just between them. Rather, a’s being
F nomically necessitates a’s being G only because the other Fs are also all
of them Gs. That the conjunction of states of affairs is a case of nomic
necessitation is a purely relational property of the conjunction.
The objection to the Regularity theory is that this seems not enough. We
think that if a’s being F is nomically to necessitate a’s being G, then at least
36
www.ebook3000.com

part of what must exist is some direct, dyadic relation holding between the
two particular states of affairs. (This is part of what Hume was saying
when he demanded a necessary connection between particular cause and
particular effect over and above the fact that they instantiate a regularity.)
Suppose now that a is the only instance of an F in the whole history of
the universe, and that it is still a G. In this case the Naive Regularity
theory, at least, is forced to say that it is a law that Fs are Gs. a’s being
F necessitates a’s being G. But this also is unintuitive. For it is natural to
say that, given a is F and is G, and given that this is the only F, it is still a
further question whether or not a relation of nomic necessitation holds
between the two states of affairs.
2
Laws of nature as Principles of Explanation
Suppose that a number of Fs have all been observed, and that each is a
G. No F that is not a G has been observed. We might ask for an explanation
of this fact. One possible explanation is that it is a law that Fs are Gs. If
such a law really holds, then the explanation will be quite a good one.
Suppose, however, that laws are mere regularities. We are then trying to
explain the fact that all observed Fs are Gs by appealing to the hypothesis
that all Fs are Gs. Could this hypothesis serve as an explanation? It does
not seem that it could. That all Fs are Gs is a complex state of affairs which
is in part constituted by the fact that all observed Fs are Gs. ‘All Fs are Gs’
can even be rewritten as ‘All observed Fs are Gs and all unobserved Fs are
Gs’. As a result, trying to explain why all observed Fs are Gs by postulat-
ing that all Fs are Gs is a case of trying to explain something by appealing
to a state of affairs part of which is the thing to be explained. But a fact
cannot be used to explain itself. And that all unobserved Fs are Gs can
hardly explain why all observed Fs are Gs.
The point may be obscured because explanations are confused with good
reasons. That all the observed Fs are Gs may well constitute a good reason
for thinking that all Fs are Gs. But a good reason for P is not necessarily an
explanation of P. The presence of smoke is a good reason for thinking that
ﬁre is present. But it is not an explanation of the presence of ﬁre.
Laws, however, explain regularities.1 Even if we take the Humean
uniformity itself, that all Fs are Gs, it seems to be an explanation of this
1
In Part II a distinction will be drawn between underived laws and derived laws (Ch. 10,
Sec. 3). Derived laws are nomic truths deductively derived from the set of underived laws.
I do not think that derived laws explain regularities.
37

uniformity that it is a law that Fs are Gs. But, given the Regularity theory,
this would involve using the law to explain itself. We need to put some
‘distance’ between the law and its manifestation if the law is to explain the
manifestation.
It is possible, of course, to reject the idea that laws of nature are
principles of explanation. Wittgenstein said in the Tractatus (1921):
The whole modern conception of the world is founded on the illusion
that the so-called laws of nature are the explanations of natural phenom-
ena. (6.371)
But surely, all things being equal, we should prefer an account of laws
which makes appeals to them genuine explanations?
3
The Paradoxes of Conﬁrmation
The line of argument in this section will be this. If we are concerned with
the conﬁrmation of statements of unrestricted, universally quantiﬁed,
material implication – that is to say, with statements of Humean uniform-
ities – then the ‘paradoxes’ are not genuinely paradoxical. It does not
follow, however, that the paradoxes pose no difﬁculty for the view that
laws of nature are mere Humean uniformities. For that to be the case, it is
necessary that they not be paradoxical with respect to the conﬁrmation of
such statements as ‘It is a law of nature that Fs are Gs’. Otherwise,
statements of mere Humean uniformity will have a property which state-
ments of purported laws of nature lack. Now, with regard to what has
always been treated as the central paradox of conﬁrmation, it is not clear
that there is any asymmetry between ‘It is a Humean uniformity that Fs
are Gs’ and ‘It is a law of nature that Fs are Gs’. But, I will argue, if we
consider a further paradox, then an asymmetry emerges.
The paradoxes were discovered by Carl Hempel (1945). The traditional
central difﬁculty arises thus. If we consider the generalization:
For all x, x is a raven ⊃x is black,
then, while the observation of a raven which is not black refutes the
generalization, the observation of a raven which is black, although failing
to establish the theory, would seem to conﬁrm it. However, the general-
ization is logically equivalent to:
For all x, x is not black ⊃x is not a raven.
But if the observation of a black raven conﬁrms the original statements, so,
presumably, the observation of a non-black non-raven, for instance a
38
www.ebook3000.com

white shoe, conﬁrms the second statement. Yet it seems a reasonable
assumption that what conﬁrms the second statement also conﬁrms the
logically equivalent ﬁrst statement. Hence the observation of a white shoe
conﬁrms that:
For all x, x is a raven ⊃x is black.
That is the paradox upon which attention has been focussed. But as
Hempel realized, the generalization is also conﬁrmed by observation of
non-ravens which are black: observation of black shoes as well as white.
For the generalization says something about everything that there is, viz.
that either that thing is not a raven or, if it is a raven, then it is black.
Hence, once an object is observed to be a non-raven, the observation
conﬁrms the generalization regardless of what colour the object turns
out to have.
If we remember that we are dealing with a material implication, then
there is nothing paradoxical here. It is simply a consequence of the truth-
table for ‘⊃’. We could exhibit this by rewriting the generalization as:
For all x, ((x is a raven and x is black) v (x is not a raven and x is black) v
(x is not a raven and x is not black)).
Instances of any one of the three disjuncts will do as conﬁrmers. Indeed, at
any rate if we abstract from any knowledge which we have about the
frequency of ravens compared to non-ravens or black things to non-black
things, it would seem that instantiations of the disjuncts are of equal value
as conﬁrmers.
Now, however, consider the hypothesis that it is a law of nature that Fs
are Gs and take some individual, a. With respect to the properties F and
G there are four possibilities concerning a:
(1) Fa & Ga
(2) Fa & ~Ga
(3) ~Fa & Ga
(4) ~Fa & ~Ga.
(I will call (1) and (2) the positive instances, (3) and (4) the negative
instances. (2), although a positive instance, is a falsifying one.) It is natural
to think that (1) conﬁrms the law-hypothesis, it is clear that (2) refutes it.
For reasons which will emerge, the status of (4) is ambiguous and so I shall
leave it aside for the present. But what of (3)? Prima facie, if possibility (3) is
realized, then the law-hypothesis is neither refuted nor conﬁrmed. It is true
that (3) refutes another hypothesis: that it is a law that Gs are Fs. But why
should this be thought to conﬁrm that it is a law that Fs are Gs?
39

But suppose, as the Naive Regularity view holds, that we can substi-
tute ‘(x) (Fx ⊃Gx)’ for ‘it is a law that Fs are Gs’. Then, because of the
truth-table for ‘⊃’, it follows that (3) will be a conﬁrmer of the law along
with (1) and (4). So ‘(x) (Fx ⊃Gx)’ cannot be substituted for ‘it is a law
that Fs are Gs’.
Following up this point, I believe that we can see why it is that (3) fails to
conﬁrm the law-hypothesis. As Dretske remarks (1977, p. 261), conﬁrm-
ation is roughly the converse of explanation. (I take him to be speaking
here of the conﬁrmation of hypotheses involving laws.) Suppose that we
have no direct evidence bearing upon the hypothesis that it is a law that Fs
are Gs. If we then come upon an object which is both an F and a G then this
observation would be explained by the law-hypothesis. So it conﬁrms the
hypothesis. Again, if we come upon an object which is neither an F nor a
G, then perhaps it can still be said that this observation is explained by the
law-hypothesis. For, given the law, we know that since the object is not a
G, it cannot be an F. But suppose, ﬁnally, that we come upon something
that is not an F but is a G. There is no case at all for saying that this
observation is explained by the hypothesis that it is a law that Fs are Gs. So
it does not in any way conﬁrm the law.
But, to what has been said so far, the following objection may be urged
by a Regularity theorist. Law-statements at least entail the corresponding
statement of Humean uniformity. From the premiss ‘it is a law that Fs are
Gs’ the material conditional ‘for all x, x is F ⊃x is G’ may be deduced. But,
as we have seen, along with Fs that are Gs, and non-Fs that are non-Gs,
non-Fs that are Gs conﬁrm the material conditional. Observation of non-Fs
that are Gs must therefore conﬁrm the law-statement.
However, this is a bad argument, and there is no reason to accept its
conclusion. It is a false principle that where P entails Q, and R conﬁrms Q,
then R must conﬁrm P. R may be so far from conﬁrming P that it actually
refutes P. That all mice are under three inches long entails that all mice are
under three feet long. The discovery of a mouse two feet long would
conﬁrm the latter proposition but falsify the former.
One might try to restrict the principle by restricting R to propositions
which are compatible with P. This is actually the situation in the case
which we are concerned with. But even this restricted principle fails to
hold. The existence of unicorns entails the existence of animals. The
observation of a zebra, which is compatible with the existence of unicorns,
not merely conﬁrms the existence of animals but does better by establish-
ing their existence. Yet the observation of zebras does nothing to conﬁrm
the existence of unicorns.
40
www.ebook3000.com

That completes my argument to show that one of the paradoxes of
conﬁrmation spells trouble for the Regularity theory. But I ﬁnd an oppor-
tunity to cast some further light upon the theory of the conﬁrmation of
nomological statements.
Michael Tooley has drawn my attention to the following line of argu-
ment. Suppose it to be a law that Fs are Gs. Is it not then equally a law that
non-Gs are non-Fs? But if the latter is a law, then non-Gs which are non-Fs
are certainly conﬁrming instances of the law. For they are ‘positive
instances’ of the law. If observation of them does not conﬁrm it, then
nothing does. But if the observation conﬁrms the law, then it conﬁrms
the logically equivalent law that Fs are Gs.
This argument is interesting because, if correct, it supplies a reason for
thinking that observation of non-G non-Fs may conﬁrm the F!G law, a
reason which does not depend upon taking the law as a material implica-
tion. As a result, it does not have the consequence that non-Fs which are
Gs are conﬁrmers of the law. It drives a wedge between the two types of
negative instance. Another wedge has already appeared with the earlier
suggestion that the law explains why a non-G is a non-F in a way that it
does not explain the observation of a non-F which is a G.
The argument suggested by Tooley, however, has an uncertain point.
Should we allow the premiss that if it is a law that Fs are Gs, then it is a
law that non-Gs are non-Fs? Perhaps all that should be admitted is that if it
is a law that Fs are Gs, then it is the case that all non-Gs are non-Fs. And
indeed, if laws of nature are relations between universals, as will be
argued in Part II, and if there are no negative universals, as I am also
inclined to argue, then it will not be a law that non-Gs are non-Fs. It is true
that I draw a distinction between underived and derived laws (Ch. 10,
Sec. 3), and, given that distinction, I allow it to be a derived law that non-Gs
are non-Fs. But derived laws are supervenient upon underived laws: they
are nothing but entailments of premisses made up of true statements of
underived laws.
If the statement that it is a law that Fs are Gs entails nothing more than
that each non-G is a non-F, then the Tooley argument for thinking that
observation of a non-G non-F conﬁrms the law-hypothesis breaks down.
We have also seen that to argue that because observation of a non-G non-F
conﬁrms the generalization that each non-G is a non-F, it therefore con-
ﬁrms the entailer of ‘each non-G is a non-F’, viz. ‘it is a law that Fs are Gs’,
is to appeal to a false principle.
However, there does seem to be some reason to think that observation
of a non-G non-F conﬁrms in some way that it is a law that Fs are Gs. I am
41

inﬂuenced particularly by the fact that the law seems to explain why all
non-Gs are non-Fs. At the same time, however, Fs that are Gs seem better
conﬁrmers of the law than non-G non-Fs. I suggest that the situation is that
observation of Fs which are Gs provides ﬁrst-grade conﬁrmation, obser-
vation of non-F non-Gs second-grade conﬁrmation, and observation of
non-F Gs no conﬁrmation at all. Working out the suggestion will involve
no appeal to such things as normal background knowledge.
Non-Gs have the following importance in testing the hypothesis that it
is a law that Fs are Gs, or even the hypothesis that all Fs are Gs. Either they
are Fs or they are non-Fs. If they are Fs, however, the hypotheses are
falsiﬁed. Hence observation of a non-G non-F is a case where, as we may
put it, the hypothesis was up for testing but was not falsiﬁed. ‘Survival’ of
such tests is a point in favour of the hypothesis. Non-Fs, by contrast, have
no such importance. Whether they are Gs or are non-Gs, the hypothesis
survives.
I do not think that it matters that in the case of a non-G non-F we may
become aware that it is a non-F before we realize that it is a non-G, and so
lose interest in it as a potential falsiﬁer. The class of non-Gs has a certain
objective logical relation to the hypotheses. The relation is that of being a
class of potential falsiﬁers: because if any of the non-Gs are Fs, then the
hypothesis is falsiﬁed.
Second-grade conﬁrmation, then, is failure to falsify, but failure to
falsify in a context (the context of the non-Gs) which permits the possibil-
ity of falsiﬁcation. The context of the Fs, of course, provides the same
possibility. So an F which is a G provides second-grade conﬁrmation also.
The relative number of Fs by comparison with the non-Gs (intuitively,
there are far fewer ravens than non-black things) may have a further
inﬂuence here, normally tipping the balance towards the worth as con-
ﬁrmers of the positive instances.
But what of the special value as conﬁrmers of observation of Fs which
are Gs? What of ﬁrst-grade conﬁrmation? If we are concerned with mere
universal generalizations, then I do not think that they do have a special
value. (And, as we have seen, even observation of non-Fs which are Gs
must be given some conﬁrmatory value.) But given the right theory of law,
a special value can plausibly be attached.
I shall be arguing in Part II that only the ‘positive instantiations’ of a law
are genuine instantiations of the law. An F that is a G instantiates the law
that Fs are Gs. Non-G non-Fs do not instantiate the law, because there are
no such universals. As a result, in the positive instances there is something
there to be explained: the conjunction of two properties. The conﬁrmation
42
www.ebook3000.com

of the law given by observation of the conjunction is therefore direct in a
way that it is not in the negative cases. What we have in the negative cases
taken by themselves is a mere Humean uniformity: a consequence of the
law but not the law itself. Hence observation of FGs conﬁrm the law in a
way that observation of non-F non-Gs do not.
4
The Problem of Counterfactuals
Law-statements support counterfactuals. If the law-statements are true,
then the counterfactuals supported are said to be true. The statement that
it is a law that Fs are Gs supports the counterfactual that if a, which is not
in fact an F, were to be an F, then it would also be a G. If the law obtains,
then this counterfactual is said to be true.
Statements of mere uniformity, however, do not support counterfac-
tuals in this way. Suppose it to be a mere uniformity that everybody in a
certain room at a certain time is wearing a wrist-watch. There will be no
particular reason to assert that if a, who was not in the room at the time,
had been in the room, then a would have been wearing a wrist-watch.
Statements of Humean uniformity, however, are nothing more than
statements of unrestricted or cosmic uniformity. How can this difference
in scope, this setting the scene in the largest room of all, contribute
anything to the support of counterfactuals? Laws, therefore, cannot be
identiﬁed with mere uniformities.
Notice that it is not part of this argument that law-statements are the
only sort of statement which support counterfactuals. All the soldiers in a
certain place at a certain time may be in uniform. Furthermore, this may be
no accident. Orders may have been given which ensure that soldiers who
are in that place at that time are all in uniform. Under these circumstances,
the counterfactual statement ‘If soldier a had been in that place at that
time, then he would have been wearing uniform’ may well be accounted
true. But it is not a law of nature that soldiers in that place at that time are
wearing uniform.
It is very often the case that, when a counterfactual is said to be true,
it is said to be true in virtue of some necessity, whether that necessity
be logical, nomic or of some other sort. In the soldier case, it seems that
it is only because there are laws governing human actions that the
counterfactual can be asserted. Perhaps soldiers at that place and time
wear uniform as a nomic effect of the issuing of certain orders. Never-
theless, the statement which supports the counterfactual is not a law of
nature.
43

It is to be noticed also that, given a law-statement, there are deﬁnite limits
to the range of individuals which can ﬁgure in the counterfactual statements
sustained by the law-statement. Suppose that we have a law governing the
interaction of pairs of electrons. We can imagine two electrons, E1 and E2,
which do not exist, but still assert that, if they did exist, they would interact as
provided for in the law. Suppose, again, that P is an actually existing proton
and E an actually existing electron. We can assert that, if P were an electron,
P and E would repel each other according to the electron-formula. We might
make such an assertion in the course of developing an argument to show that
P is not an electron. But now suppose P to be a certain quadratic equation or a
certain philosopher. Can we still assert that, if P had not been a quadratic
equation (a philosopher) but an electron, P and E would be governed by the
electron-formula? It is not clear that we can. To suppose that an equation or a
philosopher is an electron is to make such extraordinary suppositions that we
are perhaps not entitled to think that, in these new worlds, the ordinary laws
of physics will continue to hold.
It seems that we can say only this. If P were anything at all, including
something which does not exist, and E an electron, then, for most or for
many values of P, it can be asserted truly that, if P were an electron, it
would repel E according to the electron-formula. This limited result,
however, is amply sufﬁcient to show that the electron-formula is not just
a statement of a Humean uniformity. For the latter does not support
counterfactuals at all.
The argument given so far refutes the suggestion that a law-statement
supports a certain counterfactual if and only if the conjunction of the law-
statement plus the antecedent of the counter-factual entails the truth of the
consequent of the counter-factual. From the conjunction of the electron-
formula, and the premiss that P (which is in fact a quadratic equation or a
philosopher) is an electron, it follows that P obeys the electron-formula.
Yet we have seen reason to doubt that the electron-formula sustains
counterfactuals about what would hold if quadratic equations or philoso-
phers were electrons. Again as Mackie has pointed out (1966), from a
statement of mere uniformity, such as the statement that everybody in a
certain room is wearing a wrist-watch, together with the statement that
randomly chosen a is in the room (actually false), it follows that a is
wearing a wrist-watch. Yet the statement of uniformity clearly does not
support the counterfactual that if a were to be in the room, a would be
wearing a wrist-watch.
It seems plausible, however, that, provided the antecedent of the coun-
terfactual has been fully stated, the sort of entailment just illustrated is a
44
www.ebook3000.com

necessary condition for a law-statement to support a counterfactual. Some
further limiting condition is then required to give necessary and sufﬁcient
conditions for a law-statement to support counterfactuals.
Consider the case of the wrist-watch again. Suppose that in thought we
add a to the persons in the room, although we know that a is in fact not in
the room. We can see no particular reason to think that a will resemble the
people actually in the room in respect of wearing a wrist-watch. This
seems to be the reason why we do not think that the statement of uniform-
ity sustains the counterfactual.
Suppose, again, that we are given an electron-formula, and the false
supposition that P, actually a quadratic equation or a philosopher, is an
electron. The supposition that a quadratic equation (philosopher) is an
electron is so extraordinary, we are so altering the world in making the
supposition, that we have no particular reason to think that the electron-
formula will hold in this altered world. So we do not think that the
electron-formula can sustain a counterfactual involving P.
Suppose, ﬁnally, that ‘all Fs are G’ is a statement of Humean uniformity.
If we suppose that a is an F, although in fact it is not an F, what reason have
we to think that this new F will come within the scope of the uniformity? It
may or it may not. The Humean uniformity is a molecular state of affairs. To
suppose that a is also F is to suppose that the original molecular state of
affairs is augmented by a further state of affairs: a’s being F. What reason is
there to think that it would also be augmented by a’s being G?
But, by comparison, if it is a law that Fs are Gs, and if we suppose, what
is false, that a is an F, and if the supposition that a is an F is not too radical,
there will be no reason to think that the law fails to hold in the altered
world. Hence the law-statement supports the counterfactual.
At this point, however, a difﬁculty raised by David Lewis should be
considered. Suppose that Determinism is true. Determinists assert the
truth of counterfactuals, and we do not think that they are inconsistent
to do so. But when a Determinist supposes falsely that a is F, and then
considers what consequence will follow from this supposition, is he not
involved in inconsistency? For in the real world it is determined that a is
not an F (or, if a is non-existent, it is determined that there is no a). Is a,
then, to be F by a miracle? If so, the Determinist has also to suppose that
Determinism is false. The implausible alternative is that the Determinist
must covertly suppose that world-history is altered in whatever way may
be necessary to bring it about that a is F.
I think that the answer to this is that the second alternative is not so
implausible. In making such a counterfactual supposition, we feel
45

ourselves free to tinker with particular states of affairs fairly much as we
please. We are interested in what the laws, taken by themselves, dictate.
Our false supposition must not be such as to call the laws into question: it
must be a physically possible supposition. (Or, if physically impossible,
we must be abstracting from whatever laws make it physically impos-
sible.) But it does not have to be physically possible relative to the laws
plus actual history and geography.
In a counterfactual supported by laws, the laws call the tune. Why is
this? I take it that it is because the laws involve something which the
Regularity theory denies them to have, and which particular states of
affairs do not have: a certain necessity (which need not be logical). They
say what must happen, and so they have authority in counterfactual
reasoning.
What has been done so far is this. (1) It has been pointed out that law-
statements (in many cases) do, but statements of local and Humean
uniformity in general do not, support counterfactuals. Laws are therefore
not Humean uniformities. (2) A theory of what it is for a law-statement to
support a counterfactual was sketched.2 The law-statement plus the fully
stated antecedent of the counterfactual must entail the consequent of the
counterfactual. Furthermore, the supposition of the truth of the antecedent
of the counterfactual must not be such as to bring into doubt whether, in
this new thought-situation, the law continues to hold. It is the necessity of
the law which then ensures the truth of the counterfactual. This seems to
explain why statements of Humean uniformity do not sustain counter-
factuals, and explain why law-statements do. So, again, laws are not
simply Humean uniformities.
An important attempt to evade the above arguments has been made by
Mackie (1966). Suppose that we have evidence which makes it inductively
very probable that all Fs are Gs. We then consider an a which we know or
believe not to exist, or not to be an F. On the supposition that a is an F,
however, it is inductively very probable that a is a G. We are therefore
entitled to assert that if a were to be an F, then it would be a G.
This point, neutral in itself, can then be used to show how Humean
uniformities might support counterfactuals, and so be laws after all. The
argument is very simple. When we actually assert the existence of a
Humean
uniformity,
and
further
use
the
assertion
to
support
2
Notice that this is not put forward as a general theory of what it is for a statement to
support a counterfactual. A uniﬁed general theory may be too much to hope for. At any
rate, I have not sought to give one.
46
www.ebook3000.com

counterfactuals, it will be because we think we have inductive evidence for
the obtaining of this uniformity. Hence the counterfactual is justiﬁed.
The ﬁrst thing to be said about this suggestion is something which
Mackie himself points out. If the Regularity theorist is to take this way
out of the problem of counterfactuals, then it must be possible to give a
rational solution to the Problem of Induction while assuming that the
laws of nature are mere uniformities. It is impossible to combine (1)
Mackie’s way out, (2) the Regularity theory of laws with (3) inductive
scepticism. I believe, however, and will argue in the next section, that
to accept a Regularity theory of laws is to be committed to inductive
scepticism.
I have two other difﬁculties with Mackie’s suggestion. First, if state-
ments of laws of nature sustain counterfactuals in this manner, then the
counterfactuals ought to inherit the uncertainty which attends inductive
justiﬁcation. Suppose that all the observed Fs are Gs, but that there is other
evidence which counsels a little caution about whether it is a law that Fs
are Gs. It would be rational to reason: on the basis of the evidence it is
probable, but not certain, that it is a law that Fs are Gs. The appropriate
counterfactual would appear to be: ‘If a were to be an F, then it is very
probable that a would be a G’. That is to say, the consequent of the
counterfactual will be a statement of probability. (Or, if Mackie’s account
of counterfactuals as condensed arguments is correct, the conclusion of the
argument will be a statement of probability.)
But, given these circumstances, I do not think that we would assert this
counterfactual. Either it is a law that Fs are Gs, or it is not. If it is a law,
then the counterfactual that is true is just ‘If a were to be an F, then a would
be a G’. If it is not a law, then, in default of other facts, the counterfactual is
simply false. If Mackie is right, then counterfactuals of this sort should
reﬂect our inductive uncertainties. But they seem not to do so. We do not
assert a counterfactual with a probabilistic consequent. Rather, we assert a
counterfactual with the strong consequent, but assert it in a suitably
tentative manner.
The second objection is this. It seems logically possible that a rational
creature should have knowledge (or at least true beliefs) about the content
of some or all of the laws of nature, although that knowledge or belief was
not inductively acquired or supported. Now might not such a creature use
law-statements to support counterfactuals in just the same way that we
do? It seems possible. Yet how would it be possible if the assertion of such
counterfactuals involves reliance upon an inductive inference from ante-
cedent to consequent?
47

I know of no other way besides Mackie’s in which a Regularity theorist
can hope to solve the problem for his analysis posed by the fact that law-
statements sustain counter-factuals.
I will ﬁnish this section by mentioning a point put to me by Chris
Mortensen in correspondence. The traditional difﬁculty for the Regularity
theory which we have been exploring is this. If it is a law that Fs are Gs,
then it will often be the case that we wish to assert that if a, which is not an
F, had been an F, then it would have been a G. But a mere regularity
cannot sustain such counterfactuals. Here is Mortensen’s new difﬁculty.
Suppose instead that we consider an actual F which is a G. Will we not
often be prepared to assert that if this thing had not been a G then it would
not have been an F? If it had not expanded, then it would not have been a
metal. But can the Regularity theorist give an account of such counter-
factuals? Why assume that the regularity would have been maintained if
the object had not been a G? Why not instead assume that if the thing had
not been a G, it would still have been an F, and the regularity (law) would
have failed?
5
The Problem of Induction
In this section it will be argued that if laws of nature are nothing but
Humean uniformities, then inductive scepticism is inevitable. The argu-
ment has its complications, so it may be advisable to begin by sketching its
course.
I start from the premiss that ordinary inductive inference, ordinary
inference from the observed to the unobserved, is, although invalid, never-
theless a rational form of inference. I add that not merely is it the case that
induction is rational, but it is a necessary truth that it is so.
To say that the rationality of induction is a necessary truth does not, of
course, absolve us from saying why it is a necessary truth. After all, Hume
denied that it was a truth at all. We need an explanation of the rationality
of induction.
My own explanation is this. The sort of observational evidence which we
have makes it rational to postulate laws which underlie, and are in some
sense distinct from, the observational evidence. The inference to the laws is
a case of inference to the best explanation. (Whether this inference is
governed by any rules of (non-deductive) logic is a matter about which
I am agnostic.) If the inferred laws exist, then, of course, they entail condi-
tional predictions about the unobserved (‘if it is an F, then it will be a G’).
48
www.ebook3000.com

Suppose, however, that laws of nature are conceived of as mere
Humean uniformities. Then, I contend, this explanation of the necessity
of the rationality of induction must fail. On that view, the law is nothing
more than the conjunction of its observed manifestations with its unob-
served manifestations. Such a law is not an explanation of the observa-
tions. Indeed, as Hume perceived, the true form of the inductive inference
then becomes simply an inference from the observed cases to the unob-
served cases. And, given that the law is just the observed plus the unob-
served cases, that inference, I think Hume was right to argue, is an
irrational inference.
Hume did not consider the possibility of using non-valid inductive
arguments involving logical probabilities. But I contend that they are
worthless where laws are conceived of as Hume conceived of them.
Hume’s instinct was right.
To tie up this argument it is necessary to ask why inference to the best
explanation is rational. But that I think is analytic in a fairly obvious way.
If making such an inference is not rational, what is? It may still be asked
why the inference to underlying laws is the best explanation of our induct-
ive evidence. The only answer to that is to challenge the questioner to ﬁnd
a better explanation.
I will now try to spell out the steps of this argument, concentrating upon
the case against the Regularity theory.
1.
Inductive inference is rational. We make inferences from the observed
to the unobserved. Such inferences are central to the conduct of life. It is
notorious among philosophers that these inferences are strictly invalid and
also that they are very difﬁcult to formalize. Are they nevertheless
rational? In ordinary life we assume without question that they are
rational. Hume, however, denied that they are rational. This constitutes
his inductive scepticism.
Inductive scepticism is one of those sceptical theses that question part of
the bed-rock of our beliefs. (As opposed, say, to scepticism about the
existence of God, or the claims of psychical research.) It is this bed-rock
of beliefs which G. E. Moore defended in his vindication of commonsense
(1925). I think that he was right to defend them. This central core has the
characteristic that we are much more certain of their truth than any of the
philosophical arguments used to make us feel sceptical about them. We
think, or we should think, that it is more likely that the arguments are
unsound in some way (philosophy is very difﬁcult) than that the beliefs
are false.
49

One of the problems involved in casting doubt upon such beliefs is that
the doubt-casting arguments require premisses, but it is not easy to see
from where the premisses can be collected. To use premisses which are not
drawn from the bed-rock of our beliefs is to bring the less certain as a
reason for doubting the more certain. It appears that the best situation
which the sceptic can hope for is to play off some of our truly fundamental
beliefs against others. But such beliefs seem to cohere reasonably well. It
takes a philosophically sophisticated argument to make a case for there
being such an incoherence. But such an argument will again fall under
suspicion for the reason already given: it will be less certain than our
certainty that our system of fundamental beliefs is a coherent one.
It is to be noted also, as Hume so conspicuously noted, that a philoso-
pher’s denial of one of these fundamental beliefs always involves him in a
certain amount of mauvaise foi. He may believe the sceptical theory, or,
more likely, experience an illusion of belief, while he is in his study. But in
his ordinary thinking and reasoning he will return to the unsceptical belief
which he has ofﬁcially repudiated. As Hume said:
Nature, by an absolute and uncontrollable necessity, has determined us
to judge as well as to breathe and feel . . . (Treatise, Bk I, Pt IV, Sec. 1)
Now, of all our beliefs, the belief in the rationality of our inferences to the
unobserved has claims to be our most basic belief of all. It is therefore a
most serious philosophical objection to a philosophical theory if it has
inductive scepticism as a consequence. But, I claim, the Regularity theory
has just this consequence.
2.
That induction is rational is a necessary truth. Some of our bedrock
beliefs are contingent (‘I am now writing’), others are necessary (‘7+5=12’).
What is the status of our belief that inductive inference is rational? Is
inductive scepticism contingently false or necessarily so? It seems that
the rationality of inductive inference must be a necessary truth. For sup-
pose it to be contingent. The question must surely come up then how we
can know, or rationally believe, this contingent truth. It would seem to be
the sort of contingent truth for which we would have to have inductive
reasons. (How could we know it a priori?) But this involves a vicious
regress of justiﬁcation. Assuming then, as I am assuming, that we know
or rationally believe that inductive inference is rational, then it must be a
necessary truth that induction is rational. (Earlier I failed to appreciate this
point. David Stove convinced me of my error. He remains ﬁrm in his
condemnation of all the further steps of my argument.)
50
www.ebook3000.com

3.
The explication of this necessary truth. If it is a necessary truth, why is
it a necessary truth? According to some philosophers, for instance Straw-
son (1952, Ch. 9), it is a necessary truth because it is part of the meaning of
the word ‘rational’ that ordinary inductive inferences are rational. If
necessary truths are analytic, then there is a sense in which this Strawso-
nian answer must be correct. It is nevertheless utterly unsatisfying. We
want to be given some deeper reason why the rejecting of inductive
inference as rational ﬂies in the face of the meaning of the word ‘rational’.
(Compare this with somebody who said that ‘no surface could be red and
green all over at the same time’ was guaranteed by the meanings of ‘red’
and ‘green’, but who told us nothing more.)
My object is to show that, if the Regularity theory of law is accepted,
then we cannot explicate the necessity of the rationality of inductive
inference. But it seems easiest to proceed by giving, at least in outline,
my own explication of that necessity and then showing, by contrast, the
difﬁculties involved in holding the Regularity view.
Suppose that all observed Fs are Gs, and that the further observational
circumstances are such as to make it rational to believe that it is a law that
Fs are Gs. Suppose that it is in fact a law. According to the Regularity
view, the law is exhausted by the fact that the observed Fs are Gs and the
unobserved Fs are Gs. I hold, however, that the law involves an extra
thing, some further state of affairs. The presence of this extra thing (in my
view a relation between universals, but I do not want to depend here upon
the details of my view) serves, ﬁrst, to explain why all the observed Fs are
Gs, and, second, to entail that any unobserved Fs there are will be Gs.3 The
postulation of the extra thing is a case of inference to the best explanation.
It is rational to postulate what best explains the phenomena. Induction is
thus rational, because it is a case of inference to the best explanation.
All this is a promissory note, dependent upon a satisfactory theory of an
extra thing which will serve both as best explainer of the observations and
entailer of conclusions about the unobserved. I will try to redeem the note
in Chapter 6, Section 7. But I hope enough has been said for the purpose of
criticizing the Regularity theory. On my view, we have a pattern of
inference which runs observed instances ! law ! unobserved instances.
But the Regularity theorist cannot take such a pattern seriously. For him it
reduces to: observed instances ! observed instances + unobserved
instances [his account of the law] ! unobserved instances. Clearly this
3
Subject to a qualifying condition which will emerge in Part II.
51

is no more than the pattern of inference: observed instances ! unobserved
instances. As a Regularity theorist, Hume understood this very well, and
so constantly presented the inference in this way.
But if the inference is of this latter pattern, then it seems that Hume was
also right to regard it as irrational. In the pattern of inference which
I favour we have ﬁrst a passage from observations to the entity which
best explains the observations. It seems reasonable(!) to regard this as a
rational, although non-deductive, inference. Second, we have a deductive
passage from the entity to the unobserved cases. But what makes the
Regularity theorist’s preferred pattern of inference rational? On his view
the law does not explain the observations. As Hume pointed out, the
observed cases do not entail that the unobserved cases will resemble them.
There seems to be no other way to explicate the rationality of the inference.
4.
Can the Regularity theorist’s inference be saved by necessary connections
in the world? Hume maintains that there is no logically necessary connec-
tion between distinct existences, where present and future (or the
observed and the unobserved) are taken to be paradigms of distinct
existences. We can put his point in a contemporary way by saying that
he denies that there is any de re logical necessity linking such distinct
things as the present and the future. This is an essential step in his
argument. If it could be successfully denied, then it might be possible to
show the rationality of inductive inference while upholding a Regularity
theory of the nature of laws.
I believe that Hume was right to deny the existence of a de re logical
necessity linking the present and the future (the observed and the unob-
served). But here I will conﬁne myself to pointing out what a dialectically
weak position the Regularity theorist will place himself in if he tries to
introduce such a necessity. It is argued against the Regularity theory, for
all the plausible reasons which we have already noted in previous chap-
ters, that if it is a law of nature that all Fs are Gs, then this is not a mere
material implication. Pace the Regularity theory, some stronger connec-
tion, some necessity linking being F and being G, is required. This the
Regularity theorist denies. But now suppose that the Regularity theorist,
faced with difﬁculties about the Problem of Induction, tries to solve these
difﬁculties by introducing de re necessary connections between present
and future. Will not his denial of any nomic necessity over and above
mere regularity become quite unprincipled?
5.
Can the Regularity theorist’s inference be saved by non-deductive logic?
A second reaction to Hume’s argument requires consideration. D. C.
52
www.ebook3000.com

Williams (1947), D. C. Stove (1973) and J. L. Mackie (1979), Stove inﬂu-
enced by Williams, and Mackie by Stove, point out that Hume overlooked,
and failed to argue against, the possibility that observational premisses,
while they do not entail any conclusion about the unobserved, may yet
bestow some logical probability upon such conclusions. Consider the
argument: 99% of Fs are Gs, a is an F, so, therefore, a is G. The premisses
do not entail the conclusion. Yet, given these premisses, and given no
other relevant information about a, it would obviously be rational to
conclude that a is a G. So, it may be suggested, the evidence that all the
observed Fs are Gs bestows some positive logical probability upon the
proposition that unobserved Fs are also Gs.
A purely mathematical argument can be mounted. It is a necessary truth
of arithmetic that a high proportion of large samples of a population
match the distributions in the population itself. So, given a large number
of observed Fs all of which are Gs, there is a high probability that the
sample matches, or approximately matches, the population of all the Fs,
unobserved as well as observed.
However, there is a conclusive reason for thinking that the principles
of logical probability cannot, by themselves, solve the Regularity theor-
ist’s problem. The difﬁculty is that an argument from logical probability
is of a purely formal sort. As a result, it cannot differentiate between
more and less ‘natural’ classes. The fact that all hitherto observed
emeralds are green might be taken to bestow a probability upon the
hypothesis that all other emeralds are also green. But what of the
hypothesis that all emeralds are green up to 2000 ad but blue there-
after? That is to say, what of the hypothesis that emeralds are grue? If the
evidence we have now (before 2000 ad) bestows a certain logical prob-
ability on the hypothesis that all emeralds are green, why will it not
bestow the same logical probability upon the hypothesis that all emer-
alds are grue?
Objection may be made to the predicate ‘grue’. It may be said that it
involves essential reference to a particular time (2000 ad) which ‘green’
does not. It may be said that, on the ‘grue’ hypothesis, a change occurs in
emeralds at 2000 ad in a way that a change does not occur on the ‘green’
hypothesis. To these objections Goodman has given replies (1954). But we
do not here need to consider whether the replies are any good or not. For,
if it is just a formal argument from logical probability being advanced, any
differences between ‘green’ and ‘grue’ must be irrelevant. The observed
sample of emeralds are green. The observed sample of emeralds are grue.
The mathematics is the same in both cases.
53

As a result, if an argument from logical probability is to assist the
Regularity theorist, he will have to use some more restricted principle.
Obviously, he ought in some way to restrict the principle to cases where
natural predicates such as ‘green’ are used, as opposed to unnatural
predicates such as ‘grue’. I would argue myself that this involves bringing
in universals. The observed Fs and the unobserved Fs must be genuinely
the same, or at least objectively similar where similarity is cashed in terms
of universals. At any rate, let us suppose that a restricted principle can be
formulated, whether or not it involves universals. The difﬁculty is that it
remains impossible to see how the new principle is to be justiﬁed.
To repeat. The Regularity theorist’s problem is to justify an inference
from, say, observed emeralds to unobserved emeralds, while denying that
there is any intermediate law. For his concept of law is that it is simply the
greenness of observed emeralds plus the greenness of unobserved emer-
alds. How then can it help him to add the unobserved class to the
observed class, and then argue from the observed class to this total class
using the mathematics of probability? His problem is to get from the
observed class to a completely disjoint class. No logical probability can
help here. (And if it did, it would equally help with unnatural as well as
natural predicates.)
The argument as a whole may be put this way. The task is to explicate
the rationality of a inductive inference from P (say that all observed
emeralds are green) to R (say that unobserved emeralds are green). I say
that we can do this if we accept that P permits a non-deductive inference
to a law Q, that all emeralds are green, from which it follows that R. But
our concept of the law must be a suitable one. If our concept of law is
simply the concept of P+R, the inference pattern becomes P ! (P+R),
(P+R) ! R, which reduces to P ! R. That inference pattern Hume was
right to think non-rational. It remains to show that there is a concept of Q,
which allows rational P ! Q. I believe that this demand can be satisﬁed if
Q is conceived of as a relation between universals, and P ! Q conceived of
as a case of inference to the best explanation.
6.
Why is inference to the best explanation rational? The inference from P to
Q is not a deductive one. What then makes it rational? Only that Q, the
existence of an appropriate law, is the best explanation which can be given
of the observations. But why is an inference to the best explanation rational?
Here I do think that we can ﬁnally appeal to the meanings of words, the
appeal which Strawson and others made too soon. To infer to the best
explanation is part of what it is to be rational. If that is not rational, what is?
54
www.ebook3000.com

It could still be wondered whether an appeal to laws is really the best
explanation of P. To that we can reply with a challenge ‘Produce a better,
or equally good, explanation’. Perhaps the challenge can be met. We
simply wait and see.
Notice ﬁnally that non-deductive logic may have a part to play in
exhibiting the rationality of the inferences from P to Q. It may be that
the inference to laws as the best explanations of the observed facts can be
formalized, or partially formalized, and that principles of inductive logic
have a part to play in the formalization. All I deﬁnitely deny is that such
principles can aid the Regularity theorist to make a rational inference from
the observed to the unobserved.
55

5
Can the Regularity theory be
sophisticated?
B
1
Preliminary
The strength of the case against the Naive Regularity theory of laws in
particular, and the Regularity theory of laws in general, should now be
evident. Some of the difﬁculties which have been rehearsed have been
appreciated by Regularity theorists themselves. It is rather generally rec-
ognized that the class of Humean uniformities includes members which
we do not wish to include among the laws of nature. A number of
Regularity theorists have also recognized that it is not even easy to say
what a uniformity is. The trouble here is provided by strange predicates
such as ‘grue’. Suppose that all Fs are Gs, but that the predicates ‘F’ and
‘G’ pick out what we would naturally think of as a heterogeneous miscel-
lany. Is this a Humean uniformity? Intuitively, no. But the unsupplemen-
ted Naive Regularity theory seems to lack the resources to eliminate such
‘uniformities’.
More recently, Regularity theorists have faced up to the difﬁculties
posed for their view by the apparent existence in nature of irreducibly
probabilistic laws. There is no simple emendation of the Naive theory
available for dealing with such laws. For instance, it is no good substitut-
ing relative frequencies for uniformities, because certain relative frequen-
cies are only the most probable, not the inevitable, manifestations of
probabilistic laws. The only way to preserve a Regularity theory seems
to be to introduce objective single-case chances or propensities, and then
assert that probabilistic laws are uniformities linking more ordinary prop-
erties with these new sorts of property.
Against this background, let us consider various attempts to produce
sophisticated versions of the Regularity theory. (For an account of the
earlier literature, see Suchting, 1974.) The attempts fall under two heads
in the ﬁrst place. First, there are those who look for an external criterion to
mark off ‘good’ from ‘bad’ uniformities. The criterion given is always, in a
broad sense, epistemic. It is a matter of our cognitive attitudes to the
56
www.ebook3000.com

uniformities – what evidence we have for them, and so forth. Second, there
are those who look for an internal criterion, something about the uniform-
ities themselves. There are, in turn, two types of view here. First, there is
Brian Skyrms’ recent attempt (1980) to mark off the good uniformities as
the resilient ones. This is an objectivist version of the Epistemic solution.
Second, there is the Ramsey–Lewis view, where the criterion of goodness
remains external to any individual uniformity, but it is internal to the
whole class. Only those uniformities which hang together in a certain
systematic way are accepted as laws of nature. In the rest of this chapter
these three approaches will be criticized. This completes the case against
the Regularity theory of laws.
2
Epistemic restriction upon uniformities
Molnar (1969) gives the following account of such restrictions. What I have
called the Naive Regularity theory requires to be supplemented by
a clause requiring p [the statement of Humean regularity] to be known in
a certain way, or that the evidence for it be of a certain kind, or that the
evidence be acquired in a certain manner. (p. 82)
Two quotations may help to give the ﬂavour. Goodman says forthrightly:
I want . . . to emphasize the Humean idea that rather than a sentence
being used for prediction because it is a law, it is called a law because it is
used for prediction . . . (1954, p. 26)
By contrast, there are laboured complexities from Ayer (quite foreign to
his usual style!):
Accordingly I suggest that for someone to treat a statement of the form ‘if
anything has ϕ it has ψ’ as expressing a law of nature, it is sufﬁcient (i)
that subject to a willingness to explain away exceptions he believes that
in a non-trivial sense everything which in fact has ϕ has ψ (ii) that his
belief that something which has ϕ has ψ is not liable to be weakened by
the discovery that the object in question also has some other property X,
provided (a) that X does not logically entail not–ψ (b) that X is not a
manifestation of not–ϕ (c) that the discovery that something had
X would not in itself seriously weaken his belief that it had ϕ (d) that
he does not regard the statement ‘if anything has ϕ and not–X it has ψ’ as
a more exact statement of the generalization that he was intending to
express. (1956, pp. 233–4)
57

Even all this is not supposed to give more than a sufﬁcient condition for a
law of nature! It is not necessary, partly because:
. . . clearly it makes sense to say that there are laws of nature which
remain unknown. (p. 234)
Suchting (1974, pp. 76–7), besides referring to Goodman and Ayer,
mentions Braithwaite (1927), Ramsey (1929) and Strawson (1952) among
those who favour epistemic versions of the Regularity theory. Elements of
such an approach are, of course, to be found in Hume himself. (See his
second deﬁnition of ‘cause’ in the Treatise, Bk I, Pt III, Sec. XIV.) My
criticism of Epistemic theories is indebted to Molnar, Suchting and
Dretske (1977, pp. 254–5). Dretske gives further references.
The second quotation from Ayer gives the principal reason for rejecting
any attempt to sophisticate the Regularity theory by adding epistemic
conditions. A law can be unknown, its existence not even suspected.
Hence a law cannot be a Humean uniformity to which persons have some
epistemic attitude.
How might this objection be met? It is hard to see what the Epistemic
theorist can do except appeal to counterfactuals. A Humean uniformity is
a law if and only if either we have a certain epistemic attitude, A, to it, or,
if certain other conditions C (presumably also epistemic conditions) had
obtained, we would have had attitude A to it. For instance, suppose that
H is a Humean uniformity of which in fact we know nothing. C might be
coming to know (true) evidence E, and then, on the basis of this and
ordinary
scientiﬁc
reasoning,
coming
to
the
rational
belief
that
H obtained. Attitude A might be the attitude of using the proposition that
H obtains both as a basis for predictions and in counterfactual reasoning.
An obvious analogy is the Phenomenalist’s attempt to give the truth-
conditions for statements about unobserved objects, events, etc. in terms of
sense-experiences which perceivers would have if, contrary to fact, their
circumstances were of a certain sort.
To mention the analogy is already to place the Epistemic theorist’s
appeal to counterfactuals under a cloud. The Phenomenalist’s appeal to
counterfactuals is known to face great difﬁculties. One serious problem for
an Epistemic theorist is that his counterfactuals apparently demand the
existence of certain laws: laws about epistemic attitudes. For what else
would justify his counterfactuals? But if so, his account is threatened by
circularity. A Humean uniformity is a law if we would take a certain
epistemic attitude, A, to it, under certain epistemic circumstances, C. Yet
the conditional can only hold provided that there are laws suitably linking
58
www.ebook3000.com

these epistemic attitudes with these circumstances. But what account is to
be given of these laws?
The laws will have to be Humean uniformities. Furthermore, they must
be uniformities to which we have the right epistemic attitudes.
It is not clear to me whether or not this account can avoid circularity.
But, in any case, the following objection can be brought. It is clearly
possible that there should be a universe governed by laws, and one in
which there were some Humean uniformities which we would not wish to
account laws, but in which there were no minds. (It might be very like our
universe if, as seems likely enough, the emergence of rationality demands
highly speciﬁc conditions.) But in this universe there would be no
Humean regularities involving epistemic attitudes, and hence, according
to the Epistemic theorist, no laws.
Could the Epistemic theorist who wishes to give an account of this law-
governed but mindless universe, treat the required laws of epistemic
attitude as uninstantiated laws? We have seen (Ch. 2, Sec. 7) that the
concept of an uninstantiated law must be given some countenance. Func-
tional laws, for instance, may involve ‘missing values’. But what account
can a Regularity theorist give of uninstantiated laws? For him, they must
surely be in some way parasitic upon, perhaps deduced from, instantiated
laws, that is, instantiated uniformities. But in a mindless universe, what
would these regularities be? Even if there were certain actual regularities
from which hypothetical regularities about the behaviour of minded
objects could be extrapolated, this would be pure luck. It would depend
upon the particular laws which happened to hold in the universe, for
instance whether physicalism happened to be true. So any attempted
escape via uninstantiated laws seems blocked.
In any case, Michael Tooley has pointed out to me a still more radical
possibility which would rule out any appeal by the Epistemic theorist to
counterfactuals based upon laws. Might there not have been laws of
nature which actually rule out the possibility of there being any minds?
For instance, the laws might have been such that they only permitted
things of very simple structure to exist. Since the Epistemic theorist is a
Regularity theorist he must hold that what the laws of nature are is a
contingent matter. Hence he must allow the possibility of laws which
make minds nomically impossible. But he can give no account of these
in his terms.
Epistemic theories may also face another, more direct, threat of circular-
ity. Can the required concepts of knowledge, rational belief, etc. be ana-
lysed without making appeal to the notion of law? Naturalistic accounts of
59

these notions, at least, appeal to the notions of law and/or cause. (I have
argued for an account of knowledge in terms of law in my 1973, Pt III.)
Cause in turn may have to be analysed in terms of law.
There is a ﬁnal, rather fundamental, difﬁculty for the Epistemic
approach. Why is a certain Humean uniformity the object of the epistemic
attitudes appropriate for laws, while another is not? If the reproach is to be
avoided that the difference is ontologically arbitrary, then it must be said
that the difference of attitude is based upon a real or supposed difference
in the objective nature of the uniformities in question. (The epistemic
counterfactuals associated with unknown laws will in particular require
such an objective ground.) But if there are these objective differences, then
why should not they by themselves serve to mark off the Humean uniform-
ities which are to be accounted laws from those which are not to be so
accounted? In this way, the Epistemic sophistication of the Regularity
theory passes naturally over into either that of the Resiliency or the
Systematic approach.
This last objection shows that an attempt to modify the Epistemic view
by talking only about the regularities which it would be rational to treat in
certain epistemic ways, must appeal to differences in the regularities
which make rational the difference in epistemic attitude. The modiﬁcation
therefore passes over into one of the Objectivist or internal solutions
although in a concealed manner.
3
The Resiliency solution
Skyrms’ view has already been discussed in Chapter 3, Section 5, in
connection with probabilistic laws.1 As a result, it can be dealt with fairly
brieﬂy here. Suppose it to be a Humean uniformity that Fs are Gs. What
further condition will turn it into a law? We want Fs to be Gs resiliently,
that is to say, we want there to be actual Fs which are Gs in every
nomically possible circumstance. That demand, the demand for absolute
resiliency, cannot be met, of course. But, Skyrms points out, we might get
relative resiliency. It might be that there are Fs which are Hs, which are Js,
which are Ks . . . where the class of factors {H,J,K. . .} covers a wide range of
suitable circumstances. Then, and only then, the uniformity is a law.
How wide must the range of factors be, and what makes the factors
suitable? Intuitively, it will be the instantiation of many factors which put
1
It was noted there that Skyrms himself does not want to interpret resiliency in an
objectivist way. But it is a natural and interesting way to take it.
60
www.ebook3000.com

Fs to the test, factors which would produce an F non-G if it is nomically
possible to produce such a thing. Consider, for instance, Tooley’s descrip-
tion of the case of Smith’s garden (Ch. 3, Sec. 2):
All the fruit in Smith’s garden at any time are apples. When one attempts
to take an orange into the garden, it turns into an elephant. Bananas so
treated become apples as they cross the boundary, while pears are
resisted by a force that cannot be overcome. Cherry trees planted in the
garden bear apples or they bear nothing at all. (1977, p. 686)
The generalization about the fruit in Smith’s garden is highly resilient
because it holds in a wide variety of circumstances which could have been
expected to falsify it if it was falsiﬁable.
The objection, however, is obvious and has already been raised against
Skyrms’ treatment of probabilistic laws. Why should there not be laws
which are in fact unresilient? If it is a law that Fs are Gs then, by deﬁnition,
it is potentially resilient. It is not physically possible that there should be a
K such that, if there is an F which is a K, it is not a G. But why should
nature be so obliging as to furnish us with reasons for thinking that there is
no such K? Why should there be Fs accompanied by factors which are
plausible, but failed, candidates for being K? Why should not Smith’s
garden exist in a remote country which contained no fruit but apples,
yet still it be a law that it bear nothing but apples? It seems to me that only
a vulgar positivism could make us reject such a possibility.
For this reason, then, the Resiliency solution must be rejected. It is to be
noted in any case that this solution to the problems faced by the Naive
Regularity theory will have to incorporate many elements of the System-
atic solution, still to be discussed. For how is the Resiliency theorist to give
an account of what it is to be a factor which genuinely tests a putative law?
He can only do this if he can ﬁlter out the nomically signiﬁcant factors
from others. It will be a matter, therefore, of his selecting among the
Humean uniformities those which hang together to make a coherent
system: the Systematic approach. Difﬁculties for the Systematic view will
therefore, in general, be difﬁculties for the Resiliency approach.
4
Systematic restrictions upon uniformities
F. P. Ramsey put forward the Systematic view in a paper written in 1928,
‘Universals of Law and of Fact’ (Ramsey, 1978). He abandoned the view in
a paper written in 1929, but there summarized it deftly, saying that the
uniformities which we call laws are the
61

consequences of those propositions which we should take as axioms if
we knew everything and organized it as simply as possible in a deduct-
ive system. (1978, p. 138)
This formulation makes the axioms laws because they are among the
consequences of themselves.
A preliminary difﬁculty is that, on the face of it, Ramsey’s suggestion is
an epistemic one. As David Lewis says (1973, p. 73) it seems to involve ‘a
counterfactual about omniscience’. However, we may agree with Lewis
(and Ramsey himself, 1978, pp. 131–2) that no such counterfactual is really
involved. Consider the class of the Humean uniformities among which we
select to form our deductive system. Even though many of the uniform-
ities will be unknown, corresponding to each uniformity, known or
unknown, is a true proposition. (It is clear that there are unknown truths.
What they are is, fortunately, something which does not have to be
discussed here.) It is an objective fact that certain deductive relations hold
between these true propositions so that the propositions, and sub-sets of
them, form various deductive systems. Standards of simplicity are per-
haps human standards. But, it may be hoped, they are standards about
which humans agree, and so the standards are in a sense objective.
Lewis endorses the Ramseyan view. He develops it thus:
Whatever we may or may not ever come to know, there exist (as abstract
objects) innumerable true deductive systems: deductively closed, axio-
matizable sets of true sentences. Of these true deductive systems, some
can be axiomatized more simply than others. Also, some of them have
more strength, or information content, than others. The virtues of simplicity
and strength tend to conﬂict. Simplicity without strength can be had
from pure logic, strength without simplicity from (the deductive closure
of) an almanac. . . What we value in a deductive system is a properly
balanced combination of simplicity and strength – as much of both as
truth and our way of balancing permit. (p. 73)
He goes on:
We can restate Ramsey’s 1928 theory of lawhood as follows: a contingent
generalization [a statement of Humean uniformity] is a law of nature if and
only if it appears as a theorem (or axiom) in each of the true deductive
systems that achieves a best combination of simplicity and strength. (p. 73)
It is to be noted that the class of Humean uniformities from which the laws
of nature are to be selected can be thought of as including every ‘vacuous’
62
www.ebook3000.com

law. None of these laws bestow any strength. But inclusion of a selected
few along with instantiated uniformities may increase the simplicity of
systems of the latter by the ﬁlling in of gaps. These selected few are the
uninstantiated laws recognized by scientists.
This Ramsey–Lewis suggestion seems to me to be the best that a Regu-
larity theorist can do when faced with the problem of distinguishing
between laws of nature and mere accidental Humean uniformities. It is
certainly superior to Epistemic solutions of the problem. (It might be
improved still further by incorporating elements of the Resiliency view.)
Furthermore, as I will try to bring out at the end of this section, it is based
upon a genuine insight. Nevertheless, it faces a number of difﬁculties. It is
to be noted, also, that even if we grant that it solves the problem about
accidental uniformities, it does little to meet the difﬁculties for a Regularity
theory proposed in Chapters 3 and 4.
The ﬁrst objection which may be made to the Systematic solution is that
an element of subjectivism remains. We have already noticed that it has to
involve our standards of simplicity, which, even granted that they are
shared by all rational mankind, may not be shared by other rational
creatures. The same point seems to hold for standards of strength. Lewis
also refers to ‘our way of balancing’ simplicity and strength. May there not
be irresoluble conﬂicts about the exact point of balance? A Rationalist
temperament might value simplicity where an Empiricist valued strength.
If such a conﬂict arose, there could for Lewis be no truth of the matter.2
Second, the Systematic solution faces a difﬁculty involving Humean
‘uniformities’ picked out by predicates such as Goodman’s ‘grue’. If we
take the best system formed from the natural, or non-grue-like, predicates,
then it seems that, by introducing these strange predicates, systems which
are just as good or even better might be formed.
Suppose, for instance, that the natural system contains three fundamen-
tal laws: Fs are Gs, Hs are Js, Ks are Ls. Let us unify them in the following
way. Deﬁne an M as ‘an F or an H or a K’. Deﬁne an N as ‘a G, or a J or an
L’. We then have a ‘single’ fundamental law: Ms are Ns. But now what is
wrong with treating M-ness and N-ness as real properties linked by a real
uniformity, and treating the original ‘properties’ as artiﬁcial divisions of
the Ms and the Ns? M-ness and N-ness cannot be ruled out by an appeal to
the criterion of simplicity. That criterion is applied to the deductive
2
Lewis tells me that he thinks that the attraction of the Systematic view rests upon the (so
far reasonable) hope that the winning system is so far ahead that it wins by any reasonable
standards.
63

organization of sets of uniformities. It is only applied after sets of uniform-
ities have already been formed.
Can it be said that, where the M–N ‘law’ has greater simplicity, it lacks
the strength of the original generalizations? On the new system, given an
F we can deduce that it is an N. But on the old system, we can deduce that
it is a G, and G is a further specialization of N. However, this seems to beg
the question. Suppose that the old system could have been improved,
so that a theoretical identiﬁcation of properties could have been made:
G = J = L. To say that an F was a G would then have been no more
informative than saying that it is a G or a J or an L. But the new predicate
‘N’ is being supposed to pick out a single property which the predicates
‘G’, ‘J’ and ‘L’ artiﬁcially break up. From the standpoint of the ‘property’
N, therefore, G is J, and J is L.
Goodman, and perhaps other Epistemic theorists, do not have to be
overly concerned with this problem. For Goodman, the fact that we pick
out certain regularities and project them onto the unobserved is what
makes them laws. But this solution is unavailable to a Systematic theorist
because of his much more Realistic view of laws.
However, I do not think that this is an insuperable difﬁculty for the
Systematic theorist. What he must do, however, is to give objective criteria
for distinguishing genuine from pseudo-uniformities. He cannot treat the
classes of things linked together in uniformities as mere classes, or classes
uniﬁed only by the application of the same (!) predicate to each member of
the class. Instead, he will have to carve nature at the joints. He will have to
appeal either to objective resemblances which hold together some, but
only some, classes, or else to objective universals (properties, etc.) which
are instantiated by some but only some classes. For myself, I believe that
the Resemblance solution without universals breaks down. A Regularity
theorist who wants to give objective criteria for real uniformities must be a
Realist about universals.
In the third place, although I have already said that the Systematic view
is open to the objections brought against the Regularity theory in Chap-
ters 3 and 4, I would like to point in particular to the difﬁculty about
counterfactuals. Epistemic theorists may be able to do something with this
problem. For they can urge that it is our preparedness to extrapolate
beyond actual instances falling under a uniformity to merely possible
instances which, wholly or partly, constitutes the lawfulness of the uni-
formity. By comparison, what can the Systematic theorist say? Laws are
those uniformities which form part of the best deductive systematization
of the uniformities. If we imagine a new object and endow it with a certain
64
www.ebook3000.com

property, or if we feign that a real object has a property which it actually
lacks, what reason have we to think that its further properties will ﬁt the
general propositions of the best deductive system? The best deductive
system is a mere de facto systematization. Why should new objects or
changed objects conform to it?
Lewis suggests in reply to this difﬁculty that (a) the best deductive
system of general propositions is an important feature of the world; and
(b) counterfactuals hold important features ﬁxed as far as possible. But
importance is a relative matter. Suppose it to be a law that Fs are Gs,
suppose that a is not F, but it is not an unreasonable suggestion that a be
F. We say that if a had been an F, it would have been a G. According to
Lewis we do this because the system in which the Humean uniformity that
Fs are Gs ﬁts, the system of laws so-called, is important to us. We therefore
keep it constant even while supposing what we know to be false, that a is
F. Suppose, however, that we, or our culture, were quite uninterested in
the system of laws. Then, presumably, it would fail to be the case that if a
were an F, then a would be a G.
But it does not seem that the truth-conditions for counterfactuals can be
as relative as that. We think that if a were an F, then a would have to be a
G. Is this necessity only a necessity relative to standards of importance?
If the Systematic theorist is to give an objective account of such counter-
factuals, his best chance seems to be Mackie’s idea that it is a matter of
inductive inference. But this depends, even waiving other difﬁculties,
upon ﬁnding a solution of the Problem of Induction compatible with a
Regularity theory of laws. I argued in Section 5 of the previous chapter
that this cannot be done.
The fourth objection is that, like any coherence theory, the Systematic
view yields the possibility of equally coherent, but incompatible, system-
atizations. In Chapter 3, Section 6, functional laws were discussed. Given
variable magnitudes P and Q, it may be that only a ﬁnite number of these
magnitudes (magnitude types) are instantiated omnitemporally. The
instantiated magnitudes may be compatible with different, and incompat-
ible, possible functional laws. In such a case, the Systematic view presum-
ably takes ‘the law’ to be that expressed by the simplest formula, where
both intrinsic simplicity, and simplicity of ﬁt with other laws, are taken
into account.
A conventionalist, subjectivist, tendency is already evident. But what of
the case, already discussed, where there appear to be just three fundamen-
tal laws, all functional ones? L1 and L2 do not involve any uninstantiated
values, are different in their mathematical nature, but are equally simple.
65

The third law involves a choice between two formulae, ‘L3’ and ‘L4’,
because it involves uninstantiated values. L3 and L4 would be equally
simple, and L3 closely resembles L1, while L4 closely resembles L2. Either
would appear to do equally well as the third law. It seems to be arbitrary
which is said to be the law.
Lewis (1973, p. 73) said that something is a law of nature
if and only if it appears as a theorem (or axiom) in each of the true
deductive systems that achieves a best combination of simplicity and
strength. [my italics]
No doubt he did not say ‘in any of the equally good true deductive
systems’, because, for example, this would make L3 and L4 both laws,
and ‘L3’ and ‘L4’ would sustain incompatible counterfactuals. But Lewis’
formulation means that, in the case which we have envisaged, there is no
third law. This seems wrong also. I think the least evil is to say that an
arbitrary decision has to be made as to whether L3 or L4 is the third law.
The cost is the revelation that, in certain possible situations, the Ramsey–
Lewis view yields no non-arbitrary answer.
Lewis might not be too worried by this difﬁculty. Perhaps such cases are
part of what he has in mind when he says that lawhood ‘has seemed a
rather vague and difﬁcult concept’ (p. 73). Difﬁcult it certainly is. But is it a
vague one? Scrutinized through the spectacles of a Regularity theory, no
doubt it is. But my own intuition is that the dividing line between laws
and non-laws is a precise one. If the theory to be advanced in the second
half of this book is anywhere near correct, then the dividing line is precise.
And, comparing the theories, is not this difference in precision a disadvan-
tage of the Systematic version of the Regularity theory?
I come ﬁnally to the ﬁfth objection, which is the one on which I place by
far the greatest weight. I begin by saying that I agree with Ramsey and
Lewis that it seems that the uniformities which are manifestations of the
laws of nature can be picked out from the whole class of Humean uni-
formities in the general way that they suggest. (Resiliency considerations
may also be important.) But I deny that this is a necessary truth. I deny,
what they assert, that their criterion is part of our concept of a law of
nature.
Against them, I advance the following thesis. Consider the whole class
of the Humean uniformities. Consider then any class formed by selecting
members of this class, including the whole class and the null-class. I assert
that it is logically possible that the uniformities in the selected class are
manifestations of laws of nature, while the uniformities in the remainder
66
www.ebook3000.com

class are mere accidental uniformities. It is logically possible that every
Humean uniformity is the manifestation of a law of nature, that none are
(‘the Humean universe’), or that any other sub-class is the class of the
manifestations of laws.3
How is this position to be argued for? An example already given in
Chapter 2, Section 3, can be mentioned again. The following seems to be a
meaningful supposition. Given the co-instantiation of a complex of phys-
ical properties, P,Q,R,S, it is a law that a further property, E, emerges. This
emergent law might be quite unintegrated with the other laws of nature. It
might be a ‘nomological dangler’. Far from adding simplicity to the system
of laws, the (P,Q,R,S) ! E law would add complexity. Suppose further
that the conjunction of P,Q,R and S is very rare in the history of the
universe. The law will hardly add any strength to the system of laws.
(Resiliency may also fail.) Indeed, the (P,Q,R,S) ! E uniformity appears
to be just the sort of uniformity that the Ramsey–Lewis theory of lawhood
is designed to exclude. Yet it might be a law.
Here is another consideration. David Stove has pointed out (not in print)
that although contemporary science with good reason views the laws of
nature as forming an integrated system, this was not always so. In past
centuries the working system of generalizations accepted was at least
compatible with a much less integrated set of laws. It seemed quite likely
then that laws of nature were such that the many different sorts of thing in
the universe had each of them their irreducibly different ways of working.
Suppose that what then seemed likely enough to be the truth about the
laws of nature had turned out in fact to be the case. The Systematic theorist
can accept this possibility. He can say that, in that case, the true deductive
system which achieves a best combination of simplicity and strength fails
to achieve a very good combination of simplicity and strength. The winner
is a winner out of a poor ﬁeld.
But a difﬁculty remains. It is the integrated nature of the set of laws
upon which the Systematic theorist relies to show that certain uniformities
(the blackness of races of ravens, moas all dying before ﬁfty) are mere
3
Suchting says: ‘the actual number and distribution of instances of a universal [generaliza-
tion] seem to be, with respect to that universal at least, a completely accidental matter
which could not affect the law-likeness or otherwise of the universal’ (1974, pp. 81–2).
Suchting’s point seems to be equally correct, and the reverse of the point just made. I am
saying that one can keep the Humean uniformities ﬁxed, and vary the laws indeﬁnitely.
He is saying that we can keep the laws ﬁxed, and vary the number and distribution of
their instances indeﬁnitely. I am indebted to Michael Tooley for the observation that
Suchting’s and my points mirror each other in this way.
67

accidents, and not laws. These uniformities do not ﬁt into the simplest,
strongest system. But if the simplest, strongest system is not very simple
and strong, it is likely to lack the resources to eliminate such accidental
uniformities from the privileged set. Let the accidental uniformity be no
more than fairly widespread, and it must be admitted. The patricians,
lacking organization among themselves, will lack the power to exclude
pushy plebeians.
Yet might it not be a mere accident, not a law, that all races of ravens are
black, that all moas die before ﬁfty, and yet it be the case that the laws of
our world cannot be given the degree of systematization necessary to
exclude these uniformities?
For these reasons, then, I think that we ought to reject the Systematic
sophistication of the Regularity theory. What remains to be explained is
the undoubted appeal of the Systematic view. We will understand this
appeal, I think, if we see that the postulation of laws is a case of inference
to the best explanation. The thing to be explained is the observed regular-
ity of the world. Now, other things being equal, of two systems of putative
laws which are compatible with the observed regularities, the better
explainer of the regularities is the system which has the greater simplicity
and strength. For the best explanation explains the most by means of the
least. Explanation uniﬁes.
But while this explains the appeal of the Systematic view, it does not
justify it. There is a sense in which ‘the best explanation’ must be true, for if
it is not true, it is not ‘the best’. But what would be the best explanation if it
were true, need not be true. It is logically possible that there are no laws at
all, even though the regularities of the world are best explained by postu-
lating systems of laws. Among such systems, those with the maximum
strength and simplicity are, all other things being equal, to be preferred as
explanations, although it is logically possible that the actual system of
laws has less strength and simplicity than some other false systems.
If this is correct, then the Systematic approach mistakes good method-
ology about laws for analytic truth about lawhood.
So it seems that neither the Epistemic nor the Resiliency nor the System-
atic approaches can bolster up the great weaknesses of the Regularity
theory of laws. We seem well justiﬁed in looking for some other account
of the nature of laws.
68
www.ebook3000.com

PART II
Laws of nature as relations
between universals

www.ebook3000.com

6
Laws of nature as relations
between universals1
B
1
The need for universals
It will be assumed from this point onwards that it is not possible to
analyse:
(1) It is a law that Fs are Gs
as:
(2) All Fs are Gs.
Nor, it will be assumed, can the Regularity theorist improve upon (2)
while still respecting the spirit of the Regularity theory of law.
It is natural, therefore, to consider whether (1) should be analysed as:
(3) It is physically necessary that Fs are Gs
or:
(4) It is logically necessary that Fs are Gs
where (3) is a contingent necessity, stronger than (2) but weaker than (4).
My own preference is for (3) rather than (4), but I am not concerned to
argue the point at present. But what I do want to argue in this section is
that to countenance either (3) or (4), in a form which will mark any
advance on (2), involves recognizing the reality of universals.
We are now saying that, for it to be a law that an F is a G, it must be
necessary that an F is a G, in some sense of ‘necessary’. But what is the basis
in reality, the truth-maker, the ontological ground, of such necessity?
I suggest that it can only be found in what it is to be an F and what it is to be a G.
In order to see the force of this contention, consider the class of Fs:
a, b, c . . . Fa necessitates Ga, Fb necessitates Gb . . . and so on. Now consider
1
An earlier version of portions of this chapter appeared in Philosophical Topics, Vol. 13,
No. 1, 1982.
71

the universal proposition: for all x, Fx necessitates Gx. Are we to suppose
that this proposition is simply a way of bringing together all the individual
necessitations? If we do suppose this, then we seem to have gone back to a
form of the Regularity theory. The new version could meet the objection
made to the orthodox Regularity theory that no inner necessity is provided
for in the individual instantiations of the law. But it will be exposed to
many of the other difﬁculties which we brought against the Regularity
theory. For instance, no progress would have been made with the Problem
of Induction. In the past, for all x, Fx necessitates Gx. But what good
reason can we have to think that this pattern of necessitation will
continue?
We need, then, to construe the law as something more than a mere
collection of necessitations each holding in the individual case. How is this
to be done? I do not see how it can be done unless it is agreed that there is
something identical in each F which makes it an F, and something identi-
cal in each G which makes it a G. Then, and only then, can the collection of
individual necessitations become more than a mere collection. For then,
and only then, can we say that being an F necessitates being a G and, because
of this, each individual F must be a G. But this is to say that the necessita-
tion involved in a law of nature is a relation between universals.
Suppose that one is a Nominalist in the classical sense of the term, one
who holds that everything there is is a particular, and a particular only.
Because there is nothing identical in the different instantiations of the law,
such a Nominalist, it seems, is forced to hold a Regularity theory of law.
For if he attempts to hold any sort of necessitation theory, then he can
point to no ontological ground for the necessity. He is nailed to Hume’s
cross. A Realist about universals may also hold a Regularity theory of law,
and, indeed, will have great advantages over the Nominalist when it
comes to saying what a uniformity is. But the Realist can also move beyond
the Regularity theory. For he can hold that the uniformity is based upon
something which is not a uniformity: a relationship holding between the
universals involved in the uniformity.
It might be wondered whether even a relationship between universals
can really advance beyond a mere uniformity. Suppose that the universal
F is related to the universal G in such a way that Fs are Gs. Might it not
happen that at a certain point in time F and G come to be related in a
different manner, so that it is no longer the case that Fs are Gs? If this
possibility is admitted, it can hardly be denied that for each instantiation of
F the relation between the two universals might be different. So the law
that (all) Fs are Gs sinks to a mere uniformity again.
72
www.ebook3000.com

But to argue in this way is to fail to see what a relation between
universals is like. If F and G are related by a dyadic relation, a relation
whose terms are conﬁned to these two universals, then it cannot be that
they have this relation at one time or place, yet lack it at another. The
universals F and G are exactly the same things at their different instanti-
ations. They cannot dissolve into different F-nesses and G-nesses at differ-
ent places and times: if they do, we are not dealing with unitary
universals, that is, with universals. As a result, there can be no question
of their being related in a certain way at one place and time, yet not being
related in that way elsewhere. R(F,G) and ~R(F,G) are incompatible states
of affairs. We have still to understand in concrete detail how such a
relation is reﬂected at the level of particulars. But if it holds in one instance,
then it holds in all, because it is the one identical thing in all the instances.
But, it may still be objected, the very same particular may have incompat-
ible properties, including incompatible relational properties, at different
times. Why, then, should not the universal F have R to G at one time, but
have R to H, which is incompatible with G, or simply lack G, at another?
It is true that we speak of the same particular having incompatible
properties at different times. But I take this to be an argument for saying
that the true subjects of the incompatible properties are not identical. The
true subjects are different temporal phases (parts) of the particular
involved. The case where a thing is red all over today, and green all over
tomorrow, is really little different from the case where it is today red at the
top and green at the bottom. In the case of a universal, however, its
instantiations at different times do not involve different parts of the
universal. The identical universal is present in each instantiation.
It is possible to take the view that particulars, or at any rate selected
particulars, ‘true’ particulars, do not have temporal parts. It is necessary
then to introduce properties which involve a temporal index: being red at
t1, being green at t2. Such properties are a particular case of what may be
called ‘quasi-universals’. The notion of a quasi-universal is one which will
be discussed again in Section 7 of this chapter. They resemble universals in
permitting a multitude of instances, but unlike universals proper they
involve temporal or spatial restrictions.
Our present interest in quasi-universals is this. I have argued that if it is
the case that N(F,G), that is if being an F necessitates being a G, then it must
be the case that each F is a G.2 But the following sceptical doubt may be
2
This will have to be qualiﬁed. See Ch. 10, Sec. 4.
73

raised. If a number of Fs have been observed during the interval t1 to t2,
and during this time all are Gs, then this observation can be explained by
postulating that N(F,G). All Fs will then be Gs. But why should we not also
explain the phenomena by postulating instead a relation between F and
the quasi-universal Gt1!t2?
I suppose that the answer to this, over and above any doubts which one
may have about quasi-universals, is that explanatory principles should be
as comprehensive and unifying as is compatible with what we know or
believe. Given that all observed Fs are Gs, and given that the observations
have been made between t1 and t2, then, other things being equal, the facts
are better explained by the hypothesis that N(F,G) than by the hypothesis
N F; Gt1!t2
ð
Þ:
Still another objection may be made. I have asserted that states of affairs
such as N(F,G) are contingent. ‘In a different possible world’ it will not be
the case that N(F,G). But now, it may be said, if we do not allow that the
universal F can be related in a certain way to universal G at one time, and
related in a different way to G at another time, why should we allow that
the universals can be differently related in different worlds?
This, however, appears to be the original difﬁculty in a new form. If
universals F and G are contingently related, then, by deﬁnition, they can
be differently related in different worlds. But for them to be differently
related at different times in the same world, different phases of the two
universals would have to be present at the different times. But that
supposition is not a real possibility, if it is universals that we are dealing
with. Consider, by way of parallel, two point-instants in our world.
Suppose it is a contingent fact that they are related by the relation R, a
two-termed relation relating these point-instants. If they have that rela-
tion, it does not make sense to say that there was a time at which they
gained it, or a time at which they will lose it. They either have the relation
or they lack it. At the same time, however, it remains possible that they
should not have had that relation. The situation with N(F,G) is just
the same.
Before leaving this section, I should call attention to one possibility
which might be canvassed for moving beyond the Regularity theory of
law, yet avoiding relations between universals. There are some Nominal-
ists who accept the existence of objective relations of resemblance between
particulars. They cannot analyse these resemblance relations in terms of
common properties, because this would be to pass over into Realism, but
they recognize relations of resemblance nevertheless. To have the property
F is to be a member of a class of particulars which have certain
74
www.ebook3000.com

resemblance relations to certain paradigm objects. Similarly for the prop-
erty G. Such a Resemblance Nominalist may try saying that the ground of
the necessity of an F being G is to be found in a relation between the
network of resemblance relations which any F has to all the other Fs, and
the network of resemblance relations which the same F has to all the other
Gs (because it is a G).
I have criticized Resemblance Nominalism elsewhere (1978, Ch. 5),
putting forward what are, for the most part, rather traditional, and
I think decisive, difﬁculties. Even supposing that they can be surmounted,
there is a further problem for the Resemblance Nominalist in the present
situation. For him, there is still not strictly anything in common to each F,
and to each G. This F resembles all the other Fs, but another F has its
resemblance-relations to the members of a slightly different class. The
same holds for the Gs. It is not clear that this shifting ground is sufﬁcient
to yield the required unitary connection between being an F and being a G.
The Resemblance Nominalist would also face difﬁculties in the case of
laws which have only one instantiation.
I think, therefore, that we can set aside solutions to the problem of nomic
connection which try to use connections between networks of resemblance-
relations. The only serious competitor to a Regularity view seems to be the
view that a law is constituted by a relation between universals.
2
The theory of universals
Before going on to develop such a view, however, something requires to
be said about the nature of universals. Even if Nominalism is rejected,
different views of universals may be accepted. These different views place
constraints of differing severity upon theories of laws of nature as relations
between universals. My own views on universals, developed in my 1978,
place quite sharp restrictions upon the theory of laws. It may turn out that
these restrictions are too sharp: the theory of laws is a vital proving-
ground for the theory of universals. In the rest of this section, however,
I will simply sketch, in fairly dogmatic fashion, the outlines of my theory
of universals.
Universals I take to be monadic, that is, properties, or else dyadic,
triadic . . . n-adic, that is, relations. Universals are governed by a Principle
of Instantiation. A property must be a property of some real particular; a
relation must hold between real particulars. What is real, however, is not
to be conﬁned to the present. Past, present and future I take to be all and
equally real. A universal need not be instantiated now.
75

A major reason for accepting the Principle of Instantiation is my desire
to uphold, along with Realism about universals, the logically independent
doctrine of Naturalism. Naturalism I deﬁne as the view that nothing else
exists except the single, spatio-temporal, world, the world studied by
physics, chemistry, cosmology and so on. (Whether Physicalism is true
of this world, that is, whether this world can in principle be completely
described using nothing but the concepts and laws of an ideal physics, is a
further question. I do subscribe to Physicalism, but I regard it as more
speculative than Naturalism.)
Those philosophers drawn to Naturalism are also regularly drawn to
Nominalism. It seems natural to many to think of the spatio-temporal
world as a world of mere particulars. And certainly if we admit uninstan-
tiated universals we are abandoning the doctrine of Naturalism. But Nat-
uralism combined with Nominalism has proved a very narrow ontological
base. As a result, many philosophers drawn in these two directions have
found themselves reluctantly forced to postulate extra entities: for
instance, ‘abstract’ sets, and/or possible worlds. It is very worthy of
remark, therefore, that, provided we restrict ourselves to instantiated uni-
versals, Naturalism can be combined with the rejection of Nominalism.3
Given the Principle of Instantiation, universals can be brought into the
spatio-temporal world, becoming simply
the
repeatable
features
of
that world.
The rejecting of uninstantiated universals involves one in rejecting the
notion that a universal corresponds to every general predicate. But I wish
to reject this idea in any case. It may well be that it is impossible to explain
the use of general words without postulating universals.4 But we should
not think that what universals there are are to be determined semantically,
with universals corresponding to each general word or phrase (or each
possible general word or phrase) which has a different meaning. I call this
a priori Realism (about universals). Against it, I wish to uphold an a
posteriori Realism. On the latter view, just what universals there are in
the world, that is, what (repeatable) properties particulars have, and what
(repeatable) relations hold between particulars, is to be decided a posteriori,
on the basis of total science.
A property, to take the simplest because monadic case, is something
which is strictly identical, strictly the same, in all its different instances. We
3
As I learnt from my teacher, John Anderson.
4
In my 1978, zeal for thrusting out semantics from the theory of universals led me to shy
away even from this obvious point. Michael Bradley (1979) rightly protested.
76
www.ebook3000.com

should not assume that any old predicate, which in all probability has
come into existence for purely practical reasons, applies in virtue of such
identities. It is at least plausible that, as contemporary physics claims, the
charge e on every electron is strictly identical. It is very unlikely, as
Wittgenstein perceived although he was no Realist about universals, that
all games have something identical which makes them all games.
I believe that this demand for strict identity across particulars rules out
disjunctive and negative universals, although my argument involves some
uncertainties. What are not ruled out, however, are conjunctive and other
structurally complex universals. Indeed, it seems to be an intelligible
hypothesis, compatible with everything that we know, that every univer-
sal is complex. There may be no simple universals. (For detailed argument
in support of the above, see Armstrong, 1978, Ch. 14 and 15.) There is also
reason to rule out as pseudo-properties such things as the identity of a
thing with itself. The chief difﬁculty here is that identity bestows no
causal/nomic power.
Particulars are not to be reduced to bundles of universals, as Russell and
Blanshard argued, but nevertheless cannot exist without properties. (The
principle of the Rejection of Bare Particulars.) The mutual dependence of
universals upon particulars, and particulars upon universals, may be put
by saying that neither can exist in independence of states of affairs. If a
particular has a certain property, or two or more particulars are related,
these are states of affairs. (Universals having properties, or being related,
will also be states of affairs: higher-order states of affairs.) The bare
particular and the pure universal are vicious abstractions from states of
affairs. The particularity of a particular, and equally its properties and
relations, are abstractions from states of affairs, but not vicious ones. The
particularity of a is a non-vicious abstraction from all the states of affairs in
which a ﬁgures. The property F (or F-ness) is a non-vicious abstraction
from all the states of affairs where some particular has F (see Skyrms,
1981). The factors of particularity and universality are really there in states
of affairs.
As is implied by the previous paragraph, in particular by talk about
‘vicious abstraction’, I take it to be of the essence of particularity and
universality that they are found only in states of affairs. The Principle of
Instantiation, and the Rejection of Bare Particulars, are, I think, necessary
truths.
The question then arises whether properties and relations themselves
fall under universals. Are there higher-order universals? Here again, in
this very difﬁcult ﬁeld of enquiry, we must not proceed a priori, that is,
77

semantically. We must not assign properties and relations to ﬁrst-order
properties and relations just because there is a predicate under which an
indeﬁnite number of those universals can be brought. Irreducibly
higher-order universals, if they exist, must be postulated on an a
posteriori basis.
Moving on to the more speciﬁc topic of higher-order relations, I am
inclined to argue that the so-called ‘internal’ relations between universals,
relations which appear to hold with logical necessity on the basis of the
nature of the universals related, are not genuine relations. The ‘relations’
are not anything over and above the ‘related’ universals themselves.
Many-place predicates are involved to which no relations correspond.
My reasoning in support of this conclusion has an Irish ﬂavour. If it can
be shown a priori that two universals must stand in a certain relation, then
there is no such relation for them to stand in. Nomic connection between
universals, however, cannot be established a priori. It must be discovered a
posteriori. So perhaps laws of nature can be treated as irreducibly second-
order relations, genuine relations between universals. Indeed, I speculate
that the laws of nature constitute the only irreducibly second-order rela-
tions between universals.
This sketch of a theory of universals will show some of the constraints
which I think ought to be put upon an account of laws of nature as
relations between universals.
3
A ﬁrst formulation
During the 1970s, three philosophers, Fred Dretske, Michael Tooley and
myself, all put forward the idea that the laws of nature are relations
holding between universals. The idea is not a new one. It may even be
thought to have been anticipated by Plato (Phaedo, 102–107). But in
Dretske (1977), Tooley (1977), and Armstrong (1978, Ch. 24), the idea
seems to be more clearly articulated, and worked out in greater detail
(especially in Tooley), than it had been in previous discussion. The utterly
natural idea that the laws of nature link properties with properties had
never entirely been lost sight of. But it was now made the object of some
systematic attention.
Each of the three of us came to our view independently, and from
different intellectual backgrounds. So it seems to be one of those not
uncommon cases of an idea for which the time is ripe which is then hit
upon independently by different people. It is true that Tooley and I met
and talked over the topic at length before either of us published. But we
78
www.ebook3000.com

had reached the central contention each by ourselves. We had even
reached it by different routes. Tooley had been thinking about the laws
of nature, and had decided that a satisfactory account of them could only
be given if appeal were made to universals. I had been thinking about
universals and then wondered whether laws might not be relations
between these entities.
We all three had exactly the same idea. Suppose it to be a law that Fs
are Gs. F-ness and G-ness are taken to be universals. A certain relation,
a relation of non-logical or contingent necessitation, holds between F-
ness and G-ness. This state of affairs may be symbolized as ‘N(F,G)’.
Although N(F,G) does not obtain of logical necessity, if it does
obtain then it entails the corresponding Humean or cosmic uniformity:
(x) (Fx ⊃Gx). That each F is a G, however, does not entail that F-ness
has N to G-ness:
N F; G
ð
Þ ! x
ð Þ Fx  Gx
ð
Þ:
(1)
x
ð Þ Fx  Gx
ð
Þ ! N F; G
ð
Þ:
(2)
A scheme of this sort has attractive features. As already remarked, it is
very natural to think of laws as linking properties. It seems natural to say
that all Fs are Gs because being an F necessitates being a G. Again, one of
the problems which plagues the Regularity theory, that of distinguishing
between ‘accidental’ cosmic uniformities and those which are genuine
manifestations of a law, is automatically solved. As will emerge, there
are many other advantages.5
At the same time, however, the entailment in (1) is a very puzzling one.
(I am indebted to a correspondence with David Lewis here.) Two univer-
sals are linked in a certain way. This state of affairs is in turn linked to a
corresponding uniformity, where this second linkage is an entailment. Is
the uniformity part of, actually contained in, the relation between the
universals, so that the entailment has the form (P&Q) ! P, with P = the
uniformity? If so, the relation between the universals contains a surplus,
Q, over and above the uniformity. What is this surplus, and how is it
related to the uniformity? An alternative is that the entailment has the
5
Those who do not work in the Humean tradition of thought about law and cause may
think that the entailment is too strong. They may think that the entailment holds only
subject to the provision that no interfering factor is present.
I am inclined to think that this qualiﬁcation is correct. (See Ch. 10, Sec. 4, which
discusses the distinction between ‘iron’ laws and ‘oaken’ laws.) But it will greatly simplify
the discussion if the qualiﬁcation can be ignored for the present.
79

form P ! (PvQ). This seems a bit more promising. But how is this form to
be forced upon N(F,G) ! (x) (Fx ⊃Gx)?6
If the entailment does not have one of these two simple formal struc-
tures, then it seems that we will have to say that the entailment holds in
virtue of a de re necessity linking the relation between the universals, on
the one hand, and the uniformity it ‘produces’, on the other. This is the
picture which I get from the Phaedo. The Forms up in Heaven are related
in a certain way, and, as a result, a uniformity is produced on earth. Such
a doctrine is extremely mysterious. The mystery is only a little reduced
by bringing the Forms to earth and letting them exist only in their
instantiations. We still have the puzzle of a relation between the univer-
sals which logically necessitates something distinct from itself: the
uniformity.
A closely connected difﬁculty is that the relation N which is said to hold
between the universals lies under suspicion of being no more than ‘that
which ensures the corresponding uniformity’. Tooley explicitly says that it
is a theoretical entity, introduced as that which explains the uniformity.
But, of course, he thinks of this theoretical entity realistically. It has to have
a nature of its own. Now what is this nature, and how does it ensure the
uniformity?
Consider here that, prima facie, different laws involving the univer-
sals F and G are conceivable. It may be a law that Fs are Gs, or that no
Fs are Gs (if we admit exclusion laws), or perhaps that, where some-
thing is an F, then something else is a G. It may therefore be asked how
the relation between the universals determines the correct uniformity.
Tooley introduces the formal device of a ‘construction-function’ which
takes a given set of universals to the appropriate uniformities (1977,
pp. 677–9). But how are we to understand the construction? Is it a real
relationship in the world, holding between the universals and the
uniformity? If so, the mystery is not dispelled, but rather increased.
Now we have a relation between the universals, a construction-
function and a uniformity. Or is it to be instrumentally conceived
(which I am informed by Tooley was his intention)? If so, we are
unhelpfully left once again with the related universals and the uni-
formity in which they issue.
6
Of course ‘N(F,G) ! (x) (Fx ⊃Gx)’ can always be tortured into one of these two forms. But
I am talking about formulations where ‘P’ and ‘Q’ stand for what it would be natural to
take as elements in the situation.
80
www.ebook3000.com

I do not want to walk away from our formulae:
N F; G
ð
Þ ! x
ð Þ Fx  Gx
ð
Þ
(1)
ðxÞ ðFx  GxÞ ! NðF, GÞ:
(2)
But it should be clear from this section that there is an urgent need to
explain them.
It may be tempting, however, to deal with the problem as a logician
might. Why not, while stipulating that F and G both be universals, do
nothing more than place a modal operator of some sort in front of the
statement of Humean uniformity? Why not analyse:
It is a law that Fs are Gs
as:
c
x
ð Þ Fx  Gx
ð
Þ
(1)
or even, if it is desired to deny the contingency of laws:
x
ð Þ Fx  Gx
ð
Þ?
(2)
The answer to this is not just that such a brisk procedure is merely a
technical solution unaccompanied by metaphysical insight, although this
objection is serious enough. It also faces an important internal difﬁculty.
Because the fundamental connective involved is ‘⊃’, defenders of these
formulae must wrestle with the Paradoxes of Conﬁrmation. For if this is
what a law is, not only Fs which are Gs, but also non-Fs which are non-Gs,
and non-Fs which are Gs, will conﬁrm the existence of the nomic connec-
tion. We saw in Chapter 4, Section 3, that it may be possible to accept that
non-Fs which are non-Gs in some degree conﬁrm the hypothesis that it is a
law that Fs are Gs. But what of non-Fs which are Gs? It seems that they do
not conﬁrm the law-hypothesis at all. This is a difﬁculty for the Regularity
theory. The difﬁculty remains for an analysis of laws which simply places
a modal operator in front of the Regularity formulae.
4
Laws as universals
Returning to our problem of understanding the entailment N(F,G) ! (x)
(Fx ⊃Gx), the germ of a further elucidation was provided for me by Jim
Lovelace, a graduate student at the University of Texas at Austin. He
asked me whether the state of affairs N(F,G), with which I wanted to
identify the law that Fs are Gs, was itself a universal. Lovelace was not
81

particularly pushing in that direction, he simply wanted to discover my
view. But the more I considered the question, the more I began to see the
attraction of taking N(F,G) to be both the obtaining of a relation between
universals, and a (complex) universal itself.
This idea, that the state of affairs constituted by N(F,G) is itself a
universal, will not solve the whole problem of understanding the entail-
ment. In the end, as we shall see, the relation of nomic necessitation,
N, will have to be accepted as a primitive. But if we can also accept that
N(F,G) is a universal, instantiated in the positive instances of the law, then,
I think, it will be much easier to accept the primitive nature of N. It will be
possible to see clearly that if N holds between F and G, then this involves a
uniformity at the level of ﬁrst-order particulars.
Just as Fa, or Rab, is a state of affairs (see Sec. 2), so N(F,G) is a state of
affairs. Rab is a state of affairs involving ﬁrst-order particulars falling
under a ﬁrst-order universal. N(F,G), by contrast, involves second-order
particulars (ﬁrst-order universals) falling under a second-order universal.
The question is whether this state of affairs, N(F,G), could simultaneously
be a universal, a ﬁrst-order universal?
If it could, then we might be on the way to understanding the relation
between a law and the uniformity in which it manifests itself. We could
understand this relation if we could understand the relation between a law
and a particular instantiation of the law. For the Regularity theory the
latter relation is perspicuous enough. It is the relation between a uniform-
ity and a particular instance falling under the uniformity. But what is the
relation between a law and a particular (positive) instantiation of the law,
where the law is a relation between universals? If only we could think of
this relation between universals as itself a (ﬁrst-order) universal, then we
could assimilate the relation between law and positive instantiation of the
law to a particular case of that of a universal to its instances.
If the law is a universal, and its instantiations particulars of the univer-
sal, then, like any other universal, the law will be fully present in each
instantiation. The relationship of universal to particular may involve
problems. But they are problems which a believer in universals must face,
and try to solve, in any case. What a gain if the way that a law stands to its
positive instantiations could be assimilated to this relationship!
In my 1978, I said that a state of affairs such as N(F,G) was not a
universal, but a particular (Vol. I, p. 115, n. 1). I arrived at this view in
the course of thinking about a very interesting phenomenon in the theory
of universals which I called, rather melodramatically, ‘the victory of par-
ticularity’. Consider particulars a, b and a universal R. The state of affairs,
82
www.ebook3000.com

Rab, in which we may suppose them to be joined, is a particular, not a
universal. For it is not susceptible of repetition in the way that a universal
is. It is not a one which may run through a many. Particulars + universal =
a particular. I then argued, as an afterthought, that N(F,G) was equally
insusceptible of repetition. Even universals + a higher-order universal = a
(ﬁrst-order) particular. States of affairs are always ﬁrst-order particulars.
But perhaps the afterthought was a mistake. In the state of affairs, Rab,
the ﬁrst-order particulars, a and b, together with the ﬁrst-order universal,
R, yield a state of affairs which is a ﬁrst-order particular. In the state of
affairs, N(F,G), the second-order particulars, F and G, together with the
second-order universal, N, yield a state of affairs which, considerations of
symmetry suggest, is a second-order particular. But a second-order particu-
lar is a ﬁrst-order universal. Just the result which we want. N(F,G) would
be a ﬁrst-order universal, and its instances will be the positive instanti-
ations of the law.
How is the suggestion to be worked out further? I propose that the state
of affairs, the law, N(F,G), is a dyadic universal, that is, a relation, holding
between states of affairs. Suppose that a particular object, a, is F, and so,
because of the law N(F,G), it, a, is also G. This state of affairs, an instanti-
ation of the law, has the form Rab, where R = N(F,G), a = a’s being F, and
b = a’s being G:

NðF, GÞ

ða0s being F, a0s being GÞ:
Logicians are inclined to protest at this point. (Two logicians of my
acquaintance have.) On the view being put forward, ‘N(F,G)’ can function
as a complete statement, putting forward something which is true or false.
At the same time, however, if N(F,G) is to be a universal, the ‘N(F,G)’ can
also function as a mere part of a statement. Pavel Tichy (private communi-
cation) objects that N(F,G) cannot be both a dyadic attribute and an 0-adic
attribute (his term for a state of affairs).
But I do not see why N(F,G) should not simultaneously be a (dyadic)
universal and a state of affairs. Clearly it cannot simultaneously be a
dyadic attribute and an ‘0-adic attribute’ if these attributes are of the same
order. But N(F,G) is being supposed to be a dyadic attribute of the ﬁrst order,
a ﬁrst-order universal, while also being an ‘0-adic attribute’ of the second
order, i.e. a second-order state of affairs.
Suppose that one event – a change in something – precedes another
event – say, a further change in the same thing. This whole complex is a
state of affairs. In particular, it is a relation between two events. The
83

related events – the two changes – are, however, themselves states of
affairs. So we have a state of affairs of the form Rab, but where a and b
are themselves states of affairs. Now if the particulars in a state of affairs
can themselves be states of affairs, as in this case, why cannot universals
also be states of affairs?
To continue the answer to Tichy, it seems clear that laws, although
states of affairs, and real, are abstractions, that is, that they cannot exist
in independence of other things. A universe could hardly consist of laws
and nothing else. If laws are relations between universals, then the fact
that laws are abstractions is explained, at any rate if it is granted that
universals are abstractions, as, contra Plato, I take them to be. (I do not, of
course, take them to be abstract in the Quinean/North American misuse of
the term ‘abstract’. In that misuse it is Platonic universals which are
abstract!) For a relation between abstractions will itself be an abstraction.
Given, then, that relations between universals, i.e. laws, are abstractions,
what sort of abstractions are they, and what are they abstractions from?
We get a fairly clear answer to these questions if we say that laws are
universals, and so are abstractions from particulars which instantiate those
universals, i.e. abstractions from the particulars which instantiate (posi-
tively instantiate) the law. For a simple law like the law that Fs are Gs, the
particulars instantiated by the law seem to be pairs of states of affairs: such
things as a’s being F, and a’s being G.
At this point, however, a different and more sympathetic objection may
be urged. Do we really need the complex formula:

NðF;GÞ

ða0s being F, a0s being GÞ?
Could we not simply represent the instantiation of the law as:
Nða0s being F, a0s being GÞ?
The fact that the two states of affairs involve the two universals F and G,
and these alone, might seem sufﬁcient to ensure that the necessitation
holds in virtue of the universals involved: that it is a relation of universals.
(Whether the instantiation would then be an instance of N(F,G), i.e.
whether N(F,G) would be a universal, is less clear.) However, although
the matter is difﬁcult, considerations to be advanced in the next section
suggest that we do need to represent the situation in the more cumbrous
way. I will drop the matter for the present.
Now we must face the problem, raised in the last section, that there may
be different patterns of necessitation linking the very same universals.
84
www.ebook3000.com

Perhaps it will be the case that a’s being F necessitates, in virtue of the
universals involved (F and G), that a is not a G (an exclusion law). Or
perhaps a’s being F necessitates that something else is G. Different rela-
tions of necessitation seem to be required. For the pattern of inference from
‘a is F’ is now different.
It is not clear whether we do require these other relations of necessita-
tion. The matter will have to be explored later (Ch. 10, Sec. 6). But if we do,
then we shall have to subscript ‘N’ to indicate the different patterns of
necessitation which may hold between states of affairs. We will then have
to think of N as a determinable relation of which N1, N2, . . . etc. are
determinate forms. The metaphysical status of determinables is a difﬁcult
issue, but perhaps that question can be evaded here.
However, it is the notion of necessitation itself, whether in determinable
or determinate form, which produces the deepest protests and/or puzzle-
ment. Perhaps the strain would be eased if it could be argued that this is
the relation of logical necessitation. But I ﬁnd it hard to bring myself to
believe that the laws of nature are logical necessities, and will argue
against this view in Chapter 11.
Consider mere conjunctions of universals. That is, consider the instanti-
ated pattern of something being F, and also being G, where F and G are
universals. This pattern may be thought of as itself a universal, having
F and G as parts. Certainly, at least, the pattern is a one which can be
instantiated in many particulars. But, given an F, it is not a compulsory
pattern. There may be another instantiated pattern of something being F,
and also being H, but where H is incompatible with G. The two patterns
can be instantiated side by side (in different Fs).
Contrast this with the necessitation involved in laws. If a thing’s
being F necessitates that that thing is G, then, given that H and G are
incompatible, it is not possible that a thing’s being F also necessitates
that thing being H. And so the following complaint may be made. At
the end of all our explanations, this factor of necessitation remains
unexplained.
This reproach is just, I think, but the inexplicability of necessitation just
has to be accepted. Necessitation, the way that one Form (universal) brings
another along with it as Plato puts it in the Phaedo (104d–105), is a
primitive, or near primitive, which we are forced to postulate. Regularity
theories of law reject it, but we have seen the inadequacy of Regularity
theories. In rejecting Regularity theories we are committed to nomic neces-
sity in some form or another. (It was perhaps a shortcoming of the original
Dretske–Tooley–Armstrong formulation that this was not made evident.)
85

We must admit it in the spirit of natural piety, to adopt Samuel Alexan-
der’s phrase.
Nevertheless, it may be possible to do a little more. The matter is
speculative, but there does seem to be at least the logical possibility of
a form of necessitation in nature which does not involve a relationship
between universals. It may have a claim to be a still more primitive
notion of necessitation. If so, it may provide an independent conceptual
grip, an independent conceptual ﬁx, upon the notion of necessitation. It
may be that the notion of necessitation between universals can then be
presented as the bringing together of antecedently understood, and con-
ceptually independent, elements. In the next section this line of thought is
developed.
5
Causation as a relation between particulars
The story now to be told involves David Hume, Donald Davidson and
Elizabeth Anscombe. It concerns causation.
Hume said that:
we may deﬁne a cause to be an object, followed by another, and where
all the objects similar to the ﬁrst are followed by objects similar to the
second. (Inquiry concerning Human Understanding, Section VII)
As Davidson remarks (1967), Hume is here talking about particular causal
sequences: this event causing that event. He is saying that to be such a
sequence is to be an instance of a regular sequence. We might say that for a
particular sequence to be causal is for it to fall under a law (conceived of as
a regular sequence).
Hume’s formulation strongly suggests, and has been taken by his fol-
lowers to suggest, an epistemological point. To recognize a particular
causal sequence as causal is to bring it under some sequence, or, as may
be said, to bring it under some particular law.
When scrutinized, however, this epistemological point appears to be
less than plausible. We are very often able to recognize that a certain
singular sequence is a causal one, yet have absolutely no idea what regular
sequence it could be an instance of, what law it could fall under. My
favourite example here is one which I heard from Douglas Gasking.
A small piece of stuff is observed to be dropped into a glass of liquid, in
a laboratory, say. The next thing perceived to happen is that the glass
explodes violently. Under these circumstances we would have little doubt
that we had witnessed a particular causal sequence. The dropping of the
86
www.ebook3000.com

stuff into the glass caused the explosion. But we might have absolutely no
idea what was the regular sequence involved. We could not begin to
formulate the law. Once alerted to the existence of such examples, we
see that they are in fact ubiquitous.
Davidson is sympathetic to Hume’s ontological position on causation.
But faced with the epistemological difﬁculty he makes the following
suggestion. When we think that we have identiﬁed a particular sequence
as causal, we do not necessarily claim to know any law governing the
sequence, even in a quite rough and ready way. What we claim, rather, is
that there is some description of the sequence in question under which the
sequence is law-governed. We do not make a speciﬁc nomic claim, but an
existential one. In this way, Davidson thinks, we can partially reconcile a
Singularist theory of causation, such as that of C. J. Ducasse, with Hume’s
view:
The reconciliation . . . depends on the distinction between knowing there
is a law ‘covering’ two events and knowing what the law is: in my view,
Ducasse is right that singular causal statements entail no law; Hume is
right that they entail there is a law. (1967, p. 92 in Sosa)
Davidson’s contention, however, really leaves him in a rather weak pos-
ition vis-à-vis those who wish to uphold the possibility of singular caus-
ation without there being any law at all in the background, known or
unknown. This is the point made by Miss Anscombe:
It is over and over again assumed that any singular causal proposition
implies a universal statement running “Always when this, then that”;
often assumed that true singular causal statements are derived from such
‘inductively believed’ universalities. Examples indeed are recalcitrant,
but that does not seem to disturb. Even a philosopher acute enough to
be conscious of this, such as Davidson, will say, without offering any
reason at all for saying it, that a singular causal statement implies that
there is such a true universal proposition – though perhaps we can
never have knowledge of it. Such a thesis needs some reason for believ-
ing it! (1971, p. 81 in Sosa)
What is to be said about Miss Anscombe’s contention? Suppose that one
event causes another event. It is natural to think that both events have a
great many characteristics which are causally irrelevant in this situation. If
those characteristics had been absent, or had been altered in certain ways,
the causal sequence would still have occurred. It may therefore be plaus-
ibly argued that there is an important sense in which the ﬁrst event causes
87

the second event only under certain descriptions. For those of us who are
Realists about universals this will become the contention that what goes
on here is one state of affairs (say, to give an oversimpliﬁed schema, a
acquiring the property F) causing a second state of affairs (say, b acquiring
the property G).
At this point we might think that Miss Anscombe’s position is weak. If
a’s becoming F causes b to become G, and these are the causally relevant
states of affairs, are we not in the presence of some F!G law?
However, I do not think that this conclusion really does follow. If a’s
becoming F causes b to become G, then there is an F!G law only if the ﬁrst
event causes the second event in virtue of the universals F and G. And while
it is natural to expect the universals to be ‘operative’ in this way, I do not
see how to prove that they must be so operative. For myself, I would think
worse of the universe and these universals if they were not operative.
Nevertheless, I think that Miss Anscombe can fairly claim that it is logic-
ally possible that a’s becoming F should cause b to be G, where this causal
connection is purely singular, simply a matter of this event causing that
event. I think, therefore, that Miss Anscombe has the right of it against
Davidson.
As just indicated, I do not much welcome the admission that purely
singular causal connection is logically possible. I should like to believe
that all causation is governed by law. Perhaps in fact it is. But I do not
see how to exclude the logical possibility of causation without law.
(In my 1978, I still accepted that cause logically must involve law. See
Vol. II, p. 149.)
The importance for our argument of the notion of purely singular
causation, causation without law, is that it brings out the logical possibility
of necessitation without law. It brings out the possibility of one state of
affairs, a’s being F, say, necessitating a’s being G, without any laws being
involved. For reasons which will be developed later (Ch. 10, Sec. 7), we
cannot identify causation with (natural) necessitation.7 There are, or can
be, cases of necessitation which are not cases of causation. As a result, we
cannot identify causal laws with laws of nature, or purely singular caus-
ation with purely singular necessitation. But purely singular causation, if it
occurs, is a case of purely singular necessitation, and, from the point of
view of our present argument, it is the logical possibility of purely singular
necessitation which is important.
7
No positive theory of causation will be developed in this work.
88
www.ebook3000.com

The argument of this section is in fact linked to the point which came up
in the previous section when we were wondering whether:

NðF;GÞ

ða0s being F, a0s being GÞ
(1)
could be simpliﬁed to:
Nða0s being F, a0s being GÞ:
(2)
The difﬁculty with (2), we can now see, is that it seems to be compatible
with purely singular necessitation. The point may be brought out by
saying that (2) is compatible with:
Nðb0s being F, b0s being HÞ
(3)
where a 6¼ b and H is incompatible with G. (3), however, is incompatible
with (1). So (2) is weaker than (1). Miss Anscombe’s point about causation
may be generalized by saying that a situation of the sort (2) is at least
logically possible even though (1) is false.
A ﬁnal remark on singular necessitation. A statement that one state of
affairs necessitates another state of affairs must, it seems, still sustain
counterfactuals even if the relation of necessitation is purely singular.
Suppose that a’s being F necessitates a’s being G, but no law is involved.
It can then be asserted that if a’s being F had not obtained, and in the
absence of other states of affairs necessitating a’s being G, then a’s being
G might not have obtained. (The need for ‘might’ rather than ‘would’ is a
response to an objection made to the ‘would’ formulation by Peter van
Inwagen. He pointed out to me that the counterfactual has to allow for a’s
being G being an uncaused state of affairs and so occurring even though
a’s being F does not occur.)
6
Necessitation, universals and laws
If the argument of the previous section has been correct, then it is
now possible in some small degree further to elucidate the notion,
central to our account of a law of nature, of one universal necessitating
another. For we now have our ‘independent ﬁx’ upon the notion of
necessitation.
We may perhaps render ‘N(F,G)’, the assertion of a state of affairs which
is simultaneously a relation, in words as follows:
Something’s being F necessitates that same something’s being G, in
virtue of the universals F and G.
89

This is not to be taken simply as:
For all x, x being F necessitates that x is G.
because this would be to fall back, once again, into a form of the Regular-
ity theory. Instead, as the phrase ‘in virtue of the universals F and G’ is
supposed to indicate, what is involved is a real, irreducible, relation, a
particular species of the necessitation relation, holding between the uni-
versals F and G (being an F, being a G). The related universals are abstrac-
tions from states of affairs, but not vicious abstractions, and their being
related is itself an (abstract) state of affairs.
The concept of necessitation involved here is a relation holding between
universals, between sorts of states of affairs, types rather than tokens. But,
I suggest, it is essentially the same notion as the singular necessitation
which, as we saw in the previous section, might hold between particular
states of affairs, between tokens.
In this way, I hope, we ﬁnally obtain a reasonably perspicuous view of
the entailment:
N F; G
ð
Þ ! x
ð Þ Fx  Gx
ð
Þ:
8
Transfer in thought the concept of necessitation from the sphere of par-
ticular states of affairs, taken simply as particular, to the sphere of sorts or
types of states of affairs, that is, universals. Instead of a’s being
F necessitating it to be the case that a is G, without beneﬁt of law, we have
instead something’s being F necessitating that something to be G, where a
type of state of affairs (the universal F) necessitates a type of state of affairs
(the universal G). It is then clear that if such a relation holds between the
universals, then it is automatic that each particular F determines that it is a
G. That is just the instantiation of the universal N(F,G) in particular cases. The
left-hand side of our formula represents the law, a state of affairs which is
simultaneously a relation. The right-hand side of the formula represents
the uniformity automatically resulting from the instantiation of this uni-
versal in its particulars.
So, in something of the spirit of John Locke’s theory of complex ideas,
we have put the concept of necessitation together with the concept of
universals (types of states of affairs) to yield the notion of a law of nature.
8
If we accept the view that there can be purely singular necessitations, then we can insert
an intermediate term in the formula above:
N(F,G) ! (x) N(Fx,Gx) ! (x) (Fx ⊃Gx).
None of the reverse entailments hold.
90
www.ebook3000.com

Objection may be made to this putting together. Even if the concept of
particular necessitation is conceded to be a coherent concept, it may still be
asked what is the justiﬁcation for employing it in a new context: that of
sorts of states of affairs, the realm of universals? I cannot prove that the
transfer is justiﬁed. All I can do is to point to the explanatory value of the
‘new complex idea’ as a reason for thinking that it is a coherent concept.
But I take it that inference to a good, with luck the best, explanation has
force even in the sphere of metaphysical analysis.
It is worth noting that, in the new realm of universals, necessitation-
statements still sustain counterfactuals. I am not referring to the ordinary
counterfactuals sustained by law-statements, although we shall shortly see
that the theory sketched does permit a plausible account of these in the
way that the Regularity theory does not. I am thinking rather of counter-
factuals parallel to those sustained by statements of purely singular neces-
sitation. If a’s being F determines a’s being G, but purely as a matter of
singular necessitation, then if a’s being F had not obtained, and in the
absence of other states of affairs necessitating a’s being G, then a’s being
G might not have obtained. Similarly, if being an F did not exist (states of
affairs of the being an F sort did not exist) then, in the absence of other
factors which would have necessitated the instantiation (existence) of G,
G might not have been instantiated (might not have existed).
Before ﬁnishing this section, let us note that the introduction of necessi-
tation between singular states of affairs leads to an intuitively quite satis-
fying picture. We have the possibility of necessity at every level. At the
ﬁrst level we have nothing more than a ﬁrst-order state of affairs necessi-
tating a further ﬁrst-order state of affairs, for example:
Nða0s being F, a0s being GÞ:
At the second level, we have a ﬁrst-order universal, a type of ﬁrst-order
states of affairs, necessitating a further ﬁrst-order universal, again a type of
ﬁrst-order states of affairs, for example:

NðF;GÞ

ða0s being F, a0s being GÞ:
With this necessitation between universals we have what are called laws of
nature. At a third level, we would have a second-order universal, that is, a
universal instantiated by ﬁrst-order universals, a type of second-order
states of affairs, necessitating a further second-order universal, also a type
of second-order states of affairs. This would be a second-order law, a law
about ﬁrst-order laws. There is no a priori limit to this ascending series.
91

There is no difﬁculty in treating N, the ﬁrst-order relation holding
between particular states of affairs, as the same thing as the second-order
relation N found in N(F,G), and the third-order relation N found in
second-order laws. There is no particular reason to accept a Principle of
Order Invariance: that if a universal is of order M in one instantiation, then
it is of order M in all instantiations. (See my 1978, Ch. 23, Sec. II.)
7
Advantages and some disadvantages of conceiving of laws of nature
as relations between universals
I hope that I have now provided at least the outlines of a coherent version
of the view that the laws of nature are relations between universals. In this
section I will consider in turn all the difﬁculties which I previously
brought against the Regularity theory, and examine the fortunes of the
new theory in the face of these difﬁculties.
In the ﬁrst place, it is clear that the problem of accidental Humean
uniformities is no problem for the present view. The single-case Humean
uniformities, the Humean uniformities correlated with local uniformities
and the uniformities which are only uniformities because certain possibil-
ities are not realized, need not be taken as manifestations of laws. For no
appropriate relation may hold between the universals involved. Being a
moa need not necessitate dying before ﬁfty.
In the second place, pseudo-uniformities expressed by means of predi-
cates such as ‘grue’ likewise present no problem. For it is plausible to say,
on the basis of total science, that ‘grue’ is a predicate to which no genuine,
that is, unitary, universal corresponds. Where there are no universals,
there is no relation between universals.
In the third place, we saw that a Regularity theory of laws has some
difﬁculty with the phenomenon of uninstantiated laws. The Naive Regu-
larity view must either bar all possible laws of this sort, or none of them.
But in fact we want to take a more selective attitude, admitting as true a
few, but rejecting as false most, statements of uninstantiated law. It may be
that a sophisticated Regularity theory, in particular the Systematic view,
can admit uninstantiated laws in this selective way, as statements which
make a contribution to ‘rounding out’ the system of instantiated
uniformities.
If laws of nature are relations between universals, and themselves
universals, and if uninstantiated universals are rejected, as I am inclined
to think that they should be, then it seems that uninstantiated laws will
have to be rejected. Yet, as just noted, we want to admit some.
92
www.ebook3000.com

In the next chapter it will be argued that some statements of uninstan-
tiated law can be accepted because they are concealed counterfactuals,
saying not what laws hold, but what laws would hold in certain unrealized
conditions.
In the fourth place, spatio-temporally limited laws (‘laws of cosmic
epochs’) which it seems that the Regularity theory could be stretched to
admit, must be ruled out if laws of nature are relations between univer-
sals. It may be argued that this is a plus for the Regularity theory. But this
possible plus is quite overshadowed by the problem created for the Regu-
larity theory by small-scale regularities. Tooley’s case, the case of Smith’s
garden which will bear nothing but apples, seems to be completely incom-
patible with a Regularity view.
But what of the view that laws of nature are relations between univer-
sals? Is it not also refuted by Smith’s garden? I do not think it is, but it is
true that it must be modiﬁed in some degree. What seems required is that
we introduce the notion of a quasi-universal. An example of such an entity
would be fruit grown in Smith’s garden. This is not a universal, because it
involves essential reference to a particular: Smith’s garden. But it is not
quite a particular either, because it is capable of repetition. In fact it would
answer to Aristotle’s condition for a universal, because it is ‘predicable of
many’. Normally, we would simply think of this as a particular part of the
extension of a universal. But if it turns out to be required for a law, then we
take it more seriously as an entity in its own right, a quasi-universal which
can be related in the usual way to the universal of being an apple. We have
N (an F having R to a certain garden, A).9
If this is a possible modiﬁcation of the relations between universals
theory, then it can be applied back to the problem of laws which are
restricted to cosmic epochs. They too would be laws which relate a certain
range of quasi-universals (Fs in epoch 13, say) to universals, by a necessi-
tation relation.
So the Universals theory can make shift to deal with the problem posed
by the Smith’s garden case. If the shift succeeds, then it also works for laws
restricted to cosmic epochs. The Regularity theory, on the other hand,
9
The Smith’s garden case now appears as an intermediate case between fully general laws of
nature, involving relations between universals, and the purely particular necessitations
between states of affairs envisaged by Miss Anscombe. A purely particular necessitation is
the limiting case of a law such as the law governing Smith’s garden. But because the
limiting case is purely singular, we would not call it a law. If objective single-case
propensities, with propensity less than 1, are allowed to be logically possible, then we
must admit singular probabiliﬁcations as well as singular necessitations.
93

although it can make a shift to deal with the problem of cosmic epochs,
seems helpless before the Smith’s garden case.
In the ﬁfth place, the Universals theory can give an elegant account of
the nature of inﬁnitely qualiﬁed laws, at any rate if negative universals are
rejected. I will leave discussion of this until Chapter 10, Section 4.
In the sixth place, we saw that the Regularity theory faces great difﬁculty
in accounting for irreducibly probabilistic laws. It seems necessary to
introduce objective single-case propensities or chances, something which
runs very much against the spirit, at least, of the Regularity theory. In
Chapter 9, I will consider how an account of laws of nature as relations
between universals could handle probabilistic laws. The view which
I favour involves a probability of necessitation in the particular case, but
holding in virtue of a relation of the universals involved.
In the seventh place, we saw that functional laws with missing values
create some embarrassment for the Regularity theory. For different func-
tional formulae may all ﬁt the actually instantiated values. A Naive Regu-
larity theory will have to take all the formulae to express laws. A more
sophisticated theory has nothing but considerations of simplicity and
coherence to determine which of the formulae is to count as the real law.
Although the Universals theory does encounter some problems with
functional laws (the subject of the next chapter), it need have no truck with
the quasi-conventionalism adumbrated in the previous sentence. As
will be shown, there can be objective relations between universals which
will determine what functional formula expresses the real law. Functional
laws turn out to be higher-order laws.
In the eighth place, we saw that the Regularity theory of law is unable to
provide an inner connection for the individual instantiations of the law.
The necessity which obtains when a’s being F necessitates a’s being G is
purely external. It is constituted by the fact that all the other Fs (if any) are
Gs. The demand for an inner necessity is triumphantly met by a Universals
theory. The problem is solved in a peculiarly satisfactory way if the law is
itself conceived of as a universal, and the instantiations of the law as
instances falling under that universal. For then the law is fully present in
each instance.
In the ninth place, if all the observed Fs are Gs, then it seems to be an
explanation of this fact that it is a law that Fs are Gs. But, given the
Regularity theory, the explanatory element seems to vanish. For to say
that all the observed Fs are Gs because all the Fs are Gs involves explain-
ing the observations in terms of themselves. Suppose, however, that the
law, if it exists, is the holding of an irreducible relationship of necessitation
94
www.ebook3000.com

between the universals F and G. To postulate such a necessitation uniﬁes
the given phenomenon (which is a mark of explanation), and leads to
further predictions extending beyond what is observed.
In the tenth place, the Regularity theory is exposed to at least one of the
Paradoxes of Conﬁrmation. Observing an F which is a G conﬁrms that it is
a law that Fs are Gs. It is possible to argue that a non-G non-F conﬁrms
the law. But it seems clear that non-Fs which are Gs in no way conﬁrm the
law. Yet, given the Regularity theory of law, where the statement of the
law becomes a universally quantiﬁed statement of material implication,
non-Fs which are Gs would conﬁrm the law.
The conﬁrmation which an F which is a G gives to the hypothesis that it
is a law that Fs are Gs is no puzzle for the Universals theory. If the law
holds, then the observation is explained. So the observation conﬁrms the
existence of the law. A puzzle arises, however, about non-G non-Fs. At the
intuitive level, it is rather unclear whether they have conﬁrmatory value.
Certain arguments to show that they do conﬁrm the law seem to fail
(Ch. 4, Sec. 3). However, there is one argument for saying that non-G
non-Fs conﬁrm which appears to have force. If it is a law that Fs are Gs,
then this does seem to explain concerning non-Gs why they are all non-Fs.
Hence a non-G non-F may be thought to conﬁrm the law. At the same
time, however, non-G non-Fs do not seem to have the same conﬁrmatory
value as FGs.
As already mentioned in Chapter 4, I believe it can be made plausible
that non-G non-Fs are second-grade conﬁrmers of the law. Notice ﬁrst that
the fact that it is a law that Fs are Gs does nothing to explain the existence
of non-Gs. (It ensures the existence of Fs.) But if there are non-Gs, then
each of them must be a non-F. The class of non-Gs, therefore, is a class
whose members put the law-hypothesis to the test. The non-Gs must be
either Fs or non-Fs. If they are Fs, it is not a law that Fs are Gs. Non-G non-
Fs, therefore, represent failures to falsify within a class of instances where
there is a logical possibility of falsiﬁcation. This seems to be conﬁrmation
of a sort, although it is not the direct conﬁrmation given by Fs which are
Gs. Fs which are Gs also yield this second-grade conﬁrmation, but in
addition they conﬁrm directly.
In the eleventh place, the Regularity theory is not able, while the Univer-
sals theory is able, to explain why statements of law sustain counter-
factuals. Suppose it to be a law that Fs are Gs, but that a is not F. In
general, at least, we will be prepared to conclude that if a were an F, it
would be a G. Suppose, however, that laws are mere Humean uniform-
ities. We are then in thought adding a new member to the class of Fs.
95

There seems to be no particular reason why the new member should
maintain the uniformity. Suppose, however, that the law is constituted
by the fact that something’s being F necessitates that something being G, a
connection holding in virtue of the universals involved. If we now add a to
the class of Fs we will, in general, have every reason to think that the F!G
necessity is maintained. To suppose a new red thing does not change the
nature of redness. To suppose a new F does not change the nature of the
universal F. So why should not N(F,G) obtain in the imagined state of
affairs?
In the twelfth place the Regularity theory involves inductive scepticism.
Given the Regularity conception of a law of nature, inductive inference
cannot be rational. Suppose that the observed Fs are all Gs, and that Fs
have been observed in a wide variety of conditions. What good, if non-
valid, argument is there to the conclusion that unobserved Fs are Gs?
Unobserved Fs will be Gs only if it is a law that Fs are Gs. But if the law
is simply the conjunction of the observed and the unobserved cases, no
appeal to the law can have any value. The inference will be a straight
inference from the observed to the unobserved. But then, it was argued,
there is no way to show that the inference is rational.
I believe that the Universals theory can do better. The postulation of a
connection between universals can provide an explanation of an observed
regularity in a way that postulating a Humean uniformity cannot. The
inference to a connection of universals is a case of an inference to the best
explanation. A series of states of affairs is observed, each a case of an
F being a G. No Fs which are not Gs are observed. The postulation of the
single state of affairs, the law N(F,G), gives a uniﬁed account of what is
otherwise a mere series. Furthermore, it deductively yields a prediction
which enables it to be tested, the prediction that all other Fs will be Gs. It is
therefore a good explanation of the phenomena. With luck, it is the best. It
may well be, of course, that, although a regularity is observed, we think it
unlikely that the terms ‘F’ and ‘G’ pick out genuine universals. The
inference then may be of a less concrete sort. We might infer, for instance,
that some boundary condition C obtains, that there exist universals F* and
G*, that it is a law that F*s under conditions C are all G*s, that this
connection sufﬁces to ensure that all Fs in C are Gs, but yet not know
what C, F* and G* actually are. But an inference to some such underlying
pattern might still be the best explanation of the uniformity.
If this is correct, then induction becomes a particular case of the infer-
ence to explanatory (‘theoretical’) entities. The law, a relation between
universals, is a theoretical entity, postulation of which explains the
96
www.ebook3000.com

observed phenomena and predicts further observations. Many philoso-
phers of science have distinguished between ‘simple induction’ – the
argument from observed Fs to all Fs – and the argument to hidden or
theoretical entities (Peirce’s ‘abduction’). It seems to be a great and intel-
lectually encouraging simpliﬁcation that, given our account of laws, the
two sorts of argument are shown to be not really two.
Can inferences to laws be formalized, or partially formalized? In par-
ticular, can a non-deductive logic of inductive inference be developed? The
matter lies beyond the sphere of my competence, but the idea seems quite
promising. Tooley suggests (1977, p. 693):
if relations among universals are truth-makers for laws, the truth-maker
for a given law is, in a sense, an “atomic” fact, and it would seem
perfectly justiﬁed, given standard principles of conﬁrmation theory, to
assign some non-zero probability to this fact’s obtaining.
This is an initial probability, or logical probability on a tautology. I am
sceptical of the possibility of making any interesting assignments of such
probabilities. (Should not Empiricists be suspicious of them?)10 But if all
the observed Fs have been G, then it certainly seems reasonable to assign a
positive probability on that evidence to the hypothesis that it is a law that
Fs are Gs.
What handles remain for the inductive sceptic? It seems that he might
raise two doubts. He might ask what reason there is to think that laws
construed as irreducible relations between universals constitute the best
explanation of the observed regularity of the world. More fundamentally,
he might ask what reason there is to think that the observed regularities of
the world have any explanation at all.
There do seem to be other possible explanations of the regularity of the
world. Perhaps, as Berkeley thought, the regularities in things reﬂect no
power in the things themselves, but only a particular determination of the
will of God to have ordinary things (‘ideas’ for Berkeley) behave in a
regular manner. If it seemed best to him, he could abrogate the so-called
‘laws of nature’ tomorrow.
The answer to doubts such as these is simply to admit them. There can
be no guarantee that the explanatory scheme which we favour is in fact the
10 Peter Forrest points out another difﬁculty for Tooley here. Given, what seems correct, that
there are an inﬁnite number of possible universals, will not the initial probability assign-
able to a given law be inﬁnitesimal only? Such inﬁnitesimal assignments will do nothing
to further the justiﬁcation of induction.
97

best explanatory scheme. All that can be done is to spell out all proposed
schemes as fully as possible, and try to see which scheme ﬁts the apparent
facts best. We avail ourselves in this enterprise of whatever apparently
good canons of explanation we possess or can develop. The basic insight
here seems to be involved in the concept of a good explanation: that it
should genuinely unify, and that it should be genuinely informative.
A more thoroughly sceptical approach will ask what reason we have to
think that the regularities of the world have any explanation at all. Might
not the world be a Humean world, mimicking a world governed by
genuine laws? Or, even if there are necessitations, might they not all be
purely singular? If, as I would grant, these are logical possibilities, why
should we move beyond these possibilities?
But if it be granted, as I think it should be granted, that laws, if they
exist, would constitute a good, probably the best, explanation of the
regularities of the world, then I do not think that the sceptic’s position is
very strong. A good explanation of the phenomena is, presumably, a
rational explanation of the phenomena. It is surely a great advance in
the battle against the sceptic to be able to say ‘This is a, perhaps the,
rational explanation of the phenomena, although it is logically possible
that the phenomena have no rational explanation.’ After all, a burden of
Hume’s complaint against inductive reasoning is that it is not rational.
Inferring to the best explanation is not a deductive process, but it is
rational. And laws as relations between universals do explain observed
regularities, and explain them well, although laws as mere uniformities do
not explain observed regularities at all.
We may also ask the inductive sceptic what reason he has to believe that
there are any observed regularities to explain. It is logically possible that
our world is a Humean world. Solipsism of the present moment is also
logically possible, as the sceptic well knows. If there is no good reason to
move beyond the regularities of the world to laws which are more than
regularities, then there is equally no good reason for him to move beyond
his present observations and/or sensations to a regular world.
In the thirteenth, and ﬁnal, place, I add a new point. The Universals
theory allows us to understand, and to sympathize with, the notion that
laws of nature govern particular states of affairs. Because of the imperfect
analogy between social law and law of nature, it is clear that there must be
an element of metaphor in this notion. But if the Regularity theory is
correct then the metaphor is totally misleading, a mere product of meta-
physical confusion embedded in ordinary speech and thought. But if laws
of nature are relations between universals (and are universals), then the
98
www.ebook3000.com

laws do have a relative independence from the states which instantiate
them. This explains the bite of the metaphor.
At a later point (Ch. 10, Sec. 4), a distinction will be drawn between
‘iron’ and ‘oaken’ laws. Unlike iron laws, oaken laws do not hold no matter
what. They hold only in the absence of interfering factors, and such an
absence is not a further factor. A law of nature of this sort has an even
closer, if still imperfect, resemblance to social law. For there is an (admit-
tedly weak) sense in which it can ‘fail to apply’ or even ‘be broken’.
Before leaving this topic, and although this chapter is already far too
long, we do need to look at an argument used by Braithwaite and others
with the object of showing that, because the Regularity account of laws
claims less than other ‘stronger’ accounts, the latter accounts will be
exposed not to less, but to more sceptical doubt. This will be the matter
for a ﬁnal section.
To sum up this section. It seems that in the areas where the Regularity
theory of law conspicuously fails, the Universals theory for the most part
conspicuously succeeds. Of course, this is not the end of the matter. There
remains always the question of other bulges in the carpet. The Universals
theory can smooth out the bulges which the Regularity theory creates. But
perhaps in doing so the Universals theory creates worse bulges of its own
elsewhere.
This is what we must now investigate. We shall see that the Universals
theory involves some real problems and uncertainties. My judgement is
that these problems and uncertainties are not of the overwhelming sort
which the Regularity theory faces. Perhaps, however, this is a matter for
others rather than myself to decide. At any rate, I think that enough has
been said in its defence, and enough against its main opponent, to show
that a theory of laws as relations between universals is well worth
investigating.
8
Braithwaite’s and Popper’s argument
In
his
book
Scientiﬁc
Explanation
(1968,
ﬁrst
edn.
1953),
Richard
Braithwaite puts forward the following argument:
Another reason for starting with the constant-conjunction view is that,
according to it, scientiﬁc laws are logically weaker propositions than
they would be on any alternative view of their nature. On any other
view, a scientiﬁc law, while including a generalization, states something
more than the generalization. Thus the assumption that a scientiﬁc law
99

states nothing beyond a generalization is the most modest assumption
that can be made. This modesty is of great importance in considering
the problem of induction. It is difﬁcult enough to justify our belief in
scientiﬁc laws when they are regarded simply as generalizations; the
task becomes more difﬁcult if we are required to justify belief in prop-
ositions which are more than generalizations. This fact does not seem to
me to have been sufﬁciently recognized by many of those who
criticize the constant-conjunction view for affording no sound basis
for induction. (1968, pp. 11–12)
The same argument is used, although in a hypothetical manner, by Karl
Popper in his Logic of Scientiﬁc Discovery (1959, Appendix):
To a student of method who opposes the doctrine of induction and
adheres to the theory of falsiﬁcation, there is not much difference
between the view that laws are nothing but strictly universal statements
and the view that they are ‘necessary’: in both cases, we can only test our
conjecture by attempted refutations.
To the inductivist there is a crucial difference here: he ought to reject
the idea of ‘necessary’ laws, since these, being logically stronger, must be
even less accessible to induction than mere universal statements. (p. 437)
The argument reappears, more cautiously put, in D. H. Mellor (1980):
The debatable question is whether laws are more than generalizations,
and if so, what more. Now if giving laws one content rather than
another made the problem of induction soluble for them, this would
be a strong argument for giving them that content. But since I believe
no such solution is presently available for any credible content, I must
look to other arguments. Hume’s problem [the problem of induction]
does, however, provide a reason for preferring weak readings of natural
laws. The less a law says, the less there is to be certiﬁed in claiming it to
be true. (p. 108)
To restate the argument. Suppose that we have good inductive evidence,
E, for its being a law that Fs are Gs. The Regularity theorist interprets the
law as being constituted by the fact that all Fs are Gs. I have argued that
the law is a necessitation relation holding between the universals F and G:
N(F,G). I assert, however, that N(F,G) entails that all Fs are Gs, and I deny
the reverse entailment. So ‘N(F,G)’ is logically stronger than ‘all Fs are Gs’.
Hence it should be harder to establish N(F,G) on the basis of E than it is to
establish that all Fs are Gs.
100
www.ebook3000.com

The ﬁrst point to be made about this argument may be illustrated by
considering the dispute between Instrumentalism and Realism with
regard to scientiﬁc theories. Rather loosely following Van Fraassen (1980,
p. 36) we may compare the instrumentalist to the atheist. He denies that
there are any scientiﬁc entities lying beyond the observable ones. The
Realist is like the theist. He asserts the existence of scientiﬁc entities lying
beyond the observable ones. Both may be said to be ‘dogmatists’. Both
assert propositions which go beyond the observed. The Instrumentalist
asserts that nothing lies beyond the observed. The Realist asserts that
theoretical entities lie beyond, and explain, the observed. The proposition
which sticks to the observational evidence is the ‘agnostic’ view which
neither denies nor asserts the existence of theoretical entities Realistically
conceived. (This is the view which Van Fraassen recommends as
reasonable.)
Suppose, then, that we have good inductive evidence for believing that
it is a law that Fs are Gs. What sort of thing should we take the law to be?
The ‘atheistical’ view is that it is the fact that each F is G, and nothing else.
The ‘theistic’ view is that it is a relationship between universals which
entails, without being entailed by, the fact that each F is G. The ‘agnostic’
view is that the law is at least the fact that each F is G, and that it may or
may not be something more.
Now it is clear that not only the ‘theistic’ but also the ‘atheistic’ view of
laws is logically stronger than the ‘agnostic’ view. It is the agnostic view,
therefore, which the Braithwaite–Popper argument should favour. (I am
indebted to Michael Tooley for pointing out to me the analogy with Van
Fraassen’s argument.)
It may be said that the ‘agnostic’ view of the law, involving as it does
a disjunction and an exclusive one at that, is not a view in which we can
remain. Suppose this to be so. Have we then got any reason to come
down on the ‘atheistical’ rather than the ‘theistic’ side of the disjunc-
tion? The principles of logical probability, which are the principles
appealed to in this argument, give us no reason. These principles make
no distinction between negative and positive propositions, between the
absence of a relationship of universals and its presence. From the
standpoint of the principles of logical probability, ‘atheist’ and ‘theist’
are equally dogmatic.
Of course, the ‘atheist’, the Regularity theorist, does seem to be asserting
something weaker than the ‘theist’, the upholder of the Universals theory.
But it is clear wherein that weakness lies. Unlike the principles of logical
probability, Occam’s Razor does distinguish between lacks and absences,
101

on the one hand, and the corresponding presences of entities, on the other.
It favours lacks and absences and disfavours presences.
It seems, then, that the real drive behind the Braithwaite–Popper argu-
ment is not really a point about logical content at all, but that it rests upon
a covert appeal to Occam’s Razor. The Razor, however, says that entities
are not to be multiplied beyond necessity. The ﬁrst ﬁve chapters in this work
may therefore be tendered in evidence to show that the postulation of
mere regularities is inadequate as an account of what it is to be a law that
Fs are Gs.
A second difﬁculty for the argument is that, at best, it could only be
used to support the Naive Regularity theory of laws. A sophisticated
Regularity theory, whether in an Epistemic or Resiliency or Systematic
version, does not hold that ‘It is a law that Fs are Gs’ can be translated as
‘All Fs are Gs’. It is necessary that all Fs are Gs, but something further must
be added: some epistemic, or, preferably, some resiliency or systematic
conditions. Hence, simply considering logical probabilities, the formal
situation for a sophisticated Regularity theory is the same as that for the
Universals theory. So if the argument is a good one, it gives us not only a
reason for preferring a Regularity theory to the Universals theory, but also
a reason for preferring the Naive Regularity theory to a sophisticated
Regularity theory.
But, I hope, if the ﬁrst ﬁve chapters of this work have done anything,
they have shown the utter untenability of the Naive Regularity theory. It
must be abandoned. The Braithwaite–Popper argument then gives us no
guidance as to whether it should be abandoned for a sophisticated Regu-
larity theory, or some other theory.
It seems clear, therefore, that there is no particular reason to take heed of
the argument. If there are positive reasons to prefer the Universals theory
over the Regularity theory, then the argument in no way weakens those
reasons. I have argued, of course, that there are such reasons.
102
www.ebook3000.com

7
Functional laws
B
It turns out that the problem of giving an account of functional laws is
very closely bound up with the problem of uninstantiated laws. I will
approach the problem of functional laws via an account of ‘missing values’
of such laws.
We will consider a functional law of the simplest sort. Let P and Q be
distinct variable magnitudes,1 and f be some functional constant. Let the
law be manifested in the uniformity:
x
ð Þ P
ð Þ Px  9Q
ð
Þ Qx & Q ¼ f P
ð Þ
ð
Þ:
ð
Here ‘P’ and ‘Q’ are restricted variables ranging over possible values
(values which are properties) of the distinct magnitudes P and Q. The
function is a total function, that is to say, there is a value of Q associated
with each value of P. (This last requirement is made only to simplify the
discussion.) Now consider the individual values of the variable ‘P’. For
each of these values, which are perhaps indenumerable in number, we can
state a law, a law with a very simple form. Suppose that P1 is such an
individual value, and suppose that the value of f p1


happens to be Q1.
We then have good old N(P1Q1), manifesting itself in:
x
ð Þ P1x  Q1x
ð
Þ
This suggests a preliminary way of thinking about the functional law. We
can think of it as a conjunction (perhaps an inﬁnite conjunction) of a set
of simple laws each having the form just displayed: it is a law that PNs
are QNs.
1
These magnitudes are to be thought of as families of properties. Cf: Swoyer (1982, p. 205):
‘many philosophers think of laws as involving physical magnitudes rather than proper-
ties, often explicating such magnitudes as functions from sets of physical objects into the
real numbers, and for such purposes as axiomatisation this can be useful. Nevertheless a
function like “rest mass in kilograms” will map an object to 5.3 because of something about
the object, viz. the mass that it has, rather than conversely.’
103

Suppose now that P involves a missing member of the family. Property
P0 is omnitemporally never instantiated. f P0
ð
Þ, however, yields a deter-
minate value: property Q0. We therefore assert it to be a law that P0s are
Q0s. We have N(P0,Q0), ‘manifesting’ itself in (x) (P0x⊃Q0x). But the
question arises what is the justiﬁcation for asserting this uninstantiated
law. Why are we justiﬁed in adding it to the set of instantiated laws
involving P and Q?
A
Regularity
theory
can
only
solve
the
problem
in
a
semi-
conventionalist manner. It gives us the simplest system to assume that
the missing value of Q will be f of P0. A Universals theory, if it is in
addition prepared to admit (omnitemporally) uninstantiated universals,
can solve the problem in a completely Realistic way. The universal, P0, can
exist, although uninstantiated, the universal, Q0, can also exist, even if
uninstantiated, and P0 and Q0 could be related by the appropriate higher-
order relation. Observation of instantiated values will then constitute the
evidence for believing that in fact all this is the case.
We, however, while admitting universals, wish to admit only instanti-
ated universals. Universals are abstractions from states of affairs. They are,
indeed, sorts or types of states of affairs. What is such a view to say about
the uninstantiated P0!Q0 law?
The view which I wish to put forward is that a statement of uninstan-
tiated law should be construed as a counterfactual. Instances of the uni-
versal P0 do not exist, that is, P0 does not exist. Hence the P0!Q0 law does
not exist. But if there were P0s, that is, if P0 existed, then P0s would be
governed by the law that P0s are all Q0s. Statements of uninstantiated law
are really only statements about what laws would hold if, contrary to fact,
certain universals were instantiated, that is, existed. I thus admit
uninstantiated laws, but only as logically secondary cases of laws.
To continue to work this idea out. We are for the moment thinking of
the functional law as a conjunction (perhaps inﬁnite) of laws each having
the simple form: it is a law that PNs are QNs. But by what right do we
extrapolate (counterfactually) from this bunch of laws to the ‘law’ that P0s
are Q0s? The problem must remind us of the more ordinary problem of
extrapolating from the actual set of Fs, each of which is a G, to the
conclusion that, if particular a were an F, as it is not, then a would be a
G. In the latter case, the counterfactual will be sustained if it is a law that Fs
are Gs. Laws, we are further assuming, are relations between actually
instantiated universals. So it seems that what is required in order to license
our extrapolation to the P0!Q0 ‘law’ is that there be a law governing the
conjunction of laws of the PN!QN sort. The statement of this law, in
104
www.ebook3000.com

conjunction with the counterfactual supposition that P0 exists, will yield
the P0!Q0 law. The law governing the conjunction of laws must then be
construed, given our programme, as a relation between actually instanti-
ated universals.
We thus reach the conception of a functional law as a higher-order law
which governs, indeed in this particular case completely determines the
nature of, a set of lower-order laws. If there were no such higher-order
law, but instead a mere coincidental conjunction, perhaps inﬁnite, of ﬁrst-
order laws, then there would be no justiﬁcation for making statements of
uninstantiated law. Furthermore, if we reduce the higher-order law to a
mere regularity, it will no more sustain counterfactuals than will a ﬁrst-
order law construed as a mere regularity.
Pursuing this idea, how are we to render our (especially simple) func-
tional law linking the variable magnitudes P and Q? It will have this form.
It is a law [second-order] concerning P-type properties, that, if a particular
[ﬁrst-order] has one of these properties, then it is a law [ﬁrst-order] both
that this particular has a Q-type property, and that a certain relation [the
function: Q=f(P)] holds between this P-type and this Q-type property.2
We are developing the conception of laws of nature as relations between
universals, states of affairs which are simultaneously universals. It is
therefore required that the notion of a P-type property and a Q-type
property be each the notion of a universal. The universals must each be
ones, running through the many constituted by the P-type properties, and
the Q-type properties, respectively. They will therefore have to be higher-
order universals, properties of properties. It is here that certain problems
arise, problems which we will need to consider shortly.
But ﬁrst let us think about the form of the law. Can it be represented
simply as N(P,Q), with N a third-order universal, P and Q second-order
universals, and the second-order state of affairs N(P, Q) also a second-
order universal? In fact, the formula ‘N(P, Q)’ is a little too simple. What
we have rather is N (being a P-type property, being a Q-type property
such that Q is a function, f, of that same P-type property). It can be
shortened to N(P, a Q such that Q = f P
ð Þ). This second-order state of
affairs will also be a second-order dyadic universal (Ch. 6, Sec. 4), and
its instances will be pairs of ﬁrst-order universals of which the ﬁrst
2
It is to be noted that it would be possible for a second-order law of this sort itself to be an
uninstantiated law. But, if our account of uninstantiated laws is correct, it would then be
necessary at some point to reach a still higher-order law which is an instantiated law. From
this the uninstantiated second-order ‘law’ could be counterfactually derived.
105

member is an instance of P and the second member is the appropriate
instance of Q. The instances of the law will thus be ﬁrst-order laws of
nature. The account is parallel to that given of N(F,G), but with everything
moved up one order.
Since N is the same relation as that to be found in N(F,G), then, from the
second-order law as it was formulated in the previous paragraph, ﬁrst-
order laws can be deduced. For example, it can be deduced that some-
thing’s having the property P1 necessitates that that same thing has Q1,
where Q1 = f P1
ð
Þ: In this case, the second-order law not only governs the
ﬁrst-order law, but fully determines its content. But it is possible to have
second-order laws which govern ﬁrst-order laws without fully determin-
ing the latter’s content. We will meet hypothetical examples in the next
chapter.
But the real problem here seems to be raised by the required second-
order universals, P and Q. A typical class of P-type or Q-type properties
would be the class of the determinate masses. Can it be said that the
determinate mass-properties (such as the property of being one kilogram
exact) all have the common property of being a mass? P and Q ought to be
common properties of this sort. Now, while the predicate ‘being a mass’
certainly applies to all and only this class of properties, it is less clear that
we are entitled to say that being a mass is a genuine property of determin-
ate masses.
Being a mass is a determinable, and the individual mass-universals are
determinates falling under that determinable. In Part VI of my 1978 (Vol.
II) I argued that there are no determinable universals, only determinates.
A particular class of determinates is a class of universals having a certain
ordered structure. (I suggested that this structure was governed by ‘rela-
tions’ of partial identity holding between the universals involved.) But
I argued that there is no element genuinely common to each universal in
the class in virtue of which it is a member of that class. The argument is
difﬁcult, and I am less than fully conﬁdent of it, but there is some reason to
be suspicious of such properties as being a mass.
We have seen that the state of affairs N(F,G) is simultaneously a ﬁrst-
order relation. If being a mass is a property of properties, then one kilogram’s
being a mass will be a second-order state of affairs, M(K), and this state of
affairs, by symmetry, will also be a ﬁrst-order property which will attach
to ﬁrst-order particulars, such as this balance-weight. This may seem
unnecessary reduplication. Why need the balance-weight have both the
property K and the property M(K)? And if it has M(K), will it not have
M1(K), M2(K) . . . where M1, M2 . . . are determinates intermediate between
106
www.ebook3000.com

M and K? (As redness is between colour and fully determinate shade.)
Realists about properties should be careful about properties! They should
not multiply them in the reckless way favoured by those for whom
properties are the mere shadows of predicates or are constituted by classes
of particulars.
But perhaps this difﬁculty can be answered. Properties are to be postu-
lated on an a posteriori basis. In particular, they are to be postulated
because and where natural science demands them. Now, if there are
functional laws linking being some mass with some other determinable
property, then we have a need to postulate a property of being a mass, a
common nature possessed by the determinate mass-universals. We do not
need the intermediate determinables. So perhaps determinable universals
can be admitted on a selective basis.
If this justiﬁcation for such second-order properties fails, there remain a
couple of positions which might be tried. In my 1978 discussion (Ch. 24,
Sec. 3) I canvassed the possibility of moving away from determinables to
still more general properties, and in particular to the formal nature of the
ordered structure possessed by the classes of determinates in question. We
could imagine a higher-order law which linked all those classes of deter-
minate properties which have the same formal structure with further
classes of determinate properties, the latter classes all having the same or
another formal structure, according to some formula.
The difﬁculty about this is that nature might not be so obliging. Perhaps
the class of P-type properties is linked with the class of Q-type properties
according to a certain formula, but the class of R-type properties, a class
with exactly the same formal structure as the class of P-type properties, is
linked to the class of S-type properties in a quite different manner. The
P!Q and the R!S connections might require distinct higher-order laws.
A somewhat shoddy third solution is that what we have here is a
higher-order equivalent of ‘cosmic epochs’. Laws of cosmic epochs restrict
the scope of laws to particular temporal epochs (or spatial areas). We have
grudgingly admitted the possibility of such laws (Ch. 3, Sec. 1). If they
exist, they involve a necessitation relation, holding not between universal
and universal, but between a quasi-universal (F in a certain epoch) and a
universal. Think now of all the universals that there are as forming a
‘space’. A class of determinates is a class of adjoining universals taking
up a certain ‘area’ of this space. It can then be suggested that the higher-
order law is restricted in its scope to this area of universals. Different laws
hold in different areas. It would be a matter of second-order quasi-
universals.
107

This survey of suggestions for uniting the classes of universals linked in
functional laws indicates that the conception of functional laws as higher-
order laws is not without its problems. But something of the sort seems
required if we are to give an account of uninstantiated functional laws
within the scope of a Universals theory, yet not countenance uninstan-
tiated universals. The most hopeful line seems to argue for higher-order
universals corresponding to some determinable properties viz. those
required for functional laws.
108
www.ebook3000.com

8
Uninstantiated laws
B
In the previous chapter an account of uninstantiated laws was given.
According to this view, strictly there are no uninstantiated laws. State-
ments of uninstantiated law tell us that a certain law would govern the
antecedent universal, if, contrary to fact, that universal existed, that is, was
somewhere instantiated. Such an account deals fairly easily with the
problem of ‘missing values’ of functional laws. But certain cases of unin-
stantiated laws have been suggested by Michael Tooley (1977) which the
counterfactual account appears to be unable to handle.
1
Tooley’s cases
The cases to be discussed are not actual uninstantiated laws proposed by
scientists. They are imaginary situations where, it is plausible to say, we
should be inclined to postulate uninstantiated laws. Tooley himself was
not concerned with the topic of uninstantiated laws for its own sake.
Rather he wanted to use the cases, ﬁrst to criticize the Regularity theory,
and second to support the view that laws of nature are relations between
universals. I largely followed him in his estimation of the cases in my 1978
(Ch. 24). Now I have doubts.
The Fundamental Particle case (1977, p. 669). Tooley imagines a world
containing ten, and only ten, types of fundamental particle. Allowing that
a particle may interact with a particle of its own type as well as with
particles of other types, this allows for 55 interaction laws governing the
interaction of pairs of particles. Suppose that 54 of these laws are known.
They prove in each case to be so idiosyncratic that, given any 53 of them,
the nature of the 54th could not be known, or even rationally conjectured,
antecedently to experience. But suppose that the 55th law, the law of the
interaction of B-type with J-type particles, is not known. This occurs
because, although this type of interaction is physically possible, yet
boundary conditions in the universe are such that, throughout all time,
no B-particle is ever close enough to a J-particle to interact with it.
109

Tooley claims that, in this situation, we would have good reason to
assert the existence of an uninstantiated law governing B–J interactions.
But although we would have good reason to assert the existence of the
law, we would not be able even to conjecture what its detailed content
was. This is quite different from the case of the missing values of func-
tional laws. In the latter cases, we can say just how the uninstantiated
particulars would behave, if they were instantiated.
The Emergent property case (1977, p. 685). I will present the case in my
own way. Suppose that there are, as it seems that there perfectly well
might be, irreducible, simple, emergent properties. (On certain views of
the secondary qualities, they will be of this nature.) Suppose that there is a
sequence of complex structural properties, P,Q,R. . ., which form a scale of
some sort. Suppose that the conjunction of P,Q and R, when instantiated
by a particular, gives rise to the simple emergent property E. Suppose that
the conjunction of Q,R and S gives rise to the distinct simple emergent
property F, and R,S and T to G. Under circumstances of this sort, we might
have good reason to believe that S,T and U, when conjoined, would give
rise to yet another simple emergent property. Suppose, however, that,
although the conjunction of S,T and U is physically possible, in fact it is
never at any time instantiated. Would we not have good reason to believe
that an uninstantiated law linked the conjunction of S,T and U with some
further simple emergent property?
This Emergent property case resembles the Fundamental particle case.
We would have good reason to believe that a law existed, but would be
unable to specify its full content. We could specify the antecedent circum-
stances of the law (if S,T,U. . .) together with the general nature, but not the
speciﬁc content, of the consequent.
2
Tooley’s conclusions
Tooley draws three conclusions from his cases. Two are agreeable, but the
third is not.
The ﬁrst conclusion is that the Regularity theory is false. The Regularity
theory can give no account of uninstantiated laws of the sort which, if
Tooley is correct, his cases force us to postulate. In the case of uninstan-
tiated laws governing ‘missing values’ of functional laws, the Regularity
theory, if in some difﬁculties, is not helpless. It is at least colourable that
the uninstantiated laws are asserted because they ﬁll up gaps in the system
of instantiated uniformities, that is, instantiated laws. But if we agree that,
in Tooley’s cases, deﬁnite and determinate uninstantiated laws exist, but
110
www.ebook3000.com

yet that this determinate content is unknown to us, no account at all of
these laws is available to a Regularity theorist.
Second, Tooley draws the conclusion that laws of nature must be rela-
tions between universals. For what could act as truth-maker or ontological
ground for these uninstantiated laws except the universals involved and
their relations? In the Fundamental particle case, for instance, there must
be a relation between those universals which make a B-type particle a
particle of the B-type, and the universals which make a J-type particle a
particle of the J-type. The existence and nature of the other 54 laws gives us
good reason to postulate such a relation, but at the same time keeps us in
the dark as to the exact nature of the relation.
So far, very promising. The Regularity theory has been humbled, the
Universals theory exalted. But, as Tooley points out, there is bitter to
swallow with the sweet. For, third, it appears that these uninstantiated
laws require uninstantiated universals. Consider the B–J law. It has the
form ‘If a B-type particle and a J-type particle have the relation R, then. . .’
Now the complex universal, the whole state of affairs of a B having R to a J,
which constitutes the antecedent universal, is, by hypothesis, never instan-
tiated. Yet it is this universal which requires to be related to the consequent
universal (which perhaps is never instantiated either). So it seems that
Tooley’s cases force us to admit at least the logical possibility of uninstan-
tiated universals.
Can the difﬁculty be escaped? Can we not give an account of such ‘laws’
by appealing to counterfactuals about what laws would hold if the ante-
cedent universals were instantiated? May we not say that if the B–R–J
universal existed, as it does not, then there would be a (necessitating or
probabilifying) relation holding between it and some further universal?
What would be the truth-makers for this counterfactual? Well, there do
exist B-type particles, and J-type particles. Furthermore, the relation R is,
presumably, elsewhere instantiated. The unknown consequent universal
may be uninstantiated. But surely at least the constituent universals of the
consequent universal will be instantiated? So there will exist a class of
universals to act as truth-makers.
I put forward this solution in my 1978 (Vol. II, pp. 156–7). But, alas, this
Tooley-without-tears solution founders on the Emergent property case.
There the uninstantiated law has the form: if S,T,U, then an unknown
simple property emerges. It is an intelligible supposition that the conjunc-
tion of S,T and U (all separately instantiated, it may be supposed) is a
necessary condition for the emergence of the simple property. If so, since
the conjunction S,T, and U is uninstantiated at any time, the simple
111

property is uninstantiated at any time. Since the property is simple, it can
have no instantiated constituents. So the truth-maker for the uninstan-
tiated S,T,U law includes one uninstantiated universal. Hence, if we accept
Tooley’s general line of argument, we must also accept that we could have
good reasons for postulating uninstantiated universals. Uninstantiated
universals are therefore logically possible.
One way which we could attempt to block this conclusion would be to
deny that we can make sense of the notion of the absolutely or ontologic-
ally simple as applied to universals. But, with Tooley, I see no reason to
deny the possibility of such simplicity. I do not know whether any simple
universals actually exist. But I can see no reason to deny that they
might exist.
Should we then simply accept the conclusion that it is logically possible
that there are uninstantiated universals? This is the course which Tooley
himself recommends. After all, mere logical possibilities are not very
harmful. Nothing like Tooley’s cases are to be found in current scientiﬁc
approximations to the laws of nature. The Principle of Instantiation can be
retained as a likely contingent truth.
However, I think that there is good reason to reject this approach. It will
be a disaster for the theory of universals. Once the logical possibility of one
universal existing uninstantiated is admitted, it seems difﬁcult to deny the
logical possibility of any universal existing uninstantiated. For is it to be
supposed that universals will differ among themselves in this fundamen-
tal respect? Nor can the line be drawn at properties. For any relation also,
it will have to be logically possible that it should exist without instanti-
ation, that is, without terms. (It would not be difﬁcult to construct Tooley
cases involving relations rather than properties.) All universals will then
become substances in Hume’s sense, that is, things logically capable of
independent existence.
But it seems mistaken to conceive of universals in this way. Without
arguing the matter in detail here, I will say that there will be problems in
connecting universals so conceived to their particulars. The problem is
perhaps clearest in the case of relations. If a two-place relation holding
between particulars a and b is something capable of independent existence
apart from a, b, and other particulars, will it not require at least one further
relation to link it to a and b? And if this relation can itself exist uninstan-
tiated (as it would, for instance, in a universe of monads) it will be subject
to the same inﬁrmity, and so ad inﬁnitum. This Bradleian regress can only
be escaped if universals (and also the particularity of particulars) are mere
abstract (but real) factors in states of affairs.
112
www.ebook3000.com

In any case, however, it seems that Tooley is forced to accept that there
probably are actual uninstantiated universals. We have already seen that
scientists do recognize the existence of various ‘laws’ which, although it is
logically possible that they should be instantiated, are apparently unin-
stantiated. All such empirical cases seem to be cases of ‘missing values’ of
more comprehensive functional laws. But they are uninstantiated laws
nevertheless. Now what account is Tooley to give of the truth-makers for
such laws? It will be extremely arbitrary for him to give a Realistic account
of the ‘laws’ involved in his imaginary cases, yet give a non-Realistic
account of those uninstantiated law-statements actually asserted by scien-
tists. In consistency, he must postulate uninstantiated universals in the
latter cases also. Then universals, however, will be actual, not merely
possible.
So it seems that Tooley should include uninstantiated universals in his
ontology. To those of us who wish to uphold the hypothesis that the only
thing which in fact exists is the spatio-temporal manifold, this is an
unwelcome conclusion. It gives us strong motive and reason for seeking
an alternative account.
3
Tooley’s cases solved by the introduction of powers?
Tooley’s cases, however, are an extremely rich source for metaphysical
speculation. There is yet another way in which we can react when con-
fronted by them. It would be possible to return to an old line of thought
and to link universals with powers.
Suppose that it is a nomic truth that Fs which are not Gs cannot be Hs,
and similarly that Gs which are not Fs cannot be Hs, but that it is a law that
Fs which are also Gs are Hs. The universal, F, might then be thought to be
linked to a power, possessed by all particulars which are F. (G would have
a similar power.) Whether the universal and the power are linked neces-
sarily or contingently would be a further point for later discussion. But the
things which were F would have a power, in virtue of being F, a power
such that if they were also Gs, then they would further be Hs. This link
between the power and its potential consequences would be necessary.
(Things which were G would have a corresponding power.) In the simpler
case where it was a law that Fs are Gs, Fs would presumably still have a
power, but a full or plenary power which could not but be exercised.
How would this introduction of powers deal with Tooley’s cases?
Simply by saying that in Tooley-type cases what we would be dealing
with would be instantiated universals which bestowed (non-plenary)
113

powers upon the particulars which instantiated the universals. A B-type
particle, for instance, might have the power, if it came to have R to a J-type
particle, to produce some quite idiosyncratic upshot. A non-plenary power
need not be exercised, and so it might be that this power never is exer-
cised. There might also be other omnitemporally unexercised powers to
produce something having a simple quality of a certain sort, a quality
which no actual thing ever had or will have.
What the solution in terms of powers is doing is dealing with Tooley’s
uninstantiated laws by associating, as it were, a ghost of the consequent
with the antecedent universals of the uninstantiated law. Having the
power is very like having a mental state with an intentional object. Just
as the intentional object may not be a real object, so the ‘object’ of the
power may never be actualized. But the power still exists and points to its
object. We have here a universalist equivalent of the objective propensities
of particulars discussed in Chapter 3, Section 4. What was said there is
relevant to the present discussion.
While granting that what we have here is a possible solution to the
problem raised by Tooley’s cases, I would wish to avoid, if at all possible,
the cumbrous ontology of powers. We already have particulars and cat-
egorical universals, combined in states of affairs. To introduce powers is to
introduce non-categorical universals alongside universals, and to intro-
duce them in great profusion, wherever universals are linked by laws.
Relations between universals will still be required. If an object instantiates
a universal, then the universal bestows certain (universal) powers on the
object. The relation between universal and powers may be necessary or it
may be contingent. There is room for philosophical differences on this
point. But there will be a relation between the two sorts of universal. Again
there will apparently have to be some sort of relation between the power
and its actualization, when the latter occurs. In such a case we have a
plenary power, and the relation between power and actualization will be
necessary.
Hence, since we will still require relations between universals, the
ontology of powers is deﬁnitely uneconomical. This is a good reason for
at least trying to see if we can proceed without powers.
A truly radical attempt to overcome the problem of linking categorical
universals with powers would be to reduce all universals to powers. The
properties of a thing would just be identiﬁed with the thing’s capacities to
act and be acted upon by other things.
I believe, however, that such an attempt is involved in vicious regress.
The power is constituted the power it is by the sort of actualizations it
114
www.ebook3000.com

gives rise to in suitable sorts of circumstance. But what are these sorts of
actualization and sorts of circumstance? They themselves can be nothing
but powers, and so again they can only be constituted by the sorts of
actualization which they give rise to in suitable circumstances. The power
to produce A is nothing but the power to produce the power to produce
B . . . and so on. Nor will the situation be relieved by bringing the powers
around in a circle.
4
A sceptical treatment of Tooley’s cases
I therefore ﬁnally propose a sceptical account of Tooley’s cases, a solution
which does not accept one of Tooley’s premisses. I begin from the already
presented idea that statements of uninstantiated law are a certain sort of
counterfactual. They are statements that if a certain universal was instanti-
ated which in fact is not instantiated, then this universal would be related
in a certain fashion to a certain other universal. The counterfactual is
sustained by a statement of a higher-order law.
Let us identify these elements in Tooley’s cases. In both of them we can
point to, if not identify very precisely, the higher-order laws. In the
Fundamental particle case we have the following. It is a law concerning
the laws of 2-particle fundamental interactions that, given two different
types of interaction (e.g. the A–A interaction and the B–D interaction)
whatever (ﬁrst-order) law governs the one interaction, then the ﬁrst-order
law governing the second type of interaction is quite different in form.
For the Emergent properties case we have the following sketch of a
higher-order law. It is a law concerning a certain range of complex prop-
erties that, if objects have a certain sort of conjunction of properties in this
range, then it is a law that they have certain emergent simple properties, a
different simple property being associated with each different conjunction.
If there are no such higher-order laws, then, I maintain, there can be no
uninstantiated laws. It is because the cases as sketched by Tooley suggest,
as a best explanation of the given facts, that there are such higher-order
laws, that he can go on to assert with plausibility the existence of his
uninstantiated laws. If the latter are counterfactuals, as I am now suggest-
ing, how else can they be sustained except by a higher-order law?
Suppose, now, that one has these higher-order laws as premisses, and
that one conjoins them with the false premisses that B and J particles do
sometimes meet (in the Fundamental particle case), or that the complex of
properties S,T and U is somewhere coinstantiated (in the Emergent prop-
erty case). One can then deduce that the B–J laws would be idiosyncratic.
115

One can deduce that the conjunction of S,T and U would give rise to a new
simple property. One can make statements of uninstantiated law, that is,
assert a certain sort of counterfactual, to this effect.
Tooley’s intuition, and it is a plausible one, is that, in such cases, there is
a deﬁnite B–J interaction law, which we cannot know; and also that a
certain deﬁnite simple property would emerge, although we cannot know
what it would be. If this intuition is correct, then my resolution of his cases
fails. But it is this intuition which I now wish to challenge.
My challenge is based upon certain reasonably widely appreciated
features of counterfactual reasoning. Here is a more ordinary case of
counterfactual reasoning (the details suggested by Gregory Currie).
I think it weakens the grip of Tooley’s cases.
Suppose that there is an irreducibly probabilistic law to the effect that, if
P, then either Q or R will occur, but not both. Q and R are equiprobable.
Suppose that a particular a, lacks property P at t, but suppose that it is
nomically possible, although false, that it has P at t. It seems clear that, in
this situation, we are entitled to assert the counterfactual: if a had been P at
t, then either Q or R would have occurred. It is clear also that, since the law
is irreducibly probabilistic, and the probabilities equal, that we have no
reason to assert that the outcome would have been Q rather than R, or
R rather than Q.
But suppose that a philosopher asserts: nevertheless, there is a truth of
the matter. All that we are in a position to assert rationally is that the
outcome would have been Q or R. Yet in fact the outcome would have
been Q. Or it would have been R. Excluded middle holds. But our epi-
stemological situation happens to be a little unfortunate.
For such a philosopher there are, besides actual states of affairs involv-
ing particulars, physically possible but non-actual states of affairs
involving particulars. Since they are states of affairs, part of the ontological
furniture, they are determinate. Excluded middle must hold. Against this,
however, I suggest that, for the given case at least, this is an anti-Actualist
stand which few of us would wish to take. The true position seems to be
that there are no such states of affairs. There is no fact of the matter.
Excluded middle fails.1
But now, in the light of this case, is it not quite plausible to treat Tooley’s
uninstantiated laws as the same sort of phenomenon, but one level higher
up? We are certainly justiﬁed in asserting the counterfactual: if a B and a
1
In the now standard symbolism for counterfactuals, from (P⎕! (QvR)) we cannot validly
conclude that ((P⎕!Q) v (P⎕!R)).
116
www.ebook3000.com

J were to interact, then the interaction would be governed by a quite
idiosyncratic law. But this is simply a deduction from the higher-order
laws governing laws of fundamental particle interaction in Tooley’s uni-
verse, conjoined with a false premiss that B and J particles interact. There is
no need to believe that there is a deﬁnite idiosyncratic law, but one, alas,
forever unknown to us.
It must be admitted that there is some asymmetry of intuition here. In
the ﬁrst-order case, it is natural to think that excluded middle fails for the
counterfactual involved. In Tooley’s cases, it is quite natural, when pre-
sented with them, to think that the B–J combination of particles obey a
deﬁnite but unknown law. Even considered in the light of the ﬁrst-order
case, Tooley’s cases retain persuasive power.
I think that this asymmetry is linked to the tradition, as old as Plato, of
treating particulars as contingent beings but universals as necessary ones.
If a necessary being is possible, then it exists. If universals are necessary
beings, therefore, every possible universal exists, though many may be
uninstantiated. And if the universals exist, then they either have or do not
have the relations attributed to them by Tooley.
I believe, however, that this is an incorrect philosophy of universals.
Universals are as much contingent beings as particulars, and they do not
exist uninstantiated. And so it becomes much less obvious that, if a
universal that does not exist were to exist, that is, if a universal were
instantiated, then it deﬁnitely would, or deﬁnitely would not, have certain
relations to further universals.
I conclude, then, that Tooley’s ingenious cases do not prevent us from
treating statements of uninstantiated law as concealed counterfactuals,
where truth or falsity depends wholly upon actual, that is, instantiated,
laws. Statements of uninstantiated law assert only that if, contrary to fact,
certain sorts of thing existed, then these things would obey a certain law.
‘The law’ may be speciﬁed indeterminately only, and have no being
beyond this speciﬁcation.
5
Uninstantiated laws with nomically impossible antecedents
D. H. Mellor (1980, pp. 113–14) has pointed out that, in scientiﬁc practice,
we sometimes assert the existence of ‘laws’ where the antecedent condi-
tions are not merely uninstantiated, but are, and are understood by us to
be, nomically impossible. His example is high temperature values of the
vapour pressure law for water. The values are missing because it is a law
that water decomposes before it reaches these temperatures.
117

As already pointed out in Chapter 2, Section 7, one can hardly admit as
a genuine objective law one which has a nomically impossible antecedent.
Here, then, is an uninstantiated law of which we certainly cannot give a
Realistic account. We cannot possibly treat it as a law alongside other
laws, but one happening to lack the characteristic of instantiation.
What account can we give of such laws? An account of the following
sort seems more or less inevitable. The ‘law’ is deduced from a major and
a minor premiss. The major premiss contains a certain law-statement
presumed true, probably a functional law. But the major premiss also
contains a contrary-to-fact assumption: that some further law of nature
does not hold. The holding of this other law ensures that certain values of
the variables in the original functional law are not instantiated. But with
this other law ‘thought away’, these values become nomically possible.
The minor premiss will then be the further false assumption that these
forbidden values are actually instantiated. The conclusion of the argu-
ment will be that these values obey the formula of the ﬁrst, functional,
law. This conclusion, detached and asserted independently, constitutes
the uninstantiated law.
Such statements of uninstantiated law are therefore counterfactuals
about what law would hold if (a) a certain law did not hold; (b) a condition
were instantiated which was made nomically possible by the fact that the
law referred to in (a) did not hold. It is this condition which is governed by
the uninstantiated ‘law’.
There does not seem to be any particular difﬁculty here. But the result
may be used as a further argument against any Realistic (e.g. Tooley-
style) account of uninstantiated laws. As Mellor points out, scientiﬁc
practice seems to make no very sharp distinction between uninstantiated
laws which lack, and those which have, nomically possible antecedents.
Now, since it seems that we have to give an anti-Realistic account of the
former, this is some reason for giving an anti-Realistic account of all
uninstantiated laws.
We will return to the subject of uninstantiated laws with nomically
impossible antecedents when we discuss the view that laws of nature
are logical necessities in nature (Ch. 11, Sec. 4).
118
www.ebook3000.com

9
Probabilistic laws
B
1
The form of probabilistic laws
In the last two chapters we gave an account of functional laws as higher-
order laws, that is, laws governing laws. We also proposed a (non-Realist)
account of uninstantiated laws. Our next task is to try to bring irreducibly
probabilistic laws within our scheme.
At ﬁrst sight there appears to be some difﬁculty in this undertaking.
Suppose it to be a law that Fs are Gs, and suppose that a is F. We then
have:

NðF;GÞ

ða0s being F, a0s being GÞ
(1)
where N(F,G) is a necessitation relation holding between the two states of
affairs, a’s being F and a’s being G, a necessitation holding in virtue of the
two universals involved in the two states of affairs.
Suppose, however, that the law which links F and G is irreducibly
probabilistic. There is a probability P(1 > P > O) that an F is a
G. Suppose, again, that a is F. It would be simple and elegant to analyse
the situation in just the same way as in the case of the deterministic law:

ðPr : PÞ ðF; GÞ

ða0s being F, a0s being GÞ
(2)
where ((Pr:P) (F,G)) gives the objective probability of an F being a G, a
probability holding in virtue of the universals F and G.
But, of course, there is an obvious difﬁculty. Because the law is only
probabilistic, the state of affairs, a’s being F, may not be accompanied by
the state of affairs, a’s being G. The ‘relation’ ((Pr:P) (F,G)) will then lack its
second term.
How might we try to get round this failure of symmetry?
First, it might be suggested that the probabilistic law can be instantiated
by two different sorts of situation:
119


ðPr : PÞ ðF; GÞ

ða0s being F, a0s being GÞ
(3)

ðPr : 1  PÞ ðF; GÞ

ða0s being F, a0s not being GÞ:
(4)
The difﬁculty with this view is that it involves postulating negative states
of affairs, in order to provide a second term for the relation in (4). It may be
that a satisfactory metaphysics is forced to postulate such states of affairs,
but we should certainly try to avoid doing so if at all possible. Absences
and lacks are ontologically suspect. (If absences and lacks are real, why, if
there is a choice between the presence of A and the absence of A, should
Occam’s Razor disfavour the former?)
Second, we might re-introduce chances or propensities within the states
of affairs:

NðF; HÞ

ða0s being F, a0s being HÞ
(5)
with H a P-strength propensity to be G. This has the advantage that we do
not need the new universals of the form (Pr:P) (F,G), but can instead
appeal to universals of the form of our old friend (N(F,G)). Its disadvan-
tage is equally obvious: we are back with propensities or powers as extra,
irreducible, properties of individuals, over and above the categorical
properties.
I think that we have a better way out than either of the two suggestions
just noted. I suggest that we can after all stick with the original suggestion:

ðPr : PÞ ðF; GÞ

ða0s being F, a0s being GÞ:
(2)
What we must do, though, is limit the instantiation of the universal ((Pr:P)
(F,G)) to those cases where the particular which is F is also G. Probabilistic
laws are universals which are instantiated only in the cases where the probability
is realized.
One objection to the suggestion is obvious. What if, omnitemporally, the
probability is never realized? Given the rejection of uninstantiated univer-
sals, this would mean that there was no law. Yet does not the probabilistic
law itself provide for the physical possibility that every instance falling
under the law is a negative instance?
I wish to deny this possibility. If there is to be a law giving a probability
that Fs are Gs, then, I assert, it is logically necessary that, at some time,
there exists an F which is a G instantiating the law. The situation is the
same as that with ordinary universals. If the monadic universal, U, is
to exist, then it is not necessary that any speciﬁc particular have
120
www.ebook3000.com

property U. But it is necessary that, at some time, there be a particular
which has U. Otherwise U can be no more than a merely logically possible
universal, or, at best, a merely physically possible universal.
Suppose that Fs are never Gs. If we say that nevertheless there could be
a probabilistic law giving a chance of Fs being G, then, given that laws of
nature are relations between universals, we shall have to allow that the
universal G exists. But G may not be instantiated. For it seems absurd that
the existence of the F!G law depends upon the existence of Gs elsewhere,
Gs which have nothing to do with Fs. So we are back with the logical
possibility of uninstantiated universals, a possibility rejected in the previ-
ous chapter.
But having said these things, we are now in a position to qualify them.
Although we have rejected uninstantiated universals and uninstantiated
laws (a particular case of uninstantiated universals) as items in the uni-
verse alongside instantiated universals and laws, we have allowed that
statements of uninstantiated law may have more or less objective truth-
conditions. As a result, it can be allowed in the case under discussion that
no Fs might be Gs, and yet that a ‘law’ might still be truly assertable giving
a certain probability of an F being a G.
Uninstantiated law-statements, I have argued, are, if properly under-
stood, a species of counterfactual. They tell us only what laws would
hold if, contrary to fact, certain universals were instantiated. They are
counterfactuals which require to be backed by further laws: higher-order
laws. Suppose, then, that the property F has the property P. And suppose
that all other properties besides F which have the property P bestow
upon their particulars a certain identical probability of being a G, a
probability which is actually realized in some cases associated with each
property. We have a series of (instantiated) probabilistic laws, all having
the same form.
Under these circumstances, it would be reasonable to explain (unify)
this series of laws by postulating a higher-order law to the effect that any
P-type property involved a ﬁrst-order law to the effect that such a prop-
erty bestowed on its particulars a certain ﬁxed probability of being a
G. Given the law, it could then be deduced for the case of Fs that, despite
the fact that none of them were Gs, they too had that probability of being a
G. (Perhaps the probability was rather low, and the omnitemporal number
of Fs rather small.) The probabilistic F-law could then be thought of as a
universal which was omnitemporally never instantiated (and which there-
fore did not exist), but which had a physical possibility (indeed, a certain
probability) of existing.
121

By contrast, suppose that no Fs are Gs, and that no higher-order law
exists from which it could be deduced that Fs have some probability of
being a G. Then, I maintain, it cannot be the case that there is in any sense a
law that Fs have a certain probability of being a G.
Is this conclusion counterintuitive? I do not think it is seriously so. It is
clear that in such circumstances we would have no reason to assert a law
giving Fs a probability of being a G. (The situation would not be like the
Tooley cases, where an elaborate scenario was outlined which did give an
apparent reason to assert an uninstantiated law. Such a scenario gives just
the sort of evidence which would make us suspect the presence of a
higher-order law, and the higher-order law can in turn be used to justify
‘uninstantiated laws’.) In the interest of getting rid of those strange
entities: uninstantiated laws and uninstantiated universals: I suggest that
we take this lack of reason to have not merely an epistemological but also
an ontological moral. Real laws, like all real universals, are instantiated in
spacetime.
It may be noted, incidentally, that there is no parallel difﬁculty where a
merely probabilistic law linking Fs and Gs is instantiated in each case. This
might even be a likely happening where the probability was high and the
omnitemporal number of Fs low. Yet the law could still be genuinely
probabilistic, not deterministic. There would be a problem how we could
tell that it was only a probabilistic law. But even here we might have rather
good evidence to show that it was not deterministic. For instance, it might
be that we were forced to postulate merely probabilistic laws in other cases
because they all involved actual cases where probabilities failed to be
realized. This would be evidence for a higher-order law that all the
relevant laws were probabilistic, even those whose manifestations were
compatible with their being deterministic.
2
Probabilistic laws as probabilities of necessitation
If probabilistic laws are only instantiated in those cases where the prob-
ability is realized, then the way is open, at least, to think of such laws as
involving necessitation. Let it be a law that Fs have a certain probability of
being a G. Let a be F and be G, and let this state of affairs be an instanti-
ation of the law. We have:

ðPr : PÞ ðF; GÞ

ða0s being F, a0s being GÞ:
(1)
I should like to read this as saying that a’s being F necessitates a’s being G, a
necessitation holding in virtue of the fact that universals F and G give a
122
www.ebook3000.com

certain probability, P, of such a necessitation. Instead of formula (1) we
might restore our relation N and write:

ðN : PÞ ðF; GÞ

ða0s being F, a0s being GÞ
(2)
where P is a number between 1 and 0, including inﬁnitesimals. If the law
had been deterministic, where we previously wrote:

NðF; GÞ

ða0s being F, a0s being GÞ
(3)
we could now rewrite (3) as a limiting case of (2):

ðN : 1Þ ðF; GÞ

ða0s being F, a0s being GÞ:
(4)
It is to be noted that the necessitation involved here is necessitation in the
singular case: a’s being F necessitating a’s being G. As we have already
seen in Chapter 6, Section 5, in discussing Miss Anscombe’s view, it is
intelligible that the necessitation should be purely singular: without beneﬁt
of law. But necessitation in the singular case can also hold in virtue of a
relation of universals. If the relation between F and G is (N:1) then there
logically must be necessitation in each singular case. If the relation is (N:P)
where P is less than 1, then we have a certain objective probability of
necessitation in each singular case.
I now offer four arguments, none of them conclusive but all I think
suggestive, in favour of an interpretation of probabilistic laws as giving a
probability of a necessitation.
The ﬁrst consideration arises from thinking about causal laws. We gen-
erally conceive of these as deterministic, but this seems just a habit of
thought. The laws could be irreducibly probabilistic. Suppose physicalism
is true, and that the laws of physics are irreducibly indeterministic, as the
quantum laws appear to be. Belief in such premisses would surely not lead
us to deny that there were causes of the French Revolution. Rather we
should say that it did have causes, but causes governed by irreducibly
probabilistic laws.
Now consider a case where a cause, a singular event, brings about its
effect, a further singular event, but the sequence is governed by an irredu-
cibly probabilistic law. The ﬁrst event caused, brought about, the second
event. If so, did it not necessitate the second event? Is not causing a species
of necessitation? Yet the law governing the sequence was probabilistic. So
the probabilistic law gives a probability of a necessitation, a probability
which was realized in this case.
123

A second line of thought which inclines me in the same direction is due
to Michael Tooley (unpublished to date). Suppose that it is an irreducibly
probabilistic law that if a G has property E, then there is a 50/50 chance
that, as a result, the G will have property H. It is also an irreducibly
probabilistic law that if a G has the property F, then there is a 50/50
chance that, as a result, the G will have the property H. It is physically
possible for a G to be both an E and an F at the same time. Finally, it is only
by being an E or an F that a G can be an H.
Now suppose that, on a certain occasion, a, which is a G, has the
properties E and F. It is also an H.
What should we say about this case? Should we simply say that,
because a was E and F, it had an increased chance of being H, a chance
which was realized? It seems to me, as it seems to Tooley, that it is natural
to want to say more than this. It is natural to ask whether it is a’s being E, or
a’s being F, or perhaps both (a case of overdetermination), which is respon-
sible for a’s being H. But to talk this way is to suggest that it was (1) a’s
being E; or (2) a’s being F; or (3) both; which necessitated a’s being H.1
There appear to be three sets of counterfactuals associated with the three
possibilities. (10) If a had still been E, but had not been F, it would still have
been H. If a had been F, but not E, it would not have been H. (20) If a had
been F, but had not been E, it would still have been H. If a had been E, but
not F, it would not have been H. (30) Only if a had not been E and not been
F would it not have been H.
These three sets of counterfactuals, (10) (20) and (30), are incompatible. If
one accepts that one of them is true (although it is by bad chance impos-
sible to tell which), and further accepts the plausible principle that the
truth-maker for the true set is some categorical feature of the world, then
this truth-maker is naturally identiﬁed as a pattern of necessitation.2
1
A similar case, from which a similar moral is drawn, is proposed by John Foster (1979,
pp. 169–70).
2
In Ch. 8, Sec. 4, it was argued that if it is a law that where P, then either Q or R, but
without any factor to determine whether it is Q or R which obtains, then the counter-
factual ‘if a were P, then a would be Q or R’ is sustained, but it cannot be concluded that if
a were P, then a would be Q or a would be R. There is no inconsistency between this stand
and our present contention that, since we are able to assert different and incompatible
counterfactuals about the conditions under which the G would not have been H, different
patterns of necessitation correspond to the different counterfactuals. In the former case, it
is natural to assert that a would be Q or R, but not at all natural to assert that either a
would be Q, or, a would be R, although we cannot know which. We simply do not think
that there are such counterfactual facts. But in our present case it seems natural to assert
that one of three incompatible sets of counterfactuals is true, although we cannot tell
124
www.ebook3000.com

A third consideration is this. We reach the same result, viz. that prob-
abilistic laws give a probability of a necessitation, if we think of the
probabilistic laws involved as universals, universals instantiated only in
the cases where the probabilities are somewhere realized. If, in the cases
just discussed, the GE!H law applies to the case of a, we have:

ðN ::5Þ

ðE & GÞ, H

ða0s being E & G, a0s being HÞ:
(1)
In words, this may be rendered: the state of affairs of a’s being both E and
G necessitates a’s being H, a necessitation holding in virtue of the fact that
the universals involved ((E&G),H) give a probability of such a necessita-
tion of .5. If the GF!H law applies to the case of a we have:

ðN ::5Þ

ðF & GÞ, H

ða0s being F & G, a0s being HÞ
(2)
with a parallel translation. At least one of these law-universals must apply
to the case, linking the states of affairs named inside the right-hand
parenthesis of each formula. As already anticipated in my translation of
(1), what can these links be but necessitations?
Fourthly, and ﬁnally, another idea of Tooley’s pushes us in the same
direction. Suppose that it is an irreducibly probabilistic law that Fs have a
certain probability of being Gs. But suppose that there is indeterminism in
the universe, and some Fs are Gs not because they instantiate a law, but for
no reason at all. The joint satisfaction of these two conditions seems to be a
meaningful supposition. Suppose now that a is F and is G. Is this case a
manifestation of the probabilistic law, or is it simply an indeterministic
phenomenon? If this question can be meaningfully asked, as it seems that
it can, then we give an account of the distinction by saying that in the ﬁrst
case a’s being F necessitates a’s being G, a necessity absent in the second
case. The necessitation, in turn, is an instantiation of the probabilistic law.
One thing which might worry one in this account of probabilistic laws is
whether Actualism has been deserted. Are we not involved in irreducible
potentialities, which are rejected in other places in this book? Take the case
where it is a probabilistic law that Fs are G, this law is instantiated in a
number of cases, and then consider a, an F which is not G. Object a has a
which. It is therefore reasonable to look for incompatible categorical truth-makers to
correspond to these incompatible counterfactuals. I suggest that we ﬁnd these truth-
makers in different patterns of necessitation. In the former case we would be arguing to
counterfactuals – on the basis of excluded middle – counterfactuals whose truth-maker
does not easily appear. In the latter case we are arguing from counterfactuals which it is
natural to assert to a categorical truth-maker.
125

certain probability, P, of being G, but the probability is not realized. Is not
this probability a pure unrealized potentiality of a to be G?
I trust that this is not so. I want to say that a is F, that it has various other
categorical properties, and that that is the end of the matter as far as a is
concerned. It is certainly true that a had a certain probability of being G.
But the truth-maker for this truth is to be found in the positive instanti-
ations of the probabilistic law. And what is to be found in the positive
instantiations is the instantiation of a certain objective relation between the
universals F and G: the relation (N:P) (F,G).
3
Other types of probabilistic laws
In the probabilistic law which we have been considering, each F is quite
independent of every other F in respect of its having the property G. But
we can conceive of laws having a probabilistic element where this is not
so. For instance, it could be a law that a certain proportion of the Fs all
existing at one time are Gs. This condition is not probabilistic. But it might
be added that the Fs which are Gs do not differ in any nomically relevant
way from the Fs which are not G. Yet a certain proportion nomically must
be Gs.
Such a law would not be a law governing individual Fs but
governing more sophisticated individuals: for instance, the class of Fs
at a time. It would be necessitated that a certain proportion of the
members of all such classes were Gs. The law-statement would sustain
counterfactuals of a sort which a straightforward probabilistic law-
statement would not sustain. We could say, for instance, ‘This F, which
is G, might not have been G (nomically might not), but if it had not
been G, then some other (unspeciﬁed) F among the F non-Gs would
have been a G.’
If there are metaphysical qualms about classes (as I believe that there
should be) then it may be possible to substitute for talk about the class of
Fs at a time the aggregate of the Fs at that time. Consider the aggregate
of the Fs at a time. There will always be one and only one way of
dividing that aggregate into two parts, so that the two parts have the
following nature. The ﬁrst part can be exhaustively and exclusively
divided into parts each of which is an F which is a G. The second part
can be similarly divided into parts each of which is an F which is not a
G. The ﬁrst part will be a structure of, say M F-parts. The second part
will be a structure of, say N F-parts. The numerical relationship M/N
reﬂects the proportion of Fs which are Gs in the whole class of Fs at a
126
www.ebook3000.com

given time. To say that a certain proportion of the Fs at any time
nomically must be Gs is to say that the M/N ratio cannot fall below a
certain value V. In this way, perhaps, the law can be represented as a law
about the aggregate of the Fs at a time. A proportion, V, of the F-parts of
the aggregate of the Fs must be Gs.
127

10
Further considerations concerning
the form of laws
B
After introducing the conception of laws of nature both as relations hold-
ing between universals, and as universals, in Chapter 6, we tried in the
next three chapters to extend the account to functional laws, to uninstan-
tiated laws and to probabilistic laws. It was argued that functional laws
are higher-order laws: laws which dictate, or in some possible cases
merely govern, lower-order laws. It was argued that uninstantiated laws
are not really laws at all, but are rather counterfactuals about what laws
would hold if certain conditions were realized. In the case of probabilistic
laws it was argued that our original schema can be applied fairly straight-
forwardly. Such laws give probabilities of necessitation, probabilities less
than probability 1. Deterministic laws are laws where the probability of
necessitation is 1.
There are a great many other questions to be considered concerning the
possible forms which a law of nature can take. In this chapter various of
these issues will be taken up.
1
Scientiﬁc identiﬁcation
We may begin from the point that, if our general account of laws of nature
is to be sustained, they must contain at least two universals. What then of
theoretical identiﬁcations, such as the identiﬁcation of temperature with
mean kinetic energy, or laws of universal scope, that is, laws having the
form: it is a law that everything is F? The present section will be devoted to
theoretical identiﬁcation.
Consider the identiﬁcation of water with H2O, temperature with mean
kinetic energy, inertial mass with gravitational mass. Are they laws of
nature? They are certainly purely general scientiﬁc truths, discovered a
posteriori. (It is a matter of current dispute whether they are necessary or
contingent truths. I favour the latter view, but the matter need not be
argued here.) If water is H2O, to take this as our example, then we have
two universally quantiﬁed generalizations: all samples of water are made
128
www.ebook3000.com

up of H2O molecules, all collections of H2O molecules are samples of
water. Is it laws which are instantiated in each instance falling under the
generalizations? It is interesting to notice that, given the Molnar deﬁnition
of the Regularity theory of laws of nature (Ch. 2, Sec. 1), and given further
that the generalizations are contingent, the generalizations qualify as laws
of nature. For they are universally quantiﬁed, omnitemporally and omnis-
patially true, and, besides logical terms, contain nothing but non-logical
predicates.1
Some think of these identiﬁcations as laws, for instance, Mellor, 1978,
pp. 119–20. Pap spoke of ‘composition laws’ (1962, p. 363), Fodor speaks of
‘bridge laws’ (1974).2
But if we accept a Realistic theory of properties (universals), and hold
that laws are relationships between these properties, then for these ‘iden-
tiﬁcations’ to be laws they would have to link distinct properties. The
distinct predicates would have to apply in virtue of distinct properties.
And, indeed, it is conceivable that, for instance, temperature and mean
kinetic energy of molecules are distinct coextensive properties. But every
principle of method speaks for their being the same property. However, if
the identiﬁcations are genuine identiﬁcations, then, given our view of
laws, they cannot be laws.
Is this embarrassing? I do not think so. They are not very plausible cases
of laws. There is, however, a rather shallow dialectic which can drive us to
thinking that they must be laws. It is rather easy to endorse unthinkingly
the reﬂection that the discoveries of natural science are conﬁned to: (1) the
laws of nature; (2) matters of historical and geographical fact (in the widest
sense of ‘history’ and ‘geography’). It is a reﬂection which I myself have
endorsed in the past. If this is in the back of one’s mind, then one will ﬁnd
general scientiﬁc identiﬁcations puzzling. They are certainly not mere
historical or geographical facts. The temptation is then to try to see them
as laws of nature.
1
David Lewis has suggested to me that here is another difﬁculty for the Naive Regularity
theory. It is certainly clear that it is a difﬁculty for the Molnar deﬁnition. But a Naive
Regularity theory could meet the objection in at least one way: by accepting universals,
and then stipulating that in a formula such as ‘(x) (Fx⊃Gx)’, ‘F’ and ‘G’ should name
distinct universals. As has several times been pointed out, this stipulation would also serve
to dissolve the grue problem.
2
Fodor, in his article, is critical of the idea that certain bridge-laws exist, in particular that
there are bridge-laws between psychology and physics. But he does not challenge the
conception of bridge-laws.
129

But if the position taken up in this essay is anywhere near correct, then
we can already see that this dichotomy is too simple. For there is at least
one other task which science has: the identiﬁcation of genuine universals
(genuine properties and relations). It is true that establishing what univer-
sals there are is inextricably bound up with establishing what the laws of
nature are. But the enterprises are still distinguishable. After all, establish-
ing the laws, on the one hand, and the historical and geographical facts, on
the other, are enterprises which are also inextricably bound up with each
other. Yet they are clearly distinguishable enterprises.
What, then, are scientiﬁc identiﬁcations? I think that they are a matter of
discovering truths about universals, but not those truths which constitute
the laws of nature. It is a discovery about temperature that it is mean
kinetic energy, but it is not a law about temperature. Rather, we have made
a discovery about the internal structure of the universal, or class of
universals, temperature. It may be compared to the discovery of the internal
structure of a certain particular object, for instance, the internal structure
of the Earth. But instead of exploring the geography of a ﬁrst-order
particular, the Earth, we are instead exploring the geography of a
second-order particular: the universal of temperature. Most universals
are complex, conceivably all are (‘structures all the way down’). Science
is concerned, among other things, to lay out the internal structure of
universals.
The above account seems to ﬁt the case of water and of temperature.
The identiﬁcation of inertial and gravitational mass is not quite the same.
It is instead the second-order equivalent of identifying a certain mountain
seen from one perspective, with a certain mountain seen from another,
or, indeed, with identifying Hesperus with Phosphorus. Property A,
inertial mass, is known in one way, as a universal ﬁguring in a certain
set of laws or putative laws. Property B, gravitational mass, is known in
another way, as a universal ﬁguring in a different set of laws or putative
laws. They turn out to be (are hypothesized to be) the very same
universal.
A less sophisticated but similar case is that where visually apprehended
roundness (the seen shape of coins, saucers, etc.) is identiﬁed with tac-
tually apprehended roundness (the felt shape of coins, saucers, etc.). One
philosopher who resists this identiﬁcation is Berkeley. He maintains in the
New Theory of Vision that the objects of sight and touch are not merely
numerically different (although he thinks they are) but speciﬁcally different
also (Sec. 121–48). Most of us, however, take the ‘two’ roundnesses to be
one and the same property.
130
www.ebook3000.com

2
Laws with universal scope
Scientiﬁc identiﬁcations do not really seem to raise any problem for our
account of laws. But, as Tooley has pointed out (1977, pp. 676–7), a real
problem is set by laws with universal scope: laws of the form, everything
is F. It is not clear that any such laws actually obtain. But it is clearly
possible that there should be such laws. How could they be relations
between universals? They can hardly involve a universal necessitating
itself!
It may be noted, incidentally, that here is one of the few places where
the Regularity theory, and equally any theory which simply places some
necessity operator in front of the Regularity formulae but makes no
attempt to explicate that operator in terms of relations between universals,
has a clear advantage over our theory. There is no special problem about a
regularity with universal scope. Those of us who reject the Regularity
theory would point out that that theory cannot draw the apparently
intelligible distinction between accidental and law-like regularities with
universal scope. But this is simply a particular case of the general difﬁculty
that the Regularity theory has in drawing the accidental/law-like distinc-
tion among regularities.
We have admitted, as a primitive, the notion of necessitation: one state
of affairs necessitating another. Kicked upstairs to universals this becomes
the notion of a certain sort of state of affairs necessitating another: one
universal necessitating another. In both these cases we have a dyadic
notion of necessitation. Could there be a primitive monadic notion of
necessitation also, and could this be appealed to explain laws of
universal scope?
As Peter Forrest has pointed out, such a solution would gain plausibility
if we could give sense to notions of triadic, tetradic . . . n-adic
necessitation also.
However, I do not believe that this solution is a possible one. Consider
the anti-Realist view of laws that they are mere inference-licences. The
Realist will reject this. But the Realist will surely not reject the view that
laws supply an ontological ground which, being known or hypothesized,
licenses an inference. It seems, furthermore, that in every case a law
licenses an inference. Given a law, we can always use it to specify a certain
sort of state of affairs which, if given together with the law, allows us to
infer to a further state of affairs. (We may, of course, only be able to infer a
certain probability that the further state of affairs obtains or will obtain.)
However complex the ﬁrst state of affairs may be, the law must respect the
131

dyadic structure of that inference. In such an inference we go from what
can always be represented as a premiss to a conclusion. It seems that the
law should have a corresponding dyadic structure because, if it did not, it
could not be used to make these inferences. (This is the justiﬁcation for
talking of the universals involved in a law as ‘antecedent’ and ‘conse-
quent’ universals.) The point holds even for the case of laws of universal
scope. Given that something exists, it can be inferred that it is F. So nomic
necessitation must always be dyadic.
One rather disreputable way to solve our problem would be to treat a
law of universal scope as a cosmological version of Smith’s garden. All the
fruit in Smith’s garden must be apples. All the things in the world must be
Fs. In the ﬁrst case, it was suggested (Ch. 6, Sec. 7), we have a relation
between what we called a quasi-universal: being a fruit grown in Smith’s
garden and a universal being an apple. In the second case we have a relation
between being anything in the universe and being F. The universe is here
taken as a particular – as a very big garden indeed.
However, Tooley has suggested another, considerably more elegant,
way out (1977, p. 676). We could take the law with universal scope to be
a higher-order law. The higher-order law would read thus. It is a law
concerning properties that, if something has any property, P, then it is a
(ﬁrst-order) law that Ps are Fs. Being a property nomically necessitates that
something’s having that property nomically necessitates that something
being F.
To carry through this solution involves maintaining that being a property
is itself a property: a second-order property possessed by properties. For,
after all, we do not just want the second-order Humean uniformity that,
for every property, it is a law that if something has that property, it further
has F. That is no more than the manifestation of the second-order law.
Instead, we want propertyhood to be nomically active in the situation.
Fortunately, it seems plausible to argue that propertyhood is a genuine
property of properties. (As already argued, independently of the current
issue, in Armstrong, 1978, Ch. 23, Sec. III.) It is not simply the case that the
predicate ‘property’ applies to all properties.
Given the rather simple nature of the manifestation of a law of universal
scope – everything is F – this solution seems a triﬂe cumbrous and
elaborate. It also involves overdetermination. If a thing has more than
one property, then it will have F in virtue of each of these properties.
A third solution has been suggested to me by Peter Forrest. We need
ﬁrst to notice that talk about laws of universal scope can hardly be taken
literally. If the scope is to be truly universal, then every existent, be it
132
www.ebook3000.com

particular or universal of any order, law, state of affairs or whatever, will
have to have the property F. But there can hardly be laws of this sort.
A ‘law of universal scope’ will have to be more restricted than this. Its
form might be:
Every ﬁrst-order particular is an F,
although, in view of the different sorts of particular which we recognize
(thing, event, process, etc.), even this might be too wide. Let us, however,
remain with this form.
Now consider that each ﬁrst-order particular may be said to have
something in common which marks it off from all other existents: the
property of ﬁrst-order particularity. How seriously we should take this
property is not at all clear. If there were no question of laws of universal
scope, then one might argue that here we have a mere predicate to which no
genuine property, no genuine universal, corresponds. But universals are to
be postulated a posteriori. If there appears to be a law that every ﬁrst-order
particular has property F, then might we not attribute nomic power to ﬁrst-
order particulars in their character as ﬁrst-order particulars? Being a ﬁrst-order
particular necessitates being F. But to construe the law in this way is to
introduce a genuine monadic universal of being a ﬁrst-order particular.
I will not attempt to adjudicate between Tooley’s and Forrest’s solutions
of the problem about laws of universal scope. Both of them seem to be
reasonably promising ways of solving the problem.
But before leaving this section I will say something about Determinism.
We may perhaps formulate the hypothesis of Determinism in the
following way. For every (ﬁrst-order) universal, there exists a determinis-
tic (strictly universal) law, such that the universal is the consequent uni-
versal in that law. Such a formulation ﬁts in with our general approach.
Now, as Tooley has pointed out, we have to distinguish between it being a
fact, that for every universal that universal is the consequent universal in a
law, and it being a law that this is so. The fact could obtain although the
law did not obtain. The fact could be a ‘cosmic coincidence’ concerning
universals, a mere universal quantiﬁcation.
If Determinism is a law, then, it will have to be a second-order law, a
law that certain laws exist, and, linking up with the concerns of this
section, it will be a law of universal scope, that is, a law about all ﬁrst-
order universals. What will the form of the law be? I think it will be
something like this:
N (being a ﬁrst-order universal, being N-ed by a (ﬁrst-order) universal).
133

Once again, although we should not assume a priori that being a ﬁrst-order
universal is a universal, if we think that there are good scientiﬁc reasons to
believe that Determinism is a law, then we would have a posteriori reasons
to postulate the existence of this second-order universal. Being N-ed by a
(ﬁrst-order) universal, that is, having the converse of N to some (ﬁrst-order)
universal, has the form of a relational property which might attach to
universals. There is no reason to deny that relational properties are real,
nor to deny that they could be terms of a N relation (for this, see Sec. 6 of
the present chapter).
A weaker hypothesis than Determinism is that, for each ﬁrst-order
universal, there exists some law, deterministic or probabilistic, such that
the universal is the consequent universal in some law. Everything is
governed, but not necessarily governed by deterministic laws. We might
call this Weak Determinism. Whether Strong Determinism is true, or even
whether Weak Determinism is true is, I take it, not a matter to be decided a
priori by philosophers.
3
Are there any Exclusion laws?
If we reject negative properties, as I am inclined to think that we should,
then exclusion laws involve some difﬁculty. Consider the putative law
that Fs cannot be Gs. If not being G is not a property, then it cannot be the
case that F-ness necessitates the presence of this property in F-particulars.
An exclusion law, then, will have to be a matter of a relation between
F and the universal G. If we accept the Principle of Instantiation, the latter
will have to be instantiated elsewhere.
In my 1978 (Ch. 24, Sec. II) I simply accepted exclusion laws under these
conditions. But subsequent reﬂection shows how unsatisfactory the
account is. What have instances of G at other times and places got to do
with the exclusion law? In any case, if there are exclusion laws, there
seems no call for the excluded property to be instantiated. Suppose, for
instance, that, given certain conditions, a law forbids a certain arrange-
ment of fundamental particles. Why should that arrangement be some-
where else instantiated?
Furthermore, if the view outlined in Chapter 6 is accepted, that laws of
nature are not simply relations between universals but are at the same
time universals themselves, instantiated in their instances, then the exclu-
sion law certainly cannot be a relation between F and G. Consider a
particular instantiation: a is F, and a’s being F excludes a’s being
G. There is here no being G to be related to. We must either accept not
134
www.ebook3000.com

being G as a universal, attaching to a, or else reject the possibility of
exclusion laws.
One way to deal with this problem would be to accept the existence of
negative universals on a selective basis only. It is the reverse of scientiﬁc to
postulate negative universals in automatic fashion wherever the positive
universal is absent. For, in general, such absences do no work in the world,
and their postulation does no work in our theories. But if negative univer-
sals are postulated selectively, for instance, where they are required for
exclusion laws, then it may be possible to live with them in good Empiri-
cist conscience. So we can consider the selective relaxation of the ban on
negative universals.
However, let us also explore more bold policies. Do we really need
exclusion laws? Let us begin by considering the general problem of nega-
tive facts or states of affairs. It seems that if we know every positive fact
about the world, then given that these are the totality of positive facts, we
are deductively given every negative fact. Negative facts appear to be
supervenient upon the positive facts, which suggests that they are nothing
more than the positive facts. Given a true negative statement, the truth-
makers for this statement are positive states of affairs.
Suppose, then, that we are given the totality of positive laws, determin-
istic and probabilistic. If we then take the totality of possible worlds in
which these and only these laws obtain, we are given all the positive
physical possibilities among particular states of affairs. Now, it may be
suggested, do not these positive physical possibilities give us all the
physical possibilities? What need of further exclusion laws? The latter
are supervenient upon the positive possibilities. It might be useful in
practice to have exclusion formulae. But these will do no more than tell
us where the positive possibilities have their limits.
But might it not be that among the physical possibilities allowed by the
positive laws alone, there would be certain arrangements which nomically
could not arise? To take account of these, it may be argued, it would be
necessary to include exclusion laws in addition. However, it seems that it
should be possible to accommodate the exclusions indirectly, by putting
some positive modiﬁcation or qualiﬁcation into the positive laws. One
could try to take advantage of an old line of thought about negations.
Suppose Fs to be Hs, where H is a positive property (say, having a certain
velocity). What is H is of necessity not-G (having another velocity). In
attributing positive H to an F, one is automatically attributing the negative
not-G. So one could try to represent the nomic exclusion of a certain
arrangement as the nomic permitting of a certain positive arrangement,
135

or range of positive arrangements, where the positive arrangements logic-
ally exclude the excluded arrangements.
At this point, it will be useful to introduce a distinction among types of
law which is of considerable importance for our argument as a whole, but
which will also cast light on the particular topic of exclusion laws. This is
the distinction between underived laws and derived laws. Underived laws
are what we have hitherto spoken of as laws. They are relations between
universals. Derived laws are mere logical consequences of the holding of
underived laws. Suppose that all the underived laws are given, together
with the premiss that these are all the underived laws. Whatever further
nomic truths can be deduced from this body of truths constitute the
derived laws. The vital point is that they involve no new relations between
universals.
We can now say that, in the situation envisaged in the penultimate
paragraph, given it is an (underived) deterministic law that Fs are H
(which is positive), and that H logically excludes G, then it is a derived
exclusion law that no Fs are Gs. But we need not object to derived, but
only to underived, exclusion laws.
It would be possible for this device to lead to a certain artiﬁciality.
Suppose, for example, that the world was apparently governed by just
one functional law, but that a certain few values of the function appeared
not to be permitted. It would be necessary to recast the function so that its
positive range of permitted values did not include the forbidden values.
This might be conspicuously more artiﬁcial than combining the original
function with a few underived exclusion principles.
A further case where it may seem even more difﬁcult to resist underived
exclusion principles is this. Suppose that the world is lawless and that
properties are found attaching to particulars in almost every possible
collocation. One combination, however, never occurs: no Fs are Gs. This
could just be cosmic accident. But could it not also be the manifestation of
an underived exclusion law?
The putative situation is an extreme and peculiar one. But giving an
account of it in terms of positive laws would be rather uneconomical. It
would be necessary to postulate laws for every property, giving some
probability that a particular having that property had any other property.
Only one such law would be lacking: a law which gave an F a probability
of being a G. In such a situation we might prefer to postulate a single
underived exclusion law.
In any case, David Lewis has objected, is there any reason to assume, as
is here assumed, that indeterminism must involve a distribution of deﬁnite
136
www.ebook3000.com

probabilities? Might it not be that there are no laws at all, except that
exclusion law?
Suppose this apparent exclusion law to be that no Fs are Gs. One might
still explain the facts without involving an underived exclusion law by
postulating a positive property, H, such that H logically excludes the
property G, and such that it is a law that Fs are Hs. But can we say that
in such a case such a positive H must exist?
The upshot of this discussion is that there are perhaps situations where
one would wish to introduce underived exclusion principles as genuine
connections between universals. But, if this has to be done, it seems
important to do this by introducing negative properties, and make the
law a matter of some positive state of affairs necessitating a negative
property. We introduce a new type of property rather than a new type
of law. For only thus can the law be treated as instantiated in its
instances.
4
Iron laws and oaken laws
If we do have selectively to introduce negative properties we can distin-
guish between negative states of affairs (a particular’s having a negative
property) necessitating and negative states of affairs being necessitated. It
seems that while we ought to be reluctant to introduce necessitated nega-
tive states of affairs, we should be extremely reluctant to countenance
necessitating negative states of affairs. Lacks and absences could perhaps
be thought of as effects, but we ought to be deeply reluctant to think of
them as causes.
In this section, at any rate, it will be assumed that there are no negative
necessitating conditions. Given this premiss, it will be argued that we can
then draw an interesting and important distinction between types of law.
Our argument looks back to the discussion of inﬁnitely qualiﬁed laws in
Chapter 3, Section 3.
Suppose it to be a nomic truth that, with an exception, Fs are Gs. Let
the exception be that Fs which are Hs are not Gs. Consider now a
which is an F, but not an H. a’s being F necessitates that a is G, and
necessitates it in virtue of the universals involved. By hypothesis, these
universals do not include not being H. Notice, however, that although
a’s being F necessitates a’s being G, it is not the case that each F is a
G. We have:

ðN : 1ÞðF; GÞ

ða0s being F, a0s being GÞ
(1)
137

but we do not have:
ðxÞ ðFx  GxÞ:
(2)
Contrast this with the case where a’s being F necessitates a’s being G, and
F and G are such that a’s being F necessitates a’s being G whatever other
properties a has. In this second case (2) is true – each F is a G.
Following a suggestion by J. W. N. Watkins (in correspondence) I shall
call laws of the second sort ‘iron’ laws. They tell us that, given certain
conditions, some further state of affairs is necessitated (or has a certain
probability of being necessitated – note that an iron law can be irreducibly
probabilistic) no matter what further conditions are added. If it is a case of
necessitation (N:1), then the law issues in an exceptionless uniformity.
It will now be seen that the analysis of laws given in Chapter 6 is an
analysis of iron laws. But we also need to recognize that there can be laws
which are less than iron laws, and which therefore need not issue in
exceptionless uniformities. Following a suggestion by Ann Dix, I shall call
them ‘oaken’ laws. David Lewis suggested ‘rubber’ laws to me, but this is
potentially misleading because too soft. Oaken laws can be deterministic
laws. Given a is F, and given that H is absent, a nomically must be
G. Indeed, it seems that every law could be an oaken law, and yet
Determinism be true of the universe, although there would have to be
an inﬁnite number of laws, since every law would have to be qualiﬁed.
The oaken law which we have considered has associated with it a single
factor which, if present, will prevent an F being a G. But it is not contrary
to reason that there should be an inﬁnite number of factors such as H,
factors lacking any common factor but each preventing an F from being
what it naturally tends to be in the absence of interfering factors: a G.
It seems to be a contingent matter whether the laws of our universe are
all iron, all oaken or are a mixture of the two. It has been suggested, for
instance, that the law of the disintegration of the radium atom, like other
quantum laws, is a probabilistic but iron law. Under all physically possible
circumstances, there is the same objective probability that, over a certain
time-interval, the atom will disintegrate.
Consider by way of contrast Newton’s First Law. A body continues in
its present state of motion or rest unless acted upon by a force. (Let us
assume, for the sake of the case, that the law is an instantiated law. Perhaps
the forces upon a particular particle exactly balance for a period of time,
producing at least a simulacrum of the antecedent of the law.) Here the
present state of the body is determined by its previous state to continue in
138
www.ebook3000.com

that previous state: we might think of it as a case of immanent causation.
But the law is oaken. As explicitly provided for in the statement of the law,
all sorts of other factors (forces) may be present in the situation. If they are
present, then the particle will not continue in its previous state of motion
or rest (although that previous state will still have its nomic inﬂuence).
Newton’s First Law is a conservation law, and many conservation laws
are oaken laws. For instance, given an isolated system, energy is con-
served. The energy of the system at a certain time determines that the
system has that same energy at a latter time. But this law holds providing
only that ‘nothing interferes’.
But cannot an oaken law always be represented, in principle at least, as
an iron law by putting in all the negative qualiﬁcations? Yes, in a way it
can, provided that we bear in mind how wide the qualiﬁcations may be
which are implied by the phrase ‘in principle’. It could even be that the
statement of, say, Newton’s First Law as an iron law, would have to be of
inﬁnite length. This would be the case if the number of sorts of force
capable of acting upon bodies was irreducibly inﬁnite. But the vital point
to remember is that the relation of necessitation present in each instanti-
ation of the law involves only the actual universals involved. If negative
universals are excluded as necessitating factors, then the absence of factors
capable of interfering with the necessitation is not a factor in the
necessitation.
It appears, then, that if N(F,G) is an oaken law, then all that is entailed is
that for all x where interfering conditions are absent, if x is F, then x is G. The
interfering conditions will be a perfectly determinate set of conditions, but
it is logically possible that there are an inﬁnite number of them. Note that
the laws involving the interfering conditions may themselves be oaken.
Does this mean, then, that we need to recognize two sorts of necessita-
tion, NI and NO, associated with iron and oaken laws respectively?
I would hope to avoid this conclusion. I have up to this point written as if:
NðF; GÞ
(1)
entails
ðxÞ ðFx  GxÞ:
(2)
I now modify that claim. For there to be an entailment, the scope of (2)
must be narrowed from all Fs to all uninterfered with Fs. An interfering
property, I, is one such that if x is F and is I, then it is not a law that FIs are
Gs. An uninterfered with instance of F is one which lacks any such further
property I.
139

N(F,G) may now be said to be an iron law if and only if there does
not, as a matter of fact, exist any such property I which is capable of
interfering with Fs in this way. It will remain logically possible that
there is such a property I, and so even in this case the strong entailment
will not hold.
But might there not be laws which would, as it were, necessarily be
iron laws, what one might dub ‘steel’ laws? Perhaps so. But such laws,
I suggest, should be treated as second-order laws. It would be a law that
all laws having certain property (perhaps a certain form) were laws
where the corresponding universally quantiﬁed generalization held. It
would be a law that all laws having property L exhibited the ‘if N(F,G),
then (x) (Fx ⊃Gx)’ pattern. This second-order law might in turn be iron
or oaken, and, if iron, might be steel.
It is an important fact about a law whether it is iron or oaken. But,
I suggest, the relation of necessitation, N, is the same in the two cases.
5
Disjunctive laws
Tooley has pointed out (1977, p. 677) that there might be laws having
the form: it is a law that Fs are either Gs or Hs, but where there is no
nomic factor differentiating the FGs and the FHs. The problem here is
that being G or H is a disjunctive property and there are good reasons in
the theory of universals to reject disjunctive properties. (See my 1978,
Ch. 14.) How then should we analyse such a situation? Tooley takes the
law to be a three-termed relation holding between the universals, F,G
and H, with a construction-function taking these universals to the
manifestation of the law: the quasi-uniformity that all Fs are either
G or H. I, however, wish to treat the law as a species of necessitation
instantiated in each of its instances. Can this be done in this sort of case
without postulating disjunctive universals? A somewhat complex dis-
cussion proves necessary.
There are different possibilities here, which should ﬁrst be sorted out.
We are not interested in the case where it is a law that Fs are Gs, or a law
that Fs are Hs, and still less in the case where both are laws. In all these
cases the disjunction is trivially necessitated. (It could be treated as a
derived law.) We are interested in the cases where there are Fs which are
not Gs and are therefore Hs, and where there are Fs which are not Hs and
are therefore Gs. Given the satisfaction of these two conditions, Gs and Hs
might be related in three different ways. It might be logically impossible
that Gs be Hs. It might be logically possible but physically impossible for
140
www.ebook3000.com

Gs to be Hs. Finally, Gs which are Hs might be physically possible, and, let
us assume, some Gs actually be Hs.
Let us begin with the simplest case, where G and H exclude each other.
We have the following nomic truths: Fs which are not Gs are Hs; and Fs
which are not Hs are Gs. Considered separately, they appear to be each of
them oaken laws. It is a law that Fs are Hs, except that this necessitation
can be interfered with by the factor G. That is, if Fs are Gs, then the
tendency of Fs to be Hs is interfered with by the addition of an extra
factor. Again, it is a law that Fs are Gs, except that this necessitation can be
interfered with by the factor H. That is, if Fs are Hs, then the tendency of Fs
to be Gs is interfered with by the addition of an extra factor. Either law
taken separately appears to present no difﬁculty, granted the distinction
between iron and oaken laws.
Why, then, should it not be possible for both oaken laws to hold
together? If so, the disjunctive law that an F must be a G or an H can be
represented as a pair of oaken laws, laws which do not involve
disjunctions.
This solution in terms of two oaken laws leaves an uneasiness which
may be articulated thus. In order for Fs to be deﬁnitely Hs, or Gs, must
they not ﬁrst fail to be Gs, or fail to be Hs, and then, and only then, come to
be Hs or come to be Gs? The failures would then be actual factors in the
situation, which is what it is wished to deny.
However, if there is a worry here, then it seems to be a worry which is
already involved in the original idea of a law which necessitates disjunct-
ively. The law is such that if an F is not a G, then it must be an H, and if not
an H, then it must be a G. So, for the F to be an H, say, must it not ﬁrst have
failed to be a G? Presumably this argument can be rejected, and, if it can be
rejected, it can be rejected when the law is formulated as two oaken laws.
As David Lewis has pointed out to me, the worry may be particularly
worrisome where what ﬂows from being an F is something that occurs in
the future. As Lewis says, two points are worth making in this connection.
First, I regard the future as real. We are not to think of the present as the
growing edge of being. Second, an a which is F at present, may become
G after a certain interval of time, t. In that case, becoming G after interval t
is a relational property of a now. It seems a perfectly good universal, and
can therefore be a term in a relation of nomic necessitation. (See the next
section.) Suppose, then, that we have an alleged irreducibly disjunctive
law:
NðF; ððGvHÞ after interval tÞÞ:
141

My suggestion applied to this case is that this be broken up into two
oaken laws:
N

F, ðG after interval tÞ

with ðH after interval tÞ absent
(1)
N

F, ðH after interval tÞ

with ðG after interval tÞ absent:
(2)
The sort of case which we have been considering is that where the
properties G and H are logically incompatible, such as that where a
quantum-mechanical system must pass into one of two incompatible
energy-levels. What of the case where G and H are not logically incompat-
ible, but nomically exclude each other? We want to deny, if at all possible,
that here we have a case of an underived exclusion law.
This can be achieved without great difﬁculty. We already have the
conditions that an F which is not a G must be an H, and an F which is
not an H must be a G. We simply add that an F which is a G cannot be an
H, and an F which is an H cannot be a G. The factors G and H exercise an
inhibiting effect upon Fs, preventing them from being Hs and Gs respect-
ively. Are these exclusion laws? They are, but we need not treat them as
underived exclusion laws. Among the (positive) laws which govern Fs
there are none which give Fs any probability of being (G&H)s. To produce
this result is beyond an F’s power. The exclusion law is supervenient upon
the body of these positive laws.
We come ﬁnally to the case where some Fs are both Gs and Hs. For this
case the two original oaken laws are required, and in addition a probabil-
istic law giving Fs a certain chance of acquiring the conjunctive property
(G&H).
In this case we have three laws, the ﬁrst two of them oaken:
ðN : 1ÞðF; GÞ; with H absent
(1)
ðN : 1ÞðF; HÞ; with G absent
(2)
ðN : PÞ

F; ðG&HÞ

(3)
where P is less than 1. (The previous case was one where no such law as (3)
holds.) These laws, however, will, taken just by themselves, permit the
possibility of an F which is G by accident, and is H by accident. This, one
might object, shows that the conjunction of (1) to (3) under-translates the
statement ‘it is a law that an F must be a G or an H’. For, in the double-
accident case, the object’s being F does not determine it to be anything, even
disjunctively.
142
www.ebook3000.com

However, the double-accident case can be excluded by reformulating
(1) as:
ðN : 1Þ ðF; GÞ with the ðN : 1Þ ðF; HÞ pattern absent:
(1′Þ
(It will be remembered that laws are universals, and so are properties
which can be absent from certain complex states of affairs.) This will
ensure that if an F is H only by accident, then it is G by necessity. This
will prevent a double accident. A parallel reformulation of (2) will ensure
that, if the F is G only by accident, then it is H by necessity. Reformulation
of both (1) and (2) will prevent any accident at all.
Besides ordinary disjunctive laws, Tooley also mentions the possibility
of laws having the form that anything which lacks F has G (p. 677). As he
remarks this can be rendered as a disjunctive law of universal scope:
everything is either an F or a G. I, therefore, can render it as two oaken
laws of universal scope. In the absence of property F, everything must be a
G. In the absence of property G, everything must be an F. We can then use
whatever is the correct account for laws of universal scope (see Sec. 2).
6
Do laws always link the properties of the same object?
In the schematic laws which we have so far considered, it is a matter of one
object having a property, and, as a result, having another property. It is
this relation which has been symbolized by ‘N’. But besides being deter-
ministic, laws may be probabilistic, and the probabilities may take any of
continuum-many values between 1 and 0. So N becomes a determinable
whose determinates range from (N:1) down to (N: some inﬁnitesimal > 0).
Given the rejection of exclusion laws, (N:0) is rejected.
Restricting ourselves now for convenience to deterministic laws, can
they all be given the form (N:1) (F,G)? We have seen the need to introduce
higher-order laws, laws governing laws. Functional laws appear to be
higher-order laws. Higher-order laws, however, exhibit the same form as
ﬁrst-order laws, but where the N relates higher-order universals. We have
also seen the need to distinguish between underived and derived laws.
Derived laws are mere deductions from the body of underived laws, and
may take various forms, such as exclusion laws. It is, at best, underived
deterministic laws which have a single form. Finally, we have distin-
guished between iron and oaken laws. With an iron law, (N:1) (F,G) holds,
no matter what. It is a law that Fs are G. But with an oaken law there can
be additional factors which, if present along with factor F, prevent Fs
143

being Gs. (The absence of such factors is not a factor.) But, even if the law
is oaken, it was argued that the relation which is instantiated in each
instantiation is the same as that which would be instantiated if the law
were an iron one, viz. (N:1) (F,G).
Exclusion laws we have rejected, or were at least inclined to reject,
except as derived laws. If underived exclusion laws do have to be admit-
ted, then it seems better to introduce negative universals rather than a new
form of law. For in this way we can hold fast to the fruitful idea that laws
are themselves universals instantiated in the instances of the law. If so, the
law remains of the form (N:1) (F,G) with not-G as a substitution-instance
for G. It may be remarked that if local laws have to be admitted, such as
the case of Smith’s garden, a quasi-universal, for instance fruit in Smith’s
garden, becomes a substitution-instance for one or more of the universals
F and G.
Laws of universal scope may also apparently be reduced to the familiar
form, one way or another. Tooley takes them to be higher-order laws to
the effect that whatever property a thing has, it is a ﬁrst-order law that
something having that property has a further speciﬁed property. Forrest
suggests that they are ﬁrst-order laws, but involve a special antecedent
universal, such as being a ﬁrst-order particular.
In the previous section, it was argued that disjunctive laws: all Fs are
either Gs or Hs: could be reduced to two oaken laws of orthodox form.
A more desperate remedy would be to countenance the admission of
disjunctive properties in such cases.
So far, then, it seems that we have been able to resist the suggestion that
deterministic laws have any form except (N:1) (F,G).
But what now of cases where it is a law that, if something is F, then
something else must be a G? A great deal can be done here by appealing to
relational properties. Suppose it is a law that, if something is an F, then there
exists something else, which is a G, and which stands to the F in the
relation R, where F, G and R are genuine universals. We can reduce the
law to the familiar form by saying that it is a law concerning Fs that they
have the further relational property of having R to a G. This appears to be
perfectly good consequent universal, which the universal F might necessi-
tate. Once again we return to the form: it is a law that Fs are Gs.
It is to be noted, as already remarked in the previous section, that R may
be, or may involve, a temporal relation. Indeed this will be the natural
case. A set-up of the sort F may in time produce a G. The producing of a G,
after a certain interval of time, would seem to be something which could
be a relational property of Fs.
144
www.ebook3000.com

The question to be decided, however, is whether this appeal to relational
properties is available in every case. Suppose it is a law that, if something
is an F, then there exists something (the same thing or another thing)
which is a G. It is not speciﬁed what relation the G must have to the
F – simply that there must be such a G. Here, perhaps, we have a law not
reducible to the standard form.
It is to be noted that even here there is dyadic predicate linking the
F and the G. The F is either the same as or distinct from the G. But there is no
reason to think that a genuine relation corresponds to this artiﬁcial predi-
cate, and so the F will have no genuine relational property as a result.
The real question, however, is whether Fs and Gs could really be
nomically linked in this utterly permissive way. Fs must be Gs, or
something else must be G. Can the G be anywhere in space and time?
Can it be in the past? If it cannot, we are beginning to set up conditions
which the G must satisfy to be the G necessitated by this F. And then we
are beginning to specify the relationship which the G must have to the F.
I leave the matter in suspense. It seems clear that, in the case of the law-
statements with any empirical plausibility, it will be possible to ﬁnd
deﬁnite relations which the necessitated instance of G must have to the
necessitating instance of F. It may be that there could be laws where this is
not so.
But, with this dubious exception, I believe it may be plausibly claimed
that laws can all be reduced to the F ! G form. We need to specify the
strength of the probability involved. But this may exhaust the possible
forms of underived laws of nature.
7
Formal properties of necessitation
What are the formal properties of the relation of necessitation? I shall
argue that it is irreﬂexive, non-transitive, it does not contrapose, and,
ﬁnally, that it is non-symmetrical. It is to be noticed that the results hold
as much for purely singular necessitation, if such a thing exists, as for
relations between universals.
(1) First, the relation is necessarily irreﬂexive. a’s being F cannot necessitate a’s
being F, nor can there be a law of nature of the form N(F,F). This seems
fairly obvious in itself. But in any case I believe that nothing is genuinely
related to itself (Armstrong, 1978, Ch. 19, Sec. VI).
(2) It might seem that necessitation is necessarily transitive. If a’s being
F necessitates a’s being G, and a’s being G necessitates a’s being H, must it
145

not be that the case that a’s being F necessitates a’s being H? And if N(F,G)
and N(G,H) obtain, then must it not be the case that N(F,H)? It is true that
if (N:.5) (F,G) and (N:.5) (F&G,H), then it is false that (N:.5) (F,G&H). But
will it not be the case that (N:.25) (F,G&H,)? Will we not have a
transmission of probabilities of which transitivity is a limiting case?
I do not think that this is correct. In the ﬁrst place, any such transitivity
will only hold subject to the condition that the laws involved are iron ones.
But even if we presuppose this condition, transitivity fails to hold. What is
then true is that if N(F,G) and N(G,H), then it is at least a derived law that
Fs are Hs. But it need not be the case that N(F,H). Similarly with
probabilistic cases.
It is conceivable that N(F,G), N(G,H) and N(F,H) should all obtain, three
independent relations between universals. Suppose a to be F,G and H, and
that all these laws hold. a’s being H would then be a case of overdetermin-
ation. a would be H both because a was F and also because a was G. Special
counterfactuals would hold. If the F ! G law had not held, the F ! H law
would still have ensured that a was H. If the F ! H law had not held, the
combination of the F ! G and G ! H law would still have ensured that a
was H.
(3) Contraposition fails to hold. If N(F,G) then it is not the case that N G; F


,
because there are no such universals. However, provided that we have
N:1, and also that N(F,G) is an iron law, then it is a derived law that
everything which is not a G is not an F. For cases of singular necessitation
we have a derived counterfactual. If a’s being F necessitates a’s being G,
then if a had not been G, a would not have been F.
(4) Finally, necessitation appears to be non-symmetrical. Clearly, it is not
symmetrical. At one stage I was inclined to think it was asymmetrical. If N
(F,G), then it could not be the case that N(G,F). The best that could obtain,
I thought, was that it was a derived law that Gs are Fs. I have been
convinced that the conjunction of N(F,G) and N(G,F) is a logical possibility
by considerations put to me by Tooley.
Consider the proposition that every state of affairs having the form Fa, or
some suitably selected sub-class of such states of affairs, has a prior cause.
Such a proposition might be true. But not only that. Might it not be a law of
nature? States of affairs, or states of affairs of a certain restricted sort,
nomically must have prior causes. That is surely a possible law. If so,
however, we will have to think of the state of affairs as necessitating the
existence of the prior cause. (We will need to introduce appropriate
146
www.ebook3000.com

universals.) The prior cause, however, also necessitates the state of affairs.
Faced with this possibility, it seems that one must admit the possibility of
symmetrical cases of necessitation.
It is true that this is not actually a case of N(F,G) and N(G,F). Instead, a
general deterministic law would govern the necessity which runs from
state of affairs to prior cause, and a particular causal law would govern the
way the cause necessitated the state of affairs. Supposing the latter law to
be N(F,G), there would be no necessity that N(G,F). Nevertheless, in
the light of Tooley’s argument, it is hard to see how we could deny that
N(G,F) might hold.
Tooley’s argument, incidentally, seems to show conclusively that there
can be nomic necessitation which is not causal necessitation. If the exist-
ence of a suitable state of affairs necessitates a prior cause, this can hardly
be a case of backward causation! So causal laws are a mere sub-species of
the possible laws of nature.
What marks off the sub-species is not investigated in this work. (It is one
of the topics taken up in a forthcoming work by Tooley.)
Returning now to the topic of this section, we can say that underived
necessitation relations are necessarily irreﬂexive, not necessarily transitive,
cannot be contraposed, and are non-symmetrical. It remains to argue that
they are contingent rather than necessary.
147

11
Are the laws of nature
necessary or contingent?
B
Suppose it to be granted that laws of nature, if underived, are irreducible
relations between universals. Should those relations be thought of as
holding necessarily? Must they obtain ‘in every possible world’? Suppose
that event a precedes event b by a certain interval of time. This is a ﬁrst-
order state of affairs having the form R(a,b). It would be generally con-
ceded that this state of affairs might have been other than it is. But suppose
that we ascend to a second-order state of affairs, to a law of nature N(F,G).
Here, it may be argued, we have a state of affairs which could not be other
than it is.
In what follows I shall argue, on the contrary, that N(F,G) and R(a,b) are
both contingent states of affairs.
The obvious objection to the view that a true statement of a law of
nature, such as ‘N(F,G)’, is a necessary truth is that it is discovered to be
true a posteriori, using the method of hypothesis, observation and
experiment. By contrast, the necessary truths of logic and mathematics
are, in general at least, established a priori, by thought, reason and
calculation alone.
This argument is not conclusive. The distinction between truths known,
or rationally believed, a posteriori and those known, or rationally believed,
a priori, is an epistemological one. Kripke has raised the question why it
should determine the logical status of the truths known, or rationally
believed.
Nevertheless, in trying to discover the laws of nature, scientists feel free
to consider possibilities in a very wide-ranging manner, quite unlike the
constraints which naturally suggest themselves in logical and mathemat-
ical argument. It would have to be admitted, at the least, that the laws of
nature give a deﬁnite impression of contingency. The onus of proof would
therefore appear to be on those who maintain that the impression is mere
illusion.
148
www.ebook3000.com

1
Arguments for the necessity of laws
It may be, however, that this onus can be reversed. A traditional Rational-
ist line of thought here, put to me by Martin Tweedale, is to appeal to the
Principle of Sufﬁcient Reason. If a law such as N(F,G) is a mere contingent
fact, then there is no sufﬁcient reason why Fs should be Gs, rather than
something else. But there ought to be such a reason.
To appeal to the Principle of Sufﬁcient Reason is to insist that there must
be an explanation why things are so rather than another way. The appeal
must therefore enlist the sympathy of anybody who, like myself, looks to
an account of laws which treats them as the explanations of regularities.
Should we not go further and explain the laws themselves? To the extent
that laws can be brought under higher-order laws, this can be done even
by the Contingency view. But these higher-order laws will remain unex-
plained on that theory. There will be no sufﬁcient reason for these laws.
The question arises, however, whether we cannot overdo that good
thing: explanation. There is one philosophy which traces back all appear-
ance of contingency to a single necessary being, the Absolute, which is the
sole reality. That hypothesis, I believe, attempts to take explanation too far.
A sign that this is so is that no serious and principled deduction of the
phenomena from the One has ever been given, or looks likely to be given.
But if explanation has to stop short of the Absolute, then we have to
accept brute fact, that is, contingency, at some point. At what point should
we do this? That is a question of the utmost delicacy for every philosophy.
In my judgement, the Regularity theory of law gives up much too soon.
Instead, I have argued, regularities among particular states of affairs can
be explained by connections between universals. Atomic connections of
universals are substituted for molecular regularities. Can these connec-
tions in turn be explained? The system of connections may be simpliﬁed,
and brought under higher-order laws. But when all this has been done, is
there any hope of demonstrating the necessity of the ultimate connections?
I do not believe that there is. Necessity can be asserted, but it cannot be
demonstrated or even made plausible. That does not close the matter. But
it does suggest that to appeal to Sufﬁcient Reason here is to attempt to
carry explanation too far.
An attempt which is sometimes made to back up this assertion is to
argue that if the relation between the universals is contingent only, then it
is possible that it should change over time, thus resurrecting at least the
Problem of Induction. But to advance this argument is to demonstrate that
one has lost one’s grip upon what universals are. As already pointed out in
149

Chapter 6, Section 1, it is not possible that both N(F,G) and ~N(F,G)
should obtain. To add that one obtains at t, and the other at t2, is
confusion.
A second line of thought is to be found in Swoyer (1982). He argues that
properties must have ‘essential features’. He rejects the idea that these
essential factors are phenomenal, or that they consist of properties of
properties. By elimination, he reaches the idea that the essential features
are the relations of ‘nomic implication’ which properties have to other
properties
But why need properties have essential features at all? Perhaps their
identity is primitive. To uphold this view is to reject the Principle of the
Identity of Indiscernibles with respect to properties. Properties can just be
different, in the same way that, many of us would maintain, ordinary
particulars can just be different although having all their features in
common. (For the latter, see my 1978, Ch. 9, Sec. 1.) Swoyer objects to this
view that the ‘primitive’ difference of ordinary particulars is grounded in
something: their distinct spatio-temporal locations. But suppose, as seems
thinkable, that there are particulars which are not spatio-temporal. Pace
Aquinas, may not two angels simply be different from each other while
having all the same properties? Apparently they would be primitively
different. And why should not the same be true for properties? We might
put the matter this way: properties can be their own essence.
It is to be noted, in any case, that if properties demand essential features,
then it seems reasonable that these essential features should have essential
features also. (If this further move is not necessary, why should the regress
ever be embarked upon?) This will either lead to vicious inﬁnite regress, or
else to a circle of entities which provide essential features for each other. (I
suppose that Swoyer thinks that the nomic network holding properties
together creates such a circle.) But what of the circle as a whole? What is
essential to it? Nothing, presumably. It is just itself. But if it can be just
itself, why not a ‘circle’ of one, a single property which has no essential
feature, but is instead just itself?
It may be noted, before leaving Swoyer, that he criticizes the view that
laws of nature are contingent relations between universals by saying that
it will involve ‘cosmic coincidence’ at the level of universals. This seems
incorrect. The Regularity view does take a law to be a cosmic coincidence.
But coincidence demands repetitions: this F is a G, that F is a G, and so on.
If we have N(F,G) there is no repetition: it is, as Tooley puts it, an ‘atomic
fact’. All that is legitimate in Swoyer’s complaint is that there is no sufﬁ-
cient reason for F bearing N to G.
150
www.ebook3000.com

I turn now to a much less global argument for the necessity of laws of
nature, put forward by Sydney Shoemaker (1980). Shoemaker argues:
what makes a property the property it is, what determines its identity, is
its potential for contributing to the causal powers of the things that
have it. (p. 114)
From this he draws the conclusion, among others, that the link between a
property and its potential effects is a necessary one. He says (p. 116) that his
reason for holding this view is ‘broadly speaking, epistemological’. Proper-
ties can only be known through their effects, ultimately their effects upon
observers. If there were causally idle properties, then we could never have
the slightest reason to believe in their existence. Again, if two different
properties made exactly the same contribution to the causal powers of the
things which had the properties, we would never have the slightest reason to
believe that two properties were involved, rather than one. These epistemo-
logical points must be taken as clues to the ontology of the situation. Contri-
bution to the causal powers of a thing determines the identity of properties.
In a note added in proof, Shoemaker accepts a criticism offered by
Richard Boyd. Causal powers are powers to bring about certain sorts of
effect. But the identity of a property is determined not simply by what it
can help to bring about, but also by what can help to bring it about.
Properties are what they are because they can contribute to bringing about
certain effects, and because certain other properties can contribute to
bringing it about that something possesses the property. It seems to me
that at this point Shoemaker might as well adopt an explicitly nomic view
of what determines a property to be what it is. A property is determined to
be the particular property it is by the fact that it is nomically linked, in just
certain ways, to just certain further properties. The necessity of the laws of
nature will then be directly evident.
Epistemological arguments with ontological conclusions are notoriously
difﬁcult to estimate. I have already used at least one such argument myself
in Chapter 9, Section 1. I there argued in the following way. Suppose that
no Fs are Gs, omnitemporally. Suppose that there is no higher-order law
from which a law giving a certain probability that an F is a G may be
deduced counterfactually. We would then have no good reason to assert
the existence of a law giving Fs a certain probability of being a G. I took
this to be a clue to the ontology of the situation: in the circumstances, there
can be no such law.
Notice, however, that my argument was not my sole, it was not even my
main, argument for my conclusion. My main objection to admitting
151

probabilistic laws in such a situation was that it would force us to admit at
least the logical possibility of the ontological reality of uninstantiated laws
and uninstantiated universals, a logical possibility which there is inde-
pendent reason to reject. Shoemaker’s case, however, seems to depend
solely upon his epistemological argument. It is worth noticing here that
from the premiss that the laws of nature are necessary, Shoemaker’s rejec-
tion of idle properties, and rejection of different properties which make no
nomic difference, cannot be extracted. For might there not be properties
which of necessity are nomically idle? Might there not be two or more
distinct properties from which identical nomic connections necessarily
ﬂowed? To rule out such possibilities, it seems that Shoemaker can only
appeal to the fact that we could never have any good reason to assert that
such possibilities are realized.
There is, however, one way in which Shoemaker might support his
position further here. He could argue that a property is constituted by, is
nothing but, its nomic links with other properties. Nomically idle proper-
ties would then be nothing, and properties with all the same nomic links
would be the same property. This is a version of the view that properties
are pure powers. The difﬁculty with this position is that it seems to lead
either to inﬁnite regress, or else to circularity, each of which appears to be
vicious. If a property is nothing but its capacity to enter into nomic
relations to further properties, the same must be said of these further
properties, and so on indeﬁnitely unless we return in a circle to the
original property or properties. No property is anything in itself, but only
in its relations to other properties as given by the laws of nature. But how
can a system of things, each logically nothing in itself independently of the
system, be made into something by incorporation in the system? (See
Swinburne, 1980, pp. 313–20, and Chapter 8, Section 3, of the present
work.)
If an ontology of properties as pure powers is rejected, Shoemaker has
only his epistemological argument to appeal to. But if one of the conse-
quences of his argument, viz. the necessity of the laws of nature, turns out
to have ontologically unacceptable consequences, that will be a good
reason for rejecting his conclusion. In the rest of this chapter I hope to
show that the Necessity theory is indeed ontologically unacceptable.
2
Strong Necessity
Although I do not believe in the literal reality of possible worlds, or even
in the literal reality of ways things might have been but are not, I know of
152
www.ebook3000.com

no way to argue the question before us except by considering possible
worlds. It may be that the necessary/contingent distinction is tied to a
metaphysics which recognizes possibility as a real something wider than
actuality. If this could be shown, then my inclination would be to abandon
the necessary/contingent distinction and declare our present question
about the status of the laws of nature unreal. But I cling to the hope that
an account of ‘possible worlds’ can be given which does not assume the
existence of possibilia. (My hope would be to give a combinatorial account of
logical possibility, perhaps along the general lines of the Tractatus, but
without a commitment to atomism. See Skyrms, 1981.) In the meanwhile,
I discuss our question in terms of possible worlds.
Suppose, then, that the laws are necessary, and that it is a law that Fs are
Gs. What does it mean to say that this law is necessary? One thing which
might be meant is the assertion that:
⎕

NðF, GÞ

:
I will call this the doctrine of Strong Necessity with respect to laws. Our
formula says that the universals F and G are related by the relation N in
every possible world. That is, F,G and any other nomically related univer-
sals which there are, are necessary beings.
Martin Tweedale has objected to me (private correspondence) that there
can be relations between non-existent items. For instance, of two speciﬁed
grammars neither of which is the grammar of any actual language, one
might be more powerful or more complex than the other. As a result,
although Tweedale agrees that universals are not necessary existents, and
so do not exist in every possible world, still, he thinks, he can uphold the
doctrine of the Strong Necessity of laws of nature.
To my mind it is very unsatisfactory to talk about relations between
non-existents. It invites us into a Meinongian jungle, where I would not
wish to go. It would be better, I think, to say that if there was a speciﬁed
grammar G1 and a speciﬁed grammar G2, then G1 would be more power-
ful than G2. But, however we phrase the statement which compares the
two grammars, the vital metaphysical point is that, like any other state-
ment, it requires some truth-maker, and that truth-maker cannot be some-
thing nonexistent. (In passing, I believe that this shows that we should
accept that the past and the future exist.) What can that truth-maker be? In
the case of the grammars, it is at least plausible that the truth-maker is the
two concepts of the two grammars where concepts are actual mental
entities. That G1 is more powerful than G2 is a conceptual truth. The
153

necessity of N(F,G), however, is presumably not a conceptual truth. What
can its truth-maker be? Given that we work with possible worlds, which
we have agreed to do, it seems that either F must exist in every possible
world, and in each world have N to the universal G which also exists in
that world, or else F must exist in some possible worlds only, and in those
worlds have N to G. Tweedale has rejected the ﬁrst alternative, and so
must accept the second. This, however, as we shall see shortly, is the
doctrine that the laws of nature are only weakly necessary, a view to be
criticized in the next section.
I believe, then, that the Strong Necessity view of laws of nature does
make the universals involved necessary beings. To my mind, to have
drawn this consequence is already to have produced a good reason for
denying that the laws of nature are strongly necessary.1 For I maintain that
universals are just as much contingent beings as particulars are.
Worse follows, however. It is generally agreed that, whatever the status
of universals, ﬁrst-order particulars are contingent beings. If it is necessary
that N(F,G), then F and G must exist in every universe, and be related by
N. But there can be worlds where there are no Fs and no Gs. So, the
doctrine of Strong Necessity is committed to uninstantiated universals.
I maintain, however, that the Principle of Instantiation is a necessary truth.
Universals, although real, are only abstractions from states of affairs, and
so are incapable of existing in independence of states of affairs.2 If
1
Although not relevant to the current argument, it is interesting to consider whether the
principle: if the laws of nature are strictly necessary, then the related universals are
necessary beings: can be converted. Given that universals are necessary beings, does it
follow that their irreducible relations, and so the laws of nature, are necessary? One might
invoke the principle: if the terms of a relation involve nothing but necessary beings, then
the relation itself must hold necessarily. This principle has some plausibility. Apparently
obvious counter-examples, such as co-instantiation by particulars, fail to respect the
condition that the term of the relation involve nothing but necessary beings. However,
I do not know how to give positive arguments for the principle. I have argued in this work
that laws of nature, that is, relations between universals, are themselves universals. If all
universals are necessary beings, then the converted principle follows. But the doctrine of
Strong Necessity does not demand that every universal be a necessary being. It only
demands that universals which are nomically related be necessary beings. Grant that (N
(F,G)) is a ﬁrst-order universal. It is not automatically nomically related to anything. So it
need not fall within the scope of the doctrine of Strong Necessity.
2
Michael Tooley has suggested that it is possible to allow that universals can only exist in
states of affairs, yet for these universals to be uninstantiated. Suppose that N(F,G) holds
but there are no Fs or Gs. F and G are uninstantiated, but it can still be maintained that
they exist only in a state of affairs: the second-order state of affairs, N(F,G). He suggests
that we demand only of a universal that either it be ‘saturated from the top’ (ﬁgure in a
higher-order state of affairs) or that it be ‘saturated from the bottom’ (have instances).
154
www.ebook3000.com

universals could exist uninstantiated, then they would be substances, and
would require a relation (a universal) to relate them to their particulars.
The horrors of Bradley’s regress would then be upon us (see Ch. 8, Sec. 2).
It is possible to treat those universals which ﬁgure in laws as necessary
beings, that is, as existing in every possible universe, and yet still maintain
the necessity of the Principle of Instantiation. But to do this it is further
necessary to maintain that it is a necessary truth that every universal
which can ﬁgure in a law is instantiated, at some time, in our universe
(and every other). I do not know how to show that such a Principle of
Plenitude is false or, if true, not necessarily true. But it does not seem a
very plausible hypothesis! It seems logically possible that there might have
been some other universals, over and above the ones instantiated in our
universe, obeying further laws.
I conclude then that, at the very least, a doctrine that the laws of nature
are strongly necessary is incompatible with the view that universals are
contingent beings.
3
Weak Necessity
But this is not the end of the matter. As pointed out in particular by
Swoyer (1982), it is still possible to defend what may be called a Weak
Necessity theory.
Suppose it is held that Socrates is essentially human. This should not be
rendered as:
⎕ðSocrates is humanÞ:
Such a reading will have the human Socrates existing in every possible
world, but, presumably, Socrates is a mere contingent being. What is
wanted can be achieved by a weaker proposition:
⎕ðSocrates exists  Socrates is humanÞ:
There will then be worlds in which Socrates exists, and worlds in which he
does not. But in every world in which he does exist, he is human. (I hasten
It seems to me, however, that the two forms of saturation differ markedly, and that
‘saturation from the bottom’ is always required. Notice that ‘saturation from the top’ has
no theoretical upper limit, but that ‘saturation from the bottom’ ends with ﬁrst-order
particulars. Notice, further, that if (N(F,G)) is itself a universal, as I maintain, then if there
are no Fs it will itself be unsaturated from the bottom, and may be unsaturated from the
top, that is, not be a constituent of any higher-order state of affairs.
155

to add that I do not myself believe in essential properties, save relative to
some conceptual scheme. The example was introduced only for purposes
of illustration.)
Applying the same idea to an analysis of laws of nature as relations
between universals, we render:
It is a law that Fs are Gs
as:
⎕ðthe universal F exists  NðF, GÞÞ:
This clever modiﬁcation appears to enable one, should one so wish, to
maintain the necessity of the laws of nature, yet evade the consequences
just spelled out for the Strong Necessity theory. In all and only those worlds
which contain the universal F, it is a law that Fs are Gs. It is then possible to
maintain further that there are both worlds in which F exists and worlds in
which F does not exist, that is, that F, like Socrates, is a contingent being. It
can be further maintained, if we wish to maintain it, that it is a logically
necessary condition for F to exist in a world that F be at some place and
time instantiated in that world, that F be ‘saturated from below’. Or if, like
Tooley, one rejects the necessity of the Principle of Instantiation, but still
wishes, as he does, to maintain that universals are contingent beings, one
can countenance worlds where F exists and is instantiated, worlds where
F exists and is not instantiated and worlds where F does not exist at all. In
every world of the ﬁrst two sorts, and only in them, it is the case that N(F,
G). In this way, the contingency of universals is combined with the
necessity of laws.
In order now to investigate this suggestion, let us consider the case
where it is a law that Fs which are Hs are Gs, but where Fs which are
not Hs cannot be Gs. It seems clear that there are actual laws of this form.
If so, they are possible. Now consider two sets of worlds: ﬁrstly, worlds
which contain the universal F but not the universal H; second, worlds
which contain both the universal F, the universal H and where some Fs
are Hs.
In the latter set of worlds the law of nature N((F&H),G) obtains. The
critical question is this: does this law hold in the ﬁrst sort of world, where
the universal H is lacking?
It seems that it cannot. For if the universal H is lacking, then at least one
term is lacking in the relation between universals which constitutes the
law. But if it does not, then can it really be said that the universal F is the
same universal as the universal F in the worlds where the law does obtain?
156
www.ebook3000.com

For to say that the laws of nature are necessary, even in the weak sense, is
surely to say that the laws ﬂow from the nature of the universals involved.
The laws which they enter into are at least part of their being.
Should we then say that every world which contains the universal
F must contain the universal H (and, perhaps, Fs which are Hs), and,
indeed, every other universal to which F is nomically related? This is very
counterintuitive. It is particularly unintuitive if we also wish to uphold the
Principle of Instantiation for universals and for laws.
However, there is a natural compromise to be investigated. Considering
the F-without-H worlds, may we not treat the N((F&H),G) law as a merely
potential law in these worlds? If there were Hs (or uninstantiated H) in
that sort of world, as there are not, then the law would obtain.
The critical question then arises what is the truth-maker, the ontological
ground, for this counterfactual? Can it be simply this: in all possible
worlds where the universals F and H both exist (and, perhaps, are co-
instantiated), it is a law that (F&H)s are Gs?
If this is a satisfactory answer, then it seems that the Weak Necessity
view of the laws of nature can be upheld. But I do not ﬁnd it satisfactory.
For it seems, once again, that the necessary truth of the counterfactual
must ﬂow from the nature of the universal F, a nature which must be the
same in every world, including the worlds which lack H. The truth-maker for
the counterfactual must therefore be present in the H-lacking worlds. But
there is no truth-maker available in such worlds.3
Or, rather, there is no truth-maker available in such worlds unless we
introduce irreducible powers (as I think Shoemaker might). If the universal
F necessarily bestows powers upon whatever particulars are F so that, if
these particulars are also H, then those particulars further must be G, then
it will not be necessary for the universal H also to exist. The universal
F will be big with all its nomic potentialities, however impoverished the
world in which it exists. These potentialities, which will include its poten-
tial to necessitate G if it, F, is co-instantiated with H, will serve as truth-
maker for the law that N((F&H),G).
3
Dangerous as it is, perhaps it will help to see the force of this argument if I make an
epistemological point. Suppose that our world contains F, but not H (or else contains
H but no FHs). We want to know if it is a law that (F&H)!G. If the laws of nature are
necessary, then must it not be possible in principle to discover that it is a law? But if the
only truth-makers are states of affairs in merely possible worlds which contain both Fs and
H, or those containing FHs, then, since we are not in those worlds, we would have no
conceivable way of telling whether (F&H)!G holds or does not hold. So we want the law
to ﬂow from the nature of F.
157

The old tradition which links powers with necessity is here upheld. The
Weak Necessity view requires irreducible powers. But if we wish to
uphold a purely Actualist metaphysics, then it seems that we should reject
the Weak Necessity view of laws of nature and declare them to be
contingent.
In the above argument, it was assumed that the universals which enter
into laws are contingent beings. Suppose, however, that one also holds
that these contingent beings must be instantiated to exist (an important
motive for adopting the Weak Necessity theory). There is then a further
embarrassment for the theory. In the case of a deterministic law, whether
iron or oaken, the embarrassment does not arise. For instance, if N(F,G) is
a deterministic oaken law, then, in every world containing Fs which are
not subject to one or more of the possible interfering factors, it is an
instantiated law that such Fs are Gs. Suppose, however, that the law is
probabilistic only. To make the difﬁculty stand out clearly, let the prob-
ability be a very low one (but let the probabilistic law be iron). Let the law
also not be derivable from some higher-order law.
The problem for the upholder of the Weak Necessity theory is now this.
Should he or should he not allow worlds containing Fs which are not Gs?
Suppose ﬁrst that he allow such worlds. A Contingency theorist would
simply allow such worlds on the grounds that, in them, the law fails to
hold. But for the Weak Necessity theorist, where there are Fs, it is always a
law that they have a certain chance of being Gs. So, if he allows worlds
with Fs which are not G, then in these worlds the F!G law must hold but
must be uninstantiated. If the law is a law not derived from some other
laws he is then driven towards postulating an uninstantiated universal in
that world (the universal G), contrary to hypothesis. (G might be instanti-
ated elsewhere in the world, but there will be worlds in which it is not.)
The alternative for the upholder of the Weak Necessity theory is to say
that in every world containing Fs the law is instantiated, however low the
probability of instantiation is. This seems to be an arbitrary stipulation.
This difﬁculty may make us think that irreducibly probabilistic laws do
not assort very well with a theory that laws are necessary.
4
Uninstantiated laws
The necessity theory also has some problems with uninstantiated laws. We
begin by recalling the distinction already made in Chapter 8, Section 5,
between uninstantiated laws whose antecedents are nomically impossible,
and those whose antecedents, though uninstantiated, are nomically
158
www.ebook3000.com

possible. Mellor (1980, pp. 113–14) gives as an example of an uninstan-
tiated law with nomically impossible antecedents the high temperature
values of the vapour pressure law for water. That water decomposes
below these temperatures is itself a law of nature. Newton’s First Law,
on the other hand, seems to be an uninstantiated law whose antecedent
condition is nomically possible. A body not acted upon by a force would
not be violating any law.
It seems, however, that the Necessity theory must give radically differ-
ent accounts of these two sorts of laws. This is at least, a major inelegance
of the theory.
Consider, ﬁrst, uninstantiated laws with nomically possible antecedents.
What is nomically possible is logically possible, and so the antecedent
universal in the uninstantiated law is at least a logically possible existent.
Now, either universals are necessary beings, or they are not. If they are
necessary, they exist in the actual world, and so the antecedent universal
in the uninstantiated law exists in the actual world and is suitably related
to its consequent universal. This will be a completely Realistic account of
such uninstantiated laws. If universals are contingent beings, then either it
is logically possible for these contingent beings to exist uninstantiated, or it
is not. If they can exist uninstantiated, then, presumably, uninstantiated
laws in this world have as their antecedent universals such uninstantiated
universals, which exist in this world. Again, we will have a completely
Realistic account of uninstantiated laws (with nomically possible antece-
dents). Suppose, ﬁnally, that universals are contingent beings and it is
logically impossible that they should exist uninstantiated. At least there
will be other possible worlds in which the antecedent universals of the
uninstantiated laws are instantiated. In each of these worlds the law will
hold. This is at least a quasi-Realistic account of these sorts of
uninstantiated law.
But now consider uninstantiated laws of nature with nomically impos-
sible antecedents. As Mellor points out, if the laws of nature are necessary
(it seems to be irrelevant whether the necessity is Strong or Weak), then
such laws will have logically impossible antecedents. Such laws, then,
correspond to nothing at all in any world. The best which could be
claimed for them is that they are vacuously true. Then, however, there
would follow the unacceptable conclusion that a ‘law’ with the same
impossible antecedent and a consequent logically incompatible with the
original consequent would also be true.
Mellor takes the argument of the previous paragraph to be enough to
refute the notion that the laws of nature are necessary. This seems to me to
159

be too optimistic. The Necessity theorist may be able to give some account
of the truth-conditions of statements of uninstantiated law with nomically
impossible antecedents. Consider a parallel. In order to prove a theorem,
P, a mathematician may begin by assuming that ~P. From this premiss he
may deduce Q, which involves a contradiction, and so prove P. Now
consider his statement ‘if ~ P, then Q’. Here a hypothetical connection is
asserted, but one, presumably, with a logically impossible antecedent. Yet,
if he is a good mathematician, it may be in some sense true, a sense in
which ‘if ~P, then ~Q’ is not true. Difﬁcult it may be to give truth-
conditions for this statement ‘if ~P, then Q’, but we do not doubt that it
has truth-conditions.
The upholder of the Necessity theory of laws may therefore maintain
that there can be ‘true’ statements of uninstantiated law with nomically
impossible conditions. Their truth-conditions will perhaps resemble the
conditions for the mathematician’s ‘if ~P, then Q’.
But Mellor’s argument has its force, even if he has overestimated that
force. An upholder of the Necessity theory of laws must drive a deep
wedge between uninstantiated laws with nomically possible antecedents
and uninstantiated laws with impossible antecedents. Whatever account
he gives of the latter it cannot be the same account which he gives of the
former. But, as Mellor says, this seems very arbitrary. Scientists make no
such sharp distinction between the two sorts of uninstantiated law.
The argument is far from conclusive. But it is an unhappy consequence
of the Necessity theory.
160
www.ebook3000.com

Conclusions
B
I will try to sum up the main positive theses argued for in this essay.
Laws of nature are dyadic relations of necessitation (or probabiliﬁca-
tion) holding between universals. They are (higher-order) states of affairs,
states of affairs which are simultaneously universals. The instantiations of
these universals are the positive instances falling under the law. It is an
intelligible notion that a particular ﬁrst-order state of affairs should neces-
sitate a further ﬁrst-order state of affairs, yet not in virtue of the universals
involved in these states of affairs. But in a law of nature this same relation
of necessitation links sorts of states of affairs, that is, universals. Such
necessitations ‘might have been other than they are’, that is, they are
contingent. Where one sort of state of affairs necessitates another, then it
is entailed, in the absence of further interfering factors (which are always
at least logically possible), that the ﬁrst sort of state of affairs is constantly
conjoined with the second sort of state of affairs.
All genuine laws are instantiated laws. Statements of uninstantiated law
are to be construed as counterfactuals about what laws would hold if
certain conditions were realized. Such statements depend for their truth
upon the existence of higher-order laws. Given the higher-order law and
the contrary-to-fact condition, then the uninstantiated law may be
deduced.
Functional laws are higher-order laws governing those lower-order
laws which can be deduced from a functional law after substituting
particular values for independent variables. Higher-order laws are rela-
tions between higher-order universals. These higher-order universals are
instantiated by the lower-order universals involved in the lower-order
laws. (Mass may be a higher-order universal, instantiated by the determin-
ate mass-values such as one kilogram exact.)
Irreducibly probabilistic laws are also relations between universals.
These relations give (are constituted by) a certain objective probability
that individual instantiations of the antecedent universal will necessitate
instantiation of the consequent universal. They give a probability of a
161

necessitation in the particular case. Like all laws, they must have (positive)
instantiations at some time. Deterministic laws are limiting cases of prob-
abilistic laws (probability 1).
It is always logically possible that the antecedent universal of a law of
nature should be instantiated, yet that, because of the presence of interfer-
ing factors, the consequent universal not be instantiated. (The absence of
interfering factors is not a factor.) If this possibility is no more than a
logical possibility, then the law may be said to be iron. (A probabilistic law
can be an iron law.) If interference sometimes actually occurs, then the law
may be said to be oaken.
There are strong, if not conclusive, reasons to reject negative and dis-
junctive universals. As a result, there is reason to reject exclusion laws, and
laws with disjunctive consequents. However, such laws may be freely
admitted as derived laws. Derived laws are no more than the logical
consequences of the underived or genuine laws. They involve no further
universals or relations between universals.
It appears that all laws link a state of affairs where a particular has a
property with a state of affairs where that same particular has a further
property. However, the properties involved may be relational properties.
The relations involved in these relational properties will regularly involve
temporal relations.
The necessitation relation, unlike logical necessitation, is not reﬂexive, is
not transitive, cannot be contraposed, and is not symmetrical.
162
www.ebook3000.com

Works cited
B
Anscombe, G.E.M. (1971) Causality and Determination, Cambridge University Press,
reprinted in Causation and Conditionals, ed. E. Sosa, Oxford University Press,
1975
Armstrong, D.M. (1973) Belief, Truth and Knowledge, Cambridge University Press
Armstrong, D.M. (1978) Universals and Scientiﬁc Realism, 2 vols., Cambridge
University Press
Ayer, A.J. (1956) What is a Law of Nature? Revue Internationale de Philosophie, 10,
reprinted in Ayer, The Concept of a Person, London: Macmillan, 1963
Beauchamp, T.L. (1972) Cosmic Epochs and the Scope of Scientiﬁc Laws, Process
Studies, 2
Berkeley, G. (1948) Essay towards a New Theory of Vision, Works, ed. A.A. Luce and
T.E. Jessop, Vol 1, London: Nelson
Bradley, M. (1979) Critical Notice of D.M. Armstrong’s Universals and Scientiﬁc
Realism, Australasian Journal of Philosophy, 57
Braithwaite, R.B. (1927) The Idea of Necessary Connection, Mind, 36
Braithwaite, R.B. (1968) Scientiﬁc Explanation, Cambridge University Press
Broad, C.D. (1935) Mechanical and Teleological Causation, Proceedings of the
Aristotelian Society, Supp. Vol. 14, reprinted in Induction, Probability and
Causation, Selected Papers by C.D. Broad, Dordrecht: Reidel, 1968
Davidson, D. (1967) Causal Relations, Journal of Philosophy, 64, reprinted in
Causation and Conditionals, ed. E. Sosa, Oxford University Press, 1975
Dretske, F.I. (1977) Laws of Nature, Philosophy of Science, 44
Fodor, J.A. (1974) Special Sciences (or: The Disunity of Science as a Working
Hypothesis), Synthese, 28
Foster, J. (1979) In Self-defence, in Perception and Identity, ed. G.F. Macdonald,
London: Macmillan
Goodman, N. (1954) Fact, Fiction and Forecast, Atlantic Highlands, N.J.: The Athlone
Press
Hempel, C.G. (1945) Studies in the Logic of Conﬁrmation, reprinted in Hempel,
Aspects of Scientiﬁc Explanation, New York: The Free Press, 1965
Hume, D. A Treatise of Human Nature, 2 vols., Everyman, 1911
Hume, D. Inquiry concerning Human Understanding, ed. L.A. Selby-Bigge, Oxford
University Press, 1946
163

Johnson, W.E. (1924) Logic, Part III, Cambridge University Press
Kneale, W.C. (1950) Natural Laws and Contrary-to-fact Conditionals, Analysis, 10,
reprinted in Philosophical Problems of Causation, ed. T.L. Beauchamp, Belmont,
Cal.: Dickenson, 1974
Kneale, W.C. (1961) Universality and Necessity, British Journal for the Philosophy of
Science, 12, reprinted in Philosophical Problems of Causation, ed. T.L. Beauchamp,
Belmont, Cal.: Dickenson, 1974.
Lewis, D.K. (1973) Counterfactuals, Oxford: Basil Blackwell
Mackie, J.L. (1966) Counterfactuals and Causal Laws, in Analytical Philosophy: First
Series, ed. R.J. Butler, Oxford: Basil Blackwell
Mackie, J.L. (1974) The Cement of the Universe, Oxford University Press
Mackie, J. L. (1979) A Defence of Induction, in Perception and Identity, ed. G.F.
Macdonald, London: Macmillan
Mellor, D.H. (1974) In Defence of Dispositions, Philosophical Review, 83
Mellor, D.H. (1980) Necessities and Universals in Natural Laws, in Science, Belief
and Behaviour, ed. D.H. Mellor, Cambridge University Press
Molnar, G. (1969) Kneale’s Argument Revisited, Philosophical Review, reprinted in
Philosophical Problems of Causation, ed. T.L. Beauchamp, Belmont, Cal.:
Dickenson, 1974
Moore, G.E. (1925) A Defence of Common Sense, in Contemporary British Philosophy
(Second Series) ed. J.H. Muirhead, London: Macmillan
Musgrave, A. (1981) Wittgensteinian Instrumentalism, Theoria, 47
Pap, A. (1962) An Introduction to the Philosophy of Science, Free Press of Glencoe
Plato, Phaedo, trans. D. Gallop, Oxford University Press, 1975
Popper, K.R. (1959) The Logic of Scientiﬁc Discovery, London: Hutchinson
Ramsey, F.P. (1929) General Propositions and Causality, reprinted in Ramsey
(1978)
Ramsey, F.P. (1978) Foundations, ed. D.H. Mellor, London: Routledge & Kegan Paul
Shoemaker, S. (1980) Causality and Properties, in Time and Cause, ed. P. Van
Inwagen, Dordrecht: Reidel
Skyrms, B. (1980) Causal Necessity, New Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press
Skyrms, B. (1981) Tractarian Nominalism, Philosophical Studies, 40
Stove, D.C. (1973) Probability and Hume’s Inductive Scepticism, Oxford University
Press
Strawson, P.F. (1952) An Introduction to Logical Theory, London: Methuen
Suchting, W.A. (1974) Regularity and Law, in Boston Studies in the Philosophy of
Science, ed. R.S. Cohen, and M.W. Wartofsky, Dordrecht: Reidel
Swinburne, R. (1980) Properties, Causation and Projectibility: Reply to Shoemaker,
in Applications of Inductive Logic, ed. L.J. Cohen, and M. Hesse, Oxford
University Press
164
www.ebook3000.com

Swoyer, C. (1982) The Nature of Natural Laws, Australasian Journal of Philosophy, 60
Tooley, M. (1977) The Nature of Laws, Canadian Journal of Philosophy, 7
Van Fraassen, B.C. (1980) The Scientiﬁc Image, Oxford University Press
Whitehead, A.N. (1933) Adventures of Ideas, Harmondsworth, Middx: Penguin
Books
Williams, D.C. (1947) The Ground of Induction, Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard
University Press
Wittgenstein, L. (1921) Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus, translated by D.F. Pears and
B.F. McGuiness, London: Routledge & Kegan Paul 1961
165

Index
B
abduction, 97
Absolute, the, 149
abstraction, 77, 84, 90
Actualism, 8–9, 116, 125, 158
Alexander, S., 86
Anderson, J., 76
Anscombe, G.E.M., 86–9, 93, 123
Aquinas, St T., 150
Aristotle, 93
Ayer, A.J., 15, 57–8
Bacon, J., xiii
Bare Particulars, rejection of, 77
Beauchamp, T., 22
Berkeley, G., 97, 130
Blanshard, B., 77
Blumenfeld, D., 14–15
Boyd, R., 151
Bradley, F.H., 112, 155
Bradley, M., xiii
Braithwaite, R.B., 58, 99–102
brakeless trains, case of, 20
Broad, C.D., 20
causality, 4, 58, 60, See also laws, causal
properties, 150
Regularity theory, 10, 86–7
Singularist theory, 10, 87–9
chances, as objective single-case, 27, 30–2, 56,
93–4, 114, 120
classes, 126–7
commonsense, 49
conﬁrmation, 38–43, 97
construction-function, 80, 140
‘cosmic epochs’. See laws, spatio-temporally
limited
counterfactuals, 91, 124, 146
Epistemic theory of laws, 58–9
limiting relative frequencies, 33
Necessity theory of laws, 156–7
probabilistic laws, 126–7
Regularity theory, 41–3, 96
singular necessities, 90
Systematic theory of laws, 64–5
uninstantiated laws, 104–5, 111–13, 115–17,
121
Currie, G., xiii, 116
Davidson, D., 86–9
determinables and determinates, 85, 106,
143
Determinism, 45, 133–4, 138
dispositions, 8
Dix, A., 138
Dretske, F.I., 40, 58, 78, 85
Ducasse, C.J., 87
Fodor, J., 129
Forrest, P., xiii, 4, 97, 131–3, 144
Foster, J., 124
Gasking, D.A.T., 86
Goldstein, L., xiii
Goodman, N., 15, 53, 57–8, 63
‘grue’ problem, 15, 53–4, 56, 63, 92, 129
Hanson, R., 7
Harré, R., 7
Hempel, C., 38
Hochberg, H., xiii
Hume, D., 4, 20, 112
causation, 4, 86–7
inductive scepticism, 48–55, 98
necessary connection, 37, 72, 101
Identity of Indiscernibles, Principle of,
150
induction, 5, 48–55, 65, 96–102, 149
inductive scepticism, 5, 48–55, 99
inference to the best explanation
induction, 48–9, 51–2, 96
laws, 37–8, 68, 91, 95
predictive success of science, 6
rationality, 54
166
www.ebook3000.com

inﬁnitesimals, 31
Instantiation, Principle of, 75–7, 112, 134,
154–7, See also states of affairs
Instrumentalism, 7, 101
Jackson, F., xiii
Johnson, W.E., 20
Kneale, W.C., 11, 18, 48–55
knowledge, 60
Kripke, S., 148
Langtry, B., xiii
laws
bridge, 3, 129
causal, 14, 88, 122–3, 147
conservation, 139
derived, 37, 41, 136, 140, 143, 162
deterministic, 27–31, 128, 134, 136, 143, 162
disjunctive, 144
Eliminativist theory, 5, 64–5
Epistemic theory, 57–60
exclusion, 6–7, 80, 142–4, 162
forms of, 6–7
functional, 6–7, 21, 35, 94, 103–8, 128, 143,
161
higher-order, 94, 105–8, 115, 117, 121, 161
inference-licences, 131–2
inﬁnitely qualiﬁed, 25–7, 94, 137
Instrumentalism about, 8
iron, 79, 99, 137–41, 143, 162
lack of paradigms, 5–7
local uniformities. See Smith’s garden, case
of
oaken, 99, 137–41, 144, 158
probabilistic, 6–7, 12, 27–34, 56, 94, 116,
119–28, 142, 151, 158, 161
Ramsey–Lewis theory. See laws, Systematic
theory
Realism about, 8, 26
Resiliency theory, 33, 57, 60–1, 63, 67
spatio-temporally limited, 22–3, 93, 107
steel, 140
Systematic theory, 21, 57, 61–8, 92
underived, 37, 41, 136, 142–3, 145
uninstantiated, 19–21, 35, 59, 63, 92–3,
104–5, 109–11
universal scope, 131–4, 143–4
vacuous. See laws, uninstantiated
Lewis, D., xi, 74, 79
brakeless trains, 19
counterfactuals, 46, 65
difﬁculty for Naive Regularity theory, 129
disjunctive laws, 136, 143
exclusion laws, 137
probabilistic laws, 29
‘rubber’ laws, 138
Systematic theory of laws, 62–8
uninstantiated laws, 20
limiting relative frequency, 28–9, 31, 33
Locke, J., 90
Lovelace, J., 81
Mackie, J. L., 32–4, 44, 46–8, 53, 65
magnitudes, physical, 103
Meinong, A., 19, 153
Mellor, D.H.
Braithwaite–Popper argument supported,
101
objective chances, 30
probabilistic laws, 30
scientiﬁc identiﬁcations as laws, 129
uninstantiated laws, 19–20, 117–18, 158–60
unintelligibility of Universals theory of
laws, 32
moas, case of, 17
Molnar, G., 10–11, 14, 19, 58, 129
Moore, G.E., 5, 49
Mortensen, C., xiii, 48
Musgrave, A., 7
Naturalism, 76
necessitation
different patterns of, 85
explanatory force, 95
formal properties, 131–2, 145–7
laws, 36–7, 46, 71, 79
negations, 137, 139
primitive, 82, 85–6, 131
probabilistic laws, 122–6
universals, 89–92, 131
without law, 88–9, 91–3
Newton, I., 6, 20, 139, 159
Nominalism, about universals, 15, 72, 75–6
O’Neill, L., xiii
Occam’s Razor, 101, 120
Order Invariance, Principle of, 92
Pap, A., 129
Paradox of Analysis, 5
Particulars, Bare, 77
167

Peirce, C. S., 97
Phenomenalism, 58
Physicalism, 76
Plato, 78, 85, 117
Popper, K.R., 17, 99–102
possible worlds, 153
Potts, T., 35
Powers, 8, 31–2, 113–15, 120, 150, 157
probabilities, initial, 97
probabilities, logical, 31, 49, 53–4, 101–2
propensities, objective single-case. See
chances, objective single-case
properties
disjunctive, 140
essential, 156
general, 13
geography, 3
higher-order, 105–7, 132
identity-conditions, 150–1
negative, 134–7
relational, 144, 162
quasi-universals, 73, 93–4, 107, 132
Quine, W. V., 84
Ramsey, F.P.
Epistemic theory of laws, 58
Systematic theory of laws, 57, 61–3, 66–7
unintelligibility of Universals theory of
laws, 32
relations, 77
resemblance nominalism, 15, 64, 75
Resiliency. See laws, Resiliency theory
Russell, B., 77
Sanford, D., xiii
science, tasks of, 3, 129
Shoemaker, S., 151–2, 157
Skyrms, B., 32, 57, 60–1, 77, 153
Smart, J.J.C., xiii
Smith’s garden, case of, 24–5, 61, 93–4, 132, 144
Socrates, 5
states of affairs, 77
contingency, 148
laws, 81–3, 89–92
negative, 120, 135, 137
universals abstractions from, 81–3, 90, 104,
112, 154, 161
Stove, D.C., xiii, 50, 53, 67
Strawson, P.F., 51, 54, 58
Suchting, W.A., 56, 58, 67
Sufﬁcient Reason, Principle of, 149
Swinburne, R., xiii, 152
Swoyer, C., xiii, 103, 150, 155
Tichy, P., 83
Tooley, M., xi
Braithwaite–Popper argument, 102
causal necessitation, 147
conﬁrmation of law-statements, 40
Determinism, 133
disjunctive laws, 140, 143
Epistemic theory of laws, 59
initial probability of law-statements, 97
laws as atomic facts, 150
probabilistic laws, 30, 124–5
Smith’s garden case, 24–5, 61, 93
spatio-temporally limited laws, 22
Systematic theory of laws, 67n3
uninstantiated laws, 20, 109, 122
universal scope, laws of, 131–3, 144
universals, contingent beings, 156
‘saturation from above and below’, 154
Universals theory of laws, 79–80, 86
Toulmin, S., 7
Tractatus, 38, 153
truth, partial, 6
Tweedale, M., xiii, 149, 153–4
Universal Gravitation, Law of, 6
Van Fraassen, B., 101
Van Inwagen, P., xiii, 89
‘victory of particularity’, 82
Watkins, J.W.N., xiii, 138
Watson, W.H., 7
Whitehead, A.N., 22
Williams, D.C., 53
Wittgenstein, L., 7, 38, 77
168
www.ebook3000.com

