
i
What Really Causes Schizophrenia
HAROLD D. FOSTER
A free copy of this book is available at www.hdfoster.com.  “What really
causes AIDS” also can be downloaded at this website.

ii
© 2003 by Harold D. Foster.  All rights reserved.
No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval
system, or transmitted, in any form or by an means, electronic,
mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise, without the
written prior permission of the author.

iii
Dedicated to Delta 3.5

iv
AUTHOR’S NOTE
This book is written and published to provide information on
schizophrenia.  It is sold with the understanding that the pub-
lisher and author are not engaged in rendering legal, medical,
or other professional services.  In addition, this book is not to
be used in the diagnosis of any medical condition.  If “expert”
assistance is desired or required, the services of a competent
professional, especially one who is an expert in nutrition, should
be sought.
Every effort has been made to make this book as complete and
accurate as possible.  However, there may be mistakes both
typographical and in content.  Therefore, this text should be
used as a general guide and not as the ultimate source of
information.  Factual matters can be checked by reading the
cited literature.  This book seeks to stimulate, educate, and
entertain.  The publisher and the author shall have neither
liability nor responsibility to any entity or person with respect
to any loss or damage caused, or alleged to be caused, directly
or indirectly by the concepts or information contained in this
book.  Anyone not wishing to be bound by the above may
return this volume for a refund of its purchase price.

v
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The unusual cover of this book is based on the painting “Any
thing out there?” by Keith Loreth.  My thanks go to him for
giving his permission to use this work of art for this purpose.
I would also like to thank Dr. Abram Hoffer and Dr. Joseph
Campbell with whom I have spent many pleasant lunches at
the University Club discussing orthomolecular medicine in
general and nutrition in particular.  My gratitude is also ex-
pressed to several other people who assisted me in the prepa-
ration of this volume.  Jill Jahansoozi typed the manuscript.
Diane Braithwaite undertook the demanding task of typeset-
ting, while cover design was in the expert hands of Ken
Josephson.  My wife, Sarah, helped proofread several drafts.
Their dedication and hard work is acknowledged with thanks.
Debt is also acknowledged to the professional staff at Trafford
Publishing for their assistance with on-demand manufactur-
ing and Internet marketing of this book.

vi
Whoever wishes to investigate medicine properly,
should proceed thus:  in the first place to consider the
seasons of the year, and what effects each of them
produces... Then the winds, the hot and the cold,
especially such as are common to all countries, and
then such as are peculiar to each locality.  We must
also consider the qualities.  In the same manner,
when one comes into a city to which he is a stranger,
he ought to consider its situation, how it lies as to the
winds and the rising of the sun:  for its influence is
not the same whether it lies to the north or the south,
to the rising or to the setting sun.  These things one
ought to consider most attentively, and concerning the
water which the inhabitants use, whether they be
marshy and soft, or hard, and running from elevated
and rocky situations, and then if saltish and unfit for
cooking, and the ground, whether it be naked and
deficient in water, or wooded and well watered,
and whether it lies in a hollow, confined situation,
or is elevated and cold:  and the mode in which the
inhabitants live, and what are their pursuits, whether
they are fond of drinking and eating to excess, and
given to indolence, or are fond of exercise and labour,
and not given to excess in eating and drinking.
Francis Adams, The Genuine Works of Hippocrates, 1849
(on Airs, Waters, and Places), vol. 1, p. 190

vii
WHAT REALLY CAUSES SCHIZOPHRENIA:
AN EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
How difficult is the schizophrenia jigsaw?  How complex is the
puzzle?  In The Madness of Adam and Eve, Horrobin1 points
out that:
While in familial and personality terms the problem is
devastating, in biochemical terms the problem cannot
be very serious.  After all, the young person functioned
near normally for fifteen, twenty-five or thirty-five years
before becoming ill.  Moreover, all schizophrenic pa-
tients vary in the severity of their illness, often, as
documented earlier, becoming near normal while the
body temperature is elevated.  The fundamental bio-
chemical problem, therefore, cannot be too serious and
must be reversible.
This is an extremely intelligent and encouraging character-
ization.  It seems fair to ask, however, if the problem is so
biochemically simple, why have thousands of doctors and
scientists spent countless billions of dollars, over more than
100 years, in endless unsuccessful attempts to discover the
etiology of schizophrenia?
The logical answer to this question must be that they are try-
ing to hammer jigsaw puzzle pieces into spaces where they do
not fit.  Conventional drug treatment rests, to a large degree,
on the “dopamine hypothesis,” that is on the belief that excess
dopamine accentuates and decreased dopamine reduces the
positive or  hot symptoms of schizophrenia.2  The evidence for
high levels of dopamine in schiphrenia is poor3 and Parkin-
sonism (the mimicking of Parkinson’s disease) has occurred
frequently in patients treated for this hypothesized excess.
Since Parkinson’s disease is known to stem from a dopamine

viii
deficiency, it seems likely that drugs causing a similar illness
in schizophrenics are creating a lack of this neurotransmitter,
rather than correcting an excess of it.
If too much dopamine is not the root cause of schizophrenia,
what is?  Certainly genetics must play a significant role be-
cause 50 percent of patients with this illness come from fami-
lies with a history of the disorder.4  This preponderance cannot
be explained by abnormal child rearing since adoption has no
impact on the risk of subsequently becoming schizophrenic.
There is, beyond a doubt, therefore, a strong genetic compo-
nent to schizophrenia, but it cannot be as straightforward as
the inheritance of certain characteristics such as eye colour,
since, as Myers5 points out, “about half of the twins who share
identical genes with a schizophrenic victim do not develop the
disorder.”  One must agree with Nicol and Gottesman’s6 assess-
ment that some individuals “have a genetic predisposition to
the disorder but that this predisposition by itself is not suffi-
cient for the development of schizophrenia.”  The schizophre-
nia gene(s), therefore, is not destiny but it is enhanced risk.
This book discusses four genetic aberrations7-10 that occur more
frequently than normal in subgroups of schizophrenics.  These
include the low enzyme activity variant of the catechol-O-meth-
yltransferase gene, the GSTM1*O allele (required to produce
a form of glutathione S-transferase) and possibly the C677TT
variant of the gene for methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase.
Beyond this, many schizophrenics appear to have inherited an
unusual Nogo (reticulon 4, RTN4, or RTN-X) variant gene from
both parents.  What these four genetic aberrations appear to
have in common is that they all result in higher than normal
exposure to adrenochrome, a metabolite of adrenaline, or in
an abnormal susceptibility to its negative impacts.  Since all of
these variants are quite widely distributed in the human pop-
ulace, it seems likely that abnormal levels of adrenochrome

ix
must carry some evolutionary advantage(s).  That is, there
appear to be not one, but at least three and maybe four bal-
anced genetic morphisms involved in this mental illness.  It is
argued here that the genetic aberrations increasing the risk of
schizophrenia appear to promote religious sense, technical and
artistic creativity, and leadership.11  They also seem to provide
a greater resistance to a wide range of cancers, especially that
of the lung.12  While they may be extremely destructive in indi-
viduals prone to develop schizophrenia, such genes are highly
beneficial for humanity as a while.
In a recently published book, The Invisible Plague: The Rise of
Mental Illness from 1750 to the Present, Torrey and Miller13
argue that throughout human history, the baseline rate of
insanity was approximately one case for each 2,000 members
of society.  Using a great diversity of records, ranging from
mental health surveys to psychiatrists’ diaries, they are able
to prove beyond reasonable doubt that industrialization has
been accompanied by dramatic increases in mental illness.  In
England, Ireland, Canada, and the USA, for example, “the
prevalence of insanity, as a rate per population, increased at
least sevenfold between the mid-18th and mid-20th centuries.”
In the USA and especially in Ireland, the increase was greater.
Torrey and Miller24 argue that “we are now in the midst of an
epidemic of insanity so insidious that most people are even
unaware of its existence.”  The invisible plague appears worst
in Ireland where the number of insane persons per 1,000 pop-
ulation has reached almost 8.0.  This seems to be about 16
times the pre-industrial global baseline.
One does not have epidemics of genetic diseases, simply be-
cause the human genome does not alter rapidly enough to
cause them.  The current epidemic of insanity, associated with
both schizophrenia and bipolar disorder, that has developed
over the past 250 years is a very strong argument that the

x
triggers that increase the negative impacts of the genetic
aberrations linked to this mental illness have become more
common.  These appear to include anything that either stim-
ulates the body’s production of adrenaline or promotes its
metabolism to adrenochrome and its derivatives.  Such trig-
gers include stress and its associated “fight or flight” response
system, excess sugar consumption, and exposure to substances
causing allergic reactions.
Besides being an hallucinogen, adrenochrome is a highly reac-
tive neurotoxin that, in schizophrenia, undermines at least three
major biochemical systems.  It is an antagonist of the hormone
triiodothyronine and can damage the thyroid.  In chronic schizo-
phrenics, this gland impairment appears permanent.  Adreno-
chrome also has a Jekyll and Hyde relationship with serotonin
and, so, impacts on tryptophan and its other chief metabolite
niacin.  At low levels, serotonin appears to stimulate adreno-
chrome formation, while at higher levels it retards the process.
Adrenochrome also generates numerous free radicals causing
oxidative stress, eventually exhausting the schizophrenic anti-
oxidant defence systems, creating deficiencies of glutathione
peroxidase, superoxide dismutase, and catalase.  Complicating
the impacts of high adrenochrome conversion from adrenaline
are the numerous interactions that normally occur between
triiodothyronine, serotonin, and the three major components
of the antioxidant defence system.
If the adrenochrome hypothesis is correct, the “ideal” treat-
ment for schizophrenia should involve eight steps, designed to
reduce the production of adrenaline and slow down its metab-
olism to adrenochrome and other toxic indoles.  Such a treat-
ment should also attempt to reduce the further biochemical
abnormalities that result from either an excess of adrenochrome
and its metabolites, or from other impacts of the four genetic
aberrations that appear associated with this mental illness.

xi
Since many schizophrenics are over-oxidizing adrenaline be-
cause of allergic reactions to the environment, they need extra-
special surroundings because of such sensitivities.  Ideally, a
treatment clinic would be like the Lange Meridian Center,15
which was built using Bau-Biologie principles.  Step two in-
volves genetic and biochemical screening to identify the most
likely effective treatment protocol.  Allergy testing is also es-
sential, as is a low sugar diet.  The western diet has been
increasingly dominated by sugar.  The per capita consumption
in the USA, for example, has increased by roughly a factor of
20 since 1822.16  Hypoglycemia, consequently, is now rampant.
This elevated dietary intake of sugar stimulates the body to
release insulin which, in turn, drives the blood sugar levels
down, encouraging the adrenal glands to release adrenaline.
In schizophrenics this is oxidized to produce abnormally high
levels of adrenochrome and its metabolites.  The fifth step in
the treatment of schizophrenia should involve medications that
must quickly reduce the destructive impacts of excess adreno-
chrome and its derivatives.  They must also address the other
biochemical anomalies directly related not to such indoles, but
to the genetic aberration encouraging their overproduction.  In
schizophrenics with the MTHFR C 677TT variant, for example,
the patient will also be suffering from depressed methionine
and elevated homocysteine.
There appear to be several avenues for lowering excess adreno-
chrome levels.  These include high doses of niacin or niacina-
mide and the use of other natural methyl acceptors thiamine
(vitamin B1), riboflavin (vitamin B2), and ubiquinone (Coenzyme
Q10).  Niacin is usually the treatment of choice.
Another adrenochrome antagonist, triiodothyronine, appears
very effective in treating schizophrenia.  As shown by Danziger,17
every one of the 80 schizophrenics who had been ill for 6 months
or less, who took between 120 to 1,200 milligrams of desiccated

xii
thyroid daily for at least 100 days, recovered, suffering relapses
only if they later discontinued their medication.  These doses
may seem high, but it should be remembered that schizophren-
ics are known to be very resistant to thyroid medications.  This
is probably because all chronic schizophrenics appear to be
suffering from badly damaged thyroid glands.
Treatment might also involve attempts to directly raise body
levels of another adrenochrome antagonist, serotonin.  If sero-
tonin is not provided as a supplement, its metabolism could
be encouraged by the consumption of foods that are high in
tryptophan, such as beans, cod, pork, soybeans, and cheese
(provided that the patient is not allergic to them).  In addition,
every effort should be made to repair the antioxidant defence
system, increasing glutathione peroxidase, catalase, and su-
peroxide dismutase activity.
Since there appear to be several genetic aberrations involved
in schizophrenia, subgroups of patients also will suffer from
distinct biochemical imbalances that need correction.  The sixth
step of the treatment protocol should address these.  To illus-
trate, schizophrenics with the MTHFR C677TT variant of the
gene encoding for methylenetetrahydrofolate will suffer from
an excess of homocysteine and a deficiency of methionine, even
if treatment reduces adrenochrome levels.  Beyond the provi-
sion of methionine, since the remethylation (or detoxification)
of homocysteine requires folic acid, vitamin B12, zinc, and
trimethylglycine, it is likely that schizophrenics with this ge-
netic aberration will require high doses of these nutrients.18
Adrenochrome excess and the other biochemical abnormalities
that occur in schizophrenia can eventually cause serious dam-
age to the thyroid gland19 as well as to the brain itself.  Long
term chronic patients are, therefore, much more difficult to treat
successfully.  This task might not be impossible, but it will

xiii
almost surely require higher doses of orthomolecular nutrients,
taken for longer periods, before improvement is apparent.
One of the major problems in chronic schizophrenia is the
development of brain atrophy, associated with large fluid filled
spaces known as ventricles.  Buckman and coworkers20 pro-
vided evidence that blood levels of the selenoenzyme glutath-
ione peroxidase have a strong negative correlation with
computer tomography scan measures of such brain damage.
Simply put, the less blood glutathione peroxidase, the greater
the brain damage in chronic schizophrenics.  Obviously, one
treatment strategy worth trying is supplementation with the
four nutrients, selenium, cysteine, glutamine, and tryptophan,
that the body requires to produce glutathione peroxidase.21
Injected glutathione may be of value.  There is also growing
evidence that eicosapentaenoic acid can repair ventricle dam-
age in chronic schizophrenics, leading to an improvement in
their mental health.22-24
It is clear that damage is not restricted to the brain in chronic
schizophrenics.  All of these patients also appear to suffer from
extensive thyroid abnormalities.25  I do not know how to repair
a damaged thyroid gland.  If this is impossible, significant
behavioural improvements can only be expected when using
a protocol that includes continuous desiccated thyroid gland
supplementation.
The eighth and final step in the treatment of schizophrenia
involves treatment for the soul.  Recovering schizophrenics are
still one of the few groups society feels free to abuse, ostracize,
and discriminate against.  While it is socially acceptable to admit
to cancer, heart disease, multiple sclerosis, or Parkinson’s dis-
ease, admitting to schizophrenia invites fear and derision.  To
recover, schizophrenics need employment, respect, and com-
passion.  Too often they receive rejection, abuse, and insult.

xiv
REFERENCES
1.
Horrobin, D. (2002).  The Madness of Adam and Eve. London: Transworld
Publishers.
2.
Seeman, P., Guan, H.C., and Van Tol, H.H. (1995).  Schizophrenia:
Elevation of dopamine D4-like sites, using [3H] nemonapride and
[125I] epidepride. European Journal of Pharmacology, 286(2), R3-5.
3.
Issa, F., Gerhardt, G.A., Bartko, J.J., Suddath, R.L., Lynch, M.,
Gumache, P.H., Freedman R., Wyatt, R.J., and Kirch, D.G. (1994).
A multidimensional approach to analysis of cerebrospinal fluid
biogenic amines in schizophrenia: I. Comparisons with healthy con-
trol subjects and neuroleptic-treated/unmedicated pairs analysis.
Psychiatry Research, 52(3), 237-249.
4.
Myers, D.G. (1992).  Psychology. New York: Worth Publishers.
5.
Ibid.
6.
Nicol, S.E., and Gottesman, I.I. (1983).  Clues to the genetics and neuro-
biology of schizophrenia. American Scientist, 71, 398-404.
7.
Park, T.W., Yoon, K.S., Kim, J.H., Park, W.Y., Hirvonen, A., and
Kang, D. (2002).  Functional catechol-O-methyltransferase gene
polymorphism a susceptibility to schizophrenics. European Neuro-
psychopharmacology, 12(4), 299-303.
8.
Harada, S., Tachikawa, H., and Kawanishi, Y. (2001).  Glutathione S-
transferase M1 gene deletion may be associated with susceptibility
to certain forms of schizophrenia. Biochemical and Biophysical
Research Communications, 281, 267-271.
9.
Deng, H., Liu, X., Cai, G., Sun, X., Wang, Y., Terwedow, H., Wang, Z.,
and Xu, X. (2002).  A linkage disequilibrium study of methylene-
tetrahydrofolate reductase C677T and schizophrenia. Zhonghua
Yi Xue Yi Chuan Xue Za Zhi, 19(3), 198-200.
10.
Novak, G., Kim, D., Seeman, P., and Tallerico, T. (2002).  Schizophrenia
and Nogo: Elevated mRNA in cortex, and high prevalence of
a homozygous CAA insert. Molecular Brain Research, 107(2),
183-189.
11.
Horrobin, op.cit.
12.
Hoffer, A., and Foster, H.D. (2000).  Why schizophrenics smoke but have
a lower incidence of lung cancer: Implications for the treatment of
both disorders. Journal of Orthomolecular Medicine, 15(3), 141-144.
13.
Torrey, E.F., and Miller, J. (2002).  The invisible plague: The rise of men-
tal illness from 1750 to the present. New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers
University Press.

xv
14.
Ibid.
15.
Baubiologic Home Study Course. http://www.bau-biologieusa.com/def.
html.
16.
Schauss, A. (1980).  Diet, crime and delinquency. Berkeley, CA: Parker
House.
17.
Danziger, cited by Hoffer, A. (2001).  Thyroid and schizophrenia. Journal
of Orthomolecular Medicine, 16(4), 205-212.
18.
Pfeiffer, C.C. (1987).  Nutrition and mental illness: An orthomolecular
approach to balancing body chemistry. Rochester, VT: Healing Arts
Press.
19.
Skoliarova, N.A. (1975).  Morphology of the endocrine system in schizo-
phrenia according to early autopsy findings (the Hypophyseal-
Thyroid System). Zhurnal Nevropatologii Psikhiatrii Imeni S S
Korsakova, 75(7), 1045-1053 (in Russian, abstract only consulted).
20.
Buckman, T.D., Kling, A., Sutphin, M.S., Steinberg, A., and Eiduson, S.
(1990).  Platelet glutathione peroxidase and monoamine oxidase
activity in schizophrenics with CT Scan abnormalities: Relation to
psychosocial variables. Psychiatry Research, 31(1), 1-14.
21.
Mariorino, M., Aumann,K.D., Brigelius-Flohe, R., and Doria, D., van
den Heuvel, J., McCarthy, J.E.G., Roveri, A., Ursini, F., and Flohé,
L. (1998).  Probing the presumed catalytic triad of a selenium-
containing peroxidase by mutational analysis. Z.Ernahrungswiss,
37(Supplement 1), 118-121.
22.
Emsley, R., Myburgh, C., Oosthuizen, P., and van Rensburg, S.J. (2002).
Randomized, placebo-controlled study of ethyl-eicosapentaenoic
acid as a supplement treatment in schizophrenia. American Jour-
nal of Psychiatry, 159(9), 1596-1598.
23.
Horrobin, D.F., Jenkins, K., Bennett, C.N., and Christie, W.W. (2002).
Eicosapentaenoic acid and arachidonic acid: Collaboration and not
antagonism is the key to biological understanding. Prostaglandins
Leukot Essent Fatty Acids, 66(1), 83-90.
24.
Peet, M., Brind, J., Ramchand, C.N., Shah, S., and Vankar, G.K. (2001).
Two double-blind placebo-controlled pilot studies of eicosapentae-
noic acid in the treatment of schizophrenia. Schizophrenia Research,
49(3), 243-251.
25.
Skoliarova, op. cit.

xvi
There are causes for all human suffering, and there
is a way by which they may be ended, because
everything in the world is the result of a vast
concurrence of causes and conditions and everything
disappears as these causes and conditions change
and pass away.
[The teachings of Buddha by
Bukkyo Dendo Kyokai,
112th revised edition]

xvii
TABLE OF CONTENTS
1
Schizophrenia: From Bedlam to Babel..............................1
2
The Schizophrenia Pandemic .........................................11
3
Genesis: In The Beginning..............................................17
4
The Genetic Basis of Schizophrenia................................25
5
Biochemical Abnormalities .............................................39
6
Pulling the Trigger: Location, Location, Location.............63
7
No Barking Dogs:  Medical Anomalies ............................77
8
Unconventional Treatments ...........................................87
9
Conventional Treatment .................................................99
10
Regression Analysis: The Road Back ............................109
11
A Tale of Two Hypotheses ............................................. 121
12
Pulling the Trigger ........................................................ 137
13
The Unsupporting Cast ................................................ 147
14
The Acid Test: Do the Pieces Fit?.................................. 161
15
The Times They Are A Changing................................... 209
16
What’s In It For Darwin? .............................................. 231
Index.................................................................................... 241
The Author ........................................................................... 256

xviii
The lunatic, the lover and the poet
Are of imagination all compact:
One sees more devils than vast hell can hold,
That is, the madman: the lover, all as frantic
Sees Hellen’s beauty in a brow of Egypt:
The poet’s eye, in a fine frenzy rolling,
Doth glance from heaven to earth, from earth to heaven;
And as imagination bodies forth
The forms of things unknown, the poet’s pen
Turns them to shapes and gives to
airy nothing
A local habitation and a name.
William Shakespeare, A Midsummer Night’s Dream

1
SCHIZOPHRENIA: FROM BEDLAM TO BABEL
1
But strange that I was not told
That the brain can hold
In a tiny ivory cell
God’s heaven and hell.
Oscar Wilde (1854-1900)
Schizophrenia may be the cruellest disorder,1 afflicting “young
adults, often beginning insidiously and progressing until the
ambitions, potentials, and hopes of early years are disregarded
in disarray.  In their place lie broken thoughts, inappropriate
or stunted emotions, and internal voices, or other mispercep-
tions that can make existence a living hell.”  Unfortunately, it is
not rare.  Schizophrenia is the commonest serious mental ill-
ness of the Developed World.  In the USA, it accounts for some
24 percent of all admissions to mental hospitals.2  Initially, the
disease is often episodic with acute phases interspaced with
remissions, but it often becomes chronic.
Schizophrenia is an imprecise diagnosis, in some ways similar
to one of heart disease or cancer.  It is not a single illness but
a spectrum of conditions that have similar symptoms, a symp-
tom complex of abnormal brain function.  Schizophrenia usu-
ally consists of a combination of disorders of thinking process,
perception, emotions, and sensory stimuli.  It is a mental
disorder that is often associated with apparently inexplicable
anxiety, rapid mood swings, and fatigue.3  Typically, schizo-
phrenics suffer from auditory, olfactory, or visual illusions and
hallucinations.  Their senses of touch, taste, and smell may be
distorted.  It is hardly surprising with such handicaps that

2
schizophrenics behave in strange ways, or say totally mean-
ingless or inappropriate things.4
Schizophrenia can be divided into four subtypes:  simple, he-
bephrenic, catatonic, and paranoid.5  Simple schizophrenia is
characterized by confusion, withdrawal, and apathy.  Hebe-
phrenic schizophrenia is an unusual mixture of silliness, hy-
pochondria, and delight in bizarre adornments and childish
pranks.  In contrast, catatonic schizophrenics huddle in gro-
tesque positions, often refusing to move, to take food, or visit
the bathroom.  They also may display muteness and stupor.
Paranoid schizophrenics are dominated by feelings of perse-
cution, suspicion, and bitterness.  Everything is sinister or
threatening.  They may respond to simple gestures or circum-
stances with violence.  Schizophrenic symptoms are often de-
scribed as either positive or negative.6  Positive symptoms are
so named because they involve the presence of altered behav-
iours, including delusions, hallucinations, extreme emotions,
incoherent thoughts and speech, and excited motor activity.
In contrast, negative symptoms encompass a lack of normal
behaviours, such as the display of emotion, social interaction,
speech, and movement.
BEDLAM
Schizophrenia’s history is one of man’s inhumanity to man.  It
is not a coincidence that the word Bedlam has two meanings.
One of these, a corruption of Bethlehem, is as Bedlam, a pop-
ular name given to England’s oldest insane asylum, Bethlem
Hospital.  Mental patients have been “treated” there since as
early as 1403, but it was not until 1547 that its admissions
were limited to the insane.  For centuries, Bedlam was known
for the brutality and lack of respect shown to its patients.7  It
functioned largely as a tourist attraction that “Everybody who

3
lived in London or ever came to London visited as a matter of
course.”8  The hospital was an entertaining “zoo and freak show
... in which the inmate was regarded as a beast or monster.”
Having paid their entrance fees, 17th century visitors exploited
patients by getting them drunk and harassing them, finding
great amusement in the “Ravings ... cursing and swearing” they
provoked.9-10  As might be expected, then, Bedlam also has
come to mean any scene of confusion and uproar.11
As Charles Darwin’s theory of evolution gained greater sup-
port in the late 1800s, many people decided it held the key to
“improving humanity.”  Social Darwinians sought to explain
crime, alcoholism, poverty, prostitution, homelessness, and,
of course, insanity as the price paid for the inheritance of
“defective germ plasma.”12  That is, all society’s problems were
seen as genetic.  The way to solve them was through eugenics,
a systematic attempt to increase desirable and decrease un-
desirable genetic traits in the population.  To illustrate, British
scientist Francis Galton13 promoted these ideas in two basic
ways.  “Positive eugenics” encouraged the healthiest and most
intelligent to marry and procreate.  “Negative eugenics” included
the institutionalization, castration, and sterilization of those,
including schizophrenics, who were considered “defective” or
“undesirable.”  Galton’s ideas were most readily accepted in
the USA, Canada, Scandinavia, and, of course, Germany.14  They
formed Hitler’s rationale for liquidating the occupants of Ger-
many’s mental hospitals and all those supposedly showing
eugenic social or racial inferiority, including homosexuals and
Jews.  In the USA, during the period 1907 to 1940, a total of
18,552 insane individuals were sterilized.  Half of these pro-
cedures were carried out in California, with a quarter more
taking place in Virginia and Kansas combined.15  Sterilization
of the mentally ill continued in the USA until the mid 1970s.
At one time or another during the 20th century, 33 states had
statutes permitting involuntary sterilization.

4
Such assaults on the mentally ill and the retarded did not lead
to improvement in their lives.  Life magazine ran an exposé of
the cruel and unjust treatment of America’s insane under the
headline “Bedlam 1946: Most US Mental Hospitals are a Shame
and a Disgrace.”  Its author, Albert Q. Maisel,17 described insti-
tutions that had been allowed “to degenerate into little more
than concentration camps on the Belsen pattern.”  Patients
were given food like that “usually found in most garbage cans.”
Attendants had little or no training and provided medications
on whim.  Scores of deaths of patients followed beatings by
such “guards.”  Torrey18 described one of Life’s photographs of
naked patients, in wards with beds packed so tightly together
that the floor was not visible, as looking like “a drawing done
by William Blake to illustrate Dante’s Inferno.”
Then came Deinstitutionalization.  This was supposed to be
accompanied by the provision of alternative community facili-
ties for the mentally ill.  However, “what took place was simply
depopulation of the state hospitals. It was as if a policy of re-
settlement had been agreed upon but only eviction took place.”19
In the words of a New York Times editorial,20 deinstitutionali-
zation became “a cruel embarrassment, a reform gone terribly
wrong.”  Now the bulk of the insane in the USA are living on
the streets, under bridges and in parks, alleys, and in home-
less shelters.  Increasing numbers of the untreated seriously
mentally ill end up in prisons and jails as the violent acts per-
petrated by them increase.  The situation is similar in Canada
and most other countries.  In the USA, approximately one-third
of all homeless people are seriously mentally ill; that is, they
are schizophrenics or suffering from bipolar disorder.21  If they
cannot function effectively under normal circumstances, how
can they cope without food or shelter, living on the streets?
In truth, only one out of every five young people who experi-
ence an initial episode of schizophrenia will ever recover enough

5
to live anything approaching a normal life, without drugs or
on low drug doses.22  Even the most modern drugs are incom-
patible with a normal lifestyle.  Rarely do schizophrenics who
take them work and pay income taxes because, on average,
the available drugs for the treatment of schizophrenia result
in only a 15 to 20 percent reduction in symptoms.  Drugs
frequently also cause serious side-effects that include invol-
untary movement, very much like that seen in Parkinson’s
disease.  These adverse effects lead to many schizophrenics
discontinuing treatment and, of the four out of five who do not
achieve near normality, only one is likely to take his or her
prescribed medication continuously.  Of the remaining three,
only one will maintain contact with support services.  The
other two often join the homeless, live in seclusion at home, or
commit suicide.
BABEL
According to Genesis, the Tower of Babel was erected on the
Plain of Shinar in Babylonia by Noah’s descendants.24  Its build-
ers intended to find the backdoor to Heaven, but Jehovah,
angered by their presumption, decided to stop construction.
This he did by inflicting them with a diversity of languages.
Meaningful communication became impossible and Noah’s de-
scendants were then scattered over the face of the earth.  This
story from the Old Testament, which was perhaps inspired by
the fall of the famous temple-tower of Etemenanki, gave rise to
the English word “babble.”25
Bedlam and Babel appear together in this chapter’s title to
highlight the link between the continuing inhumane treatment
of the mentally ill and the inability of the diverse disciplines
that study them to communicate.  As Horrobin26 has pointed
out:

6
Schizophrenic patients have been ill served by the
narrow ultra-specializations of the second half of the
twentieth century.  Each has seen the illness from its
own very limited perspective.  [Give a child a hammer
and everything becomes a nail.]  Those inclined to psy-
chological and psychoanalytical levels of explanation
have blamed dysfunctional families for the disease.
Those interested in a broader sociological picture have
blamed society as a whole.  Those interested in drug
action have blamed the neurotransmitter function.
Almost no one has taken any interest at all in the
whole-body manifestations of the illness, which care-
ful clinicians in the first half of the century had noted.
Almost no one has attempted to integrate what is
known in a coherent and integrated fashion.
As a consequence of this domination of the schizophrenia re-
search agenda by narrow specialists, the recovery rate from
the illness is no better today than it was a century ago27 yet
like so many of our other mysteries “the truth is out there.”  In
an attempt to discover it, this book seeks clues to the causes
of schizophrenia from all available sources.  That is, they are
collected not just from the social and physical sciences, but
also from conventional and unconventional medicine and from
the testimonies of recovered patients and their relatives.
Money is not a good measure of the wasted lives of schizophren-
ics or of the pain and suffering their illness causes to families,
friends, and to society as a whole. Nevertheless, it gives some
idea of the enormous losses involved. In England in 1992, the
hospitalization of schizophrenics cost £652 million, amount-
ing to 5.4 percent of the National Health Service hospital budget.
When indirect expenses, such as those for social services,
courts, lost wages, and family expenses were added to the
total, the annual cost of insanity (schizophrenia and bipolar
disorder) in England was at least £3 billion.28  In Canada each
year, schizophrenia is responsible for $1.1 billion in direct and

7
$1.2 billion in indirect costs, for a total of $2.3 billion.29  In the
USA in 1991, schizophrenia has an annual price tag of $65
billion and bipolar disorder of over $45 billion.30  As a conse-
quence, taken together these two illnesses cost the USA $110
billion in 1991.  Insanity is the single most expensive disease
category under both the Supplemental Security Income and
Social Security Disability Insurance programs.  USA federal
income supplement payments to schizophrenics account for a
large part of this $110 billion.  No matter where or how you
measure it, schizophrenia is an enormous social burden that
must be lifted.
SUMMARY
Several conclusions can be drawn from schizophrenia’s clini-
cal expression.  In its early acute stages, this mental illness is
episodic.  That is, its symptoms increase and decrease mark-
edly over time.  Eventually, in most cases, it becomes chronic,
without remission.  These fluctuations suggest that there may
be a social or environmental “trigger(s)” promoting acute schiz-
ophrenic episodes.  Differences between the four major sub-
types of the condition also imply that there is unlikely to be
a common cause for all forms of schizophrenia.  The illness,
therefore, is probably a syndrome, associated with several en-
vironmental “triggers,” and/or genetic abnormalities.

8
REFERENCES
1.
Torrey, E.F. (1980). Schizophrenia and civilisation. New York: Jason
Aronson.
2.
Fishbein (1985).  Fishbein’s illustrated medical and health encyclopae-
dia. Westport, CT: Stuttman.
3.
Hoffer, A. (1987).  Common questions on schizophrenia and their answers.
New Canaan, CT: Keats.
4.
Torrey, op. cit.
5.
Galton, L.  Why young adults crack up.  The Huxley Institute for Biosocial
Research.  http://www.schizophrenia.org/crackup.html
6.
Frederickson, A. (1998.  The dopamine hypothesis of schizophrenia.
http://serendip.brynmawr.edu/bb/neuro/neuro98/202s98-
paper2/Frederickson2.html
7.
Braum, L.L., Phillips, R.S., and Dickey, N.H. (Eds.) (1979).  Funk and
Wagnalls New Encyclopaedia, 3, 277.
8.
O’Donoghue, E.G. (1914).  The story of Bethlehem Hospital from its foun-
dation in 1247. London: Unwin.
9.
Andrews, J. (Ed.), and Briggs, A., and Waddington, K. (1997).  The his-
tory of Bethlem Hospital. London: Routledge.
10.
Torrey, E.F., and Miller, J. (2002).  The invisible plague: The rise of men-
tal illness from 1750 to the present. New Brunswick: Rutgers Uni-
versity Press.
11.
Braum et. al., op. cit.
12.
Kevles, D. (1995).  In the name of eugenics: Genetics and the uses of
human heredity. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
13.
The Gale Encyclopaedia of Psychology. Eugenics. http://www.find
articles.com/cf_dls/g2699/0001/2699000124/p1/article.html
14.
Image Archive on the American Eugenics Movement, Dolan DNA Learn-
ing Center, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory. http://www.eugenics
archive.org/eugenics/
15.
Torrey, E.F. and Miller, J. (2002) op. cit.
16.
Image Archives on the American Eugenics Movement. op.cit.
17.
Maisel, A.Q. May 6, 1946. Bedlam 1946: Most US mental hospitals are
a shame and a disgrace. Cited by Torrey, E.F. (1988) Nowhere To
Go: The Tragic Odyssey of the Homeless Mentally Ill. New York:
Harper and Row.
18.
Torrey, E.F. (1988) Ibid.

9
19.
Ibid.
20.
Cited in Ibid.
21.
Ibid.
22.
Horrobin, D. (2002) The Madness of Adam and Eve: How Schizophrenia
Shaped Humanity. London: Transworld Publishers.
23.
Ibid.
24.
Braum et al. (1979) op. cit.
25.
Ibid.
26.
Horrobin, D. (2002) op. cit.
27.
Ibid.
28.
Knapp, M. (1997) Costs of Schizophrenia. British Journal of Psychiatry.
171, 509-518 cited by Torrey E.F. and Miller, J. (2002) op. cit.
29.
Goeree, R. et. al. (1999). The economic burden of schizophrenia in
Canada. Canadian Journal of Psychiatry 44, 464-472 cited by
Torrey, E.F. and Miller, J. (2002) op. cit.
30.
Torrey, E.F., and Miller, J. (2002) op. cit.

10
Within the scientific community those who succeed
tend to be reserved and cautious and stay within
carefully prescribed activities.  The bold, the
daring lone ranger may be romanticized by other
parts of American culture, but that glorification
does not extend to the internal workings of
science.  Funds are given to those who stay well
within the confines of their field, not those who
push the envelope.
Devra Davis, When Smoke Ran Like Water:
Tales of Environmental Deception and the
Battle Against Pollution, New York: Basic Books, 2002.

11
THE SCHIZOPHRENIA PANDEMIC
2
At the end of the seventeenth century, insanity was of
little significance and was little discussed.  At the end
of the eighteenth century, it was perceived as prob-
ably increasing and was of some concern.  At the end
of the nineteenth century, it was perceived as an epi-
demic and was a major concern.  And at the end of the
twentieth century, insanity was simply accepted as
part of the fabric of life.  It is a remarkable history.
E. Fuller Torrey and J. Miller1
HISTORY OF SCHIZOPHRENIA
Nobody has done more to shed light on the history of schizo-
phrenia than E. Fuller Torrey.  This chapter draws very heavily
on his scholarship and is only a shadow of it.2,3  Of particular
value are his books Schizophrenia and Civilisation, which be-
came available in 1980, and The Invisible Plague: The Rise of
Mental Illness from 1750 to the Present.  The latter has just been
published (2002), with Judy Miller as a co-author.  If you are
truly interested in schizophrenia’s history, it will be extremely
worthwhile to read Torrey’s books and articles on the topic.
Mesopotamian tablets dating back to the second millennium
BC describe symptoms of paranoid delusions, mania, and de-
pression.4  Similarly, the Bible, in Deuteronomy 28, warns of
the penalty for breaking God’s commandments:  “The Lord
will smite you with madness and blindness and confusion of

12
mind.”  Occasional references to insanity also occur in early
Indian texts on Ayurvedic medicine, from the 1st century AD.
They can also be found in ancient Greek and Roman litera-
ture.  Hippocrates, for example, described insanity following
childbirth (postpartum psychosis) and insanity accompanying
epilepsy.  He also identified the delirium that is secondary to
high fevers (phrenitis).  Greek mythology is full of characters
visited by madness, as punishment by the gods.
Insanity was again described by Islamic physicians, including
Al-Razi (Rhazes) and Ibn Sina (Avicenna) during the 7th and
8th centuries.  Ibn Sina, for example, discussed mania in his
writings and reviewed the case of a patient having delusions of
being a cow.  When Islamic medicine was at its peak, hospitals
in Cairo, Alexandria, Damascus, Aleppo, Baghdad, and Fez had
wards for the treatment of the insane.7
In Christian Europe during the Middle Ages, there was little
systematic study of medicine.  Nevertheless medieval physi-
cians were well aware that mental illness could result from
“humoral imbalance, intemperate diet and alcohol intake, over-
work and grief.”8  As Europe’s Middle Ages gave way to the
Renaissance, insanity became more obvious, largely because
of its appearance in King Charles VI in France and his grand-
son King Henry VI in England.  Charles VI, for example, be-
came mentally ill in 1392, at age 24. Over the next 30 years he
had a series of remissions and relapses.  Such insanity was
often given a religious interpretation and prayer became an
accepted form of treatment.9
Clearly, for more than two thousand years there is evidence
that humanity has been afflicted by insanity.  However, in both
Schizophrenia and Civilisation10 and The Invisible Plague,11 Tor-
rey makes a strong case that the prevalence of insanity, in the
form of schizophrenia, began to increase rapidly with the onset

13
of the Industrial Revolution.  To cite directly from the former
book:12
It was as if somebody rang a bell precisely at the
turn of the nineteenth century to herald the official
entrance of schizophrenia.  Whereas up to that point
there appear to have been at best a few scattered
cases in the literature, classical schizophrenia was
suddenly being described by different people in dif-
ferent places all at about the same time.  Such an
entrance for a disease is rather dramatic.  Almost from
the first historical suggestions of schizophrenia, an
accompanying theme can be heard in the background:
Insanity (and schizophrenia) were rapidly increasing.
The persistence of this idea throughout the nineteenth
century and into the twentieth is one of the most strik-
ing facets of the short history of schizophrenia.
This dramatic increase in schizophrenia was probably first
documented, in 1829, by Halliday13 who claimed insanity had
more than tripled in England during the previous 20 years.  A
similar increase in prevalence was obvious in France where,
after an extensive analysis, Renaudin14 established that there
had been a major increase in insanity between 1835 and 1854,
especially in younger, more prone to schizophrenia, age groups.
In 1861 Griesinger remarked on the growing number of insane
in Germany, while 6 years later Belgrave15 asserted that the
same phenomenon had occurred in Denmark.  Even stronger
proof of an increase in schizophrenia, during the 19th century,
was provided by the Australian physician, Tucker.16  He visited
400 asylums, mainly located in Europe and the USA, during
the period 1882 to 1885.  His report Lunacy in Many Lands
described his 3-year odyssey, concluding that the vast major-
ity of superintendents of asylums believed that insanity had
recently increased and this “must be accepted as a fact.”
Statistical evidence to support the view that insanity was on
the rise during the 19th century began to accumulate in 1840,

14
in the USA, with the first census that identified the “insane
and idiotic.”  Later censuses recorded these two categories in-
dependently.  From these data, Gorwitz17 calculated that, in
1840, the USA prevalence rate for insanity was 50.7 per
100,000.  By 1860 it had risen to 76.7, reaching 183.3 per
100,000 population by 1880.  It would appear, therefore, that
in the USA there was more than a threefold increase in insan-
ity, during a 40 year period, in the middle of the 19th century.
During the same time span, the number of inmates in insane
asylums rose from 2,561 to 38,047.  By 190418 there were
150,151 such patients.
On the basis of this evidence, Torrey19 concluded that “schizo-
phrenia, as we know it, is probably of recent origin, and the
reasons for this have to do with the spread of civilization and
its concomitants.”  This relationship between Western indus-
trial civilization and schizophrenia appears to be continuing
today.  In India, for example, there have been several studies
published since 1966 which support the view that the disease
is most prevalent among the more highly educated and/or west-
ernized castes.20  Similarly, in northern Ghana, between 1937
and 1963, as Westernization occurred, the prevalence of schiz-
ophrenia rapidly increased.21  In Papua and New Guinea, more
than a 20-fold difference in schizophrenia prevalence was iden-
tified among districts, those where the disease was most com-
mon having the greatest contact with Western civilization.22
In a more recent book, The Invisible Plague: The Rise of Mental
Illness from 1750 to the Present, Torrey and his co-author Judy
Miller23 argue that throughout human history, the baseline
rate of insanity was approximately one case for each 2,000
members of society.  Using a great diversity of records, ranging
from mental health surveys to psychiatrists’ diaries, they are
able to prove beyond reasonable doubt that industrialization
has been accompanied by dramatic increases in mental illness.

15
In England, Ireland, Canada, and the USA, for example, “the
prevalence of insanity, as a rate per population, increased at
least sevenfold between the mid-18th and mid-20th centuries.”
In the USA and especially in Ireland, the increase was greater.
Torrey and Miller24 then argue that “we are now in the midst of
an epidemic of insanity so insidious that most people are even
unaware of its existence.”  The invisible plague appears worst
in Ireland where the number of insane persons per 1,000 pop-
ulation has reached almost 8.0.  This seems to be about 16
times the pre-industrial global baseline.
SUMMARY
The abnormally high levels of schizophrenia amongst the Irish,
both in Ireland and abroad, support a genetic component to
schizophrenia.25  Nevertheless, studies in Canada, Norway,
Saudi Arabia, and the Sudan have shown that inbreeding
associated with consanguineous marriages does not increase
the prevalence of schizophrenia.  Similarly, inbreeding rates
are highest in Japan, Brazil, India, and Israel but none of these
countries has abnormally high rates of schizophrenia.26
One does not have epidemics of genetic diseases, simply be-
cause the human genome does not alter rapidly enough to
trigger them.  The current epidemic of insanity, associated with
both schizophrenia and bipolar disorder, that has developed
over the past two centuries is a very strong argument that
neither disease is primarily genetic in origin.  Schizophrenia’s
rise, especially in urban areas, suggests that, at the very least,
it has a “trigger” or “triggers” that is (are) most common in
industrialized regions.27

16
REFERENCES
1.
Torrey, E.F., and Miller, J. (2002).  The invisible plague: The rise of mental
illness from 1750 to the present. New Brunswick: Rutgers Univer-
sity Press.
2.
Torrey, E.F. (1980). Schizophrenia and civilization. New York: Jason
Aronson.
3.
Torrey and Miller, op. cit.
4.
Ibid.
5.
Ibid.
6.
Ibid.
7.
Youssef, H.A., and Youssef, F.A. (1996).  Evidence for the existence of
schizophrenia in medieval Islamic society. History of Psychiatry, 7,
55-62.
8.
Torrey and Miller, op. cit.
9.
Ibid.
10.
Torrey, op. cit.
11.
Torrey and Miller (2002), op. cit.
12.
Torrey, op. cit.
13.
Halliday (1829), cited by Torrey, op. cit.
14.
Renaudin (1862).  Observations deduced from the statistics of the in-
sane. Journal of Mental Science, 7, 534-546.
15.
Griesinger (1861), cited by Torrey, op. cit.
16.
Belgrave (1867), cited by Torrey, op. cit.
17.
Tucker, G.A. (1887).  Lunacy in Many Lands. Sydney: Charles Potter.
18.
Pollock, H.M., and Malzberg, B. (1937).  Trends in mental disease.
Mental Hygiene, 21, 456-465.
19.
Torrey, op. cit.
20.
Ibid.
21.
Ibid.
22.
Ibid.
23.
Torrey and Miller, op cit.
24.
Ibid
25.
Ibid
26.
Ibid
27.
Ibid

17
GENESIS: IN THE BEGINNING
3
Most secrets of knowledge have been discovered by
plain and neglected men than by men of popular fame.
And this is so with good reason. For the men of popu-
lar fame are busy on popular matters.
Roger Bacon (1220-1292)
The seeds needed to produce most crops are planted months
and sometimes years before the harvest.  Many diseases also
have significant latency periods.  The “trigger” that causes
multiple sclerosis is acquired in childhood or adolescence,
long before any of its symptoms appear.  We know this be-
cause the disorder is far more common in the north of the USA
than in the south.  Adult migration between these high (north-
ern) and low (southern) prevalence zones1 does not seem to
effect whether or not a person develops multiple sclerosis.
However, risk is not defined at birth, and migration north or
south during childhood, or adolescence, increases or decreases
the chance of eventually developing the disorder.  Shingles is
an acute infection of a particular sensory nerve that causes an
outbreak of blisters and severe pain.  It occurs only in adults
who have had chickenpox as children and is caused by the
same virus, reactivated after being dormant in the body for
decades.3  Does schizophrenia have a similar “incubation” or
“latency” period, before clinical symptoms appear in early adult-
hood, but long after the disease has been acquired?  If so, just
when are the seeds of “the cruellest disease of the Western
World”4 planted?

18
THE WOMB
Although the symptoms of schizophrenia rarely become obvi-
ous until early adulthood, some unfortunate individuals appear
destined for this mental illness from before birth.  They often
display minor physical abnormalities that begin to develop in
the fetus during the first trimester of pregnancy.  Such charac-
teristics may include an abnormal head size, asymmetrical,
malformed or low-seated ears, a high steeped mouth, furrowed
feet, and/or webbed fifth finger.  Infants who later become schiz-
ophrenic often display an unusually long third toe and/or a
gap between the first and second digits.5  Some similar char-
acteristics occur in Down’s syndrome and other genetic dis-
orders.  They also may be linked to fetal exposure to teratogens
(such as alcohol), dietary deficiency, and rubella infection.6
BIRTH
Life is never easy for schizophrenics.  Even delivery may be
unusually complicated and dangerous.7  The births of future
psychotics, for example, have often been associated with
toxemia, bleeding during pregnancy, and the threat of sponta-
neous abortion and asphyxia.8  If one twin dies during the peri-
natal period the other’s chance of becoming schizophrenic is
increased.9  Future schizophrenics typically have low birth
weights10 and are born prematurely.11  Labour is often pro-
longed.12
THE ACUTE PHASE
Three new technologies provide windows into the brain, pro-
viding numerous clues on the origins and nature of schizo-
phrenia.13  CAT (computerized axial tomography), for example,

19
is used to take X-ray photographs of the brain that are capable
of revealing any damage.  PET (positron emission tomography)
scans for brain activity by showing differences in the consump-
tion of glucose.  This sugar acts as a chemical fuel, with active
neutrons “burning” more.  Using a form of radioactive glucose,
PET scans can identify where the brain neutrons are the most
active.  As Myers14 points out, this gives new meaning to the
phrase “food for thought.”  MRI (magnetic resonance imaging)
is based on the fact that the centres of atoms spin.  In MRI, the
head is placed into a strong magnetic field which aligns the
spinning atoms of the brain.  A brief pulse of radio waves is
then used to momentarily disorientate them.  As they return to
their normal spin, such atoms generate signals which, after
computer-processing, produce detailed pictures of the soft tis-
sues of the brain.  All these techniques have been used to study
the brains of schizophrenics and to compare them with those
of controls who do not have the illness.
Such technologies have identified abnormalities in those parts
of the schizophrenic brain that are related to memory and rec-
ognition of speech that are visible by the time an individual
has their first psychotic episode.  Compared with a control group,
magnetic resonance imaging has established that schizophren-
ics have smaller bilateral hippocampal and left planum tempo-
rale volumes.  Beyond this, patients with paranoid psychosis
have smaller amgydala volumes than those with non paranoid
psychosis.  Such differences in brain structure and function
occur together in the early stages of schizophrenia.15-16
Brain scans have also shown that if only one identical twin is
schizophrenic, he or she has the larger brain cavities (termed
ventricles).  In contrast, the thalamus, a control centre that
routes brain signals, is smaller than normal in the schizophrenic
twin brain.17-18  Any malfunction in the thalamus may contrib-
ute to the overflow of sensory stimulation that is experienced


21
confirmed that fluid-filled brain ventricles, seen in acute schiz-
ophrenics, are enlarged in those with chronic mental illness.25
The presence of such evidence of brain atrophy in chronic schiz-
ophrenia has been linked to levels of the important antioxidant
enzyme glutathione peroxidase.  The lower the activity level of
this enzyme in platelets, the larger such structural brain abnor-
malities appear to be.26  There are other malfunctioning organs
in schizophrenia besides the brain.  Skoliarova27 has described
a series of autopsies that were conducted on schizophrenics
within 20 minutes to 5 hours after death.  Regardless of the
type of schizophrenia involved, there was always a clear visible
deterioration of the thyroid gland, rarely seen in other patients.
It follows, therefore, that some symptoms seen in chronic schiz-
ophrenics must be caused by a malfunction of the thyroid.
SUMMARY
The decline into schizophrenia begins in the womb, where it is
marked by frequent first trimester appearance of minor phys-
ical abnormalities, very similar to those seen in fetal alcohol
syndrome,28 such as a webbed fifth finger.  Second trimester
“mis-wiring” of the fetal brain also often occurs.  Births tend to
be difficult and prolonged, commonly associated with toxemia
and other maternal health problems.  Birth weights are typical-
ly low.  Such abnormalities cannot be solely of genetic origin
because there are many recorded cases of only one identical
twin being schizophrenic.29-30  It follows, therefore, that there
must be some “trigger” or “triggers” affecting the fetus early in
pregnancy, that promotes the future development of schizo-
phrenia.  Its impact must be subtle because the anatomical
changes seen in this mental illness are relatively minor.  Some,
however, become more obvious later in life, especially if schiz-
ophrenia has become chronic.  They then often include a dam-
aged thyroid gland and overdeveloped brain ventricles.

22
REFERENCES
1.
Foster, H.D. (1992).  Health, disease and the environment. London:
Belhaven.
2.
Kurtzke, J.F., Beebe, G.W., and Norman, J.E. Jr. (1979).  Epidemiology
of multiple sclerosis in U.S. veterans: 1. Race, sex and geographi-
cal distribution. Neurology, 29, 1228-1235.
3.
Fishbein’s illustrated medical and health encyclopaedia (1985), 4, 1302-
1303.
4.
Torrey, E.F. (1980).  Schizophrenia and civilization. New York: Jason
Aronson.
5.
Guy, J.D., Majoriski, L.V., Wallace, C.J., and Guy, M.P. (1983).  The in-
cidence of minor physical anomalies in adult male schizophrenics.
Schizophrenia Bulletin, 9, 571-582.
6.
Templer, D.I. (1992).  Schizophrenia and the environment. Western Geo-
graphical Series, 27, 115-141.
7.
Jacobsen, B., and Kinney, D.K. (1980). Perinatal complications in adopted
and nonadopted schizophrenics and their controls: Preliminary
results. Acta Psychologica Scandinavia, 62C, Supplement 285,
337-346.
8.
McNeal, T.F. (1987).  Perinatal influences in the development of schizo-
phrenia. In H. Helmchen and F.A. Henn (Eds), Biological perspec-
tives of schizophrenia (pp. 125-138). New York: John Wiley and
Sons.
9.
Reveley, A.M., Reveley, M.A., and Murray, R.M. (1984).  Cerebral ven-
tricular enlargement in nongenetic schizophrenia: a controlled twin
study. British Journal of Psychiatry, 144, 89-93.
10.
Lane, E.A., and Albee, G.W. (1966).  Comparative birth weights of schizo-
phrenics and their siblings. Journal of Psychology, 64, 227-231.
11.
Ibid.
12.
Jaccobsen and Kinney, op. cit.
13.
Myers, D.G. (1992).  Psychology. New York: Worth Publishers.
14.
Ibid.
15.
The Schizophrenia Homepage (2002).  Brain abnormalities occur early
in psychosis. http://www.schizophrenia.com/newsletter/allnews/
2002/earlyabnormalities.htm
16.
Sumich, A., Chitnis, X.A., Fannon, D.G., O’Ceallaigh, S., Doku, V.C.,
Falrowicz, A., Marshall, N., Matthew, V.M., Potter, M., and Sharma,
T. (2002).  Temporal lobe abnormalities in first-episode psychosis.
American Journal of Psychiatry, 159(7), 1232-1235.

23
17.
Siegfried, T., and Goetinck, S. (1996).  Mental illness is no myth. http:/
/www.pendulum.org/articles/articles_dmn_nomyth.html
18.
Andreasen, N.C., Arndt, S., Swayze II, V., Cizadlo, T., Flaum, M., O’Leary,
Ehrhardt, J.C., and Yuh, W.T. (1994).  Thalamic abnormalities in
schizophrenia visualized through magnetic resonance image aver-
aging. Science, 266(5183), 294-298.
19.
Siegfried and Goetinck, op. cit.
20.
Akbarian, S., Kim, J.J., Potkin, S.G., Hetrick, W.P., Bunney, W.E. Jr.,
and Jones, E.G. (1996).  Maldistribution of interstitial neurons in
prefrontal white matter of the brains of schizophrenic patients.
Archives of General Psychiatry, 53(5), 425-436.
21.
Bunney, B.G., Potkin, S.G., and Bunney, W.E. (1997).  Neuropathologi-
cal studies of brain tissues in schizophrenia. Journal of Psychiatric
Research, 31(2), 159-173.
22.
Seeman, P., Guan, H.C. and Van Tol, H.H. (1995).  Schizophrenia:
Elevation of dopamine D4-like sites, using [3H] nemonapride and
[125I] epidepride. European Journal of Pharmacology, 286(2), R3-
5.
23.
Kestler, L.P., Walker, E., and Vega, E.M. (2001).  Dopamine receptors in
the brains of schizophrenia patients: A meta-analysis of the find-
ings. Behavioral Pharmacology, 12(5), 355-371.
24.
Green, B. (2000).  The aetiology of schizophrenia: A review. http://www.
priory.com/psych/aetioschiz.htm
25.
Buckman, T.D., Kling, A.S., Eiduson, S., Sutphin, M.S., and Steinberg,
A. (1987).  Glutathione peroxidase and CT scan abnormalities in
schizophrenia. Biological Psychiatry, 22(11), 1349-1356.
26.
Buckman, T.D., Kling, A., Sutphin, M.S., Steinberg, A., and Eiduson, S.
(1990).  Platelet glutathione peroxidase and monoamine oxidase
activity in schizophrenics with CT Scan abnormalities: Relation to
psychosocial variables. Psychiatry Research, 31(1), 1-14.
27.
Skoliarova, N.A. (1975).  Morphology of the endocrine system in schizo-
phrenia according to early autopsy findings (the Hypophyseal-
Thyroid System). Zhurnal Nevropatologii Psikhiatrii Imeni S S
Korsakova, 75(7), 1045-1053 (in Russian, abstract only consulted).
28.
Lohr, J., and Bracha, H.S. (1989).  Can schizophrenia be related to
prenatal exposure to alcohol? Some speculations. Schizophrenia
Bulletin, 15(4), 595-603.
29.
Gottesman, I.I. (1991).  Schizophrenia genesis: The origins of madness.
New York: Freeman.
30.
Myers, op. cit.

24
The next big step in psychiatry is not likely to
come from further refinements of the drugs and
psychotherapies that define the field today.
It will come, instead, from discoveries about
human genetic variations and the ways they
affect the brain.  Just as eye-opening stories from
psychoanalysts’ couches guided psychiatry in the
first half of the twentieth century, and the products
of smelly chemistry laboratories guided it in the
second half, so will knowledge about individual
genetic differences guide psychiatry over the next
fifty years.
Samuel Barondes, in John Brockman (Ed.),
The Next Fifty Years: Science in the
First Half of the Twenty-First Century,
New York: Vintage Books, 2002

25
THE GENETIC BASIS OF SCHIZOPHRENIA
4
Mind, mind alone,
Is light, and hope, and life and power.
Ebenezer Elliott (1833)
Think carefully before you dismiss the dirty, ragged, homeless,
bag lady, mumbling incoherently while searching in garbage
cans for her next meal.  There, but for the Lord’s grace, go you
and I.  God may not play dice with the universe, but every
mating is a gamble and every fertilized egg a genetic lottery.
The odds against any one person, picked at random from the
general population, being schizophrenic are roughly 1 in 100,
a long shot.1  The odds of any four randomly selected people
all being schizophrenics are, therefore, 1004, that is 1 in 100
million.  Nevertheless, all of the identical Genain quadruplets
began to suffer from this mental illness in high school and
have been in and out of hospitals ever since.2  These women, of
course, shared not only identical genes but also very similar
environments.  Nevertheless, the Genain family experiences
seem to confirm a significant role for genetics in schizophrenia.
Not that this evidence was really needed, since a genetic link
was established firmly by family and twin studies3 conducted
in Europe during the period 1920 to 1987.  Such research
showed that relatives of schizophrenics were more likely than
normal to develop the disorder, the closer the relationship, the
greater the likelihood.  According to Myers,4 the lifetime risk of
developing schizophrenia for relatives of a victim of the illness
are roughly as follows: grandchildren (5 percent); uncles and
aunts (2 percent); half siblings (6 percent); siblings (8 percent);

26
siblings with one schizophrenic parent (17 percent); children
(13 percent); fraternal twins (18 percent); identical twins (48
percent); and the offspring of two schizophrenics (47 percent).
Such figures, of course, gave impetus to the eugenics move-
ment that sought to “improve” the human genome by prevent-
ing the reproduction of schizophrenics.
Genetics must play a significant role in schizophrenia because
50 percent of patients with this illness in the USA come from
families with a history of the disorder.5  This preponderance
cannot be explained by abnormal child rearing since adoption
has no impact on the risk of subsequently becoming schizo-
phrenic.6  There is, beyond a doubt, therefore, a strong genetic
component to schizophrenia, but it cannot be as straightfor-
ward as the inheritance of certain characteristics such as eye
colour, since, as Myers7 points out, “about half of the twins
who share identical genes with a schizophrenic victim do not
develop the disorder,” one must agree with Nicol and Gottes-
man’s8 assessment that some individuals “have a genetic pre-
disposition to the disorder but that this predisposition by itself
is not sufficient for the development of schizophrenia.”  The
schizophrenia gene(s), therefore, is not destiny but it is enhanced
risk.  In a paper written in Nature in 1964, Julian Huxley and
his three co-authors9 argued that the high frequency of schiz-
ophrenia found in the general population (roughly 1 percent)
could not be maintained by genetic mutation alone, but was
evidence of a balanced morphism.  After all, the fertility of schiz-
ophrenics is only about 70 percent of that found in unaffected
members of the community.10  If the schizophrenia trait did not
provide some counterbalancing advantage, the number of those
suffering from the associated mental illness would decline very
rapidly to a much lower level that could be maintained by mu-
tation alone.11  If true, this means that the high prevalence of
the gene(s) partly responsible for schizophrenia can only occur
because this trait confers both unfavourable and favourable

27
properties.  When two selective forces oppose one another in
this way, the frequency of the two genes stabilize, in what is
known as balanced polymorphism.12  What this would mean in
this case is that inheriting the schizophrenia trait in its heter-
ozygous form does not lead to schizophrenia and also carries
with it some selective advantage, such as resistance to another
disease.  Conversely, those inheriting the schizophrenia trait
in homozygous form would very likely become mentally ill.   This
type of trade-off situation occurs with the “sickling” trait which
in its heterozygous form gives considerable protection against
malaria but in its homozygous form causes deadly sickle cell
anaemia.13
The argument for balanced polymorphism in schizophrenia
makes a great deal of sense and is reviewed in detail in a later
chapter.  It is, however, currently out of favour with geneti-
cists, most of whom feel that schizophrenia “is not a single
disease entity but may reflect common symptomatology caused
by several distinct genetic abnormalities.”14  That is, they are
looking for a variety of genetic aberrations, not one key trait.  At
least two recent papers give detailed overviews of progress to
date.15-16  These references can be consulted for details.  The
following discussion draws heavily from the article by Sawa
and Snyder17 that appeared in Science in April 2002.
One way to simplify the genetic complexity of a disease or dis-
order is to concentrate on individuals who have an obvious
rare inherited form of it.  Children who have a deletion of 22q11
suffer from an illness that used to be called velocardiofacial
syndrome or DiGeorge syndrome but is now termed 22q dele-
tion syndrome (22qDS).  They are characterized by learning
disabilities, cardiac defects and hypernasal speech (that is
linked to abnormalities in the palate) and have abnormal facial
features.  Interestingly, 25 to 30 percent of such children be-
come schizophrenic as adults.18

28
There is growing evidence that the gene causing the symptoms
of 22qDS, that is DiGeorge syndrome, may be that encoding
catechol-O-methyltransferase (COMT), one of the two princi-
pal enzymes that degrade catecholamines, such as dopamine.19
The activity of dopamine in the brain is normally terminated
by reuptake by a transporter protein.  This protein is relatively
inactive in the prefrontal cerebral cortex, suggesting that it is
here that catechol-O-methyltransferase has the primary respon-
sibility for the inactivation of dopamine.  Mice deprived of the
ability to produce catechol-O-methyltransferase tend to con-
firm this because they develop elevated dopamine levels but
only in the prefrontal cortex.20
Weinberger and coworkers21 have examined a common genetic
polymorphism of catechol-O-methyltransferase in which valine
has been replaced by zinc gluconate.  The methionine type of
this enzyme has only 25 percent of the activity of the valine
form.  This means that an individual with the Val-COMT allele
(coding the valine-catechol-O-methyltransferase form of the
enzyme) would be expected to have less dopamine in their pre-
frontal cortex.  It has been found that schizophrenics and their
unaffected brothers and sisters who have the Val-COMPT allele
perform poorly on memory tests, a brain function that depends
heavily on the prefrontal cortex.  As Sawa and Snyder22 point
out “It is remarkable that COMT [the gene encoding the enzyme
catechol-O-methyltransferase], which regulates dopamine, is
localized to 22q11 where a microdeletion is associated with a
profound increase in susceptibility to schizophrenia.”  However,
Sawa and Snyder may be stretching their point as, according
to Kern and Bernards, the enzyme catechol-O-methyltransfer-
ase metabolizes epinephrine to the inactive metabolite, me-
tanephrine, not dopamine.23
Five recent studies,24-28 from countries as different as Finland,
Wales, the USA, and Israel, have also stated that homozygosity

29
of a low enzyme activity variant of the catechol-O-methyltrans-
ferase (COMT) gene is related to aggression in schizophrenics.
Kotler and coworkers,29 for example, found a significant excess
(46.7 percent versus 21.0 percent) homozygosity of this low en-
zyme activity variant in 30 mostly male (28 out of 30) homicidal
schizophrenics in a maximum-security psychiatric facility in
Israel, as compared to 415 controls (Pearson chi (2)=10.53,
P=0.005, df=2).  No such difference in COMT genotype was found
between a further 62 non-violent schizophrenics and the same
415 number control group.  However, a significant excess (46.7
percent versus 25.8 percent) homozygosity of this low enzyme
activity variant was identified when homicidal and nonviolent
schizophrenic patients were compared.  It seems apparent from
these results that the most dangerous group of schizophren-
ics, specifically those that are homicidal, includes numerous
patients with a specific genetic anomaly that influences how
catecholamines degrade.  Analysis of data from both Finland
and the USA30 further suggests that the same genetic trait is
also abnormally common in schizophrenics who commit sui-
cide in a violent manner.
A recent paper by Park and coworkers31 also tends to confirm
that there is an association between genetic polymorphism of
catechol-O-methyltransferase and susceptibility to schizophre-
nia.  This study involved comparisons of 103 Korean schizo-
phrenic in-patients and 103 age and sex matched controls.
They concluded that:
... subjects with at least one low activity associated
COMT-L allele showed a tendency of elevated risk for
schizophrenia (OR = 1.7, 95% CI = 0.9-3.1) compared
with those homozygous for the high activity associated
COMT-H alleles.  Moreover, when cases were strati-
fied by family history of schizophrenia, a significant
combined effect was seen:  the cases with concurrent
family history of schizophrenia and the COMT-L allele

30
containing genotypes had an almost 4 fold (OR = 3.9,
95% CI = 1.1-14.3) higher risk of schizophrenia com-
pared to controls with the COMT-HH genotypes.
Further evidence of genetic abnormalities in schizophrenia af-
fecting the regulation of catecholamines recently has been pro-
vided by Harada and coworkers.32  These researchers collected
DNA samples from 87 unrelated Japanese patients with schiz-
ophrenia and 176 controls from the same district, to explore
for any association between schizophrenia and polymorphism
of the GSTM1 gene.  To quote them directly (I have deleted
their references):
The glutathione S-transferases (GST’s:EC 2.5.1.18)
belong to a family of multifunctional enzymes that
catalyze the conjugation reaction between reduced
glutathione (GSH) and a variety of xenobiotics includ-
ing carcinogens, environmental contamination, anti-
cancer agents, antibiotics, and products of the oxidative
process.  Amongst the four major classes of GST’s (α,
µ, π, θ), the µ class GSTM1 and the θ class GSTT1
display significant polymorphism, including an ab-
sence of the gene.  The human  µ-class GST’s assigned
to Chromosome 1p13.3 are subgrouped into GSTM1,
M2, M3, M4, and M5.  Recent experimental evidence
have indicated that GST1 and M2 classes catalyze a
glutathione conjugate of catecholamine ο-quinones,
including aminochrome, dopachrome, adrenochrome
and noradrenochrome under physiological conditions.
GSTM2 displays stronger activity for dopachrome and
noradrenochrome than GSTM1, and in contrast, GSTM1
displays catalytic activity of adrenochrome at levels
1.5 times greater than GSTM2, and the remaining
classes of GST’s (α, π, θ) possess very low or negative
catalytic activity for all ο-quinones.
Harada and colleagues33 analyses of DNA from the 87 schizo-
phrenics and 176 controls clearly established that an abnor-
mal form of GSTM1 was much more common in schizophrenics
than in those without the disorder.  Specifically:

31
The frequency of the GSTM1*0 allele was signifi-
cantly higher amongst the patients with schizophrenia
compared to controls (P = 0.00075).  Moreover, the
incidence of the GSTM1*0 was significantly higher
amongst the schizophrenic patients classified as dis-
organized type (P = 0.0008), relative to the control
sample.  Our findings suggest that the GSTM1*0 is
associated with an increased susceptibility to schizo-
phrenia, particularly disorganized type of the disease.
It is therefore likely that the GSTM1 gene deletion con-
stitutes to vulnerability for disease states of this kind,
rather than being the direct cause of schizophrenic
conditions.
The evidence from Japan, therefore, strongly suggests that
abnormalities in the gene coding for glutathione S-transferase
which is involved in the regulation of the catecholamines, par-
ticularly adrenochrome, appears to play a significant role in
schizophrenia.
There may be other genetic aberrations in schizophrenia, though
the evidence is still contradictory.  Methylenetetrahydrofolate
reductase (MTHRF) catalyzes the conversion of 5,10-methylene
THF to 5-methylTHF.34  The latter substance is the major type
of circulatory folate and the predominant carbon donor for the
remethylation of homocysteine to methionine.  Patients who
are severely deficient in MTHFR suffer from developmental de-
lay, motor and gait dysfunction, seizures, and schizophrenic
episodes and other neurological abnormalities.  Many such
problems are probably the consequence of elevated homo-
cysteine,35 although abnormally low MTHFR activity can also
cause depressed levels of circulatory folate, and lower availa-
bility of methionine.
The gene for MTHFR is located on chromosome 1 at 1p36.3.
Most of the allelic variants discovered to date are rare and cause
severe MTHFR deficiency resulting in homocystinuria.  Two

32
alleles, however, C677T and A1298C, are common variants
that are not associated with homocystinuria.36  Arinami and
coworkers37 examined the possibility of a role for C677T poly-
morphism in MTHFR in schizophrenia, major depression, and
bipolar disorder.  The TT variant was found to occur in 12 per-
cent of 419 controls, 21 percent of 297 schizophrenics (P<0.0006;
P<0.002 after Bonferroni correction), 28 percent of 32 patients
with severe depression (P<0.02), and a statistically insignificant
13 percent of bipolar disorder cases.  Regland and coworkers38
also screened 11 schizophrenics with high homocysteine levels
to see if they carried C677T.  Seven of these patients were
found to be homozygous for C677TT.  Another male patient
was heterozygous.
Similarly, Deng and colleagues39 have reported that MTHFR
C677T is more common in Chinese families that have a mem-
ber that developed schizophrenia before reaching 25 years of
age.  Beyond this, Joober and colleagues40 have shown that the
C677TT variant of this gene is more common than expected in
those schizophrenics who respond well to neuroleptics.
Taken as a whole, the evidence seems to suggest that some
schizophrenics have a variant of the MTHFR gene that reduces
their ability to metabolize homocysteine effectively.  Neverthe-
less, there have been negative studies41-42 that have not found
this variant overrepresented in a sample of schizophrenics and
the issue is not settled.
Evidence has been put forward recently for a fourth genetic
aberration in many schizophrenics.  Novak and coworkers43
from the University of Toronto studied post-mortem frontal
cerebral cortices from 81 schizophrenics and from a control
group of 61.  They discovered that 17 out of 81 schizophrenics
had inherited an unusual Nogo (reticulon 4, RTN4 or RTN-X)
variant gene from both parents.  In contrast, only 3 percent of

33
the control group were homozygous for this genetic variant.
Nogo did not seem linked to schizophrenia if heterozygous, that
is if the variant was inherited from only one parent.
One of the functions of the Nogo gene is to produce proteins
that inhibit growth of brain nerve endings.44  The variant gene,
found to be more common in schizophrenics, has three extra
chemical bases, known as CAA, in a region where protein pro-
duction is regulated.  It is possible that these extra CAA bases
cause the variant Nogo gene to overproduce proteins, reducing
the number of nerve endings in regions of the brain associated
with schizophrenia.  This, of course, might make it more sus-
ceptible to damage from toxins.
SUMMARY
Is schizophrenia genetic?  Are genes destiny?  The truth ap-
pears to be that certain genetic aberrations, especially those
which cause abnormalities in the degradation of catecholamine
neurotransmitters, seem likely to increase the risk of develop-
ing schizophrenia.  However, there are strong lines of evidence
that prove schizophrenia is more than just the injustice of
genetic inheritance.  From the middle of the 19th century to
the middle of the 20th, in the Developed World the majority of
schizophrenics were confined to mental asylums for most of
their reproductive years.  Suicide rates amongst them were
much higher than in the normal population and many were
sterilized in the name of eugenics.  As a result, their rates of
procreation were very low and so the transmission of any “schiz-
ophrenic genetic trait” to the next generation occurred infre-
quently.  Nevertheless, at exactly the same time, as Torrey and
Miller43 have shown, schizophrenic prevalence in the Devel-
oped World continued to rise steadily.  Indeed, “the epidemic
of insanity that has occurred over the past two centuries is a

34
strong argument against these diseases [schizophrenia and
manic-depression] being primarily genetic in origin.”  Then
again, as in sickle cell anaemia, the schizophrenic trait may be
a balanced polymorphism, so that despite its obvious disad-
vantages, it carries with it huge, as yet unappreciated, social
benefits.44
REFERENCES
1.
Torrey, E.F. (1980).  Schizophrenia and civilization. New York: Jason
Aronson.
2.
Myers, D.G. (1992).  Psychology. New York: Worth Publishers.
3.
Gottesman, I.I. (1991).  Schizophrenia genesis: The origins of madness,
New York: Freeman.
4.
Myers, op. cit.
5.
Torrey, op. cit.
6.
Kety, S.S., Rosenthal, D. and Wender, P.H. (1975)
7.
Myers, op. cit.
8.
Nicol, S.E., and Gottesman, I.I. (1983).  Clues to the genetics and neuro-
biology of schizophrenia. American Scientist, 71, 398-404.
9.
Huxley, J., Mayr, E., Osmond, H., and Hoffer, A. (1964).  Schizophrenia
is a genetic morphism. Nature, 204, 220-221.
10.
Gregory, I. (1960).  American Journal of Psychiatry, 116, 961. Cited by
Ibid.
11.
Huxley et al., op. cit.
12.
McElroy, A., and Townsend, P.K. (1989).  Medical anthropology in eco-
logical perspective. Boulder, CO: Westview Press.
13.
Ibid.
14.
Sawa, A., and Snyder, S.H. (2002).  Schizophrenia: Diverse approaches
to a complex disease. Science, 296, 692-695.
15.
Ibid.
16.
Bray, N.J., and Owen, M.J. (2001).  Searching for schizophrenia genes.
Trends in Molecular Medicine, 7(4). 169-174.
17.
Sawa and Snyder, op. cit.

35
18.
Murphy, K.C., Jones, L.A., and Owen, M.J. (1999).  High rates of schizo-
phrenia in adults with velo-cardio-facial syndrome. Archives of
General Psychiatry, 56(10), 940. Cited by Ibid.
19.
Sawa and Snyder, op. cit.
20.
Gogos, J.A., Morgan, M., Luine, V., Santha, M., Ogawa, S., Pfaff, D.,
and Karayiorgou, M. (1998).  Catechol-O-methyltransferase-defi-
cient mice exhibit sexually dimorphic changes in catecholamine
levels and behavior. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sci-
ences, 95(17), 9991-96.
21.
Egan, M.F., et al. (2001).  Proceedings of the National Academy of Sci-
ences, 98, 6917.  Cited in Sawa and Snyder, op. cit.
22.
Sawa and Snyder, op. cit.
23.
Kern, C., and Bernards, C.M. (1997).  Ascorbic acid inhibits spinal
manigeal catechol-O-methyltranferase in vitro, markedly increas-
ing epinephrine bioavailability. Anesthesiology, 86(2), 405-409.
24.
Strous, M.D., Bark, N., Parsia, S.S., Volavka, J., and Lachman, H.M.
(1997).  Analysis of a functional catechol-O-methyltransferase
gene polymorphism in schizophrenia: Evidence for association with
aggressive and antisocial behavior. Psychiatry Research, 69(2-3),
71-77.
25.
Kotler, M., Barak, P., Cohen H., Averbuch, I.E., Grinshpoon, A.,
Gritsenko, I, Nemanov, L., and Ebstein, R.P. (1999).  Homicidal
behavior in schizophrenic associated with a genetic polymorphism
determining low catechol-O-methyltransferase (COMT). American
Journal of Medical Genetics, 88, 628-633.
26.
Jones, G., Zammit, S., Norton, N., Hamshere, M.L., Jones, S.J., and
Milham, C. (2001).  Aggressive behaviour in patients with schizo-
phrenia is associated with catechol-O-methyltransferase genotype.
British Journal of Psychiatry, 179, 351-355.
27.
Lachan, H.M., Nolan, K.A., Mohr, P., Saito, T., and Volavka, J. (1998).
Association between catechol-O-methyltransferase genotype and
violence in schizophrenia and schizoaffective disorder. American
Journal of Psychiatry, 155(6), 835-837.
28.
Nolan, K.A., Volavka, J., Czobor, P., Cseh, A., Lachman, H., Saito, T.,
Tiihonen, J., Putkonen, A., Hallikainen, T., Kotilainen, I., Rasanen,
P., Isohanni, M., Jarvelin, M.R., and Karvonen, M.K. (2000).  Sui-
cidal behavior in patients with schizophrenia is related to COMT
polymorphism. Psychiatric Genetics, 10(3), 117-124.
29.
Kotler et al., op. cit.
30.
Nolan et al., op. cit.

36
31.
Park, T.W., Yoon, K.S., Kim, J.H., Park, W.Y., Hirvonen, A., and
Kang, D. (2002).  Functional catechol-O-methyltransferase gene
polymorphism a susceptibility to schizophrenics. European Neuro-
psychopharmacology, 12(4), 299-303.
32.
Harada, S., Tachikawa, H., and Kawanishi, Y. (2001).  Glutathione S-
transferase M1 gene deletion may be associated with susceptibility
to certain forms of schizophrenia. Biochemical and Biophysical Re-
search Communications, 281, 267-271.
33.
Ibid.
34.
Methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase: Homocysteinemia, schizophrenia,
rages, depression, CNS dysfunction, neural tube defects.  http://
www.kmmutants.org/07A.php
35.
Ibid.
36.
Botto, L.D., and Yang, Q. (1999).  5,10-Methylenetetrahydrofolate re-
ductase (MTHFR) gene variants and congenital anomalies.  Centers
for Disease Control and Prevention, Human Crenome Epidemiol-
ogy Network.  http://www.cdc.gov/genomics/hugenet/reviews/
MTHFR.htm
37.
Arinami, T., Yamada, N., Yamakawa-Kobayashi, K., Hamaguchi, H., and
Tosu, M. (1997).  Methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase variant and
schizophrenia/depression. American Journal of Medical Genetics,
74(5), 526-528.
38.
Regland, B., Germgard, T., Gottfries, C.G., Grenfeldt, B., and Koch-
Schmidt, A.C. (1997).  Homozygous thermolabile methylenetetra-
hydrofolate reductase in schizophrenia-like psychosis.  Journal of
Neural Transmission, 104(8-9), 931-944.
39.
Deng, H., Liu, X., Cai, G., Sun, X., Wang, Y., Terwedow, H., Wang, Z.,
and Xu, X. (2002).  A linkage disequilibrium study of methylene-
tetrahydrofolate reductase C677T and schizophrenia. Zhonghua Yi
Xue Yi Chuan Xue Za Zhi, 19(3), 198-200.
40.
Joober, R., Benkelfat, C., Lal, S., Bloom, D., Labelle, A., Lalonde, P.,
Turecki, G., Rozen, R., and Rouleau, G.A. (2000).  Association be-
tween the methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase 677C-ST missense
mutation and schizophrenia. Molecular Psychiatry, 5(3), 323-326.
41.
Kunugi, H., Fukuda, R., Hattori, M., Kato, T., Tatsumi, M., Sukai, T.,
Hirose, T., and Nanko, S. (1998).  C677T polymorphism in methy-
lenetetrahydrofolate reductase gene and psychoses.  Molecular Psy-
chiatry, 3(5), 435-437.
42.
Virgos, C., Martorell, L., Simo, J.M., Valero, J., Figuera, L., Joven, J.,
Labad, A., and Vilella, E. (1999).  Plasma homocysteine and the
methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase C677T gene variant: Lack of
association with schizophrenia.  Neuroreport, 10(10), 2035-2038.

37
43.
Novak, G., Kim, D., Seeman, P., and Tallerico, T. (2002).  Schizophrenia
and Nogo: Elevated mRNA in cortex, and high prevalence of
a homozygous CAA insert. Molecular Brain Research, 107(2),
183-189.
44.
University of Toronto. Science Daily, November 13, 2002. http://www.
sciencedaily.com/releases/2002/11/021113070931.htm
45.
Torrey, E.F., and Miller, J. (2002).  The invisible plague: The rise of
mental illness from 1750 to the present.  New Brunswick: Rutgers
University Press.
46.
Huxley et al., op. cit.

38
There are no final answers in science, only varying
degrees of probability.... Science is not the affirmation
of a set of beliefs but a process of inquiry aimed at
building a testable body of knowledge constantly
open to rejection or confirmation.  In science,
knowledge is fluid and certainty fleeting.  That is
at the heart of its limitations.  It is also its greatest
strength.
Michael Shermer, Why People Believe Weird Things,
New York: Henry Holt and Co., 2002

39
BIOCHEMICAL ABNORMALITIES
5
While a more subtle and quiet offence which may pass
unnoticed in the historical moment, ideocide is ulti-
mately, in its continually expansive accumulative enor-
mity, a far more pernicious crime against all humanity
than any “simple” genocide.
Stuart Troy1
We had just agreed to give the student her master’s degree.
The tension in the examination room had receded and the com-
mittee members began to chat.  “It just goes to show,” said the
biochemist, “that health in the end always boils down to bio-
chemistry.”  Being a geographer, I was sure he was mistaken.
In the end, everything is spatial and if you cannot explain this
distribution pattern you have accounted for nothing.  In a mel-
low mood, I let his comment pass unchallenged.  It’s probably
just as well that I did because, after considerable reflection, I
decided that he may well be right.  After all, pathogens cause
abnormalities in biochemistry, and so too do toxins.  Genetic
aberrations result in biochemical abnormalities and so too does
trauma.  Vitamin, mineral, and other nutrient deficiencies and
excesses correct or interfere with normal biochemical activity.
Drugs, herbs, and supplements attempt to reverse biochemical
imbalances, while even stress and exercise impact on the body’s
biochemistry.  Clearly, if we don’t know or cannot explain the
abnormal biochemistry of schizophrenia, how can we identify
its causes?

40
THYROID HORMONES
Federal health officials are seriously considering giving potas-
sium iodide pills to every Canadian living within 10 kilometres
of a nuclear power plant.2  Potassium iodide pills are used to
flood the thyroid gland, so preventing it from absorbing iodine
131, a radioactive isotope released in large quantities during
nuclear power plant disasters.  An interesting development,
but what does it have to do with schizophrenia?  Fetuses irra-
diated by the exploding atomic bomb dropped on Nagasaki City
subsequently developed a higher than normal prevalence of
schizophrenia.3  This illness was more common in those ex-
posed in their second trimester than in their third.  The closer
pregnant women were to the hypocentre of this exploding atomic
weapon, the higher the subsequent prevalence rate of schizo-
phrenia in their offspring.  A similar phenomenon can be seen
in the Ukraine, amongst those most affected by the Chernobyl
nuclear power plant disaster.5-6  Survivors from the permanently
evacuated Exclusion Zone and clean-up workers who entered
it now have a schizophrenia incidence rate that is about five
times as high as that of less irradiated Ukrainians (5.4 per
10,000 in Exclusion Zone workers and evacuees compared to
1.1 per 10,000 in the Ukraine in 1990).  Those exposed to
radiation levels of 0.30 sievert or more have the highest risk of
subsequently developing schizophrenia.7  These observations
strongly suggest a role for a malfunctioning thyroid gland in
schizophrenia, a possibility that has been confirmed by the
direct measurement of thyroid hormones in schizophrenics.
Thyroid gland problems may also have a genetic dimension
since De Lisi and coworkers8 have shown that thyroid disor-
ders are unusually common in the relatives of schizophrenics.
There is little doubt of abnormal thyroid function in schizophre-
nia although this appears to change as the illness progresses.
In the early acute stage, thyroxine (T4) levels are elevated but

41
there is some disagreement over whether, or not, the same
can be said of triiodothyronine (T3).  Roca and coworkers,9 for
example, took serial measurements of various thyroid hormone-
related indices from 45 acute hospitalized psychiatric patients.
These showed that thyroxine, the free thyroxine index, triio-
dothyronine, and the free triiodothyronine index are often
elevated in psychiatric inpatients, especially early in hospital-
ization, and that the levels of thyroid hormones are strongly
correlated with severity of psychiatric symptomatology.  Simply
put, elevated thyroid hormones are common amongst those
recently hospitalized with acute psychiatric problems and the
more elevated these hormones are, the worse the patients’
symptoms.  A similar study was conducted by Baumgartner
and colleagues10 on 63 schizophrenic patients, some of whom
were in remission.  These researchers concluded that the se-
rum levels of thyroxine (T4) in acutely ill schizophrenic patients
were elevated, but those of triiodothyronine (T3), reverse triio-
dothyronine (rT3), and thyrotrophin (TSH) were normal.
The situation in chronic schizophrenics, those “permanently”
hospitalized, appears somewhat different.  Othman and cowork-
ers11 examined the thyroid status of 249 chronic male and fe-
male schizophrenics who had been hospitalized for an average
of 10 years.  They discovered a wide range of abnormalities,
including thyroid antibodies in 20 percent of such schizophren-
ics and elevated or depressed thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH)
in 22 percent.  Depressed triiodothyronine also occurred in 23
percent of those patients with normal levels of TSH.  These
data led Othman and colleagues to conclude that “there is a
spectrum of thyroid function test abnormalities in chronic schiz-
ophrenia.”  These results seem to be consistent with the work
of Turianitsa and colleagues12 who carried out radioimmuno-
assays of the pituitary-thyroid systems of patients suffering
from various types of schizophrenia, identifying an enhanced
degregation of peripheral blood thyroxine and an excess of

42
metabolically active triiodothyronine.  In a further study, Rao
and coworkers13 compared the basal serum amino acids, cen-
tral monoamines, and hormone levels in 110 schizophrenic pa-
tients with those of 90 healthy controls.  They found that in
drug-free schizophrenics, dopamine levels were elevated and
melatonin and thyroid hormones were depressed.  They con-
cluded it was dopaminergic overactivity in such schizophrenics
that was lowering both melatonin and thyroid hormone levels.
Niacin
Orthomolecular psychiatrists such as Abram Hoffer14 have
known since the early 1950s that schizophrenics typically are
deficient in vitamin B3.  Vitamin B3 refers to nicotinic acid
and nicotinamide, more often called niacin and niacinamide
by physicians.  Both are precursors to nicotinamide adenine
dinucleotide (NAD), an active coenzyme in the human body.
Although niacin and niacinamide share similar properties,
niacin is a vasodilator and niacinamide is not.  This means
that when a healthy person takes a medicinal dose of niacin
(approximately 3 grams), they begin to flush strongly.  This
reddening is accompanied by sensations of both itching and
heat because niacin opens the skin’s capillaries and increases
the blood flow.
The majority of schizophrenics receiving niacin do not flush.
This may be because they are extremely niacin deficient or
because their flushing mechanism is disabled.  More recently,
conventional physicians have begun to confirm that schizo-
phrenics respond to niacin in a far more subdued way than
individuals without a family history of mental illness.  Ward
and coworkers,15 for example, tested the skin flushing of 38
schizophrenics and 22 normal controls, five minutes after the
application of aqueous metyl nicotinate (AMN).  It was found
that 83 percent of the schizophrenics, but only 23 percent of

43
the controls, had little or no reaction to this solution.  Several
other researchers16-17 have demonstrated such differences.  As
a result, the degree of skin redness after a niacin challenge is
now the basis for a diagnostic patch test which has been devel-
oped by Horrobin.18  When available to family physicians, this
will allow them to diagnose acute schizophrenia with the accu-
racy now achieved by a team of highly trained psychiatrists.
“Kryptopyrrole”
In 1960, the hallucinogenic drug LSD was being used to treat
alcoholics.19  Hoffer realized that this protocol was causing
alcoholics to hallucinate in a manner similar to many schizo-
phrenics.  This coincidence led him to believe that LSD use
might be triggering biochemical imbalances in alcoholics sim-
ilar to those seen in schizophrenia.  To test this hypothesis,
urine samples were collected from alcoholic patients before and
after receiving therapeutic doses of LSD.20  Urine from the first
of these patients showed a mauve staining spot on the paper
chromatogram after development with Ehrlich’s reagent.  Such
a mauve spot did not appear in tests of the urine from alcohol-
ics before they were given LSD, but it appeared in tests of the
urine of many, but not all of them, after taking this drug.
Schizophrenic patients’ urine was then tested in the same way.
The characteristic mauve stain also appeared on the chroma-
togram paper for many, but again not all, of the samples from
these patients.  The mauve factor was structurally identified in
1969 by Irvine,21 and is now thought to be 2-hydroxy-hemo-
pyrrolene-5-one.22  As it circulates in the body it “forms a stable
Schiff’s base with pyridoxal (the aldehyde form of pyridoxine or
vitamin B-6) and subsequently complexes with zinc, stripping
the body of these two essential substances as it is excreted.”23
As a result of these reactions, schizophrenics producing large
quantities of it are simultaneously also very zinc and vitamin
B-6 deficient.24

44
Just how common is elevated “kryptopyrrole” in schizophre-
nia?  In 1965, O’Reilly and Hughes25 claimed that it was present
in 11 percent of healthy controls, 24 percent of disturbed chil-
dren, 42 percent of psychiatric patients, and 52 percent of
schizophrenics.  Hoffer’s26 experience after testing a much larger
sample consisting of “thousands of patients at our four research
centers” was somewhat different.  Elevated “kryptopyrrole” was
found in the urine of 75 percent of acute schizophrenics, 25
percent of all non-psychotic patients, and 5 percent of physi-
cally ill patients.  It was absent from the urine of normal sub-
jects and most interestingly was never found in the urine of
recovered schizophrenics.  The evidence suggests that although
urinary “kryptopyrrole” (probably 2-hydroxy-hemopyrrolene-5-
one) is not an absolute sign of schizophrenia, it occurs with
much greater regularity in schizophrenics than in anyone else.
Glutathione Peroxidase and Antioxidant Defence System
The brains of chronic schizophrenics often display enlarged
fluid-filled spaces known as ventricles.27  These are signs of
brain atrophy and are highly suggestive of neuronal tissue
damage.  In 1987, Buckman and colleagues28 published a
paper that described using computed tomography scans to
measure these ventricles and establish ventricle-brain ratios.
Such ratios were then compared to the activity of the impor-
tant antioxidant selenoenzyme glutathione peroxidase in blood
samples taken from both chronic schizophrenics and age and
sex-matched nonschizophrenic mental patients.  Buckman and
coworkers were able to show that in chronic schizophrenics,
but not in patients suffering from other mental illnesses, there
was a strong negative correlation between glutathione peroxi-
dase activity in both isolated platelets and erythrocytes and
computed tomography scan measures of brain atrophy and
associated increased ventricle-brain ratios.  In short, the less
of the selenoenzyme glutathione peroxidase in the blood of a

45
chronic schizophrenic, the greater the brain damage suffered.
These relationships were not found in the control group and
suggested a unique relationship between levels of glutathione
peroxidase (and hence one of its key components selenium),
and the mechanism responsible for tissue damage in the brains
of schizophrenics.
In the period since this paper was published, several other
researchers have presented evidence to confirm that there is
an impaired antioxidant defence system in schizophrenia that
is associated with excessive lipid peroxidation and abnormal
free radical pathology.29-34  Mahadik and coworkers,35 for ex-
ample, have shown that elevated lipid peroxides, indicative of
an abnormal antioxidant defence system, are characteristic of
first episode, never-medicated schizophrenics.  This analysis,
involving 26 patients and 16 normal controls, demonstrates
that the antioxidant defences of schizophrenics are in disarray
as early as the appearance of the first significant symptoms.
The work of Buckman and colleagues36-37 has suggested that
these inadequacies of the antioxidant defence system contin-
ue and ultimately result in serious brain damage in chronic
schizophrenics.
While several studies have shown abnormal glutathione per-
oxidase activity in schizophrenics, problems with other anti-
oxidant enzymes have also been reported, including abnormal
catalase and superoxide dismutase activity.38-40  Why schizo-
phrenics suffer from the excess generation of free radicals,
disrupted antioxidant defences, and associated brain damage
is uncertain.  Mahedik and Mukherjee41 cautiously suggest
that it may result from increased catecholamine turnover.  In
an interesting, comprehensive review of oxidative reactions
and schizophrenia, Smythies agrees with the suggestion that
some of this excessive lipid peroxidation is caused by excess
adrenochrome.42

46
Essential Fatty Acids
When phospholipids (highly complex lipids that are essential
to brain function) were extracted from the plasma of schizo-
phrenics and compared with those of controls, two abnor-
malities became apparent.  The n-6 essential fatty acid levels
were significantly reduced in schizophrenia, while those of
the n-3 essential fatty acids were elevated.43  More recently,
membrane phospholipid abnormalities have been confirmed
in the postmortem brains of schizophrenics using high-pres-
sure liquid chromography in conjunction with an evaporative
light-scattering detector.44  This technique showed that the
membranes of schizophrenics contained depressed levels of
phosphatidylcholine and phosphatidylethanolamine.  In addi-
tion, levels of polyunsaturated fatty acid were determined uti-
lizing capillary gas chromatography.  These were found to be
abnormally low in schizophrenic brains, relative to control
brains.  Particularly noticeable was a large decrease in arachi-
donic acid.
Interestingly, these abnormalities may be at least partially
corrected by diet.  Peet and coworkers,45 for example, have
shown that n-3 fatty acid supplements appear to improve schiz-
ophrenic symptoms.  Similarly, on a larger scale, it has been
demonstrated that eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA) supplements
have a similar positive impact on these fatty acid abnormali-
ties and, as a consequence, on patients suffering from schizo-
phrenia.46-47
Horrobin,48 who has been the major instigator of research into
the role of abnormalities in fatty acid metabolism in schizo-
phrenia, has recently described the current situation.
We are still developing our understanding of the
details of errors in biochemistry.  But gradually a
consensus is developing that there are two important

47
problems in phospholipid biochemistry in schizophre-
nia. One relates to a chronic overactivity of one or more
of the phospholipase A2 group of enzymes.  This leads
to a steady leak of AA [arachidonic acid] and other
fatty acids from cell membranes, not leaving sufficient
AA behind to mount a normal cell-signalling response
to stimulation.  The second relates to a failure to in-
corporate AA and related fatty acids back into
phospholipids.  The problem may be in one of a group
of enzymes called FACL, the absence of one of which
can lead to Alport syndrome.  As a consequence of
these two abnormalities, brain HUFAs [highly unsatu-
rated fatty acids] are readily oxidized, and the break-
down products, which are volatile, are excreted in the
breath.
Tryptophan and Serotonin
Tryptophan is the least abundant of the essential amino acids
in food,49 a characteristic that in the past has lead to major
mental health problems.  Maize is deficient in tryptophan, and
children eating a diet that was overly rich in it often developed
pellagra.  The symptoms of this disease were known as the four
Ds, namely dermatitis, diarrhea, dementia, and ultimately, if
not treated effectively, death.50  Pellagra is thought to be due to
a codeficiency of both tryptophan and its metabolite niacin.51
As a result of eating too much maize, children became deficient
in both of these nutrients and so could not produce adequate
nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide, triggering the development
of pellagra.  Clearly then, inadequate dietary tryptophan can
cause serious mental illness.
Tryptophan is also a necessary precursor of serotonin.  Any-
one with depressed levels of this essential amino acid, there-
fore, is always deficient in serotonin.  As the author52 has
described in his book What Really Causes AIDS, whole blood
serotonin levels are abnormally low in AIDS patients.  This is

48
because HIV-1, as it is replicated, removes tryptophan from
the human body.  Interestingly, the lower the blood tryptophan
and serotonin levels in AIDS victims, the worse their associated
neuropsychiatric symptoms.53
There definitely appear to be tryptophan associated abnormal-
ities in schizophrenia.  Mileikovskii54 found depressed serot-
onin levels in the urine of 30 Russian schizophrenics, while
Ravikumar and coworkers55 identified elevated tryptophan and
its derivative serotonin in the plasma of Indian neuropsychiat-
ric patients.  Indeed, Lucca and colleagues56 considered brain
tryptophan in Italian schizophrenics to be so abnormal that it
could be used to distinguish them from patients with severe
depression.
At least two attempts57-58 have been made to study the impact
of depressed tryptophan and its derivatives niacin and serot-
onin in schizophrenics by deliberately reducing the levels of
this amino acid in diet.  The results suggest that low tryptophan
diets cause a significant increase in the severity of negative
symptoms in schizophrenia59 that may be accompanied by a
decline in cognition.60
These results are not too surprising due to the fact that the
tryptophan derivative serotonin is a neurotransmitter associ-
ated with 5-HT receptors.61  Abnormalities of such brain sero-
tonin receptors have been discovered by post-mortem studies
of unmedicated schizophrenics.62  There is a decreased num-
ber of 5-HT2A receptors and an increased number of 5-HT1A
receptors in the frontal cortex of brains of untreated schizo-
phrenics.  These abnormalities do not occur in young unmed-
icated patients, suggesting that they develop over a period of
time as a consequence of serotonin abnormalities.63  Interest-
ingly, the hallucinogenic drug LSD has been found to be a 5-
HT agonist, increasing its effects.64

49
Histamine
According to Pfeiffer,65 some 70 percent of all schizophrenics
suffer from histamine imbalances.  Fifty percent are thought
to display an excess of copper and depressed blood histamine,
while the remaining 20 percent have symptoms caused by a
histamine excess and depressed blood copper levels.  Such
relationships appear to be biochemically logical.  Histamine is
a neurotransmitter and chemical modulator that is regulated
by histaminase and ceruloplasmin, two copper-containing pro-
teins.  Pfeiffer and colleagues66 argued that high levels of free
copper in the body increases the activity of these two enzymes,
causing excess degradation of histamine.  This deficiency is, in
turn, thought to be responsible for some of the psychiatric prob-
lems seen in a large subgroup of schizophrenics.  Conversely,
a copper deficiency reduces histaminase and ceruloplasmin
levels and activity, creating an excess of histamine, which in
itself has adverse psychiatric implications.
There is no doubt that histamine does have significant func-
tions in the brain.  It is associated with wakefulness, the sup-
pression of seizures, hypothermia, and emesis.67  It has been
found that drugs that are antagonistic to it and so interfere
with HI (histamine) receptors, modify eating and drinking pat-
terns, alter endocrine secretions from the pituitary gland, and
increase opioid-induced insensitivity to pain.  Histamine also
plays a role in cognition and arousal.68
There is mounting evidence that Pfeiffer69 is correct in that
many schizophrenics display histamine abnormalities.  Lipman
and Telias,70 for example, tested the skin of long-term, hospi-
talized schizophrenics who had not responded favourably to
conventional therapy with histamine.  All of these chronic schiz-
ophrenics smoked or had been passively exposed to the smoke
of others.  Such patients were found to be very sensitive to the

50
histamine intracutaneous test.  A healthy control group of non-
smokers was not.  Prell and coworkers71 further analysed the
levels of histamine metabolites in the cerebrospinal fluid of 36
chronic hospitalized schizophrenics and eight healthy controls.
They found that the mean level of the key histamine metabo-
lite tele-methylhistamine was 2.6-fold higher (p=0.006) in schiz-
ophrenics than it was in controls.  Twenty-six of such chronic
psychiatric patients showed elevated levels of this metabolite
that were higher than any seen in the control group.  Such
elevated histamine metabolite levels could not be attributed to
medication, since they were very similar in schizophrenics tak-
ing and withdrawn from neuroleptic drugs. Prell and col-
leagues72 also have shown that high levels of this primary his-
tamine metabolite, an index of brain histaminergic activity,
seems to be strongly associated with excess daily urine pro-
duction, suggesting a role for histamine in fluid regulation.
The levels of the copper-containing enzyme histaminase, which
is involved in the regulation of histamine, also has been meas-
ured in schizophrenics.  Vieira and colleagues,73 for example,
analysed the activity of histaminase in the plasma of 23 schiz-
ophrenics and compared it with 32 healthy controls.  They dis-
covered that plasmatic histaminase was significantly higher in
schizophrenics, especially in those they termed “non mentally
deteriorated” and those with thymic symptoms.
Glutamate
Glutamate imbalance may also play a role in schizophrenia.
Faustman and coworkers,74 for example, compared the levels
of glutamate in the cerebrospinal fluid of 19 medication free
male schizophrenics, or schizoaffective patients, with their
clinical symptoms.  Ratings of positive symptoms were signifi-
cantly inversely related to glutamate levels, while hallucinatory
behaviour was strongly positively linked to it.  That is, higher

51
glutamate seemed related to more pronounced schizophrenia.
Interestingly, kynurenic acid, an endogenous glutamate an-
tagonist, is also highly elevated in the cerebrospinal fluid of
schizophrenics.75  This antagonist has a preferential action at
the glycine-site of the N-methyl-D-asparate receptor (a sub-
type of glutamate brain receptor).
Glutamate is essential but dangerous, a neurotransmitter that
can be cytotoxic at high levels.  It is clearly necessary for nor-
mal brain function since when healthy individuals are given
its antagonists phencyclidine76 or ketamine77 they develop a
psychosis that is very similar to schizophrenia.  In contrast,
the N–methyl-D-asparate antagonist amantedine greatly im-
proves the symptoms of catatonic schizophrenics.  Viewed as a
whole, the schizophrenia-glutamate biochemical evidence
seems to suggest an excess of this excitatory amino acid neuro-
transmitter in this illness.  This excess may be linked to a
decrease in the non-N-methyl-D-asparate subtypes of gluta-
mate receptors in the medial temporal lobe.79
Catecholamines
There are several reasons why schizophrenics are thought to
be suffering the effects of too much dopamine.  To illustrate,
drugs that are designed to lower brain dopamine levels reduce
some of the symptoms in schizophrenia.  Others, like amphet-
amines that are known to increase brain dopamine, conversely
worsen symptoms.80  In addition, as previously discussed, there
is considerable evidence of dopamine receptor abnormalities in
schizophrenic brains.81  One would expect, therefore, that the
cerebrospinal fluid of schizophrenics would contain highly ele-
vated levels of dopamine.  Interestingly, this has been hard to
establish.  Issa and colleagues82 simultaneously measured the
levels of 20 biogenic amines, their metabolites and other com-
pounds from 24 medication-free schizophrenics and 12 healthy

52
controls.  This approach allowed the study of interactions be-
tween metabolites of each of the three major neurotransmitter
pathways (serotonergic, noradrenergic, and dopaminergic).
Statistical analysis (stepwise discriminant function analysis)
comparing the cerebrospinal fluid of schizophrenics with that
of healthy volunteers showed the major differences between
these two groups involved levels of tryptophan (and its deriva-
tive tryptophol) and epinephrine but not dopamine.
Although there are studies83 suggesting that the metabolite of
dopamine, homovanillic acid, is elevated in the cerebrospinal
fluid of schizophrenics, this may not be the case.  Tuckwell
and Koziol84 conducted a meta-analysis of research results
available in 1993 and concluded that “the data does not sup-
port the claim that the level of this dopamine catabolite is raised
whereas some evidence strongly supports the claim that it is
actually lowered.”  In summary, as Yamamoto and colleagues85
have pointed out:  “In spite of extensive studies over the last
two decades to find direct evidence in support of the dopamine
hypothesis of schizophrenia, no undisputed experiential data
has been obtained.  In contrast, estimation of noradrenalin
(another major catecholamine) and its metabolites in post-
mortem brain and in the cerebrospinal fluid appears to be
producing consistent results.”
Homocysteine
The essential amino acid methionine is the indirect source of
homocysteine.  As methionine is metabolized by the body it
produces homocysteine before either recycling it to methio-
nine, or creating a final breakdown product, cystathionine.
The former step requires vitamin B12 and folate and the latter
requires vitamin B6.86  Inadequacies of these key vitamins can
slow homocysteine metabolism and allow abnormal levels of it
to build up, creating a condition known as homocysteinemia,

53
associated with atherosclerosis,87 strokes,88 and cardiovascu-
lar disease.89  Beyond this, it is well known that the oxidation
product of homocysteine, homocysteic acid, exerts potent ex-
citatory effects.90
As might be expected, therefore, evidence is growing that many
schizophrenics suffer from elevated homocysteine levels.91-93
Regland and coworkers94 point out that numerous schizophren-
ics display high homocysteine levels that seem unrelated to
psychopharmacological medication or to nutrient deficiency in
folate or cobalamin.  They believe, therefore, that this excess of
homocysteine in schizophrenia must be related to an inherent
methylation deficiency.  It also seems linked to aggressive and
antisocial behaviour.95
SUMMARY
For centuries, the British aristocracy hunted for grouse and
pheasants using cartridges filled with lead bird shot.  This
ammunition created an expanding circle of small pellets, each
of which was capable of causing a fatal wound.  Schizophrenia
may be like this. It is possible, but unlikely, that each one, or
most, of the biochemical abnormalities just described is linked
to its own distinct genetic aberration or environmental trigger.
A display in the Guinness World Records Museum96 shows that
60 Dutch students spent 7 weeks setting up 2.3 million domi-
noes at the Expo Centrum FEC in Leeuwarden.  On August 28,
1998, the first domino was deliberately pushed over to trigger
the fall of 1,605,757 more.  This event was an extreme display
of the domino effect.  Schizophrenia may be another.  It is
possible that the numerous biochemical abnormalities just
described may be linked in a chain of cause and effect.  If this
is the case, a single genetic aberration may result in one initial


55
9.
Roca, R.P., Blackman, M.R., Ackerley, M.B., Harman, S.M., and
Gregerman, R.I. (1990).  Thyroid hormone elevations during acute
psychiatric illness: Relationship to severity and distinction from
hyperthyroidism. Endocrine Research, 16(4), 415-417.
10.
Baumgartner, A., Pietzcker, A., and Gaebel, W. (2000).  The hypothal-
amic-pituitary-thyroid axis in patients with schizophrenia. Schizo-
phrenia Research, 44(3), 233-243.
11.
Othman, S.S., Abdul, K.K., Hassan J., Hong, G.K. Singh, B.B., and
Raman, N. (1994).  High prevalence of thyroid test abnormalities
in chronic schizophrenia. Australian and New Zealand Journal of
Psychiatry, 28(4), 620-624.
12.
Turianitsa, I.M., Lavkai, I.U., Mishanich, I.I., Margitich V.M., and Razhov,
K.F. (1991).  Status of the thyroid gland in patients with schizo-
phrenia. Zhurnal Nevropatolgii Psikhiatrii Imeni SS Korsakova, 91(1),
122-123.
13.
Rao, M.L., Gross, G., Strebel, B., Braunig, P., Huber, G., and Kloster-
kotter, J. (1990).  Serum amino acids, central monoanimes and
hormones in drug-naive, drug free, and neuroleptic-treated schizo-
phrenic patients and healthy subjects. Psychiatry Research, 34(3),
243-257.
14.
Hoffer, A. (1998).  Vitamin B3, schizophrenia: Discovery recovery contro-
versy. Kingston, Ontario: Quarry Press.
15.
Ward, P.E., Sutherland, J., Glen, E.M., and Glen, A.I. (1998).  Niacin
skin flush in schizophrenia: A preliminary report. Schizophrenia
Research, 29(3), 269-274.
16.
Puri, B.K., Hirsch, S.R., Easton, T., and Richardson, A.J. (2002).  A vol-
umetric biochemical niacin flush-based index that non-invasively
detects fatty acid deficiency in schizophrenia. Progress in Neuro-
psychopharmacology and Biological Psychiatry, 26(1), 49-52.
17.
Hudson, C.J., Lin, A., Cogan, S., Cashman, F., and Warsh, J.J. (1997).
The niacin challenge test: Clinical manifestation of altered trans-
membrane signal transduction in schizophrenia? Biological Psy-
chiatry, 41(5), 507-513.
18.
Lecture by Horrobin, D. at 31st Annual Conference Nutritional Medicine
Today, April 11-14, 2002, Vancouver, BC, “Essential fatty acids in
relation to schizophrenia and depression: An update.”
19.
Hoffer, op. cit.
20.
Ibid.
21.
Irvine cited by Pfeiffer, C.C., Mailloux, R., and Forsythe, L. (1988).  The
schizophrenias: Ours to conquer. Wichita, Kansas: Bio-Communi-
cations Press.

56
22.
Irving, D.G. (1978).  Hydroxy-hemopyrrolenone not kryptopyrroles in
the urine of schizophrenics and phorphyrics. Clinical Chemistry,
14, 1069-1070.
23.
Pfeiffer et al.,  op. cit.
24.
Ibid.
25.
O’Reilly and Hughes cited by Pfeiffer et al., op. cit.
26.
Hoffer, op. cit.
27.
Myers, D.G. (1992).  Psychology. New York: Worth Publishers.
28.
Buckman, T.D., Kling, A.S., Eiduson, S., Sutphin, M.S., and Steinberg,
A. (1987).  Glutathione peroxidase and CT scan abnormalities in
schizophrenia. Biological Psychiatry, 22(11), 1349-1356.
29.
Buckman, T.D., Kling, A., Sutphin, M.S., Steingerg, A., and Eiduson, S.
(1990).  Platelet glutathione peroxidase and monoamine oxidase
activity in schizophrenics with CT scan abnormalities: Relation to
psychosocial variables. Psychiatry Research, 31(1), 1-14.
30.
Govorin, N.V., Govorin, A.V., and Skazhutin, S.A. (1991).  Significance
of disorders of the process of lipid peroxidation in patients with
persistent paranoid schizophrenia resistant to the treatment. Zhur-
nal Nevropatolgii Psikhiatrii Imeni S S Korsakova, 91(7), 121-124.
31.
Altuntas, I., Aksoy, H., Cockun, I, Caykoylu, A., and Akcay, F. (2000).
Erythrocyte superoxide dismutase and glutathione peroxidase ac-
tivities, and malondialdehyde and reduced glutatathione levels in
schizophrenic patients. Clinical Chemical Laboratory Medicine,
38(12), 1277-1281.
32.
Herken, H., Uz, E., Ozyurt, H., Sogut, S., Virit, O., and Akyol, O. (2001).
Evidence that the activities of erythrocyte free medical scavenging
enzymes and the products of lipid peroxidation are increased in
different forms of schizophrenia. Molecular Psychiatry, 6(1), 66-73.
33.
Srivastava, N., Barthwal, M.K., Dalal P.K., Agarwal, A.K., Nag, D., Srimal,
R.C., Seth, P.K., and Dikshit M. (2001).  Nitrite content and anti-
oxidant enzyme levels in blood of schizophrenia patients. Psycho-
pharmacology (Berl), 158(2), 140-145.
34.
Kuloglu, M., Ustundag, B., Atmaca, M., Canatan, H., Tezcan, A.E., and
Cinkilinc, N. (2002).  Lipid peroxidation and antioxidant enzyme
levels in patients with schizophrenia and bipolar disorder. Cell Bio-
chemistry and Function, 171-175.
35.
Mukerjee, S., Mahadik, S.P., Scheffer, R., Correnti, E.E., and Kelkar, H.
(1996).  Impaired antioxidant defense at the onset of psychosis.
Schizophrenia Research, 19(1), 19-26.

57
36.
Buckman et al., op. cit.
37.
Buckman et al., op. cit.
38.
Muckerjee et al., op. cit.
39.
Kuloglu et al., op. cit.
40.
Herken et al., op. cit.
41.
Mahadik, S.P., and Mukherjee S. (1996).  Free radical pathology and
antioxidant defense in schizophrenia: A review. Schizophrenia
Research, 19(1), 1-17.
42.
Smythies, J.R. (1997).  Oxidative reactions and schizophrenia: A review-
discussion. Schizophrenia Research, 24, 357-364.
43.
Horrobin, D.F., Manku, M.S., Morse-Fisher, N., Vaddadi, K.S., Court-
ney, P., Glen, A.I., Spellman, M., and Bates, C. (1989).  Essential
fatty acids in plasma phospholipids in schizophrenics. Biological
Psychiatry, 25(5), 562-568.
44.
Yao, J.K., Leonard, S., and Reddy, R.D. (2000).  Membrane phospholi-
pid abnormalities in postmortem brains from schizophrenic pa-
tients. Schizophrenic Research, 42(1), 7-17.
45.
Peet, M., Laugharne, J.D., Mellor, J., and Ramchand, C.N. (1996).
Essential fatty acid deficiency in erythrocyte membranes from
chronic schizophrenic patients, and the clinical effects of dietary
supplementation. Prostaglandins Leukotrienes and Essential Fatty
Acids, 55(1-2), 71-75.
46.
Puri, B.K., Richardson, A.J., Horrobin D.F., Easton, T., Saeed, N.,
Oatridge, A., Hajnal, J.V., and Bydder, G.M. (2000).  Eicosapen-
taenoic acid treatment in schizophrenia associated with symptom
remission, normalisation of blood fatty acids, reduced neuronal
membrane phospolipid turnover and structural brain changes.
International Journal of Clinical Practice, 54(1), 57-63.
47.
Peet et al., op. cit.
48.
Horrobin, D. (2002).  The Madness of Adam and Eve: How schizophrenia
shaped humanity. London: Transworld Publishers.
49.
Braverman, E.R. (with Pfeiffer, C.C.) (1987).  The healing nutrients within:
Facts, findings and new research on amino acids. New Canaan: Keats
Publishing.
50.
Ibid.
51.
Ibid.
52.
Foster, H.D. (2002).  What really causes AIDS. Victoria, BC: Trafford
Publishing.

58
53.
Fuchs, D., Moller, A.A., Reibnegger, G., Stockle, E., Werner, E.R., and
Wachter, H. (1990).  Decreased serum tryptophan in patients with
HIV-1 infection correlates with increased serum neopterin and with
neurologic/psychiatric symptoms. Journal of Acquired Immuno-
deficiency Syndrome, 3(9), 873-876.
54.
Mileikovskii, Iu A. (1976).  Excretion of catecholamines and tryptophan
derivatives in schizophrenia. Zhurnal Nevropatologii Psikkiatrii Imeni
S S Korsakova, 76(5), 710-714.
55.
Ravikumar, A., Deepadevi, K.V., Arun, P., Manojkumar, V., and Kurup,
P.A. (2000).  Tryptophan and tyrosine catabolic pattern in neuro-
psychiatric disorders. Neurology India, 48(3), 231-238.
56.
Lucca, A., Lucini, V., Catalano, M., and Smeraldi, E. (1995).  Neural
amino acid availability in two major psychiatric disorders. Progress
in Neuro-psychopharmacology and Biological Psychiatry, 19(4), 615-
626.
57.
Golightly, K.L., Lloyd, J.A., Hobson, J.E., Gallagher, P., Mercer, G., and
Young, A.H. (2001).  Acute tryptophan depletion in schizophrenia.
Psychological Medicine, 31(1), 75-84.
58.
Sharma, R.P., Shapiro, L.E., Kamath, S.K., Soll, E.A., Watanabe, M.D.,
and Davis, J.M. (1997).  Acute dietary tryptophan depletion: Effects
on schizophrenic positive and negative symptoms. Neuropsycho-
biology, 35(1), 5-10.
59.
Ibid.
60.
Golightly et al., op. cit.
61.
East, S., Burnet, P., Kerwin, R., and Harrison, P. (2002).  An RT-PCR
study of 5-HT(6) and 5-HT(7) receptors mRNAs in the hippocampal
formation and prefrontal cortex in schizophrenia. Schizophrenia
Research, 57(1), 15.
62.
Harrison, P.J. (1999).  The neuropathology of schizophrenia: A critical
review of the data and their interpretation. Brain, 122, 593-624.
63.
Green, B. (2000).  Schizophrenia: A review. http://www.priory.com/
psych/aetioschiz.htm
64.
Ibid.
65.
Pfeiffer, C.C. (1987).  Nutrition and mental illness: An orthomolecular
approach to balancing body chemistry. Rochester, Vermont: Heal-
ing Arts Press.
66.
Pfeiffer, C.C., Mailloux, R., and Forsythe, L., (1970).  The schizophrenias:
Ours to conquer. Wichita, Kansas: Bio-Communications Press.
67.
Sturman, G. (1996).  Histaminergic drugs as modulators of CNS func-
tion. Pflugers Archiv, 431(6 Suppl. 2), R223-224.

59
68.
Fernandez-Nova, L., and Cacabelos, R. (2001).  Histamine function in
brain disorders. Behavioral Brain Research, 124(2), 213-233.
69.
Pfeiffer, op. cit.
70.
Lipman, D.G., and Telias, I.D. (1992).  Histamine skin sensitivity in
chronic schizophrenic smokers not responding favourably to
neuroleptics. Medical Law, 11(7-8), 649-652.
71.
Prell, G.D., Green J.P., Kaufmann, C.A., Khandelwal, J.K., Morrishow,
A.M., Kirch, D.G., Linnoila, M., and Wyatt, R.J. (1995).  Histamine
metabolites in cerebrospinal fluid in patients with chronic schiz-
ophrenia: Their relationships to levels of other aminergic trans-
mitters and ratings of symptoms. Schizophrenia Research, 14(2),
93-104.
72.
Prell, G.D., Green, J.P., Elkashef, A.M., Khandelwal, J.K., Linnoila, M.,
Wyatt, R.J., Lawson, W.B., Jaeger, A.C., Kaufmann, C.A., and
Kirch, D.G. (1996).  The relationship between urine excretion and
biogenic amines and their metabolites in cerebrospinal fluid of
schizophrenic patients. Schizophrenic Research, 19(2-3), 171-176.
73.
Vieira, R.M., de Silva, I.J., Azevedo, M., and Manso, C.F. (1995).  An
analysis of plasma histaminase in schizophrenic patients and its
relationship to clinical parameters. Acta Medicine Portugal, 8(5),
289-297.
74.
Faustman, W.O., Bardgett, M., Faull, K.F., Pfefferbaum, A., and
Csernansky, J.G. (1999).  Cerebrospinal fluid glutamate inversely
correlates with positive symptom severity in unmedicated male
schizophrenic/schizoaffective patients. Biological Psychiatry, 45(1),
68-75.
75.
Erhardt, S., Blennow, K., Nordin, C., Skogh, E., Lindstrom, L.H., and
Engberg, G. (2001).  Kynurenic acid levels are elevated in the cer-
ebrospinal fluid of patients with schizophrenia. Neuroscience Let-
ters, 313(1-2), 96-98.
76.
Green, op. cit.
77.
Mechri, A., Saoud, M., Khiari, G., d’Amato, T., Dalery, J., and Gaha, L.
(2001).  Glutaminergic hypothesis of schizophrenia: Clinical re-
search studies with ketamine. Encephale, 27(1), 53-59.
78.
Northoff, G., Eckert, J., and Fritze, J. (1997).  Glutamatergic dysfunc-
tion in catatonia? Successful treatment of three acute catatonic
patients with the NMDA antagonist amantadine. Journal of Neurol-
ogy Neurosurgery and Psychiatry, 62(4), 404-406.
79.
Green, op. cit.
80.
Ibid.

60
81.
Seeman, P., Guan, H.C., and Van Tol, H.H. (1995).  Schizophrenia:
Elevation of dopamine D4-like sites, using [3H] nemonapride and
[125I] epidepride. European Journal of Pharmacology, 286(2), R3-5.
82.
Issa, F., Gerhardt, G.A., Bartko, J.J., Suddath, R.L., Lynch, M.,
Gumache, P.H., Freedman R., Wyatt, R.J., and Kirch, D.G. (1994).
A multidimensional approach to analysis of cerebrospinal fluid
biogenic amines in schizophrenia: I. Comparisons with healthy con-
trol subjects and neuroleptic-treated/unmedicated pairs analysis.
Psychiatry Research, 52(3), 237-249.
83.
Kahn, R.S., Harvey, P.D., Davidson, M., Keefe, R.S., Apter, S., Neale,
J.M., Mohs, R.C., and Davis, K.L. (1994).  Neuropsychological cor-
relates of central monoamine function in chronic schizophrenia:
Relationship between CSF metabolites and cognitive function.
Schizophrenia Research, 11(3), 217-224.
84.
Tuckwell, H.C., and Koziol, J.A. (1993).  A meta-analysis of homovanillic
acid concentrations in schizophrenia. International Journal of Neuro-
science, 73(1-2), 109-114.
85.
Yamamoto, K., Ozawa, N., Shinba, T., Hoshino, T., and Yoshii, M. (1994).
Possible noradrenergic dysfunction in schizophrenia. Brain Re-
search Bulletin, 35(5-6), 529-543.
86.
Challem, J., and Dolby, V. (1996).  Homocysteine: The new “cholesterol.”
New Canaan, Connecticut: Keats Publishing.
87.
McCully, K.S. (1988).  Homocysteine thioactone in arteriosclerosis and
cancer. Research Communications in Chemical Pathology and Phar-
macology, 59(1), 107-119.
88.
Coull, B.M., Malinow, M.R., Beamer, N., Sexton, G., Nordt, F., and
deGarmo, P. (1990).  Elevated plasma homocyst[e]ine concentra-
tions as a possible independent risk factor for stroke. Stroke, 21(4),
572-576, cited by Challem and Dolby, op. cit.
89.
Boushey, C.J., Beresford, S.A.A., Omenn, G.S., and Motulsky, A.G.
(1995).  A quantitative assessment of plasma homocysteine as a
risk factor for vascular disease. Journal of the American Medical
Association, 274, 1049-1057, cited by Challem and Dolby, op. cit.
90.
Arinami, T., Yamada, N., Yamakawa-Kobayashi, K., Hamaguchi, H., and
Toru, N. (1997).  Methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase variant and
schizophrenia/depression. American Journal of Medical Genetics,
74(5), 526-528.
91.
Susser, E., Brown, A.S., Klonowski, E., Allen, R.H., and Lindenbaum,
J. (1998).  Schizophrenia and impaired homocysteine metabolism:
A possible association. Biological Psychiatry, 44(2), 141-143.

61
92.
Regland, R., Johansson, B.V., Greenfeldt, B., Hjelmgren, L.T., and
Medhus, M. (1995).  Homocysteinemia is a common feature of
schizophrenia. Journal of Neural Transmission, General Section,
100(2), 165-169.
93.
Freeman, J.M., Finkelstein, J.D., and Mudd, S.H. (1975).  Folate-respon-
sive homocystinuria and “schizophrenia”: A defect in methylation
due to deficient 5,10-methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase activ-
ity. New England Journal of Medicine, 292(10), 491-496.
94.
Regland et al., op. cit.
96.
Guinness World Records Museum. http://www.guinnessmuseum.com/
exhibits.html

62
Canst thou not minister to a mind diseased;
Pluck from the memory a rooted sorrow;
Raze out the written troubles of the brain;
And, with some sweet oblivious antidote,
Cleanse the stuffed bosom of that perilous stuff
Which weighs upon the heart?
William Shakespeare, Macbeth

63
PULLING THE TRIGGER:
LOCATION, LOCATION, LOCATION
6
The most common diseases are the toughest to crack.
Heart disease, cancer, diabetes, psychiatric illness:
all of these are “complex” or “multi factorial” diseases,
meaning that they cannot be ascribed to mutations in
a single gene or to a single environmental factor.  Rather
they arise from the combined action of many genes,
environmental factors, and risk-conferring behaviours.
One of the greatest challenges facing biomedical re-
searchers today is to sort out how these contributing
factors interact in a way that translates into effective
strategies for disease diagnosis, prevention, and
therapy.
P. Kiberstis and L. Roberts1
The very slow speed with which reproduction is able to modify
the human genome ensures that epidemics cannot be driven
by genetic change.  Despite this, each of the five countries stud-
ied in detail by Torrey and Miller2 had experienced steadily
increasing schizophrenia prevalence rates for some two cen-
turies or more.  This slow but steady rise in the number of
schizophrenics proves, beyond any reasonable doubt, that there
must be more to this psychiatric illness than genetic mutation
alone.  However, identical twin studies3 show that there has to
be a very strong genetic dimension to schizophrenia.  After all,
the identical twin of a schizophrenic has roughly a 50-50 chance
of developing this illness, even if reared apart from his or her
sibling.4  Nevertheless, it is just as true that these same statis-
tics prove that half of the identical twins that “share” their genes

64
with a schizophrenic brother or sister never suffer from the
illness.  As Nicol and Gottesman5 point out, the available evi-
dence, therefore, shows that some members of the population
must “have a genetic predisposition to the disorder but that
this predisposition by itself is not sufficient for the develop-
ment of schizophrenia.”  Simply put, for genetic reasons some
people have a higher than normal probability of becoming schiz-
ophrenics.  Whether they do so, however, depends upon being
exposed to some trigger or triggers.  It is not yet agreed what
such initiator(s) may be, but the steady increase in the preva-
lence of schizophrenia over the past 250 years6 strongly sug-
gests that exposure is becoming more common.
GEOGRAPHICAL CONTRIBUTIONS—INTERNATIONAL
Numerous academic and clinical avenues have been used in
attempts to identify what it is that triggers schizophrenia in
genetically susceptible individuals.  One of these approaches
has been to study the genetic-trigger relationship geographi-
cally, since if the incidence and/or prevalence of schizophrenia
can be shown to vary markedly from place to place, so too must
their trigger(s).
A great deal can be learned about schizophrenia by studying
its distribution patterns.  This illness is still quite uncommon
in parts of the Developing World, but as countries industrialize
there is often a sharp accompanying increase in schizophrenia.
Even so, prevalence rates still display at least an eight-fold
difference among industrialized nations.7  The highest number
of schizophrenics per 100 population are found in Ireland, Scan-
dinavia (especially parts of northern Sweden), and in Eastern
Europe (particularly in Croatia).  In parts of Western Ireland,
for example, 4 out of 100 people will be afflicted with it during
their lifetime.  Intermediate prevalence rates for schizophrenia

65
can be found in England, Germany, Japan, and the USA.  In
the USA, for example, approximately 1 out of every 100 inhab-
itants will eventually develop this mental disorder.  Southern
Europe clearly has significantly lower prevalence rates but poor
data collection makes it difficult to establish them accurately.
This is also true of the Developing World although Field8 iden-
tified 41 schizophrenics during a survey of 4,283 Ashanti peo-
ple in southern Ghana.  This would suggest a schizophrenia
prevalence rate of about 4 per 1,000, roughly one-tenth that of
the worst affected parts of Ireland.
There is growing evidence to suggest that such global spatial
variations in numbers of schizophrenics in populations of sim-
ilar size may be more of a reflection of rates of recovery than
incidence.  That is, there seems to be less variation in the inci-
dence of schizophrenia than in its prevalence because patients
from non-literate, rural societies recover from this illness far
faster than those living in urban communities.  Evidence sup-
porting such rural-urban differences in the speed with which
schizophrenics often recover has been reported in South Afri-
ca,9 Nigeria,10 Mauritius,11 Sri Lanka,12 and Taiwan.13  It is not
logical to argue that these differences are just a question of
diagnosis.  An International Pilot Study of Schizophrenia, co-
ordinated by the World Health Organization, diagnosed patients
using identical criteria in both developing nations (Columbia,
India, and Nigeria) and developed countries (Denmark, England,
the Soviet Union, Czechoslovakia, and the USA).14  The initial
2-year follow-up of such schizophrenia patients showed con-
siderably better outcomes in those from the Developing World.
This negative relationship between schizophrenia and degree
of industrial development was again confirmed by Jablensky
and Sartorius.15  There are many reasons why such a relation-
ship may exist.  Templer and Veleber,16 for example, studied
schizophrenia prevalence rates and diet in 18 countries, estab-
lishing quite marked product moment correlation coefficients

66
between this illness and the consumption of both wheat (0.38,
0=0.06) and milk (0.58, p=0.01).  Their research suggested that
schizophrenia was more common in countries where wheat and
milk formed a significant part of the diet.  This concept was not
new since Dohan17-18 had been arguing for many years that
allergies to milk and grains were involved in schizophrenia.
This is interesting since Reading and Meillon19 have proposed
that susceptibility to milk and wheat allergies are inherited, a
fact that could be used to account for the proneness of certain
families to specific diseases, including schizophrenia.
GEOGRAPHICAL CONTRIBUTIONS—NATIONAL
The most comprehensive national study of variables in the prev-
alence of schizophrenia was undertaken by this author20 in the
mid 1980s.  Information was collected from the literature for
219 variables at the state scale for the conterminous United
States.  These variables included levels of 35 elements in soils
and surface sediments and air and water pollutants, together
with the frequencies of numerous social, industrial, commer-
cial, and agricultural activities.  Anyone interested in the orig-
inal sources of this information is directed to two previous books
on health and the environment published by the author.21-22
If the trigger(s) for schizophrenia is environmental, both it and
the illness it promotes must vary spatially together.  To explore
this possibility, health data, collected during the same time
period, for identical areas, was also needed.  The best sources
of information on the geographical distribution of schizophre-
nia in the USA are the annual surveys of Patients in Mental
Institutions, conducted by the Biometry Branch of the Office of
Program Planning and Evaluation, National Institute of Mental
Health.23  These volumes enumerate patients in state and county
mental hospitals that provide psychiatric care.  Since much of

67
the environmental information had been collected in the 1960s,
it was decided to use medical data from 1965.  Unfortunately,
information from state and country mental institutions was not
compatible with that from private and general hospitals.  Whilst
details of the number of patients being treated for schizophrenic
reactions at the end of 1965 were given for 272 state and coun-
ty mental hospitals, other institutions reported only admission
and discharge rates for schizophrenics.  Initial analysis, there-
fore, was restricted to schizophrenic patients in state and county
mental facilities, many of these needing long term care.  The
data used to compare the prevalence of schizophrenia was
obtained by dividing the number of patients recorded from each
state by the total population of that state, as established by
the 1960 census.  Prevalence rates in 1965 were particularly
high in the northeastern USA.
While each of the 219 geographical variables could have been
mapped and visually compared with the USA prevalence of
schizophrenia, this would have been a long, subjective, and
tedious process.  A statistical comparison, using Pearson cor-
relation coefficients achieved the same goal both much more
easily and accurately.  It should be remembered that a high
positive correlation between the 1965 USA distribution of
schizophrenics and a particular variable, indicates that the two
tend to rise and fall together from state to state.  This suggests
that the variable may be a trigger for the illness.  Conversely, a
strong negative correlation between schizophrenia prevalence
and a geographical variable demonstrates that when one is
common the other is not.  This implies that a deficiency of this
variable may trigger the illness.
Using this statistical approach it was found that the preva-
lence of schizophrenia in state and country mental hospitals in
1965 showed the strongest positive correlation with selenium
deficient fodder crops (r=0.58497, p=0.0001).  In contrast, the

68
highest negative correlation occurred between schizophrenia
and sunlight (r=-0.57024, p=0.0001).  What these results mean
is that schizophrenia was found to be most common in those
states in the USA where the agricultural soils were deficient in
the trace element selenium but tended to be relatively uncom-
mon in states receiving high levels of sunlight.  A subsequent
comparison of the prevalence means for the states with soils
highest and lowest in selenium produced a relative risk of 1.77:1.
This means that in selenium deficient states, schizophrenia in
1965 was almost twice as common as in those where soil levels
of this element are elevated.24
There were also several strong positive correlations with evi-
dence of industrial activity, namely the proportion of the pop-
ulation employed by manufacturing industries (r=0.55393),
industrial water withdrawal (r=0.54871), population density of
the state (r=0.53936), the number of toxic waste sites per unit
area (r=0.51000, p=0.0003), and the use of road salt (r=0.50225,
p=0.0004) (p=0.0001 unless otherwise stated).  Also of signif-
icance appeared to be the reasonably strong negative corre-
lations with soils that contained very high levels of calcium
(r=-0.45784, p=0.0014) and were enriched in strontium (r=
-0.43360, p=0.0026).
Correlations, such as these, do not prove cause and effect.  What
they do, however, is to stimulate hypotheses that can then be
tested more rigorously.  The proceeding study seems to suggest
that in some way the triggering of schizophrenia in genetically
susceptible individuals may involve deficiencies of selenium
and /or calcium and/or sunlight and is most likely to occur in
highly polluted urban areas.  The evidence for and against these
possibilities is reviewed later in detail.
Two subsequent studies have further supported the possibility
that selenium deficiency may play a role in schizophrenia.

69
After the publication of my paper, Brown25 decided to explore
this idea and conducted a more detailed survey of the USA se-
lenium-schizophrenia relationship.  To do this, he used 2-by-2
contingency tables to compare prevalence data from the nine
USA schizophrenia surveys that had been conducted between
1880 and 1963 with selenium deficiency in crops.  This analy-
sis provided further evidence of a significant correlation between
schizophrenia and low environmental selenium (p<0.0001; Yates
corrected chi-square).  Simply put, for the entire time period for
which reliable information has been available, schizophrenia
has been most common in those states where the environment
contains the lowest levels of the trace element selenium.  This
continuity suggests that the relationship between selenium
deficiency and schizophrenia, first identified for the year 1965
in my own survey,26 is not the result of any statistical quirk but
rather reflects a long-term association.  This does not, of course,
prove a causal link, but it is certainly consistent with one.
In the book, Reducing Cancer Mortality: A Geographical Perspec-
tive,27 I argued that global variations in deaths from cancers of
the esophagus seemed to strongly reflect differences in environ-
mental selenium and calcium.  That is, mortality from cancers
of the throat seems to be much more common in communities
situated in regions where, for geological reasons, soil selenium
and calcium levels are low.  A similar relationship appears to
occur between these two elements and schizophrenia.28  If  these
suggestions are correct, it follows that rates of both these ill-
nesses should rise and fall together, depending on the availa-
bility of selenium and calcium in the foodchain.29  This may be
the case.  In 1990, Templer and his colleagues30 correlated a
series of medical and geographical variables with indicators of
schizophrenia’s frequency in both Italy and the USA.  Only one
of these variables, mortality from cancer of the esophagus, cor-
related positively and significantly in both countries.  That is,
only one of them, death from cancer of the esophagus, rose

70
and fell together with schizophrenia both in the districts of
Italy and the states of the USA.  This, of course, is what might
be expected if there were some sort of link between a low in-
take of both selenium and calcium and the development of
both schizophrenia and esophageal cancer.
In an attempt to explore this hypothesis further, I compared
Arieti’s map of first hospital admission rates for schizophrenia
for Italian districts, for the period 1947 to 1949 with Dainelli’s32
geological map of that country.  During that time period, the
highest schizophrenic admission rates had occurred in districts
located in the low calcium predominantly Paleozoic rocks of
the north.33  Examples include Emilia with 12.2, Lombardy
with 11.8, and Venezia with 9.4 schizophrenic hospital admis-
sions per 100,000 inhabitants, each year.  In contrast, in Puglie,
in Italy’s “heel,” where there are large outcrops of Cretaceous
calcium-enriched chalk, the annual admission rate had been
only 4.9 per 100, 000.  However, the admission rates were also
low in Sardinia, where the rocks are not of Mesozoic origin.
Obviously, while the Italian evidence is not conclusive, it cer-
tainly seems consistent with the possibility that both high cal-
cium environments and sunlight tend to reduce the incidence
of schizophrenia.
Torrey and coworkers34 have confirmed recently that schizo-
phrenia is more common in urban than in rural areas.  Using
information from the Danish national case registry, these re-
searchers divided the country into 217 regions which were used
in a study of the geography of the birthplaces of 2,199 schizo-
phrenics.  Using log-linear Poisson regression, the data were
analysed by age, gender, month of birth, genetic relatedness,
and degree of urbanization.  Torrey and colleagues concluded
that the degree of urbanization of the place of birth could ex-
plain more of the clustering of schizophrenics, in Denmark,
than any of the other variables examined.

71
Schizophrenia is an age specific disease that is usually first
diagnosed in patients between the ages of 18 and 30.  Geo-
graphical analysis, however, strongly suggests that it has
its roots much earlier in life.  It has been demonstrated, in
every country in the northern hemisphere where the issue
has been examined, that the birth dates of schizophrenics oc-
cur in higher numbers during the colder months of the year.35
Hare and colleagues,36 for example, have shown that in Eng-
land and Wales a disproportionate number of schizophrenics
have January, February, and March birthdays.  This was also
discovered to be the case in both Norway37 and Denmark.38
A fairly similar cold weather birth peak also has been identi-
fied in Sweden, Ireland, the USA, Japan, Germany, and the
Philippines.39  As Torrey40 points out, “together these studies
included over 125,000 schizophrenic patients and conclusive-
ly established the winter-spring seasonality of schizophrenic
births in the Northern Hemisphere.”  The magnitude of this
cold season excess of schizophrenic birthdays is generally be-
tween 6 and 10 percent.  Although there is some evidence of
seasonality in the birthdays of schizophrenic patients in the
southern hemisphere, it is, as yet, not as convincing.  However,
when McGrath and colleagues41 compared the birth dates of
patients born in the northern and southern hemispheres, in a
sample of 9,348 Australian schizophrenics, they identified a
significant difference.  Interestingly, in Singapore42 where the
birth dates of 9,655 schizophrenics were analysed, there ap-
peared to be no such fluctuation.  This is not surprising be-
cause in such equatorial areas there are no formal seasons of
the year.
The seasonality of schizophrenia birth rates, therefore, shows
on a global scale that the trigger(s) for schizophrenia varies in
intensity with the seasons.  While this fact seems to support
the possibility of the involvement of sunlight intensity in the
disorder, it should be remembered that a large number of other

72
geographical variables ranging from trace element levels in
drinking water and food to viral infection also tend to fluctuate
with the seasons.
GEOGRAPHICAL CONTRIBUTIONS—LOCAL
As early as 1939, Faris and Dunhan43 demonstrated that in
Chicago schizophrenics tended to live on the fringes of the
central business district in what is often called the ‘Zone of
Transition’ by geographers.  A similar distribution pattern was
later recognized in English cities, in Nottingham,44 Plymouth,45
and Brighton.46  Two basic theories have been put forward in
efforts to explain this clustering phenomenon.47  The breeder
theory argues that it is the social and/or physical character-
istics of the environment in these particular high prevalence
zones that cause mental illness in abnormally high numbers
of their population.  That is, the trigger(s) that promote the
development of schizophrenia in genetically predisposed indi-
viduals are especially common surrounding the central busi-
ness districts of large cities.  The drift theory,48 in contrast,
suggests that the alienation, loss of confidence and economic
loss that accompanies the symptoms of schizophrenia causes
a decline in status that often forces those with this mental
illness to relocate in poor quality, older housing on the fringes
of the prosperous central business district.
Beyond its spatial dimensions, schizophrenia displays a socio-
economic dimension.  The illness occurs most often amongst
the poor in England, Ireland, Norway, Iceland, the USA, and
Japan, but in India, and possibly Italy, it is more prevalent
amongst the rich.49

73
SUMMARY
Infants destined to become schizophrenics are most often born
in the coldest season of the year, to lower class mothers who
live in the urban centres of temperate industrialized nations.
Symptoms of their mental illness begin to become apparent in
early adulthood.  If not institutionalized, schizophrenics often
congregate in the ‘Zone of Transition,’ that is in the older,
dilapidated properties that ring the central business districts
of urban cores.  Their diets tend to include milk and wheat
from agricultural areas where soils are calcium and selenium
deficient.  Clearly, this is a stereotype but it is based on some
50 geographical studies that together ought to be of value in
identifying the trigger(s) that cause the development of schizo-
phrenia in the genetically susceptible.
REFERENCES
1.
Kiberstis, P., and Roberts, L. (2002).  It’s not just the genes. Science,
296(5568), 685.
2.
Torrey, E.F., and Miller, J. (2001).  The invisible plague: The rise of men-
tal illness from 1750 to the present. New Brunswick: Rutgers
University Press.
3.
Gottesman, I.I. (1991).  Schizophrenia genesis: The origins of madness.
New York: Freeman.
4.
Myers, D.G. (1992).  Psychology. New York: Worth.
5.
Nicol, S.E., and Gottesman, I.I. (1983).  Clues to the genetics and neuro-
biology of schizophrenia. American Scientist, 71, 398-404.
6.
Torrey and Miller, op. cit.
7.
Torrey, E.F. (1987).  Prevalence studies in schizophrenia. British Jour-
nal of Psychiatry, 150, 598-608.
8.
Field, M.J. (1960).  Search for security: An ethno-psychiatric study of
rural Ghana. Evanston: Northwestern University Press.
9.
Lamont, A.M., and Blignault, W.J. (1953).  A study of male Bantu
admissions at Weskoppies during 1952. South African Medical Jour-
nal, 27, 637-639.

74
10.
Lambo, T.A. (1965).  Schizophrenic and borderline states. In A.V. de
Reuck and R. Porter (Eds.), Transcultural psychiatry (pp. 62-75).
Boston: Little Brown.
11.
Murphy, H.B.M., and Raman, A.C. (1971).  The chronicity of schizo-
phrenia in indigenous tropical peoples. British Journal of Psychia-
try, 118, 489-497.
12.
Waxler, N.E. (1979).  Is outcome for schizophrenia better in non-indus-
trial societies? The case of Sri Lanka. Journal of Nervous and Men-
tal Disease, 167, 144-158.
13.
Lin, T.Y. (1965).  Discussion. In A.V. de Reuck and R. Porter (Eds.),
Transcultural psychiatry (pp. ??-??). Boston: Little Brown. Cited by
Torrey, op. cit., p. 206.
14.
Cited by Torrey, E.F. (1980).  Schizophrenia and civilization. New York:
Jason Aronson.
15.
Jablensky A., and Sartorius, N. (1988).  Is schizophrenia universal?
Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica-Supplementum, 344, 65-70.
16.
Templer, D., and Veleber, D.M. (1980).  Schizophrenia prevalence: Wheat,
milk and temperature. Journal of Orthomolecular Psychiatry, 9(4),
284-286.
17.
Dohan, F.C. (1966).  Cereals and schizophrenia: Data and hypothesis.
Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 42, 125-152.
18.
Dohan, F.C., and Grassberger, J.C. (1973).  Relapsed schizophrenics:
Earlier discharge from the hospital after cereal-free, milk-free diet.
American Journal of Psychiatry, 130, 685-688.
19.
Reading, C.M., and Meillon, R.S. (1988).  Your family tree connection.
New Canaan, Connecticut: Keats.
20.
Foster, H.D. (1988).  The geography of schizophrenia: Possible links
with selenium and calcium deficiencies, inadequate exposure to
sunlight and industrialization. Journal of Orthomolecular Medicine,
3(3), 135-140.
21.
Foster, H.D. (1986).  Reducing cancer mortality: A geographical perspec-
tive. Western Geographical Series, Vol. 23. Victoria, BC: Western
Geographical Press.
22.
Foster, H.D. (1992).  Health, disease and the environment. London:
Belhaven.
23.
US Department of Health, Education and Welfare, Public Health Serv-
ice, National Institute of Mental Health, Survey and Reports Sec-
tion, Biometry Branch (1967).  Patients in Mental Institutions 1965
Part II: State and County Mental hospitals, PHSP No. 1597. Chevy
Chase, MD.

75
24.
Brown, J.S., and Foster, H.D. (1996).  Schizophrenia: An update of the
selenium deficiency hypothesis. Journal of Orthomolecular Medi-
cine, 11(4), 211-222.
25.
Brown, J.S. (1994).  Role of selenium and other trace elements in the
geography of schizophrenia. Schizophrenia Bulletin, 20(2), 387-398.
26.
Foster (1988), op. cit.
27.
Foster (1986), op. cit.
28.
Foster, H.D. (1990).  Schizophrenia and esophageal cancer: Comments
on similarities in their spatial distributions. Journal of Orthomo-
lecular Medicine, 5(3), 129-134.
29.
Ibid.
30.
Templer, D.I., Hughey, B., Chalguijian, H., Lavoie, M., Trent, N.H.,
Sahwell, R., and Spencer, D.A. (1990).  Multiple sclerosis, schizo-
phrenia, temperature and latitude. Journal of Orthomolecular Medi-
cine, 5(3), 125-128.
31.
Arieti, S. (1974).  Interpretation of schizophrenia. New York: Basic Books.
32.
Dainelli, G. (1940).  Atlante Fisico Economico d’Italia. Costituzione
Litologica. Scale 1:2,500,000. Milano: Consociazione Turistica
Italiana.
33.
Foster (1992), op. cit.
34.
Torrey, E.F., Mortensen, P.B., Pedersen, C.B., Wohlfahrt, J., and Melby,
M. (2001).  Risk factors and confounders in the geographical clus-
tering of schizophrenia. Schizophrenia Research, 49(3), 295-299.
35.
Torrey (1980), op. cit.
36.
Hare, E.H., Price, J.S., and Slater, E. (1974).  Mental disorder and sea-
son of birth. British Journal of Psychiatry, 124, 81-86.
37.
Odegaard, O. (1974).  Season of birth in the general population and in
patients with mental disorder in Norway. British Journal of Psy-
chiatry, 125, 397-405.
38.
Videbech, T.H., Week, A., and Dupont, A. (1974).  Endogenous psy-
choses and season of birth. Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 50,
202-218.
39.
Torrey (1980), op. cit.
40.
Ibid.
41.
McGrath, J., Welham, J., and Pemberton, M. (1995).  Month of birth,
hemisphere of birth and schizophrenia. British Journal of Psychiatry,
167(6), 783-785.

76
42.
Parker, G., Mahendran, R., Koh, E.S., and Machin, D. (2000).  Season
of birth in schizophrenia: No latitude at the equator. British Jour-
nal of Psychiatry, 176, 68-71.
43.
Faris, R., and Dunham, H. (1939).  Mental disorders in urban areas.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
44.
Giggs, J. (1973).  The distribution of schizophrenics in Nottingham. Trans-
actions of the Institute of British Geographers, 59, 55-76.
45.
Dean K., and James, H. (1981).  Social factors and admission to psychi-
atric hospital: Schizophrenia in Plymouth. Transactions of the In-
stitute of British Geographers, 6, 39-52.
46.
Bagley, C., Jacobsen, S., and Palmer, C. (1973).  Social structure and
the ecological distribution of mental illness, suicide and delin-
quency. Psychological Medicine, 3, 177-187.
47.
Jones, K., and Moon, G. (1987).  Health, disease and society. London:
Routledge and Kegan Paul.
48.
Myerson, A. (1940), cited in Ibid, p. 202.
49.
Torrey (1980), op. cit.

77
NO BARKING DOGS:  MEDICAL ANOMALIES
7
Inspector Gregory:  “Is there any other point to which
you would wish to draw my attention?”
Holmes:  “To the curious incident of the dog in the
night-time.”
“The dog did nothing in the night-time.”
“That was the curious incident,” remarked Sherlock
Holmes.
The Adventure of Silver Blaze,
Arthur Conan Doyle (1892)
As Arthur Conan Doyle so clearly showed in The Adventure of
Silver Blaze,1 sometimes what does not happen can be the key
to solving a mystery.  The dog had seen no reason to bark
because it knew and trusted the criminal, greatly reducing the
length of Sherlock Holmes’ list of suspects.
CANCER
Schizophrenics typically are heavy smokers, but very rarely do
they develop lung cancer.  Together with Abram Hoffer, I have
argued that this medical anomaly may eventually provide new
treatments for both disorders.2  About 33 percent of Americans
smoke, but this figure rises to 90 percent amongst USA schizo-
phrenics.3-4  Similarly, in Ireland about 49 percent of males and
36 percent of females smoke, compared to 92 percent of chronic

78
male and 82 percent of chronic female schizophrenics.5  Indeed,
every available study confirms that schizophrenics are much
more likely to smoke than are the general population.  Not only
that, but, as already pointed out in the previous chapter, they
tend to live in selenium deficient regions and their serum dis-
plays depressed levels of the enzyme glutathione peroxidase.
This is significant because this selenoenzyme plays a major
role in the body’s defence against the free radical damage caused
by smoking.  Schizophrenics then are exceptionally heavy smok-
ers who lack a key enzyme which protects against cancer.
It follows that lung cancer must be rampant amongst schizo-
phrenics.  Strangely it is not.  Indeed, the available evidence
suggests it is rare.  As early as 1893, Snow6 suggested psychi-
atric patients never developed cancer.  This is an exaggeration
today, but the evidence is good that they are very unlikely to
die of it, especially of cancer of the lung.  In 1979, Rice7 claimed
that there had never been a recorded case of bronchogenic
carcinoma in a hospitalized chronic schizophrenic, despite that
group’s abnormally high tobacco use.  Craig and Lin8 also
documented a depressed incidence of lung cancer in chronic
schizophrenic smokers.  Probably, the most comprehensive
study of the occurrence of cancer amongst schizophrenics was
conducted by Gulbinat and colleagues.9  They also established
very low relative risks of lung cancer, during the period 1957
to 1980, amongst Dutch male (rr = 0.38) and female (rr = 0.33)
schizophrenics.  Similarly, in Canada, Hoffer10 has treated some
4,000 schizophrenics since 1952.  There have been only five
cases of cancer amongst them; lymphoma, thyroid cancer, and
three examples of breast cancer.  In every case, the patient
responded well to treatment and is still alive.
All the available evidence then suggests that schizophrenics
are very heavy smokers who, nevertheless, die far less fre-
quently of lung cancer than the general public.  This low lung

79
cancer incidence has been recorded amongst the patients of
both conventional and unconventional physicians over a long
time period.  It appears very likely, therefore, that it cannot be
due to treatment but must be related to the biochemistry of
the mental illness itself.
RHEUMOTOID ARTHRITIS
Lung cancer is not the only illness that appears to be less
common than normal in schizophrenics.  As early as 1936,
Nissen and Spencer11 noted that patients with arthritis rarely
suffered from psychotic disorders.  Conversely, schizophrenics
developed arthritis less often than might be expected.  Oken
and Schulzer12 conducted a meta-analysis of this negative re-
lationship in 1999.  These researchers combined their own
data with that from 14 earlier studies, 12 of which had con-
firmed this lack of comorbidity.  In total, rheumatoid arthritis
was discovered to have occurred in only 31 of 28,953 schizo-
phrenics, a mean frequency of 0.107 percent—well below the
expected range of 1 percent.  This evidence strongly suggests
that rheumatoid arthritis is, indeed, relatively uncommon in
schizophrenics.
As Torrey and Yolken13 point out, schizophrenia and rheuma-
toid arthritis share many similarities.  Both are chronic, re-
lapsing diseases of unknown etiology.  Both became prominent
early in the 19th century and affect approximately 1 percent of
the European and North American populations.  Both run in
families and have a high pair wise concordance among identi-
cal twins, so that if one such twin has rheumatoid arthritis
there is about a 30 percent chance of it developing in the
other.  Both schizophrenia and rheumatoid arthritis are more
common in urban than rural areas.  Nevertheless, having one
appears to reduce the chance of suffering from the other.

80
PAIN THRESHOLD
There is extensive literature indicating that schizophrenics are
insensitive to pain, especially during psychotic episodes.  This
is as true of physical pain associated with illness or injury as it
is of deliberately inflicted experimental pain.14  The strong evi-
dence for this phenomenon has been summarized by Dworkin15
in The Schizophrenia Bulletin and there are numerous case his-
tories to support it.  Horrobin16 recalls a patient who jumped
from a high window, picked himself up, and walked a mile to
the nearest bus stop.  Later that day he was found behaving
distractedly in the local town centre and was returned to the
hospital.  He had no complaints, but a routine medical exam-
ination discovered two broken ankle bones.  In a healthy per-
son such breaks would have caused agony, but the patient
had walked around for half a day without feeling the pain.
Another example of such pain insensitivity was that of a hospi-
talized schizophrenic patient who seemed unwell to the nurse
on duty, despite claiming to be in good health.17  Although the
individual did not complain of any problems, the nurse even-
tually called for the doctor.  A clinical examination suggested a
ruptured appendix, later confirmed by operation.  This con-
dition is normally exceptionally painful but the patient felt
nothing to complain about.
MALARIA
In 1927, the Austrian psychiatrist, Julius Wagner-Jauregg won
a Nobel Prize for treating psychosis with malaria.18  He had
discovered that the fevers and high temperatures caused by
malaria could kill the spirochaete bacterium, Treponema pal-
lidium, that caused syphilis.  This bacterium is very sensitive
to temperature and a rise of a few degrees will kill it.  Patients
and doctors were happy to exchange malaria for syphilis and

81
so avoid the dementia eventually caused by the latter.  Malaria
therapy continued to be widely used until the 1950s, when
penicillin became the accepted treatment for cerebral syphilis.
Naturally, Wagner-Jauregg also wanted to see what effect
malaria would have on the other large group of patients in
mental hospitals, schizophrenics.  The impact of deliberately
giving malaria to schizophrenics was even more unexpected.
To quote Horrobin:19
As the first fever took hold, a few days after the delib-
erate infection, the schizophrenic patients seemed to
lose their psychosis. But sadly, when the fever came
down, the psychosis returned. In contrast to the situa-
tion with syphilis, there was no long-term improvement
and certainly no cure.
Nevertheless, elevated temperatures or other fever-related
changes must somehow depress one or more of the biochem-
ical processes causing schizophrenic psychosis.
HERPES
The experimental infection of the rat neonatal brain with herpes
simplex virus type 1 (HSV-1) has been shown to delay the de-
velopment of prepulse inhibition of acoustic startle.20  This brain
function is also known to be diminished in schizophrenia.  The
question arises then, “Is there evidence that maternal herpes
infection can increase the probability of the development of
schizophrenia in her offspring?”  The answer to this question
appears to be yes.
Pandurangi and coworkers21 discovered that schizophrenics
with abnormally high serum levels of antibodies to the herpes
virus had more extensive cortical atrophy, a smaller left fron-
tal brain area, and a larger second quadrant of the corpus

82
callosum.  In short, schizophrenics that had been infected, at
some time, with herpes displayed more obvious brain anoma-
lies than those who had not.  It appears that many such schiz-
ophrenics were exposed to herpes in the womb.  Buka and
colleagues22 conducted a nested case-control study of 27 schiz-
ophrenics and 54 matched volunteers.  Stored blood samples,
taken from their mothers at the end of pregnancy, were ana-
lysed for specific antibodies.  This research showed that the
children of mothers whose blood contained elevated antibod-
ies to herpes simplex virus type 2 were at increased risk of
developing schizophrenia and other psychotic illnesses later
in life.
CELIAC DISEASE AND OTHER ALLERGIES
Patients with celiac disease are unable to adequately absorb
fats, certain starches, and some sugars.  This digestive tract
disorder has been connected with an allergy to gluten, a
grain protein.23  As a consequence of this maldigestion, celiacs
often become deficient in a wide variety of nutrients including
fats, folic acid, vitamins A, B12, D, E, K, copper, iron, and
selenium.24  Interestingly, many schizophrenics test positive
for celiac disease.25  Conversely, relatives of celiacs tend to de-
velop schizophrenia more often than normal.26-27  There is con-
flicting evidence on whether or not schizophrenics have
abnormal intestinal absorption.28-29  This tendency may be a
consequence of their medications.  Nevertheless, some schizo-
phrenics certainly improve on gluten-free diets.30
The conventional viewpoint is that schizophrenics are rarely
allergic.31  Conversely, many alternative physicians consider
brain allergies to be the root cause of schizophrenia and base
their treatments around this belief.32  Why this disagreement
may be occurring is discussed in detail in a later chapter.

83
TICK-BORNE ENCEPHALITIS
Brown33 has shown that there is a strong positive geographical
association between schizophrenia prevalence in the USA and
the distribution of Lyme disease together with its primary vec-
tors, Ixodid ticks.  Such Ixodid ticks are responsible, in North
America and throughout the world, for the spread of encepha-
litis.  Interestingly, tick-borne encephalitis occurs most often
in countries, including Croatia, Norway, Finland, Germany, and
Ireland, where the highest rates of schizophrenia also are
found.34  Recently, Fritzche and Schmidli35 have argued that
the dual seasonality of schizophrenic births in Switzerland
“mirrors the seasonal concentration of ticks (Ixodes ricinus)
nine months earlier, with a major peak in spring and a minor
peak in autumn separated by a decrease in humidity in the
summer.”  These authors believe that maternal infection by
Borrelia burgdorferi through tick bites is an environmental de-
terminant of schizophrenia.  This is an interesting hypothesis
that deserves further examination.
SUMMARY
The evidence just presented suggests that maternal infections
during pregnancy, such as herpes simplex virus type 2 (HSV-2)
and tick-borne encephalitis, may increase the future risk of
schizophrenia in offspring.  The biochemical abnormalities
associated with schizophrenia may also help to prevent lung
cancer and rheumatoid arthritis.  A final group of anomalies,
such as an insensitivity to pain, a decline of symptoms with
increasing body temperature, and susceptibility to celiac dis-
ease, provide direct insights into the biochemistry of schizo-
phrenia itself.

84
REFERENCES
1.
Doyle, A.C. (1982).  Memoirs of Sherlock Holmes XIII - The Adventure of
Silver Blaze.  http://www.geocities.com/Athens/Delphi/9404/
holmes2_1.html
2.
Hoffer, A., and Foster, H.D. (2000).  Why schizophrenics smoke but
have a lower incidence of lung cancer: Implications for the treat-
ment of both disorders. Journal of Orthomolecular Medicine, 15(3),
141-144.
3.
Lohr, J.B., and Flynn, K. (1992).  Smoking and schizophrenia. Schizo-
phrenia Research, 8(2), 93-102.
4.
McEnvoy, J.P., Freudenreich, O., and Wilson, W.H. (1999).  Smoking
and therapeutic response to clozapine in patients with schizophre-
nia. Biological Psychiatry, 46(1), 125-129.
5.
Masterson, E., and O’Shea, B. (1984).  Smoking and malignancy in
schizophrenia. British Journal of Psychiatry, 145, 429-432.
6.
Snow, H. (1893).  A treatise: Practical and theoretic on cancers and the
cancer process. London: J. and A. Churchill.
7.
Rice, D. (1979).  No lung cancer in schizophrenics. British Journal of
Psychiatry, 134, 128.
8.
Craig, T.J., and Lin, S.P. (1981).  Cancer and mental illness. Compre-
hensive Psychiatry, 22, 404-410.
9.
Gulbinat, W., Dupoint, A., and Jablensky, A. (1992).  Cancer incidence
of schizophrenic patients. Results of record linkage studies in three
countries. British Journal of Psychiatry Supplement, 18, 75-83.
10.
Hoffer and Foster (2000), op. cit.
11.
Nisson, A.A., and Spencer, K.A. (1936).  The psychogenic problem (endo-
crinal and metabolic) in chronic arthritis. New England Journal of
Medicine, 214, 576-581.
12.
Oken, R.J., and Schulzer, M. (1999).  At issue: Schizophrenia and rheu-
matoid arthritis: The negative association revisited. Schizophrenia
Bulletin, 25(4), 625-638.
13.
Torrey, E.F., and Yolken, R.H. (2001).  The schizophrenia-rheumatoid
arthritis connection: Infectious, immune, or both? Brain Behavior
and Immunity, 15(4), 401-410.
14.
Dworkin, R.H. (1994).  Pain insensitivity in schizophrenia: A neglected
phenomenon and some implications. Schizophrenia Bulletin, 20(2),
235-248.

85
15.
Ibid.
16.
Horrobin, D. (2002).  The Madness of Adam and Eve. London: Trans-
world Publishers.
17.
Ibid.
18.
Ibid.
19.
Ibid.
20.
Engel, J.A., Zhang, J., Bergstrom, T., Conradi, N. Forkstam, C., Liljeroth,
A., and Svensson, L. (2000).  Neonatal herpes simplex virus type 1
brain infection affects the development of sensorimotor gating in
rats. Brain Research, 863(102), 233-240.
21.
Pandurangi, A.K., Pelonero, A.L., Nadel, L., and Calabrese, V.P. (1994).
Brain structure changes in schizophrenics with high serum titers
of antibodies to herpes virus. Schizophrenia Research, 11(3), 245-
250.
22.
Buka, S.L., Tsuang, M.T., Torrey, E.F., Kleganoff, M.A., Bernstein, D.,
and Yolken, R.H. (2001).  Maternal infections and subsequent
psychosis among offspring. Archives of General Psychiatry, 58(11),
1032-1037.
23.
Werbach, M.R. (1988).  Nutritional influences on illness: A source book of
clinical research. Tarzana, California: Third Line Press.
24.
Ibid.
25.
Dohan, F.C. (1980).  Hypothesis: Genes and neuroactive peptides from
food as a cause of schizophrenia. In E. Costa and M. Trabucchi
(Eds.), Neural peptides and neuronal communication (pp. 535-538).
New York: Raven Press.
26.
Dohan, F.C., and Grassberger, J.C. (1973).  Relapsed schizophrenics:
Earlier discharge from the hospital after cereal-free, milk-free diet.
American Journal of Psychiatry, 130, 685-688.
27.
Ashbenazi, A., Drasilowsky, D., and Levin, P. (1979).  Immunological
reaction of psychotic patients to fraction of gluten. American Jour-
nal of Psychiatry, 136, 1306-1309.
28.
Wood, N.C., Hamilton, I., Axon, A.T., Khan, S.A., Quirke, P., Mindham,
R.H., McGuigan, K., and Prison, H.M. (1987).  Abnormal intestinal
permeability: An aetiological factor in chronic psychiatric disease?
British Journal of Psychiatry, 150, 853-856.
29.
Lambert, M.T., Bjarnason, I., Connelly, J., Crow, T.J. Johnston, E.C.,
Peters, T.J., and Smethurst, P. (1989).  Small intestine permeabil-
ity in schizophrenia. British Journal of Psychiatry, 155, 619-622.

86
30.
De Santis, A., Addolorato, G., Romito, A., Caputo, S., Giordano, A.,
Gambassi, G., Taranto, C., Manna, R., and Gasbarrini, G. (1997).
Schizophrenic symptoms and SPECT abnormalities in a coeliac
patient: Regression after a gluten-free diet. Journal of Internal Medi-
cine, 242(5), 421-423.
31.
Goldman, L.S. (1999).  Medical illnesses in patients with schizophrenia.
Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 60 Suppl 21, 10-15.
32.
Cott, A. (1971).  Controlled fasting treatment of schizophrenia in the
USSR. Schizophrenia, 3, 2-10.
33.
Brown, J.S. Jr. (1994).  Geographic correlation of schizophrenia to ticks
and tick-borne encephalitis. Schizophrenia Bulletin 20(4), 755-775.
34.
Ibid.
35.
Fritzsche, M., and Schmidli, J. (2002).  Seasonal fluctuations in schizo-
phrenia. American Journal of Psychiatry, 159(3), 499-500.

87
UNCONVENTIONAL TREATMENTS
8
The way of the world is to praise dead saints, and
persecute living ones.
Nathaniel Howe1
Thomas Alva Edison (1847-1931) was probably the greatest
and most prolific inventor the world has ever known.2  He started
inventing at an early age, continuing until his death, and was
granted a total of over 1,000 patents, including those for the
electric light, phonograph, and motion-picture camera.  These
inventions in turn permitted the development of several enor-
mous industries, including the electric utilities and the record-
ing and motion picture industries.  How could one man be so
prolifically creative?
After patenting his phonograph, Edison began attempting to
develop an electric light bulb that would be suitable for the
home.  He wanted to use a glowing wire or filament, made out
of a substance that was able to endure very high temperatures,
yet did not burn out, melt or fuse.  Edison and his staff tried
hundreds of possible filaments, quickly discarding those that
did not meet these criteria.  After more than a year of hard
work, Edison developed a high-resistance carbon-thread that
burned steadily for over 40 hours.  This became the first effec-
tive incandescent electric light because it lasted a long time
and used a small current.  Edison, therefore, produced some
of the most influential inventions of the 19th and 20th century

88
by trial and error.  He experimented to see whether or not some-
thing was effective.  If it was not, he abandoned it and quickly
moved on.  If it was effective, he rapidly put it to practical use.3
This is the approach that has been taken by several unortho-
dox physicians who have developed their own treatments for
schizophrenia.  I know some of them personally and have met
former schizophrenics who have been treated by them and now
appear completely normal.  Others, I am simply aware of through
the published alternative literature and am impressed by their
results.  This chapter describes what I consider to be the five
most effective unconventional approaches to the treatment of
schizophrenia and the innovators who were behind their
development.
CONTROLLED FASTING
The Moscow Psychiatric Institute, a huge 3,000-bed research
centre, contained a 77 patient unit headed by Dr. Uri Nick-
olayev that, for over 20 years, treated schizophrenics with 20
to 30 day fasts.4  The large majority of patients had requested
admission to this unit, but a few were transferred to it after all
conventional treatments had failed.
Throughout the fasts, patients were obliged to drink a mini-
mum of one litre of water each day.  Most drank much more.
They were also expected to exercise for at least 3 hours daily,
participating in outdoor walks, deep breathing classes, and
other physical exertions.  There was also a regimen of daily
cleansing enemas, baths, showers, and massage.  During a
typical 28-day fast, patients lost 15-16 percent of their total
body weight, but their skin colour remained good and muscle
tone healthy.  At the conclusion of their fasts, patients stayed
in the hospital where they were fed a salt-free, fruit, vegetable,
and milk diet.  The amounts of food and its caloric value were

89
gradually increased.  Meat, eggs, and fish were excluded from
the diet and bread was not eaten until the sixth or seventh
day.  Patients were normally discharged after they had been
eating for a length of time equivalent to that spent fasting.  They
were advised to continue taking regular prophylactic fasts of
some 3 to 5 days in length but were told not to abstain from
eating for more than 10 days in any one month.  Fasting stopped
when a patient’s appetite was fully restored, tongue became
clean, and symptoms had been alleviated.  Anyone thinking of
using fasts to treat mental illness should read Cott’s article in
Schizophrenia which provides far more detail, including the
risks involved.  Contraindications for the use of Dr. Nickolayev’s
fasting treatment, for example, are heart problems (such as his-
tory of cardiac arrythmas or of thrombosis), tumours, ulcers,
and pulmonary disease.
Such fasting seemed to work well.  Symptoms greatly improved
in 64 percent of all chronic schizophrenics completing the
Soviet program.  Effects were most obvious 2 or 3 months after
recovery began, provided the prescribed diet had been faithful-
ly followed.  Unfortunately, although paranoid schizophrenics
showed marked improvement while fasting, this diminished
after they began eating once again.  Other types of schizophren-
ics tended to continue to improve provided they ate only the
suggested diet.
Dr. Juli Shapiro studied many of the schizophrenic patients
undergoing this fasting/diet regime, discovering that fasting
had a major impact on histamine levels.5  This was because
during the time patients abstained from eating, large quan-
tities of heparin formed in tissue surrounding blood vessels.
This lowered histamine levels.  It was discovered also that
catecholamines were depressed in the urine of schizophrenics,
prior to fasting.  During fasts, their urine catecholamines nor-
malized and then in the early part of the recovery period rose

90
above levels seen in controls.  Eventually, they stabilized at
levels seen in normal, healthy individuals.  The elevated levels
of serotonin seen in schizophrenics before fasting also dropped
to an optimum during the fast, but tended to rise again later.
It is clear from Shapiro’s work that fasting and associated
restrictive diets normalized some of the biochemical irregulari-
ties previously described in schizophrenics.  Significant changes
were also noted in transaminase, cholesterol, bilirubin, and
glucose levels during this program.6
In Canada, Dr. Abram Hoffer used a modified fast to treat
those of his schizophrenic patients who had not responded
well to his usual orthomolecular treatment.7  Two hundred
such patients were asked to drink only water while fasting
for 4 days.  On the fifth day they proceeded to reintroduce
foods, one at a time.  When eating a food to which they were
allergic, schizophrenic symptoms often quickly reappeared,
although this might take several days in the case of certain
grains.  In numerous patients, cow’s milk acted as a halluci-
nogen.  In total, 60 percent of the 200 “problem” patients tested
in this way responded well to the fast and, when placed on
permanent diets that eliminated the offending foods, experi-
enced significant permanent improvements in their mental
health.
HISTAMINE THERAPY
Many triggers can induce psychotic states.  They include inad-
equate atmospheric oxygen, organic causes of deficient blood
oxygenation, impaired cerebral blood flow, improper cerebral
oxygen exchange, or disturbed cerebral cellular chemistry.  The
fact that so many of these triggers had a common denomina-
tor (interference with cerebral oxidative processes) stimulated
Sackler and colleagues8 to experiment in 1949 with histamine,

91
a vasodilating agent.  This they believed might improve oxygen
flow in the brains of hospitalized psychotics.  Their treatment
protocol was described in detail in two articles9-10 published in
the Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease.  It consisted of an
average of fourteen, 1 to 3 mg histamine injections given once
or twice daily.  Twenty one catatonic schizophrenics were treated
in this way with histamine.  Nine of these improved, one suffi-
ciently to be discharged.  Similarly, two of the nine paranoid
schizophrenics given histamine were sufficiently well enough
to be sent home.
In 1955, Hoffer and Parsons11 repeated Sackler and cowork-
ers’12 treatment protocol on 12 acute Canadian schizophrenics.
Nine of these were improved and discharged, with four of them
still being in good health 1 to 2 years later, despite the fact they
had been given no further histamine after leaving the hospital.
It would seem from these three studies that injection with high
doses of the vasodilator histamine is of lasting benefit to roughly
a third of schizophrenics.
THYROID HORMONE THERAPY
Thyroid hormone appears to be the most successful of all un-
conventional treatments for schizophrenia.  Between 1946 and
1956, Danziger prescribed desiccated thyroid for 120 schizo-
phrenics.13  Daily dosages ranged from 120 to 1,200 milligrams,
although only 10 patients required over 600 milligrams.  Many
of those given thyroid hormones had received and failed to re-
spond positively to a wide variety of other therapies, including
ECT, psychotherapy, and psychoanalysis.  Thyroid medication
was taken for at least 100 days, since for many, recovery was
slow.  According to Hoffer,14 45 percent of the chronic schizo-
phrenics recovered, becoming normal in every way.  Even more
surprising, every one of the 80 schizophrenics who had been

92
ill for 6 months or less, and who completed the treatment,
recovered, suffering relapses only if they later discontinued
their own home thyroid medication.
In 1963, Lochner and coworkers15 conducted a double blind
controlled comparison study on 30 chronic schizophrenics who
had been hospitalized for at least 4 years and who had a his-
tory of mental illness that had lasted 8 years or longer.  Half of
this group received 200 micrograms of triiodothyronine, while
the remainder were given a placebo.  Twelve of the group re-
ceiving the hormone improved, becoming more active, socia-
ble, interested in their environment and willing to work.  One,
who for years had proved unresponsive to all other medica-
tions, recovered to the point he was able to work in the hospital
kitchen.  None of the placebo group improved, but two became
more active.
Danziger and Lochner and coworkers16 have demonstrated that
desiccated thyroid and triiodothyronine are very effective treat-
ments for many types of schizophrenia.  The required doses
are very high and seem most effective in the early, acute stages
of mental illness.  However, thyroid hormone treatment is still
valuable for chronic schizophrenics, although improvement is
usually less dramatic and may take longer to achieve.
DR. CARL PFEIFFER’S PROTOCOLS
The Princeton Brain Bio Center was established in New Jersey
in 1971.  It was headed for many years by Dr. Carl Pfeiffer.  By
the time of publication of his book Nutrition and Mental Illness17
it had treated over 5,000 schizophrenic patients using its own
unique protocols.  Pfeiffer was a biochemist who believed that
95 percent of all schizophrenics belonged to one of five bio-
types.  In histapenia, the most common, the patient suffered

93
from depressed blood histamine and an excess of copper.  The
daily treatment given at the Brain Bio Center to the 50 percent
of schizophrenics with these characteristics was 100 mg of
niacin and 250-500 mg of niacinamide, 1-3 mg of folic acid,
10-30 mg of zinc and 5-50 mg of manganese (both as gluco-
nates).  In addition, the patients where expected to eat a high
protein diet and to take 2 grams of vitamin C a day to help
excrete copper.  Histadelia was diagnosed in 20 percent of the
Center’s schizophrenic patients.  This was characterized by high
blood histamine and low copper.  Its treatment consisted of
500 mg of calcium gluconate taken twice a day (in the morning
and evening) to release histamine and 500 mg of methionine,
taken at the same times to help excrete it.  In addition, hista-
delics were given 10-30 mg of zinc and 5-50 mg of manganese
daily to increase their basophils (white blood cells that contain
the majority of the body’s histamine).  Thirty percent of the 5,000
schizophrenics examined at the Princeton Brain Bio Center,
30 percent also were considered to suffer from pyroluria, caused
by a double deficiency of both zinc and vitamin B6.  The treat-
ment for this illness is fairly obvious and included vitamin B6
(at a daily dose sufficient to allow dream recall but never be-
yond 2 grams), and 30 mg of zinc gluconate taken both in the
morning and again in the evening.  Manganese gluconate also
was prescribed twice daily, at doses of 10 mg.  Care was taken
to avoid numbness of fingers and toes from these high levels of
vitamin B6.  If such symptoms appeared, the patient stopped
taking this vitamin but replaced it with pyridoxal phosphate at
one-tenth the normal vitamin B6 dose.18
Ten percent of schizophrenics who attended the Princeton Brain
Bio Center out-patient clinic were considered to be suffering
from cerebral allergy (often caused by wheat gluten), and a fur-
ther 20 percent from nutritional hypoglycemia.  The former were
treated with supplements, similar to those given to histadelics,
with the addition of vitamin B6 and vitamin C.  Where the latter

94
avoided sugar and alcohol, while taking magnesium gluconate,
zinc, chromium, vitamin B3, and a multivitamin that did not
contain copper.19
The percentages of each of the five types of schizophrenia,
given in the preceding discussion of treatment at the Princeton
Brain Bio Center, do not add up to 100 percent.  This is be-
cause many of Pfeiffer’s patients were found to be simultane-
ously suffering from more than one type.  How effective were
Pfeiffer’s protocols for the treatment of schizophrenia?  He writes,
“When the exact biotype guides the appropriate treatment,
90 percent of these patients will attain social rehabilitation.”20
Dr. Carl C. Pfeiffer was a prolific author.  Anyone needing more
detailed information on his approach is directed towards his
books.21-23  These include The Schizophrenias: Ours to Conquer;
Nutrition and Mental Illness; and Mental Illness: The Nutritional
Connection.
DR. ABRAM HOFFER’S PROTOCOL
In the early 1950s, Osmond and Smythies realized that pink
(that is deteriorated) adrenaline sprays were making some asth-
matics psychotic, causing them to hallucinate.24  Hoffer25 knew
that similar side effects accompanied the use of mescaline and
made a list of all identified compounds that caused hallucina-
tions in those who were awake.  The list is short.  It included
harmline, mescaline, ibogaine, d-lysergic acid diethylamide (d-
LSD-25), and deteriorated adrenaline.  Hoffer was delighted to
realize all were indoles (LSD, harmline, ibogaine) or could be-
come indoles (mescaline).  It was not known what pink adren-
aline was, however, until 1952 when Hutcheon26 described how
the oxidation of adrenaline created the indole adrenochrome.
Hoffer then experimented by taking this substance himself,
finding it made him paranoid.

95
It seemed logical, therefore, to design a treatment for schizo-
phrenia that was directed at reducing the patient’s exposure to
adrenochrome.27  In the body, noradrenalin is converted to adren-
aline and then to adrenochrome.  Hoffer and coworkers knew
the conversion of noradrenalin to adrenaline requires methyl
groups, which are provided by methyl donors.28  Noradrenalin
is a methyl acceptor that adds one methyl group to become
adrenaline.  They argued that if they could prevent the addition
of this methyl group to noradrenalin, there should be a cor-
responding reduction in the amount of adrenaline available for
conversion to adrenochrome.  As a result, they decided to use
high doses of another natural methyl acceptor, niacin (vitamin
B3), to reduce the conversion rate of noradrenalin to adrena-
line and then to adrenochrome.  Double-blind controlled ex-
periments on acute schizophrenics conducted in Saskatchewan
with high doses of niacin (usually 3 to 6 grams daily) were very
successful, outperforming the then conventional treatments
and reducing suicide rates.29
Dr. Hoffer was involved with these trials in the 1950s, but is
still an active physician.  His treatment of schizophrenia has
not remained static.  Rather it has evolved as additional evi-
dence of the links between schizophrenia and nutrition has
become available.  His patients are now initially put on an
elimination diet to identify foods to which they are allergic or
sensitive.  They are also encouraged to stop consuming any
processed or prepared foods to which refined sugar has been
added.  This reduces their exposure to many other food addi-
tives which are very common in such “junk” foods.30
Beyond this, patients are given the following supplements:
vitamin B3 (niacin or niacinamide), 0.5 to 2 grams 3 times daily;
vitamin B6, 250-500 mg daily (in most cases); B vitamin com-
plex; vitamin C, 3 or more grams daily; zinc gluconate or zinc
citrate, 50 mg daily.  If there is danger of tardive dyskinesia

96
from prescription drugs, 15-30 mg of manganese is added each
day to prevent it.  Patients are also given selenium and omega
3 essential fatty acids that are rich in EPA (Eicosapentaenoic
acid), but not in DHA (Docosahexgenoic acid).31  The best prep-
aration, Kirunal, has a ratio of some 3:1.  Four large capsules
are taken twice daily by the patient.
Based on six prospective double-blind studies, the personal
treatment of over 4,000 patients, studies conducted by other
molecular physicians, and letters from schizophrenics who have
tried his treatment program after reading his books, Hoffer pro-
vides these statistics.  Ninety percent of patients who are ill for
the first time, or who are suffering their second or third schiz-
ophrenic episode and who follow the regime just cited will
become well within 2 years.  No patients will be worse than
they were when they started the treatment protocol and none
will have tardive dyskinesia (drug-related involuntary muscu-
lar movements).  All such patients continue to have the best
results if they stay on the regimen indefinitely.  Approximately
50 percent of chronic schizophrenics, including those mentally
disturbed for several years, will show improvement on this treat-
ment after 10 years.  Only some of them will be able to return
to work.  Hoffer does not include “the chronic patients seen in
the back wards of mental hospitals” in this latter group.32
SUMMARY
Relative alternative medicine cure rates for different protocols
provide insights into the origins of schizophrenia.  Most im-
pressive are the extremely high recovery rates observed in
acute schizophrenics treated early with elevated triiodothyro-
nine or desiccated thyroid.33  These results imply that a defi-
ciency of triiodothyronine occurs at or very near the top of
schizophrenia’s causal chain.  Similarly, the frequent success

97
achieved by Pfeiffer’s34 regime for reducing histamine and by
Hoffer’s35 orthomolecular treatment designed to lower adreno-
chrome suggest that excesses of both of these compounds
occur early in schizophrenia’s development.  Similarly, the
Soviet36 recoveries achieved by fasting imply that various foods
may trigger schizophrenia through allergic reactions.  In addi-
tion, the lower but still impressive cure rates37 caused by ele-
vating histamine support Pfeiffer’s38 contention that there is
a subgroup of schizophrenics whose members suffer from a
deficiency of that substance.
REFERENCES
1.
Howe, N. quoted in Edwards, T. (compiled 1955). The New Dictionary of
Thoughts (p. 396). New York: Doubleday.
2.
Thomas Alva Edison.  http://www.jshum.net/Edison/
3.
Ibid.
4.
Cott, A. (1971).  Controlled fasting treatment of schizophrenia. Schizo-
phrenia, 3, 2-10.
5.
Ibid.
6.
Ibid.
7.
Kail, K., and Lawrence, B. (with Goldberg, B.) (2000).  Allergy free: An
alternative medicine definitive guide. Tiburon, CA: Alternative
Medicine.Com.
8.
Sackler, A.M., Sackler, M.D., and Sackler, R.R. (with van Ophuijsen,
J.H.W.) (1949).  Non-convulsive biochemotherapy with histamine.
Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease, 110, 149-160.
9.
Ibid.
10.
Sackler, M.D., Sackler, R.R., Sackler, A.M., and van Ophuijsen, H.H.W.
(1951).  The technique of histamine biochemotherapy and sugges-
tions for its use in psychiatry. Journal of Nervous and Mental Dis-
ease, 113, 40-51.
11.
Hoffer, A., and Parsons, S. (1955).  Histamine therapy for schizophre-
nia: A follow-up study. Canadian Medical Association Journal, 72,
352-355.
12.
Sackler, op. cit.

98
13.
Hoffer, A. (2001).  Thyroid and schizophrenia. Journal of Orthomolecular
Medicine, 16(4), 205-212.
14.
Ibid.
15.
Ibid
16.
Ibid
17.
Pfeiffer, C.C. (1987).  Nutrition and mental illness: An orthomolecular ap-
proach to balancing body chemistry. Rochester, VT: Healing Art Press.
18.
Ibid.
19.
Ibid.
20.
Ibid.
21.
Ibid.
22.
Pfeiffer, C.C., Mailloux, R., and Forsythe, L. (1970).  The schizophrenias:
Ours to conquer. Wichita, KS: Bio-Communications Press.
23.
Pfeiffer, C.C., and Holford, P. (1996).  Mental health: The nutritional con-
nection. London: ION Press.
24.
Hoffer, A. (1998).  Vitamin B3 schizophrenia: Discovery recovery contro-
versy. Kingston, ON: Quarry Press.
25.
Ibid.
26.
Ibid.
27.
Hoffer, A. (1999).  Orthomolecular treatment for schizophrenia: Mega-
vitamin supplements and nutritional strategies for healing and re-
covery. Los Angeles, CA: Keats Publishing.
28.
Hoffer (1998), op. cit.
29.
Ibid.
30.
Safe Harbor (2002).  Alternative Mental Health On-line. The standard
recommended “schizophrenia” nutritional and dietary regimen:
A remarkable 90% recovery rate. http://www.alternativemental
health.com/articles/schizdiet.htm
31.
Ibid.
32.
Ibid.
33.
Hoffer (2001), op. cit.
34.
Pfeiffer, op. cit.
35.
Safe Harbor, op. cit.
36.
Cott, A. (1971) op. cit.
37.
Sackler, A.M. et al. (1949) op. cit.
38.
Pfeiffer, C.C. (1987) op. cit.

99
CONVENTIONAL TREATMENT
9
Nothing will ever be attempted if all possible objections
must first be overcome.
Samuel Johnson1
Over the past 30 or 40 years, consumer confidence in con-
ventional medicine has been in serious decline.2  There have
been many reasons for this, including drug side-effects, the
emergence of resistant bacteria, and failure to make much
progress in curing chronic illnesses, such as arthritis, cancer,
cardiovascular disease, and schizophrenia.  Simultaneously,
there has been a general questioning of authority, driven by the
civil rights, consumer, and women’s movements.  One of med-
icine’s harshest critics has been Horrobin,3 who has argued
that medical progress has been “pathetic” over the last 30 to
40 years.  He suggests that something has gone seriously wrong
with the process of drug discovery in the pharmaceutical in-
dustry, but because of the astronomical cost of developing
innovative drugs, they are unlikely to come from anywhere
else.  To quote Horrobin4 directly:
We have taken drug discovery procedures from patient-
orientated clinicians and handed them over to large
bureaucracies who will work only with patent-protected
products that give an adequate financial return.  No
wonder that real progress is so slow.
This chapter sets out both to see whether this criticism is valid
for the treatment of schizophrenia, and to collect clues from
conventional medicine that may be of value in understanding
the etiology of the disorder.

100
INSULIN COMA THERAPY
The discovery of insulin led to the realization that in small
doses it could improve the appetite and mental state of pa-
tients with anorexia.5  Sakel6 then discovered that deliberately
causing insulin hypoglycemia countered the symptoms of with-
drawal in morphine addiction.  Prior to this, clinical hypoglyc-
emia had been considered dangerous, but Sakel7 showed that
it could be controlled by the administration of glucose.  He
then began to use the technique to treat schizophrenia.  Trials
were carried out in most of the Developed World, nearly all of
them reporting favourable results.  In a series of over 400
Swiss patients treated before 1937, 59 percent reached either
the complete or social remission of schizophrenia.8  In over
one thousand schizophrenics given insulin coma therapy, 11.1
percent recovered, 26.5 percent greatly improved, and a fur-
ther 26 percent showed some benefit.  The figures from an
untreated control group of patients were 3.5 percent, 11.2 per-
cent, and 7.4 percent respectively.  In contrast, a comparable
number of schizophrenics who received cardiazol convulsion
therapy did not even match the recovery rates seen in the
control group.
Three aspects of insulin coma therapy soon became obvious.
Firstly, the treatment greatly shortened the duration of the
illness.  In one Pennsylvania hospital, for example, 95 percent
of schizophrenics who were treated and recovered were dis-
charged within a month.9  Untreated patients who made spon-
taneous remissions took 1 to 3 years to reach a similar stage of
improvement.  Secondly, only 38 percent of patients treated
with insulin coma therapy remitted.  In contrast, only 10 per-
cent of those untreated with insulin showed such a recovery.
Thirdly, results were much more impressive if treatment was
given early in the illness.  Figures from New York10 showed
that only 27 percent of schizophrenics treated within 6 months

101
of the first appearance of their symptoms failed to improve.
If insulin coma therapy was given to patients who had been
schizophrenic for 5 years or longer, the percentage of those
failing to respond increased to 66 percent.  Bond11 discovered
that 67 percent of patients who had displayed schizophrenic
symptoms for less than 18 months fully recovered or showed
great improvement after insulin coma therapy.  In contrast,
only 30 percent of those treated 18 months or more after onset
showed similar improvement.  Many of the recoveries were long
lasting.  In New York State, for example, 60 percent of insulin
coma treated patients were still living in the community, in a
recovered or improved condition, 2 years later.
Although the use of insulin to treat schizophrenia showed im-
pressive early results, further controlled studies demonstrated
that most improvements were temporary.  Nevertheless, since
Sakel’s treatment was gentler and carried fewer side effects
than many other techniques, it was still in use in many coun-
tries until fairly recently.12  Why did it achieve the beneficial
results seen from the quoted statistics?  Some clues appear
obvious from the research of Baumann and MGaillard,13 who
showed that the injection of insulin in schizophrenia decreased
the levels of free and total tryptophan and tyrosine in plasma,
enhancing the tryptophan to tyrosine ratio.  Conversely, the
administration of glucose to reverse insulin’s effects increased
plasma tryptophan.  They argued that the reason that insulin
coma therapy was beneficial to schizophrenics was probably
because it increased tryptophan uptake by the brain and so
enhanced cerebral serotonin synthesis.14  One might add that
it may also have increased the availability of another tryptophan
derivative, niacin.  Interestingly, insulin potentiation therapy,
a non-diabetic use of the hormone, is claimed to dramatically
improve the effectiveness and delivery of a wide range of drugs.
It has been used in the treatment of cancer, arthritis, cardio-
vascular, and various neurological diseases.15

102
ELECTROCONVULSIVE TREATMENT (ECT)
The first experiments with electroconvulsive treatment (ECT)
were made by Cerletti more than 50 years ago.16  It became a
widely used therapy until the 1970s, when strong opposition
was voiced against it.17  According to Hoffer18
There is a loud, hostile, anti-ECT group, consisting of
ex-ECT patients and a small number of physicians,
who are violently opposed to its use.  Their reasoning
is entirely out of context, and much of their argument
is driven by the word “shock” not by the treatment
itself.  ECT, like any medical or surgical procedure,
must be used carefully. When it is so used, it is a very
effective treatment for a very small proportion of pa-
tients with severe depression and/or schizophrenia.
Since the mid 1980s, there has been a renewal of electrocon-
vulsive treatment on patients under general anaesthesia.19  The
major objection to this therapy by former patients is that it
causes serious memory losses that are considered to outweigh
any decline in symptoms associated with this therapy.  Inter-
estingly, Hoffer20 has shown that high doses of niacin, given
for a few weeks prior to electroconvulsive treatment, prevents
such memory loss.
It is unusual to find both conventional and unconventional
physicians supporting the same therapy.  However, as Hoffer21
has pointed out:
Critics have complained about the use of ECT by or-
thomolecular physicians [such as himself] because they
declare ECT is not orthomolecular.  Of course, since no
one knows why ECT is effective, they may be wrong.
It certainly does correct some biochemical abnormality
because patients are improved or cured.  All we need
to assume is that the presence of symptoms is a meas-
ure of metabolic abnormality.

103
While I agree entirely with Hoffer’s sentiments expressed above,
I believe that there is considerable evidence to show why elec-
troconvulsive shock can benefit schizophrenics.  3-methoxy-4-
hydroxyphenylglycol (MHPG) is a major metabolite of noradren-
aline.22  Researchers have shown that electroconvulsive shock
treatment lowers plasma MHPG in schizophrenics and de-
pressed patients,23-24 suggesting that it slows the conversion of
noradrenalin to MHPG and possibly to adrenaline and hence
to adrenochrome.
DRUG THERAPY
The discovery of the beneficial effects of chlorpromazine (thora-
zine) in the early 1950s began the drug era in the treatment of
schizophrenia.25  This tranquillizer calmed down hyperactive
patients and ameliorated some of their “hot” or “positive” symp-
toms, such as agitation and restlessness.  Chlorpromazine and
its successor drugs, such as haloperidol (haldol), thioridazine
(mellaril), fluphenazine (prolixin), and trifluoperazine (stelazine),
are known as conventional antipsychotics, or “neuroleptics.”
The latter term is derived from the Greek and means “to clasp
the neuron.”26  This designation stems from the work of Delay
and Deniker,27 who discovered that the best dose of chlorpro-
mazine varied enormously from patient to patient, but that the
drug seemed most effective when given at levels close to those
causing neurologic side effects, like those seen in Parkinson’s
disease.  This might be expected since Parkinson’s disease pa-
tients are deficient in dopamine and neuroleptics block the D2
subtype of dopamine receptor.28  Conversely, amphetamines29
have been found to release dopamine and to exacerbate schiz-
ophrenia’s positive symptoms.  These contrasting drug effects
gave rise to the “dopamine hypothesis,” which rests on the be-
lief that excess dopamine accentuates and decreased dopamine
reduces the positive or hot symptoms of schizophrenia.

104
More recently, several “atypical” neuroleptics have been devel-
oped that carry lower incidences of neurologic side effects than
older conventional antipsychotics, such as chlorpromazine.30
The most effective of these new drugs appears to be clozapine
(clozaril), which, as well as blocking dopamine receptors, also
impacts at the 5-HT2 subtype of serotonin receptor.31  Indeed,
many “atypical” neuroleptics have been designed to exert greater
potency at 5-HT2 serotonin receptors than at dopamine D2
receptors.  Drugs that block these specific serotonin receptors
include olanzapine (zyprexa), quetiapine (Seroquel), and risp-
eridone (risperdal).32  Even more recently, certain antipsychot-
ics have begun to target a subtype of glutamate receptor.33
How effective are such drug treatments for the average schiz-
ophrenic?  In 2000, Geddes and coworkers34-35 published a
meta-regression analysis based on pooled data from 52 con-
trolled studies.  Together, these studies had compared the newer
atypical antipsychotics against the traditional typical antipsy-
chotics in the treatment of 12,649 patients.  Geddes and col-
leagues could find no clinical evidence of greater efficacy or
tolerability in the newer drugs.  In short, Horrobin36 was cor-
rect when he wrote:
Almost fifty years after the first anti-schizophrenic drug,
chlorpromazine, was produced we have made virtually
no further progress in controlling schizophrenic symp-
toms.  Drugs, on average, still improve symptoms by
only 15-25 percent, leaving 75-85 percent of symp-
toms unresolved.  The side-effects of Parkinsonism,
TD [tardive dyskinesia] and agranulocytosis have been
drastically reduced, but new side effects of weight gain,
sedation, diabetes and cardiac problems are still there
and may have worsened.  There has not been much
change in tax paying, nor in employment at levels com-
mensurate with the underlying abilities of the patient.
Despite billions of dollars of expenditure, we have not
made that much progress.

105
Naturally, such frank assessments have not been well received
in psychiatry.37  Nor was the profession comforted by the recent
Cochrane Review38 of beta-blocker supplementation, the ad-
junct use of beta-adrenergic receptor antagonists.  This review,
written by Cheine and coworkers,39 examined all published
randomized control trials using these drugs and concluded
that “there is no evidence of any effect of beta-blockers as an
adjunct to conventional antipsychotic medication.”  In short,
there is no evidence that beta-blockers work.  For a detailed
discussion of many of the adverse side-effects of psychiatric
drugs the reader is directed to Peter R. Breggin’s websiste.40
SUMMARY
The meta-regression analysis conducted by Geddes and col-
leagues41 and the Cochrane Review of beta-blockers42 both im-
ply that conventional medicine has made little, if any, progress
in the treatment of schizophrenia in the last 40 years.  Indeed,
the recovery records hint that both insulin coma and electro-
convulsive (with niacin) therapies may have been more effec-
tive than current drug regimes.  If this is the case, then
dopamine excess cannot be the key to schizophrenia.  If it in-
deed exists, elevated dopamine in schizophrenics must be of
relatively minor significance, given the small decline in symp-
toms achieved by drugs designed to correct it.  The results
obtained by the use of insulin coma and electroconvulsive
therapies suggest that an excess of dopamine is less impor-
tant in schizophrenia than either the conversion of tryptophan
to serotonin and niacin, or the metabolism of noradrenaline
to MHPG.

106
REFERENCES
1.
Johnson, S. cited by Pearson, D. and Shaw, S. (1983). Life extension: A
practical scientific approach. New York: Warner Books.
2.
CNN Interactive, Alternative Medicine. http://www.cnn.com/HEALTH/
indepth.health/alternative.medicine/
3.
Horrobin, D.F. (2002).  Evidence-based medicine and the need for non-
commercial clinical research directed towards therapeutic innova-
tion. Experimental Biology and Medicine, 227(7), 435-437.
4.
Ibid.
5.
Sargant, W., and Slater, E. (1944).  An introduction to physical methods
of treatment in psychiatry. Edinburgh: E. and S. Livingstone. The
insulin treatment of schizophrenia taken from this book is avail-
able on the Internet: http://www.priory.com/homol/insulin.htm
6.
Ibid.
7.
Ibid.
8.
Ibid.
9.
Ibid.
10.
Ibid.
11.
Ibid.
12.
Sabbatini, R.M.E. The history of shock treatment therapy in psychiatry.
http://www.epub.org.br/cm/n04/historia/shock_i.htm
13.
Baumann, P., and MGaillard, J. (1976).  Insulin coma therapy: Decrease
of plasma tryptophan in man. Journal of Neural Transmission, 39(4),
309-313.
14.
Ibid.
15.
Insulin Potentiation Therapy. http://www.iptq.com/
16.
Boiteux, J., Roubaud, L., Gandelet, N., Nezelof, S., Vittouris, N., Bonin,
B., Sechter, D., and Bizouard, P. (1997).  Indications for electro-
convulsive therapy. Encephale, 23(Special Issue No. 3), 21-26.
17.
Ibid.
18.
Hoffer, A. (1998).  Vitamin B3 schizophrenia: Discovery recovery contro-
versy. Kingston, ON: Quarry Press.
19.
Boiteux, op. cit.
20.
Hoffer (1998), op. cit.

107
21.
Ibid.
22.
Tripodianakis, J., Markianos, M., Sarantidis, D., and Agouridaki, M.
(2002).  Biogenic amine turnover and serum cholesterol in suicide
attempts. European Archives of Psychiatry and Clinical Neuroscience,
252(1), 38-43.
23.
Vesugi, H., Toyoda, J., and Iio, M. (1995).  Positron emission tomogra-
phy and plasma biochemistry findings in schizophrenic patients
before and after electroconvulsive therapy. Psychiatry and Clinical
Neurosciences, 49(2), 131-135.
24.
Werstiuk, E.S., Coote, M., Griffith, L., Shannon, H., and Steiner, M.
(1996).  Effects of electroconvulsive therapy on peripheral adreno-
ceptors, plasma, noradrenaline, MHPG and cortisol in depressed
patients. British Journal of Psychiatry, 169(6), 758-765.
25.
Sawa, A., and Synder, S.H. (2002).  Schizophrenia: Diverse approaches
to a complex disease. Science, 296(5568), 692-695.
26.
Ibid.
27.
Ibid.
28.
Ibid.
29.
Ibid.
30.
McEnvoy, J.P., Scheifler, P.L., and Frances, A. (1999).  Expert consen-
sus guideline series treatment of schizophrenia. Journal of Clinical
Psychiatry, 60, Supplement 11, 1-80
31.
Schizophrenia. http://faculty.washington.edu/chudler/schiz.html
32.
Ibid.
33.
Ibid.
34.
Geddes, J., Freemantle, N., Harrison, P., and Bebbington, P., for the
National Schizophrenia Guideline Development Group (2000).
Atypical antipsychotics in the treatment of schizophrenia: A sys-
tematic overview and meta-regression analysis. British Medical
Journal, 321, 1371-1376.
35.
Kapur, S., and Remington, G. (2000).  Atypical antipsychotics. Patients
value the lower incidence of extrapyramidial side effects. British
Medical Journal, 321, 1360-1361.
36.
Horrobin, op. cit.
37.
Schizophrenia.co.uk., Waterlow, M. (2002).  A typical antipsychotics no
more effective than conventional drugs—study stirs up debate.
http://www.schizophrenia.co.uk/treatment/treatment_articles/
treatment_articles_24.html

108
38.
Cheine, M., Ahonen, J., and Wahlbeck, K. (2002).  Beta-blocker supple-
mentation of standard drug treatment for schizophrenia (Cochrane
Review). The Cochrane Library, Issue 3. Oxford: Update Software
Ltd. http://www.cochrane.org/cochrane/revabstr/ab000234.htm
39.
Ibid.
40.
Peter R. Breggin’s website, Psychiatric Drug Facts, can be found at
http://www.Breggin.com/
41.
Geddes et. al., op. cit.
42.
Kapur and Remington, op. cit.

109
REGRESSION ANALYSIS: THE ROAD BACK
10
We should be paying more attention to the exceptional
patients, those who get well unexpectedly, instead of
staring bleakly at all those who die in the usual pat-
tern.  In the words of René Dubos, “Sometimes the
most measurable drives out the most important.”
B.S. Siegel (1986)1
I first used this quotation from Love, Medicine and Miracles in
1988 in “Lifestyle changes and the ‘spontaneous’ regression of
cancer: An initial computer analysis.”2  That article was de-
signed to shed new light on the strange, unexpected cancer
recoveries that occasionally delight those affected by them, while
perplexing the medical profession.  The idea behind the paper
was simple.  A questionnaire was used to collect information
from published accounts that included patients’ treatment(s),
dietary and lifestyle changes, mineral, vitamin, and herbal
supplements, and detoxification procedures.  This approach
generated a great deal of useful new information, while stimu-
lating hypotheses that may eventually help to explain such
‘spontaneous’ regressions.  As a result of this modest success,
the same basic technique was used to write this chapter, a
discussion of information collected from the testimonies of 50
recovered schizophrenics.  The Schizophrenia Bulletin regularly
publishes such accounts.  Many former schizophrenics have
written or contributed to books or articles.  Some have de-
scribed their experiences on the Internet.  Masks of Madness:
Science of Healing,3 a documentary hosted by Margot Kidder

110
and sponsored by The Canadian Schizophrenia Foundation, was
another useful source.  Obviously, since material was simply
abstracted from the first 50 cases encountered, no claims can
be made that the sample was necessarily random or repre-
sentative.  Nevertheless, the exercise provided some interesting
insights into the causes of and cures for schizophrenia.
Since the publication of A Beautiful Mind4 and the release of
the movie based upon it, recovered schizophrenics have been
receiving more public attention than usual.  John Nash was a
prodigy, an outstanding member of Princeton and MIT mathe-
matics departments in the 1950s until, at 30, he had a schizo-
phrenic breakdown.  Eventually, thanks in part to his wife’s
selflessness and support from the mathematics community,
Nash emerged from the world of mental hospitals and psychosis
to win a Nobel Prize for his early work on game theory that had
revolutionized economics.5  Dr. Nash, however, is not unique.
Many recovered schizophrenics are extremely intelligent.  Dr.
Fred Frese,6 for example, is the director of a large mental health
clinic in Ohio, a trained psychologist, and a diagnosed schizo-
phrenic.  Indeed, Hoffer7 in his Editorial: The Future of Psychia-
try writes “I know of 17 young men and women who became
schizophrenics in their teens, were treated properly, recovered,
went to college, became doctors and psychiatrists and are prac-
tising.”  What, then, can we learn from such schizophrenics
who are once again fully functional?
CONVENTIONAL TREATMENT
Drugs
Few (12 percent) recovered schizophrenics consider the drugs
they received while hospitalized to have been of much benefit.
More typical are the views of a former patient who, when writ-
ing, worked as a mental health professional employed by the

111
US National Institutes of Health.  Philosphically, she consid-
ered her stay at the “funny farm” the very best training she
could have had as a mental health professional.8  To quote her
directly:
I don’t need to read a textbook to understand the mean-
ing of psychosis and neurosis.  I know how it feels to
be a guinea pig; to shuffle under the influence of Haldol;
to sleep under the influence of Dalmane; to lose my
hair under the influence of Lithium.  I know the joy of
insanity and the hell of an insane asylum.
Prior to her illness, the same author had seen the movie One
Flew Over the Cuckoo’s Nest.9  She recalls laughing at the pa-
tients’ antics and silently applauding their ability to survive in
a world of silent suffering and sadness.  However, the nature of
her own mental hospital stay contrasted markedly with the
virtual reality of Hollywood.
Later, as a cuckoo in the nest, I found the experience
of hospitalization much less amusing.  Medication upon
medication made my thoughts return to reality, but my
body seemed suspended in time and space.  There
was no laughter; there were no tears; there was only
existence.  The poignantly painful ending of the movie
reappeared as my own personal pain.  I, too, had been
symbolically suffocated in the name of caring and love.
The major difference between me and the movie char-
acter was that I had survived.
In a similar vein, John Hammell,10 the founder of International
Advocates for Health Freedom writes:
On the back wards, where the sun doesn’t shine, time
is measured in the burning of cigarettes.  Drugged
zombies pace listlessly past the peering eyes of hos-
pital staff who observe the pathetic scene from the
other side of the nurses’ station window, like people
peering into an aquarium.

112
Locked naked behind a two inch thick steel door, I felt
sealed in a tomb of hopelessness.  I lay on the rubber
mat in the corner, with muscles turned to jello by an
injection of a highly toxic neuroleptic drug called
thorazine.  On the walls were obscenities scrawled in
blood and excrement from past prisoners in the se-
clusion room, and the fetid stench of stale urine filled
the air.
Hammell fortunately managed to encourage his mother to take
him, on a pass, to see Carl C. Pfeiffer:
Armed with the proper nutrients, I smuggled them back
in to the last hospital I was in, and took them on the
sly while mouthing my medication, and spitting it down
a toilet.  I had to hide my vitamins in a cavity gouged
out from the underside of a foam mattress because
they did room searches for contraband – and if they’d
found my vitamins, they would have confiscated them
as if they were cocaine or marijuana, having been
brainwashed into believing that any amount over the
RDA merely gives us “expensive urine.”
After just three weeks of taking my supplements, I was
doing so much better that I was given a full medical
discharge, with the doctors scratching their heads,
wondering which of their drugs had been helping me,
but none of them had been – I was spitting them all
down the toilet where the toxic substances belonged.
That was 23 years ago.
Accommodation and Support
Housing, work and respect are crucial dimensions of recovery.
One patient, Ronald Peterson,11 wrote about the benefits of
Fountain House, a clubhouse model program, run by its mem-
bers and staff. Its major goal was to provide practical and emo-
tional support to patients so that they could become part of
the wider community. The author recalls comments by chronic
patients about their need to have a special place to relate to:

113
Here you are really needed.... This is the only place
in the city that can use me.... I’m expected here every
day and that’s what is important to all of us.
As another patient related:
I’ve got a lot of work to do here every day and this
makes me feel worthwhile.... Here there’s no busy work
– everything we do is something that has to be done.
Patients also need to believe that the future will be better than
the past.
It’s really something to feel you are back in the world
today.... I feel more adjusted to the outside world....
For the first time, I’m looking forward to the future....
What you get here most is hope for the future.... Here
we have the outlook that all of us can make it on our
own some day.... I’m 30, and it’s about time to get
away and be on my own, to live my own life.
UNCONVENTIONAL TREATMENT
Diet
Interestingly, 22 percent of the recovered schizophrenics be-
lieved that much of their improvement could be traced to die-
tary change.  To quote directly from J.F. Donald12 of New York:
As a schizophrenic, I have also learned that avoiding
certain foods is necessary – namely, cheese (except
cottage cheese and cream), caffeine and cigarettes.
These all contain taraxacin which is toxic to the schizo-
phrenic.  Another thing of interest is that over fifty per
cent of schizophrenics suffer from hypoglycemia, or
low blood sugar.  It is extremely important that these
people avoid anything with a high content of sugar, as
well as the things named above (cheese, caffeine, and
cigarettes).  It is also important that these people eat

114
often, or their blood sugar level will drop and they will
experience uncomfortable psychological symptoms,
such as depression or lightness of the head.
I will now attempt to give a fairly complete list of the
things which a person with hypoglycemia should avoid:
cheese, anything made with sugar, potatoes, rice, ce-
reals, spaghetti, macaroni, noodles, wines, cordials,
cocktails, and beer.
VITAMINS AND MINERALS
Many recovered schizophrenics believe that their improved
health is due largely to high doses of vitamin and mineral sup-
plements.  The most commonly taken nutrients are niacin,
niacinamide, and vitamin C, used by 28, 8, and 14 percent of
former patients respectively.  Most of these nutrients are taken
at levels way beyond Recommended Daily Allowances.  The larg-
est daily dose I encountered was 25 grams of niacin.13  One of
the most spectacular recoveries related to this vitamin involved
a young schizophrenic known simply as S from New York.14
Her history was described by her mother but had been verified
by Schizophrenics Anonymous.
Our daughter’s illness was rapidly coming to a climax
when she slashed her wrists, which landed her in the
psychiatric ward of one of our hospitals.  She was
delirious and escaped from the ward, climbed out an
open window, and jumped seventy-two feet to the
ground. When found, she was in a coma and for the
next two months she had continuous hallucinations.
I was told she would have to be sent to a state hospital
and that she was incurably insane.
The mother then read of Dr. Hoffer’s program in a national
magazine and sought out a local psychiatrist who was scepti-
cal but willing to try the regime on her daughter.  Here is how
S’s mother15 described the results:

115
After a month on niacin, ascorbic acid, other vitamins,
and minerals, my daughter appeared to have made
remarkable progress.  Then she had a relapse.  The
psychiatrist had only been giving her the dosage for
acute cases, so, at my insistence, he prescribed the
double dosage needed for chronic cases.
After nine months, she is a different person!  She is in
excellent health, pink cheeks, clear skin, firm face, and
bright eyes.  Before she was hospitalized, she was
always tired and despondent, pale, with skin rashes.
Her medication is not to be changed for five years.
Another parent wrote16 about the experiences of their son who
unwittingly verified the value of niacin in schizophrenia’s treat-
ment by starting, stopping, and then restarting a supplementa-
tion program.  This boy was first diagnosed as a schizophrenic
at age 16, after 3 years of antisocial activity and withdrawal.
By this time, he hardly spoke and his behaviour was bizarre
and inappropriate.  A year later, he began to take 3 grams of
niacin and 1 gram of vitamin C each day.  He was on no other
medication and had never taken tranquillizers.
The change was obvious within a few weeks.  He
began functioning again as a human being, slowly
emerging from the cocoon of silence and withdrawal
in which he had wrapped himself.  His school grades
shot up amazingly.
For a year he took his vitamins faithfully, never missing a day.
His grades became so good that he was then accepted by a
nearby university.  Feeling that he had been cured largely by
his own “will to get well,” he stopped taking any vitamins.  He
did reasonably well during his first year on campus but “dur-
ing the second he gradually slid back into a milder form of the
old apathy and lethargy.”  After 3½ years without niacin and
vitamin C “the depression, extreme fatigue, irritability, mental
confusion had all come back.”  He then returned home and
restarted his alternative treatment, but replacing niacin with

116
niacinamide to avoid flushing.  He also went on an antihypo-
glycemic diet and added other vitamins to the regime.  “Again
he responded in a completely positive way to this therapy.”
Eventually he became an excellent driver, found a job as a
landscape architect and, for the first time in his life, a girl
friend.  In short, he was “well and a functioning, self-support-
ing member of society” by the time his father contributed to
The Schizophrenia Bulletin.17
Perhaps the last word on niacin is best left to Irene18 from
British Columbia:
I started on vitamin B-3 a year and a half ago, and it
has truly given me a kind of life I’ve never experienced.
Until then I was on a medication that did keep my
nerves under control but, unfortunately for me, kept
me in a state of complete fatigue.
The B-3 seems to put the vitality in my constitution
that I feel the other medication must have stifled.
It has helped me to concentrate and think clearly.
Because of this, I started to get my self-confidence
back and then I started ‘feeling’ things again.  Like my
emotions began to work again.  I started to feel friendly
with people.  I was able to share an experience and
relate to people and really started to live again.
Niacin, niacinamide, and vitamin C are not the only apparently
beneficial orthomolecular treatments.  Other patients appear
to have been cured by high doses of desiccated thyroid.  Shirley
Christina,19 treated for 3 years with this protocol, wrote “since
I can remember, I was, for the lack of a better word, screwy.”
Ms. Christina had formerly suffered from serious emotional
problems and had been suicidal.  “[Thyroid medication] has
changed my life.  I can hold down a job.  I was so suicidal when
I met him [Dr. David Derry, the physician prescribing thyroid
medication], I don’t think I’d be alive today [without his pre-
scribed treatment].”

117
Also of considerable interest is the dramatic recovery of a cat-
atonic schizophrenic,20 Mrs. J., after she was given intrave-
nous glutathione and injections of vitamin B12, together with
various other oral nutrients, including lipoic acid.
The first evening after treatment there was no appar-
ent change.  But the following day it was quite appar-
ent that something had happened, and by evening the
changes became dramatic.  After several months of
not speaking to anyone, she began singing Christmas
carols that afternoon.  In the evening, she had a tele-
phone conversation lasting over an hour, then had a
half-hour conversation with me.  For days, a persist-
ent smile frequently graced her face, and on several
occasions she spontaneously began dancing about the
house and thoroughly enjoying the music playing.
The IV treatmenets were continued twice weekly for
two more weeks, then cut back to once per week for
three weeks, and are now being given once every two
weeks.  The overall elapsed time of recovery was about
six weeks from the start of the first treatment, though
it would have been about four weeks if treatment had
been started with twice-weekly IVs and lipoic acid from
the beginning.
She has completely recovered and shows no lingering
trace of her former mental state.  Her condition would
now be considered to be completely normal (or above)
under any competent examination.
SUMMARY
The views of the 50 recovered schizophrenics discussed in this
chapter do not represent a statistically valid sample.  These
case histories were chosen because they appeared in publica-
tions in the University of Victoria McPherson Library, in my
own book and tape collection, or on the Internet.  Neverthe-
less, the analysis does provide “food for thought.”  Relatively

118
few former schizophrenics consider that they owe their cur-
rent better health to the conventional drug treatments that
they received in mental institutions.  Indeed, most feel they
were abused by their hospital experiences.  There is far greater
support amongst them for the orthomolecular treatments of
schizophrenia, especially the use of very high doses of niacin.
Perhaps more surprising is the widespread belief amongst re-
covered schizophrenics that dietary change played a major role
in their recoveries.  Many of them claim to have suffered from
hypoglycemia and to have regained their health only after avoid-
ing sugar, cokes, cheese, cereals, spaghetti, and other foods
that greatly influence the body’s production of insulin.  A link
between diet and the mind is hardly news.21-22  However, re-
cently it has been confirmed by an experiential double-blind,
placebo-controlled, randomized trial of the effects of nutrition-
al supplements on 231 young adult prisoners in the custody of
HM Prison Service.23  Prisoners receiving vitamin, mineral, and
omega-6 and omega-3 essential fatty acid supplements, for a
minimum of 2 weeks, committed an average of 26.3 percent
fewer disciplinary offences than controls during the trial.  In
short, nutritional supplements reduce violence in young pris-
oners, some of whom are almost certainly schizophrenic.  This
overview also highlights the strong need that schizophrenics,
like everyone else, have for decent shelter, jobs, and respect.
That is, they have a need for a reduction of stress in their lives,
something that unfortunately is a rarity both in hospitals and
on the streets.

119
REFERENCES
1.
Siegel, B.S. (1986).  Love, medicine and miracles. New York: Harper and
Row.
2.
Foster, H.D. (1988).  Lifestyle changes and the ‘spontaneous’ regression
of cancer: An initial computer analysis. International Journal of
Biosocial Research, 10(1), 17-33.
3.
The Canadian Schizophrenia Foundation (1998).  Masks of Madness:
Science of Healing. Documentary film, Sisyphus Communications
Ltd. This video is available from the International Schizophrenia
Foundation, 16 Florence Avenue, Toronto, Ontario, Canada M2N
1E9. Cost $39.95. Tel: 416 733-2117.
4.
Nasar, S. (1998).  A Beautiful Mind: The life of mathematical genius and
Nobel Laureate John Nash. New York: Simon and Schuster Adult
Publishing Group.
5.
Ibid.
6.
Thomas, T.T. (1998).  A psychologist describes his own experiences with
schizophrenia.  Speaker notes for Dr. Fred Frese, September 23,
1998. http://www.thomasthomas.com/Psychologist%20with%
20Schizophrenia20%Frese.20%20092398.pdf
7.
Hoffer, A. Editorial: The future of psychiatry. HealthWord Online. http://
www.healthy.net/library/journals/ortho/issue11.2/editorial.htm
8.
Anonymous (1980).  First person account: After the funny farm. Schizo-
phrenia Bulletin, 6(3), 544-546.
9.
Ibid.
10.
Hammel, J. (2003).  Urgent appeal from an orthomolecular psychiatric
survivor: Vitamin access threatened globally. Townsend Letter for
Doctors and Patients, 234, 98-99.
11.
Peterson, R. (1982).  What are the needs of chronic mental patients?
Schizophrenia Bulletin, 8(4), 610-616.
12.
Donald, J.F. (1974) cited by Blaine, T.R. (1974).  Mental health through
nutrition. Secaucus, NJ: Citadel Press.
13.
M.P. New York (1974) cited by Blaine, T.R. (1974), op. cit.
14.
Parent of S. (1974) cited by Blaine, T.R. (1974), op. cit.
15.
Ibid.
16.
Name Withheld (1973).  Megavitamin therapy – some personal accounts.
Schizophrenic Bulletin, 7, 7-9.
17.
Ibid.

120
18.
Irene from British Columbia (1974) cited by Blaine, T.R. (1974), op. cit.
19.
Lee, K. (2002).  Doctor to appeal renewed suspension MD treated vari-
ous disorders with high doses of thyroid medication. National Post,
October 2, 2002 B1.
20.
Safe Harbor. Alternative Mental Health Online. http://www.alternative
mentalhealth.com/testimonials/dramatic_recovery.htm
21.
Schauss, A. (1981).  Diet, crime and delinquency. Berkeley, CA: Parker
House.
22.
Dishinger, R.C. (1998).  Bad behavior and illness are caused by bio-
chemical imbalances: Nutrients such as vitamins, minerals, amino
acids, and enzymes give biochemical balance. Owensboro, KT: Medici
Music Press.
23.
Gesch, C.B., Hammond, S.M., Hampson, S.E., Eves, A., and Crowder,
M.M. (2002).  Influence of supplementary vitamins, minerals and
essential fatty acids on the antisocial behaviour of young adult
prisoners: Randomised, placebo-controlled trial. British Journal of
Psychiatry, 181, 22-28.

121
A TALE OF TWO HYPOTHESES
11
Science does not progress by traditional beliefs, but
rather by radical new ideas of single, imaginative
minds.
Philip S. Callahan1
Jigsaw puzzles must be challenging yet possible to solve.  This
balance is achieved by cutting an attractive picture into myr-
iad complex shapes, while also providing a photograph proving
they can be correctly reassembled.  The best way to recreate
the picture is to begin by sorting pieces into piles with common
characteristics.  Eventually, after a little trial and error, the
green, black, and white fragments may begin to form a herd of
grazing cattle.  The brown, grey, and white pieces may then
create a windmill.  Finally the complete scene becomes clear.
Unfortunately, disease jigsaws do not have pictures on their
boxes.  We do not know ahead of time what the illustration on
schizophrenia’s container looks like, although the proceeding
10 chapters have provided us with numerous pieces of the
puzzle.  These now have to be sorted into groups, unified by
common themes.  Clearly, for example, Skoliarova’s autopsy
observations of thyroid damage in schizophrenics2 belongs to-
gether with Danziger’s very successful desiccated thyroid treat-
ment regime3 and Roca and colleagues’ observation that the
severity of schizophrenic symptoms in early hospitalization
reflect thyroxine and triiodothyronine imbalances.4

122
How difficult is the schizophrenia jigsaw?  How complex is the
puzzle?  In The Madness of Adam and Eve, Horrobin5 points
out that:
While in familial and personality terms the problem is
devastating, in biochemical terms the problem cannot
be very serious.  After all, the young person functioned
near normally for fifteen, twenty-five or thirty-five years
before becoming ill.  Moreover, all schizophrenic pa-
tients vary in the severity of their illness, often, as
documented earlier, becoming near normal while the
body temperature is elevated.  The fundamental bio-
chemical problem, therefore, cannot be too serious and
must be reversible.
This is an extremely intelligent and encouraging character-
ization.  It seems fair to ask, however, if the problem is so
biochemically simple, why have thousands of scientists spent
billions of dollars, over more than 100 years, in endless un-
successful attempts to discover the etiology of schizophrenia?
During the past 30 years knowledge and equipment has greatly
improved yet, at best, the cure rates for schizophrenics have
remained static.
As a child, I would occasionally have trouble completing a
jigsaw puzzle.  In frustration, I would take a piece that looked
as it might fit, but did not, and force it into a vacant spot.  At
the same time, I would probably be complaining about the
poor quality of the puzzle’s manufacture.  Driving a round
piece into a square hole was, of course, the easiest way to
guarantee failure.  I will begin this attempt to put together the
pieces of the schizophrenia jigsaw by showing that the main
reason conventional medicine has made so little progress in
understanding the etiology of the disease is because several
critical pieces of the puzzle have been hammered into the wrong
holes.

123
DOPAMINE HYPOTHESIS
The current conventional treatment for schizophrenia rests
largely upon the belief that there is an excess of dopamine
involved in the disorder.  This suggests that schizophrenia is
somewhat like the mirror image of Parkinson’s disease which
involves a deficiency of the same neurotransmitter.6  The evi-
dence for the dopamine hypothesis in schizophrenia is shaky
at best.  It includes the fact that drugs designed to reduce
dopamine’s effect, such as haloperdol and chlorpromazine, act
by blocking dopamine receptors in the brain.  However, as pre-
viously discussed, this only tends to reduce the symptoms of
schizophrenia by some 15 to 25 percent.7  Interestingly, such
drugs have Parkinsonism as a side effect, suggesting that in
reality they may be causing a deficiency of brain dopamine.8
Other evidence used to support the dopamine hypothesis comes
from the fact that high doses of amphetamines produce schiz-
ophrenia-like symptoms known as “amphetamine psychosis.”
This is thought to be because amphetamines work by making
the brain upregulate its dopamine D2-like receptors, while caus-
ing a persistent decline in striatal dopamine levels.9  However,
amphetamines only mimic the positive symptoms of schizo-
phrenia.  There is no evidence that they cause negative symp-
toms, such as lack of emotion, action, or speech.  Beyond this,
children at risk for schizophrenia have brain wave patterns
similar to those seen in schizophrenics.  These childhood symp-
toms can be reduced by drugs that block dopamine receptors.10
While it cannot be denied that there are abnormally high num-
bers of dopamine D2- and D4-like receptors in the schizo-
phrenic brain,11-12 there are many good reasons to believe that
the dopamine hypothesis is, at best, incomplete and, at worst,
in error.  Amphetamines do more than increase dopamine lev-
els in the brain, they also alter other neurotransmitter levels.13

124
It is possible, therefore, that some of the symptoms of “am-
phetamine psychosis” are associated with these other affects.
Furthermore, drugs that block dopamine receptors do so quick-
ly, and yet it sometimes takes days before their effects on
schizophrenics become obvious.14  This suggests that they are
having an impact further down the “catecholamine chain,”
perhaps by reducing one or more of dopamine’s derivatives.
Alternatively, the effects of dopamine blockers may be even
more indirect.  Such drugs may be influencing other systems
that have a more direct impact on schizophrenia.  Newer drugs,
such as clozapine, block both dopamine and serotonin15 re-
ceptors, but as discussed earlier, they appear to be no more
effective than the traditional neuroleptics that impact on
dopamine alone.16
The best evidence against the dopamine hypothesis, however,
seems to come from experimental biology and biochemistry.
The great driving force behind the hypothesis is the belief that
extra dopamine receptors in the brain must result from an ex-
cess of dopamine.  This belief is an error, since there is good
evidence that it may be a malfunction of the thyroid system
that is responsible for such abnormalities.  Overstreet and col-
leagues17 have demonstrated that male rats, raised on iodine-
deficient diets, develop an abnormally high (28 percent increase)
number of dopamine receptors in the striatum.  Gilbert18 has
argued also that long exposure to a lack of iodine, seen, for
example, in many Africans and Chinese, results in a crucial
dopamine-thyroid action that slows cell timing mechanisms.
Interestingly, in women suffering from multiple sclerosis, the
rate of relapse declines during pregnancy as dopamine levels
increase.19  In contrast, pregnancy is often associated with a
depressed thyroid function, which in some cases culminates
in goiter.20-21  Certainly, there is a link between dopamine and
the thyroid because Kaptein and colleagues22 have shown that
dopamine reduces serum TSH and aggravates low thyroxine

125
levels in patients for whom it is prescribed.  It is quite likely,
therefore, that the dopamine receptor anomalies seen in schiz-
ophrenics are caused not by an excess of dopamine but by a
depression of thyroid hormones.
If there were an excess of dopamine in schizophrenia one would
expect that biochemists would easily be able to identify it.  This
has not been the case.  Indeed, when Tuckwell and Koziol23
conducted a meta-analysis of research results on the topic,
examining all the literature available to them in 1993, they
found no evidence of high levels of homovanillic acid, the
dopamine catabolite, in schizophrenics.  This lack suggests that
there is not an excess of dopamine in schizophrenia.  Beyond
this, these researchers24 concluded that homovanillic acid lev-
els were, if anything, perhaps below normal.  Yamamoto and
colleagues25 also pointed out that extensive biochemical stud-
ies, spread over two decades, had failed to provide any conclu-
sive evidence of undisputed dopamine excess in schizophrenia.
They further noted that this was not true for noradrenalin and
its metabolites, which appeared to be elevated in the cerebro-
spinal fluids and postmortem brains of schizophrenics.26  The
most logical conclusion to be drawn from the biological and
biochemical evidence is that for some 50 years the pharma-
ceutical industry and its researchers have been trying to push
a round jigsaw puzzle piece into a square hole.  This explains
why, as Horrobin27 has pointed out, their clinical results have
been so poor and their drugs so ineffective in treating the
disorder.
ADRENOCHROME HYPOTHESIS
In the 1950s a few asthmatics using out-of-date adrenaline
sprays became psychotic.28  It was later discovered that the
pink or deteriorated adrenaline such sprays contained had

126
been oxidized to adrenochrome and to other indoles.  In an
effort to discover what was causing the psychological problems,
Drs. Hoffer and Osmond began to experiment on themselves.
In one such trial, Osmond29 was administered 300 milligrams
of spray containing adrenochrome.  Within 11 minutes his ears
felt plugged and his vision became abnormal.  Rapidly swing-
ing one arm back and forward caused him to see it as a series
of stationary arms.  Within an hour, he decided to cycle home
from the hospital and noticed that the roadside trees were
expanding as if being pumped up with air.  Clearly, he was
hallucinating.  Arriving home earlier than usual he found his
wife was out and became very depressed, deciding that she
must have left him and returned to her mother in a distant
city.  He counted all the suitcases.  One was missing, increas-
ing his certainty that she had gone.  Finding a pile of clothes
he concluded his wife had been packing to leave and had de-
cided to go out to purchase her airline ticket.  His depression
increased.  Remembering the experiment, he became very an-
gry with the person who had forced him to take adrenochrome.
[He had, in fact, been a very willing participant in the experi-
ment.]  Clearly, he was becoming paranoid.  Hoffer30 describes
similar experiences, including adrenochrome induced paranoia.
This evidence suggests that intelligent, highly educated indi-
viduals can be made to display many of the symptoms of acute
schizophrenia very quickly, simply by exposing them to excess
adrenochrome.
What, then, is the chance that elevated adrenochrome is the
key to most schizophrenia?  Four significant genetic aberra-
tions have been recognized in this disorder.  Many patients
suffering from it have a low enzyme activity variant of the
catechol-O-methyltransferase (COMT) gene in which valine has
been replaced by methionine.31  This methionine type of the
enzyme has only 25 percent of the activity of the valine form.
Since catechol-O-methyltransferase metabolizes epinephrine

127
to the inactive metabolite metanephrine, this means that schiz-
ophrenics with this variant produce far less metanephrine than
normal, leaving more epinephrine for possible oxidation to
adrenochrome.32  As might be expected, therefore, five recent
studies 33-37 from countries as diverse as the USA, Finland,
Wales, and Israel have reported that this low enzyme activity
variant of the catechol-O-methyltransferase (COMT) gene is
associated with aggression, homicides and violent suicides in
schizophrenics.
In contrast, other schizophrenics seem to carry an abnormal
form of the GSTM1 gene, known as the GSTM1*0 allele.38  The
GSTM1 gene catalyses a glutathione conjugate of catecho-
lamine-O-quinones, that includes dopachrome, adrenochrome,
and noradrenochrome.  There are five classes of GST but the
GSTM1 gene is much more effective than the other four class-
es as a catalyst of adrenochrome.39  What this means is that
schizophrenics carrying the GSTM1*0 allele probably produce
higher than normal levels of adrenochrome.
Two of the known genetic aberrations in schizophrenia, con-
sequently, by different mechanisms, increase brain exposure
to adrenochrome, an indole that has been demonstrated ex-
perientially to produce hallucinations and paranoia.  This is
because the abnormal form of the catechol-O-methyltransferase
gene, found in many schizophrenics, increases the amount of
epinephrine that is available for oxidation to adrenochrome.
In contrast, the abnormal type of glutathione S-transferase gene,
also common in schizophrenics, is very effective in catalysing
adrenochrome.  As a consequence, either genetic variant will
result in an abnormal exposure to this paranoia-producing
indole.
The biochemical impact of the third genetic aberration, iden-
tified in a subgroup of schizophrenics,40 is less obvious.

128
Certainly, the C677T allele of the gene coding for methylene-
tetrahydrofolate (MTHFR) reduces the availability of methionine,
while simultaneously increasing homocysteine.41  That is, this
allele, apparently fairly common in schizophrenics, disrupts
the normal remethylation of homocysteine to methionine.  The
implications of this are not so clear.
Miller and Kelly42 have published an interesting overview of
the known and anticipated biochemical impacts of elevated
levels of homocysteine.  It is obvious that these are extremely
complex.  Specifically, homocysteine:
is an intermediate metabolite of methionine metabo-
lism and is itself metabolized by two pathways: the
re-methylation pathway, which regenerates methionine,
and the trans-sulfuration pathway, which degrades
homocysteine into cysteine and then taurine.  Because
homocysteine is located at this metabolic crossroad, it
impacts all methyl- and sulfur-group metabolism oc-
curring in the body.  Consequently, elevated levels of
homocysteine would be expected to negatively impact
the biosynthesis of all of the following: S-adenosyl-
methionine, carnitine, chondroitin sulfates, coenzyme
A, coenzyme Q10, creatine, cysteine, dimethylglycine,
epinephrine, glucosamine sulfate, glutathione, glycine,
melatonin, pantethine, phosphatidylcholine, phospha-
tidylserine, serine and taurine.
What, then, is the impact of elevated homocysteine and de-
pressed methionine on the adrenochrome levels in the brain?
The Hoffer protocol for the treatment of schizophrenia seeks to
alter remethylation by providing high doses of niacin (vitamin
B3), a natural methyl acceptor, that is used to reduce the
methylation of noradrenalin to adrenaline and then to adreno-
chrome.43  Since methylation is so important to the formation
of adrenochrome, it is clear that the C677T allele must have
an impact on brain levels of this metabolite of adrenaline.

129
The literature seems unclear, however, on whether high levels
of homocysteine and/or low levels of methionine and cystath-
ionine will elevate or depress adrenochrome production.
Axelrod,42 for example, has shown that in the rat liver a short-
age of methionine reduced the metabolism of adrenaline to
adrenochrome.  On the other hand, Fonlupt and coworkers45-46
have shown that elevated S-adenosylhomocysteine increased
norepinephrine synthesis in the rat brain.  This, of course, is
likely to increase adrenochrome levels.  Similarly, Brown and
colleagues,47 in a paper entitled “Unexpected increase in cate-
cholamines in adrenals of rats treated with 3-deazaadenosine,”
describe how this methylation inhibitor caused a doubling of
both norepinephrine and epinephrine in rat adrenals.  Beyond
this, Yoshida and coworkers48 have described how supplement-
ing rat diets with methionine caused a decline, not an increase,
in brain levels of norepinephrine (and one would assume adren-
ochrome).  If methionine does, in fact, decrease brain adreno-
chrome, then it follows that the activity of the C677T allele will
increase it.  All that seems clear at the moment is that this
genetic aberration alters brain adrenochrome levels in schizo-
phrenics.  It is also known that elevated homocysteine is asso-
ciated with aggression and rage in both men and women,49
characteristics that are much more likely to be linked to a rise
than a fall in brain adrenochrome.50
The fourth genetic aberration that has been linked to schizo-
phrenia is an unusual Nogo variant gene that seems likely to
overproduce proteins that reduce the number of nerve endings
in the regions of the brain associated with schizophrenia.51  If
this is the case, this aberration probably makes those affected
by it more likely to be adversely impacted by neurotoxins such
as adrenochrome.

130
SUMMARY
Why has the role of adrenochrome in schizophrenia been so
neglected by mainstream medicine?  Unfortunately, soon after
the initial studies by Osmond, Smythies, and Hoffer, Rinkel
published a report claiming that adrenochrome was not an
hallucinogen.52  This quickly killed off the interest of psychia-
trists in the substance.  However, as Hoffer53 has pointed out,
Rinkel:
obtained a supply of adrenochrome semicarbazide,
known commercially as stable adrenochrome.  It was
used by surgeons to decrease bleeding.  Rinkel gave
this inert material to a few subjects and found no hal-
lucinogenic activity.  He was unaware this substance
is not hydrolyzed in the body, does not release adreno-
chrome and has different properties.  Adrenochrome
critics apparently never read Rinkel’s subsequent re-
port where he acknowledged his error.
As a consequence of this mistake by Rinkel, the dopamine hy-
pothesis has been dominant in psychiatry for half a century.
Chamberlin54 noted in his discussion of the multiple working
hypotheses concept that the originators of a new theory tend to
have a maternal or paternal relationship to it.  As a result, they
tend to continue to defend it long after it becomes obvious that
it is incorrect.  The pharmaceutical industry has made billions
of dollars selling drugs to combat an excess of nonexistent
dopamine in schizophrenia.  Countless psychiatrists have built
reputations and businesses on treatments that depend upon
it.  However, despite all the vested special interests intent on
propping up this hypothesis, it is clear that there is no dopa-
mine excess in schizophrenia.  While the experimental, clini-
cal, genetic, and biological evidence does strongly support an
excess of a catecholamine in schizophrenia, it is adrenochrome

131
not dopamine.  The remainder of this book demonstrates that,
while it is impossible to complete a jigsaw puzzle if one believes
that dopamine is the key to schizophrenia, it is a relatively
simple task to do so on the assumption that adrenochrome
plays that role.
REFERENCES
1.
Callahan, P.S. (1976).  Tuning into nature. Old Greenich, CT: The Devin-
Adair Co.
2.
Skoliarova, N.A. (1975).  Morphology of the endocrine system in schizo-
phrenia according to early autopsy findings (the hypophyseal-
thyroid system). Zhurnal Nevropatologii Psikhiatrii Imeni SS
Korsakova, 75(7), 1045-1053. (In Russian, abstract only consulted).
3.
Hoffer, A. (2001).  Thyroid and schizophrenia. Journal of Orthomolecular
Medicine, 16(4), 205-212.
4.
Roca, R.P., Blackman, M.R., Ackerley, M.B., Harman, S.M., and
Greyerman, R.I. (1990).  Thyroid hormone elevations during acute
psychiatric illness: Relationship to severity and distinction from
hyperthyroidism. Endocrine Research, 16(4), 415-417.
5.
Horrobin, D. (2002).  The Madness of Adam and Eve: How schizophrenia
shaped humanity. London: Transworld.
6.
Foster, H.D. (1999).  Parkinson’s disease, multiple sclerosis and amyo-
trophic lateral sclerosis: The iodine-dopachrome-glutamate hypoth-
esis. Journal of Orthomolecular Medicine, 14(3): 128-136.
7.
Horrobin, D.F. (2002).  Evidence-based medicine and the need for non-
commercial clinical research directed towards therapeutic innova-
tion. Experimental Biology and Medicine, 227(7), 435-437.
8.
Tolosa, E., Marti, M.J., Valldeoriola, F., and Molinuevo, J.L. (1998).  His-
tory of levodopa and dopamine agonists in Parkinson’s disease
treatment. Neurology, 50 (Suppl 6): S2-10; discussion S44-48.
9.
Crawford, C.A., Zavala, A.R., Karper, P.E., and McDougall, S.A. (2000).
Long-term effects of postnatal amphetamine treatment on striatal
protein kinase A activity, dopamine D(1)-like and D(2)-like binding
sites, and dopamine content. Neurotoxicology and Teratology, 22(6),
799-804.
10.
Schizophrenia. http://faculty.washington.edu/chudler/schiz.html

132
11.
Seeman, P., Guan, H.C., and Van Tol, H.H. (1955).  Schizophrenia:
Elevation of dopamine D4-like sites, using [3H] nemonapride and
[1251] epidepride. European Journal of Pharmacology, 286(2),
R3-5.
12.
Kestler, L.P., Walker, E., and Vega, E.M. (2001).  Dopamine receptors in
the brains of schizophrenic patients: A meta-analysis of the find-
ings. Behavioral Pharmacology, 12(5), 355-371.
13.
Gouzoulis-Mayfrank E., Daumann, J., and Sass, H., (2002).  Chronic
neurotoxic damage in ecstasy (MDMA) users. Review of the cur-
rent state of research. Nervenartz, 73(5), 405-421.
14.
Schizophrenia, op cit.
15.
Ibid.
16.
Geddes, J., Freemantle, N., Harrison, P., and Bebbington P. for the Na-
tional Schizophrenia Guideline Development Group (2000).  Atypi-
cal antipsychotics in the treatment of schizophrenia: A systematic
overview and meta-regression analysis. British Medical Journal, 321,
1371-1376.
17.
Overstreet, D.H., Crocker, A.D., Lawson, C.A., McIntosh, G.H., and
Crocker, J.M. (1984).  Alterations in the dopaminergic system and
behaviour in rats reared on iodine-deficient diets. Pharmacology
Biochemistry and Behavior, 21(4), 561-565.
18.
Gilbert, C. (1997).  Major human cancers are preventable: Physiological
stimuli induce a dopamine-thyroid-immune efficient mechanism.
European Journal of Cancer Prevention, 6, 269-276.
19.
Confavreux, C., Hutchinson, M., Hours, M.M., Cortinovis-Tourniaire,
P., and Moreau, T. (1998).  Rate of pregnancy-related relapse in
multiple sclerosis. Pregnancy in multiple sclerosis group. New Eng-
land Journal of Medicine, 339(5), 285-291.
20.
Murray, T.K. (1977).  Goitre in Canada. Canadian Journal of Public Health,
68, 431-432.
21.
Crooks, J., Aboul-Khair, S.A., Turnbull, A.C., and Hytten, F.E. (1964).
The incidence of goitre during pregnancy. Lancet, 2, 334-336.
22.
Kaptein, E.M., Spencer, C.A., Kamiel, M.B., and Nicoloff, J.J. (1980).
Prolonged dopamine administration and thyroid hormone economy
in normal and critically ill subjects. Journal of Clinical Endocrinol-
ogy and Metabolism, 51(2), 387-393.
23.
Tuckwell, H.C., and Koziol, J.A. (1993).  A meta-analysis of homovanillic
acid concentrations in schizophrenia. International Journal of Neu-
roscience, 73(1-2), 109-114.

133
24.
Ibid.
25.
Yamamoto, K., Ozawa, N., Shinba, T., Hoshino, T., and Yoshii, M. (1994).
Possible noradrenergic dysfunction in schizophrenia. Brain Re-
search Bulletin 35(5-6), 529-543.
26.
Ibid.
27.
Horrobin, op. cit.
28.
Hoffer, A. (1998).  Vitamin B-3 schizophrenia discovery recovery contro-
versy. Kingston, ON: Quarry Books.
29.
Dishinger, R.C. (1998).  Bad behaviour and illness are caused by bio-
chemical imbalances. Owensboro, KT: Medici Music Press.
30.
Hoffer, A. (1999). Personal communication.
31.
Murphy, K.C., Jones, L.A., and Owens, M.J. (1999).  Archives of Gen-
eral Psychiatry, 56, 9940, cited by Sawa, A., and Snyder, S.H.
(2002).  Schizophrenia: Diverse approaches to a complex disease.
Science, 296, 692-695.
32.
Kern, C., and Bernards, C.M. (1997).  Ascorbic acid inhibits spinal
manigeal catechol-O-methyltransferase in vitro, markedly increas-
ing epinephrine bioavailability. Anesthesiology, 86(2), 405-409.
33.
Strous, M.D., Bark, N., Parsia, S.S., Volavka, J., and Lachman, H.M.
(1997).  Analysis of a functional catechol-O-methyltransferase gene
polymorphism in schizophrenia: Evidence for association with ag-
gressive and antisocial behaviour. Psychiatry Research, 69(2-3),
71-77.
34.
Kotler, M., Barak, P., Cohen, H., Averbuch, I.E., Grinshpoon, A.,
Gritsenko, I., Nemanov, L., and Ebstein, R.P. (1999).  Homicidal
behavior in schizophrenia associated with a genetic polymorphism
determining low catechol-O-methyltransferase (COMT). American
Journal of Medical Genetics, 88(6), 628-633.
35.
Jones, G., Zammit, S., Norton, N., Hamshere, M.L., Jones, S.J., and
Milham, C. (2001).  Aggressive behaviour in patients with schizo-
phrenia is associated with catechol-O-methyltransferase genotype.
British Journal of Psychiatry, 179, 351-355.
36.
Lachan, H.M., Nolan, K.A., Mohr, P., Saito, T. and Volavka, J. (1998).
Association between catechol-O-methyltransferase genotype and
violence in schizophrenia and schizoaffective disorder. American
Journal of Psychiatry, 155(6), 835-837.
37.
Nolan, K.A., Volavka, J., Czobor, P., Cseh, A., Lachman, H., Saito, T.,
and Tiihonen, J. (2000).  Suicidal behaviour in patients with

134
schizophrenia is related to COMT polymorphism. Psychiatric Ge-
netics, 10(3), 117-124.
38.
Harada, S., Tachikawa, H., and Kawanishi, Y. (2001).  Glutathione S-
transferase M1 gene deletion my be associated with susceptibility
to certain forms of schizophrenia. Biochemical and Biophysical Re-
search Communications, 281, 267-271.
39.
Ibid.
40.
Arinami, T., Yamada, N., Yamakawa-Kobayashi, K., Hamaguchi, H., and
Toru, M. (1997).  Methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase variant and
schizophrenia/depression. American Journal of Medical Genetics,
74(5), 526-528.
41.
Methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase: Homocysteinemia, schizophrenia,
rages, depression, CNS dysfunction, neural tube defects. http://
www.kmmutants.org/07A.php
42.
Miller, A.L., and Kelly, G.S. (1997).  Homocysteine metabolism: Nutri-
tional modulation and impact on health and disease. Alternative
Medicine Review, 2(4), 234-254.
43.
Hoffer, A. (1998) op. cit.
44.
Axelrod, J. (1986).  Doing research in the intramural program of the
National Institutes of Health. Perspectives in Biology and Medicine,
29(3) Part 2, S131-S137.
45.
Fonlupt, P., Roche, M., Cronenberger, L., and Pacheco, H. (1979).
Activation by S-adenosylhomocysteine of norepinephrine and se-
rotonin in vitro uptake in synaptosomal preparations from rat brain.
Experientia, 35(8), 1089-1090.
46.
Fonlupt, P., Roche, M., Cronenberger, L., and Pacheco, H. (1979).  Ac-
tion of S-adenosyl-L-homocysteine on the metabolism of dopamine,
norepinephrine and serotonin in rat brain. Archives Internationales
de Pharmacodynamie et de Therapie (Ghent), 240(1), 35-44.
47.
Brown, N.D., Miura, G.A., Stermer-Cox, M.G., Richard, M.M., and
Chiang, P.K. (1985).  Unexpected increase in catecholamines in
adrenals of rats treated with 3-deazaadenosine. Biochemical and
Biophysical Research Communications, 127(3), 924-928.
48.
Yoshida, A., Yokogoshi, H., and Dikshit, M. (1986).  Effect of methio-
nine supplementation to a low soy protein diet on the brain free
amino acids, serotonin and catecholamines in rats. Nutritional
Science Soy Protein, Japan, 7, 41-46.
49.
Stoney, C.M., and Engebretson, T.O. (2000).  Plasma homocysteine con-
centrations are positively associated with hostility and anger. Life
Sciences, 66(23), 2267-2275.

135
50.
Lachan et al., op. cit.
51.
Novak, G., Kim, D., Seeman, P., and Tallerico, T. (2002).  Schizophrenia
and Nogo: Elevated mRNA in cortex, and high prevalence of a
homozygous CAA insert. Brain Research. Molecular Brain Research
(Amsterdam), 107(2), 183-189.
52.
Hoffer, A. (1982).  The adrenochrome hypothesis of schizophrenia revis-
ited. Journal of Orthomolecular Psychiatry, 10(2), 1-21.
53.
Ibid.
54.
Chamberlin, T.C. (1980).  The method of multiple working hypotheses.
Science (old series), 15, 92. This is a classical geological paper which
can be consulted on the Internet at http://www.accessexcellence.
com/AB/BC/chamberlin.html. Failure to follow the methodology set
out by Chamberlin is the root cause of lack of progress in prevent-
ing and curing schizophrenia.

136
First they ignore you, then they laugh at you, then
they fight you, then you win.
Mahatma Gandhi

137
PULLING THE TRIGGER
12
I know that most men, including those at ease with prob-
lems of the greatest complexity, can seldom accept even
the simplest and most obvious truth, if it be such as would
oblige them to admit the falsity of conclusions which they
have delighted in explaining to colleagues, which they
have proudly taught to others, and which they have
woven thread by thread into the fabric of their lives.
Leo Tolstoy (1828-1910)
Genetic inheritance plays a significant role in determining who
becomes a schizophrenic and who does not.  This, of course, is
why schizophrenia tends to run in families1 and why roughly
50 percent of identical twins will eventually become a schizo-
phrenic, if their counterpart already is one.2  Nevertheless, if
genes were destiny, all such identical twins would develop the
disorder, once their sibling had been affected.  Bishop and
Waldholz,3 in their book Genome, explain such relationships,
pointing out that “aberrant genes do not, in and of themselves,
cause disease.  By and large their impact on an individual’s
health is minimal until the person is plunged into a harmful
environment.”  The significance of the four aberrant genes just
discussed, therefore, probably depends upon location—that is
on geography and on society.
Genetic diseases, constrained by the slow pace of human re-
production, do not undergo rapid changes in incidence.  One
does not experience epidemics of genetic diseases. However,
historical reviews4-5 leave no doubt that for over two hundred
years the incidence of schizophrenia has been rising rapidly

138
throughout the Industrialized World.  That is, we have been
experiencing a pandemic of schizophrenia, the invisible plague.
This implies that the environmental and/or social trigger(s)
for schizophrenia must have become increasingly common as
societies industrialized.  Or, put another way, schizophrenia is
one of the costs that society, as a whole, has been willing to
inflict on certain genetically susceptible individuals in order
to gain the benefits of industrialization.  If the adrenochrome
hypothesis is correct, it follows that the environmental trigger(s)
for schizophrenia must be substances, processes, or activities
that encourage the formation of adrenaline and its oxidation
into adrenochrome.  Alternatively, such a trigger(s) might in-
hibit adrenochrome’s breakdown, again causing brain levels to
rise.  This chapter sets out to try to answer two basic questions
about schizophrenia.  What are the triggers that turn on aber-
rant genes?  And why do they particularly affect young people?
STRESS
Stress is the easiest way to promote the metabolism of adren-
aline in the human body.  Although medical interest in stress
can be traced back to Hippocrates,6 it was not until the 1920s
that physiologist Walter Cannon7 confirmed that response to
stress is part of a unified mind-body system.  Cannon was able
to show that various stressors, including extreme cold, lack of
oxygen, and emotion-arousing incidents trigger an outpouring
of epinephrine (adrenaline) and norepinephrine (noradrenaline).
These enter the bloodstream from sympathetic nerve endings
in the inner adrenal glands.8  In those stressed, the sympa-
thetic nervous system increases respiration and heart rate,
diverts blood to skeletal muscles, and releases fat from storage.
All these changes prepare the body for what Cannon called
“fight or flight” and are obviously part of a response system
that has evolved in an effort to deal with perceived threats.

139
Unfortunately, in situations of chronic stress, the “fight or flight”
response becomes counterproductive, leading to a cumulative
build up of adrenaline, noradrenaline, and cortisol.  If these
substances are not properly metabolized, long-term stress ap-
pears to promote disorders ranging from headaches and high
blood pressure to rheumatoid arthritis and allergies.9  What is
significant here is that the “fight or flight” response to stress is
associated with an elevation of adrenaline, oxidation of which
can lead to an excess of adrenochrome.  Perhaps it is not sur-
prising, then, that chronic stress is often linked to anxiety,
poor concentration, depression, anger, frustration, fear, and
sadness.10  Of course, if the individual being stressed carries
one of the genetic aberrations linked to schizophrenia, adren-
ochrome levels are likely to be higher than normal and may be
linked to the paranoia and hallucinations that this indole causes
when taken accidentally or experimentally.11  In summary, stress
may be a trigger for schizophrenia because it increases the
production of the precursors of adrenochrome.
Before the rise of the dopamine hypothesis, in the first 50
years of the 20th century, psychosocial explanations of schiz-
ophrenia predominated.  Such psychosocial models included
beliefs that schizophrenia was triggered by traumatic childhood
experiences, abnormal family communication, inappropriate
child-rearing practices, and cultural and social breakdown.12
To illustrate, it was discovered that schizophrenia was rela-
tively rare amongst the Hutterites,13 a religious group that
originated in 1530.  Naturally, those supporting psychosocial
explanations of schizophrenia accounted for this anomaly by
pointing to the low stress, and the relatively slow pace of life
experienced in Hutterite communities.  Such communal vil-
lages are invariably rural, being devoted to agriculture, crafts
and value-added small scale manufacturing.  Everybody is
employed and is part of a close society.  They are largely free,
therefore, of many of the urban stressors that may perhaps

140
trigger schizophrenia.  If adrenochrome is the initial biochem-
ical cause of most schizophrenia, then such psychosocial ex-
planations of the disorder begin to make sense.  After all, stress
increases the release of adrenaline which in turn can be oxi-
dized to adrenochrome.
ALLERGIES
Physicians at the Moscow Psychiatric Institute used long fasts
to treat schizophrenia, greatly improving the symptoms of 64
percent of all chronic patients who completed their program.14
This strongly suggests that there may be dietary triggers for
the disorder.  Further support for this possibility comes from
the recognition that such fasting normalizes catecholamine
levels in the urine of schizophrenics.15
Countries where the national diet traditionally contains large
quantities of cow’s milk and wheat have poor recovery rates for
schizophrenia.16  This is not unexpected as some schizophrenics
greatly improve on gluten free diets,17 perhaps because celiac
disease is common in their families.18  Indeed, Pfeiffer claimed
that 10 percent of schizophrenics suffer from a gluten allergy.19
Hoffer also discovered that, in some fasting schizophrenics, the
reintroduction of cow’s milk caused hallucinations.20  Indeed,
120 of Hoffer’s “problem patients,” those who had not responded
well to orthomolecular treatment, experienced significant per-
manent improvements in their mental health after identifying
and eliminating from their diets specific foods to which they
were allergic.21
These clues to the etiology of schizophrenia suggest that diet
often plays a key role in triggering the disorder.  This may be
one of the reasons why so many recovered schizophrenics be-
lieve that they were formerly hypoglycemic and that they had

141
greatly improved only after a major dietary change.  How can
so many different foods trigger one disease?  The best way to
understand a disorder is often to examine extreme cases.  A
few people are exceedingly allergic to a particular food, such as
peanuts or salmon or to a product such as latex and can die
rapidly if exposed to even small quantities of it.22-23  Allergic
reactions can include skin rashes, itching, hives, burning eyes,
swollen lips and tongue, difficulty breathing, wheezing, dizzi-
ness, abdominal pain, nausea, and diarrhea.  In rarer cases, a
strongly allergic individual suffers shock; blood pressure drops
markedly, the throat swells, and airways in the lungs constrict.
Without immediate treatment with epinephrine, death from
anaphalactic shock occurs.22-23
Interestingly, the treatment of choice for anaphylaxis, whether
caused by latex,25 peanuts, or insect stings,26 is always epine-
phrine, a dilute solution of adrenaline.  This is because, during
an allergic reaction, the chronic inflammatory response is usu-
ally characterized by many polymorphonucleur leukocytes,27
the presence of which have been demonstrated by Matthews
and coworkers28 to be associated with the oxidation of adrena-
line to adrenochrome.  In such an allergic reaction, oxidation
of adrenaline to adrenochrome is detectable within 5 minutes
and continues for at least 4 hours.
Of course, many people are allergic to substances that occur
in water supplies or as air pollutants or as an integral part of
products of one type or another.29  This may be one of the rea-
sons why schizophrenia’s prevalence has markedly increased
during the Industrial Revolution.  Industrialization has brought
with it an enormous range of pollutants that adversely affected
air, water, and soil quality.  By 1977, the America Chemical
Society had registered some four million chemical compounds,
32,000 of which were in commercial use.30  It is unknown how
many of these are potentially dangerous, although there are

142
currently some 2,450 substances that are thought to cause
cancer in the workplace.  While attempts are generally made to
establish the possible carcinogenicity of such industrial chem-
icals,31 their potential effects on mental health rarely appear to
be considered.
HYPOGLYCEMIA
Hypoglycemia was initially described by Dr. Seale Harris32 in
1924 when he discovered that sugar consumption stimulated
the body to release insulin which, in turn, drove blood sugar
levels down.  Harris discovered that a high-protein, low-sugar
diet, eaten at frequent small meals, maintained a normal and
stable blood sugar level, so controlling hypoglycemia.  Since
the USA sugar consumption33 per capita has increased by ap-
proximately a factor of 20 since 1822, it is not surprising that
hypoglycemia has become rampant in its population.34
It may be recalled that many recovered schizophrenics felt that
they had previously suffered from hypoglycemia.  Schauss35
also estimated that between 80 and 85 percent of criminals in
USA prisons suffer from hypoglycemia, often eating an excess
of sugary foods, and repeatedly drinking sugar-sweetened cof-
fee and/or Kool-Aid.  It is well known that when blood sugar
levels drop, adrenaline is released from the adrenal glands be-
cause it is involved in the metabolism of glucose.36-37  It follows,
therefore, that anyone suffering from the large blood sugar
swings characteristic of hypoglycemia (associated with a diet
that is too rich in sugar) is going to overproduce adrenaline.
Hypoglycemic individuals with one or more of the genetic aber-
rations seen in schizophrenia are, therefore, likely to suffer
psychosis cased by adrenochrome created by the oxidation of
this excess adrenaline.

143
SUMMARY
It is widely believed that schizophrenics have fewer allergies
than normal.  The evidence just cited, however, suggests this
is another error.  It is more than likely that one or more of the
biochemical anomalies seen in schizophrenia renders the nor-
mally used scratch or prick skin tests unreliable.  According to
Kail and coauthors,38 “These tests are limited in that they only
measure Type 1 or IgE-mediated, allergic responses (asthma,
allergic rhinitis, eczema, and hives), which are primarily trig-
gered by inhaled allergens such as pollen, mould, dust, and
animal dander.”  These procedures have only about a 15 per-
cent accuracy rate in spotting food-induced allergic reactions.39
As a consequence, delayed food allergies, together with most
chemical sensitivities, go undetected.  Interestingly, the same
type of problem is occurring in testing for tuberculosis.  To
quote Reichman and Tanne.40
In ordinary circumstances, a positive tuberculin skin
test indicates past or present latent tuberculosis infec-
tion, so most patients with active TB are assumed to
have a positive skin test.  But 27 of the 29 TB patients
in our first report had negative skin tests.  The tuber-
culin skin test measures a reaction to tuberculin by
the patient’s immune system, but these patients’ im-
mune systems were obviously so depleted by HIV that
they couldn’t muster a response to the tuberculin test.
Certainly, schizophrenics can rarely respond in the normal way
to a niacin skin challenge and often appear to have an increased
tolerance for histamine.41
The evidence presented in this chapter, therefore, suggests that
when individuals who carry specific genetic aberrations (such
as the low enzyme activity variant of the catechol-O-methyl-
transferase gene or the GSTM1*0 allele) are subjected to stress,
or substances to which they are allergic, or an excess of sugar,

144
they over-produce adrenaline and subsequently adrenochrome.
As a consequence, they experience psychotic episodes.  Stress,
allergic reactions, and the over-consumption of sugar are the
environmental triggers that, together with one or more of these
aberrant genes, cause schizophrenia.  Such triggers lead to
schizophrenia most often in the young for two basic reasons.
Adolescents and young adults are affected by rising hormone
levels, including adrenaline, that generally peak shortly before
age 30 and then begin a gradual, but straightline, decline.42  At
some point, probably during a period of stress, or after a sugar
binge that adolescents are famous for, adrenaline production
rises to a level at which associated adrenochrome becomes
elevated enough to cause the first schizophrenic episode.
REFERENCES
1.
Myers, D.G. (1992).  Psychology. New York: Worth Publishers.
2.
Ibid.
3.
Bishop and Waldholz (1990).  Genome. Cited by Bland, J.S. in Williams,
J.R. (1998).  Biochemical individuality: The basis for the genetotrophic
concept. New Canaan, CT: Keats Publishing, viii.
4.
Torrey, E.F. (1980).  Schizophrenia and Civilization. New York: Jason
Aronson.
5.
Torrey, E.F., and Miller, J. (2002).  The invisible plague: The rise of men-
tal illness from 1750 to the present. New Brunswick: Rutgers Uni-
versity Press.
6.
Myers, op.cit.
7.
Ibid.
8.
Ibid.
9.
Mind/Body Education Center. The Fight or flight Response. http://www.
mindbodymed.com/EducationCenter/fight.html
10.
Ibid.
11.
Dishinger, R.C. (1998).  Bad behaviour and illness are caused by bio-
chemical imbalances. Owensboro, KT: Medici Music Press.

145
12.
Torry (1980) op. cit.
13.
Eaton, J.W., and Weil, R.J. (1955).  Cultural and mental disorders: A
comparative study of the Hutterites and other populations. Glencoe,
IL: Free Press.
14.
Cott, A. (1971).  Controlled fasting treatment of schizophrenia. Schizo-
phrenia, 3, 2-10.
15.
Ibid.
16.
Templer, D., and Veleber, D.M. (1980).  Schizophrenia prevalence: Wheat,
milk and temperature. Journal of Orthomolecular Psychiatry, 9(4),
284-286.
17.
Vissodes, D.N., Venulet, A., and Jenner, F.A. (1986).  A double-blind
gluten-free/gluten-load controlled trial in a secure ward popula-
tion. British Journal of Psychiatry, 148, 447-452.
18.
Dohan, F.C. (1980).  Hypothesis: Genes and neuroactive peptides from
food as cause of schizophrenia. In E. Costa and M. Trabucchi (Eds.),
Neural peptides and neural communication (pp. 535-538). New York:
Raven Press.
19.
Pfeiffer, C.C. (1987).  Nutrition and mental illness: An orthomolecular ap-
proach to balancing body chemistry. Rochester, VT: Healing Art
Press.
20.
Kail, K., and Lawrence, B. (with Goldberg B.) (2000).  Allergy free: An
alternative medicine definitive guide. Tiburon, CA: Alternative
Medicine.com.
21.
Ibid.
22.
Ibid.
23.
American Academy of Allergy, Asthma and Immunology (1999).  Fast
facts: Statistics on asthma and allergic diseases. www.aaaai.org
24.
Senst, B.L., and Johnson, R.A. (1997).  Latex allergy. American Journal
of Health Syst.Pharm., 54(9), 1071-1075.
25.
Valeri, C.R., Altschule, M.D., and Pivacek, L.E. (1972).  The hemolytic
action of adrenochrome, an epinephrine metabolite. Journal of
Medicine, 3(1), 20-40.
26.
Baumgartner A., Wokalek, H., and Schöpf, E. (1989).  Bee and wasp
venom allergy. Fortschr Med., 107(21), 460-463.
27.
Nasjleti, C.E., Caffesse, R.G., and Kowalski, C.J. (1984).  Dextran-induced
inflammation and its effect on keratinized gingival epithelium in
monkeys. Journal of Periodontology, 55(9), 531-535.

146
28.
Matthews, SB, Hallet, M.B., Henderson, A.H., and Campbell A.K. (1985).
The adrenochrome pathway. A potential catabolic route for adrena-
line metabolism in inflammatory disease. Advanced Myocardiology,
6, 367-381.
29.
Foster, H.D. (1999).  Schizophrenia: The latex allergy hypothesis. Jour-
nal of Orthomolecular Medicine, 14(2), 83-90.
30.
US Environmental Protection Agency. Toxic Substances Control Act
(TSCA), PL-94- 469: Candidate List of Chemical Substances, 1-3
Washington, DC. Environmental Protection Agency, Office of Toxic
Substances (1977).
31.
Christensen, H. (1976).  Suspected carcinogens: A subfile of the NIOSH
Registry of Toxic Effects of Chemical Substances (2nd Edition).
Cincinnati, Ohio National Institute for Occupational Safety and
Health.
32.
Schauss, A. (1980).  Diet, crime and delinquency. Berkeley, CA: Parker
House.
33.
Ibid. citing data from the National Food Situation, 138 (1971).
34.
Phelps, J.K., and Nourse, A.E. (1986).  The hidden addiction and how to
get free. Boston, MS: Little, Brown and Company.
35.
Schauss, op. cit.
36.
Watt, M.J., and Hargreaves, M. (2002).  Effect of epinephrine on glucose
disposal during exercise in humans: Role of muscle glycogen.
American Journal of Physiology Endocrinology and Metabolism,
283(3), E578-583.
37.
Vicini, P., Avogaro, A., Spilker, M.E., Gallo, A., and Cobelli, C. (2002).
Epinephrine effects on insulin-glucose dynamics: The labelled
IVGTT (Intravenous Glucose Tolerance Test) two-compartment
minimal model approach. American Journal of Physiology
Endocrinology and Metabolism, 283(1), E78-84.
38.
Kail, K. et al. (2000) op. cit.
39.
Ibid.
40.
Reichman, L.B. (with Tanne, J.H.) (2002).  Timebomb: The global epi-
demic of multi-drug-resistant tuberculosis. New York: McGraw-Hill.
41.
Hoffer, A. (1992).  The adrenochrome hypothesis of schizophrenia revis-
ited. Journal of Orthomolecular Psychiatry, 10(2), 1-21.
42.
Berkow, R., Beers, M.H., Bogin, R.M., and Fletcher, A.J. (eds). (1997).
The Merk Manual of Medical Information Home Edition. New York:
Pocket Books.

147
THE UNSUPPORTING CAST
13
It is frightening (or exciting) to contemplate how many
new ideas are lying dormant in already collected in-
formation that is now put together in one way and could
be rearranged in a better way.  At first Einstein’s theo-
ries were only minimally more adequate than the ones
they replaced.  The difference in explanation amounted
to a better understanding of the wavelengths of light
from the star Sirius and a very slight alteration in the
orbit of the planet Mercury.  In terms of detail this was
like replacing a cup in a restaurant, but from that new
way of looking at things came atomic energy.
Edward de Bono1
The walls of geography departments are covered in maps be-
cause location is the key to integrating spatial data.  At smaller
scales, cities become points interconnected by networks of
rivers, roads, and railways.  This is my world.  I think in terms
of why diseases occur where they do.  In biochemistry depart-
ments, the walls are papered with charts that look, at first
glance, very like maps.  Here the points, however, represent
trace elements, hormones, fatty acids, and the other essential
biochemical components of life.  The networks that connect
them are more like those of ancestoral family trees, identifying
what gives birth to what and how.  They are lines of process
that show how disruption can spread out in all directions like
an advancing army.  Such charts confirm just how intercon-
nected the processes that occur in the human body really are.

148
If the adrenochrome excess hypothesis is correct, this adrena-
line metabolite is bound to cause other biochemical imbalanc-
es.  This chapter attempts to identify the most immediate of
these cascades.
ADRENOCHROME AND TRIIODOTHYRONINE
Even before birth, those unfortunately destined to become
schizophrenics probably suffer from abnormal thyroids.  They
demonstrate minor fetal physical anomalies, developed in the
first trimester, that are similar to those found in infants born
to women abusing alcohol during pregnancy.2  Evidence is
increasing that fetal alcohol syndrome is caused by alcohol’s
negative impacts on the thyroid gland.3  The elevation of brain
dopamine receptors also discovered in schizophrenics is sim-
ilar to that observed in rats that have been fed diets that are
deficient in iodine.4  The thyroid gland is very susceptible to
radioactive iodine damage and the prevalence of schizophre-
nia is higher than normal in both fetuses irradiated by atomic
bomb fallout5 and workers who were involved in the danger-
ous clean-up that followed the Chernobyl nuclear power plant
disaster.6
There is also direct evidence of malfunctioning thyroid glands
in psychotic inpatients early after hospitalization when their
thyroid hormone imbalances are strongly positively correlated
with the severity of their symptoms.7  A wide range of thyroid
irregularities also have been identified in “permanently hospi-
talized chronic schizophrenics.”8  In addition, Skoliarova9 has
described a series of autopsies carried out on schizophrenics
almost immediately after death.  In all cases, they had suf-
fered from a clear, visible deterioration of the thyroid gland,
rarely seen in any other type of patient.  According to Hoffer
and Osmond,10 several researchers have shown that thyroid

149
hormone (either in the form of dried gland or as the pure hor-
mone triiodothyronine) improves the cure rates for schizophre-
nia far above the natural untreated rates, but also much above
that achieved by conventional treatments, including tranqui-
lizer use.  As previously described, for example, Danziger11 pre-
scribed desiccated thyroid for 120 schizophrenics, with doses
ranging from 120 to 1,200 milligrams.  Every one of the 80
patients who had been ill for 6 months or less and who com-
pleted this treatment, recovered.
The geographical evidence12 strongly suggests that any such
benefit in schizophrenia from thyroid supplements must be
coming from extra triiodothronine, rather than from thyroxine.
This is because, in the USA, there is no significant correlation
between the prevalence of iodine deficiency disorder, goitre,
and schizophrenia.13  Schizophrenia is, however, considerably
more common in low selenium states.14  Indeed, variations in
the prevalence of schizophrenics in state and county mental
hospitals in the USA suggests a selenium deficiency relative
risk of 1.77:1.15
Selenium plays a key role in the production of triiodothyro-
nine, but not of thyroxine.  Researchers at the Hahn-Meitner
Institute in Berlin,16 for example, found that selenium is neces-
sary to produce deiodinase, the enzyme required to convert
thyroxine into triiodothyronine.  If there is a selenium defi-
ciency, deiodinase is depleted and adequate quantities of tri-
iodothyronine cannot be produced.  Naturally, this is most
likely to occur when diet is low in selenium, often reflecting a
local soil inadequacy.
Taken as a whole, this evidence suggests that there is a sig-
nificant triiodothyronine deficiency in schizophrenia which
eventually causes serious thyroid damage.  This probably ex-
plains why initially the disorder is episodic but eventually, as

150
the thyroid is rendered unable to function effectively, becomes
chronic, since it is well known that thyroid imbalances them-
selves result in psychosis.17
What, then, is the evidence that excess adrenaline and associ-
ated adrenochrome may be linked to the inadequate triiodothy-
ronine levels seen in schizophrenics?  There can be little doubt
that both adrenaline and adrenochrome have significant im-
pacts on the thyroid gland and its hormones.  Maayan and
Ingbar,18 for example, showed that both of these substances
greatly enhanced iodine metabolism in calf thyroid cells.  One
important result of this seems to be a decline in available
triiodothyronine.  It has been shown that adrenaline infused
into healthy dogs quickly causes a decline in the conversion of
thyroxine to triiodothyronine.19-20  This “low T3 syndrome” has
also been produced in rats infused with adrenaline.21  Whether
it is caused directly by excess adrenaline, or by adrenochrome
associated with adrenaline oxidation, is unclear.  The later
possibility was explored by Maayan and Ingbar22 who specu-
lated that adrenaline’s apparent impacts on iodine metabolism
activity and glucose oxidation might actually be due to its me-
tabolite adrenochrome.
The best explanation of the available evidence is that both
adrenaline and adrenochrome are antagonistic to triiodothyro-
nine.  Consequently, when certain genetically susceptible
individuals are subjected to allergens, stress, or too much sug-
ar, they produce an excess of adrenaline, some of which is
quickly oxidized to adrenochrome.  As a result, the normal
operation of the thyroid gland is disrupted and triiodothyro-
nine levels depressed.  The resulting psychotic symptoms are
known as schizophrenia and in their early stages can be
reversed by high doses of triiodothyronine.  Without such treat-
ment, damage to the thyroid becomes permanent and the dis-
order chronic.

151
ADRENOCHROME AND SEROTONIN
In What Really Causes AIDS,25 I documented that whole blood
serotonin levels are abnormally low in AIDS patients.24  This
deficiency of serotonin appears to occur because the HIV-1
virus encodes for the selenoenzyme glutathione peroxidase.
Consequently, as it is replicated HIV-1 removes tryptophan (one
of the four nutrients required to make glutathione peroxidase)
from the human body.  Interestingly, as viral replication lowers
blood tryptophan and its metabolite serotonin levels in patients
with AIDS, their neuropsychiatric symptoms worsen.25  This
suggests that serotonin deficiency may play a significant role
in psychoses such as schizophrenia.  Certainly, there is grow-
ing interest in developing drugs to alter the brain’s response to
this neurotransmitter.
There is relatively little literature, however, on the interactions
of adrenochrome and serotonin.  Two research articles by
VanderWende and Johnson27-28 appear critical.  In these publi-
cations, the authors described epinephrine’s (adrenaline) and
adrenochrome’s impacts on rat brain enzyme preparations,
paying special attention to serotonin’s impact on epinephrine
oxidation.  Their results were very surprising.  To quote these
authors directly:  “Adrenochrome formation from epinephrine
is either accelerated or inhibited by serotonin, the effect being
dependent on the relative concentrations of the indoleamine
compared to the catecholamine.”  Put more simply, when the
rat brain tissue concentration of serotonin was lower than that
of adrenaline, adrenochrome formation was accelerated, but
when the serotonin concentration was greater than that of
adrenaline, the formation of adrenochrome was inhibited.29
If, as the evidence presented so far in this book suggests,
adrenochrome excess is the key to schizophrenia, then serot-
onin must be of major significance in both preventing and pro-
moting this disorder.  This Jekyll and Hyde relationship also

152
explains why acute schizophrenic episodes may occur so sud-
denly, since a minor increase in adrenaline or fall in serotonin
may push their relationship over a system threshold, rapidly
causing an increase in adrenaline oxidation and associated
adrenochrome.
There is another aspect of serotonin that also may be of sig-
nificance in the etiology of schizophrenia.  Khazali30 injected
cows with serotonin at levels of 1, 2, and 4 milligrams per kil-
ogram over a 15 day period, while a control group was given
saline.  Blood samples were collected before and after this
experiment and assayed for plasma thyroxine and triiodothy-
ronine.  It was discovered that injections of saline or 1 and 2
milligrams of serotonin per kilogram had no impact on the
plasma concentrations of thyroid hormones.  However, 15 days
of serotonin injections at 4 milligrams per kilogram did signif-
icantly increase serum levels of both thyroxine and triiodothy-
ronine.  It would appear, therefore, that there may also be a
dose-response relationship between serotonin and triiodothy-
ronine.  Interestingly, not only is serotonin depressed in AIDS
patients, but so, too, is triiodothyronine.31  Further evidence to
support a connection between serotonin and triiodothyronine
has been provided by Sandrini and coworkers,32 who adminis-
tered triiodothyronine to rats and then monitored their brain
serotonin levels.  Both acute (once only) and chronic (once a
day for either 3 or 7 days) treatments increased serotonin lev-
els in the rat cerebral cortex, but not in the hippocampus.  It
has been found also that adding triiodothyronine to the
medications of patients with post-traumatic stress disorder,
who are taking a selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor (such
as paroxetine or fluoxetine), seems to be beneficial.33  There
appears to be little doubt, therefore, that not only does adren-
ochrome significantly impact on triiodothyronine and seroton-
in, but that these two latter substances are also strongly
interactive.

153
ADRENOCHROME AND THE ANTIOXIDANT DEFENCE SYSTEM
Schizophrenics have impaired antioxidant defence systems
which are associated with both excessive lipid peroxidation and
abnormal free radical pathology.34-39  These problems are obvi-
ous even in first episode schizophrenics, those who have never
received medication40 for this illness, and so they must be
characteristic of the disorder and not a consequence of the
drugs used to treat it.  Such failures in the antioxidant de-
fence system seem to continue and ultimately cause serious
brain damage in chronic schizophrenics.41  Buckman and co-
workers,42 for example, have demonstrated that long-term
inadequencies in antioxidant defence systems (illustrated by
depleted glutathione peroxidase stores), are associated, in
chronic schizophrenics, with large fluid-filled brain ventricles.
That is, the more depleted chronic schizophrenics are of glu-
tathione peroxidase (a key enzyme protecting against free rad-
icals), the more obvious their brain damage.  While there have
been several studies showing abnormally low glutathione per-
oxidase activity in schizophrenics, there are clearly problems
with other antioxidant enzymes, including catalase and super-
oxide dismutase.43-45
The key question here is, how likely is it that this disruption
of the antioxident defence system, observed in schizophrenia,
is caused by an excess of adrenochrome.  Smythies46 has de-
scribed six mechanisms of defense against cytotoxic quinones
such as adrenochrome, derived from catecholamines.  The first
of these mechanisms is reduction by antioxidants, such as
ascorbate and glutathione.  Interestingly, Fu and colleagues47
have dosed rats with 80 millligrams per kilogram of 3-nitro-
propionic acid.  Using an electron spin resonance technique
they were able to observe free radical signals.  It was discov-
ered that 3-nitropropionic acid enhanced adrenochrome for-
mation from adrenaline in both the rat liver and brain.  As a

154
consequence, glutathione peroxidase and superoxide dismutase
activity significantly increased in the liver while malonidialde-
hyde levels rose.  Superoxide dismutase activity also increased
in the brain, suggesting that 3-nitropropionic acid-induced
adrenochrome activity was causing lipid peroxidation damage.
This study provides direct observational evidence that adreno-
chrome creates free radicals that lead to increased oxidative
stress and is probably one of the main causes of the depletion
of glutathione peroxidase, superoxide dismutate and catalase
seen in schizophrenics.
The damage adrenochrome causes to the antioxidant defence
system also has repercussions in the operation of the thyroid
gland and the production of triiodothyronine.  Mutaku and co-
workers,48 for example, induced goitre in rats that were either
vitamin E deficient or had received an adequate supply of this
vitamin.  Those lacking in this essential antioxidant developed
goitres that included significantly increased necrosis, indicat-
ing that much of the cell death in goitre is related to the oxida-
tive status of the cells.  Beyond this, animal studies49-51 have
shown that triiodothyronine promotes superoxide dismutase,
catalase, and glutathione activities, suggesting that the anti-
oxidant defence system is considerably influenced by the thy-
roid state of the body.
Several studies also have demonstrated that serotonin is an
antioxidant52-53 and therefore is involved in reducing free radi-
cal damage.  Since oxidative stress impairs the thyroid54 and
so reduces triiodothyronine levels, lipid peroxidation must also
have a direct impact on brain levels of serotonin.  Reactive
oxygen species also play a role in major depression, and treat-
ment with selective serotonin uptake inhibitors has a suppres-
sive effect on both antioxidative enzyme activities and lipid
peroxidation.55

155
SUMMARY
Adrenochrome is a highly reactive neurotoxin that, in schizo-
phrenia, undermines at least three major biochemical systems.
It is an antagonist of the hormone triiodothyronine and can
damage the thyroid.  In chronic schizophrenics, this gland im-
pairment appears permanent.  Adrenochrome also has a Jekyll
and Hyde relationship with serotonin and so also impacts on
tryptophan and its other chief metabolite niacin.   At low levels,
serotonin appears to stimulate adrenochrome formation, while
at higher levels it retards the process.  Adrenochrome also
generates numerous free radicals causing oxidative stress,
eventually exhausting the schizophrenic antioxidant defence
systems, so creating deficiencies of glutathione peroxidase,
superoxide dismutase, and catalase.  Complicating the impacts
of high adrenochrome conversion from adrenaline are the many
interactions that normally occur between triiodothyronine, se-
rotonin, and the three major components of the antioxidant
defence system.
REFERENCES
1.
de Bono, E. (1977).  The use of lateral thinking. Harmondsworth, Mid-
dlesex: Penguin Books.
2.
Lohr, J.B., and Bracha, H.S. (1989).  Can schizophrenia be related to
prenatal exposure to alcohol? Some speculations. Schizophrenia
Bulletin, 15(4), 595-603.
3.
Cudd, T.A., Chen, W.J., and West, J.R. (2002).  Fetal and maternal
thyroid hormone responses to ethanol exposure during the third
trimester equivalent of gestation in sheep. Alcoholism - Clinical and
Experimental Research, 26(1), 53-58.
4.
Overstreet, D.H., Crocker, A.D., Lawson, C.A., McIntosh, G.H., and
Crocker, J.M. (1984).  Alterations in the dopaminergic system and
behaviour in rats reared on iodine-deficient diets. Pharmacology
Biochemistry and Behavior, 21(4), 561-565.

156
5.
Imamura, Y., Nakane, Y., Ohta, Y., and Kondo, H. (1999).  Lifetime
prevalence of schizophrenia among individuals prenatally exposed
to atomic bomb radiation in Nagasaki City. Acta Psychiatrica Scan-
dinavica, 100(5), 344-349.
6.
Loganovsky K.N., and Loganovskaja, T.K. (2000).  Schizophrenia spec-
trum disorders in persons exposed to ionizing radiation as a result
of the Chernobyl accident. Schizophrenia Bulletin, 26(4), 751-773.
7.
Roca, R.P., Blackman, M.R., Ackerley, M.B., Harman, S.M., and
Gregerman, R.I. (1990).  Thyroid hormone elevations during acute
psychiatric illness: relationship to severity and distinction from
hyperthyroidism. Endocrine Research, 16(4), 415-417.
8.
Othman, S.S., Abdul, K.K., Hassan, J., Hong, G.K., Singh, B.B., and
Raman, N. (1994).  High prevalence of thyroid test abnormalities
in chronic schizophrenia. Australian and New Zealand Journal of
Psychiatry, 28(4), 620-624.
9.
Skoliarova, N.A. (1975).  Morphology of the endocrine system in schizo-
phrenia according to early autopsy findings (the Hypophyseal-Thy-
roid System). Zhurnal Nevropatologii Psikhiatrii Imeni S S Kosakova,
75(7), 1045-1053. (In Russion, abstract only consulted.)
10.
Hoffer, A., and Osmond, H. (1967).  The hallucinogens. New York: Aca-
demic Press.
11.
Hoffer, A. (2001).  Thyroid and schizophrenia. Journal of Orthomolecular
Medicine, 16(4), 205-212.
12.
Foster, H.D. (2002).  Schizophrenia, thyroid hormones and selenium.
Journal of Orthomolecular Medicine, 17(1), 55-56.
13.
Foster, H.D. (1988).  The geography of schizophrenia: Possible links
with selenium and calcium deficiencies, inadequate exposure to
sunlight and industrialization. Journal of Orthomolecular Medicine,
3(3), 135-140.
14.
Ibid.
15.
Brown, J.S., and Foster, H.D. (1996).  Schizophrenia: An update of the
selenium deficiency hypothesis. Journal of Orthomolecular Medi-
cine, 11(4), 211-222.
16.
Toro, T. (1991).  Selenium’s role in thyroid found. New Scientist,
129(1753), 27.
17.
Beers, M.H., and Berkow, R. (Eds.) (1999).  The Merck manual of diagno-
sis and therapy. Whitehouse Station, NJ: Merck and Co. Inc.
18.
Maayan, M.L., and Ingbar, S.H. (1970).  Effects of epinephrine on io-
dine and intermediary metabolism in isolated thyroid cells.
Endocrinology, 87(3), 588-595.

157
19.
Nauman, A., Kaminski, T., and Herbaczynska-Cedro, K. (1980).  In vivo
and in vitro effects of adrenaline on conversion of thyroxine to
triiodothyronine and to reverse-triiodothyronine in dog liver and
heart. European Journal of Clinical Investigation, 10(3), 189-192.
20.
Ceremuzynski, L., Herbaczynska-Cedro, K., Broniszewska-Ardelt, B.,
Nauman, J., and Nauman, A. (1978).  Evidence for the detrimental
effect of adrenaline infused to healthy dogs in doses imitating spon-
taneous secretion after coronary occlusion. Cardiovascular Re-
search, 12(3), 179-189.
21.
Langer, P., and Földes, O. (1988).  Effect of adrenaline on biliary ex-
cretion of triiodothyronines in rats mediated by alpha 1-adreno-
ceptors and related to the inhibition of 5l- monodeiodination in
liver. Journal of Endocrinological Investigation, 11(7), 471-476.
22.
Maayan and Ingbar, op. cit.
23.
Foster, H.D. (2002).  What really causes AIDS. Victoria, BC: Trafford
Publishing.
24.
Launay, J.M., Copel, L., Callebert, J., Corvaia, N., Bricaire, F., Laplanche,
J.L., Saal, F., and Peries, J. (1989).  Serotonin and human immu-
nodeficiency viruses. Nouvelle Revue Francaise D. Hematologie,
31(2), 159-161.
25.
Ibid.
26.
McGavin, J.K., and Goa, K.L. (2002).  Aripiprazole. CNS Drugs, 16(11),
779-786.
27.
VanderWende, C., and Johnson, J.C. (1970b).  Interactions of serotonin
with the catecholamines. II - Activation and inhibition of adreno-
chrome formation. Biochemical Pharmacology, 19, 2001-2007.
28.
VanderWende, C., and Johnson, J.C. (1970a).  Biochemical Pharma-
cology, 19, 1991 cited by Ibid.
29.
VanderWendeand Johnson (1970b), op. cit.
30.
Khazali (2002).  The effect of serotonin on the GH, T3, T4, milk produc-
tion and composition. Endocrine Abstracts, 3, 187. http://www.
endocrine-abstracts.org/ea/0003/ea003p187.htm
31.
Bourdoux, P.P., De-Wit, S.A., and Servais, G.M. (1991).  Biochemical
thyroid profile in patients infected with the human immunodefi-
ciency virus. Thyroid, 1, 149.
32.
Sandrini, M., Vitale, G., Vergoni, A.V., Ottani, A., and Bertolini, A. (1996).
Effect of acute and chronic treatment with triiodothyronine on se-
rotonin levels and serotonergic receptor subtypes in the rat brain.
Life Science, 58(18), 1551-1559.

158
33.
Agid, O., Shalev, A.Y., and Lerer, B. (2001).  Triiodothyronine augmen-
tation of selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors in post-traumatic
stress disorder. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 62(3), 169-173.
34.
Buckman, T.D., Kling, A., Sutphin, M.S., Steingerg, A., and Eiduson, S.
(1990).  Platelet glutathine peroxidase and monoamine oxidase
activity in schizophrenics with CT scan abnormalities: Relation to
psychosocial variables. Psychiatry Research, 31(1), 1-14.
35.
Govorin, N.V., Govorin, A.V., and Skazhutin, S.A. (1991).  Significance
of disorders of the process of lipid peroxidation in patients with
persistent paranoid schizophrenia resistant to the treatment. Zhur-
nal Nevropatolgii Psikhiatrii Imeni SS Korsakova, 91(7), 121-124.
36.
Altuntas, I., Aksoy, H., Cockun, I., Caykoylu, A., and Akcay, F. (2000).
Erythrocyte superoxide dismutase and glutathione peroxidase ac-
tivities, and malondialdehyde and reduced glutathione levels in
schizophrenic patients. Clinical Chemical Laboratory Medicine,
38(12), 1277-1281.
37.
Herken, H., Uz, E., Ozyurt, H., Sogut, S., Virit, O., and Akyol, O. (2001).
Evidence that the activities of erythrocyte free medical scavenging
enzymes and the products of lipid peroxidation are increased in
different forms of schizophrenia. Molecular Psychiatry, 6(1), 66-73.
38.
Srivastava, N., Barthwal, M.K., Dalal, P.K., Agarwal, A.K., Nag, D., Srimal,
R.C., Seth, P.K., and Dikshit, M. (2001).  Nitrite content and anti-
oxidant enzyme levels in blood of schizophrenia patients. Psychop-
harmacology (Berl), 158(2), 140-145.
39.
Kuloglu, M. Ustundag, B., Atmaca, M., Canatan, H., Tezcan, A.E., and
Cinkilinc, N. (2002).  Lipid peroxidation and antioxidant enzyme
levels in patients with schizophrenia and bipolar disorder. Cell Bio-
chemistry and Function, 20(2), 171-175.
40.
Mukerjee, S., Mahadik, S.P., Scheffer, R., Correnti, E.E., and Kelkar, H.
(1996).  Impaired antioxidant defense at the onset of psychosis.
Schizophrenia Research, 19(1), 19-26.
41.
Buckman et al., op. cit.
42.
Ibid.
43.
Muckerjee et al., op. cit.
44.
Kuloglu et al., op. cit.
45.
Herken et al., op. cit.
46.
Smythies, J.R. (1997).  Oxidative reactions and schizophrenia: A review-
discussion. Schizophrenia Research, 24(3), 357-364.

159
47.
Fu, Y.T., He, F.S., Zhang, S.L., and Zhang, J.S. (1995).  Lipid peroxida-
tion in rats intoxicated with 3-nitropropionic acid. Toxicon 33(3),
327-331.
48.
Mutaku, J.F., Poma, J.F., Many, M.C., Denef, J.F., and van Den Hove,
M.F. (2002).  Cell necrosis and apotosis are differentially regulated
during goitre development and iodine-induced involution. Journal
of Endocrinology, 172(2), 375-386.
49.
Das, K., and Chainy, G.B. (2001).  Modulation of rat liver mitochondrial
antioxidant defence system by thyroid hormone. Biochimica et
Biophysica Acta, 1537(1), 1-13.
50.
Varghese, S., Lakshmy, P.S., and Oommen, O.V. (2001).  Changes in
lipid peroxidation and antioxidant enzyme activities by triiodothy-
ronine (T3) and polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFA) in rat liver.
Endocrine Research, 27(4), 409-416.
51.
Varghese, S., Shameena, B., and Oommen, O.V. (2001).  Thyroid hor-
mones regulate lipid peroxidation and antioxidant enzyme activi-
ties in Anabas testudineus (Bloch). Comparative Biochemistry and
Physiology B-Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, 128(1), 165-171.
52.
Ng, T.B., Liu, G., and Zhao, L. (2000).  Antioxidative and free radical
scavenging activities of pineal indoles. Journal of Neural Transmis-
sion, 107(11), 1243-1251.
53.
Horakova, L., Ondrejickova, O., Bachrata, K., and Vajdova, M. (2000).
Preventive effect of several antioxidants after oxidative stress on
rat brain homogenates. General Physiology and Biophysics, 19(2),
195-205.
54.
Mutaku et al., op. cit.
55.
Bilici, M., Efe, H., Koroglu, M.A., Uydu, H.A., Bekaroglu, M., and Deger,
O. (2001).  Antioxidative enzyme activities and lipid peroxidation
in major depression: alterations by antidepressant treatments.
Journal of Affective Disorders, 64(1), 43-51.

160
To this purpose the philosophers say that Nature does
nothing in vain, and more is in vain when less will
serve; for Nature is pleased with simplicity, and
affects not the pomp of superfluous causes.
Isaac Newton, “Rules of Reasoning in Philosophy,”
Principia Mathematica, 1687.

161
THE ACID TEST: DO THE PIECES FIT?
14
Mainstream institutions favor “hypothesis-driven”
rather than “hypothesis-generating” research.  In the
former, a scientist starts with a supposition and con-
ducts the experiment to prove or disprove the idea;
whatever the results, at least in the end there’s a pa-
per to write up, something to show for the work.  But
in hypothesis-generating research—the engine behind
today’s search for new pathogens—the scientist inches
forward by hunch and intuition, gathering clues, specu-
lating on what they mean.  “Nobody’s funding hypoth-
esis-generating research,” says Morens.  “Within sci-
ence, that’s considered the lowest level of research—
out of the primeval ooze.”
Madeline Drexler (2002).
Secret Agents: The Menace
of Emerging Infections1
So here we are, like our ancestors before us, trying to drag
ourselves out of the primeval ooze.  What makes the process
more frustrating is that the adrenochrome hypothesis was first
put forward some 50 years ago.2  Since then its proponents
have been repeatedly vilified for being different and probably
right, as is the tradition in medicine.3  When a keen, green
undergraduate, I had the luck to study in one of the world’s
truly great geology departments.  Several of my former profes-
sors, though long retired, are still known and revered by the
profession.  Interestingly though, in the 2 years I spent study-
ing the discipline, Continental Drift was hardly ever mentioned.

162
When it was, it was only so that it could be discounted as an
absurd idea that had long outlived its usefulness, the stuff of
cranks and fringe members, too ignorant to understand its
inherent weaknesses.  Of course things have changed.  It is
now no longer absurd to postulate global crustal movements,
rather the reverse.  The cranks are now those who deny Plate
Tectonics and Continental Drift.  Clearly, major hypotheses
come and go.  Just because the adrenochrome hypothesis is
half a century old and largely ignored, except by orthomolecu-
lar physicians, does not mean that it is incorrect.
The most effective way to test the validity of the adrenochrome
hypothesis is to utilize it in attempts to explain the evidence
that has been collected about schizophrenia by disciplines as
diverse as genetics and history.  That is, to see whether the
schizophrenia jigsaw puzzle can be completed using the adren-
ochrome hypothesis as its dominant theme.  To assist in this
process, Table 1 lists the clues identified in the earlier chap-
ters.  For ease of identification, each clue is numbered accord-
ing to the chapter in which it was first discussed and
it is lettered to identify its position within that chapter.  To
illustrate, clue 5A (the elevation of schizophrenia in irradiated
populations) is the first clue in Chapter 5—Biochemical Abnor-
malities.
What follows is my effort to explain each of these clues, using
the adrenochrome hypothesis as a starting point.  I cannot
adequately explain some of them.  This may be because the
adrenochrome hypothesis is incorrect or the data the clue is
based on was in error, or I am too ignorant to be aware of the
real link between the tested hypothesis and the clue.  The goal,
therefore, must realistically be to explain the majority of the
clues in Table 1 and to do so in a manner that is more con-
vincing than explanations that have been put forward using
competing hypotheses.

163
OCCAM’S RAZOR
The principle “Pluralitas non est ponenda sine neccesitate” or
“plurality should not be posited without necessity” is often ac-
credited to the medieval Franciscan monk and English philos-
opher William of Occam (ca. 1285-1349).4  Known as Occam’s
razor, or the principle of parsimony, it is now interpreted to
mean “don’t multiply hypotheses unnecessarily” or “the sim-
pler the explanation, the better.”  In its crudest form it has
been distilled into “keep it simple, stupid.”  For any given set of
facts, such as those discussed in the preceding 10 chapters to
explain why certain people develop schizophrenia, there are an
endless number of theories that could be used to explain them.5
To illustrate:
If you have a graph with four points in a line then the
simplest theory that explains them is a linear relation-
ship, but you can draw an infinite number of different
curves that all pass through the four points.  There is
no evidence that the straight line is the right one, but it
is the simplest possible solution.  So you might as well
use it until someone comes along with a point off the
straight line.  Also, if you have a few thousand points
on the line and someone suggests that there is a point
that is off the line, it’s a pretty fair bet that they are
wrong.6
What follows is this author’s attempt to draw a straight line
connecting the clues identified in the previous chapters.  That
is, an attempt to put those pieces of the schizophrenia jigsaw
puzzle together in the simplest, most logical manner and yet
still create a convincing picture.  If this can be accomplished
using the adrenochrome hypothesis, the case for change in the
approach to the prevention and treatment of schizophrenia will
be undeniable.

164
TABLE 1   THE PIECES OF THE JIGSAW PUZZLE
Chapter 1   Schizophrenia: From Bedlam to Babel
A.
Afflicts young adults
B. Episodic
C. Often becomes chronic without remission
D. Disorder of thought
E.
Disorder of perception
F.
Disorder of emotion
G. Disorder of sensory stimuli
H. Rapid mood swings
I.
Fatigue
J.
Four major subtypes
K.
Only one in five recover to lead nearly normal life after
initial schizophrenic episode
L.
Suicide common
M. Recovery rate no better than century ago
N. Whole body disorder
O. Probably syndrome with environmental and genetic
triggers
Chapter 2   The Schizophrenia Pandemic
A.
Schizophrenia (insanity) known for thousands of years
B. Increased rapidly since end of seventeenth century
C. Prevalence rises as countries or regions westernize
D. Baseline rate one case per 2000 people before Industrial
Revolution
E.
England, Ireland, Canada, USA prevalence of insanity
increased at least sevenfold between mid-eighteenth and
mid-twentieth centuries (sixteen times in Ireland)
F.
Schizophrenia most common in urban areas

165
Chapter 3   Genesis: In the Beginning
A.
Minor fetal abnormalities common
B. Birth difficult
C. One twin dies, other more likely to become schizophrenic
D. Low birth weight
E.
Prolonged labour
F.
Larger brain cavities (ventricles)
G. Malfunctioning thalmus
H. Abnormalities of subplate neurons
I.
Elevation of dopamine D4-like receptors
J.
Elevation of dopamine D2-like receptors
K.
Enlarged brain ventricles linked to depressed glutathione
peroxidase
L.
Thyroid gland deterioration in all schizophrenics
Chapter 4   The Genetic Basis of Schizophrenia
A.
Common mental illness in Developed World (1 in 100)
B. More common in relatives of schizophrenics
C. More common in specific families
D. Roughly 50 percent of identical twins will develop the
disorder if the other already has it
E.
Must have counterbalancing advantage or trait would
have died out because of low birth rate in schizophrenics
— balance morphism
F.
Common in DiGeorge syndrome (22q deletion syndrome)
G. Genetic low activity abnormality in enzyme catechol-O-
methyltransferase (metabolizes epinephrine to
metanephrine) in some schizophrenics
H. Low activity COMT gene associated with aggression in
schizophrenics (homicide/violent suicide)
I.
Genetic high activity glutathione S-transferase (GSTM1)

166
abnormality (promotes adrenochrome production) in
some schizophrenics
J.
Low activity methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR)
gene (metabolizes homocysteine) in some schizophrenics
K.
Nogo variant gene in some schizophrenics
L.
Genetic evidence suggests need for environmental trigger
Chapter 5   Biochemical Abnormalities
A.
Schizophrenia more common in irradiated populations
B. Abnormal thyroid function including elevated thyroxine
in recently hospitalized acute schizophrenics
C. Acute schizophrenic symptoms proportional to thyroid
hormone imbalance
D. Deficient in niacin (vitamin B3)
E.
Do not flush when given high dose niacin
F.
“Kryptopyrrole” levels often elevated
G. Depressed antioxidant defence system
H. Schizophrenics improve with n-3 fatty acid
supplements
I.
Membrane phospholipid abnormalities linked to leak of
arachidonic acid and other fatty acids
J.
Abnormal brain tryptophan levels
K.
Low tryptophan diets increase negative symptoms and
cognition
L.
Histamine imbalances
M. Copper imbalances
N. Glutamate imbalances linked to symptoms
O. No evidence of metabolite of dopamine (homovanillic acid)
excess
P.
No convincing experimental evidence of dopamine excess
Q. Homocysteine imbalances

167
Chapter 6   Pulling the Trigger: Location, Location, Location
A.
Schizophrenia commonest in Ireland, Northern Sweden,
and Croatia
B. Prevalence rates strongly reflect better recovery rates in
countries where diet includes little wheat or milk
C. Common in selenium deficient states of the USA
D. Common in the more industrialized USA
E.
Less common in high soil calcium states
F.
Similar prevalence rates to mortality from cancer of the
esophagus
G. Seasonality of schizophrenic births
H. Less common in areas of high sunlight
I.
Schizophrenia most common in urban areas in zone of
transition (around Central Business District)
J.
More common in poor in England, Ireland, US, and Japan
K.
More common in rich in India and Italy
Chapter 7   No Barking Dogs: Medical Anomalies
A.
Schizophrenics are heavy smokers yet lung
cancer rare
B. Rheumatoid arthritis uncommon in schizophrenics
C. High pain threshold
D. Elevated temperature (fevers) reduces symptoms
temporarily
E.
Associated with herpes simplex virus type 1
F.
Relatives of schizophrenics commonly develop celiac
disease
G. Some schizophrenics improve on gluten-free diets
H. Positive association between Ixodid ticks and
schizophrenia prevalence in US, Croatia, Norway,
Finland, Germany, Iceland, and Switzerland

168
Chapter 8   Unconventional Treatments
A.
Schizophrenics improve markedly with fasting
B. Fasting lowers histamine levels
C. Fasting normalizes catecholamines
D. Serotonin normalized by fasting
E.
Cow’s milk a hallucigen in some schizophrenics
F.
Histamine injections improve some catatonic schizophrenics
G. High dose of desiccated thyroid most successful treatment
H. Triiodothyronine at high dosages helps chronic
schizophrenics
I.
Excess of copper and depressed histamine in 50 percent
of schizophrenics, respond to niacinamide, niacin, folic
acid, zinc, and manganese
J.
Elevated histamine and low copper in 20 percent of
schizophrenics, respond to calcium, methionine, zinc,
and manganese
K.
Pyroluria caused by zinc and vitamin B6 deficiency
L.
Wheat gluten allergy in 10 percent of schizophrenics
M. Hypoglycemia in 20 percent of schizophrenics
N. Orthomolecular treatment designed to block conversion
of noradrenalin to adrenaline and then to adrenochrome
works on 90 percent of acute and 50 percent of chronic
schizophrenics
O. Above treatment includes high doses of niacin, vitamin C,
and omega 3 essential fatty acids (high in eicosapentaenoic
acid)
Chapter 9   Conventional Treatments
A.
Insulin treatment producing coma an effective treatment
B. Insulin treatment alters tryptophan levels, enhancing the
tryptophan to tyrosine ratio in plasma, probably
increasing brain serotonin
C. Electroconvulsive shock treatment lowers plasma levels
of MHPG, a major metabolite of noradrenaline

169
D. Niacin given in high doses prevents electroconvulsive
shock treatment’s memory loss side effects
E.
Neuroleptics block dopamine D2 and D4 receptors
F.
Amphetamines release dopamine and exacerbate
schizophrenia’s positive symptoms
G. Atypical neuroleptics block dopamine receptors and
5-HT2 subtype of serotonin receptors
H. Parkinson-like symptoms side effect of some neuroleptics
I.
Drugs improve symptoms by only 15-25 percent
J.
Beta-adrenergic receptor antagonists (beta-blockers) do
not work
Chapter 10   Regression Analysis: The Road Back
A.
Relatively few recovered schizophrenics give credit to drugs
B. Work, respect and loving environment with little stress
helpful in recovery
C. Many recovered schizophrenics formerly hypoglycemic,
altered diets
D. High dose niacin, vitamin C often used by recovered
schizophrenics
E.
High dose desiccated thyroid used by some recovered
schizophrenics
F.
Nutritional supplements reduce violence in prisons
THE ADRENOCHROME HYPOTHESIS: READY FOR TESTING
Adrenochrome is a hallucinogen, a neurotoxin, and a free radical
generator and there are certainly two, possibly three, and maybe
even more genetic aberrations that increase the proportion of
adrenochrome and its derivatives amongst metabolites of adren-
aline.7-10  The inheritance of such a genetic variant does not nec-
essarily lead to the development of schizophrenia.  However,

170
when high stress, excess sugar consumption, allergic reactions,
or a lack of exercise stimulate either the overproduction of adren-
aline or its rapid oxidation, then brain adrenochrome and its
derivatives appear to rise to levels at which psychosis occurs.
The resulting symptoms are known as schizophrenia.
From Bedlam to Babel
The initial chapter of this book discusses the clinical symp-
toms of schizophrenia, providing 15 basic clues (Table 1).
Schizophrenia begins as an episodic disorder that afflicts young
adults but often becomes chronic.  This mental illness is asso-
ciated with fatigue, mood swings, hallucinations, and some-
times with paranoia.  Using variations in symptoms, the dis-
order can be divided into four major subtypes.  Available drugs
rarely lead to a cure and have often caused Parkinson’s-like
symptoms.  Suicide is common amongst schizophrenics, and
so is violence against others.
Let us consider each of these clinical characteristics in order.
It is probable that the first schizophrenic episode occurs in
genetically susceptible young adults when their hormone pro-
duction has begun to increase and the affected individual has
been exposed to one or more adrenaline triggers (high sugar
intake, stress or an allergen).  In the early stages of the dis-
order, a new location may lead to dietary, allergy, or other
changes that will permit adrenochrome production to fall and
psychosis to retreat.  However, if this pattern of exposure to
adrenaline triggers is repeated too often, excess adrenochrome
will begin to seriously damage the thyroid gland, disrupt sero-
tonin levels, and encourage excessive free radical damage to
the brain.  At this point, a permanent deficiency of triiodothy-
ronine appears to occur which, in and of itself, may cause
psychosis.11  Schizophrenia, as a result, is now chronic.

171
As has been discussed, if intelligent, healthy individuals are
given adrenochrome, they quickly begin to hallucinate and sub-
sequently become paranoid.  Cats injected with one milligram
of adrenochrome became drowsy for 24 hours.  “The electroen-
cephalographic changes accompanying these lethargic, trance-
like states were occipital 4cps, slow waves with low-voltage
spike components, spreading to the frontal regions and then
diffusely over the brain.”12  Similar abnormal waves have been
recorded in the brains of humans given adrenochrome.13  At
lower doses, cats displayed a moderate insensitivity to pain.
How could an excess of adrenochrome explain four distinct
types of schizophrenia—simple, hebephrenic, catatonic, and
paranoia?  There seem to be two possible answers to this ques-
tion.  Firstly, the associated genetic aberrations themselves do
not lead only to an excess of adrenochrome.  Schizophrenics
with the low enzyme activity variant of the catechol-O-methyl-
transferase (COMT), for example, will also have far less me-
tanephrine than normal.14  Schizophrenics with other variants
will not.  Similarly, schizophrenics carrying the C677T allele of
the gene coding for methylenetetrahydrofolate will be short of
methionine while simultaneously subjected to elevated homo-
cysteine.15-16  It is possible, therefore, that some of the symp-
toms used to differentiate and subdivide schizophrenics are
caused by the other biochemical abnormalities accompanying
excess adrenochrome.  This idea is supported by the coinci-
dence that, to date, four genetic aberrations have been identi-
fied in subgroups of schizophrenics.
There is yet another intriguing possibility.  Schwarz and co-
workers17 describe giving adrenochrome to two schizophrenic
patients.  Fifty milligrams of adrenochrome quickly altered the
nature of their brain waves as sharp increases in the number
and voltage of focal sharp waves became obvious on their elec-
trograms.  Adrenochrome also had a significant impact on their

172
behaviour.  One schizophrenic18 demonstrated a loosening of
associations and an increase in disturbances of body image.
He raised his hand, gazed at it, and said that his arm was
wiggling and waving.  This he found amazing.  It seems clear
that he was experiencing a type of hallucination that was new
to him.  The second schizophrenic19 patient:
experienced catalepsy on two occasions, which per-
sisted for more than 30 minutes.  At these times, his
upper extremities were held in unnatural positions that
volunteers who served as controls could not maintain
for long.  This was not his usual reaction, and a similar
state did not develop with either mescaline or LSD-25.
If this schizophrenic had normally displayed such catalepsy
he would have been classified as a catatonic, but this state
was only induced by additional adrenochrome.
The experiences of these two schizophrenics when adminis-
tered adrenochrome hints that some of the characteristic clin-
ical symptoms, used to subdivide schizophrenics into four or
more classes, may be simply a reflection of differences in the
amount of excess adrenochrome normally produced.  I realized
that this is an idea that will not be readily accepted.  However,
there is another important clue supporting it.  Between 1946
and 1956, Danziger20 prescribed high dose desiccated thyroid
for many schizophrenics who had been ill for 6 months or less.
Everyone who successfully completed his or her program re-
covered.  These 80 former schizophrenics only suffered relaps-
es if they then discontinued their thyroid medication while at
home.  To me this suggests that, however one classifies
schizophrenics, they have a great deal in common, including a
malfunctioning thyroid gland.
Available drugs rarely lead to cures.  Some of the conventional
antipsychotics cause Parkinsonism as a side-effect.  This is

173
due to the fact that these drugs were specifically developed to
treat an excess of brain dopamine.  There is, in fact, no excess
of this neurotransmitter in schizophrenia.  Drug interference
with dopamine in schizophrenics, therefore, often causes a med-
ically-induced version of Parkinson’s disease, a well established
dopamine deficiency disorder.21
Adrenochrome results in paranoia in healthy, intelligent re-
searchers.  It might be anticipated, therefore, that the low
enzyme variant of the catechol-O-methyltransferase (COMT)
gene, which promotes adrenochrome formation, is associated
with aggression, homicides, and violent suicides.22-24  As a con-
sequence, individuals with this variant make up a significant
number of the inmates of facilities catering to the criminally
insane, in countries as diverse as the USA, Finland, Wales,
and Israel.  Interestingly, the suicide rate amongst schizophren-
ics drops markedly if they receive orthomolecular treatments
designed to lower their brain adrenochrome levels.25
The Invisible Pandemic
In this volume’s second chapter, the history of schizophrenia
is briefly reviewed, providing six more significant clues about
the etiology of this mental illness.  Schizophrenia has been
known for thousands of years.  Prior to the Industrial Revolu-
tion, traditional baseline prevalence seems to have been roughly
one case per 2,000 people.26  This figure began to change at
the end of the 16th century as prevalence started to rise with
industrialization.  As a result, in England, Ireland, Canada,
and the US insanity rates (largely schizophrenia) increased at
least 7-fold between the mid-18th and mid-20th centuries.  In
Ireland, the prevalence of insanity may have risen as much as
16-fold.  In all of these countries, schizophrenia is most com-
mon in urban areas.27

174
Can the adrenochrome hypothesis account for such historical
increases in this mental illness and for the rural-urban dif-
ferences in the prevalence of schizophrenia?  As Torrey and
Miller28 point out, “the epidemic of insanity that has occurred
over the past two centuries is a strong argument against these
diseases [schizophrenia and manic-depression] being primari-
ly genetic in origin.”  However, whether or not the prevalence
of a disease that has a strong genetic component becomes
epidemic depends to a great extent on whether or not there
are changes in the environment that “switch on” this aberrant
gene(s).
Industrialization has changed the human environment in nu-
merous ways, several of which significantly promote the pro-
duction of adrenaline and/or its oxidation to adrenochrome
and its derivatives.  Over the past two hundred years, for ex-
ample, the quantity and quality of the food supply has altered
dramatically.  A wide diversity of both imported and processed
foods are now available, increasing the probability that any
individual may be exposed to something in diet to which he or
she is allergic.  Similarly, the amount of sugar being consumed,
and, therefore, the chance of developing hypoglycemia, has
greatly increased,29 so stimulating adrenaline production in the
average citizen who is now quite likely to be diabetic and obese.
Beyond this, soils, air, and water are polluted by over 32,000
chemicals30 that are in widespread commercial use.  These sub-
stances again increase the probability of allergic reactions and,
consequently, the oxidation of adrenaline to adrenochrome.
In the past two hundred years, industrialized societies have
become increasingly noisy.  Both animal studies 31 and research
with human subjects32 adversely affected by traffic noise have
shown that noise significantly affects catecholamine levels,
stimulating the adrenal glands to release both noradrenaline
and adrenaline.  Simply put, during the past two hundred years,
cities have become increasingly noisy and polluted by novel

175
chemicals.  The pace of life is faster and stress levels higher.
All too frequently, inhabitants now tend to eat fast foods that
are high in sugar, or imported or processed products to which
some of them are allergic.  All of these trends are impacting
on the human adrenal glands, overstimulating them to pro-
duce excess adrenaline and/or promoting the oxidation of adre-
naline to adrenochrome.  As Torrey and Miller33 have pointed
out, the percentage of the population that carries genetic var-
iants which increase susceptibility to schizophrenia may not
have altered much in the past 200 years, but the trigger(s)
that promote their negative implications for mental health cer-
tainly have.  It is now much harder for genetically susceptible
individuals to avoid the harmful environmental stimuli that
‘switch on’ such aberrant genes.  This is particularly true for
those who live in those areas where all such trends have been
magnified.
Genesis: In the Beginning
The third chapter of this volume traces the clinical symptoms
of schizophrenia from the womb to the autopsy room. It docu-
ments that those destined to become schizophrenics are often
born with minor physical abnormalities, very like those seen
in fetal alcohol syndrome. These develop in the fetus during
the first trimester. Births are typically difficult and prolonged,
and birth weights usually low. Physical anatomical changes
increase later in life, especially if schizophrenia becomes chron-
ic. These include overdeveloped, fluid-filled brain ventricles and
a badly damaged thyroid gland.
Such physical abnormalities can also be explained by the adren-
ochrome hypothesis.  As previously described, andrenochrome
is antagonistic with triiodothyronine, serotonin (at high lev-
els), and the major enzymes of the antioxidant defence system

176
(glutathione peroxidase, superoxide dismutase, and catalase).
As a consequence, schizophrenics tend to suffer from severe
deficiencies of these substances.  In myxedematous cretinism,
Kashin-Beck disease (grade III), and fetal alcohol syndrome,34
there are serious fetal abnormalities that appear linked to tri-
iodothyronine deficiencies.  It seems likely, therefore, that in-
adequate fetal triiodothyronine, related to excess adrenochrome,
may cause the minor birth defects that occur frequently in
schizophrenics.  Similarly, in regions where goitre is common,
so too are stillbirths.  This suggests that inadequacies in thy-
roid hormones may also account for the difficult births and low
birthweights seen in infants who later became schizophrenic.
They may also be responsible for the elevation of dopamine D2
and D4-like receptors seen in the brains of schizophrenics.
Such receptors seem to be more common in rats fed iodine
deficient diets.35  Buckman and coworkers36 have shown that
the atrophy and large fluid-filled ventricles, seen in chronic
schizophrenics, are strongly linked to low blood glutathione
peroxidase levels.  This suggests that they are caused, at least
in part, by free radical damage, which is itself a consequence
of adrenochrome’s negative impact on the antioxidant defence
system.  There is also evidence to suggest that the damage
seen in the chronic schizophrenic thyroid is also caused by
abnormal oxidative stress.
The Genetic Basis
The current evidence suggests that there are probably four
genetic variants that are abnormally common in the schizo-
phrenic population.37-39  The first of these discussed in the fourth
chapter is a low activity form of the gene which codes for cate-
chol-O-methyltransferase.  This enzyme converts epinephrine
(adrenaline) to the inactive metabolite metanephrine.  Since
this process is inefficient in many schizophrenics, it is likely

177
that more adrenaline than normal is oxidized to adrenochrome
and its derivatives.
There is also a particular variant of the glutathione-S-trans-
ferase (GSTM1) gene that commonly occurs in schizophrenics.
This allele encourages strong catalytic activity for adreno-
chrome, ensuring that high levels of this adrenaline metabolite
occur in the brains of those who carry this variant.
There appears to be a third genetic aberration that is abnor-
mally common in schizophrenia.  Many schizophrenics seem to
carry a variant of the methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase (MTH-
FR) gene that reduces their ability to metabolize homocysteine
effectively.  This variant obviously causes severe biochemical
abnormalities, including elevated homocysteine and depressed
methionine.  The effects of these imbalances and associated
biochemical cascades that they must cause on brain adreno-
chrome levels is, as yet, unclear.  However, animal experiments
suggest that methionine decreases brain adrenochrome.  If this
is correct, this variant of the methylenetetrahydrofolate reduct-
ase gene must increase this hallucinogenic indole.
Recent work also has suggested that some schizophrenics have
a variant Nogo gene which overproduces proteins that may re-
duce the number of nerve endings in regions of the brain linked
to schizophrenia.  If this is the case, this variant gene may
make some individuals more susceptible to damage from adren-
ochrome and its derivatives.
Such genetic aberrations are obviously inherited.  Their fre-
quent presence in the human population helps to explain both
why schizophrenia is common and the high frequency with
which this mental illness occurs in families of schizophrenics.
The advantages such a genetic variation carries with it are
discussed in detail in the following chapter.

178
Biochemical Abnormalities
This book’s fifth chapter discussed 10 classes of biochemical
abnormalities identified in schizophrenia.  Among them are
triiodothyronine deficiency, inadequate glutathione peroxidase,
catalase and superoxide dismutase, and low serotonin.  It has
been demonstrated previously that adrenochrome is a strong
antagonist of all these named substances and that their deple-
tion in schizophrenics is to the expected.
Beyond these biochemical abnormalities, schizophrenics also
display niacin and tryptophan deficiencies.  Tryptophan is the
least abundant essential amino acid in foods, a characteristic
that, in the past, has led to other serious health problems.
One of these was pellagra, which is thought to be due to a
codeficiency of both tryptophan and niacin.  As a consequence
of these two deficiencies (caused by eating a diet too rich in
corn), individuals could not produce adequate nicotinamide
adrenine dinucleotide and so developed pellagra.  This disease
has symptoms known as the four Ds, namely dermatitis, di-
arrhea, dementia, and ultimately death.40  Adrenochrome ex-
cess appears to cause a serotonin deficiency.  This, in turn,
increases the demand for tryptophan, from which serotonin is
metabolized.  As schizophrenics become short of tryptophan,
niacin levels also fall since this is, in part, created in the body
from tryptophan.  Adrenochrome’s antagonism with serotonin,
therefore, is the root cause not only of serotonin’s shortage in
schizophrenia, but also of the deficiencies of tryptophan and
niacin that accompany it.
There is strong evidence of abnormalities in fatty acid metabo-
lism in schizophrenia.  Highly unsaturated fatty acids are readily
oxidized and it seems likely that adrenochrome’s antagonism
with the antioxidant defence system (glutathione peroxidase,
superoxide dismutate, and catalase) causes deficiencies of brain

179
fatty acids.  Buckman and coworkers41 have shown that de-
pleted blood glutathione peroxidase is positively linked to brain
atrophy and the size of associated ventricles.  Conversely, Peet
and coworkers have demonstrated that essential fatty acid
supplements can help to repair such brain damage in schizo-
phrenics.42  Interestingly, Rudin and colleagues43 showed that
linseed oil, which contains high levels of alpha linolenic acid
(necessary for prostaglandin production) is helpful in the treat-
ment of schizophrenia, provided it is given after adequate sele-
nium supplementation.  To quote them directly:
“If a primate is deficient in the antioxidant element
selenium, providing supplemental essential fatty ac-
ids will only make the selenium deficiency worse.
Whatever selenium stores are in the body will be used
up that much sooner in an attempt to protect the EFA
[essential fatty acids] from oxidative damage.”
These experiments and observations strongly suggest that the
abnormalities in fatty acid metabolism seen in schizophrenia
are associated with deficiencies in the selenoenzyme glutath-
ione peroxidase and in the other major components of the
antioxident defence system, caused initially by adrenochrome
antegonism.
Histamine imbalances also are common in schizophrenia.
According to Pfeiffer,44 roughly half of schizophrenics have
depressed blood histamine, while a further 20 percent have an
excess of it.  Those with low histamine he termed histapenics,
while those with elevated histamine were called histadelics.
How can there be such major differences in histamine amongst
these two groups of schizophrenics?  Histamine is formed from
the amino acid histidine and largely stored in most cells.
Pfeiffer45 showed that schizophrenics with abnormally elevated
histamine were typically highly allergic to something in the

180
environment.  As a consequence, they also had high levels of
IgE, a blood protein indicative of inhalant allergic reactions.
Such schizophrenics appear to be rapidly oxidizing adrena-
line to adrenochrome because of this allergy, and so are creat-
ing large quantities of histamine.  In addition, schizophrenics
with the methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR) genet-
ic aberration cannot effectively convert homocysteine back to
methionine.  Consequently, they are deficient in the metho-
nine needed to drive the methylation process that inactivates
histamine and so relieve allergic responses.  Schizophrenics
who have the methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase genetic ab-
erration, or who for other reasons are highly allergic, therefore
suffer from very high histamine levels.  This is why Pfeiffer46
was able to help many of them by giving them supplements of
methionine and so encouraging methylation and the metabo-
lism of histamine.
Conversely, Pfeiffer47 found that schizophrenics with depressed
histamine could be aided by high doses of tryptophan, niacin,
niacinamide and folic acid.  This was because adrenaline is a
histamine antagonist.  In anaphylactic shock, brought on by
an allergic reaction, the patient is injected with epinephrine
(adrenaline) in part to counteract the dangerously high hista-
mine levels that are occurring.48  This suggests that the high
levels of adrenaline created by the triggers of schizophrenia
(such as stress and sugar) are greatly reducing histamine lev-
els in some patients, with adverse effects, which is probably
why methyl acceptors such as niacin and niacinamide are of
value in such cases.49  They reduce adrenaline formation by
reducing noradrenalin levels and so allow histamine levels to
rise back towards normal.
The high levels of homocysteine, observed in many schizo-
phrenics, is easy to explain.  Regland and coworkers50 have
shown that schizophrenics who carry allelic variants of the

181
methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR) gene, specifically
MTHFR C677T and C677TT, have a reduced ability to metabo-
lize homocysteine.  As a result, they typically display depressed
methionine and elevated homocysteine levels.
Obviously, elevated homocysteine is a threat to health since it
is a potent neurotoxin that has been implanted in several dis-
orders, including cardiovascular51 and Alzheimer’s diseases.52
Interestingly, the high levels of homocysteine identified in a
subgroup of schizophrenics appears to explain, at least in part,
why glutamate may play a role in this disorder.  As Ho and
coworkers53 have pointed out, homocysteine is at least as exci-
totoxic as glutamate.  Beyond this, it also enhances glutamate
excitotoxicity.  That is, homocysteine can damage cerebellar
neurons in its own right, but also stimulates glutamate to cause
additional havoc.  It seems that even at relatively low concen-
trations, homocysteine has a lethal impact on a type of gluta-
mate receptor called NMDA (N-methyl-D-aspartate) receptors,54
damage to which appears to play a role in schizophrenia.
Smythies55 has also argued that dopaminochrome (and there-
fore possibly adrenochrome) may also play a role in damaging
NMDA receptors.  Certainly, Berman and Hastings56 have shown
that reactive oxygen species and dopamine oxidation products
can modify glutamate transport function, causing elevated lev-
els implicated in neuro-degeneration.
Many schizophrenics display high levels of “kryptopyrrole” in
their urine.57  Grossly elevated “kryptopyrrole” occurred in the
urine of Arthur Shawcross,58 a serial killer responsible for at
least 13 murders.  Shawcross carried the XYY chromosome
anomaly, suggesting a strong genetic aspect in excess
“kryptopyrrole”.  This is supported by the presence of this sub-
stance in patients with pyroluria,59 where it is thought to be a
genetically determined chemical imbalance that involves abnor-
malities in hemoglobin synthesis.  “Kryptopyrrole” has no known

182
function in the human body, but it binds to pyridoxine (vita-
min B6) and to zinc, making them unavailable as co-factors
in enzymes or for metabolism.  High levels of “kryptopyrrole”
in pyroluria also cause a deficiency of arachidonic acid, an
omega-6 fatty acid.60
Hoffer61 has shown that alcoholics can be made to produce
“kryptopyrrole” in their urine by giving them LSD.  It would
appear, therefore, that some or all of the indoles, including
LSD and adrenochrome, can promote the production of
“kryptopyrrole”, a process which in turn robs the body of vita-
min B6, zinc, and arachidonic acid.  Certain individuals ap-
pear to be genetically susceptible to this process since pyroluria
seems to have a genetic dimension.  Beyond this, Hoffer62 has
reported higher than normal levels of “kryptopyrrole” in the
urine of siblings of schizophrenics who are not, themselves,
mentally ill.  The extraordinarily elevated “kryptopyrrole” seen
in the serial killer Arthur Shawcross also seems to have been
linked to his XYY chromosome anomaly.63  The best evidence
that the elevated “kryptopyrrole” seen in schizophrenics is
caused by excess adrenochrome has been provided by Hoffer,64
who has demonstrated that when patients with high levels of
“kryptopyrrole” in their urine are given megadoses of niacin to
reduce the body’s adrenochrome production, “kryptopyrrole”
excretion drops rapidly and the symptoms of schizophrenia
decline.  Conversely, even in patients who are not schizophrenic,
but are excreting large amounts of “kryptopyrrole”, niacin will
be of great benefit, as, for example, in children who are wrongly
thought to be retarded.65
Pulling the Trigger: Location, Location, Location
Internationally, schizophrenia is most prevalent in northern
Sweden, Ireland, and Croatia.66  It cannot logically be argued

183
that those areas are subjected to the most stress, sugar con-
sumption, or exposure to substances likely to cause allergic
reactions.  That is, the triggers for schizophrenia do not seem
to be unusually common in regions where this mental illness
peaks.  If the adrenochrome hypothesis is correct, therefore,
those must be areas where one or more of the genetic aber-
rations that promote excess production of this indole are par-
ticularly widespread.
This appears to be the case.  Prasmusinto and coworkers,67 for
example, have compared the frequency with which the C677T
polymorphism of the methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase
(MTHFR) gene occurred in both German-Croatians and Indo-
nesians.  As discussed previously, this allele decreases the
ability to metabolize homocysteine effectively and is probably
associated with elevated adrenochrome and its derivatives in
some schizophrenics.  The research by Prasmusinto and col-
leagues68 established that this genetic aberration was much
more common in Croatians than in Indonesians (p=0.0033).
Similarly, Brattstrom and fellow researchers69 have established
that in Sweden, 29.1 percent of newborns carry the C677T/
MTHFR mutation.  The level in the Swedish elderly is 27.0
percent.  Clearly, this polymorphism is extremely common in
Sweden, being present in almost one third of the population.
This allele has also been reported at high levels in the Irish
population.70
At the national level, it is also obvious that schizophrenia is
more common in industrialized nations, especially in the zones
of transition that surround the Central Business Districts.71
These, of course, are areas of high noise and pollution, trig-
gers known to stimulate adrenaline production.  Beyond this,
Christensen and colleagues72 have demonstrated that schizo-
phrenics are much more likely to recover in countries where
national diets are high in unsaturated fatty acids.  Such fats

184
are normally derived from vegetables, fish, and seafoods and
are essential for prostaglandin manufacture.  Diets high in
ethyl-eicosapentaenoate have been shown to repair some of
the brain atrophy and abnormal ventricles seen in chronic
schizophrenics.73  In addition, many schizophrenics and their
relatives are severely allergic to wheat and/or milk.74-75  As a
result, countries where such foods make up a substantial part
of the normal diet are likely to have a significant number of
schizophrenics who are suffering from excess adrenochrome
and its derivates, triggered by allergies to either wheat and/or
milk.  The class variations in the prevalence of schizophrenics
seen in Europe, Ireland, the US, Japan, India, and Italy76 also
probably reflect dietary factors.  In such countries there are
significant class differences in both the consumption of sugar
and of essential fatty acids which are likely to influence adrena-
line production, essential fatty acid availability, and exposure
to potential allergens.
In the US,77 and to a lesser extent in Italy,78 it has been demon-
strated that schizophrenia is more common in low soil sele-
nium and calcium regions.  This is relatively easy to explain
since the production of the two adrenochrome antagonists, glu-
tathione peroxidase and triiodothyronine, requires selenium.
Glutathione peroxidase is a selenoenzyme that is known to
rise and fall in the human body with selenium availability.
Triiodothyronine cannot be produced from thyroxine without
the selenoenzyme deiodinase.  As might be expected, then,
people living in selenium deficient regions tend to have de-
pressed glutathione peroxidase79 and triiodothyronine80 levels.
Under such circumstances, adrenochrome is likely to be more
damaging.  Calcium salts reduce the adrenaline-secreting ef-
fects of potassium,81 so it is probable that individuals living in
high calcium environments are less prone to produce excess
adrenaline and, therefore, adrenochrome.  The fact that schizo-
phrenia is not as common in areas of high sunlight may reflect

185
the ease with which vitamin D is produced.  Deficiencies of
this vitamin are related to obesity.82  This may be due to a lack
of active vitamin D which increases calcium absorption in the
digestive tract and so helps reduce the adrenaline-secreting
effects of potassium.83
Since cancer of the esophagus is also most common in low
selenium, depressed calcium regions, it is not surprising that
it has a prevalence pattern similar to that of schizophrenia.
The skin’s ability to manufacture vitamin D, selenium levels in
foods, and the calcium content of drinking water all depend on
the time of year.  It is possible, therefore, that one or more of
these factors is responsible for the well known seasonal varia-
tions in the birthdates of schizophrenics.86
No Barking Dogs: Medical Anomalies
Schizophrenics are typically heavy smokers but very rarely de-
velop lung cancer.86  If the adrenochrome theory is correct, many
schizophrenics may be deficient in brain adrenaline because
too much of it is oxidized to adrenochrome.  Animal tests87-88
have shown that nicotine increases adrenaline turnover in the
hypothalamus, especially the median eminence.  This nicotine-
adrenaline relationship seems to have a therapeutic role in many
neuropsychiatric disorders including depression, Tourette’s syn-
drome, and schizophrenia.89  It seems likely, therefore, that, in
the short-term, elevated nicotine from tobacco helps alleviate
the adverse impacts of low brain adrenaline experienced be-
cause of its excessive oxidation to adrenochrome.  This is why
so many schizophrenics smoke as a form of self-medication.
Yamafuji and coworkers90 have argued that noradrenaline or
adrenaline have antitumor properties.  It seems more likely

186
from the available evidence that it is not adrenaline, but its
oxidation product adrenochrome, or derivative(s) from it, that
are protective against some cancers.  After all, the triggers of
adrenaline production (sugar consumption, stress, and aller-
gies), have all been increasing at the very time that cancer
rates have been rapidly rising.91  This suggests that adrenaline
itself cannot be protective against cancer.
There is, however, growing evidence that adrenochrome is
protecting schizophrenics against lung cancer.  Parnate, an
antidepressant, is an amine blocker that encourages adreno-
chrome production in patients receiving it.92  As a result, some
become psychotic.  One of these was a 14 year old male with a
brain tumour that required monthly fluid-drainage.  For the 5
years after a parnate-induced psychotic episode the patient
remained in good health, suggesting that the adrenochrome
high produced by this drug either cured or greatly reduced the
size of the brain tumour.  Beyond this, a new product called
IntraDose, which contains cisplatin and epinephrine (adrena-
line), is being tested as a treatment for liver cancer, cancer of
the head and neck and breast, and malignant melanoma.  In
all of these types of cancer the treatment is showing great
promise.  In liver cancer,93 for example, 38 patients were treated
with IntraDose and 55 (21) percent of these responded to the
drug.  In nine of these cases the tumour disappeared, while in
the other 12 there was a reduction in viable tumour mass of
more than 50 percent.  Excellent responses were also achieved
in malignant melanoma patients94 and those with head and
neck cancers95 and breast cancer.96  Cisplatin is a very power-
ful oxidant which will almost certainly convert any adrenaline
to adrenochrome when the two are injected together into a
tumour mass.  There is, therefore, growing experimental proof
that adrenochrome is an effective treatment for many cancers.
This probably explains the resistance of schizophrenics to lung
cancer, despite heavy smoking.

187
Schizophrenic patients have an insensitivity to pain that can
be life threatening.97  Among a group of schizophrenics experi-
encing a myocardial infarction (heart attack), for example, only
18 percent reported pain, compared to 90 percent of those ex-
periencing attacks who were not schizophrenic.  Such a re-
duced pain sensitivity has been recorded for third-degree burns,
cancer, peptic ulcers, fractures, and arthritis in many schizo-
phrenics.  Indeed, one 46-year old woman with long-term schiz-
oid psychosis who collapsed and died on the street was found
to have swallowed 422, mostly metal, objects.98
Schwarz and coworkers99 gave between 0.125 and 1 mg of pure
adrenochrome intraventricularly to several cats.  “After about
20 minutes the cats became moderately insensitive to painful
stimulation.  There was no prompt withdrawal or voicing of pain
when the paw was squeezed or the ear was pinched.”  Clearly,
adrenochrome can reduce pain sensitivity.  Horrobin100 argued
that an inability to flush, the failure to feel pain, the beneficial
effects of fever, and the resistance to arthritis seen in schizo-
phrenics were all linked to arachidonic acid abnormalities.
Arachidonic acid is usually locked up in membrane phospho-
lipids, but for the body to react to many different stimuli it
must be released as free arachidonic acid which can then reg-
ulate cell function in appropriate ways.101  Some arachidonic
acid is also then converted to prostaglandins that open up
blood vessels to allow faster blood flow.  Horrobin102 argued
that in schizophrenics, a shortage of free arachisonic acid could
explain a lack of prostaglandins and, hence, of flushing.
Arachidonic acid also is required to form prostaglandins that
respond to insult by mounting an inflammatory response.  Of
course, many schizophrenics are histamine deficient which will
also reduce their response to injury or infection.  Arthritis is
often treated with non-steroidal, anti-inflammatory drugs, such

188
as ibuprofen and aspirin, that work by blocking the conversion
of arachidonic acid to prostaglandins.  Steroids, such as hydro-
cortisone cream, in contrast, block the release of arachidonic
acid from the phospholipids.  In either case, these drugs cause
a shortage of prostaglandins by interfering with the supply of
arachidonic acid.103
The surprising but temporary improvement in schizophrenia
that is associated with fever can also be explained by an
arachidonic acid abnormality in this mental illness.  During a
fever, arachidonic acid is very rapidly released from the cell
membranes since it helps to defend against infection.104  If
schizophrenics are usually deficient in arachidonic acid, fever
may move body levels towards the norm improving brain func-
tion and reducing psychotic symptoms.  Schizophrenics are
deficient in arachidonic acid105 for at least two reasons.  Firstly,
it is an essential unsaturated fatty acid that will be subjected
to free radical damage due to the impairment of the body’s anti-
oxidant defence system caused by adrenochrome.106  Secondly,
as described, some 75 percent of acute schizophrenics display
elevated “kryptopyrrole” in their urine.  This binds to pyridox-
ine (vitamin B6) and zinc which are then excreted with it.  In
addition, “kryptopyrrole” also seems associated with a loss of
arachidonic acid which, as a result, is also deficient in patients
with pyroluria.107
The links between schizophrenia, celiac disease, and wheat
consumption seem relatively easy to explain.108  This grain con-
tains the protein gluten, an intolerance to which appears to be
the allergic cause of celiac disease.  The chief symptoms of this
illness are recurrent diarrhea accompanied by severe cramps,
alternating with constipation.109  Celiac disease is often known
as malabsorption syndrome because it is associated with an
inability to absorb fats, some sugars, and starches.  It also
frequently leads to vitamin A, E, and selenium deficiencies.

189
Any schizophrenic inheriting the genetic aberration responsi-
ble for celiac disease, or who is heterozygotic for it, is probably
allergic to gluten and so will over-produce adrenochrome.110
Beyond this, they are likely to be deficient in the antioxidants
needed to mitigate adrenochrome’s generation of free radicals
and in the essential fatty acids that are so important in brain
function.116  It is possible, therefore, that schizophrenics who
are allergic to gluten have difficulty in absorbing not only the
essential fatty acids, but also the antioxidants that are needed
to protect them.  Beyond this, if selenium deficient, they are
likely to produce inadequate triiodothyronine, the adreno-
chrome antagonist.112
There is a growing body of evidence that maternal infections
during pregnancy may be linked to schizophrenia and other
psychoses in adulthood.  Buka and coworkers,113 for example,
have demonstrated that the offspring of mothers with elevated
levels of total IgG and IgM immunoglobulins and antibodies to
herpes simplex virus type 2 are at an increased risk of sub-
sequently developing schizophrenia as well as other psychotic
illnesses.  Herpes simplex virus DNA also appears to be ab-
normally common in very aggressive, mentally retarded pa-
tients, or those with paranoid schizophrenia.114  In addition,
there is an interesting correlation between elevated schizo-
phrenia and regions where Ixodid ticks,115 and therefore infec-
tion by Borrelia burgdorferi, are commonplace.  What is clear,
however, is that the subsequent appearance of schizophrenia
that may follow such maternal infection does not occur as the
result of active viral infection or reactivation.116  Any impact
must result from brain damage in the fetus that increases
future susceptibility to schizophrenia.  Support for this pos-
sibility comes from the observation that, in rats, maternal
herpes simplex virus type 1 inhibits acoustic startle in off-
spring.117  This function is also known to be diminished in
schizophrenia.118

190
Buka and colleagues119 have shown that mothers of infants who
are likely to become schizophrenics tend to suffer from at least
two health problems.  Firstly, their elevated levels of IgG and
IgM immunoglobulins strongly support that they are highly al-
lergic to something in their environment.  As a result, they can
be expected to be over oxidizing adrenaline to adrenochrome.
Secondly, they are persistently infected by the herpes simplex
virus type 2.  Similarly, schizophrenia is elevated in regions
where Ixodid ticks, carrying Borrelia burgdorferi, are common.
Why these relationships occur is as yet unclear, but what is
apparent is that viral infection can greatly reduce the body’s
ability to detoxify adrenochrome, so exposing the developing
fetus to elevated levels of this dangerous indole.  This associa-
tion can be best documented with respect to the hepatitis B
virus.  Persistent infection with the hepatitis B virus, together
with exposure to chemical carcinogens, is known to cause
elevated liver cancer in endemic areas.120  Hepatitis B virus
infection significantly decreases glutathione S-transferase and
selenium-independent glutathione peroxidase activity in in-
fected cells.112  The body normally detoxifies adrenochrome by
conjugating it with glutathione in the presence of glutathione
S-transferase.122
It follows, therefore, that pregnant women who are suffering
allergic reactions will over produce adrenochrome.  However, if
they are also infected with the hepatitis B virus they will be
deficient in both glutathione and glutathione S-transferase, the
two compounds required to detoxify it.  As a consequence, it is
very likely that their developing fetus will be exposed to elevated
levels of this indole, a process that seems to be most damag-
ing to growth and development in the first trimester.  This is
perhaps not too surprising since it is known that newborns
(especially if they are preterm infants) are at a high risk of
oxidative stress and very susceptible to free radical damage.123

191
This seems to be because the brains of the very young, and
presumably of fetuses, are rich in polyunsaturated fatty acids,
yet have a relative deficiency of glutathione peroxidase and
superoxide dismutase.  In summary, pregnant women who are
both highly allergic and infected by pathogens that cause glu-
tathione and/or glutathione S-transferase deficiencies appear
likely to give birth to infants that have been overexposed, in
the womb, to an excess of adrenochrome and its derivatives.
This may explain the apparent relationships between mater-
nal exposure to herpes simplex virus type 2124 or to Borrelia
burgdorferi125 and the higher risk of schizophrenia in subse-
quent offspring.  Certainly, there is growing evidence that glu-
tathione S-transferase may play a role in the recurrence of
herpes simplex viruses.126
Unconventional Treatments
Controlled fasting, in combination with detoxification and vig-
orous exercise, was pioneered as a treatment for schizophrenia
by Dr. Uri Nickolayev at the Moscow Psychiatric Institute.127
Fasting will prevent allergic reactions in patients who normally
eat foods with which they are biologically incompatible.  As a
result, the production of adrenochrome and its derivatives will
fall during fasting, perhaps explaining the normalizing of
catecholamines in the urine of such patients.  In addition, fast-
ing will reduce the negative adrenaline triggering effect of sugar,
while vigorous exercise will also lower adrenaline levels.  Such
dietary changes will also cause alterations in serotonin and
histamine levels, both of which are usually abnormal in schizo-
phrenia.  Many schizophrenics, therefore, improve while fast-
ing and remain well on simple diets.
Histamine therapy seems to be of lasting benefit to roughly one
third of schizophrenics.128  This is perhaps to be anticipated

192
since Pfeiffer129 has documented that some 50 percent of all
schizophrenics suffer from histopenia, which has depressed
blood histamine as one of its major symptoms.  This seems to
be because adrenaline is a histamine antagonist and triggers
(such as stress and sugar) that stimulate the production of
adrenaline, therefore, tend to cause a depression in histamine.
In such cases, additional histamine helps to reduce schizo-
phrenia’s symptoms, since it reduces the body’s stores of
adrenaline and, therefore, of adrenochrome.
High daily doses of desiccated thyroid are an extremely effec-
tive treatment for acute schizophrenia.  As Danziger130 estab-
lished, every one of 80 acute schizophrenics receiving between
120 to 1200 milligrams of desiccated thyroid who completed
his program recovered if they had been ill for only 6 months or
less.  This appears to be because triiodothyronine is a major
adrenochrome antagonist and can help to block this indole’s
psychotic impacts.  Even chronic schizophrenics benefit greatly
from desiccated thyroid because repeated exposure to adreno-
chrome (and related depressed antioxidant defence system en-
zymes) causes permanent thyroid damage.  Desiccated thy-
roid, therefore, provides the triiodothyronine that chronic
schizophrenics have great difficulty in producing themselves.
Simpson and Amunso131 claimed that triiodothyronine was in-
effective in the treatment of chronic schizophrenia.  However,
they used dosages that were a small fraction of those prescribed
by Danziger.132  Beyond this, it should be recalled that schizo-
phrenics have an unusual insensitivity to thyroid hormones.133
Large doses do not increase their oxygen consumption nor do
they cause the hyperthyroidism one would normally expect to
develop.  Hoskins,134 for example, reported that schizophrenics
were unusually resistant to large doses of thyroid, finding that
5 grains must usually be given before the pulse rate is elevated
to 100 or more.  This is nearly twice the normal endogenous
production of thyroid.  Carl Pfeiffer135 was effective in treating

193
many schizophrenics because he recognized that they could
be classified biochemically.  Distinct differences occur because
of the variety of allergies involved and the four or more genetic
aberrations found in different forms of this mental illness.  As
a consequence, while the reduction of adrenochrome may be
of value to all schizophrenics (as shown by Danziger), there
still remain symptoms with a genetic origin.  For example, as
Regland and coworkers136 have shown, schizophrenics carry-
ing the C677TT variant of the methylenetetrahydrofolate re-
ductase gene have great difficulty in metabolizing homocysteine.
As a result, they display depressed methionine and elevated
homocysteine levels.  It is to be expected, therefore, that such
schizophrenics respond well to methionine supplements.  In
short, there is nothing in the Carl Pfeiffer protocols137 that is
inconsistent with the belief that all schizophrenics suffer from
an overexposure to adrenochrome.  This does not mean that
this is necessarily their only biochemical problem.
It is not surprising that the successes achieved using the Hoffer
protocol can be explained by the adrenochrome hypothesis.
After all, Dr. Abram Hoffer138 was one of the originators, some
50 years ago, of this hypothesis.  This emphasis on the removal
from the diet of high sugar foods and substances to which the
schizophrenic patient is allergic reduces the production of
adrenaline and so its associated metabolite adrenochrome.
Beyond this, elevated doses of vitamins and minerals help to
support the antioxidant defence system.  However, the tradi-
tional keystone to the protocol is the prescription of high daily
doses of niacin.139  This vitamin is essential in the treatment of
schizophrenia because the oxidation of adrenaline to adreno-
chrome occurs in two steps.  Initially, adrenaline loses one
electron to form oxidized adrenaline, a highly reactive molecule.
In the presence of nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide, which is
created in both oxidized (NAD) and reduced forms (NADH) from
niacin, oxidized adrenaline recaptures one electron to reform

194
adrenaline.  If NAD and NADH are in short supply, however,
oxidized adrenaline loses another electron and is converted to
adrenochrome.  This second reaction is not reversible.  Adreno-
chrome, therefore, cannot be converted back to adrenaline.  This
explains why many schizophrenics display depressed levels of
adrenaline and elevated levels of adrenochrome.
High doses of niacin, therefore, reduce adrenochrome produc-
tion in schizophrenics.  Hoffer,140 for example, examined the
results of all of the schizophrenic patients treated by four dif-
ferent psychiatrists between October 1, 1955 and December
31, 1962 at the University Hospital in Saskatoon, Canada.
These patients were re-evaluated after August 17, 1964.  Two
of the psychiatrists included rarely used niacin in their treat-
ments, and then only after it became obvious that everything
else had failed.  It was never recommended for use after dis-
charge.  Their main treatments were tranquilizers, psycho-
therapy, and electroconvulsive treatment (ECT).  In contrast,
the other two psychiatrists routinely used niacin and urged
their patients to stay on it after discharge.  Schizophrenics
were randomly assigned to one of these doctors on first ad-
mission to the hospital.
During study period there were 232 admissions who received
no niacin.  This group needed a total of 35,032 days or 96 years
in hospital over a 6-year period.  Three of them committed
suicide.  In contrast, the niacin group needed 7,424 days, or
20 years in hospital.  There were no suicides in its members.141
There has been at least one negative trial using nicotina-
mide,142-143 while orthomolecular physicians continue to swear
by its value in treating schizophrenia.144-146  This discrepancy
may stem from the fact that this trial used doses that were too
low and treatment periods that were not long enough.  Hoffer,147
for example, has used up to 32 grams of niacin per day in

195
extreme cases and continues to give it to chronic patients for at
least 5 years.  Most of his patients take 12 grams daily or less
and the vast majority between 3 and 6 grams.  It should also be
remembered that they were usually on a sugar restricted diet,
reducing their adrenaline and hence adrenochrome production.
Conventional Treatment
There is good evidence from Switzerland and elsewhere that
insulin coma therapy shortens the duration of a schizophrenic
attack in many patients, especially if given early in the illness.148
Unfortunately, this improvement proves temporary.  Baumann
and MGaillard149 argued the reason insulin coma therapy was
beneficial to schizophrenics was because it increased brain tryp-
tophan uptake and so enhanced cerebral serotonin synthesis.
This explanation is compatible with the adrenochrome hypoth-
esis since this damaging indole is a serotonin antagonist.  As a
consequence, any treatment that increases serotonin produc-
tion in schizophrenia is likely to temporarily mitigate the nega-
tive impacts of adrenochrome, while simultaneously replacing
serotonin that has been lost.  Naturally, unless the treatment
is regularly repeated, its effects will be temporary.
Electroconvulsive therapy also appears to be beneficial in the
treatment of schizophrenia, provided that it is given after a
few weeks of high niacin supplementation to prevent the
memory loss with which it is normally associated.150-151  It is
still not entirely clear why electroconvulsive therapy can be
useful in schizophrenia, but it appears to slow the metabolism
of noradrenaline.152  If this is the case, it is possible that it
reduces adrenaline and so adrenochrome levels.
Drugs, on average, still improve schizophrenic symptoms, but
by only 15 to 25 percent, leaving 75 to 85 percent unresolved.153

196
Some drugs are also linked to side-effects such as Parkinson-
ism and tardive dyskinesia.  The reasons for this association
seem obvious.  Most neuroleptics are designed to address a
dopamine excess that does not exist in schizophrenia.  As a
consequence, they may create a deficiency of dopamine with
side effects that mirror Parkinson’s disease.  These drugs also
interfere with the metabolism of other catecholamines, pro-
ducing various negative effects.  Ultimately, however, they may
have an impact on adrenochrome production, so mitigating
some of its adverse effects.  Other drugs designed to address
serotonin and glutamate154-155 imbalances are attempting to stop
dominoes further down the adrenochrome cascade from falling.
Their effects can be expected to be beneficial but minor because
they do not address the fundamental causes of the illness.
Regression Analysis: The Road Back
Very few recovered schizophrenics feel that conventional drug
treatments were the key to their recovery.  There is much more
support amongst them for the orthomolecular treatments of
Hoffer,156 Pfeiffer,157 Danziger,157 and others that rely on high
doses of adrenochrome antagonists (such as triiodothyronine)
or methyl acceptors (like niacinamide and niacin) that reduce
the conversion rate of noradrenaline to adrenaline and its
metabolite adrenochrome.  Beyond this, many also believe they
were formerly hypoglycemic or addicted to foods to which they
were allergic.  These views are also consistent with the adreno-
chrome hypothesis because such diets ultimately either stimu-
late the overproduction of adrenaline or its rapid oxidation.   This
is also true of stress, which most recovered schizophrenics have
learned to avoid as far as is possible.

197
SUMMARY
In his book, Science is God, Horrobin159 claims that:
A good hypothesis has three major characteristics.
It accounts for those facts in a precise, direct way.  It
makes predictions which are amenable to experimen-
tal testing and which suggest the direction in which
further progress may be made.
I feel confident that to this point “What Really Causes Schizo-
phrenia” has demonstrated that the adrenochrome hypothesis
can account for most of the available facts in a precise, direct
way.  Indeed, I would like to challenge supporters of the
dopamine or glutamate hypotheses to explain the observations
in Table 1 in a more convincing manner.  What remains, then,
is to demonstrate how progress in the prevention and treat-
ment of schizophrenia can be made by better application of the
adrenochrome hypothesis.
REFERENCES
1.
Drexler, M. (2002).  Secret agents: The menace of emerging infections.
Washington, DC: John Henry Press.
2.
Hoffer, A., Osmond, H., and Smythies, J. (1954).  Schizophrenia: A new
approach. II. Results of a year’s research. Journal of Mental Sci-
ence, 10, 29; cited by Hoffer, A. (1982).  The adrenochrome hy-
pothesis of schizophrenia revisited. Journal of Orthomolecular Psy-
chiatry, 10(2), 1-21.
3.
Riordan, H.D. (1989).  Medical mavericks: Volume two. Wichita, KS: Bio-
Communications Press.
4.
Carroll, R.T., The Skeptics Dictionary. http://skepdic.com/occam.html.
5.
Johnson, P., Sci-sceptic FAQ Scientific Method. http://home.xnet.com/
~blatura/skep_html.
6.
Ibid.

198
7.
Egan, M.F. et al. (2001).  Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,
98, 6917; cited in Sawa, A., and Snyder, S.H. (2002).  Schizophrenia:
Diverse approaches to a complex disease. Science, 296, 692-695.
8.
Harada, S., Tachikawa, H., and Kawanishi, Y. (2001).  Glutathione S-
transferase M1 gene deletion may be associated with susceptibil-
ity to certain forms of schizophrenia. Biochemical and Biophysical
Research Communications, 281, 267-271.
9.
Regland, B., Germgard, T., Gottfries, C.G., Grenfeldt, B., and Koch-
Schmidt, A.C. (1997).  Homozygous thermolabile methylenetetra-
hydrofolate reductase in schizophrenia-like psychosis. Journal of
Neural Transmission, 104(8-9), 931-944.
10.
Deng, H., Liu, X., Cai, G., Sun, X., Wang, Y., Terwedow, H., Wang, Z.,
and Xu, X. (2002).  A linkage disequilibrium study of methylene-
tetrahydrafolate. Yi Xue Yi Chuan Xue Za Zhi, 19(3), 198-200.
11.
Brownlie, B.E., Rae, A.M., Walshe, J.W., and Wells, J.E. (2000).
Psychoses associated with thyrotoxicosis—‘thyrotoxic psychosis.’
A report of 18 cases, with statistical analysis of incidence. Euro-
pean Journal of Endocrinology, 142(5), 438-444.
12.
Schwarz, B.E., Wakim, K.G., Bickford, R.G., and Lichtenheld, F.R.
(1956a).  Behavioral and electroencephalographic effects of hallu-
cinogenic drugs: Changes in cats on intraventricular injection.
Archives of Neurology and Psychiatry, 75, 83-90.
13.
Schwarz, B.E., Sem-Jacobsen, C.W., and Petersen, M.C. (1956b).  Ef-
fects of mescalin, LSD-25, and adrenochrome on depth electrograms
in man. Archives of Neurology and Psychiatry, 75, 579-587.
14.
Kern, C., and Bernards, C.M. (1997).  Ascorbic acid inhibits spinal
manigeal catechol-0-methyltransferase in vitro, markedly increas-
ing epinephrine bioavailability. Anethesiology, 86(2), 405-409.
15.
Regland et al., op. cit.
16.
Deng et al., op. cit.
17.
Schwarz et al. (1956b), op. cit.
18.
Ibid.
19.
Ibid.
20.
Danziger, cited by Hoffer, A. (2001).  Thyroid and schizophrenia. Journal
of Orthomolecular Medicine, 16(4), 205-212.
21.
Sawa and Synder, op. cit.
22.
Jones, G., Zammit, S., Norton, N., Hamshere, M.L., Jones, S.J., and
Milham, C. (2001).  Aggressive behaviour in patients with schizo-
phrenia is associated with catechol-O-methyltransferase genotype.
British Journal of Psychiatry, 179, 351-355.

199
23.
Lachan, H.M., Nolan, K.A., Mohr, P., Saito, T., and Volavka, J. (1998).
Association between catechol-O-methyltransferase genotype and
violence in schizophrenia and schizoaffective disorder. American
Journal of Psychiatry, 155(6), 835-837.
24.
Nolan, K.A., Volavka, J., Czobor, P., Cseh, A., Lachman, H., Saito, T.,
Tiihonen, J., et. al. (2000).  Suicidal behavior in patients with schizo-
phrenia is related to COMT polymorphism. Psychiatric Genetics,
10(3), 117-124.
25.
Hoffer, A. (1998).  Vitamin B-3 schizophrenia: Discovery recovery contro-
versy. Kingston, ON: Quarry Press.
26.
Torrey, E.F., and Miller, J. (2002).  The invisible plague: The rise of men-
tal illness from 1750 to the present. New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers
University Press.
27.
Ibid.
28.
Ibid.
29.
Schauss, A. (1981).  Diet, crime and delinquency. Berkeley, CA: Parker
House.
30.
US Environmental Protection Agency (1977).  Toxic Substances Control
Act (TSCA), PL-94-469: Candidate List of Chemical Substances, 1-3.
Environmental Protection Agency, Office of Toxic Substances, Wash-
ington, DC.
31.
Gesi, M., Lenzi, P., Alessandri, M.G., Ferrucci, M., Fornai, F., and
Paparelli, A. (2002).  Journal of Anatomy, 200(Pt.2), 159-168.
32.
Babisch, W., Fromm, H., Beyer, A., and Isling, H. (2001).  Increased
catecholamine levels in urine in subjects exposed to road traffic
noise: The role of stress hormones in noise research. Environment
International, 26(7-8), 475-481.
33.
Torrey and Miller, op.cit.
34.
Cudd, T.A., Chen, W.J., and West, J.R. (2002).  Fetal and maternal
thyroid hormone responses to ethanol exposure during the third
trimester equivalent of gestation in sheep. Alcoholism—Clinical and
Experimental Research, 26(1), 53-58.
35.
Overstreet, D.H., Crocker, A.D., Lawson, C.A., McIntosh, G.H., and
Crocker, J.M. (1984).  Alterations in the dopaminergic system and
behaviour in rats reared on iodine-deficient diets. Pharmacology,
Biochemistry and Behavior, 21(4), 561-565.
36.
Buckman, T.D., Kling, A., Sutphin, M.S., Steinberg, A., and Eiduson, S.
(1990).  Platelet glutathione peroxidase and monoamine oxidase
activity in schizophrenics with CT Scan abnormalities: Relation to
psychosocial variables. Psychiatry Research, 31(1), 1-14.

200
37.
Harada et al., op. cit.
38.
Deng et al., op. cit.
39.
Egan et al., op. cit.
40.
Braverman, E.R. (with Pfeiffer, C.C.) (1987).  The healing nutrients within:
Facts, findings and new research on amino acids. New Canaan: Keats
Publishing.
41.
Buckman et al., op. cit.
42.
Peet, M., Horrobin, D.F., E-E. Multicentre Study Group (2002).  A dose-
ranging exploratory study of the effects of ethyl-eicosapentaenoate
in patients with persistent schizophrenic symptoms. Journal of Psy-
chiatric Research, 36(1), 7-18.
43.
Rudin, D.O., and Felix, C. (with Schraeder, C.) (1987).  The omega-3
phenomenon. New York: Avon Books.
44.
Pfeiffer, C.C. (1987).  Nutrition and mental illness: An orthomolecular
approach to balancing body chemistry. Rochester, VT: Healing Arts
Press.
45.
Ibid.
46.
Ibid.
47.
Ibid.
48.
Makabe-Kobayashi, Y., Hori, Y., Adachi, T., Ishigaki-Suzuki, S., Kikuchi,
Y., Kagaya, Y., Shirato, K., Nagy, A., Ujike, A., Takai, T., Watanabe,
T., and Ohtsu, H. (2002).  The control effect of histamine on body
temperature and respiratory function in IgE-dependent systemic
anaphylaxix. Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immunology, 110(2),
298-303.
49.
Hoffer (1998), op. cit.
50.
Regland et al., op. cit.
51.
Homocysteine Studies Collaboration (2002).  Homocysteine and risk of
ischemic heart disease and stroke: A meta-analysis. Journal of the
American Medical Association, 288(16), 2015-2022.
52.
Ho, P.I., Collins, S.C., Dhitavat, S., Ortiz, D., Ashline, D., Rogers, E.,
and Shea, T.B. (2001).  Homocysteine potentiates b-amyloid neu-
rotoxicity: Role of oxidative stress. Journal of Neurochemistry, 78,
1-6.
53.
Ibid.
54.
Ibid.
55.
Smythies, J.R. (1977).  Oxidative reactions and schizophrenia: A re-
view-discussion. Schizophrenia Research, 24, 359-364.

201
56.
Berman, S.B., and Hastings, T.G. (1997).  Inhibition of glutamate trans-
port in symoptosomes by dopamine oxidation and reactive oxygen
species. Journal of Neurochemistry, 69(3), 1185-1195.
57.
Hoffer (1998), op. cit.
58.
Radix: Arthur Shawcross. http://www.treehousemountain.com/study
chart1.htm.
59.
Pyroluria. http://www.drkaslow.com/html/pyroluria.html.
60.
Ibid.
61.
Hoffer (1998), op.cit.
62.
Hoffer, A. (2002).  Personal communication.
63.
Radix: Arthur Shawcross, op. cit.
64.
Hoffer, A. (1995).  Editorial. The discovery of kryptopyrrole and its im-
portance in diagnosis of biochemical imbalances in schizophrenia
and in criminal behavior. Journal of Orthomolecular Medicine, 10
(1), 3-7.
65.
Ibid.
66.
Foster, H.D. (1992).  Health, disease and the environment. London:
Belhaven Press.
67.
Prasmusinto, D., Skrablin, S., Hofstaetter, C., Fimmers, R., and van der
Ven, K. (2002).  The methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase 677-->T
polymorphism and preeclampsia in two populations. Obstetrics and
Gynecology, 99(6), 1085-1092.
68.
Ibid.
69.
Brattstrom, L., Zhang, Y., Hurtig, M., Refsum, H., Ostensson, S., Frans-
son, L., Jones, K., Landgren, F., Brudin, L., and Ueland, P.M. (1998).
A common methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase gene mutation and
longevity. Atherosclerosis, 141(2), 315-319.
70.
Mynett-Johnson, L.A., Keenan, C., Black, I.L., Livingstone, W.J., Lawler,
M., Roche, H.M., White, B., Gibney, M.J., McKeon, P., and Smith,
O.P. (2002).  Thermolabile methylenetatrahydrofolate reductase
(C677T): Frequency in the Irish population. Irish Journal of Medi-
cal Science, 171(1), 37-39.
71.
Bagley, C., Jacobsen, S., and Palmer, C. (1973).  Social structure and
the ecological distribution of mental illness, suicide and delin-
quency. Psychological Medicine, 3, 177-187.
72.
Christensen, O., and Christensen, E. (1988).  Fat consumption and
schizophrenia. Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 78(5), 587-591.
73.
Peet et al., op. cit.

202
74.
Singh, M.M., and Kay, S.R. (1976).  Wheat gluten as a pathogenic factor
in schizophrenia. Science, 191, 401-402.
75.
Templer, D., and Veleber, D.M. (1980).  Schizophrenia prevalence: Wheat,
milk and temperature. Journal of Orthomolecular Psychiatry, 9(4),
284-286.
76.
Torrey, E.F. (1980).  Schizophrenia and civilisation. New York: Jason
Aronson.
77.
Foster, H.D. (1988).  The geography of schizophrenia: Possible links
with selenium and calcium deficiencies, inadequate exposure to
sunlight and industrialization. Journal of Orthomolecular Medicine,
3(3), 135-140.
78.
Templer, D.I., Hughey, B., Chalguijian, H., Lavoie, M., Trent, N.H.,
Sahwell, R., and Spencer, D.A. (1990).  Multiple sclerosis, schizo-
phrenia, temperature and latitude. Journal of Orthomolecular Medi-
cine, 5(3), 125-128.
79.
Murphy, J., and Cashman, K.D. (2002).  Selenium status of Irish adults:
Evidence of insufficiency. Irish Journal of Medical Science, 171(2),
81-84.
80.
Hagmar, L., Persson-Moschos, M., Akesson, B., and Schutz, A. (1998).
Plasma levels of selenium, selenoprotein P. and glutathione per-
oxidase and their correlations to fish intake and serum levels of
thyrotropin and thyroid hormones: A study on Latvian fish con-
sumers. European Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 52(11), 796-800.
81.
Voisin, A. (n.d.).  Grass Tetany. Chapter 12 Adrenaline, factor triggering
tetany. http://www.soilandhealth.org/01aglibrary/010106voisin/
010106gtchap21.html.
82.
Fujita, T. (1987).  Calcium and your health. Tokyo: Japan Publications.
83.
Voisin, op. cit.
84.
Foster, H.D. (1990).  Schizophrenia and esophageal cancer: Comments
on similarities in their spatial distributions. Journal of Orthomo-
lecular Medicine, 5(3), 129-134.
85.
Torrey, op. cit.
86.
Lohr, J.B., and Flynne, K. (1992).  Smoking and schizophrenia. Schizo-
phrenia Research, 8(2), 93-102.
87.
Anderson, K., Fuxe, K., Eneroth, P., Gustafsson, J.A., and Agnati, L.F.
(1980).  Mecamylamine induced blockade of nicotine induced in-
hibition of gonadotrophin and TSH secretion and of nicotine in-
duced increased catecholamine turnover in the rat hypothalamus.
Acta Physiologica Scandinavica Supplement, 479, 27-29.

203
88.
Amano, H., Goshima, Y., Akema, N., Ueda, H., Kubo, T., and Misu, Y.
(1989).  Effect of acute nicotine on catecholamine turnover in various
rat brain regions. Journal of Pharmacobio-dynamics, 12(1), 18-23.
89.
Dursun, S.M., and Kutcher, S. (1999).  Smoking, nicotine and psychi-
atric disorders: Evidence for therapeutic role, controversies and
implications for future research. Medical Hypotheses, 52(2), 101-
109.
90.
Yamafuji, K., Murakami, H., and Shizozuka, M. (1970).  Antitumor
activities of dupa, dopamine, noradrenaline or adrenaline and their
reaction with nucleic acids. Zeitschrift für Krebsforsschung und
Klinische Onkologic, 73(3), 195-203.
91.
Davis, D.L., and Hoel, D. (1990).  Trends in cancer mortality in industri-
alized countries. Annals of the York Academy of Sciences, 609. New
York: The New York Academy of Sciences.
92.
Hoffer, A., and Foster, H.D. (2000).  Why schizophrenics smoke but
have a lower incidence of lung cancer: Implications for the treat-
ment of both disorders. Journal of Orthomolecular Medicine, 15(3),
141-144.
93.
Matrix Pharmaceutical, Inc. (2000).  Matrix Updates Interim Phase II
Results for IntraDose in Primary Liver Cancer. http://archive.mail-
list.com/hbv_research/msg01155.html.
94.
Doctor’s Guide. Personal Edition, Stein, J. (2001).  DG Dispatch - WCM:
Intratumal IntraDose (Cisplatin/Epinephrine) Shows Promise in
Metastatic Malignant Melanoma. http://www.pslgroup.com/dg/
1f3ed2.htm.
95.
Doctor’s Guide. Personal Edition. Matrix Pharmaceutical Inc. (2001).
ASCO: IntraDose (Cisplatin/Epinephrine) Injectable Gel Demon-
strates Rapid Response in Head and Neck Cancer. http://www.
pslgroup.com/dg/1fb3c6.htm.
96.
Doctor’s Guide. Personal Edition (1998). IntraDose Shows Encouraging
Results for Malignant Melanoma and Breast cancer. http://www.
pslgroup.com/dg/c1e76.htm.
97.
The Schizophrenia Home Page. Schizophrenia patients’ insensitivity to
pain can be life threatening. http://www.schizophrenia.com/
newsletter/197/197pain.html.
98.
Jacob, B., Huckenbeck, W., Barz, J., and Bonte, W. (1990).  Death,
after swallowing and aspiration of a high number of foreign bod-
ies, in a schizophrenic woman. American Journal of Forensic Medi-
cal Pathology, 11(4), 331-335.
99.
Schwarz et al. (1956a), op cit.

204
100. Horrobin, D. (2002).  The Madness of Adam and Eve. London: Transworld
Publishers.
101. Ibid.
102. Ibid.
103. Ibid.
104. Ibid.
105. Yao, J.K., Leonard, S., and Reddy, R.D. (2000).  Membrane phospholi-
pid abnormalities in postmortem brains from schizophrenic pa-
tients. Schizophrenic Research, 42(1), 7-17.
106. Mahadik, S.P., and Mukherjee, S. (1996).  Free radical pathology and
antioxidant defense in schizophrenia: A review. Schizophrenia Re-
search 19(1), 1-17.
107. Pyroluria. http://www.drkaslow.com/html/pyroluria.html.
108. Singh and Kay, op. cit.
109. Fishbein, M., and Fishbein, J. (Eds.) (1985).  Fishbein’s Illustrated Medi-
cal Health Encyclopedia. Westport, CT: H.S. Stuttman.
110. Singh and Kay, op. cit.
111. Buckman et al., op. cit.
112. Foster, H.D. (2002).  Schizophrenia, thyroid hormones and selenium.
Journal of Orthomolecular Medicine, 17(1), 55-56.
113. Buka, S.L., Tsuang, M.T., Torrey, E.F., Klebanoff, M.A., Bernstein, D.,
and Yolken, R.H. (2001).  Maternal infections and subsequent psy-
chosis among offspring. Archives of General Psychiatry, 58(11),
1032-1037.
114. Kudelova, M., Rajcani, J., Pogady, J., and Sramka, M. (1988).  Herpes
simplex virus DNA in the brain of psychotic patients. Acta Virologica,
32(5), 455-460.
115. Brown, J.S. Jr. (1994).  Geographic correlation of schizophrenia to ticks
and tick-borne encephalitis. Schizophrenia Bulletin, 20(4), 755-775.
116. Fukuda, R., Sasaki, T., Kunugi, H., and Nanko, S. (1999).  No changes
in paired viral antibody titers during the course of acute schizo-
phrenia. Neuropsychobiology, 40(2), 57-62.
117. Engel, J.A., Zhang, J., Bergstrom, T., Conradi, N., Forkstam, C., Liljeroth,
A., and Svensson, L. (2000).  Neonatal herpes simples virus type 1
brain infection affects the development of sensorimotor gating in
rats. Brain Research 863(1-2), 233-240.

205
118. Oranje, B., Van Oel, C.J., Gispen-De Wied, C.C., Verbaten, M.N., and
Kahn, R.S. (2002).  Effects of typical and atypical antipsychotics
on the perpulse inhibition of the startle reflex in patients with schizo-
phrenia. Journal of Clinical Psychopharmacology, 22(4), 359-365.
119. Buka et al., op. cit.
120. Jaitovitch-Groisman, I., Fotouthi-Ardakani, N., Schecter, R.L., Woo, A.,
Alaoui-Jamali, M.A., and Batist, G. (2000).  Modulation of glutath-
ione S-transferase alpha by hepatitis B virus and the chemo-
preventive drug oltipraz. Journal of Biological Chemistry, 275(43),
33395-33403.
121. Ibid.
122. Baez, S., Seguar-Aguilar, J., Widersten, M., Johansson, A.S., and
Mannervik, B. (1997).  Glutathione transferases catalyse the de-
toxication of oxidized metabolites (o-quinones) of catecholamines
and may serve as an antioxidant system preventing degenerative
cellular processes. Biochemical Journal, 324(Pt.1), 25-28.
123. Buonocore, G., Perrone, S., and Bracci, R. (2001).  Free radicals and
brain damage in the newborn. Biology of the Neonate, 79(3-4), 180-
186.
124. Buka, op. cit.
125. Brown, op. cit.
126. Higaki, S., Gebhart, B.M., Lukiw, W.J., Thompson, H.W., and Hill, J.M.
(2002).  Effect of immunosuppression on gene expression in the
HSV-1 latently infected mouse trigeminal ganglion. Investigative
Ophthalmology and Visual Science, 43(6), 1862-1869.
127. Cott, A. (1971).  Controlled fasting treatment of schizophrenia. Schizo-
phrenia, 3, 2-10.
128. Sackler, M.D., Sackler, R.R., Sackler, A.M., and van Ophuijsen, H.H.W.
(1951).  The technique of histamine biochemotherapy and sugges-
tions for its use in psychiatry. Journal of Nervous and Mental Dis-
ease, 113, 40-51.
129. Pfeiffer, C.C. (1987).  Nutrition and mental illness: An orthomolecular
approach to balancing body chemistry. Rochester, VT: Healing Art
Press.
130. Danziger, cited by Hoffer, A. (2001).  Thyroid and schizophrenia. Journal
of Orthomolecular Medicine, 16(4), 205-212.
131. Simpson, G.M., and Amuso, D. (1966).  Treatment of chronic schizo-
phrenia with  triiodothyronine. Canadian Psychiatric Association
Journal, 11(4), 303-305.

206
132. Hoffer, A. (2001) op. cit.
133. Ibid.
134. Hoskins (1932), cited by Ibid.
135. Pfeiffer, op. cit.
136. Ragland et al., op. cit.
137. Pfeiffer, op. cit.
138. Hoffer (1998), op. cit.
139. Ibid.
140. Ibid.
141. Ibid.
142. McGrath, S.D., O’Brien, P.F., Power, P.J., and Shea, J.R. (1972).
Nicotinamide treatment of schizophrenia. Schizophrenia Bulletin,
5, 74-76.
143. McGrath, S.D. (1974).  Nicotinamide treatment: An addendum. Schizo-
phrenia Bulletin, 10, 5.
144. Toll, N. (1971).  Megavitamin therapy—A reader’s view. Schizophrenia
Bulletin, 4, 7.
145. Hoffer (1998), op. cit.
146. Pfeiffer, op. cit.
147. Hoffer (1998), op. cit.
148. Sargant, W., and Slater, E. (1944).  An introduction to physical methods
of treatment in psychiatry. Edinburgh: E. and S. Livingstone. The
insulin treatment of schizophrenia taken from this book is avail-
able on the Internet. http://www.priory.com/homol/insulin.htm.
149. Baumann, P., and MGaillard, J. (1976).  Insulin coma therapy: De-
crease of plasma tryptophan in man. Journal of Neural Transmis-
sion, 39(4), 309-313.
150. Hoffer (1998), op. cit.
151. Boiteux, J., Roubaud, L., Gandelet, N., Nezelof, S., Vittouris, N., Bonin,
B., Sechter, D., and Bizouard, P. (1997).  Indications for electro-
convulsive therapy. Encephale, 23(Spec. No. 3): 21-26.
152. Tripodianakis, J., Markianos, M., Sarantidis, D., and Agouridaki, M.
(2002).  Biogenic amine turnover and serum cholesterol in suicide
attempts. European Archives of Psychiatry and Clinical Neurosci-
ence, 252(1): 38-43.

207
153. Horrobin, D.F. (2002).  Evidence-based medicine and the need for non-
commercial clinical research directed towards therapeutic inno-
vation. Experimental Biology and Medicine, 227(7), 435-437.
154. Schizophrenia. http://faculty.washington.edu/chudler/schiz.html.
155. Ibid.
156. Hoffer (1998), op. cit.
157. Pfeiffer, op. cit.
158. Danziger, cited by Hoffer, op. cit.
159. Horrobin, D.F. (1969).  Science is God. Aylesbury: Medical and Techni-
cal Publishing Company.

208
And slowly answer’d Arthur from the barge:
“The old order changeth, yielding place to new,
And God fulfils himself in many ways,
Lest one good custom should corrupt the world.”
The Idylls of the King
The Passing of Arthur
Alfred, Lord Tennyson

209
THE TIMES THEY ARE A CHANGING
15
The escalating costs of the health care system will
bankrupt both states and individuals.  These costs
largely arise because we are spending vast amounts
on marginally useful treatments that ensure that pa-
tients return to the health care system again and again.
The only way this will change is if we find dramati-
cally effective treatments that remove patients from
the health care system altogether.  And the only way
to make such discoveries will be to test greater num-
bers of scientifically much more diverse approaches
to treatment.  That, I believe, is the ethical imperative
of all involved in medical research.  And because the
introduction of highly effective treatments is the only
possible basis for a dramatic reduction in costs, it
happens to be a financial imperative as well.
D.F. Horrobin (2002)1
On October 27, 2000, King County in Washington State, by a
vote of 11 to 1, passed a very unusual ordinance.2  This di-
rected psychiatrists working in the state mental health system
to make their patients well and to report annually on how suc-
cessful they had been in achieving this goal.  The ordinance
defined exactly what was to be considered a mental health
recovery.  Such a former patient had to be able to meet four
criteria.  They must have become well enough to engage in
volunteer work, or be employed full or part-time, or be en-
gaged in culturally appropriate activities, or be pursuing edu-
cational or vocational opportunities.  Secondly, a recovered

210
mental patient had to be living independently or in supported
housing.  Thirdly, they must have been discharged from the
county’s publicly funded mental health system or, at most, be
receiving only infrequent maintenance services.  Lastly, when
tested they must be able to score 81 or more on the Global
Assessment of Function Scale.  This scale measures such things
as aggression, ability to communicate, and level of personal
hygiene.
It is now some 3 years since this ordinance was passed and the
required initial report on the efficacy of the system has been
issued,3 covering the period January 1 through December 31,
2001.  King County, Washington is not a rural backwater.  It is
one of the most progressive counties in the US, the location of
Seattle.  So what did the residents of King County get for the
more than $90 million they spent on mental health in 2001?
According to the first mandated report, 7,831 mental patients,
mainly schizophrenics and patients with major depression,
were treated during the year.  Of these, 6,949 (88.7%) showed
no change, 597 (8%) displayed some improvement, 285 (4%)
regressed, and four (0.05%) recovered.  Put another way, if
you suffered from schizophrenia, major depression, or other
mental illness in King County during 2001, your chance of a
full recovery was less that one in one thousand.  That is, the
residents of the Seattle area are paying over $22 million for
each mental health recovery.  In Medieval times, victims of the
bubonic plague had a far better chance of recovery than this.
Treated with hot onion, fig, and treacle poultices or partially
plucked pigeons to draw off poisons from their swollen lymph
nodes, they were much more likely to completely recover than
schizophrenics receiving the best treatments that modern psy-
chiatry has to offer.4  If you believe that this is acceptable,
throw this book away.  If not, seriously consider the alternative
treatments that stem from an acceptance of the adrenochrome
hypotheses.

211
IMPLICATIONS OF THESE STATISTICS
I am now going to plagiarize from myself, almost repeating a
couple of pages that were written for What Really Causes Aids.5
These sentiments are just as relevant here as they were to
the discussion of why HIV-1 is powering the global pandemic.
Health has become the end product of applied science in which
answers to every human illness can be discovered ultimately
by laboratory research.  Thomas6 best expressed belief in this
biomedical paradigm when he claimed:  “For every disease there
is a single key mechanism that dominates all others.  If one
can find it and then think one’s way around it, one can control
the disorder.”  In truth, the situation is not so simple, whether
the ultimate agent of mortality is an earthquake, automobile,
genetic aberration, or virus.7  To illustrate, if asked the ques-
tion “Why did Marie Antoinette die?” one could reasonably reply,
“She had her head cut off by a guillotine.”  However, a more
comprehensive list of causes of her early demise would have to
include every event that led to the invention and development
of this instrument of execution, all of the factors that provoked
the French Revolution and the Reign of Terror associated with
it, each step in the evolution of humanity that gave our species
the brains and bodies capable of designing and constructing
the guillotine, and so on ad infinitum.  In truth, as pointed out
by Bohm,8 while we usually choose to ignore the vast cascade
of variables that stand behind any event, it is still important to
accept that no single cause and effect relationship can really
be separated from the universe as a whole.  Like the strands
that make up a rope, events converge and combine to create an
evermore binding set of circumstances, that, in total, produce
some eventual consequence, whether a pandemic, avalanche,
or chronic schizophrenia.
Growing acceptance of this interconnectedness of reality has
had important repercussions in disaster planning.9  As this

212
discipline matured, emphasis tended to move away from the
development of optimum methods of trying to deal with the
destruction, deaths, and injuries caused by hazards towards
greater emphasis on preventing disaster.  Ultimately, this trend
will have to lead to the design of more resilient systems, capa-
ble of withstanding stress with grace.10
It is clear from the cure rate admitted to by the King County
mental health system that psychiatry is failing badly.  A new
approach is obviously essential; one that recognizes the holis-
tic nature of mental health and, therefore, of necessity our
answers to its problems.  If, for example, we ask the question
“Why did John Doe die a chronic schizophrenic?” one could
reasonably answer that “He inherited an unfortunate genetic
aberration.”  A more realistic list of the causes of this fate,
however, would have to include his allergy to latex, cows milk,
or gluten or some other allergen that encouraged the oxida-
tion of his adrenaline.  In addition, John Doe over-produced
adrenaline because of his stressful lifestyle and poor diet that
provided too much sugar and too few vitamins and minerals.
However, the inadequacy of his diet was due, at least in part,
to the Green Revolution and its overuse of fertilizers and to the
impact of acid rain and heavy metal pollutants on soils.  But
didn’t John Doe die a chronic schizophrenic because of a medi-
cal profession that failed to accept the obvious:  that there is
no dopamine excess in schizophrenia?  This outdated, errone-
ous paradigm has misdirected efforts to block the ravages of
schizophrenia by the use of drugs, which themselves have pro-
duced a wide range of dangerous side effects.  Then again,
John Doe became a chronic schizophrenic because of a politi-
cal complacency that ignored pollution, environmental decay,
and ever increasing noise, while simultaneously under fund-
ing the treatment of the mentally ill, forcing John Doe onto
the streets, homeless and malnourished.  The list of reasons
that John Doe died a chronic schizophrenic is almost endless.

213
In truth, he died alone, talking to himself, lying in an alley
because we live in a virtual reality world, and so did he, until
reality came crashing through his delusions.
THE “IDEAL” TREATMENT FOR SCHIZOPHRENIA
The “ideal” treatment for schizophrenia should involve eight
steps, designed to reduce the production of adrenaline and
slow down its metabolism to adrenochrome and other toxic
indoles.  Such a treatment should also attempt to reduce the
further biochemical abnormalities that result from either an
excess of adrenochrome and its metabolites, or from other im-
pacts of the four genetic aberrations that appear associated
with this mental illness.
Treatment Facilities: Step One
Ideally, schizophrenics should be treated in quiet, rural areas
where the air is relatively unpolluted.  Such facilities should
be located in selenium-enriched regions where the water is
hard (high calcium and magnesium) and hours of strong sun-
shine high.   They should be staffed by doctors and nurses who
are willing to treat the patients with dignity and to provide
them, when possible, with meaningful work opportunities.
Many schizophrenics are over-oxidizing adrenaline because of
allergic reactions to the environment.  They need extra-special
surroundings because of such sensitivities.  Ideally, a treat-
ment clinic would be like the Lange Meridian Center11 which
was built using Bau-Biologie principles.12  Bau-Biologie is a
German term meaning “building biology,” or “the relationship
between buildings and life.”  This concept is promoted by the
Institut für Baubiologie und Ökologie in Neubeuern, Germany.

214
Its major aim is to design and construct homes and work-
places that enhance health.  The Meridian Center of Santa
Monica, California applies such principles.  Its carpets, for
example, are hypoallergenic nylon and do not contain formal-
dehyde, moth proofing, stain repellents, pesticides, or any of
the other toxic additives often used to treat carpets.  All aspects
of the clinic’s interior including walls, paints, ceiling tiles, fur-
niture, doors, fabrics, lighting, water, electrical installation,
paper, gowns, cleaning products, and even decorative plants
were selected because of their extremely low environmental
toxicity.  Some may even contribute to good human health.
The basic principle behind such Bau-Biologie mental health
clinics should be that they be expected to encourage positive
regeneration, acting as healing places for the mind, spirit, and
body.  They should be low stress facilities where a schizophrenic
is not subjected to environmental stimuli that are likely to en-
courage adrenaline production or its oxidation to adrenochrome
and its metabolites.
Genetic Screening: Step Two
All roads lead to Rome.  All genetic aberrations occurring with
abnormal frequency in schizophrenia appear either to lead to
elevated adrenochrome and its derivatives or to an inability to
withstand their impacts.  It has been suggested here that there
are at least four genetic aberrations that increase the risk of
developing schizophrenia.  To recap, these are:  homozygosity
for the Val-COMPT allele (the gene encoding catechol-0-methyl-
transferase); the GSTMI*0 allele (a catalyst for adrenochrome);
MTHFR C677TT (which reduces the metabolism of homo-
cysteine) and a variant of the Nogo gene (with three extra chemi-
cal bases, known as CAA).
It is theoretically possible to determine the state of the chromo-
somes and indeed of the genes of a developing fetus.13  A fine

215
needle is used to withdraw amniotic fluid and some of the
embryo’s cells.  After culturing, these are available for diag-
nostic tests.  Not only can chromosomes be examined by light
microscopy, but also the base sequences can be chemically
analysed to determine whether a chromosome carries an in-
creased risk of disorders such as Huntington’s chorea, mus-
cular dystrophy, or haemophilia.  It is quite possible that such
testing could look for the four aberrations just listed and iden-
tify a predisposition to schizophrenia in the developing fetus.
It is now possible to remove total cells and then genetically
manipulate them by inserting selected DNA segments from
other human body cells with the aid of a vector.  After they
have been multiplied in culture, they can be replaced into the
fetus.14  In theory, therefore, it may be possible, sometime in
the future, to modify the genes of potential schizophrenics.  As
yet, this is science fiction and may remain so for a consider-
able time since gene therapy has, to date, promised far more
than it has delivered.
Even though such genetic therapy may still lie in the distant
future for schizophrenics, genetic screening does not.  An es-
sential early step in the treatment of an acute schizophrenic
would appear to be genetic screening.  This should be con-
ducted to determine which, if any, of the four predisposing
genetic aberrations are present.  This information is critical to
designing optimum future treatment.  Even if such genetic
facilities are unavailable, there appears to be a great deal to
be gained from determining a patient’s dominant biochemical
abnormalities and their associated symptoms.  Pfeiffer,15 for
example, has provided lists of physical characteristics that can
be utilized to identify various subgroups of schizophrenics.  To
illustrate, he considered histapenics (low histamine, but with a
high body burden of copper) typically to have canker sores, and
excess fat in their lower extremities, experience difficulty with
orgasms, ringing in the ears, and an ability to withstand pain.

216
In contrast, histadelic patients (excessive histamine) typically
overproduce mucus and saliva, have a tendency to hyperactiv-
ity, can hear their own pulse on the pillow at night, tolerate a
lot of alcohol, have large ears and long toes and fingers, and
experience easy orgasms.  Pfeiffer16 gives far more detail on
the characteristics of his various subgroups of schizophrenics
in his excellent book Nutrition and Mental Illness: An Orthomo-
lecular Approach to Balancing Body Chemistry.  His insights
should be used to classify schizophrenics, even if genetic data
is available.  It seems likely that eventually a classification of
schizophrenics involving genetic, biochemical, and behavioural
abnormalities will be developed.
Allergy Testing: Step Three
Almost anything that is ingested, inhaled, or touched by a sus-
ceptible person can trigger allergies.  Such allergens include
drugs, foods, and their additives and colourings, insects, dust,
plants moulds, household cleaners, metals, fabrics, latex, and
industrial vapours.17  In susceptible individuals such substances
can result in one of four types of antibody-mediated reactions.18
In Type I (IgE-Mediated) Immediate Hypersensitivity allergies,
the antibody immunoglobulin E (IgE) is produced within min-
utes of exposure.  When an allergic individual breaths in the
pollen or other allergen causing their problem, their immune
system signals B lymphocytes to produce IgE antibodies spe-
cifically designed to target the allergen’s protein molecules.
These IgE antibodies then become attached to the surfaces of
mast cells in the respiratory and gastrointestinal tracts and to
eosinophils, comparable cells in the bloodstream.  During fu-
ture exposures, the allergen will bind to the waiting IgE anti-
body receptors, triggering the release of histamine from mast
cells and eosinophils.  As a result, swelling, itching, redness,
pain, watery eyes and nose, muscle contractions, and capil-
lary permeability occurs as the body tries to rid itself of the

217
allergen.  Such reactions also appear to be linked to the rapid
oxidation of adrenaline to adrenochrome.19
Type I “classic” allergies are usually the result of reactions to
airborne allergens including mould, pollen, dust mites, and
animal dander.  The same type of allergic reactions are also
caused, in some people, by milk, eggs, corn, nuts, peanuts,
strawberries, and chocolate.  Pharmaceuticals such as penicil-
lin (derived from mould) and aspirin, together with insect stings
and latex, can also cause the worst form of Type I allergic
reaction, anaphylaxis.20  This requires immediate adrenaline
injections to reverse the symptoms caused, in part, by the rapid
oxidation of adrenaline to adrenochrome.
In Type II, Cytotoxic Allergies, antibodies inject toxic protein
enzymes (cytotoxin) into antigen cells, killing them.  If this
process occurs in blood or tissue cells, it can result in im-
mune hemolytic anaemia when too many red blood cells die.
Intestinal cells often suffer the most damage from cytotoxic
reactions because many of the allergens involved are foods.
In Type III, Arthus Allergies, the reaction may occur as much a
10 days after exposure.  As in Type II, the antibody IgG binds
to an invading protein, but in this case forms a circulating
immune complex.  In persons with weakened immunity, such
complexes can build up in the bloodstream.  If the kidneys
cannot adequately excrete them, they accumulate in the soft
tissues, causing inflammation and symptoms such as hives,
joint pain, headaches, fatigue, and even arthritis.  It is esti-
mated that approximately 80 percent of food allergies are Type
III reactions.21
In Type IV, Cell-Mediated Allergies, symptoms typically appear
2 to 3 days following exposure.  The main triggers of such
allergies are various plants, including poison ivy, and some

218
pharmaceutical drugs.  These allergies can result in allergic
contact dermatitis, allergic colitis, Crohn’s disease, and graft-
transplant rejections.  In such Type IV reactions, T cells directly
attack an antigen.  Since it takes about a day for the body to
amass adequate T cells in the affected area, allergic symptoms
(usually allergic contact dermatitis) are experienced some 1 to
3 days after exposure.  Approximately 3,000 substances are
known to be able to cause this type of allergy, ranging from
mercury and nickel, through rubber and plastic, hair dyes,
cosmetics, and latex.  Various foods, such as pineapples,
bananas, papaya, kiwi, and avocado, are also contact aller-
gens in some sensitive individuals.22
It is quite likely, therefore, that a schizophrenic is oxidizing
adrenaline to adrenochrome as the result of one or more of
these types of allergic reactions.23  A Bau-Biologie clinic may
greatly reduce exposure to such allergen(s), resulting in a de-
cline in psychotic symptoms.  If not, there appear to be two
necessary treatment steps.  The first of these is fasting, in a
manner similar to that used by Nickolayev at the Moscow Psy-
chiatric Institute.24  This will allow the body to recover from
diet-related allergies.  Foods should be returned to the diet one
at a time after the fast is over.  When eating a food to which
they are allergic, a schizophrenic’s symptoms may quickly re-
appear.  Other symptoms may take several days to reoccur, as,
for example, in the case of certain grains.  Once a patient has
been shown to be allergic to a particular food, it should be
permanently avoided, although it may be possible to develop
less sensitivity to it with treatment.25
In addition to fasting, there are a multiplicity of available ways
to identify allergens.  The simplest of these is taking a patient
history including the circumstances surrounding original symp-
toms.  Others include the scratch or prick skin text, the patch
test, serial endpoint titration (SET), the radio allergosorbent

219
test (RAST), ELISA Test, cytotoxic testing, the ALCAT, provoca-
tive neutralization, and electrodermal screening (EDS).  This is
not the place to review the merits and drawbacks of such tests,
but all are discussed in Allergy Free: An Alternative Medicine
Definitive Guide.26  What is important here is the need to iden-
tify what, if anything, an acute schizophrenic is allergic to and
then to treat them by completely removing, when possible, this
allergen from their environments and/or diet.  It should be no
surprise to find that some patients are very allergic to a wide
variety of foods.  Jackson and colleagues,27 for example, reported
on the case of an 11 year old boy who suffered greatly from
agitation, asthma, attention deficit disorder, diarrhea, fatigue,
sleep problems, and muscle aches.  He was found to be posi-
tive in 49 out of 90 cytotoxic food/chemical sensitivity tests.
He recovered on a carefully controlled diet and natural thyroid,
mineral, and vitamin supplements.
Low Sugar Diet: Step Four
Not only are specific food allergens of concern in the schizo-
phrenic diet, but so too is sugar.  It may be recollected that
many of the recovered schizophrenics felt that they had for-
merly suffered from hypoglycemia.  The western diet has been
increasingly dominated by sugar.  The per capita consump-
tion in the US, for example, has increased by roughly a factor
of 20 since 1822.28  Hypoglycemia, as a result, is now rampant.
This elevated dietary intake of sugar stimulates the body to
release insulin which in turn drives the blood sugar levels down,
encouraging the adrenal glands to release adrenaline.29-30  It
follows, therefore, that anyone suffering from the large blood
sugar swings that characterize hypoglycemia is going to over-
produce adrenaline.  In individuals with one of the genetic ab-
errations seen in schizophrenia, this may result in psychosis,
caused by adrenaline’s oxidation to adrenochrome and other
toxic metabolites.

220
It follows, therefore, that the schizophrenic diet should be de-
signed to avoid any foods to which the patient is allergic, while
simultaneously greatly reducing sugar consumption.  It should
be remembered that, as early as 1924, Harris31 discovered that
the best way to control hypoglycemia was through small, high
protein, low-sugar meals, eaten frequently.
Adrenochrome Reduction: Step Five
The orthomolecular physician treating schizophrenia is faced
with two basic, yet distinct challenges.  Firstly, they must quickly
reduce the destructive impacts of excess adrenochrome and its
derivatives.  Secondly, they must address the other biochemi-
cal anomalies that are directly related not to such indoles, but
to the genetic aberration encouraging their overproduction.  In
schizophrenics with the MTHFR C 677TT variant, for example,
the patient will also be suffering from depressed methionine
and elevated homocysteine.
There appear to be several avenues for lowering excess adreno-
chrome levels.  Hoffer,32 for example, uses high doses of niacin
or niacinamide, up to 32 grams daily, to reduce adrenochrome.
This goal can also be achieved by the use of the other natural
methyl acceptors thiamine (vitamin B1), riboflavin (vitamin B2),
and ubiquinone (Coenzyme Q10).  Niacin is usually the treat-
ment of choice.  The oxidation of adrenaline to adrenochrome
occurs in two steps.  Initially, adrenaline loses one electron to
form oxidized adrenaline, a highly reactive molecule.  In the
presence of nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide, which is cre-
ated in both oxidized (NAD) and reduced forms (NADH) from
niacin, oxidized adrenaline recaptures one electron to reform
adrenaline.  If NAD and NADH are in short supply, however,
oxidized adrenaline loses another electron and is converted to
adrenochrome.  This second reaction is not reversible.  Adreno-
chrome, therefore, cannot be converted back to adrenaline.

221
High levels of niacin, therefore, help prevent the formation of
adrenochrome.
There is another good reason for giving niacin to schizophren-
ics.  On average, the human body requires 60 milligrams of
tryptophan to manufacture one gram of niacin.33  Tryptophan
is also needed to metabolize serotonin, another adrenochrome
antagonist.  It follows, therefore, that if the schizophrenic pa-
tient is being supplied with high doses of niacin, then more
tryptophan is likely to be converted to serotonin, also lowering
adrenochrome levels.  It should be recalled, however, that se-
rotonin has a Jekyll and Hyde relationship with adrenochrome,
only reducing its production when present at levels that ex-
ceed those of the indole.
Another adrenochrome antagonist, triiodothyronine, appears
to be very effective in treating schizophrenia.  As reported by
Danziger,34 every one of the 80 schizophrenics who had been ill
for 6 months or less, who took between 120 to 1,200 milli-
grams of desiccated thyroid daily for at least 100 days, recov-
ered, suffering relapses only if they later discontinued their
medication.  These doses may seem high, but it should be re-
membered that schizophrenics are known to be very resistant
to thyroid medications.
Treatment might also involve attempts to directly raise body
levels of another adrenochrome antagonist, serotonin.  If sero-
tonin is not provided as a supplement, its metabolism could
be encouraged by the consumption of foods that are high in
tryptophan,35 for example, beans, cod, pork, soybeans, and
cheese (provided that the patient is not allergic to them).  In
addition, every effort should be made to repair the antioxidant
defence system, increasing glutathione peroxidase, catalase,
and superoxide dismutase activity.  In What Really Causes
AIDS,36 a detailed discussion is provided on how the body’s

222
glutathione peroxidase production can be stimulated with sup-
plements and a diet enriched with tryptophan, glutamine,
cysteine, and selenium.  A small number of orthomolecular
physicians are reporting a dramatic improvement in schizo-
phrenics treated with injected glutathione.37  This can not be
taken orally because it is broken down in the digestive tract.
However, this adrenochrome antagonist appears to be very
effective when injected.
Mitigation of Other Biochemical Abnormalities: Step Six
Many of the biochemical “dominoes” in schizophrenia are part
of the cascades that occur as adrenochrome and its metabo-
lites interfere with normal levels of serotonin, triiodothyrine,
glutamine, and other components of the antioxidant defence
system.  It seems reasonable, therefore, to anticipate that
orthomolecular treatments, designed to reduce levels of the
toxin adrenochrome, will automatically correct many of these
abnormalities.  Some, however, are not due directly to excess
adrenochrome, but accompany the genetic abnormalities that
help create it.  This is why step two, genetic screening, is so
important.
To illustrate, schizophrenics with the GSTM1*0 allele are very
likely to overproduce adrenochrome.38  The treatments just
described, for example triiodothyronine, niacin, and injected
glutathione, may be capable of correcting this problem.  How-
ever, it is still possible that this genetic aberration may result
in deficiencies or excesses of other catecholamines.  This is an
issue that needs to be explored further in such patients if a
reduction of adrenochrome alone does not result in a com-
plete return to health.
Similarly, schizophrenics with the MTHFR C677TT variant of
the gene encoding for methylenetetrahydrofolate will suffer from

223
an excess of homocysteine and a deficiency of methionine,39
even if treatment reduces adrenochrome levels.  Clearly, since
these imbalances will have major adverse impacts separately,
they also need to be corrected.  It seems likely that such schizo-
phrenics would have been classified as suffering from histadelia
by Pfeiffer,40 whose treatment for this mental illness included
500 milligrams of methionine.  Such treatment would help to
elevate methionine levels but might also result in more homo-
cysteine production.  Since the remethylation (or detoxifica-
tion) of homocysteine requires folic acid, vitamin B12, zinc,
and trimethylglycine,41 it is likely that schizophrenics with this
genetic aberration will require high doses of these nutrients.
Choline is a further methyl donor that can help to lower homo-
cysteine levels, but largely in the liver and kidney.  Folic acid,
vitamin B12, and the other cofactors are still needed to protect
the brain and heart.
Many schizophrenics have a low activity associated COMT-L
allele that may cause epinephrine and metanephrine abnor-
malities42 which may need to be addressed, in addition to any
adrenochrome imbalance.  It would appear that Pfeiffer’s43 pro-
tocols would be a good place to begin when searching for treat-
ments for remedies for biochemical abnormalities above and
beyond those due to excess adrenochrome and its metabolites.
His treatments are described in detail in The Schizophrenias:
Ours to Conquer—Nutrition and Mental Illness and in Mental
Illness: The Nutritional Connection.44-45
Repairing the Damage: Step Seven
Adrenochrome excess and the other biochemical abnormali-
ties that occur in schizophrenia can eventually cause serious
damage to the thyroid gland as well as the brain itself.46  Long
term chronic patients are, therefore, much more difficult to
treat successfully.  This task might not be impossible, but it

224
will almost certainly require higher doses of orthomolecular
nutrients, taken for longer periods, before improvement be-
comes apparent.
One of the major problems in chronic schizophrenia is the
development of brain atrophy, associated with large fluid filled
spaces known as ventricles.  Buckman and coworkers47 pro-
vided evidence that blood levels of the selenoenzyme glutath-
ione peroxidase have a strong negative correlation with
computer tomography scan measures of such brain damage.
Simply put, the less blood glutathione peroxidase, the greater
the brain damage in chronic schizophrenics.  Obviously, one
treatment strategy worth trying is supplementation with the
four nutrients, selenium, cysteine, glutamine, and tryptophan,
that the body requires to produce glutathione peroxidase.48
Injected glutathione may be of value.
Rudin and colleagues49 reported some success in the treat-
ment of schizophrenics with linseed oil, although they pointed
out that the amount given was critical.  Overdosing can ap-
parently make the illness worse.  Unheated linseed oil, of
course, contains high levels of alpha linolenic acid, which is
necessary for prostaglandin production.  Interestingly, Rudin
and coworkers50 have argued that supplementing the diets of
schizophrenics with essential fatty acids is only successful
when the patient’s selenium levels are optimum.  To quote
them directly,50 “If a primate is deficient in the antioxidant
element selenium, providing supplemental essential fatty ac-
ids will only make the selenium deficiency worse.  Whatever
selenium stores are in the body will be used up the much
sooner in an attempt to protect the EFA (Essential Fatty Acids)
from oxidative damage.”  Clearly, if essential fatty acids are
going to be given to schizophrenics in attempts to reduce ven-
tricle damage, they should be preceded by high levels of sele-
nium supplementation.

225
There is growing evidence that eicosapentaenoic acid can re-
pair ventricle damage in chronic schizophrenics, leading to an
improvement in their mental health.51-54  Horrobin55 argues that
there is excess activity of phospholipase A2 in schizophrenia.
This is thought to remove highly unsaturated fatty acids, such
as arachidonic acid, from nerve cell membranes.  Excess phos-
pholipase A2 activity has been identified in the plasma, red
cells, and brains of schizophrenics and low arachidonic acid
has been found in the brains of people with this illness.
Eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA) is a natural intermediate in hu-
man metabolism that will inhibit phospholipase A2 produc-
tion, so helping to preserve highly unsaturated fats such as
arachidonic acid.  EPA occurs naturally in fish oils, but so too
do other substances that antagonize it.  However, certain fish
oils, such as Kirunal, are particularly high in EPA and low in
its antagonists.  Pure EPA (LAX-101) is also available.56  Sev-
eral studies have shown that EPA can cause substantial im-
provements in schizophrenics, without adverse side effects.  In
about 40 percent of unmedicated schizophrenics, EPA (by it-
self) can control symptoms with the use of antipsychotic drugs.
In chronic patients who had been unresponsive to normal treat-
ment, EPA also was associated with more improvement than
could be produced by conventional drugs.57  In one of Horrobin’s
presentations that I attended, he showed slides of a patient’s
brain scans, taken at various times while they were receiving
EPA.  When these scans were superimposed, it was very obvi-
ous that treatment with this essential fatty acid was repairing
brain ventricle damage.  It seems likely that EPA would be even
more effective if it was given together with supplements, in-
cluding selenium, which were designed to elevate glutathione
peroxidase activity.
It is clear that damage is not restricted to the brain in chronic
schizophrenics.  All of these patients also appear to suffer from
extensive thyroid abnormalities.58  I do not know how to repair

226
a damaged thyroid gland.  If this is impossible, significant
behavioural improvements can only be expected when using a
protocol that includes continuous desiccated thyroid gland sup-
plementation.
Repairing the Soul: Step Eight
A society can best be judged by the way in which it treats its
weakest and most vulnerable members.  Traditionally, the men-
tally ill were ejected from the main stream and isolated in badly
run, inhumane asylums.  Considered “crazy,” “insane,” and
“nuts,” they were society’s victims.  In movies they played the
role of monsters.59  They appeared in the news as perpetrators
of murders or bizarre crimes.  Recovering schizophrenics are
still one of the few groups that society feels free to abuse,
ostracize, and discriminate against.60  While it is socially ac-
ceptable to admit to cancer, heart disease, multiple sclerosis,
or Parkinson’s disease, to admit to schizophrenia is to invite
fear and derision.
To recover, schizophrenics need orthomolecular treatments,
vitamins, minerals, essential fatty acids, and hormones.  These
are rarely covered under medical plans and because of their
illness, most schizophrenics are too poor to afford them.  To
recover, schizophrenics need stress free environments.  Many
are now on the streets, in prison, or in overcrowded wards.
To recover, schizophrenics need low sugar diets that are free
of allergens.  Many are in prison eating junk foods, in hospitals
eating what passes for food there, or on the streets rummaging
around in garbage cans looking for their next meal.  To recover,
schizophrenics need employment, respect, and compassion.
All too often they receive rejection, abuse, and derision.61

227
SUMMARY
This chapter presents an eight step approach to improving the
cure rate for schizophrenia.  The approach includes treatment
in clinics designed using Bau-Biologie principles, genetic screen-
ing to identify the aberration involved, and allergy testing.
Treatments should provide diets free of allergens and low in
sugar.  Patients should also receive orthomolecular antago-
nists of adrenochrome and its metabolites and of the other
biochemical abnormalities seen in this mental illness.  Brain
repair can be encouraged by glutathione peroxidase and
eicosapentaenoic acid, while desiccated thyroid is required to
compensate for the poorly functioning thyroid glands which
are characteristic of schizophrenia.  Recovering schizophren-
ics need peaceful, low stress environments, respectable shel-
ter, meaningful work, and respect.  They do not need abuse,
derision, and social abandonment.
REFERENCES
1.
Horrobin, D.F. (2002). Evidence-based medicine and the need for non-
commercial clinical research directed towards therapeutic innova-
tion. Experimental Biology and Medicine. 227(7), 435-437.
2.
Safe Harbor.  Alternative Mental Health On-line.  King County, WA,
Ordinance Requiring Psychiatrists to Make People Well: Passed
October 16, 2000.  Ordinance 13974. Sponsors, Pullen, Fimia,
Gossett, and Irons. http://www.alternativementalhealth.com/
articles/article_KingsCounty.htm.
3.
Safe Harbor. Alternative Mental Health News Issue 28, November, 2002.
County Mental Health System Achieves Almost No Recoveries.
ezine@alternativementalhealth.com.
4.
Braum, L.L. (Ed.) (1979).  Plague or pestulence or pest. Funk and
Wagnall’s New Encyclopedia, 19, 166-167.
5.
Foster, H.D. (2002).  What really causes AIDS.  Victoria, BC: Trafford
Publishing.
6.
Thomas, L. (1979). The medusa and the snail. New York: Viking.

228
7.
Foster, H.D. (1994).  Disease as disaster. Interdisciplinary Science Re-
views, 19(3), 237-254.
8.
Bohm, cited by M. Talbot (1991).  The holographic universe. New York:
Harper Collins.
9.
Foster, H.D. (1980).  Disaster planning: The preservation of life and
property. New York: Springer Verlag.
10.
Foster, H.D. (1997).  The ozymandias principles: Thirty-one strategies for
surviving change. Victoria, BC: Southdowne Press.
11.
Kail, K., Lawrence, B. (with Goldberg, B.) (2000).  Allergy free: An alter-
native medicine definitive guide. Tiburon, CA: AlternativeMedicine.
com Books
12.
Baubiologic Home Study Course. http://www.bau-biologieusa.com/def.
html.
13.
Grünewald, P. (1994).  Genetic engineering and medicine. http://www.
anth.org/ifgene/grun2.htm.
14.
Ibid.
15.
Pfeiffer, C. (1987).  Nutrition and mental illness: An orthomolecular ap-
proach to balancing body chemistry. Rochester, VT: Healing Arts
Press.
16.
Ibid.
17.
Kail et al., op. cit.
18.
Ibid.
19.
Matthews, S.B., Hallet, M.B., Henderson, A.H., and Campbell, A.K.
(1985).  The adrenochrome pathway. A potential catabolic route
for adrenaline metabolism in inflammatory disease. Advances in
Myocardiology, 6, 367-381.
20.
Kail et al., op. cit.
21.
Ibid.
22.
Ibid.
23.
Matthews et al., op. cit.
24.
Cott, A. (1971).  Controlled fasting treatment of schizophrenia. Schizo-
phrenia, 3, 2-10.
25.
Kail et al., op. cit.
26.
Ibid.
27.
Jackson, J.A., Hunninghake, R.E., Riorden, H.D., and Doran, L. (1995).
Agitation, allergies and attention deficit disorder in an 11-year old
boy. Journal of Orthomolecular Medicine, 10(3), 130.

229
28.
Schauss, A. (1980).  Diet, crime and delinquency. Berkeley, CA: Parker
House.
29.
Watt, M.J., and Hargreaves, M. (2002).  Effect of epinephrine on glucose
disposal during excercise in humans: Role of muscle glycogen.
American Journal of Physiology, Endocrinology and Metabolism,
283(3), E578-583.
30.
Vicini, P., Avogaro, A., Spilker, M.E., Gallo, A., and Cobelli, C. (2002).
Epinephrine effects on insulin-glucose dynamics: The labelled
IVGTT (introvenous glucose tolerance test) two—compartment mini-
mal model approach. American Journal of Physiology, Endocrinology
and Metabolism, 283(1), E78-84.
31.
Schauss, op. cit.
32.
Hoffer, A. (1998).  Vitamin B-3 schizophrenia: Discovery recovery contro-
versy. Kingston, ON: Quarry Press.
33.
Ibid.
34.
Danziger, cited by Hoffer, A. (2001).  Thyroid and schizophrenia. Jour-
nal of Orthomolecular Medicine, 16(4), 205-212.
35.
Foster (2002), op. cit.  The details of nutrient levels in foods that are
provided in this book were obtained using NutriCircles for Windows,
Version 4.21.  This software is produced by Drs. E.H. Strickland
and Donald R. Davis, Strickland Computer Consulting.
36.
Ibid.
37.
Hoffer, A.  Personal communication, November 22, 2002.
38.
Harada, S., Tachikawa, H., and Kawanishi, Y. (2001).  Glutathione S-
transferase M1 gene deletion may be associated with susceptibil-
ity to certain forms of schizophrenia. Biochemical and Biophysical
Research Communications, 281, 267-271.
39.
Arinami, T., Yamada, N., Yamakawa-Kobayashi, K., Hameguchi, H., and
Toru, M. (1997).  Methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase variant and
schizophrenia/depression. Journal of Medical Genetics, 74(5), 526-
528.
40.
Pfeiffer, op. cit.
41.
Life Extension Foundation Weekly Update November 15, 2002. Protocol
Homocysteine LifeExtension@16.6centrol.com.
42.
Weinberger, et al. cited in Sawa, A., and Snyer, S.H. (2002).  Schizo-
phrenia: Diverse approaches to a complex disease. Science, 296,
692-695.
43.
Pfeiffer, op. cit.
44.
Pfeiffer, C., Mailloux, R., and Forsythe, L. (1970).  The schizophrenias:
Ours to conquer. Wichita, KS: Bio-Communications Press.

230
45.
Pfeiffer, op. cit.
46.
Skoliarova, N.A. (1975).  Morphology of the endocrine system in schizo-
phrenia according to early autopsy findings (the Hypophyseal -
Thyroid System). Zhurnal Neuropatologii Psikhiatrii Imeni S S
Korakova 75(7), 1045-1053 (In Russian, abstract only consulted).
47.
Buckman, T.D., Kling, A., Sutphin, M.S., Steinberg, A., and Eiduson, S.
(1990).  Platelet glutathione peroxidase and monoamine oxidase
activity in schizophrenics with CT scan abnormalities: Relation to
psychosocial variables. Psychiatry Research, 31(1), 1-14.
48.
Foster (2002), op. cit.
49.
Rudin, D.O., Felix, C. (with Schrader) (1987).  The omega-3 phenomenon.
New York: Avon Press.
50.
Ibid.
51.
Emsley, R., Myburgh, C., Oosthuizen, P., and van Rensburg, S.J. (2002).
Randomized, placebo-controlled study of ethyl-eicosapentaenoic
acid as a supplement treatment in schizophrenia. American Jour-
nal of Psychiatry, 159(9), 1596-1598.
52.
Horrobin, D.F., Jenkins, K., Bennett, C.N., and Christie, W.W. (2002).
Eicosapentaenoic acid and arachidonic acid: Collaboration and not
antagonism is the key to biological understanding. Prostaglandins
Leukot Essent Fatty Acids, 66(1), 83-90.
53.
Peet, M., Brind, J., Ramchand, C.N., Shah, S., and Vankar, G.K. (2001).
Two double-blind placebo-controlled pilot studies of eicosapen-
taenoic acid in the treatment of schizophrenia. Schizophrenia Re-
search, 49(3), 243-251.
54.
Joy, C.B., Mumby-Croft, R., and Joy, L.A. (2000).  Polyunsaturated fatty
acid (fish or evening primrose oil) for schizophrenia. Cochrane
Database System Review, (2) CD001257.
55.
Horrobin, D. (2000).  Published lecture outline.  Nutritional Medicine
Today 29th Annual International Conference, April 6-9, 2000,
Vancouver, BC, Canada. International Society for Orthomolecular
Medicine and the Journal of Orthomolecular Medicine.
56.
Ibid.
57.
Ibid.
58.
Skoliarova, op. cit.
59.
Frese, F.J. (1993).  Coping with schizophrenia. Innovations and Research,
2(3). http://www.mentalhealth.com/story/p52-sc04.html
60.
Ibid.
61.
Torrey, E.F. (1989).  Nowhere to go: The tragic odyssey of the homeless
mentally ill. New York: Harper and Row.

231
WHAT’S IN IT FOR DARWIN?
16
Science changes one funeral at a time.
Harvey Weiss (2002)
Roughly 1 out of every 400 Black Americans develop sickle cell
anaemia.1  In those with this chronic hereditary disease, many
of their red blood cells form rigid crescent or sickle shapes that
cannot pass through capillaries.  Affected children often die
during adolescence of strokes, heart disease, and infections.
Sickle cell anaemia also causes sufferers painful, unpredict-
able health crises.  Those children that survive are underweight
and slow to mature.2  How is it that a genetic, highly damaging
disease can be so widespread amongst the Black population in
the USA?  What’s in it for Darwin?  Or more correctly asked,
what is the evolutionary advantage that this mutation gives to
Blacks that make its obvious disadvantages worthwhile?  After
all, as McElroy and Townsend3 point out, “It is only the pheno-
typic characteristics that give some advantage of degree of
Darwinian fitness that are subject to selective action.”
At first glance, the sickle cell anaemia trait appears to provide
Blacks with the very reverse of Darwinian fitness.  After all,
those with this genetic disorder tend to die in adolescence.
Even if they don’t, they are usually underweight, slow to de-
velop, and often sick.  These are not the type of people who
might be anticipated to have larger families than the norm
and so have a disproportionate effect on the human gene pool.

232
As anticipated, the differential reproduction and mortality
linked to this genotype in the US are both negative, sufferers
reproduce less and die younger.  One might expect that, as a
result, over time the mutation responsible for sickle cell anae-
mia would have disappeared.  This has not been the case.  Why?
Malaria has plagued humanity for thousands of years.4  Even
now it affects an estimated 200 million people every year,
causing some 2 million deaths.  In tropical Africa, for example,
it kills about 1 million people annually, most of those being
children.5  The disease also contributes to death from other
causes including pneumonia, anaemia, and kidney failure.  The
anaemia associated with malaria is linked to miscarriage, still-
birth, and low birth weight.6
Malaria is caused by a protozoan parasite of the genus Plasmo-
dium, which infects red blood cells.  These protozoans cannot
live outside their hosts and depend completely on the glucose,
enzymes, and metabolism of such cells to survive.7  This para-
sitic relationship eventually destroys the red blood cells, usu-
ally at 2 or 3 day intervals.  The release of associated waste
products and pigments causes the intermittent fever and chills
seen in malaria sufferers.  Plasmodium protozoa are spread from
one human to another by four species of mosquitoes.
At some time in the past, a point mutation occurred in one of
the human DNA base pair codes for the hemoglobin protein
chains.8-9  Instead of glutamic acid at the sixth position, as is
usually the case, valine was produced.  This substitution af-
fected hemoglobin’s level of oxygen affinity and led to the dis-
tortion of the cell membrane into an irregular, sickled shape.
Plasmodium do not appreciate this abnormality.  As a result,
people with this sickling trait are unlikely to suffer as much
from malaria.  They are not completely immune but, if infected,
the disease is less severe.  In heterozygotes, who usually do

233
not exceed 30 to 40 percent of the population living in areas
where malaria is commonplace, the sickling trait provides both
normal and abnormal hemoglobin in every blood cell.  This is a
characteristic that increases their chances of surviving malaria
to reproduce.10  In those who are homozygous for sickle cell
anaemia, this characteristic still helps to resist malaria, but
their cells have nothing but abnormal hemoglobin.  As a con-
sequence, they develop sickle cell anaemia, which, as described,
is often fatal.  The offspring of two parents who carry the trait
(heterozygotes) have a 25 percent chance of being born with
sickle cell anaemia (homozygotes).11  In West African popula-
tions, this occurs in roughly 4 percent of children, most of
whom die before they can reproduce.  The sickle cell trait has
survived in Blacks, therefore, because despite the high toll
sickle cell anaemia takes, the trait is counterbalanced by the
benefits of reduced susceptibility to malaria that it provides.
Interestingly, in regions where malaria has been wiped out
and where the sickling trait only brings disadvantages, its
prevalence begins to decline.  In the US, for example, it is now
found in only 8.5 percent of Blacks.  As a result, sickle cell
anaemia occurs in a fraction of 1 percent of the Black popula-
tion,12 causing roughly 350 deaths annually.13
This brings us back to schizophrenia.  Schizophrenia is usu-
ally first diagnosed in early adulthood or late adolescence.  Sui-
cide is far more common than usual in those who suffer from
it.  Its symptoms often cause long-term hospitalization, and
prevent employment or meaningful relationships.  Given all
these evolutionary disadvantages, one might have expected
schizophrenia’s associated genetic aberrations to have disap-
peared long ago from the human gene pool.  Nevertheless,
schizophrenia occurs in roughly one out of every 100 people.
As Torrey and Miller14 have demonstrated, rather than dying
out, schizophrenia has been increasing steadily.  There seems

234
to be only one logical conclusion to be drawn from this reality.
Just as the sickle cell trait helps protect against malaria at the
cost of losses to sickle cell anaemia, schizophrenia traits must
provide some benefits to the human gene pool that outweighs
the ravages of this mental illness.  How then do schizophrenia’s
genetic traits increase Darwinian fitness?  What’s in it for
Darwin?
I have argued elsewhere in this book that there are at least
four genetic traits that predispose those who carry them to the
development of schizophrenia.  These include the low enzyme
activity variant of the catechol-O-methyltransferase gene, the
GSTM1*O allele (required to produce a form of glutathione S-
transferase) and possibly the C677TT variant of the gene for
methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase.15-17  What these three
genetic aberrations appear to have in common is that they all
result in higher than normal exposure to adrenochrome, a
metabolite of adrenaline, or an abnormal susceptibility to its
negative impacts.  Since all three of these variants are quite
widely distributed in the human populace, it seems likely that
abnormal levels of adrenochrome must carry some evolution-
ary advantage(s).  That is, there appears to be not one, but at
least three and maybe four balanced genetic morphisms.  The
suggestion that there is a balanced morphism in schizophrenia
is not new.  Sir Julian Huxley and colleagues,18 for example,
argued in Nature in 1964 that, since the fertility of schizophren-
ics was only about 70 percent of normal, the genetic aberra-
tion causing this illness must also carry with it some unrecog-
nized evolutionary advantage.  They suggested that this may
be resistance to surgical and wound shock (including burns)
associated with rapid recovery, or partial immunity to epidemic
diseases such as smallpox and bubonic plague.  It was also
suggested that heterozygote females, who did not develop
schizophrenia, might be unusually fertile, although no firm
evidence could be provided to support this possibility.

235
The balanced morphism idea has reappeared in the literature
at various times.  Hoffer,19 for example, has argued that the
family members of schizophrenics who do not develop the dis-
ease tend to be unusually intelligent.  This concept underlies
Horrobin’s20 book The Madness of Adam and Eve, in which he
argues that:
Schizophrenia can affect people of all abilities in all
strata of society, but it does with surprising frequency
seem to affect the families of the great, the good, the
clever, the rich, the ambitious, the intellectual and the
creative.
This belief is not new.  Galton’s eugenic ideas were rejected by
Henry Maudsley,21 the greatest psychiatrist in London in the
second half of the 19th century, because he knew that schizo-
phrenia occurred repeatedly in the great families of Victorian
Britain.  Maudsley recognized that an eugenic programme,
designed to eliminate schizophrenia, would inevitably prevent
the birth of some of Britain’s future most creative and dynamic
individuals.  Myerson and Boyl22 came to the same conclusion
in the US where they found that US presidents, philosophers,
writers, scientists, and physicians all had schizophrenic rela-
tives that had been treated at McLean Hospital, near Boston.
Anyone wanting more details about the close link between
brilliance and psychosis should read The Madness of Adam
and Eve.23  Suffice it to say that a recent Scandinavian study
has established that children of university graduates are al-
most twice as likely to develop schizophrenia than the children
of non-graduates.24  Similarly, Karlsson25 has shown that Ice-
landic males, with psychotic family members, seem to have more
skills and abilities and contain higher achievers in a variety of
fields than do those with families without those who have this
illness.  Healthy relatives of psychotic patients, for example,
publish more books of fiction and poetry and perform better in
school, particularly in mathematics.26-27

236
There is quite good evidence, therefore, that one or more of the
genetic aberrations that increase susceptibility to schizophre-
nia also appear to encourage intelligence and creativity.  The
last word on the topic is left to Horrobin,28 who wrote:
What I have suggested in this book [The Madness of
Adam and Eve] is that the genes for schizophrenia,
which are likely to include genes for bipolar disorder,
dyslexia, high intelligence and schizotypy, are respon-
sible for most of the religious sense, most of the techni-
cal and artistic creativity, and most of the leadership
qualities in modern humans.
The suggestion by Huxley and coauthors29 that the gene asso-
ciated with schizophrenia might give family members greater
immunity to infectious disease was supported also by Eliot
Slater.30  However, the available evidence does not seem com-
patible with this idea.  Torrey and Miller,31 for example, have
documented that epidemics have frequently caused major life
loss amongst institutionalized schizophrenics.  This has been
true of typhus, cholera, pneumonia, tuberculosis, and syphi-
lis, which appear to have been the major causes of death in
English asylums in the 19th century.  Indeed, the number of
patients in such mental hospitals fell by 17 percent between
1915 and 1920, largely because of the enormously high death
rates associated with the Spanish Lady influenza pandemic.32
The evidence, therefore, seems clear.  Schizophrenic genetic
aberrations give very little protection, if any, against the infec-
tious diseases that have been common, in the Developed World,
during the past two centuries.
This does not mean that such aberrations provide no protec-
tion against disease.  It has been argued previously that adreno-
chrome is protecting schizophrenic smokers from developing
lung cancer.38  Beyond this, it has been shown that the drug
IntraDose, which contains the powerful oxidant Cisplatin and

237
adrenaline, is a very effective treatment for melanoma and
cancers of lung, liver, breast, head, and neck.  This drug is
injected into the tumour mass where it almost certainly cre-
ates elevated adrenochrome.  It would appear, therefore, that
one of the major reasons that the genetic aberrations that are
linked to schizophrenia are so widespread is because they
provide a reduced risk for the development of cancer.  As the
environment altered during the past three centuries, the cost
of such genetic aberrations has risen, filling the mental asy-
lums with schizophrenics.  Simultaneously, the benefits of such
genetic variants have also increased as carcinogens have be-
come more widespread and diverse and the cancer mortality
rates associated with them have risen rapidly, particularly
amongst families that do not carry genes that encourage above
normal adrenochrome production.
SUMMARY
Any economist will tell you that every strategy carries with it
benefits and costs.  The genetic aberrations increasing the risk
of schizophrenia appear to promote religious sense, technical
and artistic creativity, and leadership.  They also seem to pro-
vide a greater resistance to a wide range of cancers, especially
that of the lung.  Whether you consider this Darwinian exchange
with the Devil to have been worthwhile will probably depend
on how you and your family faired in the distribution of its
associated costs and benefits.

238
REFERENCES
1.
Pearson, H.A. (1973).  Sickle cell anaemia: Clinical management during
the early years of life. In H. Abramson, J.F. Bertles, and D.L. Wethers
(Eds), Sickle cell disease (pp. 244-251). St. Louis, MO: C.V. Mosby.
2.
Ibid.
3.
McElroy, A., and Townsend, P.K. (1989).  Medical anthropology in eco-
logical perspectives. Boulder, CO: Westview Press.
4.
Ibid.
5.
McFalls, J.A. Jr., and McFalls, M.H. (1984).  Disease and fertility. New
York: Academic Press.
6.
Ibid.
7.
McElroy and Townsend, op. cit.
8.
Ibid.
9.
Stini, W. (1975).  Ecology and human adaptation. Dubuque, Iowa: Wm.
C. Brown.
10.
McElroy and Townsend, op. cit.
11.
Fishbein’s Illustrated Medical and Health Encyclopedia (1985).  Westport,
CT: H.S. Stuttman, 4; 1305-1309.
12.
Johnson, M.I. (1984).  The world and the sickle-cell gene. New York: Trado-
Medic Books.
13.
Gary, L.E. (1977).  The sickle-cell controversy. In A.S. Baer (Ed.), Hered-
ity and society: Readings in social genetics (pp. 361-373). New York:
Macmillan.
14.
Torrey, E.F., and Miller, J. (2001).  The invisible plague: The rise of
mental illness from 1750 to the present. New Brunswick: Rutgers
University Press.
15.
Lachan, H.M., Nolan, K.A., Mohr, P., Saito, T., and Volavka, J. (1988).
Association between catechol-O-methyltransferase-genotype and
violence in schizophrenia and schizoaffective disorder. American
Journal of Psychiatry, 155(6), 835-837.
16.
Harada, S., Tachikawa, H., and Kawanishi, Y. (2001).  Glutathione S-
transferase M1 gene deletion may be associated with susceptibil-
ity to certain forms of schizophrenia. Biochemical and Biophysical
Research Communications, 281, 267-271.
17.
Arinami, T., Yamada, N., Yamakawa-Kobayashi, K., Hamaguchi, H., and
Toru, M. (1997).  Methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase variant and

239
schizophrenia/depression. American Journal of Medical Genetics,
74(5), 526-528.
18.
Huxley, J., Mayr, E., Osmond, H., and Hoffer, A. (1964).  Schizophrenia
as a genetic morphism. Nature, 204, 220-221.
19.
Hoffer, A. (1998).  Vitamin B-3 schizophrenia: Discovery recovery con-
troversy. Kingston, ON: Quarry Press.
20.
Horrobin, D. (2002).  The Madness of Adam and Eve. London: Transworld
Publishers.
21.
Ibid.
22.
Ibid.
23.
Ibid.
24 . Ibid.
25.
Karlsson, J.L. (2001).  Mental abilities of male relatives of psychotic
patients. Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 104(6), 466-468.
26.
Ibid.
27.
Karlsson, J.L. (1999).  Relation of mathematical ability to psychosis in
Iceland. Clinical Genetics, 56(6), 447-449.
28.
Horrobin, op. cit.
29.
Huxley et al., op. cit.
30.
Wright, P., Gill, M., and Murray, R.M. (1993).  Schizophrenia: Genetics
and the matrnal immune response to viral infection. American Jour-
nal of Medical Genetics, 48(1), 40-46.
31.
Torrey and Miller, op. cit.
32.
Ibid.
33.
Hoffer, A., and Foster, H.D. (2000).  Why schizophrenics smoke but
have a lower incidence of lung cancer: Implications for the treat-
ment of both disorders. Journal of Orthomolecular Medicine, 15(3),
141-144.
34.
Matrix Pharmaceutical, Inc. (2000).  Matrix Updates Interim Phase II
Results for IntraDose in Primary Liver Cancer. http://archive.mail-
list.com/hbv_research/msg01155.html
35.
Doctor’s Guide. Personal Edition, Stein, J.  20 DG Dispatch - WCM:
Intratumal IntraDose (Cisplatin/Epinephrine) shows promise in
metastatic malignant melanoma. http://www.pslgroup.com/dg/
1f3ed2.htm

240
36.
Doctor’s Guide. Personal Edition. Matrix Pharmaceutical Inc. (2001).
ASCO: IntraDose (Cisplatin/Epinephrine) injectable gel demon-
strates rapid response in head and neck cancer. http://www.
pslgroup.com/dg/1fb3c6.htm
37.
Doctor’s Guide. Personal Edition (1998).  IntraDose shows encouraging
results for malignant melanoma and breast cancer. http://www.
pslgroup.com/dg/cle76.htm

241
INDEX
A
A Beautiful Mind      110, 119
aberrant genes      137-138, 144, 175
abnormal head size      18
adrenaline      v, viii, x-xi, 125, 128, 138-142, 144, 146, 148, 150-153, 155,
157, 170, 174-177, 180, 183-186, 190-196, 212-214, 217-220, 228,
234, 237
adrenaline oxidation      150, 152
adrenochrome      viii, x-xii, 30-31, 45, 94-95, 97, 103, 125-131, 135,
138-142, 144-146, 148, 150-155, 157, 161-163, 166, 168-198, 210,
213-214, 217-223, 227-228, 234, 236-237
adrenochrome semicarbazide      130
AIDS      47-48, 57, 151-152, 157, 221, 227
Al-Razi      12
alcohol      3, 12, 18, 21, 23, 43, 94, 148, 155, 175-176, 182, 199, 216
Aleppo      12
Alexandria      12
allergen      143, 150, 170, 184, 212, 214, 216-219, 226-227
allergy      66, 82, 93, 97, 139-140, 143, 145-146, 168, 170, 180, 184, 186,
193, 200, 212, 216-219, 227-228
alpha linolenic acid      179, 224
amantedine      51
amgydala volumes      19
amino acid      42, 47-48, 51-52, 55, 57-58, 120, 134, 178-179, 200
amphetamine      51, 103, 123, 124, 131, 169
anaphylactic shock      180
anorexia      100
antioxidant defence      x, xii, 44-45, 153-155, 159, 166, 175-176, 178, 188,
192-193, 221-222,
antipsychotic      103-105, 107, 132, 172, 205, 225
arachidonic acid      xv, 46-47, 54, 166, 182, 187-188, 225, 230
asphyxia      18
“atypical” neuroleptics      104
aunts      25
autopsy      xv, 23, 121, 131, 156, 175, 230
Ayurvedic      12

242
B
Baghdad      12
balanced polymorphism      27, 34
bath      88
Bau-Biologie      xi, xv, 213-214, 218, 227-228
Bedlam      1-5, 8, 164, 170
beer      114
Belgrave      13, 16
bilateral hippocampal      19
bilirubin      90
biochemical “dominoes”      222
bipolar disorder      ix, 4, 6-7, 15, 32, 56, 158, 236
birthdays      71
bizarre adornments      2
body image      172
Borrelia burgdorferi      83, 189-191
brain atrophy      xiii, 21, 44, 179, 184, 224
brain structure      19, 85
brain ventricles      21, 153, 165, 175
Brazil      15
breast cancer      78, 186, 203, 240
breeder theory      72
Breggin      105, 108
bronchogenic carcinoma      78
Brown      69, 75, 83, 86, 156, 204, 205
burning eyes      141
C
C677T      xii, xiv, 32, 36, 128-129, 171, 181, 183, 193, 201, 214, 222, 234
caffeine      113
Cairo      12
calcium      68-70, 73-74, 93, 156, 167-168, 184-185, 202, 213
Canada      ix, 3-4, 6, 9, 15, 78, 90, 119, 132, 164, 173, 194, 230
cancer      ix, xiii-xiv, 1, 30, 60, 63, 69-70, 74-75, 77-79, 83-84, 99, 101,
109, 119, 132, 142, 167, 185-187, 190, 202-203, 226, 236-237,239-240
cancer of the esophagus      69, 167, 185
cardiac defects      27
CAT (computerized axial tomography)      18
catalase      x, xii, 45, 153-155, 176, 178, 221

243
catatonic      2, 51, 59, 91, 117, 168, 171, 172
catechol-O-methyltransferase      xiv, 28-29, 35-36, 126-127, 133, 143, 165,
176, 198-199, 234, 238
catecholamine      28-31, 33, 45, 52, 58, 89, 124, 127, 129-130, 134, 140,
151, 153, 157, 168, 174, 191, 196, 199, 202-203, 205, 222
celiac disease      82-83, 140, 167, 188-189
central monoamine      42, 60
cereals      74, 85, 114, 118
cerebrospinal fluid      xiv, 50-52, 59-60, 125
ceruloplasmin      49
chalk      70
cheese      xii, 113-114, 118, 221
chemical sensitivity      219
Chernobyl      40, 54, 148, 156
children      17, 26-27, 44, 47, 82, 123, 182, 231-233, 235
Chinese      32, 124
chlorpromazine      103, 104, 123
cholesterol      60, 90, 107, 206
chronic schizophrenia      x-xiii, 1, 7, 20-21, 41, 44--50, 55-60, 74, 77-79,
84-85, 89, 91-92, 96, 99, 112, 115, 119, 132, 139-141, 148, 150,
152-157, 164, 168, 170, 175-176, 184, 192, 195, 205, 211-212,
223-225, 231
chronic stress      139
cigarettes      111, 113
cisplatin      186, 203, 236, 239-240
class variation      184
clustering      70, 72, 75
cobalamin      53
Cochrane Review      105, 108
cocktails      114
coenzyme      xi, 42, 128, 220
controlled fasting      86, 88, 97, 145, 191, 205, 228
copper      49-50, 82, 93-94, 166, 168, 215
cordials      114
corpus callosum      81
cortical circuitry      20
cost      6, 7, 9, 99, 138, 209, 234, 237
Croatia      64, 83, 167, 182-183
cystathionine      52, 129
cytotoxic food      219
Czechoslovakia      65

244
D
d-lysergic acid diethylamide      94
Dalmane      111
Damascus      12
Danziger      xi, xv, 91-92, 121, 149, 172, 192-193, 196, 198, 205, 207,
221, 229
Darwinian exchange      237
deinstitutionalization      4
deiodinase      149, 184
Denmark      13, 65, 70, 71
depression      11, 32, 34, 36, 48, 55, 60, 102, 114-115, 125-126, 134, 139,
154, 159, 174, 185, 192, 210, 229, 239
Derry      116
desiccated thyroid      xi, xiii, 91-92, 96, 116, 121, 149, 168-169, 172, 192,
221, 226-227
deteriorated adrenalin      94, 125
DHA (Docosahexgenoic acid)      96
diabetes      63, 104
diagnosis      1, 63, 65, 156, 201
dietary deficiency      18
DiGeorge syndrome      27-28, 165
distribution pattern      39, 64, 72
dopamine      vii, xiv, 8, 20, 23, 28, 42, 51-52, 60, 103-105, 123-125,
130-132, 134, 139, 148, 155, 165-166, 169, 173, 176, 181, 196-197,
199, 201, 203, 212
dopamine hypothesis      vii, 8, 52, 103, 123-124, 130, 139
dopaminergic      42, 52, 132, 155, 199
Down’s syndrome      18
drift theory      72
drinking water      72, 185
drugs      5, 39, 49-51, 58, 96, 99, 101, 103-105, 107, 110, 112, 123-125,
130, 151, 153, 169-170, 172-173, 187-188, 196, 198, 212, 216, 218, 225
dysfunctional families      6
E
Edison      87, 97
eicosapentaenoic acid      xiii, xv, 46, 57, 96, 168, 225, 227, 230
electroconvulsive treatment      102, 194
enema      88
England      ix, 2, 6, 12-13, 15, 61, 65, 71-72, 84, 132, 164, 167, 173

245
EPA (Eicosapentaenoic acid)      96
epinephrine      28, 35, 52, 126-129, 133, 138, 141, 145-146, 151, 156, 165,
176, 180, 186, 198, 223, 229, 239-240
essential fatty acid      46, 55, 57, 96, 118, 120, 168, 179, 184, 189, 224-226
ethyl-eicosapentaenoate      184, 200
eugenics      3, 8, 26, 33, 235
evolutionary advantage      ix, 231, 234
Exclusion Zone workers      40
expensive urine      112
F
fasting      86, 89-90, 97, 140, 145, 168, 191, 205, 218, 228
fetus      40, 18, 21, 148, 175, 189-191, 214, 215
Fez      12
fiction      215, 235
fight or flight      138-139, 144
Finland      28-29, 83, 127, 167, 173
fluphenazine (prolixin)      103
flush      42, 55, 116, 166, 187
focal sharp waves      171
folate      31, 52, 53, 61
folic acid      xii, 82, 93, 168, 180, 223
Fountain House      112
fraternal twins      26
Fred Frese      110, 119
free radicals      x, 45, 153-155, 189, 205
furrowed feet      18
G
Galton      3, 8, 235
Genain quadruplets      25
genetic abnormalities      7, 27, 30, 222
genetic screening      214-215, 222, 227
geographical variable      67, 69, 72
germ plasma      3
Germany      3, 13, 65, 71, 83, 167, 213
Ghana      14, 65, 73
glucose      19, 90, 100-101, 142, 146, 150, 229, 232
glutamate      20, 50-51, 54, 59, 104, 131, 166, 181, 196, 197, 201

246
glutamic acid      232
glutathione peroxidase      x, xii-xiii, xv, 21, 23, 44-45, 56, 78, 151-155, 158,
165, 176, 178-179, 184, 190-191, 199, 202, 221-222, 224-225, 227, 230
glutathione S-transferase      xiv, 30-31, 36, 127, 165, 190-191, 198, 205,
229, 234, 238
gluten      82, 85-86, 93, 140, 145, 167-168, 188-189, 202, 212
goitre      132, 149, 154, 159, 176
Gorwitz      14
grandchildren      25
Greek      12, 103
Griesinger      13, 16
GSTM1      30-31, 127, 143, 165, 177, 222, 234
H
Haldol      111
half siblings      25
Halliday      13, 16
hallucination      1-2, 20, 94, 114, 127, 139-140, 170, 172
hallucinogen      90, 169
haloperidol      103
harmline      94
heart disease      xiii, 1, 63, 200, 226, 231
hebephrenic      2, 171
herpes simplex virus type 1      81, 85, 167, 189
herpes simplex virus type 2      82-83, 189-191
heterozygous form      27
high steeped mouth      18
highly unsaturated fatty acid      47, 178, 225
histadelics      93, 179
histaminase      49-50, 59
histamine      49-50, 54, 59, 89-91, 93, 97, 143, 166, 168, 179-180, 187,
191-192, 200, 205, 215-216
hives      141, 143, 217
HM Prison Service      118
Hoffer      xi, xiv-xv, 8, 34, 42-44, 55-56, 77, 78, 84, 90-91, 94-98,
102-103, 106, 110, 114, 119, 126, 128, 130-131, 133-135, 140, 146,
148, 156, 182, 193-194, 196-201, 203, 205-207, 220, 229, 235, 239
homocysteine      xi-xii, 31-32, 36, 52, 53, 60-61, 128-129, 134, 166, 171,
177, 180-181, 183, 193, 200, 214, 220, 223, 229
homocysteinemia      36, 52, 61, 134
homocystinuria      31-32, 61

247
homovanillic acid      52, 60, 125, 132, 166
homozygous form      27
hormone level      42, 144
Horrobin      vii, xiv-xv, 5, 9, 43, 46, 55, 57, 80-81, 85, 99, 104, 106-107,
122, 125, 131, 133, 187, 197, 200, 204, 207, 209, 225, 227, 230,
235-236, 239
human gene pool      231, 233-234
human genome      ix, 15, 26, 63
hypernasal speech      27
hypochondria      2
hypoglycemia      xi, 93, 100, 113-114, 118, 142, 168, 174, 219-220
I
Ibn Sina      12
ibogaine      94
“ideal” treatment for schizophrenia      x, 213
identical twin      19, 21, 26, 63, 79, 137, 165
ideocide      39
income tax      5
increasing body temperature      83
India      12, 14-15, 48, 58, 65, 72, 167, 184
indole      x-xi, 94, 126-127, 139, 151, 159, 177, 182-183, 190, 192, 195,
213, 220-221
industrial activity      68
Industrial Revolution      13, 141, 164, 173
insane asylum      2, 14, 111
insect sting      141, 217
insensitivity to pain      49, 80, 83, 171, 187, 203
Institut für Baubiologie und Ökologie in Neubeuern      213
insulin      xi, 100-101, 105-106, 118, 142, 146, 168, 195, 206, 219, 229
insulin coma therapy      100, 101, 106, 195, 206
internal voices      1
IntraDose      186, 203, 236, 239-240
intravenous glutathione      117
iodine      40, 124, 131-132, 148-150, 155-156, 159, 176, 199
iodine deficiency      149
Ireland      ix, 15, 64-65, 71-72, 77, 83, 164, 167, 173, 182, 184
irradiate      40, 148, 162, 166
irradiated population      162
Israel      15, 28-29, 127, 173

248
itching      42, 141, 216
Ixodid ticks      83, 167, 189-190
J
Japan      15, 30-31, 65, 71-72, 134, 167, 184, 202
John Nash      110, 119
junk food      226
K
King Charles VI      12
King County      209-210, 212, 227
King Henry VI      12
Kirunal      96, 225
Korea      29
“kryptopyrrole”      43-44, 54, 166, 181-182, 188
kynurenic acid      51, 59
L
Lange Meridian Center      xi, 213
“latency” period      17
latex      141, 145-146, 212, 216-218
lifetime risk      25
linseed oil      179, 224
lipid peroxide      45
lipoic acid      117
lithium      111
low T3 syndrome      150
low-seated ears      18
LSD      43, 48, 94, 172, 182, 198
Lunacy in Many Lands      13, 16
lung cancer      xiv, 77-79, 83-84, 185-186, 203, 236, 239
Lyme disease      83
lymphoma      78
M
macaroni      114
magnesium gluconate      94
malaria      27, 80-81, 232-234

249
manganese      93, 96, 168
Margot Kidder      109
Masks of Madness: Science of Healing      109, 119
massage      88
mathematics      110, 235
Mauritius      65
maximum-security psychiatric facility      29
McLean Hospital      235
melatonin      42, 128
memory loss      102, 169, 195
mental hospital      1, 3-4, 8, 66-67, 74, 81, 97, 110-111, 149, 237
mescaline      94, 172
metanephrine      28, 127, 165, 171, 176, 223
methionine      xi, xii, 28, 31, 52, 93, 126, 128-129, 134, 168, 171, 177,
180-181, 193, 220, 223
methylation      53, 61, 128-129, 180
methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase      xiv, 31, 36, 60-61, 134, 166, 177,
180-181, 183, 193, 198, 201, 229, 234, 238
metyl nicotinate (AMN)      42
milk      66, 73-74, 85, 88, 90, 140, 145, 157, 167-168, 184, 202, 212, 217
morphine addiction      100
mosquitoes      232
MRI (magnetic resonance imaging)      19
MTHFR      xi-xii, 31-32, 36, 128, 166, 177, 180-181, 183, 214, 220, 222
multiple sclerosis      xiii, 17, 22, 75, 124, 131-132, 202, 226
multivitamin      94
muteness      2
N
n-3 fatty acid      46, 166
n-6 essential fatty acid      46
N-methyl-D-asparate receptor      51
negative      2, 48, 58, 123, 166
negative eugenics      3
neuroleptic      xiv, 32, 50, 55, 59-60, 103-104, 112, 124, 169, 196
neuropsychiatric symptom      48, 151
niacin      x-xi, 42-43, 47-48, 54-55, 93, 95, 101-102, 105, 114-116, 118,
128, 143, 155, 166, 168-169, 178, 180, 182, 193-196, 220-222
Nickolayev      88-89, 191, 218
nicotinamide      42, 47, 178, 193-194, 206, 220

250
nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide      42, 47, 193, 220
nicotinic acid      42
Nigeria      65
Nogo      xiv, 32-33, 37, 129, 135, 166, 177, 214
noodles      114
noradrenalin      52, 54, 95, 103, 105, 107, 125, 128, 138-139, 168, 174,
180, 185, 195-196, 203
noradrenergic      52, 60, 133
Norway      15, 71-72, 75, 83, 167
O
Occam’s Razor      163
offspring of two schizophrenics      26
olanzapine (zyprexa)      104
One Flew Over the Cuckoo’s Nest      111
one schizophrenic parent      26
orthomolecular      xiii-xv, 42, 58, 74-75, 84, 90, 97-98, 102, 116, 118-119,
131, 135, 140, 145-146, 156, 162, 168, 173, 194, 196-198, 200-205,
216, 220, 222, 224, 226-230, 239
oxidative reaction      45, 57, 158, 200
P
pain threshold      80, 167
Papua and New Guinea      14
paranoid      2, 11, 19, 56, 89, 91, 94, 126, 158, 171, 189
Parkinsonism      vii, 104, 123, 172, 196
Parkinson’s disease      vii, xiii, 5, 103, 123, 131, 173, 196, 226
peanut      141, 217
pellagra      47, 178
penicillin      81, 217
perception      1, 164
PET (positron emission tomography)      19
Pfeiffer      xv, 49, 55-59, 92, 94, 97-98, 112, 140, 145, 179, 180, 192-193,
196, 200, 205-207, 215-216, 223, 228-230
phospholipase A2      47, 225
phospholipids      46, 47, 57, 166, 187-188, 204
phrenitis      12
pituitary gland      49
plague      ix, xiv, 8, 11--16, 37, 73, 138, 144, 199, 210, 227, 234, 238
Plasmodium      232

251
poetry      235
pollutant      66, 141, 212
polymorphism      xiv, 27-30, 32, 34-36, 133-134, 183, 199, 201
positive      2, 50, 58-59, 103, 123, 169
positive eugenics      3
post-traumatic stress disorder      152, 158
postpartum psychosis      12
potassium iodide      40
potatoes      114
Prell      50, 59
prevalence rate      14, 40, 63-65, 67, 167
prevention      36, 63, 132, 163, 197
prick skin test      143
Princeton Brain Bio Center      92-94
prostaglandin      xv, 57, 179, 184, 187, 188, 224, 230
protozoa      232
psychiatric illness      55, 63, 131, 156
putamen tissue      20
pyridoxal phosphate      93
Q
quetiapine (Seroquel)      104
R
reduced pain sensitivity      187
relapse      xii, 12, 74, 85, 92, 115, 124, 132, 172, 221
Renaudin      13, 16
reverse triiodothyronine (rT3)      41
rheumatoid arthritis      79, 83-84, 139, 167
rice      3, 7, 75, 78, 84, 114
risperidone (risperdal)      104
road salt      68
Roman      12
rubella infection      18
S
S-adenosylhomocysteine      129, 134
selenium      xiii, 45, 67-70, 73-75, 78, 82, 96, 149, 156, 167, 179,
184-185, 188-190, 202, 204, 213, 222, 224-225

252
sensory stimuli      1, 164
serotonergic      52, 157
serotonin      x, xii, 20, 47-48, 54, 90, 101, 104-105, 124, 134, 151-152,
154-155, 157-158, 168-170, 175, 178, 191, 195-196, 221-222
shingles      17
shower      88
siblings      22, 25, 26, 182
sickle cell anaemia      27, 34, 231, 232, 233
sickle cell trait      233, 234
silliness      2
simple      2, 171
Singapore      71
skin rash      115, 141
Skoliarova      xv, 21, 23, 121, 131, 148, 156, 230
smell      1
smoke/smoking      xiv, 49, 77-78, 84, 185-186, 202-203, 239
Social Darwinians      3
South Africa      65, 73
spaghetti      114, 118
Spanish Lady influenza pandemic      236
spontaneous abortion      18
Sri Lanka      65, 74
sterilization      3
stillbirth      176, 232
stress      x, 39, 118, 138-140, 143-144, 150, 154-155, 158-159, 169-170,
175-176, 180, 183, 186, 190, 192, 196, 199-200, 212, 214, 226-227
strontium      68
stunted emotions      1
stupor      2
sugar      xi, 19, 82, 94, 95, 113, 114, 118, 142, 143, 144, 150, 170,
174-175, 180, 183-184, 186, 188, 191-193, 195, 212, 219-220, 226-227
sugar consumption      142, 170, 183, 186, 220
suicide      5, 29, 33, 76, 95, 107, 127, 164-165, 170, 173, 194, 201, 206, 233
sunlight      68, 70, 71, 74, 156, 167, 184, 202
superoxide dismutase activity      xii, 45, 154, 221
Switzerland      83, 167, 195
swollen lips      141
symptom      xiv, 1-2, 5, 7, 11, 17-18, 21, 27-28, 41-42, 46-52, 55, 58-60,
73-74, 84, 87, 90-91, 94, 101, 103-106, 115, 124, 126, 129, 143,
151, 153, 170-175, 178, 181, 185, 191, 196, 199-201, 203, 210, 223,
227-229, 236, 240
syphilis      80-81, 236

253
T
Taiwan      65
tardive dyskinesia      95-96, 104, 196
taste      1
teratogens      18
thalamus      19, 185, 202
The Madness of Adam and Eve      vii, xiv, 9, 57, 85, 122, 131, 204,
235-236, 239
The Schizophrenia Bulletin      80, 109, 116
therapy      49, 63, 81, 90-91, 97, 100-103, 106-107, 116, 119, 156, 191,
194-195, 205-206, 215
thioridazine      103
thyroid      x-xiii, 21, 23, 40-42, 54-55, 78, 91-92, 96, 98, 116, 120-121,
124-125, 131-132, 148-150, 152, 154-157, 159, 165-166, 168-170,
172, 175-176, 192, 198-199, 202, 204-205, 219-223, 225-227, 229-230
thyroid cancer      78
thyroid hormone therapy      91
thyroid stimulating hormone      41
thyrotrophin      41
thyroxine (T4)      40-41
tick-borne encephalitis      83, 86, 204
tobacco      78, 185
Torrey      ix, xiv, 4, 8-9, 11-12, 14-16, 22, 33-34, 37, 63, 70-71, 73-76,
79, 84-85, 144, 174-175, 199, 202, 204, 230, 233, 236, 238-239
touch      1
Tourette’s syndrome      185
Tower of Babel      5
toxemia      18, 21
toxic waste site      68
traffic noise      174, 199
transaminase      90
Treponema pallidium      80
trifluoperazine (stelazine)      103
trigger      7, 15, 17, 21, 43, 47, 53-54, 63-64, 66-68, 71-73, 90, 97, 137-144,
164, 166-167, 170, 175, 180, 182-184, 186, 191-192, 202, 216-217
triiodothyronine      x-xi, 41-42, 54, 92, 96, 121, 148-149, 150, 152, 154-155,
157-159, 168, 170, 175-176, 178, 184, 189, 192, 196, 205, 221-222
trimethylglycine      xii, 223
Tryptophan and Serotonin      47
tuberculosis      143, 146, 236

254
Tucker      13, 16
twin studies      25, 63
Type I “classic” allergies      217
Type II, Cytotoxic Allergies      217
Type III, Arthus Allergies      217
Type IV, Cell-Mediated Allergies      217
U
Ukrainian      40
uncles      25
V
Val-COMT allele      28
valine      28, 126, 232
ventricle      xiii, 19, 21, 44, 153, 165, 175-176, 179, 184, 224-225
ventricle-brain ratio      44
violence      2, 35, 118, 133, 169, 170, 199, 238
vitamin B12      52, 117, 223, xii
vitamin B3      42, 55, 94, 95, 98, 106, 128, 166
vitamin B6      52, 93, 95, 168, 182, 188
vitamin C      93, 95, 114, 115, 116, 168, 169
vitamin D      185
W
Washington      209-210
webbed fifth finger      18, 21
Western civilization      14
wheat      66, 73-74, 93, 140, 145, 167-168, 184, 188, 202
William of Occam      163
wine      114
womb      18, 21, 82, 175, 191
work      5, 92, 96, 112-113, 169, 209, 213, 227
Z
zinc      xii, 43, 93-95, 168, 182, 188, 223
zinc gluconate      28
Zone of Transition      72-73, 167

255
Symbols
17th century      3, 11, 164
18th century      11
19th century      11, 13-14, 33, 79, 235-236
20th century      3, 6, 11, 87, 139
2-hydroxy-hemopyrrolene-5-one      43
22q deletion syndrome (22qDS)      27
3-methoxy-4-hydroxyphenylglycol (MHPG)      103
5-HT antagonist      48
5-HT receptors      48
5-HT2A receptors      48

256
The Author
The author lives with his wife Sarah and cat McNuff in Victo-
ria, British Columbia.  A Canadian by choice, he was born in
Tunstall, Yorkshire, England where he was educated at the
Hull Grammar School and University College London.  While
at university, he specialized in geology and geography, earning
a B.Sc. in 1964 and Ph.D. in 1968 from London University.
He has been a faculty member in the Department of Geog-
raphy, University of Victoria since 1967.  A tenured professor,
he has authored or edited some 230 publications, the major-
ity of which focus on reducing disaster losses or identifying
the causes of chronic disease or longevity.  He has published
hypotheses on the origins of numerous diseases including myo-
cardial infarction, SIDS, cancer, diabetes, schizophrenia, mul-
tiple sclerosis, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, Alzheimer’s and
Parkinson’s diseases, stroke, and AIDS.
His many books include Disaster Planning: The Preservation of
Life and Property, Springer Verlag, New York; Reducing Cancer
Mortality: A Geographical Perspective, Western Geographical
Press, Victoria; and The Ozymandias Principles, Southdowne
Press, Victoria.  Further books by the author include Health,
Disease, and the Environment, Bellhaven Press (now John Wiley),
London, and What Really Causes AIDS, Trafford Publishing,
Victoria.
He is a member of the Explorers Club and several academic
organizations including The New York Academy of Sciences,
The Royal Geographical Society, and The Royal Society of Lit-
erature.  In addition, he is the editor of both the International
and Canadian Western Geographical Series and is a member
of the boards of the Journal of Orthomolecular Medicine and
the International Schizophrenia Foundation.  He has been a

257
consultant to numerous organizations, including the United
Nations, NATO, and the governments of Canada, Ontario, and
British Columbia.  Every day he takes at least the recommended
daily allowance of the known essential nutrients, in the belief
that this will slow the aging process.  As a consequence, most
of his salary is spent in health food stores.  His other bad
habits include providing treats to all the neighbourhood dogs;
losing at chess to his computer; being regularly beaten by his
stepson Dan at video games; and, with the assistance of @Derby
and various computer models, failing to correctly predict the
outcomes of horse races.  For a more complete curriculum
vitae visit http://www.hdfoster.com.  A free copy of this book
and “What Really Causes AIDS” can be downloaded at this
website.

258
The man who discovers a new scientific truth has
previously had to smash to atoms almost everything
he had learned, and arrives at the new truth with
hands blood-stained from the slaughter of a thousand
platitudes.
José Ortega y Gasset
The Revolt of the Masses, 1930


