

Tim O’Reilly
What’s the Future of Work?
Exploring the Economic Shift Led by
Software and Connectedness
Boston
Farnham
Sebastopol
Tokyo
Beijing
Boston
Farnham
Sebastopol
Tokyo
Beijing

978-1-491-94302-1
[LSI]
What’s the Future of Work?
by Tim O’Reilly
Copyright © 2016 O’Reilly Media, Inc. All rights reserved.
Printed in the United States of America.
Published by O’Reilly Media, Inc., 1005 Gravenstein Highway North, Sebastopol, CA
95472.
O’Reilly books may be purchased for educational, business, or sales promotional use.
Online editions are also available for most titles (http://safaribooksonline.com). For
more 
information, 
contact 
our 
corporate/institutional 
sales 
department:
800-998-9938 or corporate@oreilly.com.
Production Editor: Dan Fauxsmith
Interior Designer: David Futato
Cover Designer: Ellie Volckhausen
October 2015: First
Edition
Revision History for the First Edition
2015-10-01: First Release
2016-06-06: Second Release
2016-09-15: Third Release
The O’Reilly logo is a registered trademark of O’Reilly Media, Inc. What’s the Future
of Work?, the cover image, and related trade dress are trademarks of O’Reilly Media,
Inc.
While the publisher and the authors have used good faith efforts to ensure that the
information and instructions contained in this work are accurate, the publisher and
the authors disclaim all responsibility for errors or omissions, including without
limitation responsibility for damages resulting from the use of or reliance on this
work. Use of the information and instructions contained in this work is at your own
risk. If any code samples or other technology this work contains or describes is sub‐
ject to open source licenses or the intellectual property rights of others, it is your
responsibility to ensure that your use thereof complies with such licenses and/or
rights.

Table of Contents
1. The WTF Economy Is Transforming How We Do Business. . . . . . . . . . .  1
2. The Rise of Networked Platforms for Physical World Services. . . . . . .  5
3. A World of Continuous Partial Employment. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  19
4. “This Is Strictly a Business Decision”. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  31
5. 6 Things to Look for in Next Economy Companies. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  35
6. Escaping the Superstar Syndrome. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  39
7. We’ve Got This Whole Unicorn Thing All Wrong!. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  49
8. How On-Demand Logistics Could Save Brick-and-Mortar Retail. . . .  55
9. What Would Alexa Do?. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  59
10. The Game of Business: It’s Time to Rewrite the Rules. . . . . . . . . . . .  67
11. Don’t Replace People. Augment Them.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  77
12. Machine Money and People Money. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  83
13. Work Is More than a Source of Income. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  97
14. Technology and Business as if People Matter. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  101
v


CHAPTER 1
The WTF Economy Is Transforming
How We Do Business
Get the O’Reilly Next:Economy Newsletter and receive ideas and
insights on how technology is transforming the nature of work.
WTF?! In San Francisco, Uber has three times the revenue of the
entire prior taxi and limousine industry.
WTF?! Without owning a single room, Airbnb has more rooms on
offer than some of the largest hotel groups in the world. Airbnb has
800 employees, while Hilton has 152,000.
1

WTF?! Top Kickstarters raise tens of millions of dollars from tens of
thousands of individual backers, amounts of capital that once
required top-tier investment firms.
WTF?! What happens to all those Uber drivers when the cars start
driving themselves? AIs are flying planes, driving cars, advising doc‐
tors on the best treatments, writing sports and financial news, and
telling us all, in real time, the fastest way to get to work. They are
also telling human workers when to show up and when to go home,
based on real-time measurement of demand. The algorithm is the
new shift boss.
WTF?! A fabled union organizer gives up on collective bargaining
and instead teams up with a successful high tech entrepreneur and
investor to go straight to the people with a local $15 minimum wage
initiative that is soon copied around the country, outflanking a grid‐
locked political establishment in Washington.
What do on-demand services, AI, and the $15 minimum wage
movement have in common? They are telling us, loud and clear, that
we’re in for massive changes in work, business, and the economy.
What is the future when more and more work can be done by intel‐
ligent machines instead of people, or only done by people in part‐
nership with those machines? What happens to workers, and what
happens to the companies that depend on their purchasing
power? What’s the future of business when technology-enabled net‐
works and marketplaces are better at deploying talent than tradi‐
tional companies? What’s the future of education when on-demand
learning outperforms traditional universities in keeping skills up to
date?
Over the past few decades, the digital revolution has transformed
the world of media, upending centuries-old companies and business
models. Now, it is restructuring every business, every job, and every
sector of society. No company, no job is immune to disruption.
I believe that the biggest changes are still ahead, and that every
industry and every organization will have to transform itself in the
next few years, in multiple ways, or fade away. We need to ask our‐
selves whether the fundamental social safety nets of the developed
world will survive the transition, and more importantly, what we
will replace them with.
2 
| 
Chapter 1: The WTF Economy Is Transforming How We Do Business

We need a focused, high-level conversation about the deep ways in
which computers and their ilk are transforming how we do busi‐
ness, how we work, and how we live. Just about everyone’s asking
WTF? (“What the F***?” but also, more charitably, “What’s the
future?”)
The image in this article is by York Berlin on Flickr, used under a Cre‐
ative Commons license. Note: this article originally was published on
Medium; it is republished here with permission.
The WTF Economy Is Transforming How We Do Business 
| 
3


CHAPTER 2
The Rise of Networked Platforms
for Physical World Services
Figure 2-1.  
Get the O’Reilly Next:Economy Newsletter and receive ideas and
insights on how technology is transforming the nature of work.
One of the themes we’re exploring in our Next Economy thinking is
the way that networks trump traditional forms of corporate organi‐
zation, and how they are changing traditional ways of managing that
organization. Uber and Airbnb are textbook examples of this trend.
Uber has ambitious plans to manage hundreds of thousands—even‐
tually even millions—of independent drivers with a small core of
employees building a technology platform that manages those work‐
ers. Airbnb is on track to have more rooms on offer than large hotel
chains, with under a thousand employees.
5

Esko Kilpi beautifully described the power of networks in an essay
on Medium, The Future of Firms, reflecting on economist Ronald
Coase’s theory of 20th century business organization. He wrote:
The existence of high transaction costs outside firms led to the
emergence of the firm as we know it, and management as we know
it. … The reverse side of Coase’s argument is as important: if the
(transaction) costs of exchanging value in the society at large go
down drastically, as is happening today, the form and logic of eco‐
nomic and organizational entities necessarily need to change! The
core firm should now be small and agile, with a large network.
The mainstream firm, as we have known it, becomes the more
expensive alternative. This is something that Ronald Coase did not
see coming. Accordingly, a very different kind of management is
needed when coordination can be performed without intermedia‐
ries with the help of new technologies. Apps can do now what
managers used to do.[Bolding mine.]
Today, we stand on the threshold of an economy where the familiar
economic entities are becoming increasingly irrelevant. The Inter‐
net and new Internet-based firms, rather than the traditional
organizations, are becoming the most efficient means to create and
exchange value.
Of course, networks have always been a part of business. An auto‐
maker is not made up of just its industrial workers and its managers,
but also of its network of parts suppliers and auto dealerships and ad
agencies. Even its shareholders are a network that supports its capi‐
tal needs. Similarly, large retailers are aggregation points for a net‐
work of suppliers, logistics companies, and other suppliers. Fast
food vendors like McDonalds and Subway aggregate a network of
franchisees. The entire film and TV industry consists of a small core
of full-time workers and a large network of temporary on-demand
workers. This is also true of publishing and other media companies.
My own company, O’Reilly Media, publishes books, puts on events,
and delivers online learning with a full-time staff of 500 and an
extended family of tens of thousands of contributors—authors, con‐
ference presenters, technology advisers, and other partners.
But the Internet takes the networked firm to a new level. Google, the
company that ended up as the prime gateway to the World Wide
Web, provides access to a universe of content that it doesn’t own, yet
it has become the largest media company in the world. 13- to 24-
year-olds already watch more video on YouTube, much of it user-
contributed, than they watch on television. And Amazon just
6 
| 
Chapter 2: The Rise of Networked Platforms for Physical World Services

surpassed Walmart as the world’s most valuable retailer by offering
virtually unlimited selection, including marketplace items from
ordinary individuals and small businesses.
On-demand companies like Uber and Airbnb are only the latest
development in an ongoing transformation of business by the Inter‐
net. In addition to discussing these latest entrants, we’ll take a look
at what we learn from the evolution of Internet e-commerce and
content marketplaces. Then we’ll try to tease out some best practices
of Internet-era platforms and marketplaces.
The Evolution of Platforms
Consider the evolution of the retail marketplace as exemplified first
by chain stores, and then by Internet retailers like Amazon, which
have largely replaced a network of small local businesses that deliv‐
ered goods through retail storefronts. Cost efficiencies led to lower
prices and greater selection, drawing more consumers, which in
turn gave more purchasing power to larger retailers, allowing them
to lower prices further and to crush rivals in a self-reinforcing
cycle. National marketing of these advantages led to the rise of
familiar chains.
But the Internet added even more leverage, reducing the need to
invest in real estate, reaching customers who were not physically
close to prime locations, and building in new habits of customer
loyalty and instant gratification. With delivery now same day in
many locations, anything you need is only a few clicks away.
Internet retailers like Amazon were also able to offer even larger
selections of products, aggregating offerings not just from a carefully
chosen network of suppliers, but opening up self-service marketpla‐
ces in which anyone could offer products. Years ago, Clay Shirky
described the move from “filter, then publish” to “publish, then fil‐
ter” as one of the key advantages brought by the Internet to publish‐
ing, but the lesson applies to virtually every Internet marketplace. It
is fundamentally an open-ended network in which filtering and
curation (otherwise known as “management”) happens largely after
the fact.
But that’s not all. While large physical retailers cut costs by eliminat‐
ing knowledgeable workers, using lower prices and greater selection
to hedge against worse customer service (compare an old-time
The Evolution of Platforms 
| 
7

hardware store with a chain like Home Depot or Lowe’s), online
retailers did not make these same tradeoffs. Instead of eliminating
knowledgeable workers, they replaced them with software.
Even though there are several orders of magnitude more products
than in physical stores, you don’t need a salesperson to help you find
the right product on Amazon—a search engine helps you find it.
You don’t need a salesperson to help you understand which product
is the best—Amazon has built software that lets customers rate the
products and write reviews to tell you which are best, and then feeds
that reputation information into their search engine so that the best
products naturally come out on top. You don’t need a cashier to help
you check out—software lets you do that yourself.
New Workers in the Network
The greater labor efficiency of the online model can be seen by
comparing the revenue per employee of Amazon vs. Walmart. Wal‐
mart, already the most efficient retailer, employs 2.2 million people
to achieve its $482 billion in sales, or approximately $219,000 per
employee. Amazon employs 150,000 people to achieve $89 billion
in sales, or approximately $593,000 per employee. It’s easy to focus
on the jobs that were eliminated by software in a company like
Amazon. The jobs that were created are often harder to see because
they are in the network, not just in the core:
• New workers at small suppliers who were previously unable to
bring products effectively to market.
• New workers in jobs like package delivery, as the customer
who used to pick up his or her own goods now has them deliv‐
ered to the home or office. (Most ecommerce businesses
replace retail workers with software-enabled self-service; in
this one aspect, ecommerce businesses replace customer self-
service with workers.)
• New workers in warehouses that no longer handle periodic
large shipments to local retailers, but instead provide atomized
same- or next-day delivery to millions of customers.
• New workers at telecom companies, Internet service providers,
data centers, energy companies, and other suppliers to the
invisible infrastructure of the Internet that is replacing the
more visible infrastructure of bricks and mortar.
The workers in the core build and maintain the software at the
heart of the networked platform. This software doesn’t just get writ‐
8 
| 
Chapter 2: The Rise of Networked Platforms for Physical World Services

ten and left to run on its own: it is constantly updated and managed
by a set of workers who are constantly tuning the machine to make
it more effective.
One of the key social and economic questions that needs to be
asked is whether network businesses (and other technology busi‐
nesses) inevitably produce only a small core of high-paying jobs
and a much larger network of lower-wage jobs, or whether this is
the result of management choices and social policy.
Networked Platforms for Physical World
Services
One way to think about the new generation of on-demand compa‐
nies, such as Uber, Lyft, and Airbnb, is that they are networked plat‐
forms for physical world services, which are bringing fragmented
industries into the 21st century in the same way that ecommerce has
transformed retail.
Let’s start by taking a closer look at the industry in which Uber and
Lyft operate.
The coordination costs of the taxicab business have generally kept it
local. According to the Taxicab, Limousine, and ParaTransit Associ‐
ation (TLPA), the US taxi industry consists of approximately 6,300
companies operating 171,000 taxicabs and other vehicles. More than
80% of these are small companies operating anywhere between 1
and 50 taxis. Only 6% of these companies have more than 100 taxi‐
cabs. Only in the largest of these companies do multiple drivers use
the same taxicab, with regular shifts. 85% of taxi and limousine driv‐
ers are independent contractors. In many cases, the taxi driver pays
a rental fee (typically $120/$130 per day) to the owner of the cab
(who in turn pays a dispatch and branding fee to the branded dis‐
patch service) and keeps what he or she makes after paying that
daily cost. The total number of cabs is limited by government-
granted licenses, sometimes called medallions.
When you as a customer see a branded taxicab, you are seeing the
brand not of the medallion owner (who may be a small business of
as little as a single cab), but of the dispatch company. Depending on
the size of the city, that brand may be sublicensed to dozens or even
hundreds of smaller companies. This fragmented industry provides
Networked Platforms for Physical World Services 
| 
9

work not just for drivers, but for managers, dispatchers, mainte‐
nance workers, and bookkeepers. The TLPA estimates that the
industry employs a total of 350,000 people, which works out to
approximately two jobs per taxicab. Since relatively few taxicabs are
“double shifted” (these are often in the largest, densest locations,
where it makes sense for the companies to own the cab and hire the
driver as a full-time employee), that suggests that half of those
employed in the industry are in secondary support roles. These are
the jobs that are being replaced by the efficient new platforms. Func‐
tions like auto maintenance still have to be performed, so those jobs
remain. Jobs that are lost to automation are equivalent to the kinds
of losses that came to bank tellers and their managers with the intro‐
duction of the ATM.
Technology is leading to a fundamental restructuring of the taxi and
limousine industry from one of a network of small firms to a net‐
work of individuals, replacing many middlemen in the taxi business
with software, using the freed-up resources to put more drivers on
the road.
Uber and Lyft use algorithms, GPS, and smartphone apps to coordi‐
nate driver and passenger. The extraordinary soon becomes com‐
monplace, so we forget how our first ride was a magical user
experience. That magic can lead us to overlook the fact that, at bot‐
tom, Uber and Lyft provide dispatch and branding services much
like existing taxi companies, only more efficiently. And like the
existing taxi industry, they essentially subcontract the job of trans‐
port—except in this case, they subcontract to individuals rather than
to smaller businesses, and take a percentage of the revenue rather
than charging a daily rental fee for the use of a branded taxicab.
These firms use technology to eliminate the jobs of what used to be
an enormous hierarchy of managers (or a hierarchy of individual
firms acting as suppliers), replacing them with a relatively flat net‐
work managed by algorithms, network-based reputation systems,
and marketplace dynamics. These firms also rely on their network
of customers to police the quality of their service. Lyft even uses its
network of top-rated drivers to onboard new drivers, outsourcing
what once was a crucial function of management.
It’s useful to call out some specific features of the new model:
10 
| 
Chapter 2: The Rise of Networked Platforms for Physical World Services

• GPS and automated dispatch technology inherently increase the
supply of workers, because they make it possible for even part-
time workers to be successful at finding passengers and navigat‐
ing even to out-of-the-way locations. There was formerly an
“experience premium,” whereby experienced drivers knew the
best way to reach a given destination or to avoid traffic. Now,
anyone equipped with a smartphone and the right applications
has that same ability. “The Knowledge,” the test required to
become a London taxi driver, is famously one of the most diffi‐
cult exams in the world. The Knowledge is no longer required;
it has been outsourced to an app. An Uber or Lyft driver is thus
an “augmented worker.”
• The reliability and ease of use of Uber and Lyft makes it
much easier for passengers to get pickups in locations where
taxis do not normally go, and at times when taxis are unavail‐
able. This predictability of supply not only satisfies unmet
demand, but leads to increased demand. People are now more
likely to travel more widely around the city, whereas before they
might have avoided trips where transportation was hard to find.
There are other ancillary benefits, such as the ability for passen‐
gers to be picked up regardless of race, and for some previously
unemployable populations (such as the deaf) to serve as drivers.
• Unlike taxis, which must be on the road full time to earn
enough to cover the driver’s daily rental fee, the “pay as you go”
model allows many more drivers to work part time, leading to
an ebb and flow of supply that more naturally matches demand.
Drivers provide their own vehicles, earning additional income
from a resource they have already paid for that is often idle, or
allowing them to help pay for a resource which they are then
able to use in other parts of their life. (Obviously, they incur
additional costs as well, but these costs are generally less than
the costs of daily taxi rental. There are many other labor issues
as well; these will be the subject of a later essay.)
• Unlike taxis, which create an artificial scarcity by issuing a limi‐
ted number of medallions, Uber uses market mechanisms to
find the optimum number of drivers, with an algorithm that
raises prices if there are not enough drivers on the road in a par‐
ticular location or at a particular time. While customers initially
complained, this is almost a textbook definition of a Supply and
Demand Graph, which uses market forces to balance the com‐
peting desires of buyers and sellers.
Networked Platforms for Physical World Services 
| 
11

• More drivers means better availability for customers, and
shorter wait times. Uber is betting that this will, in turn, lead to
changes in consumer behavior, as more predictable access to
low-cost transit causes more people to leave their personal car at
home and use the service more. This, in turn, will allow the ser‐
vice to lower prices even further, which will increase demand in
a virtuous circle. This is the same pattern that has driven Amer‐
ican business since the Great Atlantic & Pacific Tea Company
(A&P) pioneered the model in the early part of the 20th cen‐
tury.
• There are concerns about whether lowering prices affects driver
income. So far, there are many accusations from critics but no
hard evidence that this is the case. Uber argues that greater
demand will actually increase driver income. In any case, Uber
is now putting its money where its mouth is and guaranteeing
driver income when it lowers fares.
• There are also concerns about the impact of Uber and Lyft on
urban congestion. But the data on the subject is equivocal. And
while the current algorithm is optimized to create shorter wait
times, there is no reason it couldn’t take into account other fac‐
tors that improve customer satisfaction and lower cost, such as
the impact of too many drivers on congestion and wait time.
Algorithmic dispatch and routing is in its early stages; to think
otherwise is to believe that the evolution of Google search
ended in 1998 with the invention of PageRank.
• A crowdsourced rating system is far from perfect, but it delivers
visibly better and more consistent results than whatever man‐
agement processes were performed by traditional taxi compa‐
nies.
• There is no absolute requirement that drivers be individuals,
and the supplier networks to these platforms will continue to
evolve.
The Franchise of One
In my initial post, The WTF Economy, I wrote:
WTF?! Without owning a single room, Airbnb has more rooms on
offer than some of the largest hotel groups in the world. Airbnb has
800 employees, while Hilton has 152,000.
12 
| 
Chapter 2: The Rise of Networked Platforms for Physical World Services

It would have lacked the immediate punch, but I could also have
written:
WTF?! Without owning a single restaurant, Subway has more fast
food restaurants than McDonald’s. Subway has 900 employees.
McDonald’s has 420,000.
The reason: Subway owns no restaurants, while McDonald’s owns
20% of its restaurants, with the remaining 80% franchised. (Employ‐
ment across both owned and franchised restaurants at McDonald’s is
more than 1.9 million.)
In many ways, Uber and Airbnb represent a 21st-century update of
the franchising model. In franchising, the parent company brands
and markets the product, sets standards for producing it, and
charges a licensing fee and receives a percentage of revenue from
each of its franchisees.
The difference is that technology radically lowers the barriers to
being a franchisee. In many ways, you can call the modern trend
“the franchise of one.” The smallest unit of franchising in the past
was a small business, with all the overhead that implies: real estate,
equipment, uniforms, employees (including managers), and so on.
Today, the franchise can be a single individual, and that individual
can work only part time, so it’s really “the franchise of one or even
less!”
Branding and advertising are much less necessary because the app
itself becomes a customer habit that delivers business. There are lit‐
tle or no capital requirements, workers can schedule their own time,
and turn their own under-utilized personal assets (a car, a house, or
other equipment) into business assets. In her book Peers Inc, Robin
Chase refers to this as “excess capacity.”
This is exactly the dynamic that Kilpi references when he describes
how the radically lower transaction costs of networks give them
advantages over traditional firms.
Though the details of the taxi industry differ from the hotel indus‐
try, the same dynamic applies to another great success story of the
on-demand economy: Airbnb. Like Uber and Lyft, Airbnb uses
technology to make excess capacity available in locations that were
otherwise extremely poorly served. Even in great cities, hotels are
available only in some neighborhoods, and completely unavailable
The Franchise of One 
| 
13

in others. By contrast, Airbnbs can be found anywhere that there is
demand.
A small personal anecdote: I recently got married in Fort Tryon Park
in New York City, near the Cloisters. The nearest hotel is 1.5 miles
away, and the closest “nice” hotel is 3.8 miles, yet my fiance and I
were able to walk to our wedding site from a beautiful, comfortable
Airbnb facing the park and just five minutes away. Many of our
guests stayed locally as well.
As with Uber and Lyft, we see that the granular nature of supply (the
franchise of one, or even less than one) makes it easy for more natu‐
ral market mechanisms to come into play. People can offer a
resource that they already own, testing the market to see if there is
demand and at what price. If they are satisfied with the transaction,
they can continue to offer that resource. More supply will come on
stream to match demand in highly desirable locations.
There are some interesting lessons, though, about the evolution of
the supply network. While Airbnb began as a network of properties
offered solely by individuals, already 40% of Airbnb properties are
now offered by hosts who own more than one property. There are
also anecdotal reports that small companies owning multiple cars
are starting to be part of the Uber network.
From Decentralization to Recentralization
The evolution of Airbnb’s network echoes the evolution of the
World Wide Web and the media platform businesses that grew up
on it, such as Yahoo, Google, YouTube, and Facebook.
The World Wide Web began as a peer-to-peer network of individu‐
als who were both providing and consuming content. Yet 25 years
on, the World Wide Web is dominated by the media presence of
large companies, though there is still plenty of room for individuals,
mid-sized companies, and aggregators of smaller companies and
individuals. While the platform itself began in decentralized fashion,
its growth in complexity led to increasing centralization of power.
Everyone started out with an equal chance at visibility, but over
time, mechanisms were invented to navigate the complexity: first
directories, then search engines.
Eventually, there grew up a rich ecosystem of intermediaries, includ‐
ing, at the top of the food chain, first Yahoo! then Google and their
14 
| 
Chapter 2: The Rise of Networked Platforms for Physical World Services

various competitors, but also content aggregators of various sizes
and types, such as the Huffington Post and Buzzfeed, as well as vari‐
ous companies, from Search Engine Optimizers to advertising firms
like DoubleClick and Aquantive, and content delivery firms like
Akamai and Fastly, who help other firms optimize their perfor‐
mance in the marketplace.
Later media networks such as YouTube, Facebook, and the Apple
App Store bypassed this evolution and began as centralized portals,
but even there, you see some of the same elements. In each case, the
marketplace was at first supplied by small individual contributors,
but eventually, larger players—companies, brands, and superstars—
come to dominate.
In addition, the central player begins by feeding its network of sup‐
pliers, but eventually begins to compete with it. In its early years,
Google provided no content of its own, simply sending customers
off to the best independent websites. But over time, more and more
types of content are offered directly by Google. Amazon began sim‐
ply as a marketplace for publishers; eventually, they became a pub‐
lisher. Over time, as networks reach monopoly or near-monopoly
status, they must wrestle with the issue of how to create more value
than they capture—how much value to take out of the ecosystem,
versus how much they must leave for other players in order for the
marketplace to continue to thrive.
I believe we will see some of these same dynamics play out in the
new networked platforms for physical world services, such as Uber,
Lyft, and Airbnb. Successful individuals build small companies, and
some of the small companies turn into big ones. Eventually, existing
companies join the platform. By this logic, I expect to see large hotel
chains offering rooms on Airbnb, and existing taxi companies affili‐
ating with Uber and Lyft. To optimize their success, these platforms
will need to make it possible for many kinds of participants in the
marketplace to succeed.
Key Lessons
Here are some key lessons for companies wanting to emulate the
success of Internet marketplaces like Amazon, Google, Uber, and
Airbnb:
Key Lessons 
| 
15

• Lower transaction costs are what drive the evolution of the mar‐
ket from traditional firms to large networks. Therefore, focus
relentlessly on lowering barriers to entry for both suppliers
(workers) and customers.
• Networks aggregate customers very effectively, reducing the
number of other companies that sell directly to those customers,
thus leading to industry consolidation. As Jeff Bezos famously
said, “[Their] margin is my opportunity.” Look, therefore, for
fragmented markets where technology allows you to create new
economies of scale.
• The lower costs of doing business at scale make it possible to
offer products to the market at lower prices, increasing demand.
Be sure to pass savings on to the customer. Given sufficient
investment, you can scale more quickly by passing on the sav‐
ings even before you get to scale. Jeff Bezos was able to convince
the market of this proposition, enduring years of losses or very
low margins, even as a public company, in order to reach mas‐
sive scale. Uber appears to be following the same playbook.
• That being said, use market mechanisms and data to innovate
on pricing. Google famously revolutionized advertising by cre‐
ating an auction system that favors the most effective advertise‐
ments rather than the highest bidder. I expect similar business
model innovations in the on-demand space, as the power of big
data makes it possible to make a real-time market in various
kinds of services.
• Networked platforms serve customers who were previously
hard to reach, thus increasing the total number of customers.
Therefore, don’t just skim the cream. Build mechanisms to
extend your network to underserved populations, creating new
markets. Many of the second-tier on-demand companies are
doomed to fail because they only target small populations of
affluent consumers, rather than finding a path in which the vir‐
tuous circle of scale and lower cost eventually allows them to
serve a much broader market.
• Networks aggregate suppliers very effectively, increasing both
the total number of available products and the total number of
suppliers. Suppliers range from single individuals offering a sin‐
gle product to huge firms, with many levels of smaller firms,
and also intermediaries who aggregate those smaller firms.
Therefore, build in mechanisms that will support suppliers of all
sizes. (Note to policy makers considering the employment status
16 
| 
Chapter 2: The Rise of Networked Platforms for Physical World Services

of on-demand workers: suppliers to on-demand platforms will
eventually include companies of many sizes, not just individu‐
als.)
• When you open the market to an unlimited number of suppli‐
ers, you must invest in reputation systems, search algorithms,
and other mechanisms that help bring the best to the top. Sim‐
ple, easily gamed reputation systems are table stakes; over time,
more sophisticated curation will be necessary.
• Internet-era networks don’t just seek to eliminate workers; they
seek to augment them. Invest in software that empowers your
workers, allowing them to multiply their effectiveness and to
create magical new user experiences for customers.
Cropped image on article: Visualization of the AngelList network by
Dave Troy (@davetroy). Copyright 2014 by 410 Networks. Used with
permission. Editor’s note: this post was first published on Medium; it is
republished here with permission.
Key Lessons 
| 
17


CHAPTER 3
A World of Continuous
Partial Employment
Get the O’Reilly Next:Economy Newsletter and receive ideas and
insights on how technology is transforming the nature of work.
Our future workplaces are increasingly managed by apps and
algorithms. Is technology empowering workers, or making them
ever more helpless cogs in a corporate profit machine?
When we talk about the “on-demand economy,” we are really talking
about two things: the ability of a consumer to summon a vehicle,
their lunch, or their groceries with the touch of an app or a few
words to Siri, Cortana, or Google Now; and the lives of the workers
19

who respond to those summons. Instant on-demand consumer
services mean workers must also be available on demand.
As Logan Green of Lyft noted, his company provides “transporta‐
tion as a service.” Perhaps the more general point is that it pro‐
vides labor as a service. At least for now, the car comes with a driver.
Companies such as Lyft, Uber, TaskRabbit, Postmates, Upwork (and
too many other new startups to count) all depend on a large pool of
workers who make no set work commitments, who are bound to no
schedule, but simply turn on an app when they want to work, and
compete with other workers for whatever jobs are available.
These apps have gotten a lot of attention. But focusing that attention
merely on “Next Economy companies” misses many of the deeper
changes in the labor economy.
Traditional companies have also always had a need to manage
uneven labor demand. In the past, they did this by retaining a stable
core of full-time workers to meet base demand, and an expanded
group of part-time contingent workers or subcontractors to meet
peak demand.
But in today’s world, this has given way to a kind of continuous par‐
tial employment for most low wage workers at large companies,
where sophisticated workplace scheduling software lets companies
build larger-than-needed on-demand labor pools to meet peak
demand, and then parcel out the work in short shifts and in such a
way that no one gets full-time hours.
As Esther Kaplan of The Investigative Fund points out in her Har‐
per’s article “The Spy Who Fired Me,” this design pattern has
become the dominant strategy for managing low-wage workers in
America.
A 2010 management survey led by Susan Lambert of the University
of Chicago found that 62 percent of retail jobs are now part-time
and that two thirds of retail managers prefer to maintain a large
workforce, to maximize scheduling flexibility, rather than increase
hours for individual workers. In 2012, a study of retail workers
conducted by the Retail Action Project and Stephanie Luce of the
City University of New York found that unstable scheduling, with
radical changes from week to week, was common, as was extremely
short notice. Only 17 percent of surveyed workers—and just 10
percent of those who were part-time—had a set schedule; only 30
percent received their schedule more than a week in advance.
20 
| 
Chapter 3: A World of Continuous Partial Employment

Schedules often had set start times, but many shifts ended abruptly
as soon as business declined. One in five workers had to keep her
schedule free for “call-in” shifts that rarely materialized. An
employee at Club Monaco told researchers that if sales weren’t high
enough, managers would give workers a single guaranteed shift
each week—plus four on-call shifts. A third of the employees in the
study had dependent children and were forced, like Santana, to
piece together child care to cover their increasingly erratic working
lives.
Most low-wage workers juggle two to three jobs just to get by, said
Allen Mayne, director of collective bargaining at R.W.D.S.U., a
retail workers’ union that helped found the Retail Action Project.
But it’s almost impossible to get a second job if you’ve already
promised away a claim on each of your waking hours. I asked
Mayne whether an employee could get fired for missing a shift that
she was given at the last minute. ‘In a nonunion environment?’ he
said. ‘Oh, yeah. Fine. See you’.
—Esther Kaplan, from “The Spy Who Fired Me”
Both traditional companies and Next Economy companies use apps
and algorithms to manage workers. But there’s an important differ‐
ence. Companies using the top-down scheduling approach adopted
by traditional low-wage employers demonstrate the wrong way to
use technology to manage variable workloads: pervasive workplace
monitoring, algorithmic shift assignment with minimal affordances
for worker input, and programmed limits on hours that limit
employees to part-time work to avoid triggering expensive health
benefits.
By contrast, I think there’s a lot to learn from the Next Economy
strategy of exposing data to the workers, not just the managers, let‐
ting them know about the timing and location of demand, and let‐
ting them choose when and how much they want to work. This
gives the worker agency, and uses market mechanisms to get more
workers available at periods of peak demand or at times or places
where capacity is not normally available.
There are two different approaches to using technology to manage
labor. One provides data and control solely to managers, disem‐
powering workers and minimizing their costs to improve com‐
pany profits; the other offers data to both managers and workers,
giving workers agency, the freedom to work when and how much
they want.
A World of Continuous Partial Employment 
| 
21

There have been many arguments that workers for Next Economy
on-demand companies should be treated as employees, not as inde‐
pendent contractors. I won’t speak to the complex labor regulations
used to make these determinations, but I do want to ask a question
that should concern anyone who wants to actually improve the lives
of workers rather than simply make sure that regulations are
enforced.
Which of these scenarios sounds better to you?
Our workers are employees. We used to hire them for eight hour
shifts. But we are now much smarter, and are able to lower our
labor costs by keeping a large pool of part time workers, predicting
peak demand in 15 minute increments, and scheduling workers in
short shifts. Because demand fluctuates, we keep workers on call,
and only pay them if they are actually needed. What’s more, our
smart scheduling software makes it possible to make sure that no
worker gets more than 29 hours, to avoid triggering the need for
expensive full-time benefits.
Or:
Our workers are independent contractors. We provide them tools
to understand when and where there is demand for their services,
and when there aren’t enough of them to meet demand, we pay
them more (and charge customers more) until supply and demand
are in balance. They can work as much or as little as they want until
they meet their income goals. They are competing with other work‐
ers, but we do as much as possible to maximize the size of the mar‐
ket for their services.
The first of these scenarios summarizes what it’s like to work for an
employer like Walmart, McDonalds, The Gap, or even a progressive
low-wage employer like Starbucks. Complaints from workers
include lack of control over schedule even in case of emergencies,
short notice of when they are expected to work, unreasonable sched‐
ules known as “clopens” (e.g., the same worker being required to
close the store at 11 pm, and open it again at 4 am the next day—a
practice that Starbucks banned in mid-2014), “not enough hours”,
and a host of other labor woes.
The second scenario summarizes the labor practices of Uber, the
largest and most controversial of the new breed of “on demand”
companies coming out of Silicon Valley. Talk to many drivers, as I
have, and they tell you that they love the freedom the job provides to
set their own schedule, and to work as little or as much as they want.
(This is borne out by a study of Uber drivers by economists Alan
22 
| 
Chapter 3: A World of Continuous Partial Employment

Kruger of Princeton and Jonathan Hall (now chief economist at
Uber). 51% of Uber drivers work less than 15 hours a week, to gen‐
erate supplemental income. Others report working until they reach
their target income. 73% say they would rather have “a job where
you choose your own schedule and be your own boss” than “a steady
9-to-5 job with some benefits and a set salary.”)
If “the algorithm is the new shift boss,” the business rules driving
the algorithm, and whether it increases or decreases the opportu‐
nities offered to workers, make a huge difference!
We need to recognize that yes, these are contingent jobs, without a
safety net, and that while these platforms may be great for part-time
workers looking for supplemental or transitional income, they pro‐
vide something very far from the kind of long-term stability that
constitute what we would call “a good job.” And yes, there are Uber
drivers who want a greater voice to set rates and rules. Right now
they don’t have any way to bargain over the conditions of their serv‐
ices.
But we also need to recognize that traditional jobs today have much
the same problem.
In an interview with Lauren Smiley, Secretary of Labor Tom Perez
acknowledged the risks, and highlighted that the real issue is
whether or not workers make a living wage:
When I hear about “the gig economy,” implicit in that for some is a
sense that this is the first time people work from gig to gig. That’s
just not right. You look at homecare workers and domestic workers
and so many other low wage workers who have been surviving,
oftentimes barely … people have been working from gig to gig for
quite some time. We need to make sure people working gig to gig
can make a living.
However, there are many (including, in ambiguous guidance, the US
Department of Labor) who urge that on-demand companies be
required to treat their workers as employees, not independent con‐
tractors.
There are many reasons why this is not the right answer to the fun‐
damental goal that Secretary Perez set forth.
On first blush, it would seem that being an employee has many ben‐
efits. In the US, the largest are that you are eligible for unemploy‐
ment benefits, and that you have half your social security and
A World of Continuous Partial Employment 
| 
23

Medicare tax paid for by the employer—a full 7.65% of your pay.
You may have paid holidays and paid vacation. And if you injure
yourself on the job, worker’s compensation insurance can make the
difference between being on the street and continuing to get by.
But there are some big issues that no one seems to talk about. There
is a huge gulf between the benefits often provided to full-time
employees and part-time employees. And that has led to what I call
“the 29 hour loophole.” Unscrupulous managers can set the business
rules for the automated scheduling software used by most large low-
wage employers to make sure that no worker gets more than 29
hours in a given week. Because employment law allows different
classes of benefits for part-time and full-time workers, this allows
core staff at the company to be given generous benefits, while the
low-wage contingent workers get the bare-bones version.
Once you realize this, you understand the potentially damaging
effect of the Department of Labor guidance not just for new Silicon
Valley companies but also for their workers. Turn on-demand work‐
ers from 1099 contractors into W2 employees, and the most likely
outcome is that the workers go from having the opportunity to work
as much as they like for a platform like Uber or TaskRabbit to one in
which they are kept from working more than 29 hours a week! This
was in fact exactly what happened when Instacart converted its on-
demand workers to employees. They became part-time employees.
(Even before the advent of computerized shift scheduling software,
companies played shell games with employee pay and benefits. I
remember student protests at Harvard in 2000 focused on the unfair
treatment of janitors and other maintenance personnel. “You’re not
a full-time employee,” janitors were told. “You don’t work 40 hours
for Harvard University. You work 20 hours for Harvard College, and
20 hours for the Harvard Law School.”)
Perhaps as pernicious as the fact that companies limit workers to 29
hours a week, the capricious nature of many of the schedules that
are provided by traditional low-wage employers and the lack of visi‐
bility into future working hours means that workers can’t effectively
schedule hours for a second job. They can’t plan their lives, their
child care, a short vacation, or even know if they will be able to be
present for their children’s birthdays.
By contrast, independent contractors for on-demand services can
work as many hours as they like—many report working until they
24 
| 
Chapter 3: A World of Continuous Partial Employment

reach their desired income for the week, rather than some set num‐
ber of hours—and equally importantly, they work when they want.
Many report that the flexibility to take time off to deal with child‐
care, or health issues, or legal issues, are the most important part of
what they like about the job. (That being said, if you are an on-
demand worker, not all hours are equal. Schedules that allow work‐
ers to maximize their income are, to a large extent, still driven by
marketplace demands.)
In the case of Uber, Lyft, and other transportation services, the call
for workers to be treated as employees is particularly lacking in con‐
text.
Eighty-eight percent of taxi drivers in the US are independent con‐
tractors; most pay a rental fee of up to $125/day to the taxi owner,
and only start to make money once they have paid off that fee each
day. That is a far larger amount than the cost of car payments and
insurance that most Uber and Lyft drivers pay. The taxi owner is
usually responsible for maintenance of the vehicle, but the driver is
responsible for daily expenses like gas. Why don’t taxi drivers desert
their current employers in droves? While most medallions (the city-
or county-granted right to operate a taxi) are owned by companies,
there are individual drivers who have worked for years to amass the
capital to buy their own medallion. But as is so often the case in low-
wage jobs, so many are forced to pay higher costs because they lack
the capital to pay less.
This isn’t to say that there aren’t serious problems with the inde‐
pendent contractor model for low-wage workers. Independent con‐
tractors are responsible for their own tax payments, and many, being
unsophisticated, think of their weekly check from Uber, Lyft, or
TaskRabbit as being theirs to spend. They don’t make quarterly tax
payments, and many of them find themselves unable to pay their
taxes due when April 15 rolls around.
However, there are some offsetting benefits. As independent con‐
tractors (small businesses), they are allowed to deduct 57.5 cents per
mile driven in their own vehicle. Intuit even provides an app, inte‐
grated with the Uber app, to help a driver track personal miles
driven versus miles driven on the job. For a driver putting on hun‐
dreds of miles per week, this may shelter a large part of his or her
income from taxes.
A World of Continuous Partial Employment 
| 
25

Even the notion that being an employee results in benefits such as
paid holiday and vacation isn’t quite what it appears. When an
employee “accrues vacation, holiday, or sick days” this isn’t a gift
from the employer. It is fundamentally an escrow of the employee’s
own wages. This is easiest to see for salaried workers. Let’s imagine,
for the sake of convenience, that I’m paying a salary of $26,000/year,
$500/week, or $12.50/hour. Forty hours a week for 52 weeks
amounts to 2,040 hours. Take out two weeks of vacation, two weeks
of sick pay, and two weeks of holidays, and you’re down to 1,800
hours of actual expected work, or $14.44/hour. Now add in the ben‐
efit of 7.5% of wages being paid in for the employer’s half of social
security taxes: $1,950/year, or an additional $1.08 per hour. That
means that an independent contractor making $15.52/hour but with
none of these benefits has functionally equivalent wages to an
employee with these benefits making $12.50/hour. And in fact,
much of the time, independent contractors receive a pay pre‐
mium roughly equivalent to that differential in wages. (Low wage
workers may not receive the same wage premium as higher-skilled
contractors, but they also may not receive the same benefits as
employees.)
Solutions
There is clearly a Medusa’s Nest of problems in low-wage employ‐
ment in America. Let’s start, though, by acknowledging that virtu‐
ally all low-wage workers in America are on-demand
workers. This acknowledgement lets us enumerate a set of solvable
problems:
1. Algorithms used to schedule on-demand workers must be
designed to optimize for the needs of workers as well as
employers. They should honor workers’ schedule preferences,
and let them opt-out of assigned schedules without risk of los‐
ing their jobs. Companies like Managed By Q have built easy-
to-use scheduling software for their janitorial employees that
gives those workers substantial control over their schedules.
Companies like ADP, Oracle, Kronos, Reflexis, and SAP, the
workplace scheduling giants whose software is used by compa‐
nies like McDonalds, Starbucks, and many others, must also
make their software easier to use. But this is primarily an
26 
| 
Chapter 3: A World of Continuous Partial Employment

employer policy and compliance problem, not a software prob‐
lem.
2. Said algorithms must also give employees predictable schedules,
so that they can make time for other life events, and in the event
that they are not given enough hours, so that they can schedule
shifts with another employer. This may also mean that employ‐
ers must cooperate with each other in giving shared shift visibil‐
ity, and relaxing restrictions against workers taking employment
from competitors. The Schedules That Work Act is an attempt
to address that problem.
3. Employees must be paid for “on call shifts,” where the employee
is expected to be available, but may not actually be assigned paid
work. The recent investigation by the New York Attorney Gen‐
eral has begun to drive reforms at many large retailers.
4. There needs to be what Carrie Gleason of the Fair Workweek
Initiative calls “a path to accountability.” Scheduling software
should be auditable by top management and labor leaders alike
to ensure that fair workplace practices are being carried out.
Gleason wrote, in comments on a draft of this piece, “Susan
Lambert and I have been pushing for software to actually moni‐
tor and track whether this actually happens and for managers
who build schedules aligned with worker preferences to be
rewarded.” It’s important to realize that the scheduling software
provided by companies such as ADP or Kronos, like the algo‐
rithms used by Uber and Lyft, is a tool. How that tool is
deployed and implemented is up to those who use it. As Glea‐
son and Lambert write in their paper Uncertainty by the Hour,
“Employers have chosen to use these powerful tools to treat
their workers as a cost to be minimized, if not eliminated,
instead of using these tools to capture the predictability and sta‐
bility in labor demand that already exists and deliver it to work‐
ers through more predictable and stable hours.”
5. Rather than being allowed to assign unreasonable shifts like
“Clopens” (when an employee is required to close a store at 11
pm or midnight, and reopen it at 6 am), low wage employers
might be required to use free market mechanisms to fill those
shifts, paying more if there are workers unwilling to take them
at the standard wage. (Currently, workers are compelled to take
those shifts by fear of losing their jobs if they don’t.) McDonalds
or Starbucks or Walmart might not like paying more for these
undesirable shifts, but they should not be allowed to compel
Solutions 
| 
27

workers to take them. It could well be that a market-based
approach would bring in enough workers to fill these shifts
without higher wages, but at least we’d know that. Uber’s “surge
pricing” should be seen by policy makers as a labor-friendly
workplace innovation!
6. Next Economy on-demand companies using 1099 workers
should provide tax guidance to those employees as part of the
app. The work that Uber has done with Intuit could easily be
extended to estimate overall tax liability so that workers aren’t
surprised at tax time.
7. We have to close the 29 hour loophole!
Professor Andrei Hagiu, writing in Harvard Business Review, and
venture capitalist Simon Rothman, writing on Medium, both argue
that we need to develop a new classification for workers besides tra‐
ditional employees (people who, in the US, have their income
reported to the IRS on a W2 form) and contractors (who have their
income reported on a 1099 form.) They call them “dependent con‐
tractors.” This new classification might allow some of the freedoms
of independent contractors, while adding some of the protections
afforded to employees. (After her recent interview with Secretary of
Labor Tom Perez and DOL Administrator David Weil, Lauren Smi‐
ley kicked off a discussion about that topic in this article.)
Figure 3-1. “Companies need an option between employee and con‐
tractor.” Andre Hagiu, Harvard Business Review
28 
| 
Chapter 3: A World of Continuous Partial Employment

Nick Hanauer and David Rolf go further, arguing that just as tech‐
nology allows us to deploy workers without the overhead of tradi‐
tional command and control employment techniques, it also gives
us the ability to provide traditional benefits to part-time workers,
They call this a “Shared Security Account” in conscious echo of the
safety net of a Social Security account.
A similar policy proposal for portable benefits comes from Steven
Hill at New America. Hanauer, Rolf, and Hill all suggest that we
decouple benefits like worker’s compensation, employer contribu‐
tion to Social Security and Medicare taxes, as well as holiday, sick,
and vacation pay, from employers and instead associate them with
the employee, erasing much of the distinction between 1099 inde‐
pendent contractor and W2 employee. Given today’s on-demand
technology, this is a solvable problem. It is possible to allocate bene‐
fits across multiple employers. It shouldn’t matter if I work 29 hours
for McDonalds and 11 for Burger King, if both are required to con‐
tribute pro-rata to my benefits.
This would obviously require some changes to management infra‐
structure, and data sharing between employers. But given that most
scheduling is handled by standard software platforms, and payroll is
also handled by large outsourcers, many of whom provide services
for competing employers, this seems like an intriguingly solvable
problem.
Robert Reich’s proposal might be the easiest to implement: “We
should aim instead for simplicity: Whatever party—contractor, cli‐
ent, customer, agent, or intermediary—pays more than half of some‐
one’s income, or provides more than half their working hours,
should be responsible for all the labor protections and insurance an
employee is entitled to.”
However, none of these proposals have solved the deeper dynamics
that drive the 29 hour loophole. It isn’t the basic payroll taxes that
drive companies to want to have two classes of workers. It is health‐
care to start with (a single payer system would solve that problem, as
well as many others), but also other “Cadillac” benefits that compa‐
nies wish to lavish on their most prized workers but not on every‐
one. Ultimately, the segregation of workers into privileged and
unprivileged classes, and the moral and financial calculus that drives
that segregation, has to stop!
Solutions 
| 
29

It will take much deeper thinking to come up with the right incen‐
tives for companies to understand the value of taking care of all
their workers on an equal footing. Zeynep Ton’s Good Jobs Strat‐
egy is a good place to start. As Harvard Business School lecturer and
former CEO of Stop & Shop José Alvarez wrote, “Using years of
research and analysis, Zeynep Ton has proven what great leaders
know instinctively—an engaged, well-paid workforce that is treated
with dignity and respect creates outsized returns for investors. She
demonstrates that the race to the bottom in retail employment
doesn’t have to be the only game being played.”
Editor’s note: this post was first published on Medium. It is republished
here with permission.
30 
| 
Chapter 3: A World of Continuous Partial Employment

CHAPTER 4
“This Is Strictly a Business
Decision”
When a company says, “This is strictly a business decision,” explain‐
ing why they must outsource jobs, it’s worth reading the fine print
and doing a bit of thinking about the numbers.
In this New York Times account of the closing of Carrier’s Indianap‐
olis factory and the transfer of its 1,400 jobs to Mexican workers
making about as much per day as the Minneapolis workers make
per hour, Carrier’s parent company, United Technologies, explains
that “the cuts are painful but are necessary for the long-term com‐
petitive nature of the business.” But are they? The quote from United
Technologies Chief Financial Officer Akhil Johri continues “...and
shareholder value creation.”
What does that actually mean? The article goes on to explain: “Uni‐
ted Technologies faces pressure from investors hungry for earnings
growth in an economy that’s only modestly growing at home, and
falling in important overseas markets like China and the Middle
East. Although the company’s stock has vastly outperformed bench‐
marks in the last few decades, the shares have badly trailed the Stan‐
dard & Poor’s 500 stock index over the most recent five years.
“Wall Street is looking for United Technologies to post a 17%
increase in earnings per share over the next two years, even though
sales are expected to rise only 8%. Bridging that gap means cutting
costs wherever savings can be found, as Mr. McDonough [President
31

of United Technologies’ climate, controls, and security division] sug‐
gested at the meeting with analysts.”
Let’s do a bit of very rough back-of-the-napkin math here. 1,400
workers making $21/hour, the figure cited in the article, adds up to
perhaps $60 million per year in wages, 1,400 workers making
$19/day perhaps one-tenth of that. So, the net savings are on the
order of $55 million per year. Not chump change, surely. And bene‐
fits for U.S. workers add additional cost. So, let’s round up and
assume that United Technologies saves $75 million/year from the
move. This is a company that earned $7.6 billion in profits. That is,
to a very rough approximation, this move increases United Technol‐
ogies profits by 0.1% (one-tenth of 1%).
Even imagining that United Technologies does find enough “cost
savings” to increase their earnings by 17% (i.e., adding another $1.3
billion to their profit hoard), does anyone ask why this is so neces‐
sary as to decimate yet another American community? I understand
that in this era of globalization and business disruption, sometimes
it really is necessary to cut costs to survive. But so often, that isn’t
really the case.
United Technologies is a case in point. Despite the rhetoric, we
aren’t talking about a company that is on the ropes and needs to cut
costs to “remain competitive.” In the end, we are talking about a set
of money managers on Wall Street, already members of the .01%,
demanding that profits rise in order to pump up the stock, SO
THAT THEIR INCOME WILL INCREASE, and a set of top manag‐
ers in the company going along because their compensation is also
tied to that rise in stock price. That is, this is a forced wealth realloca‐
tion from one set of stakeholders in the company to another.
That’s why there is so much anger at Wall Street from the followers
of both Donald Trump and Bernie Sanders. The system is rigged.
Companies are forced to outsource workers not by the market of
real goods and services, where supply and demand set the right
price, but by financial markets, where greed sets the price. We use
the term “the market” for both these things, but they are not the
same.
In a well-functioning financial market, financiers provide financing
that allows companies to invest, producing both new products and
employment, and creating an ecosystem of creators and consumers.
But guess what: United Technologies doesn’t need to go to financial
32 
| 
Chapter 4: “This Is Strictly a Business Decision”

markets for capital. In fact, they have so much capital that in
December 2015, they just committed to spend another $12 billion to
buy back their stock. What is the purpose of a stock buyback? Well,
to drive up the stock price. Again, who benefits? Financiers, who are
effectively strip mining the company of profits, some of which could
instead have gone to workers in the form of higher wages or to soci‐
ety in the form of productive investment in new goods and services.
When a company faces competition in the market of real goods and
services, there are three options: innovating, so that you can charge
more or grow faster than your competitors (compare Google and
the media business, or Apple and a host of competing consumer
electronics companies), cutting costs, or accepting a lower level of
corporate profit. There is an orthodoxy that I’d like to see chal‐
lenged: that profits are sacrosanct because they are demanded by
“the market,” while workers and their incomes are fair game. It is
not an economic law as fixed as the law of gravity that a business
must always seek the lowest costs and the highest profits, especially
when those profits are merely being taken out of the company to
pad the pockets of “activist investors.” As my friend Nick Hanauer
said last year at my Next:Economy Summit, speaking about the
argument that a $15 minimum wage will destroy jobs, “That’s an
intimidation tactic masquerading as an economic theory.”
It’s as a result of this system of intimidation that corporate profits
are at an all-time high and wages at an all-time low as a percentage
of total GDP.
We have to stop telling ourselves that we are forced by the market to
outsource jobs. We have a choice to reduce corporate profits instead.
“This Is Strictly a Business Decision” 
| 
33


CHAPTER 5
6 Things to Look for in Next
Economy Companies
Get the O’Reilly Next:Economy Newsletter and receive ideas and
insights on how technology is transforming the nature of work. The fol‐
lowing piece was first published in the Next:Economy newsletter.
There’s a lot of buzz about AI, on-demand, robotics, and how all this
plays into the future of human work. I’ve been referring to the cur‐
rent state of the market as “the WTF Economy” and the future
desired state as “the Next Economy.”
But what exactly makes a Next Economy company? As is always the
case, there are lots of companies that show some of the features of
the next evolution of technology, but some show the principles
more clearly than others. For example, every company now has
learned to apply big data and predictive analytics, but 15 years ago,
Google was the best Silicon Valley exemplar of this trend. Uber and
Lyft have featured in my current writing for much the same reason
—not because they are necessarily the most important of the current
generation of Silicon Valley companies, but because they are the best
examples of some of the deep trends to look for.
So when I’m evaluating Next Economy companies, what do I look
for?
35

1. They Are Platforms that Enable Networks
Companies like Uber, Lyft, and Airbnb are building on this funda‐
mental Internet story—the story that brought us Google, YouTube,
Facebook, Twitter, and their ilk—but this time, it’s happening in the
physical world.
2. They Augment Workers, Rather than Just Replacing Them
The Uber or Lyft driver is an augmented worker, able to do things
that would have been impossible without the “sixth sense” of the
smartphone. The Uber or Lyft app lets them find a passenger in real
time, a needle in the haystack of a crowded city; Google Maps ena‐
bles them to navigate easily to any address without prior training;
Waze helps them avoid traffic and find the best routes without years
of driving experience. Augmented workers mean that formerly
high-skill jobs are available to a much wider population who are
“upskilled” by their devices and apps.
3. They Create Amazing User Experiences
Think about how Apple used the capabilities of the smartphone to
completely rethink the retail showroom, or how Uber utterly trans‐
formed the experience of hailing a cab. For that matter, think about
how Uber transformed the experience of paying for a cab!
4. They Use Technology to Redesign the Way Services Ought to
Work
...rather than just replicating existing services. There were Internet-
connected taxicabs before Uber and Lyft came on the scene, but all
they used the connection for was to put a credit-card reader in the
back of the cab. Maybe the drivers used Google Maps, but no one
had put the whole package together.
5. They Transform the Structure of Their Industry
Consider two scenarios for deploying AI in healthcare. One treats
an AI (such as IBM’s Watson) as if it were a very expensive medical
appliance, but leaves every other part of the healthcare system
unchanged. In contrast, the transformative company will combine
AI, smartphone-based diagnostic sensors, and telemedicine to
upskill formerly low-wage workers, who will be deployed on
demand to take care of people in their homes.
36 
| 
Chapter 5: 6 Things to Look for in Next Economy Companies

The current revolution in technology has the potential to do for
every industry what the first Internet revolution did to media.
Industrial-age companies will be replaced by agile networks, man‐
aged by algorithm, where workers get new powers and can deliver
amazing new services.
As we’ve seen, though, in the WTF Economy that precedes the Next
Economy, workers can also get the shaft, as networks cut costs for
consumers in order to drive their growth, forgetting that for the
Next Economy to be truly successful, they have to create amazing
experiences not just for users but also for the people delivering serv‐
ices to those users. And, as Henry Ford figured out over a hundred
years ago, unless we pay workers enough to be customers for the
products and services they are delivering, there is no way for those
services to become mainstream.
This leads to my final, bonus thought about Next Economy compa‐
nies...
6. They Create an Ecosystem
An ecosystem doesn’t just mean an ecosystem of developers and
third-party apps (though Slack is the latest to show how that can be
done!). It means an ecosystem of producers and consumers, workers
and customers, all feeding off each other in that wonderful, infinite
game that we call “the economy.” In the Next Economy, robots and
AIs must be part of the ecosystem; if companies deploy them merely
to extract value for themselves, and degrade the opportunities for
humans, we’ll remain stuck in the WTF Economy.
Here’s to a new year of progress toward the Next Economy.
6 Things to Look for in Next Economy Companies 
| 
37


CHAPTER 6
Escaping the Superstar Syndrome
Get the O’Reilly Next:Economy Newsletter and receive ideas and
insights on how technology is transforming the nature of work.
There’s a meme going round Silicon Valley that there are program‐
mers with 10x the productivity and impact of an ordinary program‐
mer. I don’t doubt it. Sports show us the extraordinary impact that a
superstar can have on the success of a team. As my friend Bob Poole
used to say whenever we watched an NBA Finals series, “The team
with the most superstars wins.”
But there’s a key word there, and it’s not “superstar.” It’s “team.” The
TEAM with the most superstars wins.
Success in today’s world, whether of sports or business, requires
assembling a team of people who can work together to achieve
something extraordinary. And yes, to achieve something extraordi‐
nary, it helps that some of those people be superstars. But here’s
another lesson from sports, the best players “make their teammates
better.” Selfish superstars rarely win.
All of this is by way of introducing the role of talent in the Next
Economy.
Superstar vs. Team
Here are some of the unfortunate changes in business that have
resulted from focusing only on the superstar while ignoring the
team:
39

1. Companies have made a deliberate choice to reward their
“superstars” incredibly well, while treating ordinary workers as
a cost to be minimized or cut. Top US CEOs now earn 373x as
much as the average worker, up from 42x in 1980.
2. The bonds of loyalty that once united companies and their
workers have frayed or have been deliberately broken. Long
gone, for most companies, are the days when individuals spent
most of their career working for the same company, ascending
the career ladder till they found a comfortable rung on which to
work for the rest of their lives.
3. Outsourcing is the new corporate norm. That goes way beyond
offshoring to low-wage countries. Right here in the United
States, tons of companies are getting away with paying workers
less and providing fewer benefits. Think your hotel housekeeper
works for Hyatt or Westin? Chances are good they work for
Hospitality Staffing Solutions. Think those Amazon warehouse
workers who pack your holiday gifts work for Amazon? Think
again. It’s likely Integrity Staffing Solutions.
4. Technology has been harnessed not to empower workers, but to
make them cogs in a tightly controlled machine. (This is the
subject of Esther Kaplan’s brilliant expose, The Spy Who Fired
Me.)
It doesn’t have to be that way.
In his book Work Rules, Laszlo Bock, Google’s SVP of People Opera‐
tions, starts out by comparing Google to Wegmans Supermarkets.
Google is one of the most successful high-tech companies in the
world, with an average 30% profit margin. Wegmans is a 99-year-old
family-run supermarket chain of 84 stores in the Northeast United
States with a 1% profit margin. Yet Wegmans has been on the For‐
tune “Best Places to Work” list seventeen times. Google has topped
the list six times.
Command-oriented low-freedom management is common
because it’s profitable, it requires less effort, and most managers
are terrified of the alternative. It’s easy to run a team that does
what they’re told. But to have to explain to them why they’re
doing something? And then debate whether it’s the right thing to
do?…It’s faster and more efficient to just tell the team what to do
and then make sure they deliver. Right?
40 
| 
Chapter 6: Escaping the Superstar Syndrome

Wrong. The most talented people on the planet are increasingly
physically mobile, increasingly connected through technology,
and, importantly, discoverable by employers. This global cadre
wants to be in high-freedom companies, and talent will flow to
those companies. And leaders who build the right kind of envi‐
ronment will be magnets for the most talented people on the
planet….
The good news is that any team can be built around the princi‐
ples that Google has used. Even in the garment industry, MIT’s
Richard Lock found that this kind of approach works. He com‐
pared two Nike t-shirt factories in Mexico. Plant A gave workers
more freedom, asking them to help set production targets, orga‐
nize themselves into teams, and decide how work would be bro‐
ken up, even granting them authority to stop production when
they saw problems. Plant B tightly controlled the shop floor,
requiring workers to stick to their assigned tasks and adding
strict rules about when and how work happened. Locke found
that workers at Plant A were almost twice as productive (150 t-
shirts per day vs. 80), earned higher wages, and had 40% lower
cost for t-shirts….
Dr. Kamal Birdi of the University of Sheffield and six other
researchers studied the productivity of 308 companies across 22
years. Performance improved only when companies imple‐
mented programs to empower employees,…provided learning
opportunities that were outside what people needed to do their
jobs, increased their reliance on teamwork (by giving teams more
autonomy and allowing them to self-organize), or a combination
of these…Only when companies took steps to give their people
more freedom did performance improve.
—Laszlo Bock, Work Rules
Both, says Bock, are “high-freedom” environments, where employ‐
ees are given a great deal of discretion to “do the right thing” for cus‐
tomers, and where the company seeks to do the right thing for
employees.
MIT’s Zeynep Ton, author of The Good Jobs Strategy, comes to simi‐
lar conclusions. She writes:
Many people in the business world assume that bad jobs are neces‐
sary to keep costs down and prices low. But I give this approach a
name—the bad jobs strategy—to emphasize that it is not a necessity,
it is a choice.
There are companies in business today that have made a different
choice, which I call the good jobs strategy. These companies provide
Superstar vs. Team 
| 
41

jobs with decent pay, decent benefits, and stable work schedules.
But more than that, these companies design jobs so that their
employees can perform well and find meaning and dignity in their
work. These companies—despite spending much more on labor
than their competitors do in order to have a well-paid, well-trained,
well-motivated workforce—enjoy great success. Some are even
spending all that extra money on labor while competing to offer the
lowest prices—and they pull it off with excellent profits and
growth.
Tools to Manage a High-Freedom Workplace
In their books, Bock and Ton describe the management style of
companies that want to employ high-freedom, good jobs manage‐
ment. I highly recommend both of these books, along with some
published by my own company, like Beautiful Teams, by Andrew
Stellman and Jennifer Green, and Thinking in Promises, by Mark
Burgess.
But increasingly, there are also software tools that support high-
freedom environments. Collaborative ideation tools like Trello,
shared document editing with Google Docs or Microsoft Office 360,
and real-time conferencing environments like Google Hangouts or
Skype have all contributed to the ability of companies to build dis‐
tributed teams that can come together to solve a problem or work
on a time-limited project, and then be reformed to tackle something
else.
Slack is the latest (and one of the most promising) of the tools for
self-managed ad-hoc teams. It is a real-time communication tool
that allows teams to self-organize around any project. Its website
proudly claims that “We’re on a mission to make your working
life simpler, more pleasant, and more productive.” And it backs it
up with data from a survey of 1,100 teams using Slack: “A 25.1%
reduction in meetings. A 48.6% reduction in internal email. 80.4%
increase in team transparency. A 32% increase in team productivity.”
Stewart Butterfield, the cofounder and CEO of Slack, says:
What we are selling is corporate transformation…None of the work
we are doing to develop the product is an end in itself; it all must be
squarely aimed at the larger purpose. Consider the teams you see in
action at great restaurants, and the totality of their effort: the room,
the vibe, the timing, the presentation, the attention, the anticipation
of your needs (and, of course, the food itself); nothing can be off.
42 
| 
Chapter 6: Escaping the Superstar Syndrome

There is a great nobility in being of service to others, and well-run
restaurants (or hotels, or software companies) serve with a quality
that is measured by its attention to detail. This is a perfect model
for us to emulate. Ensuring that the pieces all come together is not
someone else’s job. It is your job, no matter what your title is and no
matter what role you play. The pursuit of that purpose should per‐
meate everything we do.
That’s a great vision of what it means to be a team!
The best—maybe the only?—real, direct measure of “innovation” is
change in human behaviour. In fact, it is useful to take this way of
thinking as definitional: innovation is the sum of change across the
whole system, not a thing which causes a change in how people
behave. No small innovation ever caused a large shift in how people
spend their time and no large one has ever failed to do so.
—Stewart Butterfield, Slack
In addition to understanding the importance of teams, Next Econ‐
omy companies understand that they must use technology to aug‐
ment their workers, not just to replace them. In addition to general-
purpose tools, like those outlined above, they focus on tools and
training that are specific to their industry.
In a conversation this past spring with BuzzFeed founder and CEO
Jonah Peretti, I asked him why he chose to use employees rather
than the outsourced content model that has increasingly been used
by his peers in the media business. Jonah made a compelling case
that he can outperform the market by carefully selecting employees,
training them, empowering them with data, and building tools that
let them work more effectively together.
Andrew Gauthier, executive producer of BuzzFeed Video, notes:
Data influences every stage of production. In the pre-production
stage, we’re very conscious of existing conversations on the Inter‐
net, about topics or identities or certain styles that appear to be res‐
onating with people. Everybody that works here lives on the
Internet, so it’s this very natural thing to say, “Oh, I’ve noticed that a
lot of my friends are posting this type of thing on Facebook.” We’ll
talk about why certain things went viral, then we’ll incorporate that
into a larger conversation.
And after a video is released?
We pay close attention to how viewers are interacting with our vid‐
eos. We look at share stats on Facebook, comments on YouTube
and BuzzFeed.com, and through those metrics, we will learn about
Tools to Manage a High-Freedom Workplace 
| 
43

what types of things in the video resonated with viewers, and also
how viewers use the video to interact with their friends—whether
they share on Facebook or Twitter or elsewhere.
Jonah told me that the secret to Buzzfeed’s success is taking this
learning, and spreading it through the organization, then empower‐
ing their producers, and getting out of the way.
I find BuzzFeed fascinating because they have found a way to benefit
from Next Economy media platforms like YouTube and Facebook
that are designed for individuals to participate, but that can be used
even more effectively by a business. The insights and the experience
of the best performers can be deployed at scale by their coworkers,
leveling up the entire organization. BuzzFeed had revenues of over
$100 million in 2014 by recognizing how to put together high-
performing teams empowered with data and 21st-century collabora‐
tion tools and turning them loose.
Marketplaces and Teams
It is worth revisiting the comparison between traditional, tightly
managed and tightly scheduled low-wage work and the approach of
on-demand platform companies like Uber, Lyft, Instacart, and
TaskRabbit that I discussed in Workers in a World of Continuous
Partial Employment. These firms offer an improvement over the
outsourcing trend because they give more autonomy and control
over earnings to workers. Workers have the freedom to choose their
own schedule, and can work as much or as little as they like. This is
an important step toward the “high-freedom” environment that Las‐
zlo Bock explains is so important for productivity.
But we’re not at the end point of the evolution of these platforms.
The marketplace algorithms that drive these kinds of companies
are a real innovation in corporate organization, and need to be
understood and improved further. But they often still seem to accept
the feudal system that our corporate world has come to resemble,
with a privileged class of well-paid aristocrats as employees at the
center of the platform, and another class of undervalued serfs acting
as subcontractors (what I’ve called “the franchise of one”) providing
actual services to end users.
There are glimmers, though, of an understanding that these workers
are not all alike, and that companies must make a commitment to
44 
| 
Chapter 6: Escaping the Superstar Syndrome

them, even if that commitment doesn’t resemble the old pledge of
lifetime employment.
In a recent conversation with Leah Busque, cofounder and CEO of
TaskRabbit, she noted: “Our job is to build tools that help increase
the income of our workers.”
This same renewed focus on the worker can be seen in the way that
the competition between Uber and Lyft is increasingly not for pas‐
sengers, who are flocking to both services, but for workers. Which
of these companies wins in the marketplace may end up not being
driven by technology but by which company provides the most
compelling environment and wages for workers, who are ultimately
the ones delivering the service that the technology only enables.
And as Zeynep Ton makes clear, it takes happy workers to deliver
outstanding service.
Unfortunately, the toxic legal environment in which these firms
operate makes it more difficult for them to take the necessary next
steps to focus on training or other improvements for their on-
demand workers. The distinction between employees and subcon‐
tractors doesn’t really make sense in the on-demand model, which
requires subcontractor-like freedoms to workers who come and go
at their own option, and where employee-based overtime rules
would prohibit workers from maximizing their income. (It’s clear
that we need a new worker classification, and a portable benefits
approach that lets multiple employers contribute to a benefits sys‐
tem that is centered on the employee, not the job.)
However, there are some very interesting ways that platforms can
embed training and income improvement opportunities into the
platform itself.
Upwork, which many might think of simply as an online platform
for outsourcing work to the lowest-cost workers, may have the
deepest insights into solving this problem. In a conversation with
Stephane Kasriel, the CEO of Upwork, a few months ago, he told me
how he thinks about solving the different challenges for various
classes of workers on the platform. There are three kinds of workers
on Upwork:
1. Those who already have marketable skills, good reputations on
the platform, and are getting all the work they need because
Marketplaces and Teams 
| 
45

they are “in the flow.” The platform doesn’t need to do much to
help these people.
2. Workers who have marketable skills but have not yet built a rep‐
utation and are not getting enough work. A lot of the focus of
Upwork’s data science team is to find these people, and point
them to the right open jobs. The challenge here is not just help‐
ing them find a perfect match with the work they have the skills
for; often it is pointing them to new areas where there is not
enough supply, where some study or retraining will let them get
a foothold in the virtuous circle of reputation and recommenda‐
tion. For example, he pointed out that a few years ago, there
were plenty of Java developers, but not enough Android devel‐
opers, and the best way for people in this second group to get
traction in the system (and better pay, since Android was paying
more than Java) was to gain new skills. Today, there aren’t
enough workers with data science skills, and there’s a pay pre‐
mium to be had there.
3. Workers who don’t have the right skills for the jobs that they are
applying for. Here, the right thing to do is sometimes to dis‐
courage people from applying for these jobs that they aren’t
going to get. This wastes the time not only of employers but of
the workers themselves. “The time they spend applying for the
wrong jobs is time they could spend working.”
Upwork has developed its own skills assessment system, and Ste‐
phane told me that the company does 100,000 hours of assessment a
month! Stephane also makes the point that if you want to under‐
stand how to study the dynamics of job marketplaces, there is no
better place to do it than on Upwork, because the “velocity of jobs”
is so high. What’s so fascinating about Upwork’s assessment system
is that it is immediately verifiable, because someone either is able to
do a job to the satisfaction of the customer, or they aren’t. This is in
stark contrast to many of the assessment tools sold by education
companies, which provide paper certifications but little evidence
that workers with those certifications can actually do the job.
There’s a lot of talk today about online talent platforms and their
role in increasing job market liquidity, and there is still a lot to
learn. James Manyika and Michael Spence write:
Much of the impact of online talent platforms stems from the use of
technology to bridge information asymmetries that impair labor-
market performance. In the past, these gaps were only partly
46 
| 
Chapter 6: Escaping the Superstar Syndrome

bridged by signals carrying useful information. But online talent
platforms aggregate much larger amounts of information effi‐
ciently, increasing the “signal density.”
With expanded data, companies can use predictive analytics to
identify the best candidate for a given role. Job seekers can augment
their educational credentials and employment histories with sam‐
ples of their work and endorsements from coworkers and custom‐
ers, thereby conveying their potential value to employers more
effectively.
Furthermore, platforms that aggregate anonymous reviews from
current and former employees give individuals a better idea of what
it is like to work for a given company, as well as the salary they can
and should expect. As employee satisfaction becomes more widely
reported, companies are facing pressure to ensure good working
conditions in order to recruit the talent they need.
So far, the biggest winners from this shift have been educated and
skilled professionals in the advanced economies. In fact, the most
sought-after engineers and software developers may not need to
apply for jobs at all; companies are now increasingly recruiting
“passive” candidates, sometimes forcing employers to increase the
salaries of workers they want to retain.
But it is not all good news. Now that employers have new tools for
recruitment and assessment, they may find low-skilled workers eas‐
ier to replace, potentially worsening income inequality in the short
run. In the longer term, however, a better overall system for skills
upgrading could be designed— one that could be integral to facili‐
tating upward mobility.
And there is another benefit in this regard. As the career outcomes
associated with specific institutions and degree programs become
more transparent, education and training providers will become
more accountable for preparing their students for prosperous and
productive lives.
All of these points suggest that we may be reaching a tipping point
where we escape the shackles of the superstar syndrome, and instead
rediscover how to enable teams, finding people’s strengths and
matching them with opportunity, building tools that make it easier
and more effective to work together, and creating dynamic labor
marketplaces in which on-demand, “high-freedom,” and the “high
velocity” of work go hand in hand.
It all starts, though, with a different mental model of the relationship
between company (or platform) and its workers.
Marketplaces and Teams 
| 
47

Reid Hoffman describes the relationship between companies and
individuals today as “The Alliance:”
The employer-employee relationship is broken, and managers face
a seemingly impossible dilemma: the old model of guaranteed long-
term employment no longer works in a business environment
defined by continuous change, but neither does a system in which
every employee acts like a free agent.
The solution? Stop thinking of employees as either family or as free
agents. Think of them instead as allies.
Editor’s note: this post was first published on Medium. It is republished
here with permission.
48 
| 
Chapter 6: Escaping the Superstar Syndrome

CHAPTER 7
We’ve Got This Whole Unicorn
Thing All Wrong!
Get the O’Reilly Next:Economy Newsletter and receive ideas and
insights on how technology is transforming the nature of work.
“Unicorn” is the term du jour in Silicon Valley, used to describe a
startup with a valuation of more than a billion dollars. Fortune mag‐
azine started keeping a list of companies with that exalted status.
TechCrunch has a constantly updated “Unicorn Leaderboard.”
But there’s another kind of unicorn that may be even more impor‐
tant, and that’s the breakthrough, once remarkable, that becomes
taken for granted. Tom Stoppard wrote eloquently about a unicorn
of this sort in his play Rosencrantz and Guildenstern Are Dead:
A man breaking his journey between one place and another at a third
place of no name, character, population or significance, sees a unicorn
cross his path and disappear. That in itself is startling, but there are
precedents for mystical encounters of various kinds, or to be less
extreme, a choice of persuasions to put it down to fancy; until—“My
God,” says a second man, “I must be dreaming, I thought I saw a uni‐
corn.” At which point, a dimension is added that makes the experi‐
ence as alarming as it will ever be. A third witness, you understand,
adds no further dimension but only spreads it thinner, and a fourth
thinner still, and the more witnesses there are the thinner it gets and
the more reasonable it becomes until it is as thin as reality, the name
we give to the common experience…. “Look, look!” recites the crowd.
“A horse with an arrow in its forehead! It must have been mistaken
for a deer.”
49

The world today is full of wonders — things that once might have
had us say “WTF?!” but are already well on their way to being the
stuff of daily life.
The other day, on the bus, I watched one old man show another how
the little blue dot in Google Maps followed them along as the bus
moved. The newcomer to the technology was amazed. The rest of us
now take it for granted that our phones know exactly where we are,
and can not only give us turn-by-turn directions exactly to our des‐
tination—by car, by public transit, by bicycle, and on foot—but also
find restaurants or gas stations nearby, notify our friends where we
are in real time, and even report where they are when they are lost.
Google Maps was a unicorn. The original multi-touch iPhone (even
before the App Store) was a unicorn. Heck, the World Wide Web
was a Unicorn, even though it didn’t make Tim Berners-Lee a bil‐
lionaire. I still remember showing someone the World Wide Web in
1993, clicking on a link and saying “That picture just came from the
University of Hawaii.” People didn’t believe it, thought we were
sh*tting them.
Siri, Google Now, and Cortana are unicorns. Uber and Lyft are uni‐
corns.
These things are unicorns not because of their valuation, but
because they are the kinds of apps that make us say WTF?!
Can you still remember the first time you realized that you could
summon a car, on demand, to pick you up wherever you are? How
cool that was, before you started taking it for granted, even com‐
plaining about it. (If you haven’t seen the late night TV rant by Louis
CK, everything is amazing and nobody’s happy, watch it now!)
We are layering on new kinds of magic that are slowly fading into
the ordinary. A whole generation is growing up that thinks nothing
of summoning cars or groceries, or buying something from Amazon
and having it show up in a couple of hours, or talking to personal
assistants on their devices and expecting to get results.
50 
| 
Chapter 7: We’ve Got This Whole Unicorn Thing All Wrong!

Characteristics of Unicorns
So what makes a real unicorn of this amazing kind?
1. It seems unbelievable at first.
2. It changes the way the world works.
3. It has enormous economic impact that is not all captured by the
entrepreneurs and venture capitalists who birthed it.
We’ve talked about the “at first unbelievable” part. What about
changing the world? Michael Schrage wrote a fascinating ebook for
Harvard Business Review entitled “Who Do You Want Your Custom‐
ers to Become?” He wrote:
Successful innovators don’t ask customers and clients to do something
different; they ask them to become someone different. Facebook asked
its users to become more open and sharing with their personal infor‐
mation, even if they might be less extroverted in real life. Amazon
turned shoppers into information-rich consumers who could share
real-time data and reviews, cross-check prices, and weigh algorithmic
recommendations on their path to online purchase. Who shops now
without doing at least some digital comparisons of price and perfor‐
mance? Successful innovators ask users to embrace—or at least toler‐
ate—new values, new skills, new behaviors, new vocabulary, new
ideas, new expectations, and new aspirations. They transform their
customers.
Schrage also gives a more contemporary example:
When Apple television advertisements show iPhone users asking Siri
questions or telling “her” what to do, the company is doing far more
than showing off the versatility of its voice-recognition, artificial intel‐
ligence interface. Siri’s company asks its customers to become the sort
of people who wouldn’t think twice about talking to their phone as a
sentient servant.
And sure enough, there is a new generation of users who think
nothing of saying things like:
Siri, make me a 6 pm reservation for 2 at Camino.
Alexa, play “Ballad of a Thin Man.”
Google Now, remind me to buy currants at Whole Foods.
Speech recognition itself is hard, but taking actions like these
require an ever more sophisticated data infrastructure—what Goo‐
Characteristics of Unicorns 
| 
51

gle refers to as “the knowledge graph”—as well as affordances for
action, a world of services available by API.
For Google Now to remind me to buy currants the next time I’m at
Whole Foods, it has to know where I am at all times, keep track of a
particular location I’ve asked for, and bring up the reminder in that
context. For Siri to make me a reservation at Camino, it needs to
know that Camino is a restaurant in Oakland, that it is open tonight,
and it must be able to call an OpenTable API to actually make the
reservation. And it will call other services, either on my devices or in
the cloud, to add the reservation to my calendar, so that yet another
agent can remind me when it is time to leave for my dinner date.
And then there are the alerts that I didn’t ask for, like Google’s warn‐
ings:
Leave now to get to the airport on time. 15 minute delay on the Bay
Bridge.
or
There is traffic ahead. Faster route available.
And increasingly, companies are offering automatic orchestration of
services, like the ability of Tripit to have an Uber waiting for me
when my flight arrives.
Everything is amazing, and all we can do is complain! The AIs are
going to take our jobs! No. They are going to transform us and our
society. And we will need to find things to work on that we didn’t
used to be able to do but now can accomplish with their help.
And that gets me to the third characteristic of true unicorns: they
create value. Not just financial value, but real-world value for society.
Consider past marvels. Could we have moved goods as easily or as
quickly without modern earthmoving equipment letting us bore
tunnels through mountains or under cities? This superpower of
humans + machines made it possible to build cities housing tens of
millions of people, for a tiny fraction of our people to work produc‐
ing the food that all the rest of us eat.
My point: in the debate about artificial intelligence and the future of
work, it’s easy to forget just how much technology already suffuses
our lives, how much it has already changed us. We need to get past
that moment of amazement, and how it fades into the new normal,
52 
| 
Chapter 7: We’ve Got This Whole Unicorn Thing All Wrong!

and put this technology to work solving real problems. We must
commit to building something new, strange to our past selves, but
better, if we commit to making it so.
Is it really AI? No, not what is variously called strong AI, or artificial
general intelligence—self awareness, and the ability that humans
seem to have to recognize new problems, think about them, and
come up with novel solutions. Maybe it’s safer just to call them algo‐
rithms. Off in the distance they appear to be unicorns, but up close,
they are just very clever computer programs suffused with masses of
data and connected to real-time sensors.
Augmented reality is another of those unicorn technologies. The
first time a VC friend of mine saw Magic Leap in action, he said, “If
LSD were a stock, I’d be shorting it.” That’s a unicorn!
But what is most exciting to me about this technology is not the LSD
factor, but how powerfully it can change the way we work.
If you’re a worker in one of the factory pilots for the Daqri smart
helmet, augmented reality is already changing your job. If you’re an
architect or a teacher in one of the HoloLens betas, it already is
changing your job. Peter Coffee led a fascinating conversation about
wearables in the workplace at Dreamforce. Garry Orsolini of HP
discusses how a remote expert can use real-time audio/video from a
wearable to help a press operator of a large industrial printing press
debug a problem starting at about 13:30.
You can imagine how technology like this can enable lower-skilled
workers to be “upskilled.” I’m particularly fond of imagining how
the model used by Partners in Health could be turbocharged by aug‐
mented reality. The organization provides free healthcare to people
in poverty using a model in which community health workers
recruited from the population being served are trained and sup‐
ported in providing primary care. Doctors can be brought in as
needed, but the bulk of care is provided by ordinary people. Imagine
a community health worker who was able to tap on Google Glass
and say, “Doctor, you need to see this!” (Yes, Glass will be back,
when Google learns to focus on community health workers, not
fashion models!)
It’s easy to imagine how rethinking our entire healthcare system
along these lines could reduce costs, improve both health outcomes
and patient satisfaction, and create jobs—imagine house calls com‐
Characteristics of Unicorns 
| 
53

ing back into fashion! Add in health monitoring by weara‐
bles, health advice from an AI like Watson made as available as Siri,
Google Now, or Cortana, an Airbnb style “franchise of one,” an
Uber-style on-demand service, and you can start to see the outlines
of the “Next Economy” being brought to us by technology.
We’ll be talking about all these issues and more at the Next:Economy
Summit. If you want to build a Unicorn that isn’t just valued at a bil‐
lion dollars, but that changes the world, we’d like to help you under‐
stand how to do just that. Arthur C. Clarke famously said “Any
sufficiently 
advanced 
technology 
is 
indistinguishable 
from
magic.” The corollary to that statement is: “But once that technology
has been around long enough, no one thinks it is anything special.”
So here’s my question to you? What technologies will we be taking for
granted five years from now? Ten? What technologies do we take for
granted now, and how did people think they were going to change the
world when they were introduced? What problems should our current
unicorn technologies be tackling? Join in the conversation on Medium.
Editor’s note: this post was first published on Medium. It is republished
here with permission.
54 
| 
Chapter 7: We’ve Got This Whole Unicorn Thing All Wrong!

CHAPTER 8
How On-Demand Logistics Could
Save Brick-and-Mortar Retail
Get the O’Reilly Next:Economy Newsletter and receive ideas and
insights on how technology is transforming the nature of work.
I remember meeting with Borders and Barnes & Noble back in
the ’90s, urging them to come to grips with the existential threat that
Amazon and the rise of online bookselling posed to their business.
They didn’t take that threat seriously until far too late.
On-demand delivery presents that same existential threat to retail‐
ers today.
I thought of this recently when reading about how Instacart’s busi‐
ness has evolved into a partnership with grocery stores.
Originally, Instacart was a pure consumer play, with on-demand
shoppers going into stores on behalf of customers and on-demand
delivery drivers taking the goods to their home or business.
Recently, Instacart reclassified some of its shoppers as employees,
partly because of controversy over W2 (employee) vs. 1099 (inde‐
pendent contractor) classification, but more importantly, because
keeping them as independent 1099 workers precluded Instacart
from training them. Now Instacart can make sure its shoppers know
how to tell when an avocado is ripe without incurring the wrath of
the IRS. (Training workers is one of the tests that tax authorities use
to determine W2 vs. 1099 status.)
55

I find this nuanced approach to the W2 vs. 1099 issue to be a great
lesson for companies coming to grips with these new technologies.
It is clear that there are jobs where managing and training a stable
pool of employees makes complete sense. Anyone who has been baf‐
fled by the layout of a new grocery store can see the advantages of
having a shopper who knows just where everything is. But getting
the groceries from the store to your door is the perfect job for an
on-demand marketplace of drivers using their own cars and on their
own time. (I’ve written about the power of the algorithmic, on-
demand labor model in my recent piece on Uber surge pricing.)
But more than just training, Instacart has been working to integrate
its shoppers—and its online storefront—more closely into grocery
stores. Instacart has inked partnerships with more than 65 retailers,
including Whole Foods, Costco, Petco, and many others. These
stores now manage their own storefronts on Instacart.
This strikes me as a quintessential “Next Economy” story. In “Net‐
works and the Nature of the Firm”, we quoted Esko Kilpi’s advice
about how the modern firm needs to change:
If the (transaction) costs of exchanging value in the society at
large go down drastically as is happening today, the form and
logic of economic and organizational entities necessarily need
to change! The core firm should now be small and agile, with a
large network. The mainstream firm, as we have known it,
becomes the more expensive alternative.
56 
| 
Chapter 8: How On-Demand Logistics Could Save Brick-and-Mortar Retail

It was in this context that I thought of the how Borders and Barnes
& Noble were defeated by Amazon, and what that might teach us
about the emerging competition between brick-and-mortar grocer‐
ies and Amazon Fresh.
Amazon is a powerhouse not to be trifled with. It has deep technol‐
ogy and logistics capabilities, and its relentless commitment to low
prices makes it the Walmart of the internet era. When Amazon
Fresh was first announced, it appeared that the brick-and-mortar
evisceration by e-commerce might be about to repeat itself in the
grocery sector.
But Instacart, in partnership with local supermarkets, brings other
advantages to the table. Amazon relies on its vertically integrated
network of warehouses and built-in distribution capability. For
Instacart, the local supermarket is the warehouse, and the same kind
of on-demand workforce that powers Uber and Lyft provides their
delivery capability. Supermarkets are typically more local than Ama‐
zon warehouses, making delivery more efficient. Instacart delivers
in 2 hours by default, or in 1 hour for a higher charge, while Ama‐
zon delivers “same day and early morning.”
In a small test, I recently tried ordering the same small basket of
goods from both Instacart and Amazon Fresh to be delivered to my
home in Oakland. Here’s what I found:
1. Amazon’s minimum order was $50. Instacart’s minimum was
$10.
2. Instacart offered me one-hour delivery for $3.99 or two-hour
delivery for $5.99. Despite claims of same-day delivery, Amazon
offered me tomorrow morning as my first option. And Insta‐
cart’s delivery was within one hour, just as promised.
3. Prices were roughly equivalent, and I was able to shop across
multiple merchants to find better prices on particular items. I
don’t know how the economics of this will hold up, but Insta‐
cart even lets you combine items from multiple retailers into a
single order.
4. Instacart’s selection was actually better. One item in particular,
Strauss Organic milk in glass bottles, was unavailable from
Amazon, but available from multiple Instacart partner retailers.
And when Whole Foods offered only whole milk, Instacart gave
me the option to check other retailers who offered Strauss, and I
found the low fat milk I wanted at Andronico’s instead.
How On-Demand Logistics Could Save Brick-and-Mortar Retail 
| 
57

5. Amazon Fresh required me to sign up for an extended version
of Amazon Prime at $299 (with a free trial period) before I
could place my first order. Instacart lets me either pay delivery
charges as I go or join Instacart Express for $99/year, which
gives me free two-hour delivery (on any delivery over $35).
In this case, Amazon, the one-time upstart, is now the incumbent, at
scale, vertically integrated. Instacart is a new kind of player, adding
an on-demand layer to a network of retailers, small and large.
Building their own on-demand delivery service is an even heavier
lift for brick-and-mortar retailers than building their own e-
commerce operation was in the late ’90s. But by partnering with a
company like Instacart, retailers (and other companies) can add this
capability, and—perhaps—compete credibly with the likes of Ama‐
zon Fresh.
The lesson of Borders and Barnes & Noble is that new technologies
may seem peripheral to your business, but before you know it, they
are in the mainstream of consumer behavior. If you don’t under‐
stand the future, you are doomed to be steamrollered by it.
Editor’s note: this post was first published on Medium. It is republished
here with permission.
58 
| 
Chapter 8: How On-Demand Logistics Could Save Brick-and-Mortar Retail

CHAPTER 9
What Would Alexa Do?
Get the O’Reilly Next:Economy Newsletter and receive ideas and
insights on how technology is transforming the nature of work.
Every once in awhile, a product comes along that changes everyone’s
expectations of what’s possible in user interfaces. The Mac. The
World Wide Web. The iPhone. Alexa belongs in that elite group of
game changers. Siri didn’t make it over the hump, despite the buzz it
created. Neither did Google Now or Cortana, despite their amazing
capabilities and their progress in adoption. (Mary Meeker reports
that 20% of Google searches on mobile are now done by voice, and
Google Now cards are an essential part of every Android user’s
experience.) But Alexa has done so many things right that everyone
else has missed that it is, to my mind, the first winning product of
the conversational era.
Let me talk you through a sample conversation to show you what I
mean.
I’m standing in the kitchen cooking, hands dirty. “Alexa, play ‘Ham‐
ilton’.” (Yes, like everyone else who’s seen it, or even heard it once,
I’m addicted!) “Playing songs from the original cast recording of
‘Hamilton’…” “Alexa, louder.” “Alexa, set a timer for 30 minutes.”
[Music volume goes way down but is still audible while Alexa
replies.] “Setting a timer for 30 minutes.” [Volume comes back up]
…"Alexa, what song is that?” [Again, volume goes down while Alexa
replies, then returns to previous volume.] “’Guns and Ships,’ by
Leslie Odom, Jr., Daveed Diggs, Christopher Jackson, Original
Broadway Cast of ‘Hamilton’"…[Phone rings.] “Alexa, pause.”
59

[Scramble to wash hands. Wish Alexa was also the interface to my
phone!]  [End phone conversation.] “Alexa, resume.” “Alexa, how
much time is left?” “About 9 minutes and 50 seconds left.”
What’s right about this:
1. Alexa is always listening, so it’s hands-free. Once you get used to
talking to the thin air and have a device wake up and respond,
the idea of pawing at a screen feels as odd as a phone without a
touchscreen did starting in 2007, when we got our first taste of
multitouch on the iPhone. Touching a microphone icon to go
into speech mode doesn’t cut it.
2. Alexa can handle some degree of state with aplomb. I can
“stack” multiple interactions, and have “her” guess with some
accuracy which context a subsequent interaction belongs to. She
knows that “pause” goes with the music,  and “how much time is
left?” goes with the timer.
3. I didn’t need to be taught many of the possible interactions. I
just guessed that they might work, tried them, and discovered
that they do. For example, I discovered that I could ask Alexa
what was playing when I called up an elderly friend to whom I’d
given an Echo to see how she liked it. She did, she said, except
for the fact that she didn’t always know what music she was
hearing. (Since she was afraid she wouldn’t know how to use it,
I’d given her very simple instructions, like “Say ‘Alexa, play
Mozart.’”) “Why don’t you try asking?” I said. “Say, ‘Alexa, what’s
playing?’” Sure enough, Alexa came back with the exact name
(and performers and conductor) of the classical piece she was
listening to.
4. The design nuance that the volume simply goes down and Alexa
talks over it during an overlapping interaction is one of those
“fit and finish” touches that are part of what makes a new UI
paradigm (like the one represented by the original Mac or the
iPhone) hum, and be a thing of beauty.
Let me contrast this with a similar interaction with Google on my
phone.
First off, by default, Google isn’t listening on most phones. You have
to touch the microphone icon to get it to switch to audio input. This
is partly a power issue—unlike an Amazon Echo, the phone has bat‐
tery life considerations—but it’s also a privacy issue. I had a conver‐
60 
| 
Chapter 9: What Would Alexa Do?

sation with an Alphabet exec in which I made the point that
Amazon had totally stolen a march on them with the Echo. He
replied, “Can you imagine the blowback if it were Google that was
always listening to you?” He had a point. But that’s how the future
happens. Someone breaks the barrier, does the unthinkable, and
then it becomes thinkable for everyone. I believe that we’re at that
point with always-on listening agents.
At least on my Nexus 6P, Google has given me the option to enable
always-on listening, even from the phone’s lock screen. Apple has
done the same with Siri on the iPhone 6. But active listening isn’t yet
on by default, and I suspect eventually it will be. (I first enjoyed this
feature on my Moto X, and it made me truly love the phone. But
that feature didn’t catch on sufficiently to make the phone a break‐
out success. And now that I’ve experienced voice interfaces done
right on the Echo, I think I know why.)
So let’s assume I can wake up my phone hands-free simply by talk‐
ing with it. Let’s replay that interaction, this time on my Nexus 6P.
“Ok, Google, play ‘Hamilton’.” “’Hamilton’ is a musical about the life
of American founding father Alexander Hamilton, with music, lyr‐
ics, and book by Lin-Manuel Miranda.” [Fail. Responds with the
result of a Google search, despite the obvious “play” instruction.
Doesn’t respond with “this is not in your library.” So I try again.]
“Ok, Google, play Bob Dylan.” [Google Play opens, starts playing
Bob Dylan from my library.] Good so far. “Ok Google, pause.” Nada.
From now on, I’m expected to interact with the app by touching the
screen. I have to hit the pause button.
But let me try other possible actions while the music plays. “Ok,
Google, what song is playing?” “’Obviously 5 Believers’.” That’s
promising! But once Google has answered my query about the song,
Google Play Music is no longer in the foreground. Some other app
or mode has answered my question. So I can’t even pause or skip the
song with a single touch of the screen. I first have to navigate back to
Google Play Music. But even when I do that, I don’t get to the con‐
trol to pause or stop the song. Instead, I get a screen asking me to
“Try Unlimited.”
That’s just bad interaction design, putting the goals of the platform
provider above my own. But even if that intervening screen weren’t
there, you can see that the handoff model, where the conversational
agent passes control to an old-school smartphone app, introduces
What Would Alexa Do? 
| 
61

needless complexity into the interface. The conversational agent
needs to remain in the foreground, intercepting requests and rout‐
ing them to the right app (and if necessary, translating them into the
native language of the app so that the user doesn’t have to switch
modes).
I touch “NO THANKS.” Now I can see and press the pause button.
But let’s go back to the sample interaction. The music is playing. Can
I run the timer over it? “Ok, Google, set a timer for 10 minutes.”
[Music stops entirely—a much less pleasing interaction than Alexa’s
gentle muting—while the Clock opens, giving me the countdown
timer from which I can see how much time is left, or, if I like,
touches to stop or change the timer.] Music resumes playing, but
now the Clock app is in the foreground.
And when I asked “Ok, Google, how much time is left?” the ques‐
tion was passed neither to Google Play, nor the Clock. Instead, Goo‐
gle read to me a search result about a calculation that the earth has
7.79 billion years left in the habitable zone.
Let me be clear: the raw capabilities that Google brings to the table
are far in excess of Alexa’s. I can ask Google questions that Alexa
doesn’t have a hope of answering. “Ok, Google, how long will it take
me to get to Palo Alto?” “Traffic is heavy so it will take you an hour
and 10 minutes.” And because of its massive amount of stored data
as well as real-time sensor data from my phone, and because of its
unparalleled expertise in AI, I expect Google to be able to do many
things that are impossible for Alexa.  But that’s precisely why Google
should be studying Alexa’s voice UI and emulating it.
The user interaction flow between Google’s voice interface and its
mobile apps is a disaster, as I’m lost in a maze of applications, each
of which expects to have control, because the voice agent has never
been given authority as conductor of the user experience. I’m forced
to switch modes unnecessarily between voice and touch. And when
the agent doesn’t know what to do, it often invokes clearly unrelated
actions. (Alexa does this too occasionally, but far less often. It’s much
better at saying “I don’t know how to answer the question you just
asked.”)
In addition to creating a consistent voice-only interaction, Alexa’s
creators have smartly partitioned the possibility space into domains,
each with an understandable set of related tasks and questions that
62 
| 
Chapter 9: What Would Alexa Do?

are within the capabilities of the agent. Unlike agents that take the
model of “ask me anything” and often fail ungracefully (Siri), or try‐
ing to guess what I might want and surface that information
unasked (Google Now), Amazon has done a brilliant job of informa‐
tion architecture. Let’s think deeply about music, and design for key
interactions. OK, how about weather? How about a kitchen timer?
What can we do to make the device more fun? (“Alexa, tell me a
joke.”)  There’s real evidence of clear and consistent human design
anticipation throughout the product. This allows Alexa to appear
more intelligent than she actually is.
Alexa’s creators demonstrate an essential insight for the era in which
we’ll increasingly be designing interfaces with and for intelligent
agents. Remember that your agent is essentially stupid, and use
humans to put it in known situations where its limited abilities are
sufficient, and users can easily learn about its capabilities.
Human-computer interaction takes big leaps every once in awhile.
The next generation of speech interfaces is one of those leaps.
Humans are increasingly going to be interacting with devices that
are able to listen to us and talk back (and increasingly, they are
going to be able to see us as well, and to personalize their behavior
based on who they recognize). And they’re going to get better and
better at processing a wide range of ways of expressing intention,
rather than limiting us to a single defined action like a touch, click,
or swipe.
Recent advice says that the hype about conversational interfaces is
overdone. "Bots are better without conversation,” says Ted Living‐
ston of Kik, a text-message-based bot platform.
I don’t buy that. My experience with Alexa on the Amazon Echo
convinces me otherwise. Of course, Alexa isn’t a chatbot. It’s a pow‐
erful voice-based service embodied in a special-purpose device. It
demonstrates that conversational interfaces can work, if they’re
designed right.
That leads me to the title of this piece: What would Alexa do?
Alexa gives us a taste of the future, in the way that Google did
around the turn of the millennium. We were still early in both the
big data era and the cloud era, and Google was seen as an outlier, a
company with a specialized product that, while amazing, seemed
What Would Alexa Do? 
| 
63

outside the mainstream of the industry. Within a few years, it WAS
the mainstream, having changed the rules of the game forever.
My work on what I called Web 2.0 over a decade ago was an exten‐
ded meditation on lessons to be learned from Google (and other
pioneers of the emerging generation of web applications, platforms,
and services). Eventually, these lessons were seen as required learn‐
ing for every organization, which had to transform itself or die. In
that “Oh sh*t” moment, Jeff Jarvis wrote a book called What Would
Google Do?, whose cover copy advertised it as “an indispensable
manual for survival and success in today’s Internet-driven market‐
place.” That is, if you didn’t figure out how to do what Google does,
you were screwed! I feel that way right now about Alexa.
If you’re making any kind of consumer gadget for the home—a TV,
a music system, a thermostat, a security system, a Wi-Fi router, a
dishwasher, or a washing machine—you should be asking yourself,
“What would Alexa do?” If you’re an automotive executive planning
to put a big touchscreen in your upcoming model instead of focus‐
ing on voice control, you should be asking yourself “What would
Alexa do?” If you’re a software company, you should be imagining a
future in which the devices used to interact with your software are
increasingly conversational, and asking yourself “What would Alexa
do?"  Heck, if you’re a restaurant or coffee shop with an app that lets
people order and pay in advance, you should be asking “What
would Alexa do?”
Fortunately, Amazon is a platform thinker, and so they’ve provided a
neat set of affordances not just for Alexa users but for Alexa devel‐
opers. App developers can add “skills” to Alexa using the Alexa
Skills Kit—for example, once you’ve added the Lyft skill, you can say,
“Alexa, ask Lyft to call me a car.” And using the Alexa Voice Service,
developers can add voice commands to their own applications.
(Google also has a speech API, and so does Microsoft.)
Unfortunately, there’s no design API, so you’ll have to pay close
attention to the way that Amazon has designed the Alexa interface,
constantly asking yourself “What would Alexa do?” as you design
your speech-enabled application. Designers who carry over too
much baggage from the touchscreen era, and don’t learn to think
natively about speech interfaces, are likely to build poorly thought-
out hybrid experiences like the one that keeps me from using speech
64 
| 
Chapter 9: What Would Alexa Do?

as an effective interface to many of the functions of my Android
phone.
I recently had the “What would Alexa do?” conversation with a
senior technology leader at Facebook. I was pointing out that Face‐
book uses AI to curate my news feed, with the notion that by watch‐
ing my behavior, it can guess what stories I most want to see. But I
don’t always want to see the same thing, I noted, any more than I
want a music player that only provides its own curated stream and
doesn’t give me any choices. It’s true that sometimes I want to listen
to music that the service chooses for me, but often, I want to express
some choice. So too with Facebook. Rather than trying to decide
from all the possible posts from my friends which to show me, give
me some affordances for expressing my intention.
An Alexa-like Facebook interface would let me say “Facebook, show
me personal updates from my friends,” and the AI would go to work
not trying to divine my taste, but in separating personal updates
from links to news stories. At another time, I might say “Facebook,
show me links about politics from my friends,” or “Facebook, show
me funny videos.” This is AI put in service of my choices, not trying
to replace my choices.
Right now, if I want Facebook to do any of those things, I can only
do it by retraining the algorithm over a period of days, religiously
avoiding favoriting or clicking on links of the type I don’t want to
see while choosing only the type I do want. I can’t just switch back
and forth!
What Alexa has shown us is that, rather than trying to boil the
ocean with AI and conversational interfaces, what we need to do is
to apply human design intelligence, break down the conversation
into smaller domains where you can deliver satisfying results, and
within those domains, spend a lot of time thinking through the “fit
and finish” so that interfaces are intuitive, interactions are complete,
and that what most people try to do “just works.”
Conversational interfaces are only one of many ways that businesses
are facing tectonic shifts as a result of new technology. If you want to
understand how technologies like AI, robotics, on-demand logistics,
and more are going to reshape the business and economic landscape,
get the O’Reilly Next:Economy Newsletter.
This piece was originally published on LinkedIn.
What Would Alexa Do? 
| 
65


CHAPTER 10
The Game of Business:
It’s Time to Rewrite the Rules
Get the O’Reilly Next:Economy Newsletter and receive ideas and
insights on how technology is transforming the nature of work.
Modern economics likes to think of itself as a science, and too often,
its practitioners have attempted to uncover its “laws,” as if they were
modern Isaac Newtons uncovering the laws of motion. But many of
the laws of economics are far more like the rules of a game than like
the laws of nature. Some of the rules represent what appear to be
fundamental constraints—the availability of resources, say, or the
absorptive capacity of the environment, or even the behavioral pat‐
terns of human nature—while others are arbitrary and subject to
change, such as tax policy, government entitlements, and minimum
wage requirements.
An economy has untold possible outcomes. Its complexity comes
both from the near-infinite variety that can come from permuta‐
tions of simple rules, and from the fact that billions of humans are
playing the game simultaneously, each affecting the outcomes for
each other. Many of the rules are written down nowhere, controlled
by no one, and constantly evolving. Individuals, businesses, and
governments are all players, and none of them can know the full
consequences of their decisions.
Even the simplest and most definitive of the “rules” of an economy
are far more complex to apply than they appear on paper. As an
Internet wag noted many years ago, “The difference between theory
67

and practice is always greater in practice than it is in theory.” This
difference between theory and practice is driven by complex interac‐
tions, not only between rules but between multiple players with
competing incentives.
This complexity came to mind last year in a conversation I had with
Uber’s economists. I was arguing that just as Google’s search algo‐
rithm takes many factors into account in producing the “best”
results, Uber’s algorithm would benefit if it took drivers’ wages, job
satisfaction, and turnover into account, and not just passenger
pickup time, which is its current fitness function. (Uber aims to
have enough drivers on the road in a given location that the average
pickup time is no more than three minutes.)
The economists explained to me that Uber’s wages were, by defini‐
tion, optimal, because they simply represent a demand curve, one of
the most basic laws of economics.
Figure 10-1. via Wikispaces
68 
| 
Chapter 10: The Game of Business: It’s Time to Rewrite the Rules

Uber’s real-time matching algorithm satisfies two overlapping
demand curves. If there are not enough passengers, the price must
go down to stimulate passenger demand. That’s the essence of Uber’s
frequent price cuts. But if there aren’t enough drivers to satisfy that
demand, the price has to go up to encourage more drivers to come
on the road. That’s the essence of surge pricing.
Uber’s argument is that the algorithmically determined cost of a ride
is at the sweet spot that will drive the most passenger demand while
also providing sufficient incentive to produce the number of drivers
to meet that demand. And because driver income is the product of
both the number of trips and the rate paid, that sweet spot will also
maximize driver income. Any attempt to set rates to specifically
raise driver income would suppress rider demand, and so reduce
utilization, and thus wages. Of course, if too many drivers show up,
this will also reduce utilization, but the economists seem confident,
based on data that they were not authorized to share with me, that
they have generally found that sweet spot.
If Uber had the courage of its convictions, it would be doing com‐
pletely algorithmic pricing (including surging prices in a negative
direction, below the base price), much as Google sets ad prices with
an auction. Why don’t they? Because they believe that customers are
more comfortable with a known base price. That is, the difference
between theory and practice is greater in practice than it is in theory.
I do believe that labor marketplace algorithms can be game changers
for business and society if they are used to model and satisfy more
and more complex conditions. There’s no question that even in their
current state, Uber’s real-time marketplace algorithms allow for far
better matching of supply and demand than the previous structure
of the taxicab and limousine industry. But Uber can do better. Algo‐
rithms such as these can be a real advance in the structure of our
economy, but only if they take into account the needs of workers as
well as those of consumers, businesses, and investors.
Here’s the rub in the real world: Uber isn’t just satisfying the two
simultaneous demand curves of customer and driver needs, but also
competitive business needs. Their desire to crush the incumbent taxi
industry and to compete with rivals like Lyft in the U.S. market and
Didi in China also affects their pricing. Under the rules of the
venture-backed startup game, they must grow at a rate that will
allow them to utterly dominate the new industry that they have cre‐
The Game of Business: It’s Time to Rewrite the Rules 
| 
69

ated in order to satisfy the enormous valuation placed on them by
their investors.
Drivers are also not playing a simple game in which they can just go
home if the wages aren’t sufficient. They have bills to pay, and may
have to work far more hours than they would like in order to meet
them. They may know in theory that they are depreciating the value
of their vehicle and running up expenses that undermine their
hourly earnings, but they don’t feel they have any choice. Alternative
jobs may be even worse, with less flexibility and even lower pay.
I suspect that over time, driver wages will need to increase at some
rate that is independent of the simple supply and demand curves
that characterize Uber’s algorithm today. Even if there are enough
drivers, the quality of drivers deeply influences the customer experi‐
ence.
Driver turnover is a key metric. As long as there are a lot of people
willing to try working for the service, it is possible to treat drivers as
a disposable commodity. But this is short-term thinking. What you
want are drivers who love the job and are good at it, are paid well,
and as a result, keep at it. Over the long term, I predict that Uber
and Lyft will be engaged in as fierce a contest to attract and keep
drivers as they are to attract and keep customers today. And that
competition may well provide further evidence that higher wages
can pay for themselves by inducing productivity and greater con‐
sumer satisfaction.
Many simplistic apologists for the capitalist system celebrate disrup‐
tion and assume that while messy, it will all work out for the best if
we just let "the invisible hand" do its work. This is true, if we cor‐
rectly understand the invisible hand. The law of supply and demand
is not describing some invisible force, but the way that players of the
game fight for competitive advantage. There are games within
games. As Adam Smith put it:
It is not from the benevolence of the butcher, the brewer, or the
baker that we expect our dinner, but from their regard to their own
interest. We address ourselves, not to their humanity but to their
self-love, and never talk to them of our own necessities but of their
advantages.
The “law” emerges from the contest between players. As labor
organizer David Rolf said to me, “God did not make being an auto
worker a good job!” Those middle class jobs that we look back at
70 
| 
Chapter 10: The Game of Business: It’s Time to Rewrite the Rules

with such nostalgia were the result of a fierce competition between
companies and labor as to who would set the rules of the game. The
invisible hand became very visible indeed by way of bitter strikes,
and then transcended the market into the political process with the
National Labor Relations Act of 1935 (the Wagner Act), the Labor
Management Relations Act of 1947 (Taft-Hartley), and state “right to
work laws.” Over the past 80 years, these acts have tilted the rules
first one way, then the other.
Right now, we’re at an inflection point, where many rules are being
profoundly rewritten. Much as happened during the industrial revo‐
lution, new technology is obsoleting whole classes of employment
while making untold new wonders possible. It is making some peo‐
ple very rich, and others much poorer. It is giving companies new
ways to organize; those new forms of organization are gradually
being matched by labor.
I am confident that the invisible hand will do its work. But not
without a lot of struggle. The political convulsions we’ve seen in the
U.K. and now in the U.S. are a testament to the difficulties we face if
we let the invisible hand struggle through normal channels! We are
heading into a very risky time.
These discussions are more than theoretical. Rising global inequality
is triggering a political backlash that could lead to profound destabi‐
lization of both society and the economy. Alas, as my friend Bill
Janeway wrote to me in an email, “The supposed laws of welfare
economics assert that the optimal distribution of wealth is achieved
when (1) no one can be made better off if done so by making some‐
one worse off and (2) the winners compensate the losers. It is also
rarely that such compensation is rendered ‘from the benevolence’ of
the winners! Unfortunately, the winners rarely do, except as the
result of political coercion.” That political coercion may be at hand.
Many discussions of our technological future assume that the fruits
of productivity will be distributed to the benefit of all. And that is
clearly not the case. Right now, the economic game is enormously
fun for far too few players, and an increasingly miserable experience
for many others.
“Between the end of World War II and 1968, the minimum wage
tracked average productivity growth fairly closely,” wrote economist
John Schmitt. “Since 1968, however, productivity growth has far
outpaced the minimum wage. If the minimum wage had continued
The Game of Business: It’s Time to Rewrite the Rules 
| 
71

to move with average productivity after 1968, it would have reached
$21.72 per hour in 2012—a rate well above the average production
worker wage. If minimum-wage workers received only half of the
productivity gains over the period, the federal minimum would be
$15.34.”
Meanwhile, the vast bulk of the value created by increasing produc‐
tivity has been allocated to corporate profits. Contrary to what you
might expect, this is not because companies need those higher prof‐
its to grow and sustain themselves, investing in new products and
hiring more people in the process. It is because of the unintended
consequences of rules designed to align the interests of management
and shareholders that instead made management prioritize growth
of the stock price above all other considerations. As Rana Foroohar,
author of the book Makers and Takers and one of the speakers at this
year’s Next:Economy Summit, put it in a recent Time magazine
cover story, “the single biggest unexplored reason for long-term
slower growth is that the financial system has stopped serving the
real economy and now serves mainly itself.”
Another huge swath of value has been allocated to consumer surplus
—the difference between what goods sell for and what customers
might have been willing to pay. (A huge amount of the value that
new technology brings has been provided to consumers free of
charge, creating consumer surplus that is difficult to measure.) Free
trade and depressed wages have also led to fierce competition by
companies to expand their market share by offering goods at lower
prices (much as Uber has done with taxi fares.) This is also a power‐
ful kind of consumer surplus, and one of many strategies that eco‐
nomic game players employ to gain advantage.
I like to use Walmart as an example of the complexity of the game
play and the tradeoffs that players ask us to make as a society. Wal‐
mart has built an enormously productive business that has vastly
reduced the cost of the goods that it supplies. A large part of the
value goes to consumers in the form of lower prices. Another large
part goes to corporate profits, which benefits both company man‐
agement and outside shareholders. But meanwhile, Walmart work‐
ers are paid so little that most need government assistance to live—
by coincidence, the difference between Walmart wages and a $15
minimum wage for their U.S. workers (approximately $5 billion/
year) is not that far off from the $6 billion/year that Walmart work‐
72 
| 
Chapter 10: The Game of Business: It’s Time to Rewrite the Rules

ers are subsidized via Federal supplemental nutrition assistance
(SNAP, formerly known as “food stamps”).
You can see here that there is a five-player game in which gains (or
losses) can be allocated in different proportion to consumers, the
company itself, financial markets, workers, or taxpayers. The cur‐
rent rules of our economy have encouraged the allocation of gains to
consumers and financial shareholders (now including top company
management), and the losses to workers and taxpayers. But it
doesn’t have to be that way.
We can wait for the invisible hand (i.e., the push and pull of the
many players in the game) to work things out, or we can try out dif‐
ferent strategies for getting to optimal outcomes more quickly. We
can rewrite the rules.
In professional sports, leagues concerned about competitive play
often establish new rules. Football (soccer) has changed its rules
many times over the past 150 years. NBA basketball added the 3-
point shot in 1979 to make the game more dynamic; rule changes
are being proposed again after the game-changing play of Golden
State Warriors star Stephen Curry. Many sports use salary caps to
keep teams in large markets from buying up the best talent and
making it impossible for smaller markets to compete. And so on.
The “fight for 15,” the movement toward a national $15 minimum
wage, is one way to rewrite the rules. Businesses and free market
fundamentalists argue that raising minimum wages will simply
cause businesses to eliminate jobs, making workers even worse off.
The evidence shows that this isn’t the case. As Nick Hanauer said
during the Q&A at last year’s Next:Economy Summit, “That’s an
intimidation tactic masquerading as an economic theory.”
The key question, expressed in the true language of Adam Smith’s
“invisible hand,” is who gets more, and who gets less. Capital, labor,
consumers, taxpayers.
As noted above, a $15 minimum wage might cost Walmart on the
order of $5 billion/year. This is no small number. It represents about
a quarter of Walmart’s annual profits, and about 1.25% of its annual
U.S. revenues. But it might save taxpayers $6 billion per year (and
that’s just the amount used to subsidize Walmart; including all the
other low-wage employers in America, the number is far larger.)
The Game of Business: It’s Time to Rewrite the Rules 
| 
73

If Walmart weren’t able to pass off part of its true costs onto taxpay‐
ers, the company would have to cut its profits or raise its prices. But
is that really such a bad thing? Let’s do some back-of-the-napkin
math. If Walmart were to reduce its profits by $5 billion (approxi‐
mately 20%), its market cap might fall, a loss to shareholders. But
leaving aside the shock of a sudden drop in earnings due to a change
in the rules, would the owners of Walmart really not have wanted to
own it if it generated $20 billion a year in profit instead of $25 bil‐
lion?
If Walmart were to pass along the additional costs to consumers,
prices would have to go up by 1.25% (or $1.25 for every $100 spent
at Walmart). If the costs were split between capital and consumers,
that would require only a 10% drop in Walmart profits and an addi‐
tional 62 cents per $100 spent by consumers. Would people really
stop shopping at Walmart if they had to spend little more than an
additional half cent for every dollar?
Those higher prices might discourage some customers, but the
higher incomes of workers might encourage them to spend more.
So, it’s not inconceivable that Walmart and its shareholders would
come out whole.
And of course, raising the minimum wage is only one way to
address the way that the current rules of our economy favor owners
of capital over human workers. Tax rates really do need some
rethinking! Why do we have preferential rates for taxes on capital
when it is so abundant that much of it is sitting on the sidelines
rather than at work in our economy? Why do we tax labor income
when one of the problems in our economy is lack of aggregate
demand due to insufficient consumer spending?
We could change these relative tax rates, and even institute a “wealth
tax,” such as proposed by Thomas Piketty, and use the proceeds to
help fund a Universal Basic Income! In fact, why not tax carbon
rather than labor, substituting a carbon tax for social security taxes,
among the most regressive of all taxes imposed? These rule changes
might be even more costly to capital owners but might well benefit
society overall.
These are political decisions as much as they are purely economic or
business decisions. And that is appropriate. Economic policy shapes
the future not just for one person or one company, but for all of us.
74 
| 
Chapter 10: The Game of Business: It’s Time to Rewrite the Rules

Throughout history and across continents, economies have played
the game using different rules. All land belongs to kings and aristo‐
crats. No one can own the land. All property should be held in com‐
mon. Property should be private. Property is entailed and cannot be
sold by the owners or heirs. Labor belongs to kings and aristocrats
and must be supplied on demand. A man’s labor is his own. Women
belong to men. Women are independent economic actors. Children
are a great source of cheap labor. Child labor is a violation of human
rights. Humans can be the property of other humans. No human
can be enslaved by another.
We look back at some of these rules as barbaric, and others as uto‐
pian dreams. But we also can see that some rules have led to golden
periods when society flourished.
Here is one of the failed rules of today’s economy: humans are
expendable. Their labor should be eliminated as a cost whenever
possible. This will increase the profits of a business, and richly
reward investors. These profits will trickle down to the rest of soci‐
ety.
The evidence is in. This rule doesn’t work.
It’s time to rewrite the rules. We need to play the game of business as
if people matter.
The Game of Business: It’s Time to Rewrite the Rules 
| 
75


CHAPTER 11
Don’t Replace People.
Augment Them.
Get the O’Reilly Next:Economy Newsletter and receive ideas and
insights on how technology is transforming the nature of work.
“Could a machine do your job?” ask Michael Chui, James Manyika,
and Mehdi Miremadi in a recent McKinsey Quarterly article, "Where
Machines Could Replace Humans and Where They Can’t Yet.” The
authors try to put the current worries about this question in per‐
spective:
As automation technologies such as machine learning and robotics
play an increasingly great role in everyday life, their potential effect
on the workplace has, unsurprisingly, become a major focus of
research and public concern. The discussion tends toward a Mani‐
chean guessing game: which jobs will or won’t be replaced by
machines?
In fact, as our research has begun to show, the story is more
nuanced. While automation will eliminate very few occupations
entirely in the next decade, it will affect portions of almost all jobs
to a greater or lesser degree, depending on the type of work they
entail.
Instead of the binary question of which jobs will be eliminated, the
authors instead wisely point out that it is tasks that are being auto‐
mated, and that automation doesn’t simply destroy jobs. It changes
them.
But they don’t go far enough in their analysis. They assess the poten‐
tial for job change in terms of the technical feasibility of automating
77

various activities, the economics of labor supply and demand, and
whether the savings from automation will justify the cost. They also
note that: “A fourth factor to consider is the benefits beyond labor
substitution, including higher levels of output, better quality, and
fewer errors. These are often larger than those of reducing labor
costs.”
But they don’t ask what, in my opinion, is the key question.
What will new technology let us do that was previously impossible?
Figure 11-1. Clockwise from top left: the Luddite rebellion, the Burj al
Khalifa in Dubai, the Compact Muon Solenoid at CERN, and Nasa’s
Juno probe
Those weavers who smashed machine looms in Ned Ludd’s rebellion
of 1811 didn’t realize that descendants of those machines would
make unbelievable things possible. We’d tunnel through mountains
and under the sea, we’d fly through the air, crossing continents in
hours, we’d build cities in the desert with buildings a half mile high,
we’d more than double average human lifespan, we’d put spacecraft
in orbit around Jupiter, we’d smash the atom itself! What is impossi‐
ble today, but will become possible with the technology we are now
afraid of?
As Google chief economist Hal Varian has said, “My grandfather
wouldn’t recognize what I do as work.” What are the new jobs of the
21st century—jobs that aren’t going to be replaced or changed, but
invented out of whole cloth?
Let me explain with a personal anecdote. I used to be legally blind
without huge Coke-bottle glasses. My eyes were fixed by an augmen‐
78 
| 
Chapter 11: Don’t Replace People. Augment Them.

ted surgeon able to do something that had been previously impossi‐
ble. Ten years ago, in my column for Make magazine, I gave an
account of my surgery:
I had laser eye surgery the other day, and after more than forty
years of wearing glasses so strong that I was legally blind without
them, I can see clearly on my own. I had a perfect outcome: 20/20
for far vision, yet still able to read and do other close work as well. I
keep saying to myself: I’m seeing with my own eyes!
But in order to remove my need for prosthetic vision, the surgeon
ended up relying on prosthetics of her own, performing the surgery
with the aid of a complex of high tech equipment and a team of
specialized technicians.
First they mapped my eyes with a device called a corneal topogra‐
pher, and came up with a modification plan. Then they used a laser
to blister the surface of my cornea, and twenty minutes later, the
surgeon used a micro-keratome to lift the flap of the blister so
another laser could do the real mods to the deeper layers of the cor‐
nea. During the actual surgery, apart from lifting the flap and
smoothing it back into place after the laser was done, her job was to
clamp open my eyes, hold my head, utter reassuring words, and tell
me, sometimes with urgency, to keep looking at the red light! After‐
wards, I asked what happened if my eyes drifted, and I didn’t stay
focused on the light. “Oh, the laser would stop. It only works when
your eyes are tracking.”
In short, surgery this sophisticated could never be done by an
unaugmented human being. The human touch of my superb doctor
was paired with the inhuman accuracy of complex machines, a
twenty-first-century hybrid freeing me from the tyranny of assistive
devices first invented in thirteenth-century Italy.
Whether or not we’re heading for a Kurzweil-style singularity, in
which humans merge with machines, an increasing number of our
activities are only possible with the aid of computers and other
complex devices. My eye surgery is only one example.
The revolution in sensors, computers, and control technologies is
going to make many of the daily activities of the twentieth century
seem quaint as, one by one, they are reinvented in the twenty-first.
This is the true opportunity of technology: it extends human capa‐
bility. There is way too much handwringing about the possibility of
technology eliminating human jobs, and way too little imagining
new jobs that could only be done with the help of technology.
There’s a profound failure of imagination and will in much of today’s
economy. For every Elon Musk who wants to reinvent the world’s
Don’t Replace People. Augment Them. 
| 
79

energy infrastructure, build revolutionary new forms of transport,
go to Mars, and forge ahead with self-driving cars, there are far too
many companies that are simply cutting costs and pulling money
out of the economy.
I sometimes think it will take a great crisis to pull us out of our cur‐
rent malaise, in much the same way that World War II helped to end
the Great Depression. Climate change or a pandemic or another vast
war impelled by anger and hopelessness may be the trigger. But one
would hope that we could avoid that dire contingency!
Economic historian Louis Hyman was recently interviewed about
the Gig economy (one symptom of the technological displacement
that Chui, Manyika, and Miremadi explore). Hyman reflected on
what the history of the Great Depression and World War II teaches
us about the kind of investment that it will take to make a better
future.
There’s a great unraveling, and there’s a great forgetting what made
possible the post-war life and forgetting that there’s a deep connec‐
tion between security in our economic lives, and security and us as
a democratic society, as people who are happy, and vote reasonably
and don’t, you know, worry about the future as much. Across lines
of class, across lines of education, we are all moving towards this
freelance economy, this unstable economy. And for some people, it
works out great if you’re a consultant. You can make tons of money
in just one day. And if you’re an undocumented worker who’s
working in very dangerous conditions outside the surveillance of
labor law, it’s not so good…
Back in the 1930s, when there were homeless encampments in
Washington, D.C., very much like the homeless encampments that
are now under the I-280 in San Francisco, the federal government
invested capital in new industries to create jobs for millions of peo‐
ple. They created tax codes that redistributed from the rich to the
poor…
But redistribution of income and the beginnings of the modern
social safety net were only part of the story. Hyman continued:
The New Deal’s Reconstruction Finance Corporation not only hel‐
ped light up America—moving it from 10 percent of homes having
electricity in 1930 to more than 60 percent a decade later—it also
funded research in the Defense Plant Corporation.
It was fundamentally about investment in edgy technology, so
things like aerospace, aluminum extraction, synthetic rubber were
all brought to scale…Aerospace before 1939 had fewer people
80 
| 
Chapter 11: Don’t Replace People. Augment Them.

working in it than worked in candy manufacturing. And after
World War II, the aerospace industry was four times the size of the
pre-war car industry. This is incredible scale and scope of an
endeavor, to utterly transform the economy in about five years, by
using idle capital….
There’s so much capital out there, and they don’t know where to put
it. It’s hard for us to imagine as normal people, but for the big play‐
ers in the global economy, the pension funds, the hedge funds, the
bazillion billionaires, they’re desperate to find an outlet for capital.
And right now, the best outlook for capital is our home mortgages
and our credit card loans. And until we provide them with better
outlets, like we did during the 1930s and ’40s, to invest in aerospace
and more cutting edge technology in industries that employ mil‐
lions, it’s going be very hard to get our economy going again. And
fundamentally, this is how capitalism has to work. It has to be a vir‐
tuous cycle, where capital comes into businesses, is invested and
creates new jobs.
Hyman’s reminder that during World War II we utterly transformed
the US economy during a period of only five years should inspire us
to ask what’s holding us back today. Do we need a crisis, or can we
make bold moves without one?
How we frame the future matters! If we create an attitude of fear
toward technology, we miss the huge opportunity to put it to work
solving problems that bedevil us today. It’s our responsibility as
entrepreneurs and technologists to rethink what’s possible!
Technology lets us rethink the very structure of how we do things.
Consider, for example, the way that Uber and Lyft have transformed
urban transportation. There were connected taxicabs long before
Uber— but all they did was to recreate the old process. What we got
for our connectivity was a credit card reader in the back and a small
screen showing us ads. What Garrett Camp and Travis Kalanick
realized was that humans were now augmented by location-aware
smartphones, and so you could completely rethink the way you
summoned a car. It would be utter magic to someone from the past
—that you can click on your phone and summon a car to wherever
you are, and to know just how long it will take for a car to pick you
up.
But when Uber started talking about self driving cars, they lost the
plot and started talking only about cutting costs and eliminating
workers. Rather than crowing about how they’d finally get rid of
those pesky drivers, they should have been talking about an experi‐
Don’t Replace People. Augment Them. 
| 
81

ment that they’ve run since 2014, delivering flu shots. “Sure, we
won’t always have drivers. But just imagine how many other jobs we
can restructure and make more magical and on demand once the
transportation is even cheaper and more convenient!”
Zipline is completely rethinking how healthcare could be delivered
in an on-demand world. Their pilot project in Rwanda looks to
address one of the leading causes of death—postpartum hemorrhage
—by delivering blood on demand, via high-speed drone, to loca‐
tions without modern transportation or healthcare infrastructure.
But if you think about it, on-demand technology could be trans‐
forming healthcare everywhere—if we think big, and use technology
not just to cut costs and improve profits but to deliver previously
impossible services!
If you’d told the weavers of Ned Ludd’s time that those machines
they were smashing would mean that ordinary people would have
more changes of clothing than the richest nobles of their day, they
would have shaken their heads in astonishment.
What might we be astonished by if we have the courage to invest in
the possibilities of a better future?
82 
| 
Chapter 11: Don’t Replace People. Augment Them.

CHAPTER 12
Machine Money and People Money
Get the O’Reilly Next:Economy Newsletter and receive ideas and
insights on how technology is transforming the nature of work.
At the outset of the Great Depression, John Maynard Keynes penned
a remarkable economic prognostication: that despite the ominous
storm that was then enfolding the world, mankind was in fact on the
brink of solving “the economic problem”—that is, the quest for daily
subsistence.
The world of his grandchildren—the world of those of us living
today—would, “for the first time…be faced with [mankind’s] real,
his permanent problem—how to use his freedom from pressing eco‐
nomic cares, how to occupy the leisure, which science and com‐
pound interest will have won for him, to live wisely and agreeably
and well.”
It didn’t turn out quite as Keynes imagined. Sure enough, after a
punishing Depression and a great World War, the economy entered
a period of unparalleled prosperity. But in recent decades, despite all
the remarkable progress of business and technology, that prosperity
has been very unevenly distributed. Around the world, the average
standard of living has increased enormously, but in modern devel‐
oped economies, the middle class has stagnated, and for the first
time in generations, our children may be worse off than we are.
Once again, we face what Keynes called “the enormous anomaly of
unemployment in a world full of wants,” with consequent political
instability and uncertain business prospects.
83

But Keynes was right. The world he imagined, where “the economic
problem” is solved is, in fact, still before us. Global poverty has sunk
to all-time lows, and, if only we play our cards right, we could still
enter the world Keynes envisioned.
Figure 12-1. Technology and free trade have greatly reduced poverty in
the world, even as they have created economic challenges for workers
in developed countries
As Max Roser, creator of Our World in Data, notes: “Even in 1981
more than 50% of the world population lived in absolute poverty—
this is now down to about 14%. This is still a large number of peo‐
ple, but the change is happening incredibly fast. For our present
world, the data tells us that poverty is now falling more quickly than
ever before in world history.”
Much of Keynes’ essay, entitled “Economic Possibilities for our
Grandchildren,” concerns the issue of what people will do with their
time when productivity has increased to the point where the
machines do all the work.
That question has resurfaced in today’s discussions about Universal
Basic Income (UBI). Fabled labor leader Andy Stern left his job as
the head of the SEIU to write a book making the case for UBI; Y
Combinator Research is planning a pilot program in Oakland, CA;
and the question of UBI has actually come to a vote in Switzerland.
84 
| 
Chapter 12: Machine Money and People Money

The proposal was soundly defeated, but the fact that it was consid‐
ered seriously tells us how far the idea has come since it was pro‐
posed by Thomas Paine in 1795, and more recently by Milton
Friedman in 1962 (and Paul Ryan in 2014).
Figure 12-2. Raising the Floor
I’d like to talk through some key paragraphs from Keynes’ essay, and
reflect on their truth as seen in today’s headlines. Think of this as the
conversation I’d be having with Keynes if he were still around to
have it. Then I’ll weave in some thoughts from a recent conversation
Machine Money and People Money 
| 
85

with Y Combinator’s Paul Buchheit about these same ideas. These
are half-formed thoughts, not polished conclusions. I’d welcome
your feedback!
Keynes’ essay opens:
We are suffering just now from a bad attack of economic pessi‐
mism. It is common to hear people say that the epoch of enormous
economic progress which characterised the nineteenth century is
over; that the rapid improvement in the standard of life is now
going to slow down; that a decline in prosperity is more likely than
an improvement in the decade which lies ahead of us. I believe that
this is a wildly mistaken interpretation of what is happening to us.
We are suffering, not from the rheumatics of old age, but from the
growing-pains of over-rapid changes, from the painfulness of read‐
justment between one economic period and another….”
Figure 12-3. The Rise of the Robots and The Rise and Fall of American
Growth both describe “headwinds” that may limit future wages for
workers
Sure enough, we are indeed once again hearing the chorus of pessi‐
mism and doubt. Automation is going to destroy white collar jobs in
the same way it once destroyed factory jobs. We have an economy
that relies on growth, but the age of growth is over. We are in the
age of “secular stagnation.” And so on.
Keynes presciently gave a new name to the heart of our current
angst:
86 
| 
Chapter 12: Machine Money and People Money

We are being afflicted with a new disease of which some readers
may not yet have heard the name, but of which they will hear a
great deal in the years to come—namely, technological unemploy‐
ment. This means unemployment due to our discovery of means of
economising the use of labour outrunning the pace at which we can
find new uses for labour. But this is only a temporary phase of mal‐
adjustment.
Like Keynes, I remain optimistic. If we play our cards right, this can
be only “a temporary phase of maladjustment.” There may be enor‐
mous dislocation, but we will come through it in the end. Keynes
wrote:
The prevailing world depression, the enormous anomaly of unem‐
ployment in a world full of wants, the disastrous mistakes we have
made, blind us to what is going on under the surface….
“The enormous anomaly of unemployment in a world full of wants.”
I love that phrase! As Nick Hanauer has said to me, “Technology is
the solution to human problems. As long as we haven’t run out of
problems, we won’t run out of work.”
There is so much left to do: dealing with the enormous transitions
to our energy infrastructure that will be required to respond to cli‐
mate change, the public health challenges of new infectious diseases,
the demographic inversion in which a growing class of elders will be
supported by a smaller cohort of workers, rebuilding the physical
infrastructure of our cities, providing clean water to the world, feed‐
ing, clothing, and entertaining 9 billion people.
Note that Nick said “we won’t run out of work,” not “we won’t run
out of jobs.” Part of the problem is that “the job” is an artificial con‐
struct in which work is managed and parceled out by corporations
and other institutions, to which individuals must apply to partici‐
pate in doing the work. Financial markets are supposed to reward
corporations to pursue work that needs doing. But as Rana Foroo‐
har has noted in her excellent new book Makers and Takers: The Rise
of Finance and the Decline of American Industry, there is a growing
divergence today between what financial markets reward and what
the economy really needs.
Machine Money and People Money 
| 
87

Figure 12-4. Makers and Takers author Rana Foroohar will be joining
us at the Next:Economy Summit
Because corporations have different motivations and constraints
than individuals, it is possible that a corporation is not able to offer
“jobs” even as “work” goes begging. Because of the structure of
employment, in uncertain times, companies are hesitant to take on
workers until they are sure of demand. And because of the demands
of financial markets, companies often find short-term advantage in
cutting employment, since driving the stock price gives owners a
88 
| 
Chapter 12: Machine Money and People Money

better return than actually employing people to get work done.
Eventually “the market” sorts things out (in theory), and corpora‐
tions are once again able to offer jobs to willing workers. But there’s
a lot of unnecessary friction.
One of the challenges of the Next Economy is to create new mecha‐
nisms that make it easier to connect people and organizations to
work that needs doing—a more efficient marketplace for work. And
you can argue that that is one of the key drivers at the heart of the
on-demand revolution that includes companies like Uber and Lyft,
DoorDash and Instacart, Upwork, Handy, TaskRabbit, and Thumb‐
tack. The drawbacks of these platforms in providing consistent
income and a social safety net shouldn’t blind us to what does work
about them. We need to improve these platforms so that they truly
serve the people who find work through them, not try to turn back
the clock to the guaranteed employment structure of jobs in the
1950s.
There is also a leadership challenge: to correctly identify work that
needs doing. We need companies to take on visionary projects that
are not being solved by the market “as it is” but that instead reshape
the market. Think of what Elon Musk has done to catalyze new
industries with Tesla, SpaceX, and SolarCity, or what Google did
with “access to all the world’s information,” or what the Gates Foun‐
dation is doing to eliminate malaria. Markets are not infallible. Gov‐
ernment can play a role here, as it did with the Internet, GPS, and
the Human Genome Project. And government’s role is not limited
just to projects that require coordinated effort beyond the capability
of even the largest commercial actors. Government must deal with
market failure. This can be the failure of the commons, outright
malfeasance by commercial actors, or problems with financial mar‐
kets such as the the one that is still strangling the economy today.
But Keynes’ essay gets even more interesting. Let’s repeat the lines
quoted above and match them with their conclusion:
The prevailing world depression, the enormous anomaly of unem‐
ployment in a world full of wants, the disastrous mistakes we have
made, blind us to what is going on under the surface….for the first
time since his creation man will be faced with his real, his perma‐
nent problem—how to use his freedom from pressing economic
cares, how to occupy the leisure, which science and compound
interest will have won for him, to live wisely and agreeably and
well.
Machine Money and People Money 
| 
89

In a recent conversation, Paul Buchheit, creator of Gmail and now a
partner at Y Combinator, said something really provocative: “There
may need to be two kinds of money: machine money and human
money. Machine money is what you use to buy things that are pro‐
duced by machines. These things are always getting cheaper. Human
money is what you use to buy things that only humans can pro‐
duce.”
Paul continued: “The key thing that humans offer that machines do
not is ‘authenticity’. You could buy a machine-made table from
Amazon for cheap, or a hand-crafted table from a person for much
more (and for real authenticity, we want it to come from a local arti‐
san, not an anonymous factory worker on the other side of the
world). In the long term, the price of the former (in machine
money) should trend towards zero, but the latter will always cost
about the same in human money (some quantity roughly propor‐
tional to the number of hours required to make it).”
Paul argues that the right name for what many are calling “Universal
Basic Income” should be “the citizen’s dividend.” This concept traces
back to ancient Athens, and in America to the writings of Thomas
Paine. In Paine’s conception, the dividend was based on shared own‐
ership of natural resources—and this is just what we’ve already seen
done in a country like Norway, in Alaska, and in a notable experi‐
ment during the 1970s, in a small town in Manitoba.
90 
| 
Chapter 12: Machine Money and People Money

Figure 12-5. Thomas Paine’s Agrarian Justice made the appeal for
sharing the value of unimproved land with every citizen of the new
United States
Where Paine argued that every citizen had a right to the underlying
value of unimproved land, Buchheit suggests that all of mankind
should have some claim on the fruits of technological progress. That
Machine Money and People Money 
| 
91

is, we should use tax policy to capture some amount of the bounty
from machine productivity, and provide that to all people as a sti‐
pend with which they can meet the needs of everyday existence.
This bounty should be distributed sufficiently that everyone can
have enough “machine money” to meet their basic needs. Mean‐
while, that machine productivity should also provide those goods at
ever lower costs, increasing the value of the citizen’s dividend. This
is the world of prosperity that Keynes envisioned for his grandchil‐
dren.
How might we pay for a Universal Basic Income? The amount
required is greater than the cost of all current social programs. In a
separate conversation, Y Combinator chief Sam Altman explained
that those who argue about how we would pay for it today miss the
point. “I am confident that if we need it, we will be able to afford it,”
he said at a recent event on UBI at Bloomberg Beta with Andy Stern
and the Aspen Institute’s Natalie Foster. One major factor that isn’t
being considered, as he expanded on it in our subsequent conversa‐
tion, is that the possible productivity gains from technology are
enormous, and these gains can be used to reduce the cost of any
goods produced by machines—what costs $35,000 today might cost
$3,500 in a future where the machines have put so many people out
of work that a Universal Basic Income is required. This is why Paul
argues for “machine money.” In a profound way, its value inflates
not as a currency normally inflates, but because the lower costs pro‐
vided by machine productivity constantly increase its purchasing
power.
What Is “Human Money” For?
I love Paul’s distinction between two types of money, but I do won‐
der whether it’s complete. His notion of human money encompasses
two very different classes of goods and services: those that involve a
true human touch—parenting, teaching, caregiving of all kinds—
and those that involve creativity.
Perhaps “human money” needs to be further subdivided into “caring
money” and “creativity money.”
Caring is a necessity of life, just as is food and shelter, and should
not be denied to anyone in a just society. In an ideal world, caring is
a natural outgrowth of family and community, as we care for those
we love, but there is also a caring economy of professionals, includ‐
92 
| 
Chapter 12: Machine Money and People Money

ing teachers, doctors, nurses, eldercare assistants, babysitters, hair‐
dressers, and masseusses. And in a society with an inverted
demographic pyramid, in which there are far more of the elderly
than young people to support them, as we will see in many devel‐
oped countries by 2050, machines may help to fill this gap.
Creativity money is what we pay for the good things of life beyond
the basics. The latest LeBron James basketball shoe. Adele’s “Hello.”
The glass of wine with friends. The night out at the movies. The
beautiful dress and the sharp suit. Sports, music, art, storytelling,
and poetry.
It’s a mistake to think that “the creative economy” is limited to enter‐
tainment and the arts. People at all levels of society pay a premium
over the base cost of goods as a way of expressing and experiencing
beauty, status, belonging, and identity. Creativity money is what
someone pays for the difference between a Mercedes C-Class and a
Ford Taurus, for a meal at The French Laundry rather than the local
French bistro, or at that same bistro rather than at a McDonald’s. It
is why those who can afford it pay $5 for an individually crafted cap‐
puccino rather than drinking Folgers instant coffee from a 5-pound
can, as our parents did. It is why we pay huge prices or wait years to
see Hamilton, while tickets for the local dinner theater are available
right now.
Creativity money is the focus of a competition as intense as any that
characterizes the machine money economy. It is already at the heart
of huge swaths of our economy: industries like fashion, real estate,
luxury goods, all depend on the competition among people who are
already rich to own more, to enjoy or sometimes just to show off
their wealth.
In the late 18th century, in his short novel Rasselas, Samuel Johnson
wrote:
But for the Pyramids, no reason has ever been given adequate to
the cost and labour of the work. The narrowness of the chambers
proves that it could afford no retreat from enemies, and treasures
might have been reposited at far less expense with equal security. It
seems to have been erected only in compliance with that hunger of
imagination which preys incessantly upon life, and must be always
appeased by some employment. Those who have already all that
they can enjoy must enlarge their desires. He that has built for use
till use is supplied must begin to build for vanity, and extend his
What Is “Human Money” For? 
| 
93

plan to the utmost power of human performance that he may not
be soon reduced to form another wish.
That is, even in a world where every need is met, there will still be “a
world full of wants.” Keynes wrote of this kind of competition too in
“Economic Possibilities for our Grandchildren”:
Now it is true that the needs of human beings may seem to be insa‐
tiable. But they fall into two classes—those needs which are abso‐
lute in the sense that we feel them whatever the situation of our
fellow human beings may be, and those which are relative in the
sense that we feel them only if their satisfaction lifts us above,
makes us feel superior to, our fellows. Needs of the second class,
those which satisfy the desire for superiority, may indeed be insatia‐
ble; for the higher the general level, the higher still are they. But this
is not so true of the absolute needs—a point may soon be reached,
much sooner perhaps than we are all of us aware of, when these
needs are satisfied in the sense that we prefer to devote our further
energies to non-economic purposes.
Given an income sufficient to the necessities of life, some people will
choose to step off the wheel—to spend more time with family and
friends, in creative pursuits, or whatever they damn well please. But
even in a world where the machines do most of the essential work,
the competition for additional creativity money will drive the econ‐
omy.
Keynes foresaw both of these possibilities. He wrote:
The strenuous purposeful money-makers may carry all of us along
with them into the lap of economic abundance. But it will be those
peoples, who can keep alive, and cultivate into a fuller perfection,
the art of life itself and do not sell themselves for the means of life,
who will be able to enjoy the abundance when it comes.
And this is the interesting bit. Creativity can be the focus of an
intense competition for status, so that “he who has built for use till
use is supplied must begin to build for vanity.” But it can also be the
key to a future human economy that would let all enjoy the fruits of
leisure that are brought to us by machine productivity.
The good life consists in enjoying the creativity of others, and in
sharing our own, not just in having our basic needs met. Much of
this, like caring, is a natural outgrowth of a successful human soci‐
ety, not an economic pursuit.
Creativity, and the patronage of creativity, may be a major compo‐
nent of the future economy.
94 
| 
Chapter 12: Machine Money and People Money

In this regard, I’m fascinated by a comment that Hal Varian, Goo‐
gle’s chief economist, made to me over dinner one night: “If you
want to understand the future, just look at what rich people do
today.” (He’s also made that same comment in writing, on more than
one occasion.) It’s easy to think of this as a heartless libertarian com‐
ment. Our dinner companion, Hal’s former student Carl Shapiro,
fresh from his stint at Obama’s White House Council of Economic
Advisers, seemed horrified. But when you think about it for a
moment, it makes a lot of sense.
Dining out was once the province of the wealthy. Now far more peo‐
ple do it. In our most vibrant cities, a privileged class experiences a
taste of a future that could be the future for everyone. Restaurants
compete on the basis of creativity and service, “everyone’s private
driver” whisks people around in comfort from experience to experi‐
ence, and one-of-a-kind boutiques provide unique consumer goods.
Rich people once took the European Grand Tour; now soccer hooli‐
gans do it. Cell phones, designer fashion, entertainment have all
been democratized. Mozart had the Holy Roman Emperor as his
patron; Kickstarter, GoFundMe, and Patreon extend that opportu‐
nity to millions of ordinary people.
New industries driven by the human touch are everywhere. In the
US, more than 4,200 craft breweries now make up more than 10% of
the market, and command a price double that of a mass-produced
beer. In the first quarter of 2016, 25 million customers purchased
hand-crafted and artisan goods on Etsy. These are small green
shoots in an economy dominated by mass-produced products, but
they teach us something important about the future.
What is happening in entertainment may be an even more interest‐
ing harbinger. While blockbusters still dominate in Hollywood and
New York publishing, a larger and larger proportion of people’s
entertainment time is spent on social media, consuming content
created by their friends and peers. That profound shift in media
consumption has most visibly enriched Facebook, Google, and the
current generation of media platforms, but it’s increasingly turning
into a real job for a larger and larger number of individual media
creators.
As YouTube star and VidCon impresario Hank Green wrote
recently:
What Is “Human Money” For? 
| 
95

I started paying my bills with YouTube money around the time I hit
a million views a month. My content was admittedly low budget
and “views” isn’t necessarily the best metric (what it means changes
drastically based on platform), but I want you to take a guess at
how many YouTube channels now get more than a million views a
month? A couple hundred? A thousand?
How about 37,000.
For context, Facebook has 12,000 employees….
If “internet creator” were a company, it would be hiring faster than
any company in Silicon Valley.
Keep in mind that “YouTube money,” as Hank names it, is only one
of many new forms of creative money that are available via online
platforms. There’s Facebook money, Etsy money, Kickstarter money,
App Store money, and more.
Some of these marketplaces are further along than others in creating
opportunities for individuals and small companies to convert atten‐
tion (the raw material of creativity money) into cash. The next few
years will see an explosion of startups that find new ways to convert
more and more of the attention that is spent online into traditional
money.
As Jack Conte, half of the musical duo Pomplamoose and founder
and CEO of crowdfunding patronage site Patreon, told me, he
founded Patreon after “Nataly and I got 17 million views of one of
our music videos, and it turned into $3,500 in ad revenue. Our fans
value us more than that.”
As crowdfunding sites like Patreon (and, of course, Kickstarter and
IndieGoGo) show, there are increasingly new opportunities for ordi‐
nary people to compete for real currency, not just attention, in the
creative economy. These sites are still a relatively small part of the
overall economy, but they have a lot to teach us about its possible
future direction.
For more reading about the shape of the Next Economy, subscribe to
the Next:Economy newsletter.
96 
| 
Chapter 12: Machine Money and People Money

CHAPTER 13
Work Is More than a Source of
Income
Get the O’Reilly Next:Economy Newsletter and receive ideas and
insights on how technology is transforming the nature of work.
I completely agree that Universal Basic Income (UBI) is a good idea.
But I think that’s just the beginning of the discussion.
I had a fascinating conversation recently with MIT economist David
Autor. I asked him if there were any good economic studies of vari‐
ous countries that had some equivalent to UBI— Indian reservations
with casinos, Norway, and Saudi Arabia came up as possibilities.
Autor said that there haven’t been any good published studies, but
his informal observations were eye opening. On Indian reservations,
there has been some nastiness about “voting people off the island”—
i.e., voting people out of the tribe in order to concentrate the bene‐
fits, but there’s apparently some evidence that it has done good
things in terms of improving quality of life and engagement. In
Saudi Arabia, where most forms of work are looked down upon and
half the population (i.e., women) are not allowed to work outside
the home at all, universal income has led to a situation in which
most non-government work is done by guest workers, the privileged
classes mostly work at sinecure jobs for the government, and there’s
a culture of luxury and indulgence among those classes.
Norway seems to have got it right. As I recall, David said “Everyone
works. Just not that much.” Norway has very high labor force partic‐
97

ipation, but also very generous social benefits, allowing people lots
of time to care for family and friends and engage in social activity.
The key, he said, was that all kinds of work are seen as having dig‐
nity.
That question of what we dignify as work and that people get social
status and satisfaction from is a thread that runs through the
Next:Economy summit. Laszlo Bock told me an amazing story,
which he in turn heard from Zeynep Ton (also a speaker at the
event) about a hospital janitor who went out of his way to change
the pictures in the rooms of people in a coma, in hopes that it would
make a small difference to them. (Since this story is retold twice
over, I hope I got it right.)
Anne Marie Slaughter, also a speaker at the event, notes that “Caring
is our most important work.” She identifies the low value that we as
a society place on this work as something we have to reverse. That
low valuation on caring is what drives women out of the workforce,
for example, as they take time to care for children, aging parents,
and other family members.
The dignity of work more broadly strikes me as a key question. If
everyone has a basic income, we will still need people to get value
from what they do. In addition to caring, sharing is work.
I think that a lot of what people do on social media, entertaining
their friends, is a kind of work that we don’t appreciate. Cory Doc‐
torow’s first book, Down and Out in the Magic Kingdom, depicts a
world of abundance in which the economy is based on reputation,
people compete to impress each other, and are paid in a reputation
currency.
One could argue that Likes on Facebook, YouTube, and other social
media platforms are a prototype of this kind of reputation economy.
It may seem far fetched to think of social media as a kind of work,
but I like to point out that we consider a poet or a novelist to be
“working,” even though their books might sell to a tiny audience, or
to no one at all; we consider an actor to be working at their career
even if all they do is audition, and put food on the table by waiting
tables.
Work is a source of meaning and identity. And we will need to cou‐
ple that with basic income if it is to succeed.
98 
| 
Chapter 13: Work Is More than a Source of Income

Finally, I’m not convinced that the robots and AIs are really going to
take all our jobs. Evidence from the agricultural and industrial revo‐
lutions argues otherwise. But more compellingly, as Nick Hanauer
notes, “We’re not going to run out of work till we run out of prob‐
lems.”
There are huge unsolved problems in the world today. We have to
rebuild infrastructure, deal with climate change, make sure that
aging populations get the care they need, feed the billions of new
people entering the world and the billions graduating to the middle
class, figure out why rich countries are demoting people from the
middle class, and much, much more.
That’s why I’ve organized the Next:Economy Summit: to start a con‐
versation about all these issues. We don’t have all the answers we
need yet, but I’m betting that if we work at it, the next economy we
build can be a better one than the one we have today. We have to
commit to making it so.
Work Is More than a Source of Income 
| 
99


CHAPTER 14
Technology and Business as if
People Matter
Get the O’Reilly Next:Economy Newsletter and receive ideas and
insights on how technology is transforming the nature of work.
It was 1930, at the start of the Great Depression, when famed econo‐
mist John Maynard Keynes wrote the following words, in the same
prescient essay where he coined the term “technological unemploy‐
ment”:
We are suffering just now from a bad attack of economic pessi‐
mism. It is common to hear people say that the epoch of enormous
economic progress which characterised the nineteenth century is
over; that the rapid improvement in the standard of life is now
going to slow down; that a decline in prosperity is more likely than
an improvement in the decade which lies ahead of us. I believe that
this is a wildly mistaken interpretation of what is happening to us.
We are suffering, not from the rheumatics of old age, but from the
growing-pains of over-rapid changes, from the painfulness of read‐
justment between one economic period and another….
The essay was called “Economic Possibilities for our Grandchil‐
dren.”
Keynes was right, and he was wrong. Sure enough, after a punishing
depression and a great World War, the economy entered a period of
unparalleled prosperity. But in recent decades, despite all the
remarkable progress of business and technology, that prosperity has
been unevenly distributed.
101

Around the world, the average standard of living has increased
enormously, but in modern developed economies, the middle class
has stagnated, and for the first time in generations, our children may
be worse off than we are. Once again, we face what Keynes called
“the enormous anomaly of unemployment in a world full of wants,”
with consequent political instability and uncertain business pros‐
pects.
It doesn’t have to be that way.
I launched a new event called The Next:Economy Summit, which
aims to help businesses, policy makers, and technologists under‐
stand where the economy went wrong and to chart a course from
the WTF economy we experience today, full of wonders and horrors
in equal measure, to a Next Economy that brings greater prosperity
to all.
I’m now planning the second annual Next:Economy Summit, which
this year I’ll be co-hosting with LinkedIn co-founder and executive
chairman Reid Hoffman. Here are some things I’ve been thinking
about and will be exploring further at the Summit this year:
• In the Next Economy, entrepreneurs tackle the world’s hard‐
est problems—before they tackle us! There are those who
worry that as more and more jobs are done by machines, there
will be nothing left for humans to do. Yet in the 21st century, we
face enormous challenges: climate change, refugees displaced by
war and economic inequality, aging populations supported by
fewer young workers, new infectious diseases, crumbling 20th
century infrastructure, and more. In the past, machinery aug‐
mented human labor, making things that were once impossible
the stuff of everyday life. We tunneled through mountains and
under the sea, brought electricity, plumbing, and instantaneous
communications even to remote locations. We have to stop wor‐
rying about “jobs” and start focusing on how to use the current
generation of technology to enable people to do things that
were unthinkable in the 20th century. As Nick Hanauer has
said, “Technology is the accumulation of solutions to human
problems. We won’t run out of jobs till we run out of problems.”
I want to showcase entrepreneurs who are making a difference,
not just making a dollar.
• In the Next Economy, creativity—not just efficiency—is the
key to competitive advantage. Even in a world where machines
102 
| 
Chapter 14: Technology and Business as if People Matter

do many tasks that humans do today, the Next Economy will
pay for what is uniquely human. We all crave the human touch,
and caring and creativity will be keys to success. People at all
levels of society pay a premium over the base cost of goods as a
way of expressing and experiencing beauty, status, belonging,
and identity. And in our most vibrant cities, a privileged class
experiences a taste of a future that could be the future for every‐
one. Restaurants compete on the basis of creativity and service,
“everyone’s private driver” whisks people around in comfort
from experience to experience, and one-of-a-kind boutiques
provide unique consumer goods.
• In the Next Economy, companies use technology not to
replace workers but to augment them, so that they can do
things that were previously impossible. Uber and Lyft drivers
can find passengers on demand at any point in the crowded city
because they have been “upskilled” by the sensors in their
phones and modern smartphone mapping technology. Surgeons
partnered with robots routinely perform surgeries that were
previously difficult or even impossible. Software robots can sift
through mountains of documents no human could read to find
the nugget of knowledge that makes all the difference.
• In the Next Economy, companies create great experiences not
just for their customers but also for their workers. What’s
more, businesses recognize that if workers aren’t well paid, they
can’t afford to be customers, and that it’s simple self-interest to
have a fairer distribution of the fruits of productivity. Even with
all the controversies about the labor practices of Uber, Amazon,
and the “gig economy” as a whole, I believe that we are still in
the early stages of the game, and that over time, creating great
places to work will be a locus of competitive advantage.
• In the Next Economy, AI and robots take over more and more
repetitive tasks, and people work at jobs that our grandfa‐
thers and grandmothers would not recognize as work. When
Hal Varian, Google’s chief economist, made that remark, he was
thinking about his own job. But how about some other jobs that
didn’t exist even a few years ago? Data scientist, user experience
designer, site reliability engineer, social media entertainer, AI
trainer…Humans will be working alongside bots, partnering
with them, managing them—and sometimes, being managed by
them.
Technology and Business as if People Matter 
| 
103

• In the Next Economy, new kinds of technology platforms
become the infrastructure of prosperity in much the same way
that roads, electricity, and telephony did in the 20th century,
enabling entrepreneurs at all levels of society. I’m not just talk‐
ing about universal fiber, but about on-demand logistics, real-
time skill-matching platforms, online education, peer-to-peer
media platforms (aka social media), real-time translation, new
mechanisms for financial exchange, assistive AI, self-driving
cars, drones, and other forms of universal robotics.
• In the Next Economy, there are new ways of paying and being
paid. And I’m not just talking about Bitcoin! For so long, we’ve
taken advertising for granted as the primary currency of online
media, but there are intriguing new models emerging, from
patronage through implicit “reputation currencies.”
• In the Next Economy, individuals cooperate across the
boundaries of companies and countries. I’m asking myself
how new networking technologies change the fundamental
nature of management and corporate structure.
• In the Next Economy, policy makers don’t just stick to old
recipes for managing the economy and providing a social
safety net, but try bold new experiments informed by data
and reflecting the reality of how people live today. Universal
Basic Income. How might that work? Portable benefits? Makes
sense in a world of “continuous partial employment.” Drones?
We’d better rethink our use of airspace! How do we regulate on-
demand transportation, homes turned into occasional hotels,
and a future of self-driving cars? We are looking to convene a
robust conversation about the legitimate public policy objec‐
tives of technology regulation, as well as how to make regula‐
tion more data driven and responsive to fast-changing
conditions.
• In the Next Economy, companies recognize that “we all do
better when we ALL do better.” “Public benefit” is not a special
class of company but the common sense of how to do business.
We’ve realized that our financial markets increasingly reward
short-term thinking and that the idea that the only obligation of
a corporation is to enrich its shareholders has made some of us
very rich, but has made our society as a whole more fragile and
our economy less productive.
Technology can make everyone richer. And it is only when everyone
is richer, not just a few, that an economy truly thrives. It is our
104 
| 
Chapter 14: Technology and Business as if People Matter

opportunity—not just our responsibility—to make the economy
enjoyed by the rich into the economy for everyone: the Next Econ‐
omy!
We’re assembling a remarkable cast of leaders—entrepreneurs, busi‐
ness and labor leaders, thinkers and policy makers, and hands-on
workers—to help us think through the challenges and opportunities
of the Next Economy.
If your startup is about augmenting humans so that they can do the
impossible, creating amazing experiences for people, solving the
world’s hardest problems, enriching not just yourself but everyone
around you, you are part of the Next Economy. I want to hear from
you.
I hope to see you at the event. I’ll also be publishing many more
pieces on the subject of technology and the future of work on
LinkedIn, using the hashtag #NextEconomy.
We also publish related links via @oreillynext on Twitter. You can
also subscribe to our weekly Next:Economy newsletter, and send us
stories that we ought to know about via Next:EconomyEdi‐
tor@oreilly.com. It provides a wealth of further reading from the
community of folks who are wrestling with questions of technology
and the future of work.
Technology and Business as if People Matter 
| 
105

About the Author
Tim O’Reilly is the founder and CEO of O’Reilly Media Inc. Con‐
sidered by many to be the best computer book publisher in the
world. O’Reilly Media also hosts conferences on technology topics,
including the O’Reilly Open Source Convention, Strata: The Busi‐
ness of Data, the Velocity Conference on Web Performance and
Operations, 
and 
many 
others. 
Tim’s 
blog, 
the 
O’Reilly
Radar “watches the alpha geeks” to determine emerging technology
trends, and serves as a platform for advocacy about issues of impor‐
tance to the technical community. Tim is also a partner at O’Reilly
AlphaTech Ventures, O’Reilly’s early stage venture firm, and is on
the board of Safari Books Online, PeerJ, Code for America,
and Maker Media, which was recently spun out from O’Reilly
Media. Maker Media’s Maker Faire has been compared to the West
Coast Computer Faire, which launched the personal computer revo‐
lution.

